Farther Additions To a Small TREATISE Called Salt Water SWEETENED: SHOWING The
Great Advantages BOTH BY SEA and by LAND, OF SEAWATER made FRESH.

TOGETHER In the Honorable Mr. BOYLE'S Letter, and the Approbation of the
COLLEGE of PHYSICIANS, of the Wholsomness of this WATER.

The Ninth Edition, October. 13.

LONDON, Printed by John Harefinch in Mountague-Court in Little Britain. 1684.

TO THE KING'S Most Excellent Majesty.
SIR,
WHEN Mr. Boil, with my Partners, and my self attended Your Majesty with the
Experiment of Reducing Salt Water into Fresh; Your Majesty seemed so well
pleased with an Invention of that Universal Benefit, that we cannot but with
our Humblest Duty acknowledge Your Gracious Reception of it; However, as Your
Great Wisdom and Judgment is not easy to be surpised, and Your Royal
Approbation never known to be Your hasty Act of Grace; Your Favor and
Patronage was not fully obtained, till with the strictest Scrutiny you had
first examined those Hopes and Probabilities, you vouchsafed to encourage in Us.

But, when upon jurther consideration, We had obviated all Difficulties, and
solved all Objections against this Undertaking, (which We hope will appear in
this Printed Paper,) Your Majesty was Graciously pleased to give us your
Approbation, and to order us your Letters Patents; which Grace and Favor ought
to be, and is received by Us with the deepest sense of our humble
Acknowledgments and Gratitude.

And if the Fruits of your Royal Grant has not hitherto been derived to Us,
it is partly by some Obstacles we met from the suggestions of a private Person,
but more especially by the late Horrid Conspiracy, when, not only our Loyal
Apprehensions for your Majesty's Danger, diverted our Thoughts from all other
Concerns, but likewise we judged it a part of our Duty not to be pressing on
your Majesty's Goodness, or on your Ministers of State, in so Important a
juncture of Affairs: But having now regained Leisure and Fredom, after the
dissipation of the greatest part of our Fears, We presume a second time to lay
these Endeavors at your Feet, as best Entitled to the Patronage of so great
an Undertaking by your own Subjects, and best able to Recommend it to the World
by your Royal Approbation.

This Experiment is in a great degree owing to the Eminent Mr. Boil, and
indeed well worthy so Ingenious a Promoter being so much the more the Favorite
of his happy Genius, as it is Universally useful to Mankind; But whatever
Advantages this Country, or indeed the World, may receive by it, his whole
Ambition is bounded in the public. Profit, contenting himself with no other
Benefit from it, than the satisfaction and pleasure of seeing it accomplished
by his Friends.

The Advantages in regard to Navigation, especially in long Voyages, which are
subject (through often Calms, and on several other accounts,) to distress for
want of Water, and the Benefits to Sea-Towns; which are incommodated by
Brackish Waters, Together with the Easiness, Cheapness, and Wholsomness of this
prepared Water, are the principal scope of these ensuing Papers, which are
Humbly Dedicated to Your Majestys Perusal, Favor, and further Approbation, by

Your Majesty's most Dutisul and Obedient Subject, R. FITZGERALD.

The foregoing Dedication, Humbly offered to His Majesty, having discovered
the Intention of this undertaking; it remains now to satisfy all Reasonable
Scruples which have been raised concerning the Wholesomness and Cheapness of
Water thus prepared.
The Queries and Answers follow.
Quest. 1 IF this Water can be made in sufficient quantities to serve the Uses
of any Ship at Sea?

Ans. About Ninety Gallons may be Prepared in every Twenty four Hours by an
Instrument of 33 Inches Diameter, which will stand under the Deck of any Ship;
and it is computed that less than three Quarts is a good Allowance for any man
in that time: And if a large Ship, wherein there are many men aboard, should
require more Water, then two or more of the Instruments may be had upon
reasonable Terms, and one man may attend several of them.

Quest. 2. In case the Operation be by Fire, it may require a Skilful Chemist,
or one knowing in such Operations, to be on Board every Shi, who will require
great Wages.

Ans. There will be no occasion for any such Person, for any Seaman may be
Instructed in an Hour or two to prepare this Water.

Quest. 3. It Is probable that the Engine may be frequently out of Order, and
being so at Sea, where Artificers and Tools are wanting to repair it, there
must necessarily follow want of Water, which will be of Ill Consequence.

Ans. This Engine is of such Contrivance, that it is never likely to be out of
Order.

Q. 4. Can this Engine be of use in Stormy-weather?

Ans. Since a sufficient quantity of Fresh Water may be so easily had by this
Engine, the Mariners will be careful to make a good Provision of it
beforehand; however, it is not to be doubted, but it will answer the worst
Accidents of the greatest Storms, and have its Effect sufficiently in the worst
Weather, especially considering that in such desperate Extremities men must be
content with smaller Allowances.

Quest. 5. The Operation being by Fire, it may endanger the Ship, and the Smoke
be very offensive?

Ans. The Engine may easily be placed in any Ship without danger of Fire,
offense of Smoke.

Quest. 6. Will not the Charge of this Instrument and Materials belonging to it
be very great?

Ans. It is difficult to make exact Answer to this, but an Instrument of the
largest Size, with all the Materials belonging to it, will not amount to above
18 pound, and may last many years, and according to the Rates of Ships, they
may be proportioned both in Bulk and Price. And where it may be thought
necessary to make use of this Experiment on Shore, for Brewing, or other uses
of a Family, Instruments and Materials may be very large, and very much cheaper
on Shore than at Sea.

Quest. 7. Will not the Fuel be very Chargeable, and take up much room in the
Ship?

Ans. The quantity of about ninety Gallons of Water may be prepared with less
than three pecks of Coals, and proportionally with any other Fire; and the
whole Room that will be taken up in the Fire, and in the few Casks to be
employed in the making and receiving this Water, will be less than the tenth
part of Stowage now employed for Water only, and upon a strict Computation made
by the Persons concerned in this Grant, the whole charge of Water will come to
about a farthing per Gallon.

Quest 8. Will not the Ingredients take up much Room, and be very Chargeable?

Ans. A Vessel less then a Barrel may contain enough of the Ingredients to
catty a Ship to the East Indies and back again; and the Ingredients for near
one hundred Gallons of this Seawater will not amount to above 12 Pence, and
will be cheaper when great quantities are used at Land.

Quest. 9. Admitting this Preparation of Water may be made, and insufficient
Quantities, it may be doubted whether it be wholesome?

Ans. The Famous Lord Bacon, having written learnedly of this Subject, had not
the least thought that the Seawater, after it had been Dis-salted, without any
Noxious addition, was Unwholesom: and it neither now is, nor ever was really
doubted whether it were wholesome; However, because invidious Persons, who are
no well-wishers to Ingenious Designs, may possibly raise Scruples, the
Gentlemen who are concerned in this Grant, have purposely, to give Public
Satisfaction, sent a large quantity of this Water to Doctor King, a very
Ingenious Physician, who is a Member of the College, and of the Royal Society;
who finds,

1. That it is Lighter than most of the Waters about the Town.

2. That it is without Sediment, and Transparent as any other Waters.

3. That it Lathers (as they call it) with Wash-Ball or Soap, better than other
Water, and with less Soap.

4. That Sugar dissolveth sooner in it, than in other Water.

5. That it Evaporates sooner than common Water.

6. That whereas common Water Putrifies and yields a Stinking Smell within a
few Weeks, this has continued Sweet and unaltered several Months, and may yet
do so much longer, being still in as good condition as it was above Eight
Months ago, November the Fifteenth, 1683.

7. That it makes Gellies as firm and good as any Water.

8. That it Boils Pease to Tenderness, Beef, Mutton, Fish, and all other Meat,
without giving it an ill Taste or Color.

9. That it has no kind of ill Taste in it self, and Boils in Milk, without
Curdling.

10. That Flowers, Plants, and all Vegetables grow in it at least as well as
any other Water.

11. And that small Animals live and grow in it.

Several men of great Quality, viz. The Earls of Shrowsbury, Westmorland,
Mulgrave and Burlington, the Lord Dunbar, Lord Lumley, Lord Falconbridge, and
Lord Chumley, besides very many Gentlemen of Quality, who frequently drink
Water, Officers of Sea, and Physicians, have Drunk of this Water, without being
in the least indisposed after it; but, lest any doubts may remain after this,
of the Salubrity of the said Water, the following Testimonial of these Learned
and Eminent Physicians, is here inserted.

Since the former Editions of this Treatise, most of the Foreign Ministers,
several Persons of Quality, eminent Merchants, Seamen, and others, have eat of
Pease, Fish, and Flesh boiled in this prepared Water; and some hundreds have
drunk of it often, and in great quantities, without the least ill effect by it;
and several of the East and West India Ships now ready to sail, have already
agreed with the Patentees, and have taken Engines from them: and some since
they have had them on board their Ship, have made Trial in the Downs of the
Operation of the said Engine at Sea, to the great satisfaction of several
Persons residing in and about Deal, and other Maritime Places near the Downs.

The Approbation of the College of Physicians, and other Doctors of Physic,
Practicing in and about London.
WHereas we have received an account in a Gazet published some Months since,
that the Honorable Robert Fitz Gerald, Esquire; has found out the way and means
of reducing Salt Water into Fresh, in quantities sufficient to serve Ships at
Sea. And for as much as some Persons may possibly make a doubt, if the said
Water be wholesome after the Salt is taken out of it. We therefore, considering
of what general Advantage this useful Experiment may be, having fully informed
our selves from Mr. Boil, that the said Experiment is made by Fire. And having
also seen an account of some Experiments made by some Members of our own Body,
do declare our Opinion, that We believe the said Water is very wholesome, and
may be safely used. And being further acquainted by the said Mr. Boil, that
the very few ingredients made use of in the said Operation, are fixed in the
Fire, and give no noxious quality to the Water; We are therefore of Opinion,
that the same may be safely used, and is at least as healthy as any other Water
used at Sea. All which we certify (at the Request of the Honorable Robert
Fitzgerald.)

Dr. Cox, President, Sir C. Scarborough, Knt. Dr. Daniel Whistler, Dr.
Weatherly. Dr. Will. Deuton. Sir. T. Millington, Knt. Dr. Walter Needham, Dr.
Thomas Short, Dr. Thomas Allen, Dr. Edmund Dickingson, Dr. William Croone, Dr.
Richard Lower, Dr. John Windebank, Dr. Daniel Cox, Dr. James Rufine, Dr.
Charles Conquest, Dr. Edmund King, Dr. Willoughby, Dr. Tho. Sydenham, Dr.
Edward Tyson, Dr. Nehemiah Grew, Dr. David Abercromby, Dr. Andrew Creagh.
Though Physic has always flourished in this Kingdom, yet in this Age it is in
greater Perfection than ever; being improved, both as to the Practical and
Speculative part, by the present Fellows of the Famous College of Physicians,
who, being Men of great Practice and Eminent Learning, cannot but give full
satisfaction to all such as inquire concerning the healthfulness of this Water;
Their Opinion being, in this particular, the more valuable, because it is to
their own Disadvantage, since the Brackish Waters of the Seacoast, and the
pu^^ifying Waters made use of at Sea, might probably have afforded them a great
number of Patients, which may hereafter be lessened by the use of this
wholesome Water.

Since the first Edition of these Papers, his Majesty has been pleased to see
some Experiments, which has so convinced his Majesty of the healthfulness of
this Water, that he has resolved to have it generally made use of in his
Seaport Garrisons; of which an account has been given in several Guzetts, by
His Majesty's special Order.

The Benefits and Advantages of SeaWater made Fresh.
MUch Stowage will be saved, so that a Ship of 50 or 60 Tun, and proportionably
of greater Bulk, may take in several Tuns of Goods more than formerly they used
to carry; which will considerably advance the Trade of all Merchants, and be of
vast profit to the Masters or Owners of Ships.

The Charge of Casks is very considerable, especially when bound with Iron, as
all SeaCasks must be; And by means of this Engine, three fourths of that charge
will be saved.

The tear and wear of Boats often going from Ship board, and frequent loss of
the Boats and men in Stormy Weather, and the Opportunity of the Sea-mens being
Drunk on shore; by which many fatal accidents do happen, (by means of having
this Water-Engine) will be prevented.

Ships in long Voyages have been forced to run many Leagues from their intended
course, which much retards their Voyage, and makes them lose fair Winds, and
maintain more Seamen at charges of Diet and Wages than they have occasion for;
which inconveniences may be prevented by having Water within themselves.

Ships are often forced to leave their Anchors and Cables behind them, by being
forced into dangerous Shoars upon account of taking in Fresh Water.

In the African, East and West India Voyages, great quantities of Fresh Water
are necessary, which the Seamen are forced to put above Deck for want of room,
which is great hindrance to a Ships Sailing, and much endangers and weakens a
Ship.

In case of Calms, which often happen in the narrow Seas, but especially near
the Line, this Instrument will be of vast advantage, by affording fresh and
wholesome Water, instead of that which is unwholesome and offensive.

Essex, Kent, all other the Seacoasts, in any part of the World, that want
wholesome Water, may be easily and and cheaply supplied by this means; as also
Venice, Amsterdam, Roterdam, and all other Towns or Places that lie near the
Sea, and either want good, or have Brackish Water.

In time of War, whole Navies may be relieved by this Engine, and Opportunity
given of making the greatest Discoveries imaginable.

It is further to be considered, that hitherto the richest and ablest bodied
Seamen have been averse horn undertaking long Voyages, by reason of
endangering their Healths, and Lives, by making use of putrified Water, which
inconvenience is not now to be feared, there being such hopes of useful Fresh
Water by the use of this Engine; and possibly a smaller number of men may serve
the use of Ships than do at present, by which much Charges will be saved to the
Masters and Owners of Ships; and Merchants may Trade upon easier Terms

In Portsmouth; Rochester, the Fenns of Lincolnshire, and any other places near
the Sea, where Waters are Brackish, and consequently unwholesome, this Engine,
etc. may be very useful, and where there is room enough to place it, very great
quantities of Water may be had for the use of whole Families, and the
Ingredients when used in great quantities may be afforded at a cheaper Rate.

A LETTER of Mr. BOYLE's to the Learned Dr. JOHN BEALE, Fellow of the Royal
Society, concerning Fresh Water made out of Seawater: Printed at the desire of
the Patentees.
SIR,
TO give you a short Account (suitable to the little time I have to do it in,)
of the Transaction, which I suppose must have given he rise to the Mention made
of my Name in the public Gazette: I must inform you, that one of my nearest
Relations, (Captain Fitzgerald) and some other Worthy Gentlemen, having
acquainted his Majesty, that They had an Invention for making Seawater sweet
and wholesome in great quantity, and with small charge, and that I had examined,
and did approve the Water so prepared; His Majesty was pleased with very
Gracious Expressions, to command Me to attend him with a further and more
particular Information. Having readily obeyed this Order, and been made
acquainted with the Objections the King thought fit to make against the
Practicableness of the Invention; which (tho a private Man had urged them) I
should think the moll Judicious that have been framed against it; I humbly
presented to him, that I looked upon this Invention as comprizing two differing
things; a Mechanical part, which related to the Engine it self, and the use of
it a Shipboard, and a Physical part, which concerns the Potableness and
Wholsomness of the Liquour. About the former of these I did not pretend to
clear the Difficulties, especially such strong ones, as His Majesty had
proposed; but left it to the Patentees to give him Satisfaction, which they
were in a readiness to offer. But as to the Wholsomness of the prepared Water,
I had made some Trials upon the Liquour, which gave me not just Crounds of
suspecting it to be unwholsom, but several Motives to believe it well
conditioned and of great use to Navigators, and not to them only. And having
hereupon briefly acquainted His Majesty with the chief Trials I had made to
examine this Sweetened Water, He was pleased to look upon them as Satisfactory,
and vouchsafed on that occasion to Discourse, as a virtuoso, of the Sea and
Brackish-maters, and gave me some new, as well instructive Observations about
them: and in conclusion, dismissed the Patentees with a Gracious Promise of his
Royal Protection, and peculiar Favor.

To this short Narrative it now remains, that I briefly Subjoyn the chief
things that persuaded me of the Salubrity of this Water, (whence may be justly
and easily inferred, the Utility the Public may receive by a cheap and easy
way of preparing it.) First, then I considered that almost all the Rainwater
that falls from the Clouds on the Main Ocean, and which (except perhaps in very
few Places in Torrid Climates) is unquestionably received as wholesome, must be
afforded by the Sea, and consequently be but Seawater freed from its Salt,
(according to the famous Motto, Redit Agmine dulci.) Next I found, (as his
Majesty himself had done,) that the Liquour was well tasted, and without any
sensible Brackishness; and some of it continued for between 4 or 5 Months in a
large Crystal Bottle, that I purposely kept unstopt, and for the most part in
a South Window, where it neither did, not probably in a long time, will
putrify, or so much as appear troubled or less transparent; during which time,
it was with Approbation tasted and smelled by several Learned Physicians of the
famous College of London. Thirdly, I found it laver very well, which most
Pump-waters, and many others that have some little (tho unperceived) common
Salt in them, will not do. Fourthly, this Water will boil Pease tender, which
amongst Seamen is one of the principal signs of good Water. Fifthly, In very
good Balances, with an Instrument that I purposely caused to be made for the
nice weighing of Liquours, I found this Water far less heavy than one would
expect; for if it differed at all in weight from the like quantity of
undistill'd Water, (I speak with an If, because it is far more difficult to be
exact in such nice Trials, than the unpractic'd will imagine) the difference
was not considerable, being but one part in 400, and that difference is very
small in comparison of that which Navigators and learned Authors relate to be
observable in natural Waters, all of them good and potable: I might tell you on
this Occasion, that the last Great Duke of Tuscany, who was an Eminent
Virtuoso, and the Patron of the celebrated Academy of the Lyncean Philosophers,
is affirmed, among other prudent Courses that he took for his Health, whereof
he was very Sollicitous, to have constantly made use of distilled Water, when
he used any Water, for his own Drinking. And I could add other things
favorable enough to the Patentees Water, if Haste, and perhaps Discretion too,
did not oblige me to leave them yet unmention'd, that I might now have time to
say somewhat of the main thing of all that convinced me of the Saltlessness of
the Water I speak of. I considered then, Sixthly, that the thing that was aimed
at by those ingenious men, that at differing times, and in several Countries
have attempted to make Seawater sweet, and the thing that was required by
proposing Recompenses, or otherwise to encourage the Makers of such Attempts,
was to free the Seawater from the Brackishness without any noxious Additament:
so that on all sides it was taken for granted, that the only thing that kept
the Seawater from being safely Potable, was its Brackishness. From which
reflection it was natural for Me to infer a Condition very favorable to our
prepared Water. For having long since written a short Discourse of the Saltness
of the Sea; I had been industrious to devise ways of comparing Waters in point
of Brackishness. And by these I found the Patentees water to be more free from
Common-salt than Waters that are usually drunk herein London, of which I
remember I showed those Gentlemen an experiment that surpised, as well as
convinced them. And that which more satisfied me myself, was a Trial that I
carefully made, by a way, which having mentioned, but not yet (for want of
opportunity) disclosed to His Majesty, the Respect I owe Him forbids me to
impart without His leave: On which account I hope you will be content to be at
present assured of these two Things; One, that by this way of Trial, I found,
(what possibly you will think strange;) that if there were in Water, so much as
one Grain of Salt, in above two Ounces of Water I could readily discover it:
The other, that even by this critical Examen, I could not detect so much as a
thousandth part of Salt in Our Prepared Water; whereas I found by Trials
purposely and carefully made, that our English Seawater contained a 44, or
45th part of good dry Salt; or, which is all one, that 44 Pints, or near so
many Pounds of Marine Water, would yield about one Pound of dry Common-Salt.

Thus Sir, you have a short and Art-less Account, such as my haste will permit,
and the nature of the Subject requires, of my Part in promoting this prositabl
Invention; to which I own my self a great well-wisher, not out of any private
Interest (tho that was obligingly proffered me by the Patentees,) but as I
think the bringing it into general use, may prove a real Service to Mankind,
upon the Score of diverse Utilities and Advantages, which yet, (tho I had
leisure,) I should think very needless to enumerate to so discerning a Person
as Dr. B. to whom I shall therefore hasten to subscribe my self,

SIR, A very Affectionate Friend, and Humble Servant, R. BOIL.

AFter so many forcible and convincing Testimonies in favor of this great
Design, I shall make an Addition of the Approbation of His Majesty of Great
Britain; who, after the publication of the first Impression, having seen the
convincing Proofs of the healthful Quality of this Water, has resolved to have
the same to be made use of in all his Seaport Garrisons; The which he caused
to be published by express Order, in several Gazetts, and particularly in that
of Monday, November. 5. 1683.

An ABSTRACT out of the Gazette, Numb. 1676.
HIS Majesty was pleased to Command the Honorable Mr. White Hall November. 2.
1683.
Boil to attend Him, to give His Majesty an Ocular Proof of the Nicety of his
way of examining the freshness and saltness of Water, and to apply it to the
Seawater, prepared according to the Patentees Invention; which being done
before His Majesty, his Royal Highness, and the Duke of Grafton, several
Persons or Quality being also present, it was made apparent, by a certain
prepared Liquid which Mr. Boil had brought with him, that a Discovery could be
made if there were so much as a thousandth pare of Salt in a proposed Water: By
which Trval His Majesty, finding that the Prepared Seawater, for which he has
granted his Royal Patent, was at least as free from Salt as the best Waters
used in this Town: received such Satisfaction as to the wholsomness of the said
Water, that He was pleased to declare his Royal Intentions both to encourage
the said Invention, and to have the said Water made use of in his several
Maritime Garrisons, which Nature has not furnished with wholesome Water.

A Copy of a Letter from Captain Macdonnel, from aboard his Majesty's Ship the
Greybound, near the Coast of Spain, to one of the Patentees of Seawater.
SIR,
FOR these Four Months past, I kept your Seawater (for its better Trial)
Buried in my Ships Hold, where, had it not been extraordinary good, it must
infallibly have been of no use, and offensive, but I Will assure you it proved
quite contrary; for yesterday, having several both of Sea and Land Officers on
board for me, I made them insensibly taste of your Water, which I pretended to
be from a Spring I watered my Ship at, Ten Leagues to the Southward of Sallie;
they all affirmed it to be as good as Tangier Water, the very best counted in
the Streights, but when I discovered the Water to be yours, they hardly would
give it Credit, and approved of it (as really it is, as good as can be drank)
which they desired me to let you know.

November. 3. 1683. I am Your Humble Servant Rand. Macdonnel.

The Extremity of the last Winter having occasioned the loss of the President,
a Rich East India Ship, and many other of His Majesty's Ship and Subjects to
perish for want of Provision and Fresh Water at Sea, His Majesty, for
prevention of the like Misfortune, was pleased to Order the following Advice to
be inserted in the Gazette of March 6. 1683.

White Hall, Feb. 28.
HIS Majesty having heard several Relations of die great Distress some of his
Subjects have lately been in at Sea for want of fresh Water, has been pleased
for their Relief in such Cases, to command the Patentees for the new Invention
of making Seawater Fresh, to give the most public notice they can of the
Usefulness of the said Invention, of which his Majesty has received so great
satisfaction, that his Majesty is pleased that those Instruments shall be
provided for his Ships and Garrisons, where they ate not naturally provided
with good Water. And in obedience to His Majesty's Order, the Patentees do
hereby give notice, That two Treatises have been written on this subject, which
may be had at the Ship against the Royal Exchange, and at the Marine Coffee
house, whereunto all Persons are referred for more particular Information; in
which the great benefit and many Conveniences of this Invention, the casiness,
both as to the Trouble and Expense, of making the Salt Water fresh, and the
Wholsomness thereof, is clearly demonstrated by the Testimony of many Eminent
Physicians. To which is added, a Letter written by the Honorable Mr. Boil, by
which he assures the Wholsomness, Durableness, and Sweetness of this Water. And
a Letter from Captain Rand. Macdonnel, of the third of November 1683. from on
Board the Greyhound Frigate, near the Coast of Spain; wherein he affirms, that
he kept of the Patentees Water, some that was given him, in his Ships Hold,
from his leaving England, being four Months, and then having several Officers
on Board him, gave them a taste of it, pretending it to be of the Spring near
Sally, where he had watered, and which is as good as the best in the Streights,
and they drank of it as such, till he discovered what it was; and then they
approved of it to be as good as could be drank.

FINIS.

