A Letter, or Paper, Signed by GARALD FITZGERALD, In behalf of an Assembly of
the Irish at GLANMALIROE in the Province of Leinster in Ireland. To the
Commissioners of PARLIAMENT delivered the 11. of March 1651.

Also A DECLARATION thereupon, made by the said Commissioners of PARLIAMENT,
March 12. 1651.

Together with a Letter from the Earl of Clanricard, to the Commander in Chief
of the PARLIAMENTS Forces in Ireland: February 14. 1651.

And Lieutenant General Ludlowes Answer thereunto, February 20. 1651.

Printed at Dublin by W. BLADEN, 1651.



A Letter, or Paper, signed by Garald Fitzgerald, in behalf of an Assembly of
the Irish at Glanmaliroe in the Province of Leinster in Ireland, to the
Commissioners of Parliament: Delivered the 11. of March 1651.
Honorable Sirs;
AS the horrid mischiefs (unavoidably) accompanying all Wars (though upon never
so just grounds undertaken) are such and so many, and so recently experimented
throughout this unfortunate Kingdom, as no man can without horror think, much
less dilate on a Theme so lamentably Tragical: even so the manifold blessings
derived from a firm and honorable Peace, are so obvious to each understanding,
as I may not presume to trouble men of so great judgment as you are, with any
Comment thereupon. Therefore to proceed briefly to the purpose; Be pleased to
understand, That the Kingdom is advertised from all parts, of a free and noble
disposition in the Commonwealth of England, to grant honorable and safe
conditions of Peace unto this People and Nation: to the acceptance whereof, I
dare assure you of their willing and real inclinations; In order whereunto, I
do in this, and other the Provinces behalfs, request your safe Conducts unto
each Province, with Blanks to Meet, Elect, and Authorize Members of the said
respective Provinces, to meet with the Members so to be Elected by other the
Provinces, at some convenient place within this Province, and thence to
Authorize Commissioners to present Proposals to such as are or shall be
thereunto Authorized by the Commonwealth of England, and conclude on such
Transactions as shall be agreed upon. Your Garrisons, in each Province, being
so obstructive, as the Members may not with safety come together to the
aforesaid Purpose. Unanimitie in this kind among the Provinces, being much
more conduceable to a general quiet, than the particular address of any
Province apart. This, I hope and expect, will produce that so much and so
passionately desired a Settlement, which ought to be the prayer and wishes of
all honest and well-affected persons. Sir Richard Barnewall Baronet, and Colonel
Walter Bagenall are Authorized and employed by the Assembly of this Province,
to solicit the Contents hereof; to whom I shall request you will be pleased to
give full credit in what they shall offer in that particular and other matters,
it being the sense of this Province, I should signify so much unto you; to
which subscribes,

Sirs, Your most humble servant GARALD FITZGERALD.
GARRENCH, 20 Feb. 1651.
To the Right Honorable, The Commissioners of the Parliament of the
Commmon-wealth of England for the affairs of Ireland.
IRELAND. A DECLARATION made in Answer to the foregoing Letter, By the
Commissioners of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England for the affairs
of Ireland.
THe said Commissioners, having on the eleventh of this instant March, received
a Letter, or Paper directed unto them, bearing date the 20. of Febr. 1651.
requesting on the behalf of the Provinces of Ireland, safe Conducts unto each
Province with Blanks; to Meet, Elect, and Authorize Members of each Province,
to meet in some convenient place, for offering Proposals to such as are or
shall be Authorized by the Commonwealth of England for the settlement of this
Nation. Which said Paper, or Letter is subscribed by one Garald Fitzgerald,
under pretense of an Authority, which the said Commissioners cannot in Duty
and with Honor to the Parliament acknowledge; Yet for the satisfaction of
those that may seem to be concerned therein, They do Declare,

I. First, That the Settlement of this Nation does of right belong to the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England only, the consideration whereof, is
at present before them.

II. Secondly, That in the Settlement thereof, the Parliament will make
distinction between such Persons as have lived peaceably according to their
duties, or (being misled) have since submitted to their Authority and
Protection, and those who have Acted or Abetted the Murders and Massacres of
the Protestants, and those that adhered to them during the first year of the
Rebellion, and likewise such Persons as now being in Arms and Opposition to the
said Authority, shall not timely submit thereunto. And therefore the said
Commissioners cannot in justice give way to any Act, so much to the prejudice
of the People of this Nation, as may involve those that are peaceably minded,
with them who continue in Hostility.

III. Thirdly, That to grant safe Conduct and Blank Passes unto such as are in
actual Hostility against the Parliament, to meet together from all the
Provinces to communicate Counsels, is an Act, to which the said Commissioners
cannot in prudence consent.

IV. Fourthly, That for such Persons as now are in actual Hostility against
the Parliament, and are willing to lay down Arms, and submit to the Authority
thereof, upon timely Application made to the Parliaments Ministers here, on
behalf of particular Persons or Places, such moderate terms will be consented
unto as Men in their condition can in reason expect.

Dated at Dublin the 12. of March 1651. Miles Corbet. Io. Jones. John Weaver.


The Earl of Clanricards Letter to the Commander in Chief of the Parliaments
Forces in Ireland, 14. Febr. 1651.
Sir,
SEveral of the Nobility, Clergy, and other Persons of quality and interest
in the Kingdom, together with the Corporation of Galloway, being met in this
Town, and having taken into their consideration, the present State and
Condition of Affairs, and the destructive Effects of a long-continued War, have
made it their suit and request unto me, to propose unto you the entertaining of
a Treaty, in order to a Settlement in this Kingdom, and for your safe Conduct
to such Commissioners, as I by their advice shall think fit to employ unto you,
for the carrying on of that matter; which request of theirs I have condescended
unto by this Express directed to you to that effect, with this further
intimation, That I shall not quit or decline them or their interests, until I
see them settled in a good Condition, fit for the Nation to accept: or if that
will be denied them, resolved to continue his Majesty's Authority and
Protection over them to the uttermost trial; and do not doubt, by Gods
assistance, with the Forces and Arms we have already, and such ayds and
supplies, probably may come from his Majesty and his Allies abroad, but that
we may be so enabled as to alter the present state of Affairs, or if that
should fail, at least make the Conquest you have hitherto gained, for a long
time, of little use or advantage to you; and sell our lives at a dear rate if
compelled thereto. And so leaving it to your consideration, and expecting your
timely Answer and certain Resolution, I remain

Your servant CLANRICARD.
GALLWAY, 14. Febr. 1651. If you please to send the safe Conduct desired, I
desire it may be sent to Sir Charles Coote, or any other you shall think fit
near this place, with a Blank for the number of five Commissioners and their
retinue, not exceeding in the whole the number of twenty; whereby, upon
intimation from him, I may send him a List of the names of the Commissioners.



To the Commander in Chief of the Parliaments Forces in IRELAND.
Lieutenant General Ludlowes Answer to the Earl of Clanricards Letter, 20.
Febr. 1651.
My Lord,
BY your Lordships of the 14. instant, you propose unto me the entertainment of
a Treaty, in order to a Settlement of this Kingdom; and do desire my safe
Conduct for such Commissioners, as you shall think fit to employ unto me, for
the carrying on of that matter. Whereunto, upon advice with the Commissioners
of the Parliament of England, and diverse General and Field-Officers of their
Army, I have thought fit to give you this return: That the Settlement of this
Nation does of Right belong to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England,
to whom we leave the same, being assured they will not therein capitulate with
those who ought to be in submission, yet stand in opposition to their
Authority: but if the Lord have that mercy in store for any who are at
present in Arms against them, as to incline their hearts to a submission to
that Government, which he by his Providence has placed over them, upon timely
Application made to their Ministers here, on the behalf of particular Persons
or Places, such moderate terms will yet be consented unto, as men in their
condition can rationally expect. As to the intimation of your future hopes and
resolutions, I shall only say thus much, That it has been the practice of
those who have served the Parliament in this Cause, to act according to their
Duty, and to leave the success to him who disposes the issues of all things;
and as the Lord has hitherto enabled them exemplarily, to proceed against
those whose hearts have been hardened upon vain and groundless expectations, to
withstand offers of such favor as have been made unto them, so I assure my
self he will still own them in his own way and work: Wherein that we may be
continually found, is the desire of

DUBLIN, 20. Feb. 1651. Your Lordship's humble servant, EDM. LUDLOWE.

For the Lord of Clanricard.
FINIS.
A Second Paper, delivered unto the Commissioners of Parliament, by Sir Rich.
Barnwall and Colonel Walter Bagenall, and the said Commissioners Answer
thereunto.
Further Proposals offered, In pursuance of the Authority given us.

To the Right Honorable, the Commissioners of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England for the affairs of Ireland.

BEing inhibited to Reply to your Honors Answer of the twelfth of this present,
only to offer what further we had in charge; In pursuance whereof, not being
satisfied by your Honors Answer, how far your Honors are impovvered. to Treat
in order to the Settlement and Peace of this Nation, We desire you will be
pleased to make the same known unto us, that if qualified with Authority for
carrying on so good a Work, Safe Conducts be given to such Persons, as by the
Provinces shall be nominated, to Convean at time and Place convenient, when and
where your Honors shall think fit. Whereupon the Province of Leinster, with
such as shall make their joyn't Addresses, will endeavor by all good means, the
setting on so happy a work, conducing to a General Quiet, and prevention of
the great effusion of much Christian blood, by a voluntary Subjection, as well
of Hearts, as Arms; the only means to Advantage, make Stable and Glorious the
Government of the Parliament in this Kingdom. Which offers, if your Honors may
not assent unto, That safe Conducts be granted to such Persons as shall be
appointed, to make their Applications to the Parliament of ENGLAND.

Dated the 15. of March, 1651. R. Barnewall, Walter Bagenall.

The Commissioners of Parliaments Answer to the foregoing Proposals. Ireland.
By the Commissioners of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England for the
affairs of Ireland.
Upon Consideration had, of the Paper this day produced by Sr Richard
Barnewall, and Colonel Bagenall, the said Commissioners do return this Answer
ensuing:

First, as to the making known the Power of the said Commissioners, as is
desired, they do not hold the same fitting, or reasonable: But such of this
Nation, whose hearts God shall incline to a timely and free Submission to the
Power of the Parliament, those Persons shall effectually know the Authority of
the said Commissioners, to grant such just things, as shall be rationally
desired; and do trust, the Lord will enable the Parliament and their Ministers
here, to make such others, whose hearts shall be still hardened to their
further destruction, sensible of the Power God has put into their hands.

And as to the granting Passes to any Persons to go to the Parliament, to
Negotiate for the Settlement of the whole Nation, the said Commissioners do not
think it fitting, it not standing with the Honor and Justice of the
Parliament, to Treat about the Settlement of the Nation, with such as,
contrary to their Duty, are in Hostility against them.

As to the residue of the said Matter contained in the said Paper, the said
Commissioners have given Answer thereunto in a former Paper of the 11.
instant: to which they refer themselves.

Dated at Dublin 15 of March, 1651. Edm. Ludlowe. Miles Corbet. Io. Jones. John
Weaver.


Printed at Dublin by W. Bladen, Anno Dom, 1651.


