STATUTA Vetera and Recentiora.

A Methodical Collection and Abridgement OF THE Statutes That relate to the
Knowledge and Practice of the COMMON LAW.

By D. F.

LONDON, Printed by John Streater, Eliz. Flesher, and H. Twyford, Assigns of
Rich. Atkyns and Ed. Atkyns, Esquires.

And are to be sold by G. Sawbridge, J. Place, J. Belliager, W. Place, T.
Basset, R. Pawlet, C. Wilkinson, T. Dring, W. Jacob, C. Harper, J. Leigh, J.
Amery, J. Poole, Booksellers in Fleetstreet and Holborne, A. D. 1672.

Cum Gratia and Privilegio Regiae Majestatis.

Preface.
AS General Abridgements of the Statutes of this Realm have hitherto been and
will always continue to be of great use; so now since they are become so
voluminous, there seems to be a like usefulness, if not a necessity, of
particular Abridgements to direct those whose Study and Employment is more
especially conversant in some peculiar practice of the Law.

Some Collections of this Nature are already published: One concerning the
Office of a Justice of Peace, under the Title of Statuta Pacis, which
comprehends a great part of the Crown Law. Others relating to the Kings
Revenue, as that of the Customs, of the Excise, another of the Hearth money,
all of great benefit in their several kinds.

But those statutes that immediately relate to the General Practice of the
Common Law and the Courts wherein the same is used, have not hitherto been
collected apart, and are in a manner left, as the choice fruit upon the upper
Branches not to be seen for the Clusters that hang below.

This Book therefore is designed for those Statutes, wherein as there is no
repetition of what has been in any former particular Abridgements: so neither
is there any notice taken of the Multitude of those other Statutes, some
whereof refer to a part of the Realm only, as those of older time which concern
the uniting of Wales, and fixing jurisdictions there, and the like; in Counties
Palatine, and of later, for the drayning of the Fenns which extend but to some
Countries; others are restrained to peculiar Jurisdictions as those of the
Sewers, of Charitable uses, Regulation of Corporations, etc. others which
(though more general) respect only the Policy of the Realm in preserving its
Religion, Strength, Trade, Riches, and Beauty, such are the statutes that
concern the Divine Service and Sacraments Anniversary Feasts and Fasts upon
special Occasions, the Militia Revenue, Navigation, Fishing Timber, Drapery,
and several other Manufactures, rebuilding of London, and many more of that
kind.

All which though of Public Advantage, yet not having a direct Aspect upon
private rights and possessions, are foreign to the present design, and most
proper for general Abridgments, in which they are to be had: This being
intended chiefly for the benefit of practisers and students of the Common Law,
that in their practice and reading they might have a ready recourse to those
statutes which particularly relate thereunto.

It was not thought convenient to go beyond the time of Edward the 3. since
when the practice of the Law has been most uniforme; because most of the Old
statutes, as Magna Charta, Merton, Marlebridge, West. 1. 2. 3. and the rest
till this time are generally but declaratory and affirmative of the Common law
(as my Lord Cook has observed) and may now by their Antiquity and uninterrupted
usage be said to be incorporated into the body of the Common Law, with which
this treatise medleth not: The other parts of those Ancient Statutes referring
generally to such proceedings as now are wholly out of use, and therefore not
proper to be inserted: such are those many Chapters that concern pleadings and
other proceedings in real Actions now out of use, and are already in print by
the name of Magna Charta, and other ancient Statutes in a little volume by
themselves.

Here therefore such only are culled out as referr to the Law as it is now used
and practiced, wherein such Care has been taken that nothing Material is
omitted: so that though it le not directly but Collaterally within the design
of this Treatise, they are here mentioned, as the statute of Hue and Cry,
because many Actions are brought thereupon, and those of Bankrupts being of
general and daily use etc.

But such statutes as have abrogated or rescinded what formerly has been in
use by the dissolution of Courts, alteration of tenures, Abridgment of
Michaelmas Term, and the like, are here omitted.

It were to be wished that the statutes as they are here set down in Order of
time in the first Table, were printed at large in a volume together by
themselves, because of that general Objection to Abridgments, that they are not
of unquestionable Authority; and it would be of further benefit to students if
enterleaved, because many of the Cases and Reports that are Extant are aptly
referrable thereunto, which if collected with Diligence and Judgment would be
an Excellent Comment on the same.

However these Tables and Abridgment are of extraordinary use: for as the first
Table shows what Statutes were made in every particular Kings Reign, so the
other furnishes you with the common and known heads and Titles of the Com^on
Law whereto every statute refers: where at one view you may see what several
statutes in several Kings Reigns have been made concerning such a Branch, head
or Title of the Common Law, such as is used by Practisers and Students in their
Common Place Books.

And since there is a great diversity in the Methodising of those heads, as
that of Fitzherbert, Brook, Rastal, Ash, and of late one more accurate by
Sergeant Roles; The Reader may be pleased to take notice, that what he finds
here, is digested (as nearly as could be) according to the last.

First Table.
Edward. 3. An^o Reg. Cap. 4. 7. EXecutors. 25. 5. Executors. 31. 11.
Administrators. Executors. 36. 15. Pleading. Ric. 2. 9. 3. Attaint. Error. 13.
17. Resceipt. 15. 3. Admiraltie. vide Court. Henr. 4. 2. 7. Nonsuit. 2. 11.
Admiraltie. vide Court. 4. 8. Attorney. 13. Judgment. 5. 8. Ley gager. Henr. 5.
1. 5. Additions. vide Brief. 2. 2. Corpus cum causa. vide Habeas Corpus. 3.
Libell. 9. 4. Amendment. Henr. 6. 4. 3. Amendment. 8. 12. Amendment. 15.
Amendment. 10. 4. Appearance. vide Default. 23. 10. Sheriff. vide Obligation.
Ric. 3. 1. 7. Fines. Henr. 7. 3. 7. Damages and Costs. 4. 20. Actions popular.
24. Fines. 11. 20. Discontinuance. vide Continuance. 19. 9. Error. 20. Damages
and Costs. Henr. 8. 7. 3. Avowrie. 21. 4. Executor. 5. Probate of Wills. vide
Executors. 13. Residence. 15. Recoveries. 19. Avowries. 23. 3. Attai^ 6.
Recognisance. 9. Citation. 15. Damages and Costs. 24. 8. Costs. 27. 10. Uses
and Wills. 16. Inrolment. 28. 13. Residence. 31. 1. Partition. 32. 1. Wills.
vide Executors. 2. Limitations. 5. Execution. 9. Maintenance. 28. Leases. vide
Powers. 30. Repleader. 32. Partition. 33. Enter congeable. 34. Conditions. 36.
Fines. 37. Rents. 38. Marriages. vide Baron and feme. 34, 35. 5. Wills. vide
Devise. 20. Recoveries. Edwar. 6. 1. 7. Discontinuance. vide Continuance. 2, 3.
13. Tithe. vide Dismes. 5, 6. 16. Offices. Phil. and Mar. 1. Sess. 2. 5.
Limitation. 4, 5. 7. Tales. vide Trial. 8. Maidens. Eliz. 1. 19. Bishops
leases. vide Powers. 5. 23. Excomunicato capiendo. v. Excomengement 8. 2.
Damages and Costs. 13. 5. Fraudulent conveyances. vide Fraud. 6. Letters
patents. vide Pleading. 7. Bankrupts. 10. Leases and dilapidations. vide
Powers. 20. Leases of Parsonages. vide Powers. 14. 8. Recoveries. 9. Tales.
vide Trial. 18. 5. Informers. vide Action popular. 11. Leases of spiritual
livings. vide Powers. 14. Jeofailes. 27. 8. Fraudulent conveyances. 5.
Demurrers. 13. Hue and cry. 29. 5. Informers. vide Attorney. 31. 3. Exigent and
Outlawry. vide Utlagary. 5. Actions popular. 6. Simonie. 10. Informers. vide
Attorney. 12. Faires and Markets. vide Market. 43. 5. Corpus cum causa. vide
Habeas corpus. 6. Damages and costs. 8. Executors. 12. Policies of assurance.
vide Merchants. Jac. 1. 3. Bishops leases. vide Powers. 15. Bankrupts. 3. 8.
Delays of Execution. vide Execution. 4. 3. Costs for the defendant. vide Costs.
7. 5. Officer impleaded. vide Office. 21. 4. Action popular. 8. Certiorari. 12.
Officer impleaded. vide Office. 13. Jeofailes. 16. Limitation. 19. Bankrupt.
23. Corpus cum causa. vide Habeas Corpus. 24. Execution. Car. 2. 13 sess. 2. 2.
Delays in execution. vide Brief and Costs. 14. 21. Sheriff. vide Office. 23.
Atturnment. Merchants. 24. Bankrupts. 16. 2. Abatement of writs of Error. vide
Brief. 5. Delays in extending Statutes v. Execution. 16, 17. 8. Arrest of
Judgment. vide Execution. 17. 7. Distress and avowry. vide Replevin. 8. Delays.
vide Execution. 19. 11. Decease of person beyond seas. v. Entry cong. 20. 4.
Error. 23. 9. Costs and Damages. 10. Administrator. vide Executors

Second Table.
Actions popular. 4 H. 7. c. 20. 31 El c. 5. 21 Jac. c. 4. 18 El c. 5.
Amendment. 9 H. 5. c. 4. 4 H. 6. c. 3. 8 H. 6. c. 12. c. 15. 27 El. c. 5.
Attaint. 9 R. 2. c. 3. 23 H. 8. c. 3. Attorney. 4 H. 4. c. 18. 29 El. c. 5. 31
El. c. 10. Avowrie. 7 H. 8. c. 4. 21 H. 8. c. Bail. 13 Car. 2. Sess. 2. c. 2.
Bankrupts. 13 El. c. 7. 1 Jac. c. 15. 21 Jac. c. 19. 14 Car. 2. c. 24. Baron
and feme. 32 H. 8. c. 38. Brief. 1 H. 5. c. 5. 16 Car. 2. c. 2. Certiorari. 21
Jac. c. 8. Conditions. 32 H. 8. c. 34. Continuance. 1 Edw. 6. c. 7. Costs. 24
H. 8. c. 8. 43 El. c. 6. 4 Jac. c. 3. 13 Car. 2. Sess. 2. c. 2. 22, 23 Car. 2.
c. 9. Court. Admiraltie. 2 H. 4. c. 11. Damages. 3 H. 7. c. 10. 19 H. 7. c. 20.
23 H. 8. c. 15. 8 El. c. 2. 43 El. c. 6. Defalt. Appearance. 10 H. 6. c. 4.
Devise. 27 H 8. c. 10. 32 H. 8. c. 1. 34, 35 H. 8. c. 5. Discontinuance. 11 H.
7. c. 20. Dismes. 2, 3 Edw. 6. c. 13. Dower. Iointure. 27 H. 8. c. 10. Entry
cong. 32 H. 8. c. 33. 19 Car. 2. c. 11. Error. 9 R. 2. c. 3. 6 Car. 2. c. 2.
16, 17 Car. 2. c. 8. 17 Car. 2. c. 8. 20 Car. 2. c. 4. Excommengement. 5 El. c.
23. Execution. 32 H. 8. c. 5. 3 Jac. c. 8. 21 Jac. c. 24. 16, 17 Car. 2. c. 5.
71 C. 2. c. 8. Executors. Administrators. 31 Edw. 3. c. 11. 21 H. 8. c. 15. 23
Car. 2. c. 10. 4 Edw. 3. c. 7. 25 Edw. 3. c. 5. 21 H. 8. c. 4. 43 El. c. 8.
Fine. 1 R. 3. c. 7. 4 H. 7. c. 24. 32 H. 8. c. 35. Fraud. 13 El. c. 5. 27. El.
c. 4. Habeas Corpus. 2 H. 5. c. 2. 43 El. c. 5. 21 Jac. c. 23. Hue and Cry. 27
El. c. 13. Inrollment. 27 H. 8. c. 16. Judge. 20 R. 2. c. 3. Ley gager. 5 H. 4.
c. 8. Libell. 2 H. 5. c. 3. Limitation. 32 H. 8. c. 2. 1 Sess. 2 P. M. c. 5. 21
Jac. c. 16. Maintenance. 32 H. 8. c. 9. Market. 31 El. c. 12. Nonsuit. 2 H. 4.
c. 7. 13 Car. 2. Sess. 2. c. 2. Obligation. 32 H. 6. c. 10. Office. 5, 6 Edw.
6. c. 16. 7 Jac. c. 5. 21 Jac. c. 12. 14 Car. 2. c. 21. Partition. 31 H. 8. c.
1. 32 H. 8. c. 32. Pleading. 36 Edw. 3. c. 15. 13 El. c. 6. 43 El. c. 12. 14
Car. 2. c. 23. Powers. 32 H. 8. c. 28. 1 El. c. 19. 13 El. c. 10. 13 El. c. 20.
18 El. c. 11. 1 Jac. c. 3. Process. 19 H. 7. c. 9. 13 Car. 2. Sess. 2. c. 2.
Prohibition. 23 H. 8. c. 9. Recognisancc. 23 H. 8. c. 6. Recoverie. 21 H. 8. c.
15. 34, 35 H. 8. c. 20. 14 El. c. 8. Rents. 32 H. 8. c. 37. Repleader. 32 H. 8.
c. 30. Replevin. 17 Car. 2. c. 7. Resceipt. 13 R. 2. c. 17. Simonie. 31 El. c.
6. Spiritual persons. 21 H. 8. c. 13. 28 H. 8. c. 13. Trial. 19 Car. 2. c. 11.
4, 5 P. M. c. 7. 14 El. c. 9. Uses. 27 H. 8. c. 10. Utlagary. 21 El. c. 3.


Action Popular.
1. REcovery in an action popular by covin shall be no bane in an action sued 4
H. 7. c. 20.
for the same thing bona side.

2. Here the defend' attainted of Collusion shall suffer 2 years imprisonment
to be prosecuted within one year.

3. No Release of a common person shall in this case discharge an action
popular.

4. Yet no collusion is in this case averrable, where the Point of the same
action, or the Collusion it self has been tried by Verdict.

5. Informers heretofore resirained by 31 El. c. 5.
order of any Court, shall not pursue actions popular.

6. In popular actions the offense shall be laid to be done in the County where
indeed it was done: otherwise if the defend' traverse and disprove that point,
the plaint' shall be barred.

7. This act does not restrain Officers, which have lawfully used to exhibit
informations, nor actions brought for Champerty, buying of Titles, extortion,
offenses against the statute of 1 El, 11. (concerning the right landing of
Merchandises, and custom of sweet wines) concealing of customs, etc. corrupt
usury, forestalling, regrating or engrossing, when the penalty shall amount to
20l. or above: For in all these cases the offense may be laid in any County.

8. Popular actions, where the King only has the forfeiture, shall be
commenced within 2 years; where he has only a part, and the Informer the
rest, within one year. But this is to be understood, where a shorter time is
not limited by any statute.

9. All suits for using unlawful games, or any art or mystery without being
brought up in it, and for not having bows and Arrows according to the
statute, shall be prosecuted at the Assizes or Sessions of the County, or at
the Leet within which the Offense was committed, and not elsewhere.

10. Actions popular which may be presented 21 Jac. c. 4.
before Justices of Assise, Nisi prius, G. D. Oyer and Terminer, or of P. shall
be prosecuted only in the Counties where the offenses were committed, except
for Recusancy, Maintenance, Champerty, buying of Titles, concealing of customs
etc. or transporting of gold, silver, munition, wool, woolfells, or leather.

11. Upon default of proving that the offense was committed in the same County,
the defendant shall be found not guilty.

12. The Informer shall make oath that the Osfence was committed in the same
County where the action is laid, and within one year before the suit commenced.

13. The defend' in a popular action, may plead the general issue, and yet give
special matter in evidence.

14. An Informer shall exhibit his suit in 18 El, c. 5.
proper person, and pursue it by himself or by his Attorney in Court, and that
by way of Information or original action, and shall have no deputy; and all
this in pain of 10. pound and the Pillory.

15. A note of the time of exhibiting the Information shall be truly taken, and
from thenceforth it shall be accounted to be of record, before which time no
process shall issue out upon it.

16. The Clark that makes out the process, shall indorse the Informers name,
and also the statute upon which the Information is grounded in pain of 40 s.

17. No Jury shall appear at Westminster for a Trial upon any penal law, when
the offense was committed above 30 miles from Westminster, except the Attorney
general for some reasonable cause require the same.

18. No Informer shall compound with any defend' before answer, nor then, but
by consent of Court, in pain of 10 l. and the pillory.

19. Where the Informer delays or discontinues his suit, or otherwise is
Nonsuit or overthrown, the court shall assign costs to the defend' to be
immediately levied by Execution issuing out of the same Court.

20. Justices of Oyer and Terminer, Assize and Peace, in their Sessions have
power to hear and determine these offenses.

21. This Act shall not restrain Actions brought for Maintenance, Champerty,
buying of titles, or Imbruary, nor any certain person, or body Politic, to
whom any forfeiture or penalty is specially limited, nor certain Officers, who
have lawfully used to exhibit Informations.

Amendment.
1. THE Justices before whom any default 9 H. 5. c. 4.
shall be found by misprision of a Clerk, in one syllable or letter too much or
too little, in any Record or Process, may amend the same as well aster Judgment
as before, so long as such Record or Process shall continue before them.

2. This shall not extend to any Record 4 H. 6. c 3.
or Process whereby any person is Outlawed: nor to Wales.

3. No Judgment or Record shall be 8 H. 6. c. 12.
reversed or annulled for error assigned by reason of the razing or interlining
of any Record, Process, Warrant, Writ, Panel, or Return: or of any Addition,
Substracton or Diminution of Words, Letters, Titles, or parcel of Letters found
in the same.

4. The Judges may reform all desects in any Record, Process, Wards, Plea,
Warr', Writ, Panel, or Return, (except Appeals, Indictments, of Treason, or
Felony, and Outlawries of the same, and the substance of the proper names,
sur-names, and Additions left out in Original Writs, Exigents, and in other
Writs of Proclamation contrary to he Statute of 1 H 5 5. concerning Additions)
so that by such misprision of the Clerk no Judgment shall be reversed or
annulled.

5. Variance alleged between a Record and the certificate thereof, shall be
amended by the Judges.

6. If a Record, Process, Writ, Warrant, Panel, Return; or any parcel thereof
be exemplified under the great Seal, and enrolled, for any Error assigned in
the said Record, etc. in any Letter, Word, Clause, or Matter varying, or
contrary to the exemplification or enrollment, there shall be no Judgment
reversed or annulled.

7. The Justices may amend the misprision 8 H. 6. c. 15.
and defaults of Clerks of the Court, or of Sheriffs their Clerks, and of all
other Officers whatsoever, found before them in any Record or Process, or the
Return of the same, by reason of writing one letter, or one syllable too much
or too little; except in Records and Processes within Wales, and of Felonies
and Treasons, and the dependants of the same.

8. After demurrer joined and entered, 27 El. c. 5.
the Judges shall proceed and give Judgment according to the right of the cause
and matter in Law, without regard to any defect in the proceeding, except such
only as the party shall express, together with his Demurrer. After which time
no Judgment shall be reversed by Writ of Error, or for any other defect, then
such as he shall there mention; and if there happen to be any other, the Judges
may amend there.

9. This Act shall not extend to the proceeding in an Appeal of Felony or
Murder upon an Indictment, Presentment, or penal Statute.

Attaint.
1. HE in the reversion shall have an Attaint or writ of Error upon a false 9
R. 2. c. 3.
Verdict found, or an erroneous Judgment given against the particular Tenant.

2. If the Oath be found false or the Judgment erroneous, and the Tenant still
in life, he shall be restored to his possession and issues, and the Reversioner
to the arrerages: But if he be dead, or be found of Covin with the demandant,
the Reversioner shall have all: Yet the Tenant may traverse the Covin by scire
facias out of the Judgment or writ of Attaint, if he please.

3. Upon every untrue Verdict before 23 H. 8. c. 3.
Judges of Record, (except where the thing in demand extends not to the value
of 40. l. or concerns life) the party grieved shall have an Attaint against
the petty Jury, and also against the party that has the Judgment thereupon.

4. The Process here shall be Summons, Resummons and distress infinite, as well
against the petty Jury and the party, as against the grand Jury, who shall be
of the accustomed number, and have Lands to the yearly value of 20 marks out
of Ancient demesne.

5. The distress shall be awarded 15 days before the return of it, and shall
be made upon the land of every one of the grand Jury, as is used in other
distresses.

6. Albeit the Defend' or petty Jury or some of them appear not, yet the Grand
Jury shall proceed.

7. If any of the petty Jury appear, the Plaint' shall assign the false
serement whereunto the petty Jury shall have no other answer (if they be the
same persons, and the writ, process and assignement be good) but that they made
true serement, which shall be tried by 24 of the grand Jury, unless the Plaint'
has before been nonsuited, or discontinued his suit, or had Judgment against
the Jury for the same Verdict.

8. Howbeit that the Defend' may plead that they gave a true verdict, or any
other matter which may bar the attaint; but notwithstanding such plea the
grand Jury shall nevertheless enquire whether the first Jury gave a true
verdict, or no.

9. If the petty Jury be found to have given an untrue verdict, they shall each
of them forfeit 20 l. to be divided between the King and the Plaint', and
incurr several fines at the Discretion of the Justices, and be ever after
disabled to give testimony in any court.

10. If the Defendants plea in bar be found against him, the Plaint' shall
have Judgment to be restored to what he lost, with his reasonable costs and
damages.

11. Outlawry or Excommunication shall be no plea against the Plaint' in
attaint; and in the aforesaid process such day shall be given as in Dower, but
no Essine or protection allowed.

12. If the Grand Jury appear not, so that the petty Juryes verdict remain
untried, the defalters shall upon the first distress forfeit 20 s. upon the 2
d. 40 s. and upon every distress after 5 l. the like penalty is also to be
inflicted upon the Tales.

13. The attaint is maintainable as long as any two of the the petty Jury are
alive.

14. An attaint shall also lie for a personal thing under the value of 40 l. in
manner aforesaid, save only in such case the Grand Juror is to have lands worth
5 marks per annum out of ancient demesne, or to be worth a hundred marks in
goods, and the forefeiture of each Juror shall be but 5 l.

15. For want of sufficient Jurors in one County a Tales shall be awarded into
another County at the Discretion of the Justices.

16. An attaint shall also lie for him in Reversion or Remainder; and also if
in attaint the Plaint' be nonsuit or discontinue his suit, he shall be fined at
the discretion of the Justices.

17. All Attaints shall hereafter be taken at the Kings Bench or common pleas
and not elsewhere, and Nisi prius shall be granted upon the distress; at the
discretion of the Justices also any of the petty Jury may appear and answer by
attorney.

18. As concerning the forfeitures, the several moyties shall be recovered by
the King and parties respectively by Ca: Sa: or si: fa: or Elegit, or action of
debt against each of the Petty Jury: their Executors or Administrators having
sufficient goods of the Testators not administered.

19. Judgment and Execution of Restitution to the Plaint', and of discharge of
Restitution to the tenant or Defend' shall be given and had as in case of a
grand Attaint has been used.

20. The nonsuit or release shall not prejudice his companions.

21. In every writ of Attaint after the test these words shall be inserted per
Statutum continuatum usque annum 23 H. 8. Dei gratia etc.

Attorney.
1. ALL Atturneys shall be examined 4 H. 4. c. 14
by the Justices, and by their discretion put into the Roll.

2. Those that are by them approved, shall swear truly to serve in their
offices, and to make no suit in a foreign county. An insufficient Attorney
shall be put out by the like discretion of the Justices; and their Masters or
Clients shall have notice thereof, lest they be prejudiced thereby.

3. As any dye or cease, the Justices shall appoint others, being virtuous,
learned, sworn as aforesaid.

4. If an Attorney be found notoriously in fault, he shall forbear the Court,
and be never admitted into any other Court.

5. The Treasurer and Barons of the Exchequer shall pursue the like course
there at their discretion.

6. If any shall be sued upon any penal 29 El. c. 5.
Law in the Kings Bench, common pleas, or Exchequer, where such person is
baylable by law, or may appear by Attorney, the person so sued shall at the day
contained in the first process appear by Attorney to defend the same, and shall
not be urged to personal appearance, or to put in bail to answer the same.

7. The said clause of 29 El. shall only 3. El. c. 10.
extend to natural born subjects or free Denizens.

Avowry.
1. REcoverers of Lands, Tenements 7 H. 8. c. 4.
and Advowsons, their heirs and assigns may distrain for rents, services and
customs due and unpayd, and make avowry and Justify the same, and have like
remedy for recovering them, as the Recoverers might have had or done, albeit
the said recoverers were never seized thereof; and shall also have a Quare
impedit for an advowson, if upon avoydance any disturbance be made by a
stranger, as the recoverers might have had, albeit they were never seized
thereof by presentation.

2. Here every Avowant in any Replegiare or second deliverance, if their
avowry, conusans or Justification be found for them, or the Plaint' be
otherwise barred, shall recover his damages and costs.

3. Termer for years may falsify a feigned recovery had against him in the 21
H. 8. c. 15.
reversion, and shall retain and enjoy his term against the Recoverer, his
heirs and assigns, according to his Lease.

4. Also the Recoverer shall have like remedy against the termer, his Executors
and Assigns by Avowry or action of Debt for rents and services reserved upon
such lease, and due after such recovery, and also like action for wast done
after such recovery as the lessor might have had, if such recovery had never
been.

5. No Stat' of staple merchant or Execution by Elegit shall be avoided by such
feigned recoveries, but such ten'ts shall have like remedy to falsify such
recoveries as is here provided for the Lessee for years.

6. Upon a Replevin, an Avowry may 21 H. 8. c. 19.
be made by the Lord or Conusee, and Justification by his Baylife or servant
upon the Land holden of the said Lord, without naming any person certain to be
tenant thereof: the like law is also upon every writ sued of second deliverance.

7. In any Replegiare or second deliverance for rents, services, customs, or
damage feasant, if the Avowry, Conusance or Justification be found for the
Defendant, or the Plaint' be nonsuit or otherwise barred, the Desend' shall
recover such Damages and costs as the Plaint' should have had if he had
recovered.

8. Both parties shall in such Writs have like pleas, aid, prayers, Ioynders in
aid, as at the common Law, notwithstanding this act; pleas of disclaimer only
excepted.

Bail.
1. NO person arrested upon any writ 13 Car. 2. Sess. 2. c. 2.
out of the Kings Bench or common pleas, upon which he is liable by the Stat'
23 H. 6. c. 10. shall be forced to give security or enter into bond with
Sureties for his appearance at the day in such writ, bill or process specified
in any sum above 40l. unless the cause of action be expressed particularly: and
where such cause of action is not expressed, all sheriffs and officers shall
let to bail persons arrested upon 40l. security for their appearance,
according to the Stat' 23 H. 6.

2. Upon appearance by Attorney in term entered in court, where the process is
returnable, the bail bond shall be satisfied and discharged, and after such
appearance no amerciaments shall be estreated against any Sheriff or officer
for want of appearance; and if the Plaint' in some personal action declare not
before the end of the next term after appearance, nonsuit shall be entered
against him, and costs taxed and levied, as in the Stat' 28 H. 8. c. 15.

3. Proviso this Act extend not to capias utlagatum, Attachments upon Rescous,
Attachments of Privilege, or any other attachment for contempt whatsoever,
issuing out of any of the said Courts.

Banckrupts.
1. IF any person (Subject or Denizen) 13 El. c. 7.
exercising trade does depart the Realm, conceal him or her self, take
Sanctuary, suffer him or her self to be arrested, outlawed or imprisoned
without just cause, to the intent to defraud his or her Creditors being
Subjects born, he shall be deemed Bankrupt.

2. The Lord Keeper or Chancellor upon complaint in writing against any such
Bankrupt, may appoint honest and discreet persons to take such order with the
body of the Bankrupt wherever found, and also with the Lands (as well Copy as
free) hereditaments, Annuities, offices, writings, goods, chattels and debts
wheresoever known, which the Bankrupt has in his own right, with his wife,
child, or children, or by way of trust, or any secret use; and to cause the
said premises to be searched, rented, appraised and sold for the payment of
the Creditors rateably according to their debts, as in the discretion of such
Commissioners or the most part of them shall be thought fit.

3. The vendees of Coppy-hold Land shall compound with the Lord for their
fines, and then shall be admitted and make fealty according to the Custom of
the manor.

4. Such of the Commissioners as execute the Commission shall upon the
Bankrupts request render him the account and also the overplus (if any be) unto
him, his Executors, Administrators and Assigns.

5. The Commissioners have power to convene before them any person accused or
suspected to have any of the Bankrupts goods, chattels or debts, or to be
indebted unto him, and for discovery thereof to examine upon Oath or otherwise,
as they or the most of them think fit.

6. The Person refusing in that behalf to disclose or swear shall forfeit the
double value of the goods and chattels so concealed, to be ordered and employed
by the Commissioners or the most part of them.

7. The person demanding or detaining any of the Bankrupts goods, chattels,
lands, or debts not justly due, shall forfeit the double value to be levied,
recovered and employed as aforesaid.

8. If after all the Creditors are paid out of the Bankrupts Estate and the
forfeitures, any surplusage be, it shall be by the Commissioners divided
between the Queen, her heirs and successors, and the poor of the place where
such Bankrupts happen to be.

9. If any person indebted absent himself from his usual place of abode, upon
conplaint the Commissioners or the most of them shall award 5 proclamations to
be made upon 5 sundry market days near the said place, commanding him to
render himself to the Commissioners or one of them; which if he do not in
convenient time, he shall be adjudged out of the Queens protection, and the
party wittingly receiving or concealing him, upon Information to the
Commissioners or the most of them, suffer such imprisonment and pay such fine
as the Lord Chancellor or Keeper shall think fit.

10. The Creditor not fully satisfied by this means may, notwithstanding this
act, take his course at law for the recovery of the residue of the debt.

11. The Estate which happens to the Bankrupt by purchase or descent after he
becomes a Bankrupt, shall also be extendable by the Commissioners, or the more
part of them.

12. This Act shall not extend to Annual Estates of Land (free or Copy) by him
conveyed before he became Bankrupt, so that they were conveyed bona fide, and
not to such as were privy to his fraudulent purpose.

13. Every Subject born or Denizen, who using trade shall depart the Realm, 1
Jac. c. 15.
keep house, absent him or her self, to be arrested for debt not justly grown
due, to be outlawed, imprisoned, fraudulently procure his person to be arrested
or goods attached, depart from home, make any fraudulent grant of Lands or
goods, with intent to deceive his other Creditors being Subjects born, or being
arrested lie in prison 6 months or more, shall be adjudged a Bankrupt.

14. The Bankrupt hereby described shall be proceeded against as is limited by
the 13 El. 7. in like manner as if he had been there so fully described.

15. Any Creditor shall be received to take his part if he come in within 4
months after the Commission sued forth, and pay his part of the charge:
otherwise the Commissioners may proceed to distribution.

16. If a Bankrupt grant his lands or goods, or transferr his debt into other
men's names, except to his children upon marriage, they being of age to consent,
or upon valuable consideration, the Commissioners may notwithstanding sell
them, and such Sail shall be good.

17. If upon warning in writing left 3 times at the most usual place where he
dwelt within one year before he became Bankrupt, he appear not before the
Commissioners, they may cause him to be proclaimed at some public place or
places, and if upon 5 such proclamations he yield not himself, they shall by
warrant cause him to be brought before them to be examined concerning his
Estate.

18. If the Bankrupt shall refuse to be examined, the Commissioners shall
commit him until he conform; or if being informed he commit perjury to the
prejudice of the Creditors to the value of 10l. or more, he shall be indicted
for the same, and after conviction stand upon the pillory, and have one of his
ears nailed thereto and cut off.

19. If any person be known or suspected to detain any of the Bankrupts Estate,
and do not appear or send some lawful Excuse at the next meeting after warning
given him, or appearing refuses to be examined upon Oath, the Commissioners by
warrant shall cause him to be arrested, and if he still refuse, shall commit
him until he do submit.

20. The Witnesses shall have convenient charges allowed them ratably by the
Creditors, and such of them as shall be perjured, and their procurers shall be
indicted upon the Stat' 5 El. 9.

21. The forfeitures of this Act shall be recovered by the creditors, and (the
costs of suit deducted) shall be ratably divided amongst them.

22. The Commissioners have power to Assign the Bankrupts debts to the
Creditors, and by such assignement they shall be recoverable as their proper
debts.

23. No debtor shall be prejudiced by the payment of his debt to the Bankrupt,
hefore he have notice that he is Bankrupt.

24. The Commissioners shall make such account to the Bankrupt, and likewise
pay him such overplus, as by 13 E^iz. 7. is ordained, and the Creditors being
all satisfied the bankrupt may recover the remaining debts.

25. If any of the Commissioners or other person employed by them be sued for
any act done by force of the Commission, the Defend' may plead not guilty, or
Justify, and the whole matter shall be brought in Evidence according to the
very truth thereof, and if the verdict pass for the Defend' he shall have his
costs.

26. The Commissioners shall proceed to Execution notwithstanding the death of
the Bankrupt.

27. All laws made against Bankrupts 21 Ja. c. 19.
shall be construed beneficially for the Creditors.

28. Persons of Trade and Scriveners that procure protection except of
Parliament, and all such as by exhibiting petitions endeavor to compel their
Creditors to take less than their due debts, or to gain time for the payment
thereof, or being indebted in 100 l. or more shall not satisfy the same within
6 months after the same grows due, and the Debtor arrested, or within 6 months
after the original writ sued out and notice given thereof in writing at the
place of his abode, or after arrest escape out of prison, or procure
enlargement by putting in common bail, shall be adjudged Bankrupt, and in case
of arrest from the time of the arrest.

29. Commissions and other proceedings provided by 13 El. 7. and 1 Jac. 15.
shall also be pursued against him that by this act is prescribed to be a
Bankrupt, and proceedings provided by this act shall be pursued against him
that is described in the other 2.

30. The Bankrupts wife shall also be examined upon oath, and if she appear not
or refuse to be examined, she shall incurr the punishment inflicted by the
former laws, in like cases.

31. The Bankrupt that fraudulently concealeth his goods, or tendreth not some
just reason why he became Bankrupt, shall after conviction be set in the
pillory and lose one of his ears.

32. The Commissioners may by themselves or others break open the Bankrupts
house or chests etc. where his Estate is, or is reputed to be, and then seize
and order his body or Estate, as by the former laws is ordained.

33. In the Distribution of the Bankrupts Estate, no more respect shall be had
unto debts upon Judgment, Recognizances, specialties with penalties or the
like, than to other debts.

34. The Commissioners may proceed when the Bankrupt by fraud makes himself
accomptant to the King.

35. Another man's goods in the Bankrupts possession shall be also distributed
by the Commissioners as the Bankrupts own goods.

36. The Commissioners grant of the Bankrupts entailed Estate shall be good,
except when the reversion or remainder is in the King.

37. No Purchaser shall be impeached by this or the former act, unless the
Commission be sued forth within 5 years after he becomes bankrupt.

38. This act, as also all the former, shall extend to Strangers, (both Aliens
and Denizens) as well as to subjects born, as well to be relieved as also to be
subject to the penalty thereof.

39. Whereas diverse Noblemen, and 14 Car. 2. c. 24.
Gentlemen, not brought up in trade, have notwithstanding put great stocks into
the East India and Guiny company, it is declared that no person adventurer for
putting in money or Merchandise into the said Companies, or for adventuring or
managing the fishing, called the royal fishing Trade, shall be taken or reputed
a merchant or trader within any stat' for Bankrupt, or be liable to the same.

40. Provided, that persons Trading or trafficking in any other manner, than in
the said companies or fishing, shall be liable to the Commission of Bankrupts.

Baron and Femme.
ALL marriages shall be adjudged 82 H. 8. c. 38. Marriage
Lawful, that are not prohibited by Gods Law.

Brief.
1. IN Original Writs, where Exigent 1 H. 5. c. 5.
shall be awarded, Addition of the Defendants condition and dwelling shall be
inserted.

2. Outlawries otherwise prosecuted shall be void.

3. Surplusage of Additions shall not prejudice, albeit the writ do therein
vary from the Records and Deeds.

4. The Clerks of the Chancery shall not omit such additions, in pain to be
fined at the discretion of the Chancellor.

5. Original Writs may be sued upon 13 C. 2. Sess. 2. c. 2. Delays in Execution.
personal actions against Prisoners in the Fleet, and an Habeas Corpus granted
to bring them to the Bar, to answer any suit or declaration: being put in, and
the defendant not appearing, Judgment may be entered by nihil dicit, and the
Prisoner charged in Execution upon notice hereof to the Warden of the Fleet by
rule of Court.

6. In Actions of debt, and other personal actions, and Ejectione firmae in any
of the said Courts, after Issue joined to be tried by the Jury, and after
Judgment obtained, there shall not need to be fifteen days between the Test
and return of any venire fac', Hab' corpora jurator', Distringas, Fieri fac' or
Cap' ad satisfac', and the want of it shall be no error.

7. Provided this extend not to Writs of Cap' ad satisfac', where any exigent
after Judgment is to be awarded, nor to any Cap' ad satisfac', in order to
make any bail triable.

Certiorari.
CErtioraries shall not be allowed 21 Iac. c. 8.
unless the Indicted will become bound with sufficient sureties (such as the
Justices of Peace in Sess' shall like of) to pay to the prosecutor within one
month after conviction such costs and damages as the said Justices shall assess.

Conditions.
1. GRantees of Reversions may take 32 H. 8. c. 34.
advantage of conditions and covenants against Lessees of the same Lands, as
fully as the Lessors, their heirs or successors might have done.

2. Lessees may also have the like remedy against the grantees of Reversions,
which they might have had against their Lessors or Grantors, their heirs or
successors; all advantage of recoveries in value, by reason of any Warranty in
deed or Law by voucher or otherwise, only excepted.

Costs.
1. THere shall be no costs awarded to 24 H. 8. c. 8.
the Defendant, when any Action is sued to the Kings use.

2. In personal Actions in the Courts at 43 El. c. 6.
Westminster (being not for land or battery) when it shall appear to the Judges
(and so by them signified) that the debt or damage to be recovered amount not
to the sum of 40 s, or above, the said Judges shall award to the plaintiff no
more costs than damages.

3. If the defendant or plaintiff be nonsuit, 4 Jac. c. 3.
or overthrown by lawful trial in any action whatsoever, the tenant or
defendant shall have costs to be assessed and levied by the 23 H. 8. c. 15.

4. If any person sue a writ of Error to 13 Car. 2. Sess. 2 c. 2.
reverse a Judgment after verdict, and the said Judgment is afterward
affirmed, he shall pay to the defendant in the Writ of Error double Costs, to
be assessed by the Court where such Writ of Error shall be depending.

5. In all actions of Trespass, Assault and 22, 23 Car. 3. c.
Battery, and other personal actions, wherein the Judge at the trial of the
cause shall not find and certify under his hand upon the back of the Record,
that an Assault and Battery was sufficiently proved, or that the freehold or
title of the Land was chiesly in question, the plaintiff shall have no more
costs than damages, in cases the Jury find damages under 40 s.

Continuance. Discontinuance.
1. THe death of the King shall not discontinue 1 E. 6. c. 7.
any suit betwixt party and party; neither shall the variance between the
Original and Judicial process in respect of the Kings name ^e material, as
concerning any fault to be alleged therefore.

2. Assizes of Novel disseisin, Mortdancestor, Juris u^rum, or Attaints, shall
not be discontinued by reason of death, new Commissions, or Associations, or
the not coming of the same Justices to any of them.

3. Preferment of the demandant or plaintiff to be Duke, Archbishop, Marquess,
Earl, Vicount, Baron, Bishop, Knight, Justice of the one bench or the other, or
Sergeant at Law, shall not make the suit abatable.

4. Preferment of a Justice of Assise, Jail-deliver, or Peace, or of any other
Commissioners to the dignities aforesaid, shall not lessen his power.

5. New Justices of Jail-deliver may give Judgment of a Prisoner sound guilty
of Treason or Felony, though he were reprieved by other Justices.

6. No Process or suit before Justices of Assise, Jail-deliver, Oyer and
Terminer, or Peace, or other of the Kings Commissioners shall be discontinued
by a new Commission, or by the alteration of any of their names.

Court. Admiralty.
1. THe Admirals Court shall not have 13 R. 2. c. 5. confirmed by 2 H. 4. c. 11.
cognizance of any thing done within the Realm, but only upon the Sea.

2. The party grieved upon non-observance of the 13 R. 2. c. 5. shall by action
upon his case recover double damages against the Prosecutor in the Admiralty,
and the Prosecutor shall also forfeit 10 l. to the King.

Damages.
1. WHen any person bound by a 3 H. 7. c 10. confirmed by 19 H. 7. c. 20.
Judgment shall sue (before Execution had) a Writ of Error to reverse it, if
the Judgment be affirmed, the Writ discontinued, or the party that sueth it be
nonsuit, the party against whom the Writ is brought shall recover his costs
and damages at the discretion of the Justices before whom the said Writ is sued.

2. If the Plaintiff be nonsuit or overthrown 23 H. 8. c. 15.
by lawful trial in any Action, Bill, or Plaint, for trespass upon the 5 R. 2.
c. 7. or for any debt or covenant upon specialty or contract, or for detinue,
account upon the case, or upon any Statute, the defendant shall have his costs,
to be assessed by the Judge, or Judges of the Courts, and to be recovered as
the plaintiff might have recovered his, in case Judgment had been given for
him.

3. He that sues in forma pauperis shall not pay costs, but shall suffer such
punishment as the Justices or Judge of the Court shall think fit.

4. When any person shall sue forth of 8 El. c. 2.
the Kings Bench any Latitat, Alias, and Pluries Capias, against any person who
thereupon does appear, and put in bail, if the plaintiff do not declare within
three days after, or do after declaration delay or discontinue his suit, or be
nonsuit, the Judges of that Court shall thereupon award damages against the
plaintiff.

5. The like shall be done in the Courts of the Marshalsea London, and all
other Corporations and Liberties where the Courts are kept de die in diem, but
where they are not so kept, then the plaintiff must declare at the next Court
after appearance, unless he have longer time allowed him by the Court.

6. If any shall maliciously (for vexation and trouble) cause or procure any
person to be arrested or attached to answer in any of the said Courts at the
suit of any person, whereas there is none such, or without the consent and
agreement of the party at whose suit such arrest and attachment is procured,
the party so causing or procuring the same, and thereof convict by indictment,
presentment, the testimony of two or more witnesses, or other due proof, shall
suffer six months imprisonment without bail, and shall not be enlarged until he
have satisfied the party grieved his treble damages, and besides shall forfeit
unto him (if he be known) 10 l. to be recovered (as also treble damages) by
action of Debt, Bill or Plaint, in any Court against the party so offending,
his Executors, or Administrators, in which no Essoign, etc. shall be allowed.

7. In personal actions in the Courts at 43 El. c. 6.
Westminster (being not for Land or Battery) when it shall appear to the Judges
(and so by them signisied) that the debt or damages to be recovered amount not
to the sum of 40 s. or above, the said Judges shall award to the Plaintiff no
more costs than damages, but less at their discretion.

Defalt. Appearance.
1. NO Filizer, Exigenter, or other Ossicer whatsoever in any suit 10 H. 6. c.
4. confirmed by 18 H. 6. c. 9.
shall make entry, that the Plaintiff obtulit se in propria persona sua, unless
the Plaintiff before such entry made does indeed appear in proper person before
some of the Justices of the place where the Plea depends, and either by himself
or some other credible person of his Counsel, make oath that he is the same
person in whose name that suit is commenced and prosecuted.

Devlse. Testament.
1. EVery person having manors, Lands, 32 H. 8. c. 1.
tenements or hereditaments holden in Socage, or of the Nature of Socage
tenure, and not having any manors, Lands, etc. holden of the King by Knights
service, Socage tenure in chief, nor of any other person by knights service,
shall have power to give, dispose, will and devise as well by his last will and
testament in writing, as otherwise by any act executed in his life, all such
manors, Lands, etc. at his pleasure.

2. Where the Stat' 32 H. 8. c. 1. mentions 34, 35 H. 8. c. 5.
manors, Lands, etc. of inheritance, it shall be expounded and taken of
Estates in fee simple.

3. Every person having a sole Estate in fee simple, or seized in coparcenary,
or in common in fee simple, in any manors, Lands, tenements, rents, or other
hereditaments in possession, Reversion or Remainder, and having no lands holden
of the King, or of any other by Knights service, may give, dispose, will or
devise to any person or persons, (Except bodies Politic and corporate) by his
last will and testament in writing, or by act executed in his life by himself
solely or by himself and others jointly, severally, or particularly, or by all
those ways or any of them as much as in him of right is, all his said ma^nors,
lands, tenements and hereditaments, or any of them, or any rents, commons, or
other profits out of the same or any parcel thereof, at his free will and
pleasure.

Discontinuance.
1. IF a woman, that has an estate in 11 H. 7. c. 20.
Dower, for life, or in Tail, jointly with her husband, or only to her self,
or for her use, in any lands etc. of the Inheritance or Purchase of her
husband, or given to the husband and wife by the husbands ancestors, or any
seized to the use of the husband or his ancestors, do, sole, or with an
after-taken husbband, discontinue, or suffer a Recovery by covin, it shall be
void, and he to whom the land ought to belong after the death of the said
Woman, may enter, as if the woman were dead, without discontinuance or
recoverie.

2. Provided, that the woman may enter after the husbands death. But if the
woman were sole, the Recovery or discontinuance barreth her for ever.

3. This act extends not to any recovery, or discontinuance with the heir next
inheritable to the woman, or by his consent of record enrolled.

Dismes.
1. EVery person shall without fraud 2, 3 H 6. c. 13.
yield and pay all predial Tithes, as has been used, or of right or custom
they ought to have been paid.

2. None shall take or carry away any Tithes paid, (or that ought to have been
paid as aforesaid) before he has justly divided and set forth for the use
thereof, the 10th part thereof, or otherwise agreed for the same tithes with
the Parson, Vicar, or other owner or proprietor or farmer thereof in pain to
forfeit the treble value of the tithes so carried away.

2. At Tything time it shall be lawful for the owner (claiming such predial
tithes) his deputy or Servant, to see his said tithes be truly set out and
severed from the nine parts, and the same quietly to take and carry away.

3. If any person carry away his Corn, Hay, or other predial tithes before they
be set out, or willingly withdraw his tithes of the same, or other things
whereof the tithes ought to be paid, or do let such owner to view, take and
carry away such tithes, by reason whereof they are lost, impaired or hurt, that
then upon due proof thereof before a spiritual Judge the party so carrying
away, withdrawing or stopping shall pay the double value of the tithe so taken,
lost, withdrawn or taken away before costs of suit to be recovered before such
Ecclesiastical Judge according to the Ecclesiastical laws.

4. Tithe of Cattle feeding in a wast or common where the Parish is not known,
shall be paid by the owner of such Cattle in the Parish where he dwells.

5. None shall be compelled to pay tithes for lands, or other hereditaments,
which by the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, or by any privilege or
prescription, are not chargeable therewith, or are discharged by any
composition real.

5. Barren Heath, and wast ground (other then such as be discharged from tithe
by Parliament) which has heretofore paid no tithes by reason of the barrenness
thereof, but be now improved and converted to arable ground or meadow, shall at
the end of 7 years next after such improvement pay tithes; or if they yield
some small tithe before such improvement, they shall only pay that same small
tithe during the first 7 years, but afterward shall pay the full tithe
according to such improvement.

6. Every person exercising Merchandice, buying and selling, or any other art
or fuculty, (being such persons and in such places as heretofore have used to
pay personal tithes within 40 years, or of right ought to have paid them, and
not day Laborers) shall yearly at or before Easter pay for his personal tithes
the 10th part of his clear gains, reasonable charges and expenses being
deducted.

7. Handycraft men having used to pay tithes within 40 years shall still pay
them.

8. The ordinary has power to examine him that refuses to pay his personal
tithes by any lawful means otherwise than by his own oath concering the
payment of such tithes.

9. Offerings shall be paid in the place where the party dwells at such 4
offering days as heretofore within the space of 4 years last past have been
used for the payment thereof but in default thereof at Easter.

10. Parishes that stand upon or toward the sea coast, the commodities whereof
consist much in fishing, shall pay their tithes as they have done within 40
years, and their offerings as aforesaid.

11. This Act shall not extend to London, or Canterbury, or their Suburbs, or
to any other Town, or place, where the inhabitants have used to pay tithes by
houses.

12. Suites for substracting or withdrawing of tithes or other profits
spiritual shall be prosecuted in the Ecclesiastical Court before the
Ecclesiastical Judge who has power (no original or Prohibition hanging) to
Excommunicate the party disobeying the sentence, and if he stand Excommunicate
40 days to certify the Excommunication (after publication at the place or
parish where such party dwells) into Chancery, and thereupon to require
process de excommunicato capiendo, to be awarded against the person so
Excommunicate.

13. Before a prohibition shall be granted the party Plaint' shall bring a true
copy of the libell exhibited into the Ecclesiastical Court concerning that
suit, subscribed with the hand of the party, and thereunder shall be written
the Suggestion whereupon the party demands such prohibition; and the libell
thus ordered shall be delivered to the Justices of the Court where the
prohibition is so demanded: and if such suggestion be not proved to that Court
by 2 sufficient witnesses within 6 months next after such prohibition granted,
the other party shall upon request have consultation, the double costs and
damages awarded by the said court, and may recover such costs and damages by
action of debt.

14* This act shall not give power to any Ecclesiastical Judge to hold plea of
any matter against the meaning of the Statute of W. 2. c. 5. Articuli cleri,
circumspecte agatis, Sylva caedua, the treatise de regia prohibitione, nor of 1
E. 3. 10. nor to any of them, nor where the Kings court ought of right to have
Jurisdiction.

15. No tithes of marriage goods shall be paid in Wales or the marshes thereof.

Dower. Iointure.
1. WHere an estate is made in possession, 27 H. 8. c. 10.
or use to husband and wife, and his heirs, or the heirs of their two bodies,
or to them for their lives, or for the wives life for her Iointure, in any of
these cases she shall not have dower: Howbeit, upon a lawful eviction of that
Iointure, she shall be endowed according to the rate of the husbands land
whereof she was dowable.

2. Such a Iointure being made after marriage, the wife (after her husbands
death) may refufe it and betake her to her dower, unless such Iointure be made
by Act of Parliament.

Entry.
1. Where a disseisor dies seized of 32 H. 8. c. 33.
lands, that descent shall not take away the entry of the disseisee, or his
heir, unless the disseisor had peaceable possession thereof five years next
after such disseisin committed.

2. If any prisoner, person for whose 19 Car. 2. c. 11.
life or life's any estates have been or shall be granted remaining beyond sea,
or otherwise absenting themselves the Realm for 7 years, and no sufficient
proof made of their lives, shall thereupon be accounted naturally dead; and if
thereupon any person shall be evicted out of any lands or Tenements by virtue
of the same act, and afterward the person upon whose life the estate depends
shall return, or be proved living, or to have been living at the time of the
eviction, then the tenant or lessee who was ousted, or his Executors etc. may
reenter, repossess and enjoy the said land in their former estate, so long as
the persons upon whose lives the estate depends shall live, and shall recover
against the lessors etc. or other persons upon action for damages, the full
profits, with lawful interest.

Error.
1. HE in reversion shall have a writ of Error upon an erroneous Judgment 9 R.
2. c. 3.
given against tenant for life.

2. For preventing abatement of writs 16 Car. 2. C. 2.
of Error upon Judgment in the Exchequer, enacted: That the not coming of the
Lord Chancellor and Lord Treasurer or either of them at the day of the return
of any writ of Error, to be sued forth by Virtue of the Statute 31 Ed. 3. c.
12. (recited in the Statute 31 El. c. 1.) shall not cause any abatement, or
discontinuance of any such writ of Error. But if both the Chief Justices of
either Bench, or either of them, or any one of the said great officers, the
Lord Chancellor, or Lord Treasurer, shall come to the Exchequer Chamber, and
there be present at the day of the return of any such writ of Error, it shall
be no abatement or discontinuance: But the suit shall proceed, to all intents,
as if the said Lord Chancellor and Lord Treasurer had come and been present at
the day and place of return of such writ.

3. After a verdict of 12 men in any 16, 17 Car. 2. c. 8.
action, suit, bill, or demand, commenced after the 25th of March 1665. in any
of the Courts of Record at Westminster, or Courts of Record in the County
Palatine of Chester, Lancaster, or Durham, or Court of the great Session, or in
any of the 12 shires of Wales, Judgment thereupon shall not be stayed or
reversed, for default in form or lack of form, or lack of pledges, or but one
pledge to prosecute returned upon the Original writ, or for default of entering
of pledges upon any bill or declaration, or for default of bringing into Court
of any Bond, Bill, Indenture, or other deed whatsoever mentioned in the
declaration or other pleading, or for default of allegation of the bringing
into Court of letters Testamentary, or letters of Administration, or by reason
of the Omission of Vi and armis, or contra pacem, or for mistaking of the
Christian name, or Sur-name, of the plaint' or defend', demand' or Tenant,
sum or sums of money, day, month, or year, by the Clarke in any Bill,
Declaration, or pleading, where the right name, Sur-name, sum, day of the
month or year, in any writ, plaint, Roll or Record preceding, or in the same
Roll or Record, where the mistake is committed, is rightly alleged, whereunto
the plaintiff might have demurred, and shown the same for cause: Nor for want
of the averrment of Hoc paratus est Verificare per Recordum, or for not
alleging, prout patet per Recordum, or for that there is no right Venue, so as
the cause were tried by a Jury of the proper County or place where the acted is
laid.

4. Nor any Judgment after Verdict, confession by Cognovit actionem, or relicta
verificatione, shall be reversed for want of misericordia, or Capiatur, or by
reason that a Capiatur is entered for a misericordia, or a misericordia for a
Capiatur: Nor, that Ideo concessum est per Curiam is entered for ideo
consideratum est per Curiam; nor for that increase of costs after a Verdict in
any action or upon a nonsuit in Replevin, are not entered to be at the request
of the party for whom the Judgment is given; nor by reason that the costs in
any acton whatsoever are not entered to be by consent of the plaint': But that
all such omissions, variances, defects and other matters of like nature, not
being against the right of the matter of the suits, nor whereby the issue or
Trial are altered, shall be amended by the Justices and other Judges of the
Courts where such Judgments are or shall be given, or whereupon the record is
or shall be removed by writ of error.

5. Provided this Act extend not to any writ, declaration or suit of Appeal of
Felony or Murder, nor any Indictment nor presentment of Felony, Murder,
Treason, or other matter, nor to any process upon any of them, nor to any
writ, Bill, action or Information upon any penal Statute, other than concerning
Customs and subsidies of Tunnage and poundage.

6. And after the 20th of March 1664. no execution shall be stayed in any of
the aforesaid Courts by writ of Error, or supersedeas thereupon after Verdict
and Judgment in any action personal whatsoever, unless a recognisance with
condition according to the former Statute made 3 Jac. c. 8. shall be first
acknowledged in the Court where such Judgment shall be given.

7. In writs of Error to be brought upon any Judgment after Verdict in any
writ of Dower, or of Ejectione firmae, no Execution shall be stayed, unless the
plaint' in such writ of Error shall be bound to the plaint' in such writ of
Dower or Ejectione firmae in such reasonable sum as the Court to which such
writ of Error shall be directed, shall think fit, with condition that if the
Judgment shall be affirmed in the said writ of Error, or the writ of Error
discontinued in default of the plaint' therein, or that the said plaint' be
nonsuit in such writ of Error, that then the plaint' shall pay such costs,
damages, and sums of money as shall be awarded after such Judgment affirmed,
discontinuance, or nonsuit; And the Court wherein such execution ought to be
granted upon such affirmation, discontinuance or nonsuit, shall issue a writ to
enquire as well of the mean profits, as of the damages by any ways committed
after the first Judgment in Dower or Ejectione firmae: And upon return thereof
Judgment shall be given, and execution awarded for such mean profits and
damages, and for costs of suit.

8. Provided this Act extend not to any writ of Error to be brought by any
Executor or Administrator, nor any action Popular, nor to any other action
which is or shall be brought upon any penal law or statute (except actions of
debt for not setting forth of Tithes) Nor to any Indictment, presentment,
Inquisition, Information, or Appeal.

9. This Act to continue in force for three years, and to the end of the next
session of Parliament, after the said three years, and no longer.

10. In all Actions, personal, real, or 17 Ca^. 2. c. 8.
mixed, the death of either party, between the Verdict and Judgment, shall not
be Death after Verdict.
alleged for error, so as such Judgment be entered within two terms after such
Verdict.

11. This Act to continue for the space of five years, and from thence to the
end of the next Sessions of Parliament.

12. Judgment shall or may be given 20 Car. 2. c. 4.
in any Suit or Writ, or Writs of Error in the Exchequer, in the preseuce of
the Exchequer.
Lord Keeper, notwithstanding the vacancy of a Lord Treasurer, in such manner
as has been accustomed where there was present both the Chancellor, and the
Lord Treasurer.

Excommengement.
1. EVery Writ de Excommunicato capiendo 5 El. c. 23.
shall be made in Term time, and returnable in the Kings Bench the next day
after the Test thereof, having 20 days betwixt the Test and return.

2. After the Writ shall be sealed, it shall be forthwith brought into the
Kings Bench, and there opened, and delivered of record to the Sheriff or other
Officer, or other Deputies to whom the Execution thereof appertains, and then
if the Sheriff or other Officer do not duly execute it, the Justices shall
amerce him at their discretion, and estreat the amercement into the Exchequer.

3. At the return of the Writ, the Sheriff or other Officer, etc. shall not be
compelled to bring the party arrested into the Kings Bench, but only return the
Writ with a short Declaration how it was executed, to the end the Justices may
proceed therein according to the tenor of this act.

4. If the Sheriff, or etc. return a non est inventus, then shall issue out of
the Kings Bench a Capias returnable in term time two months (at least) after
the test thereof, with a Proclamation to be made 10 days (at least) before
the return in the County Court, Assise, Jail-deliver, or Sessions, that the
party shall within 6 days after such Proclamation yield his body to the Gaol,
and there remain as a Prisoner, in pain of 10 l. and what shall be done
therein, and thereupon shall be returned by the Sheriff, or etc.

5. If upon the return it appear that the party has not rendered himself
prisoner upon the first Capias, he shall forfeit 10 l. more to be estreated as
aforesaid, and then a second Capias shall be awarded against him with a pain to
forfeit 20 l. to be estreated by the Justices as aforesaid, and then a third
Capias shall be awarded with like Proclamation and pain, and then a fourth, and
so infinitely, until he render himself prisoner, upon the several returns
whereof he shall forfeit 20 l. to be estreated as aforesaid.

6. The party yielding his body shall be committed to prison in like sort as is
he had been taken upon the Excom. Cap.

7. If the Sheriff, etc. make a false return upon any of the said Writs, he
shall forfeit to the party grieved 40 l.

8. The Bishops Authority to receive submission, and deliver the Excommunicate
is saved according to the former usuage, viz. by a certificate thereof from the
Bailiff into the Chancery, and then a Writ from thence to deliver the Prisoner.

9. In Wales, the Counties Palatine of Lancaster, Chester, and Durham, and Ely,
(the Cinque Ports being Jurisdictions exempt, where the Queens Writ runs
not) a Significavit (being of Record in Chancery) shall be sent by Mittimus to
the Justices or head Officers there, who shall then proceed against the
Excommunicate as the Kings Bench is above directed.

10. If in the Excom. Cap. the Excommunicate have not a sufficient addition
according to the Statute 1 H 5. 5. or if in the Significavit it be not
contained that the Excommunication proceeds upon some cause or contempt of some
original matter of Heresy, refusing to have his child baptized, refusing to
receive the Sacrament, to come to Divine Service, or Errors in matters of
Religion or Doctrine, Incontinency, Usury, Symony, Perjury in the
Ecclesiastical Court, or Idolatry, he shall not incurr the penalties aforesaid.

11. If the Addition be with a nuper of such a place, the first Capias and
Proclamation shall issue forth without any penalty: and in such case also if
the party be proclaimed in a County where he is not for the most part resiant,
he shall not incurr the penalties aforesaid.

12. Persons in Prison under age, non sane memory, shall not incur the
penalties aforesaid.

Execution.
1. IF Lands delivered in Execution on 3^ H. 8 c. 5.
just cause be recovered without sraud from the tenant in Execution before he
shall have levied his whole debt and damages, he may have a scire fac' out of
the Court from whence he had his Execution, returnable into the same Court at a
day 40 days at least after the date of such scire fac'; At which day if the
Defendant being lawfully warned make default, or do appear and not plead a
sufficient cause other than the former acceptance of the Lands, to avoid the
said suit for the residue of the said debt and damages, the said Court shall
award a new writ of Execution for the levying thereof.

2. No Execution shall be stayed upon 3 Jac. c. 8.
any Writ of Error or Supersedeas thereupon for the reversing of a Judgment in
any Action of debt, or upon any contract in the Courts at Westminster, of the
Counties Palatine of Lancaster, or Chester, or of the great Sessions in Wales,
unless the Plaintift with two sufficient sureties (such as the Court shall like
of) shall first be bound to the party (for whom such judgment is given) by
Recognizance in the same Court, in double the sum adjudged, to prosecute the
said Writ of Error with effect, and to pay, if the judgment be affirmed, all
debts, damages and costs so adjudged, and all costs and damages for delaying
the Execution by the Writ of Error.

3. The parties or party at whose suit 21 Jac. c. 24.
any person shall stand charged in Execution for debt or damages recovered,
their Executors, Administrators, may after the death of the person so charged
in Execution lawfully sue forth new Execution against the Lands and Tenements,
Goods and Chattels of the person deceased, in like manner as if the person
deceased had never been taken in Execution: Howbeit this act shall not extend
to Lands sold lona fide after the Judgment given, when the money raised
thereupon is paid, or secured to be paid to Creditors in discharge of due debts.

4. For further remedy against the staying of Execution after Judgment in part
provided against by the Stat' 3 Jac. c. 8. no Execution shall be stayed in any
of the said Courts by Writ of Error or Supersedeas after Verdict and Judgment,
in Action of debt upon the Stat' of 2 E. 6. for Tithes, promise for payment of
money, Trover, Covenant, Detinue, or Trespass, unless such Recognisance in the
same Court be first entered as directed by the said Statute, and if such
Judgment be affirmed, the party presenting such Writ of Error to pay double
costs for such delay.

5. Proviso this Act shall not extend to any popular action, except 2 E. 6. nor
to any Indictment, Information, Inquisition, or Appeal.

6. When any Judgment, Statute, or 16. 17. C. 2 c. 5.
Recognizance shall be extended, it shall not be avoided or delayed by occasion
of omission of any part of the Lands or Tenements extendible, saving always the
remedy of Contribution against such person whose Lands be or shall be extended
out of such extent for time to come.

7. This Act gives no extent or contribution against any Heir within the age of
21 years, during such minority, further than might have been before this Act.

8. Provided this Act extend only to such Statutes as be for the payment of
money, and to such extents as shall be within 20 years after the Statute,
Recognizance, or Judgment had.

9. This Act to continue for three years, and from thence to the end of the
next session of Parliament, and no longer.

10. Where any Judgment after a 17 Car. 2. c. 8.
Verdict shall be had, by, or in the name of any Executors or Administrators,
in such case an Administrator de bonis non may sue forth a scire fac', and take
Execution upon such Judgment.

11. This Act to continue for the space of five years, and from thence to the
next sessions of Parliament.

Executor.
THe Ordinarys shall depute the next and most lawful friends of the intestate
31 El. 3. c. 11.
to administer the goods; which deputies shall have the benefit and incurr the
charge of an Executor, and shall also be accountable to the Ordinaries as
Executors.

2. Administration of intestates goods shall be granted to the widow, or next
21 H 8. c. 5.
of kin to the intestate, or both as the ordinary shall think fit.

3. The Ordinary or other person enabled 22, 23 Car. 2. c. 10.
to make distribution of the surplusage of the Estate of the Intestate shall
distribute one third to the wife, and all the residue equally amongst the
children and such persons as legally represent his Children, in case any of
them be dead, other than such child, or children (not being heir at Law) who
shall have any Estate by the Settlement of the intestate, or shall be advanced
by the intestate in his life time by portion, or portions equal to the share
that shall by such distributions be allotted to the other children to whom such
distribution is to be made; and in case any child (other than the heir at Law)
who shall have any Estate by Settlement from the said intestate, or shall be
advanced in his life time by the intestate by portion not equal to the share
which will be due to the other children by such distribution as aforesaid, then
so much of the Surplusage of the Estate of the Intestate to be distributed to
such child or children as shall have any such Land, or Settlement from the
Intestate, or were advanced in his life time, as shall make the Estate of all
the said children to be equal as near as can be estimated: But the heir at Law
notwithstanding any Land that he shall have by descent or otherwise from the
Intestate is to have an equal share in the distribution with the rest of the
children without any consideration of the value of the Land which he has by
descent, or otherwise from the Intestate.

4. And in case there be no children nor any legal representatives of them,
then one moyetie of the said Estate to be allotted to the wife of the
intestate, the residue of the said Estate to be distributed equally to every of
the next of kindred of the Intestate who are in equal degree, and those who
legally represent them.

5. Provided that there be no representatives amongst collaterals after Brother
and Sisters children; and in case there be no wife, then the Estate to be
equally distributed to, and amongst the Children; and in case there be no
Children, then to the next of kindred in equal degree of, or unto the
Intestate, and their Legal Representatives, and in no other manner whatsoever.

6. No such distribution shall be made till after one year after the Intestates
death, and every one to whom any Share shall be allotted shall give bond with
Sureties in the said Courts to secure the Administrator pro rata, if any debts
be afterward recovered.

7. This Act to continue for 7 years and from thence to the next Session of
Parliament.

8. Executors shall have an action for a 4 E. 3. c. 7.
trespass done to their Testator, as for his goods and Chattells carried away
in his Life, and shall recover their damage, in like manner as he, whose
Executors they are, should have done if he had lived.

9. Executors of Executors shall have 35 E. 3. c. 5.
actions of debt, account, and of goods carried away of the first testators,
and Execution of Statute Merchants, and recognisances made unto him, and shall
also answer to others so far forth as they shall recover of the first testators
goods, as the first Executors should have done.

10. That part of the Executors which 21 H. 8. c. 4.
take upon them the charge of a will, may sell any land devised by the Testator
to be sold, albeit the other part, which refuse, will not join with them.

11. If any person shall obtain any goods, or debts of an intestate, or
releases or other discharge of any debt or duty (which belonged to the
intestate) by fraud (or by procuring the Administration to be granted to a
stranger of mean estate and not to be found, with intent thereby to obtain the
intestates estate) and not upon valuable consideration, or in satisfaction of
some just debt answerable to the value of the goods so obtained, in such case
such person shall be chargeable as Executor of his own wrong, so far as the
value of the goods, or debts so obtained shall amount unto: Howbeit he shall
also be allowed such reasonable deductions, as other Executors, or
Administrators ought to have.

Fines.
1. AFine shall after the engrossing thereof be openly read and 1 R. 3. c. 7.
proclaimed in the common pleas, the same term, and there the three next terms
after, upon four several days, and in the mean time all pleas shall cease.

2. A transcript of the fine shall be sent to the Justices of Assize of the
County where the land lies, to be there also proclaimed at every Assize holden
there that year, and then also all pleas shall cease.

3. An other transcript thereof shall be also sent to the Justices of Peace of
the same County, to be in like sort proclaimed at their four Sessions holden
that year: And both the Justices of Assize and Peace shall make Certificate of
such proclamation made, the second return of the term then next following.

4. A fine so proclaimed and certified shall conclude all persons both privy
and Strangers (Except women covert, other than such women as the parties to the
fine, persons under age, in prison, out of the realm, or out of sound mind) if
they pursue not their right, title, claim, interest, by way of action or
lawful entry within 5 years after the proclamations so made and certified as
aforesaid.

5. The right of Strangers which happens to come unto them after the fine is
engrossed is saved, so that they pursue their right or title within 5 years
aster it so comes to them: and here an action against the pernor of the profits
is maintainable.

6. If the parties to whom such right or title comes, be covert, under age, in
prison, out of the Land, or of non sane memory, they or their heirs have time
to pursue their right or title, within 5 years after such imperfections
removed: so also have they in case they had right of title at the time of the
fine levied.

7. Fines at the common Law have the same force they had before; and a fine may
be levied according to this Statute or the common law, at the Election of the
parties.

8. Every Fine after the engrossing shall be 4 H. 7. c. 24.
proclaimed in the Court the same Term, and the 3 next, four several days in
every Term, and in the mean time all pleas shall cease.

9. The Proclamations being so made, the fine shall conclude all persons both
privyes and strangers, except persons under age, covert, out of the Realm, or
not of Sane memory, being not parties nor privyes to the fine.

10. The right and interest that any person or persons, (other than parties)
has, or have at the time of the fine engrossed, is saved, so that they or
their heirs, pursue such their right or interest by action or lawful entry
within 5 years after the proclamation so made: so also is the right and
interest saved, which accrues after the engrossing of the fine, so that the
parties having the same, pursue it within 5 years after it so accrues; and in
this case the action may be brought against the pernor of the profits.

11. If at the time of the fine engrossed, or of such accruer as aforesaid, the
persons be Covert, (and no parties to the fine) under age, in prison, out of
the Realm, or of non sane memory, they or their heirs have time to pursue their
actions within 5 years after such imperfection removed.

12. The exception, that none of the parties, nor any to their use had any
thing in the lands at the time of the fine levied, this way or at the common
law, at the pleasure of the parties.

13. Fines at the Common Law have the same force they had before the making of
this Act, and a fine may be levied this way, or at the Common Law, at the
pleasure of the parties.

14. All Fines levied by any person or 32 H. 8. c. 36.
persons of full age, of Lands intailed before the same Fine, to themselves or
to any of their Ancestors in Possession, Reversion, Remainder, or Use, shall
immediately after the Fine engrossed and Proclamations made, be a sufficient
bar against them and their Heirs, claiming only by such intail, and against
all other claiming only to their use, or to the use of any heir of their bodies.

15. Howbeit this Act shall not bar the interest of any persons accrued, by
reason of any Fine levied by a woman, after her Husbands death, contrary to the
Statute of 11 H. 7. 20.

16. A Fine levied by him who is restrained by any express Act of Parliament so
to do, shall be void, notwithstanding this Act.

17. This Act shall not extend to any Fine heretofore levied of Lands now in
suit, or heretofore lawfully recovered in any Court by Judgment, or otherwise:
Nor to any Fine of Lands intailed by the Kings Letters Patents, or any Act of
Parliament, the reversion thereof at the time of such Fine levied being in the
King.

Fraud.
1. ALL fraudulent conveyances of 13 El. c. 5.
Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods or Chattels, and all such Bonds, Suits,
Judgments, and Executions, made to avoid the debt or duty of others, shall (as
against the party only, whose debt or duty is so endeavored to be avoided,
their Heirs, Successors, Executors or Assigues) be utterly void; any pretense,
feigned consideration, or etc. notwithstanding.

2. Every of the parties to such a fraudulent conveiance, Bond, Suit,
Judgment, or Execution, who being privy thereunto shall wittingly justify the
same to be done bona fide, and upon good consideration, or shall alien or
assign any Lands, Lease, or Goods, so to them conveyed as aforesaid, shall
forfeit one years value of the Lands, Lease, Rent, Common, or other profit out
of the same, and the whole value of the goods, and also so much money as shall
be contained in such covenous Bond; and being thereof convicted, shall suffer
half a years imprisonment, without bail: and here the said forfeitures are to
be divided betwixt the Queen, and the party grieved.

3. Common Recoveries against the tenant of the freehold, shall be good
notwithstanding this Act; and so shall all Estates made for procuring of a
voucher in Formedon: Neither shall this Act extend to grants made bona fide,
and upon good consideration, to persons not privy to such collusions.

4. Every Conveyance, Grant, Charge, 27 El. c. 4.
Encumbrance, and Limitation, of use or uses, of, in, or out of any Lands, or
other Hereditaments made to defraud any purchaser of the same, in fee, or
tail, for life, or years, shall (as against such purchaser only, and every
other person lawfully claiming from, by or under him) be utterly void; the said
purchaser having obtained the same for money, or some other good consideration.

5. Every of the parties to such fraudulent conveyances, or being privy
thereunto, who shall justify the same to be made bona fide, and on good
consideration, to the disturbance and hinderance of the purchasor, or of any
other lawfully claiming from, by, or under him, shall forfeit one years value
of the Lands, or other hereditaments so purchased or charged, to be divided
betwixt the Queen and the party grieved, and being thereof convicted, shall
suffer half a years imprisonment without bail.

6. Conveyances made upon good consideration, and b^na fide, shall be good,
notwi^hstanding this Act.

7. If Lands be first conveyed with clause, provision, or condition of
revocation, determination or alteration, and afterward sold or charged for
money or other good consideration, before the first conveyance was revoked,
altered, or made void, according to the power given thereby; In this case such
first conveyances shall be void against the Vendee, and all others lawfully
claiming from, by, or under him: Howbeit no lawful Mortgage, made bona side,
without fraud, shall be impeached by his Act.

8. All Statutes Merchant, and of the Staple, shall within six months after
this acknowledgement be entered in the Office of the Clerk of Recognizances,
taken according to the Statute of 23 H. 8. 6. and the Clerk there (upon showing
the same) shall make entry thereof, for which he shall have 8 d. and no more.

9. Every such Statute, which is not within four months after the
acknowledgment thereof delivered to be entered accordingly, shall be void
against the purchaser of the Lands chargeable therewith, and against his Heirs,
Successors, Executors and Assigns.

10. The said Clerk shall within the said six months make entry of every
Statute to him delivered, as aforesaid, and shall indorse thereupon the day and
year of such his entry with his own name, in pain to forfeit for every Statute
so brought unto him, and not entered as aforesaid, 20 l. to be divided betwixt
the Queen, and the prosecutor.

11. The Clerk shall take for the search of a Statute but 2 d. for every such
search, in pain to forfeit to the party grieved twenty times so much as he
takes above, to be recovered in any Court of Record by Action of debt, etc.

12. Provided, that this Act shall not extend to make good any purchase made
void by reason of any former conveyance, so as the party so making void the
same, his Heirs or Assigns, were the first day of this Parliament in actual
possession of the Lands, out of which any such Purchase, Lease, Charge, or
Profit was made.

Habeas Corpus.
1. IF a Corpus cum causa, or Certiorari be granted out of the Chancery to 2 H.
5. c. 2. Corpus cum causa.
remove one that is in prison upon an Execution at another man's suit, he shall
be remanded.

2. No Writ of Habeas Corpus, or other Writ sued forth to remove an Action,
shall 43 Fl. c. 5.
be allowed, unless it be delivered to the Judge, or Officer of the Court,
before the Jury appear, and one of them be sworn.

3. No Writ to remove a suit commenced 21 Jac. c. 23
in an inferior Court shall be obeyed, unless delivered to the Steward, etc. of
the same Court before issue or demurrer joined; so as such issue or demurrer be
not joined within six weeks after the Arrest or Appearance of the defendants.

4. An Action or Suit once remanded, shall never afterward be again removed.

5. When the thing in demand exceeds not 5 l. the suit shall not be removed
by any writ, save only by Writs of Error or Attaint.

6. This Act shall only extend to Courts of Record, where an Utter Barrester of
three years standing is Judge, Recorder, Steward, or etc. or assistant to such
Officer there, and not of Council in any action there depending.

7. Neither shall this Act extend to any Action which cannot be tried in such
inferior Courts.

Hue and Cry.
1. THe Hundred where fresh suit shall 27 El. c. 13.
cease, shall answer half the damages to the Hundred where in the felony shall
be committed, to be recovered in any Court at Westminster in the name of the
Clerk of the Peace of the County wherein the felony was committed; and here the
death or change of the Clerk of the Peace shall not abate the suit.

2. When in this case damages are recovered against one or some few inhabitants
of the Hundred, and the rest refuse to contribute thereunto, two Justices of
Peace (1 Qu.) dwelling within, or near the same Hundred, shall for the levying
thereof, set a Tax upon every Parish within that Hundred; according to which,
the Constables and Headboroughs of every Town shall tax the particular
Inhabitans, and levy the money upon them by distress and sale of goods, and
deliver the money levied to the said Justices, or some of them.

3. No Hundred shall be chargeable when any of the Malesactors shall be
apprehended, or when the Action is not prosecuted within one year after the
robbery committed.

4. No Hue and Cry shall be deemed legal, unless the pursuit be both by Horse
and Foot.

5. No person robbed shall maintain an Action in this case, unless with all
convenient speed he makes his robbery known to some near Town, Village, or
Hamlet, and within 20 days before the Action brought, make oath before a
Justice of Peace dwelling within or near the Hundred where the Robbery was
committed, whether he know the parties that robbed him, or any of them; and if
he know, shall enter into sufficient Bond before the same Justice, to prosecute
the person or persons so by him known, by Indictment, or otherwise, according
to Law.

Inrollment.
1. BArgains and Sales to an use of Inheritance 27 H. 8. c. 16.
of Freehold must be by deed indented and enrolled within six months after the
date thereof, in some Court of Record at Westminster, or in the County where
the Land lies, before the Custos Rotulorum, two Justices of Peace, and the
Clerk of the Peace, or two of them, whereof the Clerk to be one: And here the
fee to be paid for such inrolment, when the Land is not worth 40 s. per an is 2
s. and when it is more 10 s. to be equally divided betwixt the Justice or
Justices then present, and the Clerk of the Peace, who ought to inroll them in
Parchment, and to deliver them unto the Custos Rotulorum within one year after.

2. This Act shall not extend to Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments in
Corporations, where an Officer or Officers there have lawfully used to inroll
Deeds or other Writings.

Justices.
NO Lord nor other shall sit upon 20 R. 2. c. 3. Justice of Assise.
the Bench with the Justices of Assize, in pain of great forfeiture to the
King, and the Justices there commanded not to suffer it.

Judgment.
Judgments given shall continue, and the 4 H. 4. c. 23.
parties for whom they are so given, and their heirs shall be in Peace until
they shall be attaint, or Error if any be.

Ley gager.
IN actions of Debt upon the arrearages 5 H. 4 c. 8.
of an account, feigning (to the intent to put the defendants from their law)
that the same was found before their Apprentices or Servants, as Auditors
assigned therein, it shall be in the Judges discretion upon examination of the
Attorneys (or whom else they please) to receive the defendants to their law, or
to try the same by enquest.

Libell.
A Copy of a Libell grantable in the Ecclesiastical Court shall be presently 2
H 5. c. 3.
delivered upon the defendants appearance.

Limitation.
1. SEisin in a writ of right shall be 32 H. 8. c. 2.
within 60 years before the Test of the same writ.

2. In a Mortdancester, Cosinage, Ayel, writ of entry sur disseisin, or any
other possessory action upon the possession of his Auncestor or predecessor, it
shall be within 50 years before the Test of the Original of any such writ.

3. In a writ upon the parties own seisin or possession, it shall be within 30
years before the Test of the Original of the same writ.

4. In an Avowry or Cosinage, for rent suit, or services of the seisin of his
Auncestor, Predecessoror, his own, or any other, whose estate he pretends to
have; it shall be within 40 years before the making of such Avowry or
Cognizance.

5. Formedons in reverter or remainder, and Scire facias upon fines shall be
sued within 50 years after the title or cause of action accrued and not after.

6. The party demandant, Plaint', or Avowant that (upon Traverse or denier by
the other party) cannot prove actual possession, or seisin within the times
above limited, shall be for ever after barred in all such writs, actions,
avowries, cognizance, prescription, etc.

7. Provided, that in any of the said actions, avowries, prescriptions etc. the
parties grieved may have an Attaint upon a false verdict given.

8. The Statute of 32 H. 8. c. 2. shall not extend 1 P and M. sess. 2. c. 5.
to a writ of right, of Advowson, Quare Impedit, Assize of Darrein presentment,
Jure patronatus, writ of right of ward, writ of ravishment of ward, nor to the
seisor of the wards body or estate: But the time of the seisin to be alleged
in such cases, shall be as it was at the common law before the making of the
said Statute.

9. All writs of Formedon in Descender, Remainder, or Reverter, for any title
or 21 Jac. c. 16.
cause now in esse, shall be sued within 20 years next after this present
Session of Parliament, and for any title or cause hereafter accruing, within 20
years after such title or cause so accruing: otherwise such title shall be for
ever barred, and the party claiming utterly excluded from entry.

10. None now having any right or title of entry into any Manors, Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments, now held from him or them, shall thereinto enter,
but within 20 years next after the end of this Session of Parliament, or within
20 years next after any other title accrued; And none shall at any time
hereafter make any entry into Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, but within
20 years next after his or their right or title, which shall hereafter first
descend or accrue to the same.

11. The titles of any Infant, Femme covert, non compos mentis, one imprisoned,
or beyond sea, are saved so as they commence their suit within 10 years after
such imperfections removed.

12. All actions upon the case, (other then for Slander,) actions for account
(other then such as concern Merchandise) Actions of Trespass, debt, detinue,
Trover, and Replevin, shall be commenced within 3 years after this present
Session of Parliament, or within 6 years after the cause of suit, and not after.

13. All actions of Trespass, of assault, Battery, wounding, and imprisonment,
shall be commenced within one year after this Sessions, or within 4 years after
the cause of suit, and not after.

14. All actions upon the case for words shall be commenced within one year
after this present Session, or within 2 years after the words spoken, and not
after.

15. Provided, that if in any such actions Judgment be given for the plaint',
and the same be reversed by Error, or a Verdict pass for him, and upon motion
in arrest of Judgment it is given against him, or if the defend' be outlawed in
the suit, and after reverse the Outlawry, in these cases the plaint', his
Heirs, Executors or Administrators, may commence a new action within a year
after such Judgment reversed, or given against the plaint', or outlawry so
reversed, and not after.

16. The right of action in the cases abovesaid is saved to an Infant, Femme
covert, non compos mentis, a person imprisoned or beyond sea, as they commence
their suit within the times above limited respectively, after their
imperfections removed.

Maintenance.
1. NOne shall buy any pretended 32 H. 8. c. 9.
right or title to any land, unless the Seller has taken the profits thereof
one whole year before such bargain, in pain that both the buyer and seller
shall each of them forfeit the value of the same Land, to be divided betwixt
the King and the Prosecutor.

2. None shall unlawfully maintain any suit or action, retain any person for
maintenance, embrace Jurors, or suborn witnesses, to the hindrance of Justice,
or the procurement of perjury, in pain to forfeit for every such offense 10 l.
to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor.

3. Howbeit purchasing of a pretended title by him that is already lawfully
possessed of the thing whereunto title is made, is lawful.

4. Proclamations shall be made at the Assizes, of the Statutes made against
Maintenance, Champertie, Embracery and unlawful Retainers.

5. The Offenders against this Act shall be porsecuted within one year.

Market. Fair.
1. EVery Seller or Exchanger of a 31 El c. 12.
Horse in a Fair or Market, which being unknown to the Toll taker, or
Book-keeper does not procure one credible person that is well known unto him,
to vouch the sale of the same horse; Also every false voucher, and the
Toll-taker, or Book-keeper, that suffers such sale or exchange to pass, shall
forfeit 5 l. to be divided betwixt the Queen and the prosecutor: And besides,
the sale of such horse shall be void.

2. The names of the Buyer, Seller and voucher, and the price of the horse,
shall be entered in the Toll-book, and a note thereof delivered to the Buyer
under the Toll-takers or Book-keepers hand, for which the Buyer shall pay 2 d.

3. Notwithstanding such sale and voucher as aforesaid, the right owner or his
Executors may redeem a stolen horse, if they claim him within 6 months after
the stealing, at the parish, or Corporation, where he shall find him, and make
proof by 2 sufficient witnesses before the next Justice of peace in the
Country, or before the head officer of a Corporation, that the horse was his,
and repay to the Buyer such price for the horse as the same buyer shall upon
his own oath before such Justice or officer, testify to have paid for him.

Nonsuit.
1. WHere before Justices of Assise 2 H 4. c. 7.
the parties are adjourned for some difficulty in Law upon the matter found,
in this case the plaint' shall not be nonsuited, albeit the verdict pass
against him.

2. Unless the plaint' named in any writ, 13 Car. 2. Sess. 2. c. 2.
Bill, or process in B. R. or C. B. shall put into the Court a declaration
against the persons arrested, in some personal action, or Ejectione firmae of
Lands, or tenements, before the end of the term next sollowing after
Appearence, then a Nonsuit for want of a Declaration may be entered against the
plaint' in the said Courts respectively.

Obligation.
Sheriffs and other officers shall take 23 H. 6. c. 10.
no bond of any arrested person but for appearance, and to themselves only,
and shall not take for it more then 4 d. and bonds otherwise taken (color
officii) shall be void.

Office.
1. NOne shall bargain or sell any Office or Deputation, or any part 5 E. 6 c
16. Grant.
thereof, or receive or take any money, fee, reward, or other profit, directly
or indirectly, or any promise, agreement, bond or assurance, to receive any
such profit for the same; which office shall concern the administration or
execution of Justice; or the receipt, controlment or payment of any of the
Kings money or revenue, or any Account, Aulnage, Auditorship, or surveying of
any of the Kings Lands, or any of his customs, or any administration or
attendance in any Custom House, or the keeping of any of the Kings Towns,
Castles or Fortresses, (being places of strength or defense) or any Clerkship
in any Court of Record, in pain that the Bargainee thereof shall lose his
place, and the Bargainor be adjudged disable to execute the same; and every
such bargain and agreement shall be void.

2. Provided, that this Act shall not extend to any office or Inheritance, or
for the Keeping of a Park, House, Manor, Garden, Chase, or Forest, nor to the
two Chief Justices, or Justices of Assize, but that they may grant offices as
they did before the making of this Act: Also all acts done by an Officer
(removeable by force of this statute) shall be good in law until he be removed.

3. An action brought against a Justice of Peace, Mayor or Bailiffe of a
Corporation, 7 Jac. c. 5. Pleading.
Headborough, Portreeve, Constable, Tithingman, or Collector of Subsidies or
fifteens, for any thing done by reason of their several offices, both they and
all their assistants may plead the general issue, and yet give the special
matter in evidence.

4. Here if the verdict pass for the defendant, Costs.
or the plaint' be nonsuit or discontinue his suit, the defendant shall be
allowed double costs, to be recovered as costs in other cases given to the
defend' use to be recovered.

5. The Statute of 7 Jac. 5. is confirmed, and Churchwardens, Sworn-men and 21
Jac. c. 12.
overseers of the poor, together with their assistants are to be comprehended
within the purview of the same Statute.

6. An action brought against any the said officers, their deputies or
assistants, shall be laid in the County where the fact was committed, and not
elsewhere.

7. The unnecessary charges and tedious 14 Car. 2. c. 21.
attendance in passing the accounts of Sheriffs being very burdensome, it is
enacted, Sheriffs.
that Sheriffs shall not keep tables of receipt for any more then their own
family, or retinue, nor shall send any presents to any Judge of Assise nor give
any gratuity to any officer, nor have more then 40 menservants, nor under 20
in any County in England, nor under 12 in Wales, upon forfeiture of 100 l. for
every such default* Proviso this clause not to extend to the Sheriffs of London
or Middlesexs, nor Westmerland, or any Sheriff of a City and County, or Town
and County.

8. Sheriffs in England shall not be charged to answer any illeviable Seizure,
Farm, Rent, Debt, or other thing whatsoever, which was not writ or process to
them to be levied, and the persons, Lands and tenements, of which the same is
leviable particularly expressed, but shall be discharged without petition,
plea, or other trouble or charge whatsoever.

9. All seisures made before the 1 Jac* R. 1. and yet remaining upon the
Sheriffs accounts, and all seisures and debts pardoned, are discharged and to
be left out of their accounts, and no process to issue for levying the same,
nor any other Rent or farm not particularly set forth, or which has been
unanswered for 40 years past, and all other dead farms and seisures and all
desperate illeviable and unintelligible debts, shall be removed out of the
Annual Roll and Sheriffs charge in the exannual Roll, there to remain until
revived by Commission.

10. The several Remembrancers shall enroll and certify the Engrosser of the
great Roll, all debts, chargeable upon Sheriffs by their returns, into the
Exchequer upon writs of fi. fac. levari fac. capias, and other process, and all
fines and amerciaments already set before the first day of February 1662. and
all debts, fines and Amerciaments hereafter set before the next term after
returns of such fines and amerciaments set, that so they may be charged and
comprehended within Quietus est, upon pain of 40 l. upon the officer for every
default, the one moytie to the King, the other to the party grieved.

11. And none shall be Sheriff unless he have lands in the same County
sufficient to answer the King and his people.

12. Every Sheriff having obtained a quietus est (as by the act 21 Jac. c. 5.
he might) the Sheriff, his heirs, Executors Lands and tenements, shall be
clearly discharged of all accounts and debts whatsoever, unless he be
prosecuted and Judgment given within 4 years after the same; and every Officer
by whose default process shall be sent contrary to this act, shall incurr the
same penalty aforesaid.

13. This act not to extend to the Counties of Chester, Lancaster, and Durham,
or the Counties of Wales, being Counties palatine, as to the manner of their
accompting, who are to account before the respective Auditors as aforesaid.

14. Not to extend to enjoyne the Remembrancer to transcribe to the engrosser
of the great roll any inquisitions or seisures, but such as have been formerly
charged in the foreigne accounts of Sheriffs, but Inquisitions upon Attainder
and other forfeitures to be put in charge as formerly.

15. Not to exclude his Majesty's Remembrancer from writing forth process for
his majesty's Debts, duties, outlawries, or other charge or process of Leva:
fa. at any persons suit to levy issues of Lands seized, or venditioni exponas
for goods, for any debt to the King, or upon outlawry, or to alter any pleading
touching the same.

16. That no debt, duty, fine, or Amerciament or seizure charged in the great
Roll of the pipe by any record of the Kings Remembrancer, nor any proceedings
thereupon be stayed, compounded, or discharged, by order of any Judgment entered
in the said office of the Kings Remembrancer, where the Original of such debt
or charge remains.

17. If any debts, seisures, fines, or other be not levied and paid upon
process of Summons of the pipe, the Clerk of the pipe shall the next term
after return of such process certify the office of the Kings Remembrancer, who
shall issue process for levying the same.

18. Ancient and lawful fees belonging to the Kings Remembrancer not abridged
by this act.

19 The act to continue to the end of the first Sessions of the next Parliament
and no longer.

Partition.
1. IOyntenants and tenants in common 31 H. 8. c.
of any inheritance in their own right, or in right of their wifes, in any
manors, Lands, tenements or hereditaments, may be compelled to make partition
by writ de partitione facienda as coparceners are compellable to do, and this
writ shall be pursued at the common law.

2. That after such partition made they shall have Aid of one another and of
their heirs to dereigne warranty and to recover pro rata as coparceners use to
do.

3. Ioyntenants, and Tenants in 32 H. 8. c. 32.
common, that have inheritance or freehold in any manors, Lands, tenements or
hereditaments, shall be also compellable to make partition by the said writ to
be pursued upon their case: howbeit such partition shall not be prejudicial to
any but the parties to such partition, their heirs and Assigns.

Pleading.
1. ALL pleas which shall be pleaded 36 E. 3. c. 15.
in any Court whatsoever, within the Realm, shall be pleaded, showed, depended,
answered, debated, and judged in the English tongue, and entered and enrolled in
the Latin. Howbeit the Laws and Customs of the Realm, as also the Terms and
process shall be holden and kept, as before this time has been used.

2. And Exemplification of the inrollment of the Letters patents by H. 8. E. 6.
13 El. c. 6.
Q. M. P. and M. Q. El. or any of them, since the 4th of Februrary in the 27 H.
8. or hereafter to be granted by the Queen, her Heirs, or Successors, shall be
of as good force to be pleaded, or showed in behalf of the Patentees, their
heirs, Executors and assigns, and every of them, and every other person, or
persons, having any Estate from, by or under them, or any of them, as well
against the Queen, her heirs and Successors, and all other persons whatsoever,
as if the Letters patents themselves were produced.

Policies of assurance.
1. THe Lord Chancellor, or Lord 43 El c. 12.
Keeper shall award a standing commission (to be yearly renewed, or as often as
to him shall seem meet) for the hearing and determining of all such causes
arising, and policices of Assurance, as shall be entered in the office of
Assurance in London.

2. This Commission shall be directed to the Judge of the Admiraltie, the
Recorder of London, 2 Doctors of the Civil, 2 Common Lawyers, and 8 grave or
discreet Merchants, or to 5 of them; which Commissioners or the greater part of
them shall have power to hear and determine all such causes in a brief and
Summary course as to their discretion shall seem meet, without formality of
pleadings or proceedings.

3. The Commissioners have also power to Summon parties, Examine witness upon
Oath, and commit to prison such as contemn or disobey their orders, or decrees.
They shall meet and sit once a week at the least in the office of assurance, or
in some other convenient public place, for the execution of the said
commission, and no fees shall be there exacted by any person whatsoever.

4. If any be grieved by their Sentence or decree, he may exhibit his bill in
Chancery for the reexamination thereof; so as he first satisfy the sentence so
awarded, or deposite with the Commissioners the sum awarded, and then albeit he
be imprisoned he shall be enlarged: and here the Lord Chancellor, or Keeper
has power to reverse or affirm every such sentence or decree, and in case it
be affirmed to award the party assured double costs.

5. No Commissioner shall meddle in the execution of the Commission wherein he
is party, assurer, or assured, not until he has taken his Corporal Oath before
the Major, and Court of Aldermen to proceed uprightly and indifferently between
party and party: only the Judge of the Admiralty is excused from that Oath.

6. Upon some defects in the statute of 14 Car. 2. c. 23.
43 El. c. 12. It is enacted that the Lord Chancellor, or keeper of the great
Seal, shall yearly issue out one standing Commission, authorizing Commissioners
or any 3 of them, whereof a doctor of the Civil Law or a Barrister of the
Common Law be always one (of 5 years Standing) to make a Court of policies of
assurance and an Act, as any five before might have done.

7. The said Commissioners or any 3 of them empowered to Summon parties and
witnesses, and upon contempts and delays in the witnesses upon first Summons
and reasonable Charges: and in the parties upon second Summons to imprison
offenders, or to give every Commissioner having taken the Oath before the Lord
Major of London, to proceed uprightly in the Execution of the said Commission.

8. Commissions may issue out of the Court of Admiralty for examining witnesses
beyond sea, or in remote place by direction of the said Commissioners, or any
three of them, and decrees may be made against the body and goods, and against
the Executors, etc. and Execution accordingly, and assess costs of suit as to
them shall seem meet.

9. Any of the said Commissioners may administer an Oath to any witness legally
summoned, so as the adverse party have timely notice, to the end Witnesses may
be truly examined.

10. Provided, That in no case Execution be against Body and Goods for the same
debt.

11. Provided, That an Appeal may be to the Chancery as in the said former Act.

Powers.
1. LEases made by tenant in tail, or by 32 H. 8. c. 28. A fair Leases.
him who is seized in the right of his wife, or Church, they being of full age
at the time of such Lease made, shall be good and effectual in the Law against
the Lessors, their Wives, Heirs and Successors.

2. The Statute shall not extend to any Lease made of Lands in the hands of any
Farmer by force of any old Lease, unless such old lease expire within a year
after the making of the new, nor to any grant to be made of any Reversion of
any Manors, Lands, etc. nor to any Lease of any Manors, Lands, etc. which have
not been let to farm, or occupied by Farmers 20 years before; such Lease made,
nor to any Lease to be made without impeachment of waste, nor to any Lease to
be made for above 21 years or 3 lives from the day of the making thereof; and
that upon every such Lease there be reserved so much yearly as has been
usually paid for the Lands so let within 20 years next before such Lease made,
and the Reversioners of the Manors, Lands, etc. so let, after the death of such
Lessor, or his Heirs, may have such remedy against such Lessee, his Executors
and Assigns, as such Lessor might have had against such Lessee.

3. That all Leases made by the Husband, of Manors, Lands, etc. (being the
inheritance of the Wife) and she to seal to the same, and the rent shall be
reserved to the Huband and Wife, the heirs of the Wife, and here the Husband
shall not Alien or discharge the rent, or any part thereof longer than during
the Coverture, unless it be by Fine levied by Husband and Wife.

4. This Act shall not extend to give liberty to take more Farms or Leases than
might have been taken before this Act, nor to any Parson or Vicar to make any
Lease otherwise than they might have done before.

5. All Leases for years made within three years before the 12 of April in the
31 of H. 8. by writing indented under seal, by any person of full age, sane
memory, and not lawfully contracted, or Covert-Baron, of any Manors, Lands,
etc. wherein he or they have an estate of inheritance to his or their own use,
at the time of the making thereof, and whereof the Lessee or Lessees, or their
A signs, now have the possession by force of such Lease or Leases, and no
cause of re-entry or forfeiture thereof had or made, shall be good in Law
against such Lessors, their Heirs and Successors; so as so much yearly rent be
reserved for the same as was paid for the same within 20 years next before the
making of such Lease or Leases, or else such Lease or Leases to be of no other
force than they were before the making of this Act.

6. No Fine, Feoffement, or other Act done by the Husband only of the
inheritance of freehold of the Wife, shall make any discontinuance, or
prejudice the Wife or any other who is to enjoy it after her decease, the fines
levied by the Husband and Wife only excepted.

7. This Act shall not give liberty to the Wife, or her Heirs, to avoid any
Lease hereafter to be made of the Wifes inheritance by the Husband, Wife, for
21 years or under, or three lives; whereupon the accustomed yearly rent for 20
years before is reserved according to the tenor of this act.

8. This Act shall not extend to the making good any Lease made by any
Ecclesiastical person, which are made void by Authority of Parliament, or by
any such person or other now attainted of Treason.

9. All Estates made by any Archbishop, 1 Eliz. c. 9.
or other Bishop, of any Manors, Lands, etc. parcel of the possessions of their
Bishopric, or united or appertaining thereunto, to any person or persons, body
Politic or Corporate, other than to the Queen, her Heirs and Successors, and
other than for the term of 21 years and 3 lives, from the time of such Estate
made, and whereupon the accustomed yearly rent or more shall be reserved and
payable yearly during such term for 21 years or 3 lives, shall be void to all
intents and purposes.

10. All Leases, Conveyances, or Estates made by any Master or Fellows of 13
El. c. 10.
any College, Dean and Chapter of any Cathedral or Collegiate Church, Master
or Guardian of any Hospital, Parson, Vicar, or any other having any spiritual or
Ecclesiastical Living, or any Houses, Lands, Titles, or other Hereditaments,
being parcel of their College, Cathedral Church, Chapter, Hospital, Parsonage,
Vicarage, or other spiritual promotion, or belonging thereunto, other than for
21 years, or 3 lives, from the making thereof, and whereupon the accustomed
yearly rent shall be reserved and payable yearly during the term, shall be
utterly void to all intents and purposes.

11. This Act shall not make good any Lease or other Grant against the private
Statutes of any College or Collegiate Church.

12. This Act shall not be extended to any Lease hereafter to be made upon
surrender of a former Lease, or by reason of any Covenant or condition
contained in any former Lease, and so continuing, so as the Lease to be made
contain not more years than the residue of the years of such former Lease, nor
any less rent than is thereby reserved.

13. All Leases made by such persons 18 El. c. 11.
as are mentioned in 13 El. 10. where another Lease is in being not to be
expired, surrendered or ended within three years next after the making such new
Lease, shall be void, and all Bonds and Covenants for the removing any such
Lease contrary to this Act or the said Statute of 13 El. 10. shall also be
void; howbeit this Act shall not extend to any Lease or Leases heretofore made
to any such person or persons.

14. Upon complaint to the Ordinary, and sentence given upon any offense
committed by the Incumbent against the Statute 13 El. 20. whereby he ought to
lose the profits of his Benefice; the Ordinary within two months after such
sentence given, and request made by the Churchwardens, or one of them, shall
grant the sequestration thereof to such inhabitant or inhabitants there, as to
him shall seem convenient, and upon default in the Ordinary, it shall be lawful
for every parishioner there to retain his Tithes, and for the Churchwardens to
take the profits of the Glebe, and other rents and duties of such Benefice to
be employed to the use of the poor, until the sequestration shall be committed
by the Ordinary, and then the Churchwardens or Parishioners are to account to
him or them to whom such sequestration shall be committed, and he or they shall
employ the said profits to such uses as by the said Statute of 13 El. c. 20.
are appointed, in pain to forfeit the double value of the profits withholden,
to be recovered in the Ecclesiastical Court by the Poor of the Parish. 1 Jac.
c. 3.


15. All assurances of Bishops Lands to the King shall be void.

Process.
1. LIke Process shall be hereafter had 19 H. 7. C. 9.
in actions upon the Case sued in the Kings Bench, or Common pleas, as in
actions of Trespass or Debt.

2. Original writs may be sued upon personal actions in the Fleet, and an
Habeas 13 Car. 2. sess. 2. c. 2.
corpus granted to bring them to the bar to answer any suit and Declaration;
being put in, and the defend' not pleading Judgment may be entered by Nihil
dicit, and the prisoner charged in Execution upon notice thereof to the Warden
of the Fleet by Rule of Court.

Prohibition.
1. NOne shall be cited to appear out of the Diocese or peculiar jurisdiction
23 H. 8. c. 9. Citation.
where he or she lives, except by some Ecclesiastical, or other person within
the Diocese, or other jurisdiction wherein he is so cited, for some offense or
cause committed, or omitted, contrary to right or duty, or upon an appeal or
other lawful cause, or when the Judge dares not, nor will not cause him to be
cited, nor is any way party to the suit, or at the Instance of the Inferior
Judge to the Superior, where the law Civil, or Canon does allow it, and all
this in pain to forfeit double damages to the party grieved, and 10 l. to the
King, to be divided betwixt him and the prosecutor.

2. The Archbishop may cite for heresy in any Diocese within his province,
upon consent or neglect of the Bishop or Judge there.

3. This Act shall not restrain the Jurisdiction of the Prerogative Court for
probate of Testaments.

4. The Ecclesiastical Judge shall take but 3 d. for a citation upon the pains
aforesaid.

Recognisance.
1. THe Chief Justices of the King's Bench 23 H. 8. c. 6.
and common Pleas, or either of them, or (in their absence out of the Term)
the Major of the Staple at Westminster, and the Recorder of London, jointly
together, shall have power to take recognisances for the payment of debts in
this form following.

Noverint universi per praesentes nos A. B. and D. C. teneri and firmiter
obligari Joanni Style in cent' libr' Sterling solvendis eidem Ioanni, aut su^
cert' Attornat' hoc script' ostend' haered' vel Execut' suis in tal' fest' etc.
proxim' futur' post dat' praesent', and si defecero, vel defecerimus in
solutione debit' praedict' Volo and conced'. Vel sic. Volumus and concedimus
quod tunc currat super me, haered', and Execut' meos. Vel, super nos and
quemlibet nostrum, haered' and Execut' nostros poena in Statuto stapul' de
debit' pro Marchandisis in ead' emptis recuperand', ordinat' and provis'. Dat'
tali die, Anno Regni Regis etc.

2. Such obligation shall be sealed with the seal of the Recognisor or
Recognisors; as also with such a seal as the King shall appoint for that
purpose, and with the seal of one of the Chief Justices, or the seals of the
said Major of the staple and Recorder, and every of the said Justices; and the
said Major and Recorder shall have the Custody of one such seal to be appointed
by the King as aforesaid.

3. The Clerk of the Recognisances (to be also appointed by the King) or his
sufficient deputy or deputies shall write and inroll such obligations in two
several Rolls indented, whereof one shall remain with such of the said
Justices, or with the said Major and Recorder, that take such Recognisance, and
the other with the writer thereof: also such Clerk, or his deputy or
deputies, shall be dwelling or abiding in London, and shall not be absent from
thence by the space of two days in pain to forfeit 10 l.

4. The Clerk or his deputy (at the request of the Creditors, their Executors
or Administrators) shall certify such obligations in the Chancery under his or
their seal.

5. The Recognisees of such obligations, their Executors and Administrators,
shall have in every point, degree and condition, against the Recognisors, their
heirs, executors and Administrators, such process, Execution, commodity, and
Advantage, as has been had upon an obligation of the statute of the Staple,
and shall also pay like fees for the same.

6. Here the Recognisor so bounden or otherwise grieved by such an obligation,
shall have like remedy by Audita Querela, and all other remedies in law; as
upon obligations of the Statute of the staple.

7. Upon the sealing of the process for the execution of every such
obligation, the King shall have a halfe-penny in the pound.

8. The Tenant by such a Recognisance, his Executors or Administrators, being
outed shall have like remedy, upon an obligation of a statute of the staple.

9. The Justices, or the Major and Recorder's fee for taking such a
recognisance, is 3 s. 4 d. the clarks fees is as much, and his fees for
certifying such obligation is 20 d. and none of them shall take more in pain of
40 l.

10. From henceforth the Major or Constable of the staple shall take no
Recognisance of the statute of the staple, in pain of 40 l. except between
Merchants, being free of the same staples, for Merchandise of the said staple
between them lawfully bought and sold.

11. The forfeitures abovesaid are to be divided betwixt the King and the
Prosecutor, and proved by Information, Action of Debt, Bill or Plaint, in which
no Essoin, etc. shall be allowed.

Recoveries.
1. A Termer for years may satisfy a 21 H 8. 15.
feigned Recovery had against them in the Reversion, and shall retain and enjoy
his Term against the Recoverer, his Heirs and Assigns, according to his Lease.

2. Also the Recoverer shall have like remedy against the Termer, his Executors
or Assigns, by avowry or action of debt, for rents and services reserved upon
such Lease, and due after such Recovery, and also like action for waste done
after such recovery, as the Lessor might have had if such recovery had never
been.

3. No Statute of the Staple, Statute Merchant, or Execution by Elegit, shall
be avoided by such feigned recovery, but such tenant shall also have like
remedy to falsify such Recoveries as is here provided for the Lessee for years.

4. No feigned recovery hereafter to 34 and 35 H. 8. c. 20.
be had by assent of parties against any tenant or tenants in tail of any
Lands, Tenements or Hereditaments, whereof the reversion or remainder at that
time of such recovery had shall be in the King, shall bind or conclude the
Heirs in tail, whether any condition or voucher be had in any such feigned
recovery or not: but that after the death of every such Tenant in tail, against
whom such recovery shall be had, the heirs in tail may enter, hold and enjoy
the Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments so recovered according to the form of
the gift of tail, the said Recovery notwithstanding.

5. And here the Heirs of every such tenant in tail, against whom any such
recovery shall be had, shall take no advantage for any recompense in value
against the voucher and his heirs.

6. This Act shall not extend to prejudice the Lessee or Lessees of such tenant
in tail made by writing indented of any Manors, Lands, etc. for 21 years, or 3
lives, or under, whereupon the accustomed rent or rents is or shall be yearly
reserved during the said term or terms, but the same Lessee or Lessees shall
enjoy his or their term or terms, according to the Statute of 32 H. 8. 28. this
Act notwithstanding.

7. All Recoveries had or prosecuted by agreement of the parties, or by Covin,
against tenants by courtesy, tenants in tail, after possibility, etc. for term
of life or lives, or of Estates determinable upon life or lives, or of any
Lands, or Tenements, or Hereditaments, whereof such particular tenant is so
seized, or against any other with voucher over of any such particular tenant,
or of any having right or title to any such particular Estate, shall from
henceforth, as against the Reversioners, or them in Remainder, and against
their Heirs and Successors, be clearly void.

8. This Act shall not prejudice any person that shall by good title recover
any Lands, etc. without fraud, by reason of any former right or title: Also
every such recovery had by the assent and agreement of the person in reversion
or remainder, appearing of record in any of the Queens Courts, shall be good
against the party so assenting.

Rents.
1. THe Executors or Administrators of tenant in fee-simple, in fee-tail, 23 H.
8. c. 37.
or for term of life, of rent-services, rent-charges, rent-secks, and
fee-farms, upon whom any such rent or fee-farm was due and unpaid at the time
of his death, shall have an action of debt for all the arrerages thereof
against the tenant or tenants that ought to have paid them to their testator,
or against the Executors or Administrators of such tenant or tenants; and shall
also distrain for the said arrerages upon the Lands charged therewith, so long
as they continue in the seisin or possession of such tenant in demesne, or of
any other person proclaiming by or from him, in like manner as their Testator
might have done: And the said Executors or Administrators shall likewise for
the same Distress lawfully make avowry upon the matter aforesaid.

2. This Act shall not extend to any Manor, Lordship, or Dominion in Wales, or
the Marches thereof, where the inhabitants have used time out of mind to pay to
every Lord or Owner of such Manors, etc. at their first entry into the same,
any sum or sums of Money, for the discharge of all Duties, Forfeitures and
Penalties wherewith the Inhabitants were chargeable to any of their said Lords,
Ancestors or Predecessors, before their such entry.

3. If any person has in right of his wife any estate in fee-simple, fee-tail,
or for term of life, in any such Rents or fee-farms, and the same happen to be
due and unpaid in his wives life, such Husband, after the death of his wife,
his Executors and Administrators shall have an action of debt for the said
arrerages against the tenant of the demesne that ought to have paid the same,
his Executors or Administrators, and shall likewise distrain for the same, and
make avowry, as he might have done if his wife were living: The like power has
tenant pur autre vie for arrerages due and unpaid in the life time of cestuy
que vie.

Repleader.
1. IN all Actions after issue had, there 32 H. 8. c 30.
shall be Judgment given, notwithstanding any mispleading, lack of color in
sufficient pleading, or Jeofail, miscontinuance, discontinuance, misconveying
of Process, mis-joyning of Issue, lack of Warrant of Attorney of the party
against whom the issue shall be tried, or any other default or negligence of
any of the parties, their Counselors or Attorneys.

2. Provided, that every Attorney shall deliver, or cause to be delivered his
or their sufficient and lawful warrant of Attorney, to be entered of Record for
every Action or Suit wherein he is named Attorney, to the Officer or his Deputy
ordained for the receipt and entering thereof in the same term, when the issue of
the said Action is entered of Record, or before, in pain to forfeit 10 l. to the
King, and to suffer imprisonment at the discretion of the Justices of the
Court, where such Action depends.

Replevin.
1. FOr more speedy and effectual proceeding 17 Ca^. 2. c. 7.
upon distress and avowries for Rents, Enacted, that when any Plaintiff in
Replevin by Plaint or Writ returned, removed or depending in any of the Kings
Courts at Westminster, the Defendant making a suggestion in nature of an Avowry
or Conusance for such rent, to ascertain the Court of the cause of the
Distress; the Court upon his Prayer shall award a Writ to the Sheriff of the
County where the distress was taken, to enquire by the Oaths of 12 good and
lawful men of his Bailywick touching the sum in arrear at the time of such
distress taken, and the value of the goods or chattels distrained; And
thereupon 15 days shall be given to the Plaintiff, or his Attorney in Court,
of the sitting in such inquiry; and thereupon the Sheriffs shall inquire of the
truth of the matter contained in such Writ by the Oath of 12 good and lawful
men of his County; and upon return of such Inquisition, the Defendant shall
have Judgment to recover against the Plaintiff the arrerages of such rent, in
case the Goods or Cattle distrained shall amount unto that value; and if they
amount not to that value, then so much as the value of the said Goods and
Cattle so distrained shall amount unto, together with full costs of suit, and
shall have execution thereupon by Fieri facias, or Elegit, or otherwise as the
Law shall require. And in case such Plaintiff shall be nonsuit after conusance
or avowry made, and issue joined, or if the Verdict shall be given against such
Plaintiff, then the Jurors that are impannelled or returned to enquire of such
Issue, shall at the prayer of the Defendant enquire concerning the sum of
such Arrears, and the value of the Goods and Cattle distrained. And thereupon
the Avowant, or he that makes conusance shall have Judgment for such
Arrerages, or so much thereof as the Goods or Cattle distrained amounts unto,
together with his full costs, and shall have execution for the same by Fieri
facias or Elegit, or otherwise, as the Law shall require.

2. And if any Judgment in any of the Courts aforesaid be given upon demurrer,
for the Avowant, or him that makes conusance for any rent, the Court shall at
the prayer of the defendant award a writ to enquire of the value of such
distress: And upon return thereof Judgment shall be given for the avowant, or
him etc. for the arreares alleged to be behind in such avowry or Conusance, if
the goods, or Cattle so distreined amount to that value: And if they shall not
amount to that value, then for so much as the said goods or cattle so
distreined shall amount unto, together with his full costs of suit: and shall
have like execution as aforesaid.

3. Provided that in all cases aforesaid, when the value of the cattle
distreined as aforesaid shall not be found to be to the full value of the
arreares distreined for, that the party to whom such arreares were due, his
Executors or Administrators, shall from time to time distrein again for the
residue of the said arreares.

Resceipt.
1. IF any tenant for life, in Dower, by the law of England, or in tail after
13 R. 2 c. 17.
possibility of issue extinct, be impleaded, and in the reversion come into the
Court and pray to be received to defend his right, at the day that the tenant
pleads to the action or before, he shall be then received to defend his
right, and after such receipt the business shall be hasted as much as may be by
the law without any delay whatsoever of either side: And therefore here days of
grace shall be given by the discretion of the Judges between the demandant and
the party so received, and not the common day in plea of land, unless the
demandant will thereunto consent, lest the demandants may be too much delayed,
because they must plead to two Adversaries.

2. Howbeit they in the reversion who so pray to be received, shall find
sureties for the issues of the tenements demanded for the time that the
demandants be delayed after the plea determined between the demandants and
tenants, if the Judgment pass for the demandant against them in the reversion,
as well where the receipt is counterpleaded, as where it is granted.

Simonie.
1. IF any person or persons having election 31 El. c. 6.
or voice in the nomination or choice of any person to have place in any
Church, College, School, Hospital, Hall, or other society, shall take any
reward directly or indirectly, or any promise or assurance thereof directly or
indirectly, for such their Election or voice, that then their Election shall be
void: and that then such person that has power to dispose thereof may dispose
of the same as if the person before elected were actually dead.

2. If any person of such societies take any reward or assurance thereof
directly or indirectly for resigning such place, the party giving it shall
forfeit the double value thereof, and the party taking it shall be incapable of
such place, and also then the party to whom such place appertains may dispose
thereof as aforesaid.

3. At every Election this statute and the statutes which concern election
shall be read.

4. The forfeitures which shall be by this statute, shall be divided between
the Queen and the prosecutor.

5. If any person for any reward or assurance thereof directly or indirectly
taken, do present or collate any person to any benefice with cure of Souls,
Dignity, Prebend or living Ecclesiastical, or give or bestow the same for any
corrupt consideratio, nevery such presentation, collation, gift and bestowing,
and every admission, Institution or investiture and induction thereupon, shall
be void, and from thenceforth the Queen, her heirs and Successors may present
or Collate thereunto, or give or bestow the same for one turn only.

6. None shall give or take any such reward, or take, or make any assurance, in
pain to forfeit the double value of one years profit of such spiritual
promotion, and the person taking such promotion shall be disabled in Law to
enjoy the same.

7. If any person for any such reward or assurance thereof, except lawful fees,
admit, institute, instal, induct, invest, or place any person in any spiritual
promotion, the party so offending shall forfeit the double value of one years
profit of such promotion, and such Institution etc. shall be void; and then the
patron or other person to whom the next gift appertains, may present or
collate thereunto.

8. Howbeit no lapse shall incurr upon any such violence until 6 months after
notice given by the Ordinary to the Patron.

9. If any Incumbent of any benefice with cure of souls shall corruptly resign
or exchange the same, or shall corruptly take for resigning or exchanging the
same, directly or indirectly, any benefit whatsoever, both the giver and the
taker thereof shall lose the double value of the benefit so had, to be divided
between the Queen and the prosecutor.

10. Penalties inflicted by the Ecclesiastical Law are not taken away by this
statute.

11. If any person shall directly or indirectly, take any reward or other
profit or assurance thereof, (lawful fees only excepted) to make a Minister, or
to give license to preach, he shall forfeit 20 l. and the party so made a
minister 10 l. and if the party so made a minister be instituted, inducted, or
installed into any benefice within 7 years after, such Induction etc. shall be
void, and the party having the gift thereof may present or collate, as if he
were dead.

12. The forfeitures of this act shall be divided between the Queen and
prosecutor.

Spiritual persons. Residence.
1. NO spiritual person shall take to farm (to himself, or any other 21 H. 8.
c. 13.
for his use) any lands or other hereditaments for life, year or at will, in
pain to forfeit 10 l. for every month he so continues the same, to be divided
betwixt the King and the Prosecutor.

2. This Act shall not extend to any spiritual person for taking to farm any
temporalties (during the time of vacation) of any Archbishopricks, Bishoprics,
Abbeys, Priories, or Collegiate, Cathedral or Conventual Churchs, nor to any
such person who shall render or make traverse upon any office, concerning his
Freehold.

3. No spiritual person shall (by himself or any other for his use) buy, to
sell again, any cattle, victual or Merchandise whatsoever, in pain to forfeit
treble the value thereof, to be divided betwixt the King and the Prosecutor,
and every such bargain shall be void.

4. Howbeit a spiritual person may buy Horses, Mares, Cattle or other goods for
his necessary use and employment, and in case they happen not to fit for his
turn, may sell them again, so as this be done without fraud or covin.

5. Also Abbots, Priors, Abbesses, Prioresses, Provosts, Presidents and Masters
of Colleges and Hospitals, and all other spiritual Governors and Governesses
of any houses of Religion, Lands of the yearly value of 800 Marks, or under,
may use and occupy so much thereof for the maintenance of their houses, as they
or any of their Predecessors have done within 100 years last past,
notwithstanding this Act.

6. Likewise Spiritual Persons not having sufficient Glebe or demesne Lands in
right of their Churches or houses, may notwithstanding this Act, for the only
expenses of their Houses, and for their Carriages and Journeys, take in farm
other Lands, and buy and sell Corn and Cattle for the only manurance and
pasturage of such Farms, so as if it be done for such purposes only without
fraud or covin.

7. If any person, having a Benefice with cure of Souls of the yearly value of
8 l. or above, accept another with cure of souls, and he be instituted and
inducted in possession of the same, immediately upon such possession thereof
the first benefice shall be adjudged void, and then it shall be lawful for the
Patron thereof to Present another, as if the incumbent had died or resigned;
any License, Union, or other Dispensation to the contrary notwithstanding.

8. Every License, Union or other Dispensation obtained contrary to this Act
shall be void, and none shall obtain from Rome or elsewhere any License, Union,
or Toleration to receive any Benefice with Cure, in pain of 20 l. to be divided
between the King and Prosecutor.

9. Provided, that every spiritual person of the Kings Council may purchase
License or dispensation to keep three Benefices with cure; and the Chaplains of
the King, Queen, Kings Children, Brethren, Sisters, Uncles or Aunts may so keep
each of them two.

10. Also an Archbishop and Duke may have each of them six Chaplains; a
Marquess and Earl five; a Vicount and other Bishop four; the Chancellor, Baron,
and every Knight of the Garter three; every Duchess, Marchioness, Countess and
Baroness, being Widows, two; the Comptroller and Treasurer of the Kings
household, the Kings Secretary and Dean of his Chapel, the Kings Almoner and
Master of the Rolls, each of them two; and the chief Justice of the Kings
Bench, and Warden of the Cinque Ports, each of them one: And each of the said
Chaplains may purchase a License or Dispensation to keep two Benefices.

11. Likewise the Brothers and Sons of temporal Lords born in Wedlock, may
purchase such License or Dispensation to keep as many Benefices with cure as
the Chaplains of a Duke or Archbishop; and the Brethren and Sons of a Knight
born in Wedlock may keep two.

12. Provided, that the aforesaid Chaplain shall exhibit (where need shall be)
Letters under the Sign or Seal of the King, or other their Lord and Master,
testifying whose Chaplain they be, or else not to enjoy such Plurality of
Benefices.

13. Also Doctors and Bachellors of Divinity, Doctors of Law, and Bachellors of
Law Canon, admitted to their degrees by any of the Universities of this Realm
and not by grace only, may purchase such License to keep two Benefices with
cure.

14. And because Archbishops must use (at the consecration of Bishops) eight
Chaplains, and Bishops (at giving of Orders, and consecration of Churches) six,
every of them may have two Chaplains above the number limited.

15. Every spiritual person that is advanced (by color of this Act) to keep
more Benefices with cure than is above limited, shall incurr the penalty above
provided by this Act.

16. Every spiritual person promoted to any Arch-deaconary, Deanary, or dignity
in a Monastery or Cathedral Church, or other Church Conventual or Collegiate,
or being beneficed with any Parsonage or Vicarage, shall be personally resident
and abiding upon his said Dignity, Prebend or Benefice, or at one of them at
least, in pain to forfeit for not being resident by the space of a month
together or of 2 months (to be accounted at several times in one year) 10 l. to
be divided betwixt the King and the Prosecutor.

17. None shall obtain from Rome (or elsewhere) any License or dispensation for
non-residence, in pain of 20 l. to be forfeited as aforesaid.

18. Howbeit this Act shall not extend to any Spiritual person in the Kings
service beyond Sea, or upon any Pilgrimage beyond Sea, during the time that he
shall be in the Kings Service, or upon the said Pilgrimage, nor to any Scholar
abiding for study without fraud at any University within this Realm, nor to any
of the King or Queens Chaplains in ordinary, neither yet to any of the
abovesaid Chaplains which shall daily attend upon their Lord or Masters
households, so long as they so attend without fraud, nor to the Master of the
Rolls, or Dean of the Arches, the Chancellor, or Commissary of any Archbishop
or Bishops, the 12 Masters of Chancery, or 12 Advocates of the Arches (being
clergy men) so long as they execute their offices or places, or to any
spiritual person being compelled by the injunction of the Lord Chancellor, or
the Kings Council, to daily appearance to answer the Law, so long as he shall
be so enjoined.

19. Also a Spiritual person (being the Kings Chaplain) may accept (of the
Kings gift) any Benefices to what number soever without incurring the penalty
of this act; and also the King may license his Chaplains for non-residence upon
their benefices, notwithstanding this act.

20. No Spiritual person shall take in farm any Parsonage or Vicarage in pain
to forfeit 40 s. for every week he or any other (for his use) so occupies the
same, and also ten-times the value of the profit or rent that he makes thereof;
both which forfeitures are to be divided between the King and prosecutor.

21. Provided, that no Deanary, Arch-Denary, Chancellorship, Treasurership or
Chantership or Prebend in any Cathedral, or Collegiate-Church, nor Parsonage
that has a Vicar endowed, nor any Benefice perpetually appropriate, shall be
taken to be a Benefice with cure of Souls.

22. No Spiritual person or any other for his use shall keep any Tun-house or
Brew House in pain to forfeit for every month so keeping the same 10 l. to be
divided as aforesaid: howbeit he may make a Brew House for his own private use.

23. Every Duchess, Countess, Marchioness or Baroness, being widows, shall
retain their privileges concerning Chaplains, notwithstanding intermarriages
with other persons of lower degree.

24. All Spiritual persons having possessions in right of their houses (above
the value of 800 marks) may keep so much thereof as may be necessary for the
maintenance of their household, notwithstanding this act, or may take a dwelling
house with Orchards and Gardens for their dwelling, so as by color thereof
they take not liberty to be non-resident.

25. Every Spiritual person above the 28 H. 8. C 13.
age of 40 years, (the Chancellor, Vice Chancellor, Comessary, Rulers of
Colleges and Halls, Doctors of the Chair, and readers of Divinity in either of
the Universities only excepted) shall be resident upon one of their Benefices
according to the statute of 21 H. 8. 13. upon pain therein provided for
non-residence.

26. Also every Beneficed person under the age of 40 years abiding in either of
the Universities shall not enjoy the privilege of non-residence provided by
the said Statute of 21 H. 8. 13. unless he be present at ordinary Lectures both
in the House and Schools, and in his proper person perform the Exercises
according to the Statutes of the University where he so abides.

27. This Statute shall not extend to any Reader of any Public Lecture in
Divinity, Law, Physic, Philosophy, or humanity, or any of the literal
Sciences, nor to Interpreters or Teachers of the Hebrew, Chaldee, or Greek
tongues in either of the Universities, nor yet to any person who shall repair
thither to proceed Doctor in Divinity, Law, Physic, for the time of their
proceedings there, according to the Statutes of the said Universities.

Trial.
1. IN any action where the life or death of any person who has remained 19
Car. 2. c. 11.
beyond sea, or has absented himself by the Challenge.
space of 7 years, shall come in question between the Lord, or Reversioner or
Tenant, the said Reversioner or Lessor may take exception to any of the Jurors
that his real Estate is held by lease or copy for lives, who upon proof shall
be set aside as in other challenges.

2. A Tales de circumstantibus may upon 4, 5 P. M. c. 7.
enquest for the King or Queen by any Authorized thereunto, or Assigned by the
Tales.
Court, or upon request by the prosecutor or his Attorney, and by the command
of the Justices of Assise or Nisi prius in a suit commenced upon a penal
statute.

3. In case the Plaint', or Defend' refuse or forbear to pray a Tales, it shall
be 14 El c. 9.
granted by the Justices of Assise in England, and by those of Oyer, and
Terminer in Wales, Chester, Lancaster, and Durham, at the prayer of the Defend'
or tenant, and that as well in suits upon Penal laws as upon other trials.

Uses.
1. WHere any person or persons stand or are seized of any 7 H. 8. c. 10.
Honors, Manors, Lands, Tenements, Rents, Services, Reversions, Remainders,
or other hereditaments to the use, confidence or trust of any other person or
persons, or of any body politik, by reason of any bargain, sale, feoffment,
fine, recovery, covenant, contract, agreement, will, or otherwise, in every
such case, every such person and persons and body politic having such use,
confidence and trust in fee-simple, fee-taile, for life or years, or otherways,
or any use, confidence or trust in Remainer or Reversion, shall stand and be
seized, deemed and adjudged to be in lawful seizure, estate and possession of
and in the Honors, Castles, etc. with their Appurtenances of and in such like
Estates as they have in use, trust or confidence of or in the same: and the
estate, right, title and possession of such person or persons as are seized of
any lands, tenements or hereditaments to the use, confidence or trust of any
such person or persons, or body politic, shall be deemed and adjudged to be in
him or them, that have any such use, confidence or trust, of any such quality,
manner or form or condition as they had before in or to the use, confidence or
trust, that was in them.

2. When diverse persons are so seized to the use, confidence or trust of any of
themselves, they amongst them that have such use or trust shall likewise have
the seisin, Estate and possession in such quality, manner and condition as they
had the use or trust.

3. Howbeit the right, title etc. of all other (except the person so seized to
any use or trust) is saved, and all former right, title etc. is also saved to
them.

4. Where any be seized to any use or intent, that another shall have a yearly
rent out of the same Lands Cestuy que use of the rent shall be deemed in the
possession thereof, of like estate as if he or she had the use, and shall
distrain for non-payment of the said rent, and make Avowrys, Conusances and
Justifications, and use all other remedies therein, as if the rent had been
actualy granted to Cestuy que use.

Vtlagary.
1. IN every action personal, where an Exigent shall be awarded, a writ of 31
El. c. 3.
proclamation shall also be awarded and issue out of the same Court of the same
test, and return with the Exigent, and shall be delivered of record and
directed to the Sheriff of the County, where the Defend' at the time of the
Exigent was dwelling, and shall contain the effect of the same action.

2. The Sheriff shall thereupon make 3 proclamations, viz. one at a full
County, another at the Sessions, and the last one month at least before quint.
Exact. by virtue of the Exigent at or near the Church or Chapel door of the
Parish, where the Defend' was dwelling at the time of awarding the Exigent,
upon a Sunday after divine Service and Sermon, or in case there be no Sermon,
after divine service; and if he dwell in no Parish, then in the Parish next
adjoining to his place of abode; and all outlawries otherwise had shall be void.

3. The officer for making the Exigent and proclamation may take such fees for
the same as are limited by the Statute of 6 H. 8. 4. and the Sheriff for making
proclamation at the Church door shall have 12 d.

4. In real actions, after summons upon the land (14 days at least before the
return thereof) proclamation of the Summons shall be made upon a Sunday, in
form aforesaid, in the parish where the land lies; which Proclamation shall be
returned with the names of the Summoners.

5. If the summons be not so proclaimed, no Grand cape shall be awarded, but an
Alias and Pluries summons, until a Summons and Proclamation be made according
to this Act.

6. Before allowance of a writ of Error, or reversing of an Outlawry by plea or
otherwise, the defend' in the Original action shall put in bail, to appear and
answer the Plaint', and also to satisfy the condemnation, if the Plaint' begin
his suit before the end of two terms next after the allowance of the said writ,
or avoiding the Outlawry.

FINIS.

