FIVE Matters of State, which has lately happened between his Majesty, and his
high Court of PARLIAMENT.

First, His Majesty's Demands to the Gentry of Yorke-shire, concerning the
Town of Hull, answered by two several parties.

Secondly, The humble Answer of those, who petitioned to his Majesty the
thirtieth of April, and diverse other Knights and Gentlemen of that Country.

Thirdly, the humble answer of the Gentry of the County of York.

Fourthly, A Letter sent from Hull, to the Right Worshipful the high Sheriffs
of Yorkshire, together with the Gentry of that County, now attending his
Majesty's pleasure at York.

Fifthly, The htmble Petition of the Gentry, Ministers, and Freeholders of the
County Palatine of Chester, presented to his Majesty at York. 1642.

London, Printed for F. Coules, and T. Bates. 164^.

His Majesty's demands to the Gentry of Yorkshire, concerning the Town of
Hull, Answered by two several parties.
We conceive that the substance of His Majesty's proposition unto us the 30.
of April consisted in two particulars, First, to know, Whether we would defend
his Majesty's Royal Person from violence, or no, according to our duties.
Secondly, To have our advice concerning his Majesty's not being admitted into
his Town of Hull, and how his Majesty may be vindicated in his honor for that
affront, and how he may be put into the possession of his own.

The humble Answer of those who Petitioned your Majesty the 30. of April. and
diverse other Knights and Gentlemen.
May it please your most Excellent Majesty,
We shall be ready to defend his Majesty's person from violence, by all such
ways, as the Law and our duties bind us. And for the means to uindicate your
Majesty's honor, and to put you into possession of your own, We conceive
that the best advice, that we can offer unto your Majesty is, humbly to desire
you to hearken to the Counsels of your Parliament, who (we assure our selves
will be careful of your Majesty's person and honor, and to whom your Majesty
has already bin pleased to direct a message to that purpose.

The humble Answer of the Gentry of the County of York.
ACcording to Your Majesty's Command to Your Majesty's proposition, we profess
our willingness, as in duty we are bound to defend your Majesty's Sacred
person against all Foreign and Domestic attempts, to the uttermost of our
power, and as our allegiance binds us, And for the keeping of your Majesty's
honor, touching the business of Hull, Your Majesty being pleased to commend
it to Your Parliament, the high Counsel of Your Kingdom, we do humbly crave
pardon that we do not interpose: But forasmuch as Your Majesty may look for
a particular satisfaction at our hands, we humbly and heartily profess that
we shall be ready to serve Your Majesty in the same and all other occasions,
with our lives and fortunes, as far as your Majesty shall be pleased legally
to enable and command us.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty: The humble petition of the Gentry,
Ministers and Freeholders of the County Palatine of Chester, and of the
Inquests serving at the Assizes for the body of the said County.
Presented to his Majesty at York, May 7. 1642. Humbly shows,
THat though our heartbreaking griefs have been many and great, through a
lively apprehension of our woeful distractions, which have been of late much
increased by this long night of your absence from your great Council, yet we
have had some surviving relics of hope, that the sighs and groans the tears
and prayers of so many dutiful and well affected Subjects from all parts might
(in time) have been accepted, and at length have proved powerful to have
melted your royal breast into compassion, and with (such a loving and pleasant
violence) might have won you to embrace again with all tenderness, your whole
Kingdom as it is at this present represented in Parliament.

But now we lament, that even those hopes appear to us gashly, as breathing
their last, having little vigor remaining in them to uphold our hearts, for
our sorrows are doubled, our fears multiplied, by the report of your
Majesty's resolutions, to undertake a dangerous voyage into your Kingdom of
Ireland, whereon we look with much wonder and astonishment; far be it from you
(dread Sovereign) to blame our hearts, which (guided by the strength of Law
and duty) cannot consent to a journey so perilous, by which your Royal
Person (wherein we challenge so great an interest, that it is no more Yours
than ours) shall undergo variety of dangers by sea and land, wind and waters,
having no difference betwixt a King and his meanest vassal.

And if God (the Guardian and preserver of Princes) shall safely waft you over,
what valuable security can be given us of Your life, being amongst such
Popish, barbarous, and cruel Rebels as (having banished the sense of all
Religion, Piety, and Humanity, and rejecting God, and you their King from
reigning over them,) do continue to murder daily your innocent and Protestant
Subjects, of all ages, sexes, and conditions, and which they would persuade the
world they do act by Your Authority, Approbation. and Command, thereby
heaping vengeance upon their own heads, and rendering them incapable and
unworthy the thoughts of the least grace and favor; let Your Justice, we
beseech Your Majesty, have its proper work upon them, and your mercy upon us,
by granting our most humble prayers to these particulars:

To comfort our hearts by your residing where you may with best conveniencie
consult with your great Council before you thus hazard your Person and your
people.

To consider to what danger hereby you expose us to the Popish faction, when
your Majesty shall leave us naked, and not put into a posture of defense, to
repel the rage and attempts of the enemies to our Religion, when we have too
just cause to fear, that they do but wait for an opportunity to bring to
birth their Cruel Conceptions. And what so great advantage can they hope for,
as would be this of Your absence.

To advise whether this journey would not much retard the intended relief for
Ireland since (upon the first rumor) many who were minded to subscribe
thereto, do demur in their proceedings, and others wish they might recall what
they have subscribed.

Not to ^eprive us at once of that poor remainder of hope we have to reap
further good by the endevors of Your Parliament, whereof we shall despair.
when Your Presence shall be wanting to infuse life in their Prop^sals and
Conclusions.

To believe that a j^urney to White Hall will be the more f^r Your Honor and
safety, and far more acceptable to your truest Subjects than a voyage to
Ireland.

To view at our humble entreaty that part of King David's story, who being
resolved in person to war against his own Rebels, acquainted the people with
his intention, in these words of resolution, I will go with you my self also,
but his best Subjects (that were ready to hazard their lives for him, would not
suffer him to venture his regal Person, which was to them so perilous)
opposed him in th^se terms, Thou shall not go forth: neither did David reject
them as presumptuous, knowing that their confident expression in that
particular, was the issues of their duty and love, but gave them this mild and
satisfactorie reply, (which we humbly beg may be your Majesty's answer to your
Parliament: Us, and all other your good Subjects) What seems you best, that
will we do.

So shall we eve^ pray, etc.


A Letter sent to the Right Worshipful the high Sheriff, and the rest of the
County of York, now attending his sacred Majesty's Pleasure.
Gentlemen,
NOw (if ever) stand fast, quit your selves as Fathers of your Country, let it
appear before God and all the World, that truly generous blood runs in your
vienes; Evidence in Gods Name, your heartiest loyalty and dearest affection to
his most sacred Majesty. But while you remember the King, forget not the
Kingdom for the Lords sake; put not asunder those things which God has so
nearly joined together, Oh consider the Honor, the cause of God, the good
success of this present Parliament, your lives, Laws, Liberties, your
temporal, your spiritual welfare lie all bleeding this day at your own feet,
and earnestly supplicate your best assistance.

Tell Us We beseech you; shall we dye and you live? Can it possibly go well
with you, while ill with Us? Is it not your own cause and quarrel? nay, Gods
and the Kings which we maintain? Stand you not as much interessed and as
deeply engaged to appear, for God and the Kings honor as we our selves were
disposed to recriminate, we could anathomize before God and man the
worthlesnesse of those unreasonable, men who seem the great Zealots, not only
for the ruin but the ecclipsing of the glory of this blessed Parliament.

But our intent only is, to beg that at your hands which in Justice you dare
not, and in charity; (we are sure) ought not to deny us, and that is your help
and utmost endeavor in this nicke of our (we had almost said your) greatest
necessity. Be assured there was never a greater prize in your hands then at
this time. In poor Hull are embarked two of the richest Jewels in the world.
Gods truth, and Christendomes Peace: each of which in valuation far exceed a
Kings Ransom.

We delight not in a needless and superfluous expense of words, and therefore
we shall in short tell you, what we or rather God expects his day at al your
hands. viz. That you (and that with instance) petition his most Excellent
Majesty, to vouchsafe the influence of his Royal favor and gracious presence
to his Great Council, the High. Court of Parliament, the only way, (in humane
apprehension) to stanch the bleeding wounds of Ireland, and distracted England.

That you now help the Lord against the mighty.

That with as humble boldness you manifest your extreme unwillingnesse to
come in an hostile way against us, least you bring guiltles blood upon your own
heads, and kindle such a fire in England, as will never be quenched: Assure your
selves, that without much caution and greatest circumspection, you may raise up
such a spirit as will not be conjured down again in haste.

Worthies Ponder we beseech you our present but sad condition, set your selves
before Gods awful bar, make our case your own.

Let your consciences speak, would you betray so great a trust committed to
you, by so great a Council? would you that we should wound through your sides
heaven and Earth? what you shall attempt against us, will in the reflection
result upon God, the King, the Church, the State, your selves; Would you to
satisfy a good King set open the Gates, and with the same courtesy gratify a
very bad company, who seek nothing less then either the safety of his
Majesty's Royal Person and Posterity; or the security of his Dominions* and
Liegepeople? Would you have us wash our hands in your dearest blood? in sum;
would you have us render you the people of the Kings wrath? We are confident
you would not; Do then (according to the primordiall Law) as you would be done
unto. Strike in we beseech you effectually whilst you have time ^^t not God
upon another course of deliverance, least the honor of Yorkshire be laid in
the dust for ever.

Oh! give us in this great straight, real restimony of your affections; and
you shall for ever have the acknowledgement of the real obligations of all.

Your affectionate friends and humble Servants in the port Town of Hill.

FINIS.

