ON THE DEATH OF THE ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE RUPERT; A Pindarique Ode.

By THOMAS FLATMAN.

Vtinam Viveres!

LONDON, Printed for Benj. Took at the Ship in S. Paul's Churchyard, 1683.

On the DEATH OF THE ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE RUPERT: Pindarique Ode.
STANZA I.
MAn surely is not what he seems to be;
Surely our selves we over-rate,
Forgetting that like other Creatures, we
Must bend our heads to Fate.
Lord of the whole Creation, Man,
(How big the Title shows!)
Trifles away a few uncertain Years,
Cheated with Hopes, and rackt with Fears,
Through all Life's little Span,
Then down to silence, and to darkness goes:
And when we Die, the Crowd that trembling stood
E're while struck with the terror of a Nod,
Shake off their wonted Reverence with their Chains,
And at their pleasure use our poor Remains.
Ah mighty Prince!
Whom lavish Nature, and industrious Art
Had fitted for immortal Fame,
Their utmost Bounty could no more impart;
How comes it that Thy venerable Name
Should be submitted to my Theme?
Unkindly baulkt by the prime skilful men,
Abandoned to be sullied by so mean a Pen!
II.
Tell me, ye skilful men, if you have read
In all the fair Memorials of the Dead,
A Name so formidably Great,
So full of Wonders, and unenvi'd Love,
In which all Virtues, and all Graces strove,
So terrible, and yet so sweet;
Show me a Star in Honors Firmament,
(Of the first magnitude let it be)
That from the darkness of this World made free,
A brighter luster to this World has lent.
Ye men of reading, show me one,
That shines with such a beam as His.
Rupert's a Constellation,
Outvies Arcturus, and the Pleiades.
And if the Julian Star of old out-shone
The lesser Fires, as much as them the Moon,
Posterity perhaps will wonder why
An Hero more divine than He
Should leave (after his Apotheosis)
No Gleam of light in all the Galaxie
Bright as the Sun in the full blaze of Noon.
III.
How shall my trembling Muse Thy Praise rehearse!
Thy Praise too lofty even for Pindar's Verse!
Whence shall she take her daring flight,
That she may soar aloft
In numbers masculine and soft,
In numbers adaequate
To thy Renowns Celestial height!
If from thy noble Pedigree,
The Royal Blood that sparkled in thy Veins
A low Plebeian Eulogy disdains,
And he blasphemes that meanly writes of Thee.
If from thy Martial Deeds she boldly rise,
And sing thy valiant Infancy,
Rebellious Britain after felt full well,
Thou from thy Cradle were a Miracle.
Swadled in Armor, Drums appeased thy Cries,
And the shrill Trumpet sung thy Lullabies.
The Babe Alcides thus, gave early proof
In the first dawning of his Youth,
When with his tender hand the Snakes he slew,
What Monsters in his riper Years he would subdue.
IV.
Great Prince, in whom Mars and Minerva joined
Their last efforts to frame a mighty Mind,
A Pattern for Brave men to come, designed:
How did the Rebel-Troops before thee fly!
How of thy Genius stand in aw!
When from the sulphurous Cloud
Thou in Thunder gav'st aloud
Thy dreadful Law
To the presumptuous Enemy.
In vain their traitorous Ensigns they displaid,
In vain they fought, in vain they prayed,
At thy victorious Arms dismayed.
Till Providence for Causes yet unknown,
Causes mysterious and deep,
Connived a while, as if asleep,
And seemed its dear Anointed to disown;
The prosperous Villainy triumphed over the Crown,
And hurled the best of Monarchs from his Throne.
O tell it not in Gath, nor Ascalon!
The best of Monarchs fell by impious Power,
The unspotted Victim for the guilty bled.
He bowed, he fell, there where he bowed he fell down dead;
Blessed Martyr baptized in his sacred gore.
V.
Nor could those tempests in the giddy State,
O mighty Prince, thy Loyalty abate.
Though put to flight, thou fought'st the Parthian way,
And still the same appear'dst to be
Among the Beasts, and scaly Fry,
A Behemoth on Land, and a Leviathan at Sea;
Still, were thou Brave, still were thou Good,
Still firm to thy Allegiance stood
Amidst the foamings of the popular flood:
( Cato with such a constancy of mind,
Espoused that Cause which all his Gods declined.)
Till gentler Stars amazed to see
Thy matchless and undaunted Bravery,
Blushed and brought back the murdered Father's Son,
Lest thou should plant him in the Imperial Throne,
Thou with thy single hand alone.
He that forgets the Glories of that Day,
When CHARLES the Merciful returned,
Never felt the transports of glad Sion's Joy,
When she had long in dust and ashes mourned:
He never understood with what surprise
She opened her astonished eyes
To see the goodly Fabric of the second Temple rise.
VI.
When CHARLES the Merciful his Entrance made
The Day was all around serene,
Not one ill-boding Cloud was seen
To cast a gloomy shade
On the triumphal Cavalcade.
In that, his first, and happy Scene,
The Powers above foretold his Halcyon Reign,
In which, like them, He evermore should prove
The kindest methods of Almighty Love:
And when black Crimes His Justice should constrain,
His pious Breast should share the Criminals pain:
Fierce as the Lion can he be, and gentle as the Dove.
Here stop my Muse, -- the rest let Angels sing,
Some of those Angels, who with constant care
To His Pavilion, near attendants are,
A Lifeguard given him by the Omnipotent King,
The Omnipotent King, whose Character He bears,
Whose Diadems on Earth he wears;
And may he wear it long, for many, many years.
VII.
And now (illustrious Ghost!) what shall we say?
What Tribute to thy precious memory pay?
Thy Death confounds, and strikes all Sorrows dumb.
Kingdoms and Empires make their moan,
Rescued by thee from Desolation;
In Pilgrimage hereafter shall they come,
And make their Offerings before thy Tomb,
Great Prince, so feared abroad, and so adored at home.
Jove's Bird that durst of late confront the Sun,
And in the wanton German Banners played,
Now hangs her Wing, and droops her Head,
Now recollects the Battles thou have won,
And calls too late to thee for aid.
All Christendom deplores the loss,
Whilst bloody Mahomet like a Whirlwind flies,
And insolently braves the ill-befriended Cross.
Europe in blood, and in confusion lies.
Thou in an easy good old age,
Removed from this tumultuous Stage,
Sleep'st unconcerned at all its Rage,
Secure of Fame, and from Detraction free:
He that to greater happiness would attain,
Or toward Heaven would swifter fly,
Must be much more than mortal man,
And never condescend to Die.
Dec. 13. 1682.
FINIS.

