A copy of A LETTER SENT FROM The Lo: Fairfax to the Major of Hull; And by him
sent To the Committee of both Kingdoms: CONCERNING THE GREAT VJCTORY Obtained
against Prince RUPERT about the Raising the Siege at YORK.

Also a true RELATION of a Defeat given to Colonel Hastings by the Lord Grayes
Forces, JULY the First; 1644.

At Bosworth Field, in the very place where King RICHARD the Third was slain.

With the Names of such Commanders and Soldiers as were slain and taken.

Printed according to Order.

London, Printed for Edward Husbands, and are to be sold at his shop in the
Middle Temple. July 6. 1644.

Mr. Major:
AFter a dark Cloud, it has pleased God to show the Sunshine of his glory, in
Victory over his Enemies, who are driven into the walls of York; many of their
chief Officers slain, and all their Ordnance and Ammunition taken, with small
loss (I praise God) on our side. This is all I can now write, Resting

Yours assured, Ferdinando Fairfax.
2. Julii; 1644.
An Extract of a Letter, dated at Hull the third of July 1644.
AT the beginning of the day, it went hard with our Forces; Prince Rupert fell
on the Rear, and got between us and York, and joined with the York Forces,
and put my Lord Manchesters men for a while to the worst; but they recovered
their ground, and two Pieces of Ordnance of the Enemies; and in conclusion, the
Enemy was Rounted; leaving Ordnance, Bag and Baggage behind him: Sir Charles
Lucas and many gallant Commanders are slain, and (it is said) Prince Rupert is
wounded; but into York he is fled. The Battle begun at sit in the morning,
and continued till nine at night: On Wednesday (being the Fast day) at Hull
they had ill tidings in the morning by some that ran away, which gave them
cause of Humiliation; but in the afternoon Public Thanksgiving.

Worthy SIR:
THis days success, so far beyond Expectation has hastened these Lines, as I
promised, to give you a speedy account of our proceedings here: This morning
Intelligence was brought to our Horse quarters, that the Enemy was plundering
about Hinckley; whereupon my noble Lord Gray being ever ready of any
opportunity to serve his country, forthwith sent out a well resolved party,
under the command of captain Babington, consisting of Eighty good Horse, they
marched toward Bosvvorth field, where they overtook One hundred and twenty of
Hastings Forces, and there fought with them, in the very place where King
Richard was slain: At the first charge the Enemy fled, our men made a hot
pursuit for three miles, killed six, wounded many, took Forty prisoners, a List
whereof I have enclosed, as truly collected as the short time will permit; for
I believe, upon further examination, there will be found a greater number of
Officers then are here named, for the habits and postures of many of the
prisoners give just cause to suspect their condition to be far above common
Troopers. We lost not one man; captain Babington shot in the hand, whose
Behavior I cannot pass; At the discovery of the Enemy he made a stand, and
gave strict command to his Soldiers to forbear plunder, but to go on
courageously with him; and promised them on the word of a Gentleman, that if
the day proved theirs (which he feared not with Gods assistance) what prize
should be gained from the Enemy should be theirs; this succeeded, and is
performed accordingly. There was also wounded on our party, the Quartermaster
to Sir Edward Hartop, he is shot in the thigh, and a common Soldier or two
slightly wounded. And to make our success the greater, this was done after we
had three days hard march, and but four hours refreshment before this Design
was undertaken (our Forces being called back from their march to Sir William
Waller, upon Intelligence of the Enemies Design to plunder our country.)

We attribute all to the giver of Victories: I pray you let us hear what good
News the West affords, which will be as welcome to us, as I am confident this
will be to you; If you intend correspondency, be as diligent to take
opportunity, as is

Your most affectionate Friend and Servant.
Leicester; July 1. 1644. My Lord is now gone out in person, in pursuit of
Colonel Nevill and Colonel Pate, who are plundering the other side of the
Country. We pray for his good success.



A List of some of Colonel Hastings Troops, taken prisoners by the Lord Grays
Forces at King RICHARDS field the first day of July; 1644.
George Barker, Lieutenant. Thomas Dudley, Cornet. Henry Barrodale, Cornet.
Store, Cornet. Durham, Corporal.
Troopers under Major Perkins.
John Carver. John Griffin. John Burbage. William King. William Allat. Henry
Mumford. Matthew Casseldine. Edward Casey. John Rudiard. Henry Foulds. Edward
Key. Francis Morris.
Troopers under Lieut. Col. Dudley.
Mr. George Bent. Thomas Pickering. Thomas Bonner. John Hall. William Friar.
Matthew Smith. William Armston. John Armston.
Troopers under Lieut. Col. Kneviton.
Henry Braces. Nicholas Alsop. John Fox. John Lawkins. William Cheten.
Valentine Merry. Henry Drabble. Henry Robinson. Zachary Aden. Edward Dilks.
Troopers under Major Bruington.
Tho: Clark. John Everingham. Bryan White. Thomas Bounigton. John Marley, under
Captain Merrill.
Troopers under captain Matthews.
Daniel Atkins. William Harris.
Threescore Horses taken.

One hundred cattle, besides sheep and other goods in a very great proportion,
rescued and restored to the Owners.

FINIS.

