A SERMON PREACHED AT COTENHAM* ^^ar CAMBRIDGE, On the 9th. of September, 1683.
Being the Day set Apart for Public Thanksgiving FOR THE DELIVERANCE OF His
Sacred Majesty AND THE GOVERNMENT From the Late Treasonable Conspiracy. By JOHN
FITZ-WILLIAM, D. D. and Chaplain to His ROYAL HIGHNESS.

LONDON: Printed for Will. Not, at the Queens-Arms in the Pall Mall, 1683.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, And my most Honored LORD, GEORGE, Lord
BISHOP of Winchester, PRELATE of the most Noble Order of the GARTER.
My LORD,
THe Zeal I had for the present Government, even while it was merely to be
enjoyed in hopes, and we could only wish it might be restored, filled me with a
just Indignation to find It, after its Re-establishment, now again assaulted by
Men of such restless turbulent Spirits, that it is probable they would scarce
si^ quiet and still (or not long) under One of their own framing and devising;
and that put me upon expressing my thoughts of Their late design^d Attempt
against It: And had not This set me on the Work, I might plead the Command of
Authority enjoining a public Thanksgiving to God for our Deliverance from it;
in performing which, the Priests being to be the Peoples Mouths, That seemed to
require, that I, one of that Order, should consider well, take advice, and
speak my mind of their Fact.

Accordingly I did, (i. e.) as well as the little leisure Windsor and my
attendance there afforded, would permit; and my Thoughts of it, rough drawn as
they were, I showed them to Your Lordship at Farnham, desiring You to pass
Judgment upon them; where meeting with your Approbation and Encouragement, I
was resolved, without moulding them into a more regular Figure and Order, to
make them public, and send them into the World under the Protection of Your
Name: concluding there was none fitter to countenance a Sermon against Change
of Government, than ^ou, who have stood unalterable in the last great
Vicissitudes and Changes here; was the same in them, as you were before, or are
now after them; as great and faithful an Advocate for the Church afflicted and
trod under foot, as you are a Father of it now, raised and re-flourishing; as
dutifully devoted to an Exiled Prince then, as you are to Him now, restored,
and seated on His Throne; whose Allegiance follow^d Caesar abroad, and attended
on Him, not His Fortune, home again.

But there are other reasons, with reference to my self, why I praefix your
Name to it: I was determined to take some occasion of recognizing your Favors
to me, in recommending me to that Person of singular perspicacity in Affairs of
State, and unshaken Fidelity to the Crown, the late Lord Treasurer
Southampton's Patronage; and after His Death, taking me into Your Own; and
since my dismission from your Service with a fair Reward, recommending me anew
to His Royal Highness's, where now I am, and was (as your Lordship knows) as
willing to be, when that Prince was in the greatest danger of being oppressed
by the Power of His Enemies, Tacit.
as ever M. Terentius was frank after the utter Rnine of Sejanus to own he had
been his Friend, Annal. 6.
had coveted to be so, and glad he was admitted to that Relation.

I was determined, I say, to make some such recognition, which I could not with
more satisfaction to my self, than by a Declaration as notorious as Print could
make it, and addressing it to your Lordship, that I am,

My LORD, Your Honors most Obliged, Affectionately Humble, and Obedient
Servant, J. FITZ-WILLIAM.
Cotenham, Sept. 12. 1683.
The Summary of the whole Discourse.
S. 1. THe Text explained, and divided into three parts, and thence three
Doctrines raised.

S. 2. The first Doctrine handled, That fearing God and the King are
inseparable Duties: and there it is showed, That though there be a connection
between all the Commands, yet that there seems to be a closer Union between
Fearing God and the King; so that the One cannot be found without the Other.

S. 3. Second Doctrine, As a manifestation of our fearing God and the King, we
ought not to meddle with them who are given to change: wherein is treated,. 1.
That we may meddle with them who are given to change, either by consenting to
them, or by assisting them; and the meddling either way proved to be Unlawful..
2. By these Arguments, 1. Because contrary to the Duties of Subjection to
Governors, and praying for them.. 3. 2 dly, To the tenor of the Gospel,
proceeding from Ambition, Covetousness, Revenge, etc., 4. 3 dly, The methods
for bringing it about extreme ill; as, 1. by Lies. 2. by hypocritical
pretenses. 3. by violation of positive Oaths, Natural Obligations, and entering
into illegal Covenants.. 5. 4 ly. The means by which it is executed are base
Treachery, or open Violence.. 6. 5 ly, The Concomitants and Consequences of it
are sad and dismal.

S. 4. The third Doctrine, That the endeavoring a Change is very destructive
to those who engage in it: The Danger of this remonstrated in several respects:
1. There is danger it may be discovered while it is carrying on, 1. because the
Design must be entrusted to many. 2. because some unforeseen accident may
administer occasion to the Discovery. 3. there is danger it may miscarry at the
point of execution. 4. it is in danger that it may not thrive through this
World, even after it has succeeded, but that the Authors may be overtaken, and
punished here. 5. however, they run a certain danger of being mightily
tormented in the other World.

S. 5.. 1. The first Use is of Reproof, directed against those who in their
Practice dissever the Fear of God and the King.

. 2. The seccond a Reprehension of those who affect a Change.

. 3. The third is Exhortatory, to persuade not to endeavor a Change, or meddle
with them who do.

. 4. The fourth is Hortatory, to return Thanks and Praise unto God, for his
Goodness in preventing the impiety of those who designed to have worked a
Change here; and to pray unto him that he would still bring to naught such
Counsels.

The DUTIES of Fearing GOD and the KING, AND THE Mischiefs of CHANGE.
Prove. 24. verse 21, 22. 21. My Son, Fear thou the Lord and the King, and
meddle not with them that are given to change.

22. For their Calamity shall rise suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them
both?


Hebrew-Text in that part of it which we have rendered, (...)
Meddle not with them that are given to change, (various and inconstant men)
than the Latin, 70 (...) ^^rab.
who read it, Meddle not with Detractors; or the Syriack and Chaldee
paraphrase, Meddle not with ^ools; (...) travenias ulli^e Mercer in loc. Bayn.
in loc.
or than the Greek and Arabic, Fe^^ God and the King, and disobey neither; And
the Changers denoted being such rather who vary from the Precepts of God, and
Edicts of the King than vary the Order, and respect those of the King before
those of God; which some Rabbis have hinted at, last of all, since the Ruin
of them both here may be either actively taken the Punishment which both God
and the King can inflict, Vatabl. and Castal. in loc.
as Vatablus and Castalio have expounded it; or passively, that which both they
that fear not God nor the King, Mercer ibid.
shall suffer, as Mercer; and its indifferent which we admit, and we may safely
both: I shall insist no farther upon explaining the Text, but distributing it
into three parts, whereof two are Commands, 1. Fear God and the King. 2. Meddle
not with them that are given to change. The 3. a Reason to enforce the
observance of them, For Calamity shall suddenly come upon them, and who knows
the ruin of them both? I shall thence raise as many Propositions to treat on:

1. That fearing God and the King are Duties inseparable.

2. That as a manifestation of our fearing God and honoring the King, we ought
not to meddle with those who are given to change: where, though the change may
have such a latitude as to signify that from Gods Mandate, yet I shall choose
to consider it as a deflection from the Kings Ordinances, because it is
immediately conjoined with fearing the King, and so may be supposed to design
civil inconstancy and mutability; and likewise it is most suitable to the
occasion, that I should regard it in that sense.

3. That the endeavoring a change in the Civil Government, proves dangerous
and pernicious to the persons engaged in the Design.

Fearing God and the King are Duties inseparable. 1 PROPOSIT.


Indeed all the Commands are so chained together, Fearing God and honoring the
King inseparable.
that he who loosens but a single Link, dissolves the whole Chain; who
transgresses One, is guilty of All.

For, All the Commands and our Duties are connext.
though they were wrote in two distinct Tables, and distributed under ten
Heads, or Words, (as the Jewish Doctors speak) by God himself; yet, his
Authority (being the Soul which quickened them) like the Soul animating the
several Members of the Body, gave them all but one common Life and Being: So
that a particular violation of One, becomes of necessity a univeral destruction
to All.

And, Plut. de Virtut. Moral. quem ap. Lipsium manuduct. ad Stoica Phylos. l.
3. c. 4. vide.
as the Commands, so our Obligations to observe them are connext; Priore
sententiam Zenoni Tribuit idem de contrariet Stioco. posteriorem Zenoni.
If not after that manner as Zeno affirmed all Virtues were* (...).
who promiscuously confounded them together; yet so as (hrysippus has
explained that Stoical Doctrine, That a man could not be truly Brave, Eodem
modo exponit, Cic. de fin. l. 5. and Sen. Ep. 68.
without the conduct of Prudence; nor Prudent, without attending to Justice;
nor Just, without the regulation of Temperance.

So in like manner, a man cannot be piously affected toward God, without being
honestly disposed toward men; cannot express his love toward the One, in the
instances belonging to him, without showing it toward the Other in all points
which concern them; and he who pretends to the Former, and neglects the Latter,
1 St. John 3. 21, 22.
proclaims himself a Liar.

The reason of this is plain and obvious, because if I perform the First from a
right Principle, out of conscience of my Duty toward God requiring it: the
same Principle will engage me to do the Second, because he demands that
likewise. And on the other side, if the motive of my Love and Respect to my
Fellow Creature Man, be his bearing the Image of God, I cannot but love and
reverence Him who fashioned him after his own likeness.

And as there is no dividing, so there is no commuting of Duties; Our Zeal in
one kind, will not make atonement for our Remissness in another; Our Piety,
for Injustice.

But though all the Commands are inseperably conjoined, But yet these two of
Fearing God and Hououring the King are more closelyunited.
yet there is a closer and more indissoluble Union (if I may be permitted to
say so) between these two particular ones of fearing God, and the King, by how
much Kings are more lively expressions of God's Majesty and Power, than
ordinary Images, other men, are. The wise man has here mentioned them as one
Command; and St. Peter too, 1 Pet. 2. 17
even while he uses two words for them, Fear and Honor, Fear God, Honor the
King; for this Honoring the King is the same Act as Fearing of Him, or
expressive of it.

And Kings, for their nearer and exacter resemblance of Him, are adorned with
His Title, wear His Name, and have His Style given them by Himself.

Psalm. 82. 6. and John 10. 34.
I have said, ye are Gods; and, Exodus 22. 28.
Thou shall not curse the Gods.

From this strict Alliance and Union of these two Commands, arising out of the
near resemblance between the Persons, No Fearing God, without Honoring the
King.
God and the King, and the Majesty of the One, and Sovereignty of the Other;
it is made as impossible to Adore God, and not Revere the King, who represents
Him, as it is to Honor the King, and throw all the Contumely we can upon his
Lieutenants or Viceroys commissioned by him.

And of necessity follows, that the Subjects withdrawing their Obedience from
their lawful Prince, is a denying Gods Authority, a shaking off His Government
from their Shoulders, a laying Him aside, that He should not reign over them.

(God plainly declares this to Samuel, when the Israelites, weary of his
administration, who was deputed to it by himself, were desirous to have a King
of their own nomination.

They have not rejected thee, 1 Samuel 9. 7.
but Me, that I should not reign over them)

Treason against Him, Vlpian in l. 1. ad l. Jul. Majest. scribit, crimen in
Imperatorem admissum sacrilegio esse proximum.
is a kind of Sacrilege; a revolt from Him, an Apostasy from God; a resisting
Him, an opposing God; rebelling against Him, fighting with God; the setting up
the Title of a counterfeit Prince against the true One, an introducing a
Plurality of God-heads; the obeying of a Usurper, Idolatry; the slandering his
Anointed and his Footsteps, a blaspheming God; the blaming his Conduct, a
quarrelling with Providence.

And as we cannot Fear God the Supreme Potentate, No Honoring the King,
without Fearing God.
without Honoring the Subordinate, who bears his Image and Superscription, so
we cannot Honor this Last as we should, without Fearing the Former as we
ought. We cannot revere the Copy of Divinity transcribed in the King, without
revering the Original, the Deity, from whom his Power came, any more than we
can have a veneration for the Picture of a man, and none for his Person; We
cannot be for the Monarchy, and supporting it, while we dethrone God, by a
denying him either in Words or Actions; not for upholding the Government, while
by impious Disputes, or wicked Lives, we exclude his Regiment out of the World;
not for maintaining the Prerogative, while we are for clipping the Wings of his
Power, and confining it to some Cases only.

There is no bearing true Faith and Allegiance to our King, when we do it not
to our God; no being Loyal Subjects to the One, while we are downright
Traitors to the Other.

The reason of this is clear, because the honoring and obeying our Prince
should proceed from a Religion toward God, a conscientious regard to his
Authority, exacting the payment of both these; which if they do not, they are
false and spurious, wanting the true and genuine Parent, a right Principle I
mean, for their production, and must needs be fickle and inconstant, for not
being grounded upon a sure and standing bottom: So that when in inviting
occasion offers of promoting our Interest to greater advantage, of serving our
ambition with better success, than by honoring or obeying him; or of
gratifying our revenge, of wrecking our malice; then these are forgot and
withdrawn: or last of all, Baxter' s holy Commonwealth, These. 137.
when by a declination in the state of Affairs he is grown too weak to compel
us to render these, then we deny the payment of them, and justify it too.

Then Maxims of Humane Wisdom, the most contrary to these Precepts of the
Divine, are broached by us, That the King is not Gods Minister, but the Peoples
Servant; and as theirs, stands accountable to them for his Misdemeanors; That
his Power being a Trust only from and for them, is revocable at their pleasure
and discretion, and they may justly re-seize it into their own hands, and for
their own behoof, when they see it is not administered for their Good; That
Wicked and Irreligeous Princes (and such are all they whom they please to brand
with those Marks) have actually forfeited their Crown and Dignity to them:
Ibid. These. 136.
And then Practices squared (or rather deformed) by these enormous Rules,
Affirming That such Princes depose themselves.
are set on foot too. Seditious Clubs and Cabals are erected; Illegal
Associations formed, and entered into; Secret Conspiracies hatched; next open
Iusurrections raised against them; and last of all, villainous Assassinations
committed upon their Persons.

A disdainsul Pride swelled Number. 16. 8, 13, 14.
Tiathan, Abiram and On, Sons of Reuben, and so of the eldest House, to see
that Power lodged in Moses and Aaron's hands, which by Right of Primogeniture
they imagined belonged to them. Ambition seduced 2 Samuel 15.
Absalom, the Peoples Gull. And Revenge for being removed from his great
Charge, and drove into Exile by Solomon, inflamed 1 Kings, 11. 28. 40.
Jeroboam into Rebellion under the Reign of his Son.

And every one of these either forsook God before they did their lawful
Governors, or else renounced Them and disclaimed Him together.

The first, the Seditious Reubenites were engaged in a Schism against God, at
the same time as they were up in a mutiny against their Rulers; joined
themselves to Korah a Levite, who had usurped the Priests Office, in burning
Incense before the Lord, which appertained not to him.

Absalom had his hands imbrew'd in his Brother Amnon's blood, 2 Samuel 13. 28.
before he lifted them up against his Prince and Father.

And Jeroboam, 1 King. 12. 27, 28.
to strengthen himself in his unjust acquisitions, made a change in the
Worship; to continue the rent in State, by widening it, he made a rupture in
Religion; to defend his Rebellion, he set up Idolatry, two Calves at Dan and
Bethel.

2 PROP.
The second Proposition was, That as a manifestation of our fearing God, and
honoring the King, we ought not to meddle with those who are given to change.

Meddle we may, Meddling not to change Covernment, a sign of fearing God and
honoring the King.
either by approving the projects of men designing a Change, or by actual
endeavoring one our selves; and the concerning our selves either way is
unlawful.

The first; The approving a Change renders us as equally guilty, as if we had
brought it about; for it is consenting to a Crime which derives all the
Malignity of it upon us: the external commission of it being only the owning of
that to the World, which we had before perpetrated within our selves; and it
being withal certain, The Consenting to a Change, renders us as guilty as
bringing it about.
we should commit what we consent to and approve, did not the Law (which takes
cognizance only of Facts, or of an Overt-declaration of our intending them)
restrain, or some Accident intervening, or Power interposing, hinder us.

Catiline was not less a Conspirator, and an Enemy to Rome, when he sat in
consultation within its Walls, by what methods and practices its Frame and
Constitution were to be subverted, than when he took the Field, and usurping
the Ensigns and Badges of Consulship, he joined with C. Mallius.

And a man may be as complete a Rebel as he was, without taking up Arms against
the Government, merely by justifying the lawfulness of so doing; a Traitor, by
giving a favorable ear to overtures tending that way; deep died in the blood
of his Prince, by being conscious to a Design of shedding it; or all over
Coal-black with foul Poison, which he has neither prepared nor mingled, by
being privy to an intention of administering it.

And as we are guilty in the Courts of Heaven and our own Consciences, of a
Treason or Conspiracy which has once gained our liking, though we proceed not
to execution; so we may by the Law of State be justly punished for the same, if
that can be proved.

For although it might be hard, it was not unjust, when a Nobleman of Normandy
was arrested and condemned of Treason by the Judges of the Parliament of Paris,
for an intention to kill Francis the first, which he himself disclosed in
Confession to his Ghostly Father, as a Crime he repented of, and for which he
craved the comfort of Absolution.

The second; The endeavoring it, as guilty as the prime Leaders.
The endeavoring a Change, plungeth the person (though he be drawn in by the
artifice of others) over head and ears in guilt; immerseth him as deep in it,
as the first Contrivers and hottest Promoters of it; For it matters not to the
abatement of that, what time he engaged in it, or whether after engagement he
was active or supine in prosecuting it; nor is it any, what means he chooses
to effect it, whether fair or foul, as we distinguish; whether he be for
picking his way, (as we say) or resolved to adventure through thick and thin.

In a Crime of this nature, there are no Accessaries, but all Principals.

Arguments to show the unlawfulness of endeavoring a Change.
will be manifest from these following Reflections.

1. The endeavoring it is contrary to the Duties so often and so earnestly
pressed upon us in Scripture, of not touching God's Anointed, of being subject
to the Higher Powers, (i. e.) those invested with the Supreme, Psalm. 105, 15,
because God ordained them the place and station; Romans 13. d. 1. ad ^.
of submitting to every Ordinance of every one constituted in Authority, 1 Pet.
2. 13, 14.
whether to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors as those who are sent,
commissioned, by him.

For is not the Assassination of God's Anointed, thus contrary to our not
touching Him? Is not the plucking down Rulers, a laboring to level them to us,
or to raise and build our selves up above them, so, to our subjection and
submission to Them? Is not the endeavoring to embroil the Affairs of His or
Their Government, so, to living quietly under it? And are not these the methods
we pursue, in order to bring about a Change, or some of the ends we propose in
laboring it? And if they are, they cannot, with all the allowance of favor,
be so construed, as they may be reconciled with our honoring Him or Them; for
it may be as easily made out, that you may smite them with the Fist of
Violence, and not touch them; raise Combustions, and not meddle in their
Affairs; as salve the doing these with honoring Them.

And if there have been men among us who have taken these courses, and yet have
confidently, or rather impudently, styled themselves His Majesty's most Loyal
Subjects, and pretended to be affectionate lovers of the established
Government, they ought to prove the forementioned Texts were to be expounded
backward, and show us they have sound out the mysterious Art of salving
Contradictions; of making Light and Darkness* Order and Confusion, dwell
together; Peace and War salute and kiss each other; or else leave us at liberty
to dis-believe their Professions, when we see their Practices.

Again, Contrary to the duty of praying for them.
the endeavoring it is contrary to the Duty of praying for the safety of our
Governors, and the prosperity of their Government; a point which the Jews were
commanded to do for the Peace of Babylon, and the lives of Nebuchadnezzar and
Baltazar his Son while they were Captives in that place, Jer. 29. 7. Baruch. 1.
11.
and held so by those persons; 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2,
which Christians are for Kings, and all that are in Authority, that under them
they may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all Godliness and Honesty, with
this recommendation, because it is good and acceptable in the fight of God their
Savior, and which in the first and purest Ages of that Doctrine they performed
for their Emperors and Kings, irrespectively to their Religion, their Opinions
in it, their natural Disposition, or their carriage toward them; For their
Heathen Persecutors, as Tertull. c. 30. Apol. p. 30. ed. Rigal. F. and B. Nos
euim pro salute Imperatorum Deum invocamus aeternum, etc. dein Oramus pro
omnibus Imperatoribus, vitam illis prolixam, Imperium securum, Demum tutam,
Exercitus Fortes, Senatum Fidelem, Populum probum, orbem quietum and quaecunque
hominis and Caesaris vota sunt.
Tertullian is a competent Witness for Sept. Severus, and Dionys. Alexand.
Epist. ad Herm. ap. Euseub. l. 7. c. 11. p. 257. ed. Henr. Valesii. Illius vero
Dionysii sunt verba ad Aemilianum Praefectum Aegypti jubentem ut Deos Imperti
custodes adoraret, (...); etc. (...).
Dionysius of Alexandria for Valerianus and Galienus: Their Arrian, as the
Fulgentius ad Thrasimund. l. 3. c. 36. Claudit librum peroratione pro Rege.
African did for Thrasimund, such, and a Goth to boot: The Praefatio praemissa
Synod. Agathens. Actis: Tom. 4. p. 1382. ed. Labb. and Cossart. quae habita
erat Anno 22 Alarici Gothorum in Gallia Regis. Cum-Sancta Synodus cenvenisset,
ibique fli^is in terram Genibus pro Regno ejus, pro longaevitate, pro populo
Dominum Deprecaretur ut qui nobis Congregationis permiserat Potestatem Regnum
ejus Dominus faelicitate extenderet.
Gallican, for Alaricus the same: The Theodoret. l. 4. c. 26. Spectatim de
Aphraate Monacho (quamvis sparsim per integrum librum de Obedientia Orthodox.
agit) quem ad Imperatorem cum e Regia Porticu Antiochena, festinantem vidisset
and percontatus esset, (...), respondisse refe't (...).
Eastern, for the Emperor Valens an Arrian: for Epist. Conc. Ephesin. Sess. 7.
ad Theodos. and Valent. Imperat. extans apud Binium uti puto, vel inter Acta
Conc. edita ab Hieron. Commelino. Omissam vero a Labbaeo and Cossart. aestimo,
quod per Dei gratiam and ipsorum Majestatis Sanctionem Coactam agnoverit.

Omnes and singuli assiduas Christo Domino pro Regni vestri stabilitate Preces
offerimus, etiam atque etiam obsecrantes, ut Christianissimum vestrum fastigium
quam diutlssime orbi tucatur incolume.


Theodosius the younger, and Valentinian the third, the one a favourer of
Nestorius, and the other a very dissolute person.

And the substance of their Prayers was, That God would grant them a long Life,
and a secure Reign; preserve their Family in Safety, and their Government in
Peace: In short, whatsoever others or themselves could wish for; all which is
perfectly inconsistent with attempts on their Persons, or practices to disturb
the tranquillity of the Government. And therefore, He who prays, or pretends to
do so, for his Prince, That his Crown may slourish long upon his head, and his
Empire may continue like the Sun and Moon through all Generations: and yet is
guilty of such, confutes himself, and his actions disgracefully give his Tongue
the Lie; for They would bring his Life to a sudden period, and his Kingdom to a
sad catastrophe, while This expresses abundance of clamorous Zeal for the
Preservation of the One, and Establishment of the Other.

2 Argum. The very endeavoring it opposite to the tenor of the ^ospel.
2 dly. It Is most opposite to the tenor of the Gospel, and the frame of
Christianity. The Virtues That inculcates, and This makes profession of, are,
Contentedness in all Estates, Humility in the highest, Patience in suffering,
Meekness in bearing, and Charity in forgiving Injuries: whereas Discontent,
Pride, Ambition, Impatience, Anger, Revenge, are the Passions and Vices which
instigate men to endeavor revolutions in Governments.

They affect Novelty, Thucydid. (...);
and therefore sit uneasy under the present Government, which will be always
deemed * heavy by men of such volatile and unquiet Spirits.

They love not a Constitution wherein Divine Providence has a hand, Statius
Theba^d.
and are for one of their own setting up.

This made the Israelites request to have a King, like the rest of the Nations
round about, Militis aut ^lebis ingenium observit Nec imposites unquam cervice
volenti far Duces.
when they were under a Theocracy; God reserving the Sovereignty in his own
hands, but exercising the Acts of it by Samuel, 1 Samuel 8. 5.

The Yoke of Authority galls their stiff Necks, though in it self never so
easy; and they are for shaking it off, venturing the issue either of having
none at all, or one that will hang very loose about them. 1 Kings 12. c. a. v.
14. ad. 21.


An opinion that Jeroboam's Loins would be lighter than Rehoboam's little
Finger, occasioned the Revolt of ten Tribes from the latter, and the mutation
which thereupon succeeded in the Jewish State.

Or they are dissatisfied with their station and place in the Government, as
too low and mean for men of their Abilities and Merits; and suspecting they are
not like to rise higher, or make themselves greater, in the present posture of
Affairs, are for disturbing them, as the probabl'st way to gain their point; or
out of mere indignation to see themselves neglected, as they esteem, are for
subverting it, Nem^c^rum qui in Republica ver. santur quos vincit sed a quibas
vincitur aspicit.
though they themselves be oppressed with its fall.

Or if they stand high, they are displeased to see any above them; (for it is
the nature of Ambition not to look down, but up; not on those behind, but those
before) and therefore they will unhinge the whole Frame, in hopes to get into
their places, or tumble all down, so they may Them.

Or they are Poor and Needy, and so would sain enrich themselves, though it be
with the spoils of their Country, which they can never come to have the
ransacking of, but in public Commotions: Want enraged Catiline and his
Associates to conspire against theirs.

For that Observation of the Historian will be always found true; Sal. de. B.
Catil. de ipso Catil. Inopia and mali meres stimulabant.
Those in a Commonwealth who want Power or Riches, will envy them who have; and
out of mere anger or madness with their private Fortune, will desire and labor
to have the public State turned topsy-turvy.

Or they like not the disposition of their Governors; Idem ibid. Nova ex
optant, odio suarum rerum omnia misceri student
They are too mild, or too severe for them; too sordid, or too profuse; And
though the Excesses of Princes are to be born with as overmuch Drought, or
immoderate Rain; nor are vicious Princes always succeeded by vicious, but the
good interpose and compensate for the bad: yet they will not expect time to
assist them with this remedy, idem B. Jugurth Semper in Civitate quibas opes
nu^^^e sunt bonis invident; vetera odere, nova expetunt, odio suarum rerum
mutari omnia student.
but are for immediate discarding them, and going in quest after another of a
more suitable temper, let the hazard of the Wild-goose-Chace be what it will.

Or they have been disgusted by them, Cerialis ita loquitur. Quomodo
sterilitatem aut nimios imbres, and caetera naturae mala, ita Luxum vel
Avaritiam Dominantium tolerate. Vitia erunt, donec homines; sed neque hac
continua and meliorum interventu pensantur. Iacit. hist. l. 4 c. 73, 74. ed.
Lips.
because in the disposition of Honors they have passed them over, or have not
had that high esteem for them, they have for themselves; or they have disgraced
them in words or actions: And to be revenged for these neglects and affronts,
they will combine together to Depose and Murder them; care not whether they
confound Heaven and Earth in one common Chaos again, so be it they have their
revenge.

Pausanius killed Philip of Macedon, (...)
for advancing Attalus to the Government of a Province, instead of punishing
him upon his Complaint for abusing his Body; and Aruns brought the Goths into
Italy, for having not Justice done him against Lucamon, Tacit. Annal. l. 1^, c.
12.
who had defiled his Wife; Lucanum propriae causae accendebant, quod fa^^am
carminum ejup premebat Nero prohib.. eratque ostentare.
Lucan conspired with Piso and others against Nero's Life, Idem Ibid. Cuspini
an. Maximus
for snppressing his Poem; De Quinctiano. a Nerone probroso Carmine diffamatus
coniumelias ultum ibat.
Quinctianus, for Defaming him in Song; Maximus against Valentinian the third,
Roderic Teleton l. 3. c. 8. and 19.
Julian a Nobleman of Spain calls in the Moors thither to be even with Roderic
for corrupting his Wife or Daughter; and even he was, for their success put an
end to his Life and the Gothique race of Kings in that Country. P^tav.
Rationar. part. 1. l. 8. c. 4.


Robert of Artois called the English into the France because a Suit of Law went
against him: Joan Buss^ eres Hist.
And Charles of Bourbon raised up harles the fifth against Francis the first,
Gallic. l. 16. c. 11. part. 3. p. 301.
for the same reason; and Bodilus killed Chilperick for ordering him to be
Whipped as a punishment. D. Pet. l. 8. c. 3. Ration. par 1.


Or last of all their Villainies, Jo. Bussier l. 3. c. 18. p. 1.
have rendered them obnoxious to the Justice of the Government, from which they
have no way left of saving themselves, unless by committing the greatest, that
of undermining and overthrowing it.

The Philosopher wisely observed, (...) Imminentium periculum emedium ipsa
pericula arbitrati, Aristot. Polit. l. 5. c. 3.
Those who have done wrong, usually fly to Sedition to protect them against
Punishment; Tacit.
and the Historian, That men fling themselves intoactual dangers to secure
themselves against those they only fear.

dly. The methods which men usually, and of necessity almost must take to bring
about a Change are extremly ill. 3 d. Argument.


The first of which is the Devising and Venting Lies against their Governors.
The Methods to bring it about ill. as (1.) by Lies.


This of Slandering them and their Conduct, is generally the first step
Seditious Incendiaries take in their progress to Rebellion.

Absalom, 2 S^muel 15. 34.
The prime model of such, told the people, There matters were good and right,
but no man deputed of the King to hear them.

And having this precedent before them, they fail not of complaining to the
People of their Princes neglecting his Affairs and Justice; or insinuating
moreover his Inclinations to alter Religion, and Laws, then which nothing is (I
am sure ought to be) more tender and dear to them; to bring in a Foreign Power
or Settle a standing Army; than which, nothing can be more Dreadful and
Afrightful to them; that he Affects an Immensity of Power, or Arbitrarily
exercises what he has already: In short they Maliciously spy out Faults where
there are none, Agravate those that are, and with a like greediness and
pleasure divulge them both, Tacitus Annal. lib. 16. Inserunt querelas and
ambiguos de principe sermones, quaeque alia turbamenta Vulgi.
to weaken his Credit and Estimation with his People.

They make Invidious Constructions of his Designs, Odious Reflections on his
Actions, and spread them Abroad; which when they are grown the subject of
Common Report, fill the Peoples minds with Fears and Jealousies, and so dispose
them, as Combustible matter soon takes Fire, for Tumults and Insurrections.

The spreading of false Rumors, is to the Multitude as Winds to the Sea, Psalm.
46. 3.
Makes them Rage and Swell, lift up their voice and roar, in the elegant
Expression of the Psalmist, who otherwise like that, smooth when not blown
upon, would have layn still and calm; and by insensible degrees it tends to
work this effect, though the False News within few Hours, Days at farthest, can
be disproved; for either the refutation shall never reach so far as the Lie
went, or if it does, that has made too deep an Impression in some to be
eras'd; the Poison of it has wrought it self so far in, and lodged it self so
strongly, that Truth is too weak an Antidote to expel it.

The second method is near of kin to this, False and Hypocritical pretenses.
2d. Method False Pretenses.


They who level at the Government, always disguise those aims with the fair and
specious colors of maintaining endangered Religion, Liberty and Property;
while they have no Sense of the first; intend to Oppress the second, and Seize
on the third.

These are all such pleasing names in the Peoples Ears, that albeit no attempt
toward a Change can be made, without first Violating Religion and its commands
of Subjection and Obedience; and its always seen if that succeeds, that Liberty
is afterward crushed, and Property usurped: Yet as Conspiring Knaves never
fail to make use of them; so nor easy Fools to be charmed and caught by them,
to contribute their assistance toward the destruction of them all in a Change.

For when that is actually done, then these cunning Contrivers of it are sure to
bind the silly, giddy, helpers of it forwards with Chains for Cords, and
instead of an easy yoke, to put a heavy burdensome clog about their Necks; for
enjoyed or promised Freedom, to entail Slavery on them and their Posterity: And
have the Impudence at the same time to call this State of Oppression and
Tyranny, Galgacus popularis noster ap. Agricoloe vitam a Tac^to scriptam.
an asserting the Privileges of the Nation, and restoring the People to their
Birthright. Auferre, trucidare, rapere falsis nominibus Imperium, atque ubi
solitudinem fecerint, pacem appellant.
As the Romans when they had seized on Kingdoms without right, Miseram
servitutem falso pacem vocarent.
and wasted them with Fire and Sword, called that Desolation Peace.

This is the recompense, Civilis apud Eundem l. 4. Hist.
and a deserved one, they meet with for their easiness in believing the
pretenses, and forwardness in aiding them in their wicked enterprises.

Absalom used both these colors: He complained that the due course of Law was
stopped, and seemed grieved that Justice did not freely flow in its Channels,
and promised withal to open them a passage, 2 Samuel 15 chapter
if he were made Judge; That every man then who had a Suit, and would come unto
him, should have right done him.

And yet he violated the Law of Nature in thus affecting the Sovereignty, which
was not to be had without Killing or Commanding his Father as his supreme; and
proceeded farther in the breach of it, in Lying with his Concubines without
regard to shame, in the face of the Sun, and before the Eyes of the People.

He made Profession of Concience too, the paying of a Vow he had 2 years stood
charged with, to have his Fathers leave to make a Journey to Hebron, when it
was only to gain the opportunity of time, 2 Samuel 15. v. 7, 8, 9, 10.
and the convenience of place to commence a Rebellion.

And Jeroboam if he did not cover his Ambition at first with zeal for the
purity of Religion, and charge Solomon's making twelve Oxen to support the
brazen Sea in his Temple with a degree of Idolatry, 1 Kings 12 28, 29, 30.
as the Rabbis have done; yet he was a great Stickler for the Peoples Liberty,
went with them to Rehoboam to redress their Grievances: And as being got into
the Throne he certainly debased Religion, in setting up the Calves at Dan and
Bethel, and proclaiming they were the Gods which brought the Israelites out of
Egypt; so it is as little to be questioned but that he infringed their Liberty,
laid heavier Taxes on the revolted Tribes than ever Solomon did, toward the
payment of the Soldiers and Garrisons it was necessary he should maintain for
the holding of his ill got power; and those, no doubt, harder to be paid in his
divided and unquiet Usurpation, than the same would have been under Solomon,
while the Kingdom stood entire, and his Reign flowed with Peace and Wealth.

The third method is, The third Method toward a Change, Breaking Oaths.
Breaking through all Oaths they stand bound by, Of bearing true Faith and
Allegiance to their Governors, of discovering all Treasonable Designs and
Practices against their Persons or Authority: Oaths in which they deposited
with them the richest Pawn it was possible for them to stake down, and gave
them the strongest Security the others could require of their Fidelity and
Obedience, their Salvation; Oaths in which they called God's Omniscience to
witness these Engagements, and his Justice and Power to revenge the breach of
them.

And yet, as if they were no more to be held by them than Samson was with green
Wyths or new Ropes, (which to his force were slight and weak as single Threads)
or as if their consciences were no more to be wounded by Perjury, than the
German Hard-men are by Sword and Shot; or last of all, as if they had a secret
Recipe of being acquainted with Conspiracies, and not being affected with the
Treason of them: All who are for innovating in Government, direct their
Councels against the Constitution it self, or the Supreme Person in it, to the
Subverting the One, and Deposing or Murdering the Other, notwitstanding their
Oaths to the contrary.

But if there were no breaking through Oaths, (and yet I believe there is
scarce any form of Regiment in the World which takes not this kind of
cautionary Bond from their Subjects) they must make their way through all
Natural Obligations to come at their end. Natural Obligations.


For every man who is not born to Empire, Aerodius l. 10. Rer. Judicat. tit. ad
Municipal. c. 3.
antecedent to all Oaths, Sed si Patriae, non nobis Nati sumus, etc. Cur
licebit Civitatem tanquam Militiam deserere, cui Nativitate, cui Sanguine, cui
Divino Humanoque jure addicti and adstricti sumus? Atqui qui Militiam deserit
Adultero aut Homicida propterea gravius peccat. (inquit Aristoteles) quod hic
unum aut alterum laedit; illa Remp. Quid de eo igitur, qui Civitatem, qui
Patriam deserit? Jus Natural, jus Gentium laedit sane ut jura Sanguinis non
possunt Commutari ita nec originis.
and abstracting from the force of all Humane Laws, is born with a tie of Duty
and Obedience to the Government under which he was born; Zouch fecial. Gent. p.
2. S. 2. sect. 17.
and he can no more dissolve, change or transfer this Obligation by a
subsequent Protestation of his Obedience to a Prince or State, Aerod. pan. l.
10. tit. 1. Sparfim.
other than his Natural, than he could before he came into the World choose of
what Parents he would descend, the Country where, and the Dominion under which
he would make his entrance into it.

Yet farther, Entering into unlawful Oaths.
besides the wickedness of breaking through all Civil and Natural Obligations
to bring on a Change, they bind themselves by impious Oaths, the most directly
contrary to those Engagements, to labor it: Catiline initiated his Accomplices
to the privacy of his Conspiracy by a Sacrament solemn as a Sacrifice to the
Gods, drank to them in a mingled Bowl of man's Blood and Wine, made them pledge
him and one another in that, and so doing, their mutual Faith, devoting
themselves with horrid Execrations to suffer all ills, in case they infringed
it, before he ventured to acquaint them with the Villainy they were to be Actors
in. And the Gunpowder-Traytors bound their Truth and Secrecy one to another in
the wicked Project they had in hand, by the Sacrament of the Body of Christ.

4 Argum. The Means of effecting it, Base.
The Means by which a Change is executed, are base and vile, generally by occult
Fraud and Treachery, without any preceding Declaration of Animosity.

If the Government be Monarchical, and the Change depend upon the removal of
the present Possessor of the Crown, or the legal Heir and Successor to it, it is
executed by Poison, a Stab, Shot, Tacit 2 hist.
or some such foul villainous means; the using of which is the Symptom, Arma
aperta palam vites, fraus and dolus ecculta ecque inevitabilia.
or rather the Malady, of an abject profligate Mind, which a person of any
bravery of Spirit can no more do, than he can protect himself against them.

He has the Courage to oppose Arms to Arms, and may be with success; Caesur
apud. Sal. B.
but he dares not be an Assassin, or Poysoner: He has no more a Soul that can
be guilty of such base Actions, than he has a Body that is defensible and
proof against them. Catilin Hostem adversum homini strenuo opprimere haud
difficile est pericula neque facere, neque vitare bonis in pr^mtu est.


Or if it be accomplished with the formality of a Process, as ours was, when
our Prince was Arraigned and Sentenced by a mock Court of Justice, and
accordingly Executed; or as that of Naples was, when Conradine the Nephew of
Conrade the Emperor, contending for that Crown, and the other of Sicily, with
the House of Anjou and the Papal See, being taken at the Battle of Alby, was
Tried, Condemned, and Beheaded in the public Streets of Naples: Raynald Annal.
ad A. 1268. P. Aemil. l. 7. and Mich.
it makes it still more villainous; for there is no more capital Injustice,
than that which is done with the Ceremony of the Law, and the Pageant-shew of
Justice. Ritio de Reg to sic l. 3.


But if it be a Republic, in the strict notion of the word, its Change is
hardly to be effected without violence, as many times that of Kingdoms is not
too, and the Government has no warning to prepare it self against this danger,
as in a just War denounced by a Foreign Enemy it has; but like concealed Fire,
it breaks out all of a Flame, which masters in a moment whatever opposes it,
or stands in its way.

5 Argum. The Concomitants and Consequences of (...) Change, Dire.
But fifthly, The Concomitants and Cousequences of a Change, are dire and
mischevous: If it is not preceded and ushered in, it is attended and followed by
Tumults and Insurrections, where the Sword is licentiated to do those horrid
Wickednesses which I have too great a tenderness to mention, or, may be, you to
hear; Virgins are deflowered; Matrons ravished; Sucklings hanging at their
Mothers Breasts, snatched thence; Children torn from the Bosoms and kind
Embraces of their Parents, and both either dashed against the stones, or
impaled upon the Spears point, or swoon away through Famine in the streets; the
Comeliness of Youth shamefully abused against Nature; Manhood tortured with all
Cruelty; Old Age, without Reverence to it, and the tender Sex, without Pity to
it, forced to suffer all the Contumelies of Military Insolence; Temples
profaned and pillaged; ancient Inheritances turned to Strangers, and Houses to
Aliens, or else sacked and burnt; all places filled with Lust, Rapine and
Murder; the Air resounding with the dreadful groans of the dying; the Ground
strewn with the ghastly Carcases of the slain, or drowned in a Deluge of their
Blood; In short, where there is no other Spectacle but Sadness and Horror

For their Calamity shall rise suddenly, etc. and might be regarded by us as
such here; But because I cannot treat of it with the same brevity as I have
done the foregoing, I shall choose rather to handle it under the qualification
I propounded it at first, as an absolute entire Proposition,

That the attempting a change in Government, 3 PROP. Or Doctrine The danger of
defigning a Change in 3 respects.
proves dangerous and pernicious to the persons engaged in the Design.

I shall exhibit the danger of it to your view in these several respects:

1. From the difficulty of carrying on such a Design without detection; and in
that case, the severity of punishment which shall be inflicted on the Agents
concerned in it.

2. If it be not prevented by discovery, but succeeds to their hearts desire,
the punishment it may in probability meet with some time or other in this World.

And 3. If it be so lucky and thriving, as to escape punishment in this World,
yet the certainty of its being pursued, overtaken, and punished by Divine
Justice in the World to come.

The danger in the 1 st. respect from Detection.


1. And the difficulty of this arises in the first place from the number of
those who of necessity must be engaged in an affair of this nature, Its hard to
aviod discovery because of the number, the taking or treacherous humor of some
of the Conspirators.
always too many to keep Council, and too few for Action. And in such a number
there will be some who are troubled with a natural infirmity, are leaky and
chinky in the Comaedians Phrase, and cannot hold a secret; are in Boccalini's
afraid if they should, that it would smell and corrupt their Breath, in the Son
of Sirach's travel, with it and are in pain till they be delivered of it. This
was the weakness of Dymnus a Complice with Philotas in the Conspiracy against
Alexander. Sal. B. Cat. de Curio Huic homini non minor vanitas inerat quam
audacia, neque reticere quae audierat, neque, suamet ipse scelera ^ccultare,
etc.
He could not forbear telling it Nicomachus a Catamite Boy he loved, Tac.
Annal. 15. ^rusira filentium and fidem in tot Censciorum Animis and cor poribus
sperari.
who acquainted his Brother Ceballinus with it, and he the King by Motronus.
And the Disease of Curious in Cataline's, who tatled it to Fulvia his Mistress,
and she revealed it to the Consul.

Others are of a treacherous disposition inclining them to betray whatsoever is
Committed to their Trust, Curt. l. 6. number. 7
though under the strictest and Sacred'st adjurations of Secrecy to seal up
their Lips in Silence, Plut. v. Alex.
and their Associates to boot, though leagued together in mutual confidence by
the powerful Cement of a Sacrament.

Nor is it reasonably to be expected otherwise, that men false to their Lawful
Governors Authority, should be true to one another in Villainy.

dly, If it pass safe these pikes of Garrulity or Perfidiousness, some
occurrence or other (which we call Accident and are apt to give to chance but
in Truth happens not without the interposition of Divine Providence watchful
for the Conservation of Governments it has erected) administers some Jealousy
of a Contrivance carried on against it. 2 ly. Its often discovered by some
strauge Providence.
Either to the Rulers and Conducters of Affairs, or persons unconcerned in the
management of them.

This occasions the apprehension of the suspected, Tac. Annal. 15.
who through Fear or Hope are wrought upon to discover all they know of the
Confederacy and Confederates: Cruciatu aut Praemio cuncta pervia esse.
For Torments or Rewards are the Picklocks of all Secrets, and scarce a humane
breast so fastened with the bars and bolts of Obstinacy, which one of these will
not open: So Mordecai either overheard Bigthan and Theresh contriving to lay
Hands on Ahasuerus, Esther 2. 21, 22.
or suspected their Design and Accused them. So it was in Piso's Conspiracy.
Milichus a manumis'd servant of Scevinus, Tac Annal.
one of the chiefs in that Plot against Nero, suspected he had some such
Design, from his calling for his Rusty-Sword, and ordering it to be scoured and
sharpn'd, Filleting useful for the binding up of Wounds to be got ready; the
making his Will, and giving his Slaves their Freedom; all which he did but the
day before it should have been put in Execution: Thereupon he accuses him to
the Emperor, and on this dark intimation alone he is seized and brought before
him; where, while he stood Confronted by Milichus singly, he considently denied
any knowledge of it; but understanding Natalis had declared something, he
forthwith Confesses all, and names his Accomplices: Lucanus, Quinchanus, Joan.
Buss. l. 16. c. 12. p. 3. p 303, and 304.
Senecio; the first of which upon Examination did his Mother, the other two
their Intimatest Friends Two Domestics of the Duke of Bourbons, Martignon and
Argogne, penetrat'd into his Conjuration, and revealed it to Francis the first:
So the Sagacity of one of our Princes from an obscure Expression in a Letter to
the Lord Monteagle, warning him to keep from that Session of Parliament,
becanse it should receive a Terrible Blow, scented out the Treason, which was
then near perfected, and that Powder should be the Instrument of it: confirmed
in which conjecture more and more by weighing the Word, he gives order for a
diligent search to be made of the Cellers and Vaults about the
Parliament House, which happily ended in the taking the Prime Artificer of
wickedness standing before the doors as one of them; where all the Engines
prepared to work the Dire mischief lay hid under Piles of Wood and Coal.

Thus God undiscerned, Psalm 64.. v. 56, 78
shoots with a secret Arrow at those who encourage themselves in mischief, and
commune among themselves of laying snares, and say, that no man shall see them;
so that suddenly they are wounded, and he makes their own Tongues to fall upon
them.

Thus he orders it, Psalm. 9 15.
That they fall into the Pit which they dug for others; and that in the Net
which they laid privily should their own foot be caught.

3 ly. It often fails at the point of Execution
or Gods Miraculous Providence, it often fails at the very nick and point of
Execution through precipitancy and Inconsideration.

The design of Quinctianus against the Life of the Emperor Commodus, De
Quintiano, (...).
miscarried by his rash drawing out his naked Poiynard, ^ Herodian l 1. vita
Common p. 12. edit H. Steph.
and presenting it toward his Breast with this Complement, The Senate sends
thee this; for this, though small warning, gave him opportunity to make his
escape.

In like manner did that of Antonius de Volaterra against Lawrence di Medici,
by so little notice before, as the crying out of, Ah Traitor! gave him to
prevent it.

2 d. Danger is of its being punished afterward, though it succeeds for the
present.
yet in the second place; these persons are often at the long run overtaken by
Vengence, and explarily punished in this World.

Innumerable footsteps of this justice are left us standing both on Sacred and
Civil Records: The earth opened her mouth wide and swallowed up Corah Dathan
and Abiram with their Rebellious Crew in the very act and height of their
wickedness: Numb. 16. 32.
Abimelech, who died his Princely Scarlet in the Blood of 70 Brethren he slew,
Judges 9 chapter v. 53.
that he might rule without control, had his Skull at the storming of Thebez
broke by a Stone thrown from a Woman's hand, on which the Historian, who relates
it, makes this remarque.

Athaliah who murdered all the Royal Line of Judah (except an Infant Heir
preserved by his Aunt for a more favorable juncture) that she might reign and
reign without a Rival, 2 Kings c. 11. 16.
fell from her Greatness by the same bloody steps she mounted to it; was slain
by her Guard within the Verge of her Palace.

Jeroboam the grand Usurper of the Israelitish Crown, though he escaped in his
Person, yet was punished in the utter extirpation of his Posterity; 1 King 15.
29.
Nadab his Son killed and all his Family by the Sword of Baasha, not one left
alive who breathed.

This murderers Son Elah, 1 King 16. 10, and 12.
together with all the Male Line destroyed by Zimri; not one left who pissed
against the Wall.

Zimri after seven days reign, 1 King 16. 15, 18.
laid hands on himself to avoid falling into Omri's who Besieged him, burning
his Palace over his own head.

Shallum who took away Zechariah's Life and Kingdom was deprived of both within
a Month by Menahem, 1 King. 15. 30.
whose Son Pekajah had the like turn done him by Pekah the Captain of his
Guard, 2 King 18. 9.
and he by Hoshea, who in the 9 th. year of his Usurpation was stripped of his
Regality, and carried Captive by Salmanezer into Assyria and Media, Quod de
Caesure memoriae Traditum est hoc etiam de Gordiano evenisse perscribit nam
omnes quicunque illum gladio appetiverunt (qui novem fuisse dicuncuntur) postea
inte remptis Philippissua ma nu suisque gladiis and iisdem quibus illum
percusserant interisse dicuntur, Jul. Capit. vi. Gordia 3tii p. 241. ed. C.
Sigonii.
and with him expired that Monarchy.

And should I travel now out of Sacred Story into Profane for Instances, time
would fail me in recounting the Tragical ends of Usurpers or Rigicides, of
Cyrus who seized on his Grandfathers Kingdoms, of Bessus whose Murder of
Darius Ochus caused the Translation of the Empire from the Persian to the
Greeks, of Philip the Usurper of the Macedonian Crown, slain between his Son
Alexander the Great and his Son in Law Alexander of Epirus at the Espousals of
his Daughter; of Pisistratus who invaded the Athenian, Julius Caesar who
Invaded the Roman Government: The Murderers of Gordian the Emperor, who fell
all by their own hands, employing those very Swords against their own Lives,
which they had before used to take away his.

And infinite numbers more mentioned by the Roman, Byzantine and other Writers;
Cuspin t. Maximus Sidon 2. Ep. l. 3
only I cannot omit two memorable Examples. the one of Maximus, who procured
the Murder of Valentinian the Third, P Diac. l 17 Mat 26. 52. Rev 13. 10. Tac.
A. Loquens de Galbae occissoribus, nec priores nec futuri principes terruere,
quo facerent scelus cujus ultor est quisquis successit.
Torn afterward in pieces by the People of Rome; the other of Phocas, who
through the barbarous murder of his Master Mauritius, ascended the Throne of
Constantinople: He taken by Photinus, received a suitably reward, and had his
Head, Hands, Feet, and Privities cut off

In these, generally speaking, is that saying of our Savior verified, They who
take the Sword, [take it against lawful Authority] shall perish with the Sword,
[the Sword of Justice;] And of St. John, He that kills with the Sword, must
be killed with the Sword; by the Sword, very often, of him whose way to the
Throne that persons Sword cut, Tac. l. 1. hist de Galbae occisoribus omnesque
conquiri and interfici jussit, non Honor Galbae sed tradito Principibus more
munimentum ad praesens in pos terum ultionem.
in murdering him who sat thereon; for Princes recompense such a kindness
done them, by revenging it on the Authors: David did it on the Amalekite who
slew Saul at his own entreaty, and with exemplary severity on those two who
slew Ishboseth their Master, and his Competitor for Empire, cutting off first
their Hands and Feet.

Amassas put to death the murderers of his Father Joas; Alexander, Pausanias
and his Abettors; and thus Vitellius did those who killed Galba; Probus, the
murderer of Aurelianus and Tacitus; Theophilus, the murderers of Leo
Armenius, though his death made his Father Michael Balbus Emperor; and
Claudius, as great a Bruit as he was, Zonaras de Theophil. and Zezim. l. 1. p.
35. ed. p. 35. ed. Steph. de Probo me morat.
those of Caligula: And a Christian Council has enjoined the Successor to take
this just revenge of those whose hands were embrew'd in his Predecessors Blood.

But if Justice does not follow them so close and fast, as to signalize her
self in the overtaking and punishing them here, she will pursue them into
another World, Sueton. 6. Conc. 6. Tol. v. l. 7. tit. 2. c. 20, 21, 22, 23.
and there certainly apprehend and chastise them: In this sense that of Amos
shall be fulfilled, He that escapes of them, shall not be delivered.

And therefore, 3 Danger Of being certainly punished in the world to come, if it
escape scotfree in this.
if we have seen or observed men who have been active in disturbing the Order
and Tranquillity of States, and turning them topsy-turvey through Ambition or
Revenge, go off the Stage gloriously with all their ill-got Power and
Greatness, or at least steal silently into their Graves, (as a late Usurper,
and a later Boutefeu, among us have done, whose Names I Will commit to Oblivion,
Amos 9. 1.
because I will not gratify their Vanity in thirsting after a great Name)
though we are no more to envy than applaud their Fortune, but really pity their
misery, such, that their Crimes were not punished according to their Condignity
here, but reserved to be so in another World, with pains that Almighty
Vengeance alone can inflict, and the Damned alone sustain.

There, there, at God's Tribunal, shall they stand to be judged, whom the Bench
has been too weak to reach, or take cognizance of; and then shall his terrible
Sentence deliver over such who have evaded the lash of the Law to evil Angels,
his Executioners, to scourge with Scorpions.

Then with his own right Arm shall he discomfit, and overthrow in a perpetual
Destruction, such successful Rebels who have been too strong for the Arm of
Flesh to correct.

For, should he not do this, that infinitely impartial Justice of his, in
rendering to every man according to his Job 34. 11.
ways, and the fruit of his Jer. 17. 10. and 32. 19.
doings; that exact Truth of his, which has declared, though hand join in
hand, Prove. 11. 21.
the wicked shall not be unpunished, would be liable to be questioned and
impeached.

Upon that Justice and Truth then which can never be justly and truly taxed, we
may be confident that they shall then receive their woeful Doom.

For can it be thought, that he who will not hold him guiltless that takes his
Name in vain, should connive at the violation of all Obligations of Duty and
Fidelity contracted in that Name; and let such escape scot-free who do this
that they rise up against them who wear his Name, and are clad in the Rays of
his Majesty? That if men shall be in danger of Hell fire for calling their
Brother Fool, Mat. 5. 21.
they shall be in none for railing against their Superiors invested with
Authority from above, 1 Pet. 1 2. c. 9. comp. with the 10. Jud. ^ comp. with
the 13.
and acting by a Commission from Heaven? St. Peter and St. Jude have taught us
otherwise, viz. That God reserveth such who speak evil of Dignities unto the
day of Indgment, to be punished: for the blackness of darkness for ever.

Certainly, if neither Thieves, nor Extortioners, nor the Covetous, shall
inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, 1 Cor. 6. 10.
as St. Paul has told us they shall not; If pety Thieves, who steal a Lamb
from the Fold, or a Thimble and Bodkin out of the House; small Extortioners,
who take Ten in the Hundred; poor Covetous Ones, who rake and scrape to save a
penny, shall not: I say, Certainly such Thieves who rob and spoil whole
Countries, such Extortioners who by their exactions for the maintenance of
their unwarrantable Armies, poll and flea the People to the skin, such Covetous
who are not to be sated with all the plundered Wealth of Provinces, (and such
are all Rebels against Government) shall not.

If such Hypocrites who make long prayers to devour widows houses, Mat. 33. 14.
shall receive greater Damnation; then they who do so to swallow whole Kingdoms
in a Usurpation, shall receive That, or a greater than the greater.

If Liars, Sorcerers, Whoremongers, Murderers, and Idolaters, shall receive
their part in the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone, Rev. 21. 8.
as we are informed they shall; surely such Liars, who maliciously slander
their Prince, first to weaken his Credit, then his Hands; such Sorcerers, who
with the Witchcraft of cunning and fair speaking alienate the Peoples
affections from him; such Whoremongers who are guilty of, and stand answerable
to Justice for all the Rapes and Deflorations Soldiers raised by them to begin
an Insurrection, and make a Revolt, in the heat of War and Lust commit.

Surely then those Murderers of their honest Fellow Subjects who will not side
with them in taking up Arms, and of their Prince if they prevail; then those
Idolaters, who, crowned with success, erect false Power in opposition to the
legal One, and would compel all to acknowledge and pay homage to it, like
Nebuchadnezzar, to fall down and worship the Image they have made and set up,
shall be cast there.

1 Use of Reproof of those who in th^^^ ^^^ctice dissever the Commands of
Fearing God and the King.
and try how practically useful they may be to us.

And first, The inseperability of these two Commands of Fearing God, and
Honoring the King, may serve for a Reproof against two sorts of men, whose
Cloak of Hypocrisy or open Profaneness put assunder in practice what God has
joined together in precept.

The first make use of their pretended Fear of God, to justle out the King's
Honor; their serving Him, to excuse their Disobedience to This; their fits of
Devotion and Extatical Raptures, their acts of Disloyalty; their asserting the
true Religion, justify their rising up against Majesty.

The other pay their Duty to their Prince, at the rate of substracting it from
their Maker; think with their Allegiance do discount for their Irreligion; that
being good and faithful Subjects, makes amends for being bad and false
Christians; being right for the Government and Laws of the Land, satisfies for
Actions unbecoming and scandalous to the glorious Gospel of their Savior.

These are such gross mistakes, and the practices grounded on them so
dangerous, that the entertainers of such Principles, and such Actors, deserve
the sharpest rebuke, to be told with all smartness on both ears: That a devout
stirrer up of Sedition, a religious Incendiary, a godly Rebel, on one hand; and
an atheistical Royallist, a dissolute Leige-man, a wicked good Subject on the
other, are contradictions in the adject: To be subject to the Powers which be,
for conscience sake, because ordained by God; and to strive or fight with them
for conscience sake, because they are not of the same persuasion in matters of
Faith with us, of the same piece in Religion: To honor God's Vicegerent, by a
dutiful deporting our selves toward him; and to dishonor the Sovereign of all
the World, who constituted him such, by flagitious lives, are inconsistent
impossibilities.

dly. If the dividing the Commands deserves such a reproof, the neglecting the
caution or the going directly against the wise Charge in the Text, Reproof 2.
of those who are given to change, and particularly of us of England.
of not meddling with those who are given to change, requires a yet sharper
rebuke.

It Is observed of Islanders, that they are usually as variable as the Weather
of their Climate is; and it has been our reproach, that none have been more so
than we.

After that great and total change which the success of the last Rebellion
produced, the subversion of the Monarchy for a time, how many several Changes
did we pass through after! We shifted Scenes of Government, or rather Anarchy,
as often as in the Pythagorean Opinion the Soul does Bodies.

First, The obscene part of a House of Commons, which had the impudence to
style it self a Parliament, domineers; next, upon their being thrown out by
their own Army, a Council of State, formed for the most part of Officers; then
a Convention of some of their Creatures, or confiding Brethren, with the
assumed name of a Parliament too; then a single person, and he a General
forsooth, advanced from a Lieutenant or Captain at first, (and that Officer
extracted from an indigent Gentleman) with the specious title of Protector of
the Commonwealths of England, Scotland and Ireland: He succeeded by an unequal
Son, unfit to hold what he had got, and so deposed by his ambitious and jealous
Kindred: then at the Armies call that filthy part of the Commons return to take
the Reins of Government, who not pleasing their powerful Masters, are a second
time disgracefully expulsed by them; then a Creature of the Armies begetting
and moulding, with a new name of their own devising, a Committee of Safety, is
substituted; this occasioned a difference between the English and Scotch Army,
the last declaring its dissatisfaction against the Proceedings of the former;
and the Contest ended by the gradual mouldring away of That, and the
subsistence of This, in placeing the ejected Members once more in their Seats;
who being scarce warm there, had unwelcom Guests added to them by the prudent
Fabius, General MONCK, viz. those who were secluded (1648.) by violence, for
voting the King's Concessions satisfactory, and a ground for Peace; who
dissolving themselves, made room for the sitting down of that Assembly which
recals home our Exiled King and His Brothers.

And when all the Tribes seemed unanimous in bringing back our David to his
Throne, and he was according to their wish safe seated thereon, one would have
thought all these Feverish Distempers should have been allayed, our floating
Island fixed by His Restoration, as they say Delos was by Apollo's Birth. But
there was no such matter; for there was a Party of men injured, as they
supposed, by His Restitution, because it stripped them of their ill-got Wealth
and Power: and these were restless to bring all things back to the late
Confusion again, as the probabl'st means to re-imburse and re-instate
themselves.

These endeavored to seize His Majesty's Castle of Dublin, and make an
Insurrection here; and being defeated in both, continued the carrying on of the
Design here, which they thought to accomplish by surprising the * Tower; and to
facilitate that, resolved to set fire on the City, 1663. June 1. in Ireland.
for which several Army Officers being taken, Arraigned, and Convicted by the
Teflimony of others and their own Confession, were Condemned and Executed the
April before that September in which great part of it was laid in Ashes. 1666.
April 26. in They were Tried at the Sess. in the Old baily*


There was another Party indeed for His Restoration, yet not for His or the
Kingdoms sake, but with hopes to have their fallen Ark of the Covenant and the
Kirk-Discipline reared and set up; like the People of Rome, Live. Inde
libertatis auram captare unde servitutem timendo in eum statum Remp. ad
duxerant.
who oppressed by the Decemviri, looked up to the Nobility, in expectation by
their help to breath free Air, who by fear of their Power before had brought
themselves into that state of Servitude.

These finding themselves mistaken in their measures, engaged themselves in our
Neighborhood of Scotland in two actual Rebellions, the one at Pentland-hills,
the other at Bothwel-bridge, for the Cause of the holy League. 1666. Nov. 26.
1679. May 29.


And both these (neither being disheartened by their former ill success) joined
together lately in one common Design, either of undermining and blowing up the
Government by Fraud, or overthrowing it by plain force.

I will not trouble you with repeating to you the method of this last Project,
which you have had fully and yet succinctly deduced in His Majesty's
Declaration; but it may be I shall trouble you, and grate your tender ears, in
charging you with assisting toward it, and so bringing you in as Medlers with
them who were given to change.

For, Did not you show your selves such, by siding and going along with that
Faction which wrought the last dismal Change, or by following men who traced
their steps, and practiced the same methods of Sedition which ushered in that
Rebellion?

For first, Did you not greedily swallow down the Lies they fed you with
against the Government; sometimes as if it was making it self Arbitrary and
Tyrannical; other times as if it was selling you for Bondslaves to the French;
and by and by as if it were introducing Popery, Images were just a setting up
in your Churches to be worshipped, and the holy Water for sprinkling was already
in the Porches?

And when the falsehood of these were discovered to you, were you not as ready
to entertain any new ones they devised to stop those Leaks, (though never so
ridiculous?) Had they not inured you so to them, or you your selves, that your
Spirits were not to be kept up without them; as men accustoming their Stomachs
to Brandy, are fainting if they warm them not ever and anon with a Dram of the
Bottle.

2. Have you not had their persons in the greatest admiration, who made the
biggest noise for Religion and Liberty, while their Lives manifested they had
extinguished the One all but the Name, and their arbitrary proceedings that
they were resolved to prostitute the Other to their own Lusts? Such who had
scrupled at Order and Decency in the Church, but had made none of involving
three Kingdoms in misery and Confusion; strained at Conformity, but swallowed
down Rebellion; stumbl'd at a Ceremony, but leaped over the Murder of their
King?

Were not such esteemed the fittest persons you could choose to represent you,
and act on your behalf; Atheists, to Reform Religion for you; Bankrupts, to
secure your Property; Old Army Officers, to guard your Liberty; and
Conspirators of forty years growth and upwards, to shield you from the danger
of the late Plot?

3. Last of all, Did you not look upon your selves as absolved from the Oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy, and on them as antiquated Bonds? Or were you not
for expounding them so as they might be best accomodated to Rebellion, or
willing Disciples of such Masters who did? That they were stipulations of a
conditional Obedience, provided the King maintained your Rights, and that
limited and restrained to some Cases only; so that the King not performing the
former, you were not bound to the latter; or commanding something without the
Verge of his Authority, might be opposed by Arms, and forced within compass; or
that they might be violated without sin, for promoting such great goods as the
Power of Godliness and the Freedom of the Gospel? Did not the Casuistical
Divinity of such Rabbis please you, who directed you in order to shake the
Crown from off the Monarchs Head in time, as well as to enfeeble his hands for
the present? How, A Pamphlet entitled, No Prot. Plot, 2d. part, p. 26. ad
calcem:
as Jurors, sworn to make true enquiry between Him and Prisoners at the Bar,
you might break such an Oath with the deepest sense of Religion, and a Treatise
of occasional Commun.
before sworn with a sound Conscience; call Damnation upon your heads with the
Fear of God before their eyes? How in singleness of heart you might receive the
Communion kneeling, to capacitate you for an Office whereby to do mischief to
the State, and yet be free from the Idolatry charged upon that gesture there?

Exhort. 1.
as it is more than to be suspected you have, I exhort you to wash away the
contracted guilt with the Tears of Repentance, Not to meddle in bringing about
a Change.
and to take care for the future of drawing any farther on your selves. If you
have sinned in this kind, sin no more.

The Contrariety of any ways assisting toward a change of Government, to the
Doctrine of Christ enjoining subjection to all Powers irrespectively which are
lawful, Romans 13.
because ordained by God; To a Caligula, S. Aug. l. 5. de C. D. 21.
as well as an Augustus; to cruel Nero's and Domitians, as well as to courteous
Vespasians; to an Apostate Julian, as well as a Christian Constantine: because
they had equally their Power from Him; 1 Pet. 2. 12, 13.
to that demanding us to pray for all in Authority, because constituted by Him;
Of the Vices, which drive and push men on to this, (such as are discontent with
the lowness of their station, Ambition to climb higher, Covetousness to make
themselves richer, Envy against those who are above them in Place, or exceed
them in Fortune, Revenge for some conceived affront or neglect) to a Christian
Frame of Spirit; the baseness of the courses taken to bring it about, Lies,
deep Dissimulation, and Perjury; Of the means to execute it, Devilish Fraud and
Treachery; the horrid Concomitants and Consequences of it, Confusion and
Desolation, should be very powerful Arguments to dissuade you from meddling.

But if the Villainy and Wickedness of it will not, certainly the Danger of
being discovered, through the Falseness and Cowardice of Partakers with you in
the Design; or by some unforeseen (and therefore unpreventable) occasion; of
miscarrying at the very nick of executing it, through rashness or
faintheartedness; or if it take effect, and you succeed for a time, the danger
of being afterward over-turn'd, and brought under the Wheel; (for Rebellion,
though it prospers on the Stage through four Acts, Cicero Catilin. 4.
is generally plagued in the fifth; Nulla esse potest in tanti sceleris
immanitate immanitate punienda crudelitas.
) and then, in all the forementioned Cases, the certainty of being punished
should discourage you; which, let it be never so sharp and painful, the black
Complexion of your Crimes will make it construed Mildness and Clemency; Or, if
the Torments man can inflict are too mean Considerations to dis-hearten men of
Bravery from thus attempting, surely those which God can and will lay on you,
should afright you; if the Princes Wrath will not, Damnation should; if the
Gallows, the Wheel, Dis-membring, Unbowelling, Breaking, will not, Hell, its
Fire, Smoke, Chains of Darkness, should; if the Pains of the first Death
cannot, those of the second, containing all the exquisite sorts of Pain which
usher in the first, intended into infinity in degree, extended into eternity in
duration, (the Portion in the next World of the most prosperous and thriving
Rebels in This) should; under all which this shall be a farther aggravation,
the Reflection that Lucifer, Chief of the Rebel-Angels Armies, and Ringleader
of all here below, shall be the Minister of God's Vengeance to you, whom his
subtle Arts first inveigl'd and drew in.

And now, Exhort. 2. To praise God for the discovering and preventing the
impious design of making a Change in the Government.
If upon the score of Religion, a sense of the impious Villainy of endeavoring
a Change, a consideration of the dreadful everlasting Torments with which
(unrepented) it shall be revenged, you detest such thoughts, and abhor such
Miscreants who are inclined that way; you may, at my entreaty, or rather Gods
by me his Ambassador, be induced to comply with another part of your Duty,
which is, to praise and magnify the riches of his Mercy and Goodness, in
preventing the Change designed to be brought upon this Nation, by men who wiped
their mouths, and called themselves the peaceable People of the Land, while
they had War in their hearts, and there delighted and wantoned in mischief, and
all the dismal consequents of that; For bringing to light all their secret
Counsels of Darkness; For baffling their Devices, and making them of none
effect; For disappointing their proud hopes, and turning their weapons formed
against his Anointed and his Friends, upon themselves.

If the stopping Blood from breaking out in such plentiful issues as should
cover the face of the Land again; If the repressing of Rape, Uncleanness,
Robbery, Profanation of holy things, and all other sorts of Disorders, which
are not barely committed, but priviledg'd in Tumults; If the sheathing up the
Sword, and shutting up Fire from ravaging, and making this Eden of ours, this
Garden of the Lords, desolate as a barren Wilderness; If the not letting loose
upon us other Judgments for the just Punishment of our Murders, and those
forementioned Crimes, deserve an humble and thankful Remembrance of God's
gracious deallng, it is due upon these occasions, the detection of a horrid
Conspiracy to raise an Insurrection, whose mildest aim, interpreted by the
greatest Charity, could not be less than seizing on and imprisoning the King's
Person, till he should have consented to their wild demands; and another of a
more barefaced Impiety, against His Life, His dearest Brother's, many of the
Lords of His Council, of the Magistracy of His capital City, of the rest of the
Body of His Subjects, whose signal Loyalty had marked them out for fit Victims
to Phanatick Rage. A Murder, as relating to the King, not only execrable in it
self, but in its circumstances likewise: For they who had murdered Him before
in His Reputation, by mis-calling Him Tyrant, (whose fault was His Clemency)
intended to murder Him in His Person, after the same manner as they in Tac.
An. nal. l. 15. and 12. hist. Et cepisse im petum Subrius Flavius ferebatur in
scenam Canentem Neronem aggrediendi. Afterward at Baiae, Cujus amenitate
captus Caesar. crebro ventitabat, balneasque and Epulas inibat omissis excubiis
and fortune sunt male.
Piso's Conspiracy did Nero, the worst of that denomination; To which purpose,
they of the Faction who had the Learning may be supposed to have examined that
History, Then, Tandem statuere Circenfium Iudorum die qui Cereri celebratur
destinata Exequi.
to parallel it the fitter.

For they designed to do it as he should go to or return from some of his
Houses of Pleasure, (as they did that Emperor at Baiae) as least secured there
by Guards or Friends; or at some Recreation and Pastime, as they did him at the
Theater or Circersian Game; and resolved if their Design should be prevented by
a Discovery, Tac. Annal. 15. c. 15. de Nerone, Crebro rumore lacerabatur
tanquam viros insontes ob invidiam aut metum extinuisset; ceterum ceptam,
adultamque conjurationem esse, neque tunc dubitavere quibus rerum noscendi^nra
erat and fatentur qui post intevitum Neronis in urbem regressi sunt.
impudently to outface the World they had none; so they have actually done,
though it was proved by the Depositions of persons engaged in it, and confessed
by Parties suffering for it, and that at a time chiefly when they should speak
the Truth, or could be least supposed to lie against themselves, viz. at the
point of death; as the well-wishers to Piso's Conspiracy spread it abroad, That
he and those others executed upon that score, were murdered out of envy or
fear: albeit they who pried narrowly into Affairs at that juncture, and those
who had fled, upon their return home after Nero's Death, allowed the Truth of
it.

Such (alas!) is the unhappy condition of Princes, that they must be first
oppressed by an Insurrection, before it will be believed there was one a
hatching, and men seemingly unprovided should venture to contest with their
armed Forces; Murdered, before it will be entertained there was any
Treasonable intention against their Lives.

But I hope otherwise, at least of a great part of this Nation, of all who were
not partakers of the Secrecy, that they are fully convinced of the reality of
both the Conspiracies: Dion. l. 52. (...).
And if we are, acknowledging God's Providence (which is always awake to
conserve the Peace of Kingdoms and States, and takes the Persons of Kings and
Princes into his particular Care and Guardianship, unless otherwise provoked)
in the Discovery, awakening the minds of some of the Conspirators with the
horror of their meditated Crime, and filling others with such suspicions of
their Accomplices, that they could have no peace with their Consciences, nor calm
in their Breasts, until, like Jonah in a Storm, Sueton. v. Domit. c. 21.
observat conditionem principum esse miserrimam, quibus de con^uratione comperta
non creditur nisi occifis.
they had revealed their own Guilt, and discovered others; acknowledging
likewise his goodness in preventing the mischiefs which would have ensued had
they taken effect, let us adore and praise his holy Name for these mavelous
acts, that he has delivered David his Servant from the peril of the Sword
which was ready to be drawn against him, preserved his Anointed, the Breath of
our Nostrils, from being taken in the Pit which was dug for him, and that he
has not given us over a Prey unto the teeth of our Enemies, but their Snares
are broken, and we, with our Souls, our Lives in our hands, are escaped out of
them; Yea further, that he has driven them back, and making inquisition for
Blood, he remembered to bring to open Light and condign Punishment men who
thirsted after it: Let us, for this eminent mercy, be praising him, and with
the memorial of our deliverance, transmit our Thanks to Posterity; for the
gracious and merciful Lord has so done it, that it ought to be had in
remembrance, and the Wonder declared unto the Children of Men.

Together with these Praises, let us join our ardent Prayers, That he would
change the hearts of such evil-minded persons, whose dis-affection to the
Government makes them afflicted and grieved for its Prosperity; and put them in
fear, such as they may not dare for the future to think of disturbing its
Peace; Or if they will not be afraid, yet that he would not suffer them to
have the upper-hand of us, but still continue to deliver David his Servant from
the hands of such strange Children whose right hand is a right hand of
Iniquity; and making ready the strings of his Bow against the face of them, he
would put to flight and scatter the People who delight in War.

So shall it come to pass, Tac. Annal. 2. ferenda Regum ingenia, neque usus
Crebras mutationes.
that our Prince having the Hearts or the Necks of such who would have
disturbed the Tranquillity of his Government, by endeavoring a Change, (
Change, more destructive to a Nation than the worst of the worst Governors can
be;) we his People, secure even from the Fears of Calamity and Ruin, shall
enjoy every one our own, our Flocks and Herds, the Fruit of our Labor, and our
Fields; a Trade which shall silence all complaints of Poverty and Decay, or all
grounds for them; our Wives, Children, Servants, Families, with safety, and our
persons with freedom; and a farther Blessing than all this, even the Lord for
our God.

Now God, who alone can, give us all this peaceable frame of Spirit here, and
then reward us with that happiness hereafter which consists in the fruition of
Himself;

To whom, One undivided Essence, subsisting in Three Personalities, the Father,
Son, and Holy Spirit, be ascribed all Power, Glory, Might, Majesty and
Dominion, throughout all Churches of the Saints, now and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

