Pindarique Ode ON THE DEATH Of the Right Honorable THOMAS EARL of OSSORY.

By Thomas Flatman, Esquire;

Amotum ex oculis quaerimus invidi.

Horat. LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Benjamin Took at the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1681.

ON THE DEATH Of the Right Honorable THOMAS EARL of OSSORY. Pindariq' Ode.
Stanza. I.
NO more! -- Alas that bitter word, No more!
The Great, the Just, the Generous, the Kind,
The universal Darling of Mankind,
The Noble Ossory is now No more!
The Mighty Man is fallen --
From Glory's lofty Pinnacle;
Meanly like one of Us He fell,
Not in the hot pursuit of Victory,
As Gallant Men would choose to die;
But tamely like a poor Plebeian, from his Bed
To the dark Grave a Captive led;
Emasculating Sighs and Groans around,
His Friends in floods of Sorrow drowned;
His awful Truncheon, and bright Arms laid by,
He bowed his glorious Head to Destiny.
II.
Celestial Powers, how unconcerned you are?
No black Eclipse, or Blazing-Star
Presaged the Death of this Illustrious Man,
No Deluge, no, nor Hurricane;
In her old wonted course Nature went on,
As if some common thing were done,
One single Victim to Deaths Altar come,
And not in OSSORY an whole Hecatombe.
Yet, when the Founder of Old Rome expired,
When the Pellean Youth resigned his breath,
And when the great Dictator stoop't to Death,
Nature and all her Faculties retired;
Amazed she started when amazed she saw
The breaches of her ancient Fundamental Law
Which kept the World in aw;
For men less brave than Him, her very Heart did ache,
The laboring Earth did quake,
And Trees their fixed Foundations did forsake;
Nature in some prodigious way
Gave notice of their fatal Day.
Those lesser Griefs with pain she thus expressed,
This did confound, and overwhelm her Breast.
III.
Shrink ye Crowned Heads, that think your selves secure,
And from your mouldring Thrones look down,
Your greatness cannot long endure,
The King of Terrors claims you for his own;
You are but Tributaries to his dreadful Crown.
Renowned, Serene, Imperial, most August,
Are only high and mighty Epithets for Dust.
In vain, in vain so high
Our towering expectations fly,
While the Blossoms of our hopes, so fresh, so gay,
Appear, and promise Fruit, then fade away.
From valiant OSSORY'S ever Loyal Hands
What did we not believe?
We dreamed of yet unconquered Lands
He to his Prince could give,
And neighboring Crowns retrive;
Expected that he would in Triumph come
Laden with Spoils, and Afric Banners home,
As if an Hero's years
Were as unbounded as our fond Desires.
IV.
Lament, Lament, you that dare Honor love,
And court her at a Noble rate
(Your Prowess to approve,)
That dare religiously upon Her wait,
And blush not to be Good, when you grow Great,
Such Mourners suit His Virtue, and His State.
And you, brave Souls, who for your Country's good
Did wondrous things in Fields, and Seas of Blood,
Lament the undaunted Chief that led you on;
Whose exemplary Courage could inspire
The most degenerate Heart, with Martial-English Fire.
Your bleeding Wounds who shall hereafter dress
With an indulgent tenderness;
Touched with a melting Sympathy,
Who shall your Wants supply?
Since He, your good Samaritan is gone.
O Charity! thou richest Boon of Heaven,
To Man, in pity given!
(For when well meaning Mortals give,
The Poor's, and their own Bowels they relieve;)
Thou make us with alacrity to Die,
Mis't and bewailed like Thee large-hearted OSSORY.
V.
Arise ye blessed Inhabitants Above,
From your Immortal Seats Arise,
And on our Wonder, on our Love
Gaze with astonished Eyes.
Arise! Arise! make room,
The exalted shade is come.
See where He comes! what Princely Port He bears!
How God-like He appears!
His shining Temples round
With Wreaths of everlasting Laurels bound!
As from the bloody Field of Mons He came,
Where He out fought the Hyperbolies of Fame.
See how the Guardian Angel of our Isle
Receiv's the Deifi'd Champion with a Smile!
Welcome the Guardian Angel says
Full of Songs of Joy and Praise,
Welcome Thou art to me,
And to these Regions of Serenitie!
Welcome the Winged Quire resounds,
While with loud Euge's all the Sacred Place abounds.
THOMAS FLATMAN.


