Five Strange and wonderful Prophesies and Predictions of several men
foretold long since. All which are likely to come to pass in these our
distracted times.
Viz. 1 Ignatius his prophesies and strange predictions of these times. 2 Some
of Scottish Merlins prophesies. 3 Old Otwell Bins his prophesies. 4 Master
Brightman his predictions. 5 Mother Shiptons prophesies, more fuller and larger
than ever before was printed.


Ignatius Loyola his Prophesies.
WHen first and latter meet in days and name,
Some shall the Church and State contemn and blame:
There shall be then a Church within the Moon,
From which most Lunatic aspects shall come;
For as she shows a changing various face,
So strange new changes shall the Church disgrace.
Down then shall fall the Bishops Constellation,
And all the people shall love innovation.
Then women shall be all allowed to teach,
And in the Moone-Church shall in Pulpits preach;
Most strange Ecclipses every where abound,
While darkness strives the light still to confound:
Her motions shall be turned in her sphere,
With apparitions shining every where,
In Germany, in Holland, Amsterdam,
In Scotland and all countries you can name,
This Moon Church with a full clear face shall shine*
And every Nation shall think it divine:
Then to make many Popes it shall be fit
To rule the Curch with wisdom and with wit:
And that which was called the Church Catholic,
Shall be transformed to the Church Lunatic;
Then all the wandering Planets you shall see Erroneous and popular opinions.

Will in a strange and hot combustion be:
Venus must yield a while, and Mars shall reign,
And many men in battle shall be slain;
Strange orders and strange factions shall be seen
In the Moone-Church, the like has never been:
Then Schisms and Sects shall with the truth contend,
When this you see, the world is near an end.
Scottish Merlin his Prophesies of Old England.
WHen Englands Rose is gathered and hence gone,
There shall succeed a second Solomon;
Then Manna down from Heaven a while shall rain, The preaching of the Gospel
should have free passage.

And being full they shall this food disdain:
The Serpent then shall show his power and might,
And men shall dazzled be with too much light:
The Kingdom then on waves of surging seas
Shall s^^at, and be called the Antipodes: Matters carried in a contrary
manner.

False Prophets shall sow fancies for good seeds,
And men be pleased then with Pans rude reeds: Ignorant Preachers.

Apollo shall become a Shepherd Swain,
And on the mountains keep his flocks again, Scholars grow contemptible.

And men shall wade in blood up to their chins,
And all this come upon them for their sins.
Minerva then shall on the Muses frown,
And the Blue Bonnet put the Myter down:
Time shall grow sick with a hot burning fever, Dogged and dissenting ^ime*

And the Dog days shall last whole years together:
A Cuckoo then on Cheap Side Cross shall sit, The Roundheads Cuckow-like
exclaiming against the Cross^.

And nodding with his head, cry Down with it:
From an old tree a voice shall then be heard,
While Asses bray therein with a long beard. Brownists.

Then the Greek fire put to the fire in Welsh, (...) to fire, and Tame fire in
Welsh, make Puritaine.

Shall make true Protestants against them belch.
When this strange Metamorphosis you see,
Let Papists then beware of the Greek P.
The world shall be with child with too much wit*
And women Mid-wives shall deliver it. Women Preachers.

When men's heads are as round as any-ball,
The world shall then unto dissension fall:
Then sons of earth and croaking frogs shall make
A strange religious noise in pond and lake: Ignorant discoursers of Religion.

Then cork shall float, Unworthiness shall be advanced.
and Gentry down shall sink,
And paper then much store of blood shall drink:
Then Commons shall grow proud, Relations of war in pamphlets.
but very bare,
And to be then enclosed shall take great care; Defended.

While each one would a Phaeton become, Popularitie.

To rule the glorious chariot of the Sun.
Then Boys along the street, Young Statists.
as they do walk,
Shall like young Machivels both prate and talk*
When this you see, then be therewith content,
There Is like to be then a strange government.
The Hammer and the Spade shall think that they
Could without King or Kesar the Land sway.
The Commons shall grow wild, and sometimes vex
At the integrous goodness of R X:
When this and other things before recited
Do happen, England shall be much affrighted:
Then shall the people Clergymen despise,
And seek to pluck out Englands two fair Eyes. Oxford and Cambridge.

There shall be Locusts, and of flies great swarms,
And wings shall better be than legs and arms: Greedy Patentees.

Strange Comets shall within this Land appear, Running away as Finch did.

With thunder that shall fright the eye and ear. Furious and factious zeal.

Luke-warmnesse there shall be in great and small,
The Gospel tossed like a Tennis ball;
There shall be mourning then in stead of mirth,
A Mouse shall be an Elephants great birth: Many things in agitation.

The Shepherds then their cotes shall hardly keep,
Because they once did starve and fleece their sheep. Ministers accused.

And then a star of Marses sphere shall come, The Earl of Strafford.

That by an axe shall fall, and be undone:
Then Irish Rebels shall on Bog and Heath
Be conquered, and be forced to taste of death;
Then shall the Moon again recover light, The Protestant Church.

When that these Rebels are all put to flight:
Then shall the Whore of Rome wear poor apparel,
And pawn her Myter to maintain her quarrel.
When the small Birds and Eagle join in one, The King and the Parliament.

They quickly shall subdue the Whore of Rome:
Bu^ yet a while there shall be hot fierce wits,
And Schismaticka shall run in frantic fits,
Until their necks grow longer, that they may
Grow wise and modest against another day;
Then Crows and Rooks shall never vex the Dove, Facticus sp^rits shall not
disturb the peace.

The Church shall be united in true love,
The Lion with the Lamb shall then lie down,
And England be a Land of much renown.
Then all your Sectaries which did abound, Unity in Religion.

Shall in the sheafe of unity be found.
Before that nine be set before twice twenty, 1649. or 1650.

In England there shall be much peace and plenty,
And he that bears the great Worthies name, Charles our most gracious King.

Shall be the tenth great Worthy by his fame.
O England, now behold and see
The strange sayings of a Prophecy,
Foretold some forty years agone,
Whose words and truth shall here be shown.
Master Brightmans Prophesies.
WHen Englands Church grows Englands shame,
Full of lukewarmnesse, Master Brightman makes Lao^icea the counterpane of
England* terming it lukewarm.
glory vain,
The worst in works, and outward form,
And with contrary factious torn,
When Romish Ri^es by reformation, And as for reformation next specified, he
names the Church of England a Hotchpotch of cont^ar^^s; not so cold to be all
Romish, nor so hot to admit a full reformation, etc.

Shall be expelled out of this Nation*
Lord Beggar-Bishops then shall come
To ruin, and be overthrown.
The Priests shall be vile to each wight,
Their downfall read with much delight;
For God will not them guiltless hold,
That neither have been hot nor cold.
The Scotch Church shall be in condition
A virgin free from superstition, The Sco^tish Church typified by Philadelphia,
he says shall be a virgin Church, chaste, and not so defiled with Romes
superstitions as others.

They shall be joined in Covenant,
Against which the world shall boast and vaunt:
But Englands Church must feel the storm,
Until she thoroughly her-selfe reform;
Such hurly burly and such stir,
No form of Church shall remain in her:
But reformation must take breath,
From the reign of Queen Elizabeth.
The Prophecy of old Otwell Bins, kept by M. Smith Vicar of Hudderfield 40
years.
THen James shall seek a second crown, The sayings of old Otwell Bins of
Greishorow, and delivered to him by Doulton a Seminary, which Prophecy Mr.
Smith Vicar of Hud-derfield in Yorkshire kept forty years, begins to show how
King James should wear the Crown of England, and reign but half the time
that Queen Elizabeth did.

In pulling Pope and Papists down;
But James shall vanish from the^^ face
At half Elizabeth's royal race.
Then using foreign pol^cies,
Grudgings and discontents arise;
Yet shall they assemble at the seat
Of Parliament, for a work most great;
But strange opinions there shall sow,
Dissentions that too high shall grow;
And L^odicea's, Englands Church,
Of grace and beauty some shall lurch:
And Smiths of policy shall invent,
To cast molds of new government,
While vulgar Birds of weakest wing
Grow stout against their Eagle King,
Whose just integrous heart shall prove
The Adamant of Subjects love:
Then Pride shall some in prison lock, Then it is showed how the pride of the
Bishops should lock some in pr^s^n. And should also lop a head off, as the
Earl of Strafford.

And lop a head off on a block:
By honest power they^^^ all bring down
An Aspirer that assumed a Crown;
That he whose power did Laws contemn
Might find a grave, no Diadem.
Some Comic Scenes shall then be acted
By vulgar Players much distructed; And now since Religion has been turned
into a Comedy, the Cobblers, ^eltmakers, Brewers Clerks and women have acted
their parts therein, and like fools been only laughed at, while the Muses have
been sorry to see, that Stultorum omnia sunt plena, that the high study of
Divinity should be mouthed out of Tubs, and be made the subject of foolish
arrogancy.

The Gospel from a tub or tun
Shall broached by Mechanics run.
Petticoats shall in Pulpits preach,
And women be allowed to teach;
And in those gloomy dogged days
They shall tear off the Muses Bays.
Thus strife and fury shall increase,
And Roundheads shall disturb the peace
Of Religion, while they it toss
In blankets, and pull down the Cross.
The Brownists shall no old prayers brook,
Sermons shall drown the Service-booke:
Then all men in those times shall see
Great troubles and calamity:
Then on the Irish bogs and heath,
Many a man shall taste of death.
The Soldiers wages shall increase,
Till wars at last in conquest cease:
To such as are good Landlords known,
In hostile times some love is shown:
But for all such as have great store,
They Are in less safety than the poor:
Then twenty pounds of coin in hand,
Is worth so much of yearly land.
From Ireland then there shall come one,
Must lose his head upon a stone:
But when England does swim in floods
Of plenty, and grows proud of goods,
Then from their sleep they shall be waked,
To know themselves both blind and naked;
Christ's Church must know some misery,
There shall be a doleful tragedy:
The Lord abroad his sword will send,
Unless they warning take t'amend:
Yet Germany, France, and Britanny,
This last act of your tragedy,
Good days will follow, bad ones cease,
There shall be plenty and great peace:
The whore of Romes nose shall be slit, Where you find these words, there shall
be a doleful Tragedy; Master Brightman says, that after it is past, there
will ensue abundance of peace, and that before 1650 the Jews shall be called,
Rome demolished, and the Pope quite vanquished and overcome; and that it shall
be in destroying at the year 1686 in some of his Dominions. He concludes that
our King should be the tenth Worthy, and that the Moon, which is the Church,
should flourish in his reign, which God grant that it may, to Gods glory, the
honor of the King, and the prosperity of the Kingdom of England.

And of her proud attire be stripped:
In the mean time Bishops shall be
Thrown down from all their dignity;
Their Hierarchy and their train
Shall never recover strength again:
Nor is Romes City only Rome,
But all the Popes Dominion;
So that Rome feels herself annoyed,
While she in Ireland is destroyed:
In forty one by computation,
The Pope shall fall by Reformation:
A Clergyman shall then suffice
His pride with one poor Benefice;
Then Cambridge and the Oxonian
Shall be scorned by the Rotundian,
And some that cannot say nor sing,
Shall drink much at a troubled spring,
And Cobblers then shall leave their last,
In Sermons up their gall to cast:
Magpies and Parrats then shall prate,
Both of the Eagle and the State,
Until they bring things in conclusion,
To much disorder and confusion.
Rebels and men most seditious
Shall make the times prove pernicious,
Rich men shall do things unbefitting,
An upright Judge be scarce found sitting:
Vpstart honor shall seem dreams,
And Bishops Seas prove little streams;
While many feathered Foul shall fly
Beyond the seas for jeopardie;
Rumors shall be of wars and Arms,
And there shall be of Sects great swarms:
A sort of mad rude common people
Shall pull the cross from every steeple.
The King while they do thus presume,
Unto this Realm the right shall doom,
He shall this Kingdom wisely guide,
And other Kingdoms more beside:
Then Peers and Commons shall elect,
Whose Laws shall ever take effect;
No man shall Lawyers counsel crave,
For men their right at home shall have;
And Officers each Town within,
Shall right their wrongs and punish sin*
Worthies be nine, and reckon we,
And this the tenth and last shall be:
The Moon o^scur'd full sixty year,
Shall then get light and shine full clear;
While England then for joy shall sing,
And bless the reign of their good King.
Mother Shiptons Prophecy, more ample and fuller than ever before printed.
When stern wars shall in England reign,
The plough shall cease, and Citizens gain.
By those have least, least shall be lost
And worst for them that have the most.
You shall not know of war ore night,
Yet in the morning it shall affright:
And full three years this war shall last*
Before that it be done and ^as*
And when all the world is as lost,
It shall be then called Christ's crossed;
And where King Richard made his fray,
The^ shall war for half a crown a day:
To warfare they will say for your King,
But stir not upon pain of hanging:
For he that goes forth to complain,
Shall never more return again:
Then Ravens on the Cross shall sir,
And Nobles and Commons blood think fit
To drink then London woe is me,
For ever shall destroyed he:
Then York shall be besieged, and they
Shall keep them out till the third day,
After that they will let them in,
And to hang the Mayor they will begin,
The Sheriffs too and the Aldermen,
And make a Proclamation then,
That for twent^e years a house or Tower
May be taken or any Bower;
Then never shall be wars again,
Nor any Kings or Queens shall reign;
But the Kingdom governed by (...)
And then old York shall London ^ed:
Then shall be a white Harvest of Corn*
Which shall by women kind he shorn:
Then in the North a woman shall say,
Mother, I have seen a man to day.
There shall moreover for one man,
A thousand women be seen ^han:
On St. James Church hill a man sitting
Shall be seen, and his fill weeping.
A sh^p sailing on the Thames shall come
Up to the ci^^e of rich London,
A Ship master as he does pass,
Shall say, What a fair City this was,
Now nor ^ house is left, I think,
That for money can let us have drink.
Thus Shiptons wife most strange events did show
In former times, God grant they pr^ve not true.
FINIS.

