Divine Conduct: OR, THE MYSTERY OF Providence. WHEREIN The Being and Efficacy
of Providence is Asserted, and Vindicated: The Methods of Providence as it
passes through the several Stages of our Lives opened; and the proper course of
improving all Providence directed, in a TREATISE upon Psalm 57. Ver. 2.

By John Flavell, Preacher of the Gospel.

Totam Dei Providentiam omnia tandem dirigere ad gloriam suam, and ad Electorum
salutem; ac tum quiescere Spiritum Dei, cum videt Impios damnari, ac Electos
servari; ex qua utraque re Deus glorificetur.

Hieron-Zanchii Miscell. Tom. 2. page 199. Psalm. 111. 4 (...) memoriam fecit
mirabilium suorum.

LONDON: Printed by R. W. for Francis Tyton at the Three Daggers in
Fleetstreet. MDCLXXVIII.

TO THE Right Honorable WILLIAM EARL of BEDFORD, Lord RUSSELL of Thorne^^ugh,
and Knight of the Most Noble Order of the GARTER.
My LORD,
IT was a weighy, and savoury Speech, Mr. Isaa^ Ambrose Epist. to his Vltima.
which a Pious Pen once saved from your Lordship's lips, viz. that You
accounted the Prayers of Gods Ministers and People, the best Walls about your
House. He that so accounts, doubtless understands, that Prayer engages
Providence, Isa. 45. 11. and Providence so engaged, is the surest Munition, Job
1. 10.

Many great men enclose their dwellings with an high Wall, but the foundation
(as the Wisest of men observes) is laid in their own conceits, Prove. 18. 11.
Yea, in sin, and crying sin too, Hab. 2. 12. Of such Walls we may say, as the
Oracle to Phocas, (...). If the Building emulate the Skies, yet sin being in
the bottom, all will totter.

It Is a fond vanity, to think of ensuring a destiny that can control the
Stars, and endure the assaults of Fortune, (as they love to speak) whilst
Providence is not engaged for them, no not so much as by a bare acknowledgement.

My Lord, It is not the vast bulk of an Estate, nor the best humane security in
the World, but the vigilant care of Divine Providence, that guards both It, and
its Owners from the stroke of ruin. It Is the fear of God within us, and the
Providence of God round about us, which make the firm and solid basis of all
sanctified and durable prosperity. It is beyond all debate, that there is a
Providence of God always enfolding those in everlasting arms, that bear his
Image. The Impress of that Image upon you, and the Embraces of those Arms about
you, will advance you higher, and secure you better, than your Noble Birth or
Estate could ever do.

My Lord, Providence has molded you, e melJori luto, made you both the
Offspring and Head of an Illustrious Family, planted you in a rich and pleasant
Soil, caused many Noble Branches to spring from you, drawn your life even unto
old age, through the delights and honors of this world. And now that you have
tried all those things that make the fairest pretensions to happiness; what
have you found in all these painted beauties, and false glozing excellencies
which have successively courted you? Which of them all can you pronounce
self-desirable? Which can you call objectum par amori? What is it to have the
flesh indulged, sense gratified, fancy tickled? What have you found in meats
and drinks, in stately Houses and pleasant Gardens; in Gold and Silver, in
Honor and Applause to match the Appetite of your Nobler Soul? Surely (My Lord)
to turn from them all with a generous disdain, as one that knows where to find
better entertainment; is much more Noble, than wholly to immerse, and lose our
Spirits in those sensual fuitions, as many do, alas, too many in our days!

We are fallen into the dregs of time, Sensuality runs every where into
Atheism. ProvidentJa peperit liv^^Jas, sed filJa devoravit matrem. The
largesses of Providence have so blinded, and perfectly stupefied the minds of
some, that they neither own a Providence, nor a God, who do (...), as Plutarch
both wittily and judiciously replied upon Colotes the Epicurean.

But blessed be God, there is a sincere part, both of the Nobles and Commons of
England, which this Gangrene has not yet touched, and Ihope, never shall.

My Lord, It is both your Honor and Interest, to be (...), the entire and
devoted servant of Providence. It was once the wish of a good man, optarem id
me esse Deo, quod est mihimanus mea. This is the most Noble and Divine life
that can be, to live and act in this world upon Eternal designs. To look upon
our selves and what we have, as things devoted to God; not to be content that
Providence should serve it self of us, (for so it does even of those things
which understand nothing of it) but to study wherein we may serve Providence,
and be instrumental in its hand for the good of many; this is to be truly
Honorable; quo magis quis Deo vivit, eo evadit nobilJor, clarJor, divinJor.

How much God has honored you in this respect, the World will understand
better, when your Lordship shall be gathered to your Fathers, and sleep in the
dust, then he that praises, cannot be suspected of flattery; nor he that is
praised, be moved with vain glory: But the approbation of God, is infinitely
better than the most glorious Name among men, before, or after death.

And as it is most honorable to serve, so you will find it most comfortable to
observe the ways of God in his Providence. To compose our selves to think of
the Conduct of Providence through all the Stages of life we have hitherto
passed. To note the results of its profound Wisdom, the Effects of its tender
Care, the distinguishing fruits of its special Bounty: To mark how Providence
have gone along step by step with the Promises, and both with us, till they
have now brought us near to our Everlasting Rest, Oh how delectable! how
transporting are such Meditations as these!

My Lord, It is the design of this Manual, to assert the Being and Efficacy of
Providence against the Atheism of the times; and to display the Wisdom and care
of the Providence of God in all the Concerns of that people who are really his.
It Is probable, if your Lordship will stoop to such a vulgar composure, somewhat
may occurr of a grateful relish to your pious mind. I confess, It is not
accommodated, either in exactness of method, or elegancy of style, to gratify
the curious; nor yet is it destitute of what may please and profit the truly
gracious.

Should I here recite the pleasures and advantages resulting from an humble and
heedful eying of the methods of Providence, it would look more like a Book in
an Epistle, than an Epistle in a Book. One taste of spiritual sense will
satisfy you better, than all the accurate descriptions and high EncomJums that
the most elegant Pen can bestow upon it.

My Lord, It is not that eminent station that some persons retain (in civil
respects) above the vulgar, that will enable them to penetrate the Mysteries,
and relish the sweetness of Providence better than others; (for doubtless many
that live immediately upon Providence for daily bread, do thereby gain a nearer
acquaintance with it, than those, whose outward enjoyments flow to them in a
more plentiful and stated course) but those that excel in grace and experience,
those that walk and converse with God in all his dispensations toward them;
these are the persons who are most fully and immediately capable of these high
pleasures of the Christian life. The daily flow and increase whereof in your
Lordships Noble Person and Family, is the hearty desire of

From my Study at Dartmouth, Aug. 10. 1677. Your Lordships most humble servant,
JOHN FLAVELL.

To the ingenuous Readers, those especially that are the heedful Observers of
the ways of PROVIDENCE.
Reader,
THERE are two ways whereby the blessed God condescends to manifest himself to
men, His Word, and his Works. Of the written Word we must say, No words like
these were ever written since the beginning of Time, which can (as one speaks)
take life and root in the Soul, yea, does it as really as the seed does in the
ground: and are fitted to be engraffed and naturalized there, so as no
coalition in nature can be more real than this, James 1. 21. This is the most
transcendent and glorious medJum of manifestation; God has magnifJed his word
above all his name, Psalm. 138. 2.

However, the manifestations of God by his Works, whether of CreatJon or
Providence have their value, and glory: but the prime glory and excellency of
his ProvidentJal works consists in this, that they are the very fulfillings and
real accomplishments of his written word. By a wise and heedful attendance
hereunto, we might learn that excellent Art, which is (not unfitly) called by
some ScJentJa architectonica, an Art to clear the Mysterious occurrences of
Providence, by reducing them to the written word, and there lodge them as
Effects in their proper Causes. And doubtless, this is one of the rarest
essays men could pursue against Atheism, to show, not only how Providence
concur in a most obvious tendency to confirm this great Conclusion, Thy word
is Truth; but how it sometimes extorts also the confession of a God, and the
truth of his Word, from those very tongues which have boldly denied it.
Aeschyles the PersJan relating their discomf^ture by the GrecJan Army, ^schiles
^ragoed.
makes this not able observation, When the GrecJan Forces hotly pursued us,
(says he) and we must needs venture over the great water Strymon, then frozen;
but beginning to thaw; when a hundred to one we had all dyed for it, with mine
eyes I then saw many of those Gallants whom I had heard before so boldly
maintain, there was no God, every one upon their knees, with eyes and hands
lifted up, begging hard for help and mercy, and entreating that the Ice might
hold till they got over. Many thousand seals has Providence forced the very
Enemies of God to set to his Truths, which greatly tends to our confirmation
therein; but especially, to see how the Word and Providence of God do
enlighten each other; and how the Scriptures contain all those Events, both
great and small, which are disposed by Providence in their seasons: And how not
only the Promises of the Word, are in the general faithfully fulfilled to the
Church in all her Exigences and Distresses; but in particular to every member
of it; they being all furnished by Providence with multitudes of Experiences to
this use and end. O how useful are such observations!

And as the profit and use, so the delight and pleasure resulting from the
observations of Providence, is exceeding great. It will doubtless be a part of
our entertainment in Heaven, to view with transporting delight, how the designs
and methods were laid to bring us thither: and what will be a part of our
blessedness in Heaven, may well be allowed to have a prime ingrediency into our
Heaven upon Earth* To search for pleasure among the due Observations of
Providence, is to search for water in the Ocean: for Providence does not only,
ultimately design to bring you to Heaven, but (as intermediate thereunto) to
bring (by this means) much of Heaven into your souls in the way thither.

How great a pleasure is it to discern how the most wise God is providentially
steering all to the Port of his own Praise, and his peoples Happiness, whilst
the whole world is busily employed in managing the Sails, and tugging at the
Oars, with a quite opposite design and purpose? To see how they promote his
design by opposing it, and fulfill his will by resisting it, enlarge his Church
by scattering it, and make their rest to come the more sweet to their souls, by
making their condition so restless in the world. This is pleasant to observe
in general: But to record and note its particular designs upon our selves; with
what profound wisdom, infinite tenderness, and incessant vigilance it has
managed all that concerns us from first to last, is ravishing and transporting.

O what an History might we compile of our own Experiences, whilst with a
melting heart me trace the footsteps of Providence all along the way it has
led us to this day; and set our Remarques upon its more eminent performances
for us, in the several Stages of our Life!

Here it prevented, and there it delivered: Here it directed, and there it
corrected. In this it grJeved, and in that it relJeved. Here was the Poison,
and there the Antidote. This Providence raised a dismal Cloud, and that
dispelled it again. This straightened, and that enlarged. Here a want, and there a
supply. This Relation withered, and that springing up in its room. Words cannot
express the high delights and gratifications, a gracious heart may ^ind in such
employment as this.

O what a world of rarities are to be found in Providence! The blind heedless
world makes nothing of them: they cannot find one sweet bit, where a gracious
soul would make a rich feast. Plutarch relates very exactly, how Timoleon was
miraculously delivered from the conspiracy of two Murderers, by their meeting
in the very nick of time a certain person, who to revenge the death of his
Father, killed one of them, just as they were ready to give Timoleon the fatal
blow, though he knew nothing of the business, and so Timoleon escaped the
danger. And what did this wonderful work of Providence think you, yield the
Relator? Why, though he were one of the most learned and ingenious among the
Heathen Sages; yet all he made of it, was only this, The Spectators (says he)
wondered greatly at the Artifice and contrivance which Fortune uses. This is
all he could see in it. Had a spiritual and wise Christian had the dissecting
and Anatomizing of such a work of Providence, what glory would it have yielded
to God! What comfort and encouragement to the Soul! The Be makes a sweeter
meal upon one single flower, than the Ox does upon the whole Meadow, where
thousands of them grow.

O Reader, if thy heart be spiritual and well stockt with experience, if thou
have recorded the ways of Providence toward thee, and wilt but allow thy self
time to reflect upon them; what a life of pleasure may thou live! What an
Heaven upon Earth does this way lead thee into! I will not here tell thee, what
I have met in this path, lest it should seem to savor of too much Vanity; non
est religJo ubi omnJa patent. There are some delights and enjoyments in the
Christian life, which are and must be enclosed. But Try it thy self, Taste and
See, and thou will need no other inducement; thine own Experi^nce will be the
most powerful Oratory to persuade thee to the study and search of Providence.

Histories are usually read with delight: when once the fancy is caught, a man
knows not how to disengage himself from it. I am greatly mistaken, if the
History of our own lives, if it were well drawn up, and distinctly perused,
would not be the pleasantest History that ever we read in our lives.

The ensuing Treatise is an Essay to that purpose, in which thou will find some
remarques set upon Providence, in its passage through the several Stages of our
life. But Reader, thou only art able to compile the History of Providence for
thy self, because the memorJals that furnish it, are only in thine own hands.
However, here thou may find a pattern, and general Rules to direct thee in
that great and difficult work, which is the very end, and design of this Manual.

I have not had much regard to the dress, and ornament in which this Discourse
is to go abroad, for I am debtor both to the strong and weak, the wise and
foolish: and in all my observation I have not found, that ever God has made
much use of labored periods, Rhetorical flowers, and Elegancies to improve the
power of Religion in the world: Yea, I have observed, how Providence has
sometimes rebuked good men, when upon other Subjects they have too much
affected those pedantick fooleries in withdrawing from them its usual aids, and
exposing them to shame; and much more may it do so, when it self is the Subject.

Reader, if thy stomach be nice and squeasie, and nothing will relish with
thee, but what is spruce and elegant, there are store of such composures in the
world, upon which thou may even surfeit thy curious fancy: mean time there
will be found some that will bless God for what thou despisest, and make many a
sweet meal upon what thou loathest.

I will add no more, but my hearty prayers that Providence will direct this
Treatise to such hands, in such seasons, and so bless and prosper its design,
that God may have glory, thou may have benefit, and my self comfort in the
success thereof, who am

Thine and the Churches servant in the hand of Providence, John Flavell.

Divine Conduct, OR THE MYSTERY OF Providence: Opened in a TREATISE Upon PSALM.
57. 2. I will cry unto God most high, unto God that performs all things for
me.
THE greatness of God is a glorious, and uns^archable Mystery. The Lord most
high is terrible; he is a great King over all the Earth, Psalm. 47. 2. The
condescesinon of the most high God to men is also a profound Mystery. Though
the Lord be high, yet has he respect unto the lowly, Psalm. 13 8. 6. But when
both these meet together (as they do in this Scripture) they make up a
matchless Mystery. Here we find the most High God performing all things for a
poor distressed creature.

It is the great support and solace of the Saints in all the distresses that
befall them here, that there is a Wise Spirit sitting in all the wheels of
motion, and governing the most excentrical Creatures and their most pernicious
designs to blessed and happy issues. And indeed it were not worth while to live
in a world (...) devoid of God and Providence.

How deeply we are concerned in this matter, will appear by that great
Instance, which this Psalm presents us with.

It was composed (as the Title notes) by David prayer-wise, when he hid himself
from Saul in the Cave: And is inscribed with a double Title, Altaschith Michtam
of David. Altaschith refers to the scope, and Michtam to the dignity of the
subject matter.

The former signifies destroy not, Itaschith (...) perdas, (...). vel (...)
Saulem; ^ressit ^im suos ^vid qui ^^citabant ^^sum ut ^ulem ^rderet* vel(...)
me ^ ^^eus. Gei^^ in loc. ^ichtam ^ (...) aureum vel aureolum earmen ^ (...)
(i. e.) aurum optimum; (...) psalmus hic precJosus est instar auri. Bu. gensis.
or let there be no slaughter, and may either refer to Saul, concerning whom he
gave charge to his servants not to destroy him; or rather, it has reference to
God, to whom in this great exigence he poured out his soul in this pathetical
ejaculation, Altaschith destroy not.

The later Title Michtam signi^ies a golden ornament, and so is suited to the
choice and excellent matter of the Psalm, which much more deserves such a
Title, than Pythagoras his golden Verses did.

Three things are remarkable in the former part of the Psalm. Viz. (1) His
extreme danger. (2) His earnest address to God in that extremity. (3) The
Arguments he pleads with God in that address.

His extreme danger, expressed both in the Title, Psalm. The Title tells us,
this Psalm was composed by him when he hid himself from Saul in the Cave. This
Cave was in the Wilderness of Engedi among the broken Rocks where the wild
Goats inhabited, C^m aut^ locum in quo lateb (...) esse ab (...) ercitu S^ lis
vide^ nec jam ullum (...), quo^ antease^per in si^libus perculis ferat: n^
q^oque a d^um co^git. M^rus in
an obscure and desolate hole; yet even thither the Envy of Saul pursued him, I
Sam. 24. 1, 2. And now he that had been so long hunted as a Partridge upon the
Mountains, seems to be enclosed in the net; for the place was begirt with his
Enemies, and having in this place no outlet another way, and Saul himself
entering into the mouth of this Cave, in the sides and creeks whereof he and his
men lay hid, and saw him; judge to how great an extremity, and to what a
desperate state things were now brought: Well might he say, as it is ver. 4. My
soul is among Lions, and I lie even among them that are set on fire. What hope
now remained? What but immediate destruction could be expected?

Yet this frights him not out of his ^aith and duty, Be merciful to me, O God,
be merciful unto me. This excellent Psalm was composed by him, when there was
enough to discompose the best man in the world. The repetition notes both the
extremity of the danger, and the ardency of the Supplicant. Mercy, Mercy!
nothing but Mercy, and that exerting it self in an extraordinay way, can now
save him from ^ine*



(1.) He pleads his reliance upon God, as an Argument to move mercy. Be
merciful to me, O God, be merciful unto me, for my soul trusts in thee; yea
in the shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge, until these calamitJes be
overpast, v. 1. This his trust and dependence on God, though it be not
Argumentative in respect of the dignity of the Act; yet it is so in respect,
both of the nature of the Object, a compassionate God, who will not expose any
that take shelter under his wings; and in respect of the Promise, whereby
protection is assured to them that fly to him for sanctuary, Isa. 26. 3. Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because he
trusts in thee. Thus he encourages himself from the consideration of that
God, to whom he betakes himself.

(2.) He pleads former experiences of his help in past distresses, as an
Argument encouraging hope under the present strait, ver. 2. I will cry unto God
most high, unto God that performs all things for me.

In which words I shall consider two things,

1. The Duty resolved upon, 2. The Encouragement to that resolution.
I will cry unto God. Crying unto God, is an expression that does not only
denote Prayer, but intense and fervent prayer. To cry, is to pray in an holy
passion; and such are usually speeding prayers, Psalm 18. 6. and Heb. 5. 7.

The Encouragements to this Resolution, and

1. Objective, taken from The Sovereignty of God. and 2. Subjective, taken from
The Experience he had of his Providence.


The Sovereignty of God, I will cry unto God most Upon this he acts his faith
in Extremity of danger. Saul is high, but God the most high; and without his
permission, he is assured Saul cannot touch him. He had no^ to help; and if he
had, he knew God must first help the helpers, or they cannot help him. He had
no means of defense or escape before him, but the Most High is not limited by
means. This is a singular prop to faith, Psalm. 59. 9.

The Experience of his Providence hitherto: unto

The word which we trad^^ate [ performeth] comes from a root, (...) perfecit,
desecit, destit, Pagnin. Buxtor
that signifies both to perfect, and to desis^ or cease. For when a business is
performed and perfected, the Agent then ceases and ^^sists from working: he
puts to the last hand, when he finishe^ the work. To such an happy issue the
Lord has brought all his doubtful and difficult matters before; and this gives
him encouragement, that he will still (...) gracious, and perfect that which
concerns him now, as he speaks, Psalm. 138. 8. The Lord will perfect that
which concerns me.

The Sep^uagint renders it by (...) who profits, or benefiteth me. And it is
a certain Truth, that all the results and issues of Providence are profitable
and beneficial to the Saints. But the Supplement in our Translation well
receives the importance of the place, Who performs all things. And it
involves the most strict and proper notion of Providence, which is nothing else
but the performance of God's gracious purposes, and promises to his people. And
therefore Vatablus and Muis supply and fill up the room which the conciseness
of the Original leaves, with quae promisit, I will cry unto God most high, unto
God that performs the things which he has promised. Payment is the
performance of promises. Grace makes the promise, and Providence the payment.

Piscator fills it with benignitatem and misericordJam suam, unto God that
performs his kindness and mercy. But still it supposes the mercy performed,
to be contained in the promise. Mercy is sweet in the promise, and much more so
in the providentJal performance of it to us.

CastalJo's Supplement comes nearer to ours, rerum mearum Transactorem, I will
cry unto God most high, unto God the Transactor of my affairs.

But our English, making out the sense by an universal particle, is most fully
agreeable to the scope of the Text. For it cannot but be a great encouragement
to his faith, that God had transacted all things, or performed all things for
him; this Providence that never failed him in any of the straits that ever he
met with (and his life was a life of many straits) he might well hope it would
not now fail him, though this were an extraordinary and matchless one.

Bring we then our thoughts a little closer to this Scripture, and it will give
us a fair and lovely prospect of Providence in its 1. Universal 2. Effectual 3.
Beneficial 4. Encouraging
Influence upon the Affairs and Concerns of the Saints.

The expression imports the Universal Interest Providence in and upon all the
Concerns and Interests of the Saints. It has not only its hand in this or
that, but in all that concerns them. It has its eye upon every thing that
relates to them throughout their lives, from first to last. Not only great, and
more important, but the most minute and ordinary affairs of our lives are
transacted and managed by it. It touches all things that touch us, whether more
nearly or remotely.

It displaies the Efficacy of ProvidentJal Influences. does not only undertake,
but [performeth] and perfects what concerns us. It goes through with its
designs, and accomplisheth what it begins. No difficulty so clogs it, no cross
accident falls in its way, but it carries its design through it. Its motions
are irresistible and uncontrollable, he performs it for us.

And (which is sweet to consider) all its products beneficJal to the Saints. It
performs all things [for them]. It Is true, we often prejudge its works, and
unjustly censure its designs, and under many of our straits and troubles we
say, all these things are against us: but indeed Providence neither does, nor
can do any thing that is really against the true Interest and go^d of the
Saints. For what are the works of Providence, but the execution of God's
Decree, and the fulfilling of his Word? and there can be no more in Providence,
than is in them. Now there is nothing but good to the Saints in God's purposes
and promises; and therefore, whatever Providence does in their Concernments, it
must be (as the Text speaks) the performance of all things for them.

supporting, and encouraging must the consideration of these things be in a day
of distress and trouble? What life and hope will it inspire our Hearts and
Prayers withal, when great pressures lie upon us? It had such a chearing
influence upon the Psalmist at this time, when the state of his affairs was to
the eye of sense and reason forlorn, and desperate: there was now but an hairs
breadth (as we say) betwixt him and ruin.

A potent, e^^aged, and implacable Enemy had driven him into the hole of a
rock, and was come after him into that hole, yet now whilst his soul is among
Lions, whilst he lies in a cranny of the Rock, expecting every moment to be
drawn out to death, the reflections he had upon the gracious performances of
the Most High for him, from the beginning to that moment, support his soul, and
inspire hope and life into his prayers, I will cry unto God most high, unto God
that performs all things for me.

The amount of all you have in this Doctrinal Conclusion.

DOCT. That it is the duty of the Saints, especJally in times of straits, to
reflect upon the performances of Providence for them in all the states, and
through all the stages of their lives.

The Church in all the works of mercy, owns ^he ^and of God, Isa. 26. 12. Lord,
thou have wrought all our works in (or for) us. And still it has been the
pious, and constant practice of the Saints in all generations, to preserve the
memory of the more famous, and remarkable providence that have befallen them
in their times, as a precious treasure. If thou be a ChristJan indeed, I know
thou have, if not in thy book, yet certainly in thy heart a great many precJous
favors upon record; the very remembrance and rehearsal of them is sweet: how
much more sweet was the actual enjoyment? Baxter's Saints Rest, p. 768. Thus
Moses by divine direction wrote a memorial of that victory obtained over Amalek
as the fruit and return of prayer, and built there an Altar with this
Inscription Jehovah Nissi, The Lord my Banner, Exodus 17. 14, 15. Thus Mordecai
and Hester took all care to perpetuate the memory of that signal deliverance
from the plot of Haman, by ordaining the feast of Purim, as an Anniversary
throughout every generatJon, every family, every Province, and every Ci^y, that
those days of Purim should not fail from among the Jews, nor the memorJal of
them perish from their seed, Esth. 9. 28. For this end you find Psalms indicted,
to bring to remembrance, Psalm. 70. the Title. Parents giving suitable names to
their Children, that every time they looked upon them, they might refresh the
memory of Gods mercies, 1 Samuel 1. 20. The very places where eminent Providence
have appeared, new named, upon no other design, but to perpet^ate the memorial
of those sweet Providence which so refreshed them there: Thence Bethel took
its name, Genesis 28. 19. And that well of water where Hagar was seasonably
refreshed by the Angel in her distress, Beer-la-hai-roi, the well of him that
lives and looks on me, Genesis 16. 14. Yea, the Saints have given, and God has
assumed to himself new Titles upon this very score and account; Abraham's
Jehovah jirch, and Gideon's Jehovah shallum were ascribed to him upon this
reason. And sometimes you find the Lord styles himself, The God that brought
Abraham from Vr of the Chalde^s: then the Lord Lord that brought them out of
Egypt: then the Lord that gathered them out of the North Country: still
minding them of the gracious providence which in all those places he had
wrought for them.

Now there is a twofold reflection upon the providentJal works of God.

When the ^ecords of Eternity shall be exposed to view, all the counsels and
results of that profound wisdom looked into; how will it transport? when it
shall be discerned, Lo, thus were the designs said: here were the apt
junctures and admirable dependencies of things, which when acted upon the stage
of time, seemed so perplex^ and intrica^e, ^owes Blessedness, p. 76.
This blessed sight is reserved for the perfect state. It is in that Mount of
God, where we shall see both the Wilderness and Canaan: the glorious Kingdom
into which we are come, and the way through which we were led into it. There
the Saints shall have a ravishing view of that beautiful frame, and every part
shall be distinctly discerned, as it had its particular use, and as it was
connected with the other parts, and how effectually and orderly they all
wrought to bring about that blessed design of their salvation, according to the
promise, Romans 8. 28. And we know that all things work together for good to them
that love God, etc. For it is certain, no Ship at Sea keeps more exactly by the
Compass which directs its course, than Providence does by that Promise, which
is its Cynosura and Pole Star.

The other partial and imperfect in the way to

Betwixt these two is the same difference, as betwixt the sight of the
dis-jointed wheels and scattered pins of a Watch, and the sight of the whole
united in one frame, and working in one orderly motion: or, betwixt an ignorant
Spectators viewing some more observable vessel or joint of a dissected body;
and the accurate Anatomist's discerning the course of all the veins and
arteries of the body, as he follows the several branches of them through the
whole, and plainly sees the proper places, figure, and use of each, with their
mutual respect to one another.

O how ravishing and delectable a sight is that! to behold at one view the
whole design of Providence, and the proper place, and use of every single act,
which we could not understand in this world: for what Christ said to Peter,
John 13. 7. is as applicable to some providence in which we are now concerned,
as it was to that particular action; What I do thou know not now, but
hereafter thou shall know it. All the dark intricate puzling Providence at
which we were sometimes so stumbled, and sometimes amazed, which we could
neither reconcile with the promise, nor with each other; nay, which we so
unjustly censured and bitterly bewailed, as if they had fallen out quite cross
to our happiness: we shall than see to be unto us, as the difficult passage
through the Wilderness was unto Israel, the right way to a City of habitatJon,
Psalm 107. 7.

And yet though our present views and reflections upon Providence be so short
and imperfect in comparison of that in Heaven, yet such as it is under all its
present disadvantages, it has so much excellency and sweetness in it, that I
may call it a little Heaven, or as Jacob called his Bethel, the Gate of Heaven.
It Is certainly an highway of walkking with God in this world, and as sweet
communion may a soul enjoy with him in his Providence, as in any of his
Ordinances. How often have the hearts of its observers been melted into tears
of joy, ^ther was (...) to ^escribe God, (...) at last (...), risit (...) dubie
(...) sapi^iam Do^us, and (...), Deus (...), non ^uax.
at the beholding of its wise and unexpected productions! How often has it
convinced them, upon a sober recollection of the events of their lives, that if
the Lord had left them to their own counsels, they had as often been their own
tormenters, if not executioners? Into what, and how many fatal mischiefs had
they precipitated themselves, if Providence had been as short sighted as they?
They have given it their hearty thanks, for considering their Interest more
than their Importunity, and not suffering them to perish by their own desires.

The benefits of adverting the works of Providence, are manifold and
unspeakable; as in its place we shall show you. But not to entangle the thread
of the discourse, I shall cast it into this method.





of Providence for them in all their Concernments.

Fourthly, In what manner this duty is to be performed

Fifthly, What singular benefits result to them

And then apply the whole in such Uses, as offer themselves from the Point.

The first General Head.
First, I shall undertake the proof and defense of That the affairs of the
Saints in this world are certainly conducted by the Wisdom and care of specJal
Providence.

And herein I address my self with cheerfulness, to perform (as I am able) a
service for that Providence, which has throughout my life performed all things
for me, as the Text speaks.

There is a twofold consideration of Providence according to its twofold
Object, and manner of dispensation; the one is general, exercised about all
creatures, rational and irrational, animate and inanimate; the other specJal
and peculiar. Christ has an universal Empire over all things, Ephesians. 1. 22.
the head of the whole World, by way of dominJon; but an head to the Church, by
way of unJon and specJal influence, John 17. 2. the SavJour of all men, but
especJally of them that belJeve, 1 Timothy 4. 10. The Church is his specJal care
and charge; he rules the world for its good, as an head consulting the welfare
of the body.

Heathens generally denied Providence, and no wonder, since they denied a God:
for the same Arguments that prove one, will prove the other. Aristotle the
Prince of Heathen Philosophers, could not by the utmost search of reason, find
out the Worlds original, and therefore concludes, it was from Eternity. The
Epicureans did in a sort acknowledge a God, but yet denied a Providence, and
wholly excluded him from any interest or concern in the affairs of the world,
as being inconsistent with the felicity and tranquillity of the Divine Being to
be diverted and cumbered with the care and labor of government. This assertion
is so repugnant to reason, that it is a wonder themselves blush^ not at its
absurdity; but I guess at the design, and one of them speaks it out in broad
language. Itaque imposuistis cervicibus nostris sempiternum dominum, quem dJes
and noctes timeremus. Quis enim non timeat omnJa providentem, and cogitantem,
and animadvertentem, and omnJa ad se pertinere putantem, curJosum and plenum
negotii Deum? Vell. apud Cicer. de Natura Deorum. They foresaw, that the
concession of a Providence, would impose an eternal yoke upon their necks, by
making them accountable for all they did to an higher Tribunal: and that they
must necessarily pass the time of their sojourning here in fear, whilst all
their thoughts, words and ways were strictly noted and recorded, in order to
an account by an All-seeing and righteous God: and therefore labored to
persuade themselves that was not, which they had no mind should be. But these
Atheistical and foolish conceits fall flat before the undeniable evidence of
this so great and clear a truth. Now,

My business here, is not so much to deal with professed Atheists, who deny the
existence of God; and consequently deride all evidences brought from Scripture,
of the extraordinary events, that fall out in favor of that people that are
called His: but rather to convince those, that professedly own all this; yet
never having tasted Religion by experience, suspect at least, that all these
things which we call specJal providence to the Saints, are but natural events,
or mere contingencJes: and thus whilst they profess to own a God, and a
Providence, (which profession is but the effect of their education) they do in
the mean time live like Atheists; and both think and act, as if there were no
such things: and really I doubt, this is the case of the far greatest part of
the men of this generation.

But if it were indeed so, that the affairs of the World in general, and more
especially those of the Saints, were not conducted by divine Providence, but
(as they would persuade us) by the steady course of natural causes: beside
which, if at any time we observe any event to fall out, it is merely casual and
contingent, or that which proceeds from some hidden and secret cause in nature:
If this indeed were so, let them that are tempted to believe it, rationally
satisfy the following demands.

First Demand.
How comes it to pass, that so many signal mercies and deliverances have
befallen the people of God, above the power, and against the course of natural
causes: to make way for which, there has been a sensible suspension and stop
put to the course of nature? It is most evident, that no natural effect can
exceed the power of its natural cause. Nothing can give to another, more than
it has in it self. And it is as clear, that whatsoever acts naturally, acts
necessarily: Fire burns adultimum sui posse to the uttermost of its power:
Waters overflow, and drown all that they can. Lions and other rapacious and
cruel ^easts, especially when hungry, tear and devour their prey: And for
Arbitrary and rational Agents, they also act according to the principles and
Laws of their natures. A wicked man when his heart is fully set in him, and his
will stands in a full bent of resolution, will certainly (if he have power in
his hand, and opportunity to execute his conceived mischief) give it vent, and
perpetrate the wicked devices of his heart: for having once conceived mischief,
and travailing in pain with it (according to the course of nature) he must
bring it forth, as it is Psalm. 7. 14. But if any of these inanimate, brutal, or
rational agents, when there is no natural obstacle or remora, have their power
suspended, and that when the effect is near the birth, and the design at the
very article of execution, so that though they would, yet cannot hurt; to what
think you is this to be assigned and referred? Yet so it has often been seen,
where Gods interest has been immediately concerned in the danger and evil of
the event. The Sea divided it self in its own Channel, and made a wall of
water, ^ow ^d was ^phyry (...) to it,^en in^^ of ^etter, (...) pretense must
serve the turn, That Moses taking the advantage of a (...) water unknown to the
EgyptJans, passed over the people thereat: as Moses a stranger, were better
acquainted there, than the EgyptJan (...).
on each side, to give Gods distressed Israel a safe passage, and that not in a
calm, but when the Waves thereof roared; *as it is Isa. 51. 15. The fire when
blown up to the most intense and vehement flame, had no power to singe one hair
of Gods faithful Witnesses, when at the same instant it had power to destroy
their intended ExecutJoners at a greater distance, Dan. 3. 22. Yea, we find it
has some time been sufficient to consume, but not to torment the body; as in
that known instance of blessed Bayncha^, who told his Enemies, The flames were
to him as a bed of Roses. The hungry Lions put off their natural fierceness,
and became gentle and harmless, when DanJel was cast among them for a prey. The
like account the Church S^ory gives us of Polycarpe, and DJonysJus Areopagi^a,
Acts an^ M^n. Vo^ p. 55.
whom the fire would not touch, but stood after the manner of a Ship-man's fail
filled with the wind about them.

Are these things according to the course and Law of Nature? To what secret
natural cause, can they be ascribed? In like manner, we find the vilest, and
^iercest of wicked men, have been withheld by an invisible hand of restraint
from injuring the Lords people. By what secret cause in nature, was Jeroboam's
hand dried up, and made inflexible at the same instant it was stretched out
against the Man of God? 1. King. 13. 4. No wild Beasts rend and devour their
prey more greedily, than wicked men would destroy the people of God that dwell
among them, were it not for this providential restraint upon them. So the
Psalmist expresses his case in the words following my Text, My soul is among
Lions, and I lie among them that are set on fire. The Disciples were sent forth
as Sheep into the midst of Wolves, Mat. 10. 16. It will not avail in this case
to object, Those miraculous events depend only upon Scripture testimony, which
the Atheist is not concluded by: for beside all that may be alleged for the
Authority of that testimony (which is needless to produce to men that own it)
what is it less that every eye sees, or may see at this day? Do we not behold a
weak defenseless handful of men, wonderfully, and (except this way)
unaccountably preserved from ruin in the midst of potent, enraged and
truculent enemies, that fain would, but cannot destroy them; when as yet, no
natural impediment can be assigned why they cannot?

And if this pose us, what shall we say, when we see events produced in the
world for the good of Gods chosen, by those very hands and means, which were
intentionally employed for their ruin? These things are as much beside the
intentions of their enemies, as they are above their own expectations; yet such
things are no rarities in the world. Was not the Envy of Joseph's brethren, the
cursed Plot of Haman, the Decree procured by the ^nvy of the Princes against
DanJel, with many more of the like nature, all turned by a secret and strange
hand of providence, to their greater advancement and benefit: their Enemies
lifted them up to all that honor and preferment they had.

Second Demand.
How is it (if the Saints Concerns are not ordered by a special divine
Providence) that natural causes unite and assocJate themselves for their relJef
and benefit in so strange a manner as they are found to do? It is undeniably
evident, that there are mavelous coincidencies of Providence, confederating
and agreeing as it were, to meet and unite themselves to bring about the good
of Gods Chosen. There is a like face of things showing it self in diverse places
at that time, when any work for the good of the Church is come upon the stage
of the world. As when the MessJah the capital mercy came to the Temple, then
Simeo^ and Anna were brought thither by Providence, as witnesses to it. So in
Reformation work, when the Images were pulled down in Holland, one and the same
spirit of zeal possessed them in every City and Town, that the work was done in
a night. He that heedfully reads the History of Joseph's advancement to be the
Lord of Egypt, may number in that story twelve remarkable acts or steps of
Providence, by which he ascended to that honor and authority: if but one of
them had failed, in all likelihood the Event had done so too: but every one
sell in its order, exactly keeping its own time and place. So in the Churches
deliverance from the plot of Haman, we find no less than seven acts of
Providence concurring strangely to produce it, as if they had all met by
appointment and consent, to break that snare for them: one thing so aptly
suiting with, and making way for another, that every heedful observer must
needs conclude, this cannot be the effect of casualty, but wise counsel. Even
as in viewing the accurate structure of the body of a man, the ^igure,
position, and mutual respects of the several members and vessels has convinced
some, (and is sufficient to convince all) that it was the effect of divine
Wisdom and power: in like manner, if the admirable adaptation of the means and
instruments employed for mercy to the people of God be heedfully considered,
Act. and Mon. Vol. p. 974.
who can but conf^ss, that as there are tools of all sorts and sizes in the
shop of Providence; so there is a most skilful hand that uses them, and that
they could no more produce such effects of themselves, than the Ax, Saw, or
Chisell can cut or carve a rude logg into a beautiful figure, without the hand
of a s^ilful Artificer?

We find by manifold instances, that there certainly are strong combinations,
and predispositions of persons and things, to bring about some issue and design
for the benefit of the Church, which themselves never thought of: they hold no
intelligence, communicate not their counsels to each other, yet meet together,
and work together as if they did: which is, as if ten men should all meet
together at one place, and in one hour, about one and the same business, and
that without any fore-appointment betwixt themselves; can any question, but
such a meeting of means and instruments is certainly, though secretly
overruled by some Wise invisible Agent?

Third Demand.
If the Concerns of Gods people be not governed by special Providence, Whence
is it, that the most apt and powerful means employed to destroy them are
rendered ineffectual, and weak contemptible means employed for their defense
and comfort, crowned with success? This could never be, if things were wholly
swayed by the course of nature. If we judge by that rule, we must conclude, the
more apt and powerful the means are, the more successful and prosperous they
must needs be; and where they are inept, weak, and contemptible, nothing can be
expected from them: thus reason lays it according to the rules of nature; but
Providence crosses its hands, as Jacob did in blessing the Sons of Joseph, and
orders quite contrary issues and events. Such was the mighty power and deep
policy used by Pharaoh to destroy Gods Israel, that to the eye of reason, it
was as impossible to survive it, as for crackling thorns to abide unconsumed
amidst devouring flames; by which Emblem, their miraculous preservation is
expressed, Exodus 3. 2. the bush was all in a flame, but no consumption of it.
The Heathen Roman Emperors, who made the World tremble, and subdued the
Nations under them, have employed all their power and policy against the poor,
naked, defenseless Church, to ruin it; yet could not accomplish it, Rev. 12.
3, 4. O the Seas of blood that Heathen Rome shed in the ten persecutions! yet
the Church lives, and when the Dragon gave his power to the Beast, Rev. 13. 2.
(i. e.) the State of Rome became Antichristian, O what slaughters have been
made by the Beast in all his dominions; so that the Holy Ghost represents him,
as drunken with the blood of the Saints, Rev. 17. 6. And yet all will not do:
the gates ( i. e.) the powers and policies of Hell cannot prevail against it.
How manifest is the care and power of Providence herein? Had half that power
been employed against any other people, it had certainly swallowed them up
immediately, or in the hundredth part of the time wo^^ them out. How soon was
the PersJan Monarchy swallowed up by the GrecJan, and that again by the Roman?
Act. and Mon. Vol. p. 974.
DJoclesJan and Maximin in the height of their persecution ^ound themselves so
baffled by Providence, that they both resigned the government, and lived as
private men. But in this wonderful preservation God makes good that promise,
Jer. 30. 11. though I make a full end of all NatJons, yet will I not make a
full end of Thee: and that in Isa. 54. 17. no weapon formed against thee shall
prosper.

On the contrary, how successful have weak and contemptible means been made for
the good of the Church? Thus in the first planting of Christianity in the
world, by what weak and improbable instruments was it done? Christ did not
choose the eloquent Orators, or men of Authority in the Courts of Kings and
Emperors, but twelve poor Mechanics, and Fishermen; and these not sent
together in a troop, but some to take one Country to conquer it, and some
another: the most ridiculous course (in appearance) for such a design as could
be imagined; and yet in how short a time was the Gospel spread, and the
Churches planted by them in the several Kingdoms of the world? This the
Psalmist ^oresaw by the Spirit of Prophecy, when he said, Out of the mouth of
Babes and Sucklings have thou ordained strength, to still the Enemy, and the
Avenger, Psalm. 8. 2. At the sound of Rams horns Jericho is delivered into the
hands of Israel: see Josh. 6. 20. By three hundred men with their Pitchers and
Lamps, the huge host of MidJan is discomsited, Judges 6. 19. The Protestants
besieged in BezJers in France are delivered by a drunken Drummer, who going to
his Quarters at midnight, rang the Alarm-Bell of the Town, not knowing what he
did; and just then were their enemies making their assault. And as weak and
improbable means have been blessed with success to the Church in general, so to
the preservation of its particular members also. A Spider by weaving her web
over the mouth of an Oven, shall hide a servant of Christ, Du Moulin from his
Enemies, who took refuge there in that Bloody ParisJan Massacre. A Hen shall
sustain another many days at the same time, by lodging her egg every day, in
the place where he had hid himself from the Cutthroats. Examples might be
easily multiplied in the case; but the truth is too plain and obvious to the
observation of all ages to need them. And can we but acknowledge a divine and
special Providence overruling these matters, when we see the most apt and
potent means for the Churches ruin frustrated, and the most silly and
contemptible means succeeded and prospered for its good?

Fourth Demand.
If all things be governed by the course of nature, and force of natural
causes, How then comes it to pass, that men are turned (like a bowl by a rub)
out of the way of evil, unto which they were driving on with full speed? Good
men have been engaged in the way to their own ruin, and knew it not; but
Providence has met them in the way and preserved them by strange diversions,
the meaning of which they understood not, till the Event discovered it. Paul
lay bound at Caesarca, the High PrJest and chief of the Jews request Festu^,
that he might be brought bound to Jerusalem, having laid wait in the way to
kill him; but Festus (though ignorant of the plot) utterly refuses it, but
chu^es rather to go with them to Caesarea, and judge him there: by this rub,
their bloody design is frustrated, Acts 25. 3, 4.

Possido^^^^ in the li^e of Augustine, Possid. in vit. Aug. cap. 15.
tells us, that the good Father going to teach the people of a certain Town,
took a Guid^ with him, to show him the way; the guide mistook the usual road,
and ignora^tly foll into a by-path, by which means he escaped (...) by the
hands of the bloody Donatists, who knowing his intention waylaid him to kill
him in the road.

And as memorable and wonder^ul are those rubs and diversions wicked men have
met with in the way of perpetrating the evils conceived and intended in their
own hearts. Genesis 31. 24.
Laban and Esa came against Jacob with mischievous purposes; but no sooner are
they come nigh him, but the shackles of restraint are immediately clapped upon
them both, so that their hands cannot perform their enterprises. Balaam runs
greedily for reward to curse Isra^l; but meets with an unexpected check at his
very out-set, and though that stopped him not, but he essayed every way to do
them mischief, yet he still finds himself ^etter'd by an effectual bond of
restraint, that he can no way shake off, Numb. 22. 25, 38. Saul the
High-Priest's Blood-hound, breaths out threatenings against the Church, and goes
with a bloody commission toward Damas^us, to hale the poor ^lock of Christ to
the slaughter; but when he comes nigh the place, he meets an unexpected stop in
the way, by which the mischief is not only diverted, but himself converted to
Christ, Acts 9. 1, 2, 3, 4. Who can but see the singer of God in these things?

Fifth Demand.
If there be not an overruling Providence ordering all things for the good of
Gods people, How comes it to pass, that the good and evil which is done to them
in this world, is accordingly repaid into the bosoms of them that are
instrumental therein?

1. How clear is it to every man's observation, that the kindnesses and benefits
any have done to the Lords people, have been rewarded with full measure into
their bosoms? The EgyptJan Midwives res^sed to obey Pharaoh's inhumane command,
and saved the Male Children of Israel: for this the Lord dealt well with them,
and built them houses, Exodus 1. 21. The Shunamite was hospitable, and careful
for Elisha, and God recompensed it with the desirable enjoyment of a Son, 2
Kings 4. 9. 17. Rahab hid the Spies, and was exempted from the common
destruction, for it Heb. 11. 31. PublJus the chief man of the Island Melita,
courteously received and lodged Paul after his shipwreck: the Lord speedily
repaid him for that kindness, and healed his Father, who lay sick at that time
of a Bloody Flux and Fever, Acts 28. 7, 8. --

In like manner, Si ab exor dio mundi ad nostra^ usq^e memoriam percurramus
historias, insignia divine ultionis in peccatores occurrent in^dicia. Alstedii
Not. Theol. p. 196.
we find the evils done to Gods people have been repaid, by a just retribution
to their enemies.

Pharaoh and the EgyptJans were cruel enemies to Gods Israel, and designed the
ruin of their poor innocent babes; and God repaid it, in smiting all the
firstborn of Egypt in one night, Exodus 12. 29.

Haman erected a Gallows fifty Cubits high for good Mordecai, and God so
ordered it, that himself and his ten Sons were hanged on it. And indeed it was
but meet, that he should eat the fruit of that tree which himself had planted,
Esther 7. 10.

Ahitophel plots against David, and gives counsel like an Oracle, how to
procure his fall; and that very counsel, like a surcharged Gun, recoils upon
himself, and procures his ruin: for seeing his good counsel rejected, (good
politically, not morally,) it was now easy for him to guess at the issue, and
so at his own fate, 2 Samuel 17. 23.

Charles the Ninth most inhumanely made the very Canals of Paris to stream with
Protestant blood, and soon after he died miserably, his blood streaming from
all parts of his body.

Stephen Gardener, that burnt so many of Gods dear servants to ashes, was
himself so scorched up by a terrible inflammation, that his very tongue was
black and hung out of his mouth, and in dreadful torments ended his wretched
days.

Maximinus that cruel Emperor, who set forth his ProclamatJon engraven in
Brass, for the utter abolishing of the Christian Religion, was speedily smitten
like Herod, with a dreadful judgment, swarms of Lice preying upon his
Entrails, and causing such a stench, that his PhysicJans could not endure to
come nigh him, and for refusing it were slain. Hundreds of like Instances might
easily be produced, to confirm this Observation. And who can but see by these
things, that verily there is a God that judges in the Earth?

Yea, so exact have been the retributJons of Providence to the Enemies of the
Church, that not only the same persons, but the same members that have been the
instruments of mischJef, have been made the subjects of wrath.

The same Arm which Jeroboam stretched out to smite the Prophet, God smites.
The Emperor AurelJan when he was ready to subscribe the Edict for the
persecution of the ChristJans, Eusebius. l. 7 cap. 29.
was suddenly crampt in his Knuckles, that he could not write.

Mr. Greenhill in his Exposition upon Ezekiel. 11. 13. tells his Auditory, that
there was one then present in the Congregation, who was an eyewitness of a
Woman scossing at another for purity and holy walking, who had her tongue
stricken immediately with the Palsy, and died thereof within two days.

Henry the Second of France in a great rage against a Protestant Counselor,
committed him to the hands of one of his Nobles to be imprisoned, and that with
these words, that he would see him burned with his own eyes: but mark the
righteous providence of God, within a ^ew days after, the same Noble man, with
a Lance put into his hands by the King, did at a Tilting match run the said
King into one of his eyes, whereof he dyed.

Yea, Providence has made the very place of sinning, the place of punishment,
1 King. 21. 19. In the place where Dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall Dogs
lick, thy blood: and it was exactly fulfilled, 2 Kings 9. 26. Thus Tophet is
made a burying place for the Jews, till there was no room to bury; and that was
the place where they had offered up their Sons to Molech, Jer. 7. 31, 32. The
Story of Nightingale is generally known which Mr. Fox relates, how he f^ll out
of the Pulpit and brake his neck, whilst he was abusing that Scripture, 1 John
1. 10.

And thus the Scriptures are made good by Providence, whosoever diggeth a pit shall
fall therein, and he that rolleth a stone, it shall return upon him, Prove. 26.
27. and Matthew. 7. 2. with what measure you mete, it shall be measured to you
again.

If any shall yet say, ^bject.
These things may fall out casually: That many thousands of the Churches
Enemies have dyed in peace, and their end been like other men.

We answer with Augustine, (...)
If no sin were punished here, no Providence would be believed; and if every
sin should be punished here, no Judgment would be expected. But, that none may
think these Events to be merely casual and accidental, we yet further demand.

Sixth Demand.
If these things be merely casual, How is it that they square and agree so
exactly with the Scriptures in all particulars?

We read, Amos 3. 3: Can two walk together except they be agreed? If two men
travel in one road, it is like they are agreed to go to the same place.
Providence and Scriptures go all one way: and if they seem at any time to go
diverse or contrary ways; be sure, they will meet at the journeys and. There
is an agreement betwixt them so to do.

Does God miraculously suspend the power of natural Causes, as in the first
Demand was opened? Why, this is no accidental thing, but what harmonizeth with
the word, Isa. 4. 3. 2. When thou passest through the waters, I will be with
thee, and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee. When thou walk
through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the shame kindle upon
thee.

Do natural Causes unite and associate themselves for the good of Gods people?
Why, this is no more than what is contained in the Promises, and is but the
^ul^illing of that Scripture, 1 Cor. 3. 22. All is yours, for ye are Christ's;
(i. e.) the use, benefit and service of all the Creatures is for you, as your
need shall require.

Are the most apt and powerful means employed for their ruin frustrated? Who
can but see the Scriptures fulfilled in, and expounded by such Providence? See
Isa. 54. 15, 16, 17. and 8. 8, 9, 10. expounded by 2 Kings 18. 17. and seq.

See you at any time a rub of Providence diverting the course of good men from
falling into evil, or wicked men from committing evil; how loudly do such
Providence proclaim the truth and certainty of the Scriptures, which tell us,
That the way of man is not in himself, neither is it in him that walks to
direct his steps, Jer. 10. 23. and that in Prove. 16. 9. A man's heart devises
his way, but the Lord directs his steps.

Do you see adequate retributions made to those that injure or befriend the
people of God? Why, when you see all the kindness and love they have shown the
Saints returned with an Overplus into their bosoms; how is it possible, but you
must see the accomplishment of these Scriptures in such Providence? Isa. 32.
8. 2 Cor. 9. 6. The liberal soul devises liberal things, and by liberal things
he shall stand.

And when you see the evils men have done, or intended to do to the Lords
people, recoiling upon themselves; he is perfectly blind, that sees not the
harmony such Providence bear with these Scriptures, Psalm. 140. 11, 12. Psalm.
7. 14, 15, 16. Psalm. 9. 16.

O what exact proportions do Providence and Scriptures hold! little do men
take notice of it. Why did Cyru^ contrary to all rules of State policy freely
dismiss the Captives, but to fulfill that Scripture, Isa. 45. 13. So that it was
well observed by One, That as God has stretched out the Expansum or Firmament
over the natural; so he has stretched out his Word over the rational World. And
as the Creatures on earth are influenced by those heavenly bodies, so are all
Creatures in the World influenced by the Word, and do in^allibly fulfill it,
when they design to cross it.

Seventh Demand.
If these things be contingent, How is it that they fall out in such remarkable
nicks and junctures of time, which makes them so greatly observable to all that
consider them?

We find a multitude of Providence so timed to a minute, that had they fallen
out never so little sooner or later, they had signified but little what now
they do. Certainly, it cannot be casualty, but counsel, that so exactly nicks
the opportunity. Contingentia rerum (...) este causis proximis, secundis, and
particularibus, non e causa prima, and universali, respectu cujus nihil
contingens est, sed omnia necessaria, necessitat^ immut abilitatis non causae.
Wendelin. Theol. p. 183.
Contingen^^^* keep to no Rules.

How remarkable to this purpose, was the tidings brought to Saul, that the
Philistines had invaded the Land? 1 Samuel 23. 27. just as he was ready to grasp
the prey. The Angel calls to Abraham, and shows him another Sacrifice, just
when his hand was giving the ^atal stroke to Isaac, Genesis 22. 10, 11. A Well of
water is discovered to Hagar, just when she had le^t the Child, as not able to
see its death, Genesis 21. 16, 19. Rabshak^h meets with a blasting Providence,
hears a rumor that frustrated his design, just when ready to give the shock
against Jerusalem, Isa. 27. 7, 8. So when Haman's plot against the Jews was
ripe, and all things ready for execution; On that night could not the King
sleep, Esth. 6. 1. When the horns are ready to gore Judah, immediately
Carpenters are prepared to ^ray them away, Zech. 1. 18, 19, 20, 21. How
remarkable was the relief of Rochell by a Shoal of Fish that came into the
Harbor, when they were ready to perish with famine, such as they never
observed before, nor after that time. Mr. Dod could not go to bed one night,
but has a strong impulse to visit, (though unseasonably) a neighbor
Gentleman, and just as he came, he meets him at his door, with an halter in his
pocket, just going to hang himself. Dr. Tate and his Wife in the Irish
RebellJon, flying through the Woods with a Sucking-Child, which was just ready
to expire; the Mother going to rest it upon a Rock, puts her hand upon a bottle
of warm Milk, by which it was preserved. A good Woman (from whose mouth I
received it) being driven to a great extremity, all supplies failing, was
exceedingly plunged into unbelieving doubts and fears, not seeing whence
supplies should come; when lo! in the nick of time, turning some things in a
Chest, unexpectedly lights upon a piece of Gold, which supplied her present
wants, till God opened another door of supply. If these things fall out
casually, how is it, they observe the very nick of time so exactly? as that it
is become proverbial in Scripture, Genesis 22. 14. In the Mount of the Lord it
shall be seen.

Eighth Demand.
Lastly, Were these things casual and contingent, how can it be, that they
should fall out so immediately upon, and consonantly to the prayers of the
Saints? So that in many Providence, they are able to discern a very clear
answer to their prayers, and are sure they have the petitions they asked of
him, 1 John 5. 15.

Thus when the Sea divided it self, just upon Isreal's cry to Heaven, Exodus 14.
10. When so signal a victory is given to Asa, immediately upon that pathetical
cry to Heaven, Help us O Lord our God, 2 Chronicles. 14. 11, 12. When Ahitophel
shall go and hang himself, just upon that prayer of distressed David, 2 Samuel
15. 31. When Haman shall fall and his plot be broken, just upon the Fast kept
by Mordecai and Hester, Esth. 4. 16. Our own Speed, in his History of Britain,
tells us, that Richard the First besieged a Castle with his Army, they offered
to surrender, if he would save their lives; he refuses, and threatens to hang
them all: upon this an Arbalaster charged his Bow with a square Arrow, making
first his prayer to God, that he would direct the shot, and deliver the
Innocent from oppression; it struck the King himself, whereof he dyed, and they
were delivered. Abraham's servant prayed for success; and see how it was
answered, Genesis 24. 45. Peter was cast into prison, and prayer was made for him
by the Church, and see the event, Acts 12. 5, 6, 7, 12. I could easily add to
these, the wonderful examples of the return of prayers which was observed in
Luther, and Dr. Winter in Ireland, and many more; but I judge it needless,
because most Christians have a stock of experience of their own, and are well
assured, that many of the Providence that befall them are, and can be no other
than the return of their prayers.

And now who can be dissatisfied in this point, that wisely considers these
things? Must we not conclude as it is, Job 36. 7. He withdraws not his eye
from the Righteous: and as 2 Chronicles. 16. 9. The eyes of the Lord run to and fro
through the whole earth, to show himself strong in tho behalf of them whose
heart is perfect toward him. His providence proclaim him to be a God hearing
prayers.

The Second General Head.
HAving proved, That the Concernments of the Saints in this World, are
certainly conducted by the wisdom and care of special Providence; my next work
is to show you, In what Affairs and Concerns of theirs, the Providence of God
does more especJally appear; or what are the most remarkable performances of
Providence for them in this world.

And here I am not led directly by my Text, to speak of the most internal and
spiritual performances of Providence, immediately relating to the souls of his
people; though they all relate to their souls mediately and eventually; but of
the more visible and external performances of Providence for them: and it is
not to be supposed, I should touch all these neither; they are more than the
sands; but that which I aim at, is to discourse to you some more special and
more observable performances of Providence for you. And we shall begin at the
beginning.

The first Performance of Providence.
I.
ANd First, Providential performance in our for^mation and prot^^ction in the
wom^^
Let us consider, how well Providence has performed the first work that ever
it did for us, in our formatJon and protectJon in the womb. Certainly, this is
a very glorious and admirable performance; it is that the Psalmist admires,
Psalm. 139. 15. My substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret,
and curJously wrought in the lower parts of the earth. The Womb is so called
upon this account, because as curious Artists, when they have some choice piece
in hand, perfect it in private, and then bring it into the light for all to
gaze at; so it was here. And there are two things admirable in this performance
of Providence for us.

The rare structure and excellent composition Me^aphor^ ab acupictoribus (...)
ope^^ (...). Om^ia (...) est dominus pondere, numero, mensur^*
I am wonderfully made; that word Ru^hampti -- is very full. The Vulgar renders
it, painted as with a needle, (i. e.) richly embroidered with nerves and veins.
Oh the curious workmanship that is in that one part the eye! How has it forced
some to acknowledge a God upon the examination of it! Providence, when it went
about this work, had its model or pattern before it, according to which it
molded every part, as it is, Ver. 16. In thy Book were all my members written.
Have thou an integral perfection and sulness of members? It is because he wrote
them all in his Book, or limned out thy body, according to that exact model
which he drew of thee in his own gracious purpose, before thou had a being:
Had an eye, an ear, a hand, a foot been wanting in the platform, thou had now
been sadly sensible of the defect: this world had been but a dungeon to thee,
without those windows: thou had lived, as many do, an object of pity to
others: if thou have low thoughts of this mercy, ask the blind, the deaf, the
lame and the dumb, the value and worth of those mercies, and they will tell
thee. There is a world of cost bestowed upon thy very body. Thou might have
been cast into another mould, ^^ther in ^rtJum ^^^cept. ^here are ^me ^embers
^^at are ^^tical, as (...) liver, ^^are and ^rain, in ^^ese are ^laced the
^atural, ^^tal and ^^nimal ^^irits; ^^ese spi^^ts are ^^rried by (...) Veins,
^rteries (...) Nerves. ^he Veins carry the natural Spirits from the Liver, the
Arteries the vi^l Spirits from the Heart, the Nerves the animal Spirits from
the ^rain: other members are officJal, as the hands and feet: the superi^^r
does rule the inferior, and the inferior support the superior* (...) wisdom
have thou made them all.
and created a Worm or a Toad. I remember Luther tells us of two Cardinals,
riding in great pomp to the Council of Constance, and by the way they heard a
man in the fields bitterly weeping and wailing: when they came to him, they
found him intently viewing an ugly Toad; and asking him, why he wept so
bitterly, he told them, his heart was melted with this consideration, that God
had not made him such a loathsome and deformed Creature; hoc est quod amare
fleo, said he: whereupon one of them cries out, Well said the Father, Surgunt
indocti, and rapJent Coelum, The unlearned will rise and take Heaven, and we
with all our learning shall be cast into Hell. No part of the Common lump was
so figured and polisht as man is. Galen gave Epicurus an hundred years time to
imagine a more commodious situation, configuration, or composition of any one
member of a humane body. And if all the Angels had studied to this day, they
could not have cast the body of man into a more curious mould.

And yet all this is but the enamelling of the Angels, nay, capable o^
Espousals to Christ, and eternal Communion with God. It Is the Wonder of Earth,
and the Envy of Hell.

Suppose now (and why should you not suppose, what you so frequently b^hold in
the world?) that Providence had so permitted and ordered it, that thy soul had
entered into thy body with one or two of its faculties wounded and defective:
Suppose its Understanding had been cracked; what a miserable life had thou
lived in this world? neither capable of service nor comfort. And truly, when I
have considered those works of Providence, in bringing into the world in all
Countries and Ages some such spectacles of pity; some deprived of the use of
reason, and differing from Beasts, in little more than shape and ^igure; and
others, though sound in their understandings, yet deformed or defective in
their bodies, monstrous, misshapen and loathsome Creatures; I can resolve the
design of this Providence, into nothing beside a demonstration of his Sovereign
power; except they be designed as soils, to set off the beauty of other rare
and exquisite pieces, and intended to stand before your eyes, as Monitors of
Gods mercy to you, that your hearts (as often as you beheld them) might be m^lted
into thankfulness for distinguishing favor to you.

Look then (but not proudly) upon thy outside and inside, see and admire what
Providence has done for thee, and how well it has performed the first service
that ever it did for thee in this world. And yet, this was not all it did for
thee, before thou saw this world. It preserved thee, as well as formed thee
in the womb: else thou had been as those Embryo's Job speaks of, Job 3. 11,
12. that never saw the light. Abortives go for nothing in the world, and there
are multitudes of them, some that never had a reasonable soul breathed into
them; but only the rudiments, and rough draught of a body: these come not into
the account of men, but perish as the Beast does. Others that dye in, or
shortly after they come out of the Womb: and though their life was but for a
moment; yet that moment entails an Eternity upon them: and had this been your
case, as it is the case of Millions, then (supposing your salvation) yet had
you been utterly unserviceable to God in the world: None had been the better
for you, nor you the better for any in the world. You had been utterly
incapable of all that good which throughout your life you have either done to
others, or received from others.

And if we consider the nature of that obscure life we lived in tho womb; how
small an accident (had it been permitted by Providence) had extinguished our
life, like a Bird in the shell? We cannot therefore but admire the tender care
of Providence over us, and say with the Psalmist, Psalm. 139. 13. Thou have
covered me in my Mothers womb: and not only so, but as it is, Psalm. 22. 9. Thou
art he that took me out of my Mothers womb. He preserved thee there to the
fullness of time, and when that time was come, brought thee safely through
manifold hazards, into that place in the world which he from Eternity espied
for thee. Which leads us to the second performance.

The Second Performance of Providence.
II.
THe second great performance of Providence, Provide^tial performanc^ with
re^spect to the tim^ and plac^ of our Nativity
for the people of God, respects the place, and time in which it ordered their
Nativity to fall. And truly, this is no small concernment to every one of us,
but of vast consequence, either to our good or evil, though it be little minded
by most men. I am persuaded, the thoughts of ^ew Christians penetrate deep
enough into this Providence, but slide too slightly and supersicially over an
Abyss of much mercy, rich and mani^old mercy wrapped up in this gracious
performance of Providence for them.

Ah friends! can you think it an indifferent thing, into what part of the World
the womb of Nature had cast you out? Is there no odds, upon what Spot of the
Creation, or in what Age of the World your lot had fallen? It may be you have
not seriously bethought your selves about this matter. And because this Point
is so seldom touched, I will therefore dive a little more particularly and
distinctly into it, and endeavor to warm your affections with a representation
of the many and rich benefits you owe to this one performance of Providence for
you.

And we will consider it under a double respect or relation, as it respects
your present comfort in this world, and as it relates to your eternal happiness
in the world to come.

present comfort in this world. All the rooms in this great house are not alike
pleasant and commodious for the Inhabitants of it. You read Psalm. 74. 20. of
the dark places of the Earth, which are full of the habitatJonr of cruelty: and
many such dismal places are found in the habitable Earth. What a vast tract of
the world lies as a waste Wilderness?

Suppose your Mothers had brought you forth in America, among the Salvage
IndJans, who herd together as brute beasts; are scorched with heat, and starved
with cold; being naked, destitute and defenseless. How poor, miserable and
unprovided of Earthly comforts and accommodations, are many Millions of the
Inhabitants of this world? What mercies do you enjoy in respect of the
amaenity, fertility, temperature and civility of the place of your habitation?
What is it but a Garden enclosed out of a Wilderness? I may without partiality
or vanity say, God has (even upon temporal accounts) provided you with one of
the healthfullest, pleasantest, and in all respects, the best furnished room in
all the great house of this world. Hear what our own Chronicler says of it,
Speed's Chron.
It is the fortunate Island, the Paradise of pleasure, the Garden of God; whose
Valleys are like Eden, whose Hills are as Lebanon, whose Springs are as Pisgah,
whose Rivers are as Jordan, whose Wall is the Ocean, and whose Defense is the
Lord Jehovah.

You are here provided of necessary and comfortable accommodations for your
bodies, that a great part of the world are unacquainted with. It is not with
the poorest among us, as it is said to be with the poor RussJans, whose poverty
pinches and bites with such sharp teeth, that their poo^ cry at the doors, Give
me and cut me, give me and kill me.

Say not, The barbarous Nations in this excel you; that they possess the Mines
of Silver and Gold, which it may be you think enough to salve all other
inconveniences of life. Alas poor Creatures! better had it been for them, if
their Country had brought forth Briars and Thorns instead of Gold, Silver, and
precJous stones; for this has been the occasion of ruining all their other
comforts in this world: this has invited their cruel avaritious enemies among
them, under whose servitude they groan, and dye without mercy: and thousands of
them have chosen death rather than life, on the terms they enjoyed it. And why
might not your lot have fallen there as well as where it is? Are not they made
of the same clay, and endowed with as good a nature as your selves? O what a
distinction has Divine Mercy made, where Nature made none! Consider ungrateful
man, thou might have fallen into some of those Regions, where a tainted air
frequently cloyes the jaws of death, where the Inhabitants differ very little
from the Beasts in the manner of their living: but God has provided for thee,
and given the poorest among us far better accommodations of life, than the
greatest among them are ordinarily provided with. O what has Providence done
for you?

spiritual mercJes, and advantages you here enjoy for your souls. Oh, this is
such an advantageous cast of Providence for you, as obliges you to a thankful
acknowledgement of it, to all Eternity. For let us here make but a few
suppositions in the case before us, and the glory of Providence will shine like
a Sunbeam full in your faces.

(1.) Suppose it had been your Lot to have fallen in any of those vast
Continents possessed by Pagans and Heathens at this day, who bow down to the
Stock of a Tree, and worship the Host of Heaven. This is the case of Millions,
and Millions of Millions: ^^Jerwoods EnquirJes, ^hap. 13. p. 118, 119
for Pagan Idola^^rs (as that searching Scholar Mr. Bri^^wood informs us) do
not only fill the circumference of nine hundred miles in Europe, but almost the
one half of Africa, more than the half of AsJa, and almost the whole of America.

Oh how deplorable had thy case been, if a Pagan Idolatress had brought thee
forth, and Idolatry had been sucked in with thy Mothers milk! then in all
probability, thou had been at this day worshipping Devils, and posting with
full speed in the direct road to Damnation: for these are the people of Gods
wrath, Jer. 10. 25. Pour out thy fury upon the Heathen that know the^ not, and
upon the familJes that call not upon thy name. How dreadful is that imprecation
against them? ^sal. 97. 7. which takes hold of them and all that is theirs,
Confounded be all they that serve graven Images, that boast themselves of Idols.

(2.) Or suppose your Lot had fallen among Mahometans, who next to Pagans
spread over the greatest tract of the Earth: for though ArabJa bred that
unclean Bird, yet it was not that Cage, that could long contain him; for, not
only the ArabJans, but the PersJans, Turks and Tartars, do all bow down their
backs under that grand Impostor. This poison has dispersed it self through the
veins of AsJa, over a great part of Africa, even the Circumference of seven
thousand miles, and stops not there, but has tainted a considerable part of
Europe also.

Had your Lot fallen here, O what unhappy men and women had you been,
notwithstanding the natural amenity and pleasantness of your native soil? You
had then adored a grand Impostor, and dyed in a fools Paradise. Instead of Gods
lively Oracles, you had been (as they now are) deceived to your eternal ruin
with such fond, mad and wild dreams, as whosoever considers would think, the
Authors had more need of manacles and fetters, than arguments or sober answers.

(3.) Or if neither of these had been your Lot, but you had been emptied by the
womb of Nature into this little spot of the Earth which is ChristJanized by
profession, but nevertheless for the most part overrun by Popish Idolatry, and
AntichristJan delusions; what unhappy men and women had you been, had you sucked
a Popish breast? For this people are to be the subjects of the VJals of Gods
wrath to be poured out successively upon them, as you may read Rev. 16. and the
Scriptures in round and plain language tell us, what their fate must be, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11, 12. And for this cause God shall send them strong delusJon, that
they should belJeve a lie, that they all might be damned who belJeved not the
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.

Nay, you might have fallen into the same Land in which your habitation now is,
and yet have had no advantage by it as to salvation, if he that chose the
bounds of your habitations, had not also graciously determined the times for
you, Acts 17. 26. For*

(4.) Suppose your Lot had fallen where it is during the Pagan State of
England, who for many hundred years were gross and vile idolaters. Thick
darkness overspread the people of this Island, and as in other Countries, the
Devil was worshipped, and his lying Oracles zealously attended upon.

The shaking of the top of Jupiter's Oak in Dodona, the Caldron smitten with
the rod in the hand of Jupiter's Image, the Laurel and Fountain in Daphne:
these were the Ordinances on which the poor deluded Wretches waited. So in this
Nation they worshipped Idols also: the Sun and Moon were adored for Gods, ^ide
Ver^igan' s British Antiqui^i^s.
with many other abominable Idols which our Ancestors worshipped, and whose
memorials are not to this day quite obliterated among us.

(5.) Or suppose our Lot had fallen in those later miserable days, in which
Queen Mary sent so many hundreds to Heaven in a fiery Chariot* and the poor
Protestants sk^lked up and down in holes and woods, to preserve them from
Popish Inquisitors, who like Bloodhounds, hunted up and down through all the
Cities, Towns and Villages of the Nat^on, to seek out the poor sheep of Christ
for a prey.

But such has the special care of Providence toward us been, that our turn to
be brought upon the stage of this World was graciously reserved for better
days: so that if we had had our own option, we could not have chosen for our
selves, as Providence has. We are not only furnished with the best room in
this great horse; but before we were put into it, it was swept with the beesom
of National Reformation, from Idolatry, yea, and washed by the blood of Martyrs
from Popish filthiness; and adorned with Gospel lights, shining in as great
luster in our days, as ever they did since the Apostles days. You might have
been born in England for many Ages, and not have found a ChristJan in it: yea,
and since ChristJanity was here owned, and not have met a Protestant in it. Oh
what an Obligation has Providence laid you under, by such a merciful
performance as this for you?

If you say, Object.
All this indeed is true; but what is this to eternal salvation? Do not
multitudes that enjoy these privileges, eternally perish notwithstanding them?
yea, and perish with an aggravation of sin and misery beyond other sinners?

True, Sol.
they do so; and it is of very sad consideration that it should be so; but yet
we cannot deny this to be a very choice and singular mercy, to be born in such
a Land, and at such a Time. For let us consider what helps for salvation men
here enjoy, beyond what they could enjoy, had their Lot fallen according to the
forementioned suppositions.

(1.) Here we enjoy the ordinary means of salvation, which elsewhere men are
denied and cut off from. So that if any among the Heathens be saved and brought
to Christ, it must be in some miraculous or extraordinary way: for, How shall
they belJeve in him of whom they have not heard* and how shall they hear
without a Preacher? Romans 10. 14. Alas! were there a desire awakened in any of
their hearts after a Gospel discovery of salvation, (which ordinarily is not,
nor can be rationally supposed) yet, poor Creatures, they might travel from Sea
to Sea, to hear the Word, and not find it: whereas you can hardly miss the
opportunities of hearing the Gospel: Sermons meet you frequently, so that you
can scarcely shun or avoid the Ordinances and Instruments of your salvation.
And is this nothing? Christ even forces himself upon us.

(2.) Here, in this Age of the World, the common prejudices against
Christianity are removed, by the advantage it has of a public profession
among the people* and protection by the Laws of the Country. Whereas, were
your habitation among Jews* Mahometans, or Heathen Idolaters* you would find
Christ and ChristJanity the common odJum of the Country* every one defying and
deriding both name and thing; and such your selves likely had been, if your
birth and education had been among them. For you may observe, that whatever is
(...) traditionally delivered down from Father to Son, every one is fond of,
and zealous in its defense. The Jews, Heathens and Mah^metans are at this day
so tenacious of their errors, that with spitting, hissing, and clapping of
hands, and all other signs of indignation and abhorrence they chase away all
others from among them.

Is it not then a special mercy to you to be cast into such a Country and Age,
where (as a learned Divine observes) the true Religion has the same advantages
over every false one, Mr. Pink^
as in other Countries they have over it? Here you have the presence of
precious Means, and the absence of soul-destroying prejudices, two signal
mercies.

(3.) Here, in this Age of the World, Christianity bespeaks you as soon as you
are capable of any sense, or impressions o^ Religion upon you; and so by an
happy anticipatJon, blocks up the passages, by which a false Religion would
(...) certainly enter. Here you ^uck in the first notions and principles of
Christianity, even with the Mothers milk: and certainly, such a prepossession
is a choice advantage. Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem Testa di^.
Train up a Child in the way he should go, and when he is old ^e will not depart
from it* Prove. 22. 6.

(4.) Here you have, or may have the help and assistance of Christians to
direct your way, resolve your doubts, support your burdens, and help you
through those difficulties that attend the new birth. Alas! if a poor soul had
any beginnings or saint workings and stirrings after Christ and true Religion
in many other Countries, the hand of every man would presently be against him,
and none would be found to relieve, assist or encourage, as you may see in that
Example of Gal^acJus; the nearest relations would, in that case, prove the
greatest Enemies, the Country would quickly hoot at him as a Monster, and cry
Away with the Heretic to the Prison or Stake.

Whether these eventually prove blessings to your souls or no, certain I am,
that in themselves they are singular mercies, and helps to salvation, that are
denied to Millions besides you. So that if Plato when he was near his death,
could bless God for three things, viz. That he was a Man, and not a Beast: that
he was born in Greece; and brought up in the time of Socrates: much more cause
have you to admire Providence, that you are Men, and not Beasts; that you were
born in England, and brought up in Gospel days here. This is a Land the Lord
has EspJed for you, as the expression is, Ezekiel. 20. 6. and concerning it, you
have abundant cause to say, as in another case the Psalmist does, Psalm. 16. 6.
The lines are fallen to me in pleasant places, and I have a goodly heritage.

The Third Performance of Providence.
III.
THe next observable Performance of Providence, Providen^ial performances with
respect to ^he Stock and Family out of which we ^prang.
which must be heedfully adverted and weighed, is the designatJon of the stock
and family out of which we should spring and rise. And truly, this is of
special consideration, both as to our temporal and eternal good; for whether
the families in which we grew up, were great or small in Israel; whether our
parents were of the higher or lower Class, and rank among men: yet if they were
such as feared God and wrought righteousness, if they took any care to educate
you religiously, and trained you up in the nurture and admonitJon of the Lord,
you are bound to reckon it among your chief mercies, that you sprung from the
loins of such parents: for from this Spring a double stream of mercy rises to
you.

(1.) Temporal and external mercies to your outward man. You cannot but know,
that as Godliness entails a blessing, so wickedness and unrighteousness a curse
upon posterity. An instance of the former you have in Genesis 17. 18, 20. On the
contrary, you have the threatening, Zech. 5. 4. and both together, Prove. 3. 33.
The Curse of the Lord is in the house of the wicked, but he Blesses the
habitatJon of the just. True it is, that both these imply the Childrens
treading in the steps of their Parents, according to Ezekiel. 18. but how
frequently is it seen, that wicked men breed their children vainly and
wickedly; so that as it is said of Abijam, 1 Kings 15. 3. He walked in all the
sins of his father, which he had done before him; and so the curse is entailed
from generation to generation. To escape this Curse, is a choice Providence.

(2.) But especially take notice, what a stream of spiritual blessings and
mercies, ^lows from this Providence to the Inner man. O it is no common mercy,
to descend from pious Parents* Some of us do not only owe our natural life to
them, as Instruments of our Beings, but our Spiritual and Eternal life also. It
was no small mercy to Timothy, to be descended from such Progenitors, 2 T^m. 1.
5. nor to. Augustine, that he had such a Mother as Monica, who planted in his
mind the precepts of life with her Words, watered them with her Tears, and
nourished them with her Example. We will a little more particularly inspect
this mercy, and in so doing, we shall find manifold mercies contained in it.

(1.) What a Mercy was it to us, to have Parents that prayed for us before they
had us, as well as in our Infancy, when we could not pray for our selves? Thus
did Abraham, Genesis 15. 2. and Hannah, 1 Samuel 1. 10, 11. and some here likely are
the fruits and returns of their Parents Prayers. This was that holy course they
continued all their days for you, carrying all your concerns, especially your
Eternal ones before the Lord with their own; and pouring out their souls to God
so affectionately for you, when their eye-strings and heart strings were
breaking. Oh put a value upon such Mercies; for they are precious. It Is a
greater Mercy, to descend from praying Parents, than from the loins of Nobles.
See Job's pious practice, Job 1. 5.

(2.) What a special Mercy was it to us, to have the excrescencies of
corruption nipt in the bud by their pious and careful discipline? We now
understand, what a critical and dangerous season Youth is, the wonderful
proclivity of that Age to every thing that is evil. Why else are they called
Youthful lusts? 2 Timothy 2. 22. When David asks, Wherewith shall a young man
cleanse his way? it is plainly enough employed in the very Question, that the way
he takes lies through the pollutions of the world in his youth, Psalm. 119. 9.
When you find a David praying, that God would not remember the sins of his
youth, Psalm. 25. 7. and a Job bitterly complaining, that God made him to
possess the sins of his youth, Job 13. 26. Sure, you cannot but reflect, with a
very thankful heart, upon those happy means, by which the corruption of your
nature was happily prevented, or restrained in your Youth.

(3.) And how great a Mercy was it, that we had Parents, who carefully
instilled the good knowledge of God into our souls in our tender years? How
careful was Abraham of this duty? Genesis 18. 19. and David? 1 Chronicles. 28. 9. We
have some of us had Parents, who might say to us, as the Apostle, Gal. 4. 19.
My little Children, of whom I travail again in birth till Christ be formed in
you. As they longed for us before they had us, and rejoiced in us when they had
us; so they could not endure to think, that when they could have us no more,
the Devil should. As they thought no pains, care or cost too much for our
bodies to feed them, cloth and heal them; so did they think no prayers,
counsels or tears, too much for our souls, that they might be saved. They knew
a parting time would come betwixt them and us, and did strive to make it as
easy and comfortable to them as they could, by leaving us in Christ, and
within the blessed bond of his Covenant.

They were not glad, that we had Health, and indifferent whether we had Grace.

They as sensibly felt the miseries of our souls as of our bodies; and nothing
was more desirable to them, than that they might say in the great day, Lord,
here am I, and the Children which thou have given me.

(4.) And was it not a special Favor to us, to have Parents that went before
us as Patterns of Holiness, and beat the path to Heaven for us by their
Examples? Who could say to us, as Phil. 4. 9. What things ye have heard and
seen in me, that do; and as 1 Cor. 11. 1. Be ye followers of us, as we are of
Christ. The Parents life is the Child's copy. O it is no common mercy, to have a
fair copy set before us, especially in the moulding age: we saw what they did,
as well as heard what they said. It was Abraham's commendation, that he
commanded his Children, and his household after him, to keep the way of the
Lord. And such mercies some of us have had also.

Ah my friends, let me beg you, that you will set special remarques upon this
Providence, which so graciously wrought for you: and that your hearts may be
more thoroughly warmed in the sense of it, compare your condition with others,
and seriously bethink your selves,

(1.) How many Children there be among us, that are drawn headlong to Hell by
their cruel and ungodly Parents, who teach them to curse and swear as soon as
they can speak? Many families there are, wherein little other language is
heard, but what is the Dialect of Hell. These, like the old logs and small
spray, are preparing for the fire of Hell, where they must burn together. Of
such Children, that Scripture, Psalm. 49. 19. will one day be verified, except
they repent, They shall go to the generatJon of their fathers, where they shall
not see light.

(2.) And how many families are there, though not so profane, who yet breed up
their Children vainly and sensually, as Job 21. 11, etc. take no care what
becomes of their souls, so they can but provide for their bodies? If they can
but teach them to carry their bodies, no matter if the Devil act their souls:
If they can but leave them Lands or Moneys, they think they have very fully
discharged their duties. O what will the language be, wherewith such Parents
and Children shall great each other at the Judgment Seat, and in Hell for ever?

(3.) And how many be there, who are more sober, and yet hate the least
appearances of Godliness in their Children? who instead of cherishing, do all
that they can to break bruised reeds, and quench smoking ^lax, to stifle and
strangle the first appearances, and offers they make toward Christ? Who had
rather accompany them to their graves, than to Christ, doing all that in them
lies, Herod like, to kill Christ in the Cradle? Ah Sirs, ye little know, what a
mercy ye do or have enjoyed in Godly Parents, and what a good Lot Providence
cast for you in this Concernment of your bodies and souls.

If any shall say, This was not their case, Object.
they had little help Heavenward from their Parents: To such I shall only
reply three things.

(1.) If you had little furtherance, Sol.
yet own it as a special Providence, that you had no hinderance; or, if you had
opposition, yet

(2.) Admire the Grace of God, in plucking you out by a wonderful
distinguishing hand of mercy from among them, and keeping alive the languishing
sparks of Grace amidst the floods of opposition.

(3.) And learn from hence, if God give you a posterity of your own, to be so
much the more strict and careful of relational duties, by how much you have
sensibly felt the want of it in your selves*

But seeing such a train of blessings, both as to this life, and that to come,
follow upon an holy education of Children; I will not dismiss the Point, till I
have discharged my duty, in exhorting Parents and Children to their duties.

Parents, or to whom the Education of Children is committed, I beseech you
mind, how concerning a duty lies on you: and that I may effectually press it,
consider,

(1.) How near the Relation is betwixt you and your Children, and therefore how
much you are concerned in their happiness or misery. Consider but the Scripture
account of the dearness of such Relations, expressed (1.) By longings for them,
as Genesis 15. 2. Genesis 30. 1. and (2.) By our joy when we have them, as Christ
expresses it, John. 16. 21. (3.) The high value set on them, Genesis 42. 38. (4.)
The sympathy with them in all their troubles, Mark 9. 22. and (5.) By our
sorrow at parting, Genesis 37. 35. Now shall all this be to no purpose? For to
what purpose do we desire them before we have them, rejoice in them when we
have them, value them so highly, sympathize with them so tenderly, grieve for
their death so excessively; if in the mean time no care be taken what shall
become of them to Eternity?

(2.) How God has charged you with their souls, as well as bodies: and this
appears by two sorts of Precepts. (1.) Precepts directly laid upon you, Deuteronomy.
6. 6, 7. and Ephesians. 6. 4. (2.) By Precepts laid on them to obey you, Ephesians. 6. 1.
which plainly implies your duty, as well as expresses theirs.

(3.) What shall comfort you at the parting time, if they dye through your
neglect in a Christless condition? Oh this is the cutting consideration, My
Child is in Hell, and I did nothing to prevent it; I helped him thither. Duty
discharged, is the only root of comfort in that day.

(4.) If you neglect to instruct them in the way of Holiness, will the Devil
neglect to instruct them in the way of Wickedness? No, no, if you will not
teach them to pray, he will to curse, swear and lie. If ground be uncultivated,
weeds will spring.

(5.) If the season of their youth be neglected, how little probability is
there of any good fruit afterward? that is the Moulding age, Prove. 22. 6. How
few are converted in old age? A twig is brought to any form, but grown limbs
will not bow.

(6.) You are instrumental causes of all their spiritual misery; and that (1.)
By generatJon, (2.) ImitatJon, they lie spiritually dead of the Plague which
you brought home among them, Psalm. 51. 5. Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, and
in sin did my Mother conceive (or warm) me.

(7.) There Is none in the World so likely as you* to be Instruments of their
Eternal good. You have peculiar advantages that none other has; as (1.) The
interest you have in their affections. (2.) Your opportunities to instill the
knowledge of Christ into them, being daily with them, Deuteronomy. 6. 7. (3.) Your
knowledge of their tempers: if therefore you neglect, who shall help them?

(8.) The consideration of the great day, sho^^d move your bowels of pity for
them. O remember that Text, Rev. 20. 12, etc. I saw the dead small and great
stand before God. What a sad thing will it be, to see your dear Children at
Christ's left hand? O friends, do your utmost to prevent this misery. Knowing
the terrors of the Lord, we persuade men.

Children, especially you that sprang from religious Parents, I beseech you,
obey their Counsels; and tread in the steps of their pious Examples. To press
this, I offer these Consideration.

(1.) Your disobedience to them, is a resisting of Gods Authority, Ephesians. 6. 1.
Children, obey your Parents in the Lord: there is the Command: your rebellion
therefore runs higher than you think. It is not Man, but God that you disobey;
and for your disobedience God will punish you. It may be, their tenderness will
not suffer them, or you are grown beyond their correction: all they can do, is
to complain to God; and if so, he will handle you more severely than they could
do.

(2.) Your Sin is greater than the Sin of young Heathens and Infidels; and so
will your Account be also. O better (if a wicked Child) that thou had been
the offspring of Salvage IndJans, nay, of Beasts, than of such Parents. So
many Counsels disobeyed, Hopes and Prayers frustrated, will turn to sad
aggravations.

(3.) It Is usual with God, to retaliate men's disobedience to their Parents in
kind: Commonly our own Children shall pay us home for it. I have read in a
grave Author, of a wicked Wretch that dragged his Father along the house: the
Father begged him, not to draw him beyond such a place: for, said he, I dragged
my Father no farther. O the sad, but just retributions of God!

And for you, in whose hearts Grace has been planted by the blessing of
Education, I beseech you to admire Gods goodness to you in this Providence. Oh
what an happy Lot has God cast for you! How few Children are partakers of your
mercies?

See that you honor such Parents; the tie is double upon you so to do. Be you
the joy of their hearts, and comfort of their lives, if living: if not, yet
still remember the mercy while you live, and tread in their pious path; that
you and they may both rejoice together in the great day, and bless God for each
other to all Eternity.

The Fourth Performance of Providence.
IV.
THe next remarkable performance of Providence for the People of God in which I
will instance, Providential performances about ou^ Conversion to God.
shall be with respect to its ordering the Occasions, Instruments and Means of
their Conversion.

In nothing does Providence shine forth more gloriously in this world, than it
does in this performance for the people of God. How curiously soever its hand
had molded your bodies, how tenderly soever it had preserved them, and how
bountifully soever it had provided for them; if it had hot also ordered some
means or other for your Conversion, all the former favors and benefits it had
done for you, had signified little. This, O this is the most excellent benefit
you ever received from its hand. You are more beholden to it for this, than for
all your other mercies. And in opening this performance of Providence, I cannot
but think your hearts must be deeply affected. This is a subject which every
gracious heart loves to steep its thoughts in. It Is certainly the sweetest
History that ever they repeated: they love to think and talk of it. The Places
where, and Instruments by whom this work was wrought, are exceedingly endeared
to them for the works sake: yea, endeared to that degree, that for many years
after their hearts have melted, when they have but passed occasionally by those
places, or but seen the faces of those persons, that were used as Instruments
in the hand of Providence for their good. As no doubt, but * Jacob's Beth-el
was ever after that night sweet to his thoughts: Genesis 48. 3.
so other Saints have had their Bethels as well as he. O blessed Places, Times
and Instrurments! O the deep, the sweet impressions, never to be razed out of
the memory or heart, that this Providence has made upon those on whom it
wrought this blessed Effect at years of discretion, and in a more sensible way!

But lest any poor soul should be discouraged under the display of this
Providence, because he cannot remember the Time, Place, Instruments and Manner
wherein, and by which Conversion-work was wrought; I will therefore premise
this necessary distinction, to prevent injury to some, whilst I design benefit
to others.

Conversion, as to the subjects of it, may be considered two ways; either as
it is more sensibly wrought in persons of riper years, who in their youthful
days were more profane and vile; or upon persons in their tender years, into
whose hearts Grace was more insensibly, and undiscernably instilled by Gods
blessing upon pious Education. In the former sort, the distinct acts of the
Spirit, as illuminating, convincing, humbling, drawing them to Christ, and
sealing them are more evident and discernable: in the latter, more obscure and
confused; they can remember, that God gave them an Esteem and liking of godly
persons, Care of duty, and Conscience of sin; but as to the Time, Place,
Instruments and Manner of the work, they can give but a slender account of
them: however, if the work be savingly wrought in them, there is no reason they
should be troubled, because the Circumstances of it are not so evident to them,
as they are to others. Let the substance and reality of the work appear, and
there is no reason to afflict your selves, because of the inevidence of such
Circumstances.

But yet where the Circumstances as well as Substance are clear to a man: when
we can call to remembrance, the Time when, the Place where, the Instrument by
whom that work was wrought, it must needs be exceeding sweet: and they cannot
but yield a fresh delight to the soul every time they are reflected upon.

There are many of the following occasions, which it may be, we took for
straglers when they first befell us: but they proved scouts sent out from the
main body of Providence, which they make way for.

Now there be diverse things in those Providence, that are versant about this
work, which are exceeding sweet, and taking; as namely,

Acts 8. 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, etc. the Eunuch at that very instant when he was
reading the Prophet Esaias, has an Interpreter, one among a thousand, that joins
his CharJot, just as his mind was by a fit occasion prepared to receive the
first light of the knowledge of Christ.

And how strange was that Change (how far soever it went) upon Naaman the
SyrJan? recorded 2 Kings 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. That the SyrJans in their incursion
should bring away this girl, (likely her beauty was the inducement,) and shel
must be presented to Naaman's Wife, and relate to her the power of God that
accompanied the Prophet; though you find in that particular case there had
never been an instance given before, Luke 4. 27. Doubtless, the whole of this
affair was guided by the signal direction of Providence.

So for the Conversion of the Samaritans, it is observed John 4. 4. Christ must
needs go that way, (i. e.) it lay just in the road betwixt Judea and Galilee,
and at the sixth hour (i. e.) high noon, he rests himself upon Jacob's Well,
still seeming to have no other design, but his own refreshment, by sitting and
drinking there: but O what a train of blessed Providence follow this, which
seemed but an accidental thing! first the Woman of SamarJa, and then many more
in that City are brought to believe in Christ, as you find Verse 29. and 41.

It is noted by MelchJor Adams in the Life of JunJus, Melch. Adams Vit Theol.
par 2. p. 194.
how very an Atheist he was grown in his younger years; but in order to his
Conversion to God, first, a wonderful preservation of his life in a public
tumult at Lions in France must make way, which forces from him the
acknowlegement of a Deity. Then his Father sends for him home, and with much
gentleness persuades him to read the Scriptures; he lights upon the first of
John, and with it he sensibly feels a Divine Supernatural Majesty and Power
seizing his soul, which brought him over by a complete Conversion to Jesus
Christ. Thus, as the Woman of Tekoa told David, does God devise means to bring
back his banished.

Lavater tells us, that many Spanish Soldiers, going into the Wars of Germany,
were there converted to Christ, by falling into the CitJes and Towns, where
godly Ministers and Christians were.

Mr. Robert Bolton, though an excellent Scholar, yet in his younger years he
was a very irreligious person, and a jeerer of holy men; but being cast into
the company of godly Mr. Peacock, was by him brought to repentance, and proved
a famous Instrument in the Church of Christ.

A scrap of paper accidentally coming to view, has been used as an occasion of
Conversion. This was the case of a Minister of Wales, See Firmin' s (...)
Christian p. 119.
who had two Livings, but took little care of either. He being at a Fair,
bought something at a Pedlers Standing, and rent off a leaf of Mr. Perkin's
Catechism to wrapped it in, and reading a line or two in it, God set it home, so
as it did the work.

The Marriage of a Godly Man into a Carnal Family, has been ordered by
Providence, for the Conversion and Salvation of many therein. Thus we read, in
the Life of that renowned English Worthy Mr. John Bruen, that in his second
Match it was agreed, that he should have one years diet in his Mother-in-laws
house: During his abode there that year (says Mr. Clark) the Lord was pleased
by his means, graciously to work upon her Soul, as also upon his Wises Sister,
and half Sister, their Brothers Mr. WillJam and Thomas Fox, with one or two of
the servants in that Family.

The reading of a good Book, has been the means of bringing others to Christ.
And thus we find many of the German Divines converted, by reading Luther's
Books: yea, and what is more strange, ^l^yden' s ^omment. ^. 475.
Mr. Sleyden in his Commentary tells us, that VergerJus, though he were present
an eye and ear-witness to that doleful case of Spira, which one would think
should move a stone, yet still continued so firm to the Popes Interest, that
when he fell into some suspicion among the Cardinals, he resolved to purge
himself, by writing a Book against the German Apostates: but whilst he read the
Protestant Books, out of no other design, but to con^ute them; whilst he is
weighing the Arguments, is himself convinced and brought to Christ. He finding
himself thus overcome by the truth, imparts his conviction to his Brother, a
zealous Papist also: this Brother deplores the misery of his case, and seeks to
reclaim him; but VergerJus entreating him to weigh well the Protestant
Arguments, he also yields; and so both immediately betook themselves to preach
Justification by the free grace of God through the blood of Christ.

Yea, not only the reading of a Book, or hearing a Minister, but (which is most
remarkable) the very mistake or forgetfulness of a Minister, (...) cap. 15.
has been improved by Providence for this end and purpose. Augustine once
preaching to his Congregation, forgot the Argument which first he proposed, and
fell upon the Error of the Manichees beside his first intention: by which
discourse, he converted one Firmus his Auditor; who fell down at his feet
weeping, and confessing he had lived a Manichee many years. Another I knew, who
going to preach, took up another Bible than that he designed, in which, not
only missing his No^es, but the Chapter also in which his Text lay, was put to
some loss thereby: but after a short pause, he resolved to speak to any other
Scripture that might be presented to him, and accordingly read that Text, 2
Pet. 3. 9. The Lord is not slack concerning his Promise, etc. And though he had
nothing prepared; yet the Lord helped him to speak both methodically and
pertinently from it: by which discourse, a gracious change was wrought upon one
in the Congregation, who has since given good Evidence of a sound Conversion,
and acknowledged this Sermon to be the first and only Means thereof.

The accompanying of others in a Neighbourly civil Visit, has been overruled
to the same end. Thus many of the Jews accompanied Mary unto Bethany,
(designing only to manifest their civil respect) but there they met Christ, saw
the things which he did, and believed on him, John 11. 45.

Mr. Firmin in his Real ChristJan, page 97, 98. tells us of one, who had lived
many years in a Town where Christ had been as clearly, and as long preached, as
in any Town in England. This man when he was about seventy six years of age,
went to visit a sick Neighbor. A Christian friend of mine (says mine Author)
came to see him also, and finding this old man there; whom he judged, to be one
that lived upon his own stock: Civility, good Works, etc. he purposely fell
into that discourse, to show how many persons lived upon their duties, but
never came to Christ. The old man sitting by the bed side, heard him; and God
was pleased to convince him, that he was such a person, who had lived upon
himself without Christ to that day; and would say afterward, had I dyed before
threescore and sixteen, I had perished, for I knew not Christ.

The committing of a godly man to Prison, has been the method of Providence,
to save the soul of a poor Keeper. So Paul, Acts 16. 27. was made a Prisoner,
to make his Keeper a spiritual Freeman. The like success had Dr. Barnes in
Queen Mary's days, who afterward celebrated the Lords Supper in Prison with
his converted Keeper.

The scattering of Ministers and ChristJans by Persecution from CitJes and
Towns, into the ignorant and barbarous parts of the Country, has been the way
of Providence, to find out, and bring home some lost sheep that were found
there, to Jesus Christ, Acts 8. 1. 4. The like signal Event has since followed
upon the like scattering of godly Ministers, whereof are many (...)

A. Servant running away from his Master, (likely upon no other design but to
live an idle life) yet falling into such places and companies, as Providence
ordered (in a design to him unknown) has thereby been brought to be the
servant of Christ. This was the very case of Onesimus, who run away from his
Master Philemon, to Rome; where by a strange Providence (possibly a mere
curiosity to see the Prisoners) he there falls into Paul's hands, who begat him
to Christ in his bonds, Philemon, Ver. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16.

Going to hear a Sermon in jest, has proved some men's Conversion in earnest.
The above named Mr. Firmin in the forecited Book, tells us of anotorious
drunkard, whom the drunkards called Father, that one day would needs go to hear
what Wilson said, out of no other design it seems, but to scoff at that holy
man: but in the prayer before Sermon, his heart began to thaw; and when he read
his Text, which was John 5. 14. Sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee:
he could not contain; and in that Sermon the Lord changed his heart, though so
bitter an Enemy, that the Minister on Lecture-dayes was afraid to go to Church
before his shopdoor. Lo, these are parts of his ways, but how small a portJon
is known of him?

The dropping of some grave and weighty word accidentally in the presence of
vain carnal persons, the death of an Husband, Wife or Child, a fit of sickness,
with a thousand other such like occasions, have been thus improved by
Providence to the Conversion of souls.

And no less remarkable and wonderful are the designs of Providence in ordering
the removes, and governing the motJons of Ministers, from place to place in
order unto the Conversion of souls. Thus oftentimes it carries them to places
where they intended not to go; God having (unknown to them) some Elect Vessels
there, who must be Called by the Gospel.

Thus Paul and Timothy (a sweet and lovely pair) when they were traveling
through PhrygJa and GalatJa, were forbid to preach the Word in AsJa, to which
probably their minds inclined, Acts 16. 6. and when they essayed to go into
BythinJa, the Spirit suffered them not, Ver. 7. But a man of MacedonJa (i. e.
an Angel in the shape or habit of a man of that Country) appeared to Paul in a
Vision, and prayed him, saying, Come over into Macedonia, and help us, Ver. 9.
and there did God open the heart of LydJa.

I knew a pious Minister now with God, who falling in his Study upon a very
rouzing subject, intended for his own Congregation, was strongly moved, when he
had finished it, to go to a rude, vile, profane people, about five miles off,
and first preach it to them; after many wrestlings with himself, not being
willing to quench any motion that might be supposed to come from the Spirit of
God, he obeyed, and went to this people, who had then no Minister of their own,
and few durst come among them. And there did the Lord, beyond all expectation,
open a door, and several profane ones received Christ in that place, and
engaged this Minister to a Weekly Lecture among them, in which many souls were
won to (...).

(...) ^ame holy Man, at another time, being (...) a Journey, passed by a
company of vain persons, who were wrestling upon a Green near the road: and
just as he came against the place, one of them had thrown his Antagonist, and
stood triumphing in his strength and activity. This good man rode up to them,
and turning his speech to this person; told him, Friend, I see you are a strong
man; but yet let not the strong man glory in his strength: You must know, that
you are not to wrestle with flesh and blood, but with principalities and
powers, and spiritual wickednes^es: how sad will it be, that Satan should at
last trip up the heels of your hope, and give you an eternal overthrow? And
after about a quarter of an hours serious discourse upon this subject, he left
them, and went on his Journey; but this discourse made such an imperssion, that
the person had no rest, till he opened his trouble to a godly Minister, who
wisely following the work upon his soul, saw at last the blessed issue thereof
in the gracious change of the person, whereof he afterward gave the Minister a
joyful account. O how unsearchable are the Methods of Providence in this matter?

Nay, what is yet more wonderful, the Providence of God has sometimes ordered
the very malice of Satan, and wickedness of men, as an occasion of Eternal good
to their souls. A very memorable Example whereof* I shall here give the Reader,
faithfully re^^^ing what not many years past ^ell out in my own observation in
this place, to the astonishment of many spectators.

In the year 1673. there came into this Port a Ship of Poole, in her return
from Virgini^; in which Ship was one of that place, a lusty young man of twenty
three years of age, who was Surgeon in the Ship. This person in the voyage
fell into a deep melancholy, which the Devil greatly improved to serve his own
design for the ruin of this poor man; however, it pleased the Lord to restrain
him from any attempts upon his own life, until he arrived here. But shortly
after his arrival, upon the Lords Day early in the morning (being in bed with
his Brother) he took a knife prepared for that purpose, and cut his own throat,
and withal leapt out of the bed, and though the wound was deep and large, yet
thinking it might not soon enough dispatch his wretched life, desperately
thrust it into his st.match, and so lay wallowing in his own blood, till his
Brother awaking, made a cry for help: hereupon a PhysicJan and a Surgeon
coming in, found the wound in his Throat mortal; and all they could do at
present, was only to stitch it and apply a plaster, with design, rather to
enable him to speak for a little while, than with any expectation of cure; for
before that, he breathed through the wound, and his voice was inarticulate.

In this condition I found him that morning, and apprehending him to be within
a few minutes of Eterity, I labored to work upon his heart the sense of his
condition, telling him, I had but little him to do any thing for him, and
therefore desired him to let me know, what his own apprehensions of his present
Condition were: He told me, he hoped in God for Eternal Life; I replied, that I
feared his hopes were ungrounded, for that the Scripture tells us, No Murderer
has eternal life abiding in him, but this was self-murder, the grossest of
all Murders: and insisting upon the aggravation and heinousness of the fact, I
perceived his vain confidence began to fall, and some meltings of heart
appeared in him. He then began to lament with many tears his sin and misery,
and asked me, if there might yet be hope for one that had destroyed himself,
and shed his own blood. I replied, the sin indeed is great, but not
unpardonable; and if the Lord gave him repentancae unto life, and ^aith to
apply Jesus Christ, it should be certainly pardoned to him: and finding him
unacquainted with these things, I opened to him the nature and necessity of
faith and repentance, which he greedily sucked in, and with great vehemence
cried to God, that he would work them upon his soul, and entreated me also to
pray with him and for him, that it might be so. I prayed with him, and the Lord
thawed his heart exceedingly in that duty: loath he was to part with me; but the
duties of the day necessitating me to leave him, I briefly summed up what was
most necessary in my parting counsel to him, and took my leave, never expecting
to see him more in this world. But beyond my own and all men's expectation, he
continued all that day, and panted most ardently after Jesus Christ: no
discourses pleased him, but Christ and faith; and in this frame I found him in
the evening. He rejoiced greatly to see me again, and entreated me to continue
my discourses upon these subjects; and after all told me, Sir, the Lord has
given me repentance for this sin* yea, and for every other sin. I see the Evil
of sin now, so as I never saw it before. O I loath my self: I am a vile
creature in my own eyes. I do also believe; Lord help my unbelJef. I am
heartily willing to take Christ upon his own terms. One thing only troubles me,
I doubt this bloody sin will not be pardoned. Will Jesus Christ (said he) apply
his blood to me, that have shed my own blood? I told him, Christ shed his blood
even for them that with wicked hands had shed the blood of Christ; and that was
a sin of deeper guilt than his. Well, (said he) I will cast my self upon
Christ; let him do by me what he will. And so I parted with him that night.

Next morning the wounds were to be opened; and then, the opinion of the
Surgeons was, he would immediately expire.

Accordingly, at his desire, I came that morning and found him in a most
serious frame. I prayed with him, and then the wound in his stomach was opened,
but by this time the Ventricle it self was swollen out of the orifice of the
wound, and lay like a livid discolored Tripe upon his body, and was also cut
through; so that all concluded, it was impossible for him to live; however they
stitcht the wound in the stomach, enlarged the Orifice, and somented it, and
wrought it again into his body, and so stitching up the skin, left him to the
dispose of Providence.

But so it was, that both the deep wound in his throat, and this in his stomach
healed: and the more dangerous wound sin had made upon his soul, was, I trust,
effectually healed also. I spent many hours with him in that sickness; and
after his return home, received this account from Mr. Samuel Hardy, a Minister
in that Town. Part whereof I shall transcribe.

Dear Sir,
I Was much troubled at the sad Providence in your Town; but did much rejoice,
that he fell into such hands for his body and soul. You have taken much pains
with him, and I hope to good purpose. I think, if ever a great and through work
were done such a way, it is now; and if never the like, I am persuaded now it
is. Never grow weary of such good works. One such Instance is (methinks) enough
to make you to abound in the work of the Lord all your days, etc.


O how unsearchable are the ways of Providence, in leading men to Christ! Let
none be encouraged by this to sin, that grace may abound. These are rare and
singular Instances of the mercy of God, and such as no presumptuous sinner can
expect to find. It Is only recited here, to the honor of Providence, which
works for the recovery of sinners in ways that we understand not. O what a
fetch has Providence beyond our Understandings!

And as it orders very strange occasions to

(1.) By quickening and reviving dying convictions and troubles for sin. Souls
after their first awakening, are apt to lose the sense and impression of their
first troubles for sin; but Providence is vigilant to prevent it; and does
effectually prevent it sometimes, by directing the Minister to some discourse
or passage, that shall fall as pat, as if the case of such a person had been
studied by him, and designedly spoken to. How often have I found this in the
cases of many souls, who have professed they have stood amazed, to hear the
very thoughts of their hearts discovered by the Preacher, who knew nothing of
them! Sometimes by directing them to some proper rousing Scripture, that suites
their present case. And sometimes by suffering them to fall into some new sin,
which shall awaken all their former troubles again, and put a new efficacy and
activity into the Conscience. The world is full of Instances in all these
cases, and because most Christians have experience of these things in
themselves, it will be needless to recite them here. Search but a few years
back, and you may remember, that according to this Account (at least, in some
particulars) Providence ordered the matter with you. Have you not found some
rod or other prepared by Providence, to rouse you out of your security? Why,
this is so common a thing with Christians, that they many times presage an
affliction coming from the frames they find their own hearts in.

(2.) It gives also great assistance to the work of the Spirit upon the soul,
by ordering, supporting, relieving and cheering means, to prop up and comfort
the soul, when it is over-burthened, and ready to sink in the deeps of
troubles. I remember Mr. Bolton gives us one Instance, which fits both these
cases, the reviving of convictJons, and seasonable supports in the deeps of
troubles. And it is of a person that by convictions had been fetched off from
his wicked companions, and entered into a reformed course of life; but after
this, through the inticement of his old companions, the subtilty of Satan, and
corruption of his own heart, did again relapse into the ways of sin. Then was
Providentially brought to his view that Scripture, Prove. 1. 24, 25, 26, etc.
this renewed his trouble; yea, aggravated it to a greater height than ever;
insomuch that he could scarcely think (as it seems by the relation) his sin
could be pardoned. But in this plunge, that Text Luke 17. 4. was presented to
him, which sweetly settled him in a sure and glorious peace.

Nor can we here forget that miraculous work of Providence, in a time of great
extremity, which was wrought for that good Gentlewoman Mrs. Honeywood, (and is
somewhere mentioned by the same Author) who under a deep and sad desertion,
refused and put off all comfort, seeming to despair utterly of the grace and
mercy of God. A worthy Minister being one day with her, and reasoning against
her desperate conclusions, she took a Venice-glass from the Table, and said,
Sir, I am as sure to be damned, as this glass is to be broken; and therewith
threw it forcibly to the ground; but to the astonishment of both* the glass
remained whole and sound, which the Minister taking up with admiration, rebuked
her presumption, and showed her what a wonder Providence had wrought for her
satisfaction, and it greatly altered the temper of her mind. O how unsearchable
are his ways! and his paths past finding out! Lo, these are part of his ways;
but how small a portion do we know of him?

ANd now suffer me to expostulate a little with thy soul Reader, have thou been
duly sensible of thy obligation to Providence, for this inestimable favor? O
what has it done for thee! there are diverse kinds of mercies conveyed to men
by the hand of Providence, but none like this: in all the Treasury of its
benefits, none is found like this. Did it cast thee into the way of Conversion,
and order the means and occasions of it for thee, when thou little thoughtest
of any such thing? How dear and sweet, should the remembrance of it be to thy
soul! Methinks it should astonish and melt you every time you reflect upon it.
Such Mercies should never grow stale, or look like common things to you: for do
but seriously consider the following particulars.

surprising the mercy was, which it performed for you in that day. Providence
had a design upon you, for your eternal good, which you understood not. The
time of mercy was now fully come; the Decree was now ready to bring forth that
mercy, with which it had gone big from Eternity, and its gracious design must
be executed by the hand of Providence, so far as concerned the external means
and instruments: and how aptly did it cause all things to fall in with that
design, though you knew not the meaning of it? Look over all the before
mentioned Examples, and you shall see the blessed work of Conversion begun upon
those souls, when they minded it no more, than Saul did a Kingdom, that morning
he went out to seek his Fathers Asses, 1 Samuel 9. 3, 20. Providence might truly
have said to you in that day, as Christ said to Peter, John 13. 7. What I do
thou know not now, but hereafter thou shall know it. Gods thoughts are not
as our thoughts; but as the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are his
thoughts higher than ours, and his ways than our ways. Little did Zacheus
think, when he climbed up into the Sycamore-tree, to see Christ as he passed
that way, what a design of mercy Christ had upon him, who took thence the
occasion of becoming both his Guest and SavJour, Luke 19. 5, 6, 7, 8. And as
little did some of you think, what the aim of Providence was, when you went
(some out of custom, others out of curiosity, if not worse ends) to hear such a
Sermon. O how stupendous are the ways of God!

What a distinguishing and seasonable mercy Angel troubled the Waters, you were
brought to the Pool; to allude to that, John 5. 4. Now the accepted day was
come, the Spirit was in the Ordinance, or Providence that converted you, and
you were set in the way of it. It may be, you had heard many hundred Sermons
before, but nothing would stick till now, because the hour was not come. The
Lord did, as it were, call in the Word for such a man, such a woman; and
Providence said, Lord, here he is, I have brought him before thee. There were
many others under that Sermon, that received no such mercy. You your selves had
heard many before, but not to that advantage, as it is said, Luke 4. 27. There
were many Lepers in Israel in the days of Elizeus, but to none of them was the
Prophet sent, save unto Naaman the SyrJan. So there were many poor unconverted
souls beside you under the Word that day, and it may be, to none of them was
salvation sent that day, but to you. O blessed Providence, that set you in the
way of mercy at that time!

What a weighty and important mercy was Providentially directed to your souls
that day. There are mercies of all sizes and kinds in the hands of Providence
to dispense to the sons of men: its left hand is full of blessings, as well as
its right. It has health and riches, honors and pleasures, as well as Christ
and Salvation to dispense. The world is full of its left hand favors; but the
blessings of its right hand are invaluably precious, and few there be that
receive them. It does thousands of kind offices for men; but among them all,
this is the chiefest, to lead and direct them to Christ. For consider,

(1.) Of all mercies, this comes through most and greatest difficulties, Ephesians.
1. 19, 20.

(2.) This is a spiritual mercy, excelling in dignity of nature all others,
more than gold excels the dirt under your feet, Rev. 3. 18. One such gift, is
worth thousands of other mercies.

(3.) This is a mercy immediately slowing out of the fountain of Gods electing
love, a mercy never dropped into any, but an Elect Vessel, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 4, 5.

(4.) This is a mercy, that infallibly secures Calvation; for as we may argue
from Conversion to Election, looking back, so from Conversion to Salvation,
looking forward, Heb. 6. 9.

(5.) Lastly, This is an Eternal mercy, that which will stick by you, when
Father, Mother, Wife, Children, Estate, Honors, Health and Life shall fail
thee, John 4. 14.

O therefore set a special Mark upon that Providence, that set you in the way
of this mercy. It has performed that for thee, which all the Ministers on
Earth, and Angels in Heaven could never have performed. This is a Mercy, that
puts weight and value into the smallest Circumstance that relates to it.

The Fifth Performance of Providence.
V.
THus you hear, how instrumental Providence has been, in ordering the Means
and Occasions of the greatest Mercies for your souls. Let us now take into
consideration, Providential performances with respect to our Civil Calling.
another excellent Performance of Providence respecting the good of your bodies
and souls too, in respect of that Employment and Calling it has ordered for
you in this world; for it has not only an Eye upon your well being in the
world to come, but upon your well being in this world also; and that very much
depends upon the Station and Vocation to which it calls you.

Now the Providence of God with respect to our civil Callings, may be displayed
very takingly in the following particulars.

fruges consumere nati, the Wens of the body politic, serving only to
disfigure and drein it, to eat what others earn. Sin brought in sweat, Genesis 3.
19. but now, not to sweat increases sin, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 12. He that lives idly,
cannot live honestly; as is plainly enough intimated, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11, 12. But
when God puts men into a lawful Calling, wherein the labors of their hands or
heads is sufficient for them, it is a very valuable mercy: for thereby they eat
their own bread, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 12. Many a sad Temptation is happily prevented;
and they are ordinarily furnished by it, for works of mercy to others, and
surely it is more blessed to give, than to receive.

Callings and Employments in the world, as are, not only lawful in themselves,
but most suitable to you. There be many persons employed in sinful Trades and
Arts, merely to furnish other men's lusts: they do not only sin in their
Employments; but their very Employments are sinful: they trade for Hell, and
are Factors for the Devil. DemetrJus and the Crafts-men at Ephesus, got their
Estates by making Shrines for DJana, Acts 19. 24, 25. ( i. e.) little cases,
or boxes with folding leaves, within which the Image of that Idol sat
enshrined. These were carried about by the People in Procession, in honor of
their Idol. And at this day, how many wicked Arts and Employments are there
invented, (and multitudes of persons maintained by them) merely to gratify the
pride and wantonness of a debauched age?

Now to have an honest lawful employment, wherein you do not dishonor God in
benefiting your selves, is no small mercy.

But if it be not only lawful in it self, but suited to your genJus and
strength, there is a double mercy in it. Some poor Creatures are engaged in
Callings, that eat up their time and strength, and make their lives very
uncomfortable to them: they have not only spending and wasting Employments in
the world; but such as allow them little or no time for their general Calling:
and yet all this does but keep them and theirs alive. Oh therefore, if God have
^itted you with an honest Employment, wherein you have Iess toil than others,
and more time for Heavenly Exercises, ascribe this benefit to the special care
of Providence for you.

In settling you in such an Employment and Calling Parents could ever expect you
should arrive to. There are among us such persons, as on this account are
signally obliged to Divine Providence. God has put them into such a way, as
neither they nor their Parents ever projected. For, look as the Flower-de-luce
in the Campass, turns now this way, then that way, and never ceases moving,
till it settle to the North point; just so it is in our setlement in the world.
A Child is now designed for this, then for that, but at last setles in that way
of Employment which Providence designed him to. How strangely are things
wheeled about by Providence! not what we, or our Parents, but what God designed
shall take place. Amos was very meanly employed at first, but God designed him
for a more honorable and comfortable Calling, Amos 7. 14, 15. David followed
the Ewes, and likely never raised his thoughts to higher things in the days of
his youth; but God made him the Royal Shepherd of a better flock, Psalm 78. 70,
71. Peter and Andrew were employed as Fishermen, but Christ calls them from
that to an higher Calling, Matthew. 4. 18, 19. to be fishers of men. Pareus when
h^ was fourteen years old, was by the instigation of his Stepmother, placed
with an Apothecary; but Providence so wrought, that he was taken off from that,
and sitted for the Ministry; wherein he became a fruitful and eminent
Instrument to the Church. James Andreas was by reason of his Fathers inability
to keep him at School, designed for a Carpenter; but was afterward by the
persuasion of friends, and assistance of the Church-stock sent to Stutgard, and
thence to the University, and so arrived to a very eminent station of service
to the Chruch. A master builder OecolampadJus was by his Father designed for a
Merchant; but his Mother by earnest entreaties, prevailed to keep him at
School: and this Man was a blessed Instrument in the reformation of Religion, I
might easily cite multitudes of such Instances; but a taste may suffice.

Have thou not made an hedge about him, and all that he has? This is the
Enclosure of Providence, which secures to us, what by its favor we acquire in
the way of honest industry.

Moses f^r the Tribe of Judah, Exodus 33. 7. Let his hands be sufficJent for
him: and it is no small mercy, if yours be so to you. Some there be that have
work, but not strength to go through with it; others have strength, but no
employment for it. Some have hands, and work for them; but it is not sufficient
for them and theirs. If God bless your labors, so as to give you and yours
necessary supports, and comfort in the world by it, it is a choice Providence,
and with all thankfulness to be acknowledged.

Object. 1. Object.
IF any that fear God shall complain, That although they have a Calling, yet it
is an hard and laborious one, which takes up too much of their time, which they
would gladly employ in other, and better work. I answer,

(1.) It Is like, Sol.
Wisdom of Providence foresaw this to be the most suitable and proper
Employment for you; and if you had more ease and rest, you might have more
temptations than now you have: the strength and time which is now taken up in
your daily labors, wherein you serve God, might otherwise have been spent
upon such lusts wherein you might have served the Devil.

(2.) Hereby it may be, your health is the better preserved, and natural
refreshments made the sweeter to you, Eccle^. 5. 12. The sleep of a laboring
man is sweet to him, whether he eat little or much: but the abundance of the
rich, will not suffer him to sleep.

(3.) And as to the service of God, if your hearts be spiritual, you may enjoy
much Communion with God in your very Employments, and you have some intervals
and respits for that purpose. Have you not more spare hours, than you employ to
that end?

Object 2. ^bject. 2.
But all my labors will scarcely suffice, to procure me and mine the
Necessaries of life. I am kept short and low to what others are; and this is a
sad affliction.

Though the Wisdom of Providence has ordered you a lower, (...).
and poorer condition than others, yet (1.) Consider how many there be that are
lower than you in the world: you have but little of the world; yet others have
less. Read the description of those persons, Job 30. 4, etc. (2.) If God have
given you but a small portion of the world; yet if you be godly, he has
promised never to forsake you, Heb. 13. 5 (3.) Providence has ordered that
condition for you, which is really best for your eternal good. If you had more
of the world than you have, your heads and hearts might not be able to manage
it to your advantage. A small Boat must have but a narrow Sail. You have not
wanted hitherto the necessaries of life, and are commanded, having food and
raiment (though none of the finest) to be therewith content. A little that a
righteous man has, is better than the riches of many wicked, Psalm. 37. 16.
better in the AcquisitJon, sweeter in the FruitJon, and more comfortable in the
Account.

Well then, if Providence has so disposed of you all, that you can eat your
own bread, and so advantagiously directed some of you to employments, that
afford not only necessaries for your selves and families, but an overplus for
works of mercy to others, and all this brought about for you in a way you did
not project; let God be owned, and honored in this Providence. Will you not
henceforth call him, My Father, the Guide of my youth? as it is Jer. 3. 4.
Surely, it was the Lord that guided you to setle as you did in those days of
your youth: You reap at this day, and may to your last day, the fruits of those
early Providence in your youth.

NOw see that you walk answerably to the obligations of Providence in this
particular; and see to it in the fear of God, that you abuse not any of those
things to his dishonor, which he has wrought for your comfort. To prevent
which, I will here drop a few needful Cautions, and shut up this particular.

Be not slothful and idle in your VocatJons. 1. Cautio^
It Is said, Augustus built an Apragapolis, a City void of business; but I am
sure God never erected any City, Town or Family to that end. The Command to
Adam, Genesis 3. 19. no doubts reaches all his posterity: and Gospel-Commands back
and second it upon Christians, Romans 12. 11. and 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11. If you be
negligent, you cannot be innocent. And yet,

Be not so intent upon your particular Callings, 2. Cautio^
as to make them interfere with your general Calling. Beware you lose not your
God in the Crowd and hurry of Earthly business. Mind that solemn warning, 1 Timothy 6. 9. But they that will be rich fall into TemptatJon, and a snare, and
into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which drown men in destructJon and
perditJon. The inhabitants of O Enoc, a dry Island near Athens, bestowed much
labor to draw in a River to water it, and make it fruitful; but when the
Sluices were opened, the waters slowed so abundantly, that it overflowed the
Island, and drowned the Inhabitants. The application is obvious. It was an
excellent saying of Seneca, rebus non me trado, sed commodo. I don't give, but
lend my self to business.

Remember always, ^. Caution
the success of your Callings and earthly Employments is by Divine blessing,
not humane diligence alone, Deuteronomy. 8. 18. Thou shall remember the Lord they God;
for it is he that gives thee power to get wealth. The Devil himself was so far
Orthodox, as to acknowledge it, Job 1. 10, Have not Thou made an hedge about
him, and about his house, and about all that he has on every side? Thou have
blessed the work of his hand, etc. Recommend therefore your affairs to God by
prayer, according to Psalm. 37. 4, 5. Delight thy self also in the Lord, and he
shall give thee the desires of thine heart. Commit thy way unto the Lord; trust
also in him, and he shall bring it to pass. And touch not with that which you
cannot recommend to God by Prayer for a blessing.

Be well satisfied in that Station and Employment in which Providence has
placed you, ^. Caution
and do not so much as wish your selves in another, 1 Cor. 7. 20. Let every man
abide in the same Calling, wherein he was called. Providence is wiser than you,
and you may be confident has suited all things better to your Eternal good,
than you could do, had you been left to your own option,

The Sixth Performance of Providence.
VI.
THus you see, the care Providence has had over you in your youth, in respect
of that Civil Employment to which it guided us in those days.

We will in the next place consider it as our Guide, Providential performances
with respect to ^ our Civil^ Relations.
and the Orderer of our RelatJons for us. That Providence has a special hand
in this matter, is evident both from Scripture assertions, and the
acknowledgements of holy men, who in that great concernment of their lives,
have still owned, and acknowledged the directing hand of Providence. Take an
instance of both. The Scripture plainly asserts the dominion of Providence over
this affair in Prove. 19. 14. A prudent Wife is from the Lord: and Prove. 18. 22.
Whose. finds a Wife, finds a good thing, and obtains favor of the Lord.
So for Children, see Psalm. 127. 3. Lo, Children are an heritage of the Lord;
and the fruit of the Womb is his reward.

And it has ever been the practice of holy men, to seek the Lord for direction
and counsel, when they have been upon the change of their condition. No doubt
but Abraham's encouragement in that case was the fruit of prayer, Genesis 24. 7.
His pious servant also, who was employed in that affair, did both earnestly
seek counsel of God, Gen, 24. 12. and thankfully acknowledge his gracious
Providence in guiding it, Ver. 26, 27.

The same we may observe in Children, the fruit of marriage, 1 Samuel 1. 20. Luke
1. 13, 14. Now the Providence of God may be diverse ways displayed for the
engaging of our hearts in love to the God of our mercies.

(1.) There is very much of Providence seen in appointing the Parties each for
other. In this, the Lord goes oftentimes beyond our thoughts and projections;
yea, and oftentimes crosses men's desires and designs to their great advantage.
Not what they fancy; but what his infinite wisdom judges best, and most
beneficial for them takes place. Hence it is, that probabilities are so often
dashed; and things remote and utterly improbable are brought about, in very
strange and unaccountable methods of Providence.

(2.) There is much of Providence seen in the harmony and agreeableness of
tempers and dispositions; from whence a very great part of the tranquillity and
comforts of our lives results: or at least, though natural tempers and
educations did not so much harmonize before, yet they do so after they come
under the Ordinance of God, Genesis 2. 24. They two shall be one flesh, not one
only in respect of Gods institutJon, but one in respect of love and affectJon,
that those who so lately were mere strangers to each other, are now endeared to
a degree beyond the nearest relations in blood. Vbi supra, For this cause shall
a man leave Father and Mother, and shall cleave to his Wife, and they two shall
be one flesh.

(3.) But especially, Providence is remarkable, in making one instrumental to
the eternal good of the other, I Cor. 7. 16. How know thou, O Wife, but thou
may save thy Husband? or how know thou, O Man, whether thou shall save thy
Wife? Hence is that grave Exhortation to the Wives of unbelieving Husbands, 1
Pet. 3. 1. to win them by their conversation, which should be to them in stead
of an ordinance.

Or if both be gracious, then what singular assistance and mutual help is
hereby gained to the furtherance of their Eternal good? Whilst they live
together as Heirs of the grace of life, I Pet. 3. 7. O blessed Providence! that
directed such into so intimate relation on Earth, who shall inherit together
the common SalvatJon in Heaven!

(4.) How much of Providence is seen in Children the fruit of MarrJage? To have
any Posterity in the Earth, and not be left altogether as a dry tree: To have
comfort and joy in them, is a special Providence, importing a special mercy to
us. To have the breaches made upon our Families repaired, is a Providence to be
owned with a thankful heart. When God shall say to a man, as he speaks in
another case to the Church, Isa. 49. 20. The Children which thou shall have
after thou have lost the other, shall say again in thine ears, the place is too
strait for me, etc

And these Providence will appear more affectingly sweet and lovely to you, if
you but compare its allotments to you, with what it has allotted to many
others in the world. For do but look abroad, and you shall find,

(1.) Multitudes unequally yoked, to the imbittering of their lives, whose
Relations are clogs and hindrances both in Temporals and Spirituals. Yea, we
find an account in Scripture of gracious persons, a great part of whose comfort
in this world has been split upon this Rock. Abigail was a discreet and
virtuous W^man, but very unsuitably matched to a churlish Nabal; see 1 Samuel 25.
25. What a temptation to the neglect of a known duty, prevailed upon the
renowned Moses, by the means of Zipporah his Wife? Exodus 4. 24, 25. David had
his scoffing Michal, 2 Samuel 6. 20. And patient Job no small addition to all his
other afflictions, from the Wife of his bosom, who should have been a support
to him in the day of his trouble, Job 19. 17.

No doubt, but God sanctifies such rods to his Peoples good. If Socrates knew
how to improve his affliction in his Zantippe, to the increase of his patience;
much more will they who converse with God under all Providence, whether sweet
or bitter. Nevertheless this must be acknowledged to be a sad stroke upon any
person, and such as maims them upon the working hand, by unfitting them for
duty, 1 Pet. 3. 7. and cuts off much of the comfort of life also.

(2.) How many are there, who never enjoy the comfortable fruits of Marriage?
but are denied the sight, at least, the enjoyment of Children, Jer. 22. 30.
Thus says the Lord, write this man Childless, etc. or if they have Children,
yet cannot enjoy them, Hosea 9. 12. Though they bring up Children, yet will I
bereave them, that there shall not be a man left; who only bear for the grave,
and have their expectations raised for a greater affliction to themselves.

(3.) And it is no rare or unusual thing to see Children and near Relations the
greatest Instruments of affliction to their Parents and Friends: so that after
all their other sorrows and troubles in the World, nearest Relations bring up
the rear of sorrows (as One speaks) and prove greater griefs than any other.
Mr. T. C. in his Isa^gog^
O how many Parents have complained with the Tree in the Fable, that their very
hearts have been rived asunder with those Wedges that were cut out of their own
bodies? What a grief was Esau to Isaac and Rabecka? Genesis 26. 34, 35. What a
scourge were Absalom and Amnon to David?

Well then, if God have set the solitary in FamilJes, as it is Psalm. 68. 6.
built an house for the desolate, given you comfortable relations, which are
springs of daily comfort and refreshment to you, you are upon many accounts
engaged to walk answerably to these gracious Providence. And that you may
understand wherein that decorum and agreeable comportment with these
Providence consists, take up the sense of your duty in these brief hints.

(1.) Ascribe to God the glory of all those The way of man is not in himself,
nor is it in him that walks to direct his own steps, Jer. 10. 23. Not what
you projected, but what an higher counsel than yours determined, is come to
pass. Good Jacob when God had made him the Father of a Family, admired God in
the mercy, Genesis 32. 10. With my staff (said he) I passed over this Jordan, and
now I am become two bands. And how does this mercy humble and melt him? I am
not worthy of the least of all the mercJes, and of all the (...), which thou
have showed unto thy servant.

David's sin, that he should dare to abuse so great love and mercy, as God had
shown him in his Family Relations, 2. Sam. 12. 7, 8, 9.



The Seventh Performance of Providence.
VII.
YOu have heard how well Providence has performed its part of you,
providen^ial provi^ion for us and ours.
in planting you into families, who once were solitary. Now let us in the next
place view another gracious performance of Providence for us, in making
provisJon from time to time for us and our FamilJes. I the rather put these
Providence together in this place, because I find the Scripture does so, Psalm
107. 41. He sets the poor on high from afflictJon, and makes him familJes
like a flock.

You know the Promises God has made to his People, Psalm. 34. 10. The young
LJons shall lack, and suffer hunger; but they that seek the Lord, shall not
want any good thing. And have you not also seen the constant performance of it?
Cannot you give the same answer, if the same question were propounded to you
that the Disciples did, Luke 22. 35. Since I sent you forth, lacked ye any
thing? and they said, nothing. Can ye not with Jacob, call him, the God that
fed you all your life long? Genesis 48. 15. Surely he has given bread to them
that fear him, and been ever mindful of his Covenant, Psalm. 111. 5.

To display this Providence, we will consider it in the following particulars.

(1.) The assiduity and constancy of the care of Providence for the Saints,
Lam. 3. 23. His mercJes are new every morning. It is not the supply of one or
two pressing needs, but all your wants, as they grow from day to day through
all your days, Genesis 48. 15. The God that fed me all my life long. The care of
Providence runs parallel with the line of life. See Isa. 46. 3, 4. Hearken unto
me, O house of Jacob, and all the remnant of the house of Israel, which are
born by me from the belly, which are carried from the Womb: and even to your
old age I am he, and even to hoar hairs will I carry. you: I have made, and I
will bear, even I will carry, and will deliver you. So that as God bid Israel,
Micah 6. 5. to remember from Shittim^ unto Gilgal, that they might know the
faithfulness of the Lord; so would I persuade thee, Reader, to record the ways
of Providence, from first to last, throughout thy whole course of this day,
that thou may see what a God he has been to thee.

(2.) The seasonableness, and opportuneness of its provisions for them: for so
runs the promise, Isa. 41. 17. When the poor and needy seek water, and there is
none, and their tongue fails for thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God
of Israel will not forsake them; and so has the performance of it been. And
this has been made good to distressed Saints sometimes in a more ordinary way,
God secretly blessing a little, and making it sufficient for us and ours: Job
tells us of the secret of God upon his Tabernacle, Job 29. 4. ( i. e.) his
secret blessing is in their Tabernacles; by reason whereof it is that they
subsist; but it is in an unaccountable way that they do so. And sometimes in an
extraordinary way it breaks forth for their supply. So you find in 2 Kings 17.
9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. the Cruse and Barrel sail not.

Mr. Samuel Clarke, (...), Vol. ^. 342.
in the Life of that painful and humble servant of Christ Mr. John Fox, records
a memorable Instance of Providence, and it is this, That toward the end of
King Henry the Eighth his Reign he went to London, where he quickly spent that
little his friends had given him, or he had acquired by his own diligence, and
began to be in great want. As one day he sat in Paul's Church, spent with long
fasting* his countenance thin, and his eyes hollow, aft^^ the ghastful manner
of dying men, every one shunning a Spectacle of so much horror: There came one
to him, whom he had never seen before, and thrust an untold sum of money into
his hand, bidding him, be of good cheer, and accept that small gift in good
part from his Countryman; and that he should make much of himself, for that
within a few days new hopes were at hand, and a more certain condition of
livelihood. Three days after the Duchess of Richmond sent for him to live in
her house, and be Tutor to the Earl of Surrey's Children, then under her care.

Mr. Isaac Ambrose a worthy Divine, whose labors have made him acceptable to
his generatJon, in his Epistle to the Earl of Bedford prefixed to his Last
things, gives a pregnant Instance in his own case; his words are these; For
mine own part, ( says he) however the Lord has seen cause to give me but a
poor pittance of outward things, for which I bless his name; yet in the income
thereof, I have many times observed so much of his peculiar Providence, that
thereby they have been very much sweetened, and my heart has been raised to
admire his grace. When of late under an hard dispensation (which I judge not
meet to mention) wherein I suffered conscientiously) all streams of wonted
supplies being stopped, the waters of relief for my self and family did run low*
I went to bed with some staggerings and doubtings of the Fountains letting out
it self for our refreshing; but e're I did awake in the morning, a Letter was
brought to my bed side, which was signed by a choice friend Mr. Anthony Ash,
which reported some unexpected breakings out of Gods goodness for my comfort.
These are some of his lines -- Your God who has given you an heart thankfully
to record your experiences of his goodness, does renew experiences for your
encouragement. Now I shall report one, which will raise your spirit toward the
God of your mercies. Whereupon he sweetly concludes, One morsel of Gods
provision, especially when it comes in unexpected and upon prayer, when wants
are most, will be more sweet to a spiritual relish, than all former enjoyments
were.

(3.) The Wisdom of Providence in our provisions. And this is discovered in two
things: (1.) In proportioning the quantity, not satisfying our extravagent
wishes, but answering our real needs; consulting our wants, not our wantonness,
Phil. 4. 19. My God shall supply all your wants; and this has exactly suited
the wishes of the best and wisest men, who desired no more at its hand. So.
Jacob, Genesis 28. 20. and Agur, Prove. 30. 8, 9. Wise Providence considers our
condition as Pilgrims and Strangers, and so allots the VJaticum provision, that
is needful for our passage home. It knows the mischievous influence of fullness
and redundancy upon most men, though sanctified; and how apt it is to make them
remiss, and forgetful of God, Deuteronomy. 6. 12. that their hearts, like the Moon,
suffers an Eclipse when it is at the full; and so ^a^ts and orders all to their
best advantage (2.) Its Wisdom is much discovered in the manner of dispensing
our portion to us. It many times suffers our wants to pinch hard, and many
scars to arise, out of design to magnify the care and love of God in the
supply, Deuteronomy. 8. 3. Providence so orders the case, that faith and prayer coming
betwixt our wants and supplies, the goodness of God may be the more magnified
in our eyes thereby.

And now let me beg you to consider the good hand of Providence, that has
provided for, and suitably supplied you and yours all your days, and never
failed you hitherto: and labor to walk suitably to your experiences of such
mercies. In order whereunto, let me press a few suitable Cautions upon you.

Beware, that you forget not the care and Israel, Psalm. 106. 3. that they soon
forgot his wondrous works. A bad heart and a slippery memory, deprive men of
the comfort of many mercies, and defraud God of the glory due for them.

Do not distrust Providence in future exigencies. Behold, he smote the rock,
that the waters gushed out, and the streams overflowed: can he give bread also?
can he provide flesh for his people? How unreasonable and absurd are these
queries of unbelief, especially after their eyes had seen the power of God in
such extraordinary effects?

Do not murmur and regret under new straits. Genesis 32. 10.

Do not show the least discontent at the lot The lines are fallen unto me in
pleasant places; yea, I have a goodly heritage. Surely that is best for you,
which Providence has appointed, and one day you your selves will judge it so
to be.

Promise, Isa. 41. 17. as well as expressed in the Command, Phil. 4. 6.
Remember God, and he will not forget you.

Matthew. 6. 25, 26. Consider the fowls of the Air, (says Christ) not the fowls
at the Door, that are daily fed by hand; but those of the Air, that know not
where to have the next meal; and yet God provides for them. Remember your
relation to Christ, and his engagements by promise to you, and by these things
work your hearts to satisfaction and content with all the allotments of
Providence.

The Eighth Performance of Providence.
VIII.
THe next great advantage and mercy the Saints receive from the hand of
Providence, ^roviden^^al per^^rmances (...) our ^reserva^^on from (...) power
(...) Tem^tation.
is in their preservatJon from the snares, and temptatJons of sin, by its
preventing care over them. That Providence wards off many a deadly stroke of
Temptation, and puts by many a mortal thrust which Satan makes at our souls, is
a truth as manifest as the light that shines. This is included in that
promise, 1 Cor. 10. 13. God will with the temptatJon make a way to escape, that
ye may be able to bear it. Providence gives an outlet for the souls escape,
when it is shut up into the dangerous straits of Temptation. There are two
eminent ways whereby the force and efficacacy of temptation is broken in
believers. One is by the operation of internal grace, Gal. 5. 17. The Spirit
lusts against the flesh; so that ye cannot do the things that ye would ( i.
e.) Sanctification gives sin a miscarrying womb after it has conceived in the
soul. The other way, is by the external working of Providence; and of this I am
here engaged to speak.

The Providence of God is the great Obex and hinderance to a world of sin,
which else would break forth like an overflowing flood from our corrupt
natures. It prevents abundance of sin, which else wicked men would commit, Genesis
19. 11. The Sodomites were greedily pursuing their lusts: God providentially
hinders it, by smiting them blind. Jeroboam intends to smite the Prophet;
Providence interposed, and withered his arm, 1 Kings 13. 4. Thus you see, when
wicked men have contrived, and are ready to execute their wickedness,
Providence claps on its manacles, that their hands cannot perform their
enterprises, as it is Job 5. 12.

And so much corruption there remains in good men, that they would certainly
plunge themselves under much more guilt than they do, if Providence did not
take greater care of them than they do of themselves: for though they make
conscience of keeping themselves, and daily watch their hearts and ways, yet
such is the deceitfulness of sin, that if Providence did not lay blocks in
their way, it would (more frequently than it does) entangle and defile them.
And this it does diverse ways.

(1.) Sometimes by stirring up others to interpose with seasonable counsels,
which effectually dissuade them from prosecuting an evil design. Thus Abigail
meets David in the nick of time, and disswades him from his evil purpose, 1 Samuel 25. 34.

And I find it recorded (as on another account was noted before) of that holy
man Mr. Dod, that being late at night in his Study, he was strongly moved
(though at an unseasonable hour) to visit a Gentleman of his acquaintance; and
not knowing what might be the design of Providence therein, he obeyed, and
went; when he came to the house, after a ^ew knocks at the door, the Gentleman
himself came to him, and asked him, whether he had any business to him: Mr. Dod
answered, no: but that he could not be quiet till he had seen him. O Sir,
(replied the Gentleman,) you are sent of God at this hour, for just now (and
with that, takes the Halter out of his pokcet,) I was going to destroy my self.
And thus was the mischief prevented.

(2.) Sometimes by hindering the Means and Instruments, whereby the Evil it
self is prevented. Thus, when good Jehosaphat had joined himself with that
wicked King AhazJah, to build Ships at EzJon-Gaber to go to Tarshish, God
prevents the design, by breaking the Ships with a storm, as you read, 2 Chronicles.
20. 35, 36, 37.

We find also in the Life of Mr. Bolton, written by Mr. Bagshaw, That whilst he
was in Oxford, he had familiar acquaintance with Mr. Anderton, a good Scholar,
but a strong Papist, who knowing Mr. Bolton's good parts, and perceiving that
he was in some outward wants, took this advantage, and used many arguments to
persuade him to be reconciled to the Church of Rome, and to go over with him to
the English Seminary, assuring him he should be furnished with all necessaries,
and have gold enough. Mr. Bolton being at that time, poor in mind and purse,
accepted the motion, and a day and place was appointed in Lancashire, where
they should meet and take shipping and be gone: but Mr. Anderton came not, and
so he escaped the share.

(3.) Sometimes by laying some strong affliction upon the body, Some
afflictions are (...) punishments, others are (...), (...) chastisements, and
these are both (...), trials of grace, and (...), preservatives from sin.
to prevent a worse evil. And this is the meaning of Hosea 2. 6. I will hedge
up her way with thorns. Thus Basil was a long time exercised with a violent
headache, which (as he observed) was used by Providence to prevent Lust. Paul
had a thorn in the flesh, a messenger of Satan sent to busset him: and this
affliction, whatever it was, was ordained to prevent pride in him, 2 Cor. 12. 7.

(4.) Sometimes sin is prevented in the Saints, by the better information of
their minds at the Sacred Oracles of God. Thus, when sinful motions began to
rise in David's mind, from the prosperity of the wicked, and his own afflicted
state, and grew to that height, that he began to think, all he had done in the
way of religion, was little better than lost labor; he is set right again, and
the temptation dissolved, by going into the Sanctuary, where God showed him how
to take new measures of persons and things; to judge them by their ends and
issues, not their present appearances, Psalm. 73. 12, 13, 17.

(5.) And sometimes the Providence of God prevents the sins of his people, by
removing them out of the way of Temptations by death. In which sense we may
understand that Text, Isa. 57. 1. The Righteous is taken away from the Evil to
come; the evil of Sin as well as Sufferings. When the Lord sees his people low
spirited, and not able to grapple with strong trials and temptations which are
drawing on, it is with respect to them a merciful Providence, to be disbanded
by death, and set out of harms way.

Now consider, and admire the Providence of God, O ye Saints, who has had more
care of your souls, than ever ye had of them. Had not the Providence of God
thus wrought for you in a way of prevention, it may be you had this day been so
many Magor Missabibs. How was the heart of David melted under that preventing
Providence forementioned in 1 Samuel 25. 34. He blesses the Lord, the
Instrument, and the Counsel by which his soul was preserved from sin. Do but
seriously bethink your selves of a few particulars about this case. As,

(1.) How your corrupt natures have often impetuously hurried you on toward
sin, so that all the inherent grace you had, could not withstand its force, if
Providence had not prevented it in some such method as you have heard, Jam. 1.
14. Every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lusts, and enticed.
You found your selves but feathers in the wind of temptation.

(2.) How near you have been brought to the brink of sin, and yet saved by a
merciful hand of Providence. May you not say with him in Prove. 5. 14. I was
almost in the midst of all evil: or as Psalm. 73. 2. My feet were almost gone,
my steps had well nigh slidden. O merciful Providence! that stepped in so
opportunely to your relief.

(3.) How many have been suffered to fall by the hand of Temptations to the
reproach of Religion, and wounding of their own Consciences, to that degree,
that they have never recovered former peace again; but lived in the world
devoid of comfort to their dying day?

(4.) How woeful your case had been, if the Lord had not mercifully saved you
from many thousand temptations, that have assaulted you? I tell you, you cannot
estimate the mercies you possess by means of such Providence. Are your names
sweet, and your Consciences peaceful, two mercies as dear to you as your two
eyes? Why surely, you owe them, if not wholly, yet in great measure, to the
aids and assistances Providence has given you all along the way you have
passed through the dangerous tempting World to this day.

Walk therefore suitably to this Obligation of Providence also: and see,

(1.) That you thankfully own it. Don't impute your escapes from sin to
accidents, or to your own watchfulness or wisdom.

(2.) See that you tempt not Providence on the other hand, by an irregular
relyance upon its care over you, without taking all due care of your selves.
Keep your selves in the love of God, Jude 21. Keep your hearts with all
diligence, Prove. 4. 23. Though Providence keep you, yet it is in the way of
your duty.

The Ninth Performance of Providence.
IX.
THus you see what care Providence has had over your souls, Providen^ial
pre^entions of bodily ^angers.
in preventing the spiritual dangers and miserJes that else would have befallen
you in the way of temptatJons: in the next place I will show you, that it has
been no less careful for your bodJes, Psalm. 17. 8. Thou keep^st me as ^he apple
^f thine eye. The eye ^ath five Tunicks (...) guard it against danger. (1.)
Ara^i^a tunica, ^ike a Spiders web. (2.) Retiformis, like a net. (3.) Uvea,
like a ber^^y. (4.) Cornea, like an horn. (5.) Adnata tunica, the cover or lid
of the eye; here is guard upon guard, resembling the various ways Providence
has to secure us from ruin.
and with how great tenderness it has carrJed them in its arms through
innumerable hazards* and dangers also. He is called the keeper of Israel that
never slumbereth nor sleeps, Psalm. 121. 4. the preserve of men, Job. 7. 20.
To display the glory of this Providence before you, let us take into
consideration, The perils into which the best of men sometimes fall, and the
way and means by which Providence preserves them in those dangers.

There are manifold hazards into which we are often cast in this World. The
Apostle Paul gives us a general account of his dangers, in 2 Cor. 11. 26. And
how great a wonder is it, that our life has not been extinguished in some of
those dangers we have been in? For,

(1.) Have not some of us fallen, and that often into very dangerous sicknesses
and diseases, in which we have approached to the very brink of the grave? and
have or might have said with HezekJah, See Job 33. 18, 19, 20, 21. and 28.
Isa. 38. 10. I said in the cutting off of my days, I shall go to the gates of
the grave: I am deprived of the residue of my years. Have we not often had the
sentence of death in our selves? and our bodies at that time been like a leaky
Ship in a storm (as One aptly resembles it) that has taken in water on every
side, Mr. T. Goo^win in his Aggravation of sin against mercy, p. 30.
till it was ready to sink? Yet has God preserved, careened, and lanched us
out again as well as ever. Oh what a wonder is it, that such a crazy body
should be preserved for so many years, and survive so many dangers! Surely, it
is not more admirable to see a Venice-glass pass from hand to hand in continual
use for forty or fifty years, The Eye is but a small part of the body, yet
Physicians reckon no less than thirty diseases incident to it. Nascuntur in ^o
leucoma, glaucoma, lippitudo, xerophthalmJa, sicus, lithJasis, epiphora and
trignita id genus vitJa.
and still to remain whole, notwithstanding many knocks and falls it has had.
If you enjoy health or recover out of sicknesses, it is because he puts none of
these diseases upon thee, or because he is the Lord thy PhysicJan, Exodus 125.
26.

(2.) And how many deadly dangers has his hand rescued some of you from, in
those years of confusion and public calamity, when the Sword was bathed in
blood, and made horrid slaughter, when it may be, your lives were often given
you for a prey? This David put a special remarque upon, Psalm. 140. 7. O God the
Lord, the strength of my salvatJon; thou have covered my head in the day of
Battle.

Beza being in France in the first Civil War, and there tossed up and down for
two and twenty months, recorded six hundred deliverances from dangers in that
space, for which he solemnly gave God thanks in his last Testament. If the
Sword destroyed you not, it was because God did not give it a Commission so to
do.

(3.) Many of you have seen wonders of salvation upon the deeps, where the hand
of God has been signally stretched forth for your rescue and deliverance. This
is elegantly expressed in Psal^ 107. 23, 24* 25, 26, 27. (which I have See my
Seaman' s Companion, p. 41.
elsewhere opened at large) concerning which, you may say in a proper sense,
what the Psalmist does metaphorically, Psalm. 124. 1. and 4. If it had not been
the Lord who was on our side, then the waters had overwhelmed us, the stream
had gone over our soul. To see men that have spent so many years upon the Seas,
(where your lives have continually hanged in suspense before you) attain to
your years, when you could neither be reckoned among the living nor the dead
(as Seamen are not) Oh, what cause have you to adore your great preserver! Many
thousands of your Companions are gone down, and you yet here to praose the Lord
among the Living. You have bordered nearer to Eternity all you^ days than
others, and often been in eminent perils upon the Seas, surely such, and so
many Salvations call aloud upon you for most thankful acknowledgements.

(4.) To conclude, how innumerable hazards and accidents, (the least of which
has cut off others) has God carried us all through! I think I may safely say,
your privative and positive mercies of this kind are more in number than the
hairs of your heads. Many thousands of these dangers we never saw, nor were
made particularly sensible of; but though we saw them not, our God did, and
brought us out of danger, before he brought us into fear. Some have been
evident to us, and those so remarkable, that we cannot think, or speak of them
to this day, but our souls are freshly affected with those mercies.

It is recorded of our famous Jewel, Clark's Lives, p. 262.
that about the beginning of Queen Mary's Reign, the Inquisition taking hold of
him in Oxford, he fled to London by night; but providentially losing the Road,
he escaped the Inquisitors who pursued him: however, he fell that night into
another eminent hazard of life, for wandering up and down in the snow, he
fainted, and lay starving in the way, panting and laboring for life, at which
time Mr. Latimer's servant found and saved him.

It were easy to multiply Examples in this kind, Histories abounding with
them; but I think there are few of us, but are furnished out of our own
experience abundantly; so that I shall rather choose to press home the sense of
these Providence upon you, in order to a suitable return to the God of your
mercies for them, than add more Instances of this kind. To this purpose, I
desire you seriously to weigh the following particulars.

(1.) Consider what you owe to Providence for your protection, by which your
life has been protracted unto this day, with the usefulness and comfort
thereof. Look abroad in the world, and you may daily see some in every place,
who are Objects of pity, bereaved by sad accidents of all the comforts of life,
The learned Alsted sets himself to enumerate the manifold hazards through which
the life of man is carrJed in the hand of Providence, in Theol. Catechet. p.
191, 192, etc. and pJously concludes in these words, Denique, qu^d ab innumeris
malis, quae ab omnibus creaturis omni tempore tibi impendent, mirabiliter
libera^is; in his omnibus inquam, quae s^imus ^rebro evenire solita, ac proinde
it a se habent, ut nobis quoque possint evenire, solam Dei providentiam debes
suspicere and praedicare.
whilst in the mean time Providence has tenderly preserved you, keeping all
your bones, so that not one of them is broken, Psalm. 34. 20. Is not the Elegant
and Comely Structure of thy Body spoiled, thy members d^storted, or made so
many seats of Torment, the usefulness of any part deprived? why, this is
because Providence never quitted its hand of thee since thou came out of the
womb, but with a watchful eye and tender hand has guarded thee in every place,
and kept thee as its charge.

(2.) Consider, how every member which has been so tenderly kept, has
nevertheless been an Instrument of sin against the Lord; and that, not only in
the days of your unregeneracy, when ye yJelded your members as Instruments of
unrighteous^ess unto sin, (as the Apostle speaks in Romans 6. 13.) but even since
you gave them up in Covenant unto the Lord, as dedicated Instruments to his
service: and yet how tender has Providence been over them! You have often
provoked him to afflict you in every part, and lay penal evil upon every member
that has been instrumental in moral evil; but O how great have his compassions
been toward you, and his patience admirable!

(3.) Consider, what is the aim of Providence in all the tender care it has
manifested for you; why does it protect you so assiduously, and suffer no evil
to befall you? Is it not that you should employ your bodies for God, and
cheerfully apply your selves to that service he has called you to? Doubtless,
this is the end and level of these mercies; for else to what purpose are they
afforded you? Your bodies are a part of Christ's purchase, as well as your
souls, 1 Cor. 6. 19. They are committed to the charge and Tutelage of Angels,
Heb. 1. 14. who have performed many services for them. They are dedicated by
your selves to the Lord, and that upon the highest account, Romans 12. 1. They
have already been the subjects of manifold mercies in this world, Psalm. 35. 10.
and shall partake of singula^ glory and happiness in the world to come, Phil.
3. 21. And shall they not then be employed, yea, cheerfully worn out in his
service? How reasonable is it they should be so? Why are they so tenderly
preserved by God, if they must not be used for God?

The Tenth Performance of Providence.
X.
YOu have heard many and great things performe^ for you by Divine Providence,
^^^viden^^^ Assi^^ces in (...) work (...) Mortifi^^^^on
in the former particulars; but there is an eminent favor it bestows on the
Saints, which has not yet been considered, and indeed is too little minded by
us, and that is, The Aid and assistance it gives the people of God in the great
work of MortificatJon.

Mortification of our sinful affections and passions, is the one half of our
Sanctification, Romans 6. 11. dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God.

It Is the great Evidence of our Interest in Christ. See Gal. 5. 24. Romans 6. 5,
6, 7, 8, 9.

It Is our safety in the hour of Temptation. The corruptions in the world are
through lust, 2 Pet. 1. 4.

Our Instrumental fitness for service, depends much upon it, 2 Timothy 2. 21. John
15. 2. How great a service to our souls therefore must that be, by which this
blessed work is carried on upon them?

Now there are two Means or Instruments employed in this work. The Spirit, who
effects it internally, Romans 8. 13. And Providence, which assists it externally.
The Spirit indeed is the principal Agent, upon whose operation, the success of
this work depends; and all the Providence in the world can never effect it
without him. But these are secondary and subordinate means, which by the
blessing of the Spirit upon them, have a great stroke in the work. How they are
so serviceable to this end and purpose, I shall open in the following account.

(1.) More generally. The most wise God orders the dispensations of Providence
in a blessed subordination to the work of his Spirit. There is a sweet harmony
betwixt them in their distinct workings. They all meet in that one blessed
issue which God has by the counsel of his Will directed them to, Ephesians. 1. 11.
Romans 8. 28. Hence it is, that the Spirit is said to be in, and order the
motions of the wheels of Providence, Ezekiel. 1. 20. and so they move together by
consent. Now, one great part of the Spirit's internal work, being to destroy
sin in the people of God; see how conformable to his design external
Providence are steered and ordered in the following particulars.

(1.) There is in all the regenerate a strong propension and inclination to
sin, and in that lies a principal part of the power of sin. Of this Paul sadly
complains, Romans 7. 23. But I see another law in my members* warring against the
law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of sin, which is in
my members: and every believer daily ^inds it to his grief. O it is hard, it is
hard to forbear those things that grieve God. God has made an hedge about us,
and fenced us against sin by his Laws; but there is a proneness in nature to
break over the hedge, and that against the very reluctations of the Spirit of
God in us. Now, see in this case, the concurrence and assistance of Providence,
for the prevention of sin; look, as the Spirit internally resists those sinful
inclinations, so Providence externally lays bars and blocks in our way to
hinder and prevent sin: and this is the meaning of those places lately cited,
Hosea 2. 6. and 2 Cor. 12. 7. So Job 33. 17, 18, 19. There is many a bodily
distemper inflicted on this very score, to be a clog to prevent sin: Oh bear
them patiently upon this consideration. Basil was ^orely grieved with an
inveterate headache, he earnestly prays, it might be removed; God removed it:
but no sooner was he freed of this clog, but he felt the inordinate motions of
lust; which made him pray for his headache again. So it might be with many of
us, if our clogs were off.

A Question may be moved here, (...).
Whether it be the genJus and property of a gracJous spirit, to forbear sin,
because of the rod of afflictJon? They have surely higher motives and nobler
principles than these. This is the temper of a carnal and slavish spirit.

Indeed it is so, when this is the sole or principal restraint from sin: when a
man abhorrs not sin, because of the intrinsic ^ilth, but only because of the
troublesome consequents and effects. But this is vastly different from the case
of the Saints under sanctified afflictions; for as they have high^r motives and
nobler principles, so they have lower and more sensible ones too; and these
are, in their kind and place, very useful to them. (2.) Besides, you must know,
that afflictions work in another way upon gracious hearts to restrain them from
sin, or warn them against sin, th^n they do upon others. It is not so much the
smart of the rod which they feel, as the tokens of Gods displeasure, which
affrights and scares them, Job 10. 17. Thous renewest thy witnesses against me,
etc. and this is that which principally affects them. See Psalm. 6. 1. O Lord,
rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure: and
Jer. 10. 24. O Lord, correct me, but with judgment, not in thine anger, lest
thou bring me to nothing: and surely this is no low and common argument.

(2.) Notwithstanding this double sense of Gods command, and preventive
afflictions, yet sin is too hard for the best of men: their corruptions carry
them through all to sin. And when it is so, not only does the Spirit work
internally, but Providence also works externally in order to their reductJon.
The ways of sin are not only made bitter unto them, by the remorse of
Conscience, but by those afflictive rods upon the outward man, with which God
also follows it; and in both these respects, I find that place expounded,
Eccles. 10. 8. Whosoever breaks an hedge, a Serpent shall bite him. If, as some
expound it, the hedge be the Law of God, then the Serpent is the remorse of
Conscience, and the sharp teeth of afflictJon, which he shall quickly feel, if
he be one that belongs to God.

The design and aim of these afflictive Providence, is to purge and cleanse
them from that pollution into which temptations have plunged them, Isa. 27. 9.
By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit, to
take away his sin. To the same purpose is that place, Psalm. 119. 67. Before I
was afflicted I went astray, but now have I kept thy word. These afflictions
have the same use and end to our souls, that frosty weather has upon those
clothes that are laid a bleaching; they alter the hue, and make it whiter,
which seems to be the allusion in those words, Dan. 11. 35. And some of them of
understanding shall fall to try them, and to purge, and to make them white.

And here it may be querJed, (...).
Upon what account afflictions are said to purge away the iniquities of the
Saints. Is it not unwarrantable, and very dishonorable to Christ, to attribute
that to affliction, which is the peculiar honor of his blood?

It is confessed, (...).
that the blood of Christ is the only Lavatory, or Fountain opened for sin, and
that no afflictions how many, or strong, or continual soever they be, can in
themselves purge away the pollution of sin, as we see in wicked men, who are
afflicted and afflicted, and again afflicted; and yet, nevertheless sinful: and
the Torments of Hell, how extreme, universal and continual soever they are, yet
shall never fetch out the stain of one sin.

But yet, this hinders not, but that a sancti^ied affliction, may in the
efficacy and virtue of Christ's blood, produce such blessed effects upon the
soul. Though a Cross without a Christ, never did any man good, yet thousands
have been beholden to the Cross, as it has wrought in the virtue of his death
for their good. And this is the case of those souls that this discourse is
concerned about.

(3.) We find the best hearts, if God bestow any comfortable enjoyment upon
them, too ap^ to be overheated in their affections toward it* and to be too
much taken up with these outward comforts. This also shows the great power
and strength of corruption in the people of God, and must by some means or
other be morti^ied in them.

This was the case of HezekJah, his heart was too much affected with his
treasures; so that he could not hide a vainglorious temper, as you find Isa.
39. 2. and so good David, Psalm. 30. 7. he thought his Mountain, ( i.e. his
Kingdom, and the splendor and glory of his present state) had stood so fast,
that it should never be moved.

The same good man, how did he let out his heart and affections upon his
beautiful Son Absalom? as appears by the doleful lamentation he made at his
death, prizing him above his own life, which was a thousand times more worth
than he.

So Jonah, when God raised up a Gourd for him to shelter him from the Sun, how
excessively was he taken with it, and was exceedingly glad of it?

But will God suffer things to lie thus? Shall the Creature pu^^oin, and draw
away our affections from him? No, this is our corruption, and God will purge
it. And to this end he sends forth Providence to smite those Creatures, on
which our affections are either inordinately or excessively let out, or else to
turn them into rods, and smite us by them.

^s HezekJah too much pu^^ed up with his full Exchequer? Why, those very
BabylonJans to whom he boasted of it, shall empty it, and make a prey of it,
Isa. 39. 6.

Is David hugging himself in a fond conceit of the stability of his Earthly
Splendour? Lo, how soon God beclouds all, Psalm. 30. 7. Is Absalom doted on, and
crept too far into his good Fathers heart? this shall be the Son of his sorrow,
that shall seek after his Fathers life.

Is Jonah so transported with his Gourd? God will prepare a Worm to smite it,
Jonah 4. 6, 7.

How many Husbands, Wives and Children has Providence smitten upon this very
account? It might have spared them longer, if they had been loved more
regularly, and moderately. This has blasted many an Estate, and hopeful
project; and it is a merciful dispensation for our good.

(4.) The strength of our unmortified Corruption shows it self in our pride,
and the swelling vanity of our hearts when we have a name and esteem among men;
when we are applauded and honored, when we are admired for any gift or
excellency that is in us, this draws forth the pride of the heart, and shows
the vanity that is in it. So you read, Prove. 27. 21. As the ^ining pot for
silver, and the ^urnace for* gold, so is a man to his praise: (i.e.) as the
^ornace will discover what dross is in the metal when it is melted, so will
praise and commendations, discover what pride is in the heart of him that
receives them. This made a good man say, He that praises me, wounds me. And
which is more strange, this corruption may be felt in the heart, even when the
last breath is ready to expire. It was the saying of one of the German Divines,
when those about him recounted for his encouragement the many services he had
done for God, auferte ignem (says he) adhuc enim paleas habeo. Take away the
sire, for there is still the chaff of pride in me. To crucify this corruption
Providence takes off the bridle of restraint from ungodly men, and sometimes
permits them to traduce the names of Gods servants, as Shimei did David's. Yea,
they shall fall into disesteem among their friends, as Paul did among the
CorinthJans; and all this to keep down the swelling of their spirits at the
sense of those excellencies that are in them: The design of these Providence
being nothing else, but to hide pride from man. Yea, it deserves a special
remarque, that when some good men have been engaged in a public and eminent
work, and have therein, it may be, too much sought their own applause, God has
withheld usual assistance at such times from them, and caused them to salter so
in their work, that they have come off with shame and pity at such times, how
ready and presential soever they have been at other times. It were easy to
give diverse remarkable examples to confirm this Observation. But I pass on.

(5.) The corruption of the heart shows it self, in raising up great
expectations to our selves from the Creature, and projecting abundance of
felicity and contentment from some promising and hopeful enjoyments we have in
the world. This we find to have been the case of holy Job in the days of his
prosperity, Job 28. 19. Then I said, I shall dye in my nest, I shall multiply
my days as the sand. But how soon were all these expecta^ions dashed by a
gloomy Providence, that benighted him in the Noontide of his prosperity: and
all this for his good, to take off his heart more fully from creature
expectations. We often find, the best men to over-reckon themselves in worldly
things, and over-act their confidences about them. They that have great and
well-grounded expectations from Heaven, may have too great and ungrounded
expectations from the Earth. But when it is so, it is very usual for Providence
to undermine their Earthly hopes, and convince them by experience how vain they
are. Thus Haggai 1. 9. the peoples hearts were intently set upon prosperous
Providence, full Harvests, and great Increase; whilst in the mean while no
regard was had to the Worship of God, and the things of his House; therefore
Providence blasts their hopes, and brings them to little.

(6.) Corruption discovers it self in dependence upon Creature comforts, and
sensible props. Oh how apt are the best men, to lean upon these things, and
stay themselves upon them! Thus did Israel stay themselves upon Egypt, as a
feeble man would lean upon his staff; but God suffered it both to fail them,
and wound them, Ezekiel. 29. 6, 7, 8. So for single persons, how apt are they to
depend upon their sensible supports? Thus we lean on our Relations, and the
inward thoughts of our hearts are, that they shall be to us so many springs of
comfort to refresh us throughout our lives; but God will show us by his
Providence our mistake and error in these things. Thus an Husband is smitten,
to draw the soul of a Wife nearer to God in dependence upon him, 1 Timothy 5. 5.
So for Children, we are apt to say of this or that Child, as Lamech of Noah,
Gen.5. 29. This same shall comfort us; but the wind passes over these slowers
and they are withered, to teach us, that our happiness is not bound up in these
enjoyments. So for our Estates, when the world smiles upon us, and we have got
a warm nest, how do we prophecy of rest and peace in those acquisitions,
minding, with good Baruch, great things for our selves; but Providence by a
particular or general calamity over-turns our projects, as Jer. 45. 4, 5. and
all this to reduce our hearts from the Creature, to God our only rest.

(7.) Corruption discovers its strength in good men, by their adherence to
things below, and lothness to go hence. This often proceeds from the engaging
enjoyments and pleasant fruitions we have here below. Providence morti^ies this
inclination in the Saints, (1.) By killing those ensnaring comforts
beforehand, making all or most of our pleasant things to dye before us. (2.)
By imbittering this world to us, by the troubles of it, (3.) By making life
undesirable, through the pains and infirmities we feel in the body, and so
loosing our root, in order to our more easy fall by the fatal stroke.

And thus I have finished the Second General Head; but before I pass from this,
I cannot but make a pause, and desire you with me, to stand in an holy
amazement, and wonder at the dealings of God with such poor worms as we are!
Surely God deals familiarly with men! his condescensions to his own clay are
astonishing! All that I shall note at present about it, shall be under these
three heads, wherein I find the matter of my present meditations summed up by
the Psalmist, Psalm. 144. 3. Lord what is man, that thou t^kest knowledge of
him? or the son of man, that thou make account of him? And in this Scripture
you have represented,

The immense and transcendent goodness of God, who is infinitely above us and
all our thoughts, Job 11. 7, 8, 9. Can thou by searching, find out God? can
thou find out the Almighty unto perfection? It is as high as Heaven; what can
thou do? deeper than Hell; what can thou know? The measure thereof is longer
than the Earth, and broader than the Sea. 2 Chronicles. 2. 6. The Heaven and Heaven
of Heavens cannot contain him. Exodus 15. 11. He is glorious in holiness,
fearful in praises, doing wonders. When the Scripture speaks of him
comparatively, see how it expresses his greatness, Isa. 40. 15, 16, 17. Behold
the Nations are as the drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small dust of
the balance: behold he takes up the Isles as a very little thing. And Lebanon
is not sufficient to burn, nor the Beasts thereof sufficient for a
burnt-offering. All Nations before him are as nothing, and they are accounted
to him less than nothing and vanity. When the holJest men have addressed
themselves to him, see with what humility and deep adoratJon they have spoken
of him and to him! Isa. 6. 5. Woe is me for I am undone, because I am a man of
unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips; for mine
eyes have seen the King the Lord of Hosts. Nay, what aspects the very Angels of
Heaven have of that glorJous Majesty, you may see, Ver. 2, 3. Each one had six
wings, with twain ^e covered his face, and with twain he covered his feet, and
with twain be did fly. And one cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy
is the Lord of Hosts; the whole Earth is full of his glory.

The baseness, vileness and utter unworthiness Verily every man, at his best
estate, is altogether vanity. Every man, take where you will: and every man in
his best estate, or standing in his freshest glory, is, not only vanity, but
altogether vanity. Col Adam col Hebel, every man ^s every vanity. For do but
consider the best of men in their ExtractJon, in their ConstitutJon, and in
their outward ConditJon.

(1.) In their ExtractJon, Ephesians. 2. 3. By nature Children of wrath even as
others. The blood that ^uns in our veins, is as much tainted as theirs in Hell.

(2.) Consider them in their ConstitutJon and ^atural temper, and it is no
better, yea, in many a worse temper than in Reprobates: and though grace depose
sin in them from the Throne; yet* Oh what offensive and God provoking
corruptions daily break out of the best hearts!

(3.) Consider them in their outward ConditJon, and they are inferior (for the
most part) to others, 1 Cor. 1. 26, 27, 28, etc. and Matthew. 1. 25. I thank thee
O Father (says Christ) that ^ou have hid these things from the Wise and
Prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes.

And now let us consider and admire, that ever Can a man be profitable God? No,
the holiest of men add nothing to him; yet, see how great account he makes of
us. For,

Ephesians. 1. 4, 5. How ancient, how free, and how astonishing is this act of grace!
This is that design which all Providence are in pursuit of, and will not rest
till they have executed.

only Son out of his bosom speak this truth, That God makes great account of
this vile thing Man? Never was man so magnified before. If David could say,
Psalm. 8. ^. When I consider the Heavens the work of thy hands, the Moon and
Stars which thou have ordained, Lord, what is man? How much more may we say?
when we consider thy Son, that lay in thy bosom, his infinite excellency, and
unspeakable dearness to thee; Lord, what is man, that such a Christ should be
delivered to death for him! for him, and not for fallen Angels! Heb. 2. 16. for
him when in a state of enmity with God! Romans 5. 8.

(...) any hurt it, I will keep it night and day. H^ withdraws not his eye
from the righteous, Job* 36. 7. no, not a moment all their days; for did he
so, a thousand mischiefs in that moment would rush in upon him, and ruin him.

as one whom his Mother comfort, so will I comfort you. He comforts his (
viz. by refreshing Providence) a^ an indulgent Mother her tender Child. So
Isa* 31. 5. As birds flying, viz. to their nests, when their young are in
danger, so he defends his. No (...) tenderness in the Creature can shadow forth
the tender bowels of the Creator.

Does not the variety of the fruits of his Providence Our mercJes are new every
morning. See Psalm. 40. 5. It is a fountain from which do stream forth spiritual
and temporal, ordinary and extraordinary, public and personal mercies, mercies
without number.

Does not the ministration of Angels in the Are they not all ministering spirits
sent forth, etc.

Does not the Providence, which this day calls Preached November. V.
bespeak the great account God has for his people? O if not so, why had we not
been given up as a prey to their teeth! See Psalm. 124. If the Lord had not been
on our side, then wicked men, there compared to fire, water, wild beasts, had
devoured us. O blessed be God for that teeming Providence that has already
brought forth more than seventy years liberty and peace to the Church of God. I
shall move in behalf of this Providence, that you would do by it, as the Jows
by their Purim, Esth. 9. 27, 28. and the rather, because we seem now to be as
near danger by the same Enemy as ever since that time: and if such a mercy as
this be forgotten, God may say as Judges 10. 13. I will deliver you no more.

The Third General Head.
HAving proved the Concernments of the people of God to be conducted by the
care of special Providence, and given Instances in the ten last named Heads,
what influence Providence has upon those Interests and concerns of theirs
among the rest; we come in the next place, to prove it to be the duty of the
people of God, to reflect upon these performances of Providence for them, at
all times; but especially in times of straits and troubles.

This I will evidence to be your unquestionable duty, by the following
particulars.

i.e.) by their meditations, (to send at least their thoughts) to Shiloh, and
see what God did to it, Jer. 7. 12. So for mercies, God calls us to consider
and review them, Micah 6. 5. Remember O my people from Shittim unto Gilgal,
that ye may know the faithfulness of the Lord: q. d. if you reflect not upon
that signal Providence, my faithfulness will be covered, and your
unfaithfulness discovered. So for Gods works of Providence about the Creatures,
we are called to consider them, that we may prop up our faith by those
considerations for our own supplies, Matthew. 6. 28. consider the Fowls and
Lillies.

It Is plain, that this is our duty, because the Lord when thy hand is lifted up
they will not see. Nay, it is a sin, which God threatens and denounces woe
against in his Word, Psalm. 28. 4, 5. and Isa. 5. 12, 13. Yea, God not only
threatens, but smites men with visible Judgments for this sin, Job 34. 26, 27.

And for this end and purpose it is, that the Scripture: all which do invite
and call men to a due and deep observation of them. So in that great and
celebrated work of Providence, in delivering Israel out of EgyptJan bondage,
you find a note of attentJon twice affixed to it, Exodus 3. 2, 9. So when that
daring Enemy Rabsheka (that put HezekJah and all the people into such a
consternation) was defeated by Providence, there is a note of attentJon prefixed
to that Providence, 2 Kings 19. ^. Behold, I will send a blast upon him, etc.
So when God glorifies his wisdom and power, in delivering his people from their
Enemies, and ensnaring them in the works of their own hands, a double note of
attentJon is affixed to that double work of Providence, Psalm. 9. 16. higgaJon
s^lah. So at the opening of every seal which contains a remarkable series or
branch of Providence, how particularly is attention commanded to every one of
them, Rev. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Come and see, come and see. All these are
very useless and super^luous additions in Scripture, if no such duty lies upon
us. See Psalm. 66. 5.

Psalm 107. is spont in narratives of Gods Providential care of men. To his
people in straits, Ver. 4, 5, 6. To prisoners in their bonds, Ver. 10, 11, 12.
To men that lie languishing upon beds of sickness, Ver. 17, 18, 19. To Seamen
upon the stormy Ocean* Ver. 23, etc. To men in times of famine, Ver. 33. to
Ver. 40. Yea, his Providence is displayed in all those changes that fall out in
the world, de^asing the high, and exalting the low, Ver. 40, 41. and at every
paragraph men are still called upon to praise God for each of these
Providence: but Ver. ult. shows you what a necessary ingredient to that duty,
observation is. Whos^ it wi^e, and will observe these things; even they shall
understand^ the loving kindness of the Lord. So that of necessity, God must be
defrauded^ of his praise, if this duty be neglected.

Thou ^rakest the heads of LevJathan in pJeces, and gave him to be meat to
the people inhabiting the Wilderness; (i.e.) food to their ^aith. From
Providence past, Saints use to argue to fresh and new ones to come. So David,
1 Samuel 17. 37. The Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the Lion, and out
of the paw of the Bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistin.
So Paul, 2 Cor. 1. 10. Who has delivered, and in whom also we trust, that he
will yet deliver. If these be forgotten o^ not considered, the hands of ^aith
hang down. See Matthew. 16. 9. How is it that ye do not remember* neither
consider? This is a Topic from which the Saints have used to draw their
Arguments in prayer for new mercies. As Moses, Numb. 14. 19. when he prays for
continued or new pardon^ for the people, he argues from what was past, As thou
have forgiven them from Egypt until now. So the Church, Isa. 51. 9, 10. argues
for new Providence upon the same ground Moses pleaded for new pardons.

It is a vile slighting of God* not to observe I will come nigh to you in
judgment. He comes nigh in mercies also, Psalm. 145. 18. The Lord is nigh unto
all them that call upon him, etc. Yea, he is said to visit us by his Providence
when he corrects, Hosea 9. 7. and when he saves and delivers, Psalm. 106. 4.
These visitations of God preserve our spirits, Job. 10. 12. And it is a
wonderful condescension in the great God to visit us so often, Job 7. 18. every
morning, and every moment. But not to take notice of it, is a vile and brutish
contempt of God, I^a. 1. 3. Zeph. 3. 2. You would not do so by a man for whom
you have any respect. It Is the character of the wicked, not to regard Gods
favors, Isa. 26. 10. or frowns, Jer. 5. 3.

observatJon of his Providence. Your prayers are to be suitable to your
conditions: sometimes we are called to praise, sometimes to humiliation. In the
way of his Judgments you are to wait for him, Isa. 26. 8. to prepare to meet
him, Zeph. 2. 1, 2. Amos 4. 12. Now your business is, to turn away his anger
which you see approaching. And sometimes you are called to praise him for
mercies received, Isa. 12. 1, 2. but then you must first observe them.

Thus you find the matter of David's Psalms still varied, according to the
Providence that befell him: but an inobservant heedless spirit can never do
it. And thus you have the grounds of the Duty briefly represented; we pass on to

The Fourth General Head.
LEt us next (according to our method proposed) proceed to show, in what manner
we are to reflect upon the performances of Providence for us. And certainly, it
is not every slight and transient glance, nor every cold, historical,
unaffecting rehearsal, or recognition of his Providence toward you, that will
pass with God, for a discharge of this great duty. No, no, it is another manner
of business than the most of men understand it to be. O that we were but
acquainted with this heavenly spiritual exercise! how sweet would it make our
lives! how light would it make our burdens! Ah Sirs! you live estranged from
the pleasure of the Christian life, while you live in the ignorance or neglect
of this duty. Now to lead you up to this heavenly, sweet and profitable
exercise, I will beg your attention to the following Directions.

The First Direction.
Labor to get as full and through recognitJons of the Providence of God about
you from first to last, as you are able. O sill your hearts with the thoughts
of him and his ways. If a single act of Providence be so ravishing and
transporting, what would many such be, if they were presented together to the
view of the soul? If one Star be so beautiful to behold, what is a
ConstellatJon? Let your reflections therefore upon the acts and workings of
Providence for you, be full extensively and intensively.

(1.) Let them be as extensively full as may be* Search backward into all the
performances of Providence throughout your lives. So did Asaph in Psalm. 77. 11,
12. I will remember the works of the Lord: surely I will remember thy wonders
of old: I will meditate of all thy works, and talk of thy doings. He labored
to recover and revive the ancient Providence of God, mercies many years past,
and suck a fresh sweetness out of them by new reviews of them. Ah Sirs, let me
tell you, there is not such a pleasant History for you to read in all the
world, as the History of your own lives, if you would but sit down, and record
to your selves from the beginning hitherto, what God has been to you, and done
for you; what signal manifestations, and out-breakings of his mercy,
faithfulness and love, there have been in all the conditions you have past
through: if your hearts do not melt before you have gone half through that
History, they are hard hearts indeed. My father, the guide of my youth.

(2.) Let them be as intensively full as may be. Let not your thoughts swim
like feathers upon the surface of the waters, but sink like lead to the bottom.
The works of the Lord are great, sought out of them that have pleasur^ therein,
Psalm. 111. 2. Not that I think it feasible to sound the depth of Providence by
our short line, Psalm. 77. 19. Thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the great
waters, and thy footsteps are not known; but it is our duty to dive as far as we
can; and to admire the depth, when we cannot touch the bottom. It is in our
viewing Providence, as it was with Elijah's servant, when he looked out for
rain, 1 Kings 18. 44. he went out once and viewed the Heavens, and saw nothing;
but the^ Prophet bids him go again and again, ^and look upon the face of Heaven
seven times; and when he had done so, what now, says the Prophet? O now, says
he, I see a cloud rising like a man's hand; and then, keeping his eye upon it
intent, he sees the whole face of Heaven covered with clouds. So you may look
upon some Providence once and again, and see little or nothing in them; but
look seven times, (i. e.) meditate often upon it, and you shall see its
increasing glory, like that increasing cloud.

There are diverse things to be distinctly pondered, and valued in one single
Providence, before you can judge the amount and worth of it: as (1.) The
seasonableness of mercy may give it a very great value. When it shall be timed
so opportunely, and ^all out in such a nick, as may make it a thousand fold
more considerable to you than the same mercy would have been at another time.
Thus when our wants are suffered to grow to an extremity, and all visible hopes
^ail, then to have relief given in, wonderfully enhances the price of such a
mercy, Isa. 41. 17, 18.

(2.) The peculJar care and kindness of Providence to us, is a consideration
which exceedingly heightens the mercy in it self, and endears it to us. So,
when in general calamities upon the world, w^ are exempted by the favor of
Providence, covered under its wings; when God shall call to us in evil days,
Come my people, enter thou into thy chambers, as it is in Isa. 26. 20, 21. When
such Promises shall be fulfilled to us in times of want and famine, as Psalm.
33. 18, 19. When others are abandoned and exposed to misery, who have every way
as much, it may be much more visible security against it; and yet they
delivered up, and we saved: Oh, how endearing are such Providence! Psalm. 91.
7, 8.

(3.) The Introductiveness of a Providence, is of special regard and
consideration, and by no means to be neglected by us. There are leading
Providence, which how slight and trivial soever they may seem in themselves,
yet in this respect justly challenge the first rank among Providential favors
to us; because they usher in a multitude of other mercies, and draw a blessed
train of happy consequences after them. Such a Providence was that of Jesse's
sending David with provisions to his Brethren that lay encamped in the Army, 1 Samuel 17. 17. And thus every Christian may furnish himself out of his own stock
of Experience, if he will but reflect, and consider, the Place where he is, the
Relations that he has, and the Way by which he was led into them.

(4.) The Instruments employed by Providence for you, are of special
consideration. And the finger of God is clearly seen by us when we pursue that
meditation. For,

Sometimes great mercies shall be conveyed to us by very improbable means, and
more probable ones laid aside. A stranger shall be stirred up to do that for
you, which your near relations in nature had no power or will to do for you.
Jonathan, a mere stranger to David, clave closer to him, and was more friendly
and useful to him, than his own Brethren, who despised and slighted him.
Ministers have found more kindness and respect from strangers, than their own
people that are more obliged to them, Mark 6. 4. A Prophet (says Christ) is
not without honor, save in his own Country, and among his own Kin, and in his
own House.

Sometimes by the hands of EnemJes, as well as Strangers, Rev. 12. 16. The
Earth helped the Woman. God has bowed the hearts of many wicked men, to show
great kindness to his people, Acts 28. 2.

Sometimes God makes use of Instruments for good to his people, who designed
nothing but evil and mischief to them. Thus Joseph's Brethren were instrumental
to his advancement, in that very thing, wherein they designed his ruin, Genesis
50. 20.

(5.) The design and scope of Providence must not e^^ape our through
consideration, what the aim and level of Providence is. And truly this, of all
others, is the most warming and melting consideration. You have the general
account of the aim of all Providence, in Romans 8. 28. And we know that all
things work together for good, to them that love God. A thousand friendly hands
are at work for them, to promote and bring about their happiness. O, this is
enough to sweeten the bitterest Providence to us, that we know it shall turn to
our salvation, Phil. 1. 19.

(6.) The respect and relatJon Providence bears to our prayers, is of singular
consideration, and a most taking and sweet meditation. Prayer honors
Providence, and Providence honors Prayer. Great notice is taken of this in
Scripture, Genesis 24. 45. Dan. 9. 20. Acts 12. 12. You have had the very
PetitJons you asked of him. Providence have born the very signatures of your
Prayers upon them. O how affectingly sweet are such mercies!

The Second Direction.
IN all your Observations of Providence, have a special respect to that Word of
God, which is fulfilled and made good to you thereby.

This is a clear truth, that all Providence have relation to the written Word.
Thus Solomon in his prayer, acknowledges, that the Promises and Providence of
God went along step by step with his Father David all his days; and that his
hand (put there for his Providence) had fulfilled whatever his mouth had
spoken, ^ Kings 8. 24. So Joshuah in like manner acknowledges, that not one
good thing had failed, of all the good things which the Lord had spoken, Jos.
23. 14. He had carefully observed what relation the Works of God had to his
Word. He compared them together, and found an exact harmony. And so may you
too, if you will compare them as he did.

This I shall the more insist upon, because it is by some Interpreters supposed
to be the very Scope of the Text. For (as was noted in the Explication) they
supply and fill the sense with quae promisit, the things which he has
promised; and so read the Text thus, I will cry unto God most high, to God who
performs the things he has promised, for me.

Now though I see no reason to limit the sense so narrowly, yet it cannot be
denied, but this is an especial part of its intendment. Let us therefore in all
our reviews of Providence, consider, what word of God, whether it be of
threatening, caution, counsel, or promise is at any time made good to us by his
Providence. And hereby a twofold excellent advantage will result to us.

(1.) This will greatly confirm to us the truth of the Scripture, when we shall
see its truth so manifest in the events. Certainly had Scripture no other seal
or attestation, this alone would be an unanswerable Argument of its divinity.
When men shall find in all ages the works of God wrought so exactly according
to this model, that we may say, As we have read or heard, so have we seen. O
how great a con^irmation is here before our eyes!

(2.) This will abundantly direct and instruct us in our present duties under
all Providence. We shall know hereby what we have to do, and how to carry our
selves under all changes of conditions. You can learn the voice and ^rrand of
the rod only from the Word, Psalm. 94. 12. The Word interprets the works of God.
Providence in themselves, are not a perfect guide. They often puzzle and
entangle our thoughts; but bring them to the Word, and your duty will be
quickly manifested, as Psalm. 73. 16, 17. Until I went into the Sanctuary, then
I understood their end: and, not only their end; but his own duty, to be quiet
in an afflicted condition, and not envy their prosperity.

Well then, bring those Providence you have past through, or are now under, to
the Word; and you will find your selves surrounded with a mavelous light; and
see the verification of the Scriptures in them. I shall therefore here appeal
to your consciences, whether you have not found these Events of Providence
falling out agreeably in all respects with the Word.

This is your wisdom.

Now, let the events of Providence speak, whether this be true or not.
Certainly it will appear to be so, whether we respect our present comfort, or
future happiness, both which we may see daily exposed by departure from duty,
and secured by keeping close to it. Let the question be asked of the Drunkard,
Adulterer, or profane Swearer, when by sin they have ruined body, soul, estate
and name, whether it be their wisdom to walk in those forbidden paths after
their own lusts? Whether they had not better consulted their own interest and
comfort, in keeping within the bounds and limits of Gods commands? and they
cannot but confess, that this their way is their folly. What fruit (says the
Apostle) had ye in those things, whereof you are now ashamed? for the end of
those things is death, Romans 6. 21. Does not the Providence of God verify upon
them those threatenings that are written, in the experience of all ages? Prove.
23. 29. Prove. 23. 21. Prove. 5. 9. Job 31. 12. Prove. 5. 10. all which woes and
miseries they escape, that walk in Gods Statutes. Look upon the ruined estates
and bodies you may every where see, and behold the truth of the Scriptures
evidently made good in those sad Providence.

The Word tells you, that your departure from Sam. 12. 21. Prove. 3. 5.

Let the Events of Providence speak to this also; ask your own experience, and
you shall have a full confirmation of this truth. Did you ever leave the way of
simplicity and integrity, and use sinful shifts, to bring about your own
designs, and prosper in that way? Certainly God has cursed all the ways of
sin; and whoever finds them to thrive with them, his people shall not. Israel
would not rely upon the Lord, but trust in the shadow of Egypt; and what
advantage had they by this sinful policy? See Isa. 30. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. David
used a great deal of sinful policy to cover his wicked fact; but did it
prosper? See 2 Samuel 12. 12. It is an excellent note of Livy, ConsilJa callida,
prima specJe l^ta, tractata dura, eventu tristJa. Sinful policies in their
first appearances, are pleasant and promising, in their management difficult,
in their event sad. Some by sinful ways have gotten wealth; but that Scripture
has been verified in their experience, Prove. 10. 2. Treasures of wickedness
profit nothing. Either God has blown upon it by a secret curse, that it has
done them no good, or given them such disquietness in their consciences, that
they have been forced to vomit it up, e're they could find peace, Job 11. 13,
14, 15.

That which David gave in charge to Solomon, has been found experimentally
true by thousands, 1 Chronicles. 22. 12, 13. That the true way to prosperity, is to
keep close to the rule of the Word. And that the true reason why men cannot
prosper, is their forsaking that rule, 2 Chronicles. 24. 20.

It Is true, if God have a purpose to destroy a man, he may for a time suffer
him to succeed and prosper in his sin, for his greater hardening, Job 12. 6.
But it is not so with those whom the Lord loves; their sinful shi^ts shall
never thrive with them.

trust and con^idenc^ in the Creature, even the greatest and most powerful
among Creatures, Psalm. 14 6. 3. It tells us, that it is better to trust in the
Lord, than in them, Psalm. 118. 8. It forbids our con^idence in those Creatures
that are most nearly allied, and related in the bonds of nature to us, Micah 7.
5. It curses the man that gives that relyance to the Creature, which is due to
God, Jer. 17. 5.

Consult the Events of Providence in this case, and see, whether the Word be
not verified therein? Did you ever lean upon an EgyptJan reed, and it did not
break under you, and pierce as well as deceive you? O how often has this been
evident in our experience! Whatsoever we have over-loved, idolized,
and leaned upon, God has from time to time broken it, and made us to see the
vanity of it; so that we find, the readiest course to be rid of our comforts,
is to set our hearts inordinately or immoderately upon them* for our God is a
jealous God, and will not part with his glory to another. The World is full of
examples of persons deprived of their comforts, Husbands, Wives, Children,
Estates, etc. upon this account, and by this means. If Jonah be over-joyed in
his Gourd, a Worm is presently prepared to smite it. Hence it is, that so many
graves are opened for the burying of our Idols out of our sight. If David say,
My mountain shall stand strong, I shall not be moved; the next news he shall
hear, is of darkness and trouble, Psalm. 30. 6, 7. O how true and faithful do we
find these sayings of God to be! Who cannot put to his seal, and say, Thy words
are truth?

The Word assures us, that sin is the Cause and Be sure your sin will find you
out: (i. e.) the sad effects and afflictions that follow it shall ^ind you out.
So Psalm. 89. 30, 31, 32. If his sons forsake my Law, I will visit their
iniquitJes with rods.

Enquire now at the mouth of Providence, whether this be indeed so, according
to the reports of the Word. Ask but your own Experiences, and you shall find,
that just so Providence has ordered it all along your way. When did you grow
into a secure, vain, carnal frame, but you found some rouzing, startling
Providence sent to awaken you? When did you wound your Consciences with guilt,
and God did not wound you for it, in some or other of your beloved enjoyments?
Nay, so ordinary is this with God, that from the observations of their own
frames and ways, many Christians have fore-boded and pre^aged troubles at hand.

I do not say, that God never afflicts his people, but for their sin; for he
may do it for their trial, 1 Pet. 4. 12. Nor do I say, that God follows every
sin with a rod; for who then should stand before him? Psalm. 130. 3. But this I
say, that it is Gods usual way, to visit the sins of his people with rods of
affliction, and this in mercy to their souls. Upon this account it was, that
the rod of God was upon David in a long succession of troubles upon his Kingdom
and family, after that great prevarication of his, 2 Samuel 12. 10. And if we
would carefully search out the seeds and principles of those miseries under
which we or ours do groan; we should find them to be our own turnings aside
from the Lord, according to that Jer. 2. 19. and Jer. 4. 18. Have not all these
cautions, and threatenings of the Word been exactly fulfilled by Providence in
your own experience? Who can but see the infallible truth of God in all that he
has threatened! And no less evident is the truth of the Promises to all that
will observe how Providence makes them good every day to us; for consider,

How great security God has given to his people in the Promises, that no man
shall lose any thing by self-denial for his sake. He has told us, Mark 10. 29,
30. Verily, I say unto you, there is no man that has left House, or Brethren,
or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands for my sake,
and the Gospels; but he shall receive an hundred fold now in this time, houses,
and Brethren and Sisters, and Mothers, and Children, and Lands with
persecutions, and in the world to come Eternal life.

Though that vile Apostate JulJan derided this Promise, yet thousands and ten
thousands have experienced it, and do at this day stand ready to set their seal
to it. God has made it good to his people, not only in spirituals; inward joy,
and peace; but even in Temporals also: instead of natural relations who took
care for them before, hundreds of ChristJans shall stand ready to assist and
help them: So that though they have left all for Christ, yet they may say with
the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6. 10. As having nothing, and yet possessing all things. O
the admirable care and tenderness of Providence over those that for Conscience
sake have lest all, and cast themselves upon its immediate care! Are there not
at this day to be found many so provided for, even to the envy of their
Enemies, and their own admiration? Who sees not the faithfulness of God in the
Promises, that has but an heart to trust God in them!

The Word of Promise assures us, that whatever will never leave them, nor
forsake them, Heb. 13. 5. that he will be with them in trouble, S^mma haec est,
(...) omnia (...) supp^dit^^^ a(...) omnibus (...) vitae humanae o^^ nibus no^
o^^iciier in ^ala^ tatibus ^ erigere (...) sideratio^ providentis ti^ divi^^
Alsted. Theol. ^ techet. P. 19^.
Psalm. 91. 15.

Consult the various Providence of your life in this point, and I doubt not,
but you will find the truth of these Promises as often confirmed, as you have
been in trouble. Ask your own hearts, where, or when was it that your God
forsook you, and left you to sink and perish under your burdens? I doubt not,
but most of you have been at one time or other plunged in difficulties,
difficulties out of which you could see no way of escape by the eye of reason;
yea, such, as it may be, staggered your faith in the Promise, as David's was, 1 Samuel 27. 1. when he said, I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul. All men
are Liars, (even Samuel himself) and yet notwithstanding all, we see him emerge
out of that Sea of trouble, and the Promises made good in every tittle to him.
The like doubtless you may observe in your own cases. Ask your own souls the
question, and they will satisfy it. Did God abandon and cast you off in the
day of your straits? certainly you must belie your own experience, if you
should say so. It Is true, there have been some plunges and difficulties you
have met with, wherein (1.) You could see no way of escape, but concluded you
must perish in them. (2.) Difficulties that have staggered your faith in the
Promises, and made you doubt, whether the fountain of All Sufficiency would let
out it self for your relief. (3.) Yea, such difficulties as have provoked you
to murmuring and impatience, and thereby provoked the Lord to forsake you in
your straits; but yet you see he did not. He has either (1.) Strengthened your
back to bear, or (2.) Lightened your burden, or (3.) Opened an unexpected door
of escape, according to that Promise, 1 Cor. 10. 13. so that the evil which you
feared, came not upon you.

Psalm. 119. 50, 92. -- 2 Samuel 23. 5. That for this very purpose it was written,
Romans 15. 4. No rules of moral Prudence, no sensual remedies can perform that
for us, which the Word can do.

And is not this a sealed Truth, attested by a thousand of undeniable
experiences? Hence have the Saints fetched their CordJals, when fainting under
the rod. One Word of God can do more, than ten thousand words of men to relieve
a distressed soul. If Providence have at any time directed you to such
Promises, as either assure you that the Lord will be with you in trouble, Psalm.
91. 15. or that encourage you from inward peace, to bear cheerfully outward
burdens, John 16. 33. or satisfy you of Gods tenderness and moderation in his
dealings with you, Isa. 27. 8. or that you shall reap blessed fruits from them,
Romans 8. 28. or that clear up your interest in God, and his love under your
afflictions, 2 Samuel 7. 14. Oh, what sensible ease and relief ensues! how light
is your burden, compared with what it was before!

The Word tells us, that there is no such way Prove. 11. 25. Isa. 32. 8. Prove.
19. 17. Prove. 11. 24.

Consult Providence now, and you shall find it in all respects according to the
report of the Word. O how true is the Scripture testimony herein! There are
many thousand Witnesses now living, that can set their seals to both parts of
this proposition. What men save (as they count saving) with one hand,
Providence scatters by another hand: and what they scatter abroad with a
liberal hand and single eye for God, is surely repaid to them or theirs. Never
did any man lose by distributing for God. He that lends to the poor foeneratur
Domino, as some expound that Text, puts his money to interest to the Lord. Some
have observed how Providence has doubled all they have laid out for God, in
ways unexpected to them.

Prove. 16. 7. and does not Providence confirm it? This the three Jews found by
experience, Dan. 3. 28, 29. and so did DanJel, chap. 6. v. 20, 21, 22. This
kept up John's reputation in the conscience of Herod, Mark 6. 20. So it fell
out, when ConstantJus made that exploratory decree; those that were
conscientious were preferred, and those that changed their religion, expelled.
Never did any man lose at last by his fidelity.

Psalm. 37. 5, 6, 7. and Prove. 16. 3.

And as you have read in the Word, so you have found it in your own Experience.
Oh, what a burden is off your shoulders, when you have resigned the case to
God^ Then does Providence issue your affairs comfortably for you. The
difficulty is soon over, when the heart is brought to this.

Thus you see, how Scriptures are fulfilled by Providence in these few
Instances I have given of it. Compare them in all other cases, and you shall
find the same: for all the lines of Providence lead from the Scripture, and
return thither again, and do most visibly begin and end there.

The Fourth Direction.
IN all your reviews and observations of Providence, be sure that you ^ye God
as the Author or orderer of them all, Prove. 3. 6.

In all the comfortable Providence of your lives, Author or donor of them.
Remember he is the father of mercJes, that begets every mercy for you, 2 Cor.
1. 3. The God of all comfort, without whose order no mercy or comfort can come
to your hands. And think it not enough thus to acknowledge him in a general
way; but when you receive mercies, take special notice of the following
particulars.

(1.) Eye the Care of God for you, 1 Pet. 5. 7. He cares for you. Your Father
knows you have need of these things, Matthew. 6. 32. It is but to acquaint him
what you want, and your wants are supplied, Phil. 4. 6. (...), torture not your
selves about it: you have a Father that cares for you.

(2.) Eye the Wisdom of God, in the way of dispensing his mercies to you, how
suitably they are ordered to your condition, and how seasonably. When one
comfort is cut off and removed, another is raised up in its room. Thus Isaac
was comforted in Rebecka after his Mothers death, Genesis 24. 67.

(3.) Eye the free Grace of God in them, yea, see riches of Grace in every
bequest of comfort to so vile and unworthy creatures as you are. See your
selves over-topt by the least of all your mercies, Genesis 32. 10. I am not worthy
of the least, said Jacob.

(4.) Eye the Condescension of God, to your requests for those mercies, Psalm.
34. 6. This is the sweetest bit in any enjoyment, in which a man can sensibly
relish the return and answer of his Prayers, and greatly inflames the souls
love to God, Psalm. 116. 1.

(5.) Eye the Design and end of God in all your comforts. Know that it is not
sent to satisfy the cravings of your sensual appetite, but to quicken and
enable you for a more cheerful discharge of your duty, Deuteronomy. 28. 47.

(6.) Eye the Way and Method in which your mercies are conveyed to you. They
all slow to you through the blood of Christ and Covenant of grace, 1 Cor. 3.
22, 23. Mercies derive their sweetness from the Channel through which they run
to us.

(7.) Eye the Distinguishing goodness of God, in all the comfortable enjoyments
of your lives. How many thousand better than you, are denied those Comforts?
See Heb. 11. 37.

(8.) Eye them all as comforts appointed to refresh you in your way to far
better and greater mercies than themselves. The best mercies are still reserved
till last, and all these are introductive to better.

Behold, I create evil, and devise a device against you. And Amos 3. 6. Is
there evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? More particularly,

Set before you the Sovereignty of God. Eye Psalm. 115. 3. which is the most
conclusive reason and argument of submission, Psalm. 46. 10. For if we, and all
we have, proceeded from his Will, how equal is it, that we be resigned up to
it? It is not many years agone since we were not, and when it pleased him to
bring us upon the Stage of action, we had no liberty of indenting with him, on
what ^erms we would come into the world; or refuse to be, except we might have
our being on such terms as we desired. His Sovereignty is gloriously displayed
in his Eternal Decrees and temporal Providence. He might have put you into
what rank of Creatures he pleased. He might have made you the most despicable
Creatures, Worms or Toads: or, if men, the most vile, abject and miserable
among men: and when you had run through all the miseries of this life, have
damned you to Eternity, made you miserable for ever, and all this without any
wrong to you. And shall not this quiet us under the common afflictions of this
life?

Set the Grace and Goodness of God before you the Lord, the Lord merciful and
gracJous. There are two sorts of mercies that are seldom eclipsed by the
darkest affliction that befalls the Saints in their temporal concerns, sc.
sparing mercy in this world, and saving mercy in that to come. It is not so bad
now as it might, and we deserved it should be, and it will be better herea^t^r.
This the Church observed, and reasoned her self quiet from it, Lam. 3. 22. Has
he taken some? he might have taken all. Are we afflicted? it is mercy we are not
destroyed. Oh if we consider what temporal mercies are yet spared, and what
spiritual mercies are bestowed, and yet continued to us, we shall find cause to
admire mercy, rather than complain of severity.

kind of your affliction, this, and not another: the Time, now and not at
another season: the Degree, in this measure only, and not in a greater: the
Supports afforded you under it, not le^t altogether helpless: the Issue to
which it is over ruled, it is made to your good, not ruin. Look upon all these,
and then ask thy heart that question God asked Jonah, Do thou well to be
angry? Surely, when you consider all, what need you had of these rods, that
your corruptions will require all this, it may be much more to mortify them;
that without the perishing of these things, you might have perished for ever;
you will see great reasons to be quiet and well satisfied under the hand of God.

faithfulness of the Lord before you under the saddest Providence. So did
David, Psalm. 119. 75. This is according to his Covenant faithfulness, Psalm. 89.
32. Hence it is, that the Lord will not withhold a rod when need requires it,
1. Pet. 1. 6. Nor will he forsake his people under the rod, when he in^licts
it, 2 Cor. 4. 9.

Oh what quietness will this breed! I see my God will not lose my heart, if a
rod can prevent it; he had rather hear me groan here, than howl hereafter: his
love is judicious, not fond: he consults my good, rather than my ease.

Eye the All-sufficJency of God in the day of affliction. fountain still as
full as ever, though this or that pipe be cut off, which was wont to convey
somewhat of it to me. O Christians, cannot you make up any loss this way? Cannot
you see more in God, than in any or all the Creature comforts you have lost?
With what eyes then do you look upon God?

Lastly, Eye the Immutability of God. Look on The Father of lights, with whom
is no varJableness, nor shadow of turning. Eye Jesus Christ, as the same
yesterday, to day and for ever. Oh how quietly will you then behave your selves
under the changes of Providence? It may be, two or three days have made a sad
change in your condition: the death of a dear relation has turned all things
upside down: that place is empty where lately they were, as it is, Job 7. 10.
His place shall know him no more: Well, but God is what he was, and where he
was: Time shall make no change upon him, as it is in Isa. 40. 6, 7, 8. The
grass withers, the flower sadeth; but the word of the Lord abides for ever.
O how composing are those views of God to our spirits under dark Provi^

The Fifth Direction.
LAstly, Work up your hearts to those frames, and exercise those affectJons
which the several Providence of God that are versant about you call for,
Eccles. 7. 14. Suit your selves to answer the design and end of God in all
Providence. As there are various affections planted in your souls, so are
there several graces planted in those affections, and several Providence
appointed to draw forth, and exercise these graces.

Church in general, or your families and persons in particular, then it is
seasonable for you to exercise godly sorrow and humility of spirit: for in that
day, and by those Providence God does call to it, Isa. 22. 12. Micah 6. 9.
Now, sensitive pleasure and natural joy, is out of season, Ezekiel. 21. 10. Should
we then make mirth? If there be either (1.) A silial spirit in us, we cannot be
light and vain, when our Father is angry; or (2.) If any real sense of the evil
of sin which provokes Gods anger, we must be heavy hearted when God is smiting
for it; or (3.) If any sense and compassion for the miseries that sin brings
upon the world, it will make us to say with David, Psalm. 119. 158. I beheld the
transgressors and was grJeved. It Is sad to consider the miseries that they pull
down upon themselves in this ^orld and that to come. (4.) If there be any care
in us to prevent utter ruin, and stop God in the way of his anger, we know
this is the means to do it, Amos 4. 12.

HOw sad and dismal soever the face of Providence (said Habakuck, chap. 3. 17.)
yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God of my salvation.

There are two sorts of Comforts, Natural and Sensitive, Divine and Spiritual.
There is a time when it becomes ChristJans to exercise both; so Hest. 9. 22.
And there is a time when the former is to be suspended and laid by, Psalm. 137.
2. But there is no season, wherein spiritual joy and comfort in God is
unseasonable, as appears by those Scriptures, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16. Phil. 4. 4. This
spiritual joy or comfort, is nothing else but the cheeriness of our heart in
God, and the sense of our interest in him, and in his Promises. And it is sure,
that no Providence can render this unseasonable to a Christian. Let us suppose
the most afflicted and calamitous state a Christian can be incident to, yet,

(1.) Why should sad Providence make him lay by his comforts in God? when as
those are but for a moment, but these eternal, 2 Cor. 4. 17.

(2.) Why should we lay by our joy in God, upon the account of sad Providence
without, when at the very worst and lowest ebb, the Saints have infinitely more
cause to rejoice, than to be cast down? There Is more in one of their mercies to
comfort them, than in all their troubles to deject them. All your losses are
but as the loss of a farthing to a Prince, Romans 8. 18.

(3.) Why should they be sad, as long as their God is with them in all their
troubles? As Christ said, Matthew. 9. 15. Can the Children of the Bridegroom be
sad, whilst the Bridegroom is with them? So say I, Can the soul be sad,
whilst God is with it? Oh methinks, that one Promise, Psalm. 91. 15. I will be
with him in trouble, should bear you up under all burdens. Let them be cast
down, that have no God in trouble to turn to.

(4.) Why should they be sad, as long as no outward dispensation of Providence,
(be it never so sad) can be interpreted as a mark or sign of Gods hatred or
Anger, Eccl. 9. 2, 3. There is one event to the righteous and wicked. Indeed,
if it were a signification of the Lords wrath against a man, it would justify
our dejection; but this cannot be so: his heart is full of love, whilst the
face of Providence is full of frowns.

(5.) Why should we be cast down under sad Providence, whilst we have so great
security, that even by the hands of these Providence God will do us good, and
all these things shall turn to our salvatJon? Romans 8. 28. By these God is but
killing your lusts, weaning your hearts from a vain world, preventing
temptations, and exciting your desires after heaven; this is all the hurt they
shall do you, and shall that sadden us?

(6.) Why should we lay by our joy in God, when as the change of our condition
is so nigh? It Is but a little while, and sorrows shall flee away: you shall
never suffer more: God will wipe away all tears, Revel. 7. 17. Well then, you
see there is no reason upon the account of Providence, to give up your joy and
comfort in God. But if you will maintain it under all Providence, then be
careful

(1.) To Clear up your Interest in, and Title to God. Faith may be separated
from comfort, but assurance cannot.

(2.) Mortify your inordinate affections to earthly things. This makes
Providence that deprive and cross us so heavy. Mortify your opinion and
affection, and you sensibly lighten your affliction. It is strong affection
that makes strong affliction.

(3.) Dwell much upon the meditation of the Lords near approach; and then all
these things will seem but trifles to you. Let your moderation be known unto
all men, the Lord is at hand.

EXercise heavenly mindedness, and keep your hearts upon things eternal, under
all the Providence with which the Lord exercises you in this world, Genesis 6. 9.
Noah walked with God, yet met with as sad Providence in his day, as any man
that ever lived since his time. But alas! we find most Providence, rather
stops, than steps in our walk with God. If we be under comfortable Providence,
how sensual, wanton and worldly do our hearts grow! And if sad Providence
befall us, how dedolent or distracted are we! And this comes to pass partly
through the narrowness, but mostly, through the deceitfulness of our spirits.
Our hearts are narrow, and know not how to manage two businesses of such
different natures, as Earthly and Heavenly matters are without detriment to
one. Pectora nostra duas curas non admittunt. But certainly such a frame of
spirit is attainable that will enable us to keep on in an even and steady
course with God, whatever befall us. Others have attained it, and why not we?
Prosperous Providence are for the most part a dangerous state to the soul. The
Moon never suffers an Eclipse, but at full; yet I^hosaphat's grace suffered no
Eclipse from the fullness of his outward condition, who had riches in abundance,
and his heart was lifted up in the way of Gods commandments, 2 Chronicles. 17. 5, 6.
David^s life was as full of cares, turmoils and encumbrances, as most men we
read of; yet how spiritual the temper of his heart was, that excellent Book of
Psalms, (which was mostly composed amidst those distractions) will acquaint us.
The Apostles were cast into as great necessities, and suffered as hard things,
as ever men did; yet how raised and heavenly their spirits were amidst all, who
sees not? And certainly, if it were not possible to maintain
heavenly-mindedness in such a state and posture of affairs, God would never
exercise any of his people with such Providence: he would never give you so
much of the world to lose your hearts in the love of it, or so little to
distract you with the cares of it. If therefore we were more deeply sanctified,
and the tendencies of our hearts heavenward more ardent and vigorous; If we
were more mortified to Earthly things, and could not but keep our due distance
from them; our outward conditions would not at this rate draw forth and
exercise our inward corruptions, nor would we hazard the loss of so sweet an
enjoyment as our fellowship with God is, for the sake of any concernment our
bodies have on Earth.

UNder all Providence maintain a contented This grace must run parallel with
all Providence. Learn how to be full, and how to suffer want, and in every
state to be content, Phil. 4. 12.

In this duty all men are concerned at all times, and in every state, not only
the people of God, but even the unregenerate also. I will therefore address
some considerations proper to both. And first to the unregenerate, to stop
their mouths from repining, and charging God ^oolishly, when Providence crosses
them. Let them seriously consider these four things.

(1.) That Hell and Eternal damnation are the portion of their cup, according
to the tenor of Law, and Gospel threatenings. Whatsoever therefore is short of
this is to be admired as the fruit of Gods stupendous patience, and
forbearance toward them. Ah poor souls! Know you not, that you are men and
women condemned to wrath by the plain sentence of the Law? Mark 16. 16. John 3.
36. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6, 7. And if so, ^ure there are other matters to exercise your
thoughts, desires, fears and cares about than these. Alas! if you cannot bear a
frown of Providence, a light cross in these things, how will you bear the
everlasting burnings! A man that is to lose his head to morrow, is not very
solicitous what bed he lies on, or how his Table is ^urnisht the night before.

(2.) Consider, though you be condemned persons, and have no promise to entitle
you to any mercy; yet there are very many mercies in your possession at this
day. Be your condition as afflictive as it will, is life nothing? especially
considering whither you must sink, when that thread is cut. Are the necessary
supports of life nothing? Does not Providence minister to you these things,
though you daily disoblige it, and provoke God to send you to your own place?
But, above all, is the Gospel and precious means of salvation nothing, by which
you yet are in a capacity of escaping the damnation of Hell? O what would the
damned say, if they were but put into your condition once more? What, and yet
fret against God, because every thing else suits not your desires?

(3.) Consider, that if ever you be rescued out of that miserable condition you
are in, such cross Providence, as these you complain of, are the most probable
means to do it. Alas! prosperity and success is not the way to save, but
destroy you, Prove. 1. 32. You must be bound in fetters, and holden in cords of
affliction, if ever your ear be opened to instruction, Job 36. 8, 9, 10. Woe to
you, if you go on smoothly in the way in which you are, and meet with no
crosses.

(4.) Lastly, Consider, all your troubles under which you complain, are pulled
down upon your heads by your own sins. You turn Gods mercies into sin, and then
fret against God, because he turns your sins into sorrow. Your ways and doings
procure these things to you. Lay your hand therefore upon your mouth and say,
Why does the living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sin, Lam. 3.
39. But I must turn to the Lords people, who have least pretenses of all men to
be dissatisfied with any of Gods Providence, and yet are but too frequently
sound in that temper. And to them I shall offer the following considerations.

(1.) Consider your spiritual mercJes and privileges with which the Lord Jesus
has invested you, and repine at your Lot of Providence if you can. One of
these mercies alone, has enough in it to sweeten all your troubles in this
world. When the Apostle considered them, his heart was overwhelmed with
astonishment; so that he could not forbear in the midst of all his outward
troubles to cry out, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who has abounded to us in all spiritual blessings, etc. Ephesians. 1. 3. Oh, who
that sees such an Inheritance settled upon him in Christ, can ever open his
mouth more to repine at his Lot of Providence!

(2.) Consider your sins, and that will make you contented with your Lot. Yea,
consider two things in sin. (1.) What it deserves from God, and (2.) What it
requires to mortify and purge it in you. It deserves from God Eternal ruin:
the merit of Hell is in the least vain thought. Every sin forfeits all the
mercies you have; and if so, rather wonder your mercies are so many, than that
you have no more. Besides, you cannot doubt, but your corruptions require all
the crosses, wants and troubles that are upon you, and it may be, a great deal
more, to mortify and subdue them. Don't you find, after all the rods that have
been upon you, a proud heart still, a vain and earthly heart still? Oh how many
bitter potions are but necessary to purge out this tough malignant l^umour!

(3.) Consider how near you are to the Change of your conditJon: have but a
little patience, and all will be as well with you as your hearts can desire. It
is no small comfort to the Saints, that this world is the worst place that ever
they shall be in: things will better every day with them. If the Traveller have
spent all his money, yet it does not much trouble him, if he know himself
within a few miles of his own home. If there be no Candles in the house, we do
not much matter it, if we are sure it is almost break of day; for then there
will be no use for them. This is your case; your salvatJon is nearer than when
you belJeved, Romans 13. 11.

I have done with the directive part of this discourse; but before I pass to
this fifth Head, I judge it necessary to leave a few Cautions to prevent the
abuse of Providence, and your miscarriages in your behavior toward it. And

First Caution.
If Providence delay the performance of any mercy to you, that you have long
waited and prayed for^ yet see, that you despond not; nor grow weary of
wait^ing upon God for that reason. It pleases the Lord oftentimes to try, and
exercise his people thi^ way, and make them cry, How long Lord, ho^ long? Psalm.
13. 1, 2.

These delays both upon spiritual and tempo^ral accounts are frequent, and
when they befa^^us, we are too apt to interpret them as denyals and fall into a
sinful despondency of mind, though^ there be no cause at all for it, Psalm. 31.
12. Lam. 3. 8. 44. It is not always that the returns of prayer are dispatched
to us in the same hour they are asked of God; yet sometimes it falls out so,
Isa. 65. 24. Dan. 9. 23. But though the Lord means to perform to us the mercies
we desire* yet he will ordinarily exercise our patience to wait for them; and
that for these reasons.

(1.) Because our time is not the proper season for us to receive our mercies
in. Now the season of mercy is a very great circumstance that adds much to the
value of it. God judges not as we do; we are all in haste, and will have it
now, Numb. 12. 13. But he is a God of judgment, and blessed are they that wait
for him, Isa. 30. 18.

(2.) Afflictive Providence have not accomplished that design upon our hearts
they were sent for, when we are so earnest and impatient for a change of them;
and till then the rod must not be taken off, Isa. 10. 12.

(3.) The more prayers and searchings of heart come between our wants and
supplies, our afflictions and reliefs, the sweeter are our reliefs and supplies
thereby made to us, Isa. 25. 9. This is our God, we have waited for him, and he
will save us: this is the Lord, we have waited for him, we will rejoice and be
glad in his salvatJon. This recompenses the delay, and pays us for all the
expenses of our patience.

But though there be such weighty reasons for the stop and delay of refreshing
comfortable Providence; yet we cannot bear it, our hands hang down and we
faint, Psalm. 69. 3. I am weary of my crying, my throat is dry, mine eyes fail
while I wait for my God. For alas! we judge by sense and appearance, and
consider not, that Gods heart may be toward us* whilst the hand of his
Providence seems to be against us. If things continue at one rate with us, we
think our prayers are lost, and our hopes perished from the Lord: much more
when things grow worse and worse, and our darkness and trouble increases, as
usually it does just before the break of day and change of our condition, then
we conclude, God is angry with our prayers. See Gideon's reply, Judges 6. 13.
This even staggered a Moses's faith, Exodus 5. 22, 23. O what groundless
Jealousies and suspicions of God are found at such times in the hearts of his
own Children! Job 9. 16, 17. Psalm. 77. 7, 8, 9.

But this is our great evil, and to prevent it in future trials, I will offer a
few proper considerations in the case.

The Lord waits that he may be gracJous. What is that? Why, it is nothing else
but the time of his preparation of mercies for you, and your hearts for mercy,
that so you may have it with the greatest advantage of comfort. The foolish
Child would pluck the apple while it is green; but when it is ripe, it drops of
its own accord, and is more pleasant and wholesome.

you, in this you please God. A mercy may be given yo^ as the fruit of common
Providence; but such a temper of heart is the fruit of special grace* So much
as the glorifying of God is better than the content and pleasure of the
creature, so much is such a frame better, than such a fruition.

Expected mercies are never nearer, than when Egypt, and Babylon, Ezekiel. 37. 11.
So we have sound it in our own personal concerns: at Evening time it shall be
light, Zach. 14. 7. When we look for increasing darkness, light* arises.

Our unfitness for mercy, is the reason why they The Lords hand is not
shortened, but our iniquitJes have separated betwixt him and us.

Consider, the mercies you wait for, are the

Consider, how many MillJons of men as good as a fearful expectatJon of wrath.
This might have been your case; and therefore be not of an impatient spirit
under the expectations of mercy.

Second Caution.
Pry not too curiously into the secrets of Providence, nor suffer your shallow
reason arrogantly to judge and censure its designs.

There be hard Texts in the Works, ^^ptura ^^suit hic ^^^ositat ^^^ae
re^laque^^^, quae ^^ingere ^^nili.
as well as in the Word of God. It becomes us modestly and humbly to reverence,
but not to dogmatize too boldly and positively upon them: a man may easily get
a strain by overreaching. When I thought to know this (says Asaph) it was too
wonder full for me. I thought to know this, there was the arrogant attempt of
reason, neque (...); cui (...) con^^tum in ju^^um vo^^: hinc ^^quod ^^cia dei
^^^ntur (...) ne se ^^^ra fa^^t non summo ^^culo in (...) ^^do men's ^^^ana.
there he pryed into the Arcana of Providence; mero^^^ prae^^. p. 112
but it was too wonderful for me, it was labor i^utilis, as Calvin expounds it.
He pryed so far into that puzzling Mystery of the AfflictJons of the
Righteous, and Prosperity of the wicked, till it begat envy toward them, and
despondency in himself, Psalm. 73. v. 3. 13. and this was all he got by
summoning Providence to the bar of reason. Holy Job was guilty of this evil,
and ingenuously ashamed of it, Job 42. 3.

I know, there is nothing in the Word or in the Works of God, that is repugnant
to sound reason: but there are some things in both, which are opposite to
carnal reason; as well as above right reason; and therefore our reason never
shows it self more unreasonable, than in summoning those things to its bar,
which transeend its sphere and capacity. Manifold are the mischiefs which ensue
upon this practice.

By this we are drawn into an unworthy suspicion Sarah laughed at the tidings of
the Son of Promise, because reason contradicted, and told her, it was natu^ally
impossible, Genesis 18. 13, 14.

Hence comes despondency of mind, and saintness Sam. 27. 1.

Hence flow temptations to deliver our selves Isa. 30. 15, 16. When our own
reason fills us with a distruct of Providence, it naturally prompts us to
sinful shifts, and there leaves us entangled in the snares of our own making.

Beware therefore you lean not too much to your own reasons and understandings.
Nothing is more plausible, nothing more dangerous. In other matters it is
appointed the Arbiter and Judge, we make it so here, and therefore we are so
di^^ident and distrustful notwithstanding the fullest security of the Promises,
whilst our reason stands by unsatisfied.

The Fifth Head.
HAving given direction for the due management of this great and important
duty, what remains, but that we now set our hearts to it, and make it the
constant work of every day throughout our lives? O what peace, what pleasure,
what stability, what holy courage and confidence would result from such an
observation of Providence as has been directed to! But alas! we may say with
reference to the voices of Divine Providence, as it is Job 33. 14. God speaks
once, yea twice, yet man perceives it not. Many a time Providence has spoken
InstructJon in duty, ConvictJon for iniquity, Encouragement under despondency;
but we regard it not. How greatly are we all wanting to our duty, and comfort
by this neglect! It will be but needful therefore to spread before you, the
loveliness and excellency of walking with God in a due and daily observation of
his Providence, that our souls may be fully engaged to it.

First Motive.
ANd First, Let me offer this, as a moving argument to all gracious souls; That
by this means you may maintain sweet and sensible communJon with God from day
to day. And what is there desirable in this world, in comparison therewith!
Thou Lord have made me glad through thy works: I will trJumph in the works of
thy hands, Psalm. ^2. 4. Your hearts may be as sweetly and sensibly refresht by
the works of Gods hands, as by the words of his mouth. Psalm. 104. per totum is
spent in the consideration of the works of Providence, which so filled the
Psalmist's heart, that, by way of ejaculation, he expresses the effect of it,
Ver. 34. My MeditatJon of him shall be sweet.

Communion with God properly and strictly taken, consists in two things; viz.
Gods manifestation of himself to the soul, and the souls answerable returns to
God. This is that (...) fellowship we have here with God. Now God manifests
himself to his people by Providence as well as Ordinances; neither is there
any grace in a sanctified soul hid from the gracious influences of his
Providential manifestations. Sometimes the Lord manifests his displeasure and
anger against the sins of his people in correcting and rebuking Providence.
His rods have a chiding voice, Micah 6. 9. Hear the rod and who has appointed
it. This discovery of Gods anger kindly melts and thaws a gracious soul, and
produces a double sweet effect upon it, namely, repentance for sins past, and
due cautJon against future sins. (1.) It thaws and melts the heart for sins
committed. Thus David's heart was melted for his sin, when the hand of God was
heavy upon him in affliction, Psalm. 32. 4, 5. Thus the Captive Church, upon
whom fell the saddest and most dismal Providence that ever befell any of Gods
people in any age of the world; see how their hearts are broken for sin under
this severe rebuke, Lam. 2. 17, 18, 19. And then, (2. For caution against sin
for the time to come; it is plain, that the rebukes of Providence leave that
effect also upon gracious hearts, Ezra 9. 13, 14. Psalm. 85. 8.

Sometimes he cheers and comforts the hearts of his people with smiling and
reviving Providence, both public and personal. There are times of lifting up
as well as casting down by the hand of Providence. The Scene changes, the
aspects of Providence are very cheerful and encouraging* their Winter seems to
be over: they put off their garments of mourning; and then, Ah, what sweet
returns are made to heaven by gracious souls! Does God lift them up by
prosperity? they also will lift up their God by praises. See Psalm. 18. Title,
and v. 1, 2, 3. So Moses and the people with him, Exodus 15. when God had
delivered them from Pharaoh, how do they exalt him in a song of thanksgiving,
which for the elegancy and spirituality of it, is made an Emblem of the
doxologies given to God in glory by the Saints! Rev. 15. 3.

Upon the whole, whatever effects our Communion with God in any of his
Ordinances does use to produce upon our hearts, the same we may observe to
follow our conversing with him in his Providence. For,

It is usually found in the experience of all the Abraham, Genesis 18. 27. I am
but dust and ashes. The same effect follows our converse with God in his
Providence. Thus when God had in the way of his Providence prospered Jacob,
how does he lay himself at the feet of God, as a man overwhelmed with the sense
of mercy! See Genesis 32. 5, 10. And Jacob said, I am not worthy of the least of
all thy mercJes, and of all the truth which thou have showed thy servant; for
with my staff I passed over this Jordan, and now am become two bands. Thus also
it was with David, 2 Samuel 7. 18. Who am I, and what is my Fathers house, that
thou have brought me hitherto! And I doubt not, but some of you have found the
like frame of heart upon you, that these holy men here expressed. Can you not
remember when God lifted you up by Providence, how you cast down your selves
before him, and have been viler in your own eyes than ever! Why, thus do all
gracious hearts; What am I, that the Lord should do thus and thus for me! O
that ever so great and holy a God should thus be concerned for so vile and
sinful a Worm!

(2.) Does Communion with God in Ordinances, Cant. 2. 3, 4, 5. Why, so does the
observation of his Providence also. Never did any man convers^ with Gods works
of Providenc^ aright, but f^^nd his heart at some times melted into love to the
God of his mercies, Psalm. 18. 1. compared with the Title. When God had
delivered him from the hand of Saul, and all his Enemies, he said, I will love
thee O Lord my strength. Every man loves the mercies of God, but a Saint loves
the God of his mercies. The mercies of God, as they are the fuel of a wicked
man's lusts, so they are fuel to maintain a good man's love to God; not that
their love to God is grounded upon these external benefits, Not thine, but
thee, O Lord, is the motto of a gracious soul; but yet these things serve to
blow up the flame of love to God in their hearts, and they find it so.

Moses, when he had been with God in the Mount for forty days, and had there
enjoyed communion with him; when he came down and saw the Calf the people had
made; see what an holy paroxysm of zeal and anger it cast his soul into, Exodus
32. 19, 20. Why, the same effect you may discern to follow the Saints converse
with God in his Providence. What was that which pierced the heart of David
with such a deep sense of the evil of his sin, which is so abundantly
manifested in Psalm 51. throughout? Why, if you look into the Title you shall
find, it was the effect of what Nathan had laid before him: and if you consult
2 Samuel 12. 7, 8, 9, 10. you shall find, it was the goodness of God manifested
to him in the several endearing Providence of his life, which in this he had
so evilly requited the Lord for, that broke his heart to pieces in the sense of
it: and I doubt not, but some of us have some times found the like effects, by
comparing Gods ways and our own together.

Does Communion with the Lord enlarge the IsaJah had obtained a special
manifestation of God, and the Lord asked, whom shall I send? he presents a ready
soul for the employment, Isa. 6. 8. Here am I, Lord, send me. Why, the very
same effect follows sanctified Providence, as you may see in Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 17. 5, 6. and in David, Psalm. 116. 12. O when a soul considers what God
has done for him, he cannot choose but say, what shall I return? how shall I
answer these engagements?

And thus you see, what sweet Communion a soul may have with God in the way of
his Providence. O that you would thus walk with him! How much of Heaven might
be found on Earth this way! And certainly, it will never repent the Lord he
has done you good, when his mercies produce such effects upon your hearts: he
will say of every savor thus improved, It was well bestowed, and will rejoice
over you to do you good for ever.

Second Motive.
A Great part of the pleasure and delight of the ChristJan life is made out of
the observatJons of Providence. It is said, Psalm. 111. 2. The works of the Lord
are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure therein: (i. e.) the study
of Providence is so sweet and pleasant, that it invites and allures the soul to
search and dive into it. How pleasant is it to a well tempered soul to behold
and observe,

(1.) The sweet harmony and consent of divine Attributes in the issues of
Providence! They may seem sometimes to jarr and clash, to part with each other,
and go contrary ways: but they only seem so to do; for in the winding up, they
always meet and embrace each other, Psalm. 85. 10. Mercy and Truth have met
together: Righteousness and Peace have kissed each other. It is spoken with an
immediate reference to that signal Providence of Isreal's deliverance out of the
Babylonish captivity, and the sweet effect thereof: wherein the truth and
righteousness of God in the promises, did as it were kiss and embrace the mercy
and peace that was contained in the performance of them, after they had seemed
for seventy years to be at a great distance from each other. For it is an
allusion to the usual demonstrations of joy and gladness, that two dear friends
are wont to give and receive, after a long absence and separation from each
other: they no sooner meet, but they smile, embrace and kiss each other. Even
thus it is here. The word (...) may be, Occurrunt nobis, Syriac.
(and by some is) rendered, have met us, and that also is true; for when ever
these blessed Promises and Performances meet and kiss each other, they are also
joyfully embraced and killed by believing souls. There is, I doubt not, a
mediate reference of this Scripture to the MessJah also, and our redemption by
him: In him it is that these divine Attributes which before seemed to clash and
contradict one another in the business of our salvation, have a sweet agreement
and accomplishment. Truth and Righteousness do in him meet with Mercy and Peace
in a blessed agreement. What a lovely sight is this! and how pleasant to
behold! O if with Habbakuk, chap. 2. v. 3. we would but stand upon our
Watchtower to take due observations of Providence; what rare prospects might
we have! I^uther understands it of the Word of God, q. d. I will look into the
Word, and observe there how God accomplisheth all things, and brings them to
pass, and how his works are the fulfilling of his Word. Others (as Calvin)
understand it of a man's own retiring thoughts and meditations, wherein a man
carefully observes what purposes and designs God has upon the World in
general, or upon himself in particular, and how the Truth and Righteousness of
God in the Word work themselves through all difficulties and impediments, and
meet in the mercy, peace and happiness of the Saints at last. Every Believer
(take it in which sense you will,) has his Watchtower as well as H^bb^kuk:
and give me leave to say, it is an Angelical employment to stand upon it, and
behold the consent of Gods Attributes, the accomplishment of his Ends, and our
own happiness in the works of Providence. For this is the very joy of the
Angels and Saints in Heaven, to see Gods Ends wrought out, and his Attributes
glorified in the mercy and peace of the Church, Rev. 14. 1, 2, 3. and 8.

(2.) And as it is a pleasant sight to see the harmony of Gods Attributes, so it
is exceeding pleasant to behold the resurrection of our own prayers and hopes
as from the dead. Why, this you may often see, if you will duly observe the
works of Providence toward you. We hope and pray for such and such mercies to
the Church, or to our selves; but God delays the accomplishment of our hopes,
suspends the answer of our prayers, and seems to speak to us, as Hab. 2. 3. For
the visJon is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak and not
lie: though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not
tarry: but we have no patience to wait the time of the Promise, our hopes
languish and dye in the interim; and we say with the despondent Church, Lam. 3.
18. Our hope is perished from the Lord; but Oh, how sweet and comfortable is
it, to see these prayers fulfilled, after we have given up all expectation of
them! May we not say of them, as the Scripture speaks of the restoration of the
Jews, it is even life from the dead. This was David's case, Psalm. 31. 22. he
gave up his hopes and prayers for lost, yet lived to see the comfortable and
unexpected returns of them. And this was the case of Job, chap. 6. 11. he had
given up all expectation of better days, and yet this man lived to see a
resurrection of all his lost comforts with an advantage. Think how that change
and unexpected turn of Providence affected his soul: it is with our hopes and
prayers as with our Alms, Cast thy bread on the waters, for thou shall find it
after many days, Eccles. 11. 1. or as it was with Jacob, who had given ov^r
all hopes of ever seeing his beloved Joseph again, but when a strange and
unexpected Providence had restored that hopeless mercy to him again, Oh how
ravishing and transporting was it? Genesis 46. 29, 30.

(3.) What a transporting pleasure is it, to behold great blessings and
advantages to us wrought by Providence, out of those very things that seemed to
threaten our ruin or misery? and yet by due observing the ways of Providence,
you may to your singular comfort find it so. Little did Joseph think his
transportation into Egypt, had been in order to his advancement there; yet he
lived with joy to see it, and with a thankful heart to acknowledge it, Genesis 45.
5. Wait and observe, and you shall assuredly find that Promise, Romans 8. 28.
working out its way through all Providence. How many times have you been made
to say as David, Psalm. 119. 71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted. O
what a difference have we seen betwixt our afflictions at our first meeting
with them, and our parting from them! We have entertained them with sighs and
tears, but parted from them with joy, blessing God for them, as the happy
Instruments of our good. Thus our fears and sorrows are turned into praises and
songs of thanksgiving.

(4.) What unspeakable comfort is it for a poor soul, that sees nothing but sin
and vileness in it self, at the same time to see what an high esteem and value
the great God has for him! This may be discerned by a due attendance to
Providence, for there a man sees goodness and mercy following him through all
his days, as it is Psalm. 23. 6. Other men prosecute good, and it flies from
them, they can never overtake it; but goodness and mercy follow the people of
God, and they cannot avoid or escape it: it gives them chase day by day, and
finds them out; even when they sometimes put themselves by sin out of the way
of it. In all the Providence that befall them, goodness and mercy pursues
them. O with what a mel^ing heart do they sometimes reflect upon these things!
and will not the goodness of God be discouraged from following me,
notwithstanding all my vile a^^ronts and abuses of it in former mercJes? Lord,
what am I, that mercy should thus pursue me, when vengeance and wrath pursue
others as good by nature as I am? It certainly argues the great esteem God has
of a man, when he thus follows him with sanctified Providence (whether they be
comforts or crosses) for his good. And so much is plain, from Job 7. 18. Lord
what is man, that thou should visit him every morning, and try him every
moment? Certainly, Gods people are his treasure, and by this it appears that
they are so, that he withdraws not his eye from them, Job 36. 7. I say not,
that Gods favor and respect to a man, may be concluded singly from his
Providence; but sanctified Providence may very much clear it to us: and when
it does so, it cannot but be matter of exceeding great joy.

(5.) To conclude, what is there in all this world, that can give a soul such
joy and comfort, as to find himself by every thing set on and farthered in his
way to Heaven! And yet this may be discerned, by an heedful attendance to the
effects and issues of Providence.

How cross soever the Winds and Tides of Providence at any time seem to us, yet
nothing is more certain, than that they all conspire to hasten sanctified souls
to God, and sit them for glory.

St. Paul knew, that both his bonds and the afflictions added to them should
turn to, or (as the word (...) imports) finally issue in his salvation, Phil.
1. 19. Not that in themselves they serve to any such purpose; but as they are
overruled and determined to such an end, through Prayer, and the supply of the
Spirit of Jesus Christ. When Prayer the external, and the Spirit the internal
means are joined with them; then Afflictions themselves become excellent means
to promote salvation. And have we not with joy observed, how those very things,
that sense and reason tell us are opposite to our happiness, have been the most
blessed Instruments to promote it? How has God blessed Crosses to mortify
corruptJon, wants to kill our wantonness, disappointments to wean us from the
world! O we little think, how comfortable those things will be in the review,
which are so burdensome to present sense*

The Third Motive
IN the next place, I beseech you consider, What an effectual means the due
observation of Providence will be to overpower and suppress the natural
Atheism that is in your hearts.

There is a natural seed of Atheism in the best hearts, and this is very much
nourished, by passing a rash and false judgment upon the works of Providence.
When we see wicked ones to prosper in the world, and godly men crushed and
destroyed in the way of righteousness and integrity; it may tempt us to think,
there is no advantage by religion, and all our self-denial and holiness, to be
little better than lost labor. Thus stood the case with good As^ph, Psalm. 73.
12, 13. B^hold, these are the ungodly that prosper in the world, they increase
in riches: and what does the flesh in^er from thence? Why no less than the
unprofitableness of the ways of holiness, Verily I have cleansed my heart in
vain, and washed my hands in innocence. This irreligious Inference carnal
reason was ready to draw from the dispensations of outward prosperity to wicked
men; but now if we would he^dfully observe, either the signal retributions of
Providence to many of them in this world, or to all of them in the world to
come; O what a full confirmation is this to our faith! Psalm. 9. 16. The Lord is
known by the Judgments that he executes. The fifty eighth Psalm contains the
Characters of the most prodigious sinners, whose wickedness is aggravated,

By the deliberation with which it is committed, V. 2.

By their habit and custom in it, V. 3.

By their incorrigibleness and persistence in it, V. 4, 5.

And the Providence of God is there invited

To destroy their power, V. 6. and that either

By a gradual and insensible consumption of them, V. 7, 8. or,

By a sudden and unexpected stroke, V. 9.

And what shall the effects of such Providence be to the Righteous? Why, it
shall be matter of joy, V. 10. And great confirmation to their faith in God, V.
11. Verily there is a God that judges in the earth.

And on the contrary, how convincingly clear are those Providence, that
demonstrate the Being, Wisdom, Power, Love and Faithfulness of God, in the
supporting, preserving and delivering of the Righteous, in all their dangers,
fears and difficulties? In these things the Lord shows himself to his people,
Psalm. 94. 1. Yea, he shows himself to spiritual eyes in these Providence, as
clearly, as the Sun manifest^ himself by his own beams of light, Hab. 3. 3, 4.
His brightness was as the light, and he had borns coming out of his hands, and
there was the hiding of his power. It Is spoken of the Lords going forth for his
people in their deliverance from their Enemies: and then he had horns or rays
and beams of power and mercy coming out of his hands; by his hands, are meant
his Providential administrations and dispensations, and the horns that came out
of them, are nothing else but the glorious display of his Attributes in those
Providence. How did God make himself known to his people in that signal
deliverance of them out of Egypt? See Exodus 6. 3. then he was known to them by
his name Jehovah, in giving being by his Providence to the mercies promised.

Thus when Christ shall give his people the last and greatest deliverance from
Antichrist, he shall show himself to his people in a vesture dipped in blood, and
his Name shall be called, The Word of God, Rev. 19. 13. His Name was the Word
of God before; but then he was the Word revealing and discovering the promises
and truths of God; now accomplishing and fulfilling them. That his Name is
near, his wonderful works declare, Psalm. 75. 1.

But more particularly, let us bring it home to our own experience. It may be,
we find our selves sometimes assaulted with Atheistical thoughts: we are
tempted to think God has left all things below to the course and sway of
nature, that our prayers reach him not, as it is Lam. 3. 44. that he regards
not what evils befall us. But, tell me Saints, have you not enough at hand to
stop the mouths of all such temptations? O do but reflect upon your own
Experiences, and solemnly ask your own hearts,

(1.) Have you never seen the All-sufficient God in the provisions he has made
for you and yours, throughout all the way that you have gone! Who was it that
supplied to you whatever was needful in all your straits? Was it not the Lord?
It Is he that has given bread to them that fear him, and has been ever mindful
of his Covenant, Psalm. 111. 5. O do but consider the constancy, seasonableness,
and at sometimes the extraordinariness of these provisions, and how they have
been given in upon prayer, and shut your eyes if you can, against the
convincing evidence of that great truth, Job 36. 7. He withdraws not his eye
from the Righteous.

(2.) Have you not plainly discerned the care of God in your preservations from
so many and great dangers as you have escaped and been carried through
hitherto? How is it, that you have over-lived so many mortal dangers,
sicknesses, accidents, designs of Enemies to ruin you? It is I presume, beyond
question with you, that the very finger of God has been in these things, and
that it is by his care alone, you have been preserved. When God had so signally
delivered David from a dangerous disease and the plots of Enemies against him,
by this (says he) I know thou favourest me, because mine enemy does not
trJumph over me, Psalm. 41. 11. he gathered from those gracious protections, the
care God had over him.

(3.) Have you not plainly discerned the hand of God, in the returns and
accomplishments of your prayers? Nothing can be more evident than this, to men
of observation, Psalm. 34. 4, 5, 6. I sought the Lord, and he heard me, and
delivered me from all my fears. They looked unto him and were lightened, and
their faces were not ashamed. This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and
saved him out of all his troubles. Parallel to this, runs the experience of
thousands and ten thousands of Christians this day; they know they have the
petitions they asked of him. The Mercy carries the very impress and stamp of
the Duty upon it. So that we can say, This is the Mercy, the very Mercy I have
so often sought God about. O how satisfying, and convincing are these things!

(4.) Have you not evidently discerned the Lords hand, in the guiding and
directing of your paths, to your unforeseen advantage? Things that you never
projected for your selves, have been brought about beyond all your thoughts.
Many such things are with God; and which of all the Saints has not ^ound that
word Jer. 10. 23. verified by clear and undeniable experience? The way of man
is not in himself. I presume, if you will but look over the mercies you possess
thi^ day, you will find three to one, it may be ten to one thus wrought by the
Lord for you. And how satisfying beyond all Arguments in the world are these
experiences, That there is a God to whom his people are exceeding dear, a God
that performs all things for them!

(5.) Is it not fully convictive, that there is a God who takes care of you, in
as much as you have found in all the temptations and difficulties of your lives
his promises still fulfilled, and faithfully performed in all those conditions?
I appeal to your selves, if you have not seen that Promise made good, Psalm. 91.
15. I will be with him in trouble; and that 1 Cor. 10. 13. God is faithful, who
will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able: but will with the
temptatJon also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it. Have not
these been as clearly made out by Providence before your eyes, as the Sun at
Noon day? What room then is left for Atheistical suggestions in your breasts?

The Fourth Motive.
THe Recording and Recognizing of the performances of Providence, will be a
singular support to faith in future exigencJes. Deligente^ perpendamusres
praeteritas, t^m praesentes; ut ad futur^ ^^rati, and ac^ineti simus: (...)
argumentare solet a praeterito, ad praesens^ and ab ^^roqu^ ad ^uturum. Alsted.
This excellent use of it lies full in the very eye of the Text. There never
befell David in all his troubles, a greater strait and distress than this; and
doubtless his faith had staggered, had not the considerations of former
Providence come in to its relief. From this Topic faith argues, and that very
strongly and conclusively. So did David's faith in many exigencies: when he was
to encounter the ChampJon of the Philistines, it was from former Providence that
he encouraged himself, 1 Samuel 17. 37. And the Apostle Paul improves his
experiences to the same purpose; 2 Cor. 1. 9, 10. Indeed the whole Scripture is
full of it: What Christian understands not the exceeding usefulness of those
experiences he has had to relieve and enliven? But I shall not satisfy my
self with the common assertion, than which nothing is more tritc in the lips of
professors: but will labor to show you, wherein the great usefulness of our
Recorded Experiences, for encouraging faith laboring under difficulties,
consists. To this purpose, I shall desire the Reader to ponder seriously these
following particulars.

How much advantage those things have upon beyond those which were never
relished by any former experience? What is Experience? but the bringing down of
the objects of faith to the dijudication and test of spiritual sense? Now when
any thing has been once tasted, felt and judged by a former Experience, it is
much more easily believed and received when it occurrs again. It Is much easier
for faith to travel in a path that is well known to it, having formerly trod
it, than to beat out a new one which it never trod, nor can see one step before
it. Hence it is, though there be a difficulty in all the acts of faith, yet
scarce in any like the first adventure it makes upon Christ; and the reason
lies here, because in the subsequent acts it has all its former experiences to
aid and encourage it; but in the first adventure it has none at all of its
own, it takes a path which it never knew before.

To trust God without any trial or experience, is a more noble act of faith;
but to trust him after we have often tried him, is known to be more easy.
O'tis no small advantage to a soul in a new plunge and distress, to be able to
say, This is not the first time I have been in these deeps, and yet emerged out
of them! Hence it was, that Christ rubbed up his Disciples memories with what
Providence had formerly wrought for them in a day of straits, Matthew. 16. 8, 9,
10, 11. O ye of little faith, why reason ye among your selves, because ye have
brought no bread? do ye not yet understand, neither remember? q. d. Were yo
never under any strait for bread before now? Is this the first difficulty that
ever your faith combated with? No, no, you have felt straits, and experienced
the power and care of God in supplying them, before now; and therefore I cannot
but call you men of little faith; for a very ordinary and small measure of
faith, assisted with so much experience as you have had, would enable you to
trust God. There is as much difference betwixt believing before, and after
experience, as there is betwixt swimming with bladders, and our first venture
into the deep waters without them.

What a singular encouragement to faith do object of faith? Now there be two
things that unbelief stumbles at in God: One is his Power, the other his
Willingness to help.

(1.) Unbelief objects the impossibility of relief in deep distresses, Psalm.
78. 19. Can God furnish a Table in the Wilderness? can be give bread also? can
be provide flesh for his people? O vile and unworthy thoughts of God!
proceeding from our measuring the immense and boundless power of God, by our
own line and measure: because we see not which way relief should come, we
conclude, none is to be expected. But all these reasonings of Unbelief are
vanquished by a serious reflection upon our own Experiences: God has helped,
therefore he can, Isa. 59. 1. His hand is not shortened: (i. e.) he has as much
power and ability as formerly.

(2.) Unbelief objects against the Will of God, and questions, whether he will
now be gracious, though he has formerly been so. But after so many experiences
of his readiness to help, what room for doubting remains? Thus Paul reasoned
from the experience of what he had done, to what he would do, 2 Cor. 1. 10. and
so did David, 1 Samuel 17. 36. Indeed if a man had never experienced the goodness
of God to him, it were not so heinous a sin to question his willingness to do
him good; but what place is left after such frequent trials?

subject. Now these Objections are of two sorts also.

(1.) Such as are drawn from our great unworthiness. How (says Unbelief) can
so sinful and vile a creature expect, that ever God should do this or that for
me? It Is true, we find he did great things for Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Moses
etc. but these were men of eminent holiness, men that obeyed God, and denied
themselves for him, and lived more in a day to his glory, than ever I did all
my days.

Well, but what signifies all this to a soul, that under all its sensible
vileness and unworthiness has tasted the goodness of God as well as they? As
unworthy as I am, God has been good to me notwithstanding: his mercy appeared
first to me, when I was worse than I am now, both in conditJon and dispositJon;
and therefore I will still expect the continuance of his goodness to me, though
I deserve it not. If when we were EnemJes we were reconciled to God by the
death of his Son, how much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his
life? Romans 5. 10.

(2.) Such as are drawn from the extremity of our present condition, if
troubles or dangers grow to an height, and we see nothing but ruin and misery
in the eye of reason before us; now umbelief becomes importune and trouble^ome
to the soul; now where are thy prayers, ^hy hopes, yea, where is now thy God?

But all this is easily put by and avoided, by ^onsulting our experiences in
former cases. This is not the first time I have been in these straits, ^or the
first time I have had the same doubts and despondencies; and yet, God has
carried me through all, Psalm. 77. 7, 8, 9, etc. This is it that suffers not a
Christian to unravel all his hopes in an hour of temptation. O how useful are
these things to the people of God!

The Fifth Motive.
THe Recognition of former Providence will minister to your souls continual
matter of praise and thanksgiving, which is the very employment of the Angels
in Heaven, and the sweetest part of our lives on Earth.

See Psalm. 61. 7, 8. If God will prepare Mercy and Truth for David, he will
prepare Praises for ^is God, and that daily. So Psalm. 71. 6. By thee have I
been holden up from the womb, thou art he that took me out of my Mothers
bowels; (there Mercies from the beginning are recognized.) My praise shall be
continually of thee: there the natural result of those recognitions is
expressed.

There be five things belonging to the praise of God, and all of them have
relation to his Providence exercised about us.

(1.) A careful Observation of the Mercles we receive from him, Isa. 41. 17,
18, 19, 20. This is fundamental to all praise: God cannot ^e glorified for the
mercies we never noted.

(2.) A faithful Remembrance of the favor* received, Psalm. 103. 2. Bless the
Lord, O my soul* and forget not all his benefits. Hence the Lord brands the
Ingratitude of his people, Psalm. 106. 13. They soon forgot his works.

(3.) A due Appreciation and Valuation of every Providence that does us good, 1 Samuel 12. 24. That Providence that fed them in the Wilderness with Manna, was a
most remarkable Providence to them; but they not valuing it at its worth, God
had not that praise for it which he expected, Numb. 11. 6.

(4.) The Excitation of all the faculties and powers of the soul in the
acknowledgement o^ these mercies to us. Thus David, Psalm. 103. 1^ Bless the
Lord, O my soul; and all that is within m^ bless his holy name. Soul-praise is
the very sou^ of praise: this is the fat and marrow of that thank-offering.

(5.) A suitable Retribution for the mercies received. This David was careful
about, Psalm. 116. 1. And the Lord taxes good HezekJah for the neglect of it, 2 Chronicles. 32. 24, 25. This consists in a full and hearty resignation of all to
him, that we have received by Providence from him: and in our willingness
actually to part with all for him, when he shall remand it.

Thus you see, how all the ingredients to praise, have respect to Providence.
But more particularly I will show you, that as all the ingredients of praise
have respect to Providence, so all the motives and Arguments obliging and
engaging souls to praise, are found therein also. To this end consider, how the
mercy and goodness of God is exhibited by Providence, to excite our
thankfulness.

(1.) That the goodness and mercy of God is let out upon his people in his
Providence about them: and this is the very root of praise. It is not so much
the possession that Providence gives us of such or such comforts, as the
goodness and kindness of God in the dispensing of them, that engages a gracious
soul to praise, Psalm. 63. 3. Because thy loving kindness is better than life,
my lips shall praise thee. To give, maintain and preserve our life, are choice
acts of Providence: but to do all this in a way of grace and loving kindness,
this is far better than the gifts themselves: life is but the shadow of death
without it: this is the mercy that crowns all other mercies, Psalm. 103. 4. It Is
this a sanctified soul desires God would manifest in every Providence about
him, Psalm. 17. 7. and what is our praising of God else, but our showing forth
that loving kindness, which he shows us in his Providence? Psalm. 92. 1, 2.

(2.) As the loving kindness of God manifested in Providence, is a motive to
praise; so the free and undeserved savours of God, dispensed by the hand of
Providence, oblige the soul to praise. This was the consideration that melted
David's heart into a thankful praising frame, even the consideration of the
free and undeserved favors cast in upon him by Providence, 2 Samuel 7. 18. What
am I? O Lord God: and what is my Fathers house, that thou have brought me
hitherto? (i. e.) raised me by Providence from a mean condition to all this
dignity: from following the Ewes, to feed Jacob his people, Psalm. 78. 70, 71. O
this is it that engages thankfulness, Genesis 32. 10.

(3.) As the freeness of mercies dispensed by Providence, engages praise; so
the Multitudes of mercies heaped this way upon us, strongly oblige the soul to
thankfulness. Thus David comes before the Lord encompassed with a multitude of
mercies to praise him, Psalm. 5. 7. We have our loads of mercies, and that every
day, Psalm 68. 19. O what a rich heap will the mercies of one day make, being
laid together!

(4.) As the multitudes of mercies dispensed by Providence, oblige to praise;
so the tenderness of Gods mercy manifested in his Providence, leaves the soul
under a strong obligation to thankfulness. We see what tender resentments the
Lord has of all our wants, straits and burdens, Psalm 103. 13. Like as a
Father pitJeth his Children, so the Lord pitJeth them that fear him. He is full
of bowels, as the word (...) in James 5. 11. signifies. Yea, there are not only
bowels of compassion in our God, but the tenderness of bowels, like those of a
Mother to her sucking child, Isa. 49. 15. He feels all our pains as if the
apple of his eye were touched, Zech. 2. 8. and all this is discovered to his
people in the way of his Providence with them, Psalm. 111. 2, 3, 4. O who of
all the Children of God has not often found this in his Providence? And who
can see it, and not be filled with thankfulness? All these are so many bands
clapped by Providence upon the soul, to oblige it to a li^e of praise. Hence it
is, that the prayers of the Saints are so full of thanksgivings upon these
accounts: it is sweet to recount them to the Lord in prayer: to lie at this feet
in an holy astonishment at his gracious condescensions to poor worms.

The Sixth Motive.
THe due observatJon of Providence will endear Jesus Christ every day more and
more to your souls. Christ is the Channel of grace and mercy: through him are
all the d^cursus and recursus gratiarum, all the streams of mercy that ^low
from God to us, and all the returns of praise from us to God, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22.
All things are ours upon no other title, but our being his.

Now there be six things in Providence, that are exceedingly endearing of the
Lord Jesus Christ to his people: and these are the most sweet and delicious
parts of all our enjoyments.

The purchase of all those mercies which Providence Christ restored all these
mercies again to us by his death. Sin had so shut up the womb of mercy, that
had not Christ made an atonement by his death, it could never have brought
forth one mercy to all eternity for us. It is with him that God freely gives us
all things, Romans 8. 32. Heaven it self, and all things needful to bring us
thither, Bona gr^tiae, and gloriae, ac pr^omnibus divinae tu^telae opis, ac
providentiae su^scutum.
among which, is principally included the Tutelage and Aid of Divine
Providence: so that whatever good we receive from the hand of Providence, we
must put it upon the score of Christ's blood; and when we receive it, we may
say, It Is the price of blood: It Is a mercy rising up out of the death of
Christ: Poli Synopsis i^ loc.
It cost him dear, though it come to me freely: It Is sweet in the possessJon,
but costly in the acquisitJon. Now this is a most endearing consideration: did
Christ dye, that these mercies might live? Did he pay his invaluable blood to
purchase these comforts, that I possess? O what transcendent, matchless love,
was the love of Christ! You have known Parents that have laid out all their
stock of money to purchase Estates for their Children; but when did you hear of
any that spent the whole stock and treasure of their blood, to make a purchase
for them? If the life of Christ had not been so afflictive and sad to him, ours
could not have been so sweet and comfortable to us: it is through his poverty we
are enriched, 2 Cor. 8. 9. These sweet mercies that are born of Providence
every day, are the fruits of the travel of his soul.

CHRIST, Matthew. 6. 33. they are given with him, as in Romans 8. 32. this is the
Tenure by which we hold them, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22, 23. Look, what we lost in Adam,
is restored again with Advantage in Christ: immediately upon the fall, that
curse, Genesis 2. 17. seized upon all the miserable posterity of Adam, and upon
all their comforts, outward as well as inward; and this still lies heavy upon
them: All that Providence does for them that are Christless, is but to feed so
many poor condemned wretches, till the sentence they are under, be executed
upon them: it is indeed bountiful and open-handed to many of them; and fills
them with Earthly comforts; but not one special sanctified mercy is to be found
among all their enjoyments: these gifts of Providence do but deceive, defile
and destroy them through their own corruptions, and for want of union with
Christ, Prove. 1. 32. The prosperity of fools shall destroy them.

But when a man is once in Christ, then all Providence are sanctified and
sweet, Tit. 1. 15. Unto the pure, all things are pure. A little that a
righteous man has, is better than the treasures of many wicked, Psalm. 37. 16.
Now Christ becomes an head of Influence, as well as of DominJon; and in all
things he consults the good of his own members, Ephesians. 1. 22.

The dispensation of all our comforts and mercies, Angels are employed in the
Kingdom of Providence, they move the wheels, ( i. e.) are instrumental in all
the revolutions in this lower world; but still they receive directions and
orders from Christ, as you may see in that admirable Scheme of Providence,
Ezekiel. 1. 25, 26, etc. Now what an endearing meditation is this! What ever
Creature be instrumental for any good to you, it is your Lord Jesus Christ that
gave the orders and commands to that Creature to do it; and without it they
could have done nothing for you: It Is your head in Heaven that consults your
peace and comfort on Earth: these be the fruits of his care for you. So in the
prevention and restraints of evil; it is he that bridles in the wrath of Devils
and men; he holds the reins in his own hands, Rev. 2. 10. 'Twas the care of
Christ over his poor Sheep at Damascus, that stopped the raging Adversary who was
upon the way, designing to destroy them, Acts. 9.

continuatJon of all your mercies and comforts, outward as well as inward, is
the fruit of his Intercession in Heaven for you. For look, as the offering up
of the Lamb of God a Sacrifice for sin, opened the door of mercy at first; so
his appearing before God as a Lamb that had been slain, still keeps that door
of mercy open, Rev. 5. 6. Heb. 9. 24. By this his intercession, our peace and
comforts are prolonged to us, Zech. 1. 12, 13. Every sin we commit, would put
and end to the mercies we possess, were it not for that caution which is put in
for us by it, 1 ^ohn 2. 1, 2.' If any man sin, we have an A^vocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: and he is the propitJatJon for our sins,
etc. This stops all pleas, and procures new pardons for new sins. Hence it is
he saves to the uttermost, to the last completing act, Heb. 7. 25. New sins do
not irritate our former pardons, nor cut off our privileges settled upon us in
Christ.

Rev. 8. 3, 4. It Is his name that gives our prayers their acceptance, John 15.
16. because the Father can deny him nothing, therefore your prayers are not
denied. Does God condescend to hear you in the day of trouble? Does he convince
you by your own experience, that your prayers have power with God, and do
prevail? O see how much you owe to your dear Lord Jesus Christ, for this high
and glorious privilege!

The Covenant of Grace, in which all your Psalm 111. 5. as well as your
justification, and other spiritual mercies.

It Is your Covenant interest, that secures to you what ever it comprizes, Isa.
55. 3. hence they are called the sure mercies of David.

Nay, this is it that sanctifies them, and gives them (...) nature of special
and peculiar mercies. One (...) mercy is worth a thousand common mercies. And
being sanctified and special mercies, they must needs be exceeding sweet beyond
all other mercies. On these accounts it was* that David so rejoiced in his
Covenant I^teres^, though laden with many afflictions, ^ Sam. 23. 5.

But now all this hangs entirely upon Christ. The New Testament is in his
bloo^, 1 Cor. 11. ^5. and whatever mercies you reap from that Covenant, you
must thank the Lord Jesus Christ for them. Put all this together, and then
think how such considerations will endear Christ to your souls!

The Seventh Motive.
THe due observations of Providence have a mavelous efficacy to melt the
heart, and make it thaw and relent ingenuously before the Lord.

How can a sanctified heart do less, than melt into tears, whilst it either
considers the dealings of God from time to time with it: or compares the
mercies received, with the sins committed; or the different administrations of
Providence toward it self and others!

Let a man but set himself to think deliberately and closely of the ways of
providence toward him, let him but follow the Tract (...) ^rovidence, as it
has led him all along the way that he has gone, and if there be any principle
of gracious tenderness in him, he shall meet with variety of occasions to
excite and draw it forth. Reader, go back with thy serious thoughts (1.) To the
beginning of the ways of God with thee, the mercies that brake out early in
thy youth, even the first born mercies from the womb of Providence; and thou will say, What need I go farther? Here is enough, not only to moves, but
overwhelm my heart. May I not from this time cry unto thee, my Father, thou art
the guide of my youth, Jer. 3. 4. What a critical time is the time of youth?
it is the moulding age; and (ordinarily) according to the course of those
leading Providence, after Providence do steer their course. What levity,
rashness, ignorance and strong propensions to sin and ruin accompanied that
age? How many being then left to the sway of their own lusts, run themselves
into those sins and miseries, which they never recover themselves from to their
dying day? These, like the errors of the first concoction, are rarely rectified
afterward. Did the Lord guide thee by his Providence, when but a Child? Did he
then preserve thee from those follies and miscarriages, which blast the very
blossom, and nip the bud, so that no good fruit is to be expected afterward?
Did he then cast thee into such families, or among such company and
acquaintance, as molded and formed thy spirit to a better temper? Did he then
direct thee into that way of employment, wherein thou have seen so large a
train of happy consequents ever since following thee? And will thou not from
henceforth say, My Father, my Father, thou art the guide of my youth?

Or (2.) Let us but bring out thoughts close to the Providence of after times,
and consider how the several changes and removes of our lives have been ordered
for us: Things we never foresaw nor designed (but much better for us, than what
we did design) have been all along ordered for us. The way of man is not in
himself. Gods thoughts have not been our thoughts, nor his ways our ways.
Among the eminent mercies of thy life, Reader, how many of them have been mere
surprizals to thee? Thy own projects have been thrust aside, to make way for
better things designed by Providence for thee.

Nay, (3.) Do but observe the Springs and Autumns of Providence, in what order
they have flourished and faded with thee, and thou will find thy self
overpowered with the sense of Divine Wisdom and Goodness: when necessity
required, such a friend was stirred up to help thee, such a place opened to
receive thee, such a Relation raised up or continued to refresh thee: and no
sooner does Providence deprive thee of any of them, but either thy need of them
ceases, or some other way is opened to thee. O the depth of Gods Wisdom and
Goodness! O the matchless tenderness of God to his people!

(4.) Compare the dealings of Providence with you and others, yea, with others
that sprang up with you in the same generation, it may be, in the same
families, and from the same Parents, it may be in families greater and more
flourishing in the world then yours, and see the difference, upon many great
accounts, it has made betwixt you and them. I knew a ChristJan, who after many
years separation, was visited by his own Brother, the very sight of whom,
wrought upon him, much as the sight of Benjamin did upon Joseph, so that he
could not refrain to fall upon his neck, and weep for joy; but after a ^ew
hours spent together, finding the spirit of his Brother, not only estranged
from all that is spiritual and serious, but also very vain and profane, he
hastened to his chamber, shut the door upon him, threw himself down at the feet
of God, and with flowing eyes, and a melting heart, admired the distinguishing
Grace of God, saying, Was not Esau Jacob's Brother? O Grace, Grace, astonishing
Grace!

(5.) Compare the carriage of Providence toward you, with your own carriage
toward the Lord; and it must needs melt your hearts to find so much mercy
bestowed, where so much sin has been committed. What place did you ever live
in, where you cannot remember great provocations committed, and manifold
mercies notwithstanding that, received? O with how many notwithstandings and
neverthelesses, has the Lord done you good in every place! What Relation has
not been abused by sin; and yet both raised up and continued by Providence for
your comfort? In every place God that left the marks of his goodness, and you
the remembrances of your sinfulness: give your selves but leave to think of
these things, and it is strange if your hearts relent not at the remembrance of
them.

(6.) Or Lastly, Do but compare your dangers with your fears, and both with the
strange out-letts and doors of escape Providence has opened, and it cannot do
less than over power you with a full sense of divine care and goodness.

There have been dark clouds seen to rise over you, judgment even at your
door, sometimes threating your life, sometimes your liberty, sometimes your
estates, and sometimes your dearest relations, in whom it may be, your life was
bound up; remember in that day, what faintness of spirit seized you, what
charges of guilt stirring up fears of the issue within you: You turned to the
Lord in that distress, and has he not made a way to escape, and delivered you
from all your fears? Psalm. 34. 4.

Oh is your life such a continued throng, such a distracted hurry, that there
is no room to be found with Christians to sit alone, and think on these things,
and press these mavelous discoveries of God in his Providence upon their own
hearts? Surely, might these things but lie upon our hearts, talk with our
thoughts by day, and lodge with us at night; they would even force their
passage down to our very Reins.

The Eighth Motive.
DVe observation of Providence will both beget and secure inward tranquillity
in your minds amidst the viciss^udes and revolutions of things in this unstable
vain world.

Psalm 4. 8. I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep, for the Lord only
makes me dwell in safety. He resolves the sinful fears of Events shall not rob
him of his inward quiet, nor torture his thoughts with anxious presages: he
will commit all his concerns into that faithful fatherly hand that had hitherto
wrought all things for him, and he means not to lose the comfort of one nights
rest, nor bring the evil of to morrow upon the day, but knowing in whose hand
he was, wisely enjoyes the sweet felicity of a resigned will.

Now this Tranquillity of our minds is as much begotten and preserved by a due
consideration of Providence, as by any thing whatsoever. Hence it was, that our
Lord Jesus Christ, when he would cure the Disciples anxious and distracting
sollicitudes about a livelihood, bids them consider the care Providence has
over the Birds of the air, and the Lillies of the field, how it feeds the one,
and clothes the other without any anxious care of theirs; and would have them
well consider those Providence, and reason themselves into a calm and sweet
composure of spirit from those considerations, Mat. 6. 27, 28, 29, 30, 31.

Two things destroy the peace and tranquillity of our lives, our bewailing past
disappointments, or fearing future ones. But would we once learn prevision and
provision to be divine prerogatives, and take notice how often Providence
baffles those that pretend to it, causing the good they foresaw (according to
their conjectures) coming to their hand, yet to balk them and ^lee from them:
and the evil they thought themselves sufficiently secured from, to invade them.
I say, would we consider how Providence daily baffles these Pretensions of men,
and asserts its own Dominion, it would greatly conduce to the tranquillity of
our lives.

This is a great truth, that there is no face of Adversity of formidable, but
being viewed from this station, would become amicable. Now there be several
things in the consideration of Providence, that naturally and kindly compose
the mind of a Christian to peace, and bring it to a sweet rest, whilst events
hang in a doubtful suspense.

As First, The Supremacy of Providence, and I had not thought (said Jacob) to
have seen thy face; and lo, God has showed me thy seed also, Genesis 48. 11.
There is a frequent coincidency of Providence in a way of surprizal, which
from no appearance, or the remotest tendency of outward causes could be
foreseen, but rather falls visibly cross to the present Scheme, and posture of
our affairs. Nothing tends to convince us of the vanity and folly of our own
sollicitudes and projections, more than this does.

performs for the people of God. The Wheels are full of eyes, Ezekiel. 1. 18.
(i.e.) there is an intelligent and wise Spirit that sits upon, (...)
and governs the affairs of this world.

This Wisdom shines out to us in the unexpected, yea, contrary events of
things. How often have we been courting some beautiful appearance that invited
our senses, and with trembling shunned the formidable face of other things, when
notwithstanding the issues of Providence have convinced us, that our danger lay
in what we counted, and our good in what we so studiously declined? This also
is a sweet principle of peace and quiet to the Christians mind, that he knows
not, but his good may be imported in what seemed to threaten his ruin. Many
were the distresses and straits of Israel in the Wilderness, but all was to
humble them, that he might do them good in the latter end, Deuteronomy. 8. 16. Sad and
dismal was the face of that Providence that sent them out of their own land,
into the land of the Chaldeans; yet even this was a project to do them good,
Jer. 24. 5. How often have we retracted our rash and headlong censures of
things upon experience of this truth! and been taught to bless our afflictions
and disappointments in the name of the Lord. Many a time have we kissed those
troubles at parting, which we met with trembling. And what can promote peace
under doubtful Providence more effectually than this?

The experiences we have had throughout our Hitherto God has helped, 1 Samuel 7.
12. We never found him wanting to us in any case hitherto: this ^s not the
first: strait we have been in: the first time that our hearts and hopes have
been low. Surely, he is the same God now as heretofore, his hand is not
shortened, neither does his faithfulness ^ail. O recount in how great
extremities former experience has taught you not to despair!

The conjectures Christians may make of the Psalm. 89. 30, 31, 32. that it is
usually the way of God to prepare some smart rods to correct thee, when either
thy heart has secretly revolted from God, and is grown vain, careless and
sensual, or when thy steps have declined, and thou have turned aside to the
commission of iniquity. And then when those rods have been sanctified to
humble, reduce and purge thy heart, it is usually observed, that those sad
Providence are then upon the change, and then the Lord changes the voice of
his Providence toward thee, Jer. 3. 12, 13. Go, and proclaim these words
toward the North, and say, Return thou backsliding Israel, says the Lord, and
I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you, for I am merciful, says the
Lord, and I will not keep anger for ever. Only acknowledge thine iniquity, etc.

If therefore I find the blessed effects of the rod upon me, that it has done
its work, to break the hard heart, and pull down the proud heart, and awaken
the drowsy heart, and quicken the slothful, negligent, lazy heart; now with
great probability I may conjecture, a more comfortable aspect of Providence
will quickly appear, the refreshing and reviving time is nigh.



(1.) It is a mighty composing meditation, when we compare the Providence of
God toward the inanimate and irrational Creatures, with his Providence
toward us. Does he take care for the very Fowls of the air, for whom no man
provides, as well as those at the door which we daily feed? Does he so clothe
the very Grass of the field? hear the young Ravens, when they cry for meat? and
can it be supposed, he should forget his own people, that are of much more
value than these?

(2.) Or if we compare the bounty and care that Providence has expressed to
the Enemies of God, how it feeds and clothes and protects them, even whilst
they are fighting against him with his own mercies; it cannot but quiet and
satisfy us, that surely he will not be wanting to that people upon whom he
has set his love, to whom he has given his Son, and for whom he has designed
Heaven it self.

(3.) Or Lastly, It must needs quiet us, when we consider, what the Lord did
for us in the way of his Providence, when we our selves were in the state of
nature, and enmity against God. Did he not then look after us, when we knew him
not? provided for us, when we owned him not in any of his mercies? bestowed
thousands of mercies upon us, when we had no title to Christ or any one
promise? and will he now do less for us, since we are reconciled and become his
Children?

Surely, such considerations as these, cannot: but fill the soul with peace,
and preserve the tranquillity of it under the most distracting Providence.

The Ninth Motive.
DVe observations of the ways of God in his Providence toward us, have an
excellent usefulness and aptitude to advance and improve Holiness in our hearts
and lives. For,

The Holiness of God is manifested to us in all The Lord is righteous in all
his ways, and holy in all his works. The Instruments used by Providence may be
very sinful and wicked, they may aim at base ends, and make use of wicked
mediums to attain them; but it is certain Gods designs are most pure, and all
his workings are so too. Though he permits, limits, orders and overrules many
unholy persons and actions; yet in all he works like himself; and his Holiness
is no more defiled and stained by their impurity; than the Sunbeams are by the
noisome exhalations of a dunghill, Deuteronomy. 32. 4. He is the rock, his work is
perfect; for all his ways are judgment, a God of truth, and without iniquity:
just and right is he. So that in all his Providence he sets before us a
perfect pattern of holiness, that we might be holy in all our ways, as our
Father is in all his ways. But this is not all.

Hosea 2. 6. but that we should not ^ind our paths to sin? Why does he clogg
us, but to prevent our straying from him? 2 Cor. 12. 7. Lest I should be
exalted above measure, there was given me a thorn in the slesh, a messenger of
Satan to buffet me. O it is good to attend to these works of God, and study the
meaning of them. Sometimes Providence crosses a hopeful thriving project to
advance our estate, and frustrates all our labors and cares; Why is this? but
to hide pride from man. Should thou prosper in the world, that prosperity
might be thy snare, and make thee a proud, sensual, vain ^oul; the Lord Jesus
sees this, and therefore withdraws the food and fuel from thy corruptions.

It may be thou have a crazy, diseased, weak body; thou labourest under often
infirmities: in this, the Wisdom and Care of God over thy soul is manifested;
for were thou not so clogged, how probable is it, that much more guilt might be
contracted? Your poverty does but clog your pride; reproaches clog your
ambition: want prevents wantonness: sickness of body conduces to the prevention
of many inward gripes of conscience, and groans under guilt.

The Providence of God may be observed to God would no^ ^ub so hard, if (...)
were not to fetch ou^ the dirt that is ingrai^^^d in our natures:(...) loves
purity so well, he had rath^^ see a hol^ than a sp^^ in his child's ga^^ment.
G^^^nalls Ch^^^stian Ar^mour, p. 2. p. 22*
that we may not ^all into it; but also by purging our sins when we are fallen
into them, Isa. 27. 9. By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged;
and this is all the fruit to take away his sin. So Dan. 11. 33, 34, 35. they
are of the same use that fire and water are for purging and cleansing; not that
they can purge us from sin in their own virtue and power, for if so, those that
have most afflictions would have most grace also; but it is in the virtue of
Christ's blood, and God's blessing upon afflictive Providence, that they purge
us from sin. A Cross without a Crist never did any man good. Now in God's
afflictive Providence for sin there are many things that tend to the purging
of it. For

(1.) Such rebukes of Providence discover the displeasure of God against us:
the Lord frowns upon us in those Providence. Our father is angry, and these
are the tokens of it; and nothing works more to the melting of a gracious hear^
than this. Must not the heart of a Child melt and break whilst the father is
angry. O this is more bitter to our Spirits than all the smart and anguish of
the affliction can be to our flesh. See Psalm. 38. 1, 2, 3. O Lord rebuke me not
in thy wrath; neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure: for thine arrows stick
fast in me; and thine band presses me sore. There is no soundness in my flesh
because of thine anger: neither is there any rest in my bones because of my sin.

(2.) By these rebukes of sin, the evil of sin is discovered more sensibly to
us, and we are made to see more clearly the evil of it in these glasses of
affliction which Providence at such times sets before us, than formerly we ever
saw. Jer. 2. 19. Thine own wickedness shall correct thee; and thy backslidings
shall reprove thee, know therefore and see that it is an evil thing and bitter,
that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in thee,
says the Lord of Hosts. O the Gall and Wormwood that we taste in it under
God's rebukes for it!

(3.) Providence blasts and frustrates all sinful projects to the people of
God: whoever thrives in them, they shall not. Isa. 30. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. And this
also convinces them of the folly that is in sin, and makes them cleave to the
way of simplicity and integrity.

Job 34. 31* I have born chastisement, I will not offend any more. O happy
Providence, how smart soever, that make the soul for ever a^raid of sin!
surely such rods are well bestowed. This gives God his end: and if ever we
sorrowed after a godly sort, in the day of our troubles it will work this
carefulness. 2 Cor. 7. 11. Behold this self same thing that ye sorrowed after a
godly sort, what carefulness it wrought in you, etc. O if ever a man have been
under a sanctified rod which has showed him the evil of sin, and kindly
humbled him for it; and a temptation should again solicit him to the same
evil: Why thinks he, what a madness is it for me to buy repentance at so dear a
rate? Have I not smarted enough already? You may as well ask me, whether I will
run again into the ^ire, after I have been already scorcht in it?

To conclude, Providence do greatly improve Sam. 7. 18.

Afflictive Providence will drive us to the feet: of God, and there make us to
judge and condemn our selves. And all this has an excellent use to destroy
sin, and promote holiness in the Soul.

The Tenth Motive.
LAstly, The ConsideratJon and study of Providence will be of singular use to
us in a dying hour. Hereby we treasure up that which will singularly sweeten
our death to us, and greatly assist our faith in the last encounter. You find
when Jacob dyed, what reflections he had upon the dealings of God with him in
the various Providence of his life. See Genesis 4. 8. 3, 7, 15, 16. In like
manner you ^ind Joshua recording the Providence of God when at the brink of
the grave: they were the subject of his dying discourse. Josh. 24. And I cannot
but think it a sweet close to the life of any Christian: It must needs sweeten
a deathbed to recount there the several remarkable passages of God's care and
love to us from our beginning to that day: to reflect upon the mercies that
went along with us all the way, when we are come to the end of it. O
Christians, treasure up these instances for such a time as that is; that you
may go out of the world blessing God for all the goodness and truth he has
performed to you all your life long. Now the meditations of these things must
needs be of great use in that day, if you consider the following particulars.

nunquam nisi morJens, producitur in longum, He never exerts his utmost rage
till the last encounter; and then his great design is to persuade the Saints,
that God loves them not, has no care nor regard for them, nor their cries;
though they pray for ease and cry for sparing mercy, they see none comes. He
handles them with as much roughness and severity as other men; yea, many of the
vilest and most dissolute wretches endure less torments, and are more gently
handled than they. Psalm. 73. 4. there are no bands in their death, when as thou
must go through a long lane of sickness to the grave, and endure many deaths in
one.

But what credit can these plausible tales of Satan obtain with a Christian who
has been treasuring up all his life long the memorJals of God's tender regard
both to his wants and prayers, and that has care^ully remarked the evident
returns of his prayers, and gracious condescensions of God to him from his
beginning to that moment? In this case his says is mightily assisted by
thousands of experiences which back and encourage it, and will not suffer the
soul to give up so easily a truth which he has so often sensibly felt and
tasted. I am sure (says he) God has had a tender fatherly care of me ever
since I became his: he never failed me yet in any former strait; and I cannot
believe he will do so now. I know his love is like himself, unchangeable. Job.
13. 1. having loved his own which were in the world he loved them unto the end:
for this God is our God for ever and ever, he will be our guide even unto
death. Psalm. 48. 14. Did he love me in my youth, and will he cast me off in my
decrepit age? O God, (says the Psalmist) thou have taught me from my youth,
and hitherto have I declared thy wondrous works, now also when I am old and
gray headed, O God, forsake me not, Psalm. 71. 17, 18.

At death the Saints are engaged in the last, and Luke 23. 46. Father into thy
hands I commend my spirit; and having said thus he gave up the Ghost. So
Stephen at his death, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit, and immediately fell
asleep, Act. 7. 59.

There be two signal and remarkable acts of faith, both exceedingly difficult,
viz. its first act, and its last. The first is a great venture that it makes of
it self upon Christ: and the last is a great venture too, to cast it self into
the Ocean of Eternity upon the credit of a Promise. But yet I know the first
adventure of the Soul upon Christ is much more difficult than the last
adventure upon death; and that which makes it so is in great measure, the
manifold recorded experiences that the Soul has been gathering up from the day
of its espousals to Christ unto its dying which is (in a sense) its marriage
day. Oh with what encouragement may a Soul throw himself into the arms of that
God with whom he has so long conversed and walked in this world! Whose visits
have been sweet and frequent, with whom the soul has contracted so intimate
acquaintance in this world; whom it has committed all its affairs to formerly,
and still ^ound him a faithful God; and now has no reason to doubt, but it
shall find him so in this last distress and exigence also.

contain them: And I know also that Jesus Christ must make up the Account for
us, or it will never pass with God; yet it is our duty to keep the Accounts of
our own mercies, and how they have been improved by us, for we are Stewards,
and then are to give an Account of our Stewardship.

At death we owe an Account also to men, Jacob when Joseph was come to take his
last farewell of him in this world, strengthened himself and sat upon the bed,
and related to him the eminent appearances of God to him, and the places where,
Genesis 48. 2, 3. as also an account of his afflictions, Verse 7. So Joshua in his
last speech to the people makes it his business to vindicate and clear the
truth of the Promises, by recounting to them how the Providence of God had
fulfilled the same to a tittle in his day. Josh. 23. 14. And behold (says he)
this day I am going the way of all the earth, and ye know in all your hearts,
and in all your souls, that not one thing has failed of all the good things
which the Lord your God spoke concerning you; all are come to pass unto you,
and not one thing has failed thereof.

And certainly it is of great importance to the world, to understand the
Judgments, and hear of the Experiences of dying men. They of all men are
presumed to be most wise and most serious: Besides, this is the last
opportunity that ever we shall have in this world to speak for God. O then what
a sweet thing would it be to close up our lives with an honorable Account of
the ways of God! to go out of the world blessing him for all the mercies and
truth which he has here performed to us! how would this encourage weak
Christians, and convince the Atheistical world, that verily there is a reality
and an excellency in the ways and people of God!

Angelical life of praise and thanksgiving. We then enter upon that everlasting
sweet employment; and as I doubt not but the Providence in which we were
concerned in this world will be a part of that Song which we shall sing in
Heaven, so certainly it will become us to tune our hearts and tongues for it
whilst we are here, and especially when we are ready to enter upon that
blessed state. O therefore let it be your daily meditation and study what God
has been to you, and done for you, from the beginning of his way hitherto.

And thus I have spread before you some encouragements to this blessed work. Oh
that you would be persuaded to this lovely and every way bene^icial practice.
This I dare presume to say, that whoever finds a careful and a thankful heart
to record and treasure up the daily experiences of God's mercy to him, shall
never want new mercies to record to his dying day. It was said of ClaudJan that
he wanted matter suitable to the excellency of his parts; but where is the head
or heart that is suitable to this matter? who can utter the mighty works of the
Lord? who can show forth all his praise? Psalm. 106. 2.

Thus I have through the aid of Providence dispatched the main design I aimed
at in the choice of this subject. All that remains will now be speedily
finished in some few Corollaries to be brie^ly noted upon the whole, and three
or four practical Cases to be stated. You have heard how Providence per^ormeth
all things for you* Learn thence,

First Corollary.
THat God is therefore to be owned by you in all that befalls you in this
world, whether it be in ^ way of success and comfort, or of trouble and
afflictJon. O it is your duty to observe his hand and disposal: When God gives
you comforts, it is your great evil not to observe his hand in them. Hence was
that charge against Israel, ^os. 2. 8. She did not know that I gave her Corn
and Wine and Oil, and multiplJed her Silver and Gold (i. e.) she did not
actually and affectionately consider my care over her and goodness to her, in
these mercies. And so for afflictions, it is a great wickedness, when God's hand
is listed up not to see it. Isa. 26. 11. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass
his masters crib, Isa. 1. 3. the most dull and stupid creatures know their
benefactors. O look to the hand of God in all; and know, that neither your
comforts nor afflictions do arise out of the dust, or spring up out of the
ground.

Second Corollary.
IF God perform all things for you, how great is his condescensJon to and care
over his people! What is man (says Job, chap. 7. v. 17, 18.) that thou
should magnifJe him, and set thine heart upon him? and that thou should
visit him every morning, and try him every moment? Such is his tender care over
you that he withdraws not his eye from you. See Job 36. 7. lest any hurt you,
he himself will guard and keep you day and night. Isa. 27. 3. Should he
withdraw his eye or hand one moment from you, that moment would be your ruin.
Ten thousand evils watch but for such an opportunity, to rush in upon you, and
destroy you and all your com^orts. You, are too dear to him to be trusted in
any hand but his own. Deuteronomy. 33. 3. All his Saints are in thy hand.

Third Corollary.
LEarn hence how you are obliged to perform all dutJes and services for God,
who performs all things for you. It was the wish of a good man, optarem id me
esse Deo, quod est mihi manus mea, Oh that I could be to God what my hand is to
me, Viz. a serviceable useful instrument. Shall God do all things for you, and
will you do nothing for God? Is Providence every moment at work for you, and
will you be idle? To what purpose then is all that God has done for you? Is it
not the aim and design of all, to make you a fruitful people? If God plant, and
fence, and water you by Providence, sure he looks you should bring forth fruit.
Isa. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4. O that in return for all the benefits of Providence, you
would say to God, as grateful Elisha said to the Shunamite, behold thou have
been careful for us with all this care, what is to be done for thee? 2 Kings 4.
13. and with David, Psalm. 116. 12. what shall I render unto the Lord for all
his benefits toward me! He is ever doing you good; be you always abounding in
his work. His Providence stands by you in your greatest distresses and dangers;
don't you flinch from God when his service and your duty is compassed about
with difficulties. O be active for that God who is acting every moment for you.

Fourth Corollary.
Does God perform all things for his people? Do not distrust him then as often
as new or great difficultJes arise. Why should you think he that has done so
many things for you, will now do no more? Surely, the Lords hand is not
shortened that it cannot save, nor his ear heavy that it cannot hear; if any
thing put a stop to his mercy, it is your iniquities, your distrust and
infidelity. Isa. 59. 1. How long will it be ere you belJeve him? If a thousand
and ten thousand of trials and experiences of his tender care, faithfulness and
love will cure this distemper in you, you have them at hand to do it. If the
frequent confutations of this your distrust by the unexpected breakings out of
mercy for you under like discouragements will cure it, look back and you may
see them. Certainly you have been often forced by Providence with shame and
repentance to retract your rash censures of his care; and yet will you fall
into the same distemper again? Oh that you would once learn this great truth,
That no man ever wanted that mercy, which he wanted not an heart to trust and
wait quietly upon God for. You never yet sought God in vain, except when you
sought him vainly.

The Fi^th Corollary.
Does God perform all things for you? ^onsilia and ^reces non (...) fine
adhi^eri, ut dei, (...) h a ec quasi ^mpedimen^, muten^r decreta (...) destin^
(...) provi^nti^e. e cur^s in^ibe^ur: sed (...) obsequi^i divin^e (...), and
^^suetum ^viden^^ ordi^^ obser^^do, con^^ntia ^nquill^^, and spe (...)
im^^atur. ^ende^ Theol. ^186.
then seek God for all by prayer, and never undertake any design without him:
Certainly, if he do not perform it for you, you can never have what you desire
and labor ^or: and though he have designed to perform this or that mercy for
you, yet for these things he will be enquired of that he may do it for you:
Ezekiel. 36. 37. I reckon that business as good as done, that mercy as good as if
it were in hand, that trouble as good as over, for the doing, enjoying, or
removing whereof we have engaged God by prayer. It Is our ^olly to engage this
instrument and that for us, to attempt this way and that to compass our design,
and all the while forget him upon whose pleasure all instruments and means
entirely depend. That which begins not with prayer, seldom winds up with
comfort. The way of man is not in himself; if it were, prayer might then be
reckoned lost labor. O let him that performs all, be owned and acknowledged in
all.

The sixth Corollary.
LAstly, If God perform all things for us, then it is our great Interest and
concernment in all things to study to please him, upon whom we depend for all
things.

It is a grave and weighty observation of Chrysostom. Chrysostom. Hom^ in 2 Cor. 7
Nothing (says he) should be grievous and bitter to a Christian, but to
provoke the displeasure of God. Avoid that, and no affliction or trouble
whatever can cast down such a prudent Soul; but even as a spark is easily
extinguished in the Sea, so will the favor of God extinguish those troubles.
It is with such a Soul (says he) as it is with the Heavens; we think the
Heavens suffer when they are overspread with clouds, and the Sun suffers when
it is eclipsed; but there is no such thing, they suffer not when they seem to
suffer. Tranquillus Deus, tranquillat omnJa. Every thing is well, and shall be
well, when all is well betwixt us and God. The great consolation of the Saints
lies in this, that all that concerns them is in the hands of their father. Pene
desperassem nisi Christus esset caput EcclesJae. I had utterly despaired (said
Luther) had not Christ been head of the Church. When he that performs all
things is our God, even our God that delights in our prosperity, that rejoices
over us to do us good, what ample security is here in the greatest confusions
and dangers? When one told Bouromeus that there were some that laid wait for
his life, his answer was, An Deus est in mundo pro nihilo? What, is God in the
World for nothing? And as notable was the reply of SilentJarJus in a like case,
si Deus mei curam non habet, quid vivo? If God take no care of me, how do I
live, how have I subsisted hitherto? Though it seems a Romance to many (says a
late grave Author) yet we must either quit the Scripture, ^^thor of (...)
fulfil^^^g of ^^ripture. ^^ar. page ^3.
or give credit to this, that the most infallible Rules for one to raise his
fortune and ensure a destiny that can control the stars, are given forth there
( viz. in the Scriptures) where that evidently is found, Sapiens dominabitur
Astris, and quomodo unusquisque faber potest esse fortunae suae. A good man may
even be his own Carver. O that we would but steer our course according to those
rare politics of the Bible, those divine Maxims of Wisdom. Fear nothing but
sin. Study nothing so much as how to please God. Warp not from your integrity
under any temptation. Trust God in the way of your duty. These are sure Rules
to secure your selves and your Interest in all the Vicissitudes of this life.

MY last work will be to state three or four practical cases about this
subject, and so I shall shut up this discourse of Providence.

First Case.
HOw may a Christian discover the will of God and his own duty under dark and
doubtful Providence?

In order to the clearing of this Case, we are to consider, what is meant by
the will of God; what by those doubtful Providence, that make the discovery of
his will difficult, and what rules are to be observed for the clearing up of
Gods will to our selves under such difficult and puzzling Providence.

As to the Will of God, it falls under a twofold secret and revealed Will; this
distinction is found in that Scripture, Deuteronomy. 29. 29. The secret things belong
unto the Lord our God, but those things which are revealed belong unto us, etc.
The first is the rule of his own actions; the later of ours: and this only is
concerned in the Quere.

This Revealed Will of God is either manifested to us in his Word, or in his
Works. The former is his commanding Will, the later his effecting or permitting
Will; the one versant about good, the other about evil.

In these ways God manifests his Will to men, but yet with great variety and
difference, both as to the things revealed, the persons to whom he reveals
them, and the degrees of clearness in which they are revealed.

(1.) As to the things revealed, there is great differenc^: for the great and
necessary duties of Religion are revealed to us in the Word, with greatest
perspicuity and evidence. About these there can be no hesitation; but things of
a lower nature and lesser concern are left more obscure.

(2.) As to the persons to whom God reveals his Will, there is great
difference; some are strong men, others babes, 1 Cor. 3. 1. Some have senses
exercised, others are of weak and dull understanding; and we know every thing
is received according to the ability and measure of the person receiving it.
Hence it is, that one man's way is very plain before him, he knows what he ought
to do: the other is ever and anon at a loss, bivious and uncertain what to do.

(3.) The manner of Gods revealing his Will to men is also very different. Some
have had special, personal, and peculiar discoveries of it made to them. So had
Samuel about the choice of the person whom he should anoint King, 1 Samuel 9. 15.
And so had David, 1 Samuel 23. 2, 4, 9, 10, 11, 12. where you find upon his
enquiry of God (likely by the Vrim and Thummim) God told him what was his duty
as to that expedition, and what would be the event of it.

But now, all are tied up to the ordinary standing rule of the written Word,
and must not expect any such extraordinary revelations from God. The way we now
have to know the Will of God concerning us in difficult cases, is to search and
study the Scriptures, and where we find no particular rule to guide us in this
or that particular case, there we are to apply general rules, and govern our
selves according to the Analogy and proportion they bear toward each other.

But now it often falls out, that in such doubtful David. that God would make
his way plain before us, Psalm. 5. 8. Afraid we are of displeasing God, and yet
doubtful we may do so; whether we resolve this way, or that. And this comes to
pass not only through the difficulty of the case, but from our own ignorance
and inadvertency; and very frequently from those Providence that lie before
us, wherein God seems to hint his mind to us, this way or that, and whether we
may safely guide our selves by those intimations of Providence, is doubtful to
us.

That God does give men secret hints and intimations of his Will by his
Providence, cannot be doubted; but yet Providence in themselves, are no stable
rule of duty, nor sufficient discovery of the Will of God. We may say of them,
as it is, Job 23. 8, 9. Behold, I go forward, but he is not there: and
backward, but I cannot perceive him: an the left hand where he does work, but I
cannot behold him: he hides himself on the right hand, that I cannot see him.

If Providence in it self be allowed to be a su^^icient discovery of Gods Will
to us, then we shall be forced often times to justify and condemn the same
cause or person, forasmuch as there is one event happens to all, and as it
falls out to the good, so to the wicked, Eccles. 9. 2. Beside, if Providence
alone were the Rule to judge any action or design by; then a wicked
undertakement would cease to be so, if it should succeed well; but sin is sin
still, and duty is duty still, what ever the events and issues of either be.

Job could not find the meaning of God in his Works, yet would he not go back
from the commandments of his lips, Job 23. 9. The like resolution you ^ind in
David, to proceed in his duty, and cleave to the Word, how many stumbling
blocks soever Providence should permit to be laid in his way. I am become
(says he) like a bottle in the smoke (not only blackt, but withered up by
troubles) yet do I not forget thy Statutes, Psalm. 119. 83. and again Ver. 87.
They had almost consumed me upon earth: but I forsook not thy precepts.

Paul by the direction of the Spirit was engaged to go to Jerusalem, Acts 20.
22. After a clear revelation of the mind of God to him in that matter, how many
difficult and discouraging Providence be^ell him in his way? The Disciples at
Tire said to him by the Spirit (though in that they ^ollowed their own spirits)
that he should not go to Jerusalem, Acts 21. 4.

Then at Cesarea he met Agabus a Prophet, who told him what should be^all him
when he came thither, Chap. 21. 10, 11. all this will not dissuade him. And
after all this, how passionately do the Brethren beseech him to decline that
journey? Ver. 12, 13. Yet knowing his rule, and resolving to be faithful to it,
he puts by all and proceeds in his journey.

Well then, Providence in concurrence with the Word may give some encouragement
to us in our way; but no testimony of Providence is to be accepted against the
Word. If Scripture and Conscience tell you, such a way is sinful, you may not
venture upon it, how many opportunities and encouragements soever Providence
may suffer to offer themselves to you, for they are only permitted for your
Trial, not your encouragement: Take this therefore for a sure Rule, That no
Providence can legitimate, or justify any moral evil. Nor will it be a plea
before God for any man to say, The Providence of God gave me encouragement to
do it, though the Word gave me none. If therefor in doubtful cases, you would
discover Gods will, govern your selves in your search after it by these Rules.

Get the true fear of God upon your hearts, The secret of the Lord is with them
that fear him, and he will show them his Covenant.

Word more, and the concerns and interests of the World less. The Word is a
light to your feet, Psalm. 119. 105. (i. e.) it has a discovering and directive
usefulness as to all duties to be done, and dangers to be avoided: it is the
great Oracle at which you are to enquire: treasure up its rules in your hearts,
and you will walk safely, Psalm. 119. 11. thy word have I hid in my heart that I
might not sin against thee.

Joh. 7. 17. If any man do his will he shall know of the doctrine. Psalm. 111.
10. A good understanding have all they that do thereafter.

Ezra, chap. 8. 21. Then I proclaimed a fast there at the river Ahava, that we
might afflict our selves before our God, to seek of him a right way for us, and
for our little ones, and for all our substance.

^ad the ^^cure ^sxts^ Provi^^nce ^^th the ^^mment (...) the ^^rd, and (...)
cannot ^ake a ^se inter^^^etation (...) them.
and no farther. There is no use to be made of Providence against the word, but
in subserviency to it. And there are two excellent uses of Providence in
subserviency to the word. (1.) Providence as they follow Promises and Prayer
are Evidences of God's faithfulness in their Accomplishment. When David
languished under a disease, and his Enemies began to triumph in the hopes of
his downfall; he prays, Psalm. 41. 10. that God would be merciful to him, and
raise him up; and by that, he says, he knew the Lord favored him, because his
Enemy did not triumph over him, ver. 11. this Providence he looked upon as a
token for good, as elsewhere he calls it, Psalm. 86. 17. And (2.) Providence
give us loud calls to those duties which the Command lays upon us, and tell us
when we are actually and presently under the obligation of the Commands as to
the performance of them. Thus when sad Providence befall the Church or our
selves, they call us to humiliation; and let us know that then the command upon
us to humble our selves at the feet of God is in force upon us, Micah 6. 9. The
Lords voice cries to the City, and the man of wisdom shall see thy name, hear
the rod, and who has appointed it. The Rod has a voice; and what does it
speak? Why now is the time to humble your selves under the mighty hand of God.
This is the day of trouble in which God has bid you to call upon him. And ^
contra, when comfortable Providence refresh us, it now informs us, this is the
time to rejoice in God according to the rule, Eccles. 7. 14. in the day of
prosperi^y be joyful. These precepts bind always, Prae^cepta a^^irmativa
obligant semper, non ad semper.
but not to always. It Is our duty therefore and our wisdom to distinguish
seasons, and know the proper duties of every season: and Providence is an Index
that points them out to us. Thus of the first Case.

The Second Case.
HOw may a Christian be supported in waiting upon God whilst Providence delays
the performance of the mercies to him for which he has long prayed and waited?

Two things are supposed in this Case.

(1.) That Providence may linger and delay the performance of those mercies to
us that we have long waited and prayed for. (2.) That during that delay and
suspension, our hearts and hopes may be very low, and ready to fail.


For the right understanding of this, know that there is a twofold term or
season fixed for the performance of mercy to us. One by the Lord our God, in
whose hand times and seasons are, Acts 1. 7. Another by our selves, who raise
up our own expectations of mercies sometimes merely through the eagerness of
our desires after them, and sometimes upon uncertain conjectural grounds and
appearances of encouragement that lie before us.

Now nothing can be more precise, certain and punctual, than is the performance
of mercy at the time and season which God has appointed, how long soever it
be, or how many obstacles soever lie in the way of it. There was a time
prefixed by God himself for the performance of that Promise of Israel's
deliverance out of Egypt; and it is said, Exodus 12. 41. At the end of the four
hundred and thirty years, even the self same day it came to pass, that all the
host of the Lord went out of the Land of Egypt. Compare this with Acts 7. 17.
and there you have the ground and reason why their deliverance was not, nor
could be delayed one day longer, because the time of the Promise was now come.
Promises like a pregnant woman must accomplish their appointed months, and when
they have so done, Providence will Midwife the mercies they go big withal into
the world, and not one of them shall miscarry.

But for the seasons which are of our own ^ixing and appointment, as God is not
tied to them, so his Providence are not governed by them: and hence are our
disappointments. We looked for peace, but no good came; for a time of health,
and behold trouble, Jer. 8. 15. And hereupon is it that we fret at the delays
of Providence, and suspect the faithfulness of God in their performance. But
his thoughts are not our thoughts, Isa. 55. 8. The Lord is not slack concerning
his promise as men count slackness, 2 Pet. 3. 9. It is slackness if you reckon
by our own rule and measure, but it is not so, if you reckon and count it by
God's. The Lord does not compute and reckon his seasons of working by our
Arithmetic, You have both these Rules compared, and the ground of our mistake
detected in that Scripture, Hab. 2. 3. The VisJon is yet for an appointed time,
but at the end it shall speak, and not lie: though it tarry, wait for it,
because it will surely come, it will not tarry.

God appoints the time: when that appointed time is come, the expected mercies
will not fail: But in the mean time, though it tarry (says the Prophet) wait
for it, for it will not tarry. Tarry, and not tarry, how shall this be
reconciled? The meaning is, it may tarry much beyond your expectatJon, but not
a moment beyond God's appointment.

Isa. 40. 13, 14. in the 13. verse you have God's faithful Promise, that he
will comfort his people, and have mercy upon his afflicted. Enough one would
think to raise and comfort their hearts. But the mercy promised was long in
coming, they waited from year to year, and still the burden pressed them, and
was not removed. And therefore ver. 14. ZJon said, the Lord has forsaken me
and my Lord has forgotten me, q. d. It Is in vain to look for such a mercy, God
has no regard to us, we are out of his heart and mind, he neither cares for us
nor minds what becomes of us.

So it was with David, after God had made him such a Promise, and in the time
thereof so faithfully performed it, that never was mercy better secured to any
man; for they are called, the sure mercJes of David, Isa. 55. 3. yet Providence
delayed the accomplishment of them so long, and suffered such difficulties to
intervene, that he even despaires to see the accomplishment of them, but even
concludes God had forgotten him too, Psalm. 13. 1. How long will thou forget me,
O Lord, for ever? And what he speaks here by way of questJon, he elsewhere
turns into a positive conclusJon, Psalm. 116. 11. All men are Liars, I shall one
day perish by the hand of Saul. And the causes of these despondencies, and
sinkings of heart are partly from our selves, and partly form Satan. If we duly
examine our own hearts about it, we shall find that these sinkings of heart are

The immediate effects of unbelief. We do Psalm. 27. 13. I had fainted unless I
had belJeved. Faith is the only Cordial that relieves the heart against these
faintings and despondencies. Where this is wanting, or is weak, no wonder our
hearts sink at this rate, when discouragements are before us.

Our judging and measuring things by the rules Abraham had done so, in that
great trial of his faith, he had certainly lost his footing; but against hope,
(i. e.) against natural probability, he belJeved in hope, giving Glory to God,
Romans 4. 18. If Paul had done so, he had fainted under his trials, 2. Cor. 4.
16, 8, we faint not (says he) whilst we look not at the things that are seen,
q. d. That which keeps up our spirits, is our looking off from things present
and visible, and measuring all by another rule, viz. the power and fidelity of
God ^irmly engaged in the Promises.

Satan manages a design upon us. Hence he takes occasions to suggest hard
thoughts of God, and to beat off our Souls from all confidence in him, and
expectations form him. He is the great makebate betwixt God and the Saints. He
reports the difficulties and fears that are in our way with advantage, and
labors to weaken our hands, and discourage our hearts in waiting upon God. And
these suggestions gain the more credit with us, because they are confirmed and
attested by sense and feeling.

But here is a desperate design carrying on under very plausible pretenses
against our souls. It concerns us to be watchful now, and maintain our faith
and hope in God. Now blessed is he that can resign all to God, and quietly wait
for his salvation. To assist the soul in this difficulty, I shall offer some
farther help beside what has been formerly given under the first CautJon, page
158. in the following Considerations.

First Consideration. Consid.

Though Providence do not yet perform the mercies you wait for, yet you have no
ground to entertain hard thoughts of God; for it is possible God never gave you
any ground for your expectation of these things from him. It may be you have no
Promise to bottom your hope upon; and if so, why shall God be suspected and
dishonored by you in a case wherein his truth and faithfulness was never
engaged to you? If we are crossed in our outward concernments, and see our
expectations of prosperity dashed; if we see such or such an outward comfort
removed, from which we promised our selves much; why must God be accused for
this? these thing you promised yourselves: but where did God promise you
prosperity, and the continuance of those com^ortable things to you? produce his
Promise, and show wherein he has broken it. It is not enough for you to say,
There are general Promises in the Scripture, that God will withhold no good
thing, and these are good things which Providence withholds form you; for that
Promise, Psalm. 84. 11. has its limitations, it is expressly limited to such as
walk uprightly; and it concerns you to examine whether you have done so, before
you quarrel with Providence for nonperformance of it. Ah friend, search thine
own heart, reflect upon thine own ways; see thou not so many ^laws in thine
integrity, so many turnings aside from God, both in heart and life, that may
justice God, not only in withholding what thou look for, but in removing all
that thou enjoyest? And besides this limitation as to the Object, it is limited
(as all other promises relating to externals are) in the matter or things
premised by the Wisdom and Will of God, which is the only Rule by which they
are measured out to men in this World, (i.e.) such mercies in such proportions
as he sees needful and most conducible to your good; and these given out in
such times and seasons as are of his own-appointment, not yours.

God never came under an absolute unlimited ^ye for outward comforts to any of
us; and if we be disappointed, we can blame none but our selves. Who bid us
expect rest, ease, delight, and things of this kind in this world? He has
never told us, we shall be rich, healthy and at ease in our habitations; but on
the contrary, he has often told us, we must expect troubles in the world, John
16. 33. and that through many tribulatJons we must enter into his Kingdom, Acts
14. 22. All that he stands bound to us by Promise for, is to be with us in
trouble, Psalm. 91. 15. to supply our real and absolute needs, Isa. 41. 17. When
the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue fails for
thirst, I the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them;
and to sanctify all these Providence to our good at last, Romans 8. 28. All
things shall work together for good to them that love God. And as to all these
things not one tittle ever did, or shall fail.

Second Consideration. (...) Consid.

But it you say you have long waited upon God for spiritual mercies to your
souls according to the Promise, and still those mercies are deferred, and your
eyes fail whilst you look for them; I would desire you seriously to consider of
what kind those spiritual mercies are, for which you have so long waited upon
God. Spiritual mercies are of two sorts; such as belong to the Essence, the
very being of the new creature, without which it must fail: or to its well
being, and the comfort of the inner man; without which you cannot live so
cheerfully as you would. The mercies of the former kind are Absolutely
necessary, and therefore put into Absolute Promises, as you see, Jer. 32. 40.
And I will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will not turn away
from them to do them good, but I will put my fear in their hearts, that they
shall not depart from me. But for the rest they are dispensed to us in such
measures, and at such seasons as the Lord sees fit, and many of his own people
live for a long time without them. The donation and continuation of the Spirit,
to quicken, sanctify and unite us with Christ is necessary, but his joys and
comforts are not so. A Child of light may walk in darkness, Isa. 50. 10. He
lives by faith, and not by feeling.

Third Consideration. 3. Consid.

You complain, Providence delays to perform to you the mercies you have prayed
and waited for; but have you right ends in your desires after these mercies? It
may be that is the cause, you ask and receive not, James 4. 3. The want of a
good aim, is the reason why we want good success in our prayers. It may be we
pray for prosperity, and our end is to please the flesh; we look no higher than
the pleasure and accommodation of the flesh; we beg and wait for deliverance
from such a trouble and affliction, not that we might be the more expedite and
prepared for obedience, but freed of what is grievous to us, and destroys our
pleasure in the world.

Certainly if it be so, you have more need to judge and condemn your selves,
than to censure and suspect the care of God.

Fourth Consideration. 4. Consid.

You wait for good, and it comes not; but is your will brought to a due
submission to the Will of God about it? Certainly God will have you come to
this before you enjoy your desires. Enjoyment of your desires is the thing that
will please you, but resignation of your wills, is that which is pleasing to
God: if your hearts cannot come to this, mercies cannot come to you. David was
made to wait long for the mercy promised him, yea, and to be content without it
before he enjoyed it, Psalm. 131. 2 he was brought to be as a weaned Child, and
so must you.

Fifth Consideration. 5. Consid.

Your betters have waited long upon God for mercy, and why should not you?
David waited till his eyes failed, Psalm. 69. 3 The Church waited for him in the
way of his judgments, Isa. 26. 8. Are you better than all the Saints that are
gone before you? Is God more obliged to you than to all his people? They have
quietly waited, and why should not you?

Sixth Consideration. 6. Consid.

Will you lose any thing by patient waiting upon God for mercies? Certainly,
not at all: Yea, it will turn to a double advantage to you to continue in a
quiet submissive waiting posture upon God. For, (1.) Though you do not yet
enjoy the good you wait for, yet all this while you are exercising your Grace;
and it is more excellent to act Grace, than to enjoy comfort. All this while the
Lord is training you up in the exercise of faith and patience, and bending your
wills in submission to himself; and what do you lose by that? Yea, and (2.)
When ever the desired mercy comes, it will be so much the sweeter to you: for,
look how much faith and prayer has been employed to produce it, how many
wrestlings you have had with God for it, so many more degrees of sweetness you
will ^ind in it, when it comes. O therefore, ^aint not, how long soever God
delay you.

Seventh Consideration. 7. Consi^^

Are not those mercies you expect from God worth the waiting for? If not, it is
your folly to be troubled for the want of them: If they be, why don't you
continue waiting? Is it not all that God expects from you for the mercies he
bestows upon you, that you wait upon him for them? You know you have not
deserved the least of them at his hands. You expect them not as a recompense,
but a free favor, and if so, then certainly the least you can do, is to wait
upon his pleasure for them.

Eighth Consideration. 8. Consid*

Consider how many Promises are made in the Word to waiting souls. One
Scripture calls them blessed that wait for him, Isa. 30. 18. Another tells us,
none that wait for him shall be ashamed, Psalm. 25. 3. ( i.e.) they shall not be
finally disappointed, but at last be partakers of their hopes. A third
Scripture tells us, they that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength,
Isa. 40. 31. a Promise you had need make much use of in such a fainting time,
with many more of like nature; and shall we faint at this rate in the midst of
so many cordials as are prepared to revive us in these Promises?

Ninth Consideration. Consid.

How long has God waited upon you when you will comply with his commands, come
up to your engagements and promises? You have made God wait long for your
reformation and obedience; and therefore have no reason to think it much, if
God make you wait long for your consolation. We have our How longs, and has
not God his? We cry, Psalm. 6. 3. But thou O Lord, how long? Psalm. 13. 1, 2. How
long will thou forget me, O Lord, for ever? How long will thou hide thy face
from me? How long shall I take counsel in my soul, having sorrow in my heart
daily? How long shall mine enemy be exalted over me? ^ut surely we should not
think these things long, when we consider, how long the Lord has exercised his
patience about us. We have made him say, How long, how long? Our unbelJef has
made him cry, How long will it be ere they belJeve me? Numb. 14. 11. Our
corrupt hearts have made him cry, How long shall vain thoughts lodge within
thee? Jer. 4. 14. Our impure natures and ways have made him cry, How long will
it be ere they attain to innocence? Hosea 8. 5. If God wait upon you with so
much patience for your duties, well may you wait upon him for his mercies.

Tenth Consideration. 10. Con^.

This impatience and infidelity of yours, expressed in your weariness to wait any
longer, as it is a great evil in it self, so very probably it is that evil
which obstructs the way of your expected mercies: you might have your mercies
soo^er, if your spirits were quieter and more submissive.

And thus of the Second Case.

The Third Case.
HOw may a Christian discern when a Providence is sanctified, and comes from
the love of God to him?

There are two sorts or kinds of Providence versant about men in this world,
the issues and events of which are vastly different, yea, contrary to each
other.

To some all Providence are overruled and Romans 8. 28. not only things that
are good in themselves, as Ordinances, Graces, Duties and Mercies; but things
that are evil in themselves, as Temptations, Afflictions, and even their Sins
and Corruptions shall turn in the issue to their advantage and benefit. (...)
though sin be so intrinsecally and formally evil in its own nature, that in it
self it be not capable of sanctification; yet out of this worst of evils God
can work good to his people; and though he never make sin the Instrument of
good; yet his Providence may make it the occasJon of good to his people; so
that spiritual benefits may by the wise overruling of Providence be occasioned
to the people of God by it.

And so for afflictions of all kinds, the greatest and sorest of them; they do
work in the influence of Providence a great deal of good to the Saints, and
that not only as the occasions, but as the Instruments and means of it, Isa.
27. 9. by this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, (i. e.) by the
instrumentality of this sanctified affliction.

Psalm. 109. 7. The Ordinances are the savor of Death, 2 Cor. 2. 16. The Grace
of God turned into wantonness, Jude v. 4. Christ himself a rock of Offense, 1
Pe. 2. 8. Their Table a snare, Psalm. 69. 22. Their Prosperity their ruin,
Prove. 1. 32. As persons are, so things work for good or evil. Tit. 1. 15. To
the pure all things are pure, but to them that are defiled and unbelJeving is
nothing pure.

Seeing therefore the Events of Providence fall out so opposite to each other
upon the Godly, and Ungodly; every thing farthering the eternal good of the
one, and the ruin of the other; it cannot but be acknowledged a most important
case in which every Soul is deeply concerned, whether the Providence under
which he is, be sanctified to him or no?

For the clearing of which I shall premise two necessary Considerations, and
then subjoyn the Rules which will be useful for the determination of the
question.

And first, Let it be considered, that we cannot all things come alike to all;
and no man knows either love or hatred by all the things that are before him.
Eccles. 9. 1, 2. We cannot understand* the mind and heart of God, by the things
he dispenses with his hand. If prosperous Providence befall us, we cannot
say, Herein is a sure sign that God loves me; for who have more of those
Providence than the people of his wrath? Psalm. 73. 7. They have more than
their hearts can wish. Sure that must be a weak Evidence for Heaven, which
accompanies so great a part of the world to Hell. By these things we may
testify our love to God; but from ten thousand such enjoyments we cannot get
any solid assurance of his love to us.

And from adverse afflictive Providence we cannot know his hatred. If
afflictions, great afflictions, many afflictions, long continued afflictions
should set a brand, or fix a Character of Gods hatred upon the persons on whom
they ^all; where then shall we find Gods people in the world? We must then seek
out the proud vain sensual wantons of the world, who spend their days in
pleasure, and say these are the men whom God loves*

Outward things are promiscuously dispensed, and no man's spiritual estate is
discernable by the view of his temporal. When God draws the Sword, it may cut
off the righteous as well as the wicked, Ezekiel. 21. 3.

materJally considered afford no evidence of Gods love to us, yet the manner in
which they befall us, and the effects and fruits they produce in us, do
distinguish them very manifestly; and by them we may discern whether they be
sanctified Providence, and fruits of the love of God, or no. But yet these
effects and fruits of Providence by which we discern their nature, do not
always presently appear; but time must be allowed for the souls exercise under
them. As it is Heb. 12. 11. Now no affliction for the present seems joyous,
but grJevous: nevertheless afterward it yJeldeth the peaceable fruits of
Righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby.

The benefit of a Providence is discerned as that of a medicine is, for the
present it gripes, and makes the stomach sick and loathing; but afterward we
find the benefit of it in our recovery of health and cheerfulness. Now the
Providence of God being some of them comfortable, and others sad and grievous
to nature, and the way to discern the sanctification and blessing of them,
being by the manner in which they come and their operations upon our spirits; I
shall consider the case as it respects both sorts of Providence, and show you
what effects of our troubles or comforts will speak them to be sanctified and
blessed to us.

And first for sad and afflictive Providence in

They come in a proper season, when we have Pet. 1. 6. if need be, ye are in
heaviness. Certainly, it is a good sign that God designs your good by those
troubles which are so fitted and wisely ordered to ni^k the opportunity. If you
see the Husbandman lopping a tree in the proper Season, it argues he aims at
the fruitfulness and flourishing of it; but to do the same thing at Midsummer
speaks no regard to it, yea, his design to destroy it.

When they are fitted both for quality and degree
it is usual with God to smite us in those very comforts which stole away too
much of the love and delight of our souls from God: to cross us in those things
from which we raised up too great expectatio^s of comfort. These Providence
speak the jealousy of God over us, and his care to prevent far worse evils by
these sad but needful strokes. And so for the degrees of our troubles,
sanctified strokes are ordinarily fitted by the wisdom of God to the strength
and ability of our inherent grace, Isa. 17. 8. in measure when it shoots
forth thou will debate with it: he stays his rough wind in the day of the
east wind. It is an AllusJon to a PhysicJan who exactly weighs and measures all
the ingredients which he mingles in a potion for his sick patient; that it may
be proportionate to his strength and no more: and so much the next words
intimate, by this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged.

Rev. 16. 9. They were scorched with great heat, and blasphemed the name of
God, which has power over these plagues. But Godly men to whom afflictions are
sanctified, they justify God, and fall out with sin, they condemn themselves
and give glory to God, Dan. 9. 7. O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee,
but unto us confusJon of faces, etc. And Lam. 3. 39. ^Wherefore does a living
man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins? Happy afflictions which
make the Soul fall out and quarrel only with sin.

out the vanity of the Spirit. So you read, Dan. 11. 35. it purifies and makes
their Souls white: Hence it is compared to a furnace which separates the dross
from the pure metal, Isa. 48. 10. Behold I have refined thee, but not with
Silver: I have chosen thee in the furnace of afflictJon. But for wicked men,
let them be never so long in the Furnace, they lose no dross, Ezekiel. 24. 6. How
many Christians can bear witness to this truth! After some sharp affliction
has been upon them, how is the earthliness of their hearts purged! they see no
beauty, taste no more relish in the world than in the white of an Egg. Oh how
serious, humble, and heavenly are they, till the impressions made upon them by
afflictions be worn off, and their deceitful lusts have again entangled them!
And this is the reason* why we are so often under the discipline of the rod.
Let a Christian (says a late writer) be but two or three years without an
affliction, and he is almost good for nothing: he cannot pray, nor meditate,
nor discourse at that rate he was wont to do: but when a new affliction comes,
now he can find his tongue, and come to his knees again, and live at another
rate.

It is a good sign afflictive Providence are turn to him that smites us. A
wicked man under affliction revolts more and more, Isa. 1. 5. turns not to him
that smites him, Isa. 9. 13. but grows worse than before; formality is turned
into stupidity and dedolency.

But if God afflict his own people with a sanctified rod, it awakens them to a
more earnest seeking of God: it makes them pray more frequently, spiritually
and fervently than ever. When Paul was buffeted by Satan, he besought the Lord
thrice, 2 Cor. 12. 8.

All this is come upon us: yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we
dealt falsely in thy Covenant* our heart is not turned back, neither have our
steps declined from thy way: though thou have sore broken us in the place of
Dragons, and covered us with the shadow of Death, Psalm. 44. 17, 18, 19. Here
you have a true account of the temper and frame of a gracious soul under
greatest afflictions. To be broken in the place of Dragons and covered with the
shadow of death imports the most dismal state of affliction: yet even then a
gracious heart turns not back ( i. e.) does not for all this abate one dram
of love to God: God is as good and dear to him in afflictions as ever.

divine teachings accompany them to our souls, Psalm. 94. 12. Blessed is the man
whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teach him out of thy law. Sanctified
afflictions are eye salve, they teach us sensibly and effectually when the
Spirit accompanies them; the evil of sin, the vanity of the creature, the
necessity of securing things that cannot be shaken. Never does a Christian take
a truer measure both of his corruptions and graces, than under the rod. Now a
man sees that ^ilthiness that has been long contracting in prosperity, what
interest the Creature has in the heart, how little faith, patience,
resignation, and self-denial we can find, when God calls us to the exercise of
them. O it is a blessed sign, that trouble is sanctified, that makes a man thus
turn in upon his own heart, search it, and humble himself before the Lord for
the evils of it!

IN the next place let us take into consideration

First Negative.
It is a sign, that comfort is not sanctified to us, The wicked boasts of hi^
hearts desire, and blesses the covetous whom the Lord abhors. The wicked
through the pride of his countenance will (...) s^^k after God; God is not in
all his thoughts, Psalm. 10. 3, 4. Here you see Providence may give men their
hearts desire, and yet they never once open their desires to God in prayer
about it. But then those gifts of Providence are only such as are bestowed on
the worst of men, and are not the fruits of love.

medJums, and indirect courses, are not sanctified mercies to them. This is not
the method in which those mercies are bestowed. Better is a little with
righteousness, than great revenews without right, Prove. 16. 8. better upon this
account, that it comes in Gods way, and with his blessing, which never follows
the way of sin. God has cursed the ways of sin, and no blessing can follow
them.

Whatever prosperity and success makes men forget God, and cast off the care of
duty, is not sanctifJed to them. It is unsanctifJed prosperity which lulls men
asleep into a deep oblivJon of God, Deuteronomy. 32. 13, 14, 15, 18. He made him ride
on the high places of the earth, that he might eat the increase of the fields;
and he made him to suck honey out of the rock, and oil out of the flinty rock,
butter of Kine, and milk of Sheep, with fat of Lambs, and rams of the breed of
Bashan, and Goats, with the fat of kidneys of wheat, and thou did drink the
pure blood of the grape; but Iesurun waxed fat and kicked; thou art waxed fat,
thou art grown thick, thou art covered with fatness: then he forsook God which
made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his Salvation. Of the Rock that
begat thee thou art unmindful, and have forgotten God that formed thee. Rare
fumant foelicibus arae.

When prosperity is abused to sensuality, and merely serves as fuel to
maintains fleshly lusts, it is not sanctifJed. See Job 21. 11, 12, 13. They
send forth their little ones like a flock, and their Children dance. They take
the Timbrell and Harp, and rejoice at the sound of the Organ. They spend their
days in wealth, and in a moment go down to the grave.

It Is a sign that prosperity is not sanctifJed to men, when it swells the heart
with pride and self-conceitedness, Dan. 4. 29, 30. At the end of twelve months
he walked in the Palace of the Kingdom of Babylon. The King spoke and said, Is
not this great Babylon that I have built for the house of the Kingdom, by the
might of my power, and for the honor of my Majesty?

That success is not sanctified to men, which O generatJon, see the Word of the
Lord; have I been a Wilderness unto Israel? a land of darkness? Wherefore say
my people, We are Lords, we will come no more unto thee?

Nor can we think that prosperity sanctifJed, which wholly swallows up the
souls of men in their own enjoyments, and makes them regardless of public
miserJes or sins, Amos 6. 4, 5, 6. They lie upon beds of Ivory, and stretch
themselves upon their couches, and eat the lambs out of the flock, and the
calves out of the midst of the stall. They chant to the sound of the Viol, and
invent to themselves Instruments of music like David. They drink wine in
bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief ointments; but they are not grieved
for the afflictions of Joseph.

But then Positively.
And Jacob said, I am not worthy of the least of all the mercJes, etc.

Ezra 9. 13. they are so many bands of restraint upon the soul that has them,
to make them shun sin.

Psalm. 18. 1. compared with the Title.

Esteeming the reproach, of Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt:
for he had respect unto the recompense of the reward.

Nehem. 2. 1, 2, 3. compared with Acts 7. 23.

It Is a sure sign that mercJes are sanctifJed, when they make the soul more
expedite and enlarged for God in duty, 2 Chronicles. 17. 5, 6. Therefore the Lord
stablished the Kingdom in his hand, and all Judah brought to Iehoshaphat
presents, and he had riches and honor in abundance. And his heart was lift up
in the ways of the Lord, etc.

carries its own testimonials with it, that it came from the love of God, and
is a sanctified mercy to the soul.

And so much of this Third Case.

The Fourth Case.
HOw may we attain unto an evenness and steddiness of spirit under the Changes,
and contrary Aspects of Providence upon us?

Three things are supposed in this Case.

1. That Providence has various and contrary Aspects upon the people of God.
2. That it is a common thing with them, to experience great disorders of spirit
under those Changes of Providence. 3. That these disorders may be (at least in
a great measure) prevented, by the due use and application of those rules and
helps that God has given us in such Cases.
That Providence has various, yea, contrary He increases the NatJons, and
destroys them; he enlarges the NatJons, and straitneth them again, Job 12.
23. The same it does with persons, Psalm. 102. 10. Thou have lifted me up, and
cast me down. See what a sad Alteration Providence made upon the Church, Lam.
1. 1, 12. How does the City sit solitary that was full of people! How is she
become as a Widow! She that was great among the NatJons, and Princess among the
Provinces, how is she become tributary! Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass
by? Behold and see, if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow, which is done
unto me, wherewith the Lord has afflicted me in the day of his fJerce anger.
And how great an Instance was Joh of this truth, Job 29. per tot. and 30.
compared? How many thousands have complained with Naomi, whose condition has
been so strangely altered, that others have said as the people of Bethlehem did
of her, Is this Naomi? Ruth 1. 19, 20, 21.

heat and cold try the strength and soundness of the constitution of our
bodies, so the alteratJons made by Providence upon our conditions, try the
strength of our graces; and too often discover the weakness and corruption of
holy men. HezekJah was a good man; but yet his weakness and corruption was
bewrayed by the alterations Providence made upon his conditions. When sickness
and pains summoned him to the grave, what bitter complaints and despondencies
are recorded? in Isa. 38. per tot. and when Providence lifted him up again into
a prosperous condition, what ostentation and vain glory did he discover? Isa.
39. 2. David had more than a common stock of inherent grace, yet not enough to
keep him in an equal temper of spirit under great alterations, Psalm. 30. 6, 7.
In my prosperity I said I shall never be moved; thou hidest thy face and I was
troubled. It is not every man can say with Paul, I know both how to be abased,
and I know how to abound every where, and in all things I am instructed both to
be full, and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need, Phil. 4. 12. He
is truly rich in grace, whose riches or poverty neither hinders the acting, nor
impoverisheth the stock of his graces.

Though the best men be subject to such disorders

Now, these helps are suited to a threefold Aspect of Providence upon us: viz.

1. Comfortable, 2. Calamitous, 3. Doubtful.
To all which I shall speak particularly and briefly.

Quest. 1. Quest. 1.

HOw may we attain to an Evenness and Steddiness of heart under the comfortable
Aspects of Providence upon us?

Under Providence of this kind, the great danger is, lest the heart be lifted
up with pride and vanity, and fall into a drowsy and remiss temper. To prevent
this, we had need urge humbling and awakening Considerations upon our own
hearts; such are these that follow.

First Consideration. ^. Consid.

These gifts of Providence are common to the worst of men, and are no special
distinguishing fruits of Gods love. The vilest of men have been filled even to
satiety with these things, Psalm. 73. 7. Their eyes stand out with fatness: they
have more than heart could wish.

Second Consideration. ^. Consid.

Think how unstable and changeable all these things are. What you glory in to
day, may be none of yours to morrow, Prove. 23. 5. Riches make themselves wings,
and flee away as an Eagle toward Heaven. As the Wings of a Fowl grow out of
the substance of its body, so the cause of the Creatures transitoriness is in
it self: It Is subjected to vanity, and that vanity, like Wings, carries it
away: they are but fading flowers, James, 1. 10.

Third Consideration. ^. Consid.

The Change of Providence is never nearer to the people of God, than when
their hearts are lifted up, or grown secure by prosperity. Does HezekJah glory
in his Treasures? The next news he hears, is of an impoverishing Providence at
hand, Isa. 39. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Others may be left to perish in unsanctified
Prosperity, but you shall not.

Fourth Consideration. 4. Consid.

This is a great discovery of the Carnality and corruption that is in thy
heart: it argues an heart little set upon God, little mortified to the world,
little acquainted with the vanity and ensnaring nature of these things. O you
know not what hearts you have, till such Providence try them. And is not such
a discovery matter of deep humiliation?

Fifth Consideration. 5. Consid.

Was it not better with you in a low condition, than it is now? Reflect, and
compare state with state, and time with time. How is the frame of your hearts
altered with the alteration of your condition? So God complains of Israel,
Hosea 13. 5, 6. I did know thee in the Wilderness, the land of drought;
according to their pasture, so were they filled: they were filled, and their
heart was exalted, therefore have they forgotten me says the Lord: q. d. You
and I were better acquainted formerly when you were in a low condition;
Prosperity has estranged you, and altered the case. How sad is it, that Gods
mercies should be the occasion of our estrangement from him?

Quest. 2. Quest. 2.

UPon the other side, it is worth considering how our hearts may be established
and kept steady under Ca^amitous and adverse Providence.

Here we are in equal danger of the other Extreme, viz. despondency and sinking
under the frowns and strokes of cross Providence. Now to support and establish
the heart in this case, take three helps.

First Consideration. 1. Consid.

First, Consider, That afflictive Providence are of great use to the people of
God, they cannot live without them. The Earth does not more need chastening
frosts, and mellowing snows, than our hearts do nipping Providence. Let the
best Christian be but a few years without them, and he will be sensible of the
need of them; he will find a sad remissJon and declining upon all his graces.

Second Consideration. 2. Consid.

No stroke of Calamity upon the people of God, can separate them from Christ,
Romans 8. 35. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall TribulatJon?
There was a time when Job could call nothing in this world but trouble his own:
he could not say, my Estate, my Honor, my Health, my Children; for all these
were gone; yet then he could say, my Redeemer, Job 19. 25. Well then, there is
no cause to sink whilst Interest in Christ remains sure to us.

Third Consideration. 3. Consid*

All your calamities will have an end shortly. The longest day of the Saints
troubles has an end; and then, no more troubles for ever. The troubles of the
wicked will be to Eternity; but you shall suffer but a while, 1 Pet. 5. 10. If
a thousand troubles be appointed for you, they will come to one at last, and
after that no more: Yea, and though our troubles be but for a moment, yet they
work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Let that support
your hearts under all your sufferings.

Quest. 3. Quest. ^

LAstly, Let us consider, what may be useful to support and quiet our hearts
under doubtful Providence, when our dear concernments hang in a doubtful
suspense before us, and we know not which way the Providence of God will cast
and determine them.

Now the best hearts are apt to grow solicitous and pensive, distracted with
thoughtfulness about the event and issue. To relieve and settle us in this
case, the following Considerations are very useful.

First Consideration. ^. Consid.

First, Let us consider the vanity and inutility of such a solicitude, Matthew.
6. 27. Which of you (says our Lord) by taking thought can add one Cubit? We
may break our peace, and waste our Spirits, but not alter the Case. We cannot
turn God out of his way, Job 23. 13. He is in one mind. We may by struggling
against God increase, but not avoid or lighten our troubles.

Second Consideration. ^. Consid.

How often do we afflict and torment our selves by our own unquiet thoughts,
when there is no real cause or ground for so doing? Isa. 51. 13. -- And have
feared continually every day, because of the fury of the oppressor, as if he
were ready to destroy, and where is the fury of the oppressor? O what abundance
of disquiet and trouble might we prevent, by waiting quietly till we see the
issues of Providence, and not bringing as we do the evils of the morrow upon
the day?

Third Consideration. ^. Consid.

How great a ground of quietness is it that the whole dispose and management of
all our affairs and concerns is in the hand of our own God and Father? No
Creature can touch us without his commission or permission. I know (says
Christ) thou could have no power against me, except it were given thee from
above, John 19. 11. Neither Men nor Devils can act any thing without Gods
leave; and be sure he will sign no order to your prejudice.

Fourth Consideration. 4. Consi^*

How great satisfaction must it be to all that believe the Divine Authority of
the Scripture, that the faith^ulness of God stands engaged for every line and
syllable found therein? And how many blessed lines in the Bible may we mark,
that respect even our outward concerns, and the happy issue of them all? Upon
these two grounds, viz. that our outward concerns with their steady direction
to a blessed end is ^ound in the Word; and this Word being of Divine Authority,
the faithfulness and honor of God stands good for every Title that is found
there. I say these are grounds of such stability, that our minds may repose
with greatest security and confidence upon them even in the cloudiest day of
trouble. Not only your eternal salvation, but your temporal Interests are there
secured. Be quieted therefore in the confidence of a blessed issue.

Fifth Consideration. 5. Consid*

How great and sure an expedient have the Saints ever found it to their own
peace, to commit all doubtful issues of Providence to the Lord, and devolve all
their cares upon him, Prove. 16. 3. Commit thy works unto the Lord, and thy
thoughts shall be established. By Works he means any doubtful, intricate,
perplexing business* about which our thoughts are rackt and tortured. Roll all
these upon the Lord by faith, leave them with him, and the present immediate
benefit you shall have by it (besides the comfort in the last issue) shall be
tranquillity and peace in your thoughts. And who is there of any standing or
Experience in Religion that has not found it so?

The Fifth Case.
HOw may a Christian work his heart into a resigning frame unto the will of
God; when sad Providence approach him, and presage great troubles and
afflictions coming on toward him?

For the right stating and resolving of this important case, it will be needful
to show (1.) What is not included and intended in the Question. (2.) What it
does suppose and include in it, and lastly, what helps and directions are
necessary for the due performance of this great and difficult duty.

First, Negatively.
As to the first, It must be premised that the Question does not suppose the
heart or will of a Christian to be at his own command and dispose in this
matter: we cannot resign it, and subject it to the will of God whenever we
desire so to do: the duty indeed is ours, but the power by which alone we
perform it is Gods: We act as we are acted by the Spirit. It is with our
hearts* as with me^eors hanging in the air* by the influence of the Sun; while
that continues they abide above, but when it fails they fall to the earth: We
can do this, and all things else be they never so difficult, through Christ
that strengthens us, Phil. 4. 13. But without him we can do nothing, John 15.
5. he does not say, without me ye can do but little, or without me ye can do
nothing but with great difficulty, or without me ye can do nothing perfectly;
but without me ye can do nothing at all. And every Christian has a witness in
his own breast to attest this truth: for there are cases frequently occurring
in the methods of Providence, in which notwithstanding all their prayers and
desires, all their reasonings and strivings, they cannot quiet their hearts
fully in the dispose; and will of God; but on the contrary do find all their
endeavors in this matter, to be but as the rolling of a returning stone
against the Hill: till God say to the heart be still, and to the will give up,
nothing can be done.

Secondly, Affirmatively.
Next, Let us consider what this case does suppose, and include in it, and we
shall find

That it supposes the people of God to have surprizals upon us: but often times
we have forewarnings of trouble^ both public and personal, before we feel
them: as the weather may be discerned by the ^ace of the Sky, when we see a
morning Sky red and lowering, this is a natural sign of a foul and rainy day,
Matthew. 16. 3. and there are as certain signs of the times, whereby we may
discern when trouble is near, even at the door: And these forewarnings are
given by the Lord to awaken us to our duties, by which they may either be
prevented, Zeph. 2. 1, 2. or sanctified and sweetened to us when they come.
These signs and notices of approaching troubles are gathered partly from the
observatJon and collation of parallel Scripture cases and examples, God
generally holding one tenor and steady course in the administrations of his
Providence in all ages, 1 Cor. 10. 6. partly from the ReflectJons Christians
make upon the frames and tempers of their own hearts, which greatly need
awakening, humbling and purging Providence. For let a Christian be but a few
years or months without a rod, and how formal, earthly, dead and vain, will his
heart grow? And such a temper presages affliction to them that are beloved of
the Lord, as really as the giving or sweating of the stones does rain. Lastly,
The ordering and disposing of the next causes into a posture and preparation
for our trouble, plainly premonisheth us that trouble is at the door. Thus when
the symptoms of sickness begin to appear upon our own bodies, the wi^e of our
bosom, or our children that are as our own souls, Providence herein awakens
our expectations of death and doleful separations: so when enemies combine
together and plot the ruin of our liberties, estates, or lives, and God
seems to loose the bridle of restraint upon their necks, now we cannot but be
alarmed with the near approach of troubles, especially when at the same time
our conscience shall reflect upon the abuse and non-improvement of these our
threatened comforts.

The case before us supposes, that these premonitions

Ah how unwilling are we to surrender to the Lord the Loan which he lent us! to
be disquieted by troubles when at ease in our enjoyments! How unwelcome are the
messengers of affliction to the best men! we are ready to say to them as the
Widow to Elijah, What have I to do with thee, O man (O messenger) of God, art
thou come unto me to call my sin to remembrance, and to slay my Son? 1 King.
17. 18. And this arises partly from the remains of corruption in the best
souls, for though every sanctified person is come by his own consent into the
Kingdom, and under the government and Scepter of Christ, and every thought of
his heart de jure, and of right must be subjected to him, 2 Cor. 10. 5. yet de
facto the conquest and power of grace is but incomplete and in part, and
natural corruption like Jerob^am with his vain men rises up against it, and
^auseth many mutinies in the soul, whilst grace like young Abijah is weak
handed, and cannot resist them. And partly from the advantage Satan makes upon
the season to irritate and assist our corrupt^ons: he knows that which is
already in motion, is the more easily moved. In this confusion and hurry of
thoughts he undiscernedly shuffles in his temptations. Sometimes aggravating
the evils which we fear with all the sinking and overwhelming circumstances
imaginable. Sometimes divining and fore-casting such events and evils, as
(happily) never fall out. Sometimes repining at the disposes of God as more
severe to us than others. And sometimes reflecting with very unbelieving and
unworthy thoughts upon the promises of God, and his faithfulness in them, by
all which the affliction is made to sink deep into the soul before it actually
comes. The thoughts are so disordered, that duty cannot be duly performed. And
the soul is really weakened, and disabled to bear its trial when it comes
indeed: just as if a man should be kept waking and restless all the night with
the thoughts of his hard journey which he must travel to morrow, and so when to
morrow is come, he faints for want of rest, midway his journey.

David in the like case and circumstances, 2 Samuel 15. 25, 26. And the King said
unto Zadock, carry back the Ark of God into the City. If I shall find favor in
the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me back again, and show me both it and his
habitatJon: but if he shall thus say, I have no delight in thee, behold here am
I, let him do to me as seems good to him.

O lovely and truly Christian temper! q. d. go Zadock, return with the Ark to
its place, though I have not the symbol, yet I hope I shall have the real
presence of God with me in this sad journey: how he will dispose the events of
this sad and doubtful Providence I know not: Either I shall return again to
Jerusalem, or I shall not: If I do, then I shall see it again, and enjoy the
Lord in his ordinances there. If I do not, then I shall go to that place where
there is no need or use of those things. And either way it will be well for me,
I am content to refer all to the divine pleasure, and commit the issue, be it
whatever it will be, to the Lord.

And till our hearts come to the like resolve, we can have no peace within.
Commit thy works unto the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be established, Prove.
16. 3. By works he means not only every enterprise and business we undertake,
but every puzzling, intricate, and doubtful event we fear. These being once
committed by an act of faith, and our wills resigned unto his, besides the
comfort we shall have in the issue, we shall have the present advantage of a
well composed, and peaceful Spirit.

But this resignation is the difficulty; no doubt of peace, could we once bring
our hearts to that. And therefore

I shall here subjoyn such helps and directions, as

First Help.
And first, Labor to work into your hearts a deep and fixed sense of the
infinite wisdom of God, and your own folly and ignorance. This will make
resignation easy to you: whatsoever the Lord does is by counsel, Ephesians. 1. 11.
his understanding is infinite, Psalm. 147. 5. his thoughts are very deep, Psalm.
92. 5. but as for man, yea the wisest among men, how little does his
understanding penetrate the works and designs of Providence? And how often are we
forced to retract our rash opinions, and confess our mistakes? acknowledging
that if Providence had not seen with better eyes than ours, and looked farther
than we did, we had precipitated our selves into a thousand mischiefs, which by
its wisdom and care we have escaped. It Is well for us that the seven eyes of
Providence are ever awake, and looking out for our good. Now if one creature
can and ought to be guided and governed by another that is more wise and
skilful than himself, as the ClJent by his learned Counsel, the PatJent by his
skilful PhysicJan, much more should every creature give up his weak reason, and
shallow understanding to the infinite wisdom of the omniscient God.

It Is nothing but our pride and arrogance overvaluing our own understandings
that makes resignation so hard. (...)
Carnal reason seems to it self a wise disputant about the concerns of the
flesh, but how often has Providence baffled it? The more humility, the more
resignation.

How few of our mercies and comforts have been foreseen by us? our own projects
have come to nothing, and that which we never thought on, or contrived has
taken place; not our choice of the ground, or skill in weighing and delivering
the Bowl, but some unforeseen Providence, like a rub in the Green was that
which made the cast.

Second Help.
Deeply consider the sinfulness and vanity of torturing your own thoughts about
the issues of doubtful Providence.

(1.) There is much sin in so doing: for, all our anxious and solicitous
emotions, what are they other than the immediate issues and fruits of pride and
unbelief? There is not a greater discovery of pride in the world, than in the
contests of our wills with the Will of God. It Is a presumptuous invading of
Gods Prerogative, to dictate to his Providence, and prescribe to his Wisdom.

(2.) There is a great deal of vanity in it: all the thoughtfulness in the
world will not make one hair white or black: all our discontents will not
prevail with God to call back (or as the word may be rendered) make void his
Word, Isa. 31. 2. he is in one mind, Job 23. 13. the thoughts of his mind are
from everlasting, Psalm. 33. 11.

Third Help.
Set before you those ch^ice Scripture patterns of s^bmission to the Lords Will
in as deep, yea, much deeper points of self-denial than this before you, and
shame your selves out of this quarrelling temper with Providence.

You know what a close trial that Providence was to Abraham, that called him
from his native Country and Fathers house, to go he knew not whither; and yet
it is said in Isa. 41. 2. he came to Gods foot, as readily obeying his call, as
a servant when his Master knocks for him with his foot.

Paul's voyage to Jerusalem, had a dismal aspect upon himself, he could expect
nothing but bonds and prisons, as he tells us, Acts 20. 23. and a great trial
it was to the Saints, who could not tell how to give up such a Minister, yet he
resigns up his will to Gods, Acts 20. 22. and so do they, Acts 21. 14. The Will
of the Lord be done.

But far beyond these, and all other patterns, what an example has our dear
Lord Jesus set before us in the deepest point of self-denial that ever was in
the world. When the Father gave the Cup of sufferings into his hands in the
garden, Mark 14. 36. a cup of wrath, the wrath of the great and terrible God,
and that without mixture: the very taste whereof, put Nature into an Agony and
astonishment, a sore amazement, a bloody sweat; and forced from him that
vehement and sad cry, Father, if it be possible, let this cup pass; yet still
with submission, nevertheless not my will, but thine be done. O blessed pattern
of obedience, and resignation to the pleasure of God! What is your case to this?

Fourth Help.
Study the singular benefits and advantages of a Will resigned up, and melted
into the Will of God.

(1.) Such a Spirit has a continual Sabbath within it self: the thoughts are
established, Prove. 16. 3. and truly, till a man come to this, he does but too
much resemble the Devil, who is a restless Spirit, secking rest, but finding
none.

It was an excellent expression of Luther, to one that was much perplexed in
his spirit about the doubtful events of some affairs of his that were then
depending: Dominus tua omnJa facJat, and tu nihil facJas, sed sis Sabbatum
Christi: (i. e.) The Lord shall do all for thee, and thou shall do nothing, but
be the Sabbath of Christ. It is by this means that the Lord gives his beloved
sleep, Psalm. 127. 2. he means not the sleep of the body, but of the Spirit.
Fideles (says One upon that place) etsi vitam agant laborJosam, composiris
tamen and tranquillis animis in fidei silentJo se continent, ac si dormirent:
(i. e.) Though believers live in the midst of many troubles here, yet with
quiet and composed minds they keep themselves in the silence of faith, as
though they were asleep.

(2.) Besides, it fits a man's spirit for communion with God in all his
afflictions, and this alleviates and sweetens them beyond any thing in the
world.

(3.) And surely a man is never nearer the mercy he desires, or the deliverance
he expects, (as One truly observes) than when his soul is brought into a
submissive temper. David was never nearer the Kingdom, than when he became as a
weaned Child.

Fifth Help.
Lastly, Think how repugnant an unsubmissive temper is both to your prayers and
professions.

You pray that the Will of God may be done on Earth as it is in Heaven, and yet
when it seems to cross your wills or interests, you struggle and fret against
it. You profess to have committed your souls to his keeping, and to leave your
eternal concerns in his hands; and yet cannot commit things infinitely less
valuable unto him. How contradictory are these things!

Your Profession as Christians, speaks you to be led by the Spirit, but this
practice speaks you to follow the perverse counsels of your own spirits. O then
regret no more, dispute no more, but lie down meekly at your Fathers feet, and
say in all cases and at all times, the Will of the Lord be done.

ANd thus I have through the Aid of Providence, performed what I designed to
speak from this Scripture. I acknowledge, my performances have been accompanied
with much weakness, yet have endeavored to speak of Providence the things that
are right. Blessed be the Lord, who has thus far assisted and protected me in
this work.

How Providence will dispose of my life, liberty and labors for time to come,
I know not, but I cheerfully commit all to him, who has hitherto performed all
things for me.

FINIS.
Postscript.
IN consideration of the great and mani^old advantages resulting from an humble
and heedful observation of Providence, I can not but judge it the concernment
of Christians that have time and ability for such a work, to keep written
Memorials, or Journals of Providence by them; for their own and others use and
benefit. For want of collecting and communicating such observations, not only
our selves, bu^ the Church of God is damnified and impoverished.

Some say, the Art of Medicine was thus acquired and perfected: when any one
had met with some rare Physical Herb, and accidentally discovered the virtues
of it, he would post it up in some public place; and so the Physi^Jan attained
his skill, by a Collection of those posted Experiments and Receipts.

I am not for posting up all that a Christian knows or meets with in his
Experience, for (as I have said before) Non est religJo, ubi omnJa pa^ent.
Religion does not lay all open; but yet there is a prudent, humble and
seasonable communication of our Experiences and observations of Providence,
which is exceeding beneficial both to our selves and our brethren.

If Christians in reading the Scriptures, would judiciously collect and record
the Providence they shall meet with there, and (if destitute of other helps)
but add those that have fallen out in their own time and experience; O what a
precious Treasure would these make? How would it antidote their souls against
the spreading Atheism of these days, and satisfy them, beyond what many other
Arguments can do, that The Lord he is God, the Lord he is God.

Whilst this Work was under my hand, I was both delighted and assisted by a
Pious and Useful Essay of an unknown Author, (...)
who has to very good purpose improved many Scriptural passages of Providence,
which seem to lie out of the road of common observation: Some passages I have
noted out of it, which have been sweet to me. And O that Christians would every
where set themselves to such work! Providence carries our lives, liberties and
concernments in its hand every moment. Your bread is in its Cupboard, your
money in its Purse, your safety in its enfolding Arms; and sure it is the least
part of what you owe, to record the favors you receive at its hands. More
parti^ularly,

(1.) Trust not your slippery memories with such a multitude of remarkable
passages of Providence as you have, and shall meet with in your way to Heaven.
It Is true, things that greatly affect us, are not easily forgotten by us; and
yet, how ordinary is it for new impressions to ra^e out former ones? It was a
saying of that Worthy man Dr. H^rris, My memory (said he) never failed me in
all my life; for indeed, I durst never trust it. Written memorials secure us
against that hazard; and besides, makes them useful to others when we are gone.
So that you carry not away all your treasure to heaven with you, but leave
these choice Legacies to your surviving friends. Certainly it were not so great
a loss, to lose your Silver, your Goods and Chattels, as it is to lose your
Experien^es which God has this way given you in this world.

(2.) Take heed of clasping up those rich treasures in a Book, and thinking it
enough to have noted them there: but have frequent recourse to them, as often as
new wants, ^ears or difficulties arise, and assault you. Now, it is seasonable
to consider and re^lect, Was I never so distress^^ before? Is this the first
plunge that ever befell me? Let me consider the days of old, the years of
a^cJent times, as Asaph did, Psalm. 77. 5.

(3.) Lastly, Beware of slighting former straits and d^ngers in comparison with
present ^nes. That which is next us, always appears greatest to us: and as
time removes us farther and farther from our former mercies or dangers, so they
lessen in our eyes, just as the Land from which they sail, does to Seamen.
Know that your dangers have been as great, and your fears no less formerly than
now. Make it as much your business, to preserve the sense and value, as the
memory of former Providence, and the fruit will be sweet to you.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A.
ABuse of Scripture punished by Providence, Page 28 Abuse of Providence
cautioned, 95, 96 AfflictJons preventive of sin, 99 AfflictJons restraints from
sin, 110 AfflictJons how they purge Corruption, 112 Adherence to creatures
checked, 117 AffectJons must suit Providence, 148 Afflictive Providence when
sancti^ied, 23^ Ambrose his providential relief, 9^ Andreas how called to the
Ministry, 80 AnticipatJons by Religion advantageous, 47 Assiduity of
providential care, 91 Aspects of Providence contrary, 247 AssocJatJon of
natural causes, 18, 19 Atheism checked by Providence, 174 Augustin's strange
deliverance, 24 Augustin's converting a Manichee, 63
B.
BArbarous Nations their sad state, 40, 41 Bible providentially mistaken, 63
Body its Elegant structure, 35, 36 Bol^on's Conversion, 61 Brethren their
different tempers, 10^ Bruens happy Marriage, 62
C.
CAllings ordered by Providence, 77, 7^ Callings sinful in themselves, 7^
Callings poor, some men's advantage, 82 CautJons about Civil Callings, 83, 84
Care of God to be eyed in Providence, 143 Christ has his hand six ways in
Providence, 187 Children settled providentially in Callings, 79 Childrens duties
pressed, 56, 57 CommunJon with God in Providence. Rules for it, and the
sweetness of it, 163 Committing to God quieting to us, 142 Complaints of
painful Callings answered, 81 Comparing Providence how melting, 194
CondescensJons of God admirable, 119, 120, 212 ConversJon two ways, 58, 59
ConversJon endears places and instruments, 57 ConversJon how great a mercy, 74,
75 Content under all Providence, 153 Crying to God what it imports, 4 Craft
sinful providentially defeated, 135 CurJosity in prying into Providence, 160,
161
D.
DAngers in extremity, 3 Dangers of death providentially prevented, 102
Dependence on Creatures checked by Providence, 116 Delays of Providence
relieved, 156, 157 Delays sink our hearts, 226, 227 Devil busy with dying
Christians, 206 DJana's shrines what they were, 78 Distrust not God in new
difficulties, 213 Dod's strange impulse, 98 Duty to advert Providence, 122
Dying hour sweetened by Providence, 205
E.
EAvenness of spirit how attained, 247 Embryoes their condition, 38
Encouragements to wait on God, 228, 229 Englands Encomium, 41* 46, 47
Epicureans why they denied Providence, 14 ExpectatJon from creatures dashed,
115, 116 Eye how guarded by nature, 102
F.
FAcultJes sound a choice Providence, 3^ Faithfulness of God eyed in
Providence, 14^ Faith two signal acts of it, 207 FamilJes providentially
assigned us, 49 Foresight of troubles how taken, 25^ Fox his wonderful relief,
9^
G.
GOd leaves not his in straits, 13^ God to be owned in all Providence, 21^
Good men's affections overheated, 11^ Greatness of God discovered, 11^
H.
HArmony of conjugal affections providential, 8^ Harmony of Gods attributes,
16^ Heavenly-mindedness in all providence, 15^ Heart how melted by Providence,
192, 19^ Heart balanced under prosperity, 25^ Heart cheered under sad
Providence, 25^ Heart quieted in doubtful Providence, 25^ Heart not under our
Command, 25^ Henry the Second punished by Providence, 2^ Holiness improved by
eying Providence, 20^
I.
IDJots the design of Providence in them, 37, 3^ Idle life a sinful life, 7^
Jewel's strange preservation, 10^ ^nterpositJons of Providence seasonable, 98
^nobservance of providence sinful, 125 ^ntroductive Providence remarkable, 130
^nstruments of Providence to be noted, 131 ^mmutability of God in changeable
Providence, 147 ^oy in God under all Providence, 149 ^nterest how best
secured, 142 ^unJus his Conversion how effected, 61
K.
KEepers converted by their prisoners, 164
L.
LIberality the best frugality, 141
M.
MArrJages the appointments of Providence, 86 Ministers removes ordered by
Providence, 66, 6^ MortificatJon promoted by Providence, 108, 109
N.
NAtural causes suspended by providence, 15, 16 Naaman's change how effected,
60 Nativity its place providentially ordered, 40, 41 Neighbourly Visits
improved by Providence, 63 Notes of attention why affixt to Providence, 123
O.
OBjectJons of Unbelief solved by Providence, 181 ObservatJons of Providence
matter of praise, 124 ObservatJons of Providence endear Christ, 187
O^colampadJus designed for a Merchant, 80 ObligatJons to duty from Providence,
212
P.
PArents godly what a mercy, 50, 51 Papists their doom, 43, 44 Parents
advantages opened, 52 Parents suffering from Children, 89 Pareus designed for
an Apothecary, 8^ Pleasures of a Christian in Providence, 1^ Places of sinning
places of suffering, ^ Pleasing God our interest, 2^ Persecutors baffled by
Providence, 21, ^ Pride checked by Providence, 114, 1^ Prayer must preface
business, 2 ^ Prayer furnished by Providence, 1^ Prosperity when sanctified, 2^
Prosperity when unsanctified, 2^ Providence working good out of evil, 1^
Providence pursues the Saints, 1^ Providence stops the way to sin, 2^
Providence must follow Scripture, 2^ Providence nicks the opportunity, 30, ^
Providence consonant to prayer, ^ Providence breaks AegyptJan reeds, 1^
Providence fails none that trust it, 138, 1^ ProvisJon for us and ours, what a
Providence, ^
Q.
QUJeting considerations under sad Providence, 1^ QuJeting arguments drawn
from Providence, 1^
R.
REcognitJons of Providence supports to faith, 1^ RecognitJons of Providence
must be full, 1^ Records to be kept of Providence, 9, ^ RelatJonal duties
pressed, 89, ^ Rebukes of Providence how useful, 203, 2^ RelJance on God
pleadable in prayer, RelatJons ordered by Providence, 85, 8^ ResurrectJon of
prayers pleasant to observe, 17^ RetributJons of Providence very signal, 25, 2^
ResignatJon to God our duty, 26^ ResignatJon facilitated five ways, 261, 26^
Rochel providentially relieved, ^ ^les to discover the Will of God, 221, 222
S.
SAmaritans Conversion how wrought, 60, 61 Satan's malice overruled by
Providence, 67, 68 ^nctificatJon of Providence how discerned, 135 ^offing at
purity punished by Providence, 27 ^ope of Providence very Considerable, 131
^^asonable provisions of Providence, 92, 93 ^^amens admirable preservation, 104
^elf-denyal no damage, 138 ^Shepherds pious observation of Providence, 36
^panish Soldiers how converted, 61 ^ul its excellent nature, 37 ^eason set for
mercy twofold, 224, 225 ^^rings and Autumns of Providence, 193, 194 ^^rvant's
running from his Master improved, 65 ^piritual mercies of two sorts, 230
T.
TArtars and Turks their sad state, 43 Dr. Tates strange experience of
Providence, 31 ^emptatJons prevented by Providence, 96 TemptatJons narrowly
escaped, 100, 101 Tenderness of Providence to the Saints, 186 Thanksgiving
includes five things in it, 183 Tranquillity promoted by eying Providence, 196
Trusting God before trial Noble faith, 180
V.
VAlue of Providence in diverse things, 129 Venice-glass how used by
Providence, 73 VergerJus his strange Conversion, 62 VJews of Providence
twofold, 10, 11, 12 Vileness of man discovered, 119 Vicissitudes of Providence
disorder thoughts, 248 Unequal marriages what a misery, 87, 88 Ungodly Parents
their sin and misery, 52, 53 Unwillingness of good men to surrender their
Comforts at the call of Providence, 25^
W.
WAles a strange conversion there, 6^ Wars, how Providence preserves in them,
10^ Waiting on God pressed by ten arguments, 22^ Weak means succeeded by
Providence, 2^ Will of God how distinguished, 21^ Will of God how revealed, 21^
All Winds serve Providence, 17^ Wicked men how quieted under crosses, 15^
Wisdom of God to be eyed in Providence, 14^ Word of God the best support in
trouble, 14^ Word of God fulfilled by Providence, 132, 13^ Wisdom of
providential appointments, 9^
Y.
YOuth, Providence then received greatly to be a^ mired, 19^
ERRATA.
Reader,
THe Commendable Care of the Printer has lest but little correcting work for
thy Pen, what is, may be thus ^^ickly rectified:

In the Title Page read (...): p. 118. l. 3. r. great^^ss: p. 146. l. 14. blot
out made: p. 150. l. 7. r. bride^amber: ibid. l. 16. for anger, r. enmity: p.
152: l. 31. ^ot out not.

FINIS.

