

Pneumatologia^ A TREATISE Of the Soul of Man: WHEREIN The Divine Original,
excellent and immortal Nature of the Soul are opened; its Love and Inclination
to the Body, with the necessity of its separation from it, considered and
improved. The Existence, Operations, and States of separated Souls, both in
Heaven and Hell, immediately after death, asserted, discussed, and variously
applied. Diverse knotty and difficult Questions about departed Souls, both
Philosophical, and Theological, stated and determined. The Invaluable
preciousness of humane Souls, and the various Artifices of Satan (their
professed Enemy) to destroy them, discovered. And the great Duty and interest
of all men, seasonably and heartily to comply with the most great and gracious
design of the Father, Son, and Spirit, for the Salvation of their Souls, argued
and pressed.

By JOHN FLAVEL, Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, late of Dartmouth.

(...).
Trism. (...).
Phocylides. Quid de Turcis, Tartaris, Moschis, Indis, Persis, aliisque omnibus
nunc temporis Barbaris Nationibus dicam? Nemo tam Barbarus, aut impius est, qui
non sentiat post mortem superesse loca, in quibus animae aut pro malefactis
pu^iantur, aut coronentur, deliciisque perfruantur pro benefactis.

Zanch. de Animae immortalitate, p. 653. London, Printed for Francis Tyton, at
the Three Daggers in Fleetstreet, 1685.

To the much honored his dear Kinsman, Mr. John Flavell, and Mr. Edward Crispe
of London, Merchants; and the rest of my worthy Friends in London, Ratcliffe,
Shadwell, and Lymehouse: Grace, Mercy, and Peace.
Dear Friends,
AMong all the Creatures in this lower World, none deserves to be styled great,
Nihil interra magnum praeter hominem, nihil in homine praeter mentem. Favorin.
E^coelo descendit (...). Juvenal. Nulla scientia melior illa qua homo novit
scripsum: relinque ergo caetera, and teipsum discute: per te curre: in te
confiste: a te incipiat cogitatio tua, and in te finiatur.
but Man; and in Man nothing is found worthy of that Epithet, but his Soul.

The study and knowledge of the Soul was therefore always reckoned a rich and
necessary improvement of time. All Ages have magnified these two words, know
thy self, as an Oracle descending from Heaven.

No knowledge, says Bernard, is better than that whereby we know our selves:
leave other matters therefore, and search thy self; run through thy self; make
a stand in thy self; let thy thoughts, as it were, circulate, begin and end in
thy self. Strain not thy thoughts in vain about other things, thy self being
neglected.

The study and knowledge of Jesus Christ, must still be allowed to be most
excellent and necessary: But yet the Worth of Necessity of Christ, is unknown
to Men, till the value, wants, and dangers of their own Souls be first
discovered to them.

The disaffectedness and aversation of men to the study of their own Souls, is
the more to be admired; not only because of the weight and necessity of it, but
the alluring pleasure and sweetness that is found therein. What Quid jucundius
quam scire quid simus, quid fuerimus, quid ^rimus, and cum his etiam divina
atque suprema illa post obitum Mundique vicissitudines?
Cardan speaks is experimentally felt by many, that scarce any thing is more
pleasant and delectable to the Soul of man, than to know what he is, what he
may, and shall be; and what those Divine and Supreme things are which he is to
enjoy after death, and the Vicissitudes of this present World: For we are
Creatures conscious to our selves, of an immortal Nature, and that we have
something about us which must overlive this mortal flesh; and is therefore ever
and anon some way or other hinting and intimating to us its expectations of,
and designations for a better life than that it now lives in the Body, and that
we shall not cease to be, when we cease to breathe.

And certainly, my Friends, Discourses of the Soul and its immortality; of
Heaven and of Hell, the next and only receptacles of unbodied Spirits, were
never more seasonable and necessary than in this Atheistical age of the World,
wherein all serious piety and thoughts of immortality are ridiculed, and hissed
out of the company of many: As if those old condemned Heretics the (...) who
asserted the corruptibility and mortality of the Soul as well as Body, had been
again revived in our days.

And as the Atheism of some, so the tepidity and unconcerned carelessness of
the most needs and calls for such potent Remedies as Discourses of this kind do
plentifully afford. I dare appeal to your charitable Judgments, whether the
Conversations and Discourses of the Many, do indeed look like a serious pursuit
of Heaven, and a flight from Hell?

Long have my thoughts bended toward this great and excellent Subject, and
many earnest desires I have had, (as I believe all thinking persons must needs
have) to know what I shall be when I breathe not. But when I had engaged my
Meditations about it, two great rubs opposed the farther progress of my
thoughts therein: Namely, I. The difficulty of the Subject I had chosen; And,
II. The distractions of the times in which I was to write upon it.


I. As for the Subject, such is the subtilty and sublimity of its nature, and
such the knotty Controversies in which it is involved, that it much better
deserves that inscription than Minerva's Temple at Saum did, (...)
Never did any Mortal reveal me plainly.

Animam praesentem mentis acie vix, aut ne vix quidem, assequimur, sed qualis
sit futura, quomodo indagabimus? Laboranthic maxima ingenia, and caligo conatus
etiam generosos non raro eludit. Jos. Stern. de Morte, cap. 20.
It is but little that the most clear and sharp-sighted do discern of their own
Souls now in the state of composition, and what then can we positively and
distinctly know of the life they live in the state of Separation? The darkness
in which these things are involved, does greatly exercise, even the greatest
Wits; and frequently elude and frustrate the most generous attempts. Many
great Scholars, whose natural and acquired abilities singularly furnished and
qualified them to make a clearer discovery, have labored in this field usque
ad sudorem, and pallorem, even to sweat and paleness, and done little more but
entangle themselves and the Subject more than before. This cannot but
discourage new attempts.

And yet without some knowledge of the hability and subjective capacity of our
Souls, to enjoy the good of the World to come, even in a state of absence from
the Body, a principal relief must be cut off from them under the great and
manifold trials they are to encounter in this evil World.

As for my self, I assure you I am deeply sensible of the inequality of my
shoulders to this Burden: and have often enough (since I undertook it) of that
grave and necessary Caution of the Poet, Sumite materiam vestris qui scribitis
^quam viribus, and versate diu quid far recusent, quid valiant humeri. Horace.
to wield and poise the burden as Porters use to do, before I undertook it.
Zuinglius blamed Carolostadius (as some may do me) for undertaking the
Controversy of that Age, because, says he, Non habet satis humerorum; his
shoulders are too weak for it.

And yet I know men's labors prosper not according to the art and elegancy of
the composure, but according to the divine blessing which pleases to accompany
them. Ruffinus tells us of a learned Philosopher at the Council of Nice, who
stoutly defended his Thesis against the greatest Wits and Scholars there, and
yet was at last fairly vanquished, by a man of no extraordinary parts: of which
Conquest the Philosopher gave this candid and ingenuous account, Against words
(said he) I opposed words, and what was spoken, I overthrew by the art of
speaking; But when instead of words, power came out of the mouth of the
Speaker, words could no longer withstand truth; nor man oppose the power of God.

O that my weak endeavors might prosper under the like influence of the Spirit
upon the hearts of them that shall read this inartificial, but well-meant
Discourse.

I am little concerned about the Contempts and Censures of fastidious Readers.
I have resolved to say nothing that exceeds Sobriety, nor to provoke any man,
except my dissent from his unproved Dictates must be his provocation.

Perhaps there are some doubts and difficulties relating to this Subject, which
will never be fully solved till we come to Heaven. For Man by the Fall being
less than himself, does not understand himself, nor will ever perfectly do so,
until he be fully restored to himself; which will not be whilst he dwells in a
Body of sin and death. And yet it is to me past doubt, that this as well as
other Subjects might have been much more cleared than it is, if instead of the
proud Contendings of masterly Wits for Victory, all had humbly and peaceably
applied themselves to the impartial search of truth.

Truth like an Orient Pearl in the bottom of a River would have discovered it
self by its native luster and radiancy, had not the feet of Heathen
Philosophers, cunning Atheists, and daring School Divines disturbed and foul'd
the stream.

2. And as the difficulties of the Subject are many, so many have been the
interruptions and Avocations I have met with whilst it was under my hand: Which
I mention for no other end but to procure a more favorable Censure from you,
if it appear less exact than you expected to find it. Such as it is I do with
much respect and affection, tender it to your hands, humbly requesting the
blessing of the Spirit may accompany it to your hearts. If you will but allow
your selves to think close to the matter before you, I doubt not but you may
find somewhat in it apt both to inform your minds, and quicken your affections.
I know you have a multiplicity of business under your hands, but yet I hope
your great concern makes all others daily to give place, and that how clamorous
and importunate soever the Affairs of this World be, you both can and do find
time to sit alone and bethink your selves of a much more important business you
have to do.

My Friends, we are Borderers upon Eternity; we live upon the Confines of the
Spiritual and Immaterial World. We must shortly be associated with bodyless
Beings, and shall have (after a few days are past) no more concerns for Meat,
Drink, and Sleep, buying and selling, Habitations and Relations, than the
Angels of God now have. Beside, we live here in a State of Trial. Man (as
Scaliger fitly calls him) is Utriusque Mundi nexus, one in whom both Worlds do
meet, his Body participates of the lower, his Soul of the upper World. Hence it
is he finds such tugging and pulling, this way, and that way; upward, and
downward; both Worlds as it were contending for this invaluable prize, the
precious Soul. All Christ's Ordinances are instituted, and his Officers ordained
for no other use or end, but the Salvation of Souls: Books are valuable
according to their Conducibility to this end. How rich a Reward of my Labors
shall I account it, if this Treatise of the Soul, may but promote the
Sanctification and Salvation of any Readers Soul!

To your hands I first tender it. It becomes your Property, not only as a Debt
of Justice, the fulfilling of a Promise made you long since upon your joint and
earnest desires for the publication of it; but as an acknowledgment of the many
Favors I have received from you, to one of you I stand obliged in the Bond of
Relation, and under the sense of many Kindnesses, beyond whatever such a degree
of Relation can be supposed to exact.

You have here a succinct account of the Nature, Faculties, and Original of the
Soul of Man, as also of its infusion into the Body by God, without intitling
himself to the guilt and sin resulting from that their Union.

You will also find the breath of your Nostrils to be the Nexus, Tie, or Bond,
which holds your Souls and Bodies in a personal Union; and that whilst the due
Crasis and Temperament of the Body remains, and Breath continues; your Souls
hang as by a weak and slender thread, over the state of a vast Eternity in
Heaven or in Hell: Which will inform you both of the value of your breath, and
the best way of improving it, whilst you enjoy it.

The Immortality of the Soul is here asserted, proved, and vindicated from the
most considerable Objections, so that it will evidently appear to you, by this
Discourse, you do not cease to be, when you cease to breathe: And seeing they
will over-live all Temporal Enjoyments, they must necessarily perish, as to all
their Joys, Comforts, and Hopes, (which is all the Death that can be incident
to an Immortal Spirit) if they be not in the proper season secured and provided
of that never-perishing food of Souls, God in Christ, their Portion for ever.

Here you will find the Grounds and Reasons of that strong inclination which
you all feel them to have to your Bodies, and the necessity (notwithstanding
that) of their divorce and separation from their beloved Bodies; and that it
would manifestly be to their prejudice if it should be otherwise. And to
overcome the unreasonable Aversations of Believers, and bring them to a more
becoming cheerful submission to the Laws of death, whenever the Writ of
Ejection shall be served upon them: You will here find a representation of that
blessed life, comely order, and most delightful employment of the incorporeal
People inhabiting the City of God; wherein, beside those sweet Meditations
which are proper to feast your hungry affections; you will meet with diverse
unusual, though not vain or unuseful Questions stated and resolved; which will
be a grateful entertainment to your inquisitive and searching minds.

It Is possible they may be censured by some as undeterminable and unprofitable
Curiosities; but as I hate a presumptious intrusion into unrevealed Secrets, so
I think it a weakness to be discouraged in the search of truth so far as it is
fit to trace it, by such damping and causeless Censures. Nor am I sensible I
have in any thing transgressed the bounds of Christian Sobriety, to gratify
the Palate of a nice and delicate Reader.

I have also here set before the Reader an Idea or representation of the state
and case of damned Souls, that if it be the Will of God, a seasonable discovery
of Hell may be the means of some men's recovery out of the danger of it, and
closed up the whole with a Demonstration of the invaluable preciousness of
Souls, and the several dangerous snares and artifices of Satan their professed
Enemy to destroy and cast them away for ever.

This is the design and general scope of the whole, and of the principal parts
of this Treatise, and Oh that God would grant me my hearts desire on your
behalf in the perusal of it! Even that it may prove a sanctified instrument in
his hand both to prepare you for, and bring you in love with the unbodied life
to make you look with pleasure into your Graves, and die by consent of Will, as
well as necessity of Nature. I remember Dr. Staughton in a Sermon preached
before King James, relates a strange Story of a little Child in a Shipwreck
fast asleep upon its Mothers lap as she sat upon a piece of the Wrack amidst
the Waves; the Child being awaked with the noise, asked the Mother what those
things were, she told it they were drowning Waves to swallow them up, the Child
with a pretty smiling Countenance, begged a stroke from its Mother to beat away
those naughty Waves, and chid them as if they had been its Play-mates. Death
will shortly Shipwreck your Bodies, your Souls will sit upon your lips, ready
to expire, as they upon the Wrack ready to go down* Would it not be a
comfortable and most becoming frame of mind to sit there with as little dread
as this little One did among the terrible Waves. Surely if our Faith had but
first united us with Christ, and then loosed our hearts off from this
enchanting and ensnaring World, we might make a fair step toward this most
desirable temper: but unbelief and earthly mindedness make us loath to venture.

I blush to think what bold adventures those men made, who upon the
Contemplation of the Properties of a despicable stone first adventured quite
out of sight of Land under its conduct and direction, and securely trusted both
their Lives and Estates to it, when all the eyes of Heaven were veiled from
them, amid'st the dark Waters, and thick Clouds of the Sky; when I either
start, or at least give an unwilling shrug, when I think of adventuring out of
sight of this World under the more sure and steady direction and conduct of
Faith and the Promises. To cure these evils in my own and the Readers heart,
these things are written, and in much respect and love tendered to your hands,
as a Testimony of my Gratitude, and deep sense of the many Obligations you have
put me under. That the Blessings of the Spirit may accompany these Discourses
to your Souls, afford you some assistance in your last and difficult work of
putting them off at death with a becoming cheerfulness, saying in that hour,
Can I not see God till this Flesh be laid aside in the Grave: Must I die before
I can live like my self? Then die my Body and go to thy dust, that I may be
with Christ. With this design, and with these hearty Wishes, dear and honored
Cousin, and worthy Friends, I put these Discourses into your hands, and remain

Your Most obliged Kinsman and Servant. Io. Flavell.

THE PREFACE.
AMong many other Largesses and rich Endowments bestowed by the Creators bounty
upon the Soul of Man, the Demonstravimus a commun^ omnium jam inde a condito
orb gentium ac popul^rum, pr^sertim b^n^rum and literatorum Consensione;
animam humanam incorruptibilem and immortalem esse; ^oque, corrupto corpore,
ip^um ^anere superstitem; ut in sempiternum aut pro benefactua Deo coronetur,
aut pro malefact^^s puniatur. Zanch. de A^lmarum immortal^tate, p. 653.
Sentiments and impressions of the World to come, and the ability of reflection
and self-intuition; are peculiar, invaluable, and heavenly gifts. By the
former, we have a very great Evidence of our own immortality, and designation
for nobler employments and enjoyments than this imbodied state admits; and by
the latter we may discern the agreeableness, or disagreeableness of our hearts,
and therein the validity of our title to that expected blessedness.

But these heavenly gifts are neglected and abused all the World over.
Degenerate Souls are every where fallen into so deep an Oblivion of their
excellent Original, Spiritual and Immortal nature; and alliance to the Father
of Spirits: That (to use the upbraiding expression of a great (...), etc. Max.
Tyr. Diss. 41.
Philosopher) they seem to be buried in their Bodies, as so many silly Worms,
that lurk in their holes, and are loath to peep forth and look abroad.

So powerfully do the Cares and Pleasures of this World charm all (except a
small remnant of regenerate Souls) that nothing but some smart stroke of
Calamity, or the terrible Messengers of death can startle them: (and even these
are not always able to do it) and when they do, all the effect is but a
transient glance at another, and an unwilling shrug to leave this World; and so
to sleep again: And thus the Impressions and Sentiments of the World to come,
(which are the natural growth and Offspring of the Soul) are either stifled
and suppressed, as in Atheists; or born down by impetuous masterly lusts, as in
Sensualists.

And for its self-reflecting and considering Power, it seems in many to be a
power received in vain. It is with most Souls as it is with the Eye, which sees
not it self, though it see all other Objects. There be those that have almost
finished the course of a long life (wherein a great part of their time has
lain upon their hands as a cheap and useless Commodity, (...) Dei est ista vita
mortalis, ubi homo vanitati similis factus est; and dies ejus velut umbra
praetereunt. Aug. de Civ^^. lib. 21. c. 24.
which they knew not what to do with;) who yet never spent one solemn, entire
hour in discourse with their own Souls. What serious heart does not melt into
Compassion over the deluded Multitude, who are mocked with Dreams, and
perpetually busied about Trifles? Who are, (after so many frustrated attempts
both of their own, and all past Ages) eagerly pursuing the fleeing shadows, who
torture and rack their brains, to find out the Natures and Qualities of Birds,
Beasts, and Plants; indeed any thing rather than their own Souls, which are
certainly the most excellent Creatures that inhabit this World. They know the
true value and worth of other things, but are not able to estimate the dignity
of that highborn Spirit which is within them. A Spirit which (without the
addition of any more natural Faculties or Powers; if those it has be but
sanctified and devoted to God) is capable of the highest Perfections and
Fruitions, even complete Conformity to God, and the satisfying Visions of God
throughout eternity. They Herd themselves with Beasts, who are capable of an
equality with Angels. O what compassionate tears must such a consideration as
this draw from the eyes of all that understand the worth of Souls!

As for me, it has been my sin, and is now the matter of my Sorrow; that
whilst Myriads of Souls (of no higher Original than mine) are some of them
beholding the highest Majesty in Heaven, and others giving all diligence to
make sure their Salvation on earth; I was carried away so many years in the
course of this World, (like a drop with the Current of the Tide) wholly
forgetting my best self, my invaluable Soul; whilst I prodigally wasted the
stores of my time and thoughts upon Vanities, that long since passed away as
the waters which are remembered no more. Nec enim pudet Sancto^ viros, postquam
renovata corda fuerint per resipiscentiam, lapsus sui and dedecoris ad dei
gloriam meminisse. Nihil nobis decedit, quod cedit in illius honorem, qui
praeteritis peccatis nostris ab inferno nos transfert in Coelum. Brightman in
Cantic. p. 12.
It shall be no shame to me to confess this folly, since the matter of my
Confession shall go to the glory of my God. I studied to know many other
things, but I knew not my self. It was with me as with a Servant to whom the
Master commits two things, viz. The Child, and the Child's Clothes; the Servant
is very careful of the Clothes, washes and brushes, starches and steels them,
and keeps them safe and clean: but the Child is forgotten and lost. My Body
which is but the Garment of my Soul, I kept and nourished with excessive care,
but my Soul was long forgotten, and had been lost for ever as others daily are,
had not God roused it by the Convictions of his Spirit out of that deep
Oblivion and deadly slumber.

When the God that formed it, out of free grace to the work of his own hands,
had thus recovered it to a sense of its own worth and danger; my next work was
to get it united with Christ, and thereby secured from wrath to come. Which I
found to be a work of difficulty to effect, (if it be yet effected) and a work
of time to clear, though but to the degree of good hope through grace.

And since the hopes and evidences of Salvation began to spring up in my Soul,
and settle the state thereof, I found these three great words, viz. Christ,
Soul, and Eternity, to have a far different, and more awful sound in my ear
than ever they used to have. I looked on them from that time, as things of
greatest certainty, and most awful Solemnity. These things have lain with some
weight upon my thoughts, and I have felt at certain seasons, a strong
inclination to sequester my self from all other Studies, and spend my last
days, and most fixed Meditations upon these three great and weighty Subjects.

I know the subject matter of my Studies and Enquiries (be it never so weighty)
does not therefore make my Meditations and Discourses upon it great and
weighty: Nor am I such a vain Opiniona^or as to imagine my Discourses every way
suitable to the dignity of such Subjects; No, no, the more I think and study
about them, the more I discern the indistinctness, darkness, crudity, and
confusion of my own conceptions, and expressions of such great and transcendent
things as those: But, In magnis voluisse sat est, I resolved to do what I
could; and accordingly some years past I finished and published in two parts
the Doctrine of Christ, and by the acceptance and success the Lord gave that,
He has encouraged me to go on in this Second part of my work, how unequal
soever my Shoulders are to the burden of it.

The Nature, Original, Immortality, and Capacity, of mine own Soul, for the
present lodged in, and related to this vile Body, destinated to Corruption;
Together with its Existence, Employment, Perfection, Converse with God, and
other Spirits, both of its own, and of a Superior Rank and Order; when it
shall, (as I know it shortly must) put off this its Tabernacle: These things
have a long time been the matters of my limited desires to understand, so far
as I could see the Pillar of fire (God in his Word) enlightening my way to the
knowledge of them. Yea, such is the value I have for them, that I have given
them the next place in my esteem, to the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and my
interest in him.

God has formed me (as he has other men) a prospecting Creature. I feel my
self yet uncentred, and short of that state of rest and satisfaction to which
my Soul in its Natural and Spiritual Capacity has a Designation. I find that I
am in a continual motion toward my everlasting abode, and the expense of my
time, and many Infirmities tell me I am not far from it: By all which I am
strongly prompted to look forward, and acquaint my self as much as I can, with
my next place, state, and employment. I look with a greedy and inquisitive eye
that way.

Yet would I not be guilty of an unwarrantable Curiosity, in searching into
unrevealed things; how willing soever I am to put up my head by faith into the
World above, and to know the things which Jesus Christ has purchased and
prepared for me, and all the rest that are waiting for his appearance and
Kingdom. I feel my Curiosity checked and repressed by that Elegant Paronomasia,
Romans 12.3. (...), In all things I would be wise unto Sobriety. I groan under
the effects of Adam's itching Ambition to know, and would not by repeating his
sin increase my own misery: Nor yet would I be scared by his Example into the
contrary evil of neglecting the means God has afforded me, to know all that I
can know of his revealed Will.

Cui ^ni^ veritas com^erta sine Deo? Cui Deus cognitus sine Christo? Cui
Christus exploratus sine Spiritu? Cui Spiritus ^ccommodatus sine fide Tertul.
de Anima.
The helps Philosophy affords in some parts of this Discourse, are too great to
be despised, and too small to be admired. I confess I read the Definitions of
the Soul given by the Ancient Philosophers, with a Compassionate smile. When
Thales calls it a Nature without Repose. Asclepiades, an Exercitation of sense.
Hesiod, a thing composed of Earth and Water. Parmenides, a thing composed of
Earth and Fire. Galen says it is heat. Hippocrates, a Spirit diffused
throughout the Body. Plato, a Self-moving Substance. Aristotle calls it,
Entelechia, that by which the Body is moved. If my Opinion should be asked,
which of all these Definitions I like best? I should give the same Answer which
Theocritus gave to an ill Poet, repeating many of his Verses, and asking which
he liked best, Those (said he) which you have omitted. Or if they must have the
Garland as the prize they have shot for, let them have it upon the same reason
that was once given to him that always shot wide, Difficilius est toties non
attingere, Because it was the greatest difficulty to aim so often at the Mark,
and never come near it. One Word of God gives me more light than a thousand
such laborious trifles. As Caesar was best able to write his own Commentaries,
so God only can give the best account of this his own Creature, on which he
has impressed his own Image.

Modern Philosophers assisted by the Divine Oracles, must needs come closer to
the Mark, and give us a far better account of the nature of the Soul. Yet I
have endeavored not to cloud this Subject with their Controversies, or
abstruse Notions; remembering what a smart, but deserved check Tertullian gives
those, Qui Platonicum and Aristotelicum Christianismum procudunt Christianis.
Words are but the Servants of Matter. I value them as Merchants do their Ships,
not by the gilded Head and Stern; the neatness of their Mould; or curious Flags
and Streamers; but by the soundness of their Bottoms, largeness of their
Capacity, and richness of their Cargoe and loading. The quality of this Subject
necessitates in many places the use of Scholastic terms, which will be obscure
to the Vulgar Reader; but apt and proper words must not be rejected for their
obscurity, except plainer words could be found that fit the Subject as well,
and are as fully expressive of the matter. The unnecessary I have avoided, and
the rest explained as I could.

The principal fruits I especially aim at, both to my own and the Readers Soul,
are, that whilst we contemplate the freedom, pleasure, and satisfaction of that
Spiritual, Incorporeal People who dwell in the Region of light and joy; and are
hereby forming to our selves a true Scriptural Idea of the blessed state of
those disembodied Spirits with whom we are to serve and converse, in the
Temple-worship in Heaven; and come more explicitly and distinctly to
understand the Constitution, Order, and Delightful employment of those our
everlasting Associates: We may answerably feel the fond and inordinate love of
this Animal life subacted and wrought down; the frightful Vizard of death drop
off, and a more pleasing Aspect appear; that no upright Soul that shall read
these Discourses may henceforth be convulsed at the name of death, but
cheerfully aspire, and with a pleasant expectation wait for the blessed season
of its transportation to that blessed Assembly. It Is certainly our ignorance of
the life of Heaven, that makes us dote as we do upon the present life. There is
a gloom, a thick Mist overspreading the next life, and hiding even from the
eyes of Believers, the glory that is there. We send forth our thoughts to
penetrate this Cloud, but they return to us without the desired success: We
reinforce them with a Sally of new and more vigorous thoughts, but still they
come back in confusion and disappointment, as to any perfect account they can
bring us from thence, though the oftener and closer we think, the more still we
grow up into acquaintance with these excellent things.

Another benefit I pray for, and expect from these labors, is, that by
describing the horrid state of those Souls which go the other way, and showing
to the living, the dismal condition of Souls departed in their unregenerate
state, some may be awakened to a seasonable and effectual Consideration of
their wretched Condition whilst they yet continue under the means and among the
Instruments of their Salvation.

Whatever the fruit of this Discourse shall be to others, I have cause to bless
God for the advantages it has already given me. I begin to find more than ever
I have done, in the separate state of sanctified Souls, all that is capable of
attracting an intellectual nature: and if God will but fix my mind upon this
state, and cause my pleased thoughts about it to settle into a frame and steady
temper; I hope I shall daily more and more depreciate and despise this common
way of existence in a Corporeal Prison; and when the blessed season of my
departure is at hand, I shall take a cheerful farewell of the greater and lesser
Elementary World, to which my Soul has been confined, and have an abundant
Entrance, through the broad gate of Assurance, unto the blessed unbodied
Inhabitants of the World to come.

A Synopsis, or View of the Soul in the state of Composition, in six
Particulars; in this first Table of Life, viz.
The Soul of Man is considered in this Treatise two ways, First, in the state
of Composition. Secondly, In the state of Separation.


1. In its general Nature, a Substance proved to be so, 1. By its Creation.
Page 11 2. By its single Existence. p. 11 3. By its S^^tentation of the Body.
p. 12 4. By the subjecting of Habits and Affections in it. p. 13
2. In its Essential Properties, which are six. 1. It is a Vital substance,
whose life is not from it self, but 1. It receives it from God. p. 13 2.
Communicates it to the Body. p. 13
2. An Immortal substance proved by eight Arguments. 1. The simplicity of its
Nature. p. 96 2. The Veracity of God, in his promises and threats. p. 98 3. The
Consent of all Nations. p. 100 4. Its everlasting habits, which are
inseparable. p. 103 5. The Peculiar dignity of Man. p. 105 6. His desires of
Immortality. p. 107 7. Its returns after death. p. 108 8. The Absurdities
clogging the Negative. p. 109
3. Endued with Understanding, to which belong 1. Thoughts to the Speculative.
2. Conscience to the Practical understanding. p. 20
4. And a Will, which glories in 1. Its Liberty. p. 23
And 2. Its Dominion both 1. Despotical. p. 24 2. Political. p. 24

Yet both restrained in some particulars. 1. As to the Body. p. 25 2. As to the
thoughts. p. 26 3. As to the Conscience. p. 27
5. Affections and Passions where is showed 1. Their rise in the Soul. p. 28 2.
Their use to the Soul. p. 29
6. Its inclination to the Body which differenceth it from other Spirits. p. 29

3. Its Excellent Original about which we have 1. Errors refuted that it was
not 1. By Seminal Traduction. p. 31 2. By Angelical Procreation. p. 32 3. By
Co^taneous Creation. p. 33
2. Its true Original asserted, ^y immediate Creation. p. 34
3. Objections against this Assertion answered. p. 37, ^^

4. Its Union with the Body, viz. 1. That God infused it, yet infused not sin
into it. p. 41
2. Knit it to the Body by our breath, about which 4 things are opened. 1. What
breath is. p. 70 2. Its Instruments. p. 71 3. Its feebleness. p. 73 4. Its
Improvements. p. 74

5. Its love to the Body both in the 1. Evidences of it, viz. 1. Its Cares
about it. p. 136 2. Fears of it. p. 137 3. Sympathy with it. p. 138 4.
Reluctancies at death. p. 139 5. Inclinations to Reunion. p. 140
And 2 Causes. 1. Propriety in it as its Instrument 1. Of Pleasure. p. 143 2.
Of Service. p. 143
2. Consuetude with it as its ancient Companion. p. 142
3. Partnership, both in Redemption and in Glory. p. 143


6. The Necessity of its separation grounded upon 1. The Law of God whose
equity is cleared, with respect to 1. The Godly. p. 169 2. The Ungodly. p. 169
2. The Providence of God moulding our frame suitably to the Law of our
Mortality. p. 169


A View of the Soul as separated, considered three ways in this Table of Death.
First, In its general Nature as a Soul separated, four ways, viz. 1. The
Nature of Separation, and that both 1. Mental and Intellectual, the usefulness
of which is showed. p. 192
2. Real and Physical; and that either 1. In ^ieri, its foregoing pains. p. 195
2. In facto esse, its dividing stroke. p. 196

2. The Notices and Signs of approaching death, where 1. The Reasons against it
are weighed. p. 250 2. The Evidences for it are produced. p. 253
3. The Changes made by separation, both upon 1. The Body visibly. p. 193 2.
The Soul more considerably in several respects. p. 199
4. The Souls ability both to exist and act when separate, proved 1. By its
understanding some things now without Phantasms or help of the Body. p. 205 2.
The Absurdities of the contrary Hypothesis. p. 207

Secondly, As a Soul in Christ, In eight Particulars, viz. 1. The proper Season
of its separation, which is not 1. Till the Work of Sanctification be wrought
out upon it. p. 208 2. Till the whole Work of Obedience be finished by it. p.
209 3. And then it goes with all its graces and Comforts with it. p. 209
2. The Ministry of Angels at the time of Separation 1. Not out of pure
Necessity, as though it could not ascend to God without them. p. 203 2. But to
grace and adorn that day. p. 204
3. Their Residence after death opened both 1. Negatively 1. They wander not up
and down the World. p. 211 2. They abide not about our Graves. p. 212 3. They
are not detained in Purgatory. p. 212 4. They fall not into a Swoon, or sleep.
p. 21^
2. Positively, they ascend to God immediately; for 1. Heaven is ready for
them. p. 21^ 2. They are ready for it. p. 214 3. Scriptures are for it. p. 214
4. Nothing in reason against it. p. 214

4. The life of holy separate Souls in respect of their 1. Pleasure which
transcends 1. All the Sensitive pleasure here. p. 218 2. All the Intellectual
pleasure here. p. 219 3. All the Spiritual Pleasure here. p. 221
2. Knowledge which is 1. More perfect in degree. p. 223 2. More easy in its
acquisition. p. 224
3. Communion with God which 1. Excels that here in ten Respects. p. 227 2.
Admits a double change. p. 232

5. The Idea of a Soul in Glory. p. 242
6. The Apparitions of departed Soul^ where 1. The Arguments for it are
produced. p. 260 2. Concessions about it laid down. p. 266 3. Reasons against
it urged, and Objections answered. p. 270
7. The Discourse and Speech of the Spirits of the just. 1. That they do
Converse in Heaven. 2. Yet without words or sound. 1. More clear. p. 274, etc.
2. More quick. p. 274, etc.
3. By an act of the Will which is
8. Their desires of Reunion, where 1. The Reasons against it are weighed. p.
282 2. The Arguments proving it produced. p. 284

Thirdly, As a damned Soul, in two things. 1. The Idea or Representation of a
damned Soul in respect of 1. The place where its Torment^ p. 334 2. The Misery
what its Torment^ p. 345 3. The Instrument its Torment^ p. 346 4. The
Aggravations of its Torment^
2. The Various Methods of destroying precious Souls 1. By Satan. 2. By Men. p.
398 3. By themselves.
3. The only season of Salvation noted and pressed upon all. p. 450


CORRIGENDA.
SOme mistakes have escaped the Press, for which the Readers Charity is
desired: in a very hasty review, some are noted as, E. G.

Page 33. l. 12. dele that. p. 90. l. 6. for its r. his. p. 98. l. 4. r.
relaxed. p. 108. l. 9 dele more. p. 140. l. 11. for put r. pull. p. 215. l. 1.
add of. p. 220. l. penult. after Boy, add to. p. 241. l. 15. for sense r.
suspense. p. 243. l. 13. for lovely r. lonely. p. 298. l. 22. add Separations.
p. 324. l. 17. for being r. bring.

GENESIS II. verse. vii. And the Lord formed Man out of the dust of the Ground,
and breathed into his nostrils the breath of Life; and Man became a living Soul.
THree things (says Tri^ sunt quae secundum essentiam hominibus sunt (...),
Deus, Ang^lus, and anima hominis. Athanas. in Tract. de de^^^.
Athanasius) are unknown to men according to their Essence, viz. God, Angels,
and the Souls of men. Of the Nature of the Divine and highborn Soul, we may
say as the learned Quari facilius est quam intelligi, and m^li^s intelligitur,
qu^m explicatur.
Whitaker does of the way of its infection by Original sin; It is easier sought
than understood, and better understood than explicated: And for its Original,
the most fagacious and renowned for wisdom amongst the ancient Plato doubted,
Aristotle denied, and Galen derided the Doctrine of the Worlds Creation.
Philosophers, understood nothing of it. It is said of Democritu^, that there
is Nihil est in toto opificio naturae, de quo non scripsit Democritus. And for
Aristotle, they styled him Regula Naturae, naturae Miratulam, ipsa eruditio,
Sol scientiaerum, Antistes literar^^ and sapientiae. Lactantius, lib. 3. cap.
17, 18.
nothing in the whole workmanship of Nature of which he did not write; and in a
more lofty, and swelling Hyperbole, they style their Eagle-eyed Aristotle, the
Rule, yea and Miracle of Nature; Learning it self, the very Sun of knowledge:
Yet both these are not only said, but proved by Lactantius to be learned
Idiots. How have the Schools of Epicurus, and Aristotle, the Cartesians and
other Sects of Philosophers, abused and troubled the world with a kind of
Philosophical Enthusiasm, and a g(...) many ridiculous phancies about the
Original of the Soul of Man? And when all is done, three words of God by the
pen of his inspired Moses, Veritatem quaerit Philosophia, invenit Theologia.
Jo. Pi^us Mirand.
enlightens us more than all their subtle Notions of the accidental concretion
of Atoms, their materia subtilis, and Anima Mundi, and the rest of their
unintelligible phancies could ever do.

The account Moses gives us in this context of the Origin of the World, and of
Man the Epitome of it, is full of Sense, Reason, Congruity, and Clearness; and
such as renders all the Essays of all the Heathen Philosophers to be vain,
inevident, self-repugnant, and inexplicable Theories.

The inspired Penman gives us in this context a Compendious Narrative of the
Worlds Creation, relating more generally the rude, inform, and indigested
Chaos; and then more particularly the specificating and diversifying of the
various beautiful Beings thence educed, by the motion of the Spirit of God upon
the face of the Waters.

When the first Matter was (strictly) created out of Nothing, (...) Motus,
commotus, agitatus fuit: no^ s^mplicem motum denotat, sed ejusm^di quam Columba
peragit, cum ovis ad (...) c^udendum pullos inc^bat. Rab. Sol.
the Spirit (as Moses excellently expresses it, chap. 1. verse. 2.) hovered, or
moved over it as a bird over her Eggs, and as it were by way of Incubation,
cherishing and influencing it, did thereby draw forth all the creatures into
their several forms, and distinct particular natures, wherein we now with
delight and admiration behold them.

In this manner and order was the stately Fabric of the World produced and
erected, but as yet it remained as a fair and well furnished house without an
Inhabitant. God had employed infinite wisdom and power about it, and engraven
his name upon the meanest creature in it; but there was no creature yet made
(except Angels, the inhabitants of another City) to read the name, and
celebrate the praises of the Almighty Creator.

He therefore thought the World imperfect till there was a Creature made that
could contemplate, praise, and worship the Maker of it: for this very use and
purpose was man created, that he might not only see, but consider the things he
saw; discourse, and rationally collect out of them the things he saw not; and
both praise and love the Maker for, and in them all.

The Palaces of Princes are not beautified and adorned to the intent men should
pay their respects and honors to the Walls; but to show the Grandeur and
Magnificence of the King, to whose person their honor is due, as Athenagoras
in his excellent Est sane palcherrimus hie mundus, non ipse tamen mundus, sed
artificiosus ille condi^or adorandus est. ut nequ^ vestro Imperio subditi, cum
aliqua re indigent, ut assequantur; cum vos editrint; omissi^ vobis Dominis, a^
Principibus, nulloque affectis honor; ad Palatii ve^t^i magnifi^entia^^se
convenant* sed Aedificii regii tam elegantem structuram obitet pratereuntes,
admirati vos ipsos ante, supraque omnia honorant. Athen. Apol.
Apology for the Christians speaks. The World is a glorious and magnificent
Pile, raised designedly to exhibit the wisdom and power of its Creator, to the
reasonable creature Man; that from him God might receive the glory of all his
other works. Of this creature man, the Masterpiece of all the visible world,
(and therefore crowned King over it, the first moment he was made, Psalm. 8.5.)
Moses in the next place gives us the account, both of his Original whence he
came, and of his Dignity what he is. The Lord God formed man out of the dust of
the Ground, and breathed into his Nostrils the breath of Life, and man became a
living Soul. Where we find The Original I. Of the body of Man. The Original II.
Of the Soul of Man.


I. The Original of the body of Man: Formed out of the dust of the ground. Dust
was its Original matter: of Dust it was made, and into Dust it must be
resolved. Genesis 3.19. The consideration is humbling, and serves to tame the
pride of Man, (...) Pulverem tenuissimam, ad domandam saperbiam. Fagius.
who is apt to dote upon his own beauty. Man's body was not made of heavenly
matter, as the radiant Sun, and sparkling Stars: No, nor yet of the most
precious and Orient earthly matter; God did not melt down the pure and splendid
Gold and Silver, or powder the precious Pearls and sparkling Diamonds; but he
formed it of the vile and despicable Dust.

We find that the sprinkling of dust upon new writing prevents many a foul
blot: I am sure, the sprinkling of our Originary dust upon our minds by serious
consideration, is the way to prevent many a proud boast.

However, the baseness of the matter, and courseness of the stuff, serves to
set off the admirable skill of the most wise and powerful Architect; who out of
such mean and despicable materials, has fashioned so exact and elegant a
piece. The Lord God formed man out of the Dust.

The Lord God] The name of God is here set down at full, (...) Dominus Deus.
Nomen Dei hic plenum est, propter hominis dignitatem. Nachm.
to set forth the dignity of man, the subject matter wrought upon, as some
conceive.

Formed] Fashioned, Pressit (...) Compressit* and per Metalepsin, premendo and
comprimendo ^uxit, formavit.
or curiously molded, and figured it. The Hebrew verb primarily signifies to
press, compress or squeeze together, and by a Metalepsis by pressing and
compressing to mould or fashion, as th^^ ^otter does his Clay. The Psalmist
uses another word to express the. artificial elegancy of the body of man,
Psalm. 139.15, 16. (...) acupictus. sum, I am embroidered, painted, or
flourished as with a needle: We render it, curiously wrought. Whatsoever Beauty
and comely proportion God has bestowed by creation upon it, Imagine^ mente
divina conceptam, quasi manu format. Fagius.
it is all ^^swerable to that excellent Idea, or model before conceived in his
mind and purpose. All this care and cost was bestowed upon the body of man,
which when all is done, is but the Case in which that inestimable Jewel, the
Soul, was to be lodged. This therefore I must lay aside, and come to the more
noble Subject,

II. The Soul of Man: About which, we have before us four things to ponder in
this Text, viz. (1.) The Nature and Property, the Soul of Man. (2.) The
Descent, and Original, the Soul of Man. (3.) The manner of Infusion, the Soul
of Man. (4.) The Nexus or bond that unites the Soul of Man.


(1.) The Nature and Property of it, a living Soul. The word (...), as also the
Chaldee Naph-sha, and the Greek (...) have one and the same Etymology, all
signifying to breathe, or respire. Not, that the breath is the Soul, but
denoteing the manner of its Infusion by the breath of God, and the means of its
continuation in the body, by the breath of our nostrils. Gods breath infused
it, and our breath continues its union with the Body. It signifies here the
rational soul, and the Hebrew word (...) a Soul, has a very near affinity with
the word (...) the heavens, and indeed there is a nearer affinity betwixt the
things, viz. Soul, and Heaven, than there is betwixt the Names.

The Epithete (...) which we translate Living, the Arabic renders a rational
Soul: and indeed none but a rational deserves the name of a living Soul. For
all other forms or Souls* which are of an earthly extract, do both depend on,
and dye with the matter out of which they were educed: But this being of
another Nature, a spiritual and substantial Being, is therefore rightly styled
a living Soul.

The Chaldee renders it a Speaking Soul. And indeed it deserves a remarque,
that the ability of Speech is conferred on no other Soul but man's. Other
creatures have apt and excellent Organs; Birds can modulate the Air, and form
it into sweet delicious notes, and charming sounds; but no creature except man,
whose soul is of an heavenly nature and extraction, can articulate the sound,
and form it into words, by which the notions and sentiments of one Soul, are in
a noble, apt, and expeditious manner, conveyed to the understanding of another
Soul. And indeed, what should any other creature do with the faculty or power
of speech, without a principle of Reason to guide and govern it? It is
sufficient to them that they discern each others meaning by dumb signs, much
after the manner that we traded at first with the Indians: But speech is proper
only to the rational or living Soul. However we render it a living, a rational,
or a speaking Soul; it distingisheth the soul of man from all other Souls.

(2.) We find here the best account that ever was given of the Origin of the
Soul of man, or whence it came, and from whom it derives its Being. O, what a
dust and pudder have the disputes and contests of Philosophers raised about
this matter! which is cleared in a few words in this Scripture. Sufflavit, ad
ostendendum animam hominis ab extri^se^o esse per c^tationem, simulqut creando
corpori insulam. Poli Synops. in locum.
God breathed into his Nostrils the breath of life, and Man became a living
Soul: which plainly speaks it to be the immediate effect of Gods creating
power. Not a result from the matter; no, no, results flow e sinu materiae, out
of the bosom of matter, but this comes ex halitu divino, from the inspiration
of God. That which is born of the flesh is flesh: But this is a spirit
descending from the Father of spirits. God formed it, but not out of any
praeexistent matter, whether Celestial or Terrestrial; much less out of
himself, as the The Stoics, says Simplicius, call the Soul (...)* pars v^l
membrum Dil: and Seneca, Deum in bumano corpore hospitantem. Which comes near
to (...).
Stoics speak; but out of nothing. An highborn Creature it is, but no
particle of the Deity. The indivisible and immutable Essence of God is utterly
repugnant to such Notions: and therefore they speak not strictly and warily
enough, that are bold to call it a Ray, or an Emanation from God.

A Spirit it is, and flows by way of Creation, immediately from the Father of
Spirits; but yet it is a spirit of another, inferior rank, and order.

(3.) We have also the account of the way and manner of its infusion into the
body, viz. by the same breath of God which gave it its being. It is therefore a
rational, scriptural, and justifiable expression of S. Augustine, creando
infunditur, and infundendo creatur; It is infused in creating, and created in
infusing. Though Dr. Brown (...) Midi^. Sent. ^ 6.
too slightingly calls it a mere Rhetorical Antimetathesis. Some of the
Fathers, as Iustine, Irenaens, and Tertullian were of opinion, That the Son of
God assumed a humane shape at this time, in which afterward he often appeared
to the Fathers, as a Prelude to his true and real incarnation; and took Dust or
Clay in his hands, out of which he formed the body of man, according to the
pattern of that body in which he appeared: And that being done, he afterward
by breathing, infused the ^oul into it. But I, rather think, it is an
Anthropopathy, or usual figure in speech, by which the spirit of God stoops to
the imbecility of our understanding's. He breathed into his nostrils the
breath of life. Heb. life's. But this plural word (...) notes rather the twofold
life of man, in this world, and in that to come; or the several faculties and
powers belonging to one and the same soul, viz. the intellective, sensitive,
and vegetative Offices thereof; than that there are more souls than one,
essentially differing, in one and the same man; for that, as Impassibile est in
uno homine esse plures animas per essentiam differentes; sed una tantum est
anima, quae vigitativae, and sensitivae, and intell^ctivae officiis s^ngitur.
Aquin ^a Q. 26. Art. 2.
Aquinas truly says, is impossible. We cannot trace the way of the spirit, or
tell in what manner it was united with this clod of Earth. But it is enough,
that he who formed it, did also unite or marry it to the body. This is clear,
it came not by way of natural resultancy from the body, but by way of
inspiration from the Lord. Not from the warm bosom of the Matter, but from the
breath of its Maker.

(4.) Lastly, we have here the Nexus, Copula, tie or band, by which it is
united with the body of man, viz. the breath of his ( i.e. of man's) nostrils.
It is a most astonishing mystery to see heaven and earth married together in
one person. The dust of the ground and an immortal spirit clasping each other
with such dear embraces and tender love. Such a noble and divine guest, to take
up its residence within the mudd-walls of flesh and blood. Alas, how little
affinity, and yet what dear affection is found betwixt them!

Now that which so sweetly links these two different natures together, and
holds them in union, is nothing else but the breath of our nostrils, as the
Text speaks: It came in with the breath; whilst breath stays with us, it cannot
go from us; and as soon as the breath departs, it departs also. All the rich
Elixirs, and Cordials in the world, cannot persuade it to stay one minute after
the breath is gone. One puff of breath will carry away the wisest, holiest, and
most desirable soul that ever dwelt in flesh and blood. When our breath is
corrupt, our days are extinct, Job 1^.1. Thou take away their breath, they
dye, and return to their dust, Psalm. 104.29.

Out of the Text thus opened arise two doctrinal Propositions, which I shall
insist upon, viz.

Doct. I.

That the Soul of man is of Divine Original, created and inspired immediately
by the Lord.

Doct. II.

That the souls and bodies of men are linkt or knit together by the feeble band
of the breath of their nostrils.

In the prosecution of these two Propositions many things will come to our
hands, of great use in Religion: which I shall labor to lay as clearly and
orderly in the Readers understanding, and press as warmly upon his heart as I
can. And first of the first.

Doct. III.

Doct. I.
That the Soul of man is of Divine Original, created and inspired immediately
by the Lord.

In this first Proposition two Things are to be distinctly pondered, viz. I.
The Nature of the Soul: II. The Original of the Soul:
Or what it is, and from whence it came.

I. The First thing which arrests our thoughts and requires Nature of the Soul,
or what kind of Being it is.

Those that are most curiously inquisitive into all other Beings, The Nature of
the Soul.
and put Nature upon the rack to make her confess her secrets, are in the mean
time found shamefully slight and negligent in the study of themselves. Few
there are that can prevail with themselves to sit down, and think close to such
questions as these are, What manner of being is this Soul of mine? Whence came
it? Why was it infused into this Body? And where must it abide, when Death has
dislodged it out of this frail Tabernacle? There is a natural aversation in Man
to such exercises of thoughts as these, although in the whole Universe of
Beings in this lower World, a more noble or desirable Creature is not to be
found Qui igitur de Anima unquam disputarunt, ii certe non de re inani, and
quae nihil praeter nomen habeat, sed de re gravissima, maximique momenti, qua
nihil sub coelo praestantius, disputasse judicandi sunt. Zanc^ de Anima, lib.
2. page 555.
.

The Soul is the most wonderful and astonishing piece of Divine workmanship:
It Is no Hyperbole to call it the Breath of God, the Beauty of Man, the Wonder
of Angels, and the Envy of Devils. One Soul is of more value than all the
Bodies in the World.

The Nature of it is so Spiritual and sublime, that it cannot be perfectly
known by the most acute and penetrating understanding, assisted in the search
by all the aids Philosophy can contribute.

It is not my design in this Discourse to treat of the several Faculties and
Powers of the Soul, or to give you the Rise, Natures, or Numbers of its
Affections and Passions: but I shall confine my Discourse to its general Nature
and Original. And seeing none can so well discover the Nature of it, as he who
is the Author of it, as Si quid de Anima examinandum est, ad Dei regulas
dirigat: certe nul^um alium potiorem animae Demonstratorem, quam Auctorem, etc.
Tertul. de Anima.
Tertullian speaks, I therefore justly expect the best light from his Word,
though I will not neglect any other aid he is pleased elsewhere to afford.

Dum vivisicat Corpus, anima est; dum vult, animus; dumscit, men's; dum recolit,
memoria; dum rectum judicat, ratio; dum spirat, Spiritus. Isidor. E^ym. v.
The Soul is variously denominated from its several Powers and Offices, as the
Sea from the several Shores it washes. I will not spend time about the several
Names by which it is known to us in Scripture, but give you that description of
it, with which my understanding is most satisfied, which take thus: The
Description of the Soul.
The Soul of Man is a vital, spiritual and immortal Substance, endowed with an
Understanding, Will, and various Affections; created with an Inclination to the
Body, and infused thereinto by the Lord.

IN this Description we have the two general parts into which I distributed
this Discourse; viz. its general Nature, and Divine Original. The Nature of the
Soul is expressed to us in these following terms.

A Substance.
1. It is a Substance:

That is to say, not a quality, or an accident inhering in another Being, or
subject; as whiteness does in the Snow: but a Being Anima est Ens per se, (i.
e.) non est in aliquo per modum partis, aut forma, a quo in suo esse dependeat.
Colleg. Conimbr. in lib. 11.
by it self. Qualities and Accidents have no Existence of their own, but
require another Being or subject to their Existence; but the Soul of Man is a
Substantial Being of it self, which will evidently appear upon the following
Grounds.

(1.) Because it is in a strict and proper sense created by God. He forms or
creates the Spirit in Man, Zech. 12.1. To him we are advised to commit it, as
to a faithful Creator. 1 Pet. 4.19. The substantial Nature of the Soul is
employed in the very Notion of its Creation; for Quicquid a Deo proprie C^eatum
est. su^stantia est: accidentia enim no^ dicuntur creari, sed concreari. Pol^ni
Syntag. p. 319.
whatsoever is created, is a Substance, an Ens per se. Accidents are not said
to be created, but concreated; the Crasis of humors, and results of matter,
are not substances created, but things rising in a natural way from created
Substances. They flow from, and as to their very Essence, depend upon
praeexistent matter; but the Soul was created out of nothing, and infused into
the body after it was formed, and organized; which evidenceth its substantial
Nature.

(2.) This evidenceth the Soul to be a Substance, that it can and does exist
and subsist by it self alone, when separated from the body by Death. Luke
23.43. To day shall thou (i. e. thy Soul) be with me in Paradise; and Matthew.
10.28. Fear not them that kill the body, but are not able to kill the Soul.
Were the Soul but an Accident, a Quality, a Result, he that kills the Body must
needs kill the Soul too. As he that casts a Snow-ball into the fire, must needs
destroy the whiteness with the Snow. Accidents fail and perish with their
Subjects: but seeing it is plain in these and many other Scriptures, the Soul
does not fail with the body; nothing can be more plain and evident, than that
it is of a substantial Nature.

When the Spaniards came first among the poor Indians, they thought the Horse
and his Rider to be one Creature; as many ignorant ones think the Soul and Body
of Man to be nothing but Breath and Body: whereas indeed they are two distinct
Creatures, as vastly different in their Natures, as the Rider and his Horse, or
the Bird and his Cage. While the Man is on Horseback, he moves according to the
motion of the Horse; and whilst the Bird is incaged, he eats and drinks, and
sleeps, and hops, and sings in his Cage. But if the Horse fail and dye under
his Rider, or the Cage be broken, the Man can go on his own feet, and the Bird
enjoy himself as well, yea better in the open Fields and Woods, than in the
Cage: neither depend as to Being or action, on the Horse or Cage.

(3.) Both Scripture and Philosophy consent in this, that the Soul is the
chief, most noble, and principal part of Man, from which the whole Man is, and
ought to be denominated. So Genesis 46.26. All the Souls that came with Jacob into
Egypt (i. e.) all the persons, as the Latins say tot capita, so many Heads,
or Persons. The Apostle in 2 Cor. 5.8. seems to exclude the body from the
notion of personality, when he says, We are willing rather to be absent from
the body, and to be present with the Lord: that We, a term of personality is
there given to the Soul exclusively of the Body: for the Body cannot be absent
from it self; but We, that is, the Souls of Believers, may be both absent from
it, and present with Christ.

To this we may add 2 Cor. 4.16. where the Soul is called the Man, and the
inner Man too, the body being but the external face or shadow of the Man. And
to this Philosophy agrees. The best Philosophers are so far from thinking that
the body is the substantial part of Man, and the Soul a thing dependent on it;
that contrarily they affirm that the body depends upon the Soul, Anima corpus
animatum conservat, and sustentat; ub^ autem illa reliquit corpus, perit
animatum corpus, and animalis ratio. Anima non est in corpore, tanquam in loco,
cum a loco circu^ sc^i^i nequeat; tota per totum meat corpus, and non et pars
in qua non tota adsit: non enim a corpore tenetur, sed ipsa tenet Corpus. Neque
est in corpore ut in vase, vel in utre, sed potius in ipsa est Corpus. Ny^^en.
de Anima lib. 2. cap. 11. (...) Anima cujusque est quisqus.
and that it is the Soul that conserves and sustains it. And that the Body is
in the Soul, rather than the Soul in the Body. And that which is seen is not
the Man, but that is the Man which is invisible. That the body might be killed
and the Man not hurt, meaning the Soul, which only deserves the name of Man.
Now if it be the chief part of Man, and that which is only worthy the name of a
Man, and from which therefore the whole is and ought to be denominated a Man:
If it be so far from depending on the body, or being contained within the body,
that the body rather depends on it, and is in it; then surely the Soul must be
what we describe it to be, a substantial Being.

(4.) It is past all Controversy, that the Soul is a Substance, because it is
the Subject of Properties, Affections and Habits; which is the very strict and
formal notion of a Substance. All the affections and passions of Hope, Desire,
Love, Delight, Fear, Sorrow and the rest, are all rooted in it, and spring out
of it, and so for Habits, Arts, and Sciences A (...) Subjectum (...) omnium
vi^^^tum and vitiorum, S^^enti^rum and Artium. Buchan. loc. Com. p. 86.
; it is the Soul in which they are lodged and seated. Having once gotten a
Promptitude to act, either by some strong, or by some frequently repeated
actings, they abide in the Soul, even when the Acts are intermitted; as in
sleep, a Navigator, Scribe, or Musician, are really Artists, when they are
neither Sailing, Writing or Playing: Because the habits still remain in their
minds, as is evident in this, that when they awake, they can perform their
several works, without learning the rules of their Art anew.

A Vital Substance.
II. The Soul is a vital Substance.: i. e.

A Substance which has an essential principle of Life in it self. A living
active Being. A living Soul, says Moses in the Text; and hereby it is
distinguished from, and opposed to matter, or body. The Soul moves it self and
the body too; it has a self-moving Virtue or Power in it self, whereas the
matter or body is wholly passive, and is moved, and acted not by it self, but
by this vital Spirit. James 2.26. The body without the Spirit is dead. It acts
not at all but as it is acted by this invisible spirit. This is so plain that
it admits of sensible proof and demonstration. Take mere matter, and compound
or divide it, alter it and change it how you will, you can never make it see,
feel, hear, or act vitally without a quickening and actuating Soul: Yet we must
still remember, that this active, vital principle, the Soul, though it has
this vital Power in it self, it has it not from it self, but in a constant
receptive dependence upon God, the first Cause both of its Being and Power.

A Spiritual Substance.
III. It is a Spiritual Substance.

All Substances are not gross, material, visible and palpable substances, but
there are spiritual and immaterial, as well as corporeal substances discernable
by Sight or Touch. To deny this were to turn a downright Sadducee, and to deny
the existence of Angels and Spirits, Acts 23.8. The word Substance as it is
applied to the Soul of Man, puzzles and confounds the dark understandings of
some, that know not what to make of an immaterial Substance, whereas in this
place it is no more than A Substance in this use of the word, is that which
depends not in respect of its Being upon any other fellow creature, as
Accidents and Qualities do, whose Being is by having their in-being in another
fellow creature as their subject; but this Being, The Soul, exists in it self.
substare accidentibus, (i. e.) to be a subject in which, properties,
affections and habits are seated and subjected. This is a spiritual Substance,
and is frequently in Scripture called a Spirit; into thy hands I commit my
spirit, Luke 23.46. Lord Jesus receive my spirit, Acts 7.59. and so frequently
all over the Scriptures. And the spirituality of its nature appears (1.) by its
Descent in a peculiar way from the Father of Spirits: (2.) in that it rejoices
in the essential Properties of a Spirit: (3.) That at Death it returns to that
great Spirit who was its Efficient and Former.

(1.) It descends in a peculiar way from the Father of Spirits, as has been
shown in the opening of this Text: God styles himself its Father, Heb. 12.9.
its Former, Zech. 12.1. It Is true, he gives to all living things (...), life
and breath, Acts 1^.25. Other Souls are from him, as well as the rational
Soul.; but in a far different way, and Manner. They flow not immediately from
him by Creation, Genesis 1.24, 27.
as this does. It is said, Let the Earth bring forth the living Creature after
his kind, but God created Man in his own Image: Which seems plainly to make a
specifical difference betwixt the reasonable and all other Souls.

(2.) It rejoices in the essential Properties of a Spirit: for it is an
incorporeal Substance, as Spirits are. It has not parts extra parts,
extension of parts: nor is it divisible, as the body is: It has not Dimensions
and Figures as matter has; but is a most pure invisible and (as the acute and
judicious Dr. More expresses it) an indiscerpible Substance. It has the
Principle of Life and Motion in it self, or rather, it is such a Principle it
self, and is not moved as the dull and sluggish matter is per aliud, by
another. Its efficacy is great, though it be unseen, and not liable to the Test
of our touch, as no spiritual substances are. A Spirit (says Christ) has not
Flesh and Bones, Luke 24.39. We both grant and feel that the Soul has a love
and inclination to the body, (which indeed is no more than it is necessary it
should have;) yet can we no more infer its Corporeity from that love to the
body, than we can infer the Corporeity of Angels from their affection and
benevolent love to men. It is a Spirit of a nature vastly different from the
body in which it is immersed. Mr. Hows Funeral Sermon. p. 9, 10.
There is (says a learned Author) no greater mystery in nature, than the union
betwixt the Soul and Body. That a Mind and Spirit should be so tied and linkt
to a clod of Clay, that while that remains in a due temper, it cannot by any
art or power free it self! -- What so much akin are a Mind and a piece of
Earth, a Clod, and a Thought: that they should be thus affixed to one another?

Certainly, the heavenly pure Bodies do not differ so much from a dunghill, as
the Soul and Body differ: they differ but as more pure and less pure matter;
but these, as material and immaterial. If we consider wherein consists the
Being of a Body, and wherein, that of a Soul, and then compare them, the matter
will be clear.

We cannot come to an apprehension of their Beings, but by considering their
primary passions and properties, whereby they make discovery of themselves. The
first and primary affection of a body Philosophical Essay, ^. 2.. 2. p. 39.
(as is rightly observed) is that extension of parts whereof it is compounded,
and a capacity of Division, upon which, as upon the fundamental mode, the
particular Dimensions (that is, the figures) and the local motion do depend.

Again, for the Being of our Souls, if we reflect upon our selves we shall
find, that all our knowledge of them resolves into this, that we are Beings
conscious to our selves of several kinds of cogitations; that by our outward
senses we apprehend bodily things present, and by our imagination we apprehend
things absent. And that we often recover into our apprehension things past and
gone, and upon our perception of things, we find our selves variously affected.

Let these two properties of a Soul and Body be compared, and upon the first
view of a considering mind it will appear, that Divisibility is not
Apprehension, or Judgment, or Desire, or Discourse: That to cut a body into
several parts, or put it into several shapes, or bring it to several motions,
or mix it after several ways, will never bring it to apprehend, or desire. No
man can think the combining of Fire, and Air, and Water, and Earth, should make
the lump of it to know or comprehend what is done to it, or by it. We see
manifestly, that upon the division of the body, the Soul remains entire, and
undivided. It is not the loss of a Leg, or Arm, or Eye, that can maim the
Understanding, or the Will, or cut off the affections.

Nay, it pervades the body it dwells in, and is whole in the whole, and whole
in every Understand i^ negatively, that the Soul is not in the parts of the
body per parts, part in one part. and part in another* seeing it is
indivisible, and has no parts.
part, which it could never do, if it self were material. Yea, it comprehends
in its understanding, the body or matter in which it is lodged; and more than
that, it can and does form conceptions of pure spiritual and immaterial Beings,
which have no Dimensions or Figures; all which sh^ws it to be no corporeal, but
a Spiritual and immaterial Substance.

(3.) As it derives its Being from the Father of Spirits in a peculiar way, and
rejoices in its spiritual properties; so at death it returns to that great
Spirit, from whence it came. It is not annihilated or resolved into soft Air,
or sucked up again by the Element of Fire, or caught back again into the soul of
the World, as some have dreamed; but it returns to God who gave it, to give an
account of it self to him, and receive its Judgment from him. Then shall the
dust return to the earth as it was, and the Spirit shall return to God who gave
it, Eccles. 12.7. Each part of Man to its like, dust to dust, and spirit to
spirit. Not that the Soul is resolved into God, as the Body is into Earth: but
as God created it a rational Spirit, conscious to it self of moral good and
evil; so when it has finished its time in the body, it must appear before the
God of the Spirits of all flesh, its Arbiter and final Judge.

By all which we see that as it is elevated too high on the one hand, when it
is made a particle of God himself; not only the Creature, but a part of God, as
Anima autem mentis particeps facta, non solum Dei opus est, verum etiam pars;
neque ab ^o, sed de eo and ex eo facta. Plut. de Qu. Platon.
Plutarch, and Quomoda credibile vidatur tam axiguam mentem humanam membranula.
etrebri, aut cord, ^aud ^mplis spaciis in^lusam; tantam Coeli mundique
magnitudinem capere, nisi illius divinae f^licisque animae particula esset
indivisibilis? Philo.
Philo Iudaeus, and others have termed it: (a Spirit it is, but of another and
inferior kind) So it is degraded too low, when it is affirmed to be matter,
though the purest, finest and most subtle in nature; which approaches nearest
to the nature of a spirit. A Spirit it is, as much as an Angel is a Spirit,
though it be a spirit of another species. This is the name it is known by
throughout the Scriptures. In a word, it is void of mixture and composition,
there are no jarring qualities, compounded Elements, or divisible parts in the
Soul, as there are in bodies, but it is a pure, simple, invisible and
indivisible Substance, which proves its spirituality, and brings us to the
fourth particular, viz.

IV. It is an immortal Substance. An immortal Substance.


The simplicity and spirituality of its nature of which I spoke before, plainly
shows us, that it is in its very nature designed for Immortality: for such a
being or Substance as this, has none of the seeds of Corruption and Death in
its nature, as all material and compounded Beings have. It has nothing within
it tending to dissolution: No jarring Elements, no contrary qualities are found
in Spirits, as there are in other Creatures of a mixed nature. Physicians and
Philosophers have disputed and contended eagerly about the true causes of
natural Death, Litigamus de via, interim ad termiminum rapimar.
and whilst they have been contending about the way, they have come to the end.
The ingress of the Soul is obscure, and its egress not clear. But this seems to
be the thing in which they generally center, that the expense and destruction
of the (...). Arist. de long. and brev. vit.

Dum flammat and micat calidum nativum corporis nostri in humido primigenio,
ej^s humidi substantia consumitur, non ^liter qua^ in lampade o^tum a flamma
exhauritur. Heurnius Aphor 1. Tam diu durat vigor vitae. quam diu stat calidum
nativum, donec ad morte^ fuerit deventum. Et quantum a calido and humido
receditur, tantus ad mortem fit acc^ssus. J. Bapt. Montanus. Ortus nostri
primordia, caloris and humoris nativi habent summum complementum, etc.
Fernelius, liber de spir. and call.


natural moisture, or radical balsam, as others call it, which is as the Oil
that maintains natural heat, or the Bridle that restrains that flame of life
from departing (as others express it); this is the cause of natural Death.
Others Vergente aetate, inaequalis adm^dum sit reparatio; aliae parts
reparantur satis faeliciter, sed aliae aegre, and in pejus. u^ ab eo tempore
corpora humana subiri incipiunt tormentum illud McZen^ii, ut viva in am^lexu
mo^t^orum immoriantur. Verulam in adita Hist. vitae and mortis.
assign the unequal reparation of the parts of the body, as the cause of death.
But be it one or other, it is evident, the Soul which consists neither of
contrariant qualities, nor of dissimilar parts, must be above the reach and
stroke of Death. For if the Soul dye, it must be either from some seeds and
principles of Death and Corruption within it self, or by some destructive power
without it self. In it self you see there is no seed or principle of death; and
if it be destroyed by a power without it self, it must be either by the stroke
of some Creature, or from the hand of God that first formed and created it: But
the hand and power of no Creature can destroy it; creature power reaches no
farther than the body, Matthew. 10.28. they cannot kill the Soul. And though the
Almighty power of God that created it out of nothing, can as easily reduce it
to nothing; yet he will never do so. For besides the Designation for Eternity,
which is discernible in its very nature, (as before was observed) and which
speaks the intention of God to perpetuate it, the threatenings of Eternal Wrath,
and promises of everlasting life respectively made to the souls of Men, as they
shall be found in Christ, or out of Christ, puts it beyond all doubt, that they
shall never dye: as will be more fully evidenced in the following Discourse.

Well then, I hope so far our way is clear in the search of the nature of the
Soul, that it is a Substance, a Spiritual Substance, and being so, it is also
an immortal Substance. No doubt remains with me as to either of these. Let us
then proceed to the consideration of its faculties and powers, by which it may
be yet more fully known, and we shall find, that,

V. It is a vital, Endued with Understanding.
spiritual and immortal Substance, endued with an understanding.

This is the noble leading faculty of the Soul: we are not distinguished from
Brutes by our senses, but by our understanding. As grace sets one man above
another, so understanding sets the meanest man, above the best of Brutes.
Strange and wonderful things are performed by the natural instinct and sagacity
of Beasts; but yet, what is said of one is true of them all, God has not
imparted understanding to them, Job 39.17. This is a Jewel which adorns none,
but rational Creatures, Men, and Angels.

It is a Faculty of the reasonable Soul, What the Understanding is.
by which a man apprehends and judges all intelligible things.

The Object of it is every Being, so far as it is true in it self, and
apprehensible by Man. It has a twofold use in the life of man, viz. (1.) To
Distinguish truth from error and falsehood: by this candle of the Lord, lighted
up in the Soul of man, he may discern betwixt duty and sin, good and evil: it is
the eye of the Soul, by which it sees the way in which we should go, and the
dangerous precipices that are on either side. It is the souls Taster, and
discerns wholesome food from baneful poison, Job 12, 11. Does not the (...) (
i.e. the understanding by the ear) try words, as the mouth tastes meat? It
brings all things as it were, in the lump before it, and then sorts them, and
orderly ranks them into their proper Classes of lawful and unlawful, necessary
and indifferent, expedient and inexpedient, that the Soul may not be damnified
by mistaking one for another. And this judgment of Discretion every man must
be allowed for himself. No man is obliged to shut the eyes of his own
Understanding, and follow another man blindfold. (2.) To direct and guide us in
our practice. This faculty is by Philosophers rightly called (...), the leading
faculty, because the will follows its practical dictates. It sits at helm, and
guides the course of the Soul: Not impelling or rigorously enforcing its
dictates upon the will; for the Will cannot be so imposed upon; but by giving
it a directive light, or pointing as it were with its finger, at what it ought
to choose, and what to refuse.


To this Faculty belong two other excellent and wonderful powers of the Soul,
viz. 1. Thoughts. 2. Conscience.


What a Thought is.
1. The power or ability of Cogitation: Thoughts are properly the actings and
agitations of the mind, or any actual operation of the understanding. They are
the musings of the mind, which are acted in the speculative part of the
understanding. It is observable that the ^^^ro^a cogitatio est mentis agitatio,
Pa^or. vel actio mentis, zanch. (...) cum puncto sinistro, locutus est o^e, aut
cord: and (...) est sermocinari intra se, (i. e.) apud se, in a^imis suis.
Hebrew word (...) suach which is used for meditation, or thinking, signifies
both to think and to speak in the mind. When the understanding or mind revolves
and meditates the things that come into it, that very Meditation is an inward
speaking, or a hidden word in the heart. Deuteronomy. 15.9. Beware lest there be a
thought in thy wicked heart, as some render it: In the Hebrew it is (...) a
word in thy heart: so Matthew. 9.3, 4. (...), they spoke within themselves, i. e.
they thought in their hearts. Matthew. 21.25.
The Objects presented to the mind are the Companions, with whom our hearts
talk and converse.

Thoughts are the figments and Creatures of the mind. They are formed within
it, in (...) innumerable. The power of cogitation is in the mind, yea, in the
spirit of the mind. Phantasia m^nti offert phantasmata, Picol.
The fancy indeed whilst the Soul is embodied, ordinarily and for the most part
presents the appearances and likenesses of things to the mind; but yet it can
form thoughts of things which the fancy can present no Image of, as when When
we think of God, says ^^rx. Tyr. Diss. 1. we must think of nothing material,
(...).
the Soul thinks of God or of itself. This power of cogitation goes with the
Soul, and is rooted in it, when it is separated from the body; and by it we
speak to God, and converse with Angels, and other spirits in the unbodied
State, as will be more fully opened in the process of this Discourse.

2. The Conscience belongs also to this faculty, What Conscience is.
for it being the judgment of a man upon himself, with respect or relation to
the judgment of God; it must needs belong to the understanding part or faculty.
Thoughts are formed in the speculative, but Conscience belongs to the practical
understanding. Iudicium appello conscientiam, ut ad intellect^m eam (...)
oste^^am. Ames.
It is a very high and awful power; it is solo Deo minor, and rides (as Joseph
did) in the second Chariot. The next and immediate Officer under God. He says
of Conscience with respect to every man, as he once said of Moses with respect
to Pharaoh, See, I have made (...) a God to Pharaoh, Exodus 7.1. The voice of
Conscience is the voice of God, for it is his Vicegerent and Representative.
What it binds on earth, is bound in heaven; and what it loses on earth, is
loosed in heaven. It observes, records, and bears witness to all our actions:
and acquits or condemns as in the name of God for them. Its Consolations are
most sweet, and its Condemnations most terrible, so terrible that some have
chosen death, which is the King of terrors, rather than to endure the
scorching heat of their own Consciences. The greatest Deference and Obedience
is due to its Commands. And a man had better Quas nos oportet mortes
praeeligere, quod non supplicium potius far; immo i^ quam profundam infe^ni
Abyssum ^o^ intra^e, quam co^tra conscientiam atte^tari? Zuing^.
endure any rack or torture in the world, than incur the torments of it. It
accompanies us as our shadow, wherever we go; and when all others forsake us,
(as at death they will) Conscience is then with us, and is never more active
and vigorous than at that time. Nor does it forsake us after death, but where
the Soul goes, it goes; and will be its Companion in the other world for ever.
How glad would the Damned be, if they might but have left their Consciences
behind them, when they went hence, but as Bernard rightly, Ipsa judicat, ipsa
imperat, ipsa observat; ipsa judicat, ipsa to^to^ ipsa carcer. Bern. lib. de
Conse. cap. 9.
It is both Witness, Judge, Tormentor and Prison, it accuses, judges,
punishes and condemns.

And thus briefly of the understanding, which has many Offices, and as many
names from those Offices.

It is sometimes called Wit, Reason, Understanding, Opinion, Judgment. And why
we bestow so many names upon one and the same faculty, the learned Author of
that small but excellent Nosce Teipsum, p. 48, 49.
Tract de Anima, gives us this true and ingenious account.

THe Wit, the Pupil of the Souls clear eye,
And in man's world, the only shining Star,
Looks in the Mirroir of the Fantasy
Where all the gatherings of the Senses are.
And after by discoursing to and fro
Anticipating and Comparing things,
She does all universal natures know,
And all Effects into their Causes brings.
When she rates things, and moves from ground to ground,
The name of Reason she obtains by this;
But when by reason she the truth has found,
And stands fixed, she Understanding is.
When her Assent she lightly does incline,
To either part she is Opinion light;
But when she does by principles define
A Certain truth, she has true Judgments fight.
And as from Senses, Reasons work does spring,
So many Reasons Understanding gain;
And many Understandings Knowledge bring,
And by much Knowledge Wisdom we obtain.
VI. Endued with a Will. What the Will is.
God has endued the Soul of man not only with an Understanding to discern and
direct, but also with a Will to govern, moderate and overruled the actions of
Life.

The Will is a faculty of the rational Soul, whereby a man either chooses, or
refuses the things which the understanding discerns, and knows.

This is a very high and noble power of the Soul. The understanding seems to
bear the same relation to the Will, as a grave Counselor does to a great
Prince. It glories in two excellencies, viz, 1. Liberty. 2. Dominion.


1. It has Freedom and Liberty, (...). Zeno.
it cannot be compelled and forced: Coaction is repugnant to its very nature.
In this it differs from the understanding, that the understanding is wrought
upon necessarily, but the will acts spontaneously. This Liberty of the Will
respects the choice or refusal of the means for attaining those ends it
prosecutes, according as it finds them more or less conducible thereunto. The
Liberty of the Will must be understood to be in things natural, which are
within its own proper sphere, not in things supernatural. It can move or not
move the Body as it pleases, but it cannot move toward Christ in the way of
faith as it pleases: it can open or shut the hand or eye at its pleasure, but
not the heart. True indeed, it is not compelled or forced to turn to God by
supernatural grace, but in a way suitable to its nature, it is determined and
drawn to Christ, Psalm. 1.10.3. It is drawn by a mighty power, and yet runs
freely, Cant. 1.4. Draw me, we will run after thee.

Efficacious grace, and victorious Delight, is a thing very different from
compulsive force. Pelagiu^ (as a late Dr. Manton in Psalm. 119. v. 36.
Author speaks) at first gave all to nature, acknowledged no necessity of
divine grace; but when this proud Doctrine found little countenance, he called
nature by the name of grace. And when that deceit was discovered, he
acknowledged no other grace but outward instruction, or the benefit of external
revelation, to discourse and put men in mind of their duty. Being yet driven
farther, he acknowledged the grace of Pardon; and before a man could do any
thing acceptably, there was a necessity of the remission of sin, and then he
might obey God perfectly. But that not sufficing, he acknowledged another
grace, viz. the example of Christ, which does both secure our rule, and
encourage our practice. And last of all, his followers owned some kind of
internal grace, but they made that to consist in some illumination of the
understanding, or moral persuasion, by probable arguments, to excite the will,
and this not absolutely necessary, but only for facilitation, as an Horse to a
journey, which otherwise a man might go a-foot. Others grant the secret
influences of Gods grace, but make the Will of man a coordinate cause with
God, namely, that God does propound the Object, hold forth inducing
considerations, give some remote power and assistance; but still there is an
indifferency in the Will of man, to accept, or refuse, as likes him best. Thus
have they been forced to quit and change their ground, but still the pride of
nature will not let men see the necessity of divine efficacious influences upon
the Will, and the consistency thereof with natural Liberty.

Imperium 1. D^spotic^m. 2. Politicum.



2. Its dignity consists in its Dominion as well as in its liberty. The Will
has an Empire and Scepter belonging to it; Yea, a double Empire, for it rules,
1. Over the Body, imperio desp^tico, by way of absolute Command. 2. Over the
other powers and passions of the Soul, imperio politico, by way of suasion.


(1.) The Will, like an absolute Sovereign, Homo no^ agit ex necessitate
naturae, sed libere, sc. modo rationali, hoc est modo imperii. Ad imperium
requiritur dictamen ultimum intellectus pr^ctici, and stante effic^ci^ imperii,
voluntas libere mov^tur. Cumel. de volun. p. 50.
reigns over the body, ( i.e.) its external members, by way of absolute
command. It says, as the Centurion did, I am in authority, and God has put
the many members of the body in subjection to me. I say to one, Move, and it
moves; to another, Stop, and it stops; and to a third, Do this, and it does it.
The obsequious members like so many Servants have their eyes waiting on the
imperial Commands of the Will, and it is admirable to behold, with what
dispatch and speed they execute its Commands, as if their obedient motions were
rather concomitant, than subsequent acts to the Wills mandates. Let it but
command to have the windows of the body open, or shut, and its done in a
moment, in the twink of an eye. And so for the rest of the external senses and
members, they pay it most ready Obedience. Yet when I say, the Will has a
despotical and absolute Sovereignty over the members, it must be understood
with a double limitation. First, They are only at its beck for use and service,
it can use them whilst well, and rightly disposed; but it cannot perpetuate
them, or restore them when indisposed. If the Soul will the health and life of
the body never so intensely and vehemently, it cannot keep off Death one moment
the longer from it. And, Secondly, Its Sovereignty no way intrenches upon, not
interferes with the Dominion of Providence over the members of the body, and
the various motions of them. God has reserved a Sovereign negative voice to
himself, whatever Decrees the Will passes. Jeroboam stretches out his hand
against the man of God to smite him, but God puts a remora in the very instant
to the loco-motive faculty, that though he would never so fain, he could not
pull in his hand again to him; 1 Kings 13.4. The Will commands the service of
the tongue, and charge it to deliver faithfully such or such words, in which,
it may be, the ruin of good men may be imported, and when it comes to do its
office, the tongue faulters, and contrary to the command of the Will, drops
some word, that discovers and defeats the design of the Will, according to that
in Job 12.20. He removes away the speech of the trusty. This is its Despotical
and Sovereign power over the external members of the body.

(2.) It has a political power over the faculties and passions of the Soul,
not by way of absolute command, but by way of suasion, and insinuation. Thus it
can often times persuade the understanding and thoughts to lay by this or that
subject, and apply themselves to to the study of another. It can bridle, and
restrain the Affections and Passions, but yet it has no absolute command over
the inner, as it has over the outward man: Its weakness and inability to
govern the inner man, appears in two things more especially remarkable, viz. 1.
It cannot with all its power and skill command and fetch off the thoughts from
some subjects which are set on, at some times with extraordinary weight upon
the Soul. However the thoughts may obsequiously follow its beck at some times,
yea, for the most part; yet there are Cases and Seasons, in which its authority
and persuasions cannot disengage one thought, as (1.) when God has to do with
the Soul in the work of Conversion. When he convinces of sin and danger, and
sets a man's evils in order before his eyes: These are terrible representations,
and fain would the carnal will disengage the thoughts from such sad subjects,
and strives by all manner of persuasions and diversions so to do; but all to no
purpose. Psalm. 51. v. 3. My sin is ever before me. The thoughts are fixed, and
there is no removing of them. It may give them a little interruption, but they
return with the more impetuous violence. And instead of gaining them off, they
at last (or rather, God by them) gains over the Will also. (2.) When Satan has
to do with the Soul in the way of Temptation, and hellish Suggestion. Look as
the Carnal will opposed it self to the thoughts in the former case to no
purpose; so the sanctified Will opposes it self to them in this case, oft-times
with as little effect or success, as he that opposes his weak breath to the
strong Current of a mighty River. Well were it, if the Sanctified Will were now
the master of the Fantasy, and could control the thoughts of the heart; but
like a mad horse, the Fancy takes the Bit in its Teeth, and runs whither it
pleases; the Will cannot govern it. Think quite anoth^^ way, says the Will:
turn thy thoughts to other things; but much the near, the Soul turns a deaf
ear to its Counsels. 2. It cannot quiet and compose a raging Conscience, and
reduce it at its pleasure to Rest and Peace. This is the peculiar work of God.
He only that stills the stormy Seas, can quiet the distressed and tempestuous
Soul. The impotence of the will in this case is known to all that have been in
those deeps of trouble. And this is the misery of the Devil and the damned,
that though they would never so fain, yet they cannot get rid of those
tormenting impressions made upon them by their own trembling and condemning
Consciences. There would not be so many pale, sweating, affrighted Consciences
on Earth, and in Hell, if the Will had any command or power over them. Tam
frigida men's est
Criminibus; tacita suda^t praecordia culpa.
It Is an horrible sight to see such a trembling upon all the members, such a
cold Sweat upon the panting bosom of a self-condemned, and wrath-presaging
Soul, in which it can by no means relieve or help it self. These things are
exempt from the liberty and dominion of the Will of man, but notwithstanding
these exemptions, it is a noble faculty, and has a vastly extended Empire in
the Soul of man: It is the door of the Soul, at which the spirit of God knocks
for entrance. When this is won, the Soul is won to Christ; and if this stand
out in rebellion against him, he is barred out of the Soul, and can have no
saving union with it. The truth of grace is to be judged and discerned by its
compliance with his call, and the measure of Grace to be estimated by the
degree of its subjection to his Will.

VII. The Soul of man is not only endued with an Understanding, Furnished with
various Affections and Passions.
and Will: but also with various Affections and Passions, which are of great
use and service to it; and speak the excellency of its nature. They are
originally designed and appointed for the happiness of man, in the promoting
and securing his chiefest good; to which purpose they have a natural aptitude:
For the true Happiness and Rest of the Soul not being in it self, nor in any
other creature, but in God, the Soul must necessarily move out of it self, and
beyond all other created Beings, to find and enjoy its true felicity in him.
The Soul considered at a distance from God, its true Rest and happiness, is
furnished and provided with desire and hope to carry it on, and quicken its
motion toward him. These are the arms it is to stretch out toward him, in a
state of absence from him. And seeing it is to meet with many obstacles,
Enemies, and difficulties in its course, which hinder its motion, and hazard
its fruition of him, Passio animae nihil aliud est, quam motus ap^etitivae
virtutis in prosecutione boni, vel fug^ mali.
God has planted in it, Fear, Grief, Indignation, Jealousy, Anger, etc. to
grapple with, and break through those intercurrent difficulties, and hazzards.
By these weapons in the hand of grace, it conflicts with that which opposes its
passage to God, as the Apostle expresses that holy fret and passion of the
Corinthians, and what a fume their souls were in, by the gracious motion of the
irascible appetite, 2 Cor. 7.11. For behold this self same thing, that ye
sorrowed after a godly sort; what carefulness it wrought in you, yea, what
clearing of your selves, yea, what indignation, yea, what fear, yea, what
vehement desire, yea, what zeal, yea, what revenge? Much like the raging and
struggling of Waters, which are interrupted in their course by some dam, or
obstacle, which they strive to bear down, and sweep away before them.

But the Soul considered in full union with, and fruition of God its supreme
Happiness, is accordingly furnished with the affections of Love, Delight, and
Joy; whereby it rests in him, and enjoys its proper blessedness in his presence
for ever. Yea, even in this life these affections are in an imperfect degree
exercised upon God, according to the prelibations and enjoyments it has of him
by faith in its way to Heaven. In a word,

The true uses and most excellent ends for which these affections and passions
are bestowed upon the Soul of man, are to qualify it, and make it a fit
subject to be wrought upon in a moral way of persuasions and allurements in
order to its union with Christ, (for by the affections, (as Mr. Fenner rightly
observes) the Soul becomes marriageable, or capable of being espoused to him)
and being so, then to assist it in the prosecution of its full enjoyment in
Heaven, as we heard but now.

But alas! how are they corrupted and inverted by sin. The concupiscible
appetite greedily fastens upon the Creature, not upon God; and the irascible
appetite is turned against holiness, not sin. But I must insist no farther on
this subject here, it deserves an entire Treatise by it self.

VIII. And an inclination and love to the Body.
The Soul of man has in the very frame and nature of it an inclination to the
body. There is in it a certain Pondus or inclination which naturally bends or
sways it toward matter, or a body. There are three different Natures found in
living Creatures, viz. 1. The Brutal. 2. The Angelical. 3. The Humane.


(1.) The Soul of a Brute is wholly confined to, and dependent on the matter or
body with which it is united. It is dependent on it both in esse, and in
operari. In its being and working; it is but a material form, which rises from,
and perishes with the body. The Soul of a Brute, Lord Chief Justice Hale, in
his Treatise de Anim^, p. 56.
(says a great Person) is no other than a fluid bodily Substance, the more
lively, subtle, and refined part of the blood (called spirit) quick in motion,
and from the Arteries by the branches of the Carotides carried to the Brain,
and from thence conveyed to the Nerves and Muscles moves the whole frame and
mass of the body, and receiving only certain weak impressions from the Senses,
and of short continuance; hindered and obstructed of its work and motion,
vanishes into the soft Air.

(2.) An Angel is a Spirit free from a body, and created without an appetite or
inclination to be imbodied. The Stoics call the Angels (...), souly
substances. And the Peripateticks, formas abstractas, abstract forms. They are
Spirits free from the fetters and cloggs of the body. Angelus est anima
perfecta, and anima est Angelus imperfectus. Bell de Ascen. mentis.
An Angel is a perfect Soul, and an Humane Soul an imperfect Angel. Yet Angels
have no such rooted disaffection and abhorrence of a body, but that they have,
and can in a ready obedience to their Lords commands, and delight to serve him,
assume bodies for a time, to converse with men in them; ( i.e.) Aerial Bodies
in the figure and shape of humane bodies. So we read, Genesis 18.2. three men (
i.e. Angels in humane shape and appearance) stood by Abraham, and talked with
him; and at Christ's Sepulcher, Luke 24. There appeared two men in shining
garments. But they abide in these bodies, as we do in an Inn for a night, or
short season, they dwell not in them as our souls in those houses of flesh,
which we cannot put on and off at pleasure, as they do; but as we walk in our
garments, which we can put off without pain.

(3.) The humane Soul is neither wholly tied to the body as the brutal soul is,
nor created without inclination to a body, as Angels are; but loves, and
inclines to it, though it can both live and act without it, when it is parted
from it at death. The proof of this Assertion, and the Reasons why God created
it with such an inclination, will in their proper place be more fully spoken to
in the following Discourse. All that I shall add is, that in this, as well as
in some other respects, our souls are made a little lower than the Angels, but
when they are uncloathed of the body, and have received it again in a new
Edition, a Spiritual body; then they shall be (...), equal unto Angels in the
way and manner of life and action.

Thus I have as briefly as I can, dispatched the first thing propounded, viz.
The Nature of the Soul, in the explication of these seven particulars. It is a
Substance, a Vital, Spiritual and immortal Substance, a Substance endued with
Understanding, Will, Affections, and an Inclination to the body. And now we are
come to the

II. Branch, viz. Its Original and Infusion. The Souls Original and Descent.


I. As to its Original, I have described it to be immediately from God, in the
way of Creation. An honor done to no other living Creature except Angels. The
world has been troubled with a great many extravagant and wild notions, about
the Original of the Soul of man: (a certain Mark and Argument of its Apostasy
from God). Solinus resert de quodam, quod accepto v^l^ere in occipitio, ad
tantam devenit ignorantiam, ut nesciret se habuisse nomen. Augustodun. de
Philosoph. Mundi, lib. 4. c. 24.
Solinus writes of one who by a wound in the hinder part of his head, fell into
such a degree of Ignorance and Oblivion, that he forgot his own name, and could
not tell whether he had any name at all. But O! What a stunning blow did man
receive by the Fall, that he should forget the very Author of his Being, and
rather claim alliance, and derive the Being of his Soul from any thing, than
God; though it bears the very Marks and Characters of its divine Author and
Father, upon it! The principal errors about the Origin of the Soul (for that
wild notion of Epicuru^ has been laid so flat by the pens of many learned men,
that it is a vanity to strike one blow more at it) may be reduced to these
three heads.

(1.) First, some affirm it to be by way of Datur agens Physicum quod aliud
esse non potest quam parens; qui ^i seminis animam e materiae sinu eliciat.
Traduction, or natural generation from the Parents to the Child. This opinion
is very ancient, Tertullian and diverse of the Western Fathers closed with it,
as judging it the best expedient to solve the difficulties of the souls taint
and defilement with Original sin. But Antiquity is no passport for errors.
The gray hairs of opinions (as one well notes) are then honorable, when they
are found in the way of truth. Dr. Brown tells us he should rather incline to
the Creation, Religio Medici, ^.36.
than the Traduction of the Soul, though either opinion (says he) will consist
well enough with Religion; did not one Objection haunt him, and this is a
Conclusion from the equivocal and monstrous productions by unnatural
Copulations: As of a Man and Beast; for if the Soul of man (says he) be not
transmitted and transfused in the Seed, why are not those productions merely
Beasts, but have also an impression and tincture of reason in as high a measure
as it can evidence it self in those improper Organs?

Which way the Doctors judgment had inclined in this Controversy, had been of
no great consideration, to the determination of it. Though it is pity we should
lose his consent and company, for the sake of such a beastly Objection as this,
which haunts his mind: for if there be any such creatures, that seem to have a
tincture of reason, it is but a tincture, and a seeming, not a real tincture
neither: which many other Brutes have.

The Dr. is too well acquainted with Philosophy, and a man of too much reason,
to allow himself to think, that such a production, as he speaks of, has two
Natures and essential Forms in one body, as of a Man and a Horse. He knows that
every entity has but one specifical Essence, and can have no more, except he
will place one and the same thing under diverse Species in the predicament of
substance. And as there cannot be two distinct forms, so neither can there be a
mixtion of them in the Centaure or monstrous Birth: For ex duobus entibus per
se, non fit unum ^ns per se. But he confesses this Objection was bred among
the Weeds and Tares of his own Brain, (a rank soil no doubt) and I am pretty
confident, he had weeded it out in his latter years; for I find this notion of
Centaures (that is half Horses, half Men) put into its proper place among his
Vulgar Errors, Book 1. chap. 4. And so I suppose that rubb being out of the
way, he returned again to us.

(2.) A Second opinion was, that they were procreated by Angels; and that which
gave the ground (such as it is) to this Opinion, or Fancy, is the similitude or
resemblance which is found betwixt Angels and the Souls of Men. Perfectum est
q^od aliud sibi si^ile producit, sed immat^iales substantiae ^ulto perfectiores
sunt quam corporatae: ergo cum ^ic alias sibi secundum speciem similes
eff^^iant, potiori ratione poterunt Angeli substantiam aliquam incorpoream
inferio is natarae procreare, id est, Animam humanam. D. Dionys. cap. 4. de
divinis nominibus.
But this fancy needs not any industry to overthrow it, for though it be
certain there is a similitude and resemblance betwixt Angels and Souls, both
being immaterial and spiritual Substances: yet Angels neither propagate by
generation, nor is it in their power to create the least Fly or Worm in the
world, much less the Soul of man, the highest, noblest and most excellent Being
Great power they have, but no creating power, that is Gods incommunicable
property; and procreate our souls they did not, for they are spirits, yet
spirits of another species.

(3.) A Third sort there are who deny not that Souls are created Substances,
The coetaneous creation of Souls rejected.
and proceeded from God; but affirm withal, that he created them simul, and
semel, together and at once, as the Angels were, and that not one by one, as
men are born into the world. Of this opinion was Plato who thought all Plato in
Tima^o finxit Deum omnes animas h^meras ante corpora simul ^easse, and in
co^paribus stellis co^stitnisse: tum eas coelestium rerum t^dio, and te^renarum
am^re captas, ut tanti scel^ris panas lu^rt^t, in corpora tanq^^m in carcerem
conjectas.
humane souls to be created together before their bodies, and placed in some
glorious and suitable Mansions, as the Stars, till at last growing weary of
Heavenly, and falling in love with Earthly things, for a punishment of that
Crime, they were cast into Bodies, as into so many Prisons. Origin sucked in
this Notion of the praeexistence of Souls. And upon this supposition it was
that Porphyry tells us in the life of Plotinus, that he blushed as often as he
thought of his being in a Body, as a man that had lived in reputation and
honor, blushes when he is lodged in a Prison. The ground on which the Stoics
bottomed their Opinion was the great dignity and excellency of the Soul, which
inclined them to think they had never been degraded and abased as they are by
dwelling in such vile bodies, but for their faults. And that it was for some
former sin of theirs, that they slid down into gross matter, and were caught
into a vital union with it. Whereas, had they not sinned, they had lived in
celestial and splendid habitations more suitable to their dignity.

But this is a pure creature of fancy; for, (1.) no Soul in the world is
conscious to it self of such a praeexistence: nor can remember when it was
owner of any other habitation than that it now dwells in. (2.) Nor does the
Scripture give us the least hint of any such thing. Some indeed would catch
hold of that expression, Genesis 2. 2. God rested the seventh day from all the
works which he had made: And it is true, he did so, the work of Creation was
finished and sealed up, as to any new species or kind of creatures to be
created, no other sort of souls will ever be created, than that which was at
first; But yet God still creates individual Souls ( My father works hitherto,
and I work) of the same kind and nature with Adams Soul. And (3.) for their
detrusion into these bodies as a punishment of their sins in the former state,
if we speak of sin in Individuals or particular persons, the Scripture mentions
none, either original or actual, defiling any Soul in any other way but by its
union with the body. Praeexistence therefore is but a Dream.

But to me it is clear, that the Soul receives not its being by Traduction or
Generation; for that which is generable is also corruptible: but the spiritual
immortal Soul (as it has been proved to be) is not subject to Corruption. Nor
is it imaginable how a Soul should be produced out of matter, which is not
endued with reason: Or how a bodily Substance can impart that to another, which
it has not in it self. If it be said, the Soul of the child proceeds from the
Soul of the Parents: that cannot be; for spiritual Substances are impartible,
and nothing can be discinded from them. Abs^rdum est aliunde esse animam
^^st^am, aliunde animam Adae; cum omnes sunt ejusdem speciti. Zanch.
And it is absurd to think the Soul of Adam should spring from one Original,
and the souls of all his offspring from another, whilst both his and theirs
are of one and the same Nature and species. To all which let me add, that as
this Assertion of their Creation is most reasonable, so it is most scriptural.
It is reasonable to think and say, Nalla virtus a^li^a agit ult^a s^^m genus,
s^d Anima ^^tellectiva excedit totum genus corporae natarae cum sit s^bstantia
s^iritualis* etc. Con^ub^
that no active power can act beyond or above the proper Sphere of its activity
and ability. But if the Soul be elicited out of the power of matter, here would
be an effect produced abundantly more noble and excellent than his cause. And
as it is most reasonable, so it is most Scriptural. To this purpose diverse
Testimonies of Scripture are cited and produced by our Divines, amongst which
we may single out these four, which are of special remark and use, Heb. 12.9.
Furthermore, we had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them
reverence; shall we not much rather be in subjection to [the Father of Spirits]
and live? Here God is called the Father of Spirits, or of Souls, and that in an
emphatical Antithesis or contradistinction to our natural Fathers, who are
called the Fathers of our Flesh, or Bodies only. The true scope and sense of
this Text is with great judgment and clearness given us by that learned and
judicious Divine Mr. Pemb^e de Origin Animae p. 59. Nihil apertins and (...)
ista Antithesi, Carnem corpusque a pare^tib^s, animas a Deo accipimus; Quod si
vilioris partis Authors, and qui minus in nos juris habent, patienter
ca^ligantes f^^^imus: quam aequiore animo ^^remus e^m qui s^premum in nos jus
obtinet, utpote partis, quae in nobis est praestanti^sima, unicus Dato^,
Conditorqu^?
Pemble, in these words: Nothing is more plain and emphatical than this
Antithesis, We receive our flesh or body from our Parents, but our souls from
God; if then we patiently bear the chastisements of our Parents who are Authors
of the vilest part, and have the least right or power over us, with how much
more equal a mind should we bear his chastisements, who has the supreme right
to us, as he is the Father and only giver of that which is most excellent in
us, viz. our souls or spirits. Here it seems evident, that our souls flow not
to us in the material Chanel of fleshly generation or descent, as our bodies
do, but immediately from God their proper Father, in the way of Creation. Yet
he begets them not out of his own Essence or Substance, as Christ his natural
Son is begotten, but (...), out of nothing that had been before, as Theodoret
well expresses it. Agreeable hereunto is that place also in Testimonium satis
clarum, quo doc^mur, pari pass^ haectria ambulare; expansionem c^^li,
f^^dationem te^rae, and ^ormationem animae ratio^alis.
Zech. 12.1. The Lord which stretches forth the Heavens, and lays the
foundations of the Earth; and forms the spirit of man within him: Where the
forming of the spirit or soul of Man is associated with those two other
glorious effects of Gods creating power, namely, the expansion of the Heavens,
and laying the foundations of the Earth, all three are here equally assumed by
the Lord, as his remarkable and glorious works of Creation. He that created the
one, did as much create the other.

Now the two former we ^ind frequently instanced in Scripture, as the effects
of his creating Power, or works implying the Almighty power of God, and
therefore are presented as strong props to our Faith, when it is weak and
staggering, for want of visible matter of encouragement. Isa. 40.22. and 42.5.
Ierem. 10.12. Job 9.8. Psalm. 104.2. q. d. Are my people in Captivity, and their
Faith nonplust and at a loss, because there is nothing in sight that has a
tendency to their deliverance, no prepared matter for their Salvation? why, let
them consider who it was that created the Heavens, and the Earth, yea and their
Souls also, which are so perplexed with doubts, out of nothing; the same God
that did this, can also create Deliverance for his people, though there be no
praeexistent matter to work it out of.

R^sol^it So^omon utramque ^ominis partem in su^ prima principia. Ut ergo
corpus in terram, unde s^mptum est resolv^t; ita etiam si anima ex ^^abl^^tia
c^l^^ti, vel ex anima (ut ^lato ait) m^^di esset facta, in eam resol^isset
Solomon. (...) simp^icite^ de ipsa dicit, ea^ redit^ram ad De^m qui ded^t
illam; docet eam e nihito in quod resolvi non poss^t, crea^am esse. Zanch.
Add to this that excellent place of Solomon in Eccles 12. 7. Then shall the
Dust return to the Earth, as it was; and the Spirit to God who gave it. Where
he shows us what becomes of Man, and how each part, of which he consists, is
bestowed and disposed of after his Dissolution, by Death. And thus he states
it: These two constitutive parts of Man are a Soul, and a Body: These two parts
have two distinct Originals: The Body as to its material cause is Dust; the
Soul in its nature is a Spirit, and as to its Origin, it proceeded from the
Father of Spirits: it is his own creature in an immediate way. He gave it; He
gave it the being it has by Creation, and gave it to us ( i.e.) to our bodies
by Inspiration. Now qualis Genesis, talis Analysis: When death dissolves the
union which is betwixt them, each part returns to that from whence it came,
dust to dust, and the Spirit to God that gave it. The Body is expressed by its
material cause, dust, the Soul only by its efficient cause, as the gift of God,
because it had no material cause at all, nor was made out of any praeexistent
matter, as the Body was. And therefore Solomon here speaks of God, as if he had
only to do with the Soul, leaving the Body to its material and instrumental
causes, with whom he concurrs by a general influence. It Is God, not Man alone;
or God by Man, that has given us these bodies: but it is not Man but God alone,
who has given us these souls. He therefore passes by the Body, and speaks of
the Soul as the gift of God, because that part of Man, and that only flows
immediately from God, and at death returns to him that gave it. All these
expressions, The Father of Spirits, the former of the spirit in Man, the Giver
of the Spirit, how agreeable are they to each other, and all of them to the
point under hand, that the Soul flows from God by immediate Creation? You see
it has no principle out of which (according to the order of nature) it did
arise, as the body had; and therefore it has no principle into which
(according to the order of nature) it can be returned, as the body has: but
returns to God its efficient cause, if reconciled, to a Father, not only by
Creation but Adoption; if unreconciled, as a creature guilty of unnatural
Rebellion against the God that formed it, to be judged.

II. God created and infused it into the body with an inherent inclination and
affection to it. Anima, quae est corporis organici perfectio, corpus
necessari^^ est; non est enim forma separata: (i e.) proprie forma est; itaque
materiam requirit, usque ad^o, ut anima a corpore s^j^^cta, (...) tamen and
inclinationem retine ^t suam, quam corporis resurrectio co^se^uitur.
The nature of the Soul and Body are vastly different, there is no affinity or
similitude betwixt them* but it is in this case, as in that of Marriage. Two
persons of vastly different Educations, Constitutions and Inclinations, coming
under Gods Ordinance, into the nearest relation to each other, find their
affections knit and endeared by their relation to a degree beyond that which
results from the union of blood: So it is here. Whence this affection rises, in
what acts it is discovered, and for what reason implanted, will be at large
discovered in a distinct branch of the following Discourse, to which it is
assigned. Mean while I find my self concerned to vindicate what has been here
asserted from the Arguments which are urged against the immediate Creation and
infusion of the Soul, and in defense of the opinion of its Traduction from the
Parents. To conceal, or dissemble these Arguments and Objections, Cameronis
praelect. in Matthew. p. 121.
would be but a betraying of the truth I have here asserted, and give occasion
for some jealousy, that they are unanswerable. To come then to an issue, and
first,

It is urged, Object. 1.
that it is manifest in it self, and generally yielded, that the souls of all
other creatures come by generation, and therefore its probable that humane
souls flow in the same Chanel also.

There is a specific difference betwixt rational souls, Sol.
and the souls of all other creatures, and therefore no force at all in the
consequence. A material form may rise out of matter; but a Spiritual rational
Being (as the Soul of Man is) cannot so rise, being much more noble and
excellent than Matter is.

What Animal is there in the world, out of whose Soul the acts of reason spring
and flow, as they do out of humane Souls? Are they capable of inventing, or
(which is much less) of learning the Arts and Sciences? Can they correct their
senses, and demonstrate a Star to be far greater than the whole Earth, which to
the eye seems no bigger than the rowel of a Spurr? Do they foreknow the
Positions and Combinations of the Planets, and the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon
many years before they suffer them? And if they cannot perform these acts of
reason, as it is sure they cannot, how much less can they know, fear, love, or
delight in God, and long for the enjoyment of him! These things do plainly
evince humane Souls to be of another species, and therefore of an higher
Original than the souls of Brutes. If all have one common nature and Original,
why are they not all capable of performing the same rational and Religious Acts?

Object. 2.
But though it should be granted that the Soul of the first Man was by
immediate Creation and Inspiration from God, yet it follows not, that the souls
of all his posterity must be so too. God might create him with a power of
begeting other souls after his own Image. The first tree was created with its
seed in it self to propagate its kind, and so might the first Man.

Sol. 1.
Trees, Animals and such like, were not created immediately out of nothing, as
the Soul of Man was; but the Earth was the praeexistent matter out of which
they were produced, by the word of Gods blessing and power; but man's Soul was
immediately breathed into him by God, and had no praeexistent matter at all.
And besides, all humane souls being of one species, have therefore one and the
same Original: The Soul of the poorest child is of equal Dignity with the Soul
of Adam. And if we consult Job 33.4. we shall find Elihu giving us there the
same account, and almost in the same words, of the Original of his Soul, that
Moses in my Text gives us of the Original of Adams Soul. The Spirit of God has
formed me, and the Breath of the Almighty has given me Life.

But it is evident, Sol. 2.
souls spring not from the Parent, as one Plant or Animal does from another:
For they have their seed in themselves, apt and proper to produce their kind;
but the seed of souls is not to be found in man: It is not to be found in his
Body; for then (as was said before) a spiritual and nobler Essence must be
produced out of a material and baser matter, ( i.e.) the matter must give to
the Soul that which it has not in it self. Nor is it to be found in his Soul,
for the Soul being a pure, simple, and indivisible Being, can suffer nothing to
be discinded from it toward the production of another Soul. A spirit, as the
Soul is, is Substantia simplex and impartibilis; an uncompounded and
indiscerpible or impartible Being. Nor can it spring partly from the Body, and
partly from the Soul, as from con-causes; for then it should be partly
corporeal, and partly incorporeal as its causes are. So that there is no
Matter, Seed, or principle of Souls found in man; and to be sure (as Baronius
strongly argues) Pate^ neque producit animam filii ex aliqua re prae^^ilente;
neque producit eam ex nulla (...) praeexistente; h^c enim^est creare: e^go
nullo modo eam producit. Baronius dissert. secunda de Origin Animae, p. 120.
he cannot produce a Soul without praeexistent matter; for that were to make
him Omnipotent, and assign a creating power to a creature. Besides, that which
is generable is also corruptible, as we see Trees, Animals, etc. which are
produced that way, to be; but the Soul is not corruptible, as has in part been
already proved, and will more fully in the following Discourse. So that Adam's
Soul and the Souls of his posterity spring not from each other, but all from
God by Creation.

If the Soul be created and infused immediately by God, Object. 3.
either it comes out of his hands pure, or impure; if pure, how comes it to be
defiled and tainted with sin? If impure, how do we free God from being the
Author of sin?

If the question be, Sol
whether souls be pure or impure as soon as they are united with their bodies,
the answer is, They are impure, and tainted as soon as united. For the union
constitutes a child of Adam, and consequently a sinful impure creature. But if
it respect the condition and state, in which God created them, I answer with
Baronius, Ani^^ ^^strae a Deo creante (...) a^cipiunt puritatem, s^u justitiam;
neque imparitatem and propensionem ad malum: Se^ tant^m essentiam spiritualem,
and proprie^ates ab essentia diman^^tes. Baron. exerci^. p. 103.
They are created neither morally pure, nor impure; they receive neither
purity, nor impurity from him, but only their naked essence, and the natural
powers and properties flowing therefrom. He inspires not any impurity into
them, for he cannot be the Author of Sin, who is the Revenger of it. Nor does
he create them in their original purity and rectitude; for the sin of Adam lost
that, and God justly withholds it from his posterity. Who wonders (says one
Ienkins on Jude, Vol. 1. p. 559.
) to see the Children, the Palaces, and Gardens of Traitors to droop and decay,
and the Arms of his House and badge of his nobility to be defaced and reversed?
That which is abused by man to the dishonor of God, may justly be destroyed,
(I add in this case) or withheld by God, to the detriment of man. Adam
voluntarily and actually deprived himself, and meritoriously deprived all his
posterity of that original righteousness and purity in which he was created. As
an holy God, he cannot inspire any impurity, and as a just and righteous God,
he may and does withhold, or create them void and destitute of that holiness
and righteousness, which was once their Happiness and Glory.

Object. 4.
But how come they then to be defiled and tainted with original sin? It Is
confessed God did not impure them, and the body cannot, for it being matter,
cannot act upon a spirit; yea, of it self, it is a dead lump, and cannot act at
all.

Sol.
What if this be one of those mysteries reserved for the world to come, about
which we cannot in this state solve every difficulty that may be moved, Must we
therefore deny its divine original? What if I cannot understand some mysteries,
^an sin^e the (...) being (...), understands no^ him^e^^, nor will (...)
restored to himself in glory. (...) p. 33^.
or answer some questions about the Hypostatical union of the two natures in
the wonderful Person of our Emmanuel, must I therefore question whether he be
(...), God-Man? We must remain ignorant of some things about our own souls,
till we come into the condition of the spirits of just men made perfect. Mean
time I think it much more our concernment to study how we may get sin out of
our souls, than to puzzle our brains to find how it came into them.

But that the Objector may not take this for an handsome slide, or go-by to
this great Objection, I return to it in a few particulars: (1.) That I think
not original sin follows either part singly, The Soul (say some) in the moment
of (...) creation and infusion by God being united with the Body by the
plastic and formative virtue of the parental seed; the Parent may be truly
said to generate the man, though he do not produce the form. Because proper
generation consists in the union, and not the production of parts. So that
Original sin is not propagated from Body to Body, no^ yet from Soul to Soul,
but from man to man.
it comes in neither by the Soul alone, nor by the body alone, a part from the
Soul; but upon the union and conjunction of both in one person. It Is the union
of these two which constitutes a child of Adam, and as such only, we are
capable of being infected with his sin. (2.) And whereas it is so confidently
asserted in the Objection, That sin cannot come into the Soul by or from the
body, because it being matter, cannot act upon a Spirit: I say, this is gratis
dictum, easily spoken, but difficultly proved. Cannot the Body act upon, or
influence the Soul? Pray then how comes it to pass, that so many souls become
foolish, forgetful, injudicious, etc. by their union with ill disposed Bodies?
Nothing is more sensibly plain and evident than that ^^ere is a reciprocal
Communication betwixt the Soul and Body. The Body does as really (though we
know not how) affect the Soul with its dispositions, as the Soul influences it
with life and motion. The more excellent any form is, the more intimate is its
union and conjunction with the matter. The Soul of man has therefore a more
intimate and perfect union with the Body, than light has with the Air: Which
is made by some, the best Emblem and Similitude to shadow forth this union. But
the union betwixt them is too intimate to be conceived by the help of any such
Similitudes. That this infection is by way of Physical agency, as a rusty
Scabbard infects and defiles a bright Sword when sheathed therein; I will not
confidently affirm, as some do. It may be by way of Natural Concomitancy, as
Estius will have it; or to speak, as Dr. Reynolds (modestly, and as becomes men
that are conscious of darkness and weakness) by way of ineffable resultancy and
emanation. (3.) In sum, Original Sin consists in two things, viz. 1. In the
privation of that original rectitude which ought to be in us. 2. In that
habitual Concupiscence which carries nature to inordinate motions.



This Privation and inordinate inclination make up that original corruption,
the rise whereof we are searching for: and to bring us as near it as we can
come, without a daring intrusion into unrevealed Secrets; our solid Divines
proceed by these steps in answering this Objection.

(1.) If it be demanded, how it comes to pass that an Infant becomes guilty if
Adam's sin? The answer is, because he is a child of Adam by natural generation.
(2.) But why is he deprived of that Original rectitude in which Adam was
created? They answer, because Adam lost it by his sin, and therefore could not
transmit what he had lost, to his posterity. (3.) But how comes he to be
inclined to that which is evil? Their answer is, because he wants that original
rectitude: For whosoever wants original rectitude, naturally inclines to that
which is evil. And so the propension of Nature to that which is evil, seems to
be by way of Concomitancy, with the defect or want of original righteousness.
And thus I have given some account of the Nature and Original of the Soul of
Man, though alas! My dim eyes see but little of its excellency and glory. Yet
by what has been said, it appears the Masterpiece of all God's works of
Creation in this lower World.

But because I suspect the Description I have given of it will be obscure and
cloudy to vulgar Readers of a plain and low capacity, by reason of diverse
Philosophical terms which I have been forced to make use of; and reckoning my
self a debtor to the weak and unlearned, as well as others, I will endeavor to
strip this Description of the Soul, for their sakes, out of those artificial
terms which darken it to them, and present it once more in the most plain and
intelligible Epitome I am capable to give it in; that so the weaker
understanding may be able to form a true notion of the Nature and Original of
the Soul in this manner.

This Soul of mine is a true and real Being: The Soul a Substance.
Not a fancy, a conceit, a very nothing. It has a proper and true Being in it
self, whether I conceit it or not. Nor indeed can I conceive of it, but by it.
It is not such a thing as whiteness is in Snow, a mere accident, which depends
upon the Snow in which it is, for the Being it has, and must perish as soon as
the Snow is dissolved: my Soul does not so depend upon my Body, or any other
fellow creature for its Being; but is as truly a Substance as my Body is,
though not of so gross and material a kind and nature. My Soul can and will
subsist, and remain what it is, when my Body is separated from it; but my Body
cannot subsist and remain what it now is, when my Soul is separated from it. So
that I find my Soul to be the most substantial and noble part of me, it is not
my Body, but my Soul which makes me a man. And if this depart, all the rest of
me is but a dead log, a lump of inanimate Clay, a heap of vile dust and
corruption. From this independent subsistence it has in it self, and the
dependence its properties and affections have upon it, I truly apprehend and
call it a Substance.

But yet when I call it a Substance, but a Spiritual Substance.
I must not conceive of it as a gross material palpable substance, such as my
Body is, which I can see and feel: No there are spiritual substances as well as
gross, visible, material Substances. An Angel is a Spiritual Substance, a real
creature, and yet imperceptible by my sight or touch; such a substance is my
Soul. Spiritual substances are as real, and much more excellent than bodily
substances are. I can neither see, hear, nor feel it, but I both see, hear and
feel by it.

My Soul is also a vital Substance. A Vita^ Substan^^
It is a principle of life to my Body. It has a life in it self, and quickens
my body therewith. My Soul is the spring of all the actions and motions of life
which I perform. It has been an error taken in from my childhood, That sense
is performed in the outward Organs, or members of my Body, as Touching in the
Hand, seeing in the Eye, Hearing in the Ear, etc. in them, I say, and not only
by them. As if nothing were required to make Sense, but an Object and an Organ.
No, no, it is not my Eye that sees, nor my Ear that hears, nor my Hand that
touches, but my Soul in and by them performs all this. Let but an Apoplex
hinder the operations of my Soul in the Brain, and of how little use are my
Eyes, Ears, Hands or Feet to me? My life is originally in my Soul, and
secondarily by way of Communication in my Body. So that I find my Soul to be a
vital, as well as a spiritual Substance.

An Immortal Substance
And Being both a vital and Spiritual Substance, I must needs conclude it to be
an immortal Substance. For in such a pure spiritual nature, as my Soul is,
there can be found no seeds or principles of Death. Where there is no
composition, there will be no dissolution. My Body indeed having so many
jarring humors, mixed elements, and contrary qualities in it, must needs fail
and dye at last. But my Soul was formed for immortality, by the simplicity and
spirituality of its nature. No sword can pierce it from without, nor opposition
can destroy it from within. Man cannot, and God will not.

endued with Understanding, Will, and Affections;
And being an immortal Spirit, fitted and framed to live for ever, I find that
God has answerably endued and furnished it with an Understanding, Will, and
Affections, whereby it is capable of being wrought upon, by the spirit in the
way of Grace and Sanctification in this world; in order to the enjoyment of God
its chief happiness, in the world to come.

By this its Understanding, I am distinguished from, and advanced above all
other creatures in this World. I can apprehend, distinguish, and judge of all
other intelligible Beings. By my Understanding I discern truth from falsehood,
good from evil. It shows me what is fit for me to choose, and what to refuse.

To this faculty or power of Understanding, my thoughts and conscience do
belong: The former, to my speculative, the latter to my practical
Understanding. My thoughts are all formed in my mind or Understanding in
innumerable multitudes and variety. By it I can think of things present, or
absent; visible, or invisible; of God, or my self; of this, or the world to
come.

To my Understanding also, belongs my Conscience, a noble, Divine, and awful
power. By which I summon and judge my self, as at a solemn Tribunal, bind and
loose, condemn and acquit my self and actions, but still with an eye and
respect to the judgment of God. Hence are my best comforts, and worst terrors.

This Understanding of mine is the director and guide of my Will: That is as
the Counselor; This, as the Prince. It freely chooses and refuses as my
Understanding directs and suggests to it. The members of my Body, and passions
of my Soul are under its Dominion. The former are under its absolute command,
the latter under its suasions and insinuations, though not absolutely and
always with effect and success.

And both my Understanding and Will, I find to have great influence upon my
Affections.

These Passions and Affections of my Soul are of great use and dignity. I find
them as manifold as there are considerations of good and evil. They are the
strong and sensible motions of my Soul, according to my apprehensions of good
and evil. By them my Soul is capable of union with the highest good. By love
and delight I am capable of enjoying God, and resting in him as the Center of
my Soul. This noble Understanding, Thoughts, Conscience, Will, Passions and
Affections, are the principal faculties, acts, and powers of this my high and
heaven-born Soul. And being thus richly endowed and furnished,

I find it could never rise out of matter, created and infused with an
inclination to the Body.
or come into my Body by way of natural generation; the Souls of Brutes that
rise that way, are destitute of Understanding, Reason, Conscience, and such
other excellent faculties and powers, as I find in mine own Soul. They cannot
know, or love, or delight in God, or set their affections on things spiritual,
invisible and eternal, as my Soul is capable to do; it was therefore created
and infused immediately into this body of mine by the Father of Spirits, and
that with a strong inclination, and tender affection to my flesh, without
which, it would be remiss and careless in performing its several Duties and
Offices to it, during the time of its abode therein.

Fearfully and wonderfully therefore am I made, and designed for nobler ends
and uses, than for a few days to eat, and drink, and sleep, and talk, and dye.
My Soul is of more value than ten thousand Worlds. What shall a man give in
exchange for his Soul?

USE.
FRom the several parts and branches of this Description of the Soul, we may
gather the choice Fruits which naturally grow upon them, in the following
Inferences and Deductions of truth and duty. For we may say of them all, what
the Historian does of Palestine, that there is nihil infructuosum, nihil
sterile; No Branch or Shrub is barren or unfruitful. Let us then search it
Branch by Branch, and,

Inference. I. The Soul a substantial Being.

Tanta praerogativa manife^^e test^tur ipsius animam, penes quam ^atio
principatus est, non esse materialem and caducam, sed s^perioris cujusdam atque
eminentis naturae, a condition reliquarum animarum longe^ distantem. Co^imb.
Disp. de Anima separ. p. 584.



FRom the substantial Nature of the Soul, which we have proved to be a Being
distinct from the Body, and subsisting by it self, we are informed, That great
is the difference betwixt the death of a Man, and the death of all other
creatures in the world. Their souls depend on, and perish with their bodies;
but ours neither result from them, nor perish with them. My Body is not a Body,
when my Soul has forsaken it; but my Soul will remain a Soul, when this body
is crumbled into dust. Men may live like beasts, a mere sensual life; yea, in
some sense, they may dye like beasts, a stupid death: but in this there will be
found a vast difference, Death kills both parts of the Beasts, destroys matter
and form; it touches only one part of Man, it destroys the Body, and only
dislodgeth the Soul, but cannot destroy it.

In some things Solomon shows the Agreement betwixt our death and theirs,
Eccles. 3.19, 20, 21. That which befall^th the Sons of Men, befalls the
Beasts; even one thing befalls them. As the one dies, so dies the other,
all go to one place, all are of the dust, and all turn to dust again. We
breathe the same common air they breathe; we feel the same pains of death they
feel; our bodies are resolved into the same earth theirs are. O! but in this is
the difference, The spirit of Man goes upward, and the spirit of a Beast goes
downward to the Earth. Their spirits go two ways at their dissolution; The one
to the Earth, the other to God that gave it, as he speaks, cap. 12.7. Though
our Respiration, and Expiration have some Agreement, yet great is the odd; in
the consequences of death, to the one and other. They have no pleasures nor
pains besides those they enjoy or feel now; but so have we, and those eternal,
and unspeakable too. The Soul of Man like the bird in the shell, is still
growing and ripening in sin or grace, Con^^^tu^, fuit, and discretum et;
re^^itque unde venera^: terra deo s^m, spiritus sa s^m. Epich^.
till at last the shell breaks by death, and the Soul flees away to the place
it is prepared for, and where it must abide for ever. The body, which is but
it is shell, perishes, but the Soul lives when it is fallen away.

How does this consideration expose and aggravate the folly and madness of the
sensual world, who herd themselves with beasts, though they have souls so near
of kin to Angels. The Princes and Nobles of the World abhor to associate
themselves with Mechanics in their shops, or to take a place among the sottish
rabble upon an Ale-bench; They know and keep their distance and Decorum, as
still carrying with them a sense of Honor, and abhorring to act beneath it:
But we equalize our high and noble Souls, in the manner of life, with the
Beasts that perish. Our Tables differ little from the Crib at which they feed;
or our Houses from the Stalls and Stables in which they lie down to rest, in
respect of any Divine worship, or Heavenly communication that is to be heard
there. Happy had it been for such men (if so they live and dye) that their
souls had been of no higher Extraction, or larger Capacity, or longer Duration
than that of a Beast: for then, as their comforts, so also their miseries had
ended at death. And such they will one day wish they had been.

A Separate Soul immediately capable of Blessedness. Inference II.
THe Soul of Man being a Substance, and not depending in its Being on the Body,
or any other fellow creature; There can be no reason on the Souls account, why
its blessedness should be delayed till the Resurrection of the Body.

It Is a great mistake. (and it is well it is so) that the Soul is capable only of
social Glory, or a Blessedness in partnership with the Body: And that it can
neither exert its own powers, nor enjoy its own happiness in the absence of the
body. The opinion of a sleeping interval took its ri^e from this error, (as it
is usual for one mistake to beget another) they conceived the Soul to be so
dependent upon the Body, at least in all its operations, that when death rends
it from the Body, it must needs be left as in a swoon, or sleep; unable to
exert its proper powers, or enjoy that felicity, which we ascribe to it in its
state of separation.

But certainly its substantial Nature being considered, it will be found, that
what perfection soever the body recieves from the Soul, and how necessary
soever its dependence upon it is: Anima ration^^i^ nihil (...) poss^t^r (...).
Co^im^r. Disp. 2. Art. 3.
The Soul receives not its perfection from the Body, nor does it necessarily
depend on it in its principal operations, but it can live and act out of a
Body, as well as in it. Yea, I doubt not, but it enjoys it self in a much more
sweet and perfect liberty, than ever it did or could, whilst it was clogged and
fettered with a body of flesh. Doubtless, Proculdubio cum ^i mortis exp^imitur
de c^^^^^tione ca^n^s, and ipsa e^pressi^ne colatu(...)to de o^pan^o co^pore
^umpit in apert^m, ad m^ram and p^^am, and sua^ (...) statim semetipsam in
expeditione substantiae recognoscit, ut de somno emergens ab imaginibas ad
veritates. Tertul. in lib. de Anima.
says Tertullian, when it is separated, and as it were strained by death, it
comes out of darkness into its own pure, perfect light, and quickly finds it
self a substantial Being, able to act freely in that light. Before the eyes of
the dead body are closed, I doubt not, but the believing Soul with open eyes
beholds the face of Jesus Christ: Luke 23.43. Philip. 1.23. but this will
also be further spoken to hereafter.

Immediately Created.
Inference III.
THe Souls of men being created immediately out of nothing, and not seminally
traduced; it follows, That all souls by nature are of equal value and dignity.
One Soul is not more excellent, honorable or precious than another: But all by
nature equally precious.

The Soul of the poorest Beggar that cries at the door for a crust, is in its
own nature of equal dignity and value, with the Soul of the most glorious
Monarch that sits upon the Throne. And this appears to be so, 1. First, because
all souls flow out of one and the same fountain, viz. the creating power of
God. They were not made better or worse, finer or courser matter, but (...),
out of nothing at all. The same Almighty power was put forth, to the forming of
one, as of another. All Souls are mine, says he that created them; Ezekiel. 18 4.
The Soul of the Child, as well as the Father, the Soul of the Beggar, as well
as the King; Those that had no praeexistent matter, but received their beings
from the same efficient cause, must needs be equal in their original nature and
value. The bodies of men which are formed out of matter, do greatly differ from
one another: some are molded (as we say) e meliori luto, out of better and
finer Clay; some are more exact, elegant, vigorous, and beautiful than others:
but Souls having no matter of which they consist, are not so differenced. 2.
Secondly, All souls are created with a capacity of enjoying the infinite and
blessed God. They need no other powers, faculties, or capacities than they are
by nature endued with (if these be but sanctified and devoted to God) to make
them equally happy and blessed with them that are now before the Throne of God
in Heaven, and with unspeakable delight and joy behold his blessed face. We
pass through the fields, and take up an Egg which lies under a clod, and see
nothing in it but a little squalid matter; yea, but in that Egg is seminally
and potentially contained such a melodious Lark, as it may be at the same time,
we see mounting Heavenward, and singing delicious notes above. So it is here.
Those poor despised souls, that are now lodged in crazy despicable bodies on
Earth, have in their Natures a capacity for the same employments, and
enjoyments with those in Heaven. They have no higher Original than these have,
and these have the same capacity and hability with them. They are Beings
improvable by grace, to the highest perfections attainable by any Creature. If
thou be never so mean, base, and despicable a creature in other respects, yet
have thou a Soul, which has the same alliance to the Father of Spirits, the
same capacity to enjoy him in glory, that the most excellent and renowned
Saints ever had. 3. Thirdly, All Souls are rated and valued in Gods book and
account, at one and the same price, and therefore by nature are of equal worth
and dignity. Under the Law, the Rich and the Poor were to give the same Ransom,
Exodus 30.15. The rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less
than half a shekel. The Redemption of Souls by the Blood of Christ, costs one
and the same price. The poorest and most despised Soul that believes in Jesus,
is as much indebted to him, for the Ransom of his Soul, as the greatest and
most illustrious person in the World. Moses, Abraham, Paul, etc. did not cost
Christ one farthing more than poor Lazarus, or the meanest among all the Saints
did. The Righteousness of Christ is unto all, and upon all that believe, and
there is no difference, Romans 3.22.


But yet we must not understand this Parity of humane Souls universally, or in
all respects. Though being of one species, or common nature, they are all
equal, and those of them that are purchased by the blood of Christ, are all
purchased at one rate; Yet there are diverse other respects and considerations,
wherein there are remarkable differences betwixt Soul, and Soul. As (1.) some
Souls are much better lodged and accommodated in their bodies than others are,
though none dwell at perfect rest and ease. God has lodged some Souls in
strong, vigorous, comely bodies, others in feeble, crazy, deformed and
uncomfortable ones. The Historian says of Galba, Anima Galbae male habitat:
The Soul of Galba dwelt in an ill Body. And a much better man than Galba, was
as ill accommodated: John wishes in behalf of his beloved Gaius, that his body
might but prosper as his Soul did; Epist. 3. v. 2. Timothy had his often
infirmities. Indeed the world is full of instances and examples of this kind.
(...) Bp. of Ab^l^m had so strong and firm a con^titution to e^dure severe
studies, that he is said (...) in^estina (...) to have h^d a body of Brass.
If some Souls had the advantages of such bodies as others have, who make
little, or very bad use of them; O what service would they do for God! (2.)
There is a remarkable difference also betwixt Soul and Soul, in respect of
natural gifts and abilities of mind. Some have great advantages above others in
this respect. The natural spirits and organs of the body being more brisk and
apt, the Soul is more vegete, vigorous, and able to exert it self in its
sunctions and operations. How clear, nimble, and firm are the apprehensions,
fancies, and memories of some souls beyond others? What a Prodigy of memory,
fancy and judgment, was Father Paul the Venetian* and Suarez, of whom Strada
says, such was the strength of his parts, that he had all S. Augustine's works
(the most copious and various of all the Fathers) as it were by heart, so that
I have seen him (says he) Statim (...) loco (...)
readily pointing with the finger to any place or page he disputed of. Our Dr.
Reynolds excelled this way to the astonishment of all that knew him, so that he
was a living Library, a third University. But above all, the character given by
Vives, of Budeu^, is amazing, that there was nothing written in Greek or Latin,
which he had not turned over and examined: That both languages were alike to
him, speaking either with more facility than he did the French, his mother
tongue; and all by the penetrating ^orce of his own natural parts, without a
Tutor: so that Q^o viro, Gallia a^^tiore inge^io, (...) produxit: hic (...)
atate nec Ita^^a quidem. Lud. Viv. in 1^. cap. de civit. De^.
France never brought forth a man of sharper wit, more piercing judgment,
exact diligence, and greater learning, nor in his time, Italy it self. Foelix
and foecundum ingenium, quod in se uno invenit, and Doctorem, and Discipulum! A
happy and fruitful wit, which in it self found both a Master, and a Scholar.
And yet Pasquier relates what is much more admirable of a young man, who came
to Paris in the twentieth year of his age, and in the year 1445, and showed
himself so excellent and exact in all the Arts, Sciences, and Languages, that
if a man of an ordinary good wit, and sound constitution, should live an
hundred years, and during that time, study incessantly, without eating,
drinking, sleeping, or any recreation; He could hardly attain to that
perfection. (3.) And yet a far greater difference is made betwixt one Soul and
another, by the sanctifying work of the Spirit of God. This makes yet a greater
disparity, for it alters and new moulds the frame and temper of the Soul, and
restores the lost Image of God to it; by reason whereof the righteous is truly
said to be more excellent than his neighbor, Prove. 12.26. This ennobles the
Soul, and stamps the highest dignity and glory upon it, that it is capable of
in this world. It Is true, it has naturally an excellency and perpetuity in it
above other Beings, as Cedar has not only a beauty and fragrancy, but a
soundness and durability far beyond other trees of the Wood: But when it comes
under the sanctification of the spirit, then it is as Cedar overlaid with gold.
(4.) Lastly, a wonderful difference will be made betwixt one Soul, and another,
by the judgment of God in the great day. Some will be blessed, and others
cursed Souls, Matt. 25. ult. some received into glory, others shut out into
everlasting misery, Matthew. 8.11, 12. Many shall come from the East, and West,
and shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of
Heaven, but the children of the kingdom, shall be cast out into outer darkness,
there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.

And that which will be the sting and aggravation of the difference which will
then be made, will be this Parity and Equality in the nature and capacity of
every Soul: by reason whereof, they that perish, will find, they were naturally
as capable of blessedness, as those that enjoy it; and that it was their own
inexcusable negligence and obstinacy that was their ruin.

Inference IV.
The Soul a created Substance.
IF God be the immediate Creator and Former of the Soul of Man, Then sin must
needs involve the most unnatural evil in it, as it is an horrid violation of
the very law of nature. No title can be so full, so absolute, as that which
Creation gives. How clear is this in the light of reason? If God created my
Soul, then my Soul had once no Being at all: That it had still remained
nothing, had not the pleasure of its Creator chosen and called it into the
Being it has, out of the millions of mere possible Beings. For as there are
millions of possible Beings, which yet are nothing; so there are millions of
possible Beings which never shall be at all. So that since the pleasure and
power of God, was the only fountain of my Being, he needs must be the rightful
owner of it. What can be more his own, than that whose very Being flowed merely
from him; and which had never been at all, had he not called it out of nothing.

And seeing the same pleasure of God, which gave it a Being, gave it also a
reasonable Being, capable of, and fitted for moral Government by laws, which
other inferior natures are incapable of; it must needs follow, that he is the
supreme Governor, as well as the rightful owner of this Soul.

Moreover, it is plain, that he who gave my Soul it is Being, and such a Being,
gave it also all the good it ever had, has, or shall have; and that it neither
is, nor has any thing but what is purely from him: And therefore he (...)
needs ^e my most bountiful benefactor, as well as (...) owner and supreme
Governor. There is not a Soul which he has created, but stands bound to him,
in all these ties and titles. Now for such a creature, to turn rebelliously
upon its absolute owner, whose only and wholly it is: upon its supreme
Governor, to whom it owes entire and absolute Obedience: upon its bountiful
^enefactor, from whom it has received all, and every mercy, it ever had, or
has; to violate his laws, slight his Sovereignty, despise his goodness,
contemn his threatenings, pierce his very heart with grief, darken the glory of
all his Attributes, confederate with Satan, his ^alicious enemy; and strike, as
far as a creature can strike, ^^ his very Being, (for in a sense, Omne pe^catum
est Deicidium, every sin strikes at the life and very existence of God). Blush
O Heavens at this, and be ye horribly afraid! O cursed sin, the evil of all
evils, which no Epithere can match; no name worse than its own can be invented,
sinful sin. This is as if some venomous branch should drop poison upon the root
that bears it. Love and gratitude to Benefactors, is an indelible principle
engraven* by nature, upon the hearts of all men. It teaches children to love
and honor their Parents, who yet are but mee^ instruments of their Beings. O
how just must their perdition be, who casting off the very bonds of nature;
turn again with emnity against that God, in whom they both live, and move, and
have their Being. O think, and think again on what an holy Mr. B^^rou^^s
exc^llency of the Soul of Man; p. 232.
Man once said, What a sad charge will this be against many a man* at the great
day, when God shall say, Had thou been made a Dog, I never had had so much
dishonor as I have had. It Is pity God should not have honor from the meanest
creature that ever he made, from every pile of grass in the field, or stone in
the street; much more that he should not have glory from a Soul more precious
and excellent than all the other works of his hands. Surely, it is better for
us, our Souls had still remained only in the number of possible Beings, and had
never had an actual existence in the second rank of Beings, but a very little
lower than the Angels; than that we should still be dishonouring God by them. O
that he should be put to levy his glory from us passively, that it should be
with us as it was with Nebuchadnezzar, from whom God had more glory when he was
driven out amongst the beasts of the field, than when he sat on the Throne. In
like manner his glory will rise passively from us, when driven out among
Devils, and not actively and voluntarily, as from the Saints.

Inference V.
IF God create and inspire the reasonable ^^ul immediately, this should
instruct and incise all Christian Parents, to pray earnestly for their
Children, not only when they are born into the world; but when they are first
conceived in the Womb.

It is of great concernment both to us, and our Children, not only to receive
them from the womb, with bodies perfectly and comely fashioned; but also with
such Souls inspired into them, whereby they may glorify God to all Eternity.
It Is natural to Parents to desire to have their children full and perfect in
all their bodily members, and it would be a grievous affliction, to see them
come into the world defective, monstrous, and misshapen births; should a Leg,
an Arm, an Eye be wanting, such a defect would make their lives miserable, and
the Parents uncomfortable. But how few are concerned, with what Souls they are
born into the world! Good God! (says (...) quam pauco^ re^erias qui tam (...)
quomodo p^e and honest (...), quam c^rant ut amplam relinquant (...)
haereditatem, qua post (...) i^lor^^. splendide, and ot^^se del^^ientur? Mu^^.
in 8 Genesis
Musculus) how few shall we find, who are equally sollicitous to have such
children as may live piously and honestly, as they are to leave them
Inheritances, upon which they may live splendidly and bravely? It pleases us
to see our own Image stamped upon their bodies; but O! how few pray, even whilst
they are in the womb, that their Souls may in due time bear the image of the
heavenly, and not animate and use the members of their bodies, as weapons of
unrighteousness against the God that formed them?

Certainly, except they be quickened with such Souls, as may in this world, be
united with Christ, better had it been for them, that they had perished in the
Womb, whilst they were pure Embryoes, and had never come into the number and
account of Men and Women: for such Embryoes go for nothing in the world, having
only the Rudiments and rough draughts of bodies, never animated and informed by
a reasonable Soul: Job 3.11, 12. But as soon as such a Soul enters into them,
though for never so little a time, it entails Eternity upon them. We also know,
that as soon as ever God breathes or infuses their Souls into them, sin
presently enters, and death by sin, and that by us, as the next Instruments of
conveying it to them: Which should have the efficacy of a mighty Argument with
us, to lay our prayers and tears for mercy, in the very foundation of that
union.

Think on this particularly, you that are Mothers of children, when you find
the fruit of the Womb quickened within you; that you then bear a creature within
you of more value than all this visible world, a creature, upon whom, from that
very moment, an eternity of happiness or misery is entailed, and therefore it
concerns you, to travel, as in pain for their souls, before you feel the
sorrows and pangs of travel for their bodies. O! what a pity is it, that a part
of your selves should eternally perish! That so rare and excellent a creature
as that you bear, should be cast away for ever, for want of a new Creation
superadded to that it has already! O! let your cries and prayers for them,
anticipate your kisses and embraces of them. If you be faithful and successful
herein, then happy is the Womb that bears them; if not, happy had it been for
them, that the knees had prevented them, and the breasts they have sucked. O!
you cannot begin your suits for mercy too early for them, nor continue them too
long, though your prayers measure all the time betwixt their Conception and
their Death.

A Vital Substance.
Inference VI.
MOreover, if God have created our Souls vital Substances, to animate and act
those bodies, How indispensably necessary is it, that a principle of spiritual
life do quicken and govern that Soul, which quickens and governs our bodies,
and all the members of them? Otherwise, though in a natural sense we have
living souls, yet they are dead whilst they live.

The Apostle in 1 Cor. 15.45, 46. compares the animal life we live, by the
union of our souls and bodies, with the spiritual life we live, by the union of
our souls with Jesus Christ. And so it is written ( viz. in my Text) The first
Man Adam was made a living Soul, the last Adam was made a quickening spirit. He
opposes the animal to the spiritual life, and the two Adams from whom they
come: And shows in both respects, the excellency of the Spiritual above the
Animal life, not in point of Priority, for that which is natural, is before
that which is spiritual, (and it must be so, because the natural Soul is the
recipient Subject of the spirits quickening and sanctifying operations) but in
point of dignity and real excellency. To how little purpose, or rather to what
a dismal, and miserable purpose, are we made living souls, except the Lord from
Heaven by his quickening power make us spiritual and holy Souls? The natural
Soul rules and uses the body as Corpus organo simile est, anima A^tificis
ratio^em obtinet. Irenaeus lib. 2.
an Artificer does his Tools; and except the Lord renew it by grace, Satan will
rule that which rules thee, and so all thy members will be instruments of
inquity to fight against God. The actions performed by our bodies, are justly
reputed and reckoned by God to the Soul, Omnia quaecunque fecerit corpus, sive
bonum, sive malum, animae reputantur. Origin. in Job.
because the Soul is the spring of all its motions, the fountain of its life
and operations. What it does by the body its instrument, is as if it were done
immediately by it self; for without the Soul, it can do nothing.

Inference VII. A Spiritual Substance.

MOreover, from the immaterial and spiritual nature of the Soul we are
informed, That Communion with God, and the enjoyment of him, are the true and
proper intentions and purposes, for which the Soul of Man was created.

Such a nature as this, is not fitted to live upon gross, material and
perishing things as the body does. The food of every creature is agreeable to
its nature, one cannot subsist upon that which another does: As we see among
the several sorts of Animals, what is food to one, is none to another. In the
same Plant there is found a root, which is food for Swine, a stalk which is
food for Sheep, a flower which feeds the Be, and a seed on which the Bird
lives. The Sheep cannot live upon the root, as the Swine does; nor the Bird
upon the flower, as the Be does; But every one feeds upon the different parts
of the Plant, which are agreeable to its Nature: So it is here, our bodies
being of an earthly material Nature, can live upon things earthly and material,
as most agreeable to them, they can relish and suck out the sweetness of these
things; but the Soul can find nothing in them suitable to its nature and
appetite, it must have spiritual food or perish. It were therefore too brutish,
and unworthy of a man that understood the nature of his own Soul, to cheer it
up with the stores of earthly provisions made for it, as he did, Luke 12.20. I
will say to my Soul, Soul, thou have much goods laid up for many years, take
thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry. Alas, the Soul can no more eat, drink,
and be merry with carnal things, than the Body can with spiritual and
immaterial things: It cannot feed upon bread that perishes, it can relish no
more in the best and daintiest fare of an earthly growth, than in the White of
an Egg: But bring it to a reconciled God in Christ, to the Covenant of Grace,
and the sweet promises of the Gospel; set before it the joys, comforts and
earnests of the Spirit; and if it be a sanctified renewed Soul, it can make a
rich Feast upon these. These make it a ^east of fat things, full of Marrow, as
it is expressed, Isaiah 25.6. Spiritual things are proper food for spiritual
and immaterial Souls.

A Spiritual Substance.
Inference VIII.
THE spiritual nature of the Soul farther informs us, That no acceptable
service can be performed to God, except the Soul be employed and engaged
therein.

The Body has its part and share in Gods worship, as well as the Soul; but its
part is inconsiderable in comparison: Prove. 23.26. My Son, give me thy heart,
(i. e.) thy Soul, thy Spirit. The holy and religious acts of the Soul, are
suitable to the nature of the Object of worship: John 4.24. God is a spirit,
and they that worship him, must worship in Spirit and in truth. Spirits only
can have Communion with that great Spirit. They were made spirits for that very
end, that they might be capable of converse with the Father of Spirits. They
that worship him, must worship in Spirit, and in Truth: That is with inward
love, fear, delight, and desires of Soul, that is to worship him in our
spirits: And in Truth, (i. e.) according to the rule of his word which
prescribes our duty. Spirit, respects the inward power; Truth, the outward
form. The former strikes at Hypocrisy, the latter at Superstition, and
Idolatry: The one opposes the inventions of our Heads, the other the looseness
and formality of our Hearts.

No doubt but the service of the body is due to God, and expected by him, for
both the souls and bodies of his people are bought with a price, and therefore
he expects, we glorify him with our souls and bodies, which are his: But the
service of the body is not accepted of him, otherwise than as it is animated
and enlivened by an obedient Soul, and both sprinkled with the blood of Christ.
Separate from these, bodily exercise profits nothing, 1 Timothy 4.8. What pleasure
can God take in the fruits and evidences of men's Hypocrisy? Ezekiel. 33.31.

Holy Paul appeals to God in this matter, Romans 1.9. God is my witness (says
he) whom I serve with my spirit. q. d. I serve God in my spirit, and he knows
that I do so. I dare appeal to him who searches my heart, that it is not idle
and unconcerned in his service. The Lord humble us, the best of us; for our
careless, dead, gadding, and vain spirits, even when we are engaged in his
solemn services. O that we were once so spiritual, to follow every excursion
from his service with a groan, and retract every wandering thought with a deep
sigh! Alas, a cold and wandering spirit in duty, is the disease of most good
men, and the very temper and constitution of all unsanctified ones. It is a
weighty and excellent expression of the Jews in their Euchologium, (...) b. ^.
q^a re potius praeveni^m faciem (...) nisi spiritu meo? nihil enim est homini
praeciosius anima sua.
or Prayer Book; Wherewithal shall I come before his face, unless it be with
my spirit? For man has nothing more precious to present to God than his Soul.
Indeed it is the best man has, thy heart is thy totum posse, it is all that
thou art able to present to him. If thou cast thy Soul into thy duty, thou do
as the poor Widow did, cast in all that thou have. And in such an offering, the
great God takes more pleasure than in all the external, costly, pompous
ceremonies, adorned Temples, a^^ external devotions in the World. It is a
remarkable an^ ^^tonishing expression of his own in this case, Isai. 66.1, 2.
Thus says the Lord, the Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth is my footstool,
where is the house that ye build to me, and where is the place of my rest? For
all these things have mine hands made, and all these things have been, says
the Lord, but unto this man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a
contrite spirit, and trembles at my word. q. d. Think not to please me with
magnificent Temples, and adorned Altars; if I had pleasure in such things,
Heaven is a more glorious Throne than any you can build me, and yet I have more
delight in a poor contrite spirit, that trembles with an holy awe and reverence
at my word, than I have in Heaven or Earth, or all the works of my hands in
either. O if there had been more trembling at his word, there had not been such
trembling as now there is, under fears of the loss and removal of it. Some can
superstitiously reverence and kiss the sacred dust of the sanctuary, as they
call it, and express a great deal of zeal for the externals of religion, but
little consider how small the interest of these things is in Religion, and how
little God looks at, or regards them.

Inference IX.
HOw much are the spirits of men sunk by sin, below the dignity and excellency
of their Nature?

Our Souls are Spirits by nature, yet have they naturally no delight in things
spiritual: They decline that which is homogeneal and suitable to Spirits, and
relish nothing but what is carnal and unsuitable to them. How are its
affections inverted and misplaced by sin? That noble spiritual Heaven-born
creature the Soul, whose Element and Center God alone should be, is now fallen
into a deep Oblivion both of God, and it self; and wholly spends its strength
in the pursuit of sensual and earthly enjoyments, and becomes a mere drudge and
slave to the body. Carnal things now measure out and govern its delights and
hopes, its fears and sorrows. O how unseemly is it, to b^^^ld such an highborn
spirit lackying up and down the Wo^^d in the service of the perishing flesh?
Their heart (says the Prophet) goes after their Covetousness, Ezekiel. 33.31. as
a Servant at the beck or nod of his Master.

O! how many are there to be found in every place, who melt down the precious
affections and strength of their Souls, in sensitive brutish Pleasures and
Delights. James 5.5. Ye have lived in pleasures upon Earth, as the Fish in the
Water, or rather as the Eel in the Mud; never once lifting up a thought or
desire to the spiritual and eternal pleasures, that are at Gods right hand.

Our Creation did not set us so low; we are made capable of better and higher
things.

God did not inspire such a noble, excellent spiritual Soul into us, merely to
salt our bodies, or carry them up and down this world for a few years, to gaze
at the vanities of it. It was a great saying of an Heathen: Mayor sum, and ad
majora natus, quam ^t carporis ^ti sim mancipium. Seneca.
I am greater, and born to greater things, than that I should be a slave to my
body. We have a spirit about us, that might better understand its Original, and
know it is so base a Being, as its daily employments speak it to be. The Lord
raise our apprehensions to a due value of the dignity of our own Souls, that we
may turn from these sordid employments with a generous disdain, and set our
affections on what is agreeable to, and worthy of an highborn spirit.

Inference X. The Soul an immortal Substance.

IS the Soul of Man, a Vital, Spiritual, and immortal Substance? Then it is no
wonder, that we find the resentments and impressions of the world to come,
naturally engraven upon the Souls of men, all the world over. These impressions
and sentiments of another life after this, do as naturally and necessarily
spring out of an immortal Nature, as branches spring out of the body of a Tree,
or feathers out of the body of a Bird. So fairly and firmly are the characters
and impressions of the life to come, sealed upon the immortal spirits of all
men, that no man can offer violence to this truth, but he must also do violence
to his own Soul, and unman himself by the denial of it. Who feels not a
cheariness to spring from his absolving, and an horror from his accusing
Conscience? Neither of which could rise from any other prinple than this. We
ar^ Beings conscious to our selves of a future State, and that our Souls do not
vanish, when our breath does: That we cease not to be, when we cease to breathe.

And this is common to the most Barbarous and Salvage Heathens: They show
(says the Apostle) the work of the Law written in their Hearts, their
Conscience also bearing them witness, and their thoughts in the mean while,
accusing, or else excusing one another. By the work of the Law, understand the
sum and substance of the Ten Commandments, comprizing the duties to be done,
and the sins to be avoided. This work of the Law, is said to be written upon
the Hearts of the Gentiles, who had no external written Law; upon their hearts
it was written, though many of them gave themselves over to all uncleanness,
and they showed, or gave evidence and proof, that there was such a Law written
upon their hearts. They showed it two ways: (1.) Some of them showed it in
their Temperance, Righteousness, and moral honesty, wherein they excelled many
of us, who have far greater Advantages and Obligations. (2.) In the efficacy of
their Consciences, which as it cleared and comfor^ed them for things well done;
so it witnessed against them, yea, judged and condemned them for things ill
done. And these evidences of a Law written on the heart are to be found,
wherever men are to be found. Their ignorance and barbarity cannot stifle
these sentiments and impressions of a future State, and a just Tribunal, to
which all must come. And the universality of it, plainly evinces, that it
springs not out of Education, but the very nature of an immortal Soul.

Let none say that these universal impressions are but the effects of an
universal Tradition, which has been time out of mind spread among the Nations
of the World: For as no such universal Tradition can be proved; so if it could,
the very propension that is found in the minds of all men living to embrace and
close with the proposals of a life to come, will evince the agreeableness of
them, to the nature of an immortal Soul. Yea, the natural closing of the Soul
with these Proposals, will amount to an evidence of the reality and existence
of thos^ invisible things. For as the natural senses, and their Organs, prove
that there are colors, sounds, savours and juices, as well as, or rather
because, there are Eyes, Ears, etc. naturally fitted to close with, and receive
them: so it is here, if the Soul naturally looks beyond the line of time, to
things eternal, and cannot bound and confine its thoughts and expectations
within the too narrow limits of present things, surely there is such a future
state, as well as Souls made apprehensive of it, and propense to close with the
discoveries thereof. So natural are the notions of a future state to the Souls
of men, that those who have set themselves designedly to banish them, and
struggled hard to suppress them, as things irksome and grievous to them, giving
int^rruption to their sensual lusts and pleasures: Yet still these
apprehensions have returned upon them, and gotten a just victory over all their
objections and prejudices. They follow them wheresoever they go, they can no
more flee from them, than from themselves; whereby they evidence themselves to
be natural and indelible things.

Inference XI. Endued with Understanding, Will, and Affections.

Has God endued the Soul of man with Understanding, Will and Affections,
whereby it is made capable of knowing, loving, and enjoying God; It Is then no
wonder to find the malice and envy of Satan engaged against man, more than any
other Creature; and against the Soul of man rather than any thing else in man.

It grates that spirit of envy, to see the Soul of Man adorning and preparing
by sanctification, to fill that place in glory, from which he fell
irrecoverably. It cut Haman to the very heart, to see the honor that was done
to Mordecai; much more does it grate and gall Satan, to see what Jesus Christ
has purchased and designed for the Souls of Men. Other creatures being
naturally incapable of this happiness, do therefore escape his fury, but men
shall be sure to feel it, as far as he can reach them; 1 Pet. 5.8. Your
Adversary the Devil, goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may
devour. He walks to and fro, that speaks his diligence; seeking whom he may
devour, that speaks his design: his restlessness in doing mischief, is all the
rest and relief he has in his own torments. It Is a mark of pure and perfect
malice to endeavor to destroy, though he knows he shall never be successful in
his attempts. We read of many bodies possessed by him, but he never takes up
his quarters in the body of any, but with design to mischief the Soul. No room
but the best in the house will satisfy him, no blood so sweet to him him as
Soul-blood. If he raise persecution against the bodies of men, it is to destroy
their souls; holiness is that he hates, and happiness is the Object of his
envy: The Soul being the Subject of both, is therefore pursued by him as his
prey.

Inference XII.
UPon the consideration both of its excellent nature, and divine Original, it
follows, That the corruption and deacing of such an excellent creature by sin,
deserves to be lamented and greatly bewailed; and the recovery of it by
sanctification to be studied, and diligently prosecuted, as the great concern
of all men.

What a Beautiful and Blessed creature was the Soul of Man at first, whilst it
stood in its integrity? His mind was bright, clear, and apprehensive of the Law
and Will of God: His Will cheerfully complied therewith, his sensitive
appetite, and inferior powers stood in an obedient subordination. God made man
upright, Eccles. 7.29. (...) straight, and equal; bending to neither extreme.
The Law of God was fairly engraven upon the table of his heart. Principles of
holiness and righteousness were inlayed in the very frame of his mind, fitting
him for an exact and punctual discharge of his duties, both to God and Man.
This was the soundness of his constitution, the healthful temper of his inner
man: Whereby it became the very region of light, peace, purity, and pleasure.
For think how serene, lightsome, and placid the state of that Soul must be, in
which there was no obliquity, not a jarr with the divine will: But joy and
peace continually transfused through all its faculties!

But sin has defaced its Beauty, razed out the divine Image which was its
glory, and stamped the very Image of Satan upon it: Turned all its noble powers
and faculties against the Author and Fountain of its Being. Surely, if all the
posterity of Adam, from the beginning to the end of the world, should do
nothing else but weep and sigh for the sin and misery of the fall; it could not
be sufficiently deplored: Other sins, like single bullets kill particular
persons, but Adams sin like a Chain-shot mowed down all mankind at once. It
murdered himself actually, all his posterity, virtually; and Christ himself,
occasionally. O! what a black train of doleful consequents attend this sin* It
has darkened the bright eye of the Souls understanding, 1 Cor. 2.14. made its
complying and obedient will, stubborn and rebellious, Ioh. 5.40. rendered his
tender heart obdurate and senseless, Ezekiel. 36.26. filled its serene and
peaceful Conscience with guilt and terror, Tit. 1.15. The consideration of
these things is very humbling, and should cause those that glory in their high
and illustrious Descents, to wrap their silver Star in Cypress, and cover all
their glory with a mourning Vail. But this is but one part of their duty.

How should this consideration provoke us, to apply our selves with most
serious diligence, to recover our lost beauty and dignity, in the way of
sanctification! This is the great and most proper use of the Fall, as Musculus
excellently speaks; ut gratiam Christi eo subnixius ambiamus, to inflame our
desires the more vehemently after grace.

Sanctification restores the Beauty of the Soul, which sin defaced. Ephesians. 4.24.
Col. 3.10. Yea, it restores it with this advantage, that it shall never be lost
again; holiness is the beauty of God impressed upon the Soul, and the impression
is everlasting* Other beauty is but a fading flower, time will plow up deep
furrows upon the fairst faces: But this will be fresh to eternity.

All moral virtues, homilitical qualities which adorn and beautify Nature, and
make it attractive and lovely in the eyes of men; are but separable accidents,
which Death discinds and crops off like a sweet flower from the stalk. Job
4.21. Does not their excellency that is in them go away? But sanctification is
inseparable, and will ascend with the Soul into Heaven. O! that God would set
the glass of the Law before us, that we may see what defiled souls we have by
nature, that we might come by faith to Jesus Christ, who comes to us by water,
and by blood. 1 Ioh. 5.6.

Inference XIII.
TO conclude: Upon the consideration of the whole matter before us, if this
excellent creature, the Soul, receive both its Being and excellencies from God;
Then he that formed it, must needs have the full and only right to possess and
use it, and is therefore most injuriously kept out of the possession of it, by
all unsanctified and disobedient persons.

The Soul of Man is a building of God, he has laid out the treasures of his
wisdom, power and goodness in this noble structure; he built it for an
habitation for himself to dwell in. And indeed such noble rooms, as the
Understanding, Will, and Affections, are too good for any other to inhabit. But
sin has set open the gates of this hollowed Temple, and let in the abomination
which makes desolate. All the doors of the Soul are barred and chained up
against Christ, by ignorance, and infidelity: he seeks for admission into the
Soul which he has made, but finds none. A forcible entry he will not make,
but expects when the Will shall bring him the keys of the Soul, as to its
rightful owner. So he expresses himself to us in Rev. 3.20. Behold, I stand ^^
the door, and knock, if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come
in to him, and sup with him, and he with me: his standing at the door, denotes
his earnest desire, and patient waiting, in the use of all those means, that
are introductive of Jesus Christ into the Souls of men: His knocking, signifies
the various essaies he makes by Ordinances and providence externally, and the
convictions and persuasions of his Spirit, and the Consciences of sinners
internally: every call of the word, and every conviction of Conscience, is a
Call, a Knock from Heaven, at the door of the Soul, for the admission of Christ
into it. By the souls hearing his voice, and opening the door, understand its
approbation, and consent to the motion and offer of God. By Christ's coming in,
is meant his uniting that Soul unto himself, that opens to him: And as his
coming in, denotes union; so his supping with the Soul, and the Soul with him,
denotes his sweet Communion; imperfect here, complete and full in Heaven.

O The admirable condescensions of God to poor sinners! The God that formed you
with a word, and can as easily ruin you with a frown; yet waits at the gates
of your Souls for admission into them. There be many Souls within the sound of
this complaint, that have kept God out of his own right, all their days. They
have shut out Jesus Christ, and delivered up their Souls to Satan; if he but
knock by a slight Temptation, the door is presently opened: but Jesus Christ
may wait in vain upon them, from Sabbath to Sabbath; and from Year to Year. But
the longest day of his patience has an end. And there is a refusal of Grace,
after which, no more tenders of mercy shall ever be made.

What say you, Souls, will you at last open the door to Jesus Christ, or will
you still exclude him? If you will open to him, he will not come in
empty-handed, he will bring a feast with him, such a feast, as you never tasted
any thing like it in your lives: But if you will not open to him; then I call
Heaven and Earth to witness against you this day, that you have once more
barred the doors of your Souls against him, whose pleasure and power gave them
their very Beings: Against him, who is their Sovereign Lord, and rightful
Owner; and consequently, this Act of yours must stop your mouths, and deprive
you of all Pleas and Apologies, when you shall knock hereafter at the door of
mercy, and God shall for ever shut it up against you, according to his ju^t,
but dreadful threatenings, Matthew. 7.22. Prove. 1.24, 25 And thus much of the
Divine Original, and excellent Nature of the Soul of Man.

Having taken a view of this excellent Creature, the Soul, in opening the
former Proposition; we come next to the consideration of its union with the
Body, in this second Proposition.

DOCT. II.
Doct. II.
THat the Souls and Bodies of men are knit together by the feeble band of the
breath in their Nostrils.

Mr. How in a Funeral Sermon, p. 9, 10.
There is (says a learned Man) no greater mystery in nature, than the union
betwixt the Soul and Body: That a mind and spirit should be so tied and linked
with a clod of Clay; that while that remains in a due temper, it cannot by any
art, or power free it self. It can by an act of the Will move an hand, or a
foot, or the whole body; but cannot move from it one inch. If it move hither,
or thither, or by a leap upward, do ascend a little, the body still follows; it
cannot shake or throw it off. We cannot take our selves out; by any allowable
means we cannot, nor by any at all (that are at least within mere humane power)
as long as the temperament lasts. While that remains, we cannot go; if that
fail, we cannot stay, though there be so many open avenues (could we suppose
any material bounds to hem in, or exclude a spirit) we cannot go out, or in at
pleasure. A wonderful thing! And I wonder, we no more wonder at our own make
and frame in this respect -- What so much akin are a mind and a piece of earth,
a clod and a thought, that they should be thus affixed to one another?

My design here is to show by what ligament, tie, or bond it has pleased the
great and wise Creator, to affix and link these so different parts of man
together: and this Moses in the Text tells us, is no other but the breath of
his nostrils.

The Breath, and Soul of Man are two distinct things. His Breath is not his
Soul, nor his Soul his Breath, but the Nexus or bond that couples and unites
his Soul and body in a personal union. The Body has no life in it self, but
its life results from its union with the Soul; James 2.26. this union is
maintained by the breath of our nostrils, which upon that account is here
called the breath of life. What breath is
Breath is an act of life, proceeding from the Souls union with its Body, and
ending with the dissolution of it. Life is continued by its respiration, and
ended by its expiration. Whilst we live, and whilst breath is in our bodies,
are terms Synonymous.

That little quantity of air, which we thus breath in and out at our nostrils,
is more to us, than all the three Regions of air, which fill up the vast space
between earth and heaven. It is in a sense, our life.

For the use and office of Respiration, the Lungs were formed, and placed where
they are, not without the most wise counsel and direction of God. What the
Lungs are.
They are that organ in the Pulmo est spirandi, and respirandi instrumentum, ad
pulmones inducitur s^^ula quae dicitur Trachea arteria, ad geminos usus
condita, etc.
body, which by the help of that Artery, called Arteria trachea, leading to
them as a Chanel, for the passage of air from the mouth and nostrils; the air
is transmitted to, and ventilated by them for the refreshment of the Cor
movet^r motu duplici, nempe (...) and (...) qua calo^ innatus attracto aere
mitigatur and refrigeratur. Alsted. Theolog. Not. p. (mihi) 614.
heart, and exhaling the fumes thereof.

The heart has continual need of such a vent and refreshment, and therefore
the Lungs, like a pair of Bellows, must be kept continually going. Longer than
breath is going, the heart is dying. That which stops the one, suffocates the
other.

And here we may with admiration contemplate the wonders, by which our lives
are continued. These Lungs are the most frail and tender part of the body, and
kept in continual motion and agitation; yet are made serviceable for Seventy,
or Eighty years together, which is the wonder of Providence. Were a piece of
Brass, Iron or Steel, kept in continual and incessant use, it would not endure
half the time. In a word, The Quia Co^^fo^^ ^itae, and offi^^na spirituum
operosi^sima, ita ut pe^petuo motu pendulum agititur; utique etiam vehementer
incalescit, ita ut si calor iste per respirationem non restingueretur, necesse
fuerit, and calidam, and ^^midum nativum nimiae aestuatione opprimi, and
suffocari. Pulmones ^ant nihil aliud quam folles quidam naturales, qui sefe
dilatando ae^em attrabunt, inque cor effundurt, ita ut cor perpetuo aestuans,
aere refrigeretur; qui aer, ubi intra co^dis meatus incaluit, iterum a cord
effunditur in pulmones, qui sese contrabendo for as emitt^^t. Kecker^* phys. p.
142.
heart, that noble part of the Body, is the shop wherein the spirits are
labored and prepared, which therefore is in continual motion and heat; and so
needs continual cooling and refreshing. We can live no longer, than it labors;
it can labor no longer than it is refreshed and cooled by respiration.

God has therefore prepared the Lungs for this service, which being of a thin,
porous, and spungy substance, can easily be dilated, and contracted. By
dilating themselves, they attract and suck in the air into themselves; first,
duly to prepare and temper it, and then communicate it to the heart for its
refreshment; which being quickly heated in the heart, is again breathed out by
the Lungs, by contracting themselves again. This double motion of inspiration
and expiration, we call Respiration, and this Respiration is the bond that
holds our Souls and bodies together.

And indeed, this is but a feeble bond, a very slender and weak thread which
holds our Souls and Bodies in union. What more volatile, evanid and uncertain,
than a puff of breath? The nostrils are the outer door of the body, our breath
is continually in our nostrils, and how soon may that depart, which is day and
night at the door, as if it were still taking its leave of us. Our breath is
always going, and what is still going, will be gone at last. How small a
difference is there betwixt Respiration and Expiration? A breathing, and a
breathless lump of clay? Breath cannot continue long, and life cannot stay a
moment behind it. Psalm. 104.29. Thou take away their breath, they dye; and
return to their dust. Life is breath given, and Death is breath taken away. The
breath of Man is like a written sentence in which there are diverse Comma's, or
short pauses; after which speedily follows a full stop, and there is an end of
it.

(...) ita and p. menes (...) ^otu (...) attra^^^t, and expell^^t. Alsted
^hcol. Mat. ^.623.
Some conceive Solomon points at the continual motion of the Lungs, in that
figurative and elegant description of the death of man, Eccles. 12.6. Or ever
the silver cord be loosed, or the golden Bowl be broken; or the Pitcher be
broken at the fountain, or the wheel be broken at the Cistern. The double
motion of the Lungs, he seems here to compare to the double motion of the
buckets in a Well, the turn of the wheel sends one down, and draws the other
up. But as we use to say proverbially, the Bucket or Pitcher that goes so often
to the Cistern or Well, is broken at last: So must we say of these, they will
fail at last. One sitting by the bedside of a dying Person, sighed out this
compassionate expression, Ah! quid s^^u^? His sick friend hearing it, replied,
Pulvis, and (...), fumus, dust, a shadow, a puff of wind. The wind without us
is fick^^, and inconstant to a proverb, and so is that within us too. Many
grudge at the shortness of life; but considering the feebleness of this Bond,
we have more cause to wonder at the slowness of death. For let us but seriously
consider the frailty of our breath on a double account: viz. 1. In respect of
our breathing instruments. viz. 2. Or of breaths-stopping accidents.


1. Great is the frailty of our breathing instruments. What is flesh, but
weakness? Even the most solid and substantial; it is as the fading grass: Isa.
40.6. But our Est enim substantia pulmon^m caro laxa, spo^giosa, aerea; and
similis coagulatae spumae sanguinis. Alsted. ibid.
Lungs are the most lax, spongy and tender of all flesh; if that which is so
airy, light and spumous, deserve the name of flesh. And as it is the most frail
of all flesh, so it is in continual motion, laboring night and day, without
rest or intermission; and that which wants alternate rest cannot be durable. We
see motion wears out the wheels of a watch, though made of Brass; but our
strength (as Job speaks) is not the strength of stones, nor our bones (the most
solid, much less our Lungs, the most frail and feeble parts) of Brass. Beside,

2. There are a multitude of breath-stopping accidents, which may, and daily do
beat the last breath out of men's nostrils, before any decay of nature cause it
to expire.

Many mortal diseases are incident to these frail and tender parts. Phthisicks,
Intenerations, Ulcers, easily bar the passage of our breath there; y^a, and
slighter accidents, which immediately touch not that part, are sufficient to
stop our breath, and dislodge our souls. A Fly, a Gn^t, the stone of a Raisin,
a Crumb of bread have often done it. There is not a pore in the body, but is a
door large enough to let in death, nor a creature so despicably small, but is
strong enough (if God commissionate it) to serve a Writ of Ejection upon the
Soul: the multitudes of diseases are so many lighted Candles put to this
slender thread of our breath, besides the infinite diversity of external
accidents, by which multitudes daily perish. So that there are as great and and
astonishing wonders in our preservation, as in out Creation.

Inference I.
HOw admirable then is the Mystery of Providence in the daily continuation of
the breath of our Nostrils?

That our breath is yet in our Nostrils is only from hence, that he who
breathed it into them at first is our life, and the length of our days, as it
is, Deuteronomy. 30.20. It is because our breath is in his hand, Dan. 5.23. not in our
own, or in our enemies hand. Till he take it away, none shall be able to do it,
Psalm. 104.29. Thou take away their breath, they dye, and return to their dust.

It Is neither food nor Physic, but God in and by them that holds our Soul in
life: Psalm. 66.9. We hang every moment of our life over the Grave, and the gulf
of Eternity, by this slender thread of our breath; but it cannot break, how
feeble soever it be, till the time appointed be fully come: if it be not
extinguished and suffocated as others daily are, it is because he puts none of
those diseases upon us, as it is, Exodus 15, 26. or if he do, yet he is Jehovah
Rophe, the Lord that heals us, as it follows in that Text.

We live in the midst of cruel enemies, yea, among them that breath out
cruelty, as the Psalmist complains, Psalm. 27.12. Such breath would quickly
suffocate ours, did not he in whose hand ours is* wonderfully prevent it. O!
what cause have we to employ and spend that breath in his praise, who works so
many daily wonders to secure it?

Inference II.
IS it but a puff of feeble breath, which holds our Souls and Bodies in union,
then every man is deeply concerned to make all have, to take all possible care
and pains, to secure a better and more durable habitation, for his Soul in
Heaven, whilst yet it sojourns in this frail Tabernacle of the Body.

The time is at hand, when all these comely and active bodies, shall be so many
breathless carcasses, no more capable of any use or service for our Souls, than
the seats you sit on, or the dead bodies that lie buried under your feet. Your
breath is yet in your Nostrils, and all the means and seasons of salvation will
expire with it; and then it will be as impossible for the best Minister in the
world to help your Souls, as for the ablest Physician to recover your Bodies.
As Physic comes too late for the one, so counsels and persuasions for the
other.

Three things are worth thinking on in this matter.

1. First, that you are not without the hopes and possibilities of Salvation,
whilst the breath of life is in your Nostrils. A mercy (how lightly soever you
value it) that would ravish with joy those miserable Souls, that have already
shot the gulf of Eternity, and turn the shrieks and groans of the Damned into
joyful shouts and acclamations of praise. Poor wretch, consider what thou
read; That thy Soul is not yet in Christ, is thy greatest misery, but that
yet it may be in Christ, is an unspeakable mercy: though thy Salvation be not
yet secured, yet, what a mercy is it, that it is not desperate. 2. Secondly,
When this uncertain breath is once expired, the last hope of every unregenerate
person is gone for ever. It is as impossible to recover hope, as it is to
recover your departed breath, or recall the day that is past. When the breath
is gone, the Compositum is dissolved. We cease to be, what now we are, and our
life is as water spilt on the ground, which shall not be gathered up till the
Resurrection. Our life is carried like a precious liquor in a brittle Glass,
which death breaks to pieces. The Spirit is immediately presented to God, and
fixed in its unalterable State. Hebrews 9.27. All means of Salvation now cease
for ever. No Ambassadors of peace are sent to the Dead. No more Calls, or
Strivings of the Spirit, no more space for Repentance. O! what an inconceivable
weight has God hanged on a puff of breath? 3. Thirdly, And since matters stand
thus, it is to be admired, what shift men make to quiet themselves in so
dangerous a State, as most Souls live in: quiet and unconcerned, and yet, but
one puff of breath betwixt them and Hell! O the stupefying and besotting nature
of sin! O the efficacy and power of spiritual delusions! Are our lives such a
throng and hurry of business, that we have no time to go alone and think, where
we are, and where we shortly must be? What shall I say? If bodily concerns be
so weighty, and the matters of Eternity such trifles; if meat, and drink, and
trade, and children, be such great things, and Christ, and Soul, and Heaven,
Hell, and the world to come, such little things in your eyes; you will not be
long in that opinion, I dare assure you.
Inference III.
IS the Tie so weak betwixt our Souls and bodies, how close and near then do
all our Souls confine and border upon Eternity?

There is no more but a puff of breath, a blast of wind betwixt this world, and
that to come. A very short step betwixt time and Eternity. There is a breath,
which will be our last breath. Respiration must and will terminate in
Expiration. The dead are the Inhabitants, and the living are Borderers upon the
invisible world. This consideration deserves a dwelling place in the hearts of
all men, whether, I. Regenerate, or II. Unregenerate.


I. Regenerate Souls should ponder this with pleasure, O it is transporting to
think how small a matter is betwixt them, and their complete Salvation. No
sooner is your breath gone, but the full desire of your hearts is come. every
breath you draw, draws you a degree nearer to your perfect happiness, Romans
13.11. Now is your Salvation nearer than when you believed: therefore both your
cheerfulness and diligence should be greater than when you were Ho^ dicit q^od
in f^d^i primordiis, ferventiores, and ad opera bona alacriores faissent
fideles; temporis autem progressu, refriguissent. Estius in loc.
in the infancy of your Faith. You have run through a considerable part of your
Christian course and race, and are now come nearer the Goal and prize of
eternal life: O, despond not, loyter not now at last, who were so fervent and
zealous in the beginning.

It Is Transporting to think how near you approach the Region of light and joy.
O that you would distinctly consider, 1. Where you lately were, 2. Where now
you are, 3. Where shortly you shall be.


1. You that are now so near Salvation, were lately very near unto Damnation:
there was but a puff of breath betwixt you and Hell. How many nights did you
sleep securely in the state of nature and unregeneracy? How quietly did you
rest upon the brink of Hell, not once imagining the danger you were in? Had any
of those sicknesses you then suffered, been suffered by God, like a candle to
burn asunder this slender thread of life, which was so near them, you had been
as miserable and as hopeless, as those that now are roaring in the lowest Hell.
I have heard of one that rid over a dangerous Bridge in the night, who upon the
review of the place next day, fell into a swoon, when he was sensible of that
danger which the darkness of the night hid from him. O Reader, shall not an
escape from Hell affect thee, as much as such an escape would do?

2. It Is no less marvelous to consider where you now are; you that were afar
off, are now made nigh, Ephesians. 2.13. you that were not beloved, are now beloved,
Romans 9. v. 25. You were in the state of death and condemnation; you are now
passed from death to life, by your free justification, 1 John 3.14. Your union
with Christ has set you free from condemnation, Romans 8.1. Dye you must, though
Christ be in you, but there is no hazard or hurt in your death. The stopping
of your breath, can put no stop to your happiness, it will hasten, not hinder
it. If the pale Horse come for you, Heaven, not Hell will now follow him; your
sins are pardoned, the covenant of your Salvation sealed, death is disarmed of
its fatal sting, and what then should hinder you from a like Triumph even upon
your deathbed, with that, 1 Cor. 15.55. O death, where is thy sting? O grave
where is thy victory?

3. And yet you have more room for joy, whilst you consider where you must and
shall be shortly. You are now in Christ, but in a few days you shall be with
Christ, as well as in him: it is well now, but it will be better ere long. Your
sin is now fully pardoned, but not fully purged out of your Souls. Your Persons
are freed from guilt, but your Hearts are not either freed from filth or grief:
But in a little time you shall be absolutely and eternally freed from both your
present condition is an Heaven, compared with your former, and your future
state will be ^n Heaven indeed, compared with your present. The path of the
just is as the shining light, which shines more and more, unto the perfect
day. Prove. 4.18.

II. But on the other side, what meditation can be more startling and amazing
to all the unregenerate and Christless world? Ponder it thou poor Christless
and unsanctified Soul. Get thee out of the noise and clamor of this world,
which makes such a continual din in thine ears, and consider how thou hangest
over the mouth of Hell it self, by the feeble thread which is spun every moment
out of thy Nostrils. As soon as that gives way, thou art gone for ever. What
shift do you make to quiet your fears, and eat and drink and labor with any
pleasure? It Is storied of Dionysius the Tyrant, that when Democles would have
flattered him into a conceit of the perfection of his happiness, as he was an
absolute Sovereign Prince, and could do what he pleased with others, as his
Vassals; Dionysius to confute his fancy, caused him to be placed at a Table
richly furnished, and attended with the most curious Music, but just over his
head hanged a sharp and heavy Sword by one single hair; which when Democles
saw, no meat would go down with him, but he earnestly begged for a discharge
from that place. This is the lively emblem of thy condition thou unregenerate
man.

There are three things in thy state sadly opposed to the former state last
described.

1. The state you were born in, was bad. 2. The state you are now in, is worse.
3. The state you shall shortly be in, if you thus continue, will be unspeakably
worst of all.
1. The State you were born in, was a sad state: you were born in sin, Psalm. 51
5. and under wrath, Ephesians. 2.3. the womb of nature cast you forth into this
world, both defiled and condemned creatures.

2. The state you are in now, is much worse than that you were born in: for
what have you been doing ever since you were born, but treasuring up wrath
against the day of wrath, Romans 2.5. For every sand of time which run out of the
glass of Gods patience toward you, a drop of wrath has been running into the
Vials of his Indignation against you. O what a treasure of sin and wrath then
is laid up in so many years as you have lived in sin? Every sin committed,
every mercy abused, every call of God neglected, and slighted, adds still more
and more to this treasure.

3. It will be much worse shortly than it is now, except preventing renewing
grace step in betwixt you, and that wrath, into which you are hastening so fast.
It Is sad to be under the Sentence of Condemnation, but unspeakably worse, to be
under the Execution of that sentence. To be a Christless man is lamentable, but
to be a hopeless man is more lamentable. For though you be now without Christ,
yet whilst the breath of life is in your Nostrils, you are not absolutely
without hope; but when once that breath is gone^ all the world cannot save or
help you. Your last breath, and your last hope expire together. Though you be
under Gods damning sentence, yet that sentence through the riches of
forbearance is not executed; but as soon as you dye, all that wrath which hanged
over your heads, so many years, in the black clouds of Gods threatenings, will
pour down in a furious storm upon you, which will never break up whilst God is
God. O think, and think again, and let your thoughts think close to this sad
and solemn Subject, there is but a Breath betwixt you and Hell.

Inference IV.
Does God maintain your life by breath? let not that breath destroy your life,
which God gave to preserve it.

No man can live without breath, and yet some might live longer than they do,
if their breath were better employed. Some men's throats have been cut by their
own Tongues, (...). Scalig. Arab. prove. Cent 1.
as the Arabian Proverb intimates. Life and death (says Solomon) are in the
power of the Tongue. Critics observe, that a Word, and a Plague, grow upon the
same root in the Hebrew Tongue? It Is certain, that some men's breath has been
baneful poison both to themselves and others: It was a word that cut off the
life of Adonijah, ^ King 2.23. and thousands since his day, have dyed upon the
point of the same weapon. It Is therefore wholesome advice that is given us Psalm
34.12. What man is he that desires life, and loves many days that he may see
good; keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile.

And the more evil the times are, the stricter guard we should keep upon our
lips. It is an evil time, the prudent will keep silence, Amos 5.13. When wicked
men watch to make a man an offender for a word, as it is Isai. 29.20, 21. it
behooves us to be upon our watch, that we offend not with our lips. It Is good
to keep, what is not safe to trust. David was as a deaf and dumb man, when in
the company of wicked men, Psalm. 38.13. he thought silence then to be his
prudence. It is better they should call you Fools, than find you so.

Inference V.
Employ not that breath to the dishonor of God, which was first given, and is
still graciously maintained by him for your comfort and good.

'Twere better you had never breathed at all, than to spend your breath in
profane Oaths, or foolish and idle Chat, whereby at once you wound the Name of
God, draw guilt upon your own Souls, and help on the ruin of others. That is a
startling Text, Matthew. 12.36. But I say unto you, that every idle word that men
shall speak; they shall give an account thereof in the day of Judgment.

To give an account, is here by a Metalepsis of the Antecedent for the
Consequent, put for punishment in Hell fire, without an intervening change of
heart, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus.

And there is more evil in this abuse of our breath, than we can easily
discern, especially upon two accounts, (1) Because it is a sin most frequently
committed and seldom repented of. The intercourse betwixt the heart and tongue
is quick, and the sense of the evil as easily and quickly passes away. (2)
Because the poisonous and malignant influence thereof abides and continues long
after: Our words may mischief others, not only a long time after they are
spoken, but a long time after the tongue that spoke them is turned to dust. How
many years may a foolish or filthy word, a profane scoff, an Atheistical
expression stick in the minds of them that heard them, after the Speakers
death! A word spoken, is Physically transient, and past away with the breath
that delivered it: but it is Morally permanent; for as to its moral efficacy, no
more is required, but its objective existence in the minds and thoughts of them
that once heard it: And upon that very ground Suarez argues for a general
Judgment, after men have past at death their particular Judgment; because
(says he) long after that, abundance of good and evil will be done in this
World by the Dead, in the persons of others that ove^live them. For look, as it
was said of Abel, that being dead, he yet speaks; so it may be said of
Julian, Porphyry, and multitudes of scoffing Atheists, that being dead, they
yet speak. O therefore get a sanctified heart to season your breath, that it
may minister grace to the hearers.

Inference VI.
LEt your breath promote the spiritual life of others, as well as maintain the
natural life in your selves.

'Though the maintaining of your natural life, be one end why God gave you
breath, yet it is not the only, or principal end of it. Your breath must be
food to others, as well as life to you. Prove. 10.21. The lips of the righteous
feed many. It will be comfortable to resign that breath to God at death, which
has been instrumental to his glory in this life. It was no low encomium Christ
gave of the Church, when he said, Cant. 4.11. Thy lips, O my Spouse, drop as
the Honeycomb, Honey and Milk are under thy Tongue. Sweet, wholesome, and
pleasant words dropped from her lips. They drop (says Christ) as the Honeycomb.
Some drops ever and anon fall actually, and others hang at the same time
prepared and ready to fall. Such a prepared and habitual Disposition, should
every Christian continually have. Your Words may stick upon men's hearts to
their Edification and Salvation, when you are in your Graves. Your Tongues may
now sow that precious seed, which may spring-up to the praise of God, though
you may not live to reap the comfort of it in this World, John 4.36, 37. it is a
rich expense of your breath, to bring but one Soul to God, and yet God has
used the breath of one, as his instrument, to save edify and comfort the Souls
of thousands, Proverbs 11.30. The fruit of the righteous is a tree of life, and
he that wins Souls is wise. The good Lord make all his people wise in this.

Surely, whether we consider the invaluable worth and preciousness of Souls,
the benefits you have had from the breath of others your selves, the innate
property of grace, wherever it is, to diffuse and communicate it self; how
short a time you have to breath, and how comfortable it will be, when you
breath your last, to remember how it has been employed for God: All this
should open your lips, to counsel, reprove, and comfort others, as often as
opportunity is ministered.

Did Christ spend his Blood for our Souls, and shall not we spend our Breath
for them? O let our lips dispense knowledge. If you will not spend your Breath
for God, How will you spend your Blood for him? If you will not Speak for him,
I doubt you will not Die for him. Away with a sullen reservedness, away with
unprofitable Chat; all Subjects of Discourse are not fit for a Christians lips.
It Is a grave Admonition God once gave his people, by the Pen of a faithful Mr.
West.
Minister. You may rue (says he) the opportunities you have lost. Here lay a
poor Wretch with one foot in Hell, would he not have started back, if he had
had light to discover his danger? Well, you are now together, something you
must say; the same breath would serve for a Compassionate Admonition, as for a
Complacent Impertinency, which will redound to neither of your advantages. You
part, the man dies, and in the midst of Hell cries out against you, One word of
yours might have saved me: You had me in your reach, you might have told me my
danger, you forbear, I hardened. The Lord reward your negligence.

Inference VII.
IF breath be the tie betwixt Soul and Body, How are we concerned to improve,
and draw forth, the precious breath of Ministers and Christians, whilst it is
yet in their Nostrills.

The breath of many Ministers is judicially stopped already, their breath serves
to little other use than to preserve their own lives; it will be stopped ere long
by death, and then those excellent treasures of Gifts and Graces, wherewith
they are richly furnished, will be gone out of your reach, never to be further
useful to your Souls. You should do by them therefore (as one aptly speaks) as
Scholars do by some choice Book they have borrowed, and must return in a few
days to its Owner: They diligently read it Night and Day, and carefully
transcribe the most useful and excellent Notes they can find in it, that they
may make them their own, when the Book is called for out of their hands.

But alas, we rather divert, than draw forth these Excellencies that are in
them. You may yet converse with them, and greatly benefit your selves by these
Converses; but (as one speaks) by the stream of your impertinent talk, that
season is neglected: afterward you see your lack of knowledge, but then the
instrument is removed. How must it gall an awakened Jew, to think what
Discourse he had with Jesus Christ? Is it lawful to give Tribute to Caesar? Why
do not thy Disciples fast? O had I nothing else to enquire of the Lord Jesus?
Would it not have been more pertinent to have asked, What shall I do to be
saved? But he is gone, and I dead in my sins. How many persons have we sent
away, that had a word of Wisdom in their hearts? Having only learnt from them
what a Clock it is, what Weather, or what News: Forgetting to ask our own
hearts, What is all this to us? And to enquite of them things worthy of their
Wisdom and Experience. Wherefore is there a price in the hand of a Fool, seeing
he has no heart to it? Proverbs 17.16. The expense of one Minutes breath in
season, may if God concur with it, be to you the ground of breathing forth
praises to God to all eternity.

Inference VIII.
ARE Souls and Bodies tacked together by so frail a thing as a puff of breath?
How vain and groundless then are all those Pleasures men take in their Carnal
Projects and Designs in this World!

We lay the Plot and Design of our future earthly felicity in our own thoughts,
we mould and contrive a design for a long and pleasant life. The model for
raising an Estate is already formed in our thoughts, and we have not patience
to defer our pleasure till the accomplishment of it, but presently draw a train
of pleasing Consequents from this Chimaera, and our thoughts can stoop to
nothing less than sitting down all the remainder of our days, in the very lap
of delight and pleasure: Forgetting that our breath is all the while in our
Nostrils, and may expire the next moment; and if it do, the structure of all
our Expectations and Projects come to nothing in the same moment: His breath
goes forth, he returns to his dust; and in that very day his thoughts
perish. Psalm. 146.4. The whole frame of his thoughts falls instantly abroad, by
drawing out this one pin, his breath. It Is good with all our earthly designs, to
mingle the serious thoughts of the Dominion of Providence, and our own frailty,
James 4.15 If the Lord will, and we live.

It Is become a common Observation, that as soon as men have accomplished their
earthly designs, and begin to hug and bless themselves in their own
Acquisitions, a sudden and unexpected period is put both to their Lives and
Pleasures, as you may see Luke 12.19, 20. Dan. 4.30.

O then drive moderately, you will be at the end of all these things sooner
than you imagine. We need not victual a Ship to cross the Chanel, as they do
that are bound to the Indies. What is your life? It is even a Vapor, which
appears for a little while; and then vanishes away, James 4.14. In one
moment the Projects of many years are overturned for ever.

Inference IX.
IS it but a puff of breath that holds Man in life, then build not too much
hope and confidence upon any man.

Build not too high upon so feeble a foundation. Cease ye from man (says the
Prophet) whose breath is in his Nostrils; for wherein is he to be accounted of?
Isai. 2.22. There are two things that should deter us from dependence upon any
man, viz. his falseness, and his frailty. Grace in a great measure, may cure
the first, but not the last. The best of men must die, as well as the worst,
Romans 8.10. it is a vanity therefore to rely upon any man. It was the saying of a
Philosopher, when he heard how Merchants lost great Estates at Sea in a moment,
Non amo foelicitatem e funibus pendentem; I love not that Happiness (said he)
which hangs upon a Rope. But all the happiness of many men, hangs upon a far
weaker thing than a Rope, even the perishing breath of a Creature.

Let not Parents raise their hopes too high, or lean too hard upon their
Children, say not of thy Child as Lamech did of Noah, this Son shall comfort
us, Genesis 5.29. The World is full of the Laments and bitter Cries of
disappointed Parents. Let not the Wife depend too much on her Husband, as if
her earthly Comforts were secured in him, against all danger. God is often
provoked to stop our friends breath, that thereby he may stop our way to sin. 1 Timothy 5.5. The trust and dependence of a Soul is too weighty to be hanged upon
such a weak and rotten pin as a Creatures breath is.

Inference X.
TO conclude; If this frail breath be all that differences the living from the
dead, Then fear not man whose breath is in his Nostrils. There is as little
ground for our fear of Man, as there is for our trust in Man. As death in a
moment can make the best man useless, and put him out of capacity to do us any
good; so it can in a moment make the worst man harmless, and put him out of a
capacity to do us any injury. Indeed if the breath of our Enemies were in their
power, and ours at their mercy, there would be just cause to tremble at them,
but they are neither Masters of their own or ours. Who art thou that thou
should (...) afraid of a man that shall die? says God to Jacob, Isai.
51.12. The breath of the mightiest is no better secured, than of the meanest,
nor never in more danger to be stopped, than when they breath out threatenings
against the Upright.

Iulian's breath was soon stopped, after he threatened to root out the Galileans.
Queen Mary resigned her breath, at the very time when she had filled the
Prisons with many of Christ's Sheep, designed for the slaughter. Read Isai.
17.12. and see what Mushromes we are afraid of; The best way to continue your
Relations and Friends to your comfort, is to give God, and not them your
dependence; and the best way to secure your selves against the rage of Enemies,
is to give God your fear, and not them. And thus of the nature of the Soul, and
its Tie with the Body.

TEXT.
Revel. VI. 9, 10, 11. And when he had opened the Fifth Seal, Ver. 9.
I saw under the Altar the Souls of them that were slain for the Word of God,
and for the Testimony which they held.

And they cried with a loud Voice, saying, Ver. 10.
How long, O Lord! holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our Blood on
them that dwell on the Earth?

And white Robes were given unto every one of them, Ver. 11.
and it was said unto them, That they should rest yet for a little season,
until their fellow Servants also, and their Brethren, that should be killed as
they were, should be fulfilled.


HAving from the former Text spoken of the Nature of the Soul, and the Tie
betwixt it and the Body; I shall from this Scripture evince the Immortality of
the Soul, which is a chief part of its Excellency and Glory: And in this
Scripture it has a firm Foundation.

This Book of the Revelation compleats and seals up the whole Sacred Canon,
Revel. 22.18. It also comprehends all the great and signal Events of
Providence, relating either to the Christian Church, or to its Antichristian
Enemies, in the several Periods of time, to the end of the World, Chap. 1. v.
19. all which the Spirit of God discovers to us, in the opening of the seven
Seals, the sounding of the seven Trumpets, and the pouring out of the seven
Vials.

The first five Seals express the State of the Church under the bloody
persecuting Heathen Emperors.

Seal 1.
The first Seal opened, Ver. 2. gives the Church a very encouraging and
comfortable prospect of the Victories, Successes, and Triumphs of Christ,
notwithstanding the Rage, Subtilty, and power of all its Enemies. He shall ride
on Conquering, and to Conquer; and his Arrows shall be sharp in the Hearts of
his Enemies, whereby the People shall fall under him. And this chearing
Prospect was no more than was needful. For

Seal 2.
The second Seal opened, ver. 3. and 4. represents the first bloody Persecution
of the Church under Nero, whom Tertullian calls Dedicator damnationis nostrae:
Tertul. Apol. cap. 5.
He that first condemned Christians to the Slaughter. And the Persecution under
him, is set forth by the Type of a red Horse, and a great Sword in the hand of
him that rode thereon. His cruelty is by Paul compared to the mouth of a Lion.
2 Timothy 4.17. Paul, Peter, Bartholomew, Barnabas, Mark, are all said to dye by
his cruel hand: and so fierce was his rage against the Christians, that at that
time, as Eusebius says, Adeo ut videret repletas humanis corporibus civitates,
jacentes mortuos, simul cum parvulis senes, foeminarumque absque ulla sexus
reverentia in publico rejesta Cadavera.
a man might then see Cities lie full of dead Bodies, the old and young, Men
and Women cast out naked, without any reverence of Persons or Sex, in the open
street.

Tacit. lib. 15. Annal.
And when the day failed, Christians (says Tacitus) were burnt in the night,
instead of Torches, to give them light in the Streets.

Seal 3.
The third Seal opened, v. 5.6. sets forth the calamities which should befall the
Church by Famine: Yet not so much a literal as a figurative Famine, as a grave
and learned Commentator Durham in Loc.
expounds it, like that mentioned, Amos 8.11, 12. which fell out under
Maximinus, and Trajan. The former directing the Persecution, especially against
Ministers, in which, many bright Lamps were extinguished. The latter expressly
condemned all Christian Meetings and Assemblies by a Law. The Type by which
this Persecution was set forth, is a black Horse. A gloomy and dismal day it
was indeed to the poor Saints, when they eat the bread of their Souls, as it
were by weight, for he that sat on him, had a pair of balances in his hand.
Then did John hear this sad voice, A measure of wheat for a Penny, and three
measures of Barley for a penny. That quantity was but the ordinary allowance,
to keep a man a live for a day. And a Roman Penny was the ordinary wages given
for a days work to a labourer. The meaning is, that in those days, all the
Spiritual food men should get, to keep their Souls alive from day to day, with
all their travel and labor, should be but sufficient for that end.

The fourth Seal opened, Seal 4.
ver. 7.8. represents a much more sad and doleful state of the Church: for
under it are found all the former sufferings, with some new kinds of trouble
superadded. Under this Seal, death rides upon the pale Horse, and Hell, or the
Grave follows him. It Is conceived to point at the presecution under Dioclesian,
when the Church was mowed down as a Meadow.

The fifth Seal is opened in my Text, Seal 5.
under which the Lord Jesus represents to his servant John the state and
condition of those precious Souls, which had been torn and separated from their
Bodies, by the bloody hands of Tyrants, for his name sake, under all the former
persecutions. The design whereof is, to support and encourage all that were to
come after, in the same bloody path. I saw under the Altar, etc. in which we
have an account, I. Of what John saw. II. Of what he heard.


I. First we have an account of what he saw, I saw the Souls of them that were
slain for the word of God, and for the testimony which they held.

Souls in this place are not put for the Blood, or the dead Carcasses of the
Saints, who were slain, as some have groundlessly imagined; but are to be
understood properly and strictly, for those Spiritual and immortal substances,
which once had a vital Union with their Bodies, but were now separated from
them by a violent death; (...). Anima proimmortali Spirit^ hominis capitu^,
sicuti Matt. 10.28. ho^ sensu dicit hic Johannes se vidisse animas, etc.
Marlorat in loc.
yet still retained a love and inclination to them, even in the state of
Separation, and are therefore here brought in complaining of their shedding of
their blood, and destruction of their Bodies.

These Souls (even of all that dyed for Christ, from Abel, to that time) John
saw, that is, in Spirit; for these immaterial substances are not perceptible by
the gross external senses. Anim^ Co^^oribus exutae invisibile^ sunt, occulis
corpo^^is, vidit ergo ^as Johannes Spiritu Paraus in loc.
He had the privilege and favor of a Spiritual representation of them, being
therein extraordinarily assisted, as Paul was when his Soul was rapt into the
third Heaven, and heard things unutterable, 2 Cor. 12.2. God gave him a
transient visible representation of those holy Souls, and that under the Altar,
he means not any material Altar, as that at Jerusalem was; but as the holy
place figured Heaven, so the Altar figured Jesus Christ, Heb. 13.10. And most
aptly Christ is represented to John in this figure, and Souls of the Martyrs at
the foot or basis of this Altar, thereby to inform us (1) that however men look
upon the death of those persons, and though they kill their names by slanders,
as well as their persons by the Sword; yet in Gods account, they dye as
Sacrifices, and their blood is no other than a drink offering poured out to
God, which he highly prizeth, and graciously accepts. Suitable whereunto
Paul's expression is, Philip. 2.17. (2) That the value and acceptance their
death and blood shed has with God, is through Christ, and upon his account;
for it is the Altar which sanctifies the gift. Matthew. 23.19. and (3.) it
informs us that these holy Souls, now in a state of Separation from their
Bodies, were very near to Jesus Christ in Heaven. They lay as it were at his
foot.

Once more, They are here described to us, by the cause of their sufferings and
death in this World, and that was, For the word of God, and for the Testimony
which they held. (i. e.) They dyed in defense of the Truths, or will of God
revealed in his word, against the Corruptions, Oppositions, and Innovations of
Men. As one of the Martyrs, that held up the Bible at the Stake, saying, This
is it that has brought me hither. They dyed not as Malefactors, but as
Witnesses. They gave a threefold Testimony to the truth, a lip Testimony, a
life Testimony, and a blood Testimony; whilst the Hypocrite gives but one, and
many Christians but two. Thus we have an account of what John saw.

II. Next he tells us what he heard, and that was, 1. A vehement Cry from those
Souls to God. 2. A gracious Answer from God to them.


1. The cry which they uttered with a loud voice was this, How long, O Lord,
Holy, and True, do thou not avenge our blood on them that dwell on the Earth?
A cry like that from the blood of Abel. Yet let it be remembered (1) This cry
does not imply these holy Souls to be in a restless state, or to want true
satisfaction and repose out of the Body; no^ yet (2) that they carried with
them to Heaven any malevolent or revengeful disposition; but that which is
principally signified by this Cry, is their vehement desire after the abolition
of the Kingdom of Satan, and the Completion and Consummation of Christ's Kingdom
in this World. That those his Enemies which oppose his Kingdom, by slaying his
Saints, may be made his footstool, which is the same thing Christ waits for in
glory, Heb. 10.13.

2. Secondly, Here we find Gods gracious Answer to the cry of these Souls, in
which he speaks satisfaction to them two ways: (1.) By somewhat given them for
present. (2.) By somewhat promised them hereafter.


(1.) That which he gives them in hand, White Robe: were given to every one of
them. It is generally agreed, that these white Robes given them, denote
heavenly Glory, the same which is promised to all sincere and faithful ones,
who preserve themselves pure from the corruptions and defilements of the World,
Revel. 3.4. and it is as much as if God should have said to them, Although the
time be not come to satisfy your desires in the final ruin and overthrow of
Satan's Tyrannical Kingdom in the World, and Christ's consummate Conquest of all
his Enemies, yet it shall be well with you in the mean time, you shall walk
with me in white, and enjoy your glory in Heaven.

(2) And this is not all, but the very things they cry for, shall be given them
also after a little season, q. d. wait but a little while, till the rest that
are to follow in the same suffering path, be got through the Red Sea of
Martyrdom, as you are, and then you shall see the foot of Christ upon the
necks of all his Enemies, and justice shall fully avenge the precious innocent
blood of all the Saints, which in all Ages has been shed for my sake; from the
blood of Abel, to the last that shall ever suffer for Righteousness sake in the
World. From all which this Conclusion is most fair and obvious:

DOCTRINE.
THat the Souls of men perish not with their Bodies, but do certainly over-live
them, and subsist in a state of separation from them. Matthew. 10.28. Fear not
them that kill the Body, but are not able to kill the Soul.

The Bodies of these Martyrs of Jesus were destroyed by diverse sorts of
torments, but their Souls were out of the reach of all those cruel Engines.
They were in safety under the Altar, and in glory, clothed with their white
Robes, when the Bodies they lately inhabited on earth, were turned to ashes,
and torn to pieces by wild Beasts.

The point I am to discourse from this Scripture, is the immortality of the
Soul, for the better understanding whereof, let it be noted that there is a
twofold Immortality.

I. Simple, and absolute in its own Nature, II. Derived, dependent, and from
the pleasure of God.
In the former Sense, God only has Immortality, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy
6.16. our Souls have it as a gift from him. He that created our Souls out of
nothing, can, if he please, reduce them to nothing again; but he has bestowed
Immortality upon them, and produced them in a nature suitable to that his
appointment: fitted for an everlasting life. So that, though God by his
absolute power can, yet he never will annihilate them, but they shall and must
live for ever in endless Blessedness or Misery; Death must destroy these mortal
Bodies, but it cannot destroy our Souls. And the certainty of this assertion is
grounded upon these reasons, and will be cleared by these following Arguments.

Argument I.
THe first Argument for proof of the Souls Immortality, may be taken from the
Simplicity, Spirituality, and uncompoundedness of its Nature. It is a pure,
simple, unmixed Being. Interitus est discessus Secretio, and direptu^ earum
partium q^ae conjuctione aliqua teneba^tur. T^lly.
Death is the Dissolution of things compounded; where therefore no composition
or mixture is found, no death or dissolution can follow.

Death is the great Divider, but it is of things that are divisible. The more
simple, pure and refined any material thing is, by so much the more permanent
and durable it is found to be. The nearer it approaches to the nature of
Spirits, the farther it is removed from the power of death: but that which is
not material, or mixed at all, is wholly exempt from the stroke and power of
death. It is from the contrariant qualities and jarring humors in mixed
Bodies, that they come under the Law and power of dissolution. Matter and
Mixture are the doors at which death enters naturally upon the Creatures.

But the Soul of man is a simple, spiritual, immaterial, and unmixed Being, not
compounded of matter and form, as other Creatures are, but void of matter, and
altogether Spiritual: as may appear in the vast capacity of its understanding
faculty, which cannot be straightened by receiving multitudes of Truths into it.
It need not empty it self of what it had received before, to make way for more
truth; nor does it find it self clogged or burdened by the greatest multitudes
or varieties of Truths, but the more it knows, the more it still desires to
know. Its capacity and appetite are found to enlarge themselves according to
the increase of knowledge. So that to speak as the matter is, if the Knowledge
of all Arts, Sciences, and Mysteries of Nature could be gathered into the mind
of one man; yet that mind would thirst, and even burn with desire after more
knowledge, and find more room for it than it did when it first sipt and
relished the sweetness of truth. Knowledge, as Knowledge, never burdens or
cloys the mind; but like fire increases and enlarges, as it finds more matter
to work upon. Now, this could never be, if the Soul were a material Being. Take
the largest Vessel, and you shall find, that the more you pour into it, the
less room is still left for more; ^
and when it is full, you cannot pour in one drop more, except you let out what
was in it before. But the Soul is no such Vessel, it can retain all it had, and
be still receptive of more; so that nothing can fill it and satisfy it, but
that which is infinite and perfect.

The natural appetite after food is sometimes sharp and eager, but then there
is a stint and measure, beyond which it (...) not; but the appetite of the mind
is more eager and unlimi^^d, it never says, till it come to rest in God, it is
enoug^, because the faculty which produces it, is more (...), spiritual and
immaterial. All matter has its limits, bounds, (...) of (...), till we attain
the desired end, which is God.
and just measures, beyond which it cannot be extended. But the Soul is
boundless, and its appetitions infinite; is rests not, but in the spiritual and
infinite Being, God alone being is adaequate object, and able to satisfy its
desires: which plainly proves it to be a Spiritual immaterial, and simple
being. And being so, two things necessarily follow therefrom.

1. That it is void of any Principle of corruption in it self. 2. That it is
not liable to any stroke of death, by any adverse power without it self.
1. It cannot be liable to death, from any seeds or Principles of Corruption
within it self, for where there is no composition, there is no dissolution, the
Spirituality and simplicity of the Soul admits of no Corruption.

2. Nor is it liable to death, by any adverse power without it self. No Sword
can touch it. No instrument of death can reach it. It Is above the reach of all
adversaries, Matt. 10.28. Fear not them that can kill the Body, but cannot kill
the Soul. The bounds and limits of creature-power are here fixed by Jesus
Christ, beyond which they cannot go. They can wound, torment, and destroy the
Body, when God permits them: but the Soul is out of their reach. A Sword can no
more wound it, than it can wound or hurt the light, and consequently it is, and
must needs be of an immortal nature.

But there seems to be a decay upon our Souls in our old Age, Object.
and decaies argue and imply corruption and are so many steps and tendencies
toward the death and dissolution thereof. The experience of the whole world
shows us how the Apprehensions, Judgments, Wit, and Memory of old Men fail,
even to that degree, that they become children again in respect of the
abilities of their minds: their Souls only serving as it were to salt their
Bodies, and keep them from putrefaction for a few days longer.

It Is a great mistake, Sol.
there is not the least decay upon the Soul, no time makes any change upon the
essence of the Soul: all the alteration that is made, is upon the Organs and
Instruments of the Body which decay in time, and become inept and unserviceable
to the Soul.

The Soul like an expert and skilful Musician is as able as ever it was, but
the Body its instrument is out of tune, and the ablest Artist can make no
pleasing melody upon an instrument whose Strings are broken, or so related that
they cannot be scrued up to their due height.

Let Hippocrates the Prince of Physicians decide this matter for us. Anima
nostra quoad essentiam muta^i non potest, aut alterari, si^^ cibi, si^^ potus,
sive cujuscunque rei alterius acc^ssu: referends est enim omnium alterationum
causa, aut ad spiritus, quibus se immiscet, aut ad vasa, sive organa que
permeat. Hippocrates lib. 1. de diae^a.
The Soul (says he) cannot be changed or altered as to its essence by the
access of meat or drink, or any other thing whatsoever; but all the alterations
that are made, must be referred either to the Spirits with which it mixeth it
self, or to the Vessels and Organs through which it streameth. So that this
proves not its corruptibility: and being neither corruptible in it self, nor
vulnerable by any creature without it self; seeing man cannot, and God will not
destroy it: the conclusion is strongly inferred, that therefore it is immortal.

Argument II.
THE Immortality of the Souls of Men may be concluded from the Promises of
everlasting Blessedness, and the Threatenings of everlasting miseries
respectively made in the Scriptures of truth, to the Godly and ungodly, after
this Life; which Promises and Threatenings had been altogether vain and
delusory, if our Souls perish with our Bodies.

1. First, God has made many everlasting Promises of Blessedness, yea he has
established an everlasting Covenant, betwixt himself and the Souls of the
Righteous; promising to be their God for ever, and to bestow endless
Blessedness upon them in the World to come. Such a Promise is that, John 8.28.
I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish. And John 4.14.
Whosoever drinks of the Water that I shall give him, shall never thirst; but
the Water that I shall give him, shall be in him a Well of Water, springing up
into everlasting life. And again, John 11.26. Whosoever lives and believes in
me, shall never dye. And once more, Romans 2.7. To them who by patient
continuance in well doing, seek for Glory and Honor, and Immortality, eternal
Life: with multitudes more of like nature.

Now if these be no vain and delusory Promises, (as to be sure they are not,
being the words of the true and faithful God) then those Souls to whom they are
made, must live for ever; for if the subject of the Promises must fail,
consequently the performance of the Promises must fail too. For how shall they
be made good, when those to whom they are made, are perished?

Let it not be objected here, That the Bodies of Believers are concerned in the
promises, as well as their Souls, and yet their Bodies perish, notwithstanding.

For we say, though their Bodies dye, yet they shall live again, and enjoy the
fruit of the Promises in eternal Glory: And whilst their Bodies lie in the
Grave, their Souls are with God, enjoying the covenanted Blessedness in Heaven,
Romans 8.10, 11. and so the Covenant-Bond is not loosed betwixt them and God, by
Death, which it must needs be, in case the Soul perished when the Body does.
And upon this Hypothesis that Argument of Christ is built, Matthew. 22.32.
proving the Resurrection from the Covenant God made with Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob. I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. God
is not the God of the Dead, but of the Living. q. d. If Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, be perished in Soul as well as in Body, how then is God their God? what
is become of the Promise and Covenant Relation? for if one Correlate fail, the
Relation necessarily fails with it. If God be their God, then certainly they
are in being; for God is not the God of the Dead, ( i.e.) of those that are
utterly perished. Therefore it must needs be, that though their Bodies be
naturally dead, yet their Souls still live; and their Bodies must live again at
the Resurrection, by virtue of the same Promise.

2. On the contrary, many threatenings of eternal misery after this life, are
found in the Scriptures of truth, against ungodly and wicked Persons. Such is
that in 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9. The Lord Jesus shall be revealed from Heaven in
flaming Fire, to render Vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting
Destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and the Glory of his Power. And
speaking of the Torments of the Damned, Christ thus expresses the misery of
such wretched Souls in Hell, Mark 9.44. Where their Worm dies not, and the
fire is not quenched. But how shall the Wicked be punished with everlasting
Destruction, if their Souls have not an everlasting Duration? Or how can it be
said, That their Worm ( viz. the remorse and anguish of their Consciences)
dies not, if their Souls dye? Punishment can endure no longer than its subject
endures. If the being of the Soul cease, its pains and punishments must have
an end.

You see then, there are everlasting Promises and Threatenings to be fulfilled,
both upon the Godly and Ungodly. He that believes on the Son, has everlasting
life; and he that believes not the Son, shall not see Life, but the wrath of
God abides on him, John 3.36. The Believer shall never see spiritual Death,
viz. the separation of his Soul from God; and the Unbeliever shall never see
life, viz. the blessed fruition of God; but the Wrath of God shall abide on
him. If Wrath must abide on him, he must abide also as the wretched subject
thereof, which is another Argument of the Immortality of Souls.

Argument III.
THE Immortality of the Soul is a Truth asserted and attested by the universal
consent of all Nations and Ages of the World. Multum dare solemus praesumptioni
omnium hominium; c^m de Animae Aeternitate disserimus, non leve momentum apud
nos habit consensus hominum aut timentium inseros, aut colentium. Soneca, Ep.
17.
We give much (says Seneca) to the presumption of all men: and that justly;
for it would be hard to think that an Error should obtain the general consent
of Mankind, or that God would suffer all the World, in all Ages of it, to bow
down under an universal Deception.

This Doctrine sticks close to the nature of Man; it springs up easily, and
without force from his Conscience. It has been allowed as an unquestionable
thing, not only among Christians, who have the Oracles of God to teach and
confirm this Doctrine, but among Heathens also, who had no other Light but that
of Nature, to guide them into the knowledge and belief of it. In omni re
co^se^sio o^^ium gentiam Lex Naturae putanda est, esque instar mill
demonst^ationum tal^^ consensio apud bonos esse deb^t. Zanch. de im^ort.
Animarum, p. 644.
Learned Zanchius cites out of Cicero an excellent passage to this purpose: In
every thing (says he) the consent of all Nations is to be accounted the Law of
Nature: And therefore with all good Men it should be instead of a thousand
Demonstrations: and to resist it, (as he there adds) what is it, but to resist
the voice of God? and how much more, when with this consent the Word of God
does also consent? As for the consent of Nations in this point, the learned
Author last mentioned has industriously gathered many great and famous
Testimonies from the ancient Chaldeans, Graecians, Pythagoreans, Stoics,
Platonists, etc. which evidently show they made no doubt of the Immortality of
their Souls. How plain is that of Phocylides? (...) Speaking of the Soul, in
opposition to the Body, which must be resolved into dust, he says, But for the
Soul, that is immortal, and never grows old, but lives for ever. (...)
And Trismegistus, the famous and celebrated Philosopher, gives this account of
Man, That he consists of two parts, being mortal in respect of his Body, but
immortal in respect of his Soul; which is his best and principal part. Pluto
not only asserts the immortality of the Souls of Men, but disputes for it, and
among other Arguments urges this, (...) Si erim Mors dissolutio esset utriusque
(corporis sc. and animae) Iu^in^ foret malis cu^ mori^^tur. Plato in epist.
That if it were not so, wicked Men would certainly have the advantage of
righteous and good Men, who after they have committed all manner of evils,
should suffer none. But what speak I of Philosophers? the most barbarous
Nations in the World constantly believe it Quid de Tu^^cis, Tartaris Moschis,
Indis Persis, aliisqu^ omnibus ^u^c temporis barba^^^ nationibus dicam? Nemo
tam barbarus aut impius est quin sentiat post montem sup(...) (...) in quibus
anime aut pro Malefactis punlantur, aut co^ountur, celiciisq p^s^uantur p^o
(...) factis. Zanch. ubi supra.
The Turks acknowledge it in their Alchoran; and though they grossly mistake the
nature of Heaven, in fansying it to be a Paradise of sensual Pleasures, as well
as the way thither; by their Impostor Mahomet; yet it is plain they believe the
Souls immortality, and that it lives in pain or pleasure after this life.

The very salvage and illiterate Indians are so fully persuaded of the Souls
Immortality, that Wives cast themselves cheerfully into the Flames to attend
the Souls of their Husbands; and Subjects, to attend the Souls of their Kings,
into the other World.

Two things are objected against this Argument.

Object. 1.
I. That some particular persons have denied this Doctrine, as Epicurus, etc.
and by Argument maintained the contrary.

Sol.
To which I answer, That though they have done so, yet (1.) this no way shakes
the Argument from the consent of Nations, because some few persons have denied
it: we truly say the Earth is Spherical, though there be many Hills and Risings
in it. If Democritus put out his own eyes, must we therefore say all the World
is blind?

(2) It is worth thinking on, whether they that have questioned the Immortality
of the Soul, have not rather made it the matter of their option and desire,
than of their Faith and Persuasion. We distinguish Atheists into three Classes,
such as are so in Practice, in Desire, or in Judgment; but of the former sorts
there may be found multitudes, to one that is so in his settled judgment. (...).
Hieroc.
If you think it strange that any Man should wish his Soul to be mortal,
Hierocles gives us the true reason of it A wicked man (says he) is afraid of
his Judge, and therefore wishes his Soul and Body may perish together by Death,
rather than it should come to Gods Tribunal.

Object. 2.
II. Nor can the strength of the Argument be eluded by saying, All this may be
but an universal Tradition, one Nation receiving it from another.

Sol.
For as this is neither true in it self, nor possible to be made good, so if it
were, it would not invalidate the Argument; for if it were not a truth
agreeable to the light of nature, and so easily received by all Men upon the
Proposal of it, it were impossible that all Nations in the World should embrace
it so readily, and hold it so tenaciously as they do.

Argument IV.
THE Immortality of the Soul may be evinced from the everlasting habits which
are subjected and inherent in it. If these habits abide for ever, certainly so
must the Souls in which they are planted.

The Souls of good Men are the good Ground, in which the Seed of Grace is sown
by the Spirit, Matthew. 13.23. ( i.e) the subjects in which gracious properties
and affections do inhere and dwell, (which is the formal notion of a Substance)
and these implanted Graces are everlasting things. So, John 4.14. It shall be
in him a Well of Water, springing up into everlasting Life, (i. e.) the Graces
of the Spirit shall be in Believers permanent habits, fixed Principles, which
shall never decay. And therefore that Seed of Grace which is cast into their
Souls at their Regeneration, is in 1 Pet. 1.23. called incorruptible Seed,
which lives and abides for ever: and it is incorruptible, not only considered
abstractly, in its own simple nature, but concretely, as it is in the
sanctified Soul, its Subject; for it is said, 1 John 3.9. The Seed of God
remains in him. It abides for ever in the Soul. If then these two things be
clear to us, viz. 1. That the Habits of Grace be everlasting. 2. That they are
inseparable from sanctified Souls;


It must needs follow that the Soul, their Subject, is so too, an everlasting
and immortal Soul. And how plainly do both these Propositions lie before us in
the Scriptures? As for the immortal and interminable nature of saving Grace, it
is plain to him that considers, not only what the fore cited Scriptures speak
about it, calling it incorruptible Seed, a Well of Water springing up into
everlasting life: But add to these what is said of these Divine qualities, in 2
Pet. 1.4. where they are called the Divine Nature: and Ephesians. 4.18. The life of
God, noting the perpetuity of these Principles in Believers, as well as their
resemblance of God in Holiness, who are endowed with them.

I know it is a great question among Divines, An gratia in renatis sit natura
and essentia sua interminabilis? Whether these Principles of Grace in the
Regenerate be everlasting and interminable in their own nature and essence? For
my own part I think that God only is naturally, essentially, and absolutely
interminable and immortal. But these gracious Habits, planted by him in the
Soul, are so by virtue of Gods Appointment, Promise and Covenant. And sure it
is that by reason hereof they are interminate, which is enough for my purpose,
if they be not essentially interminable. Though Grace be but a Creature, and
therefore has a pesse mori, yet it is a Creature begotten by the Word and
Spirit of God, which live and abide for ever, and a Creature within the Promise
and Covenant of God, by reason whereof it can never actually dye.

And then, as for the inseparableness of these Graces from the Souls in whom
they are planted, how clear is this from 1 John 2.27. where sanctifying Grace
is compared to an Unction, and this Unction is said to abide in them: And 1
John, 3.9. it is called the Seed of God, which remains in the Soul. All our
natural and moral Excellencies and Endowments go away when we dye, Job 4.21.
Does not their Excellency that is in them go away? Men may outlive their
acquired Gifts, but not their supernatural Graces: These stick by the Soul as
Ruth to Naomi, and where it goes, they go too; so that when the Soul is
dislodged by Death, all its Graces ascend up with it into Glory: it carries
away all its Faith, Love, Delight in God, all its comfortable experiences, and
fruits of Communion with God, along with it to Heaven. For Death is so far from
divesting the Soul of its Graces, that it perfects in a Moment all that was
defective in them; 1 Cor. 13.10. When that which is perfect shall come, then
that which is in part shall be done away, as the Twilight is done away when the
Sun is up, and at its Zenith. So then, Grace never dies, and this never-dying
Grace is inseparable from its Subject; by which it is plain to him that
considers, That as Graces, so Souls abide for ever.

But this only proves the Immortality of regenerate Souls. Object.


It does so, Sol.
but then consider, as there be gracious habits in the regenerate that never
dye; so there are vicious habits in the unregenerate, that can never be
separated from them in the world to come. Hence John 8.21. They are said to dye
in their sins, and Job 20.11. Their iniquities ly down with them in the dust,
and Ezekiel. 24.13. They shall never be purged. Remarkable is that place, Revel.
22. v. 11. Let him that is filthy, be filthy still. And if guilt stick so fast,
and sin be so deeply engraven in impenitent Souls, they also must remain for
ever, to bear the punishment of them.

Argument V.
THE Immortality of the Soul of Man may be evinced from the Dignity of Man
above all other Creatures (Angels only excepted) and his Dominion over them all.

In this the Scriptures are clear, that Man is the Masterpiece of all Gods
other work, Psalm. 8.5, 6. For thou have made him a little lower than the Angels
and have crowned him with glory and honor. Thou have made him to have Dominion
over the works of thy hands, thou have put all things under his feet. Other
Creatures were made for his service, and he is crowned King over them all. One
Man is of more worth than all the inferior Creatures.

But wherein is his Dignity and excellency above all other Creatures, if not in
respect of the capacity and immortality of his Soul? Sure it can be found no
where else, for as to the Body, many of the Creatures excel man in the
perfections of Sense, greatness of Strength, agility of Members, etc. Nos Aper
auditu praecellit, aranea tactu, vultur odoratu, linx visu, simia gustu: And
for beauty, Solomon in all his Glory was not arrayed like one of the Lilies of
the Field. The Beasts, and Fowls enjoy more pleasure, and live divested of
those cares and cumbers which perplex and wear out the lives of men. It cannot
be in respect of bodily perfections or pleasures that man excels other
Creatures.

If you say, he excels them all in respect of that noble endowment of Reason,
which is peculiar to man, and his singular excellency above them all.

It Is true, this is his glory, but if you deprive the reasonable Soul of
Immortality, you despoil it of all, both its glory and comfort, and put the
reasonable into a worse condition than the unreasonable and brutish Creatures;
for if the Soul may dye with the Body, and man perish as the Beast, happier is
the life of the Beast, which is perplexed with no cares nor fears about
futurities: our Reason serves to little other purpose, but to be an engine of
Torture, a mere Rack to our Souls.

Certainly, the Privilege of Man does not consist in that, as abstracted from
Immortality. But in this it properly consists, that he enjoys not only a
reasonable, but also rejoices in an Immortal Soul, which shall overlive the
world, and subsist separate from the Body, and abide for ever, when all other
Souls being but material forms, perish with that matter on which they depend.
This is the proper Dignity of Man above the Beast that perishes, and to
deprive him of Immortality, and leave him his Reason, is but to leave him a
more miserable and wretched Creature than any that God has put under his feet.
For Man is a prospecting Creature, and raises up to himself vast hopes and
fears from the world to come: by these he is restrained from the sensual
pleasures which other Creatures freely enjoy, and exercised with ten thousands
cares which they are unacquainted with; and to fail at last of all his hopes
and expectations of happiness in the world to come, is to fall many degrees
lower than the lowest Creature shall fall, even so much lower, as his
expectations and hopes had lifted him higher.

Argument VI.
THE Souls of Men must be Immortal, or else the desires of Immortality are
planted in their Souls in vain.

That there are desires of Immortality found in the hearts of all men, is a
truth too evident to be denied or doubted. Man cannot bound and terminate his
desires within the narrow limits of this world, I beseech men for Gods sake
that if at any time there arise in them a desire, or a wish that others should
speak well of them rather than evil after their death, then at that time they
would seriously consider whether those motions are not from some Spirit to
continue a Spirit after it leaves its earthly habitation, rather than from an
earthly Spirit, a vapor, which cannot act, or imagine, or desire, or f^ar
things beyond its continuance. Halt de Anim. p. 73.
and the time that measures it. Nothing that can be measured by time, is
commensurate to the desires of Man's Soul. No Motto better suits it than this,
Non est mortale quod opto. I seek for that which will not die. Romans 2. v. 7.
and his great relief against death lies in this, Non omnis moriar: That he
shall not totally perish. Yea we find in all men, even in those that seem to be
most drowned and lost in the loves and delights of this present World, a
natural desire to continue their Names and Memories to posterity after death.
Hence it is said, Psalm. 49.11. Their inward thought is, that their houses shall
continue for ever, and their dwelling-places to all generations, they call
their lands after their own Names.

And hence is the desire of children, which is, as one says, nodosa
Aeternitas, a knotty Aeternity, when our thread is spun out and cut off, their
thread is knit to it: and so we dream of a continued succession in our Name and
Family.

Abs^lom had no children to continue his Memory, to supply which defect, he
reared up a Pillar, 2 Samuel 18.18. Now it cannot be imagined, that God should
plant the desire of Immortality in those Souls that are incapable of it; nor
yet can we give a rational account, how these apprehensions of Immortality
should come into the Souls of men, except they themselves be of an immortal
nature. For, either these notions and apprehensions of Immortality, are impressed
upon our Souls by God, or do naturally spring out of the Souls of men: It forms
conceptions of things Spiritual and abstract from matter, and discerns objects
which have no dimensions, Figure, Color, or affection of matter. Si conceptus
de immortalitate fons sit ipsamet anima, est ipsa immortalis; quo^iam quod
momentan(...) est, ideam natu^ae perennis fa(...) non potest. quemadmodum
anim^: rati^^s exp^^s, conceptum ratione^et^ttis fom(...) nequit. Stern de
morte, p. 198.
if God impress them, those impressions are made in vain, if there be no such
thing as Immortality to be enjoyed; and if they spring and rise naturally out
of our Souls, that is a sufficient evidence of their Immortality. For we cannot
more conceive and form to our selves Ideas and Notions of Immortality, if our
Souls be mortal, than the Brutes which are void of reason, can form to
themselves Notions and Conceptions of rationality. So then, the very
apprehensions and desires that are found in men's hearts of Immortality, do
plainly speak them to be of an Immortal Nature.

Argument VII.
MOreover, the account given us in Scripture of the return of several Souls
into their own Bodies again after death, and real separation from them, shows
us that the Soul subsists and lives in a separate state after death, and
perishes not by the stroke of death: for if it were annihilated or destroyed
by death, the same Soul could never be restored again to the same Body. A dead
Body may indeed be acted by an assisting form, which may move and carry it from
place to place: So the Devil has acted the dead Bodies of many; but they
cannot be said to live again, by their own Souls, after a real separation by
death, unless those Souls over-lived the Bodies they forsook at death, and had
their abode in another Place and state. You have diverse unquestionable examples
of the Souls return into the Body recorded in Scripture. As that of the
Sh^namites Son, 2 King. 4.18, 19, 20, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37. That of the
Rulers daughter, Matthew. 9.18, 23, 24, 25. That of the Widows Son, Luke 7.12,
13, 14, 15. and that of Lazarus, John 11.39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45. These were
no other but the very same Souls, Non aliam, sed ipsam priorem anima^ corpori
mortuo res^itutam esse, contra tos qui puta^erunt and body putant anim^m post
mortem corporis nihil esse.
their own Souls which returned into them again, which as Chrysostom well
observes, is a great proof of their Immortality, against them that think the
Soul is annihilated after the death of the Body.

It Is true, the Scripture gives us no account of any sense or apprehension they
retained after their reunion, of the place or state they were in, during their
separation. There seemed to be perfect (...), forgetfulness of all that they
saw or felt in the state of separation. And indeed it was necessary it should
be so, that our faith might be built rather upon the sure promises of God, than
such reports and narratives of them that came to us from the dead, Luke. 16.31.
And if we believe not the word, neither would we believe, if one came from the
dead.

Argument VIII.
MOreover eighthly, The supposition of the Souls perishing with the Body, is
subversive of the Christian Religion, in the principal Doctrines and Duties
thereof: take away the Immortality of the Soul, and all Religion falls to the
ground: I will instance in 1. The Doctrines of Religion. 2. The Duties of
Religion.


1. First, It overthrows the main Principles and Doctrines of Christian
Religion, upon which both our faith and comfort is founded; and consequently,
it undoes and ruins us, as to all solid hope and true joy. The Doctrines or
Principles it overthrows are among many others such as follow. (1) It nullifies
and makes void the great design and end of Gods eternal Election. The
Scriptures tell us, that from eternity God has chosen a certain number in
Christ Jesus, to eternal life, and to the means by which they shall attain it:
out of his mere good pleasure, and for the praise of his grace. This was (1) an
eternal Act of God, Ephesians. 1.4. long before we had our being, Romans 9.11. (2) This
choice of God, or his purpose to save some, is immutable, 2 Timothy 2.19. James
1.17. (3) This choice he made in Christ, Ephesians. 1.4. Not that Christ is the cause
of Gods choosing us: For we were not elected, because we were, but that we might
be in Christ. Christ was ordained to be the Medium of the execution of this
Decree: and all the mercies which were purposed and ordained for us, were to be
purchased by the blood of Christ He was not the cause of the Decree, but the
purchaser of the mercies decreed for us. (4) This choice was of a certain
number of persons, who are all known to God, 2 Timothy 2.19. and all given to
Christ in the Covenant of Redemption, John 17.2, 6. So that no Elect person can
be a Reprobate, no Reprobate an Elect person. (5) This number was chosen to
Salvation, 1 These. 5.9. No less did God design for them than glory and
happiness, and that for ever. (6) The same persons that are appointed to
Salvation as the end, are also appointed to sanctification, as the way and
means, by which they shall attain that end. 1 Pet. 1.1, 2. 2 These. 2.13, 14.
(7) The impulsive cause of this choice was, the mere good pleasure of his will.
2. Tim. 1.9. Romans 9.15, 16. Ephesians. 1.9. (8) The end of all this is, the praise
of his glorious grace, Ephesians. 1.5, 6. to make a glorious Manifestation of the
riches of his grace for ever. This is the account the Scripture give us of Gods
eternal choice.

But if our Souls be mortal, and perish with our Bodies, all this is a mistake,
and we are imposed upon, and our understandings abused by this Doctrine. For to
what purpose are all these Decrees and contrivances of God from everlasting, if
our Souls perish with our Bodies? Certainly, if it be so, he loses all the
thoughts and counsels of his heart about us, and that counsel of his will which
is so much celebrated in the Scriptures, and admired by his People comes to
naught. For this is evident to every man's consideration, that if the Soul
(which is the Object, about which all those counsels and thoughts of God were
employed and laid out) fail in its being, all those thoughts and counsels that
have been employed about it, and spent on it, must necessarily fail, and come
to nothing with it. The thoughts of his heart cannot stand fast, as its said
Psalm. 33.11. if the Soul slide, about which they are conversant. In that day
the elect Soul perishes, the eternal consultations and purposes of Gods heart
perish with it. Kekerman tells us, that Albertus Magnus with abundance of Art,
Albertus Magnus statuam ho^rinis construxit, que cum libramentis quibusdam,
^otis, atque aliis machi^is i^t^a latentibus peritissime c^m^ositis, li^guam
quadam ratione and disciplina noventibus, articul^ta (...) prenunciarit.
and the study of thirty years made a vocal Statue in the form of a Man. It was
a rare contrivance, and much admired. The cunning Artist had so framed it, that
by Wheels and other Machins placed within it, it could pronounce words
articulately. Aquinas being surprised to hear the Statue speak, was affrighted
at it, and brake it all to pieces: Upon which Albertus told him, he had at one
blow destroyed the work of thirty years. Such a blow would the death of the
Soul give to the counsels and thoughts not of Man, but of God, not of thirty
years, but from everlasting.

If the Souls of men perish at death, either God never did appoint any Souls to
Salvation, as the Scriptures testify he did, 1 These. 5.9. or else the
foundation of God stands not sure, as his word tells us, it does, 2 Timothy 2.19.
So then, this supposition overturns the eternal Decrees and Counsels of God,
which is the first thing.

2. It overthrows the Covenant of Redemption betwixt the Father and the Son,
before this World was made. There was a federal transaction betwixt the Father
and Son from Eternity, about our Salvation, 2 Timothy 1.9. Zech. 6.13. In that
Covenant Christ engaged to redeem the Elect by his blood. And the Father
promised him a reward of those his sufferings, Isai. 53.12. accordingly he has
poured out his Soul to death for them, finished the work, John 17.4. and is now
in Heaven, expecting the full reward and fruits of his sufferings, which
consist not in his own personal glory, which he there enjoys, but in the
compleatness and fullness of his mystical Body, John 17.24.

But certainly, if our Souls perish with our Bodies, Christ has a very bad
bargain of it. Nor can that promise be ever made good to him, Isai. 53.12. He
shall see of the travel of his Soul, and be satisfied. He has done his work,
but where is his reward? See how this supposition strikes at the justice of
God, and wounds his faithfulness, in his Covenant with his Son. He has as much
comfort and reward from the Travel of his Soul, as a Mother that is delivered
after many sharp pangs of a Child that dies almost as soon as born.

3. It overthrows the Doctrines of Christ's Incarnation, Death, Resurrection,
Ascension, and Intercession in Heaven for us. And these are the main Pillars
both of our faith and comfort; take away these, and take away our lives too,
for these are the springs of all joy and comfort to the people of God, Romans 8.34

His Incarnation was necessary to capacitate him for his Mediatorial work. It
was not only a part of it, but such a part, without which he could discharge no
other part of it. This was the wonder of men and Angels, 1 Timothy 3.16. A God
incarnate is the Worlds wonder. No condescension like this, Philip. 2 6, 7.

The Death of Christ has the nature and respect of a Ransom, or equivalent
price laid down to the justice of God for our Redemption, Matt. 20.28. Act.
20.28. It bought our Souls from under the curse, and purchased for them
everlasting Blessedness, Galat. 4.4, 5.

The Resurrection of Christ from the Dead, has the nature both of a Testimony
of his finishing the work of our Redemption, and the Fathers full satisfaction
therein, John 6.10. and of a Principle of our Resurrection to eternal life, 1
Cor. 15.20.

The Ascension of Christ into Heaven, was in the capacity and relation of a
forerunner, Heb. 6.20. It was to prepare places for the redeemed, who were to
come after him to glory in their several generations, John 14.2.3.

The Intercession of Christ in Heaven, is for the security of our purchased
inheritance, to us, and to prevent any new breaches which might be made by our
Sins, whereby it might be forfeited, and we divested of it again, 1 John 2.1, 2.

All these jointly make up the foundation of our faith and hope of glory. But
if our Souls perish, or be annihilated at death, our Faith, Hope, and Comforts
are all Delusions, vain Dreams which do but abuse our fond Imaginations. For

(1.) It was not worth so great a stoop and abasement of the blessed God, as he
submitted to, in his Incarnation, wherein he appeared in flesh, yea, in the
likeness of sinful flesh, Romans 8.3. and made himself of no reputation, Philip.
2.7. An act that is, and ever will be admired by men and Angels: I say, it was
not worth so great a Miracle as this, to procure for us the vanishing comfort
of a few years, and that short-lived comfort, no other than a deluding Dream,
or mocking Phantasm; For seeing it consists in hope and expectation from the
world to come, as the Scriptures every where speak, 1 These. 5.8. and 2 Cor.
3.12. Romans 5.3, 4, 5. if there be no such enjoyments for us there, (as most
certainly there are not, if our Souls perish) it is but a vanity, a thing of
naught, that was the errand upon which the Son of God came from the fathers
bosom, to procure for us.

(2) And for what think you was the blood of God upon the Cross? what was so
vast and inconceivable a treasure expended to purchase? What! the flattering
and vain hopes of a few years, of which we may say, as it was said of the Roman
Consulship, unius anni volaticum gaudium: the fugitive joy of a year, yea, not
only short-lived and vain hopes in themselves, but such, for the sake whereof
we abridge our selves of the pleasures and desires of the flesh, 1 John 3.3.
and submit our selves to the greatest sufferings in the world, Romans 8.18. for
the Hope of Israel am I bound with this chain etc. Acts 28.20. was this the
Purchase of his blood? was this it, for which he sweat, and groaned, and bled,
and died? was that precious blood no more worth than such a trifle as this?

(3) To what purpose did Christ rise again from the dead, was it not to be the
first fruits of them that sleep? did he not rise as the common Head of
Believers? to give us assurance we shall not perish, and be utterly lost in the
grave, Col. 1.18* But if our Souls perish at Death, there can be no
Resurrection, and if none, then Christ dyed, and rose in vain, we are yet in
our sins, and all those absurdities are unavoidable, with which the Apostle
loads this supposition, 1 Cor. 15.13. etc.

(4) And to as little purpose was his Triumphant Ascension into Heaven, if we
can have no benefit by it. The professed end of his Ascension was to prepare a
place for us, John 14.2. But to what purpose are those Mansions in the Heavens
prepared, if the Inhabitants for whom they are prepared be utterly lost? And
why is he called the forerunner, if there be none to follow him, as surely
there are not, if our Souls perish with our Bodies? Those Heavenly Mansions,
that City prepared by God, must stand void for ever, if this be so.

(5) To conclude, in vain is the Intercession of Christ in Heaven for us, if
this be so. They that shall never come thither, have no business there to be
transacted by their advocate for them. So that the whole Doctrine of Redemption
by Christ is utterly subverted by this one supposition.

4. As it subverts the Doctrine of Redemption by Christ, and all the hopes and
comforts we build thereon, so it utterly destroys all the works of the Spirit
upon the hearts of Believers, and makes them vanish into nothing.

There are diverse Acts and Offices of the Spirit of God about and upon our
Souls: I will only single out three, viz. his sanctifying, sealing, and
Comforting work; all, things of great weight with believers.

(1.) His sanctifying work, whereby he alters the frames and tempers of our
Souls, 2 Cor. 5.17. old things are past away, behold, all things are become new.

The declared, and direct end of this work of the Spirit upon our Souls, is to
attemper and dispose them for Heaven, Col. 1.12. For seeing nothing that is
unclean can enter into the holy place, Revel. 21.27. And without holiness no
man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.14. It is necessary that all those that have
this hope in them, should expect to be partakers of their hopes in the way of
purification, 1 John 3.3. And this is the ground upon which the people of God
do mortify their lusts, and take so much pain with their own hearts, Matt.
18.8. counting it better (as their Lord tells them) to enter into life halt, or
maimed, than having two eyes or hands to be cast into Hell. But to what purpose
is all this self-denial, all these heart-searchings, heart-humblings, cries and
tears upon the account of Sin, and for an heart suited to the will of God, if
there be no such life to be enjoyed with God, after this animal life is
finished?

If you say there is a present advantage resulting to us in this world, Object.
from our abstinence and self-denial, we have the truer, and longer enjoyment
of our comforts on earth by it. Debauchery and licentiousness do not only flat
the appetite, and debase and alloy the comforts of this World, but cut short
our lives, by the exorbitances and abuses of them.

Though there be a truth in this, worth our noting, Sol.
yet (1) Morality could have done all this without sanctification, there was no
need for the pouring out of the Spirit, for so low a use and purpose as this.
(2) And therefore as the wisdom of God would be censured and impeached, in
sending his spirit for an end, which could as well be attained without it, so
the Veracity of God must needs be affronted by it, who, as you heard before,
has declared, our Salvation to be the end of our sanctification.

(2.) His Sealing, Witnessing and Assuring work: we have a full account in the
Scriptures, of these Offices and works of the Spirit, and some spiritual sense
and feeling of them upon our own hearts, which are two good assurances, that
there are such things as his bearing witness with our Spirits, Romans 8.16. his
Sealing us to the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4.30. his earnests given into our
hearts, 2 Cor. 1.22. All which acts and works of the Spirit, have a direct and
clear aspect upon the life to come, and the happiness of our Souls in the full
enjoyment of God to eternity. For it is to that life we are now sealed. And of
the full sum of that glory, that these are the pledges and earnests. But if our
Souls perish by death, these witnesses of the spirit are Delusions, and his
earnests are given us but in jest.

(3) His Comforting work is a sweet fruit and effect sensibly felt and tasted
by believers in this World. He is from this Office styled the Comforter, John
16.7. signanter, and eminenter. He so comforts, as no other does, or can. And
what is the matter of his comforts, but the Blessedness to come, the joys of
the coming World? John 16.13. Eye has not seen, etc.

Upon the account of these unseen things, he enableth believers to glory in
tribulations, Romans 5.4. to despise present things, whether the smiles or the
frowns of the World, Heb. 11.24. and v. 26. But if the being of our Souls fail
at death, these are but the Fantastic joys of men in a dream, and the
experiences of all Gods people are found but so many fond conceits, and gross
mistakes.

5. This supposition overthrows the Doctrine of the Resurrection, which is the
consolation of Christians. We according to the Scripture believe, that after
death has divorced our Souls and Bodies for a time, they shall meet again, and
be reunited, and that the joy at their reunion will be to all that are in
Christ, greater than the sorrows they felt at parting. This seems not
incredible to us, what ever natural improbabilities and carnal reasons may be
against it, Acts 26.8. And that because the Almighty power, which is able to
subdue all things to himself, undertakes this task, Philip. 3.21.

We believe this very same numerical Body shall rise again, Job 21.27. by the
return of the same Soul into it which now dwells in it, and that we shall be
the same persons that now we are. The remunerative justice of God requiring it
to be so.

We believe the Souls of the righteous shall be much better accommodated, and
have a more comfortable habitation in their Bodies than now they have, 1 Cor.
15.42, 43. seeing they shall be made like unto Christ's glorious Body, Phil.
3.21. And that then we shall live after the manner of Angels, Luke 20.16.
without the necessities of this animal life, These are the things we look for
according to promise; and this expectation is our great relief against (1) the
fears of death, 1 Cor. 15.55. (2) against the death of our Friends and
Relations, 1. These. 4.14. (3) against all the pressures and afflictions of this
life, Job 19.25, 26, 27.

But if the being of our Souls fail at death, all hopes and comforts from the
Resurrection fail with it; for it is not Imaginable, that the body should rise,
till it be revived, nor how it should be revived, but by the reunion of the
Soul with it: and if it be not the same Soul that now inhabits it, we cannot be
the same persons in the Resurrection we are now, and consequently, this
supposition subverts not only the Doctrine of the Resurrection, but

6 It overthrows also the faith of the Judgment to come. For if the Soul
perish, the Body cannot rise, or if it rise by a new created Soul, the person
raised is another, and not the same that lived and dyed in this World, and
consequently, the rewards and punishments to be bestowed and awarded to all men
in that day, cannot be just and equal: for we believe, according to the
Scriptures, that (1) The actions which men perform in this life, are not
transient, but are filed to their account in the world to come, Gal. 6.7. here
we sow, and there we reap; Actions done in this World are two ways
considerable, viz. Physically, or Morally; in the first consideration they are
transient, in the last, permanent and everlasting. A word is spoken, or an Act
done, in a moment, but though it be past and gone, and perhaps by us quite
forgotten, God registers it in his Book, in order to the day of account.

(2) We believe that God has appointed a day in which all men shall appear
before his judgment seat, to give an account of all they have done in the Body,
whether it be good or evil. 2. Cor. 5.10.

(3) And that in order hereunto, the very same persons shall be restored by the
Resurrection, and appear before God, the very same Bodies and Souls, which did
good or evil in this World: shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?
Justice requires that the rewards and punishments be then distributed to the
same persons that did good or evil in this World: which strongly infers the
immortality of the Soul, and that it certainly overlives the Body, and must
come back from the respective places of their abode, to be again united to
them, in order to their great account.

By all which you see the clearest proof of the Souls Immortality, and how the
contrary supposition overthrows our Faith, Duties, and Comforts. Yet all this
notwithstanding, how apt are we to suspect this Doctrine, and remain still
dis-satisfyed and doubting about it, when all is said? which comes to pass
partly from (1) the subtilty of Satan, who knows he can never persuade men to
live the life of Beasts, till he first persuade them to think they shall dye as
the Beasts do, (and partly from the influence of Sense and Reason upon us,
whereby we do too much suffer our selves to be swayed, and imposed upon in
matters of greatest moment in Religion. For these being proper Arbiters and
Judges in other matters within their Sphere, they are arrogant, and we easy
enough to admit them, to be Arbiters also in things that are quite above them;
hence come such plausible objections as these.

Object. 1.
The Soul seems to vanish and dye, when it leaves the Body, for when it has
strugled as long as it can, to keep its possession in the Body, and at last is
forced to depart; we can perceive nothing but a puff of breath, which
immediately vanishes into air, and is lost.

Sol.
We cannot perceive, therefore it is nothing but what we do, and can perceive,
viz. a puff of vanishing breath! By this argument the being of the Soul in the
Body is as questionable, as after its departure out of the Body: for we cannot
discern it by sight in the Body, yea, by this Argument, we may as well deny the
existence of God and Angels, as of Souls, for it is a spiritual and invisible
being, as they are, our gross senses are incapable of discerning Spirits, which
are immaterial and invisible substances.

Object. 2.
But you allow the Soul to have a rise and beginning, it is not eternal a part
anta, and it is certain, what ever had a beginning must have an end.

Every thing which had a beginning may have an end, Sol.
and what once was nothing, may by the power that created it, be reduced to
nothing again. But though we allow it may be so, by the absolute power of God,
we deny the consequence, that therefore it shall and must be so. Angels had a
beginning, but shall never have an end. And indeed their Immortality, as well
as ours, flows not so much from the nature of either, as from the will and
pleasure of God, who has appointed them to be so. He can, but never will
annihilate them.

But the Soul depends upon matter in all its operations, Object. 3.
nothing is in the Understanding which was not first in the Senses; it uses
the natural Spirits as its Servants and Tools in all its Operations, and
therefore how can it either subsist or act in a State of Separation?

1. The Hypothesis is not only uncertain, Sol.
but certainly false. There are acts performed by the Soul, even whilst it is
in the Body, wherein it makes no use at all of the Body. Such are the acts of
Self-intuition, and Self-reflection: and what will you say of its Acts in
Raptures and Ecstasies, such as that of Paul, 2. Cor. 12.2. and John, Revel.
21.10. what use did their Souls make of the bodily senses or natural Spirits
then?

2. And though in its ordinary actions in this life, it does use the Body, as
its Tool or Instrument in working, does it thence follow, that it can neither
subsist or act separate from them in the other World? Whilst a man is on
Horseback in his Journey, he uses the help and service of his Horse, and is
moved according to the motion of his Horse, but does it thence follow, he
cannot stand or walk alone, when dismounted at his Journeys end? We know Angels
both live, and act, without the ministry of Bodies, and our Souls are Spiritual
Substances as well as they.

But many Scriptures seem to favor the total cessation of the Souls actions,
Object. 4.
if not of its being also after Separation, as that in 2 Samuel 14.14. We must
needs dye, and are as Water spilt upon the ground which cannot be gathered up,
and Psalm. 88.10, 11, 12. with Isaiah 38.18, 19. The dead cannot praise thee.

Sol.
Those words of the Woman of Tekoa, are not to be understood absolutely, but
respectively: and the meaning is, that the Soul is in the Body as some precious
liquor in a brittle glass, which being broken by death, the Soul is
irrecoverably gone, as the Water Spilt on the ground, which by no humane power
or art of man can be recovered again. All the means in the World cannot fetch
it back into the Body again. She speaks not of the Resurrection, or what shall
be done in the World to come, by the Almighty power of God, but of what is
impossible to be done in this World by all the skill and power of Man.

And for the expression of Heman, and Hezekiah, they only respect and relate to
those services their Souls were now employed about for the praise of God, with
respect to the conversion or edification of others, as Psalm. 30.8, 9. or at
most, to that mediate service and worship, which they give God, in and by their
attendance upon his ordinances in this World, and not of that immediate Service
and praise, that is performed and given him in Heaven, by the Spirits of just
men made perfect, such was the sweetness they had found in these Ordinances and
Duties, that they express themselves as loath to leave them.

The same answer solves also the Objections grounded upon other mistaken
Scriptures, as that Psalm. 78.39. where man is called a wind that passes away,
and comes not again. It is only expressive of the frailty and vanity of the
present animal life we live in this World, to which we shall return no more
after death; it denies not life to departed Souls, but the end of this animal
life at death, the life we live in the other World, is of a different nature.

Inference I.
IS the Soul Immortal? Then, it is impossible for Souls to find full rest and
contentment in any enjoyments on this side Heaven. All temporary things are
inadaequate; and therefore unsatisfying to our Souls What gives the Soul rest
and satisfaction, must be as durable as the Soul is; for if we could possibly
find in this World a condition and state of things most agreeable in all other
respects to our desires and wishes, yet if the Soul be conscious to it self,
That it shall and must over-live, and leave them all behind it, it can never
reach true contentment in the greatest affluence and confluence of them. Man
being an immortal, is therefore a prospecting Creature, and can never be
satisfied with this, That it is well with him at present, except he can be
satisfied that it shall be so for ever. The thoughts of leaving our delightful
and pleasant enjoyments, imbitters them all to us whilst we have them. All
outward things are in fluxu continuo, passing away as the Waters, 1 Cor. 7.31.
Riches are uncertain, 1 Timothy 6.17. They fly away as an Eagle toward Heaven,
and with Wings of their own making, Prove. 23.5. (i. e.) as the Feathers that
enable a Bird to fly from us, grow out of his own substance, so does that
vanity that carries away all earthly enjoyments. This alone would spoil all
Contentment.

Inference II.
THen see the ground and reason of Satan's envy and enmity against the Soul, and
his restless designs and endeavors to destroy it. It grates that Spirit of
envy, to find himself, who is by nature Immortal, sunk everlastingly and
irrecoverably into misery, and the Souls of Men appointed to fill up those
vacant places in Heaven, from which the Angels fell. No Creature but Man is
envied by Satan, and the Soul of Man much more than his Body: It Is true, he
afflicts the Bodies of Men, when God permits him, but he ever aims at the Soul
when he wounds the Body, Heb. 10. 37. This roaring Lion is continually going
about, seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. It Is the precious Soul he hunts
after; that is the Morsus Diaboli, the Bit he gapes for, as the Woolf tears the
Fleece to come at the Flesh. All the pleasure those miserable Creatures find,
is the success of their temptations upon the Souls of Men. It Is a kind of
delight to them to plunge. Souls into the same condemnation and misery with
themselves. This is the trade they have been driving ever since their Fall. By
destroying Souls, he at once exercises his revenge against God, and his envy
against man, which is all the relief his miserable condition allows him.

Inference III.
DO the Souls of Men overlive their Bodies? Then it is the height of madness and
spiritual Infatuation, to destroy the Soul for the Bodies sake. To cast away an
Immortal Soul for the gratification of perishing flesh: to ruin the precious
Soul for ever, for the pleasures of sin, which are but for a moment, yet this
is the madness of millions of Men. They will drown their own Souls, in
everlasting perdition, to procure unnecessary things for the Body, 1 Timothy 6.9.
They that will be rich, etc. Every cheat and circumvention in dealing, every
lie, every act of oppression, is a wound given the Immortal Soul for the
procuring some accommodations to the Body.

O what Soul-undoing bargains do some make with the Devil! Some sell their
Souls outright for the gratification of their lusts, 1 King. 21.20. Many pawn
their Souls to Satan in a conditional bargain, so do all that venture upon sin,
upon a presumption of pardon and repentance. The Devil is a great trader for
Souls: he has all sorts of commodities to suit all men's humors that will deal
with him. He has profits for the Covetous, Honors for the Ambitious,
pleasures for the Voluptuous, but a Soul is the price at which he sells them,
only he will be content to sell at a day, and not require present pay: so that
it be paid on a deathbed, in a dying hour, he is satisfied. But oh, What an
undoing bargain do sinners make! To part with a treasure for a trifle, Matthew.
16.26. the precious Soul for ever, Prove. 20.17. Prove. 23.31, 32. Job 20.12, 13.
Jam. 1.15.
for the pleasures of sin which are but for a season! Heb. 11.25. We are
charmed with the present pleasure and sweetness there is in sin, but how bitter
will the afterfruits thereof be! See the Texts in the Margent, you will say
hereafter as Jonathan did, 1 Samuel 14.31. I tasted but a little honey, and I
must dye.

Inference IV.
THen the exposing of the Body to danger, yea, to certain destruction, for the
preservation of the Soul, is the dictate of spiritual wisdom, and that which
every Christian is bound to choose and practice, when both Interests come in
full opposition, Heb. 11.35. Dan. 3.28. Revel. 12.11. No promises of
preferment, no threats of Torments, have been able to prevail with the people
of God to give the least wound, or do the least wrong to their own Souls. When
Secundus was commanded to deliver his Bible, he answered, Christianus sum, non
Traditor, I am a Christian, I will not deliver it: then they desired him but to
deliver aliquam ecvolam, a Chip, a Straw, any thing that came to his hand in
lieu of it, he refused to redeem his life by delivering the least trifle on
that account to save it.

That is a great word of our Lords, Luke 9.24. He that will save his life,
shall lose it, and he that loses it for my sake, shall find it. Christians,
this is your duty and wisdom, and must be your resolution and practice in the
day of Temptation, to yield your Bodies to preserve your Souls, as we offer our
arm to defend the head. O better thy Body had never been given thee, than that
it should be a snare to thy Soul, and the instrument of casting it away for
ever. O how dear are some persons like to pay for their tenderness and
indulgence to the flesh, when the hour of Temptation shall come! Mortify your
irregular affections to the Body, and never hazard your precious Immortal Souls
for their sakes. It Is the character of an Hypocrite to choose sin rather than
affliction. Job. 36.21. But if ever thou have been in the deeps of spiritual
troubles for sin, if God have opened thine eyes to see the evil of sin, the
immense weight and value of thy Soul, and of Eternity, Thou will not count thy
life dear to thee to finish thy course with joy, Act. 20.24.

Inference V.
IF the Soul be an Immortal being, that shall have no end, Then it is the great
concern of all men to strive to the utmost for the Salvation of their Souls,
what ever become of all lesser temporary interests in this world, Luke 13 24.
There is a gate ( i.e.) an introductive means of life and Salvation: this gate
is strait, ( i.e.) there are a world of difficulties to be encountered in the
way of Salvation: but he that values and loves his never-dying Soul, must and
will be diligent and constant in the use of all those means that have a
tendency to Salvation, be they never so difficult or unpleasant to flesh and
blood. There be difficulties from within our selves, such as mortification,
self-denial, contempt of the World, parting with all at the Call of Christ: and
difficulties from without, the reproaches, persecutions and sufferings for
Christ, which would not be so great as they are, were it not for our
unmortified lusts within; but be they what they will, we are bound to strive
through them all, for the Salvation of our precious and Immortal Souls.

(1) For it is the greatest concernment of the Soul, yea, of our own Souls; we
are bound to do much for the saving of another Soul, 2 Timothy 2.10. much more
for our own, this is our darling, Psalm. 22. our only one.

(2) Others have done and suffered much for the saving of their Souls, and are
not ours, or ought they not to be as dear to us, as the Souls of any others
have been to them? Matt. 21.32.

(3) The utmost diligence is little enough to save them. Do all that you can
do, and suffer all that you can suffer, and deny your selves as deeply as ever
any did, yet you shall find all this little enough to secure them, 1. Pet.
4.18. The righteous themselves are scarcely saved, 1 Cor. 9.24.

(4) The time to strive for Salvation is very short and uncertain, Luke 13.25.
John 12.35. 'Twill be to no purpose, when the seasons and opportunities of
Salvation are once over. There is no striving in Hell, a death-pang of Despair
has seized them, hope is extinguished, and endeavors fail.

(5) Does not Reason dictate and direct you, to do now, whilst you are in the
way, as you will wish you had done, and repent with rage, and self-indignation,
because you did it not, when you come to the end and behold the final issues of
things? suppose but thy self now either (1) upon a deathbed lanching into
Eternity; (2) or at the bar of Christ; (3) or in view of Heaven; (4) or in the
sight and hearing of the damned: what think you, will you not then with, Oh
that I had spent every moment in the World, that could possibly be redeemed
from the pure necessities of life, in Prayer, in hearing, in striving for
Salvation! From a prospect of this it was, that one spent many hours daily on
his knees to the macerating of his Body; and being admonished of the danger of
health, and advised to relax, he answered, I must dye, I must dye.

Do not say, Object. 1.
you have many encumbrances, and other employments in the Word; for (1) one
thing is necessary, Luke 10.42. Those are conveniences, but this is of absolute
necessity. (2) They will thrive the better for this, Matthew. 6.33. seek this,
and they shall be added. (3) Do but redeem the time that can be redeemed to
this purpose, let not so much precious time run waste as daily does.

Say not, Object 2.
no man can save his Soul by his own striving, and therefore it is to little
purpose, for it is not of him that wills, or of him that runs, but of God
that shows mercy, Romans 9.16.

True, this in it self cannot save you, but what then? must we oppose those
things which God has subordinated? bring this home to your natural or civil
actions, eating, drinking, Plowing or Sowing, and see how the consequence will
look.

Object. 3.
Say not it is a mercenary Doctrine, and disparages free Grace; for are not all
the enjoyments and comforts of this life confessedly from free Grace, though
God has dispensed them to you in the way of your diligence and industry?

Object. 4.
To conclude, say not the difficulties of Salvation are insuperable; it is so
hard to watch every motion of the heart, to deny every lust, to resist a
suitable temptation, to suffer the loss of all for Christ, that there is no
hope for overcoming them.

For (1) God can and does make difficult things easy to his people, who work
in the strength of Christ, Philip. 4.13 (2). These same difficulties are before
all others that are before you, yet it discourageth not them, Philip. 3.11.
Others strive to the uttermost. There are extremes found in this matter: some
work for Salvation, as an hireling for his wages, so the Papists; these
disparage Grace, and cry up works. Others cry down obedience as legal, as the
Antinomians, and cry up grace to the disparagement of duties: avoid both these,
and see that you strive, but (1) think not Heaven to be the price of your
striving, Romans 4.3. (2) strive, but not for a spurt; let this care and
diligence run throughout your lives, whilst you are living, be you still
striving: your Souls are worth it, and infinitely more than all this amounts to.

Inference VI.
Does the Soul overlive the Body, and abide for ever? Then it is a great evil
and folly to be excessively careful for the mortal Body, and neglective of the
immortal Inhabitant. In a too much indulged Body, there ever dwells a too much
neglected Soul.

The Body is but a vile thing, Philip. 3.21. the Soul more valuable than the
whole World, Matt. 16.26. to spend time, care, and pains for a vile Body,
whilst little or no regard is had to the precious Immortal Soul, is an
unwarrantable folly and madness. To have a clean, and washed Body, and a Soul
all filth (as one speaks) a Body neatly clothed and dressed, Carzv. p. 148.149.
with a Soul all naked and unready: a Body fed, and a Soul starved; a Body full
of the Creature, and a Soul empty of Christ: these are poor Souls indeed. We
smile at little children, who in a kind of laborious idleness, take a great
deal of pains to make and trim their Babies, or build their little houses of
Sticks and straws. And what are they but children of a bigger size, that keep
such ado about the Body, a house of Clay? a weak pile, that must perish in a
few days! It Is admirible, and very convictive of most Christians what we read
in an Heathen. I confess (says Seneca) there is a love to the Body implanted
in us all, (...) insit^m esse nobis corpo^is nostri charitatem. Fate^ nos hujus
gere^e tutelam, nec nego indulgendum illi: ser^iendum nego. Multus enim serviet
qui corpori servit, qui pro illo nimium timet, qui ad illud omnia refert; hujus
nos nimi^^ amor timoribus inquietat, solicitudinibus onerat, contumeli^s
objicit: bones^um ei vile est c^i corpus nimis charum est: agatur ejus
diligentissime cura: ita, tamen, ut cum exiget ratio, cum dignitas, cum fides,
mittendum in ignem sit. Seneca, Ep. 14. p. 545.
we have the Tutilage and charge of it, we may be kind and indulgent to it, but
must not serve it, but he that serves it, is a servant to many cares, fears and
passions. Let us have a diligent care of it, yet so as when Reason requires,
when our Dignity or faith requires it, we commit it to the fire.

It Is true, the Body is beloved of the Soul, and God requires, that it
moderately care for the necessities and conveniences of it, but to be fond,
indulgent, and constantly sollicitous about it, is both the sin, and snare of
the Soul. One of the Fathers being invited to dine with a Lady, and waiting
some hours till she was dressed, and fit to come down, when he saw her, he fell a
weeping, and being demanded why he wept, O says he, I am troubled that you
should spend so many hours this morning in pinning and trimming your Body, when
I have not spent half the time in Praying, Repenting, and caring for my own
Soul. Two things a Master commits to his Servants care, (says one) the Child,
and the Child's clothes: it will be but a poor excuse for the Servant to say, at
his Masters return, Sir, here are all the Child's clothes neat and clean, but
the child is lost. Much so will be the account that many will give to God of
their Souls and Bodies at the great day. Lord, here is my Body, I was very
careful for it, I neglected nothing that belonged to its content and welfare;
but for my Soul, that is lost, and cast away for ever, I took little care or
thought about it. It Is remarkable what the Apostle says, Romans 8.12. We owe
nothing to the flesh, we are not in its debt, we have given it all, more than
all that belongs to it; but we owe many an hour, many a care, many a deep
thought to our Souls, which we have defrauded it of, for the vile Bodies sake.
You have robbed your Souls, to pay your flesh. This is madness.

Inference VII.
HOW great a blessing is the Gospel which brings life and immortality to light,
the most desirable mercies to immortal Souls? This is the great benefit we
receive by it, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy 1.10. Christ has abolished death,
and brought life and immortality to light by the Gospel. Life and immortality
by a (...), is put for immortal life, the thing which all immortal Souls desire
and long for. These desires are found in Souls that enjoy not the Gospel Light;
for as I said before, they naturally spring out of the very nature of all
immortal Souls But how, and where it is to be obtained, that is a secret, for
which we are entirely beholding to the Gospel-discovery. It lay hid in the Womb
of Gods purpose, till by the light of Gospel Revelation it was made manifest.
But now all men may see what are the gracious thoughts and purposes of God
concerning men, and what that ^s he has designed for their Immortal Souls even
an Immortal life, and this life is to be obtained by Christ, than which, no
tidings can be more welcome, sweet or acceptable to us.

O therefore study the Gospel. This is life eternal, to know thee the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, John 17.3. And see that you prise
the Gospel above all earthly Treasures: It Is a faithful saying, and worthy of
all acceptance: you have two inestimable benefits and blessings by it. (1) It
manifests and reveals eternal life to you, which you could never have come to
the knowledge of, any other way: those that are without it, are gropeing or
feeling after God in the dark, Acts 17.27. Poor Souls are conscious to
themselves, that there is a just and terrible God, and that their sins offend
and provoke him, but how to atone the offended Deity, they know not, Mica. 6.6,
7. But the way of Reconciliation and life is clearly discovered to us by the
Gospel. (2) As it manifests and reveals Eternal life to us, so it frames and
moulds our hearts, as Gods sanctifying Instrument, for the enjoyment of it.
It Is not only the Instrument of Revelation, but of Salvation, the word of life,
as well as the word of light, Philip. 2.16. It can open your hearts as well as
your eyes: and is therefore to be entertained as that which is the first rank
of Blessings, a peerless and inestimable Blessing.

Inference VIII.
IF our Souls be immortal, certainly our enemies are not so formidable, as we
are apt by our sinful fears to represent them. They may, when God permits them,
destroy your Bodies, they cannot touch or destroy your Souls, Matthew. 16.28. As
to your Bodies, no enemy can touch them till there be leave and permission
given them by God, Job 1.10. The Bodies of the Saints as well as their Souls
are within the line or hedge of Divine Providence. They are securely fenced,
sometimes mediately by the ministry of Angels, Psalm. 34.7. And sometimes
immediately, by his own hand and power, Zech. 2.5. As to their Souls, whatever
power Enemies may have upon them, (when divine permission opens a gap in the
hedge of Providence for them) yet they cannot reach their Souls to hurt them,
or destroy them, but by their own consent. They can destroy our perishing
flesh, it is obnoxious to their malice and rage; they cannot reach home to the
Soul: no Sword can cut asunder the band of Union betwixt them and Christ: they
would be dreadful Enemies indeed if they could do so. Why then do we tremble
and fear at this rate as if Soul and Body were at their mercy, and in their
power and hand? The Souls of those Martyrs were in safety under the Altar in
Heaven, they were clothed with white Robes, when their Bodies were given to be
meat to the Fowls of Heaven, and Beasts of the Earth. The Devil drives but a
poor trade by the persecution of the Saints; he tears the nest, but the bird
escapes: he cracks the Shell, but loses the Kernel. Two things make a powerful
defensative against our fears, (1) That all our Enemies are in the hand of
Providence. (2) That all providence are steered by that promise, Romans 8.28.

Inference IX.
IF Souls be Immortal, Then there must needs be a vast difference betwixt the
aspects and influences of death, upon the Godly and Ungodly.

O if Souls would but seriously consider what an alteration death will make
upon their condition, for evil or for good: how useful would such meditations
be to them. (1) They must be disseized, and turned out of these houses of Clay,
and live in a state of separation from them: of this there is an inevitable
necessity, Eccles. 8.8. It Is in vain to say, I am not ready, ready or unready,
they must depart when their lease is out. It Is as vain to say, I am not
willing, for willing or unwilling, they must be gone, there is no hanging back
and begging, Lord, let death take another at this time, and spare me; for no
man dies by a Proxy. (2) The time of our Souls departure is at hand, 2 Pet.
1.13, 14. Job 16.22. The most firm and well built body can stand but a few
days, but our ruinons Tabernacles give our Souls warning, that the day of their
departure is at hand. The lamp of life is almost burnt down, the glass of time
almost run: yet a few, a very few days and nights more, and then time, nights
and days shall be no more. (3) When that most certain, and near approaching
time is come, wonderful alterations will be made on the state of all Souls,
Godly and Ungodly.

(1) A mavelous alteration will then be made on the Souls of the Godly. For
(1) no sooner is the dividing stroke given by death, and the parting pull over,
but they shall find themselves in arms of Angels, mounting them through the
upper Regions in a few moments, far above all the aspectable Heavens, Luke
16.22. The airy Region is indeed the place where Devils inhabit, and have their
haunts and walks; but Angels are the Saints Convoy through Satan's Territories
from the arms of mourning Friends, into the welcome arms of officious and
benevolent Angels. (2) from the sight and converses of men, to the sight of
God, Christ, and the general assembly of blessed and sinless Spirits. The Soul
takes its leave of all men at death, Isa. 38.11. Farewell vain World, with all
the mixed and imperfect comforts of it, and welcome the more sweet, suitable
and satisfying company of Father, Son, and Spirit, holy Angels, and perfected
Saints, Heb. 12.23. (3) From the bondage of corruption, to perfect liberty, and
everlasting freedom, so much is implied, Heb. 12.23. The Spirits of just men
made perfect. (4) From all fears, doubtings, and questionings of our
conditions, and anxious debates of our title to Christ, to the clearest,
fullest, and most satisfying assurance: for what a man sees, how can he doubt
of it? (5) From all burdens of affliction, inward and outward, under which we
have groaned all our days, to everlasting rest and ease, 2 Cor. 5.1, 2, 3. O
what a blessed change to the righteous must this be?

(2) A mavelous change will also be then made upon the Souls of the ungodly,
who shall then part from, (1) all their comforts and pleasant enjoyments in the
World, for here they had their consolation, Luke 16.25. here was all their
Portion, Psalm. 17.14. And in a moment find themselves arrested and seized by
Satan, as Gods Jailer, hurrying them away to the prison of Hell, 1 Pet. 3.19.
There to be reserved to the judgment of the great day, Jude v. 6. (2) From
under the means of Grace, Life, and Salvation, to a state perfectly void of all
means, instruments, and opportunities of Salvation, John 9.4. Eccles. 9.10.
never to hear the joyful sound of preaching or praying any more, never to hear
the wooing voice of the blessed Bridegroom, saying, Come unto me, come unto me,
any more. (3) From all their vain, ungrounded presumptuous hopes of Heaven,
into absolute and final desperation of mercy. The very sinews and nerves of
hope are cut by death, Prove. 14.32. The wicked is driven away in his
wickedness, but the righteous has hope in his death. These are the great and
astonishing alterations that will be made upon our Souls, after they part with
the Bodies which they now inhabit. O that we who cannot but be conscious to our
selves, that we must overlive our Bodies, were more thoughtful of the condition
they must enter into, after that separation which is at hand.

Inference X.
IF our Souls be Immortal, Then death is neither to be feared by them in
Heaven, nor hoped for by them in Hell. The being of Souls never fails, whether
they be in a state of blessedness or of misery. O mors dulcis es, quibus amara
fuisti: te solum desiderant, qui te solum oderunt. August.
In glory they are ever with the Lord, 1 These. 4.17. There shall be no death
there, Revel. 21.4. And in Hell, though they shall wish for death, yet death
shall flee from them. Though there be no fears of annihilation in Heaven, yet
there be many vain wishes for it in Hell: but to no purpose; there never will
be an end put either to their being, or to their torments. In this respect no
other Creature is capable of the misery that wicked men are capable of when
they die, there is the end of all their misery; but it is not so with Men.
Better therefore had it been for them, if God had created them in the basest
and lowest order and rank of Creatures; a Dog, a Toad, a Worm is better than a
Man in endless misery, ever dying, and never dead. And so much of the Souls
Immortality.

TEXT.
Ephesians V. 29. For no Man ever yet hated his own Flesh, but nourishes and
cherishes it, even as the Lord the Church.


HAving given some account of the Nature and Immortality of the Soul, we next
come to discourse its Love and Inclination to the Body, with which it is
united, from this Text. The scope of the Apostle is, to press Christians to the
exact Discharge of those Relative Duties they owe to each other; particularly,
he here urges the mutual Duties of Husbands and Wives, v. 22. Wives, to an
Obedient Subjection; Husbands, to a tender Love of their Wives. This
Exhortation he enforces from the intimate Union which by the Ordinance of God
is betwixt them, they being now one Flesh, and this Union he illustrates by
comparing it with 1. The Mystical Union of Christ and the Church. 2. The
Natural Union of the Soul and Body.


And from both these, as excellent Examples and Patterns, he with great
strength of Argument urges the Duty of Love, v. 28. So ought Men to love their
Wives as their own Bodies; he that loves his Wife, loves himself. Self-love
is naturally implanted in all Men, and it is the Rule by which we measure out
and dispense our Love to others. -- Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self.

This Self-love he opens in this place, by (1.) The Universality of it. (2.)
The effects that evidence it.


(1) The Universality of it, No Man ever yet hated his own Flesh. By Flesh,
understand the Body, by a usual Metonymy of a part for the whole, called Flesh.
By hating it, understand simple hatred, or for hatred it self It Is usual for
Men to hate the Deformities and Diseases of their own Bodi^s, and upon that
account, to deal with the Members of their own Bodies, as if they hated them;
hence it is, they willingly stretch forth a gangrened Leg or Arm to be cut off,
for the preservation of the rest; but this is not simple hatred of a Man's Self,
but rather an Argument of the strength of the Souls Love to the Body, that it
will be content to endure so much Pain and Anguish for its sake. And if the
Soul be at any time weary of, and willing to part, not with a single Member
only, but with the whole Body, and loathes its Union with it any longer, yet it
hates and loathes it not simply, in and for it self, but because it is so filled
with Diseases all over, and loads the Soul daily with so much Grief* that how
well soever the Soul loves it in it self, yet upon such sad Terms and
Conditions, it would not be tied to it. This was Job's Case, Job 10.1. My Soul
is weary of my Life; yet not simply of his Life, but such a Life in Pain and
Trouble. Except it be in such Respects and Cases, No Man, says he, ever yet
hated his own Flesh; i. e. No Man in his right Mind, and in the Exercise of his
Reason and Sense; for we must except Distracted and Delirious Men, who know not
what they do, as also Men under the Terrors of Conscience, when God suffers it
to rage in Extremity, as Spira, and others, who would have been glad with their
own Hands, to have cut the Thread that tied their miserable Souls to their
Bodies: Supposing that way, and by that Change, to find some relief. Either of
these Cases forces Men to act beside the stated Rule of Nature and Reason.

(2) This Love of the Soul to the Body is further discovered by the effects
which evidence it, viz. Its Nourishing and Cherishing the Body, (...). These
Two comprize the Necessaries for the Body, viz. Food and Raiment. The first
signifies to nourish with proper Food; the latter, to warm by Clothing, as the
word (...) is rendered, James 2.16. to which the Hebrew word (...) answers, Job
31.20. The Care and Provision of these things for the Body evidences the Souls
Love to it.

DOCTRINE.
That the Souls of Men are strongly inclined, and tenderly affected toward the
Bodies, in which they now dwell.

THE Souls Love to the Body is so strong, natural, and inseparable, that it is
made the Rule and Measure by which we dispense and proportion our Love to
others, Matthew. 19.19. Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. And the
Apostle, Gal. 5.14. tells us, that the whole Law, ( i.e.) the Second Table of
the Law, is fulfilled, or sum'd up, in this Precept, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy Self. The meaning is not, that all and every one who is our
Neighbor, must be equally near to us, as our own Bodies; but it intends, (1.)
The Sincerity of our Love to others, which must be without Di^^^mulation, for
we dissemble not in Self-love. (2.) That we be as careful to avoid injuring
others, as we would our selves, Matthew. 7.12. To do by others, or measure to
them, as we would have done, or measured unto us; for which Rule, Severus the
Heathen Emperor honored Christ and Christianity, and caused it to be written
in Capital Letters of Gold. (3.) That we take direction from this Principle of
Self-Love, to measure out our Care, Love and Respects to others, according to
the different degrees of nearness in which we stand to them. As, (1.) The Wife
of our Bosom, to whom by this Rule, is due our first Care and Love, as in the
Text. (2.) Our Children and Family, 1 Timothy 5.8. (3.) To all in general, whether
we have any Bond of Natural Relation upon them or no: but especially those to
whom we are Spiritually related, as Gal. 6.10. And indeed, as every Christian
has a right to our Love and Care, above other Men, so in some Cases, we are to
exceed this Rule of Self-love, by a transcendent act of Self-denial for them, 1
John 3.16. And Paul went higher than that, in a glorious excess of Charity, to
the Community or Body of Gods People, preferring their Salvation, not only to
his own Body, but to his Soul also, Romans 9.3. but to these extraordinary Cases
we are seldom called; and if we be, the Gospel furnishes us with an higher
Rule than Self-love, John 13.34. But by this principle of Self-love in all
ordinary Cases, we must proportion and dispense our Love to all others: by
which you see what deep rooted fixed Principle in Nature Self-love is, how
universal and permanent alone this is, which else were not fit to be made the
measure of our Love to all others.

Two things will deserve our Consideration in the Doctrinal part of this point.

I. Wherein the Soul evidenceth its love to the Body. II. What are the Grounds
and Fundamental Causes or Reasons of its love to it; and then apply it.
I. Wherein the Soul evidenceth its love to the Body, and that it does in
diverse respects:

1. In its Cares for the things needful to the Body, as the Text speaks, in
Nouri^^ing and Cherishing it, ( i.e.) taking care for Food and Raiment for it.
This Care is Universal, it is implanted in the most Salvage and Barbarous
People: and is generally so excessive and exorbitant, that though it never
needs a Spur, yet most times, and with most Men it does need a Curb; and
therefore Christ in Matthew. 6.32. shows how those Cares torture and distract the
Nations of the World, warns them against the like Excesses, and propounds a
Rule to them for the allay and mitigation of them, v. 25, 26, 27. So does the
Apostle also, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. To speak as the matter is* most Souls are
overheated with their Cares and eager pursuit after the concerns of the Body.
They pant after the Dust of the Earth. They pierce themselves through with many
Sorrows, 1 Timothy 6.10. They are cumbred like Martha, with much Serving. It Is a
perfect Drudge and Slave to the Body, bestowing all its time, strength and
studies about the Body; for one Soul that puts the Question to it self, What
shall I do to be saved? a Thousand are to be found, that mind nothing more,
but, What shall I e^t, what shall I drink; and wherewith shall I and mine be
clothed? I do not say, that these are proofs of the Souls regular Love to the
Body; no, they differ from it, as a Fever from Natural Heat. This is a doting
Fondness upon the Body. He truly loves his Body, that moderately and ordinately
cares for what is necessary for it, and can keep it under, 1 Cor. 9.27. and
deny its whineing Appetite, when Indulgence is prejudicial to the Soul, or
warms its Lusts. Believers themselves find it hard to keep the Golden Bridle of
Moderation upon their Affections in this matter. It Is not every Man has
attained Agurs cool Temper, Prove. 30.8. that can slack his pace, and drive
moderately, where the Interests of the Body are concerned: the best Souls are
too warm, the generality in raging Heats, which distract their Minds, as that
word, Matthew 6. (...), signifies. If the Body were not exceeding dear to the
Soul, it would never torture it self Day and Night with such anxious Cares
about it.

2. The Soul discovers its Esteem and Value for the Body in all the Fears it
has about it. Did not the Soul love it exceedingly, it would never be
affrighted for it, and on its account, so much and so often as it is. What a
panick fear do the dangers of the Body cast the Soul into, Isa. 7.2. When the
Body is in Danger, the Soul is in Distraction, the Soul is in Fears and
Tremblings about it. These Fears flow from the Souls tender Love and Affection
to the Body; if it did not Love it so intensely, it would never afflict and
torment it self at that rate it does about it: Satan the professed Enemy of our
Souls, being thoroughly acquainted with those Fears which flow from the Fountain
of Love to the Body, politickly improves them in the way of temptation, to the
utter ruin of some, and the great hazard of other Souls: he edges and sharpens
his temptations upon us this way; he puts our Bodies into danger, that he may
thereby endanger our Souls; he reckons, if he can but draw the Body into
danger, fear will quickly drive the Soul into Temptation: It is not so much
from Satan's Malice or Hatred of our Bodies, that he stirs up Persecutions
against us; but he knows the tie of Affection is so strong betwixt these
friends, that Love will draw, and Fear will drive the Soul into many and great
Hazards of its own Happiness, to free the Body out of those Dangers. Prove.
29.25. The Fear of Man brings a Snare: and Heb. 11.37. tortured and tempted.

Upon this ground also it is, that this Life becomes a Life of Temptation to
all Men, and there is no freedom from that danger, till we be freed from the
Body, and set at liberty by Death. Separated Souls are the only free Souls.
They that carry no Flesh about them, need carry no Fears of Temptation within
them. It Is the Body which catches the sparks of Temptation.

3. The Soul manifests its dear Love and Affection to the Body, by its Sympathy
and compassionate feeling of all its Burdens: Whatever touches the Body by way
of Injury, affects the Soul also by way of Sympathy. The Soul and Body are as
the strings of two Musical Instruments, set exactly at one height, if one be
touched, the other trembles. They laugh and cry, are sick and well together.
This is a wonderful Mystery, and a rare Secret, (as a Learned Man observes,)
how the Soul comes to sympathize with the Body, and to have not only a
knowledge, but as it were a feeling of its Necessities and Infirmities; how this
Fleshly Lump comes to affect, and make its deep Impressions upon a Creature of
so different a Nature from it, as the Soul or Spirit is. But that it does so,
though we know not how, is plain and sensible to any Man. If any Member of the
Body, though but the lowest and meanest, be in Pain and Misery, the Soul is
presently affected with it, and commands the Eyes to watch, yea to weep, the
Hands to bind it up with all tenderness, and defend it from the least injurious
touch; the Lips to complain of its Misery, and beg pity and help from others
for it. If the Body be in danger, how are the Faculties of the Soul.
Understanding, Memory, Invention, etc. employed with utmost Strength and
Concernment for its deliverance. This is a real and unexceptionable Evidence of
its dear and tender Love to the Body. As those that belong to one Mystical Body
show their sincere Love this way, 1 Cor. 12.25, 26. Ephesians. 4.19. So the Soul.

4. The Soul manifests its Love to the Body by its Fears of Death, and
extreme Aversation to a Separation from it. On this account Death is called, in
Job 18.14. the King of Terrors, or the Black Prince, or the Prince of Clouds
and Darkness, as some translate that place; we read it, the King of Terrors,
meaning, that the Terrors at Death are such Terrors, as subdue and keep down
all other Terrors under them, as a Prince does his Subjects. Other Terrors
compared with those that the Soul conceives and conflicts with at parting, are
no more than a cut Finger, to the laying ones Head on the Block: O the Soul and
Body are strongly twisted and knit together in dear Bands of intimate Union and
Affection, and these Bands cannot be broken without much struggling: Oh, it is a
hard thing for the Soul to bid the Body farewell, it is a bitter parting, a
doleful separation: Nothing is heard in that Hour, but the most deep and
emphatical Groans; I say, emphatical Groans, the deep sense and meaning of
which, the Living are but little acquainted with: for no Man Living has yet
felt the Sorrows of a parting pull; what ever other Sorrows he has felt in the
Body, yet they must be supposed to be far short of these.

The Sorrows of Death are in Scripture set forth unto us, by the bearing-Throes
of a Traveling Woman, Acts 2.24. (...) and what those mean, many can tell; the
Soul is in labor, it will not let go its hold of the Body, but by Constraint;
Death is a close Siege, and when the Soul is beaten out of its Body, it
disputes the passage with Death, as Soldiers use to do with an Enemy that
enters by Storm, and fights and strives to the last. It Is also compared to a
Battle, or sharp Fight, Eccles. 8.8. that war: That war with an Emphasis. No
Conflict so sharp, each labor to the utmost to drive the other from the ground
they stand on, and win the field. And though Grace much overpower Nature in this
matter, and reconcile it to Death, and make it desire to be dissolved, yet
Saints wholely put not off this Reluctation of Nature, 2 Cor. 5.2. Not that we
would be uncloathed; as it is with one willing to wade over a Brook to his
Fathers House, puts his Foot into the Water, and feels it cold, starts back,
and is loath to venture in. Not that we would be uncloathed. And if it be so
with Sanctified Souls, how is it, think you, with others? Mark the
Scripture Language, Job 27.8. God takes away their Souls, says our
Translation; but the Root is, (...) extrahere, and signifies, to put out by
plain Force and Violence. A Graceless Soul dies not by Consent, but Force.
Thus Adrian bewailed his Departure, O Animula, vagula, blandula, hen quo vadis?
Yea, though the Soul have never so long a time been in the Body, though it
should live as long as any of the Antediluvian Father's did for many Hundred
Years, yet still it would be loath to part; yea, though it endure abundance of
Misery in the Body, and have little Rest or Comfort, but time spent in Griefs
and Fears, yet for all that, loath to part with it. All this shows a strong
inclination and affection to it.

5. It Is desire of Reunion continuing still with it, in its state of
Separation speaks its Love to the Body. As the Soul parted with it in Grief and
Sorrow, so it still retains even in Glory an inclination to Reunion, and waits
for a Day of Re-espousals: and to that sense, some searching and judicious Men
understand those words of Job, Job 14.14. If a Man die, shall he live again,
viz. by a Resurrection? if so, then all the Days of my appointed Separation, my
Soul in Heaven shall wait till that Change come. And to the same sense is that
Cry of Separated Souls, Rev. 6.9, 10, 11. How long, O Lord, how long, ( i.e.)
to the Consummation of all things, when Judgment shall be executed on them that
killed our Bodies, and our Bodies so long absent, restored to us again. In that
Day of Resurrection, the Souls of the Saints come willingly from Heaven it
self, to repossess their Bodies, and bring them to a Partnership with them in
their Glory; for it is with the Soul in Heaven, as it is with an Husband who is
richly entertained, feasted, and lodged abroad, but his dear Wife is solitary
and comfortless: it abates the compleatness of his joy. Therefore we say, the
Saints joy is not consummate till that day.

There is an exercise for Faith, Hope, and desires on this account in Heaven.

The Union of Soul and Body is natural, their Separation is not so: many
benefits will redound to both by reunion, and the Resurrection of the Body is
provided by God, as the grand relief against those prejudices and losses, the
Bodies of the Saints sustain by Separation. I say not that the propension or
inclination of the Soul to reunion with its Body, is accompanied with any
perturbation, or anxiety in its state of Separation, for it enjoys God, and in
him a placid rest; and as the Body, so the Soul rests in hope: it is such a hope
as disturbs not the rest of either: yet when the time is come for the Soul to
be re-espoused, it is highly gratified by that second Marriage, glad it is to
see its old dear companion, as two Friends after a long Separation. And so much
of the evidence of the Souls love to the Body.

II. Next we are to enquire into the Grounds and Reasons of its love and
inclination to the Body. And,

1. First the fundamental Ground and Reason thereof will be found in their
natural Union with each other. There my Text lays it: No man ever yet hated his
[own] flesh. Mark, the Body is the Souls own; And this is no more than
necessary for the conservation of the sp^cies, else the body would be
neglected, exposed, and quickly perish, being had in no more regard than any
other Body.
they are strictly married and related to each other: the Soul has a propriety
in its Body, these two make up, or constitute one Person: true, they are not
essentially one, they have far different Natures, but they are personally one,
and though the Soul be what it was, after its Separation, yet to make a Man,
the who he was, ( i e) the same complete and perfect Person, they must be
reunited: hence springs its love to the Body. Every man loves his own, John
17.19. All the World is in love with its own, and hence it cares to provide for
its welfare, 1 Timothy 5.8 If any man provide not for his own, he is worse than an
Infidel For nature teaches all men to do so Why are Children dearer to the
Parents than to all others, but because they are their own, Job 19.17. But our
Wives, our Children, our Goods are not so much our own as our Bodies are; this
is the nearest of all natural Unions*

In this propriety and relation are involved the Reasons and Motives of our
love to, and care over the Body, which is no more than what is necessary to
their preservation. For, were it not for this Propriety and Relation, no Man
would be at any more cost or pains for his own Body, than for that of a
Stranger? It Is Propriety which naturally draws Love, Care, and Tenderness along
with it; and these are ordered by the wisdom of Providence, for the
conservation of the Body, which would quickly perish without it.

2. The Body is the Souls ancient Acquaintance, and intimate Friend, with whom
it has assiduously and familiarly conversed from its beginning. They have been
partners in each others comforts and sorrows. They may say to each other, as
Miconius did to his Colleague, with whom he had spent twenty years in the
Government of the Thuringian Church: Cucurri^^s, certavimus, laboravimus,
pugnavimus, vicimus and viximus conjunctissime; We have run, striven, labored,
fought, overcome, and lived most intimately and lovingly together Consuetude
and daily conversation begets and conciliates Friendship and Love betwixt
Creatures of contrary Natures: Let a Lamb be brought up with a Lion, and the
Lion will express a tenderness toward it, much more the Soul to its own Body.

3. The Body is the Souls house and beloved habitation, where it was born, and
has lived ever since it had a being, and in which it has enjoyed all its
comforts, natural and supernatural, which cannot but strengthen the Souls
engagement to it. Upon this account the Apostle calls it the Souls home, 2 Cor.
5.6. Whilst we are at home in the Body: It Is true, this house is not so
comfortable an habitation, that it should be much desired by many Souls: we may
say of many gracious Souls, that they pay a dear rent for the house they dwell
in; or as it was said of Galba, Anima Galbae male habitat, their Souls are but
ill accommodated, but yet it is their home, and therefore beloved by them.

4 The Body is the Souls instrument by which it does its work and business in
the World, both natural and religious, Romans 6.13. Through the bodily senses it
takes in all the natural comforts of this World, and by the bodily Members it
performs all its Duties and Services. When these are broken and laid aside by
death, the Soul knows it can work no more in that way it now does, John 9.4.
Eccles. 9.10. Natural men love their Bodies for the natural pleasures they are
instrumental to convey to their Souls and spiritual men, for the use and
service they are of to (...) own and others Souls, Philip. 1.23.

5. The Body is the Souls Partner in the benefit of Christ's Purchaces. It was
bought with the same price, 1 Cor. 6.20. sanctified by the same spirit, 1 These.
5.23. interested in the same promises, Matthew. 22.32. and designed for the same
glory, 1 These. 4.16, 17. So that we may say of it, as it was said of Augustine,
and his friend Alippius, they are sanguine Christi conglutinati, glewed
together by the blood of Christ. And thus of the grounds and reasons of its
Love.

Inference I.
IS it so? Learn hence the mighty strength and prevalence of Divine Love, which
over-powering all natural Affections, does not only enable the Souls of men to
take their Separation from the Body patiently, but to long for it ardently,
Philip. 1.23 While some need Patience to dye, others need it as much to live, 2
These. 3.5. It Is said Revel. 12.11. They loved not their lives. And indeed on
these terms they first closed with Christ, Luke 12.26. To hate their lives for
his sake (ie) to love them in so remiss a degree, that when ever they shall
come in competition with Christ, to regard them no more than the things we hate.

The love of Christ is to be the supreme love, and all others to be subordinate
to it, or quenched by it. It Is not its own comfort in the Body, it principally
and ultimately designs and aims at, but Christ's glory, and so this may be
furthered by the death of the Body, its death thereupon becomes as eligible to
the Soul, as its life, Philip. 1.20. O this is an high pitch of grace! A great
attainment, to say as one did, Vivere renuo, ut Christo vivam; I refuse life to
be with Christ: Or another when asked whether he was willing to dye, answered,
Illius est nolle mori, qui nolit ire ad Christum; Let him be loath to dye, that
is loath to go to Christ So 2 Cor. 5. We are willing rather to be absent from
the Body, and present with the Lord.

It Is not every Christian that can arrive to this degree of Lov^^ though they
love Christ sincerely, yet they shrink from death cowardly and are loath to be
gone. There are two sorts of grounds upon which Christians may be loath to be
unbodied, 1. Sinful, 2. Allowable.

1. The sinful and unjustifiable grounds are such as these, viz. (1) Guilt upon
the Conscience, which will damp and discourage the Soul, and make it loath to
dye. It arms death with terror, the sting of death is sin. (2) Unmortified
affections to the World, I mean in such a degree as is necessary to sweeten
death; and make a man a Voluntier in that sharp engagement with that last and
dreadful Enemy. It is with our hearts, as with fuel, if green and full of sap,
it will not burn, but if that be dried up, it catches presently: mortification
is the drying up of carnal affections to the Creature, which is that that
resists death, as green Wood does the fire. (3) The weakness and and cloudiness
of Faith. You need Faith to dye by, as well as to live by, Heb. 11.13. All
these dyed in faith. The less strength there is in Faith, the more in death. A
strong Believer welcomes the messengers of Death, when a weak one, unless
extraordinarily assisted, trembles at them.

2. There are grounds on which we may desire a longer continuance in the Body,
warrantably and allowably: as (1) To do him yet more service in our bodies
before we lay them down. This the Saints have pleaded for longer life. Psalm.
30.9. Psalm. 88.11, 12, 13. and Isai. 38.18, 19. (2) To see the clouds of Gods
anger dispelled, whether public or personal, and a clear light break out ere
we dye, Psalm. 27.13. (3) They may desire with submission to outlive the days of
persecution, and not to be delivered into the hands of cruel men, but come to
their Graves in peace, Psalm. 31.15. and 2 Thessalonians. 3.2. That may be delivered
from absurd men.

3. But though some Christians shun death upon a sinful account, and others
upon a justifyable one, yet others there are, who seeing their Title clear,
their work done, and relishing the Joys of Heaven in the praelibations of
Faith, are willing to be uncloathed, and to be with Christ. Their love to
Christ, has extinguished in them the love of life, and they can say with Paul,
Act. 21.13. I am ready. Ignatius longed to come to those Beasts that were to
devour him, and so, many of the Primitive Christians: Christ was so dear, that
their lives were cheap, and low prized things for his enjoyment. And here
indeed is the glory and triumph of a Christians Faith and love to Christ: For
(1) it enables him to part cheerfully with what he sees and feels, for what his
eyes yet never saw. 1 Pet. 1.8. Whom having not seen ye love. (2) To part with
what is dearest on earth, and lies nearest the heart, of all he enjoys, for
Christ's sake. (3) To reconcile his heart to what is most abhorrent and
formidable to nature. (4) To endure the greatest of pains and torments to be
with him. (5) To cast himself into the vast Ocean of Eternity, the most amazing
change, to be with Christ. O the glorious Conquests of Love!

Inference II.
THen the Apostasy of unregenerate Professors in times of eminent danger, is
not to be wondered at. They will and must warp from Christ, when their lives
are in hazard for him. The love of the Body will certainly prevail over their
love to Christ and Religion. Amor meus pondus meum. Self-love will now draw.
Love is the weight of the Soul, which inclines and determines it, in the
competition of Interests, and the predominant Interest always carries it. Every
Unregenerate Professor loves his own life more than Christ, prefers his body
before his Soul; such a one may upon diverse accounts, as Education, Example,
slight Convictions of Conscience, or Ostentation of gifts, fall into a
Profession of Religion, and continue a long time in that Profession, before he
visibly recede from Christ; hope of the Resurrection of the Interest of
Religion in the World; Shame of retracting his Profession; Applause of his Zeal
and Constancy in higher Trials; The Peace of his own Conscience, and many such
Motives may prevail with a Carnal Professor to endure a while; but when dangers
of life come to an height, they are gone, Matthew. 24.8, 9, 10. And therefore our
Lord tells us, that they who hate not their lives, cannot be his Disciples,
Luke 12.26. Now will they lose their lives by saving them, Matt. 16.25. And the
Reasons are plain and forcible. For,

1. Now is the proper season for the predominant love to be discovered, it can
be hid no longer: And the love of life is the predominant love in all such
persons. For do but compare it with their love to Christ, and it will easily be
found so: They love their lives truly and really, they love Christ but
feignedly and pretendedly; and the real, will and must prevail over the feigned
love. They love their lives fervently, and intensely, they love Christ but
coldly and remissly: And the fervent love will prevail over the the remiss
love. Their love to their Bodies has a root in themselves, their love to
Christ has no root in themselves, Matthew. 13.21. and that which has a root
must needs outlast and outlive that which has none.

2. Because when life is in hazard, Conscience will work in them by way of
Discouragement; 'twill hint the danger of their eternal state to them* and tell
them, they may cast away their Souls for ever in a Bravado, for though the
cause they are called to suffer for, be good, yet their Condition is bad; and
if the Condition be not good as well as the Cause, a Man is lost for ever
though he suffer for it, 1 Cor. 13.3. Conscience, which encourages and supports
the upright* will daunt and appall the Hypocrite, and tell him, he is not on
the same terms in Sufferings, that other men are.

3. Because then all the Springs by which their profession was fed and
maintained, fail and dry up. Now the wind that was in their backs is come
about, and blows a storm in their faces. There are no Preferment nor Honors
now to be had from Religion. These men's Sufferings are a perfect Surprise to
them, for they never counted the cost, Luke 14.28. Now they must stand alone,
and resist unto blood, and sacrifice all visibles for invisibles, and this they
can never do.

O therefore Professors look to your hearts, try their predominant love,
compare your love to Christ with that to your lives. Now the like question will
be put to you that once was put to Peter, John 21.15. Love thou me more than
these? What say you to this? You think now, you do, but alas, your love is not
yet brought to the fire to be tried: You think you hate sin, but will you be
able to strive unto blood against sin? Hebr. 12.4. Will you choose suffering
rather than sin, Job 36.21? O try your love to Christ, before God bring it to
the trial. Sure I am, the love of life will make you warp in the hour of
Temptation; except

1. You sat down and counted the cost of Religion beforehand: if you set out
in Profession only for a Walk, not for a Journey; if you go to Sea for
Recreation, not for a Voyage; if you be mounted among other Professors only to
take the air, and not to engage an enemy in sharp and bloody Encounters; you
are gone.

2. Except you live by Faith, and not by Sense, 2 Cor. 4.18. Whilst we look not
at the things that are seen. You must balance present Sufferings with future
glory. You must go by that account and reckoning, Romans 8.18. or you are gone.
Now the just shall live by faith, and if Faith don't support, your fears will
certainly sink you.

3. Except you be sincere and plain-hearted in Religion, driving no Design in
it but to save your Souls; else see your lot in that Example, 2 Timothy 4.10.
Demas has forsaken me. O take heed of a cunning, subdolous, double heart in
Religion, be plain, be open, care not if your ends lay open to the eyes of all
the World.

4. Except you experience the power of Religion in your own Souls, as well as
wear the name of it. O my Brethren, it is not a name to live, that will do you
service now. Many Ships are gone down to the bottom, for all the brave Names of
the Success, the Prosperous, the Haypy return, and so will you. There is a
knowing in our selves by taste and real experience, Hebr. 10.34. which does a
Soul more service in a Suffering hour, than all the splendid Names and Titles
in the World.

5. Except you make it your daily work to crucify the Flesh, deny self for
Christ, in all the Forms and Interests of it. He that cannot deny himself, will
deny Jesus Christ, Matthew. 26.24. let him deny himself, take up his Cross, and
follow me, else he cannot be my Disciple. Ponder these things in your hearts,
whilst yet God delays the Trial.

Inference III.
IF the Souls of men be naturally so strongly inclined and affected toward the
Body, then hence you may plainly see the Wisdom of God in all the Afflictions
and Burdens he lays upon his people in this World, and find that all is but
enough to wean off their Souls from their Bodies, and make them willing to part
with them.

The life of the Saints in this World, is generally a burdened and a groaning
life, 2 Cor. 5.2. In this Tabernaele we groan, being burdened. Here the Saints
feel (1) A burden of sin, Romans 7.24. this is a dead and a sinking weight. (2)
A burden of Affliction, of this all are Partakers, Hebr. 12. though not all in
an equal degree, or in the same kind, yet all have their burdens equal to, and
even beyond their own strength to support it, 2 Cor. 1.8. pressed above
measure. (3) A burden of inward troubles for sin, and outward Troubles in the
Flesh, both together; so had Job, Heman, David, and many of the Saints.

Certainly, this befalls them not (1) Casually, Job 5.6. It rises not out of the
Dust: (2) Nor because God loves and regards them not, for they are fruits of
his love, Heb. 12.6. Whom he loves, he corrects: (3) Nor because he takes
pleasure in our groans, Lamen. 3. To tread under his feet the Prisoners of the
earth, the Lord has no pleasure: It Is not for his own pleasure, but his
Childrens profit, Heb. 12.10. And among the pr^fits that result from these
burdens, this is not the least, to make you less fond of the body than you
would else be, and more willing to be gone to your everlasting rest. And
certainly, all the Diseases and Pains we endure in the Body, whether they be
upon inward or outward accounts, by Passion or Compassion, from God or Men;
will be found but enough to wean us, and loose off our hearts from the fond
love of life. Afflictions are bitter things to our taste Ruth 1.20. so bitter,
that Naomi thought a name of a contrary signification fitter for her afflicted
condition: Call me Marah (i. e.) bitter, not Naomi, pleasant, beautiful. And
the Church, Lam. 3.19. calls them Wormwood and Gall.

The great design of God in afflicting them, is the same that a tender Mother
projects in putting Wormwood to her Breast, when she would wean the Child.

It has been observed by some discreet and grave Ministers, that before their
remove from one place to another, God has permitted and ordered some weaning
Providence to befall them, either denying wonted success to their labor, or
alienating and cooling the affections of their people toward them, which not
only makes the manner of their departure more easy, but the grounds of it more
clear. Much so it falls out in our natural death, the comfort of the World is
imbittered to us, before we leave it. The longer we live in it, the less we
shall like it. We overlive most of our Comforts, which engaged our hearts to
it, that we may more freely take our leave of it. It were good for Christians
to observe the voice of such Providence as these, and answer the Designs of
them, in a greater willingness to die.

1. Is thy Body which was once hail and vigorous, now become a crazy, sickly,
pained body to thee? neither useful to God, nor comfortable to thee; a
Tabernacle to groan and sigh in? And little hopes it will be recovered to a
better temper; God has ordered this to make thee willing to be divorced from
it. The less desirable life is, the less formidable death will be.

2. Is thy Estate decayed and blasted by Providence, so that thy life which was
once full of Creature Comforts, is now filled with Cares and Anxieties; O it is
a weaning Providence to thee, and bespeaks thee the more cheerfully to bid the
World farewell. The less comfort it gives you, the less it should entangle and
engage you. We little know with what aching hearts, and pensive breasts, many of
Gods people walk up and down, though for Religion, or Reputations sake they put
a good face upon it: but by these things God is bespeaking and preparing them
for a better State.

3. Is an Husband, a Wife, or dear Children dead, and with them the comfort of
life laid in the dust? Why this the Lord sees necessary to do, to persuade you
to come after willingly? It Is the cutting asunder thy roots in the earth, that
thou may fall the more easily. O how many strokes must God give, at our
Names, Estates, Relations, and Health; before we will give way to the last
stroke of death that fells us to the ground?

4. Do the times frown upon Religion? Do all things seem to threaten stormy
times at hand? Are desirable Assemblies scattered? Nothing but Sorrows and
Sufferings to be expected in this World? By these things God will imbitter the
earth, and sweeten Heaven to his People.

5. Is the beauty and sweetness of Christian Society defaced and decayed? That
Communion which was wont to be Pithy, Substantial, Spiritual and Edifying;
becomes either frothy or contentious, so that thy Soul has no pleasure in it?
This also is a weaning Providence to our Souls. Strigelius desired to die, that
he might be freed ab implacabilibus Theologorum odiis, from the Wranglings and
Contentions that were in his time. Our fond affection to the Body requires all
this, and much more to wean and mortify them.

Inference IV.
HOW Comfortable is the Doctrine of the Resurrection to Believers, which
assures them of receiving their Bodies again, though they part with them for a
time!

Believers must die as well as others: their Union with Christ privileges them
not from a Separation from their Bodies, Romans 8.10 Heb. 9.27. But yet, they
have special grounds of Consolation against this doleful separation above all
others. For,

1. Though they part with them, yet they part in hopes of receiving them again,
1 Thessal. 4.13, 14. They take not a final leave of them when they die.
Husbandmen cast their Seed-corn into the earth cheerfully and willingly,
because they part with it in hope; so should we; when we commit our Bodies to
the earth at death.

2. Though death separate these dear Friends from each other; yet it cannot
separate either the one or other from Christ, Luke 20.37, 38. I am the God of
Abraham, etc. Your very dust is the Lords, and the Grave rots not the Bond of
the Covenant.

3. The very same Body we lay down at death, we shall assume again at the
Resurrection. Not only the same specifical, but the same Numerical Body, Job
19.25.26. With these eyes shall I see God.

4. The unbodied Soul shall not find the want of its Body, so as to afflict or
disquiet it, nor the Body the want of its Soul; but the one shall be at rest in
Heaven, and the other sweet asleep in the Grave, and all that long interval
shall slide away, without any afflicting sense of each others absence. The time
will be long, Job 14.12. but if it were longer, it cannot be afflicting,
considering how the Soul is clothed immediately 2 Cor. 5.1, 2. and how the
Body sleeps sweetly in Jesus, 1 Thessalonians. 4.14.

5. When the day of their re-espousals is come, the Soul will find the Body so
transformed and improved, that it shall never receive prejudice from it any
more, but a singular addition to its Happiness and Glory. Now it clogs us,
Matthew. 26.41. The Spirit indeed is willing, but the Flesh is weak. It incumbers
us with cares to provide for it: and eats up time and thoughts; but then it
will be a Spiritual Body, 1 Cor. 15.43. like to the Angels, for manner of
subsistence, Luke 20.35, 36. 1 Cor. 6.13. and which is the highest step of
glory, like unto Christ's glorious Body, Philip. 3.21. well therefore might the
Father say, Resurrectio mortuorum, est Consolatio Christianorum: The
Resurrection of the Dead, is the Consolation of Christians.

USE II. Of Reproof.
IN the next place let me press you to regulate your love to your Bodies, by
the rules of Religion and right Reason: I must press you to love them, though
Nature it self teaches you so to do; but I press you to love them as
Christians, as men that understand the right use and improvement of their
Bodies. There are two sorts of errors in our love to the Body, one in Defect,
the other in Excess: both come fitly here to be censured and healed.

I. Some there be that offend in the Defect of love to their own Bodies, who
use them as if they had no love for them, whose Souls act as if they were
enemies to their own Bodies. They do not formally and directly hate them, but
consequentially and eventually they may be said to hate them, and that

(1) By defiling them with filthy lusts, so the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 6.18.
Every sin that a man does, is without the Body, but he that commits Adultery
sins against his own Body: in other sins, it is the Instrument, but here it is
both Instrument and Object; not only God, but your own Bodies are abused, and
wronged by it. The Body may be considered two ways, either 1. As our Vessels,
or, 2. As the Spirits Temple.


1. As our Vessel or Instrument for natural and Spiritual Uses and Services:
and on that account we should not injure or defile it, 1 These. 4.4, 5. but
possess it in sanctification and honor. The lusts of Uncleanness, Gluttony,
and Drunkenness quench the vigor; blast the beauty, and destroy the health and
honor of the Body; and so render it both naturally and morally unfit for the
service and use of the Soul.

2. And the injury is yet greater, if we consider it as the Spirits Temple. On
this ground the Apostle strongly convinces, and disswadeth Christians from
these abuses of the Body, 1 Cor. 6.15, 16. He argues from the Dignity God will
put upon our Bodies by the Resurrection, ver. 13, 14. They are to be
transformed, and made like unto Christ's glorious Body: and from the honor he
has already put upon the Bodies of the Saints, in their union with Christ,
ver. 15, 16. They, as well as the Soul, are ingrafted into him, and joined with
him; they are his Temples, to be dedicated, hallowed, and consecrated to his
service. O let them not be made a sink for lusts, or mere strainers for meat
and drink.

(2) By macerating them with covetous lusts, denying them their due comforts
and refreshments, and unmercifully burthening them with labors and sorrows
about things that perish. (1) Some deny their Bodies due comforts and
refreshments, which the natural and positive Laws of God both allow and
command. Their Souls are cruel Step-mothers to their bodies, and keep them too
short; not out of a prudent and Christian design to starve their lusts, but to
advance their estates. Of this evil Solomon speaks, Eccles. 6.22. There is an
evil which I have seen under the Sun, and it is common among men; A man to whom
God has given riches, Wealth, and Honor, so that he wants nothing for his
Soul, of all that he desires; yet God gives him not power to eat thereof, but
a stranger eats it. This is vanity, and it is an evil disease. Tenacity is a
disease of the Soul, like that of a Dyscracy in the stomach, which so
indisposeth it, that it cannot receive with any appetite or delight the best
refreshments at a plentiful Table. (2) And others there are that wrong and
abuse their own bodies by laying unreasonable and unmerciful loads upon them,
especially loads of grief and sorrow, wasting and weakening them beyond all
rules of reason or Religion. If a friend or relation die, they have less mercy
on their own Bodies, than a conscientious man has on the Horse he rides. Cares
and sorrows are as deadly to the Body as a Sword, 1 Timothy 6.10. Intense and
immoderate griefs about Worldly losses and crosses have slain their ten
thousands: and which is strange, the Soul seems to take a certain kind of
pleasure in loading and tormenting the Body. There is a real truth in that
strange expression of Seneca, Inest quiddam dulce tristitiae, Senec. Ep. 806.
Sorrow it self has a certain kind of pleasure attending it.

The Souls of some mourners do willingly excite and provoke their own griefs,
when they begin to abate, which is like the whetting of the knife that grows
dull, to make it cut the deeper into the Body. Cum occurrant Sermones little
jucundi, conversatio hilaris, officiosa pietas; tunc ocali velut in gaudio
relaxantur. Sen. Ep. 806.
Thus, as Seneca observes, Some Parents that have lost their beloved children,
willingly call to mind their pleasant sayings, and pretty actions, to find a
kind of pleasure in a fresh shower of tears for them; when, poor hearts! sorrow
has so broken them already, that they need consolations under their present
sorrows, rather than irritations of new ones. And the Souls unmercifulness to
the Body, is in such cases farther discovered by its obstinate refusal of all
that is comforting and relieving: So it is said of Rachel, Jerem. 31.15. Rachel
weeping for her children, would not be comforted, because they were not. So the
Israelites hearkened not unto Moses, because of the anguish of spirit, and the
cruel bondage, Exodus 6.9. Thus we studiously rake together, and exasperate
whatsoever is piercing, wounding, and overwhelming; and shut our ears to all
that is relieving and supporting, which is cruelty to our own Bodies, and that
which has so far broken the health and strength of some bodies, that they are
never like to be useful instruments to the Soul any more in this World. Such
deep and desperate wounds have their own Souls given them by immoderate grief,
as will never be perfectly healed, but by the Resurrection. Of those wounds the
body may say as it is Zeth. 13.6. These are the wounds with which I was wounded
in the house (or by the hand) of my friend: thus my own Soul has dealt cruelly
and unmercifully with me.

II. Others offend in the Excess and extravagancy of their love to the Body,
and these are an hundred to one in number with those that sin in defect of
love. My friends, upon a due search it will be found, that the love of our
Souls generally degenerates into fondness and folly: There is but little well
tempered and ordinate love found among men. We make fondlings, yea, we make
Idols of our own Bodies, we rob God, yea our own Souls, to give to the Body. It
is not a natural and kindly heat of love, but a mere feavourish heat which
preys upon the very Spirits of Religion, which is found with many of us. This
feavourish distemper may be discovered by the beating of our pulse in three or
four particulars.

(1.) This appears by our sinful indulgence to our whining appetites; We give
the flesh whatsoever it craves, and can deny it nothing it desires; pampering
the Body, to the great injury and hazard of the Soul. Some have their
conversation in the lusts of the flesh, as it is Ephesians. 2.3. Trading only in
those things that please and pamper the flesh: They sow to the flesh, Gal. 6.8.
( i.e.) all their studies and labors are but the sowing of the seeds of
pleasure to the flesh. Not an handful of spiritual Seed sown in Prayer for the
Soul all the day long; what the Body craves, the obsequious Soul like a slave,
is at its beck to give it. Tit. 3. 3. Serving diverse lusts and pleasures,
attending to every knock and call, to fulfill the desires of the flesh: O how
little do these men understand the life of Religion, or the great design of
Christianity! which consists in mortifying, and not pampering and gratifying
the Body, Romans 14. 13, 14. And according to that rule all serious Christians
order their Bodies, giving them what is needful to keep them serviceable and
useful to the Soul, but not gratifying their irregular desires: giving what
their wants, not what their wantonness calls for. So Paul, 1 Cor. 9.27. I beat
it down, and keep it under; he understood it as his Servant, not his Master. He
knew that Hagar would quickly peark up, and domineer over Sarah, expect more
attendance than the Soul, except it were kept under: These two verbs, (...) and
(...) are very emphatical; the former signifies to make it black and blue with
buffeting, the other, to bring it under by checks and rebukes, as Masters that
understand their place and Authority use to do with insolent and wanton
Servants.

It was a rare expression of an Heathen, Major sum, and ad (...) natus* quam ut
corporis mei sim mancipium: I am greater, and born to greater things, than that
I should be a drudge or Vassal to my Body. And it was the saying of a pious
Divine, when he felt the flesh rebellious and wanton, Ego faciam, aselle, ut
non calcitres: I will make thee thou Ass, that thou shall not kick. I know the
superstitious Papists place much of Religion in these external things, but
though they abuse them to an ill purpose, there is a necessary and lawful use
of these abridgments and restraints upon the Body; and it will be impossible to
mortify, and starve our lusts, without a due rigor and severity to our flesh.
But how little are many acquainted with these things? They deal with their
Bodies as David with Adonijah, of whom it is said, 1 Kings 1.6. His Father had
not displeased him at any time, in saying, Why have thou done so? And just so
our flesh requites us by its Rebellions and Treasons against the Soul: it seeks
the life of the Soul, which seeks nothing more than its content and pleasure;
this is not ordinate love, but fondness and folly, and what we shall bitterly
repent for at last.

(2.) It appears by our sparing and favoring of them, in the necessary uses
and services we have for them in Religion. Many will rather starve their Souls,
than work and exercise their Bodies, or disturb their sluggish rest: thus the
idle excuses and pretenses of endangering our health, oftentimes put by the
duties of Religion, or at least lose the fittest and properest season for them:
We are lazying upon our beds, when we should be wrestling upon our knees: The
World is suffered to get the start of Religion in the morning, and so Religion
is never able to overtake it all the day long. This was none of David's course,
he prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried, Psalm. 119.147. and Psalm.
5.3. My voice shall thou hear in the morning, O Lord, in the morning will I
direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up. And indeed we should consecrate
unto God the freshest and fittest parts of our time, when our bodily Senses are
most vigorous; and we would do so (except God by his providence disable us)
were our hearts fully set for God, and Religion lay with weight upon our
Spirits.

Some I confess cannot receive this injunction, being naturally disabled by
prevailing infirmities, but those tha^ (...), ought to do so. But O how many
slothful excuses does the flesh invent to put off duty! We shall injure our
health, etc. O the hypocrisy of such pleas! if profit or pleasure call us up,
we have no such shifts, but can rise early, and sit up late.

O Friends, why has God given you Bodies, if not to waste and wear them out in
his service, and the service of your own Souls? if your Bodies must not be put
to it, and exercised this way, where is the mercy of having a Body? If a
stately Horse were given you on this condition, that you must not ride or work
him, what benefit would such a gift be to you? Your Bodies must, and will wear
out, and it is better wear them with working, than with rusting: we are
generally more sollicitous to live long, than to live usefully and serviceably,
and it may be our health had been more precious in the eyes of God, if it had
been less precious in our own eyes? It Is just with God to destroy that health
with diseases, which he sees we would cast away in slothfulness and idleness.
Think with thy self, had such a Soul as Timothies or Gaius's been blessed with
such a Body as thine, so strong and vigorous, so apt and able for service, they
would have honored God more in it, in a day, than perhaps you do in a year.
Certainly, this is not love, but laziness, not a due improvement, but a sinful
neglect and abuse of the Body, to let it rust out in idleness, which might be
employed so many ways for God, for your own and others Souls. Well, remember
death will shortly dissolve them, and then they can be of no more use; and if
you expect God should put glory and honor upon them at the Resurrection, use
them for God now, with a faithful self-denying diligence.

(3.) It appears by our cowardly shrinking from dangers that threaten them,
when the glory of God, our own and others Salvation, Here the Soul receives a
deadly wound upon it self, toward it ^ff from the Body. So did Spira.
bid us expose and not regard them. Some there are, that rather than they will
adventure their flesh to the rage of man, will hazard their Souls to the wrath
of God. They are too tender to suffer pain or restraint for Christ, but
consider not w^^t sufferings are prepared for the fearful and unbelieving in
the World to come, Rev. 21.8. How many sad examples do the Church-Histories of
ancient and latter times afford us, of men who consulting with flesh and blood
in time of danger, have in pity to the Body ruined their Souls?

There be but few like minded with Paul, who set a low price upon his liberty
or life for Christ, Act. 20.24. or with those worthy Jews, Dan. 3.28. who
yielded their Bodies to preserve their consciences. Few of Chrysostoms mind who
told the Empress, Nil nisi peccatum timeo, I fear nothing but sin; Or of
Basils, who told the Emperor, God threatened Hell, whereas he threatened but a
prison. That is a remarkable Rule that Christ gives us Mat. 10.28. The sum of
it is, to set God against man, the Soul against the Body, and Hell against
temporal sufferings, and so surmounting these low fleshly considerations, to
cleave to our duty in the face of dangers. You read Gal. 11 16. how in pursuit
of Duty, though surrounded with danger, Paul would not conferr or consult with
flesh and blood, (i. e.) ask its opinion which were best, or stay for its
consent till it were willing to suffer; he understood not that the flesh had
any voice at the Council Table in his Soul, but willing, or unwilling, if duty
call for it, he was resolved to hazard it for God.

We have a great many little Politicians among us, who think to husband their
lives and liberties a great deal better than other plain-hearted and too
forward Christians do; but these Politiques will be their perdition, and their
craft will betray them to ruin. They will lose their lives by saving them,
when others will save them by losing them, Matthew. 10.39. For the interest of
the Body depends on and follows the safety of the Soul, as the Cabin does the
ship.

O my Friends, let me beg you not to love your Bodies into Hell, and your Souls
too for their sakes: be not so scared at the sufferings of the Body, as with
poor Spira to dash them both against the wrath of the great and terrible God.
Most of those Souls that are now in Hell, are there upon the account of their
indulgence to the flesh: they could not deny the flesh, and now are denied by
God. They could not suffer from men, and now must suffer the vengeance of
eternal fire.

(4.) In a word, it appears we love them fondly and irregularly, in that we
cannot with any patience think of death and separation from them. How do some
men fright at the very name of death? and no Arguments can persuade them
seriously to think of an unbodied and separated estate. It Is as death to them,
to bring their thoughts close to that ungrateful Subject. A Christian that
loves his Body regularly and moderately, can look into his own grave with a
composed mind, and speak familiarly of it, as Job 17.14. And Peter speaks of
the putting off of his Body by death, as a man would of the putting off of his
clothes at night, 2 Pet. 1.13, 14. And certainly such men have a great
Advantage above all others, both as to the tranquillity of their life and
death. You know a parting time must come, and the more fond you are of them,
the more bitter and doleful that time will be. Nothing except the guilt, and
terrible charges of conscience, put men into terrors at death, more than our
fondness of the Body. I do confess, Christless persons have a great deal of
reason to be shie of death: their dying day is their undoing day: but for
Christians to startle and fright at it, is strange, considering how great a
friend death will be to them that are in Christ. What are you afraid of? What,
to go to Christ? to be freed of sin and affliction too soon? Certainly, it has
not been so comfortable an habitation to you, that you should be loath to
exchange it for an Heavenly one.

USE III. Of Exhortation.
TO conclude, seeing there is so strict a friendship and tender affection
betwixt Soul and Body, let me persuade every Soul of you to express your love
to the Body, by laboring to get union with Jesus Christ, and thereby to
prevent the utter ruin of both to all Eternity.

Souls, if you love your selves, or the Bodies you dwell in, show it by your
preventing care in season, lest they be cast away for ever. How can you say you
love them, when you daily expose them to the everlasting wrath of God, by
employing them as weapons of unrighteousness, to fight against him that formed
them? You feed and pamper them on earth, you give them all the delights and
pleasures you can procure for them in this World, but you take no care what
shall become of them, nor your Souls neither after death has separated them. O
cruel Souls, cruel not to others, but to your selves, and to your own flesh,
which you pretend so much love to! Is this your love to your Bodies, what, to
employ them in Satan's service on Earth, and then to be cast as a prey to him
for ever in Hell? You think the rigor and mortification of the Saints, their
abstemiousness and self-denial, their cares, fears, and diligence, to be too
great severity to their Bodies, but they know, these are the most real
evidences of their true love to them; they love them too well to cast them away
as you do. Alas! Your love to the Body does not consist ^n feeding and
clothing and pleasing it; but in getting it united to Christ, and made the
Temple of the Holy Ghost: in using it for God, and dedicating it to God.

I beseech you brethren by the mercies of God, to present your Bodies living
Sacrifices to God, which is your reasonable service^ Romans 12.1. The Soul should
look upon the Body as a wise Parent upon a rebellious or wanton child, that
would (if left to it self) quickly bring it self to the Gallows; The Father
looks on him with compassion and melting bowels, and says, with the rod in his
hand, and tears in his eyes, my child, my naughty, disobedient, headstrong
child, I resolve to chastise thee severely, I love thee too well to suffer thee
to be ruined, if my care or corrections may prevent it. So should our Souls
evidence their love to, and care over their own rebellious flesh. It Is cruelty,
not love or pity, to indulge them to their own destruction.

Except you have gracious Souls, you shall never have glorified Bodies: except
you Souls be united with Christ, the happiness of your Bodies as well as Souls
is lost to all eternity. Know you not that the everlasting condition of your
Bodies follows and depends on the Interest your Souls now get in Christ? O that
this one sad truth might sink deep into all our considerations this day; that
if your Bodies be snares to your Souls, and your Souls be now regardless of the
future estate of themselves and them; assuredly, they will have a bitter
parting at death, a terrible meeting again at the Resurrection, and horrid
reflections upon each other, mutually charging their ruin upon each other to
all eternity. Whilst they that are in Christ part in hope, meet with joy, and
bless God for each other for evermore.

TEXT.
2 Peter. 1.13, 14. Yea, I think it meet as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to
stir you up, by putting you in Remembrance,

Knowing that shortly I must put off this my Tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus
Christ has showed me.


AT the tenth verse of this Chapter, The Apostle sums up his foregoing precepts
and exhortations in one great and most important duty, the making sure of their
calling and election. This exhortation he enforces on them by a most solemn
and weighty motive, ver. 11. Even an abundant entrance into the everlasting
Kingdom. No work of greater necessity or difficulty, than to make sure our
Salvation, no argument more forceable and prevalent than an easy and free
entrance into Glory at death, an (...), a sweet and comfortable dissolution,
to enter the Port of glory before a wind, with our full ladeing of comfort,
peace and joy in believing, our Sails full, and our Streamers flying: Oh how
much better is this than to lie Wind-bound, I mean heart-bound at the Harbors
mouth! tossed up and down with fears, doubts, and manifold temptations, making
many a board to fetch the harbor; for so much is signified in his figurative
and allusive expression, v. 11.

And for their encouragement in this great and difficult work, he ingageth
himself by promise, to give them all the assistance he can, whilst God should
continue his life, and knowing that would be but a little while, he resolves to
use his utmost endeavor to secure these things in their Memories, after his
death, that they might not dye with him. This is the general scope, and order
of the words.

Wherein more particularly, we have I. His exemplary industry and diligence in
his Ministerial work. II. The consideration stimulating and provoking him
thereunto.


I. His Exemplary industry and diligence in his Ministerial work: in which two
things are remarkable, viz. (1) The quality of his work, (...), excitare,
expergesacere, i. e. mentes vestras tanquam do mitantes ac torpescentes, etc.
Poli Synopsis.
which was to stir them up by putting them in remembrance, to keep the heavenly
flame of love and zeal lively upon the Altar of their hearts. He well knew what
a sleepy disease the best Christians are troubled with, and therefore he had
need to be stirring them up, and awakening them to their duty. (2) The
constancy of his work, as long as I am in this Tabernacle: (i. e.) as long as I
live in this World. The Body is here called a Tabernacle, in respect of its
moveableness and frailty, and in opposition to that house made without hands,
eternal in the Heavens. And it is observeable how he limits and bounds his
serviceableness to them, by his commoration in his Tabernacle or Body, as well
knowing, after death he could be no longer useful to them or any others in this
World. Death puts an end to all our ministerial usefulness: but till that time,
he judged it meet and becoming him, to be aiding and assisting their faith: Our
life and labor must end together.

II. We have here the Motive or consideration stimulating and provoking him to
this diligence, knowing that I must shortly put off this Tabernacle, even as
the Lord Jesus Christ has showed me: in which words he gives an account of (1)
The speediness, (2) Necessity, (3) Voluntariness of his death, and the way and
means by which he knew it. All these must be considered singly and apart, and
then valued altogether as they amount to a weighty Argument or Motive to excite
him to diligence in his his duty.

(1.) He reflects upon the speediness or near approach of his death. (...),
brevi suturum. Every Christian knows not the time of his death as Peter did by
special Revelation. -- But though we know it not by a word spoken to us in
particular, we know it by a word written for all in common, Eccles. 9.5. the
living know that they must die.
I must [shortly] put off this my Tabernacle; which is a form of Speech of the
same importance with that of Paul, 2 Timothy 4.6. The time of my departure is at
hand, my time in the Body is almost at an end.

(2.) The necessity of his death, it is not I may, but I must put off this my
Tabernacle, yea, I must put it off shortly; for so the Lord had showed him:
Christ had signified it expressly to him, John 21.18, 19. And besides this, most
Expositors think this clause refers to some special vision or Revelation which
Peter had of the time and manner of his own death: so that besides the natural
necessity or the inevitableness of his death by the law of Nature; he was
certified of it by special Revelation. We have here also

(3.) The voluntariness of his death, for voluntariness is consistent enough
with the necessity of the event. Deponere dicit ut significet se voluntary
mortem obiturum esse pro Christo. Pool.
I must put off, or lay down my Tabernacle; he says not, I must be torn or
rent by violence from it, but I must depose, or lay it down. Camero will have
the word here used for death, properly to signify the laying down of ones
Garments: he made no more of putting off his Body than his Garments.

Upon the consideration of the whole matter, the speediness of his death, which
he knew to be at hand, the Necessity of it, that when it came he must be gone
from them, and could be no more useful to them, and his own inclination to be
with Christ in a better state, being as willing to be gone as a weary Traveller
to be at home; he judged it meet, or becoming him, as he was called of Christ
to feed his sheep, as he was gifted extraordinarily for the Churches service,
full of spiritual excellencies, all which in a short time would be taken away
from them by death: I say, upon all these accounts he could not but judge it
meet to be stirring them up, and every way striving to be as useful as he might.

Hence the Note will be

DOCT I. How s^rong soever the Affections and inclinations of Souls are to the
fleshly Tabernacles they now live in, yet they must put them off, and that
speedily.
The certaint^ of death, Io^ 16.22.

Anni numeri (i. e.) qui numerati sunt adeo ut brevissimi periodo circumscripti.


THE point lies very plain before us in the Scriptures. That is a remarkable
expression we have in Job 16.22. When a few years are come, I shall go the way
whence I shall not return; in the Hebrew it is, when the years of number, or my
numbered years are come; years so numbered, that they are circumscribed in a very
short, period of time: when those few years are past, then I must go to my long
home, my everlasting abode, never more to return to this world: The way whence
I shall not return: elsewhere called the way of all flesh, Josh. 23.15. and the
way of all the earth, 1 King 2.2.

Eccles. 8.8.
There is no man that has power over the Spirit to retain the Spirit, neither
has he power in the day of death, and there is no discharge in that War. By
Spirit understand the natural Spirit, or breath of life, which as I showed
before, connects or ties the Soul and Body together; this Spirit no man can
retain in the day of death: we can, (as one speaks) as well stop the Chariot of
the Sun when posting to night, and chase away the shadows of the evening,
Mortem (inquit Se^eca) nulla diligentia evitat, nulla soelicitas domat, nulla
potentia vincit.
as escape this hour of darkness that is coming upon us. A man may escape the
Wars by pleading privilege of years, or weakness of Body, or the Kings
protection, or by sending another in his room; but in this War, the press is so
strict, that it admits no dispensation, young or old, weak or strong, willing
or unwilling, all is one, into the field we must go, and look that last and most
dreadful Enemy in the face. It Is in vain to think of sending another in our
room, for no man dies by Proxy: or to think of compounding with death, as
those self-deluding Fools did, Isai. 28.15. Who thought they had been
discharged of the debt by seeing the Sergeant: no, no, there is no discharge in
that War. Nihil prodest ora concludere, and vitam fugientem retinere, says
Hierom on that Text; Let us shut our mouths never so close, struggle against
death never so hard, there is no more retaining the Spirit, than a woman can
retain the fruit of her Womb, when the full time of her deliverance is come.
Suppose a man were sitting upon a Throne of Majesty, surrounded with armed
Guards, or in the midst of a College of expert and learned Physicians, death
will pass all these Guards to deliver thee the fatal message: neither can Art
help thee, when Nature it self gives thee up.

The Law of Mortality binds all, good and bad, young and old, the most useful
and desirable Saints, whom the World can worst spare, as well as useless and
undesireable sinners, Romans 8.10. and if Christ (or though Christ) be in you,
the Body is dead because of sin, Peter himself must put off his Tabernacle, for
they are but Tabernacles, frail and moveable frames, not built for continuance:
these will drop off from our Souls, as the Shell falls of from the Bird in the
Nest: be our earthly Tabernacles never so strong or pleasant, The speediness of
death. The Scriptures borrow Metaphors from all the Elements to this purpose.
we must depose them, and that shortly; our lease in them will expire quickly,
we have but a short term, James 4.14. Like a thin mist in the morning which the
Sun presently dissipates, this is a Metaphor chosen from the Air: You have one
from the Land, where the swift Post runs, Job 9.25. So does our life from Stage
to Stage, till its journey be finished; and a third from the Waters, there Sail
the swift Ships, Job 9.26. which weighing Anchor and putting into the Sea,
continually lessen the Land, till at last they have quite lost sight of it;
from the Fire, Psalm. 58.4. The lives of men are as soon extinct as a blaze made
with dry thorns, which is almost as soon out, as in. Thus you see how the
Spirit of God has borrowed Metaphors from all the Elements of Nature, to
shadow forth the brevity and frailty of that life we now live in these
Tabernacles: So that we may say (...) one did before us, Nescio an dicenda sit
vita mortalis, an vitalis mors; I know not which to call it, a mortal life, or
a living death.

The continuance of these our Tabernacles or Bodies is short, whether we
consider them absolutely, or comparatively.

I. Absolutely, if they should stand seventy or eighty years, which is the
longest duration, Psalm. 90.10. How soon will that time run out? what are years
that are past but as a dream that is vanished, or as the waters that are past
away. It is in fluxu continuo: there is no stopping its swift course, or
calling back a moment that is past. Death set out in its journey toward us the
same hour we were born, and how near is it come this day to many of us? it has
us in chase, and will quickly fetch us up, and overtake us: but few stand so
long as the utmost date.

II. Comparatively, let us compare our time in these Tabernacles (1) either
with Eternity, or with him who inhabits it, and it shrinks up into nothing,
Psalm. 39.5. Mine age is nothing unto thee. So vast is the disproportion, that
it seems not only little, but nothing at all. Or (2) with the Duration of the
Bodies of men in the first Ages of the World, when they lived many hundred
years in these fleshly Tabernacles. The length of their life was the benefit of
the World, because Religion was then (...), a thing handed down from Father to
Son; but certainly, it would be no benefit to us that are in Christ, to be so
long suspended the fruition of God in the everlasting Rest.

The Grounds and Reasons of this Necessity that lies upon all, to put off their
earthly Tabernacles so soon, are 1. The Law of God, or his Appointment. 2. The
Providence of God, ordering it suitably to this Appointment.


1. The Law or Appointment of God, which came in force immediately upon the
Fall, Genes. 2.17. In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely dye.
And accordingly it took place upon all mankind immediately upon the first
Transgression, Romans 5.12. Death entered by sin^^ The threatening not his
immediate actual personal death, in the day that he should eat, but a state of
Mortality to commence from that time, to him, and his posterity: hence its
said, Heb. 9.27. It is appointed to all men once to die.

2. The Providence of God ordering and framing the Body of man suitably to this
his Appointment; Quotidie mo^imur, quotidie enim demitur aliqu^ pars vita, and
tunc quoque cum crescimus vit^ decrescit, I^fantiam amisimus, deinde
Adolescenti^m, usque ad besternam: quicquid transit temporis perit.
a frail, weak Creature, having the seeds of death in his Constitution:
Thousands of Diseases and Infirmities are bred in his Nature, and the smallest
pore in his Body, is a door large enough to let in death. Hence his Body is
compared to a piece of cloth which Moths have fretted, Psalm. 39.11. it is become
a seary rotten thing, which cannot long hang together. And indeed it is a
wonder it continues so long as it does.

And both these viz, The divine Appointment and Providence are in pursuance of
a double design, or for the payment of a twofold debt, which God owes to the
first and to the second Adam.

(1.) By cutting off the life, or dissolving the Tabernacles of wicked men, God
pays* that debt of Justice owing to the first Adam's sinful Posterity, whose
sins cry daily to his Justice to cut them off, ^om. 6 23. The wages of sin is
death; and indeed it is admirable, that his patience suffers ungodly men to
live so long as they do, for he endures with much long-suffering, ^om. 9.22. He
sees all their sins, he is grieved at the heart with them: His forbearance does
but encourage them the more to sin against him, Eccles. 8.11. Because Sentence,
etc. yet forbears, Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, Psalm.
95.10. And it is wonderful that patience does not crack under such a load.
Habakkuk admired it, Habak 1.13. Thou art of purer eyes, etc. Yet he suffers
them to spend lavishly upon his patience from year to year, but Justice must do
its office at last.

(2.) By cutting off the lives of good men, God pays to Christ the reward of
his Sufferings, the end of his death, which was to bring many Sons to glory,
Hebr. 2.10. Alas, it answers not Christ's end and intention in dying, to have
his people so remote from him, John 17.24. He would have them where he is, that
they might behold his glory. Two vehement desires are satisfied by this
Appointment of God, and its Execution.

viz. 1. Christ's. viz. 2. The Saints.
1. Christ's desires are satisfied, for this is the thing he all along kept his
eye upon, in the whole work of his Mediation, it was to bring us to God, 1 Pet.
3.18. Though he be in glory, yet his Mystical Body is not full, till all the
elect be gathered in by Conversion, and gathered home by glorification, Ephesians.
1.23. The Church is his fullness. He is not fully satisfied, till he see his
seed, the Souls he died for, safe in Heaven; and then the debt due to him for
all his Sufferings is fully paid him, Isai. 53.11. He sees the travel of his
Soul. As it is the greatest satisfaction and pleasure a man is capable of in
this World, to see a great design which has been long projecting, and
mannaging, at last by an orderly conduct brought to its perfection.

2. The desires of the Saints are hereby satisfied, and their weary Souls
brought to rest. O what do gracious Souls more pant after than the full
Enjoyment of God, and the Visions of his face! The state of freedom from sin,
and complete Conformity to Jesus Christ! From the day of their Espousals to
Christ, these desires have been working in their Souls. Love and Patience have
each acted its part in them, 2 Thessalonians. 3.5. Love has put them into an holy
ardor and longing to be with Christ; Patience has qualified and allayed those
desires, and supported the Soul under the delay. Love cries, Come Lord, come.
Patience commands us to wait the appointed time. This appointed time on which
so great hopes and expectations depend, is the time of dissolving these
Tabernacles; for till then, the Souls Rest is suspended: And if it were
perfectly freed from all other Loads and Burdens, both of sin and affliction,
yet its very absence from Christ, would alone make it restless. For it is with
the Soul in the Body, as it is with any other Creature that is off its Center,
it does, and must gravitate and propend, it is still moving and inclining
further, and feels not it self easy, and at rest, where it is, be its
Condition in other respects never so easy. 2 Cor. 5.6. Whilst we are at home
in the Body, we are absent from the Lord: You have a little shadow or Emblem of
this in other Creatures: You see the Rivers though they glide never so sweetly,
betwixt the fragrant banks of the most pleasant Meadows in their Course and
Passage, yet on they go toward the Sea, and if they meet with never so many
Rocks or Hills to resist their course* they will either strive to get a Passage
through them, or if that may not be, they will fetch a compass and creep about
them, and nothing can stop them till by a central force they have finished
their weary Course, and poured themselves into the Bosom of the Ocean. Or as
it is with your selves when abroad from your Habitations and Relations, this
may be pleasing a little while, but if every day might be a Festival, it would
not long please you, because you are not at home.

The main Motives that persuade a gracious Soul to ab^de here, are to finish
the work of their own Salvation, and further other men's, but as their Evidences
for Heaven grow clearer to themselves, and their capacity of Service less to
others, so must their desires to be with Christ be more and more inflamed.

Now the case so standing, that Christ's condition in Heaven being a condition
of desire and longing for the enjoyment of his people there, and all the Glory
of Heaven would not content him without that; and the condition of his people
on earth, being also a state of longing, groaning and panting to be with him,
and all the Pleasures and Delights and Comforts they have on earth, will not
content them without it: How wise and gracious an Appointment of Heaven is it,
that these our Tabernacles shall and must be put off, and that shortly! For
hereby a full and mutual satisfaction is given to the restless desires both of
Christ's heart and of theirs. See the reflected flames of love betwixt them in
Revel. 22. The Spirit and the Bride say, Come, and let him that is a thirst
come; Behold I come quickly, even so Lord Jesus come quickly. Delays make the
heart sad, Prove. 13.12. Should our Commoration on earth be long, our Patience
had need be much greater than it is; but under all our burdens here, this is
our relief, it is but a little while and all will be well, as well as our Souls
can desire to have it.

Inference I.
MUst we put off these Tabernacles? Is death necessary and inevitable? Then
it is our wisdom to sweeten to our selves that Cup which we must drink, and make
that as pleasant to us as we can, which we know cannot be avoided. Die we must,
whether we be fit or unfit, willing or unwilling: it is to no purpose to shrug
at the name, or shrink back from the thing. In all Ages of the World death has
swept the Stage clean of one Generation, to make room for another, and so it
will from Age to Age, till the Stage be taken down in the general dissolution.

But though death be inevitable by all, it is not alike evil, bitter and
dreadful to all. Some tremble, others triumph at the appearance of it. Some
meet it half way, receive it as a friend, and can bid it welcome, and die by
consent, making that the matter of their Election, which in it self is
necessary and unavoidable; so did Paul, Philip. 1.23. but others are drawn or
rent by plain violence from the Body, Job 27.8. when God draws out his Soul.

That man is happy indeed, whose heart falls in with the Appointment of God, so
voluntarily and freely, as that he dare not only look death in the face with
confidence, but go along with it by consent of will. Remarkable to this purpose
is that which the Apostle asserts of the frame of his own heart, 2 Cor. 5.8. We
are confident, I say, and willing, rather to be absent from the Body, and
present with the Lord. Here is both Confidence and Complacence, with respect to
death. (...). The word signifies Courage, Fortitude, or if you will, an
undaunted boldness and presence of mind, when we look the King of Terrors in
the face. We dare venture upon death, we dare take it by the cold hand, and bid
it welcome. We dare defy its Enmity, and deride its noxious power, 1 Cor.
15.55. O Death, where is thy sting? And that is not all, we have Complacence in
it, as well as Confidence to encounter it. (...). We are willing, the
Translation is too flat, we are well pleased, it is a desirable and grateful
thing to us, to die: But yet not in an absolute, but comparative Consideration,
(...), we are willing rather, ( i.e.) rather than not see and enjoy our Lord
Jesus Christ: rather than to be here always sinning and groaning. There is no
Complacency in death, in it self, it is not desirable. But if we must go
through that strait gate, or not see God; we are willing rather to be absent
from the Body. So that you see, death was not the matter of his submission
only, he did not yield to what he could not avoid, but he balances the evils
of death, with the Privileges it admits the Soul into, and then pronounces,
(...), we are content, yea, pleased to die.

We cannot live always if we would, and our hearts should be wrought to that
frame, as to say, we would not live always if we could. Job 7.16. I would not
live always or long, says he. But why should Job deprecate that which was not
attainable? I would not live always; he needed not to trouble himself about
that, it being impossible that he should; both Statute and Natural Law forbid
it. Ay, but this is his sense, supposing no such Necessity as there is, if it
were pure matter of Election: Upon a due ballancing of the accounts, and
comparing the good and evil of death, I would not be confined always, or for
any long time to the Body: It would be a bondage unsupportable to be here
always.

Indeed those that have their Portion, their All, in this life, have no desire
to be gone hence. They that were never changed by grace, desire no change by
death; if such a Concession were made to them, as was once to an English
Parliament, that they should never be dissolved, but by their own consent, when
would they say as Paul, I desire to be dissolved? But it is far otherwise with
them whose portion and affections are in another World, they would not live
always if they might, knowing, that never to die, is never to be happy.

If you say, Qu.
this is an excellent and most desirable temper of Soul, but how did these holy
men attain it? Or what is the course we may take to get the like frame of
willingness?

Sol.
They attained it, and you may attain it in such Methods as these.

1. They lived in the believing views of the invisible World, and so must you,
if ever death be desirable in your eyes, 2 Cor. 4.18. It Is said of all that
died comfortably, that they died in faith, Hebr. 11.13. You will never be
willing to go along with death, except you know where it will carry you. 2.
They had assurance of Heaven, as well as Faith to discern it: Assurance is a
lump of Sugar indeed in the bitter Cup of death, nothing sweetens like it. So 2
Cor. 5.1. so Job 19.26, 27. This puts Roses into the pale Cheeks of death, and
makes it amiable, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56. and Romans 8.38, 39. 3. Their hearts were
weaned from this World, and the inordinate affectation of a terrene life,
Philip. 3.8. all was dung and dross for Christ; they trampled under foot what
we hug in our Bosoms. So it is said, Hebr. 10.34. Ye took joyfully the spoiling
of your goods, knowing in your selves, etc. And so it must be with us if ever
we obtain a Complacency in death. 4. They ordered their Conversations with much
Integrity, and so kept their Consciences pure and void of offense, Acts 24.16.
Herein do I exercise my self, etc. and this was their Comfort at last, 2 Cor.
1.12. This is our rejoicing, etc. So Job 27.5. My Integrity will I not let go
till I die. O this unstings death of all its terrors. 5. They kept their love
to Christ at the height, that flame was vehement in their Souls, and made them
despise the terror, and desire the friendly assistance of death, to bring them
to the sight of Jesus Christ, Philip. 1.23. so Ignatius, O how I long, etc.
Thus it must be with you, if ever you make death eligible and lovely to you,
which is terrible in it self. There is a loveliness in the death, as well as in
the life of a Christian. Let me die the death of the righteous, said Balaam.
Inference II.
MUst we put off these Tabernacles of Flesh? Many cry out on a deathbed, O
^end for Ministers and Christians to pray! Alas! What can they do then? Is that
a time for so great a work to be shuffled up in a hurry amidst distractions and
Agonies?
How necessary is it that every Soul look out in season, and make provision for
another habitation. If you must be turned out of one house, you must provide
another or lie in the streets. This the Apostle comforted himself with, that if
uncloathed, he should not be found naked, 2 Cor. 5.1. a building of God, an
house not made with hands. You must turn out, and that shortly, from these
earthly Habitations; O what provision have you made for your Souls against that
day? The Soul of Adrian was at a sad loss, when he saw he must be turned out of
this World. O Animula vagula, blandula, heu quo vadis? But it was Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob's Privilege, that God had pre^^^^d for them a City, Heb.
11.16.

I know it is a common presumption of most men, that they shall be in Heaven,
when they can be no longer on earth. Praesumendo sperant, and sperando pereunt.
But a few moments will convince them of their fatal mistake; their poor Souls
will meet with a confounding repulse like that, Matthew. 7.22. There is indeed a
City full of heavenly Mansions prepared for some, but who are they that are
entitled to it, and may confidently expect to be received into it? To be sure,
not the presumptuous, who make a Bridge of their own Shadows, and so fall and
perish in the waters. Brethren it is one of the most solemn enquiries you were
ever put upon: And therefore I beseech you see whether your Characters set you
among those men or no.

1. First, Those that are newborn shall be clothed with their new house from
Heaven, when death uncloathes them of these Tabernacles: The New Jerusalem has
(...) but newborn Inhabitants, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. and Christ tells us, John 3.3.
all others are excluded. Glory is the Privilege of Grace. Let nature be
adorned and cultivated how it will, if not renewed by grace, there is no hope of
Glory. You must be born again, or turned back again from the Gates of Heaven
disappointed. You must be regenerated or damned. This alters the temper of thy
heart, and suits it to the life of God, which is indispensably necessary to
them that shall live with him. Else Heaven would be no Heaven to us, Romans 8.7.
and therefore we must be wrought this way to it, 2 Cor. 5 5. No Privilege of
Nature, no Duties of Religion avail without this, Gal. 6.15. If Morality
without Regeneration could bring men to Heaven, Why are not the Heathens there?
If strictness in Duty without Regeneration, Why not the Pharisees there?
Believe it, neither Names, nor Duties, no nor the Blood of Christ, ever did, or
shall bring one Soul to glory without it. O then thou that boastest of an house
in Heaven, lay thine hand on thy heart and ask it; Am I a new Creature, ( i.e.)
Am I renewed (1) in my state and condition? 1 John 3.14. past from death to
life. (2) In my frame and temper? Ephesians. 5.8. once darkness, now light in the
Lord. (...) In my Practice and Conversation? Ephesians. 2.12, 13.1 Cor. 6.11. if not,
my Soul is destitute of an habitation in the City of God, and when I die, my
Body must lie in the lonely house of the Grave, that dark Vault and Prison, and
my Soul be shut out from God into outer darkness.

2. Secondly, Those that live as Strangers and Pilgrims on earth, seeking a
better place and state than this World affords them, for them God has made
preparations in glory. Hebr. 11.13, 16. If you be strangers on earth, you are
the Inhabitants of Heaven: Now there be six things included in this Character.

(1.) They look not on this World as their own home, nor on the people of it,
as their own people, 2 Cor. 5.8. (...), to be unpeopled. These are none of my
fellow Citizens, we must go two ways at death. (2.) They set not their
affections on things present as their portion, 2 Cor. 4.18. Psalm. 17.13, 14.
Their Bodies are here, their Hearts in Heaven. (3) Their carriage and manner of
life not like the men of this World, 1 Pet. 4.4. (...). So the Rule guides
them, Romans 12.2. and so their course is steered, at least intended, Philip.
3.20. our (...), our Trade is in Heaven. (4) Their Dialect and Language differs
from the Natives of this World. Their Language is earthly, 1 John 4.5, 6. but
these have a pure lip. Zeph. 3.9. (5) Their Society and chosen Companions are
not of this World, Psalm. 16.3. They are a Company of themselves, Act. 4 21. (6)
Their Spirit and temper of heart is not after the World, 1 Cor. 2.12. They have
another Spirit, Numb. 14. 24. These things discover us to be strangers on
earth, and consequently the men for whom God has prepared heavenly Habitations
when we die.
3. Thirdly, Those that live and die by faith, shall not fail to be received
into a better Habitation by death. This is another Character of them that shall
be rec^^ved into glory, laid down in the same place, Hebr. 11.13. They lived by
faith, and when they died, they died embracing the promises which is
Characteristical of those that shall dwell in that heavenly City, and implies
(1) Intimate acquaintance with the promises, they are things well known and
familiarized to them. The word (...), Salutantes, Saluting them, is a Metaphor
from the manner of parting betwixt two dear and intimate Friends. The Faith of
a Christian embraces the promises in its arms, as dear friends use to do at
parting; and says farewell, sweet promises, from which I have sucked out so
much relief and refreshment in all the troubles of my life; I must now live no
more by faith on you; but by sight: O you have often cheared my Soul, and been
my Song in the house of my Pilgrimage. (2.) It implies the firm credit that a
Believer gives to things unseen, upon the grounds of the promises, as if he did
sensibly take and grasp them in his very arms and bosom. They take Christ, and
all the invisible things in the promises into their sensible embraces, 1 Pet.
1.8. faith is to them instead of eyes. (3) It implies the sincerity of a
Believers profession, who dare trust to that at last gasp, which he professed
to believe in the midst of life, and the Comforts of this World. As he
professed to believe in health, so you shall find his Actings, when his eye and
heart strings are cracking, Romans 14.9. Christ in the promises was his professed
joy in life, and this is what he grasps at death, and lays his last hold on.
(4) It shows you whence all a Believers comfort comes in life and death. O it is
from the promises, Christ in the promises is the Spring of their Consolation.
This they fetch their comfort from, when the World cannot administer one drop
of refreshment to them. There be two great works faith performs for the Saints,
one in life, the other in death. In life, it is the Principle of Mortification
to their sins, in death, it is the spring of Consolation to their hearts: It
makes them die whilst they live, and live when they die.


4. Fourthly, Those that love the Person and Appearance of Christ, have a mark
that sets them among the Inhabitants of Heaven and Glory, 2 Timothy 4.8. but then
this love must be (1) Sincere, and without Hypocrisy. (2) Supreme, and above
all other beloveds. (3) Conforming the Soul to Christ; if sincere and supreme,
it will be transformative. (4) Longing to be with him. Such love is a mark of
Souls for whom Heaven is prepared.

Inference III.
MUst we put off our Tabernacles, and that shortly? What a Spur is this to a
diligent ^edemption and improvement of time? This is the use Peter made of it
here, and every one of us should make. It was said of Bishop Hooper, he was
spare in his diet, spare in his words, but most of all spare of his time. You
have but a little time in these Tabernacles, what pity is it to waste much out
of a little.

(1) Great is the worth and excellency of time, all the Treasures of the World
cannot protract, stop, or call back one minute of time; O what is Man, that the
heavenly bodies should be wheeled about by Almighty power in constant
Revolutions, to beget time for him! Psalm. 8.3. (2) More precious are the
Seasons and Opportunities, that are in time, for our Souls, those are the
golden spots of time; like the pearl in the Oyster shell, of much more value
than the shell that contains it. There is much time in a short opportunity.
There is a day on which our Eternal happiness depends, Luke 19.41, 42. Hebr.
4.7. (3) Invaluable are the things which God does for men's Souls in time. There
are works wrought upon men's hearts in a seasonable hour in this life, which
have an Influence into the Souls happinness throughout Eternity. There is a
time of mercy, a time of love, viz. Of Illumination and Conversion, and on that
point of time Eternal life hangs in the whole weight of it. (4) Lost
opportunity is never to be recovered by the Soul any more, Ezekiel. 24.13. Revel.
22.11. To come before the opportunity, is to come before the Bird be hatched,
and to come after it, is to come when the Bird is flown. There is no calling
back time, when it is once past. See this in the Examples you find, Luke 13.26.
Eccles. 9.10. (5) It is wholly uncertain to every Soul, whether the present day
may not determine his Lease in this Tabernacle, and a writ of Ejection be
served by death upon his Soul tomorrow, James 4.13. Luke 12.20. (6) As soon as
ever time shall end, Eternity takes place. The stream of time delivers Souls
daily into the boundless Ocean of vast Eternity. Ab hoc momento pendet
aeternitas. We are now measured by time, hereafter by eternity. (7) In Eternity
all things are fixed and unalterable. We have no more to do, all means and
works are at an end, John 9.4 and Eccles. 11.3. As the Tree falls, so it lies.
O that these weighty Considerations might lie upon your hearts, as long as you
are in these Tabernacles. If they did, (1) The Unregenerate would not so
desperately hazard their eternal happiness, by trifling away their precious
Seasons under the Gospel. O how many aged sinners, gray headed sinners hear me
this day, who in fifty or sixty years never redeemed one solemn hour to take
their poor Souls aside out of the clutter and distracting noise of the World,
to ask and debate this question with them, O my Soul, how stands the case with
thee in reference to the World to come? They have found no time to bethink
themselves, in what World their Souls shall be landed, when time shall deliver
them up into Eternity. Their whole life has been but a continual diversion
from one trifle to another; They have been serious in trifles, and trifled in
things most serious, this will afford horrid reflections in the World to come.
(2) The Regenerate would not cast away the comfort of their lives in the
Evidences of eternal life, at so cheap a rate as they do. May I not say to you,
as the Apostle does, Hebr. 5.12. for the time you have had under the Gospel,
you might have attained a rich treasure both of Grace and Comfort; Turpe est
senex elementarius. Is it not shameful and inexcusable, to be where you were
twenty years past: O let these things sink deep into every Soul.
Inference IV.
MUst we shortly put off these our Tabernacles? Then slack your pace, and cool
your selves; be not too eager in the prosecution of earthly Designs. O what
Bustling is here for the World, and for provisions for futurity, when as far
less would serve the turn: We need not victual a Ship to cross the Chanel to
France, as if she were bound to the Indies. Most men's Provisions, at least
their cares and thoughts are far beyond the preparations of their Abode in this
World. The folly of this, Christ discovers in that Parable, Luke 12.19. and on
this very account gives him the Title of a Fool, who provided for years, many
years, when, poor soul! he had not one night to enjoy those Provisions.

O the multitude of thoughts and cares this World needlessly devours! We keep
our selves in such a continual hurry and crowd of cares, thoughts and
employments about the concerns of the Body; that we can find little time to be
alone, communing with our own hearts about our great Concernments in Eternity.
It is with many of us in respect of our Souls, and their great Interests, as it
is with a man that is deep in thoughts about some Subject that wholly swallows
him up, he sees not what he sees, nor hears what he hears of any other
matter: His eyes seem to look upon this or that, but it is all one, as if he did
not. So it was with Archimedes, who was so intent in drawing his Mathematical
Scheams, that though all the City was in an Allarm, the Enemy had taken it by
Storm, the Streets filled with dreadful cries, and dead Bodies, the Soldiers
came into his particular house, nay, entered his very study, and plucked him by
the sleeve, before he took any notice of it: Even so many men's hearts are so
profoundly immersed and drowned in earthly cares, thoughts, projects, or
pleasures, that death must come to their very houses, yea, and pull them by the
sleeve, and tell them its Errand, before they will begin to awake, and come to
a serious consideration of things more important.

Inference V.
IF we must shortly put off these Tabernacles, Then the groaning and mourning
time of Believers is but short. How heavy soever their burden be, yet they
shall carry it but a little way. It Is said 2 Cor. 5 4. We that are in this
Tabernacle do groan, being burdened. Good Souls in this State are every where
groaning under heavy pressures. Their burdens are of two sorts, Sympathetical,
whereby they grieve with, and on the account of others, and so every true
member of the Church of God ought to sympathize, both with God, Psalm. 1 39.21.
Am not I grieved with them that rise up against thee? Psalm. 42.10. it is as
with a Sword in their bones; and with the people of God, Zeph 3.18. sorrowful
for the solemn Assembly, so 2 Cor. 11.29. Who is offended and I burn not? And
indeed, it is an Argument of rich, as well as true grace, that we can, and do
heartily mourn with, and for the Interest and People of God, though our own lot
in the World, as Nehemiah's, be never so comfortable. Or else our burdens are
Idiopathetical (i. e.) such as we bear upon our own proper account and score:
And where is the Christian that has not his own burden, yea, many burdens on
him at once? Some groan under the burden of sin, Romans 7.24. Scarce one day are
the tears off some eyelids on this account. And who groans not under the
burden of affliction, either inward upon the Soul, Prove. 18.14. Job 6.1, 2, 3.
or outward upon the Body, State, Relations, etc. These things make the people
of God a burden to themselves, Job 7.20, 21. Yea, under these burdens they
would sink, did not the Lord sustain them, Psalm. 55.22.

But God will put a speedy and final end to all these things; when you put off
this Tabernacle, you put off with it all those burdens, inward, and outward.
The Soul presently feels a great load off its shoulders: It shall never groan
more, God shall thenceforth wipe away all tears from their eyes: For why are
those burdens now permitted and imposed by the Lord upon you, but (1) To
prevent sin, Hosea 2.6. They are your clogs, to keep you from straying. (2) To
purge out sin, Isa^. 27.9. (3) To make you long more for Heaven, and the rest
to come? But all these ends are accomplished in that day you put off your
Tabernacles, for then sin is gone, and rest is come.

Inference VI.
MUst you shortly put off those Tabernacles, then spare them not whilst you
have them, but employ them for God with all diligence. Shortly they shall be
useless to you, yea, meat for Worms, now they may ^e serviceable, and their
Service is their honor; Ambrose said of Valentinian. No man was ever such a
Ser^ant to hi^ Master, as Val^^tinan's Body was to his Soul.
you received them not for such low ends as you employ them for. See 1 Cor. 6.
20. Glorify God in your Souls and Bodies which are his: You expect to have
them glorious Bodies one day: Oh, then, let them be serviceable Bodies now. Be
not fond of them to that degree many are, who choose rather to have them eaten
out with rust, than worn out with service. It is your present honor to be
active, and will be your singular comfort another day. What greater comfort
when you come to put them off at death, than this, that you have employed them
faithfully for God?

Inference VII.
LOok beyond this embodyed state, and learn to live now as you hope to live
shortly: Begin to be, what you expect to be. You know the time is at hand that
you shall live above all bodily concernments and employments, the Soul shall be
a drudge to the Body no more. You shall be as the Angels, Matthew. 22.30. not
marrying nor given in Marriage, which is Synecdochically put for all Carnal
Employments, and Enjoyments; eat no more, drink no more, sleep no more; buy and
sell no more. Now suit your selves as much as your State, and the Duties of
Religion will suffer you, to that State beforehand. The sum of what I aim at
is in 1 Cor. 7.29, 30. Be in all your Relations, as if you had none. Look on
those things as if already they were not, which shortly must be none of yours,
and both acquaint and accustom your thoughts to the life of separation from
the Body, which you must shortly live, which brings me home to the next point,
viz. The Condition of Humane Souls in the State of Separation.

TEXT.
Heb. 12.23. -- (...)
-- And to the Spirits of just Men made perfect.

THE particular scope of this context falls in with the general design of the
whole Gospel, which is to persuade men to a life of Holiness. The matter of the
exhortation is most weighty, and the Arguments enforcing it most powerful: he
does not talk, but dispute; he does not say, but prove that greater and more
powerful engagements unto holiness lie upon those who live under the Gospel,
than upon the people who lived under the Law. And thus the Argument lies in
this Context.

If God at the delivering of the Law upon Mount Sinai strictly enjoined and
required so great Purity and Holiness in that people, Exodus 19.10.
signified by the Ceremonies of two days preparation, the washing of their
clothes, abstinence from conjugal society, etc. much more does he require and
expect it in us who are come under a much more excellent and Heavenly
dispensation than theirs was.

To make good the sequel, he compares the legal and the evangelical
Dispensations in many particulars, verse 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. giving the
Gospel the preference throughout the whole Collation.

In sum, the privileges of the New Testament-Believers are here stated, both
negatively, and positively.

1. Negatively, by showing what we are exempted from. 2. Positively, showing
what we are come unto.
First, Negatively, What we are exempted or freed from, verse 18, 19, 20, 21.
We are not come unto the Mount that might be touched, etc. The sum of all is
this, that the promulgation of the Law was accompanied with amazing dread and
terror. For after Moses by command from God had sanctified the Mount, and set
Rails about it, that neither Priest, nor People, Man nor Beast, might touch the
very borders of it, lest they dye: the Lord descended in fire upon the top of
the Mountain the third day in the morning, with most terrible tokens of Divine
Majesty, sc. with Thundrings, Lightnings, dark clouds, and the noise of a
Trumpet exceeding loud; the Mount was covered with smoke, as the smoke of a
Furnace, and flames mounting up unto the midst of Heaven, Crebris micat ignibus
ather.
the whole Mountain shaking and trembling exceedingly: out of this horrid
Tempest the awful voice of God was heard, all the people in the Camp trembling,
yea and Moses himself quaking for fear.

This was the manner of the Laws Promulgation: but to such a terrible
Dispensation as this we are not come, which is the negative part of our
privilege.

Secondly, He opens the positive privileges, to which we are come.

(1) Ye are come, (says he) to mount Sion, not the Earthly, but the Spiritual
Sion. Mount Sion was the place celebrated above all the World for the Worship
of God, Psalm. 87.7. All my springs (says God) are in thee. There was the
Temple, the Ark of the Covenant, the glory of the Lord dwelling between the
Cherubims. The Priests that attended the service of God, had their residence
there, as the Angels have in Heaven. Thither the Tribes went up from all
quarters of Judea, Psalm. 84. as the children of God now do to Heaven from all
Quarters of the World. Judea was the best Kingdom in the World; Jerusalem the
best City in that Kingdom; and Sion the most glorious place in that City. Here
Christ taught his heavenly Doctrine; near to it he finished his glorious work
of Redemption. Hence, the everlasting Gospel went forth into all the world: and
on these considerations its put to signify the Gospel Church or State in this
place, and is therefore called the heavenly Jerusalem in the following words.
We do not come to the literal Sion, nor to the earthly Jerusalem; but to the
Gospel Church, or State, which may be called an Heaven upon earth, compared
with that literal Jerusalem.

(2) Ye are come to an innumerable company of Angels.] Gr. to myriads of
Angels, (...), Hellenistae dicunt (...)* sine alio additamento, ad
significandam innumeram multitudinem Grot.
a myriad is ten thousand; but myriads in the plural number and set down
indefinitely too, may note many millions of Angels: and therefore we fitly
tender it, to an innumerable company of Angels.

They had the ministry of Angels as well as we, thousands of them ministered to
the Lord in the dispensation of the Law at Sinai, Psalm. 68.17. But this
notwithstanding, we are come to a much clearer knowledge both of their present
Ministry for us on earth, Heb. 1.14. and of our fellowship and equality with
them in Heaven, Luke 20.36.

(3) Ye are come to the general assembly and Church of the firstborn, whose
names are written (or enrolled) in Heaven.] This also greatly commends and
amplifies the privileges of New Testament-Believers; the Church of God in
former ages was circumscribed and shut up within the narrow limits of one small
Kingdom, which was as a garden enclosed out of a waste wilderness: but now by
the calling in of the Gentiles the Church is extended far and wide, Ephesians. 3.5,
6. It is become a great Assembly comprizing the Believers of all Nations under
Heaven; and so speaking of them collectively, it is the general convention or
Assembly, which is also dignified and ennobled by two illustrious characters,
viz. (1) that it is the Church of the firstborn, (i. e.) consisting of Members
dignified and privileged above others, Primogeniti Israelitarum scripti crant
in matricula terrestri, hi vero in albo coelesti.
as the firstborn among the Israelites did excel their younger Brethren (2)
That their names are written in Heaven, (i. e.) registered or enrolled in Gods
book as Children and Heirs of the Heavenly inheritance, as the firstborn in
Israel were registered in order to the Priesthood, Number* 3.40, 41.

(4) Ye are come to God the Judge of all.] But why to God the Judge? this seems
to spoil the harmony, and jar with the other parts of the discourse. No, no;
they are come to God as a righteous Judge, who as such will pardon them, 1 John
1.9. crown them. 2 Timothy 4.8. and avenge them on all their oppressing and
persecuting Enemies, 1 These. 1.5, 6, 7.

(5) And to the Spirits of just men made perfect.] A most glorious privilege
indeed in which we are distinctly to consider 1. The quality of those with whom
we are associated or taken into fellowship. 2. The way and manner of our
association with them.


1. The Quality of those with whom we are associated, or to whom we are said to
be come, and they are described by three characters viz. (1) (1) Spirits of
Men. viz. (2) Spirits of just Men. viz. (3) Spirits of just Men perfected or
consummated.


(1) They are called Spirits, that is, immaterial substances, strictly opposed
to Bodies, which are no way the objects of our exterior Senses, neither
visible to the eye, nor sensible to the touch, which were called properly Souls
whilst they animated Bodies in this lower World; but now being loosed and
separated from them by death, and existing alone in the World above, they are
properly and strictly styled Spirits.

(3) They are the Spirits of just Men.] Man may be termed just two ways, (1) by
a full discharge and acquittance from the guilt of all his sins, and so
believers are just men even whilst they live on Earth groaning under other
imperfections, Acts 13.39. or (2) by a total freedom from the pollution of any
sin. And though in this sense there is not a just man upon Earth, that does
good, and sins not, Eccles. 7.22. yet even in this sense Adam was just
before the Fall, Eccles. 7.29. according to his original constitution, and all
believers are so, in their glorified condition, all sin being perfectly purged
out of them, and its existence utterly destroyed in them. On which account

(3) They are called the Spirits of just men made perfect,] or consummate. The
word perfect is not here to be understood absolutely, but synecdochically they
are not perfect in every respect; for one part of these just Men lies rotting
in the grave, but they are perfected, for so much as concerns their Spirit,
though the flesh perish and lie in dishonor; yet their Spirits being once
loosed from the Body, and freed radically and perfectly from sin, are presently
admitted to the facial vision and fruition of God, which is the culminating
point (as I may call it) higher than which the Spirit of man aspires not, and
attaining to this it is for so much as concerns it self, made perfect. Even as
a Body at last lodged in its center, gravitates no more, but is at perfect
rest; so it is with the Spirit of man come home to God in glory, it is now
consummate, no more need to be done to make it as perfectly happy as it is
capable to be made, which is the first thing to be considered, viz, the Quality
of those with whom we are associated.

2. The second follows, namely, the way and manner of our association with
these blessed Spirits of just Men, noted i^ this expression, we are come.] He
says not, we shall come, hereafter, when the Resurrection has restored our
Bodies, or after the general Judgment; but we are come to these Spirits of just
Men. The meaning whereof we may take up in these three particulars.

(1) We that live under the Gospel Light, are come to a clearer apprehension,
sight and knowledge of the blessed and happy estate of the Souls of the
righteous after death, than ever they had, or ordinarily could have who lived
under the Types and shadows of the Law, Ephesians. 3.4, 5. And so we are come to
them, in respect of clearer apprehension. (2) We are come to those blessed
Spirits in our Representative, Christ, who has carried our nature into the
very midst of them, and whom they all behold, with highest admiration and
delight. By Christ who is entered into that holy place where these Spirits of
just Men live, we are come into a near relation with them. For he being the
common head both to them in Heaven, and to us on Earth; we and they
consequently make but one Body or society, Ephesians. 2.19. whereupon
(notwithstanding the different and remote Countries they and we live in) we are
said to sit together with them in Heavenly places, Ephesians. 3.15. and Ephesians. 2.6.
(3) We are come.] That is, we are as good as come, or we are upon the matter
come; there remains nothing betwixt them and us but a puff of breath, a little
space of time which shortens every moment; we are come to the very borders of
their Country, and there is nothing to speak of, betwixt them and us: and by
this expression we are come, he teaches us to account and reckon those things
as present, which so shortly will be present to us, and to look upon them as if
they already were, which is the highest and most comfortable life of Faith we
can live on Earth. Hence the Note is,
DOCT. That righteous and holy Souls once separated from then Bodies by death,
are immediately perfected in themselves, and associated with others alike
perfect in the Kingdom of God.
THAT the Spirits of just Men at the time of their separation from their Bodies
do not utterly fall in their beings, nor that they are so prejudiced and
wounded by death that they cannot exert their own proper Acts in the absence of
the Body, has been already cleared in the foregoing parts of this Treatise,
and will be more fully cleared from this Text.

But the true level and aim of this discourse is at an higher mark, viz the far
more excellent, free and noble life the Souls of the just begin to live
immediately after their Bodies are dropped off from them by death, at which time
they begin to live like themselves, a pleasant free and divine life. So much at
least is included in the Apostle Epithete in my Text, Spirits of the just made
perfect, and suitable thereto are his words in 1 Cor. 13.10.12. When that which
is p^rfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away. For now we
see through a glass darkly, but then face to face; now I know in part, but then
shall I know, even as I am known.

These two Adverbs, Now, and Then, distinguish the twofold state of gracious
Souls, and show what it is whilst they are confined in the Body, and what it
shall be from the time of their emancipation and freedom from that clogg of
mortality. Now we are imperfect, but then that which is perfect takes place,
and that which is imperfect is done away; as the imperfect twilight is done
away, by the opening of the perfect day.

And it deserves a serious animadversion, that this perfect State does not
succeed the imperfect one, after a long interval (as long as betwixt the
dissolution, and Resurrection of the Body) but the imperfect state of the Soul,
is immediately done away by the coming of the perfect one. The glass is laid by
as useless, when we come to see face to face, and eye to eye.

The Waters will prove very deep here, too deep for any line of mine to fathom,
there is a cloud always overshadowing the world to come, a gloom and haziness
upon that state; fain we would with our weak and feeble beam of imperfect
knowledge penetrate this cloud, and dispel this gloom and haziness, but cannot:
we think seriously and close to this great and awful subject, but our thoughts
cannot pierce through it; we reinforce those thoughts by a salley or thick
succession of fresh thoughts, and yet all will not do, our thoughts return to
us either in confusion, or without the expected success. For alas, how little
is it that we know or can know of our own Souls now, whilst they are embodied!
much less of their unbodied state. The Apostle tells us, 1 Cor, 2.9. That eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the
things which God has prepared for them that love him. And another Apostle
adds, it does not yet appear what we shall be, 1 John 3.1.

Yet all this is no discouragement to the search and regular enquiry into the
future state; for though reason cannot penetrate these mysteries, yet God has
revealed them to us (though not perfectly) by his Spirit. And though we know
not (particularly and circumstantially) what we shall be, yet this we know that
we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. And it is our privilege
and happiness that we are come to the Spirits of just men made perfect, ( i.e.)
to a clearer knowledge of that state than was ordinarily attainable by
Believers under former dispensations.

These things premised, I will proceed to open my apprehensions of the separate
state of the Spirits of just men made perfect, in twelve Propositions, whereby,
as by so many steps we may orderly advance as far as safely and warrantably we
may into the knowledge of this great Mystery, clearing what afterward shall
remain obscure, in the solution of several Questions, relating to this Subject;
and then apply the whole in several Uses of this great point: and the first
Proposition is this,

PROP. I.
THere is a'twofold Separation of the Soul from the Body; viz, one Mental, the
other Real: Or, 1. Intellectual by the mind only. 2. Physical, by the stroke of
death.


Separatio per intellectum fit, cum duo revera conjuncta, separatim contipimus.
Conimbr. de Anima, p. 595.
1. Of Intellectual or mental Separation I am first to speak in this
Proposition, and it is nothing else but an act of the understanding or mind,
conceiving or considering the Soul and Body as separated and parted each from
other, whilst yet they are united in a personal oneness by the breath of life.

This mental Separation may and ought to be frequently and seriously made,
before death make the real and actual Separation; and the more frequently and
seriously we do it, the less of horror and distraction will attend that real
and fatal stroke when ever it shall be given. For hereby we learn to bear it
gradually, and by gentle essays to acquaint our shoulders with the burden of
it. Separation is a word that has much of horror in the very sound, and uses
to have much more in the sense and feeling of it; else it would not deserve
that title, Job 8.14. The King of Terrors, or the most terrible of all
terribles: but acquaintance and familiarity abates that horror, and that two
ways especially.

1. As it is preventive of much guilt. 2. As it gains a more inward knowledge
of its Nature.
1. The serious and fixed thoughts of the parting hour is preventive of much
guilt, and the greatest part of the horror of death rises out of the guilt of
sin. The sting of death is sin, 1 Cor. 15.56. Augustine says, Nothing more
recals a man from sin, Nihil sie revocat a p^ccato, quam frequens mortis
meditatio. August.
than the frequent meditation of death. I dare not say it is the strongest of
all curbs to keep us back from sin; but I am sure it is a very strong one.

Let a Soul but seriously meditate what a change death will make shortly upon
his person, and condition; and the natural effects of such a meditation, Qui
considerat q^alis e^it in morte, semper pavidus erit in operatione, atque, inde
in oculis sui Condi^oris vivet. Nihil quod transit, appetit; and pene mortuum
se considerat, quia se moriturum non ignorant. Greg. Mor. 12.
through the blessing of God upon it, will be a flatting and quenching of its
keen and raging appetite after the ensnaring vanities of this World, which draw
men into so much guilt, a conscientious fear of sin, and an awakened care of
duty. It was once demanded of a very holy man (who spent much more than the
ordinary allowance of time in Prayer, and searching his own heart) why he so
macerated his own Body by such frequent, and long continued Duties? His answer
was, O I must dye, I must dye: Nothing could separate him from duty, who had
already separated his Soul from his Body, and all this World by fixed and deep
thoughts of death.

2. Hereby we gain a more inward knowledge and acquaintance with the Nature of
death: and the more we are acquainted with it, the less it terrifies us. A Lion
is much more dreadful to him that never saw him, than he is to his Keeper who
feeds him every day. A pitched Battle is more frightful and scaring to a new
listed Soldier that never took his place in the Field before, nor saw the
dreadful countenance of an Army ready to engage, nor heard the thundering noise
of Cannon, and Vollies of Shot, the shouts of Armies, and groans of dying men
on every side; than it is to an old Soldier who has been used to such things.
The like we may observe in Seamen, who it may be trembled at first, and now can
sing in a Storm.

Scarce any thing is more necessary for weak and timorous Believers to meditate
on, than the time of their Separation. Our hearts will be apt to start and
boggle at the first view of death, but it is good to do by them as men use to
do by young Colts, ride them up to that which they fright at, and make them
smell to it, which is the way to cure them. Sicut panis necessarius est prae
caeteres e^ementis, it a intenta mortis meditatio ne^^ssaria est prae caeteris
donis and exercitiis. Dionys.
Look as Bread (says one) is more necessary than other Food, so the meditation
of death is more necessary than many other meditations. Every time we change
our habitations, we should realize therein our great change. Our Souls must
shortly leave this, and be lodged for a longer season in another mansion: when
we put off our clothes at night, we have a fit occasion to consider, that we
must strip nearer one of these days, and put off not our clothes only, but the
Body that wears them too.

Holy Job had by frequent thoughts familiarized death and the Grave to himself,
and could speak of them, as men use to speak of their Houses and dearest
Relations, Job 17.14. I have said to corruption thou art my father, to the
worm, thou art my Mother and Sister. But it needs much grace to bring and hold
the heart to this work, and therefore Moses begs it of God, Psalm 90.12 So teach
us to number our days; and David, Psalm. 39.4. Lord make me to know my end. Yea,
the advantages of it have been acowledged by men whose light was less, and
diversions more than ours* The Jews for this use and end had their Sepulchers
built beforehand, and that in their Gardens of pleasure too; that they might
season the delights of life, with the frequent thoughts of death, John 19.41.

Philip of Macedon would be awakened by his Page every morning with this
sentence, Memento te esse mortalem; Remember, O King, thou art a mortal man.

A Great Emperor of Constantinople not only at his Inauguration, but at his
great Feasts, Elig^ ab his saxis, ex quo, invictissime Caesar, tibi Tumulum me
fabricare velis.
ordered a Mason, to bring two stones before him, and say, Choose, O Emperor,
which of the two thou will for thy Tombstone. Reader, thou will find mental
Separation much easier than real separation: it is easier to think of death,
than it is to feel it; and the more we think of it, the less we are like to
feel it.

PROP. II. Actual Separation may be considered either in fieri, in the previous
Pangs and foregoing Agonies of it; or in facto esse, in the last separating
stroke which actually parts the Soul and Body asunder, lays the Body prostrate
and dead at the feet of Death, and thrusts the Soul quite out of its ancient
and beloved habitation.
1. LET it be considered in the previous pangs and fore-running Agonies which
commonly make way for this actual Dissolution: And to the people of God, this
is the worst and bitterest part of death, (except those conflicts with Satan
which they sometimes grapple with on a deathbed,) which they encounter at that
time. There is (says one) no poniard in death it self, like those in the way
or Prologue to it. I like not to dye, said another, but I care not if I were
dead; the end is better than the way. The conflicts and struggles of Nature
with death are bitter and sharp, pains unknown to men before, whatever pains
they have endured: Nor can it be expected to be otherwise, seeing the ties and
engagements betwixt the Soul and Body are so strong, as we showed before.

The Soul will not easily part with the Body, but disputes the passages with
death from Member to Member, (like resolute Soldiers in a stormed Garrison)
till at last it is forced to yield up the Fort Royal into the hands of
victorious death, and leave the dearly beloved Body a Captive to it.

This is the dark side of death to all good men, and though it be not worth
naming, in comparison with the dreadful consequents of death to all others, yet
in it self it is terrible.

Separation is not natural to the Soul, which was created with an inclination
to the Body: Cum separatio naturalis non sit, neque etiam violenta; sit
consequ^ns* ut ex approbata Philosophorum approbatione, praeternaturalis esse
dicatur. Conim^r.
it is natural indeed to clasp and embrace, to love and cherish its own Body;
but to be divided from it is grievous and praeternatural.

(...), partus dolo^em.
The Agonies of death are expressed in Scripture by a word which signifies the
traveling pains of a Woman, yea, by the sharpest and most acute pains they
feel, even the birth-pangs, or bearing throe, Acts 2.24.

And yet all are not handled alike roughly by the hands of death; some are
favored with a desirable (...), gentle and easy death*

It Is the privilege of some Christians to have their Souls fetched out of their
Bodies as it were by a kiss from the mouth of God, as the Jewish Rabbis use to
express the manner of Moses his death. Mr. Bolton ^elt no pain at his death,
but the cold hand of his friend who asked him what pain he felt. Yea, holy
Bayn^ham in the midst of the flames, professed it was to him as a Bed of Roses.

Every Believer is equally freed from the sting and curse of death; but every
one is not equally favored in the agonies and pains of death.

2. Separation from the Body is to be considered in facto esse, (i. e.) in the
result and issue of all these bitter pangs and Agonies which end in the actual
dissolution of Soul and Body. (...), vel anime a corpore discessus. Vives.
Death, or actual separation, is nothing else but the dissolving of the tie, or
loosing of the bond of Union betwixt the Soul and Body. Privatio actus secundi
ejusdem animae, id est, informationis seu unionis erga corpus, Conim^r.
Some call it the privation of the second Act of the Soul, that is, its Act of
informing or enlivening the Body. Others, according to Scripture phrase, the
departing of the Soul from the Body. So Peter styles it, 2 Pet. 1.15. (...),
after my departure, ( i.e.) after my death. Relictio c^rporis depositio sarcine
gravis, modo aliea sarcina non patietur, q^a homo praecipitetur in gehennem.
August.
Augustine calls it the laying down of an heavy burden, provided there be not
another burden for the Soul to bear afterward, which will sink it into Hell.

In respect of the Body which the Soul now forsakes, it is called the putting
off this Tabernacle, 2 Pet. 1.14. And the dissolving the earthly House or
Tabernacle, 2 Cor. 5.1.

In respect of the terminus a quo, the place from which the Soul removes at
death, it is called our departure hence, Phil. 1.23. or our weighing Anchor and
loosing from this coast or shore to sail to another.

In respect of the terminus ad quem, the place to which the Spirits of the just
go at death, it is called our going to, or being with the Lord, ibid. To
conclude, in respect of that which does most lively resemble and shadow it
forth, it is called our falling asleep, Acts 7. ult. our sleeping in Jesus, 1
These. 4.14. This Metaphor of sleep, must be stretched no further than the
Spirit of God designed in the choice of it, which was not to favor and
countenance the fancy of a sleeping Soul after death; but to represent its
state of placid rest in Jesus's bosom, if it refer at all to the Soul: for I
think it most properly respects the Body; Locus Sepulturae consecratus, (...),
hoc est, dormitorium appe^i^tur.
and thence the Sepulchers where the Bodies of the Saints were laid, got the
name of (...), Dormitories, or sleeping places.

This is its last farewell to this world, never more to return to a low animal
life more, Job 7.9, 10. For as the cloud is consumed and vanishes away, so he
that goes down to the grave shall come up no more; he shall return no more to
his house, neither shall his place know him any more. The Soul is no more bound
to a Body, nor a Retainer to Sun, Moon or Stars, to meat drink and sleep, but
is become a free, single, abstracted being, a separate and pure Spirit, which
the Latins call Lemures, Manes, Ghosts or Souls of the dead, and my Text
Spirits made perfect, a being much like unto the Angels who are (...), bodiless
Powers. An Angel, as one speaks, is a perfect Soul, a Soul is an imperfect
Angel. I do not say that upon their Separation they become Angels; for they
will still remain a distinct Species of Spirits. Semper a corporis compedibus,
and nexibus liberi. Max. Tyr.
Angels have no inclination to Bodies, nor were ever fettered with cloggs of
flesh as Souls were. And by this you see what a difference there is betwixt
these two considerations of death. How ghastly and affrighting is it in its
previous pangs! how lovely and desirable in the issue and result of them!
which is but the change of Earth for Heaven, men for God, sin and misery for
perfection and glory.

PROP. III. The Separation of the Soul and Body makes a great and wonderful
change upon both, but especially upon the Soul.
THere is a twofold change made upon man by death; one upon his Body, another
upon his Soul. The change upon the Body is great, and visible to every eye. A
living Body is changed into a dead carcass. A beautiful and comely Body, into a
loathsome spectacle: that which lately was the object of delight and love, is
hereby made an abhorrence to all flesh, Bury my dead out of my sight, Genesis 23.4.

What the Sun is to the greater, that the Soul is to the lesser World. When the
Sun shines comfortably, how vegete and cheerful do all things look! How well do
they thrive and prosper! The Birds sing merrily, the Beasts play wantonly, the
whole Creation enjoys a day of light and joy: but when it departs, what a
night of horror follows? How are all things wrapped up in the sable Mantle of
darkness! Or if it but abate its heat, as in Winter; the Creatures are as it
were buried in the winding sheet of Winters frost and Snow: just so it is with
the Body when the Soul shines pleasantly upon it, or departs from it.

That Body which was fed so assiduously, cared for so anxiously, loved so
passionately: is now tumbled into a pit, and left to the mercy of crawling
Worms. The change which judgment made upon that great and flourishing City
Nineveh, is a fit emblem^ to ^hadow forth that change which death makes upon
humane Bodies. That great and renowned City, was once full of people which
thronged the streets thereof: there you might have seen children playing upon
the Thresholds, Beauties showing themselves through the windows, Melody
sounding in its Palaces. But what an alteration was made upon it, the Prophet
Zephaniah describes, Chap. ^. v. 14. Flocks shall lie down in the midst of her,
all the Beasts of the Nations: both the Cormorant and the Bittern shall lodge
in the upper lintels of it: their voice shall sing in the windows, desolation
shall be in the thresholds, for he shall uncover the Cedar work.

Thus it is with the Body when death has dislodged the Soul. Worms nestle in
the holes where the beautiful eyes were once placed. Corruption and desolation
is upon all parts of that stately structure. But this being a vulgar Theme, I
shall leave the Body to the dust from whence it came, and follow the Soul*
which is my proper subject, pointing at the changes which are made on it.

The essence of the Soul is not destroyed or changed by the Bodies ruin: It is
substantially the self same Soul that it was when in the Body. The supposition
of an essential change, would disorder the whole frame and model of Gods
eternal design for the Redemption and glorification of it, Romans 8.29, 30. but
yet though it undergo no substantial change at death, yet diverse great and
remarkable alterations are made upon it by sundering it from the Body. As 1. It
is not where it was. It was in a Body, immerst in matter, married unto flesh
and blood; but now it is out of the Body, uncloathed, and stripped naked out of
its garments of flesh, like pure Gold melted out of the ore with which it was
commixed; or as a Birdlet out of her Cage, into the open Fields and Woods. This
makes a great and wonderful change upon it. 2. Being free from the Body, it is
consequently discharged and freed from all those ^ares, studies, fears and
sorrows to which it was here enthralled and subjected upon the Bodies account.
It puts off all those passions and burdens with it, never spends one thought
more about Food, and Raiment, Health and Sickness, Wives, and Children, Riches
or Poverty: but lives henceforth after the manner of Angels, Matthew. 22.30. It
is now unrelated to, and therefore unconcerned about all these things. 3. In
the unbodied state it is perfectly freed from sin, both in the Acts and Habits:
a mercy it never enjoyed since the first moment it dwelt in the Body. The cure
of this disease was indeed begun in the Work of Sanctification, but is not
perfected till the day of the Souls glorification. It Is now, and not till now,
a Spirit made perfect; that is, a Soul enjoying its perfect health and
rectitude. No more groans, tears, or lamentations upon the account of
in-dwelling sin. 4. The way and manner of its converse with, and enjoyment of
God is changed. There are two mediums by which Souls converse with God in the
Body, viz (1) One internal, sc Faith. (2) The other external, sc. Ordinances.



(1) If a man walk with God on earth, it must be in the use and exercise of
Faith, 2 Cor. 5.7. nor can there be any communion carried on betwixt God and
the Soul without it, Heb. 11.6.

(2) The external mediums are the ordinances of God, or duties of Religion,
both public, and private, Psalm. 63.2. Betwixt these two mediums of Communion
with God, this remarkable difference is sound; the Soul may see and enjoy God
by Faith, in the want or absence of Ordinances; but there is no seeing or
conversing with God in the greatest plenty and purity of Ordinances, without
Faith, Heb. 4.2.

But in the same moment the Soul is cut off from union with the Body, it is
also cut off from both these ways of enjoying God, 1 Cor. 13.12 Isai. 38.11.
But yet the Soul is no loser, nay, it is the greatest Gainer by this change.
The Child is no loser by ceasing to derive its nourishment by the Navel, when
it comes to receive it by the mouth; a more noble way, whereby it gets a new
pleasure in tasting the variety of all delectable Food. Hezekiah bemoaned the
loss of Ordinances upon his supposed deathbed, saying, I shall not see the
Lord, even the Lord in the Land of the living. q. d. Now farewell Temple and
Ordinances; I shall never go any more into his Temple where my Soul has been
so often cheared and refresht with the displays of his grace and goodness. I
shall never more join with the Assembly of his people on earth: And suppose he
had not, sure he would have lost nothing, had he then exchanged the Temple at
Jerusalem, for the Temple in Heaven, and Communion with sinful imperfect Saints
on earth, for fellowship with Angels, and the Spirits of just men made perfect.
By this change we lose no more than he loses, who whilst he stands
delightfully contemplating the image of his dearest friend in a glass, has the
glass snatched away by his friend, whom he now sees face to face.

Upon this change of the mediums of Communion it will follow, that the
Communion betwixt God and the separate Soul, excells all the Communion it ever
had with him on Earth, in (1) The Clearness. in (2) The Sweetness of it. in (3)
The Constancy.


(1) Its Visions of God in the state of Separation, are more clear, distinct,
and direct than they were on earth; Clouds and Shadows are now fled away. The
Soul now sees as it is seen, and knows as it is known, its apprehensions of
God there differ from those it had here, as the crade and confused
apprehensions of a Child, do from those we have in the manly state.

(2) They are also more sweet and ravishing. As our Visions are, so are our
Pleasures: Perfect Visions produce perfect Pleasures. The faculties of the Soul
now, and never till now, lie level to that rule, Matthew. 22.37. The Visions of
God command and call forth all the heart and soul, mind, and strength, into
acts of love and delight. It was not so here, if the Spirit were willing, the
Flesh was weak, but there the clog is off from the foot of the Will.

(3) More constant, fixed, and steady. It Is one of the greatest difficulties in
Religion, to fix the thoughts, and cure the wildness and roveings of the fancy.
The heart is not steady with God, and hence are its ups and downs, heatings and
coolings; which are things unknown in the perfect state. By all which it
appears, the change by Dissolution is great and marvelous both upon Body and
Soul, but upon the Soul more especially.

PROP. IV. The Souls of the Righteous, at the instant of their Separation, are
received by the blessed Angels, and by them transferred unto the place of
Blessedness.
THough Angels are by nature a superior order of Spirits, differing from men
in Dignity, as the Nobles and Barons in the Kingdoms of this World, differ from
inferior Subjects; yet are they made ministering Spirits, ( i.e.) serviceable
Creatures in the Kingdom of Providence, to the meanest of the Saints, Heb.
1.14. and herein the Lord puts a singular honor upon his people, in making
such excellent Creatures, as Angels, serviceable to them. Luther assigns to
them a double office, sc. to sing the praises of God on high, and to watch over
his Saints here below. Their Ministry is distinguished into three Branches;
(...), for Admonition or warning: (...), for Protection and defense: (...), for
succor, help, and comfort. This last office they perform, more especially, at
the Souls departure. Like tender Nurses, they keep us whilst we live, and bring
us home in their arms to our Fathers house when we die.

They are about our deathbeds, waiting to receive their precious charge into
their arms and bosoms. When Lazarus breathed out his Soul, the Text says, it
was carried by Angels into Abraham's bosom, Luke 10.22. And upon this account,
Tertullian calls them Evocatores animarum, the Callers forth of Souls. At the
Translation of Elijah, they appeared in the form of Horses and Chariots of
fire, 2 Kings 2. 11. Horses and Chariots are not only designed for conveyance,
but for conveyance in State; and truly it is no small honor to have such a
noble Convoy and Guard to attend our Souls to Heaven.

If it be demanded, Object.
What need is there of their help or company? Cannot God by his immediate hand
and power gather home the Souls of his people to himself at death? He inspired
them into our Bodies without their help, and can receive them again when we
expire them, without their aid.

True, S^l^t.
he can do so; but it has pleased him to appoint this method of our
Translation, not out of mere necessity, but bounty. Souls ascend not to God in
the virtue of the Angels wings or arms, but of Christ's Ascension. Had not he
ascended as our head and representative, all the Angels in Heaven could not
have brought our Souls thither. He ascended by his own power, and we ascend by
the virtue of his Ascension. It Is therefore rather for the State and Decorum,
than any absolute necessity that they attend us, in our Ascension.

God will not only have his people brought home to him safely, but honorably.
They shall come to their Fathers house in a becoming Equipage, as the Children
of a King. This puts honor upon our Ascension day, that day is adorned by the
attendance of such illustrious Creatures upon us. It Is no small honor which
God herein designs for us, that Creatures of greater dignity than our selves,
shall be sent from Heaven to attend and wait upon us thither.

Yea, That our Ascension day should in this resemble Christ's Ascension, is an
honor indeed. When he ascended, there were multitudes of these heavenly
Creatures to wait upon him, Psalm. 68.17, 18. The Chariots of God are twenty
thousand, even thousands of Angels; the Lord is among them as in Sinai, in the
holy place. Thou have ascended on high, etc. A Cloud was prepared as a Royal
Chariot to carry up the King of Glory to his Princely Pavillion, and then a
Royal Guard of mighty Angels to wait upon his Chariot, if not for support, yet
for the greater State and Solemnity of their Lords Ascension. And Oh what
Jubilations of blessed Angels were heard that day in Heaven! How was the whole
City of God moved at his coming! the Triumph is not ended to this day, no, nor
ever shall.

Now, herein God greatly honors his people, that there shall be some
resemblance and conformity betwixt their Ascension and Christ's; Quomodo
inservierunt capiti, eo modo inserviunt etiam membris. Gaudent inservi^^ i^lis
in terris, quosaliquando socios habebunt in coelis. Gerhard.
they rejoice to attend those to Heaven, who must be their fellow Citizens for
ever in Heaven! It is convenient also, that those who had the charge of us all
our life, should attend us to our Fathers house at our death. In the one they
finish their ministry, in the other, they begin their more intimate Society.

Moreover, the Angels are they whom God will employ to gather together his
Elect from the four winds of Heaven at the great day, Matthew. 24.31. and who
more fit to attend their Spirits to Heaven singly, than those who must collect
them into one Body at last, and wait upon that collective Body, when they shall
be brought to Christ? Psalm. 45.14.

Object.
But the sight and presence of Angels is exceeding awful, and overwhelming to
humane nature: it will rather astonish and terrify, than refresh and cheer us
to find our selves all on a sudden surrounded and beset with such Majestic
Creatures. We see what effects the appearance of an Angel has had upon good
men in this World. We shall die ( said Manoah) for we have seen God, Judge.
13.22. So Eliphaz, a Spirit passed before my face, the hair of my flesh stood
up, Job 4.15.

Sol.
True, whilst our Souls inhabit these mortal and sinful Bodies, the appearance
of Angels is terrible to them, and cannot be otherwise, partly upon a natural,
and partly upon a moral account. The dread of Angels naturally falls upon our
Animal Spirits: They shrink and tremble at the approach of Spirits; not only
the Spirits of Men, but of Beasts, quail at it. A Dog or an Horse is terrified
at it, as well as a Man, Numb. 22.25. The dread of Spirits strikes the Animal,
or natural Spirits, primarily; and the mind or rational Soul by consent. There
is also another cause of fear in man, upon the sight or presence of Angels,
viz. A Consciousness of guilt. Wherever there is guilt, there will be fear,
especially upon any extraordinary appearance of God to us, though it be but
imediately, by an Angel.

But when the Soul is freed both from flesh, and sin; and shall enjoy it self
in a nature like to these pure and holy Spirits, the dread of Angels is then
vanished, and the Soul will take great content and satisfaction in their
Company and Communion. The Soul then finds it self a fit Companion for them,
looks upon them as its fellow Servants, for so they are, Revel. 19.10. and the
Angels look upon the Spirits of just men, not as Inferiors and Underlings, but
with great respect, as Spirits in some sense nearer to Christ than themselves.
So that henceforth no dread falls upon us from the presence of these excellent
Creatures; but each enjoys singular delight in each others Society. And thus
we see in what honorable and pleasing Company the souls of the just go hence
to their Father's house and bosom.

PROP. V. The Soul is not so maimed and prejudiced by its separation from the
Body, but that it both can and does live, and act without it: and performs the
acts of Cogitation and Volition, without the aid and ministry of the Body.
I Know it is objected by them that assert the Souls sleeping till the
Resurrection, that though its essence be not destroyed by death, yet its
Operations are obstructed by the want and absence of the Body, its Tool and
Instrument, and thus they form their Objection.

All that the Soul understands, Object.
it understands by Species, that is, the Images of things which are first
formed in the Fantasy: Conditiones Intellectus sunt tres: (1) Objectum, ens
verum and intelligibile. (2) Phantasma, vel species sensil^ in Ph^ntasia
latens. (3) Species intelligibilis quae est accidens spirituale, repraesenta^s
idealiter intellectui rem materialem existentem extra intellectum.
As when we would conceive the nature of an House, a Ship, a Man or a Beast; we
first form the Image or Species thereof in our fancy, and then exercise our
thoughts about it: But this depending upon bodily Organs and Instruments, the
separated Soul can form no such Images. It has no such innate Species of its
own, but comes into the World an abrasa tabula, white paper; and being deprived
by separation of the help of Senses and Phantasms, it consequently understands
nothing.

Thus the Soul in its state of Separation is represented to us as wounded in
its Powers and Operations, to that degree, which seems to extinguish the very
nature of it. But

Sol.
1. We deny that the Soul knows nothing now, but by Phantasms and Images.
Intellectus incorporea and immaterialia contemplatur, ut Deum and
intelligentias, sed haec nullo modo in phantasiam cadunt, cum sunt extra
limits corporeatum viriam Conimb. de Anima, lib. 3. cap. 8. Q. 8.
For it knows it self, its own nature and powers, of which it cannot possibly
feign or form any image or representation. What form, shape, or figure, can the
fancy of a man cast his own Soul into to help him to understand its nature?

And what shall we say of its understanding during an ecstasie or Rapture? Does
the Soul know nothing at such a time? Does a dull Torpor seize and benumb its
intellectual powers? No, no; the Understanding is never more bright, clear,
apprehensive, and perfect, than when the Body in an Ecstasie is laid aside as
to any use or assistance of the mind. The Soul for that space uses not the
Bodies assistance, as the very words Ecstasie, and Rapture, convince us.

Si autem hoc non est ex natura animae, sed per accidens hoc convenit ei, ex to
quod corpori alligatur, sicut Platonics posu^runt, de facili quaestio solvi
possit. Nam remoto impedimento corporis, rediret anima ad suam naturam. Aquin.
p. 1. Q. 8. Art. 1.
2. To understand by Species does not agree to the Soul naturally, and
necessarily, but by accident, as it is now in Union with the Body: Were it but
once loosed from the Body, it would understand better without them than ever it
did in the Body by them. A Man that is on Horseback, must move, according to
the motion of the Horse he rides; but if he were on Foot, he then uses his own
proper motion, as he pleases. So here. But though we grant the Soul does in
many cases now make use of Phantasms, and that the agitation of the Spirits,
which are in the Brain and Heart, are conjunct with its acts of Cogitation, and
Intellection: Yet as a searching Scholar well observes, The Spirits are rather
Subjects, than Instruments of those actions: And the whole essence of those
acts is antecedent to the motion of the Spirits: As when we use a Pen in
writing, or a Knife in cutting; How Is Blessedness, page 174, 175.
there is an operation of the Soul upon them, before there can be any operation
by them. They act as they are first acted, and so do these bodily Spirits. So
that to speak properly, the Body is bettered by the use the Soul makes of it in
these its noble actions, but the Soul is not advantaged by being tied to such a
Body. It can do its own work without it, its operations follow its essence, not
the Body, to which it is for a time united.

In sum, It Is much more absonous, and difficult to conceive a stupefied,
benumbed, and unactive Soul, whose very nature is to be active, lively, and
always in motion; than it is to conceive a Soul freed from the shackles, and
clogs of the Body, acting freely according to its own nature, I wish the
favorers of this Opinion may take heed, lest it carry them farther than they
intend, even to a denial of its Existence and Immortality, and turn them into
downright S^matists or Atheists.

PROP. VI. That the separated Souls of the just, having finished all their work
of obedience on earth, and the Spirit having finished all his work of
Sanctification upon them, they do ascend to God, with all the habits of Grace
inherent in them; and all the comfortable improvements of their Graces,
accompanying and following them.
THis Proposition is to be opened and confirmed in these four Branches.

(1) When a gracious Soul is separated from the Body, all its work of obedience
in this World is finished. Therefore death is called the finishing of our
course, Acts 20.24. the night when man works no more, John 9.4. There is no
working in the grave, Eccles. 9.10. for death dissolves the Compositum, and
removes the Soul immediately to another World; where it can act for it self
only, but not for others, as it was wont to do on earth. I shall see man no
more (says Hezekiah) with the Inhabitants of the World, Isaiah 38.11. that
which was said of David's death, is as true of every Christian, that having
served his Generation according to the Will of God, he fell asleep, Acts 13.36.

I do not say this lower World receives no benefit at all by them, after their
death; for though they can speak no more, write no more, pray for, and instruct
the Inhabitants of this World no more, nor exhibit to them the beauty of
Religion in any new acts or examples of theirs: (which is that I mean by saying
they have finished all their work of obedience on earth) Yet the benefit of
what they did whilst in the Body, still remains, after they are gone; as the
Apostle speaks of Abel, Hebr. 11.4. Who being dead, yet speaks. This way
indeed abundance of service will be done for the Souls of men upon earth, long
after they are gone to Heaven. And this should greatly quicken us to leave as
much as we can behind us, for the good of Posterity, that after our decease (as
the Apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 1.15.) they may have our words and examples in
remembrance. But for any service to be done de novo after death, it is not to
be expected. We have accomplished as an Hireling our day, and have not a stroke
more to do.

(2) As all our work of obedience is then finished by us, so at death, all the
Work of God is finished by his Spirit upon us. The last hand is then put to all
the preparatory work for glory; not a stroke more to be done upon it afterward,
which appears as well by the immediate succession of the life of glory,
(whereof I shall speak in another Proposition) as by the cessation of all
sanctifying means and instruments, which are totally laid aside as things of no
more use, after this stroke is given, Adepto fine, cessant media, Means are
useless, when the end is attained. There is no work, says Solomon, in the
Grave. How short soever the Souls stay and abode in the Body was, though it
were regenerated one day, and separated the next; yet all that is wrought upon
it, which God ever intended should be wrought in this World, and there is no
preparation-work in the other World.

(3) But though the Soul leave all the means of grace behind it, yet it carries
away with it to Heaven all those habits of grace which were planted and
improved in it in this World, by the blessing of the Spirit upon those means:
though it leave the Ordinances, it loses not the effects and fruits of them;
though they cease, their effects still live. The truth dwells in us, and
shall be in us for ever, 1 John 2.17. The Seed of God remains in us, 1 John
3.9.

Common gifts fall at death, but saving grace sticks fast in the Soul, and
ascends with it into glory. Gracious habits are inseparable; Glory does not
destroy but perfect them. They are the Souls meetness for Heaven, Col. 1.12,
and therefore it shall not come into his presence, leaving its meetness behind
it. In vain is all the work of the Spirit upon us in this World, if we carry it
not along with us into that World, seeing all his works upon us in this life,
have a respect and relation to the life to come.

Look therefore as the same natural Faculties and Powers which the Soul had,
(though it could not use them) in its imperfect Body in the Womb, came with it
into this World where they freely exerted themselves in the most noble actions
of natural life; so the habits of Grace which by Regeneration are here
implanted in a weak and imperfect Soul, go with it to glory, where they exert
themselves in a more high and perfect way of acting, than ever they did here
below. The languishing spark of love, is there a vehement flame; the saint,
remiss, and infrequent delight in God, is there at a constant ravishing and
transporting height.

(4) To conclude, As all implanted habits of grace ascend with the sanctified
Soul to Heaven; (for the Soul ascends not thither, as a natural, but as a new
Creature) so all the effects, results, and sweet improvements of those Graces
which we gathered as the pleasant fruits of them on earth; these accompany and
follow the Soul into the other World also; Their Works follow them, Rev. 14.13.
They go not before in the notion of merits, to make way for them, but they
follow or accompany them, as Evidences, and comfortable Experiences. I doubt
not, but the very remembrance of what past betwixt God and the Soul here
betwixt the day of its Espousals to Christ, and its Divorce from the Body, will
be one sweet ingredient into their blessedness and joy, when they shall be
singing in the upper Region, the Song of Moses, and of the Lamb. They were
never given, to be lost, or left behind us. And thus you see with what a rich
Cargo the Soul sails to the other World, though if it had no other, it would
never drop Anchor there.

PROP. VII. The Souls of the just when separated from their Bodies, do not
wander up and down this World, nor hover about the Sepulchers where their
Bodies lie, nor are they detained in any Purgatory, in order to their more
perfect Purification; nor do they fall asleep in a benumbed, stupid State: But
do forthwith pass into glory, and are immediately with the Lord.
WHen once the mind of man leaves the Scripture-guidance and direction, which
is to it, what the Compass, or Pole Star is to a Ship in the wide Ocean;
Whither will it not wander? In what uncertainties will it not fluctuate? And
upon what Rocks and Quicksands must it inevitably be cast? Many have been the
foolish and groundless Conceits and Fancies of men, about the Receptacles of
departed Souls.

1. Some have assigned them a restless wandering life, now here, now there;
without any certain dwelling place any where. The only ground for this fancy,
is the frequent Apparitions of the Ghosts or Spirits of the dead, whereof many
instances are given; and who is there that is a stranger to such Stories? Now,
if departed Souls were fixed any where, this World would be quiet and free from
such disturbances.

I make no doubt but very many of these Stories have been the industrious
Fictions and Devices of wicked and superstitious Votaries to gain reputation to
their way, speaking lies in Hypocrisy to draw Disciples after them. And many
others have been the Tricks and Impostures of Satan himself, to shake the
credit of the Saints Rest in Heaven, and the imprisonment of ungodly Souls in
Hell, as will more fully appear, when I come to speak to that Question more
particularly.

2. Others think when they are loosed from the Body at death, they hover about
the Graves and solitary places where their Bodies lie, as willing, seeing they
can dwell no longer in them, to abide as near them as they can; just as the
surviving Turtle, keeps near the place where his Mate died, and may be heard
mourning for a long time about that part of the Wood. This opinion seeks
countenance and protection from that law, Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. which prohibits men
to consult with the dead; of which restraint there had been no need nor use, if
it had not been practiced; and such practices had never been continued, if
departed Souls had not frequented those places, and given answers to their
Questions. But what I said before of Satan's Impostures, is enough for present,
to return to this also.

Bell. lib. 2. de Purg. cap. 6.
3. The Papists send them immediately to Purgatory in order to their more
thorough Purification. This Purgatory, Bellarmin thus describes: It is a
certain place wherein, as in a Prison, Souls are purged after this life, that
were not fully purged here, to the intent they may enter pure into Heaven; and
though the Church (says he) has not defined the place, yet the Schoolmen
say, it is in the Bowels of the Earth, and upon the borders of Hell. And to
countenance this profitable Fable, diverse Scriptures are by them abused and
misapplied, as 1 Cor. 3.15. Matthew. 5.25, 26. 1 Pet. 3.19. all which have been
fully rescued out of their hands, and abundantly vindicated by our Divines, who
have proved, God never kindled that fire to purify Souls, but the Pope to warm
his own Kitchen.

4. Another sort there are, who affirm, they neither wander about this World,
nor go into Purgatory, but are cast by death into a Swoon or sleep; remaining
in a kind of benumbed condition, till the Resurrection of the Body. This was
the Error of Beryllus; and Irenaeus seems to border too near upon it, when he
says: The Souls of Disciples shall go to an invisible place appointed for them
of God, Discipulorum Animae abibunt in invisibilem locum, definitam ^is a Deo;
and ibi usq^e ad Resurrectionem commorabuntar, sustinentes Resurrectionem:
Post, recipientes corpora, and perfect resurgentes, (i. e.) corporaliter,
quemadmodum and dominus resurrexit, sic venlent ad conspectum Dei. Iren. lib. 5.
and shall there tarry till the Resurrection, waiting for that time, and the
receiving their Bodies, and perfectly ( i.e. corporally) rising again, as
Christ did, they shall come to the sight of God.

All these mistakes will fall together by one stroke; for if it evidently
appear (as I hope it will) that the Spirits of the just are immediately taken
to God, and do converse with and enjoy him in Heaven: Then all these Fancies
vanish, without any more labor about them particularly. Now there are four
Considerations which to me put the immediate glorification of the departed
Souls of Believers, beyond all rational doubt.

(1) Heaven is as ready and fit to receive them as ever it shall be. (2) They
are as ready and fit for Heaven, as ever they shall be. (3) The Scripture is
plainly for it. And (4) There is nothing in reason against it.
(1) Heaven is as ready and fit to receive them when they die, as ever it shall
be. Heaven is prepared for Believers, (1) By the purpose and Decree of God, and
so far it was prepared from the Foundation of the World, Matthew. 25.34. (2) By
the death of Christ, whose blood made the purchase of it for Believers, and so
meritoriously opened the Gates thereof, which our sins had barred up against
us, Heb. 10.19, 20. (3) By the Ascension of Christ into that holy place, as our
Representative and Forerunner, John 14.2. This is all that is necessary to be
done for the preparation of Heaven; and all this is done, as much as ever God
designed should be done to it, in order to its preparation for our Souls. So
that no delay can be upon that account.

(2) The departed Souls of Believers are as ready for Heaven as ever they shall
be. For there is no preparation-work to be done by them, or upon them after
death, Ioh. 9.3. Eccles. 9.10. Their justification was complete before death,
and now their sanctification is so too; Sin, which came in by the Union, going
out at the separation of their Souls and Bodies. They are Spirits made perfect.

(3) The Scripture is plain and full for their immediate glorification, Luke
23.43 To day shall thou be with me in Paradise: Luke 16.22. The Beggar dyed,
and was carried by the Angels into Abraham's bosom: Philip. 1.21. I desire to
be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is far better. The Scripture speaks
but of two ways, by which Souls see and enjoy God, viz. Faith, and Sight; the
one imperfect, suited to this life; the other perfect, fitted for the life to
come; and this immediately succeeding that, for the imperfect is done away by
the coming of that which is perfect, as the Twilight is done away by the
advancing of the perfect day.

(4) To conclude, There is nothing in reason lying in bar to it. It has been
proved before, the Soul in its unbodied State, is capable to enjoy blessedness,
and can perform its acts of Intellection, Volition, etc. not only as well, but
much better than it did when embodied. I conclude therefore, That seeing Heaven
is already as much prepared for Believers, as it need be, or can be; and they
as much prepared from the time of their Dissolution, as ever they shall be; The
Scriptures also being so plain for it, and no bar in reason against it: All the
forementioned Opinions are but the Dreams and Fancies of men, who have forsaken
their Scripture-guide; and this remains an unshaken truth, That the Spirits of
the just go immediately to glory, from the time of their Separation.

PROP. VIII. At the time a gracious Souls separation from the Body, it is
instantly, and perfectly freed from sin, which till that time dwelt in it, from
its beginning: But thenceforth shall do so no more.
IMmediately upon their separation from the Body, Ideoque vocat conse^ratos,
vel perfectos, quia carnis infirmitatibus non amplius sint obnoxii, deposita
ipsa carne. Marl. in loc.
they are Spirits made perfect, as my Text styles them; and that Epithet
perfect could never suit them, if there were any remaining root or habit of
corruption in them.

The time, yea, the set time is now come, to put an end to all the dolorous
groans of gracious Souls upon the account of indwelling sin. What the Angel
said to Joshua, Zech. 3.3, 4. The same does God say of every upright Soul at
the time of its separation, Take away the filthy Garments from him, and cloth
him with change of rayments, and set a fair Miter upon his head. Thus the
Garments spotted with the flesh, are taken away with the Body of flesh, and the
pure, unchangeable Robes of perfect holiness clothed upon the Soul, in which
it appears, without fault before the Throne of God, Rev. 14.5.

There is a threefold burdensome evil in sin, under which all regenerated souls
groan in this life, viz. (1) The Guilt, (2) The Filth, (3) The Inherence of it
in their nature. And there is a threefold Remedy or cure of these evils. The
guilt of sin is remedied by justification: The filth of sin is inchoatively
healed by sanctification: The inherence of sin is totally eradicated by
glorification. For as it entered into our persons, by the union of our Souls and
Bodies; so it is perfectly cast out by their disunion or separation at death.
The last stroke is then given to the work of sanctification, and the last is
evermore the perfecting stroke: Sin languished under imperfect sanctification
in the time of life, but it gives up the Ghost under perfected sanctification,
from (...) after death. Sanctification gave it its deadly wound, but
glorification its final Abolition. For it is with our sins after Regeneration,
as it was with that Beast mentioned Dan. 7.12. which though it was wounded with
a deadly wound, yet its life was prolonged for a season: And this is the
appointed season for its expiration. For if at their dissolution they are
immediately received into glory (as it has been proved they are, in our
seventh Proposition) they must necessarily be freed perfectly from sin,
immediately upon their dissolution; because nothing that is unclean, can enter
into that pure and holy place: They must be, as the Text truly represents them,
The Spirits of just men made perfect.

For if so great holiness and purity be required in all that draw nigh to God
upon earth, as you read Psalm. 93.5. certainly those who are admitted
immediately to his Throne, must be without fault, according to Rev. 7.14, 15,
16, 17.

When a compounded being comes to be dissolved, each part returns to its own
principle; so it is here. The Spirit of man, and all the grace that is in it,
came from God, and to him they return at death, and are perfected in him, and
by him: The flesh returns to the earth whence it came, and all that body of sin
is destroyed with it; neither the one or other shall be a snare or clog to the
soul any more. A Christian in this World, is but Gold in the Ore; at death the
pure Gold is melted out and separated, and the dross cast away and consumed.

Hence three Consectaries offer themselves to us.

Consectary I.
That a Believers life and warfare end together. We lay not down our weapons of
war, till we lie down in the dust, 2 Timothy 4.7. I have fought a good fight, I
have finished my course. The course and conflict you see are finished together.
Though they commence from different terms, yet they always terminate together.
Grace and sin have each acted its part upon the Stage of time, and the victory
hovered doubtfully s^^^times over Sin, and sometimes over Grace; but now the
^^r is ended, and the quarrel decided, Grace keeps its ground, and sin is
finally vanquished. Now, and never before, the gracious Soul stands triumphing
like that noble Argive, In vacuo solus Sessor Plausorque Theatro:
not an Enemy left to renew the Combat, the war is ended, and with it all the
fears and sorrows of the Saints.

Consectary II.
Separated Souls become impeccable, or free from all the hazard of sin, from
the time of their separation. For, there being no root of sin, now inherent in
them, consequently no temptation to sin can fasten upon them: all temptations
have their handles in the Corruptions of our natures. Did not Satan find matter
prepared within us, dry tinder fitted to his hand, he might strike in
temptations long enough before one of his hellish sparks could catch or fasten
upon us. Temptations are grievous exercises to Believers; they are darts, Ephesians.
6.16. they are thorns, 2 Cor. 12.7. but the separate Soul is out of Gunshot.
'Twere as good discharge an Arrow at the body of the Sun, as a temptation at a
translated Soul.

Consectary III.
Separated Souls are more lovely Companions, and their Converses more sweet and
delightful than ever they were in this World. It was their corruption which
spoiled their Communion on earth; and it is their spotless holiness which makes
it incomparably pleasant in Heaven. The best and loveliest Saints have
something in them, which is distastful; even sweet Briars, and holy Thistles,
have their offensive Prickles; but when that which was so lovely on earth, is
made perfect in Heaven, and nothing of that remains in Heaven, which was so
offensive in them on earth; O what delightful Companions will they be! O
blessed Society! O most desirable Companions, let my Soul for ever be united to
their assembly. I love them under their Corruptions, but how shall my Soul be
knit to them when it sees them shining in their Perfections!

PROP. IX. The Pleasures and Delights of the separate Spirits of the just, are
incomparably greater and sweeter, than those they did, or at any time could
experience in their bodily state.
WIth what a pleasant face would death smile upon Believers, what Roses would
it raise in its pale cheeks, if this Proposition were but well settled in our
hearts by faith! And if we will not be wanting to our selves, it may be firmly
settled there, by these four Considerations, which demonstrate it.

Consideration I.
Whatsoever Pleasure any man receives in this World, he receives it by means of
his Soul. Even all corporeal and sensitive delights have no other relish and
sweetness, but what the Soul gives them; which is demonstrable by this, that if
a man be placed amidst all the pleasing Objects and Circumstances in the World,
if he were in that Center where he might have the confluence of all the
delights of this World; yet if the Spirit be wounded, there is no more relish
or savor in them, than in the White of an Egg. What pleasure had Spira in his
Liberty, Estate, Wife and Children? These things were indeed proposed and urged
again and again to relieve him; but instead of pleasure, they became his
horror: let but the mind be wounded, and all the mirth is marred; one touch
from God upon the Spirit, destroys all the joy of this World. Nay,

Let but the intention of the mind be strongly carried another way, and for
that time, (though there be no guilt or wound upon the Soul) the most pleasant
enjoyments lose their pleasure. What Delight, think you, would bags of Gold,
sumptuous Feasts, or exquisite melody have afforded to Archimedes, when he was
wholly intent upon his Mathematical lines? By this then it is evident, that the
rise of all pleasure is in the mind, and the most agreeable and pleasing
Objects and Enjoyments, signify nothing without it: The mind must be found in
it self, and at leisure to attend them, or we can have no pleasure from them.

Consideration II.
Of all Natural Pleasures in the World, Intellectual Pleasures are found to be
most agreeable and connatural to the Soul of man.

The more refined and remote from sense any pleasure is, the more grateful it
is to the Soul; those are certainly the sweetest Delights that spring out of
the mind. A drop of intellectual pleasure is valued by a generous and well
tempered soul, above the whole Ocean of impure Joys, which come to it
sophisticated and tang'd through the muddy Channels of sense.

No sensualists in the World can extract such pleasure out of Gold, Silver,
Meat, and Drink; as a searching and contemplating mind finds in the discovery
of truth. In qua simulac pedem posui, foribus pessulum obdo, and in ipso
aeternitatis gremio inter tot illustres animas sedem mihi sumo; cum ingenti
quidem animo: ut s^binde magnaetum misereat, qui hanc faelicitatem ignorant.
Epist. Prin.
Heynsius, that learned Library Keeper of Leyden, professed, that when he had
shut up himself among so many illustrious Souls, he seemed to sit down there as
in the very lap of Eternity, and heartily pitied the Rich and Covetous
Worldlings that were strangers to his Delights.

Arcana coeli, naturae secreta, ordinem universi scire; majoris foelicitatis
and dulcedinis est; quam c^gitatione quis assequi potest, aut mortalis sperare.
And Cardan tells us, that to know the secrets of Nature, and the order of the
Universe* has greater pleasure and sweetness in it, than the thoughts of Man
can fathom, or any Mortal hope for. Yea, such beauty, says Talis est
Mathematum pulchritudo, ut his indignum sit divitiarum phal^ras istas and
bullas and puerilia spectacula comparari.
Plutarch, there is in the Study of the Mathematics, that it were unworthy to
compare such Baubles and Bubbles as Riches, with it. Yea, says another Dulce
est extingui Mathematicarum artium studio. Leon. Diggs.
, it were a sweet thing to be extingnished in those Studies.

Julius Scaliger was so delighted with Poetry, that he protested he had rather
be the Author of twelve Verses in Lucan, than Emperor of Germany. And to say
truth, there is a kind of Talis suavitas ut cum quis ea degustaverit, quasi
circeis poculis captus, non potest ^nquam ab illis divelli. Cardan.
enchanting sweetness in those intellectual Pleasures and Feasts of the mind;
such a delight as hardly suffers the mind to be pulled away from it. These
Pleasures have a finer edge, an higher gust, a more agreeable savor to the
mind than sensitive ones; as approaching much nearer to the nature of the Soul,
which is spiritual.

Consideration. III.
And as Intellectual pleasures do as far exceed all sensitive pleasures, as
those which are proper to a man, do those which we have in common with Beasts:
So Divine pleasures do again much more surmount Intellectual ones. For what
compare is there betwixt those joys which surprise a Scholar in the discovery
of the Secrets of Nature, and those that overwhelm and swallow up the Christian
in the discovery of the glorious Mysteries of Redemption by Christ, and his own
personal interest therein!

To solve the Phenomenon of Nature is pleasant, but to solve all the
difficulties about our Title to Christ and his Covenant, that is ravishing.
Archimedes his (...), I have found it, was but the frisk or skip of a Boy: that
rapturous voice of the Spouse, My Beloved is mine, and I am his. These are
Entertainments for Angels, 1 Pet. 1.12. a short Salvation for the season it is
felt and tasted, 1 Pet. 1.8. after these delights all others are insipid and
dry. And yet one step higher.

Consideration IV.
All that divine pleasure which ever the holiest and devoutest Soul enjoyed in
the Body, is but a Sip, or Praelibation, ^ompared with those full draughts it
has in the unbodied State.

Whilst it is embodied, it rejoices in the Earnests and Pledges of joy, but
when it is unbodied, it receives the full sum, Psalm. 16.11. In thy presence is
the fullness of joy. This fullness of joy is not to be expected, because not to
be supported in this World. The joy of Heaven would quickly make the hoops of
Nature fly. When a good man had but a little more than ordinary of the joy of
the Lord poured into his Soul, he was heard to cry, Hold, Lord, hold, thy poor
Creature is but a clay Vessel, and can hold no more. These Pleasures the Soul
has in the Body, are of the same kind indeed with those in Heaven, but are
exceeding short of them in diverse other respects.

1. The Spiritual Pleasures the Soul has in the Body, are but by reflection;
but those it enjoys out of the Body, are by immediate intuition, 1 Cor. 13.12.
now in a glass, then face to face.

2. The Pleasures it has now, though they be of a Divine nature, yet they are
relished by the vitiated Appetite of a sick, and distempered Soul; the embodied
Soul is diseased and sickly, it has many Distempers hanging about it. Now we
know the most pleasant things lose much of their pleasure to a sick man; the
separate Soul is made perfect, thoroughly cured of all Diseases, restored to its
perfect health; and consequently Divine Pleasures must needs have an higher
gust and relish in Heaven than ever they had on earth.

3. The Pleasures of a Gracious Soul on earth, are but rare and seldom, meeting
with many and long interruptions; and many of them occasioned by the Body,
which often calls down the Soul to attend its Necessities; and converse with
things of a far different nature: But from these, and all other ungrateful and
prejudicial Avocations, the separated Soul is discharged and set free. So that
its whole Eternity is spent in the highest Delights.

4. The highest Pleasures of a Gracious Soul in the Body, are but the Pleasures
of an uncentred Soul, which is still gravitating and striving forward, and
consequently can be but low and very imperfect, in comparison with those it
enjoys, when it is centred and fixed in its everlasting Rest. They differ as
the shadow of the Labourer, for an hour in the day, from his Rest in his Bed
when his Work is ended.

5. To conclude, The Pleasures it has here, are but the Pleasures of Hope and
Expectation, which cannot bear any proportion to those of sight and full
fruition. O see the advantages of an unbodied state.

PROP. X. That Gracious Souls separate from the Body, do attain to the
perfection of knowledge with more ease than they attained any small degree of
knowledge, whilst they dwelt in the Body.
GReat are the Inconveniences and Prejudices, under which Souls labor in their
Pursuits, after knowledge in this life. Veritas in puteo, Truth lies deep. And
it is hard, even with much labor, pains, and study, to pump up one clear
Notion; for the Soul cannot now act as it would, but is fain to act as it can,
according to the Limitations and Permissions of the Body, to which it is
confined; by heedful Observations, and painful Searches; it is forced to deduce
one thing from another, and is too often deceived and imposed upon by such
tedious, and manifold Connections.

Beside, Truth now is forced in compliance with our weakness, and distance from
the Fountain, to descend from Heaven under Vails, Shadows, and Umbrages,
thereby to contract some kind of Affinity with our Fancies and exterior Senses
first, that so it may with more advantage transmit it self to our
Understandings. Lumen supremum nunquam descendit sine indumento impossible est
aliter nobis lucere radium divinum, nisi varietate Sacro^um velaminum
circumvelatum Dionys. Areop. de celoest hier. cap.
It must come under some vail or other to us, whilst we are veiled with
Mortality, because the Soul cannot behold it in its native luster, nor converse
otherwise with it.

And hence it was that Augustine made his rational Conjecture, Why Men use to be
so much delighted with Metaphors, because they are so much proportioned to our
Senses, with which our reason in this embodied state has contracted such an
Intimacy and Familiarity: But when the Soul lays aside its veil of Flesh, Truth
also puts off her veil, and shows the Soul her naked, beautiful, and ravishing
face: It thenceforth beholds all truth in God the fountain of Truth. There are
five ways by which men attain the knowledge of God, say the Schools, four of
which the Soul makes use of in this World; but the fifth which is the most
perfect, is reserved for the separate state. Men discern God here, (1) In
vestigio, by his footsteps in the Works of Creation. God has impressed the
marks of his Wisdom and Power upon the Creatures, by which impressions we do
discern that God has been there. Thus the very Heathen arrive to some
knowledge of a God, Romans 1.20. Acts 17.24, 27. (2) In Vmbra, by his shadow, if
you see the shadow of a man, you guess at his Stature and Dimensions thereby.
Thus Christ made some discovery of himself to the World, in the Mosaical
Ceremonies, and ancient Types and Umbrages, Heb. 10.1. (3) In Speculo, in a
Glass: This gives us a much clearer representation of a person than either his
footsteps or shadow could: This is an imperfect or darker Vision of his face
by way of reflection And thus God is seen in his Word and Ordinances, wherein
as in a glass we behold the glory of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. (4) In Filio, In
his own Son, who is the living Image and express Character of his Father. Thus
sometimes we see a Child so lively representing his Father, in Speech, Gate,
Gesture, and every Lineament of his face, that we may say, Sic Oculos, sic ille
Manus, sic Ora ferebat: Just so his Father spoke, so he went, and just such an
one he was.

Thus we know God in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. who is the express
image of his Father, Heb. 1.3. and John 14 9. This is the highest way of
attaining the knowledge of God in this Life; but then, in the unbodied state we
see him.

(5.) Face to face, with a direct vision. This is to see him as he is: The
Believer is a Candidate for this degree now, but cannot be invested with it,
till divested of this Body of flesh. Yet the Soul when unbodied and made
perfect, attaineth not to a comprehensive knowledge of God, for it will still
remain a finite being, and so cannot comprehend that which is infinite. That
question, Job 11.7. Can thou find out the Almighty to perfection? may be put
to the highest Graduate in Heaven. And yet, 1. To see God face to face, and
know him as he is, will be a knowledge of the Divine Essence it self. To see
the Divine Essence, is to see God as he is (i. e.) to see him so perfectly and
fully that the understanding can proceed no farther in point of knowledge
concerning that great Question, What is God? Thus no man has seen, or can see
God in this World. Even Moses himself could not so see God, Exodus 33.18, 19,
20. But the Spirits of the just made perfect have satisfying apprehensions,
though no perfect comprehensions of the Divine Essence. 2. In this light they
clearly discern those deep mysteries which they here rackt their thoughts upon,
but could not penetrate in this life. There they will know what is to be known
of the Union of the two Natures in the wonderful person of our Emmanuel; and
the manner of the subsistence of each person in the most glorious and undivided
Godhead, John 14.20. The several Attributes of God will then be unfolded to
our understandings; for his Essence and Attributes are not two things, Rev.
4.8, 9, 10, 11. O what ravishing sight will this be!

The mysteries of the Scriptures and providence of God will be no mysteries
then. Curiosity it self will be there satisfied.

3. This immediate knowledge and sight of God face to face, will be infinitely
more sweet and ravishingly plasant than any or all the views we had of him here
by Faith, ever were, or possibly could be. There is a joy unspeakable in the
visions of Faith, 1 Pet. 1.8. But it comes far short of the facial vision. Who
can tell the full importance of that one Text, Rev. 22.4. The Throne of the
Lamb shall be in it, and they shall see his face. O for such a Heaven (said
one) as but to look through the keyhole, and get one glimpse of that lovely
face! Earth cannot bear such sights. This light overwhelms and confounds the
inadequate faculties of imperfect and embodied Souls. But there it is lumen
confortans, a chearing, strengthening pleasant light, as the light of the
Morning star, Rev. 2.28. 4. This sight of God will be appropriative, and
applicative. We there see him as our own God and portion. Without a clear
interest in him, the sight of him could never be beatifical and satisfying.
Sight without interest is like the light of a gloworm, light without heat. All
doubts and objections are solved, and answered, in the first sight of this
blessed face. 5. To conclude: This perfect and most comfortable knowledge is
attained without labor by the separate Soul. Here every degree of knowledge
was with the price of much pains. How many weary hours and aching heads did the
acquisition of a little knowledge stand us in? But then it flows in upon the
Soul easily. It was the Saying of a great Usurer, I once took much pains to get
a little (meaning the first stock) but now I get much without any pains at all.
O lovely state of separation! That Body which interposed, clogged and clouded
the willing and capable Spirit, being drawn aside (as a Curtain) by death, the
light of glory now shines upon it, and round about it without any in^erception
or let.



PROP. XI. The separated Souls of the Just do live in a more high and excellent
way of Communion with God in his Temple-worship in Heaven, than ever they did
in the sweetest Gospel Ordinances, and most Spiritual Duties, in which they
conversed with him here on Earth.
THAT Saints on earth have real Communion with God, and that this Communion is
the joy of their hearts, the life of their life, and their relief under all
pressures and troubles in this life; is a truth so firmly sealed upon their
hearts by experience, as well as clearly revealed in the Word, that there can
remain no doubt about it among those that have any saving acquaintance with the
life and power of Religion,

This Communion with God is of that precious value with Believers, that it
unspeakably endears all those Duties and Ordinances to them, which as means and
instruments are useful to maintain it.

At death, the people of God part with all those precious Ordinances and
Duties, they being only designed for, and fitted to the present state of
imperfection, Ephesians. 4.12, 13. but not at all to their loss, no more than it is
to his, that loses the light of his candle, by the rising of the Sun. A Candle,
a Star, is comfortable in the Night, but useless, when the Sun is up, and in
it is meridian Glory. Christian, Pray much, hear much, and drive as profitable a
trade as thou can among the Ordinances of God, and duties of Religion: For
the time is at hand that you shall serve and wait on God no more this way.

But yet think not your Souls shall be discharged from all Worship and Service
of God when you dye: No, you will find Heaven to be a Temple built for worship,
and the worship there to be much transcendent to all that in which you were
here employed. The Sanctuary was a pattern of Heaven in this very respect, Heb.
9.23. And on this very account it is called Sion in my Text, and the heavenly
Jerusalem; as denoting a Church State, and the spiritual Worship there
performed by the Spirits of just men made perfect.

Some help we may have to understand the nature thereof, by comparing it with
that Worship and Service which we perform to God here in this state of
imperfection, and by considering the agreements and disagreements betwixt them.
In this they agree, that the worship above and below are both addressed and
directed to one and the same Object; Father, Son, and Spirit; all centers and
terminates in God. They also agree in the general quality, and common Nature;
they are both spiritual Worship. But there are diverse remarkable differences
betwixt the one, and other, as will be manifest in the following collation.

1. All our Worship on Earth is performed and transacted by Faith, as the
instrument and mean thereof, Heb. 11.6. He that comes to God must believe,
etc. In Heaven Faith cease and sight takes place of it, 1 Cor. 5.7. There we
see, what here we only believe. There are now before us, Ordinances,
Scriptures, Ministers, and the Assemblies of Saints in the places of worship:
but if we have any communion with God, by or among these, we must set our
selves to believe those things we see not. By realizing and applying invisible
things, we here get sometimes, and with no small pains, a taste of Heaven, and
a transient glance of that glory. In this service our Faith is put hard to it,
it must work and fight at once. Resolutely act, whilst sense and reason stand
by contradicting and quarrelling with it. And if with much ado, we get but one
sensible touch of Heaven upon our Spirits, if we get a little spiritual warmth
and melting of our affections toward God, we call that day a good day, and it
is so indeed.

But in Heaven all things are carried at an higher rate, the joy of the Lord
overflows us without any labor or pains of ours to procure it. We may say of
it there as the Prophet speaks of the dew and showers upon the grass, Which
tarrieth not for man, nor waits for the Sons of men, Mic. 5.7.

2. No grace is or can be acted here, without the clog of a contrary corruption
upon its heel, Romans 7.21. When I would do good, evil is present with me. Every
beam of faith is presently darkened by a cloud of unbelief, Mark 9.24. Lord I
believe, help thou my unbelief. Saepe in libro experientiae legimus, quomodo a
cord nostro relinquimar, nunc est nobis^um, nunc alibi: nunc avo^at. nunc
recurrit: in sola lubricitate manens. Bern.
We often read in the Book of experience (says one) what an inconstant fickle
thing the heart is in duties: Now it is with us, by and by it is fled away and
gone; we know not where to find it: It is constant only in its inconstancy and
lubricity. There is iniquity in our most holy things, which needs pardon, Exodus
28.38. Our best duties have enough in them to damn us, as well as our worst
sins, but in that perfect state above, grace flows purely out of the Soul, as
beams do from the Sun, or crystal streams from the purest Fountain. No impure,
or imperfect acts proceed from Spirits made perfect.

3. Here the graces of the Saints are never, or very rarely acted in their
highest and most intense degree. When they love God most fervently, there is
some coldness in their love. Who comes up to the height of that rule, Matt.
22.37. Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and all thy mind,
and all thy strength. When we meditate on God, it is not in the depth of our
thoughts, without some wanderings and extravagancies, it is very hard, if not
impossible for the Soul to stand long in its full bent to God.

But in Heaven it does so, and will do so for ever, without any relaxation or
remission of its fervor. Christ among the Saints and Angels in Heaven, is as a
mighty Lodestone cast in amongst many Needles, which leap to him, and fix
themselves inseparably upon him. They all act in glory as the fire does here,
to the utmost of their power and ability. There is no note lower, than Glory to
God in the highest.

4 The most spiritual Souls on earth, who live most with God, have, and must
have their daily and frequent intermissions. The necessities of the Body, as
well as the defectiveness of their graces require and necessitate it to be so.
Our hands with Moses will hang down, and grow weary. Our affections will cool
and fall, do what we can.

But as the Spirits of just men made perfect know no remissions in the degree,
so neither any intermissions in the actings of their grace: They shall serve
him day and night in his Temple, Rev. 7.15. You that would purchase the
continuance of your spiritual comforts but for a day, with all that you have in
this World, will there enjoy them at full, without any intermitting throughout
eternity.

5. If the best hearts on earth be at any time more than ordinarily enlarged in
spiritual comforts, they need presently some humbling providence to hide pride
from their eyes. Even Paul himself must have a thorn in the flesh, a messenger
of Satan to buffet him. Bernard could never perform any duty with comfortable
enlargement, but he seemed to hear his own heart whisper thus, been fecisti,
Bernarde, O well done, Bernard.

But in Heaven, the highest comforts are enjoyed in the deepest humility, and
the entire glory is ascribed to God without any unworthy defalcations, Rev.
4.10. They put not the Crown upon their own heads, but Christ's: they cast down
their Crowns, and fall down at the feet of him that sits upon the Throne.

6. All Assemblies for worship in this World are mixed: They consist of
Regenerate, and Unregenerate, living and dead Souls; this spoils the harmony,
and allays the comfort of mutual Communion. In a Congregation consisting of a
1000 persons, Ah! How few comparatively are there that are heartily concerned
in the Duty! But it is not so above. There are ten thousand times ten thousand,
even thousands of thousands before the Throne, loving, adoring, praising, and
triumphing together, and not a jaring string in all their Harps.

7. Here the worship of God is impured, mixed, and adulterated by the sinful
additions and inventions of men. This gracious Souls groan under as an heavy
burden, sighing and praying for Reformation; as knowing they can expect no more
of Gods presence, than there is of his Order and Institution in Worship. But
above, all the Worship is pure, the least pin in the heavenly Tabernacle is
according to the perfect pattern of the divine Will.

8. We have here Duties of diverse kinds and natures to perform. All our time is
not to be spent in loving, praising, and delighting in God: but we must turn
our selves also to searching, watching, and Soul-humbling work. Sometimes we
are called to get up our hearts to the highest praise, and then to humble them
to the dust for sin and judgments. One while to sing his praises, and another
while to sigh even to the breaking of our loins: but the Spirits of just men
made perfect, have but one kind of employment, viz praising, loving and
delighting in God. There is no groaning, sighing, searching, or watching-work
in that state.

9. The most illuminated Believers on Earth have but dark and crude
apprehensions of Christ's intercession work in Heaven, or of the way and manner
in which it is there performed by him. We know indeed, that our High Priest is
for us entered within the vail, Heb. 6.20. That he appears in that most holy
place for us, Heb. 9.24. That he there represents his sufferings for us to God,
standing before him as a Lamb that had been slain, Rev. 5.6. That he offers up
our prayers with his incense to God, Rev. 8.3.

But the immediate intuition of the whole performance by the person of Christ
in Heaven, the beholding of him in his work there, with the smiles and honors,
the delight and satisfaction of the Father in his Person and Work: certainly,
this must be a far different thing, and what must make more deep and suitable
impressions upon our hearts, than ever the most affecting view of them by Faith
at this distance, could do.

10. In such ravishing sights, and joyful ascriptions of glory to him that
s^tteth upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for evermore, all the separated
Spirits of the just are employed and wholly taken up in Heaven as they come in
their several times thither, and will be so employed in that Temple-service
unto the end of the World, when Christ shall deliver up the Kingdom to his
Father, and thenceforth God shall be all in all.

The illustration and confirmation of this assertion we have in these two or
three particulars.

(1). That all the Spirits of just men from the beginning of the World, until
Christ's ascension into Heaven, did enter into Heaven as a place of rest, as a
City prepared for them of God, Heb. 11.16. and did enjoy blessedness and Glory
there: but yet there seems to be an alteration even in Heaven it self, since
the Ascension of Christ into it, and such an alteration as advances the glory
thereof both to Angels and Saints. Dr. Owen's Coristologia, p. 158.
Heaven it self (says one who is now there) was not what it is, before the
entrance of Christ into the Sanctuary for the administration of his Office.
Neither the Saints departed, nor the Angels themselves were participant of that
glory which now they are. Neither yet does this argue any defect in Heaven, or
the state thereof in its primitive constitution: For the perfection of any
state has respect unto that order of things which it is originally suited
unto. Take all things in the order of the first Creation, and with respect
thereunto, Heaven was perfect in Glory from the beginning, Page 355.
etc.

Whatever was their rest, refreshment, and blessedness; whatever were their
enjoyments of the presence of God: yet was there no Throne of Grace erected in
Heaven, no High Priest appearing before it, no Lamb as it had been slain, no
joint ascription of Glory unto him that sits upon the Throne, Prius^p^am ad
no^tra tempora pervintum est. Camero.
and to the Lamb for ever; God having ordained some better thing for us, that
they without us should not be made perfect, Heb. 11.40.

Now both the Angels and Saints in Heaven do behold Christ in his Priestly
Office within that Sanctuary, a sight never seen in Heaven before.

(2) This frame of heavenly Worship will continue as it is, until the end of
the World, and then another alteration will be made in the manner of his
dispensatory Kingdom. For then he must deliver up the Kingdom to God, even the
Father, and then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him, that put all
things under him, that God may be all in all, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor.
15.24, 28. so that as the present state of Heaven is not in all respects, what
it was before Christ's Ascension thither; so after the Consummation of the
Mediatorial Kingdom, and the gathering all the Elect into Glory, it will not in
all respects be what now it is.

Christ will never cease to be the immediate head of the whole glorified
Creation. God having gathered all the Elect, both Angels and Men, unto an head
in him, and he being the Knot or Center of that Collective Body; the whole
frame of the glorified Church would be dissolved, should he lose his relation
of an head to it. Yea, I doubt not but he will for ever continue to be the
medium of Communication betwixt God and his glorified Church: God will still
Communicate himself to us through Christ, and our adherence, love and delight,
will still be through Christ: In a word, whatever change shall be made, the
Person of Christ, and therein his humane nature, shall still continue to be the
eternal Object of Divine Glory, Praise, and Worship, Rev. 22.4.

But when he shall have gathered home all his Elect to glory, Nam si
dispensativum hoc regnum nunquam traditurus esset, nunquam regni naturalis usum
plenum esset recepturus. Junius.
he will resign this dispensatory Kingdom, and become subject ( as Man, and as
Head of that Body which he purchased) to his Father himself, that God may be
all in all, as it is, 1 Cor. 15.28.

(1) All in all, that is, All the Saints shall be filled and abundantly
satisfied, in and from God alone; there shall be no Emptiness, no want, no
complaint: For as there is water enough in one Sea to fill all Rivers, light
enough in one Sun, to illuminate all the World; so all Souls shall be eternally
filled, satisfied, and blessed in one God. Surely there is enough in God for
Millions of Souls; for if there be enough in God for all the Angels, Matthew.
18.10. yea, enough in God for Jesus Christ, Col. 1.19. there must be enough for
all our Souls; the capacity of Angels is larger than ours; the capacity of
Christ is larger than that of Angels: he that fills them, can and will
therefore fill us, or be all in all to us. (2) All in all, that is complete
satisfaction to all the Saints in the absence of all other things, out of which
they were wont to suck some comfort and delight in this World. He will now be
instead of all. Eminently all without them. We shall suck no more sweetness out
of food, sleep, Relations, Ordinances, etc. there will be no more need or use
of them, than there is of Candles in the Sunshine, Rev. 22.5. (3) All in all,
that is, God only shall be loved, praised, and admired by all the Saints; they
shall love no Creature out of God, but all in God, or rather God in them all.
This is that blessed state to which all things tend, for which the Angels and
glorified Souls in Heaven long. Hence it is that there is joy in Heaven upon
the Conversion of any poor sinner on Earth, because thereby the Body of Christ
mystical advances toward its fullness and compleatness, Luke 15.10. no sooner
is a poor Soul struck by the word to the heart, and sent home crying, O sick!
Sick! Sick of sin, and sick for Christ; but the news of it is quickly in
Heaven, and is matter of great joy there, because they wait as well as Christ,
for the time of Consummation. To conclude, Those that went first to Heaven
before Christ's Ascension, were fully at rest in God, and blessed in his
enjoyment, and yet upon Christ's Ascension thither, their happiness was
advanced: it is a new Heaven as it were to feed their eyes upon the Man Christ
Jesus there Those that now stand before the Throne, ravished with the face of
Christ, and ascribing glory to him for ever, are also in a most blessed state,
and are filled with the joy of the Lord. And yet, two things still remain to be
farther done, before they are, as they shall be for ever; viz. the Restitution
of their Bodies, which yet lie in the dust, and the delivering up of the
dispensatory Kingdom, upon the coming in of the fullness of all their fellow
Saints, and after that no more alteration for ever: But they shall be both in
Soul and Body for ever with the Lord. What Tongue of Man or Angel can give us
the complete Emphasis of that word, ever with the Lord? or that, of Gods being
all in all? O what has God prepared for them that love him!
PROP. XII. It pleases God at some times, even in this life, to give some men
the foresight, and foretaste of that Blessedness, which holy separated Souls do
now enjoy, and themselves are shortly to enjoy with God in Glory.
SPecimens and Earnests of Heaven are no unknown things upon earth. As the
Grapes of Eshcol, so the joy of Heaven may be tasted before we come thither,
and these foresights and Praelibations of Heaven are either 1. Extraordinary,
Or, either 2. Ordinary.


1. Extraordinary, for the way and manner; when the Soul is either (1) Rapt
from the Body for a short time, in an Ecstasie, when in a Visional way heavenly
things are presented to it: Or, (2) When the bodily eye is elevated and
strengthened above its natural vigor and ability, to behold the astonishing
Objects of the other World.

(1) Of the first sort and rank, was that famous Rapture of Paul, mentioned 2
Cor. 12.2, 3. I knew a man in Christ fourteen years ago, (whether in the Body I
cannot tell, or whether out of the Body I cannot tell; God knows) such an one
caught up to the Third Heaven, etc. Non constat; an Anima Pauli fuerit tunc a
corpore separata, cum ipse id se nescire fatetur. Unde quid illi circae
absractionem a sensibus reipsa acciderit, affirmare non possumus: videlicet number
mo^tuo Corpore, per separation^m animae, extincti fuerint in eo sensus: vel non
mortuo, cons^piti duntaxat. Col^eg. Connimbr. lib. 3. Art. 3. p. 512.
It Is questionable indeed, whether the Soul of the Apostle were really separated
from his Body, whilst he suffered that Ecstasie: Or whether his senses were
only laid as it were a-sleep for that time; he himself could not determine the
Question, much less can any other: but whether so, or so; this seems evident,
that his senses were for that time utterly useless to him: if his Body was not
dead, it was all one as if it had been so, for any use his Soul then made of
it. In ecstasi feriari omnes potentias praeter intellectum. A^ulen.
In Ecstasies all the Senses and Powers are idle, except the Understanding: his
Soul for that time seemed to be disjoined from his Body, much as a flame of
fire, which you shall sometimes see to play and hover at a distance from the
Wood, and then catching the Fuel again. Probably this was that Trance he fell
into in the Temple when he was praying, mentioned in Acts 22.17.

In this Rapture his Soul ascended above this World, it was caught up into
Paradise into the Third Heaven, the place in which Christ's Soul was after his
death; and there he heard those (...) unspeakable words which it is not lawful
for a man to utter: For alas! poor Mortals cannot pronounce the Shibboleth of
Heaven; the heavenly Inhabitants talk in no other Dialect; but the Language of
Heaven is not properly spoken by any, but the Inhabitants of Heaven. Now, Paul
was not admitted into their Society at that time, as he was at his death, but
was only a Spectator, a stander by, as the Angels are in the Assemblies of the
Saints here on earth. But O what a day was that day to his Soul! It was as one
of the days of Heaven; no words could signify to another man, what he felt,
what he tasted in that hour. Such favors will not be indulged to many; he was
a chosen Vessel, and appointed to extraordinary Sufferings for Christ, and it
was necessary his Supports and Encouragements should be answerable.

Isaiah 6.1, 2. Ezekiel 1.1. Dan. 10.8, 9. Apoc. 1.17.
It was no less extraordinary and wonderful a Vision which Isaiah, Ezekiel,
Daniel, and John had: such Representations of God as overwhelmed them, and made
Nature faint under them; and no wonder, for if the eyes of Creatures be so
weak, that they cannot directly behold such a glorious Creature as the Sun; How
much less can they bear the glorious Excellency and Majesty of God?

(2) And sometimes without an Ecstasie, Representations of Christ and the glory
of Heaven have been made, and the very bodily eye fortified and elevated above
its natural vigor and ability to behold them. Thus it was with Stephen at his
Martyrdom, Acts 7.55, 56. Who being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up
steadfastly into Heaven, and saw the Glory of God, and Jesus standing on the
right hand of God. That this was not a sight of faith, but an extraordinary
sight by the bodily eye, is evident from its effect upon his outward man, it
made his face shine as the face of an Angel.

2. There are also beside these, ordinary and more common foretasts of Heaven
and the glory to come, with which many Believers are favored in this World.
And such are those which come into the heart upon the steady and more fixed
views of the World to come by Faith, and the more raised and Spiritual actings
of grace in duty. Believing we rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory,
1 Pet. 1.8. (...) with a glorified joy, or a joy of the same kind and nature
with the joy of glorified Spirits; though in an inferior and allayed degree.

And yet with the allowance of its allay and rebatement, it is like new Wine
put into old and crazy Bottles, which is ready to make them fly, and would do
so, should they be of any long continuance. Stay me (says the Spouse) with
Flaggons, comfort me with Apples, I am sick of love, Cant. 2.5. The sickness
was not the sickness of desires, or of grief; of that she had complained
before: But the sickness of Love. (i. e.) She was ready to faint under the
insupportable weight of Christ's manifested and sealed Love, not able to bear
what she felt, pained with the Love of Christ; and the desired cure speaks this
to be her Case, Stay me with Flaggons, comfort me with Apples. As if she had
said, Lord, support and under-prop my Soul, for it reels, staggers, and fails
under the pressure and weight of thy Love. Much like the case of an holy man,
who cried out, under the overwhelming sense of the Love of Christ shed abroad
into his heart in Prayer, Hold Lord, hold; thy poor Creature is a Clay Vessel,
and can hold no more. Though these Joys bring not the Soul into a perfect
Ecstasie, they certainly bring it as near as may be to it. Acts and Mon. p. 811.
Mr. Fox tells us of one Giles of Bruxels, a godly Martyr, who in Prison spent
most of his time apart from the rest in secret Prayer; in which his Soul was so
ardent and intent, that he often forgot himself and the time; and when he was
called to Meat, he neither saw, nor heard those that stood by him, till he was
lifted up by the arms, and then he would gently speak to them, as one newly
awaked out of a sweet sleep. These foretasts of Heaven may from the manner of
their conveyance be distinguished into 1. Mediate, and into 2. Immediate.


1. Mediate in and by the previous use and exercise of Faith,
heart-Examination, etc. the Spirit of God concurring with, and blessing of such
duties as these, helps the Soul by them to a sight of its interest in Christ
and the glory to come; which being gained, joy is no more under the Souls
command. I have with good assurance, this account of a Minister, who being
alone in a Journey, and willing to make the best improvement he could of that
days Solitude; set himself to a close Examination of the state of his Soul; and
then of the life to come, and the manner of its being and living in Heaven, in
the views of all those things which are now pure Objects of Faith, and Hope.
After a while, he perceived his thoughts begin to fix, and come closer to these
great and astonishing things, than was usual; and as his mind settled upon them,
his affections began to rise with answerable liveliness and vigor.

He therefore (whilst he was yet Master of his own thoughts) lifted up his
heart to God in a short Ejaculation, that God would so order it in his
Providence, that he might meet with no interruption from Company, or any other
Accident in that Journey, which was granted him: for in all that days journey,
he neither met, overtook, or was overtaken by any. Thus going on his way, his
thoughts began to swell and rise higher and higher, like the waters in
Ezekiel's Vision, till at last, they became an overflowing flood. Such was the
intention of his mind, such the ravishing tastes of heavenly Joys, and such the
full assurance of his interest therein; that he utterly lost the sight and
sense of this World, and all the concerns thereof, and for some hours knew no
more where he was, than if he had been in a deep sleep upon his Bed. At last,
he began to perceive himself very faint, and almost choked with blood, which
running in abundance from his Nose, had discolored his Clothes, and his Horse,
from the Shoulder to the Hoof. He found himself almost spent, and nature to
faint under the pressure of joy unspeakable, and unsupportable; and at last
perceiving a Spring of water in his way, he with some difficulty, alighted to
cleanse and cool his face and hands, which were drenched in Blood, Tears, and
Sweat.

By that Spring he sat down, and washed; earnestly desiring if it were the
pleasure of God, that might be his parting place from this World: He said,
Death had the most aimable face in his eye, that ever he beheld, except the
face of Jesus Christ, which made it so; and that he could not remember (though
he believed he should die there) that he had one thought of his dear Wi^e, or
Children, or any other earthly Concernment.

But having drank of that Spring, his Spirits revived, the Blood stenched, and
he mounted his Horse again, and on he went in the same frame of Spirit, till he
had finished a Journey of near thirty Miles, and came at Night to his Inn.
Where being come, he greatly admired how he came thither; that his Horse,
without his direction, had brought him thither, and that he fell not all that
day, which past not without several Trances of considerable continuance.

Being alighted, the Innkeeper came to him, with some astonishment, (being
acquainted with him formerly) O Sir, said he, what is the matter with you? You
look like a dead man. Friend, replied he, I was never better in my life. Show
me my Chamber, cause my Cloak to be cleansed, burn me a little Wine, and that
is all I desire of you for present. Accordingly it was done, and a Supper sent
up, which he could not touch, but requested of the people, they would not
trouble or disturb him for that Night. All this Night passed without one wink
of sleep, though he never had a sweeter Nights rest in all his life. Still,
still, the joy of the Lord overflowed him, and he seemed to be an Inhabitant of
the other World. The next Morning being come, he was early on Horseback again,
fearing the Divertisements in the Inn might bereave him of his joy, for he said
it was now with him, as with a man that carries a rich treasure about him, who
suspects every Passenger to be a Thief; but within a few hours he was sensible
of the ebbing of the Tide, and before Night, though there was an heavenly
serenity and sweet peace upon his Spirit, which continued long with him, yet
the Transports of joy were over, and the fine edge of his delight blunted. He
many years after called that day, one of the days of Heaven, and professed he
understood more of the life of Heaven by it, than by all the Books he ever
read, or Discourses he ever entertained about it. This was indeed an
extraordinary foretast of Heaven for degree, but it came in the ordinary way
and method of Faith, and Meditation.

2. There are also immediate Illapses of Heavenly joy into the hearts of
Believers at some times; of which we may speak as the Prophet does of the Dew
and Rain, that it tarrieth not for man, nor waits for the Sons of men; a
surprising light and joy like that Cant. 6.12. Or ever I was aware; my soul
made me like the Chariots of Aminadab.

There is a witness of the Spirit, distinct from that of Water and Blood, 1
John 5.8. that is, a witness, or sealing which comes not in an Argumentative
way, by reasoning from either justification, or sanctification: But seems to
come immediately from the Spirit. I know both sorts of Testimones, how clear
and sweet soever they are for the present, are liable afterward to be called
into question; but certainly during the abode of them upon the Soul, they are
no less than a short Salvation, a real participation of the joy of the Lord.
And that which makes them so ravishing and transporting, is (1) The infinite
weight with which the concerns of Eternity lie upon the hearts and thoughts of
the People of God; nothing lies so near to their Spirits in all the World, as
the Matters of Salvation do, and have still done ever since God thoroughly
awakened them in their first effectual Conviction. Nec calor, nec sanguis, nec
sensus, nec vox superesset. Ep. ad Melanct.
It Is said of Luther, there was such a strong impression of God upon his Spirit
in his first Conviction, that there was neither Heat, nor Blood, nor Sense, nor
Speech discernable in him: though it rise to that height but in few, yet it
settles in a deep, serious, and most solemn sense, and Solicitude in all. This
heightens the Joy. (2) The restlessness of the Soul whilst Matters of Salvation
hang in a dubious sense, must needs proportionably overflow it with joy when
God shall clear it. It was the Saying of one, and is the sense of many more, I
have born (said she) seven Children, and they have all cost me dear, yet could
I be well content to bear them all over again, for one glimpse of the Love of
God to my Soul. This heightens the joy above expression.


And now, having explained the substance of the Doctrine in these twelve
Propositions; it remains that as a Mantissa or Cast upon the whole, I farther
clear what belongs to this Subject, in the Solution of several Queries about
the Soul in its unbodied and separate state; and though the Nature of some of
these Queries may seem too curious, yet I shall labor to speak according to
the rules of Sobriety, and contain my self within the line of modesty, in what
I shall speak about them: And the first is this, QUERIE I.
Querie 1.
Whether any Notion or Conception can be formed of a separate Soul, and if so,
how we may be assisted duly to form it, and conceive of it?

Sol.
Solution.. 1.
1. It must be acknowledged not only very difficult, but an impossible task for
a Soul immersed in matter, and so unacquainted with its own Nature and Powers,
as it is in its embodied state, to gain a perfect, clear, and adequate
Conception of what it shall be in the World to come. Expect not then a perfect
image, much less any magnificent draught of this excellent Creature: This would
be the same thing as to go about to depaint the Sun in its Glory, Motions, and
Influences with a Pencil. I shall think I have done enough, if I can but give
you any umbrage or faint representation of this sublime and Spiritual Being,
and the manner of its subsisting and acting out of the body. For seeing it is
by nature invisible, and in most of its actions (whilst it is in the state of
composition) it makes the same use of the body and natural Spirits, that a
Scribe does of his Pen and Ink, without which he cannot decipher the Characters
which are formed in his fancy: it must needs be difficult to conceive, how it
subsists and acts in its separate state.

. 2.
But though we acknowledge it to be a great difficulty to trace it beyond the
Limits of this World, though we perceive nothing to depart from the Body at the
instant of its expiration, but a puff of breath, which vanishes like Smoke into
the air. And though Atheistical Wits daringly pronounce an immaterial
substance to be a mere Iargon, Hobs Leviathan, cap. 34.
a Contradiction in terminis; which being joined together, destroy one another:
Yet all this does not make the Notion of a separate Soul impossible, much less
undermine its existence in its unbodied and lovely state; the Scriptures having
so abundantly obviated all these Atheistical Suggestions, by so many plain
Discoveries of the Happiness of some, and Misery of others after this Life.
Yea, my Text answers us, That Death is so far from destroying or annihilating,
that it perfects the Spirits of the Just.

. 3.
There can be no more difficulty in conceiving of a separate Soul, than there
is in conceiving of an Angel. For it is certain, that a separated Soul, and an
Angel, are the liveliest and clearest representations of each other, in the
whole number of created Beings. Dr. More's Immortality of the Soul, lib. 2.
cap. 17. 4. and 8.

Bell. de Ascen. mentis.


Some make the difference betwixt them little more, than of a Sword in the
Scabbard, from one that is naked. A Soul is but a Genius in the Body, and a
Genius (or Angel) is a Soul out of a Body. An Angel (says another) is a
complete and perfect Soul, a Soul an imperfect and incomplete Angel.

The separate Soul does not become an Angel by putting off the Body; they are,
and still will be diverse Species, but in this they agree, that in their common
nature they are both Spirits, that is, Immaterial Substances, endued with
Understanding, Will, and active power. And I know not why the one should not be
as intelligible as the other; or if there be any advantage, the Soul certainly
must have it; seeing our acquaintance with Souls is much more intimate than
with Angels. Angels indeed have larger Capacities, and have no natural
inclination to be embodied as Souls have, but their common Nature, as they are
Spirits, is the same: And if we can conceive of one, we may also of the other.

. 4.
But the difficulty seems to lie in this, how the Soul can subsist alone,
without a Body; and how the habits of Grace which were infused into it in this
life by Sanctification, do inhere in it, or can be reduced into act by it when
it has no bodily Organs to work by.

As to the first, there is no difficulty at all, if we once rightly apprehend
what is meant when we call it a Spiritual Substance; that is, a Being by it
self, independent upon any other Creature as to its existence, as was opened
before: The Soul depends not for its life upon the Body, but the Body upon the
Soul. It is the same Sword when it is drawn, as it was when sheathed in its
Scabbard; the Soul is as much it self when separated from the Body, as it was
when united with it; its Being is independent on it: it can live and act in a
Body, and it can do so without it. For it is a distinct Being from its Body, a
substantial Being by it self. And

. 5.
As for the habits of grace which accompany it to Heaven, it would much
facilitate our apprehension of it, if we but compare acquired and infused
habits with each other. It Is true, they are of different Natures and Originals,
but the Soul is the subject of them both, and their inhesion and improvement is
much after the same manner.

Take we then an acquired habit into consideration, which is nothing else, but
a permanent Quality rendering the subject of it prompt and ready to perform a
work with ease: Suppose that of Music, or Writing, and we shall find these
habits to be safely lodged in the Soul, as well when the body is laid into the
deepest sleep, which is the Image of death, as when it is awake and most
active; for they are both Artists when asleep, and need learn no new Rules to
play, or write when you awake them: which shows the habits to be permanently
rooted in their minds.

Infused habits of grace are as deeply rooted in the Soul, yea, deeper than any
acquired habit can be: For when Knowledge and Tongues shall be done away, love
abides, 1 Cor. 13.8. viz. after death, when the Body is asleep in the Grave.

. 6.
Add hereto, that these habits of grace are inseparably rooted or lodged in a
subject which is by nature a Spirit, that is to say, The Understanding and Will
are the primary Faculties of the Soul, and are therefore called Inorganical;
because not affixed to any Member of the Body as the sensitive Appetite and
locomotive Powers are to their proper Organs. The Soul therefore has the free
use and exercise of them in its separate state.
an intelligent active Being, able to use its faculties of Understanding, Will,
and Affections, and consequently in their use to reduce these habits of Grace
inherent in them into act; without the help of the Body: For to suppose
otherwise, were to dispirit it, and destroy the very nature of it.

Moreover, let this Spirit thus furnished with gracious habits, be now
considered in separation from the Body, in which state it enjoys and
rejoices in a double Privilege it never had before, viz. Perfection both of
it self, and of its Graces, and the nearest access to God it is capable of, 2
Cor. 5.6. Absent from the Body, and present with the Lord. It has now no body
to clog or cloud it, nor can it complain of distance from God, as it did in
this World. O at what rate must we conceive the love and delight of a Soul
under these great advantages to cast out their very Spirits, as I may say, in
their glorious Activities and Exercises. Well then, here you find A Spirit
naturally endued with Understanding, Will, and Affections: in these Faculties
and Affections the habits of Grace permanently rooted, which therefore
accompany it in its ascension to glory: an ability to use and exercise these
Faculties and Graces, and that in a more excellent degree and manner than it
did, or could in this World, the subject and habits inherent, being now both
made perfect: The clog of flesh knocked off, and all distance from God removed,
by its coming home to him, even as near as the capacity of the Soul can admit.
Conceive such a Spirit so qualified, now rankt in its proper order among
innumerable other holy and blessed Spirits which surround the Throne of God,
beholding his face with infinite delectation, and acting all its Powers and
Graces to the highest in the worshipping, praising, loving, and admiring him
that sits on the Throne, and the Lamb for evermore. And then you have a
true, though imperfect Idea or Notion of the Spirit of a just man made perfect.

I will not here make use of the other Glass, to represent a damned Soul,
separate for a time from its Body, and for ever from the Lord; that will be
shown you in its proper place.

Querie 2.
QUERIE II.
Whether there be any difference in the separation of Gracious Souls from their
Bodies; and if so, in what particulars does the difference appear?

Sol.. 1.
For the clear stating and satisfying of this Question, I will lay down some
things negatively, and some things positively about it. On the negative part I
desire two things may be noted.

1. First, That there is no difference betwixt the separation of one gracious
Soul, and another in point of safety. Every regenerate Soul is fully secured in
and by Jesus Christ from the danger of perishing, and is out of hazard of the
Wrath to come.

This must needs be so, because all that are in Christ are equally justified by
the imputation of Christ's Righteousness, without difference to them all, Romans
3.22. Even the Righteousness of God which is by Faith of Jesus Christ unto all,
and upon all them that believe, for there is no difference: By virtue whereof,
they are all equally secured from Wrath to come, one as well as another: as all
that sailed with Paul, so all that die in Christ come safe to the shore of
Glory, and not one of them is lost. The sting of Death smites none that are in
Christ.

2. Secondly, There is no difference betwixt the departing Souls of just men,
in respect of the supporting presence of God with them in that their hour of
distress; that Promise belongs to them all, Psalm. 91.15. I will be with him in
trouble, and so does that, Heb. 13.5. I will never leave thee, nor forsake
thee. Their God is certainly with them all, to order the Circumstances of their
death, and all the Occurrences of that day, to his glory, and their good.
Supports I have (said a good man in such an hour) though Suavities I want; and
so they have also who meet with the hardest tug at death.

But notwithstanding their equality in these Privileges, there is a great
difference betwixt the departing Souls of just men. And this difference is
manifest both in the I. External Circumstances of their death. II. Internal
Circumstances of their death.


I. In the External Circumstances of their death, all have not one and the same
passage to Heaven in all respects; for (1) First some go thither by the
ordinary road of a natural death from their Beds, and the arms of lamenting
friends, to the arms and bosom of Jesus Christ: But others swim through the
Red Sea to Canaan, from a Scaffold to the Throne, from a Gibbet or Stake to
their Fathers house, from insulting Enemies to their triumphant Brethren, the
Palmbearing Multitude. This is a rough, but honorable way to Glory. (2) Some
lie long under the hand of death, before it dispatch them, it approaches them
by slow and lingering paces, they feel every step of death distinctly as it
comes on toward them: But others are favored with a quick dispatch, a short
passage from hence to Glory. Hezekiah feared a pineing sickness, Isa. 38.10,
12. what he feared, many feel. O how many Days, yea Weeks and Months, have many
gracious Souls dwelt upon the brink of the Pit, crying, How long Lord, how
long! (3) The pains and throes of death are more acute and sharp to some of
Gods people, than to others: Death is bitter in the most mild and gentle form
of it. Two such dear and intimate Friends as the Soul and Body are, cannot part
without some tears, groans, or sighs; and those more deep and emphatical than
the groans and sighs of the living use to be: But yet (comparatively speaking)
the death of one may be styled sweet and easy to another. Latimer and Ridley
found it so, though burnt in the same flame.


In this respect all things come alike to all, and the same difference is found
in the worst, as well as in the best men: Some like Sheep are laid in the
Grave, Psalm. 49.14. others die in the bitterness of their Soul, Job 21.25. and
by this no man knows either love or hatred.

II. There are beside these, some remarkable. Internal differences in the
dissolution of good men; the sum whereof is in this, 1. That some gracious
Souls have a very hard, strait, difficult entrance into Heaven: just as it is
with Ships that sail by a very bare wind, all their art, care, and pains, will
but just weather some head-land or Cape: they steer fast by some dangerous Rock
or Sand, and with a thousand fears and dangers, win their Port at last. Saved
they are, but yet (to use the Apostles phrase) scarcely saved, or saved as by
fire. And this difficulty arises to them from one or all these causes: (1) It
ordinarily arises from the weakness of their faith, which is in many Souls
without either the light of evidence, or strength of reliance: neither able to
dissolve their doubts, nor steadily repose their hearts, and thus they die,
much at the rate they lived, poor doubting and cloudy, though gracious Souls.
They can neither speak much of the comfort of past experiences, nor of the
present foretasts of Heaven. (2) The violent assaults and batteries of
temptations make the passage exceeding difficult to some. O the sharp conflicts
and dreadful combats many poor Souls endure upon a deathbed! O the charges of
hypocrisy fortified by neglects of duty, formality, and bye-ends in duty,
falls into sin after conviction and humiliation, etc. all which the Soul is apt
to yield to, and admit the dreadful conclusion.

These are the last, and therefore oft-times the most violent conflicts. The
malice, of Satan will send them halting to Heaven, if he cannot bar them out of
it.

(3) To conclude. The hidings of Gods face, puts terror into the face of death,
and makes a dying day a dark and gloomy day. All darkness disposes to fear, but
none like inward darkness. They must, like a Ship in distress, venture into the
Harbor in the dark, though they see not their Landmarks.
2. But others have the privilege of an (...), easy death, a comfortable and
sweet passage into glory, through the broad gate of assurance, 2 Pet. 1.11.
Even an abundant entrance into the everlasting Kingdom. What a difference does
God make, not only betwixt those that have grace, and those that have none; but
betwixt gracious Souls themselves in this matter! The things which usually make
an easy passage to Heaven are (1) A pardon cleared, Isai. 33.24. The Sense of
pardon swallows up the sense of pain. (2) An heart weaned from this world, Heb.
11.9, 13, 16. An heart loosed from the World, is a foot out of the snare.
Mortified limbs are cut off from the Body with little pain. (3) Fervent love to
Christ, and longings to be with him, Philip. 1.23. He that loves Christ
fervently, must needs loath absence from Christ proportionably. (4) Purity and
peace of Conscience make a deathbed soft and easy. The strains and wounds of
Conscience in the time of life, are so many Thorns in our Bed or pillow in the
time of Death, 1 John 3.21. But integrity gives boldness. (5) The work of
obedience faithfully finished, or a steady course of holiness throughout our
life, is that which usually yields much peace and joy in death, Acts 20.24. (6)
But above all, the presence of the Comforter with us in that cloudy and dark
day, turns it into one of the days of Heaven, 1 Pet. 4.14. And thus you see,
though all dying Christians be equally safe, and all supported and carried
through by the power of God; yet their farewels to the Body are not alike
cheerful. There are many external, and internal circumstantial differences in
the deaths of good men, as well as a substantial and essential difference
betwixt all their deaths, and the death of a wicked man.



QUEST. III. Whether any Souls have notices, and forewarnings given them by
Signs, or Predictions in an extraordinary way, of their approaching Separation?
Terms opened.
The terms of this Question need a little explanation. Let us therefore briefly
consider what is meant by signs, what by predictions, and what by extraordinary
signs and predictions.

A sign is that which represents something else to us than that which is seen,
Sign^m est quod aliud repraesentat quam quod cernitur.
or heard. And a sign of death, is that which gives notice to our minds that
our departure is at hand.

A Prediction is a forewarning of a person more plainly and expressly of any
thing which is afterward to fall out or come to pass: Praedic^re est aliquem
de re aliq^a eventu^a praemonere.
and a prediction of death is an express notice or message informing us of our
own, or of another Death, to the end the mind may be actually disposed to an
expectation thereof.

Of Signs, some are ordinary and natural, some extraordinary and supernatural,
or at least preternatural.

There are natural symptoms and prognostics of Death which are common to most
dying persons, and by which Physicians inform themselves and others of the
state of the Sick. These are out of this Question, we have nothing to do with
them here, but I am inquiring after extraordinary signs and predictions by
words, or things forewarning us immediately, or by others of our approaching
death. The Question is whether such intimations of Death be at any time truly
given unto men; or whether we are to take them for fabulous reports, and
superstitious fancies.

For the Negative, Reasons for the Negative.
the following grounds are laid.

REASON I.
The sufficient ordinary provision God has made in this case, renders all such
extraordinary notices and intimations of our Death needless: And be sure the
most wise God does nothing in vain. We have three standing, ordinary, and
sufficient means to premonish us of our departure hence, viz. the Scriptures,
Reason, and daily Examples of Mortality before our eyes. The Scriptures tell us
our life is but a vapor, which appears for a little while, and then
vanishes away, James 4.14. That our days are but to an hand breadth, and that
every man in his best estate is vanity, Psalm. 39.5.

Reason tells us, so feeble a tie as our breath is, can never secure our lives
long. The living know that they must dye, Eccles. 9.5. The radical moisture
which is daily consuming by the flame of life, must needs be spent ere long.

And all the Graves we see opened so frequently are sufficient warnings, that
we our selves must shortly follow. Therefore as there was no need of Manna,
when bread might be had in an ordinary way; so neither is there need of
extraordinary signs, when God has abundantly furnished us with standing and
ordinary means for this purpose.

REASON II.
And as the Scriptures render such signs needless, so they seem to be directly
against them. Christ commands us to watch, because we know not in what hour the
Lord comes. Yea, even Isaac himself, an extraordinary person, and endued with
a Spirit of Prophecy, whereby he foretold the condition of his Sons after him,
yet it is said, Genesis 27.2. That he knew not the day of his death. And it is not
reasonable to think that common persons should know that, which extraordinary
and prophetic persons knew not.

REASON III.
All mankind belong either to God, or the Devil. To such as belong to God, such
extraordinary warnings are needless, for they have a watchful principle within
them which continually prompts them to mind their change; and besides, death
cannot endanger those that are in Christ, how suddenly or unexpectedly soever
it should befall them.

And for wicked men, it cannot be thought God should favor and privilege them
in this matter above his own children; and as for Satan, he knows not the time
of their death himself: and if he did, it would thwart his design and interest
to discover it to them, Luke 11.21. So that upon the whole, it should seem such
signs and predictions are of no use, and the relations and reports of them
fabulous.

But though these reasons make the common and daily use of such signs and
predictions needless, E contra.
yet they destroy not the credibility of them in all cases, and at all times.
For I. There are recorded instances in Scripture of premonitions and
predictions of the death of persons. Thus the death of Abijah was foretold to
his Mother by the Prophet, and the precise hour thereof, which fell out
answerably, 1 King 14.6, 12. And thus the death of the King of Assyria was
foretold exactly both as to kind, and place, Isaiah 37.7, 37, 38. II. These
predictions serve to other ends and uses sometimes, than the preparation of the
persons warned, even to display the foreknowledg, power and justice of God in
marking out his Enemies for ruin. And thus the Lord is known by the judgments
that he executes, Psalm. 9.16.


Thus Mr. Knox predicted the very place and manner of the death of the Lord of
Grange. Clark's Lives. p. 277.
You have sometime seen the courage and constancy of the Lord of Grange in the
cause of God, and now that unhappy man is casting himself away. I pray you go
to him from me (said Mr. Knox) and tell him that unless he forsake that wicked
course he is in, the Rock wherein he confideth, shall not defend him, nor the
carnal wisdom of that man (meaning the young Leshington), whom he counts half
a God, shall help him: but he shall be shamefully pulled out of that nest, and
his carcass hung before the Sun. And even so it fell out the following year,
when the Castle was taken, and his Body hanged out before the Sun. Thus God
exactly fulfilled the prediction of his death.

The same Mr. Knox in the year 1566. being in the Pulpit at Edinburgh, upon the
Lords day, a paper was given up to him among many others, wherein these words
were scoffingly written concerning the Earl of Murray, who was slain the day
before, Take up the man, whom ye accounted another God. At the end of the
Sermon, Mr. Knox bewailed the loss that the Church and state had by the death
of that virtuous man, and then added, There is one in this company that makes
this horrible murder, the subject of his mirth, for which all good men should
be sorry; but I tell him he shall dye where there shall be none to lament him.
The man that wrote the Paper, was one Thomas Metellan, a young Gentleman, who
shortly after in his Travels, died in Italy, having none to assist, or lament
him.

III. And others have had premonitions and signs of their own deaths, which
accordingly fell out. And these premonitions have been given them, sometimes by
strong irresistible impressions upon their minds, sometimes in dreams, and
sometimes by unusual elevations of their Spirits in duties of Communion with
God.

1. Some have had strong and irresistible impressions of their approaching
change made upon their minds. So had Sir Anthony Wingfield who was slain at
Breast, Anno 1594. At his undertaking of that expedition, Sir John Norris his
Expedition, p. 46.
he was strongly persuaded it would be his death; and therefore so settled and
disposed of his Estate, as one that never reckoned to return again. And the day
before he died, he took order for the payment of his debts, as one that
strongly presaged the time was now at hand, which accordingly fell out the next
day.

Much of the same nature was that of the late Earl of Marleburrough, who fell
in the Holland War. He not only presaged his own fall in that Encounter, (which
was exactly answered in the event) but left behind him that memorable and
excellent Letter, which evidenced to all the World, what deep fixed
apprehensions of Eternity it had left upon his Spirit. Many examples of this
nature might be produced, of such as have in their perfect health foretold
their own death; and others who have dropped such passages as were afterward
better understood by their sorrowful friends, than when they first dropped from
their lips.

2. Others have been premonished of their death by Dreams, sometimes their own,
and sometimes others. The learned and judicious Amyraldus gives us this well
attested relation of Lewis of Bourbon, Amyraldus of divine Dreams, p. 122, 123.
That a little before his journey from Dreux, he dreamed that he had fought
three successful Battles, wherein his three great Enemies were slain, but that
at last he himself was mortally wounded, and that after they were laid one upon
another, he also was laid upon the dead Bodies. The event was remarkable; for
the Marshall of St. Andree was killed at Dreux, the Duke of Guise at Orleans,
the Constable of Montmorency at St. Denis: and this was the Triumvirate which
had sworn the ruin of those of the Religion, and the destruction of that
Prince. At last he himself was slain at Basack, as if there had been a
continuation of deaths and funerals

Suetonius in the life of Julius Caesar, tells us that the night before he was
slain, he had diverse premonitions thereof, for that night all the doors and
windows of his chamber flew open, his wife also dreamed that Caesar was slain,
and that she had him in her arms. The next day he was slain in Pompey's Court,
having received three and twenty wounds in his Body.

Pamelius in the life of Cyprian tells us for a most certain and well attested
truth, that upon his first entrance into Carubis (the place of his banishment)
it was revealed to him in a dream, or vision, that upon that very day
twelvemonth, he should be consummate: which accordingly sell out; for a little
before the time prefixed, there came suddenly two Apparators to bring him
before the new Proconsul Galeius, Pamelius in vita Cyprian.
by whom he was condemned, as having been a Standard Bearer of his Sect, and an
Enemy of the Gods. Whereupon he was condemned to be beheaded, a multitude of
Christians following him crying, Let us die together with him.

And as remarkable is that recorded by the learned and ingenious Doctor Stern,
of Mr. Usher of Ireland, a man, says he, Dr. Sterne's disse^tatio de morte, p.
163.
of great integrity, dear to others by his merits, and my kinsman in blood: who
upon the eighth day of July, 1657. went from this to a better World. About four
of the clock the day before he died, a Matron, who died a little before, and
whilst living was dear to Mr. Usher, appeared to him in his sleep, and invited
him to sup with her the next night: he at first denied her, but she more
vehemently pressing her request on him, at last he consented, and that very
night he died.

I have also the fullest assurance that can be, of the truth of this following
Narrative. A person yet living was greatly concerned about the welfare of his
dear Father and Mother who were both shut up in London in the time of the great
Contagion in 1665. Many Lettets he sent to them, and many hearty prayers to
Heaven for them. But about a fortnight before they were infected, he fell about
break of day into this dream, That he was in a great Inn which was full of
company, and being very desirous to find a private room, where he might feek
God for his parents life, he went from room to room, but found company in them
all; at last casting his eye into a little chamber which was empty, he went
into it, locked the door, kneeled down by the outside of the bed, fixing his
eyes upon the plaisterd wall within side the bed; and whilst he was vehemently
begging of God the life of his Friends, there appeared upon the plaster of the
wall before him the Sun and the Moon, shining in their full strength. The sight
at first amazed and discomposed him so far, that he could not continue his
Prayer, but kept his eye fixed upon the body of the Sun; at last a small line
or ring of black no bigger than that of a Text pen circled the Sun, which
increasing sensibly, eclipsed in a little time the whole Body of it, and turned
it into a blackish color; which done, the figure of the Sun was immediately
changed into a perfect Death's head, and after a little while vanished quite
away. The Moon still continued shining as before, but whilst he intently beheld
it, it also darkened in like manner, and turned also into another Death's head,
and vanished. This made so great an impression upon the beholder's mind, that
he immediately awaked in confusion and perplexity of thoughts about his dream;
and awakning his wife, related the particulars to her with much emotion and
concernment; but how to apply it he could not presently tell, only he was
satisfied that the dream was of an extraordinary nature. At last Ioseph's dream
came to his thoughts with the like Emblems, and their interpretation, which
fully satisfied him that God had warned and prepared him thereby for a sudden
parting with his dear Relations, which answerably fell out in the same order,
his Father dying that day fortnight following, and his Mother just a month
afterward.

I know there is much vanity in dreams, and yet I am fully satisfied some are
weighty significant, and declarative of the purposes of God.

3. Lastly, An unusual and extraordinary elevation of the Soul to God, and
enlargement in Communion with him, has been a signifying forerunner of the
death of some good men. For as the Body has its levamen anteferale, lightning
before death, and is more vegete and brisk a little before its dissolution; so
it is sometimes with the Soul also. I have known some persons to arrive on a
sudden, to such heights of love to God, and vehement longings to be dissolved,
that they might be with Christ, that I could not but look upon it, as Christ
did upon the box of Ointment, as done against their death. And so indeed it
has proved in the event.

Thus it was with that renowned Saint, Mr. Brewen of Stapleford, as he excelled
others in the holiness of his life, so he much excelled himself toward his
death; his motions toward Heaven being then most vigorous and quick. The day
before his last sickness, he had such extraordinary enlargements of heart in
his Closet-Duty, that he seemed to forget all the concernments of his Body, and
this lower World. And when his wife told him, Sir, I fear you have done your
self hurt with rising so early; he answered: If you had seen such glorious
things as I saw this morning in private prayer with God, you would not have
said so: for they were so wonderful and unspeakable, that whether I was in the
Body, or out of the Body, with Paul, I cannot tell.

And so it was with learned and holy Mr. Rivet, who seemed as a man in Heaven,
just before he went thither. And so if has been with thousands beside these. I
confess it is not the lot of every gracious Soul, (as was showed you in the
last Question) nor does it make any difference as to the safety of the Soul,
whatever it makes as to comfort. Let all therefore labor to make sure their
Union with Christ, and live in the daily exercises of grace in the duties of
Religion; and then, though God should give them no such extraordinary warnings
one way or another, they shall never be surprised by death to their loss, let
it come never so unexpectedly upon them.

Quest.
It may be also queried whether Satan by his Instruments may not foretell the
death of some men? How else did the Witch of Ender foretell the death of Saul?
And the Southsayers the death of Caesar upon the Ides, (i. e.) the fifteenth
day of March, which was the fatal day to him?

Sol.
Foreknowledg of things to come which appear not in their next causes, is
certainly the Lords Prerogative; Isai. 41.23. Whatever therefore Satan does in
this matter, must be done either by conjecture, or commission. As to the case
of Saul, it is not to be questioned but that he knowing the Kingdom was made to
David by promise, and that the Lord was departed from Saul, and saw how near
the Armies were to a Battle, might strongly conjecture and conclude, and
accordingly tell him, To morrow thou shall be with me, 1 Samuel 28.19.

And so for the death of Caesar, The Devil knew the conspiracy was strong
against him, and the Plot laid for that day; and so it was both easy for him
to reveal it to the South-sayers, and his interest to do it: thereby to bring
that cursed Art into reputation.

As for other signs and forewarnings of death, by the unusual resort of doleful
Creatures, as Owls and Ravens, vulgarly accounted Ominous, Wall-watches, upon
this account called Death-watches; and the eating of wearing-apparel by Rats: I
look upon them generally as supertitious fancies, not worthy to be regarded
among Christians. God may, but I know not what ground we have to believe that
he does, commissionate such Creatures to bring us the message of death from
him. To conclude therefore,

Let no man expect or depend upon any such extraordinary premonitions and
warnings of his change, or neglect his daily work and duty of preparation for
it. We have warnings in the Word, in the examples of Mortality frequently
before us, in all the diseases and decays we often feel in our own Bodies: and
by the signs of the times, which threaten death and desolation. Be ye therefore
always ready, for ye know not in what watch of the night your Lord comes.

QUEST. IV. Whether separated Souls have any knowledge of, or commerce and
intercourse with men in this life: and if not, What is to be thought of the
Apparitions of the Dead?
1. By separated Souls, understand the departed Souls both of the Godly and
Ungodly indifferently: and not as it is restrained to one sort only in the
Text; for of both it is pretended there are frequent Apparitions after death.

2. By the knowledge such Souls are supposed to have after death both of
persons and things in this lower World, we understand not a general knowledge,
which one fort of them have of the state and condition of the Church militant
on earth; for this we think cannot be denied to the Spirits of the just made
perfect, seeing they are still fellow Members with us of the same mystical body
of Christ, and do behold our High Priest appearing before God, and offering up
our prayers for us; and long for the consummation of the Body of Christ as well
as cry for vengeance against the persecutors thereof, Rev. 6. 10. Nor do I
think those words, Isai. 63.16. repugnant hereunto, Abraham is ignorant of us,
and Israel acknowledges us not. For I look upon the import of those words only
as an humble acknowledgment of their defection, which rendered them unworthy
that their Forefathers should own or acknowledge them any more for their
children, Job. 14. 21. Eccles. 9. 5,6. John 19.25.
and not as implying their utter ignorance or total oblivion of the Churches
state on earth.

But I here understand such a particular knowledge of our personal states and
conditions, as they once had when they dwelt amongst us in the Body, and this
seems to be denied them by those Scriptures alleged against it in the margent.

3. By commerce and intercourse, understand not their intercession with God for
us, which the Papists affirm; but their concernments about our natural or civil
interest in this World, so as to be useful to our persons, by warning us of
death, or dangers; or to our Estates, by disquieting such as wrong us, in not
fulfilling the Wills and Testaments they once made; or by giving us notice by
words or signs of the death of our friends who died at a distance from us, or
come to some violent and untimely end.

The sense of the Words being thus determined, and the Question so stated, I
will for the resolution of it give you 1. The strength of what I find offered
for the Affirmative. 2. The general Concessions, or what may be granted. 3. My
own judgment about it, with the grounds thereof.


(1) Some there are even among the learned and judicious who are for the
Affirmative part of the Question, and do with much confidence assert, that
departed Souls both know our particular concerns in this world and intermeddle
with them: confirming their assertion both by reasons to convince us that it
may be so, and variety of instances that it is so. I will produce both the one,
and the other, and give them a due consideration and censure.

The substance of what is pleaded for the affirmative I find thus collected and
improved by Dr. Stern a learned Physician in Ireland, Dissentatio de morte, a
p. 208. ad p. 214.
in his Book entitled a Dissertation concerning Death, where he offers us these
four Arguments to convince, that is possible for departed Souls thus to appear,
and perform such offices for their Friends on Earth.

Argument I.
ANgels by command from God are useful and helpful to men; Angeli jussu Dei
hominibus opitulantur, hand quaquam ambigitur; unde animas a corpore solutas
sese reb s humanis miscere comprobari videtur. Sequtlae sundamentum duplex est,
prius, quod animae separatae Angeli sunt, saltem Angelis aequales, posterius,
quod magis idonti sunt quibus officium generi humano succurrendi demandetur,
quam Spi^itus inter quos, and corpus nullus unquam intercessit nexus, etc.
they are the Saints Guardians, and it is probable that each Christian has his
peculiar Angel: whence it will follow that separated Souls do mingle themselves
with humane affairs, and that because they are Angels, at least equal unto
Angels, Luke 20.36. Besides, they being Spirits that were once embodied, must
needs be more fit for this employment, than those who never had any tie at all
to a Body: unless we can imagine them to have lost the remembra^^^ of all that
ever they did and suffered in the Body, as also that they put off and buried
all, their affections to us with their Bodies, which is hard to think. Even as
Christ our High Priest is qualified for that office above all others in Heaven,
because he once dwelt and suffered in a Body like ours here upon Earth; so
separated Souls are qualified above all other Spirits who are unrelated to
Bodies of flesh.

Argument II.
THE Church triumphant and militant are but one Body, Ecclesia est corpus unum,
cujus membra quo meliora, to magis ad aliis) ejusdem corporis membris
o^it^landum sunt propensa; hujus autem corporis pars altera est triumphans in
coelis, altera militans in terris: illa melior, hec opis magis indiga, etc.
and by how much better the triumphant are than the militant, by so much the
more propense they are to succor and help the other that stand in need of it.
This being the case, we cannot imagine but they are inclined to perform all
good Offices for us; for else they should do less for us now they are in a
state of highest perfection in Heaven, than they did, or were willing to do in
their imperfect state on Earth.

Argument III.
A Will or Testament (as Vlpian defines it) is the just sentence or declaration
of our minds concerning that which we would have done after our decease.
Testamentum (Ulpiano definiente) est voluntatis nostra justa sententia, de co
quod post mortem nostram fieri volumus. Testamentum autem tanquam res sacra ab
omnibus gentibus religios^ observatur, Gal. 3.15. Ratio autem tam religiosa
taniq; universalis observantia est, quoniam animas little qui Testamenta
condiderant, etiam suam post mortem, in tadem voluntate perseverare, ejus
complementa curare, ac deinque, ejus vel executrices, vel non praestila
vindices esse praesumitur.
These Testaments have always, and among all Nations, been religiously
observed, as the Apostle witnesses Gal. 3.15. The reasons of this so religious
observance are a presumption that those who made them when a live, continue in
the same mind and will after death, that they take care for the fulfilling of
them, and revenge the nonperformance upon the unjust Executors. For otherwise
there can be no reason why so great a stress should be laid upon the Will of
the Dead, if they care not whether their Wills be performed or no. Why should
we be so solicitous and studious about it, and pay so great reverence to it,
but on this account?

Argument IV.
In sacris Scripturis consulere mortuos pa^s^m prohibetur, ut Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11.
Sed si homines a mortuis non suscitentur, legibus hand opus est; and si
mortuirogati non aliquando responderent, ab hominibus haudquaquam
co^^^^erentur. Stern de Morte, ubi sup.
THe Scriptures forbid consultations with the Dead, Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. This
prohibition supposes some did consult them and received answers from them;
which must needs imply some commerce betwixt the Living and the Souls that are
departed. And considering he had before forbidden their consultation with the
Devil, it appears that here we must needs understand the very Souls of the
Dead, and not the Devil personating them only.

These are the Arguments of this learned Author for the Affirmative, which he
closes with two necessary Cautions; First, That this lays no foundation for
religious Worship or Invocation of departed Souls. Those that are helpful to
us, are not therefore to be worshipped. Secondly, That we must acknowledge our
selves to be under much darkness as to the way and manner of the converse of
Spirits with us.

Dr. More of the Immortality of the Soul, Lib. 2. c. 16.
The most acute and learned Dr. More I find of the same Opinion. He affirms that
departed Souls are capable of a vital Union with an airy vehicle, (or Body) in
which they can easily move from place to place, and appear to the Living; and
act in their own affairs, as in detecting Murders, rebuking injurious
Executors, visiting, and counselling their Wives and Children, forewarning them
of such and such courses, etc. To which we may add the profession of the Spirit
thus appearing, of being the Soul of such a one; as also the similitude of the
person: And all this ado is in things very just and serious, unfit for a Devil
with that care and kindness to promote; and as unfit for a good Genius, it
being below so noble a nature to tell a lie. All these things put together, and
rightly weighed; the violence of prejudice not pulling down the balance, I dare
appeal (says he) to any, Whether it will not be certainly carried for the
present cause, and whether any indifferent Judge ought not to conclude, if
these stories which are so frequent every where, and in all Ages concerning the
Ghosts of men appearing, be but true, That it is true also that they are their
Ghosts, etc.

These are the strongest Arguments I meet with for the ^ffirmative, that the
matter is possible, it may be so, and then adding the credible instances that
it is so, the matter seems to be determined.

To this purpose Dr. Stern alleges several instances out of Scripture, as
that appearance of Samuel unto Saul, and the conference betwixt them, as also
the Letters that were sent to Iehoram, by Elijah, after that Elijah was
translated to Heaven, as appears by comparing 2 Chronicles. 21.12. with 2 Kings
3.11. In which it appears that in Iehosaphat's time who preceded this Iehoram,
Elijah was dead, and yet in Iehoram's time who succeeded him, he is said to
receive Letters from Elijah. The appearance and conference also betwixt Christ
and Moses and Elias upon the Mount in the presence of some of the Disciples
confirms it, Matthew. 17.3.

These are principal Scripture-instances: others are almost innumerable. From
among that vast heap I will select some few that are most material, and of
clearest credit.

Insularum Sco^icarum incolae ad agros, cum pro deploratis habentur, accedunt,
and rogant, at certo, a morte, die, locoq, certo ip^as conveniant; quod and
mort^i tempore and loco praestitutis ^r^^stant. Stern ibid.
It is a thing (says my Author) both known and frequent, that the Inhabitants
of the Scottish Isles, when their Friends are dying, come to them, and request
them that upon such or such a day after their death, and in such a place, they
would meet them; which the Dead accordingly do at the time and place agreed
upon, and have sometimes discourse with them.

Infinite examples of Murders (says Dr. More) have been discovered by Dreams,
the Souls of the Persons murdered seeming to appear to some or other asleep,
and to make their complaints to them; giving us a notable example out of
Baronius, of Marsilius Ficinus, who having made a solemn vow with Michael
Mercatus, (after they had been pretty warmly disputing of the immortality of
the Soul out of the Principles of their Master Plato) that whether of them two
die first, should appear to his Friend, and give him certain information of
that truth. It was Ficinus his fate to diel first, and that not long after this
mutual resolution. He was mindful of his promise when he had left the Body; for
Mercatus being very intent at his studies, betimes on a morning, heard a Horse
riding by with all speed, and observed that he stopped at his window; and
therewith heard the voice of his Friend Ficinus, crying out aloud, O Michael,
Michael, vera, vera sunt illa: That is O Michael, Michael, those things are
true, they are true. Wherepou he suddenly opened his window, and espying
Marsilius upon a white Steed, called after him, but he vanished out of his
sight. He sent therefore presently to Florence to know how Marsilius did, and
understood that he died about that hour he called at his window.

Much to the same purpose is that so famous and well attested story of the
apparition of Major George Sydenham to Captain William Dyke, Sadducismus
Triumphatus, second Part, p. 183.
both of Somersetshire, attested by the worthy and learned Dr. Thomas Dyke a
near Kinsman of the Captain's, and by Mr. Douch, to whom both the Major and
Captain were intimately known. The sum is this, The Major and Captain had many
disputes about the Being of a God, and the immortality of the Soul, in which
points they could never be resolved, though they much sought for and desired
it, and therefore it was at last fully agreed betwixt them, that he that died
first, should the third night after his Funeral, come betwixt the hours of
twelve and one, to the little house in the Garden adjoining to Major Sydenham's
house at Dulverton in Somersetshire. The Major died first, and the Captain
happened to lie that very night which was appointed, in the same Chamber and
Bed with Dr. Dyke; he acquainted the Doctor with the appointment, and his
resolution to attend the place and hour that Night, for which purpose he had
got the key of that Garden. The Doctor could by no means divert his purpose,
but when the hour came he was upon the place, where he waited two hours and an
half, neither seeing, nor hearing any thing more than usual. About six Weeks
after, the Captain and Doctor went to Eaton, and lay again in the same Inn, but
not the same Camber as before at Dulverton.

The Morning before they went thence, the Captain stayed longer than was usual
in his Chamber, and at length came in to the Doctors Chamber, but in a Visage
and form much differing from himself; with his hair and eyes staring, and his
whole body shaking and trembling: whereat the Doctor wondering, demanded, what
is the matter, Cousin Captain? The Captain replies, I have seen my Major: at
which the Doctor seeming to smile, the Captain said, if ever I saw him in my
life, I saw him but now: adding as follows. This Morning (said he) after it
was light, some one came to my Bed side, and sudainly drawing back the
Curtains, calls Cap, Cap, (which was the term of familiarity that the Major
used to call the Captain by) to whom I replied, What, my Major? To which he
returns, I could not come at the time appointed, but I am now come to tell you,
That there is a God, and a very just and terrible one, and if you do not turn
over a new leaf, you will find it so. This stuck close to him, little Meat
would go down with him at Dinner, though an handsome Treat was provided; these
words were sounding in his ears frequently, during the remainder of his life:
he was never shy or scrupulous to relate it to any that asked him concerning
it, nor ever mentioned it but with horror, and trepidation: they were both men
of a brisk humor and jolly Conversation; of very quick and keen parts, having
been both University and Inns-of-Court Gentlemen.

The Apparition of the Ghost of Sir George Villiers, Father of the Duke of
Buckingham, giving three solemn warnings, by three several Apparitions to his
Servant Mr. Parker, is a known and credible Story. But I will wade no farther
into Particulars, they are almost innumerable: let these suffice for a taste.

(2) In the next place therefore I will lay down some Concessions about this
matter: and the

First Concession is this.
That the separated Souls or Spirits of men are capable of performing and
executing any Ministry or Service for God, (if he should please to
commissionate them so to do) as well as Angels are, whom we know he frequently
imploys about the persons and affairs of his people on earth.

Though they become not Angels by their separation, as Maximus Tyrius calls
them, but remain Spirits specifically distinct from them; yet are they
Spiritual Substances as the Angels are: This their nature capacitates them
either to live and act out of the Body, or to assume (as Angels do) an aerial
Body for the time of their Ministry: nor do I know any thing in Scipture or
Philosophy repugnant hereunto.

Concession 2.
It cannot be doubted but upon some special and extraordinary reasons and
occasions, some departed Souls have returned to, and appeared in this World by
order and commission from God.

This is too manifest to be doubted by any that understands and believes the
instances recorded in Scripture. Moses and Elias long after their departure,
appeared to, and talked with Christ upon the holy Mount, in the presence of
some of his Apostles, Matthew. 17.3. nor is there any reason to question the
reality of their Apparition, or to think it to be no more than a Phantasm, Non
enim conveni^bat ut veritas mendacio, vel imaginariis testibus probaretur.
Maldon. Capellus in loc.
or imaginary resemblance of these persons; but very Moses and Elias
themselves. For they came to be Witnesses to Christ's Prophetical office, and it
was not fit so great a point should be attested by imaginary Witnesses: or that
they should be called Moses and Elias, if they were not the very same persons.

It Is therefore most likely they both appeared in their own Bodies: Credibilius
est vere corporibus suis apparnisse. Parcus in loc.
for Moses's Body we know was hidden by the Lord, and Elias his Body
immediately translated with his Soul to Heaven: when therefore the Lord would
send them upon this solemn errand, the Soul of Moses probably reassumed that
Body which was never found by man, and Elias was already embodied and fit
immediately for this Expedition.

In like manner we read, Matthew. 27.52, 53. that at the Resurrection of our
Lord, many Bodies of the Saints arose, and appeared unto many: these were no
Phantasms, but the very Souls of the departed Saints returned (having
reassumed their own Bodies) unto this World, not only to confirm the truth of
Christ's Resurrection, and adorn that great day: But as a Specimen or handsel of
the Resurrection of all the Saints in the virtue of his Resurrection at the
great Day.

Nor will I deny, but upon some lesser (though never without weighty and
solemn) occasions and reasons, God may sometimes send the Souls of the dead
back again into this World, as in the cases before recited, to evidence against
the Atheism of men, etc. Augustine relates a memorable example which fell out
at Millan, Aug. in lib. de cura promortuis agenda.
where a certain Citizen being dead, there came a Creditor to whom he had been
indebted, and unjustly demanded the money of his Son. The Son knew the Debt was
satisfied by his Father, but having no Acquittance to show, his Father appeared
to him in his sleep, and showed him where the Acquittance lay: whether it were
the very Soul of his Father, or rather an Angel, as Augustine thinks, is not
certain, though the one as well as the other be possible. But though rarely,
and upon some weighty and solemn occasions some Souls have returned and
appeared; yet I judge this is not frequently done, upon slight and ordinary
errands: and therefore to give you my own thoughts, I judge

(3) That those Apparitions which seem to be, and are generally reputed and
taken for the Souls of the Dead, are not indeed so, but other Spirits putting
on the shapes and resemblances of the Dead, and (for the most part) tricks of
the Devil to delude, or disquiet men.

Religio Med. Sect. 37. p. 82.
In this I think the learned Dr. Brown delivered his judgment more solidly and
orthodoxly, than in some other points, when he says, I believe that the whole
frame of a Beast does perish, and is left in the same State after death, as
before it was martialled into life. That the Souls of men know neither
contrary, nor corruption? that they subsist beyond the body, and continue by
the privilege of their proper nature, and without a Miracle: that the Souls of
the faithful, as they leave earth; take possession of Heaven. That those
Apparitions and Ghosts of departed persons, are not the wandering Souls of men,
but the unquiet Walks of Devils, prompting and suggesting us unto mischief,
blood and Villainy. And with this Opinion I concur, as to the ordinary and
common Apparitions of the dead: and my Reasons are,

(1) Because the Scriptures every where describe the state of departed Souls as
a fixed state, either in Heaven, or in Hell: and assigns the good or evil done
in this World by Spirits, not to the departed Spirits of men, but to Angels or
Devils: and it is our duty to regulate our Conceits by Scripture, and not
according to the vain Philosophy of the Heathens, or the Superstitious
Traditions and Opinions of Men.

As for the Souls of the godly, they are at rest with Christ, Rev. 14.13. Isai.
57.2. and as fixed as pillars in the house of God, Rev. 3.12.

And for the wicked, their Spirits are confined and secured in Hell as in a
Prison, 1 Pet. 3.19. there is a fixed Gulf betwixt them and the living, Luke
16.27, 28, 29, 30, 31.

What good offices are to be done by Spirits for us, the Angels are Gods
Commission-Officers to do them, Hebr. 1.14. They are all ministering Spirits
sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of Salvation: these are the
Spirits sent forth to walk to and fro through the earth, Zech. 1.10. their
Ministry was emblematically represented in Jacob's Vision, where they were seen
ascending and descending as upon a Ladder, betwixt Heaven and Earth, Genesis
28.12. Yea, their very name Angel, is a name of office, signifying a Messenger,
or one sent.

And for the mischief done by Spirits in this World, the Scriptures ascribe
that to the Devils: those unquiet Spirits have their Walks in this World, they
compass the whole earth, and walk up and down in it, Job 1.7. and 1 Pet. 5.8.
they can assume any shape, yea, I doubt not but he can act their Bodies when
dead, as well as he did their Souls and Bodies when alive: how great his power
is this way, appears in what is so often done by him in the Bodies of Witches.
They are not ordinarily therefore the Spirits of men, but other Spirits that
appear to us.

(2) If God should ordinarily permit the Spirits of men inhabiting the other
World, a liberty so frequently to visit this, what a gap would it open for
Satan to beguile and deceive the living! Quid enim idololatriam inter Ethnicos
and Christianos magis propagavit? Hinc flux^runt multae perigrinationes,
monasteria, delubra, dits festi, and alia. Lav. In Job. 33.
What might he not by this means impose upon weak and credulous Mortals? There
has been a great deal of Superstition and Idolatry already introduced under
this pretense: he has often personated Saints departed, and pretended himself
to be the Ghost of some venerable person, whose love to the Souls of the people
and care for their Salvation drew him from Heaven, to reveal some special
Secret to them. Swarms of Errors, and superstitious and idolatrous Opinions and
Practices, are this way conveyed by the tricks and artifices of Satan among the
Papists, which I will not blot my Paper withal: only I desire it may be
considered, that if this were a thing so frequently permitted by God, as is
pretended, upon what dangerous terms had he left his Church in this World,
seeing he has left no certain marks by which we may distinguish one Spirit
from another, or a true Messenger from Heaven from a counterfeit and pretended
one.

But God has tied us to the sure and standing rule of his Word, forbidding us
to give heed to any other voice or spirit, leading us another way, Isa. 8.19. 2
These. 2.1, 2. Gall. 1.8. It was therefore a discreet reply which one of the
Ancients made, when in Prayer a Vision of Christ appeared to him, and told him,
Thy Prayers are heard, for thou art worthy: The good man immediately clapped his
hands upon his eyes and said, Nolo hic videre Christum, etc. I will not see
Christ here, it is enough for me, that I shall behold him in Heaven.

To conclude.
My Opinion upon the whole matter is this, that although it cannot be denied,
but in some grand and extraordinary cases, as at the transfiguration, and
Resurrection of Christ. God did, and perhaps sometimes though rarely may order
or permit departed Souls to return into this World; yet for the most part I
judge those Apparitions are not the Souls of the Dead, but other Spirits, and
for the most part evil ones.

Lib. de cura pro mortuis.
Of this Judgment was St. Augustine, who when he had at full related the Story
above, of the Fathers Ghost directing his Son to the Acquittance, yet will not
allow it to be the very soul of his Father, but an Angel: where he farther
adds, If (says he) the souls of the dead might be present in our affairs, they
would not forsake us in this sort; especially my Mother Monica, who in her life
could never be without me, surely she would not thus leave me being dead.

Object. 1.
Objection 1.
But it was pleaded before, that we allow the Apparitions of Angels; and
departed Souls, if they be not Angels, at least are equal unto Angels, and in
respect of their late relation to us, are more propense to help us, than
Spirits of another sort can be supposed to be.

Sol.
Solution:
It seems too bold an imposing upon Sovereign Wisdom to tell him what
Messengers are fittest for him to send and employ in his service: who has
taught him, or been his Counselor?

Object. 2.
Object. 2.
But these offices seem to pertain properly to them as they are not only
fellow members, but the most excellent members of the mystical Body, to whom it
belongs to assist the meaner and weaker.

Sol. Sol.

If there be any force of reason in this Plea, it carries it rather for the
Angels than for departed Souls: for Angels are gathered under the same common
head with the Saints; the Text tells us, we are come to an innumerable company
of Angels: they and the Saints are fellow Citizens, and we know they are a more
noble order of Spirits: and as for their love to the Elect, it is exceeding
great, as great to be sure as the departed Souls of our dearest Relatives can
be. For after death they sustain no more civil Relations to us: all that they
do sustain is as fellow members of the same body, or fellow Citizens, which
Angels also are, as well as they.

Object. 3. Object.

But says the Doctor, the reason why all Nations pay so great honor and
religious care to the Wills of the Dead, is a supposition that they still
continue in the same mind after death, and will avenge the Falsifications of
Trusts upon injurious Executors, else, no reason can be given why so great a
stress should be laid upon the Will of the Dead.

Sol. Sol.

This is gratis dictum, to say no worse, a cheap and unwary expression: can no
reason be given for the religious observance of the Testaments of the dead, but
this Supposition? I deny it: for though they that made them be dead, yet God
who is witness to all such acts and trusts, lives: and though they cannot
avenge the frauds and injustice of men, he both can, and will do it, 1 These.
4.6. which I think is a weightier ground and reason to enforce duty upon men,
than the fear of Ghosts. Besides, This is a case wherein all the living are
concerned, all that die must commit a trust to them that survive; and if frauds
should be committed with impunity, who could safely repose confidence in
another? Quod tangit omnes, tangi debet ab omnibus: that which is of general
concernment, and becomes every man's interest, infers a general Obligation upon
all.

As for the Letters of Elijah, it is a Vanity to think they came Post from
Heaven: no, no: they were doubtless left behind him, out of due care to the
Government, and produced in that fit occasion.

Object. 4.
Object. 4.
But what need of a Law to prohibit Necromancy or consultation with the Dead,
if it were not practicable!

Sol.
Sol.
I do not think the wicked art, there prohibited, enabled them to recall
departed Souls, but it was a conversing with the Devil who personated the dead:
and therein a kind of homage was paid him, to the dishonor of God: or he might
possibly raise the Bodies of wicked men, and appear in them, but I think the
Spirits of the dead return not, except as was before limited.

Object. 5.
Object. 5.
But the matters they discover are found to be true, and the causes in which
they concern themselves are just: real Murders are detected by them, and real
frauds and injuries corrected and rectified: but the Devil being himself a liar
and Deceiver, would never do it: it is not his interest to discover or
discourage such things.

Sol.
Sol.
Though it be not his interest merely to discover it, yet it is certainly his
interest to precipitate wicked men, and hasten their ruin by the hand of
Justice: and he will speak the truth, and seem to own a righteous cause to
bring about his great design of ruining the Souls and Bodies of men. I will
shut up with three Cautions.

Caution I.
Strain not Conscience to enrich Posterity: be true to the trusts committed to
you by the Dead, or by the Living, remembering, that though they be dead and
cannot avenge the wrong, yet the Lord lives, and will surely do it in a severer
manner than they could, should they appear in the most terrible and frightful
forms to you. Beside, your own Consciences will haunt you worse than a Ghost.
Be just and true therefore in all your Promises and trusts, for God is the
Avenger.

Caution II.
Finish your work for eternity before you die: for as the Cloud is consumed,
and vanishes away; so he that goes down to the Grave shall come up no more:
he shall return no more to his house, neither shall his place know him any
more, Job 7.9, 10. Your Souls will be fixed in eternity, soon after they are
loosed from your Bodies: when death comes, away you must go, willing or
unwilling: ready, or unready: but no returning hither how willing soever.

Caution III.
Keep your selves from that heathenish and accursed practice of consulting the
Devil about your absent or dead Relations: a practice too common in Seaport
Towns, and of deep and heinous guilt before God, Isa. 8.19. And when they shall
say unto you, seek unto them that have familiar Spirits, and unto Wizards that
peep, and muter: should not a people seek unto their God? for the living to the
dead.

You need not call the Devil twice, that subtle and officious Spirit draws the
living into his Net by such a bait as this: You meet your Mortal enemy under
the disguise of your dead friend.

QUERIE V.
Whether the separated Souls of the just in Heaven, have any converse, or
communication with each other? and how that can be, seeing all the Organs and
Instruments of speech and hearing are laid aside with their Bodies?

It seems impossible that separated or unbodied Spirits should converse
together, seeing the instruments by which the thoughts are communicated from
one to another, are perished in the Grave. Suppose the Tongue of a man to be
cut out, his eyes and hands perished or made useless whilst the Soul remains in
the Body: it may enjoy its own thoughts within it self; but it is impossible to
signify them to another by words or signs.

Or suppose a man in a deep sleep (wherein the Senses are only bound for a
little time) he may indeed exercise his own fancy in a pleasant Dream, but
another cannot understand how it is entertained; but in death the Senses are
not bound but extinguished.

Beside, we must not think the felicity of the departed holy Souls to consist
in mutual Converses one with another, but in their ineffable Visions of God,
and Communion with him. To him who is Omniscient, and understands their most
inward thoughts, they can freely communicate them, and receive his, as well as
pour forth their own love; but to do it to their fellow Creatures who see not
as God does, seems impossible,

Indeed it was never doubted, but after the Resurrection they shall both know
and talk with one another in a more excellent and perfect manner than now they
do; but till that time, the Reasons above seem to persuade us, that all the
Converses above are only betwixt God and them, which indeed is enough to make
them happy: and indeed, if this ability be allowed to separated Souls, it seems
to render the Resurrection of their Bodies needless; for they are well enough
without them. But certainly the Spirits of just men are not Mutes: such an
August Assembly of holy and excellent Spirits, do not live together in their
Fathers House without mutual Converse and fellowship with each other, as well
as with God.

That acute and judicious Divine, Mr. Joseph Symonds, in the Epistle to his
Book, entitled Sight, and Faith, expresses himself about this matter thus. I
often think (says he) of the Communion of the Spirits of men, which certainly
is more than many are acquainted with: though we act one upon another in our
present state, by the help of sense; yet we are wrought and designed to a more
excellent way. Angels and the Spirits of men made perfect, converse and trade
in a mutual Communication, not without sense, but without such sense as ours.
This, as eternal life begins here, and is found in some degrees in this Mortal
State, though not in so visible appearances as to lie open to much observation.

Angels good and bad do act upon our Spirits, and our Spirits hold converse
with them, and with the Father of Spirits, which may be discerned in secret
Parlies and Discourses betwixt them and us; much of this appears in David's
Psalms: and there passes not only an inward speech, but there are invisible
approaches, entertainments and touches, which Paul found when bound in the
Spirit, and under the working of God, which wrought in him mightily, Col. 1.29.
it is also most certain that our Souls are not mute, and shut out from all
mutual Traffic with each other, except what they have by the mediation of
Senses.

Instances are found, (that as they say of two Needles touched with the
Loadstone) the Spirit of one at a distance has found it self affected with the
motion and state of another. And this we are all sensible of, that there is a
strong desire in us to Communion of Spirits; and that because the way most
ready and convenient to our bodily state is by sense, we are carried with much
inclination to maintain intercourse of our minds and Spirits by sense; but as
being made to a better way, our Souls are not satisfied with this present way,
as being both painful, and short: we cannot give an exact Copy of our
Apprehensions, Desires, Designs, Delights, and other affections by these two
great Mediators of Communion, the Eye, and the Ear: but because we are in so
great a measure confined to this course, our Souls, as it were, stand in these
two gates, to send and receive mutual Embassies each from other. Which way, as
it is short in it self, so it is much shortened by distances, disaffections,
impotencies, and disparities.

I cannot imagine that men in the state of imperfection should have so many
ways to communicate their minds, as by speaking, writing, etc. Yea, that the
very Birds and Beasts are by nature enabled to signify to each other their
Inclinations, and that the Spirits of just men which are the best of all humane
Spirits; and that when made perfect too, which is the best and highest state
attainable by them; should have none; but live at a greater disadvantage in
this respect, than they did, or the very Birds and Beasts in this World do. The
sum of my thoughts about this matter, I will lay down in the following
Sections.

. 1.
The state of Heaven (as was at large opened in our eleventh Proposition) being
an Association of Angels, and blessed Souls for the glorifying and praising of
God in his Temple there, and this Worship being carried on by joint consent, as
appears by their joint ascriptions of Glory to God, Rev. 7.9, 10, 11, 12, they
must of necessity for the orderly carrying on of this heavenly Worship,
understand each others mind, and communicate their thoughts: for without this
it is not imaginable how a joint or common service, in which thousands of
thousands are employed, can be decorously and orderly managed, except we
conceive of them as so many Machines, or wind-instruments that are managed by
an intelligent Agent, though themselves be senseless and merely passive*
certainly their consent is a different thing from that of the Keys of an
Harpsicord, or strings of a Lute: they are Intelligent Beings who understand
their own and each others mind; and beside, without this ability, that Society
in Heaven would be less comfortable, as to mutual refreshing fellowship, than
the Society of the Saints is here. So that it is not to be doubted, but these
Noble and Excellent Spirits can, and do Communicate their thoughts to each
other, and that in a most excellent way.

. 2.
But yet we cannot imagine these Communications betwixt them to be by words
formed by such instruments and Organs of Speech as we now use, for they are
bodiless Beings: words and articulate sounds are fitted to the use and service
of embodied Spirits. It is therefore probable, that they conveigh and
communicate their minds to one another, as the blessed Angels do: Ce^^tat
Angelos linguas non hab^^e; est autem in (...) aliq^^d (...) linguis, per quod
conce^tas sibi mu^^ tradunt. Lights.
not with Tongues of flesh, (though we read of the Tongues of Angels, 1 Cor.
13.1.) but in a way somewhat analogous to this, though much more noble and
excellent. For look, as the Scripture styles the most excellent food, Angels
food: so the most excellent Speech, or most eloquent Tongues, Angels Tongues.
The purest Rhetoric that ever flowed from the lips of the most charming
Orator, is but babbling, to the Language of Angels, or of Spirits made perfect.

When Paul was rapt into the third Heaven, where he was admitted to the sight,
and hearing of this blessed Assembly, it is said he heard (...), words
unspeakable, Spiritual Language, such as his Tongue neither could, or ought to
utter: such as none but heavenly Inhabitants can speak: and Dan. 8.13. I heard
(says Daniel) one Saint speaking, and another Saint said unto that certain
Saint that spoke, etc. He heard the enquiries of the Angels, desiring to know
the Mystery from the Mouth of Christ. A Language they have, but not like ours.

. 3.
The Communications of Angels and Souls in Heaven, is therefore conceived to be
an ability in those blessed Spirits silently and without sound to instill and
insinuate their minds and thoughts to each other, by a mere act of their Wills:
just as we now speak to God or our selves in our hearts, Dicimur nobis ipsis in
animo loqui, cum aliquid actu cogitamus; and animo volvimus: cogitamus autem
actu, ex voluntatis imperio, hoc est, cum volumus. Zanch.
when our lips do not move, or the least outward sign appears.

There are two ways by which the Souls of men speak, one outwardly by the
Instruments of Speech, or sensible signs; the other inwardly, without sound, or
sign. This inward silent Speech is nothing else, but an act of the Will,
calling forth such things into our actual Thoughts and Meditations, which
before lay hid and quiet in the Memory, or habit of knowledge. These thoughts,
or actual revolvings of things in the mind, is in Scripture called (...), a
Word or Speech in the heart, Deuteronomy. 15.9. Take heed to thy self, that there be
not a wicked word in thy heart, we translate, a wicked thought: thoughts are
the words and voice of the Soul: and so Matthew. 9.3. they spoke within
themselves, ( i.e.) their Souls spoke, though their lips moved not: all
Meditation is an inward Speech in the Soul, and therefore (...) indifferently
signifies both to speak, (...) cum puncto sinistro, locutus est o^e, aut cord
cogitavit, meditatus est.
and to meditate. The Objects which we revolve in our thoughts, are so many
Companions with whom we converse: and thus a man (like Heinsius) may be in the
midst of abundance of excellent Company, when he is all alone. And this is
silent talk to our selves, without any sound or noise.

Object
But you will say, though the Spirit of a man can thus talk to or with it self;
Duo sunt o^lia aliorum respectu, quorum nisi utrumque a te referetur, fieri non
potest, ut que tu habes in intellecta, and cord tuo o^culta, ^a alius habere,
and cognos^ere queat urum ex part animi est voluntas, nisi enim quae occul^a
latent in cord tuo, ea vilis aliis patefieri, quis ea percipiat^ alterum est
ipsum corpus carni^m, ac proinde licet quasi aperto priori interiorique ostio
velis, que in animo volvis, alicui patefacere, nisi tamen hoc etiam alterum
externum re^eres, nullo modo ab aliis hominibus cognosci poterunt. Z^nch. de
operibus Dei, lib. 3. cap. 19.
yet this can signify nothing to others: For what man knows the things of a
man, save the Spirit of man that is in him? 1 Cor. 2.11. It is not therefore
enough to open this internal door of the Will; for except we open also the
external door of the lips, no man can know our minds, or be admitted into the
secrets of our Souls: should we never so earnestly desire that another should
know our mind, except we please also to discover it by word or sign, he cannot
know it; and therefore an act of the Will is not sufficient, without some
external signification superadded. And these Souls being bodiless, can give no
such outward signification.

There is indeed a necessity among men in this World to unlock another door
beside that of their Will, Sol.
to communicate the Secrets of their hearts to others; Quoniam igitur Angeli
iis carent crassis corporibus, idcirco nihil impedit, quo minus q^^ unus
Angelus in sua versat mente, ea alter videat, nisi ejus voluntas: si enim ea
nolit ab altero resciri: Nunquam, nisi Deo re^^ilante rescientur. Zanch. ubi
supra.
but Angels, and the Spirits of men having no Bodies, consequently have but one
door, to wit that of the Will to open, and the opening thereof (which is done
by one act or desire in a moment) is enough to discover so much of their minds
as they would have discovered to another Spirit. If they keep the door of their
Will shut, no Angel or Spirit can know what is in their thoughts, without a
Revelation from God; and if they but will or desire others should know, no
words can so fully manifest one man's mind to another, as such an act of the
will does manifest theirs And this, says learned Zanchy, is the Tongue of
Angels, and the same way the Spirits of men have to make known their minds in
the unbodied state. It is but the turning of the Key of the Will, and their
thoughts or desires are presently seen, and known by others, to whom they will
discover them, as a man's face is seen in a glass, when he pleases to turn his
face to it. Would one Spirit make known his mind to another, it is but to will
he should know it, and it is immediately known.

. 4.
This Internal way of speaking and Communication among Spirits, is much more
noble, perfect, and excellent, than that which is in use among us by words and
signs: and that in two respects, viz. in respect 1. Of clearness. in respect 2.
Of dispatch and speed.


1. Spiritual Language is more clearly expressive of the mind and thoughts,
than words, writings, or any other External signs can be. The greatest Masters
of Language do often cloud their meaning for want of words fit and full enough
to express it: truth suffers by the Poverty and Ambiguity of words: many
Controversies are but mere strifes about words, and scufflings in the dark, by
the mistakes of each others sense and meaning: few have the ability of putting
their own meanings into apt, proper, and full expressions; and if they can, yet
others to whom they speak, want an answerable ability of understanding, and
clearness of apprehension to receive it. If we could discern the true and
natural sense of things, just as it is in the mind of the Speaker or Writer,
How many Controversies would be thereby quickly ended?

But Spirits unbodied so conveigh their sense and mind to one another, that
there can be no mistakes: no darkning of Counsel, by words without knowledge;
but one receives it just as it lies in the others mind.

2. Spiritual Language is more easy, and of quicker dispatch. Some men have
voluble Tongues, and are much more ready and presential than others, their
Tongues are as the Pen of a ready Scribe: and others, no less ready with their
hands, which keep pace with, yea, outrun the Tongue of the Speaker, as Martial
notes, Martial. Epig. lib. 14. Ep. 176.
Current verba licet, manus est velocior illis;
Nondum lingua suum, dextra peregit opus.
Yet all this is but bungling work to the ready dispatch of Spirits, one act of
the Will opens the Window to discern the mind of another clearly: so that the
converse of Spirits must needs be more excellent in both respects, than any we
are accustomed to, or acquainted with in this World. I will shut up this
Question with

One COROLLARY.
Long to be associated with the Spirits of just men made perfect. You that are
going to join that blessed Assembly, will even in this respect gain an
invaluable advantage. It Is true, there is much of comfort in the present
Converses of embodied, and imperfect Saints: it is sweet to fast and pray, to
sigh and groan together; it is sweeter to rejoice and praise our God together.
It Is sweet to talk of Heaven with our faces thitherward: but alas! what is this
to the converses that are among the Spirits of just men made perfect! With what
melting hearts have we sometimes sat under the doctrine of the Gospel. How
have our ears been chained with delight to the Preacher's lips whilst he has
been discoursing of those ravishing subjects, Christ and Heaven! But alas! How
dry and dull a thing is the best of this, to the language of Heaven! Three
things debase and spoil the communications of the Saints on Earth, viz. the
darkness, dullness, and frothiness thereof.

1. The darkness and ignorance of our understanding. How crude, weak, and
indigested are our highest and purest notions of spiritual things! We speak of
them but as children, 1 Cor. 13.11. For alas, the vail is yet upon our faces.
The Body of sin, and the Body of flesh cast a very dark shadow upon the world
to come: But the apprehensions of separated Souls are most bright and clear.
This darkness begets mistakes, mistakes beget so many quarrels and janglings
that our fellowship on earth loses at once both its profit and pleasure.

2. There is much dullness and deadness accompanying the Communion of Saints on
earth, abundance of precious time is wasted among us in unprofitable silence,
and when we engage in discourses of Heaven, that discourse is often little
better than silence. Our words freeze betwixt our lips, and we speak not with
that concernedness and warmth of Spirit which suits with such subjects.

It is not so among our brethren above: their affections are at the highest
peg, giving glory to God in the highest.

3. To conclude, in the discourses of the best men on Earth, there is too much
froth and vanity. Many words like water run away at the wast spout; but there,
God is the Center in which all terminates. O therefore let us long to be among
the unbodied people. This World will never suit us with companions in all
things agreeable to the desires of our hearts. The best company are got
together in the upper room: an hour there, is better than an Age below. What
ever fellowship Saints leave on earth, they shall be sure to find better in
Heaven.

QUERIE VI.
Whether the separated Souls of the just in Heaven do incline to a reunion
with their own Bodies? and how that reunion is at last effected?

That these blessed Souls have no such inclination or desire, these reasons
seem to persuade.

1. That their Bodies, whilst they lived in them, were no better than so many
Prisons. Many were the prejudices, damages and miseries they sustained and
suffered in them. Animam conceptu suo obstruit, and obscurat; and concretione
carnis in^aecat, unde illi velut per carneum specular obsoletior lux verum est.
Proculdubio cum vi mortus exprimitur de concretione carnis, and ipsa
expressione colatur, certe de oppanso corporis ^r^mpit in apertam, ad meram,
and puram, and suam lucem. Tertul. de Anima.
It kept them at an uncomfortable distance from the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.6. Their
bemoaning cries spoke their uneasy state. How often has every gracious Soul
thus lamented it self! Woe is me that I dwell in Mesheck. It enclosed their
Souls within it is mud walls, which intercepted the light and joy of God's face.
Death therefore did a most friendly office, when it set it at liberty, and
brought it forth into its own pure and pleasant light and liberty. These
blessed Spirits now rejoice as Prisoners do in their recovered liberty: and can
it be supposed after all these sufferings, groans, and sighs, to be dissolved;
they can be willing to be embodied again? Surely there is as little reason for
Souls at liberty, to desire to be again embodied, as there is for a Bird got
out of the Snare or Cage, to fly back again to its place of confinement and
restraint. Yea, when we consider how loath some holy Souls when under the
excruciating pains of sickness, and as yet in the sight of this alluring World;
have been to ^ear of a return to it, by the recovery of their health; we cannot
think, but being quite out of the sight of this, and in the fruitions of the
other World, the thoughts of the Body must needs be more loathsome to them than
ever.

We read, that when a good man in time of his sickness was told by his friends,
that some hopeful signs of his recovery began now to appear; he answered, And
must I then return to this Body? I was as a sheep driven out of the Storm,
almost to the Fold; and then driven back into the storm again: Or as a weary
Traveller near his home, who must go back again to fetch something he had
neglected: or as an Apprentice whose time was almost out, and then must begin a
new Term. Of some others it has been also noted, that the greatest infirmities
they discovered upon their deathbed have been their too passionate desires to
be dissolved, and their unsubmissiveness to Gods will in their longer stay in
the Body. Now, the Bodies of the Saints being so cheerfully forsaken, and that
only upon a foretaste of Heaven by Faith; how can it be thought they should
find any inclination to a reunion, when they are so abundantly satisfied with
the joys of his face in Heaven? Certainly the Body has been no such pleasant
habitation to the Soul that it should cast an eye or thought that way, when it
is once delivered out of it. If it were burdensome here, a thought of it would
be loathsome there.

2. We have showed before, that the separate Soul wants not the help of the
Body, but lives and acts at a more free and comfortable rate than ever before.
It Is true, it is not now delighted with meat and drink, with smells and sounds
as it was wont to be: but then it must be considered, that it is happiness and
perfection not to need them. It is now become equal to the Angels in the way
and manner of its living; and what it enjoyed by the ministry of the Body, it
eminently and more perfectly injoys without it. What perfections can the Soul
receive from matter? Anima rationalis nihil perfectionis recipit a materia,
quod extra il^am non posset recipe^^; ergo cum sep^rata fuerit in il^am
propensa non dicetur. Conimbr.
What can a lump of flesh, add to a Spirit? And if it can add nothing to it,
there is no reason why it should hanker after it, and incline to a reunion
with it. It added nothing of happiness to it, but much of trouble, and
therefore becomes justly undesireable to it.

3. The supposition of such a propension and inclination, seems, no way to suit
with that state of perfect rest which the Souls of the just enjoy in Heaven.
The Scriptures tell us that at death they enter into rest, Isa. 57.2. Heb. 4.9.
That they rest from their labors, Rev. 14.13. But that which inclines and
desires (especially when the desired enjoyment as in this case is suspended so
long) must be as far from Rest, as it is from satisfaction in the enjoyment of
the thing desired. We know what Solomon has observed of such a life, (and his
observation is experimentally true) that hope deferred, makes the heart sick,
Prove. 13.12. Who finds not his own desires a very rack to him in such cases. If
we be kept but a few days in earnest expectation and desire of an absent
Friend, and he comes not, what an uneasy life do we live? But here we must
suppose some have such an unsatisfied life for hundreds, and others for
thousands of years already, and how much longer they may remain so, who can
tell? We use to say lovers hours are full of Eternity. These reasons seem to
carry it for the Negative.

But if the matter be weighed once more, with the following reasons in the
counter scale, and prejudice do not pull down the balance; we shall find the
contrary conclusion much more strong and rational. For

Argument I.
THE Soul and Body are the two essential constitutive parts of Man; either of
these being wanting, the Man is not complete and perfect. The good of the
whole, is the good of the parts themselves, and every thing has a natural
desire and appetite to its own good and perfection. Anima separata ad unionem
corporis prope^sa est, nam illa vult totius compositi actualem constitutionem;
cum propter hanc tanquam finem illa sit, and in entium latitudine inveniatur.
Atque haec est illa perfectio quam anima obtinet ex illo appetitu: nam bonum
totius compositi, est bonum ipsarum partium. Affirmandum itaque est, animan
separatam naturaliter desiderare resurrectionem. Alstedii Not: Theol. pars
prima, p. 214, 215.
It Is confessed, the Soul for as much as concerns it self singly, is made
perfect, and enjoys blessedness in the absence of the Body; but this is only
the perfection and blessedness of one part of man; the other part viz the Body,
lies in obscurity and corruption: and till both be blessed, and blessed
together in a state of composition and reunion, the whole man is not made
perfect. For this therefore the Soul must wait.

Argument II.
THough death has dissolved the Union, yet it has not destroyed the relation
betwixt the Soul and Body; that dust is more to it than all the dust of the
whole earth. Hence it is that the whole person of a Believer is sometimes
denominated from that part of him, namely his Body which remains captivated by
death in the grave. Hence 2 These. 4.15. dead believers are called those that
sleep, which must needs properly respect the Body, for the Soul sleeps not; and
shows what a firm and dear relation still remains betwixt these absent Friends.
Now we all know the mighty power of relation, if it be least among entities,
yet surely it is one of the greatest things in the World in efficacy.

It is difficult to bear the absence of our dear Relatives, especially if we be
in prosperity, and they in adversity. As the case here is betwixt the Spirit in
Heaven, and it is Body in the Grave: This associated with Angels, that preyed
upon by Worms. Ioseph's case is the liveliest Emblem that occurs to my present
thoughts to illustrate the point in hand. He was advanced to be Lord over all
Egypt, living in the greatest pomp and splendour there; Genesis 43.29, 30, 31.
but his Father and Brethren were at the same time ready to perish in the land
of Canaan. He had been many years separated from them, but neither the length
of time, nor honors of the Court could alienate his affections from them. O
see the mighty power of Relation! No sooner does he see his Brethren, and
understand their case, and the pining condition of Jacob his Father, but his
bowels yearned, and his compassions rolled together for them. Yea, he could not
forbear, nor stifle his own affections, though he knew how injurious his
Brethren had been to him, and betrayed him, as the Body has the Soul: Yet all
this notwithstanding, he breaks forth into tears and outcries over them, which
made the house ring again with the news that Ioseph's brethren were come. Nor
could he be at rest in the lap of honor and plenty, until he had gotten home
his dear and ancient Relations to him. Thus stands the case betwixt Soul and
Body.

Argument III.
THE regret, reluctance, and sorrows expressed by the Soul at parting, do
strongly argue its inclination to a reunion with it, when it is actually
separated from it. For why should we surmise that the Soul which mourned and
groaned so deeply at parting; which clasped and embraced it so dearly and
affectionately; which fought, strugled and disputed the passage with death
every foot and inch of ground it got; and would not part with the Body till by
plain force it was rent out of its arms: should not when absent, desire to see
and enjoy its old and endeared friend again? Has it lost its affection, though
it continue its relation? that's very improbable. Or does its advancement in
Heaven make it regardless of its Body which lies in contempt and misery? that is
an effect which Christ's personal glory never produced in him toward us, nor a
good man's perferment would produce in him to his poor and miserable friends in
this World, as we see in the case of Joseph but now instanced in. It is
therefore harsh and incongruous to suppose the Souls love to the Body was
extinguished in the parting hour, and that now, out of sight, out of mind.

Object.
But was it not urged before in opposition to this assertion, that the Souls of
the righteous looked upon their Bodies as their Prisons, and sighed for
deliverance by death, and greatly rejoiced in the hope and foresight of that
liberty death would restore them to? How does this consist with such
reluctancies at parting, and inclinations to reunion?

Sol.
The objection does not suppose any man to be totally free from all reluctancies
and unwillingness to die. The holiest Souls that ever lived in Bodies of flesh
will give an unwilling shrug when it comes to the parting point, 2 Cor. 5.2.
But this their willingness to be gone arises from two other grounds, which make
i^ consistent enough with its reluctancies at parting, and inclination to a
second meeting.

(1) This willingness to die, does not suppose the Souls love to the Body to be
utterly extinguished, but mastered and overpowered by another and stronger
love. There is in every Christian a double love, one natural, to the Body, and
the things below; the other supernatural, to Christ, and the things above; the
latter does not extinguish, though it conquer and subdue the other. Love to the
Body pulls backward, love to Christ pulls forward, and finally prevails. This
is so consistent with it, that it supposes natural reluctation and
unwillingness to part. (2) The willingness of Gods people to be dissolved, must
not be understood absolutely, but comparatively: In that sense the Apostle will
be understood, 2 Cor. 5.8. We are confident I say, and willing rather to be
absent from the Body, and present with the Lord. (i. e.) Rather than to live
always a life of sin, sorrow, and absence from God. Death is not desirable in
and for it self, but only as it is the Souls outlet from sin, and its inlet to
God.
So that the very best desire it but comparatively, and it is but few who find
the love of this animal life subacted and overpowered by high raised acts of
faith and love. The generality even of good Souls feel strong renitencies, and
suffer sharp conflicts at their dissolution. All which discovers with what
lothness and unwillingness the Soul unclasps its arms to let go its Body. Now
as Divines argue the frame of Christ's heart in Heaven, toward his people on
earth, from all those endearing passages and demonstrations of love he gave
them at parting; so we here argue the continued love and inclination of the
Soul to its Body after it is in Heaven, from the manifold demonstrations it
gave of its affection to it in this World; especially in the parting hour. No
considerations in all the World, less than the more full fruition of God, and
freedom from sin, could possibly have prevailed with it to quit the Body,
though but for a time, and leave it in the dust. Which is our third Argument.

Argument IV.
AND as the dolorous parting hour evidenceth it, so does the joy with which it
receives it again at the Resurrection. If it part from it so heavily, and meet
it again with joy unspeakable; sure then it still retained much love for it,
and desires to be re-espoused to it, in the interval. Now, that its meeting in
the Resurrection is a day of joy to the Soul, is evident, because it is called
the time of refreshment, Acts 3.19. And they awake with singing out of the
dust, Isai. 26.19. If the direct and immediate scope of the Prophet point not
(as some think it does) at the Resurrection, yet it is allowed by all to be a
very lively allusion to it; which is sufficient for my purpose. And indeed none
that understands and believes the design and business of that day, can possibly
doubt but there was reason enough to call it a time of refreshment, a singing
morning; for the Souls of the righteous come from Heaven with Christ, and the
whole host of shouting Angels; not to be speclators only, but the subjects of
that days triumph. They come to reassume, and be reespoused to their own
Bodies, this being the appointed time for God to vindicate and rescue them from
the tyrannical power of the Grave, to endow them with spiritual qualities at
their second marriage to their Souls, that in both parts they may be completely
happy. O the joyful claspings and dear embraces betwixt them, who but
themselves can understand! And by the way, this removes the objection
forementioned, of the miseries and prejudices the Soul suffered in this world
in and from the Body. For now it receives it a spiritual Body, ( i.e.) so
subdued to and fitted for the use of the Spirit, as never to impede, clog, or
obstruct its motions and inclinations any more, 1 Cor. 15.44. In this hope it
parted from it, and with this consolation it now receives it again.

Argument V.
THere are many Scriptures which very much favor, if they do not positively
conclude the Souls inclination to and desire to be reunited with its own body,
even whilst it is in the state of its single glorification in Heaven; certainly
our Souls leave not our Bodies at death, as the Ostrich does her Egg in the
sand, without any farther regard to it, or concernment for it, but they are
represented, as crying to God to remember, ave^^^ and vindicate them, Rev.
6.1^, 11. How long, Lord, how long will thou not avenge our blood? our blood,
speaks both the continued Relation, and suitable affection they have to their
absent Bodies.

And to the same sense a judicious and learned Pen expounds that place, Job
14.14. (which is commonly, but I know not how fitly, accommodated to another
purpose) all the days of my appointed time will I wait till my change come:
which words by a diligent comparing of the Context appear to have this for
their proper scope and sense.

Job in the former verse had expressed his confidence by way of Petition, Mr.
How Is Blessedness of the Righteous, p. 170, 171.
that at a set and appointed time God would remember him, so as to recall him
out of the Grave; and now minded to speak out more fully, puts the Question to
himself, If a man die, shall he live again? And thus answers it, all the days
of my appointed time (that is, of the appointed time which he mentioned before,
when God should revive him out of the dust) will I wait till my change come:
that is, that glorious change, when the corruption of a loathsome Grave, should
be exchanged for immortal glory: which he amplifies, and utters more expressly,
Ver. 15. Thou shall call, and I will answer; thou shall have a desire to the
work of thy hands, thou will not always forget to restore and perfect thine own
Creature. And surely this waiting is not the act of his inanimate sleeping
dust, but of that part which should be capable of such an action: q. d. I, in
that part which shall be still alive, shall patiently wait the appointed time
of reviving me in that part also which Death and the Grave shall insult over in
a temporary triumph in the mean time.

Upon these grounds I think the inclination of the separated Spirits of the
just to their own Bodies, to be a justifiable Opinion. As for the damned, we
have no reason to think such a reunion to be desirable to them: for alas, it
will be but the increase and aggravation of their torments; which consideration
is sufficient to overpower and stifle the inclination of nature, and make the
very thoughts of it horrid and dreadful. To what end (as the Prophet speaks in
another case) is it for them to desire that day? It will be a day of darkness
and gloominess to them; reunion being designed to complete the happiness of
the one, and the misery of the other.

But before I take off my hand, and dismiss this question, I must remember that
I am Debtor to two Objections.

Objection 1.
The Soul can both live and act separate from the Body, it needs it not; and if
it don't want, why should it desire it?

Solution.
The life and actings of the glorified are considerable two ways. (1) Singly
and abstractly for the life and action of one part: and so we confess the Soul
lives happily and acts forth its own powers freely in the state of separation.
(2) Personally, or concretely, as it is the life and action of the whole man,
and so it does both need and desire the Conjunction or reunion of the Body:
for the Body is not only a part of Christ's purchase, as well as the Soul, and
is to have its own glory as well as it: but it is also a constitutive part of a
complete glorified person, and so considered, the Saints are not perfectly
happy till this reunion be effected, which is the true ground and reason of
this its desire.

Object. 2.
But this Hypothesis seems to thwart the account given in Scripture of the
rest, and placid state of separate Souls: for look as Bodies which gravitate
and propend, do not rest, so neither do Souls which incline and desire.

Solution.
There is a vast difference betwixt the Tendencies and Propensions of Souls in
the way to glory, and in glory: we that are absent from the Lord, can find no
rest in the way; but those that are with the Lord can rest in Jesus, and yet
wait without anxiety, or self torturing impatience, for the accomplishment of
the promises to their absent Bodies, Rev. 6.10, 11.

COROLLARY.
Let this provoke us all to get sanctified Souls to rule and use these their
Bodies now for God: this will abundantly sweeten their parting at death, and
their meeting again at the Resurrection of the just: Else, their parting will
be doleful, and their next meeting dreadful.

And so much for the Doctrine of Separation.

The USES of the Point.
OUr way is now open to the improvement and Use of this excellent Subject and
Doctrine of Separation; and certainly it affords as rich an entertainment for
our affections, as for our minds; in the following Uses: Of which the first
will be for our information in six practical Inferences.

Inference I.
IF this be the life and state of gracious Souls, after their separation from
the Body, Then holy persons ought not to entertain dismal and terrifying
thoughts of their own dissolution.

The Apprehensions and thoughts of death, should have a peculiar pleasantness
in the minds of Believers: you have heard into what a blessed Presence and
Communion death introduces your Souls: how it leads you out of a Body of sin,
a World of sorrows, the Society of imperfect Saints; to an innumerable Company
of Angels, and to the Spirits of just men made perfect. To that lovely Mount
Sion, to the heavenly Sanctuary, to the blessed Visions of the face of God. O
methinks there has been enough said, to make all the Souls in whom the
well-grounded hopes of the life of glory are found; to cry out with the
Apostle, We are con^ident, I say, yea, and willing; rather to be absent from
the Body, and present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 5.8.

When good Musculus drew near his end, how sweet and pleasant was this
Meditation to his Soul! Hear his Swanlike Song: Melchior Adams in vita Musculi,
p. 385, 386.
Nil superest vitae, frigus praecordia captat;
Sed tu Christ mihi vita perennis ades:
Quid trepidas anima, ad seeds abitura quietis?
En tibi ductor adest Angelus ille tuus.
Linque domum hanc miseram, nunc in sua fata ruentem;
Quam tibi fida Dei dextera restituet.
Peccasti? Scio, sed Christus credentibus in se,
Peccata expurgat sanguine cuncta suo.
Horribilis mors est? Fateor, sed proxima vita est,
Ad quam te Christi gratia certa vocat.
Praesto est de Satana, peccato and morte triumphans
Christus; ad hunc igitur laeta alacrisque migra.


Which may be thus translated.

Cold death my heart invades, my life does fly.
O Christ, my everlasting life draw nigh.
Why quiver'st thou my soul within my Breast?
Thine Angel's come to lead thee to thy rest.
Quit cheerfully this drooping house of clay,
God will restore it in the appointed day.
Has't sinned? I know it, let not that be urged;
For Christ thy sins with his own blood has purged.
Is death affrighting? True, but yet withal,
Consider Christ through death, to life does call.
He triumphs over Satan, sin, and Death;
Therefore with joy resign thy dying breath.
Much in the same cheerful frame was the heart of dying Bullinger, when his
mournful friends expressed their sense of the loss they should sustain by his
re^^val. Si Deo visum fuerit mea opera ulterius in Ecclesia ministerio uti;
ipse vires suffi^iet; and libens illi parebo: sin me voluerit (quod opto) ex
hac vita evocare, paratus sum illius voluntati obsequi, ac nihil est quod
j^cundius possit mihi contingere, quam ex hoc misero and corruptissimo seculo
ad Christum Servatorem m^um migrare. idem ibid.
Why, said he, If God will make any farther use of my labors in the Ministry,
he will renew my strength, and I will gladly serve him: But if he please (as I
desire he would) to call me hence, I am ready to obey his Will: and nothing
more pleasant can befall me, than to leave this sinful and miserable World, to
go to my Savior Christ. O that all who are out of the danger of death, were
thus got out of the dread of death too.

Let them only tremble and be convulsed at the thoughts and sight of death,
whose Souls must fall into the hands of a sin-revenging God by the stroke of
death: who are to breathe out their last hope, with their last breath. Death is
yours, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 3.22. your Friend, your Privilege, your
passage to Heaven: it is your ignorance of it, which breeds your fears about it.

Inference II.
GAther from hence the absolute indispensable necessity of your Union with
Christ, before your dissolution by death.

Woe to that Soul which shall be separated from its Body, before it be united
with Christ: none but the Spirits of just men are made perfect at death.
Righteous Souls are the only qualified Subjects of blessedness.

It Is true, every Soul has a natural capacity of happiness, but gracious Souls
only have an actual meetness for glory. The Scriptures tell us in round and
plain words, that without holiness, no man shall see the Lord, Hebr. 12.14.
that except we be regenerate, and born again; we cannot see the Kingdom of God,
John 3.3. You make the greatest adventure that ever was made by man; indeed, an
adventure infinitely too great for any man to make, when you shoot the Gulf of
vast eternity upon terms of hazard and uncertainty.

What think thou, Reader, dare thou adventure thy Soul, and eternal
happiness upon it, that the work of Regeneration and Sanctification, that very
same work of Grace which the Spirit of God hangs all thy hopes of Heaven upon,
in these Scriptures, is truly wrought by him in thy Soul? Consider it well,
pause upon it again, and again, before thou go forth. Should a mistake be
committed here (and nothing is more easy or common all the World over than
such mistakes) thou art irrecoverably gone. This venture can be made but once,
and the miscarriage is never to be retrieved afterward; thou have not another
Soul to adventure, nor a second adventure to make of this. Well might the
Apostle Peter call for all diligence to make our calling and our election sure:
That can never be made too sure, which is so invaluable in its worth, and to be
but once adventured.

Inference III.
HOw prejudicial is it to dying men to be then encumbered, diverted, and
distracted about earthly concernments, when the time of their departure is at
hand!

The business and employment of dying persons is of so vast importance and
weight, that every moment of their time need to be carefully saved, and applied
to this their present and most important concern. How well soever you have
improved the time of life, believe it you will find work enough upon your hands
at death: dying hours will be found to be busy and laborious hours, even to
the most painful, serious and industrious Souls, whose life has been mostly
spent in preparations for death. Leave not the proper business of other days to
that day, for that day will have business enough of its own. Sufficient for
that day, are the labors thereof Let a few Considerations be pondered to clear
and confirm this Inference.

Consideration I.
The business and employment of dying persons, is of the most serious, awful
and solemn nature and importance: it is their last preparatory work on earth,
to their immediate appearance before God their Judge, Heb. 9.27. It is their
shooting the Gulf into eternity, and leaving this World and all their
acquaintance and interests therein for ever, Isai. 28.11. It is therefore a
Work by it self to die: a Work requiring the most intense, deep, and
undisturbed exercises of all the Abilities and Graces of the inner man; and all
little enough.

Consideration II.
Tim^ is exceeding precious with dying men, the last sand is ready to fall, and
therefore not to be wasted as it was wont to be. When we had a fair prospect of
many years before us, we made little account of an hour, or day: but now, one
of those hours which we so carelessly lavished away; is of more value than all
this World to us, especially if the whole weight of eternity should hang upon
it, (as often times it does) then the loss of that portion of time, is the loss
of Soul, Body, and hope for evermore.

Consideration III.
Much of that little precious time of departing Souls, will be unavoidably
taken up and employed about the inexcusable pressing calls and necessities of
distressed nature: all that you can do for your Souls must then be done only by
fits and snatches in the midst of many disturbances and frequent interruptions:
So that it is rarely found that a dying man can pursue a serious Meditation
with calm and fixed thoughts: for besides the pains and faintings of the Body,
the Abilities of the mind usually fail. Here also they fall into a sad Dilemma,
if they do not with utmost intention of mind, fix their hearts and thoughts on
Christ, they lose their comfort, if godly; and their Souls if ungodly: and if
they do, Friends and Physicians assure them they will destroy their Bodies.
These are the straits of men bordering close upon eternity: they must hastily
catch a few moments in the intervals of pain, and then are put by all again.

Consideration IV.
There is no man living but has something to do for his own Soul in a dying
hour, and something for others also.

Suppose the best that can be supposed, that the Soul be in real Union with
Christ, and that Union be also clear, yet it is seldom found but there are some
assaults of Satan: or if not, yet how many Relations and Friends need our
experiences and Counsels, at such a time? How many things shall we have to do,
after our great and main work is done? And others have a great deal more to do,
though as safe as the former. O the Knots and Objections that are then to be
dissolved and answered! The unusual Onsets and Assaults of Satan, that are then
to be resisted! And yet most dying persons have much more upon their hands than
either of the former. The whole work of Repentance and Faith is to do, when
time is even done.

Consideration V.
Few, yea very few, are found furnished ^^^h Wisdom, Experience and
Faithfulness, to give dying Persons any considerable assistance in Soul
affairs: it may be, there may be found among the Visitants of the Sick, now and
then, a person who has a word of Wisdom in his heart; but then either he wants
opportunity, or courage and faithfulness to do the part of a true Spiritual
friend. Elihu describes the person so qualified as he ought for this work, Job
33.23, 24. and calls him one among a thousand. Some are too close and reserved,
others too trifling and impertinent: Some are willing, but want Ability; others
are able, but want faithfulness: Some cut too deep by uncharitable
censoriousness, others skin over the wound too slightly, speaking Peace where
God and Conscience speak none. So that little help is to be expected.

Consideration VI.
How much therefore does it deserve to be lamented, that where there is so much
to do, so little time to do it, and so few to help in the best improvement of
it, all should be lost as to their Souls by earthly encumbrances and wordly
affairs, which may have been done soo^^ and better in a more proper season! O
therefore let m^^^erswade all men to take heed of bringing the proper business
of healthful days to their sick beds.

Inference IV.
What an excellent creature is the Soul of man, which is capable not only of
such preparations for God whilst it is in the Body; but of such sights and
enjoyments of God when it lives without a Body!

Here the Spirit of God works upon it in the way of grace and sanctification,
Ephesians. 2.10. The scope and design of this his workmanship is to qualify and make
us meet for the life of Heaven, 2 Cor. 5.5. For this self same thing, or
purpose, our Souls are wrought or molded by grace into quite another frame and
temper than that which nature gave them: and when he has wrought out and
finished all that he intends to be wrought in the way of sanctification, then
shall it be called up to the highest enjoyments and employments for ever, that
a creature is susceptible of.

Herein the dignity of the Soul appears, that no other Creature in this World
beside it, has a natural capacity either to be sanctified inherently in this
World, or glorified everlastingly in that to come, to be transformed into the
image, and filled with the joy of the Lord. There are Myriads of other Souls in
this World beside ours, but to none of them is the Spirit of sanctification
sent, but only to ours. The Souls of Animals serve only to move the dull and
sluggish matter, and take in for a few days the sensitive pleasures of the
Creation, and so expire; having no natural capacity of, or designation for any
higher employment, or enjoyment.

And it deserves a most serious animadversion, that this vast capacity of the
Soul for eternal blessedness, must of necessity make it capable of so much the
more misery and self torment, if at last it fail of that blessedness: For it is
apparent they do not perish because they are incapable, but because they are
unwilling; not because their Souls wanted any natural faculty that others have,
but because they would not open those they have (...) ^^ceive Christ in the way
of faith and obedience, as others did

Think upon this you that live only to eat, and drink, and sleep, and play, as
the Birds and Beasts of the field do; what need was there of a reasonable Soul
for such sensual employments? do not your noble faculties speak your
designation for higher uses? and will you not wish to exchange Souls with the
most vile and despicable Animal in this World, if it were possible to be done.
Certainly it were better for you to have no capacity of eternal blessedness (as
they have not) if you do not enjoy it; and no capacity of torment beyond this
life (as they have not) if you must certainly endure it.

Inference V.
IF our Souls and Bodies must be separated shortly, how patiently should we
bear all lesser that may or will be made betwixt us and any other enjoyments in
this World.

No union is so intimate strict, and dear, as that betwixt your Souls and
Bodies. All your relations and enjoyments in this World, hang looser from your
Souls, than your Bodies do; and if it be your duty patiently and submissively
to suffer a painful parting pull from your Bodies; it is doubtless your duty to
suffer meekly and patiently a separation from other things, which are but a
prelude to it, and a mere shadow of it. It Is good to put such cases to our
selves in the midst of our pleasant enjoyments.

I have now many comfortable Relatives in the World, Wife, Children Kindred,
and Friends; God has made them pleasant to me, but he may bereave me of all
these. Does not Providence ring such changes all the World over! Are not all
Kingdoms, Cities, and Towns full of the sighs and laments of Widows, Orphans,
and Friends bereaved of their pleasant and useful Relations? But if God will
have it so, it is our duty to bound our sorrows, remembering the time is short, 1
Cor. 7.29. In a few days we must be stripped much nearer, even out of our own
Bodies by death.

God may also separate betwixt me and my health by sickness, so that the
pleasure of this World shall be cut off from me; but sickness is not death,
though it be a prelude and step toward it: I may well bear this with patience,
who must submissively bear sharper pains than these ere long. Yea, and well may
I bear this submissively, considering that by such imbittering, and weaning
providence God is preparing me for a much easier dissolution, than if I should
live at ease in the Body all my days, till death come to make so great and
sudden a change upon me.

God may also separate betwixt me and my liberty by restraint. It has been the
lot of the best men that ever were in the World, and if it should be ours also,
we should not be much startled at it, considering these Bodies of ours must be
shortly pent up in a straiter, darker, and more loathsome place of confinement,
than any prison in this World can be. The grave is a darker place, Job 17.13.
And your abode there will be longer, Eccles. 11.8.

These and all other our outward enjoyments are separable things, and its good
thus to alleviate our loss of them.

Inference VI.
HOw Heavenly should the tempers and frawles of those Souls be who are
Candidates for Heaven, and must be so shortly numbered with the Spirits of just
men made perfect!

It Is reasonable that we all begin to be, that which we expect to be for ever.
To learn that way of living and conversing which we believe must be our
everlasting life and business in the World to come. Let them that hope to live
with Angels in Heaven, learn to live like Angels on Earth, in Holiness,
Activity, and ready obedience.

There is the greatest reason that our minds be there where our Souls are to be
for ever. A spiritual mind will be found possible, congruous, sweet, and
evidential of our interest in that glory, to all those holy Souls who are
preparing, and designed for it.

First, it is possible, notwithstanding the clogs and entanglements of the
Body, to be heavenly minded. Others have attained it, Philip. 3.20. Two things
make an heavenly conversation possible to men, viz. 1. The natural abilities of
the Mind. 2. The gracious principles of the Mind.


1. The natural abilities of the mind which can in a minutes time dispatch a
nimble messenger to Heaven, and mount its thoughts from this to that World in a
trice. The power of cogitation is a rich endowment of the Soul, such as no
other creature on earth is participant of. Though spiritual thoughts be not the
natural growth of the Soul, yet thoughts capable of being spiritualized are.
And without this ability of projecting thoughts, all intercourse must have been
cut off.

2. The gracious principles implanted in the Soul do actually incline the mind,
and mount its thoughts heavenward. Yea, this will prove more than a possibility
of a conversation in Heaven; whilst Saints tabernacle on earth in Bodies of
flesh, it will almost prove an impossibility that it should be otherwise. For
these spiritual principles setting the bent and tendency of the heart
heavenward, we must act against the very law of our new Nature when we place
our affections elsewhere.

Secondly, A mind in heaven is most congruous, decorous, and comely for those
that are the enrolled inhabitants of that heavenly City. Where should a
Christians love be, but where his Lord is? Our hearts and our homes do not use
to be long asunder. It becomes you so to think and so to speak now, as those
who make account to be shortly singing Allelujahs before the throne.

Thirdly, It Is most sweet and delightful: no pleasure in all this World
comparable to this pleasure, Romans 8.6. To be spiritually minded is life and
peace. It Is a young Heaven born in the Soul, in its way thither.

Fourthly, To conclude. It is evidential of your interest in it: an agreeable
frame is the surest title, Col. 3.1, 2. Matthew 6.21. If Heaven attract your
minds now, it will center them for ever.

USE II.
THis Doctrine of the separation of the Spirits of the Just from their Bodies,
as it lies before you in this Discourse, affords a singular help to all the
people of God, to entertain lovely and pleasant thoughts of that day, to make
death not only an unregretted, but a most pleasant and desirable thing to their
Souls.

I know there is a pure, simple, natural fear of death, from which you must not
expect to be perfectly freed by all the Arguments in the World. And there is a
reverential awful fear of death, which it would be your prejudice and loss to
have destroyed. You will have a natural, and ought to have a reverential fear
of death: the one flows from your sensitive, the other from your sanctified
nature.

But it is a third sort of fear which does you all the mischief, a fear
springing in gracious Souls out of the weakness of their Graces, and the
strength of their unmortified affections. A fear arising partly out of the
darkness of our minds, and partly out of the sensuality and earthlyness of our
hearts; this fear is that which so convulseth our Souls when death is near and
imbitters our lives, even whilst it is at a distance. He that has been
overheated in his affections to this World, and over-cooled by diversions and
temptations, neglects and intermissions, to that World; cannot choose but give
an unwilling shrug, if not a frightful screech at the appearance of death.

And this being the sad case of too many, good and upright Souls for the main;
and there being so few even amongst serious Christians that have attained to
that courage and complacence in the thoughts of death which the Apostle speaks
of, 2 Cor. 5.8. to be both confident and willing rather to be absent from the
Body, and to be present with the Lord; I will from this discourse furnish them
with some special assistance therein. But withal, I must tell you upon what
great disadvantages I am here to dispute with your fears, so strong is the
current of natural and vicious fear, that except a special hand of God back and
set on the Arguments that shall be urged, they will be as easily swept away
before it, as so many Straws by a rapid Torrent; nor will it be to any more
purpose to oppose my breath to them, than to the Tides and Waves of the Sea.

Moreover, I am fully convinced by long and often experience how unsteady, and
inconstant the frames and tempers of the best hearts are; and that if it be not
full home, yet it is next to an impossibility to fix them in such a temper as
this I aim at, is. Where is that man to be found, who after the revolutions of
many years, and in those years, various dispensations of providence without
him, altering his condition, and greater variety of temptations within; can yet
say, notwithstanding all these various aspects and positions, his heart has
still held one steady and invariable tenor and course.

Alas, there be very few (if any) of such sound and Athletick temper of mind,
whose pulse beats with an even stroke, through all inequalities of condition,
alike free and willing at one time, as another, to be uncloathed of the Body,
and to be with Christ. This height of faith, and depth of mortification; this
strength of love to Christ, and ardour of holy desire, are degrees of grace to
which very few attain.

The case standing thus, it is no more than needs, to urge all sorts of
Arguments upon our timorous and unsteady hearts, and it is like to prove an hard
and difficult task to bring the heart but to a quiet and unregretting
submission to the appointment of God herein, though submission be one of the
lowest steps of duty in this case.

If it be hard to fix our thoughts but an hour upon such an unpleasing subject
as death; how hard m^st it be to bring over the consent of the will? If we
cannot endure it at a distance in our thoughts; how shall we embrace and hug it
in our bosoms? If our thoughts fly back with distaste and impatience, no
wonder if our will be obstinate and refractory. We must first prevail with our
thoughts to fix themselves, and think close to such a subject, before it can be
expected we cheerfully resign our selves into the hands of death. We cannot be
willing to go along with death, till we have some acquaintance with it; and
acquainted with it we cannot be, till we accustom our selves to think
assiduously and calmly of it. They that have dwelt many years at deaths door,
both in respect of the condition of their Bodies, and disposition of their
minds, yet find reluctance enough when it comes to the point.

Objection.
But if separation from the Body be (as it is) an enemy to Nature, and there be
no possibility to extinguish natural aversation; to what purpose is it to argue
and persuade, where there is no expectation of Success?

Solution.
Death is considerable two ways by the people of God, 1. As an Enemy to Nature,
2. As a medium to Glory.


If we consider it simply in it self, as an Enemy to Nature, there is nothing
in it for which we should desire it: but if we consider it as a medium or
passage into glory, yea, the only ordinary way through which all the Saints
must pass out of this into a better state, so it will appear not only
tolerable, but desirable to prepared Souls. Were there not a shore of glory on
the other side of these black Waters of death, for my own part, I should rather
choose to live meanly, than to die easily. If both parts were to perish at
death, there were no reason to persuade one to be willing to deliver up the
other. It were a madness for the Soul to desire to be dissolved, if it were so
far from being better out of the Body, than in it, that it should have no being
at all. But Christians, let me tell you, death is so far from being a Bar, that
it is a Bridge in your way to glory, and you are never like to come thither but
by passing over it: except therefore you will look beyond it, you will never
see any desireableness in it. I desire to be dissolved (says Paul) and to be
with Christ; which is far better. To be with Death is sad, but to be with
Christ is sweet: to endure the pains of death is doleful; but to see the face
of Christ is joyful. To part with your pleasant habitations is irksome; but to
be lodged in the heavenly Mansions is most delightful. A parting hour with dear
Relations is cutting, but a meeting hour with Jesus Christ is transporting. To
be rid of your own Bodies is not pleasing: but to be rid of sin and that for
ever; What can be more pleasing to a gracious Soul?

You see then in what sense I present death as a desirable thing to the people
of God. And therefore seeing nature teaches us (as the Apostle speaks) to put
the more abundant comeliness upon the uncomely parts; suffer me to dress up
death in its best ornaments, and present it to you in the following Arguments,
as a beautiful and comely object of your conditional and well regulated
desires. And

Argument I.
IF upon a fair and just account there shall appear to be more gain to
Believers in Death, than there is in Life: reason must needs vote death to be
better to them that are in Christ, than life can be; and consequently it should
be desirable in their eyes.

It Is a clear dictate of reason in case of choice to choose that which is best
for us. Who is there that freely exercises reason and choice together, that
will not do so?

What Merchant will not part with an hundred pounds worth of Glass Beads and
Pendents, for a Tun of Gold? A few Tinsell Toys, for as many rich Diamonds?
Mercatura est amittere, ut lucreris, that is true Merchandise, to part with
things of lesser, for things of greater value.

Now, if you will be tried and determined by Gods Book of Rates, then the case
is determined quickly, and the advantage appears exceedingly upon deaths side,
Philip. 1.21. To me to live, is Christ; and to die, is gain.

Objection
True, it might be so to Paul, who was eminent in grace, and ripe for glory;
but it may be loss to others who have not attained the height of his holiness,
or assurance.

Sol.
The true and plain sense of the Objection is this, whether Heaven and Christ
be as much gain to him that enjoys it, though he be behind others both in
grace, and obedience; as it is to them who are more eminent in grace, and have
done and suffered more for its sake? and let it be determined by your selves:
but if your meaning be, that Paul was ready for death, and so are not you: his
work and course was almost comfortably finished, and so is not yours: his death
therefore must needs be gain to him, but it may be loss to you; even the loss
of all that you are worth for ever.

To this I say, the Wisdom of God orders the time of his peoples death, as well
as all other Circumstances about it: and in this, your hearts may be at perfect
rest, That being in Christ you can never die to your loss, die when you will. I
know you will reply, that if your Union with Christ were clear, the
Controversy were ended: but then you must also consider, they are as safe who
die by an act of recumbency upon Christ, as those that die in the fullest
assurance of their interest in him.

And beside, your Reluctancies and Aversations to death, are none of your way
to assurance; but such a strong aversation to sin, and such a vehement desire
after, and love to Christ as can make you willing to quit all that is dear and
desirable to you in this World, for his sake, is the very next door or step to
assurance, and if the Lord bring your hearts to this frame, and fix them there,
it is not like you will be long without it.

But to return, Paul had here valued life, with a full allowance of all the
benefits and advantages of it, To me to live is Christ: that is, if I live, I
shall live in Communion with Christ, and service for Christ, and in the midst
of all those Comforts which usually result from both. Here Is life with the most
weighty and desirable benefits of it laid in one scale, and he lays death, and
probably a violent death too; for of that he speaks to them afterward in Chap.
2.17. thus he fills the Scales, and the Balance breaks on deaths side, yea, it
comes down with a (...), a far far better.

But here falls in ( Mr. How in Mrs. Margaret Baxter's Funeral Sermon.
as an Excellent Person observes) a Rubb in the way: there are in this case two
Judges, the Flesh and Spirit, and they cannot agree upon the values, but
contradict each other. Nature says, It Is far far better to live than to die,
and will not be beaten off from it. What then? I hope you will not put blind
and partial nature in competition with God also; as you do life with death: but
seeing Nature can plead so powerfully, as well as Grace, let us hear what those
strong reasons are, that are urged by the flesh on life's side, and what the
Soul has to reply and plead on deaths side, (for the Body can plead and that
charmingly too, though not by words and sounds) and then determine the matter
as we shall see cause: but be sure prejudice pull not down the Balance.

I. The Pleas of Nature for life, and against dissolution.
And here the doleful voice of Nature laments, pleads, and bemoans it self to
the willing Soul,

O my Soul, What do thou mean by these thy desires to be dissolved? Art thou
in earnest, when thou say thou art willing to leave thine own Body and be
gone? Consider, and think again ere thou bid me farewell, what thou art to me,
and what I have been and am to thee; thou art my Soul, that is, my Prop, my
Beauty, my Honor, my Life, and indeed, all that is comfortable to me. If thou
depart, what am I but a Spectacle of Pity, an abhorred Carcass in a few
moments? A prey to the Worms, a Captive to Death? If thou depart, my Candle is
put out, and I am left in the horrors of darkness.

I am thy House, thy delightful habitation, the House in which thou have dwelt
from the first moment of thy Creation, and never lodgedst one Night in any
other: every Room in me has one way or another been a Banquetting-room for thy
entertainment, a Room of pleasure: all my Senses have been Purveyors for thy
delight: my Members have all of them been thine Instruments and Servants to
execute thy Commands and Pleasure; if thou and I part, it must be in a shower:
thou shall feel such pains, such traveling throes, such deep emphatical
groans, such Sweats, such Agonies as thou never felt'st before. For Death has
somewhat of anguish peculiar to it self, and which is unknown, though guessed
at by the Living. Beside, when ever thou leavest me, thou leavest all that is
and has been comfortable to thee in this World: thy House shall know thee no
more, Job 7.10. thy Lands, thy Money; thy Trade, which has cost thee so many
careful thoughts, and yielded thee so many Refreshments, shall be thine no
longer: Death will strip thee out of all these, and leave thee naked.

Thou have also, since thou becamest mine, contracted manifold Relations in the
World, which I know are dear unto thee. I know it by costly experience: How
have thou made me to wear and wast my self in Labors, Cares, and Watchings for
them? But if thou will be gone, all these must be left exposed, God knows to
what Wants, Abuses, and Miseries: for I can do nothing for them or my self, if
once thou leave me. Thus it charms and pleads: thus it lays as it were
violent hands upon the Soul, and says, O my Soul, thou shall not depart. It
hangs about it much as the Wife and Children of good Galeacius Carracciolus did
about him, when he was leaving Italy to go to Geneva (a lively Emblem of the
Case before us.) It says to the Soul as Ioab did to David, thou have shamed my
face this day, in that thou love thine Enemy Death, and hate me thy friend.
O my Soul, my Life, my Darling, my Dear and only one, let nothing but
unavoidable necessity part thee and me. All this the Flesh can plead, and a
great deal more than this, and that a thousand times more powerfully and
feelingly than any words can plead the case. And all its Arguments are backed by
sense: Sight and Feeling attest what Nature speaks.

II. The Pleas of Faith in behalf of Death.
Let us in the next place weigh the Pleas and Reasons, which, notwithstanding
all this, do overpower and prevail with the Believing Soul to be gone, and quit
its own Body, and return no more to the Elementary World.

And thus the power of Faith and Love, enable it to reply.

My dear Body, the Companion and Partner of my Comforts and Troubles in the
days of my Pilgrimage on earth, great is my love, and strong are the Bonds of
my affections to thee. Thou have been tenderly, yea, excessively beloved by me:
my cares and fears for thee have been unexpressible: and nothing but the love
of Jesus Christ is strong enough to gain my consent to part with thee: thy
interest in my affections is great, but as great as it is, and as much as I
prize thee, I can shake thee off, and thrust thee aside to go to Christ.

Nor may this seem absurd or unreasonable, considering that God never designed
thee for a Mansion, but only a temporary Tabernacle to me: it is true I have had
some comfort during my abode in thee, but I enjoyed those Comforts only in
thee, not from thee; and many more I might have enjoyed, had thou not been a
snare and a clog to me.

It Is thou that have eaten up my time, and distracted my thoughts, ensnared my
affections, and drawn me under much sin and sorrow. However though we may weep
over each other as Accessories to the sins and miseries we have drawn upon our
selves, yet in this is our joint relief that the Blood of Christ has cleansed
us both from all sin.

And therefore I can part the more easily and comfortably from thee, because I
part in hope to receive and enjoy thee in a far better condition than I leave
thee. It is for both our interest to part for a time: for mine, because I shall
thereby be freed and delivered from sin and sorrow, and immediately obtain rest
with God, and the satisfaction of all my desires in his presence and enjoyment,
which there is no other way to obtain, but by separation from thee: and why
should I live a groaning burdened restless life always, to grantifie thy fond
and irrational desires? If thou lovedst me, thou would rejoice, and not
repine at my happiness. Parents willingly part with their Children at the
greatest distance for their preferment, how dearly soever they love them: and
do thou envy or repine at mine? I lived many Months a suffocating obscure
life with thee in the Womb, and neither thou nor I had ever tasted or
experienced the Comforts of this World, and the various Delights of sense, if
we had not cast the Secundine, and strugled hard for an entrance into this
World. And now we are here, alas, though thou art contented to abide, I live in
thee, but as we both lived in the Womb, an obscure and uneasy, and unsuitable
life. Thou can feed upon material bread, and delight thy self amidst the
variety of sensitive Objects thou find here; but what are all these things
to me? I cannot subsist by them; that which is food to thee, is but Chaff,
Wind, and Vanity to me. If I stay with thee, I shall be still sinning, and
still groaning: when I leave thee, I shall be immediately freed from both, and
arrive at the sum and perfection of all my hopes, desires, and whatsoever I
have aimed at, and labored for, in all the duties of my life. Let us therefore
be content to part.

Shrink not at the horror of a Grave: it is indeed, a dark and solitary house,
and the days of darkness may be many: but to thee, my dear Companion, it shall
be a Bed of rest: Yea, a perfumed Bed, where thy Lord Jesus lay bef^^e thee.
And let the time of thy abode there, be never so long, thou shall not measure
it, nor find the least rediousness in it. A thousand years there, shall seem no
more in the Morning of the Resurrection, than the sweetest Nap of an hour long
seemed to be, when I was wont to lay thee upon thy Bed to rest.

The worms in the Grave shall be nothing to thee, nor give thee the thousandth
part of that trouble that a Flea was wont to do. And though I leave thee, Jesus
Christ shall watch in the mean time over thy dust, and not suffer a grain of it
to be lost. And I will return assuredly to thee again at the time appointed: I
take not an everlasting farewell of thee, but depart for a time, that I may
receive thee for ever. To conclude, there is an unavoidable necessity of our
parting; whether willing, or unwilling, we must be separated: but the consent
of my will to part with thee for the enjoyment of Jesus Christ, will be highly
acceptable to God, and as a lump of Sugar to sweeten the bitter cup of death to
us both.

This, and much more the gracious Soul has to say for its separation from the
Body, by which it is easy to discern where the gain and advantage of death
lies to all Believers! and consequently how much it must be every way their
interest to be unbodied.

Argument II.
TO be weary of the Body upon the pure account and reason of our hatred of sin,
and longing desires after Jesus Christ, argues strongly grace in truth, and
grace in strength: it is both the Test of our sincerity, and the measure of our
attainment, and maturity of grace; and upon both accounts highly covetable by
all the people of God.

It is so great an evidence of the truth of grace, that the Scriptures have
made it the descriptive periphrasis of a Christian: so we find it in 2 Timothy
4.8. the Crown of life is there promised to all them that love the appearance
of Christ: ( i.e.) those that love to think of it, that delight to steep their
thoughts in Subjects belonging to the other World: and cast ^^ny a yearning
look that way, and 2 Pet. 3.12. they are described to be such as are looking
for, and hastening to the coming of the day of God. Their earnest expectations
and longings do not only put them upon making all the have they can to be with
Christ; but it makes the interposing time seem so tedious and slow, that with
their most vehement wishes and desires, they do what they can to accelerate and
hasten it, as Rev. 22. Come Lord Jesus, come quickly, Lovers hours, says the
Proverb, are full of Eternity O said, Mr. Rutherford; That Christ would make
long strides O that he would fold up the Heavens as an old Cloak, and shovel
time and days out of the way! Such desires as these can spring from none but
gracious and renewed Souls: for Nature is wholly disaffected to a removal hence
upon such Motives and Considerations as these: if others wish at any time for
death, it is but in a Pet, a present passion provoked by some intolerable
anguish, or great distress of nature. But to look, and long, and hasten to the
other World, out of a weariness of sin, and an hearty willingness to be with
Christ, it supposes necessarily a deep-rooted hatred of sin, abhorring it more
than death it self, the greatest of natural evils: and a real sight of things
invisible by the eye of Faith, without which it is impossible any man's heart
should be thus framed and tempered.

And as it evidenceth the truth, so also the strength and maturity of Grace:
for alas! How many thousands of gracious Souls that love the Lord Jesus in
sincerity, are to be found quite below this temper of mind. O it is but here and
there one among the Lords own people that have reached this height and eminence
of Faith and Love: it is with the fruits of the Spirit just as it is with the
fruits of the earth; some are green and raw, others are ripe and mellow: the
first stick fast on the Branches; you may shake and shake again, and not one
will drop; or as those fruits that grow in the Hedges with their Coats and
Integuments enwrapping them, as Nuts, etc. You may try your strength upon them,
and sooner break your Nails, than disclose and separate them; so fast and close
do their husks stick to them: but when time and the influences of Heaven have
ripened and brought them to their perfection, the Apples drop into your hands
without the least touch, and the Nut falls out of its Case of its own accord:
So, much so, does the Soul part from its Body when it is maturated, and come to
its strength and vigor.

Argument III.
IT may greatly prevail upon the Will and Resolution of a Believer to adventure
boldly and cheerfully upon Death, that our Bodies, of which we are bereaved and
deprived by death, shall be most certainly, and advantageously restored to us
by the Resurrection. The Resurrection of the Dead, is the encouragement and
consolation of the dying. The more our Faith is established in the Doctrine of
the Resurrection, the more we shall surmount the fears of dissolution. If Paul
urged it as an Argument to reconcile Philemon to his Servant Onesimus, v. 15.
That he therefore departed for a season, that Philemon might receive him for
ever: the same Argument may reconcile every Believer to death, and take off the
prejudice of the Soul against it. You shall surely receive your Bodies again,
and enjoy them for ever.

Now the Doctrine of the Resurrection is as sure in it self, as it is
comfortable to us: the depth and strength of its foundation, fully answers to
the height and sweetness of its consolation: be pleased to try the two pillars
thereof, and see which of them may be doubted or shaken, Matthew. 22.29. You err
(says Christ to the Sadduces, who denied this Doctrine) not knowing the
Scriptures and the Power of God: this is the ground and root of their error,
not knowing the Scriptures and the Power of God: q d. did you know and believe
the Scriptures of God, and the Power of God; you would never question this
Doctrine of the Resurrection, which is built upon them both. The Power of God
convinces all men that know and believe it, that it may be ^o, and the
Scriptures of God convince all that know and believe them, that it must be so:
as for his Power, Who can doubt it? At the Command and fiat of God, the Earth
brought forth every living Creature after his kind, Genesis 1.24, 25. at his
Command Lazarus came forth, John 11.43. And was there not as much difficulty in
either of these, as in our Resurrection? By this Power our Souls were quickened
and raised from the death of sin and guilt, to the Spiritual life of Christ,
Ephesians. 1.19. and is it not as easy to raise a dead Body, as a dead Soul? But
what stand I arguing in so plain a Case, when we are assured this mighty Power
is able to subdue all things to it self, Phil. 3.21.

And then, for his promise, that it shall be so, What can be plainer! See 1
These. 4.15, 16. This we say unto you by the Word of the Lord, etc. ( i.e.) In
the Name, or Auhority of the Lord, and by Commission and Warrant from him, he
first opens his Commission, shows his Credentials, and then publishes the
comfortable Doctrine of the Resurrection, and the Saints pre-eminence to all
others therein.

Well then, what remains in death to fright and scare a Believer? is it our
parting with these Bodies? Why, it is not for ever that we part with them; as
sure as the power and promises of God are true, firm and sufficient to
accomplish it, we shall see and enjoy them again. This comforted Job, chap.
19.25, 26. over all his diseases, when of all his enjoyments that once he had,
he could not say, my Friends, my Children, my Estate; yet then he could say, my
Redeemer. When he looked upon a poor, wasted, withered loathsome Body of his
own, and saw nothing but a Skeleton, an Image of death; yet then could he see
it a glorious Body by viewing it believingly in this glass of the Resurrection.
So then, all the damage we can receive by death, is but the absence of our
Bodies for a time, during which time, the Covenant Relation betwixt God and
them holds good and firm, Matthew. 22.32. He therefore will take care of them,
and in due time restore them with mavelous improvements, and endowments to us
again, divested of all their infirmities, and clothed with Heavenly qualities
and perfection, 1 Cor. 15.43, 44. And in the mean time the Soul attains its
rest and happiness and satisfaction in the blessed God.

Argument IV.
THE consideration of what we part from, and what we go to, should make the
medium by which we pass from so much evil, to so great good, lovely and
desirable in our eyes, how unpleasing or bitter soever it be in it self.

No man desires Physic for it self. There is no pleasure in bitter Pills and
loathsome Potions, except what rises from the end, viz, the disburthening of
Nature, and recovery of health: and this gives it a value with the Sick and
pained. Under a like consideration is death desired by sick and pained Souls,
who find it better to dye once, than groan under burdens continually.

Death is certainly the best Physician next and under Jesus Christ, that ever
was employed about them; for it cures radically and perfectly; so that the Soul
never relapses any more into any distemper. Other Medicines are but Anodynes,
or at best they relieve us but in part, and for a time; but this goes through
the work, and perfects the cure at once. Methinks that Call of Christ which he
gives his Spouse in Cant. 4.8 (Come with me from Lebanon (my Spouse) with me
from Lebanon: look from the top of Amana, from the top of Shenir and Hermon
from the Lions dens, from the Mountains of Leopards.) scarce suits any time so
well as the time of death. Then it is that we depart from the Lions Dens, and
the mountains of Leopards, places uncomfortable and unsafe. More particularly,
at death the Saints depart.

1. From defiling corruptions in^o 1. Perfect purity. 2. From heart sinking
sorrows in^o 2. Fullness of joy. 3. From entangling temptations in^o 3.
Everlasting freedom. 4. From distressing persecutions in^o 4. Full rest. 5.
From pinching wants in^o 5. Universal supplies. 6. From distracting fears in^o
6. Highest security. 7. From deluding shadows in^o 7. Substantial good.
1. From defiling corruptions into perfect purity. No sin hangs about the
separated, though it do about the sanctified Soul. They come out of the Body
suitable to that character and encomium, Cant. 4.7. Thou art all fair, my love,
there is no spot in thee. It does that for the Saints which all their graces,
and duties, all their mercies and afflictions could never do. Faith is a great
purifier, Communion with God a great cleanser, sanctified afflictions a
Refiner's fire and Fuller's Soap, these have all done their parts, and been
useful in their places; but none of them nor altogether perfected this cure
till death come; and then the work is done, and the cure perfected.

All Weeping, all Praying, all Believing, all Hearing, all Sacraments, all the
means and instruments in the World, cannot do what death will do for thee. One
dying hour will do what ten thousand praying hours never did, nor could do. In
this hour the design of all those hours is accomplished; as he that is dead by
mortification is at present freedom from sin, in respect of imputation and
dominion, Romans 6.7. so he that being justified and mortified is dead naturally;
is immediately freed from the very indwelling and existence of sin in him. We
read of the washing of the Robes of the Saints in Rev. 7.14. The blood of the
Lamb cleanses them from every spot, but it does it gradually. The last spot of
guilt indeed was fetched out by one act of justification, but the last spot
filth is not fetched out till the time of their dissolution, when they are come
out of the Agonies of death (which the Scripture calls great tribulation) then
and not till then are they perfectly cleansed. Sin brought in death, and death
carries out sin.

O what a pure lovely shining Creature is the separated Spirit of a Just man!
How clear is its Judgment, how ordinate its will, how holy, and altogether
heavenly, are all its affections now; and never till now it feels it self
perfectly well, and as it would be.

2. From heart-sinking Sorrows, into fullness of Joy. The life we now live is a
groaning life, 2 Cor. 5.2. where is the Christian that if his inside could be
seen, and his heart laid naked; would not be found wounded from many hands?
From the hand of God, of Enemies, of Friends, of Satan: but especially by the
hands of its own Corruptions. Christ our Head was styled a man of sorrows, from
the multitude of his Sorrows; and it is the lot of all his to be in a state of
sorrow in the Body. In the World (says he) you shall have trouble. When I
consider how often the Candle of Sorrow is held to the thread of life; I justly
wonder how it is protracted to such a length. What Friend, what Enjoyment had
we ever in this World, from which no sorrow, nay, many Sorrows have not sprung
up to us? And if the best Comforts bring forth Sorrows, What do the worst
things we meet with here, bring forth? I suppose, there are many thousands of
God's People this day in the World, that have as much reason to assume the same
new Name that Naomi did, and say, call me Marah. Look as Day and Night divide
all time betwixt them; so do our Comforts and our Sorrows; only with this
difference, That our Nights of Sorrow like Winter Nights, are long, cold, and
dark; and our days of Comfort short, and frequently over-cast.

But when we put off these Bodies, we put off our mourning Garments with them,
and shall never sorrow any more: thenceforth God wipes away all tears from his
Peoples eyes, Rev. 21.4. and that is not all, but they enter into their Masters
Joy, even fullness of joy and pleasures for evermore. Groans are turned into
Triumphs, and Sighs and Tears into joyful Acclamations and Songs of praise. O
that we were once made sensible thoroughly of the advantages that come by this
exchange.

3. From entangling Temptations, into everlasting Freedom. It Is this Body, and
the interest, and concerns of it, upon which Satan raises most of his Batteries
against our Souls: it is our Flesh that causes our Soul to sin: and whilst the
Soul dwells in the Body, it is within Satan's reach to tempt and defile and
trouble it. O what grievous things do the best Souls endure and suffer on this
account?

Temptations are of two sorts: Ordinary and mediate by Satan's exciteing and
manageing our Corruptions, by presenting Objects to them; or extraordinary and
immediate, like fiery darts shot immediately out of Hell into the Soul, which
puts it all into a flame and Combustion: Of the former you read in Iam. 1.14.
the latter in Ephesians. 6.16. and upon the account of the one and other the People
of God are weary of their lives: think what a grief it must be to a Soul that
loves God, to feel in it self such things as militate against and wound the
Name and Honor of God, which is, and ought to be dearer to it than its life.

But by the door of Death every gracious Soul makes it escape from the tempting
power of Satan: he can no more touch or affect the Soul with any temptation,
than we can batter the Body of the Sun with Snow-balls: for as Satan can have
no access to that place of Blessedness, where the Souls of the Saints are; so
if he could, he can find nothing in them to fasten a temptation upon. The
Schoolmen give this as the reason, why the Saints in Heaven are impeccable,
because all their thoughts and affections are everlastingly fixed in, and
employed about the blessed God; whose face they continually behold in Glory.

4. From distressing Persecutions into full and perfect rest. As Death sets us
free from the Power of Satan, so from the reach of all Persecutors, There the
wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary are at rest: as it is in Job
3.17. The price of one Ahab who had sold himself to work wickedness, was a
stock sufficient to purchase many years trouble to all Israel, 1. King 18.17.
Wicked men are as the unquiet troubled Sea, which cannot rest, Isai. 57.20.
They cannot rest from troubling the Saints, till they cease to be wicked, or to
live: when God puts out the Candle of their lives, they are silent in darkness,
1 Samuel 2.9. And when God puts out the Candle of our life, we are at rest,
though they rage never so much in this World. Death is the Saints quietus est;
their full and final discharge from persecuting Enemies. When we are dying, we
may say, as Psalm. 9.6. O thou Enemy, Destructions are come to a perpetual end.

God may put an end to these Persecutions before Death, and such a time
according to promise is to be expected, when our officers shall be peace, and
our Exactors Righteousness, Isa. 60.17. but if the accomplishment of the
promise be reserved for Ages to come, and we must spend our days under the
oppression of the wicked; yet this is our comfort, we know when we shall be far
enough out of their reach.

5. From pinching wants to universal Supplies. This is the day in which the
Lord abundantly satisfies the desires, and supplies the needs of all his
people: there are two sorts of wants upon the People of God, Spiritual and
Temporal.

Spiritual wants are the just Complaints of all gracious Souls. You read, 1
These. 3.10. of that which is lacking in the Faith of the Saints: there are none
but find many things lacking to the perfection of every Grace: Our knowledge of
God wants clearness and efficacy: Our Love to God fervor and constancy: our
Faith wants strength and stability: Darkness mixes it self with our knowledge,
deadness with our love, Unbelief with the purest acts of Faith. Go where you
will, you shall find Gods People every where complaining of their Spiritual
wants; One of a dark head, another of a dead heart, another of a treacherous
Memory. Thus they are loading one another with their Complaints.

Temporal; outward wants pinch hard also upon many of Gods People: the greatest
number of them consist of the Poor of this World, Iam. 2.5. Those whose Souls
are discharged and acquitted by God, whose Debts are paid by Jesus Christ, may
yet be entangled in a brake of Cares and Troubles in the World, and not know
which way to turn themselves in their straits and difficulties. But by death
the Saints pass from all their wants inward and outward to a state of complete
satisfaction, where nothing is lacking: from that day all their Spiritual wants
are supplied, for they are now arrived to the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ, to a perfect man, Ephesians. 4.13. Now that which is perfect is
come, and all that was in part is done ^way, 1 Cor. 13.10.

And for outward wants they shall feel them no more: for putting off the Body,
we must needs put off all cares and concerns about it. Meats for the Belly, and
the Belly for Meats, God shall destroy both it and them, 1 Cor. 6.13.

6. From distracting fears, into highest security and rest of thoughts for ever
more. The fears of God's People are either about their Souls or about their
Bodies: the fears they have about their Souls are inexpressible. Two things
especially exercise their fears about their Souls. (1) Whether they be really
united to Christ. (2) Whether they shall be able to continue and persevere in
the ways of Christ to the end: they are afraid of their sincerity and of their
stability: and these fears accompany many of Gods People from their
Regeneration to their Dissolution. O what would they not give, what would they
not do, yea, what would they not endure to get full satisfaction in those
things! Every working of Corruption, every discovery made by Temptation, puts
them into a fright, and makes them question all that ever was wrought in them.

And as their fears are great about the inward man, so also about the outward
man; especially when such bloody preparations seem to be making by the same
Enemies that have acted such, and so many bloody Tragedies already in the World.

But at death they enter into perfect peace and security, Isai 57.2. No wind of
fear shall ever ruffle and disturb their Souls, and put them into a storm any
more.

7. From deluding shadows into substantial good. This World is the World of
Shadows, and delusive appearances. Here we are imposed upon and baffled by
empty and deceitful Vanities. All we have here, is little else but a Dream: at
death the Soul awakes out of its Dream, and finds it self in the World of
Realities, where it feeds upon substantial good to satisfaction, Psalm. 17.15.

Now the advantages accrewing to the Soul by death, being so great, and many;
though the Medium be harsh and ungrateful in it self, yet there is all the
reason in the World, we should covet it for the benefits that come by it.

Argument V.
THe foretasts we have had of Heaven already in the Body, should make all the
Saints long to be unbodied for the full and perfect fruition of that Joy;
seeing it cannot be fully and perfectly enjoyed by the Soul, till it has put
off the Body by death.

That there are Praelibations, First Fruits, and Earnests of future glory given
at certain seasons to Believers in this life, is put beyond all doubting, not
only by Scripture-Testimonies, but frequent experiences of God's People. I
speak not only with the Scriptures, but with the clear experience of many
Saints; when I say, there are to be felt and tasted, even here in the Body, the
Earnests of our Inheritance, Ephesians. 1.14. The first fruits of the Spirit, Romans
8.23. The sealing of the Spirit, Ephesians. 1.13. The very Joy of the Lord, 1 Pet.
1.8. of the same kind, though in a remisser degree with that of the glorified.

That the fullness of this joy cannot be in us whilst we tabernacle in Bodies of
flesh, is as plain. When Moses desired a sight of that face which the spirits
of just men made perfect, do continually behold and adore, the Answer was, No
Man can see my face and live, Exodus 33.18, 19, 20. q. d. Moses, Thou ask a
great thing, and understandest not how unable thou art to support that which
thou desire: should I show thee my Glory in this compounded state thou now
art, it would confound thee, and swallow thee up. Nature, as now constituted,
cannot support such a weight of Glory: a Ray, a glimpse of this light
overpowers Man, and breaks such a clay Vessel to pieces: which is the reason
why the Resurrection must intervene betwixt this state, and that of the Bodies
glorification.

And it is not to be doubted, but one main end and reason why these foretasts
of Heaven are given us in the Body, is to embolden the Soul to venture through
death it self for the full enjoyment of those Delights and Pleasures. They are
like the Grapes of Eshcol to the faint-hearted Israelites; or the sweet Wines
of Italy to the Gauls, which once tasted made them restless till they had
conquered that good Country where they grew, Romans 8.23. We which have the
first fruits of the Spirit, even we our selves, do groan within our selves,
waiting for the Adoption, viz. The Redemption of our Bodies.

Well then, reflect seriously upon those sweet tastes that you have had of God
and his love in your sincere and secret addresses to him, and converses with
him. What an holy forgetfulness of all things in this World has it wrought!
How insipid and tastless has it rendered the sweetest Creature-enjoyments!
What willingness to be dissolved for a more full fruition of it! God this way
brings Heaven nigh to your Souls, out of design to overcome your Reluctancies
at death, through which you must pass to the enjoyment of it. And after all
those sights and tastes both of the truth and goodness of that state, shall we
still reluctate and hang back, as if we had never tasted how good the Lord is!
O you may justly question, whether you ever had a real taste of Jesus Christ;
if that taste do not kindle Coals of fire in your Bosoms: I mean ardent
longings to be with him, and to be satiated with his love.

If you have been privileged with a taste of tha^ hidden Manna, with the sight
of things invisible, with Joys unspeakable and full of glory; and yet are loath
to be gone to the fountain, whence all this flows: certainly you herein both
cross the design of the spirit in giving them, and cast a vile disgrace and
reproach upon the blessed God, as thinking there is more bitterness in death,
than there is sweetness in his presence. Yea, it argues the strength of that
unbelief which still remains in your hearts, that after so many tastes, and
trials as you have had, you still remain doubtful and hesitating about the
certainty and reality of things invisible.

O what ado has God with his froward and peevish Children! If he had only
revealed the future state to us in his Word, as the pure Object of Faith, and
required ^s to die upon the mere credit of his promise, without such Pawns,
Pledges, and Earnests, as these are; were there not reason enough for it? But
after such, and so many wonderful and amazing Condescentions, wherein he does,
as it were, say, Soul, if yet thou doubtest, I will bring Heaven to thee, thou
shall have it in thy own hand, thy eyes shall see it, thy hands shall handle
it, thy Mouth shall taste it; how inexcusable is our Reluctance?

Argument VI.
IT should greatly fortify the People of God, against the fears of
Dissolution, to consider that death can neither destroy the being of their
Souls by Annihilation, nor the hopes and expectations they have of blessedness
by disappointment and frustration, Prove. 14.32. The Righteous has hope in his
death. Though all earthly things fail at death (upon which account dying is
expressed by failing, Luke 16.19.) Yet neither the Soul, nor the well grounded
hopes can fail. The Anchor of a Believers hope is firm and sure, Hebr. 6.18. It
will not come home in the greatest Storm, that can beat upon the Soul. For (1)
God has foreknown and chosen them to Salvation before the World was, 1 Pet.
1.2, And this Foundation of God stands sure, having this Seal, the Lord
knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2.19. His Decrees are as firm as Mountains of
Brass, Z^ch. 6.1. (2) God has justified their persons, and therein destroyed
the power of death over them, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57. O death, where is thy
Sting? O Grave, where is thy Victory? The sting of death is s^n, the strength
of sin is the Law. If all the hurtful power of death lies in sin, and all the
destructive power of sin rises from the Law; then neither death, nor sin, have
any power to destroy the Believer in whom the Righteousness of the Law is
fulfilled, Romans 8.4. Namely, by the imputation of the Righteousness of Christ
to them, in respect of which they are as righteous, as if in their own persons
they had perfectly obeyed all its Commands, or suffered all its Penalties. Thus
death loses its sting, its Curse, and killing power over the Souls of all that
are in Christ. (3) God has sanctified their natures, which sanctification is
not only a sure evidence of their Election, and Justification, 2 These. 1.5, 6.
Romans 8.1. but a sure Pledge of their Glorification also, 2 Cor. 5.4, 5. Yea,
(4) He has made a sure and an everlasting Covenant with Believers, and among
other gracious Privileges, thereby conferred upon them, death is found in the
Inventory, 1 Cor. 13.21. Death is yours; to die is gain to them: it destroys
their Enemies, and the distance that is betwixt Christ and them. (5) He has
sealed them to this Glory by the Holy Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30. So that their hopes
are too firmly built to be destroyed by death: and if it cannot destroy their
Souls, nor overthrow their hopes, they need not fear all that it can do besides.

Argument VII.
IT may greatly encourage and embolden the People of God to die, considering,
that though at death they take the last sight, and view of all that is dear to
them on earth; yet then they are admitted to the first immediate sight and
blessed Vision of God, which will be their happiness to all eternity.

When Hezekiah was upon his supposed Deathbed, he complained, Isa. 38.11. I
shall see Man no more with the Inhabitants of the World. We shall see
thenceforth these Corporeal People no more. We shall see our Habitations and
dwelling places no more, Job 7.9, 10, 11. We shall see our Children and dear
Relations no more, Job 14.21. His Sons come to honor, and he knows it not.
These things make death terrible to men; but that which cures all this trouble
is, that we shall neither need, nor desire them, being thenceforth admitted to
the beatifical Vision of the blessed God himself.

It is the expectation and hope of this, which comfort the Souls of the
Righteous here, Psalm. 17.15. When I awake, I shall behold thy face in
righteousness. Those weak and dim representations made by faith at a distance,
are the very joy and rejoicing of a Believers Soul now, 1 Pet. 1.7, 8. but how
sweet and transporting soever these Visions of Faith be, they are not worthy to
be named in comparison with the immediate and beatifical Vision, 1 Cor. 13.12.
This is the very sum of a Believers blessedness: and what it is we cannot
comprehend in this imperfect state; only in general, we may gather these
Conclusions about it, from the account given of it in the Scriptures.

1. That it will not be such a sight of God as we now have by the mediation of
faith, but a direct immediate and intuitive vision of God, 1 John 3.2. Lumen
glory est actual^s illustratio, (i. e.) infl^xus Dei supernaturali^ elevans
intellectum ad visionem essentiae divinae. Smi^ing. Tract. 2. dis. 6. N. 33.
We shall see him as he is, 1 Cor. 13.12. Then face to face, Which far
transcends the vision of faith, in clearness and in comport; this seems to
import no less than the very sight of the divince Essence. That which which
Moses desired on Earth to see, but could not, Exodus 33.20. nor can be seen by
any man dwelling in a Body, 1 Timothy 6.16. nor by unbodied Souls comprehensively,
so God only sees himself: our eyes see the Sun which they cannot comprehend,
yet truly apprehend. God will then be known in his Essence, and in the glory of
all his Attributes: this sight of the Attributes of God, gives the occasion and
matter of those ascriptions of Praise and Glory to him, which is the proper
employment of glorified Souls, Rev. 4.11. and Rev. 5 12, 13. Which is the
proper employment of Angels, Isai. 6.3. O how different is this from what we
now have through Faith, Duties, and Ordinances? See the difference betwixt
knowledge by reports, and immediate sight in that example of the Queen of the
South, 1 Kings 10.5. The former only excited her desires, that latter
transported and rapt her very S^ul.

Some may think such a vision of God to exceed the abilities of nature, and
capacity of any Creature. But as a learned man rightly observes, Norton's
Orthodox cv^n. p. 329.
if the divine Nature be capable of union with a Creature, as its evident it is
in the person of Christ, it is also capable of being the object of vision to
the Creature; beside, we must know the light of glory has the same respect to
this blessed vision; that assisting grace has to the acts of Faith and
Obedience, performed here on Earth. It is a comforting-Soul-strengthening
light, not to dazzle and overpower; but comfort, strengthen, and clear the eye
of the Creatures understanding, Rev. 2.28. I will give him the morning star,
Lumen confortans, and Psalm. 36.9. in thy light we shall see light*

2. It will be a satisfying sight, Psa. 17.15. So perfectly quieting and giving
rest to the Soul in all its powers that they neither can proceed nor desire to
proceed any farther. The understanding can know no more, the will can will no
more; the affections of joy, delight, and love are at full rest and quiet in
their proper center. For all good is in the chiefest good eminently; as all the
light of the Candles in the World is in the Sun, and all the Rivers in the
World in the Sea. That which makes the Understanding, Will, and Affections move
farther, as being restless, and unsatisfied in all discoveries and enjoyments
here, is the limited and imperfect nature of things we now converse with; as if
you being a great Ship that draws much Water into a narrow and shallow River,
she can neither sail, nor swim but is presently aground; but let that Ship have
sea room enough, then she can turn and Sail before the wind, because there is
depth of Water, and room enough: So it is here, all that delighted, but could
never satisfy you in the Creature, is eminently in God. And what was
imperfectly in them is perfectly to be enjoyed in him 1 Cor. 15.28. God shall
be all in all, the comforts you had here were but drop by drop, inflaming, not
satisfying the appetite of the Soul. But then the Lamb which is in the midst of
the Throne shall feed them, and lead them unto fountains of living Waters, Rev.
7.17. The object fills the faculties.

3. It will be an appropriating vision of God, you shall see him as your own
God and proper portion. Else it could never be a satisfying vision, Job 19.27.
Whom I shall see for my self: Not look on him as another God, but as my God
and Portion for ever. Balaam saw Christ by a spirit of prophecy; but he had no
comfort, because no interest in him, Numb. 24.17. The wicked shall see him, but
without joy, yea with weeping eyes and gnashing of teeth because they cannot
see him as their Lord, Luke 13.28. It Is but a poor comfort to starving beggars
to stand quivering and famishing in the streets in a cold dark night, and see
the lights in the bridegrooms house, the noble Dishes served in, and to hear
the Music and mirth of the Guests that feast within. Here it will be as clear
that he is our God, as that he is God. Assurance is that which many Souls have
desired, prayed, and panted for, but cannot attain. There be many rubbs and
stumbling blocks in the way to that sweet enjoyment; but here we find what we
have been so long seeking: there be no doubts, scruples, objections, puzling
cases to exercise your own, or others thoughts. But as these did arise from one
of these grounds viz, the working of corruption, the efficacy of temptation, or
divine withdrawments, and the hidings of Gods face: so all these being removed
perfectly and for ever in that state, the Heavens must needs be clear, and not
a cloud of doubt, or fear to be seen for ever.

4. It will be a deeply affecting sight, your eye will now so affect your
hearts as they were never affected before. The first view of God will snatch
away your hearts to him, as a greater flame does the less. Love will not now
distill from the heart as Waters from a cold Still, but gush out as from a
Sluice or flood-Gate pulled up. The Soul will not move after God so deadly and
slowly as it does now, but be as the Chariots of Aminadab Can. 6.12 We may say
of the fra^mes of our hearts there, compared with what they are here, as it is
said, Deuteronomy. 12.8, 9. You shall not love or delight in God as you do this day.
If the perfection of that state would admit shame or sorrow; how should we
blush and mourn in Heaven to think how cold our love, and how low our delights
in God were on Earth? 1 John 4.16. God is love, and he that dwells in love,
dwells in God. Look as Iron put into the fire becomes all fiery; so the Soul
dwelling in the God of love, becomes all love, all delight, all joy. O what
transports must that Soul feel that abides under the line of love! feels the
perpendicular beams of electing, creating, redeeming, preserving love beating
powerfully upon it, and melting it into love. See some of their transports,
Rev. 5.13, 14.

5. It will be an everlasting vision of God, 1 These. 4.17. So shall we be ever
with the Lord, [ever with the Lord] who can find words to open the deep sense
of these few words: Vacabimus and videbimus, videbimus and amabimus, amabimus
and laudabimus in fine fine fine, said blessed Austine; This is the everlasting
Sabbath, which has no night, Rev. 22.4, 5. The eternal happiness purchased for
the Saints by the invaluable blood of Christ. If one hours enjoyment of God in
the way of faith be so sweet, and no price can be put upon it, nothing on earth
taken in exchange for it; what must a whole Eternity in the immediate, and full
visions of that blessed face in Heaven be!

Well then, if such sights as these immediately succeed the sight you have on
Earth, either by sense of things natural, or by reason of things intellectual,
or by faith of things spiritual: who that believes the truth and expects the
fulfilling of such promises as these, would not not be willing to have his eyes
closed by death, as soon as God shall please? I have read of an holy man that
had sweet Communion with God in Prayer, who in the close of his duty cried out,
claudimini oculi mei, claudimini, etc. be shut, O my eyes, be shut, you shall
never ^ee any thing on Earth, like that I have now seen. Ah little do the
Friends of dead Believers think what visions of God, what ravishing sights of
Christ, the Souls of their Friends have, when they are closing their eyes with
tears.

Argument VIII.
THE consideration of the evil days that are to come, should make the people of
God willing to accept of an hiding place in the grave, as a special favor from
God.

It is accounted an act of favor by God, Isa. 57.1, 2. to be taken away from
the evil to come. ^^ere are two kinds of evils to come, the evil of sin, and
the evil of sufferings. Sins to come are terrible to gracious hearts, when
temptations shall be at their height and strength. O what warping and
shrinking, what dissembling, yea, downright denying the known truths and ways
of God, may you see every where? Many consciences will then be wounded and
wasted. Many scandals and rocks of offense will be rolled into the way of
godliness. Christ will be exposed and put to open shame. Should we only be
spectators of such Tragedies as these, it were enough to overwhelm a gracious
and tender heart: but what upright heart is there without fears, and jealousies
of being brought under the guilt of these evils in it self, as well as the
shame and grief for them in others? O it were a thousand times better for you
to die in the purity and integrity of your consciences; than to protract a
miserable life without them. O think what a world it is that you are like to
leave behind you in respect of sin to come.

And as there are many evils of sin to come; so there are many evils of
sufferings coming on, The days of visitation are come, the days of recompense
are come, and Israel shall know it. Hos. 9.7. All the sufferings you have yet
met with, have been in Books and Histories; you never saw the Martyrdom of the
Saints, but in the Pictures and Stories. But you will find it quite another
thing to be the Subjects of these cruelties, than to be the mere Readers or
Relators of them. It Is one thing to see the painted Lion on a sign Post, and
another to meet the living Lion roaring upon you. Ah! little do we imagine how
the hearts of men are convulst, what fears, what faintings invade their Spirits
when they are to meet the King of terrors, in the frightful formalities of a
violent death.

The consideration of these things will discover to you the reason of that
strange wish of Job, chap. 14. v. 13. Oh that thou would hide me in the
Grave, that thou would keep me in secret until thy wrath be past. And it
deserves a serious thought, that when the holy Ghost had in Rev. 14.9, 10, 11,
12. described the miserable plight of those poor Souls, who being overcome by
their own fears, and the love of this this World, should plunge themselves
first into a deep guilt, by compliance with Antichrist, and receiving his mark:
then into an Hell upon Earth, the remorse and horror of their own consciences,
which gives them no rest day nor night; he immediately subjoyns, v. 13. Blessed
are the dead that dye in the Lord, yea from henceforth, says the spirit, etc.
Oh it is a special blessing and favor to be hid out of the way of those
temptations and torments in a seasonable and quiet grave.

Argument IX.
YOur fixed aversation and unwillingness to die, will provoke God to imbitter
your lives with much more affliction than you have yet felt, or would feel if
your hearts were more mortified and weaned in this point.

You cannot think of your own deaths with pleasure, no nor yet with patience:
Well, take heed, lest this draw down such troubles upon you, as shall make you
at last to say with Job, chap. 10. v. 1. My Soul is weary of my life. An
expression much like that, 2 Samuel 1.9. Anguish is come upon me, because my life
is whole in me. My Soul is hardened, or become cruel against my life as the
Chaldee renders it.

There is a twofold weariness of life, one from an excellency of spirit, a
noble principle, the ardent love of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.23. I desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ. Another from the mere pressures of affliction
and anguish of Spirit, under heavy and successive strokes from the hand of God
and men. Is it not more excellent and desirable to groan for death under a
pressure of love to Christ, than of afflictions from Christ?

I am convinced that very many of our afflictions come upon this score and
account to make us willing to dye.

Is it not sad that God is forced to bring death upon all our comfortable and
desirable things in this World, before he can gain our consents to be gone?
Why will you put God upon such work as this? Why cannot he have your hearts at
a cheaper rate? If you could dye, many of your comforts for ought I know might
live. Had Jacob come to Absalom when he sent for him the first, or second time:
Absalom had never set his field of Barley on fire, 2 Samuel 14.30. And if we were
more obedient to the will of God in this matter, it is likely he would not
consume your health, and Estates, and Relations, with such heavy str^^ks as he
has done, and will yet farther do except your wills be more compliant.

Alas! To cut off your comforts one after another, and make you live a groaning
life, the Lord has no pleasure in it; but rather he had you should lose these
things, than that he should lose your hearts on Earth, or company in Heaven:
Impatiens aegrotus crudelem facit Medicum.

Argument X.
THe decree of death cannot be reversed, nor is there any other ordinary
passage for the Soul into Glory, but through the gates of death. Heb. 9.27. It
is appointed for all men once to die, but after that the Judgment. There is but
one way to pass out of the obscure suffocating life in the Womb, into the more
free and nobler life in the World, viz. through the Throes and Agonies of
Birth: And there is ordinarily but one way to pass from this sinning, groaning
life we live in this World, to the enjoyment of God and the Glory above; but
through the Agonies of death. You must cast as it were your Secundine once
again, I mean this vile body, before you can be happy. Heaven cannot come down
to you, you cannot see God and live, Exodus 33.20. It would certainly confound
and break you to pieces like an earthen Pitcher, should God but ray forth his
Glory upon you in the state you now are: and it is sure you cannot expect the
extraordinary savor of such a translation as Enoch had, Hebr. 11.5. Or as
those Believers shall have, that shall be found alive at Christ's coming, 1
These. 4.17. You must go the common road that all the Saints go: but though you
cannot avoid, you may sweeten it. God will not reverse his Decree; but you may,
and ought to arm your selves against the fears of it. Ahashuerus would not
re-call the Proclamation he had emitted against the Jews, but he gave them full
liberty to take up arms to defend themselves against their Enemies. It Is much
so here, the Sentence cannot be revoked; but yet, he gives you leave, yea, he
commands you to arm your selves against death, and defy it, and trample it
under the feet of Faith.

Argument XI.
WHen you find your hearts reluctate at the thoughts of leaving the Body, and
the comforts of this World, then consider how willingly and cheerfully Jesus
Christ left Heaven, and the Bosom of his Father, to come down to this World
for your sakes, Pr. 8.30, 31. Ps. 40.7. Lo, I come, etc.

O compare the frames of your hearts with his in this point, and shame your
selves out of so unbecoming a temper of Spirit.

(1) He left Heaven and all the Delights and Glory of it, to come down to this
World, to be abased and humbled to the lowest; you leave this World of sin and
misery to ascend to Heaven to be exalted to the highest. He came hither to be
impoverished, you go thither to be enriched, 2 Cor. 8.9. yet he came willingly,
and we go grudgingly. (2) He came from Heaven to Earth, to be made sin for us,
2 Cor. 5.21. we go from Earth to Heaven, to be fully and everlastingly
delivered from sin; yet he came more willingly to bear our sins, than we go to
be delivered from them. (3) He came to take a body of Flesh, to suffer and die
in, Heb. 2.24. you leave your Bodies that you may never suffer in, or by them
any more. (4) As his Incarnation was a deep abasement, so his death was the
most bitter death, that ever was tasted by any from the beginning, or ever
shall to the end of the World; and yet how obediently does he submit to both at
the Father's Call, Luke 12.50. I have a Baptism to be baptized with, and how am
I straitened till it be accomplished. Ah Christians, your death cannot have the
ten thousandth part of that bitterness in it, that Christ's had. I remember one
of the Martyrs being asked, why his heart was so light at death; returned this
answer, because Christ's heart was so heavy at his death. O there is a vast
difference betwixt one and the other: the Wrath of God, and Curse of the Law,
was in his death, Gal. 3.13. but there is neither Wrath nor Curse in your
death, who die in the Lord, Romans 8.1.
God forsook him when he hanged upon the Tree in the Agonies of death, Matthew.
27.46. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? But you shall not be
forsaken. He will make all your Bed in sickness, Psalm. 41.3. He will never
leave you, nor forsake you, Heb. 13.5.

Yet he regretted not, but went as a Sheep or Lamb, Isa. 53.7. O reason your
selves out of this Reluctance at death, by this great Example and Pattern of
Obedience.

Argument XII.
LAstly, Let no Christian be affrighted at death, considering that the death of
Christ, is the death of Death, and has utterly disarmed it of all its
destructive power.

If you tremble when you look upon death, yet you cannot but triumph when you
look believingly upon Christ.

For (1) Christ died (O believer) for thy sins, Romans 4.25. his death was an
expiatory Sacrifice for all thy guilt, Gal. 3.13. so that thou shall not die in
thy sins: the pangs of death may, and must be on thy outward man, but the guilt
of sin, and the Condemnation of God shall not be upon thy inner man.

(2) The death of Christ in thy room has utterly destroyed the power of death,
which once was in the hand of Satan. Heb. 2.14. Col. 2.14, 15. his power was
not authoritative, but executive: Not as the power of a King but of a Sheriff;
which is none at all when a Pardon is produced.

(3) Christ has assured us, that his Victory over death shall be complete in
our persons. It is already a complete personal Victory, in respect of himself,
Romans 6.9. he dies no more, death has no more Dominion over him. It Is an
incomplete Victory already as to our persons. It can dissolve the Union of our
Souls and Bodies, but the Union betwixt Christ and our Souls it can never
dissolve, Romans 8.38, 39. and as for the power it still retains over our dust,
that also shall be destroyed at the Resurrection, 1 Cor 15.25, 26. comp. with
verses 54, 55, 56, 57. so that there is no cause for any Soul in Christ to
tremble at the thoughts of a separation from the body, but rather to embrace it
as a privilege, death is ours.

O that these arguments might prevail! O that they might at last win the
consent of our hearts to go along with death, which is the Messenger sent by
God to bring us home to our Fathers house.

But I doubt when all is said, we are where we were, all this suffices not to
overcome the Regrets and Reluctancies of Nature; still the matter sticks in our
minds, and we cannot conquer our disinclined Wills in this matter. What is the
matter? Where lie the Rubbs and Hindrances? O that God would remove them at
last!

Object. 1.
This is a common Plea with many, I am not ready and fit to die; were I ready I
should be willing to be gone.

Sol.
(1) How long soever you live in the Body, there will be somewhat still out of
order, something still to do: for you must be in a state of imperfection whilst
you remain here, and according to this Plea, you will never be willing to die.
(2) Your willingness to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, is one special
part of your fitness for death: and till you attain it in some good measure,
you are not so fit to die, as you should be. (3) If you be in Christ, you have
a fundamental fitness for death, though you may want some circumstantial
Preparatives. And as to all that is wanting in your sanctification or obedience
now, it will be completed in a moment upon your dissolution.

Object 2.
Others plead, the desire they have to live, is, in order to God's further
service by them in this World. O say they, it was David 's happiness to die,
when he had served his Generation according to the Will of God, Acts 13.36. If
we had done so too, we should say with Simeon, `Now let thou thy Servant
depart in peace.

Sol.
(1) God needs not your hands to carry on his service in the World: he can do it
by other hands when you are gone. Many of greater Gifts and Graces than you,
are daily laid in the Grave to teach you, God needs no man's help to carry on
his Work.

(2) If the service of God be so dear to you, there is higher and more
excellent Service for you in Heaven, than any you ever were, or can be employed
in here on earth. O why don't you long to be amidst the thick of Angels and
Spirits made perfect in the Temple-Service in Heaven?

Object. 3.
O but my Relations in the World lie near my heart, what will become of them
when I am gone?

Sol.
(1) It Is pity they should lie nearer your hearts than Jesus Christ: if they do,
you have little reason to desire death indeed.

(2) Who took care of you when death snatched your dear Relations from you, who
possibly felt the same workings of heart that you now do? Did you not
experience the truth of that word, Psalm. 27.10. When Father and Mother
forsakes me, then the Lord takes me up: and if you be in the Covenant, God
has prevented this Plea, with his Promise, Ier. 49.11. Leave thy fatherless
Children to me, I will keep them alive, and let their Widows trust in me.

But I desire to live to see the felicity of Zion before I go hence, Object. 4.
and the answer of the many Prayers I have sown for it; I am loath to leave the
People of God in so sad a condition.

The publickness of thy Spirit and Love to Zion, Sol.
is doubtless pleasing to God, but it is better for you to be in Heaven one
day; than to live over again all the days you have lived in earth in the best
times that ever the Church of God enjoyed in this World: the Promises shall be
accomplished, though you may not live to see their accomplishment, die you in
the faith of it as Joseph did, Genesis 50.24.

But alas! the matter does not stick here: this is not the main hinderance; I
will tell you where I think it lies. (1) In the hesitancy and staggering of our
faith, about the certainty and reality of things invisible. (2) In some special
guilt upon the Conscience which appalls us. (3) In a negligent and careless
course of life, which is not ordinarily blessed with much evidence or comfort.
(4) In the deep engagements of our hearts to earthly things: they could not be
so cold to Christ, if they were not overheated with other things. Till these
Distempers be cured, no Arguments can prosper that are spent to this end. The
Lord dissolve all those ties betwixt us and this World, which hinder our
consent, and willingness to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is far
better.

And now we have had a glance, a glimmering light, a faint umbrage of the state
of separated Souls of the just in Heaven: It remains, that I show you somewhat
of the state and case of damned Souls in Hell. A dreadful Representation it is,
but it is necessary we hear of Hell, that we may not feel it.

1 Pet. iii. ver. 19. By which also he went and preached unto the SPIRITS in
PRISON.
IN the former Discourse we have had a view of Heaven, and of the Spirits of
just men made perfect, the Inhabitants of that blessed region of light and
glory.

In this Scripture we have the contrary glass representing the unspeakable
misery of those Souls or Spirits which are separated by death from their Bodies
for a time, and by sin from God for ever. Arrested by the Law and secured in
the prison of Hell, unto the judgment of the great day.

A Sermon of Hell may keep some Souls out of Hell, and a Sermon of Heaven be
the means to help others to Heaven. The desire of my heart is that the
conversations of all those who shall read these discourses of Heaven and Hell,
might look more like a diligent flight from the one and pursuit of the other.

The scope of the context is a persuasive to patience upon a prospect of
manifold tribulations coming upon the Christian Churches, strongly enforced by
Christ's example, who both in his own person ver. 18. and by his spirit in his
Servants, ver. 19. exercised wonderful patience and long suffering as a pattern
to his people.

This 19. ver. gives us an account of his long-suffering toward that
disobedient and immorigerous generation of sinners on whom he waited 120 years
in the Ministry of Noah.

There are difficulties in the Text. Estius reckons no less than ten
expositions of it, Locus ^i^c omnium pene interpretum judicio difficillimus.
Estius.
and says it is a very difficult Scripture in the judgment of almost all
Interpreters. But yet I must say those difficulties are rather brought to it,
than found in it. It is a Text which has been rackt and tortured by Popish
Expositors to make it speak Christ's local descent into Hell, and to confess
their Doctrine of Purgatory; things which it knew not.

But if we will take its genuine sense, it only relates the sin and misery of
those contumacious persons, on whom the spirit of God waited so long in the
Ministry of Noah, giving an account Of 1. Their sin on Earth. Of 2. Their
punishment in Hell.


1. Their sin on Earth, which is both specified and aggravated. (1) Specified,
Namely their disobedience, They were sometimes disobedient, or unperswadeable;
neither precepts nor examples could bring them to repentance. (2) This their
disobedience is aggravated by the expense of God's patience upon them for the
space of an hundred and twenty years, not only forbearing them so long, but
striving with them, as Moses expresses it, or waiting on them, as the Apostle
here: but all to no purpose, they were obstinate, stubborn and unperswadeable
to the very last.

2. Behold therefore in the next place the dreadful but most just and equal
punishment of these sinners in Hell; they are called Spirits in prison (i e.)
Souls now in Hell.

At that time when Peter wrote of them they were not entire men, Psalm. 31.6.
Eccles. 12.7. Acts. 7.50.
but Spirits in the proper sense ( i.e.) separated Souls, bodiless and lonely
Souls: whilst in the Body it is properly a Soul, but when separated a Spirit
according to Scripture Language, and the strict notion of such a Being.

These Spirits or Souls in the state of separation are said to be in a Prison,
that is in Hell, as the word elsewhere notes Rev. 20.7. and Jude v. 6. comp.
Heaven and Hell are the only receptacles of departed or separated Souls.

Thus you have in a few words the natural and genuine sense of the place, and
it is but a wast of time to repeat and refel the many false and forced
interpretations of this Text, which corrupt minds and mercenary Pens have
perplexed and darkened it withal. That which I level at is comprised in this
plain Proposition.

DOCT.
That the Souls or Spirits of all men who dye in a state of unbelief and
disobedience, are immediately committed to the Prison of Hell, there to sufferr
the wrath of God due to their sins.

Hell is shadowed forth to us in Scripture by diverse Metaphors; for we cannot
conceive spiritual things unless they be so clothed and shadowed out unto us.
Spiritualia capere non possumus nisi adumbrata.
Augustine gives this reason for the frequent use of Metaphors and Allegories
in Scripture, because they are so much proportioned to our senses, with which
our senses have contracted an intimacy and familiarity: and therefore God to
accommodate his truth to our capacity, does as it were this way embody it in
earthly expressions, according to that celebrated observation of the Cabalists,
lumen supremum nunquam descendit sine indumento: The pure and supreme light
never descends to us without a garment or covering. In the old Testament the
place and state of damned Souls is set forth by Metaphors taken from the most
remarkable places and exemplary acts of vengeance upon sinners in this World;
as the overthrow of the Giants by the flood, those prodigious sinners that
fought against Heaven, and were swept by the flood into the place of Torments:
Hell called the place of Giants, and why.
to this, Solomon is conceived to allude in Prove. 21.16. The man that wanders
out of the way of understanding shall remain in the congregation of the dead;
in the Heb. it is, they shall remain with the Rephaims or Giants. These Giants
were the men that more especially provoked God to bring the flood upon the
World; they are also noted as the first inhabitants of Hell, therefore from
them the place of Torments takes its name, and the damned are said to remain in
the place of Giants.

Hell called Tophet, and why.
Sometimes Hell is called Trophet, Isa. 30.33. This Tophet was in the valley of
Hinnom, and was famous for diverse things. There the children of Israel caused
their children to pass through the fire to Moloch, or sacrificed them to the
Devil; drowning their horrible shrieks and ejulations with the noise of Drums.

In this valley also was the memorable slaughter of eighteen hundred thousand
of the Assyrian Camp by an Angel in one night.

There also the Babylonians murdered the people of Jerusalem at the taking of
the City, Ier. 7.31, 32. So that Tophet was a mere Shambles, the public
chopping block on which the limbs both of young and old were quartered out by
thousands; it was filled with dead Bodies, till there was no place for burial.
By all which it appears that no spot of ground in the World was so famous for
the fires kindled in it to destroy men, for the doleful cries that echoed from
it, or the innumerable multitudes that perished in it; for which reasons it is
made the emblem of Hell. Sometimes it is called a lake of fire burning with
brimstone, Hell a lake of fire.
Rev. 19.20. denoting the most exquisite torment, by an intense and durable
flame.

And in the Text it is called a prison, A prison.
where the Spirits of ungodly men are both detained and punished. This notion
of a Prison gives us a lively representation of the miserable state of damned
Souls, and that especially in the following particulars.

First, Prisoners are arrested and seized by authority of Law; it is the Law
which sends them thither, and keeps them there. The Mittimus of a Justice is
but the instrument of the Law whereby they are deprived of liberty, and taken
into custody. The Law of God which sinners have both violated and despised, at
death takes hold of them and arrests them. It Is the Law which claps up their
Spirits in Prison, and in the name and authority of the great and terrible God
commits them to Hell. All that are out of Christ are under the curse and
damning sentence of the Law which now comes to be executed on them, Gal. 3.10.

Secondly, Prisoners are carried or haled to prison by force and constraint.
Natural force backs legal authority. The Law is executed by rough and resolute
Bailiffs who compel them to go, though never so much against their will. This
also is the case of the wicked at death. Satan is Gods Bailiff to hurry away
the Law-condemned Soul to the infernal Prison. The Devil has the power of
death, Heb. 2.14 as the Executioner has of the Body of a condemned man.

Thirdly, Prisoners are chained and bolted in Prison to prevent their escape:
so are damned Spirits secured by the power of God, and chained by their own
guilty and trembling Consciences in Hell, unto the time of Judgment, and the
fullness of misery; not that they have no torment in the mean time Alas! Were
there no more but that fearful expectation of wrath and fiery indignation,
spoken of by the Apostle, Heb. 10.27. it were an inexpressible torment; but
there is a further degree of torment to be awarded them at the judgment of the
great day, to which they are therefore kept as in Chains and Prisons.

Fourthly, Prisons are dark and noisome places not built for pleasure, as other
houses are, but for punishment; so is Hell, Jud. v. 6. Reserved in everlasting
chains under darkness, as he there describes the place of torments, yea utter
darkness, Matthew. 8. v. 12. extreme or perfect darkness. Philosophers tell us of
the darkness of this World, non dantur purae tenebrae, that there is no pure or
perfect darkness here, without some mixture of light; but there is not a glade
of light, not a spark of hope or comfort shining into that Prison.

Fifthly, Mournful sighs and groans are heard in Prisons, Psalm. 97.11. Let the
sighing of the Prisoners come before thee, says the Psalmist. But deeper sighs
and emphatical groans are heard in Hell, There shall be weeping and wailing,
and gnashing of teeth, Matthew. 8 12. Those that could not groan under the sense
of sin on Earth, shall howl under anguish and desperation in Hell.

Sixthly, There is a time when Prisoners are brought out of the Prison to be
judged, and then return in a worse condition than before, to the place from
whence they came. God also has appointed a day for the solemn condemnation of
those Spirits in Prison. The Scriptures call it the judgment of the great day,
Jude v. 6. from the great business that is to be done therein, and the great
and solemn assembly that shall then appear before God.

But I will insist no longer upon the display of the Metaphor. My business is
to give you a representation of the state and condition of damned Souls in
Hell, and to assist your conceptions of them and of their state.

It Is a dreadful sight I am to give you this day, but how much better is it to
see, than to feel that wrath: the treasures thereof shall shortly be broken up,
and poured forth upon the Spirits of men.

You had in the former Discourse a faint umbrage of the Spirits of just men in
glory; in this you will have an imperfect representation of the Spirits of
wicked men in Hell: and look as the former cannot be adequate and perfect,
because that happiness passes our knowledge; so neither can this be so,
because the misery of the damned passes our fear.

The case and state of a damned Spirit will be best opened in these following
Propositions.

PROP. I. That the guilt of all sin gathers to and settles in the Conscience of
every Christless sinner, and makes up a vast treasure of guilt in the course of
his life in this World.
THE high and awful power of Conscience belonging to the understanding faculty
in the Soul of Man, was spoken to before, as to its general nature, Page 21.
And that conscience certainly accompanies it, and is inseparable from it, was
there showed. I am here to consider it as the seat or center of guilt in all
unregenerate and lost Souls. For look as the tides wash up, and leave the slime
and filth upon the shore, even so all the corruption and sin that is in the
other faculties of the Soul settles, upon the conscience. Their mind and
conscience (says the Apostle) is defiled. Tit. 1.15. it is as it were the sink
of a sinners Soul into which all filth runs, and guilt settles.

The conscience of every Believer is purged from its filthiness by the blood of
Christ, Heb. 9.14. his blood and his Spirit purify it and pacify it, whereby
it becomes the region of light and peace, but all the guilt which has been
long contracting through the life of an unbeliever, fixes it self deep and fast
in his conscience. It is written upon the Tables of their hearts as with a pen
of Iron, Jer. 17.1. (i. e.) guilt is as a mark or character fashioned or
engraven in the very substance of the Soul, as letters are cut into glass with
a Diamond.

Conscience is not only the principal engagee obliged unto God as a Judge, but
the principal director and guide of the Soul in its courses and actions, and
consequently the guilt of all sin falls upon it and rests in it. The Soul is
both the spring and fountain of all actions that go outward from man, and the
term or receptacle of all actions inward: but in both sorts of actions, going
outward and coming inward, conscience is the chief Counselor, Guide and
director in all, and so the guilt which is contracted either way, must be upon
its head? It Is the bridle of the Soul to restrain it from sin, the eye of the
Soul to direct its course; and therefore is principally chargeable with all the
evils of life. Bodily members are but instruments, and the will it self, as
high and noble a faculty or power as it is, moves not, until the judgment
comes to a conclusion, and the debate be ended in the mind.

Now in the whole course and compass of a sinners life in this World, what
treasures of guilt must needs be lodged in his conscience? What a Magazine of
sin and filth must be laid up there! It Is said of a wicked man, Job 20.11. His
bones are full of the sins of his youth: meaning his Spirit, Mind or Conscience
is as full of sin as bones are of Marrow; yea, the very sins of his Youth are
enough to fill them: and Romans 2.5. they are said to treasure up wrath against
the day of wrath, which is only done by treasuring up guilt; for wrath and
guilt are treasured up together, in proportion to each other. Every day of his
life vast sums have been cast into this treasury, and the patience of God
waits till it be full, before he call the sinner to an account and reckoning,
Genesis 15.16.

PROP. II. All the sin and guilt contracted upon the Souls and consciences of
impenitent men in this World, accompanies and follows their departed Souls to
judgment; and there brings them under the dreadful condemnation of the great
and terrible God, which cuts off all their hopes and comforts for ever.
IF you believe not that I am he, you shall die in your sins, Joh. 8.24. and
Job 20.11. His bones are full of the sins of his youth which shall lie down
with him in the dust. No Proposition lies clearer in Scripture, or should lie
with greater weight upon the hearts of sinners: nothing but pardon can remove
guilt; but without faith and repentance there never was nor shall be a pardon,
Acts 10.43. Romans 3 24, 25. Luke 24.46, 47. Look as the graces of Believers, so
the sins of Unbelievers follow the Soul whithersover it goes. All their sins
who dye out of Christ cry to them when they go hence, We are thy works, and we
will follow thee. The acts of sin are transient, but the guilt and effects of
it are permanent; and it is evident by this, that in the great day their
consciences which are the Books of record wherein all their sins are registered,
will be opened, and they shall be judged by them, and out of them, Rev. 20.12.

Now before that general judgment, every Soul comes to its particular judgment,
and that immediately after death; of this I apprehend the Apostle to speak in
Heb. 9.27. It is appointed for all men once to dye, but after that the
judgment. The Soul is presently stated by this judgment in its everlasting and
fixed condition. The Soul of a wicked man appearing before God in all its sin
and guilt, and by him sentenced, immediately it gives up all its hope, Prove.
11.7. When a wicked man dies, his expectation shall perish, Etiam spes
valentissima.
and the hope of unjust men perishes. His strong hope perishes, as some read
it; ( i.e.) his strong delusion: for alas! He took his own shadow for a bridge
over the great waters, and is unexpectedly plunged into the gulf of eternal
misery, as Matthew. 7.22.

This perishing or cutting off of hope is that which is called in Scripture the
death of the Soul, for so long the Soul will live as it has any hope. The
deferring of hope makes it sick, but the final cutting off of hope strikes it
quite dead ( i.e.) dead as to all joy, comfort, or expectation of any for ever,
which is that death which an immortal Soul is capable to suffer: the righteous
has hope in his death; but every unregenerate man in the world breaths out his
last hope in a few moments after his last breath, which strikes terror into the
very center of the Soul, and is a death-wound to it.

PROP. III. The Souls of the damned are exceeding large and capacious subjects
of wrath and torment; and in their separate state their capacity is greatly
enlarged, both by laying asleep all those affections whose exercise is
relieving: and thoroughly awakning all those passions which are tormenting.
THE Soul of man being by nature a Spirit, an intelligent Spirit, and in its
substantial faculties assimilated to God whose image it bears: it must for that
reason be exquisitely sensible of all the impressions and touches of the wrath
of God upon it. The Spirit of man is a most tender, sensible and apprehensive
Creature. The eye of the Body is not so sensible of a touch, a nerve of the
Body is not so sensible when pricked; as the Spirit of man is of the least
touch of Gods indignation upon it. A wounded spirit who can bear? Prove. 18.14.
Other external wounds upon the Body, inflicted either by man or God, are
tolerable; but that which immediately touches the Spirit of man is
insufferable. Who can bear or endure it?

And as the Spirit of man has the most delicate and exquisite sense of misery;
so it has a vast capacity to receive, and let in the fullness of anguish and
misery into it: it is a large vessel, called, Romans 9.22. a vessel of wrath
fitted to destruction. The large capacity of the Soul is seen in this, that it
is not in the power of all the creatures in the World to satisfy and fill it.
It can drink up (as one speaks) all the rivers of created good, and its thirst
not quenched by such a draught; but after all, it cries, Give, give. Nothing but
an infinite God can quiet and satisfy its appetite and raging thirst.

And as it is capable and receptive of more good than is found in all the
Creatures; So it is capable of more misery and anguish than all the Creatures
can inflict upon it. Let all the elements or men on Earth, yea, all the Devils
and damned in Hell conspire and unite in a design to torment man; yet when they
have done all, his Spirit is capable of a farther degree of torment, a torment
as much beyond it, as a rack is beyond an hard bed, or the Sword in his bowels
is beyond the scratch of a pin. The Devils indeed are the executioners and
tormentors of the damned; but if that were all they were capable to suffer, the
torments of the damned would be comparatively mild and gentle, to what they
are. O the largeness of the understanding of man! What will it not take into
its vast capacity?

But add to this, That damned Souls have all those affections laid in a deep
and everlasting sleep, the exercises whereof would be relieving by emptying
their Souls of any part of their misery: and all those passions thoroughly and
everlastingly awakened which increase their torments.

The affections of joy, delight and hope are all benumbed in them, and laid
fast asleep, never to be awakened into act any more. Their hope in Scripture is
said to perish: (i. e.) it so perishes, that after death it shall never exert
another act to all eternity. The activity of any of these affections would be
like a cooling gale, or refreshing Spring amidst their torments; but as Adrian
lamented himself, nunquam jocos dabis, thou shall never be merry more.

And as these affections are laid asleep, so their passions are rouzed and
thoroughly awakened to torment them. So awakened, as never to sleep any more.
The Souls of men are sometimes jog'd and startled in this World, by the words
or rods of God, but presently they sleep again and forget all: but hereafter
the eyes of their Souls will be continually held waking to behold and consider
their misery; their understandings will be clear and most apprehensive; their
thoughts fixed and determined; their consciences active and efficacious: and by
all this their capacity to take in the fullness of their misery enlarged to the
uttermost.

PROP. IV. The wrath, indignation, and revenge of God poured out as the just
reward of sin upon the so capacious Souls of the damned, is the principal part
of their misery in Hell.
IN the third Proposition I showed you that the Souls of the damned can hold
more misery than all the creatures can inflict upon them. When the Soul suffers
from the hand of man, its sufferings are but either by way of sympathy with the
Body; or if immediately, yet it is but a light stroke the hand of a creature
can give: But when it has to do with a sin revenging God, and that
immediately, this stroke cuts off the spirit of man, as the expression is Psalm.
88.16. The Body is the clothing of the Soul Most of the arrows shot at the
Soul in this World do but stick in the clothes, (i. e.) reach the outward man:
but in Hell, the Spirit of man is the white at which God himself shoots. All
his envenomed arrows strike the Soul, which is after death laid bare and naked
to be wounded by his hand. At death, the Soul of every wicked man immediately
falls into the hands of the living God, and it is a fearful thing to fall into
the hands of the living God, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 10.31. Their
punishment is from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power, 2
These. 1.9. They are not put over to their fellow creatures to be punished, but
God will do it himself, and glorify his power as well as justice in their
punishment. The wrath of God lies immediately upon their Spirits, and this is
the fiery indignation which devoureth the adversaries, Heb. 10.27. A fire that
licks up the very Spirit of man, who knows the power of his anger? Psalm.
90.11. How insupportable it is you may a little guess by that expression of the
Prophet Nahum, 1.5, 6. The mountains quake at him, and the hills melt, and the
earth is burnt at his presence, yea, the World and all that dwell therein. Who
can stand before his indignation? and who can abide in the fierceness of his
anger? His fury is poured out like fire, and the rocks are thrown down by him.

And as if anger and wrath were not words of a sufficient edge and sharpness,
its called fiery indignation, and vengeance: words denoting the most intense
degree of divine wrath. For indeed his power is to be glorified in the
destruction of his enemies, and therefore now he will do it to purpose. He
takes them now into his own hands. No creature can come at the Soul
immediately, that is Gods prerogative, and now he has to do with it himself in
fury and revenges poured out. Can thy hands be strong, or thy heart endure when
I shall deal with thee? Ezekiel. 22.14. Alas, the spirit quails and dies under it.
This is the Hell of Hells.

What doleful cries and laments have we heard from Gods dearest children, when
but some few drops of his anger have been sprinkled upon their Souls here in
this world! But alas there is no compare betwixt the anger, or fatherly
discipline of God over the Spirits of his children, and indignation poured out
from the beginning of revenges upon his enemies.

PROP. V The separate Spirit of a damned man becomes a tormentor to it self by
the various and efficacious actings of its own conscience, which are a special
part of its torment in the other World.
COnscience which should have been the sinners curb on earth, becomes the Whip
that must lash his Soul in Hell. Neither is there any faculty or power
belonging to the Soul of man so fit and able to do it as his own conscience.
That which was the seat and center of all guilt, now becomes the seat and
center of all torments. The suspension of its tormenting power in this World is
a mystery and wonder to all that duly consider it. For certainly should the
Lord let a sinners conscience fly upon him with rage in the midst of his sins
and pleasures, it would put them into an Hell upon Earth, as we see in the
doleful instances of Judas, Spira, etc. but he keeps an hand of restraint upon
them generally in this life, and suffers them to sleep quietly by a grumbling
or seared conscience, which couches by them as a sleepy Lion, and lets them
alone.

But no sooner is the Christless Soul turned out of the Body, and cast for
eternity at the bar of God, but conscience is rouzed, and put into a rage never
to be appeased any more. It now racks and tortures the miserable Soul with its
utmost efficacy and activity. The mere presages and forebodeings of wrath by
the consciences of sinners in this World has made them lie with a ghastly
paleness in their faces, an universal trembling in all their Members, a cold
sweating horror upon their panting bosoms, like men already in Hell: but this,
all this is but as the sweating or giving of the stones before the great rain
falls. The activities of conscience (especially in Hell) are various, vigorous,
and dreadful to consider, such are its recognitions, accusations condemnations
upbraidings, shameings, and fearful expectations.

First, the consciences of the damned will recognize, and bring back the sins
committed in this World fresh to their mind: for what is conscience, but a
Register, or book of Records wherein every sin is ranked in its proper place
and order: this act of conscience is fundamental to all its other acts; for it
cannot accuse, condemn, upbraid, or shame us, for that it has lost out of its
memory, and has no sense of. Son, remember, said Abraham to Dives in the midst
of his torments. This remembrance of sins past, mercies past, opportunities
past, but especially of hope past and gone with them, never to be recovered any
more, is like that fire not blown (of which Zophar speaks) which consumes him,
or the glistering Sword coming out of his Gall, Job 20.24, etc.

Secondly, It charge and accuses the damned Soul, and its charges are home,
positive, and self-evident charges: a thousand legal and unexceptionable
Witnesses cannot confirm any point more than one Witness in a man's bosom can
do, Rom 2.15. it convicts and stops their mouths, leaving them without any
excuse or Apology. Just and righteous are the Judgments of God upon thee, says
Conscience: in all this Ocean of misery, there is not one drop of injury or
wrong: the Judgment of God is according unto truth.

Thirdly, It condemns as well as charge and witnesses, and that with a
dreadful Sentence; backing and approving the ^entence and Judgment of God, 1
John 3.21. every self-destroyer will be a self-condemner: This is a prime part
of their misery, -- Prima est haec ultio, Juven. Sat. 13.
quod se
Iudice nemo nocens absolvitur improba quamvis
Gratia fallacis Praetoris vicerit urnam.


Fourthly, The upbraidings of Conscience in Hell are terrible and insufferable
things: to be continually hit in the teeth and twitted with our madness,
wilfulness, and obstinacy, as the cause of all that eternal misery which we
have pulled down upon our own heads, What is it but the rubbing of the wound
with Salt and Vinegar? Of this torment holy Io^ was afraid, and therefore
resolved what in him lay to prevent it, when he says, Job 27.6. My heart (
i.e. my Conscience) shall not reproach me so long as I live. O the twits and
taunts of Conscience are cruel cuts and lashes to the Soul.

Fifthly, The shameings of Conscience are unsufferable torments. Shame arises
from the turpitude of discovered actions. If some men's secret filthiness were
but published in this World, it would confound them; what then will it be, when
all shall lie open, as it will after this life; and their own Consciences shall
cast the shame of all upon them! They shall not only be derided by God, Prove.
1.26. but by their own Consciences also.

Lastly, The fearful expectations of Conscience still looking forward into more
and more wrath to come, this is the very sum and complement of their misery.
What makes a Prison so dreadful to a Malefactor, but the trembling expectations
he there lives under of the approaching Assizes? Much after the same rate, or
rather after the rate of condemned persons preparing for Execution, do these
Spirits in Prison live in the other World. But alas, no instance or similitude
can reach home to their case.

PROP. VI. That which makes the torments and terrors of the damned Spirits so
extreme and terrible, is, that they are unrelievable miseries, and torments for
ever.
They are not capable either of 1. A partial relief by any mitigation, or, 2. A
complete relief by a final cessation.


1. Not of a partial relief by any mitigation: could they but divert their
thoughts from their misery, as they were wont to do in this World, drink and
forget their sorrows; or had they but any hope of the abatement of their
misery, it would be a relief to them: But both these are impossible. Their
thoughts are fixed and determined: to remove them (though but for a moment)
from their misery, is as impossible as to remove a Mountain: their sin and
misery is ever before them. As the blessed in Heaven are bono confirmati, so
fixed and settled in blessedness, that they are not diverted one moment from
beholding the blessed face of God, for they are ever with the Lord: so the
damned in Hell are malo obfirmati, so settled and fixed in the midst of all
evil, that their thoughts and miseries are inseparable for ever.

2. Much less can their undone state admit the least hope of relief by a final
cessation of their misery. All hope perishes from them, and the perishing of
their hope, is the plainest proof that can be given of the eternity of their
misery. For were there but the remotest possibility of deliverance at last,
hope would hang upon that possibility: and whilst hope lives, the Soul is not
quite dead, the death of hope is the death of a man's Spirit: the cutting off of
the Soul from God, and the last act of hope to see or enjoy him for ever, is
that death which an immortal Soul is capable of suffering. Depart from me ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, is that Sentence which strikes hope and soul
dead for ever. In these six Propositions you have the true and terrible
Representation of the Spirits in Prison, or the state of damned Souls. I have
not mentioned their association with Devils, or the dismal place of their
confinement, which though they complete their misery, yet are not the principal
parts of it, but rather Accessories to it, or Rivers running into the Ocean of
their misery. The sum of their misery lies in what was opened before, and the
improvement of it is in that which follows.

Inference I.
IS this the state of ungodly Souls after death? Then it follows, that neither
death nor annihilation are the worst of evils, incident to man. Aristotle calls
death the most terrible of all terribles: and the Schoolmen affirm Annihilation
to be a greater evil than the most miserable being: but it is neither so, nor
so; the Wrath of God, the Worm of Conscience, are much more bitter than death.
The pains of death are natural and bodily pains; the Wrath of God and anguish
of Conscience, are spiritual and inward: that is but the pain of a few hours or
days, these are the unrelieved torments of eternity.

And as for Annihilation, what a favor would the damned account it! Indeed if
we respect the glory of Gods justice which is exemplified and illustrated in
the ruin of these miserable souls, it is better they should abide as the
eternal monuments thereof, than not be at all; but with respect to themselves,
we may say as Christ does of the Son of Perdition, Matthew. 26.24. Good had it
been for them if they had never been born: For a man's Soul to be of no other
use than a vessel of wrath, to receive the indignation, and be filled with the
fury of God; surely an un^timely Birth that was never animated with a
reasonable Soul, is better than they: for alas, they seek for death, but it
flies from them. The immortality of their Souls, which was their dignity and
privilege above other Creatures, is now their misery, and that which
continually feeds and perpetuates their flame. Here is a Being without the
comfort of it, a Being only to howl and tremble under Divine wrath: a Being
therefore, which they would gladly exchange with the contemptiblest Fly, or
most loathsome Toad, but it cannot be exchanged or annihilated.

Inference II.
HEnce it follows, That the pleasures of sin are dear bought and costly
pleasures. There is a greater disproportion betwixt that pleasure, and this
wrath; than betwixt a drop of Honey, and a Sea of Gall. Could a man distill all
the imaginable pleasure of sin, and drink nothing else but the highest and most
refined delights of it all his life, though his life should be protracted to
the Term of Methuselahs: Yet one day or night under the wrath of God would make
it a dear bargain. But

1. It Is certain sin has no such Pleasures to give you: they are all
embittered either by adverse strokes of Providence from without, or painful and
deadly gripes and twinges of Conscience within, Job 20.14. His meat in his
Bowels is turned, it is the gall of Aspes within him.

2. It Is as certain, the time of a sinner is near its Period when he is at the
height of his pleasure in sin: for look, as high delights in God speak the
Maturity of a Soul for Heaven, and it will not be long before such be in
Heaven, so the heights of delight in sin, answerably speak the Maturity of such
a Soul for Hell; and it will not be long ere it be there. Sin is now a big
Embryo, and speedily the Soul travels with death.

3 According to the measure of delights men have had in sin, will be the
degrees and measures of their torment in Hell, Rev. 18.7. so much torment and
sorrow, as there was delight and pleasure in sin.

4. To conclude, the pleasures of sin are but for a season, as you read, Heb.
11.25. but the wrath of God in Hell is for ever, and ever. There is a time,
when the pleasures of sin cannot be called pleasure to come, but the Wrath of
God that will still be wrath to come. O consider for what a trifle you sell
your Souls! When Lysimachus parted with his Kingdom for a draught of water, he
said when he had drank it, For how short a pleasure have I sold a Kingdom! And
Jonathan lamented, 1 Samuel 14.43. I tasted but a little Honey, and I must die.
Satan would not charm so powerfully as he does with the pleasures of sin, if
this point were well believed, and heartily applied.

Inference III.
WHat a matchless madness is it to cast the Soul into Gods Prison, to save the
Body out of Man's Prison!

Men have their Prisons, and God has his: but because the one is an Object of
Sense, and the other an Object of Faith; that only is feared, and this slighted
all over this unbelieving World; except by a very small number of men who
tremble at the Word of God. Now, this I say is the height of madness, and will
appear to be so in a just Collation of both in a few Particulars. (1) Man's
Prison restrains the Body only, Gods Prison Soul and Body, Matt. 10.28. The
Spirits of Men (as my Text speaks) are the Prisoners there. O what a vast odds
does this single difference make? A thousand times more than the captivating
and binding of the greatest King or Emperor differs from the imprisonment of a
poor Mechanic, or Vagrant Beggar. (2) In Man's Prison there are many comforts
and unspeakable refreshments from Heaven, but in Gods Prison none, but the
direct contrary. You read of the Apostles, Acts 16.25. how they sang in the
Prison: the Spirit of God made them a Banquet of heavenly Ioys, and they could
not but sing at it: though their feet were in the stocks, their Spirits were
never more at liberty. Algerius dated his Letters from the delectable Orchard
of the Leonine Prison: where says he, flows the sweetest Nectar. Another tells
us Christ was always kind to him, but since he became a Prisoner for him, he
even overcame himself in kindness. I verily think, says he, the Chains of my
Lord are all overlaid with pure Gold, and his Cross perfumed: but the worst
terrors of the Prisoners in Hell, come from the presence of the Lord, 2 These.
1.9. God is a terror to them. (3) The cause for which a man is cast into
Prison by men, may be his D^ty, and so his Conscience must be at least quiet,
if not joyful in such Sufferings. So it was with Paul, Acts 28.20. For the hope
of Israel am I bound with this Chain: This diffuses Joy and Peace through the
Conscience into the whole man; but the cause for which men are cast into Gods
Prison, is their sin and guilt, which arms their own Consciences against them,
and makes them as you heard before, Self-tormentors, terrors to themselves.
What odds is here? (4) In Man's Prison, the most excellent Company and sweet
Society may be found. Paul and Silas were fellow Prisoners. In Queen Mary's
days, the most excellent Company to be found in England, was in the Prisons:
Prisons were turned into Churches. But in Gods Prison no better Society is to
be found, than that of Devils, and damned Reprobates, Matthew. 25.41. (5) In Man's
Prison there is hope of a comfortable deliverance; but in Gods Prison none,
Matt. 5.26. Thou shall not come out thence, till thou have paid the last Mite.
It Is an everlasting Prison.

Compare these few obvious Particulars, and judge then what is to be thought of
that man, who stands readier to cast himself into any guilt, than into the
least Suffering? What is it but as if a man should offer his Neck to the Sword,
to save his hand? The Lord convince us what trifles our Estates, Liberties, and
Lives are to our Souls, or to the peace and purity of our Consciences.

Inference IV.
WHat an invaluable mercy is the pardon of sin, which sets the Soul out of all
danger of going to this prison! When the debt is satisfied, a man may walk as
boldly before the prison door, as he does before his own: they that owe
nothing, fear no Bailiffs. It Is the Law (as I said before) that commits men to
Prison, a Mittimus is but an instrument of Law; but the righteousness of the
Law is fulfilled in them that believe, Romans 8.4. Yea, they are made the
righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. There can be no process of Law
against them. For who shall condemn, when it is God that justifies? Romans 8.33,
34. And that divine justice might be no bar to our faith or comfort, he adds,
It is Christ that died; and yet farther to assure us that his death has made
plenary satisfaction to God for all our sins and debts, it added, Yea, rather
that is risen again. q. d. If the debts of believers to God were not fully paid
and satisfied for by the blood of Christ, how comes it to pass that our Surety
is discharged, as by his Resurrection he appears to be? O Believer, thy Bonds
are Cancelled, the handwriting that was against thee is nailed to the Cross,
the blood of Christ has done that for thee, that all the Gold and Silver in
the World could not do, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. It is a counter price, (...) e^t
pretium ex adverso respondent.
fully answering to thy debts, Matthew. 20.28. And hence to the Eternal joy of
thy heart result three properties of thy pardon, which are able to make thine
eyes gush out with tears of joy whilst thou art reading of it.

1. It is a free pardon to thy Soul; though it cost Christ dear, it costs thee
nothing. We have redemption, even the remission of sins, according to the
riches of his grace, Ephesians. 1.7. The project of it was Gods, not thine; the price
for it was Christ's blood, not thine: the glory and riches of free grace are
illustriously displayed in thy forgiveness.

2. It is as full, as it is free; a complete and perfect cause produces a
complete and perfect effect, Acts 13.39. Justified from all things, what ever
thy sins be for nature, number, or circumstances of aggravation, they cannot
exceed the value of the meritorious cause of Remission. The blood of Christ
cleanses us from all sin.

3. It must be as firm, as it is free and full, even an irrevocable pardon for
ever more. Christ did not shed his blood at an hazard, the way of
justification by faith, makes the promise sure, Romans 4 16. The justified shall
never come again under condemnation. O the unspeakable joy that flows from this
Spring! O the triumphs of faith upon this foundation!

It is not ravishing, melting, overwhelming, and amazing, to think thus with
thy self? Here sit I with a joyful plenary free pardon of sin in my hand,
whilst many who never sinned to that height and degree I have, lie groaning,
howling, sweating, and trembling under the indignation of God poured out like
fire upon their Souls in Hell. A greater sinner saved, and lesser damned. O how
unspeakably sweet is that rest into which my terrified and diquieted Soul is
come by faith! Romans 5.1. Heb. 4.3. We which have believed do enter into rest. O
blessed calm, after a dreadful Tempest! This poor breast of mine was lately
panting, sweating, trembling under the horrors of wrath to come, terrified with
the visions of Hell. No other sound was in mine ears, but that of fiery
indignation to devour the adversaries. O what price can be put upon my quietus
est? What value upon a pardon, delivered as it were at the ladders foot! O
precious hand of faith that receives it! but oh the most precious blood of
Christ which purchased it! If Satan now come with his accusations, the law with
its comminations, death with its dreadful summons, I have in a readiness to
answer them all.

Here is the law, the wrath of God, and everlasting burnings; the just demerit
of sin upon one side; and a poor sinful creature on the other side: but the
Covenant of grace has solved all. An Act of oblivion is past in Heaven, I will
forgive their iniquities, and their sins and transgressions will I remember no
more. In this Act of Grace my Soul is included; I am in Christ, and there is no
condemnation. Dye I must, but damned I shall not be: My debts are paid, my
bonds are cancelled, my Conscience is quieted; let death do its worst, it shall
do me no harm, that blood which satisfies God, may well satisfy me.

Inference V.
HOw amazingly sad and deplorable is the security and stilness of the
Consciences of sinners under all their own guilts, and the immediate danger of
Gods everlasting wrath!

Philosophers observe that before an Earthquake the Wind lies, and the weather
is exceeding calm and still, not a breath of wind going. So it is in the
Consciences of many just before the tempest and storm of Gods wrath pours down
upon them. What a golden morning opened upon Sodom, and began that fatal day?
Little did they imagine showers of fire had been ready to fall from so pleasant
and serene a sky as they saw over their heads. How secure, still, and
unconcerned are those to day, who it may be shall rage, roar, and tremble in
Hell to morrow? Caesar hearing of a Citizen of Rome who was deep in debt, and
yet slept soundly, would needs have his Pillow, as supposing there was some
strange charming virtue in it.

It is wonderful to consider what shift men make to keep their consciences in
that stilness and quiet they do, under such loads of guilt, and threatenings of
wrath ready to be executed upon them. It must be some strong Opium that so
stupefies and benums their Consciences; and upon enquiry into the matter we
shall find it to be the effect of 1. A strong delusion of Satan. 2. A Spiritual
judicial stroke of God.


1. This stilness of Conscience upon the brink of damnation proceeds from the
strong delusions of Satan; blinding their eyes and feeding their false hopes;
he removes the evil day at many years imaginary distance from them, and
interposeth many a fair day betwixt them and it, and in that interposed season,
time enough to prepare for it; without such an artifice as this, his house
would be in an uproar, but this keeps all in peace, Luke 11.21. Praesumendo
^^er^nt, and perando pere^nt.
By presuming he feeds their hopes, and by their hopes destroys their Souls.
Some he diverts from all serious thoughts of this day, by the pleasures, and
others by the cares of this life, and so that day comes upon them unawares,
Luke, 21.34.

2. This stilness of Conscience in so miserable and dangerous a state, is the
effect of a spiritual, judicial stroke of God upon the children of wrath.
That Is a dreadful word, Isaiah 6.10. Make the heart of this people fat, and
make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes: Pinguedo non refractaria solum
facit animalia, sed omnis expers sensus est, consetientibus Physicis. Glass.
the Eye and Ear are the two principal doors or inlets to the heart, when these
are shut, the heart must needs be insensible, as the fat of the Body is. There
is a Spirit of a deep sleep poured out judicially upon some men, Isa. 29.10.
Such as that upon Adam, when God took a Rib from his side; and he felt it not:
but this is upon the Soul, and is the same as to give up a man to a reprobate
sense.

Inference VI.
THe case of distressed Consciences upon earth, is exceeding sad, and calls
upon all for the tenderest pity, and utermost help from men.

You see the labourings of Conscience under the sense of guilt and wrath, is a
special part of the Torments of Hell; of which there is not a livelier Emblem
or Picture, than the distresses of Conscience in this World.

It must be thankfully confessed there are two great differences betwixt the
terrors of Conscience here, and there: One in the degrees of anguish, the
other in the reliefs of that anguish. The ordinary distresses of Conscience
here, compared with those of the damned, are as the flame of a Candle, to a
fiery Oven; a mild and gentle fire: Or as the Sparks that fly out of the top of
a Chimney, to the dreadful eruptions of Vesuvius, or Mount Aetna. Beside, these
are capable of relief, but those are unrelievable: their hearts die, because
their hope is perished from the Lord.

But yet of all the miseries and distresses incident to men in this World, none
like those of distressed Consciences: the terrors of God set themselves in
array, or are drawn up in Batalia against the Soul, Job 6.4, Whilst I suffer
thy terrors (says Heman) I am distracted, Psalm. 88.15. Yea, they not only
distract, but cut off the Spirit; as he adds v. 16. They lick up the very
Spirit of a man, and none can bear them, Prove. 18.14. for now a man has to do
immediately with God; yea, with the Wrath of the great and dreadful God; and
this wrath which is the most acute and sharp of all torments, falls upon the
most tender and sensible part, the Spirit and Mind which now lies open and
naked before him to be wounded by it. No Creature can administer the least
relief, by the application of any temporal comfort or refreshment to it. Gold
and Silver, Wife and Children, Meat and Melody, signify no more than the
drawing off a silk stockin to cure the Paroxysms of the Gout.

All that can be done for their relief is by seasonable, judicious, and tender
Applications of Spiritual Remedies, and what can be done ought to be done for
them. What heart can hear a voice like that of Job, Have pity upon me, have
pity upon me, O ye my Friends, for the Hand of God has touched me; and not
melt into Compassions over them? Is there a word of Wisdom in thy heart, let
thy Tongue apply it to the relief of thy distressed Brother: whilst his heart
meditates terror, let thine meditate his succor. It is not impossible but
thou who lendest a friendly hand to another, may ere long need one thy self,
and he that has ever felt the terrors of the Almighty upon his Soul, has
motive enough to draw forth the Bowels of his pity to another in the like case.

Alas for poor distressed Souls, who have either none about them that
understand and are able and willing to speak a word in season to their weary
Souls, or too many about them to exasperate their sorrows, and persecute them
whom God has smitten. You that have both ability and opportunity for it are
under the strongest engagements in the World to endeavor their relief with all
faithfulness, seriousness, compassion, and constancy. Did Christ shed his Blood
for the saving of Souls, and wilt not thou spend thy breath for them? Shall any
man that has found mercy from God, show none to his Brother? God forbid. A
Soul in Hell is out of your reach, but these that are in the Suburbs of Hell
are not: the Candle of intense sorrow is put to the thread of their miserable
life, and should they be suffered to drop into Hell whilst you stand by as
unconcerned: Spectators of such a Tragedy, will have little peace. Your
unmercifulness to their Souls, will be a wound to your own.

Inference VII.
BE hence informed of the evil that is in sin; be convinced of the evil that is
in it, by the eternal misery that follows it.

If Hell be out of measure dreadful, then sin must be out of measure sinful:
the torments of Hell do not exceed the demerit of sin, though they exceed the
understandings of men to conceive them. God will lay upon no man more than is
right: sin is the Founder of Hell: all the miseries and torments there, are but
the Treasures of wrath which sinners in all Ages have been treasuring up, and
how dreadful soever it be, it is but the (...), the recompense which is meet,
Romans 6. ult. The Wages of sin is death.

We have slight thoughts of sin, Fools make a mock of sin: but if the Lord by
the convictions of men's Consciences did but lead them through the Chambers of
death, and give them a sight of the wrath to come; could we but see the Piles
that are made in Hell (as the Prophet calls them, Isaiah 30.33. to maintain the
flames of Vengeance to eternity; could we but understand in what Dialect the
damned speak of sin, who see the treasures of wrath broken up to avenge it,
surely it would alter our apprehensions of sin, and strike cold to the very
hearts of sinners.

Cannot the extremity and eternity of Hell Torments exceed the evil that is in
sin? What words then can express the evil of it! Hell flames have the Nature of
a punishment, but not of an atonement.

O think on this you that look upon sin as the veriest trifle, that will sin
for the value of a Penny: that look upon all the humiliations, broken hearted
confessions, and bitter moans of the Saints under sin, as Frenzy, or
Melancholy, slighting them as a Company of half-witted Hypochondriack persons.
You that never had one sick night or sad day in all your lives upon the account
of sin; let me tell thee, that breast of thine must be the seat of sorrow: that
frothy airy Spirit of thine must be acquainted with emphatical sobs and groans.
God grant it may be on this side Hell by effectual repentance, else it must be
there in the extremity and eternity of sorrows.

Inference VIII.
WHat enemies are they to the Souls of men, who are Satan's instruments to draw
them into sin, or who suffer sin to lie upon them?

When there were but two persons in the World, one drew the other into sin; and
among the Millions of Men and Women now in the World, where are there two to be
found, that have in no case been snares to draw some into sin? Some tempt
designedly, taking the Devils work out of his hands: others virtually and
consequentially by examples which have a compelling power to draw others with
them into sin: the first sort are among the worst of Sinners, Prove. 1.10. the
latter are among the best of Saints: see Gal. 2.14. Whose Conversation is so
much in Heaven, that nothing falls out in the course thereof which may not
farther some or other in their way to Hell?

Among wicked men there are five sorts eminently accessory to the guilt and
ruin of other men's Souls. (1) Loose Professors, whose lives give their lips
the Lie: whose Conversations make their Professions blush. (2) Scandalous
Apostates, whose fall is more prejudicial, than their Profession was ever
beneficial to others. (3) Cruel Persecutors who make the Lives, Liberties; and
Estates of men the occasion of the ruin of their Consciences. (4) Ignorant and
unfaithful Ministers, who strengthen the hands of the wicked, that they should
not return from their wickedness. (5) Wicked Relations, who quench and damp
every hopeful beginning of conviction and affection in their friends: of all
which I shall distinctly speak in the next Discourse, to which therefore I
remit it at present.

And many there are who suffer sin to lie upon others, without a wise and
seasonable reproof to recover them.

O what cruelty to Souls is here! The day is coming when they will curse the
time that ever they knew you: it is possible you may repent, but then it may be
those, whose Souls you have helped to ruin, are gone, and quite out of your
reach. The Lord make you sensible what you have done, in season, lest your
repentance come too late for your selves and them also.

Inference IX.
HOw poor a comfort is it to him that carries all his sins out of this World
with him, to leave much earthly treasure (especially if gotten by sin) behind
him?

It is a poor consolation to be praised where thou art not, Quid prodest esse,
quod esse non prodest? Tertul.
and tormented where thou art: to purchase a life of pleasure to others on
earth, at the price of thine own everlasting misery in Hell. All the
consolation, sensual, voluptuous, and oppressing Wordlings have, is but this,
that they were coached to Hell in pomp and state, and have left the same
Chariot to bring their graceless Children after them in the same Equipage to
the place of Torments. There be five Considerations provoking pity to them that
are thus past into a miserable eternity, and Caution to all that are following
after in the same path.

First, That fatal mistake in the practical understanding and judgment of man
deserves a compassionate lamentation, as the cause and reason of their eternal
miscarriage and ruin. They looked upon trifles as things of greatest
necessity, and the most necessary things as mere trifles: putting the greatest
weight and value upon that which little concerned them, and none at all upon
their greatest concernment in the whole World, Luke 12.21.

Secondly, The perpetual diversions that the trifles of this World gave them
from the main use and end of their time. O what a hurry and thick succession of
earthly business and encumbrances filled up their days! So that they could find
no time to go alone, and think of the awful and weighty concernments of the
World to come, James 5.5.

Thirdly, The total waste and expense of the only season of Salvation about
these vanished, impertinent trifles, which is never more to be recovered,
Eccles. 9 10.

Fourthly, That these deluding shadows, the pleasures of a moment, is all they
had in exchange for their Souls: a goodly price it was valued at, Matthew. 16.26.

Fifthly, That by such a life they have not only ruined their own Souls, but
put their posterity, by their education of them in the same course of life,
into the same path of destruction, in which they went to Hell before them:
Psalm. 49.13. Their posterity approve their saying.

Inference X.
HOw rational and commendable is the courage and resolution of those Christians
who choose to bear all the sufferings in this World from the hands of men,
rather than to defile and wound their consciences with sin, and thereby expose
their Souls to the wrath of God for ever!

That which men now call Pride, Humor, Fancy, and Stubbornness; will one day
appear to be their great wisdom and the excellency of their Spirits. It is the
tenderness of their Consciences, not the pride and stoutness of their stomachs,
which makes them inflexible to sin, they know the terrors of a wounded
Conscience, and had rather endure any other trouble from the hands of men, than
fall by known sin into the hands of an angry God. Try them in other matters
wherein the glory of God, and peace or purity of their Consciences are not
concerned, and see if you can charge them with stubbornness, and singularity.
It was the excellency of the Spirits of the Primitive Christians, that they
durst to tell the Emperor to his face, when he threatened them with torments;
Pardon us, O Emperor, thou threatnest us with a Prison, Ignosc^, Imperator, tu
carcerem mi^aris, Deus Gehennam
but God with Hell. Do we call that ingenuity and good Nature, which makes the
mind fo^t and tractable to temptations? and will rather venture upon guilt,
than be esteemed singular?

Salvian tells us of some in his time, Mali esse co^untur, ne viies habiantur.
who were compelled to be evil, lest they should be accounted vile, and was
that their excellency? May I not fitly apply the words of Salvian here? O in
what honor and repute is Christ among Christians, when Religion shall make
them base and ignoble* He that understands what the punishment of sin will be
in Hell, should endure all things rather than yield to sin on Earth. Indeed, if
you that threaten, and tempt others to violate their Consciences, could bear
the wrath of God for them in Hell, it were somewhat; but we know there is no
suffering by a Proxy there, they tremble at the word of God, and have felt the
burden of guilt, and dare not yield to sin, though they yield their Estates and
Bodies to prevent it.

Inference XI.
HOw patiently should we bear the afflictions of this life by which sin is
prevented and purged?

The discipline of our Spirits belongs to God the Father of Spirits, he
corrects us here, that we may not be punished hereafter, 1 Cor 11.32. We are
chastened of the Lord, that we may not be condemned with the World. It is
better for us to groan under afflictions on Earth, than to roar under revenging
wrath in Hell. Parents who are wise as well as tender, had rather hear their
children sob and cry under the rod, than stand with halters about their necks
on the ladder bewailing the destructive indulgence of their Parents.

Your chastisements when sanctified are preventive of all the misery opened
before. It is therefore as unreasonable to murmur against God, because you
smart under his rod, as it would be to accuse your dearest friend of cruelty,
because he strained your arm to snatch you from the fall of an house or wall
which he saw ready to crush and overwhelm you in its ruins.

If we had less affliction, we should have more guilt. We see how apt we are to
break over the hedge, and go astray from God, with all the clogs of affliction
designed for our restraint; what should we do, if we had no clog at all? It is
better for you to be whipped to Heaven with all the rods of affliction, than
coached to Hell with all the pleasures of the World.

Christian, thy God sees, if thou do not, that all these troubles are few
enough to save thee from sin and Hell. Thy corruptions require all these rods
and all little enough. If need be, ye are in heaviness, 1 Pet. 1.6. If there be
need for it, thy dearest comforts on Earth shall die, that thy Soul may live;
but if thy mortification to them render their removal needless, thou and they
shall live together. It Is better be preserved in brine, than rot in Honey.
Sanctified afflictions working under the efficacy of the blood of Christ, are
the safest way to our Souls.

Inference XII.
HOw doleful a change does the death of wicked men make upon them! from Palaces
on Earth, to the Prison of Hell.

No sooner is the Soul of a wicked man stepped out of his own door at death, but
the Sergeants of Hell are immediately upon it, serving the dreadful summons on
the Law-condemned wretch. This arrest terrifies it more than the handwriting
upon the plaster of the Wall did him, Dan. 5.5. How are all a man's
apprehensions changed in a moment! Out of what a deep sleep are most, and out
of what a pleasant dream of Heaven are some awaked and startled at death, by
the dreadful arrest and summons of God to condemnation!

How quickly would all a sinners mirth be dampt and turned into houlings in
this World, if Conscience were but thoroughly awakened! It is but for God to
change our apprehensions now, and it would be done in a moment: but the eyes of
most men's Souls are not opened, till death has shut their bodily eyes; and
then how sudden, and how sad a change is made in one day!

O think what it is to pass from all the pleasures and delights of this World
into the torments and miseries of that World: from a pleasant Habitation, into
an infernal Prison: from the depth of security to the extremity of desperation:
from the arms and bosoms of dearest Friends and Relations, to the Society of
damned Spirits! Lord, what a change is here! Had a gracious change been made
upon their hearts by grace, no such doleful change could have been made upon
their state by death: Little do their surviving Friends think what they feel,
or what is their estate in the other World, whilst they are honoring their
Bodies with splendid and pompous Funerals. None on earth have so much reason to
fear death, to make much of life, and use all means to continue it, as those
who will and must be so great losers by the exchange.

Inference XIII.
SEe here the certainty and inevitableness of the judgment of the great day.

This Prison which is continually filling with the Spirits of wicked men, is an
undeniable evidence of it: for why is Hell called a Prison, and why are the
Spirits of men confined and chained there; but with respect to the judgment of
the great day? As there is a necessary connection betwixt sin and punishment,
so betwixt punishing and trying the Offender: there are millions of Souls in
custody, a world of Spirits in Prison, these must be brought forth to their
Trial, for God will lay upon no man more than is right: the legality of their
Mittimus to Hell, will be evidenced in their solemn day of Trial. God has
therefore appointed a day in which he will judge the World in righteousness, by
that Man whom he has ordained, Acts 17.31.

Here sinners run in Arrears, and contract vast debts; in Hell they are seized
and committed, at Judgment tried and cast for the same. This will be a dreadful
day, those that have spent so prodigally upon the patience of God, must now
come to a severe account for all: they have past their particular judgment
immediately after death, Eccles. 12.7. Hebr. 9.27. by this they know how they
shall speed in the general judgment, and how it shall be with them for ever;
but though this private Judgment secures their Damnation sufficiently, yet it
clears not the Justice of God before Angels and Men sufficiently; and therefore
they must appear once more before his Bar, 2 Cor. 5.10. In the fearful
expectation of this day, those trembling Spirits now lie in Prison, and that
fearful expectation is a principal part of their present misery and torment.
You that refuse to come to the Throne of Grace, see if you can refuse to make
your appearance at the Bar of Justice. You that braved and brow-beat your
Ministers that warned you of it, see if you can out-brave your Judge too as you
did them. Nothing more sure, or awful than such a day as this.

Inference XIV.
HOw much are Ministers, Parents, and all to whom the charge of Souls is
committed; bound to do all that in them lies, to prevent their everlasting
misery in the World to come?

The great Apostle of the Gentiles, found the consideration of the terror of
the Lord, as a spur urging and enforcing him to ministerial faithfulness and
diligence, 2 Cor. 5.11. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade
men: and the same he presses upon Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.1, 2. I charge thee
therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick, and
the dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom: Preach the Word, be instant in
season, and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long-suffering,
and Doctrine. O that those to whom so great a trust as the Souls of men is
committed, would labor to acquit themselves with all faithfulness therein as
Paul did, warning every one night and day with tears, that if we cannot prevent
their ruin which is most desirable; yet at least, we may be able to take God
to Witness, as he did, that we are pure from the blood of all men.

O consider my Brethren, if your faithful plainness and unwearied diligence to
save men's Souls, produce no other fruit but their hatred of you now, yet it is
much easier for you to bear that, than that they and you too should bear the
Wrath of God for ever.

We have all of us personal guilt enough upon us, let us not add other men's
guilt to our account: to be guilty of the blood of the meanest man upon the
earth, is a sin which will cry in your Consciences; but to be guilty of the
blood of Souls, Lord, who can bear it! Christ thought them worth his heart
blood, and are they not worth the expense of our breath? Did he sweat blood to
save them, and will not we move our lips to save them. It Is certainly a sore
Judgment to the Souls of men, when such Ministers are set over them, as never
understood the value of their peoples Souls; or were never heartily concerned
about the Salvation of their own Souls.

MATTHEW. 16.26 For what is a man profited, if he shall gain the whole world, and
lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?
DIfficult Duties need to be enforced with powerful Arguments: in the 24th
verse of this Chapter, our Lord presses upon his Disciples the deepest and
hardest duties of self-denial, acquaints them upon what terms they must be
admitted into his service, If any man will come after me, let him deny himself,
and take up his cross and follow me.

This hard and difficult Duty he enforces upon them by a double Argument, viz.
from 1. The vanity of all sinful shifts from it, v. 25. 2. The value of their
Souls which is imported in it, v. 26.
They may shift off their Duty to the loss of their Souls, or save their Souls
by the loss of such trifles. If they esteem their Souls above the World, and
can be content to put all other things to the hazard for their Salvation,
making account to save nothing but them by Christianity; then they come up to
Christ's terms, and may warrantably and boldly call him their Lord and Master;
and to sweeten this choice to them, he does in my Text balance the Soul and all
the World, weighing them one against the other, and shows them the infinite
odds and disproportion betwixt them, What is a man profited, if he shall gain
the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange
for his soul?

What is a man profited?] There is a plain Meiosis in the Phrase, and the
meaning is, how inestimably and irreparably is a man damnified! what a
Soul-ruining bargain would a man make!

If he should gain the whole world,] There is a plain Hyperbole in this Phrase;
for it never was, nor will be the lot of any man to be the sole Owner and
Possessor of the whole world Hypothetica ^ac hyperbole amissionis salutis
aeternae atrocitas summa notatur. S. Glassius.

Non magis juvabitur q^am qui acquirit Venetias, ipse vero susp^ndatur ad
portam. Pareus in loc.


But suppose all the power, pleasure, wealth, and honor of the whole World
were bid and offered in exchange for a man's Soul; what a dear purchase would it
be at such a rate! What were this, says one, but to win Venice, and then be
hanged at the gate of it? As that man acts like a mad man, that goes about to
purchase a treasure of gold with the loss of his life; for life being lost,
what is all the gold in the world to him? he can have no enjoyment of it, or
comfort in it: so here, what is all the world, or as many worlds as there are
creatures in it, when the Soul is lost? if he gain this.

And lose his own soul.] The comparison lies here betwixt one single Soul and
the whole World. The whole world is no price for the poorest, meanest and most
despised Soul that lives in it.

By losing the Soul, we are not to understand the destruction of its Being, but
of its happiness and comfort, the cutting it off from God, and all the hopes of
his favor and enjoyment for ever. This is the loss here intended, a loss never
to be repaired. The whole world can be no recompense for a loss to the Soul; if
it be but the loss of its purity or peace for a time, much less can it
recompense the loss of the Soul in the loss of all its happiness for ever. When
a man's chief happiness is finally lost, then is his Soul lost; for what benefit
can it be, nay, how great a misery must it be, to have a Being perpetuated in
torments for ever? Anima vero sua mulctetur. BezMaldon.
This is the fine or mulct which is set upon sin, as some render the word. What
shall a man gain by such pleasures, for which God will mulct or fine him at the
rate or price of his own Soul? that is, of all the happiness, joy and comfort
of it to all Eternity.

Or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?] The question aggravates
the sense, Interrogatio ^xaggerans.
and amplifies the loss and damage of the man that sells his Soul for the whole
world. There is no recompense in all the world for the hazard or danger of the
Soul one hour, nor would a man that understands what Soul and Eternity are, put
it into danger for ten thousand worlds, much less for a penny, yea, for
nothing, as many do; but to barter and exchange it for the world, to take any
thing in lieu of it* this is the height of madness. The way of buying in former
times was not by money, but by the Exchange of one Commodity for another: (...)
vocat id quo dat^, redimitur aliquid; juxta Pris^orum commercia qua non monita,
sed rorum permutatione constabant. Brugens.
and to this custom Brugensis thinks this Phrase is allusive. Now what
commodity is found in all the world, or who that is not blinded by the God of
this world, can think that the whole world it self, if all the rocks in it were
rocks of Diamonds, and the Seas and rivers were liquid Gold; is a commodity of
equivalent worth to his own Soul? Hence two Notes rise naturally.

DOCT. I.

That one Soul is of more value than the whole World.

DOCT. II.

How precious and invaluable soever the Soul of man is, it may be lost, and
cast away for ever. I begin with the first.

DOCT. I.
That one Soul is of more value than the whole World.

I need not spend much time in the proof of it, when you have considered, that
he who bought them, has here weighed and valued them; and that the point
before us is the result and conclusion of one that has the best reason to know
the true worth of them. That which I have to do, is to gather out of Scriptures
the particulars, which put together, make up the full demonstration of the
point.

1. And first, The invaluable worth of Souls appears from the manner of their
Creation. They were created immediately by God, as has been proved, and that
not without the deliberation of the whole Trinity, Genesis 1.26. Let us make man.
For the production of other Creatures, it was enough to give out the word of
his command, Let there be light, let the earth and the waters bring forth; but
when he comes to man, then you have no fiat, ^^t there he, but he puts his own
hand immediately to it, as to the Masterpiece of the whole Creation; yea, a
counsel is called about it, Let us, implying the just consultation and
deliberation of all the Persons in the Godhead about it, that our hearts might
be raised to the expectation of some extraordinary work to follow. great
Counsels and wise Debates being both the forerunners and foundations of great
Actions and Events to ensue thereupon. Thus Elihu in Job 35.10. None says,
Where is God my makers? and David in Psalm. 149 2. Let Israel rejoice in his
makers: In both places the word is plural. The consultation here is only
amongst the Divine Persons, no Angels are called to this Council Table, the
whole matter was to be conducted by the Wisdom, and effected by the Power of
God; and therefore there was no need to consult with any but himself, the
wisdom of Angels being from him: but this great Council shows what an excellent
Creature was now to be produced, and the excellency of that creature Man, was
principally in his Soul; for the bodies of other Creatures, which were made by
the word of his command, are as beautiful, elegant, and neat as the body of
man; yea, and in some respects more excellent. The Soul then was that rare
piece which God in so condescending an expression tells us was created with the
deliberation of a Go^head: those great and excellent Persons laid their heads,
as it were, together, to project its Being.

And by the way, this may smartly check the pride and arrogance of Souls, who
dare take it upon them to teach God, as we interpretatively do in our censures
of his works, and murmures at his disposals of us. Shall that Soul, which is
the product of his Wisdom and Counsel, dare to instruct or counsel its Maker?
but that by the bye. You see there is a transcendent dignity and worth in the
Soul of man above all other Beings in the World, by the peculiar way of its
production into the number of created Beings: no wise man deliberates long, or
calls a counsel about ordinary matters, much less the All-wise God.

2. Secondly, The Soul has in it self an intrinsic worth and excellency
worthy of that Divine Original whence it sprang: view it in its noble faculties
and admirable powers, and it will appear to be a Creature upon which God has
laid out the riches of his Wisdom and Power.

There you shall find a Mind susc^ptive of all light, ^oth natural and
spiritual, shining as (...) Candle of God in the inner man, closing with Truth
as the Iron does with the attractive Loadstone, a Shop in which all Arts and
Sciences are labored and formed: what are all the famous Libraries and
Monuments of Learning, but so many Systems of thoughts labored and perfected
in the active inquisitive minds of men? Truth is its natural and delectable
object, it pur^u^s eagerly after it, and even spends it self and the body too
in the chase and prosecution of Truth: Veritas in put^^.
when it lies deep, as a subterranean treasure, the mind sends out innumerable
thoughts re-inforcing each other in thick successions, to dig for and compass
that invaluable treasure; if it be disguised by misrepresentations and vulgar
prejudice, and trampled in the dirt under that disguise, there is an ability in
the mind to discern it by some lines and features, which are well known to it,
and both own, honor and vindicate it under all that dirt and obloquy, with
more respect; than a man will take up a p^ece of Gold* or a sparkling D^amond
out of the gutter: it searches after it by many painful deductions of reason,
(...). Archim.
and triumphs more in the discovery of it, than in all earthly treasures; no
gratification of sense like that of the mind, when it grasps its prey for which
it hunted.

The mind passes through all the works of Creation, it views the several
creatures on earth, considers the fabric, use, and beauty of Animals, the
signatures of Plants, penetrating thereby into their Nature and Virtues: it
views the vast Ocean, and the large train of Causes laid together in all these
things, for the good of man, by God whose Name it reads in the most diminutive
creature it beholds on earth.

It can in a moment mount it self from Earth to Heaven, view the face thereof,
describe the motions of the Sun in the Ecliptic, calculate Tables for the
motions of the Planets and fixed Stars, invent convenient Cycles for the
computations of Time, foretell at a great distance the dismal Eclipses of the
Sun and Moon, to the very Dig^^, and the ^ortentous Conjunctions of the
Planets, to the very minute of their Ingress: these are the pleasant
employments of the Understanding.

But there is an higher game at which this Eagle plays, it reckons it self all
thi^^^ ^^ile employed as much beneath its capacity, as Domitian in catching
flies: though these be lawful and pleasant exercises, when it has leisure for
them, yet it is fitted for a much nobler exercise, even to penetrate the
glorious Mysteries of Redemption, to trace redeeming love through all the
astonishing methods, and manifold discoveries of it, and yet higher than all
this, it is capable of an immediate sight or facial vision of the blessed God,
short of which it receives no pleasure that is fully agreeable to its noble
powers and infinite appetite.

View its Will, and you shall find it like a Queen upon the Throne of the Soul,
swaying the Scepter of Liberty in her hand, Culverwell.
(as one expresses it) with all the affections waiting and attending upon her.
No Tyrant can force it, no torment can wrest the golden Scepter of Liberty out
of its hand, the keys of all the Chambers of the Soul hang at its girdle, these
it delivers to Christ in the day of his power; victorious Grace sweetly
determines it by gaining its consent, but commits no rape upon it by unnatural
coaction. God accepts its offering, though full of imperfections; but no
service is accepted without it, how excellent soever the matter of it.

View the Conscience and Thoughts with their self-reflexive abilities, wherein
the Soul retires into it self, and sits concealed from all eyes but his that
made it, judging its own actions, and censuring its estate; viewing its face in
its own glass, and correcting the indecencies it discovers there: Things of
greatest moment and importance are silently transacted in this Council Chamger
betwixt the Soul and God; so remote from the knowledge of all Creatures, that
neither Angels, 1 Cor. 2.11.
Devils, or men can know what it is doing there, but by uncertain guess, or
revelation from God: here it impleads, Romans 2.15.
condemns, and acquits it self as at a privy Session, with respect to the
Judgment of the great Day: here it meets with the best of comforts, 2 Cor. 1.12.
and with the worst of terrors.

Take a survey of its Passions and Affections, and you will find them
admirable: see how they are placed by Divine Wisdom in the Soul, some for
defense and safety, others for delight and pleasure. Anger actuates the
Spirits, and rouzeth its courage, enabling it to break through difficulties:
Fear keeps Sentinel, watching upon all dangers that approach us: Hope forestals
the good, and anticipates the joys of the next Life, and thereby supports and
strengthens the Soul under all the discouragements and pressures of the present
life: Love unites it to the chiefest Good; he that dwells in love, dwells
in God, and God in him: Zeal is the Dagger which love draws in Gods cause and
quarrel, to secure it self from sin, and testify its resentments of Gods
dishonor.

O what a Divine spark is the Soul of man! well might Christ prefer it in
dignity to the whole World.

3. Thirdly, The worth of a Soul may be gathered and discerned from its
subjective capacity and hability both of Grace and Glory. It is capable of all
the graces of the Spirit, of being silled with the fullness of God, Ephesians. 3.19.
to live to God here, and with God for ever. What excellent Graces do adorn some
Souls! How are all the rooms richly hanged with Divine and costly Hangings,
that God may dwell in them! This makes it like the carved works of the Temple,
overlaid with pure Gold; here is Glory upon Glory, a new Creation upon the old;
in the inmost parts of some Souls is a spiritual Altar erected with this
Inscription, Holiness to the Lord: Here the Soul offers up it self to God in
the sacred flames of Love, and here they sacrifice their vile affections,
devoting them to destruction to the glory of their God: here God walks with
delight, even a delight beyond what he takes in all the stately Structures and
magnificent adorned Temples in the whole World, Isa. 66.1, 2.

No other Soul besides man's is marriageable to Christ, or capable of Espousals
to the King of Glory: they were not designed, and therefore not endued with a
capacity for such an honor as this; but such a capacity has every Soul, even
the meanest on Earth, and such honor have all his Saints: others may, 2 Cor.
11.2. Ephesians. 5.27.
but they are betrothed to Christ in this World, and shall be presented without
spot before him in the World to come.

It is now a lovely and excellent Creature in its naked natural state, much
more beautiful and excellent in its sanctified and gracious state; but what
shall we say, or how shall we conceive of it, when all spots of sin are
perfectly washed off its beautiful face in Heaven, and the glory of the Lord is
risen upon it! When its filthy garments are taken away, and the pure robes of
perfect Holiness, as well as Righteousness, superinduced upon this excellent
Creature! If the imperfect beauty of it, begun in Sanctification, enamou^ed its
Savior, and made him say, Thou have ravished my heart with one of thine eyes,
with one of the chains of thy neck; what will its beauty and his delight in it
be in the state of perfect^punc;Glorification! As we imagine the Circles in the
Heavens to be vastly greater than those we view upon the Globe, so must we
imagine in the case before us.

4. Fourthly, The preparations God makes for Souls in Heaven, speak their great
worth and value. When you lift up your eyes to Heaven, and behold that
bespangled Azure Canopy, beset and inlaid with so many golden Studs, and
sparkling Gems, you see but the floor or pavement of that place which God has
prepared for some Souls. He furnished this World for us before he put us into
it; but as delightful and beautiful as it is, it is no more to be compared with
the Fathers house in Heaven, than the smallest ruined Chapel your eyes ever
beheld, is to be compared with Solomon's Temple when it stood in all its shining
glory.

When you see a stately magnificent Structure built, richest Hangings and
Furniture prepared to adorn it, you conclude some great persons are to come
thither; such preparations speak the quality of the Guests.

Now Heaven, yea the Heaven of Heavens, the Palace of the great King, the
Presence Chamber of the Godhead is prepared, not only by Gods Decree and
Christ's Death, but by his Ascension thither in our Names, and as our Forerunner
for all renewed and redeemed Souls: Ioh. 14.2. In my Fathers house are many
mansions, if it were not so, I would have told you; I go to prepare a place for
you.

And where is the place prepared for them? but in his Fathers house; the same
place, the very same house where the Father, Son and Spirit themselves do
dwell: such is the love of Christ to Souls, that he will not dwell in one
house, and they in another; but as he speaks, Ioh. 12.26. Where I am, there
shall my servant also be. There is room enough in the Fathers house for Christ
and all the Souls he redeemed to live and dwell together for evermore. His
Ascension thither was in the capacity of a common or public person, to take
Livery and Seisin of those many mansions for them, which are to be filled with
their inhabitants, as they come thither in their respective times and orders.

5. Fifthly, The great price with which they were redeemed and purchased,
speaks their dignity and value. No wise man will purchase a trifle at a great
price, much less the most wise God. Now the redemption of every Soul stood in
on less than the most precious Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ: 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
You know (says the Apostle there) that ye were not redeemed with corruptible
things, as silver and gold -- But with the precious blood of Christ, as a Lamb
without blemish and without spot. All the gold and silver in the world was no
Ransom for one Soul; nay, all the blood of the Creatures, had it been shed as a
Sacrifice to the glory of Justice, or even the blood which is most dear to us,
as being derived from our own, I mean the blood of our dear Children, even of
our firstborn, the beginning of our strength, which usually have the strength
of affection: I say, none of this could purchase a pardon for the smallest sin
that ever any Soul committed, much less was it able to purchase the Soul it
self, Micah 6.6, 7. Thousands of rams, and ten thousand rivers of oil, or our
firstborn are no ransom to God for the sin of the Soul. It is only the
precious Blood of Christ that is a just ransom or counterprice, as it is called,
Matthew. 20.28.

Now who can compute the value of that Blood? such was the worth of the Blood
of Christ, which by the communication of properties, is truly styled the Blood
of God; that one drop of it is above the estimations of men and Angels; and yet
before the Soul of the meanest man or woman in the World could be redeemed,
every drop of his Blood must be shed; for no less than his Death could be a
price for our Souls. Hence then we evidently discern an invaluable worth in
Souls. A whole Kingdom is taxed when a King is to be ransomed, the delight and
darling of Gods Soul must dye, when our Souls are to be redeemed. O the worth
of Souls!

6. Sixthly, This evidences the transcendent dignity and worth of Souls, that
Eternity is stamped upon their actions, and theirs only of all the Beings in
this World: the acts of Souls are immortal, as their Nature is, whereas the
actions of other Animals having neither moral goodness or moral evil in them,
pass away as their Beings do.

The Apostle therefore in Gal. 6.7. compares the actions of men in this world
to seed sown, and tells us of everlasting fruits we shall reap from them in the
next life: they have the same respect to a future account that seed has to the
Harvest; he that sows iniquity shall reap vanity, (i. e.) everlasting
disappointment and misery, Prove. 22.8. and they that now sow in tears, shall
then reap in joy, Psalm. 126.5. every gracious action is the seed of joy, and
every sinful action the seed of sorrow; and this makes the great difference
betwixt the actions of a rational Soul, and those done by Beasts: and if it
were not so, man would then be wholly swayed by sense and present things, as
the beasts are, and all Religion would vanish with this distinction of actions.

Our actions are considerable two ways, physically and morally; in the first
sense they are transient, in the last permanent: a word is past as soon as
spoken, but yet it must and will be recalled and brought into the Judgment of
the great Day, Matthew. 12.36. whatever therefore a man shall speak, think, or
do, once spoken, thought, or done, it becomes eternal, and abides for ever.
Now, what is it that puts so great a difference betwixt humane and brutal
actions, but the excellent Nature of the reasonable Soul? It Is this which
stamps immortality upon humane actions, and is at once a clear proof both of
the immortality and dignity of the Soul of man, above all other Creatures in
this World.

7. Seventhly, The contention of both Worlds, the strife of Heaven and Hell
about the Soul of man, speaks it a most precious and invaluable Treasure.

The Soul of man is the Prize about which Heaven and Hell contend: the great
design of Heaven is to save it, and all the plots of Hell to ruin it. Man is a
Borderer betwixt both Kingdoms, he lives here upon the Confines of the
spiritual and material World; and therefore Scaliger fitly calls him, Vtriusque
mundi nexus, one in whom both worlds meet: his body is of the earth, earthly;
his Soul the offspring of a Deity, heavenly. It is then no wonder to find such
tugging and pulling this way and that way, upward and downward, such ^allies
from Heaven to rescue and save it, such incursions from Hell to captivate and
ruin it.

The infinite Wisdom of God has laid the plot and design for its Salvation by
Christ in so great depth of counsel, that the Angels of Heaven are astonished
at it, and desire to pry into it. Christ in pursuance of this eternal project
came from Heaven professedly to seek and to save lost Souls, Luke 19.10. He
compares himself to a good Shepherd who leaves the ninety nine to seek one
lost sheep, and having ^ound it, brings it home upon his shoulders, rejoicing
that he has found it, Luke 15.5.

Hell imploys all its skill and policy, sets a-work all wiles and stratagems to
destroy and ruin it: 1 Pet. 5.8. Your adversary the Devil goes about as a
roaring lion, seeking whom he may devour. The strong man armed gets the first
possession of the Soul, and with all his forces and policies labors to secure
it as his property, Luke 11.21. Christ raises all the spiritual Militia, the
very posse Coeli, the Powers of Heaven to rescue it, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. And do
Heaven and Earth thus contend, think you, de lana caprina, for a thing of
naught? No, no, if there were not some singular and peculiar excellency and
worth in man's Soul, both worlds would never tug and pull at this rate, which
should win that Prize: It was a great Argument of the worth and excellency of
Homer, that incomparable Poet, that seven Cities contended for the honor of
his Nativity: (...)
(...)
Smyrna, Rhodes, Co^ophon, Salamis, Chins, Argos, and Athens were all at strife
about one poor man, who should crown themselves with the honor of his birth:
but when Heaven and Hell shall contend about a Soul, certainly it much more
speaks the dignity of it, than the contention of seven Cities for one Homer.

What are all the wooings, expostulations, and passionate beseechings of
Christ's Ministers, what are all the convictions of Conscience, and strong
impressions made upon the affections; what are all strokes from Heaven upon men
in the way of sin: I say, what are all these but the tuggings of Heaven to draw
Souls out of the snares of Hell?

And what are the hellish temptations that men feel in their hearts, the
alluring objects presented to their eyes, the ensnaring examples that are set
round about them; but the tuggings of Satan, if possible, to draw the Souls of
men into the same condemnation and misery with himself?

Would Heaven and Hell be up in Arms, as it were, and strive at this rate for
nothing? Thy Soul, O man, how vilely soever thou depreciatest and slightest it,
is of high esteem, a rich purchase, a Creature of nobler rank than thou art
aware of. The wise Merchant knows the value of Gold and Diamonds, though
ignorant Indians would part with them for Glass-beads and Tinsel toys. And
this leads us to

8. The eighth Evidence of the invaluable worth of Souls, which is the joy in
Heaven, and the rage in Hell for the gain and loss of the Soul of man.

Christ who came from Heaven, and well knew the frame and disposition of the
Inhabitants of that City, Quoties been agimus gaudent Angeli, and tristantur
Daemones; quoties a bono deviamus Diabolum laetificamus, and Angelos suo gaudio
defraudamus. August.
tells us, That there is joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one
sinner that repents, Luke 15.7, 10. No sooner is the heart of a sinner darted
with conviction, broken with sorrow for sin, and begins to cry, Men and
brethren, what shall I do? but the news is quickly in Heaven, and sets all the
City of God a rejoicing at it, as is in the chief City of a Kingdom when a
young Prince is born.

We never read that Christ laughed in all his time on Earth; but we read, that
he once rejoiced in Spirit, Luke 10.21. And what was the occasion of that his
joy, but the success of the Gospel in the Salvation of the Souls of men? Now
certainly it must be some great good that so affects Christ and all his Angels
in Heaven at the sight of it: the degree of a wise man's joy is according to the
value of the object thereof: no man that is wise will rejoice, feel his heart
leap within him for gladness at a small or common thing.

And as there is joy in Heaven for the saving, so certainly there is grief and
rage in Hell for the loss of a Soul. No sooner had God by Paul's Ministry
converted one poor Lydia at Philippi, whither he was called by an immediate
Express from Heaven for that service, but the Devil put all the City into an
uproar, as if an Enemy had landed on their Coast, and raised a violent
Persecution, which quickly drove him thence, Acts 16.9, 14, 22.

And indeed what are all the fierce and cruel persecutions of Gods faithful
Ministers, but so many efforts of the rage and malice of Hell against them, for
plucking Souls as so many captives and preys out of his paws? For this he owes
them a spite, and will be sure to pay them, if ever he get them at an
advantage. But all this joy and grief demonstrates the high and great value of
the Prize which is won by Heaven, and lost by Hell.

9. Ninthly, The institution of Gospel Ordinances and the appointment of so
many Gospel-Officers purposely for the saving of Souls, is no small evidence of
what value and esteem they are.

No man would light and maintain a Lamp fed with golden Oil, and keep it
burning from Age to Age, if the work to be done by the light of it were not of
a very precious and important nature; what else are the Dispensations of the
Gospel, but Lamps burning with golden Oil to light Souls to Heaven, Zech. 4.2,
3, 4, and 12. compared: a magnificent Vision is there presented to the Prophet,
viz. a Candlestick of Gold with a Bowl or Cistern upon the top of it, and seven
Shafts with seven Lamps at the ends thereof, all lighted: and that these Lamps
might have a constant supply of oil, without any accessory humane help, there
are presented (as growing by the Candlestick) two fresh and green Olive Trees
on each side thereof, ver. 3. which do empty out of themselves golden Oil, ver.
12. naturally dropping and distilling it into that Bowl, and the two Pipes
thereof to feed the Lamps continually. Under this stately Emblem you have a
lively representation of the spiritual Gifts and Graces distilled by the Spirit
into the Ministers of the Gospel, for the use and benefit of the Church, as you
find not only by the Angels Exposition of it here, but by the Spirits allusion
to it, and accommodation of it in Rev. 11.3, 4. See herein what price God puts
upon the salvation of Souls: Gospel Lamps are maintained for their sakes, not
with the sweat of Ministers brows, or the expense and waste of their Spirits,
but by the precious Gifts and Graces of Gods Spirit continually dropping into
them for the use and service of Souls. These ministerial Gifts and Graces are
Christ's Ascension-gifts, Ephesians. 4.8. When he ascended up on high, he gave gifts
unto men; and what were the Royal gifts of that triumphant day? why, he gave
some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for
the edifying of the body of Christ. It is an allusion to the Roman Triumphs,
wherein the Conqueror did spargere missilia, scatter abroad his treasures among
the people. It is reported of the Palm Tree says one, that when it was first
planted in Italy, they watered its roots with Wine to make it take the better
with the Soil; but God waters our Souls with what is infinitely more costly
than Wine, he waters them with the Heart-blood of Christ, and the precious
Gifts and Graces of the Spirit, which certainly he would never do, if they were
not of great worth in his eyes. O how many excellent Ministers who were, as is
said of John, burning and shining Lights in their places and generations, have
spent themselves, and how many are there who are willing to spend and be spent,
as Paul was, for the salvation of Souls! God is at great expenses for them, and
therefore puts a very high value upon them.

Now all this respects the Soul of man, that is the object of all ministerial
labors. The Soul is the terminus actionum ad intra, the subject on which God
works, and upon which he spends all those invaluable treasures. It Is the Soul
which he aims at, and principally designs and levels all to, and reckons it not
too dear a rate to save them at.

No man will dig for common stones with golden Mattocks, the instruments that
would be worn out being of far greater value than the thing. This may convince
us of what worth our Souls are, and at what rates they are set in Gods Book,
that such instruments are sent abroad into the World, and such precious Gifts
and Graces like golden Oil spent continually for their Salvation: whether Paul,
or Apollo, or Cephas, all are yours, 1 Cor. 3.22. (i. e.) all set apart for the
service and salvation of your Souls.

10. Tenthly, The great encouragements and rewards God propounds, and promises
to them that win Souls, speaks their worth, and Gods great esteem of them.

There cannot be a more acceptable service done to God, than for a man to set
himself heartily and diligently to the Conversion of Souls: so many Souls as a
man instrumentally saves, so many Diadems will God crown him withal in the
great Day. S. Paul calls his converted Philippians his joy and his crown, Phil.
4.1. and tells the converted Thessalonians, they were his Crown of rejoicing in
the presence of Jesus Christ at his coming, 1 Thessalonians. 2.19. There is a full
reward assured by promise to those that labor in this great service, Dan.
12.3. And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and
they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever. The
wisdom here spoken of I conceive not to be only that whereby a man is made wise
to the salvation of his own Soul, but whereby he is also furnished with skill
for the saving of other men's Souls, according to that, Prove. 11.30. He that
wins souls is wise: and so the latter Phrase is exegetical of it, meaning
one and the same thing by being wise, and turning many unto righteousness: and
to put men upon the study of this wisdom, he puts a very honorable title upon
them, calling them (...), the justifiers of many, as in 1 Timothy 4.16. they are
said to save others. Here is singular honor put upon the very instruments
employed in this honorable service, and that is not all; but their reward is
great hereafter, as well as their honor great at present: they shall shine as
the brightness of the firmament, and the stars for ever and ever. The Firmament
shines like a Saphir in it self, the Stars and Planets more gloriously again;
but those that faithfully labor in this work of saving Souls, shall shine in
Glory for ever and ever, when the Firmament shall be parched up as a scrowl. O
what rewards and honors are here to provoke men to the study of saving Souls!
God will richly recompense all our pains in this work: if we did but only sow
the seed in our days, and another enters into our labors, and waters what we
sowed, so that neither the first has the comfort of finishing the work, nor
the last the honor of beginning it; but one did somewhat toward it in the
work of Conviction, and the other carried it on to greater maturity and
perfection, and so neither the one or other began and finished the work singly;
yet both shall rejoice in Heaven together, Ioh. 4.36.

You see what honors God puts upon the very instruments employed in this work,
even the honor to be Saviors under God of men's Souls, Iam. 5.20. and what a
full reward of glory, joy, and comfort they shall have in Heaven: all which
speaks the great value of the Soul with God. Such encouragements and such
rewards would never have been propounded and promised, if God had not a
singular estimation of them.

And the more to quicken his instruments to all diligence in this great work,
he works upon their fears as well as hopes; threatens them with Hell, as well
as incourages them with the hopes of Heaven: tells them he will require the
blood of all those Souls that perish by their negligence; Their blood, says
he, will I require at that watch-mans hands, Ezekiel. 33.6. which are rather
Thunderbolts than words, says Chrysostom. By all which you see what weight God
lays upon the saving or losing of Souls: such severe charges, great
encouragements, and terrible threats had never been propounded in Scripture, if
the Souls of men had not been invaluably precious.

11. Eleventhly, It is no small evidence of the preciousness and invaluable
worth of Souls, that God manifests so great and tender Care over them, and is
so much concerned about the evil that befalls them.

Among many others, there are two things in which the tender care of God for
the good of Souls is manifested, (1.) In his tenderness over them in times of
distress and danger, as a tender father will not leave his sick child in other
hands, but sits up and watches by him himself, and administers the Cordials
with his own hands; even so the great God expresses his care and tenderness,
Isa. 57.15. I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is of a
contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive
the heart of the contrite ones. Behold the condescending tenderness of the
highest Majesty! Is a Soul ready to faint and fail, O how soon is God with it,
with a reviving Cordial in his hand, lest the spirit should fail before him,
and the Soul which he has made? as it is verse. 16. yea, he put it into Christ's
Commission to preach good tidings to the meek, and to bind up the
brokenhearted, Isa. 61.1. and not only inserts it in Christ's Commission, but
gives the same in solemn charge to all his inferior Messengers whom he imploys
about them, Isa. 35.3. Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble
knees; say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not. (2.) His
special regard to Souls is evidenced in his severe prohibitions to all others
to do nothing that may be an occasion of ruin to them. He charges it upon all,
That no man put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his brothers way,
Romans 14.13. that by the abuse of our own liberty, we destroy not him for whom
Christ died, Romans 14.15. And what does all this signify, but the precious and
invaluable worth of Souls?


12. Lastly, It is not the least evidence of the dignity of man's Soul, that God
has appointed the whole Host of Angels to be their Guardians and Attendants.

Are they not all ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for them, who
shall be heirs of salvation? Heb. 1.14.

Are they not?] It is no doubtful question, but the strongest way of
affirmation; nothing is surer than that they are

All] Not one of that heavenly Company excepted. The highest Angel thinks it no
disparagement to serve a Soul for whom Christ die. Well may they all stoop to
serve them, when they see Christ their Lord has stooped even to death to save
them. They are all of them

Ministering Spirits] (...), public Officers to whom their Tutelage is
committed: to them it belongs to attend, serve, protect, and relieve them. The
greatest Peers and Barons in the Kingdom think it not below them to wait upon
the Heir apparent to the Crown in his Minority; and no less dignity is here
stamped by God upon the Souls of men, whom he calls

Heirs of Salvation] And in some respect nearer to Christ than themselves are;
on this account it is that the Angels delight to serve them. Christ's little
ones upon earth have their Angels, which always behold the face of God in
Heaven, Mat. 18.10. and therefore says our Lord there, Take heed you despise
not one of these little ones; they are greater persons than you are aware of.
Nor is it enough that one Angel is appointed to wait upon all, or many of them,
but many Angels, even a whole Host of them are sometimes sent to attend upon
one of them. As Jacob was going on his way, the Angels of God met him, and when
he saw them, he said, This is Gods host, Genesis 32.1, 2.

The same two offices which belong to a Nurse to whom the Father commits his
Child, belong also to the Angels of Heaven, with respect to the Children of
God, viz. to keep them tenderly whilst they are abroad, and bring them home to
their Fathers house at last. And how clearly does all this evince and
demonstrate the great dignity and value of Souls? Was it an Argument of the
Grandeur and Magnificence of King Solomon, that he had two hundred men with
Targets, and three hundred men with Shields of beaten Gold for his ordinary
Guard every day? And is it not a mark of far greater dignity, than ever Solomon
had in all his glory, to have Hosts of Angels attending us? In comparison with
one of this Guard Solomon himself was but a Worm in all his Magnificence.

And now lay all these Arguments together, and see what they will amount to.
You have before you no ordinary Creature; for, (1.) it was not produced as
other Creatures were, by a mere word of command, but by the deliberation of the
great Council of Heaven: and, (2.) such are the high and noble faculties and
powers found in it, as render it agreeable to, and becoming such a Divine
Original. Ye^, (3.) by reason of these its admirable powers it becomes a
capable subject both of Grace here, and Glory hereafter. (4.) Nor is this its
capacity in vain, for God has made glorious preparations for some of them in
Heaven. (5.) And purchased them for Heaven, and Heaven for them at an
invaluable price, even the precious Blood of Christ. (6.) And stamped
immortality upon their actions, as well as natures. (7) Both Worlds contend and
strive for the Soul, as a prize of greatest value. (8) Their Conversion to
Christ is the Triumph of Heaven, and Rage of Hell. (9.) The Lamps of
Gospel Ordinances are maintained over all the reformed Christian World to light
them in their passage to Heaven. (10.) Great rewards are propounded to all that
shall heartily endeavor the salvation of them. (11.) The care of Heaven is
exceeding great and tender over them. And (12.) the heavenly Host of Angels
have the charge of them, and reckon it their honor to serve them. These things
duly weighed, bring home the conclusion with demonstrative clearness to every
man's understanding, That one Soul is of more value than the whole World, which
was the thing to be proved. What remains is the improvement of this excellent
subject, in these following Inferences.

Inference I.
THE Soul of man appearing to be a Creature of such transcendent dignity and
excellency, this truth appears of equal clearness with it, That it was not made
for the body, but the body for it; and therefore it is a vile abuse of the
noble and highborn Soul, to subject it to the lusts, and enslave it to the
drudgery of the inferior and more ignoble part.

The very Law of Nature assigns the most honorable places and employments to
the most noble and excellent Creatures, and the baser and inferior to things of
the lowest rank and quality. The Sun, Moon, and Stars are placed by this Law in
the Heavens, but the Ignis fatuus and the Glowworm in the Fens and Ditches.
Princes are set upon Thrones of Glory, the Beggars lodged in Barns and Stables:
and if at any time this order of Nature be inverted, and the baser suppress and
perk over the more noble and honorable Beings, it is looked upon as a kind of
Prodigy in the Civil World: and so Solomon represents it, Eccles. 10.7. I have
seen servants upon horses, and Princes walking as servants upon the earth, (i.
e.) I have seen men that are worthy of no better employments than to rub Horses
heels, in the Saddle, with their Trappings; and men who deserve to bear rule
and to govern Kingdoms, men who for their great ability and integrity deserved
to sit at Helm, and moderate the Affairs of Kingdoms, these have I seen walking
as servants upon the earth, and this he calls an evil under the Sun, that is an
Ataxie, confusion or disorder in the course of Nature.

Now there can never be that difference and vast odds betwixt one man and
another, as there is betwixt the Soul and the body of every man. A King upon
the Throne is not so much above a Beggar that cries at our doors for a crust,
as the Soul is above a body; for the Soul of a Beggar is of the same Species,
Original, and Capacity of happiness with the Soul of the most illustrious
Prince: and sometimes greater Excellencies of mind are found in the lowest rank
and order of men; Better is a poor and wise child, than an old and foolish
King, Eccles. 4.13. but the Soul of the meanest person in the World, is better
than all the bodies in it; and therefore to make the noble and highborn Soul a
slave, a mere drudge to the vile body; as the Apostle calls it, Phil. 3.21. The
body of this vileness; what is it but to set the Beggar on Horseback, and make
the King lacquey after him on foot.

It was a generous resentment that an Heathen had of the dignity of his own
Soul, Major sum, and ad majora natus, quam ut corporis mei sim mancipium.
Seneca.
and a very just abhorrence of so vile an abuse of it, when he said, I am
greater, and born to greater things, than that I should be a slave to my body.

I know there is a debt of duty the Soul owes to its own body, and few Souls
are to be found too careless or dilatory in the discharge thereof: where one
Soul needs the Spur in this case, thousands need the Curb. Most Souls are
overheated with zeal for the concerns of the flesh, worn out and spent in its
constant drudgery: their whole life is but a serving of diverse lusts and
pleasures, as the Apostle speaks, Tit. 3.3. Imperious lusts are cruel
Taskmasters, they give the Soul no rest; the more provision the Soul brings in
to satisfy them, the more they rage, like fire by the addition of more fuel.
What a sad sight is it to see a noble immortal Soul enslaved, (...)
as the Apostles word is, Tit. 1.7. to wine? to filthy lucre, to a thousand
sorts of vassallage; like a Tapster in a common Inn, now running up stairs, and
then down, at every ones knock and call?

O what perpetual hurry and noise do thousands of Souls live in! so that they
have no time to retire into themselves, and think for what end and use they
were created, and sent into this World: all their thoughts, all their cares,
all their studies and labors are taken up about that perishing, clogging,
ensnaring body, which must so shortly fall a prey to the worms. How many
millions of poor Creatures are there that labor and toil all their life long
for a poor, bare maintenance of their bodies, and never think they have any
other business to do in this World?

And how many of an higher rank are charmed by a thick succession of fleshly
delights and pleasures into a deep oblivion of their eternal concerns? so that
their whole life is but one entire diversion from the great business and proper
end of it: Iam. 5.5. Ye have lived in pleasure on earth, lived in them, as the
fish does in the water, its proper Element, or the Eel in the mud. Sometimes it
falls out at the very close of a vain voluptuous life, when they see all their
delights shrinking away at the approaches and appearance of death; that they
begin to be a little startled at the change which is about to be made upon
them, and to cry, O what shall we do now! Ah poor Souls, is that a time to
think what you shall do, when you are just stepping into the awful state of
Eternity? O that this had been thought on in season; but you could find no
leisure for one such thought. Now you begin to wish time had been rescued out
of the hands of the cares and pleasures of this life for better purposes; but
it is gone, and never more to be recalled.

Inference II.
IS the Soul so invaluably precious, then the Salvation of the Soul is to be
the great care and business of every man in this life.

Where one thought is spent about this question, What shall I eat, drink, and
put on, a thousand should be spent about that question, What shall I do to be
saved? If a Treasure of ten or twenty thousand pounds were committed to your
trust and charge, and for which (in case of loss) you must be responsible,
would not your thoughts, cares, and fears be working night and day about it,
till you be satisfied it is safe and out of danger, and then your mind would be
at rest, but not before. Thy Soul, O man, is more worth than the Crowns and
Treasures of all the Princes in the World: if all their Exchequers were
drained, and all their Crown-Jewels sold to their full value, they could never
make up half a Ransom for the Soul of the poorest and meanest man. This
invaluable Treasure is committed to your charge, if it be lost, you are lost
for ever: that which St. Matthew calls the losing of the Soul in my Text, St.
Luke calls losing himself: if the Soul be lost, the man is lost: the body is
but as a Boat fastened to the stern of a stately Ship, if the Ship sink, the
Boat follows it.

O therefore what thoughts, what fears, what cares should exercise the minds of
men day and night, till their precious Souls be out of all danger! Methinks the
sound of this Text should ring a perpetual Alarm in the ears of careless
sinners, and make them hasten to the Ensurance-Office, as Merchants do, who
have great Adventures in danger at Sea. It was counsel given once to a King,
and worthy to be pressed upon all, from the King to the Beggar, to ruminate these
words of Christ one quarter of an hour every day, What is a man profited, if he
shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in
exchange for his soul? certainly it would make men slack their pace, and cool
themselves in their hot and earnest pursuit of the trifles of this World, and
convince them, that they have somewhat else to do of far greater importance.

It was not without great and weighty reason therefore, that the Apostle Peter
exhorts to all diligence to make our calling and election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10.
there are two words in this Text of extraordinary weight, (...).
Give all diligence, the word is study; the utmost intention of the mind,
pondering and comparing things in the thoughts, valuing reasons for, and
objections against the point before us, this is study; and such as calls for
all diligence where the subject matter is (as to be sure, here it is) of the
greatest importance: and what is the subject matter of all this study and
diligence? Why, it is the most solemn of all works that ever came under the
hand of man, (...).
to make our calling and election sure, firm, stable, or fixed, as a building
raised upon square and strong foundation; or as a conclusion is sure, when
regularly drawn from certain and indubitable premises, there can never be too
much care, too much study or pains, about that which can never be too well
secured.

Many Souls never spent one solemn hour in a close and serious debate about
this matter, others have taken a great deal of pains about it, they have broken
many nights sleep, poured out many prayers, made many a deep search into their
own hearts, walked with much conscientious watchfulness and tenderness,
proposed many a serious case of Conscience to the most judicious and skilful
Ministers and Christians: and after all, their security is not such as fully
satisfies; and probably one reason of it may be the great weight wherewith the
matters of their Salvation lie upon their spirits. O that these Soul-concerns
did bear upon all, as they do upon some: it requires more time, more thoughts,
more prayers to make these things sure, than most are aware of.

Inference III.
IF the Soul be so precious, then cetainly it is the special care of Heaven,
that which God looks more particularly after, than any other Creature on Earth.

There is an active vigilant Providence that superintends every Creature upon
Earth: there is not the most despicable diminutive Creature that lives in the
World, left without the line of Providence. God is therefore said to give them
all their meat in due season, and for that end they all wait upon him, Psalm.
104.27. as a great and provident Housekeeper orders daily convenient provisions
for all his Family, even to the least and lowest among them: the smallest
Insects and Gnats which swarm so thick in the Air, and of the usefulness of
whose Being it is hard to give an account; yet as the incomparably learned Dr.
More well observes, Antidote, p. 82.
these all find nourishment in the World, which would be lost, if they were
not, and are again convenient nourishment themselves to others that prey upon
them.

But Man is the peculiar, special care of God, and the Soul of man much more
than the body. Hence Christ fortifies the Faith of Christians against all
distrusts of Divine Providence, even from their Excellency above other
Creatures, Matthew. 10.31. Ye are of more value than many sparrows: and Matthew.
6.26. your heavenly Father feeds the Fowls of the Air, and are ye not much
better than they? and verse. 30. he clothes the grass of the field, and shall he
not much more cloth you? And so the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9.9. Does God take care
for oxen? or says he it altogether for our sakes? for our sakes no doubt this
is written. In all which places the dignity of man above all Animals and
Vegetables, in respect of both natural Excellency of his reasonable Soul, but
especially the gracious endowments of it, which endear it far more to its
Maker: this is the very hing of the Argument, and a firm ground for the
Believers Faith of Gods tender care over both parts, but especially the Soul.
The body of a Believer is Gods Creature as well as his Soul; but that being of
less value, has not such a degree of care and tenderness expressed toward it,
as the Soul has: the Fathers care is not so much for the Child's clothes, as it
is for the Child himself. Besides, the immediate wants and troubles of the
Soul, which are Idiopathetical, are far more sharp and pinching than those it
suffers upon the bodies account, which are but Sympathetical; and therefore
whenever such an excellent Creature, as a sanctified Soul, which is in Christ,
or a Soul designed to be sanctified, which is moving toward Christ, fall under
those heavy pressures and distresses, (as they often do) and are ready to fail;
let it be assured its merciful Creator will not fail to relieve, support,
revive, and deliver it as often as it shall fall into those deep distresses.

Hear how his compassionate tenderness is expressed toward distressed Souls,
Isa. 49.15. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have
compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will not I forget
thee.

Sooner shall a Woman, the more tender Sex, forget not the Nurse-child that
only sucks her breast, but the child, yea the son of her womb, and that not
when grown and placed abroad, but whilst it hangs upon her breast, and draws
love from her heart, as well as milk from her breast; than God will forget a
Soul that fears him. Let gracious Souls fortify their Faith therefore in the
Divine care, by considering with what a peculiar eye of estimation and care God
looks upon them above all other Creatures in the World: only beware you so eye
not the natural or spiritual excellencies of your Souls, as to expect mercy for
the sake thereof, as if your Souls were worthy for whose sake God should do
this: no, no, sin has nonsuited that Plea, all is of free Grace, not of debt;
but he minds us what reputation the new Creation brings the Soul into with its
God.

Inference IV.
IF the Soul of man be so precious, how precious and dear to all Believers
should the Redeemer and Savior of their precious Souls be?

Unto you therefore that believe he is precious, says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2.7.
though he be yet out of our sight, he should never be one whole hour together
out of our hearts and thoughts: 1 Pet. 1.8. Whom having not seen ye love, whom
though now ye see him not, yet believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and
full of glory. The very Name of Christ, says Bernard, Mel in ore, melos in
aure, jubilum in cord. Bern.
is Honey in the mouth, Melody in the ear, and a very Jubilee in the heart. The
blessed Martyr Mr. Lambert made this his Motto, None but Christ, none but
Christ. Molinus was seldom observed to mention his Name without dropping eyes.
Julius Palmer in the midst of the flames moved his scorched lips, and was heard
to say, Sweet Jesus, and fell asleep. Paul fastens upon his Name as a Be upon
a sweet flower, and mentions it no less than ten times in the compass of ten
verses, 1 Cor. 1. as if he knew not how to leave it.

There is a twofold preciousness of Christ, one in respect of his essential
Excellency and Glory, in this respect he is glorious as the only begotten Son
of God, the brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the express Image or Character
of his Person, Heb. 1. the other is in respect of his relative usefulness and
suitableness to all the needs and wants of poor sinners; as he is the Lord our
righteousness, made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and
Redemption: none discern this preciousness of Christ, but those that have been
convinced of sin, and have apprehended the wrath to come, the just demerit of
sin, and fled for refuge to the hope set before them: and to them he is
precious indeed. Consider him as a Savior from wrath to come, and then he will
appear the most lovely and desirable in all the World to your Souls: he that
understands the value of his own Soul, the dreadful nature of the wrath of God,
the near approaches of the wrath to his own Soul, and the astonishing love of
Christ in delivering him from it, by bearing that wrath in his place and room
in his own person, cannot choose but estimate Christ above ten thousand Worlds.

Inference V.
HOw great a trust and charge lies upon them to whom the care of Souls is
committed, and from whom an account for other men's, as well as their own Souls
shall certainly be required?

Ministers are appointed of God to watch for the Souls of their people, and
that as men that must give an account, Heb. 13.17. (...) est noctes insomnes
agere, quod solent viri (...) pernox soticitudo.
The word here translated watch, signifies such watchfulness as that of
Shepherds which keep their stocks by night in places infested by Wolves, who
watch whole nights together for their safety. If a man were a keeper only of
Sheep or Swine, it were no great matter if the Wolf now and then carried away
one whilst we slept; but Ministers have charge of Souls, one of which, as
Christ assures us in the Text, is more worth than the whole World. Hear what
one speaks upon this point.

God purchased the Church with his own Blood, Gildas Salvian, p. 260.
O what an Argument is here to quicken the negligent? and what an Argument to
condemn those that will not be quickened up to their duty by it? O, says one
of the Ancient Doctors, if Christ had but committed to my keeping one spoonful
of his Blood in a fragil glass, how curiously should I preserve it, and how
tender should I be of that glass! If the^ he have committed to me the purchase
of that Blood, should I not carefully look to my charge?

What, Sirs, shall we despise the Blood of Christ? shall we think it was shed
for them that are not worthy of our care? O then let us hear those Arguments of
Christ whenever we feel our selves grow dull and careless. Did I dye for them,
and wilt not thou look after them? Were they worth my Blood, and are they not
worth thy labor? Did I come down from Heaven to Earth, to seek and to save
that which was lost: and wilt not thou go to the next door, or street, or
village to seek them? How small is thy labor or condescension to mine? I
debased my self to this, but it is thy honor to be so employed.

Let not that man think to be saved by the Blood of Christ himself, that makes
light of precious Souls, who are the purchase of that Blood.

And no less charge lies upon Parents, to whom God has committed the care of
their Childrens Souls: and Masters that have the Guardianship of the Souls as
well as bodies of their Families: the command is laid immediately upon you,
that they sanctify Gods Sabbaths, Exodus 20.10. to command your household in the
way of the Lord, Genesis 18.19.

O Parents, consider with your selves what strong engagements lie upon you to
do all you are capable of doing for the salvation of the precious Souls of your
dear Children. Remember their Souls are infinitely of more value than their
bodies, that they came into the World under sin and condemnation; that you were
the instruments of propagating that sin to them, and bringing them into that
misery; that you know their dispositions, and how to suit them better than
others can. That the bonds of Nature give you singular advantages to prevail,
and be successful in your exhortations beyond what any others have; that you
are always with them, and can choose your opportunities, which others cannot.
That you and they must shortly part, and never meet them again, till you meet
at the Judgment Seat of Christ. That it will be inconceivably dreadful to see
them stand at Christ's left hand among the cursed and condemned, there cursing
the day that ever they were born of such ignorant and negligent, such careless
and cruel Parents as took no care to instruct, reprove, or exhort them. O who
can think without horror of the cries and curses of his own Child in Hell,
cast away by the very instrument of its Being?

Is this the love you bear them, to betray them to eternal misery? Was there no
other provision to be made, but for their bodies? Did you think you had fully
acquitted your duty, when you had got an Estate for them? O that God would
effectually touch your hearts with a becoming sense of the value and danger of
their Souls, and your own too in the neglect of that great and solemn trust
committed to you with respect to them. And you Masters, consider, though God
has set you above, and your Servants below, yet are their Souls equally
precious with your own: they have another Master that expects service from
them, as well as you: do not only allow them time, but give them your
exhortations and commands, not to neglect their own Souls, whilst they attend
your business: think not your business will prosper the less, because it is in
the hand of a praying servant; their Souls are of greater concernment than any
business of yours can be.

Inference VI.
ARE Souls so precious, then certainly the means and instruments of their
Salvation must be exceeding precious too, and the removal of them a sore
Judgment.

The dignity of the subject gives value to the instruments employed about it.
It is no ordinary mercy for Souls to come into such a part of the World, and in
such a time as furnishes them with the best helps for Salvation. Ordinan*ces
and Ministers receive their value not only from their Author, but their Object:
they have a dignity stamped upon them by their usefulness to the Souls of men,
Acts 20.32. it is the seed of life, 1 Pet. 1.23. the regenerating instrument.
It is the bread of life, Job 23.12. more than our necessary food. The Word is a
Light shining in the dark World to direct our Souls through all the snares laid
for them, unto Glory. It is the Souls Cordial in all fainting fits, Psalm.
119.50. What shall I say of the Word and Ordinances of God, the Sun that shines
in Heaven to give us light, the Fountains, Springs and Rivers that stream for
our refreshment; the Corn and Cattle on the Earth, yea the very Air we breathe
in, is not so useful, so necessary, so precious to our bodies, as the Word is
to our Souls.

It cannot therefore but be a sore judgment, and a dreadful token of Gods
indignation and wrath to have a restraint, or scarcity, of the means of
Salvation among us; but should there be (which God in mercy prevent) a removal
and total loss of these things, wrath would then come upon us to the uttermost.
What will the condition of precious Souls be, when the means of Salvation are
cut off from them? When that famine, worse than of bread and water, is come
upon them? Amos 8.11. When the Ark of God (the Symbol of his Presence) was
taken, it is said, 1 Samuel 4.13. That all the city cried out. When Paul too^ his
leave of Antioch, and told them they should see his face no more, how did the
poor Christians lament and mourn, as cut at the heart by that killing word,
Acts 20.37, 38. It made Christ's bowels to yearn and roll within him, when he
saw the multitude scattered as sheep having no shepherd, Matthew. 9.36.

Matthew Paris tells us in the year 1072. when preaching was suppressed at Rome,
Letters were then framed as coming from Hell, wherein the Devil gave them
thanks for the multitude of Souls sent to him that year: but we need no Letters
from Hell, we have a sad account from Heaven in what a sad state those Souls
are left from whom the means of Salvation are cut off: Where no vision is, the
people perish, Prove. 29.18. and Hosea 4.6. My people are destroyed for lack of
knowledge.

It Is sad when those Stars that guide Souls to Christ (as that which the
Wisemen saw did) are set, and wandering Stars shall shine in their places. O if
God remove the golden Candlestick out of its place, what but the desolation and
ruin of millions of Souls must follow?

We account it insufferable cruelty for a man to undertake the pilotting of a
Ship full of Passengers, who never learnt his Compass; or an ignorant Empirick
to get his living by killing men's bodies; but much more lamentable will the
state of Souls be, if ever they fall (which God in mercy prevent) into the
hands of Popish Guides, or blind Leaders of the blind.

Inference VII.
IF the Soul be of so precious a Nature, it can never live upon such base and
vile food as earthly things are.

(...), quasi (...), id quod a nobis rejectum projicitur canibus.
The Apostle, Phil. 3.8, 9 calls the things of this World Dogs meat, and judge
if that be proper food for such noble and highborn Creatures as our Souls are?
An immaterial Being can never live upon material things; they are no bread for
Souls, as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 55 2. Why do ye spend money, (i. e.) time
and pains, thoughts and cares) for that which is not bread? Your Souls can no
more live upon carnal, than your bodies can upon spiritual things. Earthly
things have a double defect in them, by reason whereof they are called things
of naught, Amos 6.13. of no worth or value: they are neither suitable nor
durable; and therefore in the Souls eye not valuable.

1. They are not suitable. What are Corn and Wine, Gold and Silver, Pleasures
and Honors to the Soul? The body and bodily senses can find somewhat of
refreshment in them, but not the Spirit: that which is bread to the body,
affords no more nourishment to the Soul than wind or ashes, Isa. 44.20. Cinis
est crassior illa materia in quam combustum redigitur.
He feeds of ashes. Ashes are that light and dry matter into which fuel is
reduced by the fire: the fuel before it was burnt, had nothing in it fit for
nourishment, or if the sap or juice that was in it, might in any respect be
useful that way, yet all that is devoured and lickt up by the fire, and not the
least nutriment left in the ashes; and such are all earthly things to the Soul
of man: I am the bread of life, says Christ. A Soul can feed and feast it self
upon Christ and the Promises, these are things full of marrow and fatness,
substantial and proper Soul-nutriment.

2. As earthly things are no way suitable to the Soul, so neither are they
durable. The Apostle reduces all earthly things to three Heads, the lusts of
the Eye, the lusts of the Flesh, and the pride of Life, 1 Ioh. 2.16. he calls
them all by the name of that which gives the luster and beauty to them, and
pronounces them all fading, transitory vanities, they all pass away; as time,
so these things that are measured by time, are in fluxu continuo, always going,
and at last will be all gone. Now the Soul being of an immortal Nature, and
these things of a perishing nature; it must necessarily and unavoidably follow,
that the Soul must overlive them all: and if it will do so, what a dismal case
are those Souls in, for whom no other provision is made, but that on which it
cannot subsist whilst it has them, no more than the body can upon ashes or
wind: and if it could, yet they will shortly fail it, and pass away for ever.
So then it is beyond debate, that there lies a plain necessity upon every man
to make provision in time of things more suitable and durable than earthly
treasures are, or the Soul must perish as to its comfort to all Eternity.

Hence is that weighty counsel of him that came to save them, Luke 12.33.
Provide your selves bags that wax not old, a treasure in Heaven that saileth
not: (i. e.) an happiness which will last as long as your Souls last. Certainly
the moth-eaten things of this World are no pro^^sion for immortal Spirits, and
yet multitudes think of ^^^ther provision for them; but live as if they had
nothing to do in this World but to get an Estate.

Alas! what are all these things to the Soul? They signify somewhat indeed to
the body, and that but for a little time; for after the Resurrection the bodies
of the Saints become spiritual in their qualities, and no more need these
material things than the Angels do: It Is madness therefore to be so intent upon
cares for the body, as to neglect the Soul, but to ruin the soul, and drown it
in perdition for the sake of these provisions for the flesh, is the height of
madness.

Inference VIII.
IF the Soul be so invaluably precious, then it is a rational and well advised
resolution and practice to expose all other things to hazard, yea to certain
less for the preservation of the more precious Soul.

It Is better our bodies and all their comforts should perish, than that our
Souls should perish for their sakes. Nature it self teaches us to offer an
hand or arm to the stroke of a Sword, to save a blow from the head, or put by a
thrust at the heart. It is recorded to the praise of those three Worthies, Dan.
3.28. That they yielded their bodies that they might not serve nor worship any
God, except their own God. By this rule all the Martyrs of Christ governed
themselves, still slighting and exposing to destruction their bodies and
Estates to preserve their Souls, reckoning to save nothing by Religion but
their Souls, and that they had lost nothing, if they could save them: They
loved not their lives unto the death, Rev. 12.11.

Then do we live like Christians, when the cares of our bodies are swallowed up
and subdued by the cares of our Souls, and all Creature-loves by the love of
Christ: those blessed Souls hated their own bodies, and counted them their
enemies, when they would draw them from Christ and his Truths, and plunge their
Souls into guilt and danger. This was the result of all their debates with the
flesh in the hour of temptation, Cannot we live but to the dishonor of Christ,
and ruin of our own Souls by sinful compliance against our Conscience^, then
welcome the worst of deaths rather than such a life.

Look into the stories of the Martyrs, and you shall find this was the rule
they still governed themselves by; a Dungeon, a Stake, a Gibbet, any thing
rather than guilt upon the inner man: death was welcome even in its most
dreadful form, to escape ruin to their precious and immortal Souls. One kissed
the Apparitor that brought him the tidings of his death. Another being advised,
when he came to the critical point on which his life depended, to have a care
of himself; So I will, said he, I will be as careful as I can of my best self,
my Soul. These men understood the value and precious worth of their own Souls;
and certainly we shall never prove courageous and constant in sufferings, till
we understand the worth of our Souls, as they did. Consider and compare these
sufferings in a few obvious particulars, and then determine the matter in thine
own breast.

(1.) How much easier it is to endure the torments of men in our bodies, than
to feel the terrors of God in our Consciences? Can the Creature strike with an
arm like God? O think what it is for the wrath of God to come into a man's
bowels like water, and like oil into his bones, as the expression is, Psalm.
109.18. Sure there is no compare betwixt the strokes of God and men.

(2.) The sufferings of the body are but for a moment. When the Proconsul told
Polycarp that he would tame him with fire: he replied, Your fire shall burn but
for the space of an hour, and then it shall be extinguished; but the fire that
shall devour the wicked will never be quenched: the sufferings of a moment are
nothing to eternal sufferings.

(3.) Sufferings for Christ are usually sweetened and made easy by the
consolations of the Spirit; but Hell Torments have no relief, they admit of no
ease.

(4.) The life you shall live in that body, for whose sake you have damned your
Souls, will not be worth the having: it will be a life without comfort, light
or joy: and what is there in life, separate from the joy and comfort of life?

(5.) In a word, if you sacrifice your bodies for God and your Souls, freely
offer them up in love to Christ and his Truth: your Souls will joyfully receive
and meet them again at the Resurrection of the Just; but if your poor Souls be
now ensnared and destroyed by their fond indulgence to their bodies, you will
leave them at death despairing, and meet them at the Resurrection howling.

Inference IX.
TO conclude, If the Soul be so invaluably precious, how great and irreparable
a loss must the loss of a Soul to all Eternity be!

There is a double loss of the Soul of man, the one in Adam, which loss is
recoverable by Christ; the other by final impenitence and unbelief, cutting it
off from Christ, and this is irreparable and irrecoverable. Souls lost by Adams
sin are within the reach of the arms of Christ; but in the shipwreck of
personal infidelity there is no plank to save the Soul so cast away: Of all
losses this is the most lamentable, yet what more common? O what a shrlek does
the unregenerate Soul make, when it sees whereto it must, and that there is no
remedy! Three cries are dreadful to hear on Earth, yet all three are drowned by
a more terrible cry in the other World. The cry of a condemned Prisoner at the
Bar, the cry of drowning Seamen and Passengers in a shipwreck, the cries of
Soldiers conquered in the field; all these are fearful cries, yet nothing to
that of a Soul cast away to all Eternity, and lost in the depth of Hell.

If a man, as Chrysostom well observes, lose an eye, an arm, a hand, or leg,
it is a great loss: but yet if one be lost, there is another to help him; for
omnia Deus dedit duplicia, God has given us all those members double: animam
vero unam, but we have but one Soul, and if that be damned, there is not
another to be saved.

And it is no small aggravation to this loss, that it was a wilful loss. We had
the offers and means of Salvation plentifully afforded us: we were warned of
this danger over and over: we were entreated and beseecht upon the knee of
importunity, not to throw away our Souls by an obstinate rejection of Christ
and Grace: we saw the diligence and care of others for the salvation of their
Souls; some rejoicing in the comfortable assurance of it, and others giving all
diligence to make their calling and election sure: we knew that our Souls were
as capable of blessedness as any of those that are in enjoying God in Heaven,
or panting after that enjoyment on Earth; yea, some Souls that are now
irrecoverably gone, and many others who are going after them, once were, and
now are not far from the Kingdom of God: they had convictions of sin, a sense
of their lost and miserable state, they began to treat with Christ in Prayer,
to converse with his Ministers and People about their condition: and after all
this, even when they seemed to have clean escaped the snares of Satan, to be
again entangled and overcome; when even come to Harbors mouth, to be driven
back again, and cast away upon the Rocks: O what a loss will this be!

O thou that createdst Souls with a capacity to know, love, and enjoy thee for
ever; who out of thine unsearchable Grace ^entest thine own Son out of thy
bosom to seek and save that which was lost, pity those poor Souls that cannot
pity themselves: let mercy yet interpose it self betwixt them and eternal
ruin; awaken them out of their pleasant slumber, though it be at the brink of
damnation, lest they perish and there be none to deliver them.

DOCT. II.
How precious and invaluable soever the Soul of man is, it may be lost, and
cast away for ever.

This Proposition is supposed and implied in our Saviors words in the Text,
and plainly expressed in Matthew. 7.13. Wide is the gate, and broad is the way
that leads to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat. The way to
Hell is thronged with Passengers, it is a beaten rode, one draws another along
with him, and scoffs at those that are afraid to follow: 1 Pet. 4.4. Facilis
descensus Averni; it is pleasant sailing with the Wind and Tide. Infernus ab
inferendo dicitur, quia ita inferuntur and praecipitantur, ^t nunquam ascensuri
sint.
Some derive the word Hell from a Verb which signifies to carry or thrust in,
millions go in, but none return thence: millions are gone down already, and
millions more are coming after as fast as Satan and their own lusts can hurry
them onward. You read not only of single persons, but whole Nations drowned in
this Gulf, Psalm. 9.17. The wicked shall be turned into hell, and all the
nations that forget God. How rare is the conversion of a Soul in the dark
places of the Earth, where the sound of the Gospel is not heard, the Devil
drives them along in huge droves to destruction, scarce a man reluctating or
hanging back.

And though some Nations enjoy the inestimable privilege of the Gospel of
Salvation, yet multitudes of precious Souls perish notwithstanding, sinking
into Hell daily as it were betwixt the merciful arms of a Savior stretched out
to save them. The light of Salvation is risen upon us, but Satan draws the
thick curtains of ignorance and prejudice about the multitude, that not a beam
of saving light can shine into their hearts: 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. But if our Gospel
be hid, it is hid to them that are lost: In whom the God of this world has
blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the glorious
Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them.

If our Gospel] Ours, not by way of institution, as the Authors, but by way of
dispensation, as the Ministers and Preachers of it: and certainly it was never
preached with that clearness, authority, and efficacy by any mere man, as it
was by Paul and the rest of the Apostles, and yet the Gospel so powerfully
preached, is by him here supposed to

Be hid] If not as to the general light and superficial knowledge of it, yet as
to its saving influence and converting efficacy upon their hearts, this never
reaches home to the Souls and spirits of multitudes that hear it; but it is
never finally so hidden, except

To them that are lost,] So that all those to whom the converting and saving
power of the Gospel never comes, whatever other knowledge they have, whatever
duties they perform, whatever names and reputations they may have among men,
yet this Text looks upon them all as a lost generation: they may have as many
amiable homilitical Virtues, as sweet and lovely Natures, as clear and piercing
eyes in all other things as any others; but they are such however

Whose eyes the God of this world has blinded,] Satan is here called the God
of this World, not properly, but by a Mimesis, because he challenges to himself
the honor of a God, and has a world of Subjects that obey him; and to secure
their obedience he blinds them, that they may never see a better way or state
than that he has drawn them into. Therefore he is called the Ruler of the
darkness of this World, who rules in the hearts of the children of
disobedience, the eye of the Soul is the mind, that thinking, considering and
reasoning power of the Soul; this is, as the Philosophers truly call it, the
(...), the leading faculty to all the rest, the guide to all the other
faculties which in the order of Nature follow this their Leader: if therefore
this be blinded, the Will which is caeca potentia, a blind power in it self,
and all the Affections blindly following the blind, all must needs fall into
the ditch. And this is the case of the far greater part of even the professing
World. Let us suppose a number of blind men upon an Island, where there are
many smooth paths all leading to the top of a perpendicular cliff; and these
blind men going on continually, some in one path, and some in another: but all
in some one of those many paths which lead to the brink of their ruin which
they see not; it must needs follow, if they all move forward, the whole number
will in a short time be cast away, the Island cleared, and its Inhabitants dead
and lost in the bottom of the Sea. This is the case of the unregenerate World:
they are now upon this habitable spot of earth, environed with the vast Ocean
of Eternity, there are multitudes of paths leading to eternal misery, one man
takes this way, another that; as it is Isa. 53.6. We have turned every one to
his own way; one to the way of pride, another to the way of covetousness, a
third to the way of persecution, a fourth to the way of Civility and Morality,
and so on they go, not once making a stand, or questioning to what end it will
bring them, till at last over they go at death, and we hear no more of them in
this world; and thus one generation of sinners follows another, and they that
come after approve and applaud those miserable wretches that went before them,
Psalm. 49.13. and so Hell fills, and the World empties its Inhabitants daily
into it. Now I will make it my work out of a dear regard to the precious Souls
of men, and in hope to prevent (which the Lord in mercy grant) the loss and
ruin of some under whose eyes this Discourse shall fall, to note some of the
principal ways in which precious Souls are lost, and to put such bars into them
as I am capable to put: and among many more, I will set a mark upon these
following twelve paths, wherein millions of Souls have been lost, and millions
more are confidently and securely following after, among which it is likely some
are within one step, one day or hour to their eternal downfall and destruction.
There is but one way in all the world to save and preserve the precious Souls
of men, but there are many ways to lose and destroy them: it is here as it is
in our natural birth and death, but one way into the World, but a multitude out
of it. And first

The first way to Hell discovered.
1. And to begin where indeed the ruin of very many does begin, it will be
found that an ill Education is the high way to destruction. Vice need not be
planted; if the Gardener neglect to dress, sow, and manure his Garden, he need
not give the weeds a greater advantage; but if he also scatter the seed of
Hemlock, Docks, and Nettles into it, he spoils it, and makes it fit for
nothing. Many Parents, and those godly too, are guilty of too many neglects,
through carelessness, worldly encumbrances, or fond indulgence, and whilst they
neglect the season of sowing better seed, the Devil takes hold of it; if they
will not improve it, he will; if they teach them not to pray, he will teach
them to curse, swear, and lie; if they put not the Bible or Catechize into
their hands, he will put obscene Ballads into them: and thus the offspring of
many godly Parents turn into degenerate plants, and prove a generation that
know not the God of their Fathers. This debauched Age can furnish us with too
many sad instances hereof. Thus they are spoiled in the bud; simple ignorance
in youth becomes affected and wilful ignorance in age; blushing sins in
children become impudent sins in age: and all this for want of a timely and
prudent preventing care. Others there are of the rude and ignorant multitude,
who are bred themselves much like the Beasts they daily converse withal, and so
they are fitly described, Job 30.6, 7. Go into their houses, and you may sooner
find in the window, or upon the shelf, a Pack of Cards, than a Bible or
Catechize; their Beds and Tables differ little or not at all from the Stalls
and Cribs where beasts lie down and feed, in respect of any worship of God
among them: or if for fashion sake a few words be hudled over in the evening
when their bodies are tired, the man says something, he scarce knows what, the
wife is asleep in one corner, the children in another, and the servants in a
third. This is the Education multitudes of Parents give their Children all the
week; and when the Sabbath comes, the most they learn to know at Church, is
where their own seat stands, and that it is necessary to speak with such a
Neighbor after Prayers, about such or such a bargain or business for the next
week.

And others there are who breed their Children as profanely as these do
sottishly, teaching them by their Examples the newest Oaths that were last
minted in Hell, and to revile and scoff all serious Godliness and the sincere
Professors of it, smiling to hear with what an Emphasis they can talk in the
Dialect of Devils, and how wittily they can droll upon godly Ministers and
Christians.

Such Families are Nurseries for Hell, and though God by an extraordinary hand
of Providence now and then snatch a Soul by conversion from among them, as a
brand out of the fire, yet generally they die as they live, going to the
generation of their Fathers where they shall never see light, Psalm. 49.19. I
know Education and Regeneration are two things, but I also know one is
frequently made the instrument of working the other; Quo semel est imbuta
recens, etc.
and that the savor of what first seasons our youth (generally) abides to old
age, Prove. 22.6. We may observe all the World over, how tenacious men are of
that which is (...) delivered to them by their Parents. O what a cut must it be
to the heart of that Father, whose Sons life shall tell his Conscience what a
profane Sons lips once told his Father to his face: Si male seci, a te didici.
If I have done evil, I have learnt it of you. Had they felt more of your
prudent correction, it might have prevented their destruction: Prove. 23.14.
Thou shall beat him with the rod, and shall deliver his soul from hell. That
this is a common beaten path to Hell, is beyond all question; but how to bar it
up, and stop the multitudes that are engaged in it to their own ruin, this is
the labor, this the work. I cannot be large, but I will offer a few weighty
Considerations.

The first way to Hell barred.
1. Let all Parents consider what a fearful thing it is to be the instruments
of ruining for ever those that received their Beings instrumentally from them;
and to seek whose good, they stand obliged by all the Laws of God and Nature.

In vain are all your cares and studies for their bodies, whilst their Souls
perish for want of knowledge. You rejoiced at their birth, but they will have
cause to curse the day they were born of you, and say, Let the day perish
wherein I was born, and the night in which I was conceived. You were solicitous
for their bodies, but careless of their Souls; earnest to see them rich, but
indifferent whether they were gracious. You neglected to teach them the way of
Salvation, but the Devil did not neglect to teach them the way of sin. You will
one day wish you had never been Parents, when the dol^ful cries of your damned
Children shall ring such Notes as these in your Ears. O cursed Father, O cruel,
merciless Mother, whose examples have drawn me after you into all this misery.
You had time enough, and motives enough to have warned me of this place and
misery whilst my heart was tender, and my affections pliable: Had it not been
as easy to have put a Bible as a Play-book before me? To have chastised me
when I provoked God by sin, as when I provoked you about a trifle? One word
spoken in season might have saved my Soul; one reproof wisely given, and set on
by your example, might have preserved me. Had it not been the same pains to
have asked me, Child, what will thou do to be saved? as what will thou do to
live in the world? Or had I but observed any serious Religion in you, had I but
found or heard my Father or Mother upon their knees in prayer, it might have
awakened me to a consideration of my condition: in my youth I was shame faced,
fearful, credulous, and apt to imitate; had you had but wisdom, as other
Parents have, to have taken hold of any of these handles in time, you had
rescued my Soul from Hell. Nay, so cruel have you been to your own Child, that
you allowed me no time (if I had had a disposition) for any exercise of
Religion; yea, you have quenched and stifled the sparks of convictions, and
better inclinations that sometimes were in my heart. O happy had it been, if I
had never been born of you, or seen your faces. This must be the result and
issue of your negligence, except God by some other hand (which is no thanks to
you) rescue them from their impending ruin.

(...)ldren, whose unhappy Lot it is to be born of, (...) carnal and
irreligious Parents, consider God has endued them with a Reason and Conscience
of their own, to enable them to make a better choice than their Parents did,
and that there is no taking Sanctuary from the wrath of Go^ in their Parents
examples. We read in 1 Kings 14.13. of a good Abijah in whom was found some
good thing toward the Lord God of Israel in the house of Jeroboam. Here was a
Child that would not follow his wicked Father to Hell, though he had both the
authority of a Father, and of a King over him. Amandus genitor, sed
praeponendus Creator.
You must honor your Parents, but still you must prefer your God before them.
God will never lay it to your account as your sin, but place it to the account
of your duty and comfort, that you refused to follow them in paths of sin and
destruction. No Law of God, no tie of Nature binds you to obey their commands,
or tread in their steps, farther than they command in Gods Authority and Name,
and walk in his ways. Your temptations indeed are strong, and disadvantages
great, but the greater will the mercy of your deliverance be. It will be no
Plea for you at the Judgment Seat to say, Lord, my Father or Mother did so and
so before me, and I thought I might safely follow them* or thus and thus they
commanded me, and I thought I was bound by thy command to obey them: Therefore
look to your own Souls, if they be so desperate to cast away their own. If some
Children had not minded their own Salvation more than their Parents minded it,
they had never been saved.

3. Let this consideration work upon the hearts and bowels of all serious
Christians to pity and help those that are like to perish under this
temptation; and if their Parents be so ignorant that they cannot, or so
negligent that they do not instruct and warn their own Children, you that at
any time have an opportunity to help them, have compassion on them and do it.
It Is true they are none of your Children by Nature; but would it not be a
singular hon^^^ and comfort to you, if God should make them so by (...)
thousands of Children (and it may be some of you (...) more indebted to mere
strangers upon this accoun^ (...) their nearest relations; you know not how
much (...)nal word may do them: all have not ability (...)ly useful this way,
as a late worthy Minister of our own Nation has been, who in compassion to the
^ark and barbarous corners in Wales, where ignorance and poverty shut up the
way of Salvation to them, at a vast ex^^nce procured the Translation and
Printing of the Bible in their own Tongue, and freely sent it among them. O you
that have the bowels of Christians in you, pity and help them. What is it, for
the saving of a precious Soul, to drop a serious Exhortation, as you have
opportunity, upon them, to bestow a Bible or suitable Book upon them? Believe
it, these little sums of shillings and pence so bestowed, will stand for more
in the Audit day, than all the hundreds and thousands other ways expended.

The second way to Hell discovered.
II. A second way to Hell in which multitudes are found hastening to their own
d^mnation, is the way of affected ignorance. The generality of people, even in
a Land enlightened with the Gospel, are found grossly ignorant of Christ, the
true and only way to Heaven, and of Repentance and Faith, the only way to
Christ; and thus the people perish for want of knowledge, Hosea 4.6. If the
Tree of Knowledge had been hedged in from the common people, as it is in Popish
Countries; and it had been criminal to find a Bible in our houses, there might
have been some cloak and pretense for our ignorance; but to be stupidly
ignorant of the most obvious, plain and necessary Truths, a^^ yet bred up among
Bibles and Ministers, O how ominous a darkness is this, forboding the blackness
of darkness for ever! For if the hiding of the Gospel from the hearts of men be
a token to them that they are lost Souls, how much notional light soever they
may have, much more must they be lost to all intents, from whose heads and
hearts too it is judicially hidden. They that know not God, are in the
Catalogue of the damned, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8. and if this be life eternal to know the
only true God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, then this must be death
eternal to be grossly and affectedly ignorant both of God the (...), and Christ
the Way, by the Rule of true Opposition, Ioh. 17.3.

(...) over the several Countries in the professing World, go into the Families
of Country-Farmers, day-labourers, and poor people, and except here and there a
family or person into whose heart God has graciously shined, what barbarous,
brutish ignorance overspreads them! They converse from morning to night with
Beasts, though they have Souls which are fit Companions for Angels, and capable
of sweet converse with God. The earth has opened her mouth, and swallowed up
all their time, strength, thoughts, and Souls, as it did the bodies of Corah
and his Company. They know the value of an House or Cow, but know not the worth
of Christ, pardon, or their own Souls. They mind daily what work they have to
do with their hands, but forget all they have to do upon their knees. Their
whole care is to pay their Fine or Rent to their Landlord, but not a thought
who shall pay their debts to God: They are so (...)om putting unnecessary
business aside to make way for the service of God, that Gods service is put
aside as an unnecessary business to make way for the World: the world holds
them fast till they are asleep, and will be sure to visit them as soon as their
eyes are open, that there may be no vacancy or door of opportunity left open
for a thought of their Souls, or another life to slip in. Or if at any time
they think or speak of these matters, then the world, like Pharaoh when Israel
spoke of sacrificing, is sure to speak of more work.

And thus they live and die without knowledge: there is no key of knowledge (as
it is fitly called, Luke 11.52.) to open the door of the Soul to Christ, he and
his Ministers therefore must stand without, pity they may, but help they cannot
till knowledge open the door. Satan is Ruler of the darkness of this world,
Ephesians. 6.12. that is, of all blind and ignorant Souls. Ignorance is the chain
with which he binds them fast to himself, and till that chain be knocked off by
Divine illumination, they cannot be emancipated and made free of Christ's
Kingdom, Acts 26.18. To turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan to God. Ignorance indeed incapacitates a man to commit the unpardonable
sin; but what the near, whilst it disposes him to all other sins which damn as
well as that? By ignorance it is that all the Essays of the Gospel for men's
Salvation are frustrated; that naked assent is put in the place of saving
Faith, Morality mistaken for Regeneration, a few dead Duties laid in the room
of Christ and his Righteousness. Indeed it would fill a greater Book than this
to show the mischievous effects of ignorance, and how many ways it destroys the
precious Souls of men; but seeing I can speak but little in this place to it,
let me bar up this way to Hell, if it be possible, by a few serious
Considerations.

The second way to Hell shut up.
1. Let the ignorant consider, God has created their Souls with a capacity of
knowing him and enjoying him, as well as others that are famed in the world for
knowledge and wisdom* There is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of the
Al^^^^^^, gives them understanding. The faculty is in man, but the wisdom and
knowledge that enlightens it, is from God, as the Dial shows the hour of the
day, when the Sunbeams fall upon it. If therefore God be sought unto in the use
of such helps and means as you have, even the weakest and dullest Soul has a
capacity of being made wise unto Salvation, Psalm. 19.7. The testimony of the
Lord is sure, making wise the simple.

Augustine tells us of a man so weak and simple, that he was commonly reputed a
Fool in all the Neighborhood; and yet says, I believe the grace and fear of
God was in him: for when he heard any to swear, or take the Name of God in
vain, he would throw stones at them, and show his indignation against sin, by
all the signs he could make.

2. You that are so grossly ignorant in the matters of your Salvation, are many
of you very knowing, prudent, and subtle persons in the affairs of the world,
Luke 16.8. The children of this world are wiser in their generation, than the
children of light. Had those parts, which you have, been improved and heightened
by study and observation about spirituals, as they have been about earthly
things, you had neither been so ignorant or dead-hearted as you are; you might
have been as well verst in your Bibles, as you are in the Almanacks you yearly
buy and study; you might have understood the proper seasons of Salvation, as
well as of Husbandry* The great and necessary points on which your Salvation
depends, are not so many, or so abstruse and intricate, but your plain and
inartificial heads might have understood them, and that with less pains than
you have been at for your bodies. What though you cannot comprehend the
subtleties of Shoolmen, you may apprehend the Essentials of Christianity. If
you cannot strictly and scholastically define Faith, what hinders, if your
hearts were set upon Christ and Salvation, but you may feel it, which is more
than many learned men do that can define and dispute about it. You cannot put
an Argument in Mood and Figure, no matter, if you can by comparing your Bibles
and hearts together draw savingly and experimentally this conclusion: I am in
Christ, and my sins are pardoned* You cannot determine whether Faith goes
before Repentance, or Repentance before Faith; but for all that you might feel
both the one and the other upon your own Souls, which is infinitely better.
It Is not therefore your incapacity, but negligence and worldiness that is your
ruin.

3. How many are there of your own rank, order, and education, all whose
external advantages and helps you have, and all your encumbrances and
discouragements they had, who yet have attained to an excellent degree of
saving knowledge and heavenly wisdom? How often have I heard such spiritual,
savoury, experimental Truths in Conference and Prayer from plain Rusticks, such
spiritual Reasonings about the great concerns of Salvation, such judicious and
satisfying resolutions of Cases depending upon the sensible and experimental
part of Religion, as has humbled, convinced, and shamed me, and made me say,
Surgunt indocti, etc. these are the men that will take Heaven from the proud
and scornful Ingeniosi of the World; not many wise, not many learned and acute:
many knowing and learned heads are in Hell, and many illiterate and weak ones
gone to Heaven, and others in the way thither who never had better education,
stronger parts, or more leisure than your selves; so that you are without
excuse.

4. To conclude, Would you heartily seek it of God, and would the Spirit (which
he has promised to give them that ask him) become your Teacher, how soon would
the light of the saving knowledge of God in the face of Christ shine into your
hearts? No matter how ignorant, dull, and weak the Scholar be, if God once
become the Teacher. You are not able to purchase or want time to read many
Books; but if once you were sanctified persons, the anointing you would receive
from the Father would teach you all things, 1 Ioh. 2.27. your own hearts would
serve you for a Commentary upon a great part of the Bible; it would make you of
a quick understanding in the fear of the Lord: one drop of your knowledge would
be more worth than all learned Arts and Sciences in the world to you. And is
God so far from you, and his illuminating Spirit at such a distance, that there
is no hope for you to find him? Is there never a private corner about your
Houses or Barns or in the fields, where you can turn aside, if it be but a
quarter of an hour at a time to pour out your Souls to God, and beg the Spirit
of him? Miserable Wretch! is thy whole life such a cumber, and clatter of cares
and puzzles about the World, that thou have no leisure to mind God, Soul, or
Eternity? O doleful state! the Lord in mercy pity and awaken thee. Will thou
not once strive and struggle to save thy Soul? What, perish as it were by
consent, how great then is thy blindness!

The third way to Hell discovered.
Quam frigida and jejuna sit eorum desensio, qui exemplo, etc. potentiorum se
tutos pu(...) Jun. Pa^^^. lib. 2.
III. A vast multitude of precious Souls are lost for ever, by following the
Examples, and being carried away with the course of this World. It Is indeed a
poor excuse, a silly Argument, that the multitude do as we do; yet as Iunius
rightly observes, Men's Consciences take Sanctuary here, and they think
themselves safe in it: for thus they reason, If I do as the generality do,
Argumentum turpissimum est turba. Seneca.
I shall speed no worse than they speed; and certainly God is more merciful
than to suffer the greatest part of Mankind to perish: they resolve to follow
the beaten road, let it lead whither it will.

Thus the Ephesians in their unregenerate state walked according to the course
of this world, Ephesians. 2.2. and the Corinthians were carried away unto dumb Idols,
even as they were led, 1 Cor. 12.2. just as a drop of water is carried and
moved according to the course and current of the Tide: For look as every drop
of water in the Sea is of one and the same common nature, so are all carnal and
unsanctified persons: and as these waters being collected into one vast body in
the Ocean, unite their strength, and make a strong current this way or that; so
does the whole collective body of the unregenerate World, all the particular
drops move as the Tide moves. Hence they are said to have received the spirit
of the world, 1 Cor. 2.12. one common Spirit or Principle acts and rules them
all, and therefore they must needs be carried away in the same course. And
there are two special considerations that seem to determine them, by a kind of
necessity to do as the multitude do; the one is, that they find it the easiest
and most commodious way to the flesh, here they meet with quietness and safety;
hereby they are exempt from reproaches, losses, persecutions, and distresses
for Conscience sake: rest is sweet, and here only they think to find it. The
other is the prejudice of singularity, and manifold tribulations they see that
little handful that walk counter to the course of the World involved in; this
startles them from their company, and fixes them where they are. Against such
sensible Arguments it is to no more purpose to oppose spritual Considerations,
motives drawn from the safety of the Soul, or importance of Eternity, than it
is for a man to turn the Tide or course of a River with his weak breath.

Add to this, Nemo errat sibi ipsi, sed dementiam spargit in proximos. Sen.
That as one sinner confirms and fixes another, wedging in each other, as men
in a crowd, who must move as it moves; so they make it their business to render
all that differ from them odious and ridiculous. So the Apostle notes their
practice, and Satan's policy in it, 1 Pet. 4.4. wherein they think it strange,
that ye run not with them into the same excess of riot, speaking evil of you;
(...), they gaze strangely at them, as the Hen that has hatched
Partridge-eggs, looks strangely after them when she sees them take the wing
and soar aloft, not knowing that they are of an higher kind than her own
Chickens. And that is not all, they not only gaze at them as a strange
generation; making them signs and wonders in Israel, as the Prophet speaks, but
they defame, revile, and speak evil of them, representing them as a pack of
Hypocrites, as turbulent, factious, seditious persons, the very pests of the
times and places they live in; and all this, not for doing any evil against
them, but only for not doing evil with them, because they run not with them
into the same excess of riot. Thus the World smiles upon its own, and derides
those that are afraid to follow them to Hell, by which it sweeps away the
multitude with it in the same course.

The third way to Hell shut up.
But O if the Spirit of God would please to set on and follow home the
following Considerations to your hearts, you would certainly resolve to take a
persecuted path to Heaven, though few accompany you therein, rather than to
swim like dead fishes with the stream into the dead Sea of eternal misery.

1. Though you go with the consent and current of the World, yet you go against
the express Law and prohibition of God. He has laid his command upon you, not
to be conformed to the world, Romans 12.2. That you live not the rest of your
time to the lusts of men, but to the will of God, 1 Pet. 4.2. That you follow
not a multitude to do evil, Exodus 23.2. That you go not in the way of evil men,
Prove. 4.14. That you have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness.
All these and many more are commands flowing from the highest Sovereign
Authority, obliging your Consciences to obedience under the greatest penalties;
by them your state must be cast to all Eternity in the Day of Judgment: you may
make a pish of the precept, but see if you can do so of the penalty.

2. Other men in all Ages of the World, that were as much concerned in the
World as you, and valued their lives, liberties, and estates as well as you,
have yet got out of the crowd, disengaged themselves from the way of the
multitude, and taken a more solitary and suffering path, out of a due regard to
the safety of their Souls: And why should not you love them as well, and care
for them as much as ever any that went before you did? Noah walked with God all
alone, when all flesh had corrupted their ways. Elijah was zealous for the
Lord, when he knew of none to stand by him, but thought he had been left alone.
Job was upright with God in the Land of Vz. Lot stood by himself, a godly
Nonconformist in a vile debauched Sodom. David was as a wonder to many: so was
Jeremiah and those few with him for signs and wonders in Israel. I demand of
your Consciences, what discouragements have you, that these men had not? Or
what encouragements had they which you have not? Why should not the Salvation
of your Souls be as precious in your eyes, as it was in any of theirs? Shall
you be impoverished and persecuted, if you embrace the way of Holiness? so were
they, Shall you be reproached, scorned, and reviled? so were they. All your
discouragements were theirs, and all their motives and encouragements are yours.

3. Is not the way which you have chosen marked out by Christ, as the way to
destruction? And that which you dare not choose and embrace, as the way to life?
See the marks he has given you of both in that one Text, Matt. 7.13, 14. Enter
ye in at the strait gate; for wide is the gate, and broad is the way that
leads to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat. Because strait
is the gate, and narrow is the way which leads unto life, and few there be
that find it. And where now is your encouragement and hope, that God will be
more merciful than to damn so great a part of the World! If you will do as the
Many do, dream not of speeding as well as that little flock, separated by
Sanctification from the multitude, shall speed. You have your choice, to be
damned with many, or saved with few; to take the broad smooth-beaten road to
Hell, or the difficult, suffering, self-denying path to Heaven. O then make a
seasonable necessary stand, and pause a while, consider your ways, and turn
your feet to Gods testimonies: it is a great and special part of your Salvation
to save your selves from this untoward generation.

The fourth way of losing the Soul opened.
IV. Multitudes of Souls are daily lost by rooted Habits and long continued
Custom in sin. When men have been long settled in an evil way, they are
difficultly reclaimed. Physicians find it hard to cure a Cachexy or ill habit
of body; but it is far more difficult to cure an ill custom and habit in sin,
Ier. 13.23. Can the Leopard change his spoes, or the Ethiopian his skin? then
may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil. The spots of a Leopard,
and hue of an Ethiopian, are not by way of external accidental adhesion, if so,
washing would fetch them off; but they are innate and contemper'd, belonging to
the constitution, and not to be altered: so are sinful habits and customs in
the minds of sinners; by this means it becomes a second Nature, as it were, and
strongly determines the mind to sin: A^t^neris assuescero multum est, It Is a
great matter to be accustomed this way or that, says Senceca; yea, Caput rei
est, hoc vel illo modo, hominem assuefieri, It Is the very head or root of the
matter to be so or so accustomed, says Aristotle: very much of the strength of
sin rises from customary sinning; a brand that has been once in the fire,
easily catches the second time. Every repeated act of sin lessene^h fear, and
strengthens inclination. An Horse that took an ill stroke at first breaking,
and has continued many years in it, is very difficulty, if ever, to be brought
to a better way. What men have been accustomed to from their childhood, they
are tenacious of it in their old age. Hence it is, that so few are converted to
Christ in their old age. It was recorded for a wonder in the primitive times,
that Marcus Cajus Victorius became a Christian in his old age: time and usage
fixes the roots of sin deep in the Soul: old trees will not bow as tender
pliable plants do. Hence it is, that all essays and attempts to draw men from
the course in which they have walked from their youth, are frustraneous and
succesless. The Drunkard, the Adulterer, yea the self-righteous Moralist are by
long continued usage so fixed in their course, and all this while Conscience so
stupefied by often repeated acts of sin, that it is naturally as impossible to
remove a mountain, as the will of a sinner thus confirmed in his wickedness.
However, let trial be made, and the success left to him to whom no length of
the time, or difficulty must be objected, or opposed.

The fourth way to Hell shut up, by two Considerations.
1. First, Let it be considered; the longer any man has been engaged in, and
accustomed to the way of sin, the more reason and need that man has speedily
and without delay to repent, and reform his course; there is yet a possibility
of mercy, a season of Salvation left, how far soever a Soul be gone on toward
Hell: none can say it is yet too late. When Mr. Bilney the Martyr heard a
Minister preaching thus, O thou old Sinner, that have gone on in a course of
sin these fifty or sixty years, do thou think that Christ will accept thee
now? or take the Devils leavings? Good God! said he, what preaching of Christ
is here? Had such Doctrine been preached to me in the day of my troubles, it
had been enough utterly to have discouraged me from Repentance and Faith. No,
no, Sinner, it is not yet too late, if at last thy heart be touched with a real
sense of thy sin and danger: the word is plain, Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked
forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let him return unto
the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will
abundantly pardon.

An abundant pardon thou need; thy sins by long continued custom and
frequent repetitions have been abundantly aggravated; and an abundant pardon is
with God for poor sinners: he will abundantly pardon, but then thou must come
up to his terms; thou must not expect pardon or mercy, when thy sins have
forsaken thee, but upon thy forsaking them: yea, such a forsaking as includes a
resolution or decree in thy will to return to them no more, Hos. 14.8. there
must be a change of thy way, and that not from profaneness to civility only,
which is but to change one false way to Heaven for another, or the dirty road
to hell for a cleanlier path on the other side the hedge; but a total and final
forsaking of every way of sin, as to the love and habitual practice of it; yea,
and thy thoughts too, as well as thy ways: there must be an internal, as well
as an external change upon thee; yea, a positive, as well as a negative change:
a turning to the Lord, as well as a turning from sin; and then how long soever
thou have walked in the road toward Hell, there will be time enough, and mercy
enough to secure thy returning Soul safe to Heaven.

2. Secondly, Can thou not forbear thy customary si^ upon lesser motives than
the salvation of thy Soul? and if thou can, will thou not much more do it for
the saving of thy precious immortal Soul? Suppose there were but a pecuniary
mulct of an hundred pounds to be certainly levied upon thy Estate for every
Oath thou swearest, or every time thou art drunk, would thou not rather choose
reformation than beggary? And is not the loss of thy Soul a penalty infinitely
heavier than a little money? But as the wise Heathen observed, Senec. Ep. 42.
Gratuita nobis videntur quae chariss^me constant; quae emere nollemus, si domus
nobis nostra pro illis esset danda, etc.
Ea sola emi putamus, pro quibus pecuniam solvimus; ^a gratuita vocamus, pro
quibus nos ipsos impendimus: We reckon those things only to be bought which we
part with money for; and that we have those things gratis, for which we pay our
selves: Is nothing cheap in our eyes but our selves, our Souls? Do we call that
gratis, that will cost us so dear* Darius threw away his Massy Crown when he
^red before Alexander, that it might not hinder him in his flight. Sure your
Souls are more worth than your money, and all the enjoyments you have in this
world. It had been an ancient custom among the Citizens of Antioch to wash
themselves in the Baths; but the King forbidding it, they all presently
forbear, for fear* of his displeasure: whereupon Chrysostom convinced them of
the vanity of that plea for customary sinning. You see, (...), etc. (...) 14.
says he, how soon fear can break off an old custom, and shall not the fear of
God be as powerful to over-master it in us, as the fear of man? O friends,
believe it, it is better for you to cut off a right hand, or pluck out a right
eye, than having two hands or eyes, to be cast into Hell; where their worm
dies not, and their fire is not quenched.

The fifth way of losing the Soul opened.
V. The fifth way by which an innumerable multitude of Souls are eternally
lost, is by the bait^ of sensual sinful pleasures.

Some customary sins have little or no pleasure in them, as swearing, malice,
etc. but others a^sure and entice the Soul by the sensual delight that is in
them. This is the bait with which multitudes are enticed, ensnared, and ruined
to all Eternity. Voluptatum blanditiis deliniti, ad ea garenda omnia qua prava
sunt impellimur. Arist. l. 2. Eth. c. 3.
It is a true and grave observation (...) Philosopher, That we are impelled as
it were to that which is evil, by the alluring blandishments of pleasure. This
was the first bait by which Satan caught the Souls of our first Parents in
Innocence, Genesis 3.6. The tree was pleasant to the eye. Pleasure quickens the
principles of sin in us, and inflames the desires of the heart after it. Every
pleasant sin has a world of Customers, and cost what it will, they resolve to
have it. I have read of a certain Fruit which the Spaniards found in the
Indies, which was exceeding pleasant to the taste; but Nature had so fenced it
and double-guarded it with sharp and dangerous thorns, that it was very
difficult to come at it. They tore their clothes, yea their flesh to get it;
and therefore called the Fruit, Comfits in Hell. Such are all the pleasures of
sin, Comfits in Hell. Damnation is the price of them, and yet the sensitive
appetite is so outrageous and mad after them, that at the price of their Souls
they will have them. Thus the wicked are described, Job 21.13. They spend their
days in wealth, and in a moment go down to the grave: that is, their whole
stock of time is spent in cares and labors to get wealth, and when they have
gotten it, the rest of their life is spent in those sensual pleasures that
wealth brings in, or in making provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts of
it. The Rich man, in the Parable, fared deliciously every day, Luke 16. where
his voluptuous life is described, and in that description the occasion of his
damnation is insinuated: in a pampered and indulged body is usually found a
neglected, starved Soul. But how shall the ruin of Souls this way be prevented?

The fifth way to Hell shut up by three Considerations.
1. Consider how the Morality of Heathens has bridled their sensual lusts and
appetites, and caused them with a generous disdain to repel those brutish
pleasures as things below a man. Quid staltius, turpi^^ve quam bonum rationalis
animi, ex irrationalibus nectere? Sen. Epist. 92.
What more foolish, what more base, says Seneca, than to patch up the good of
a reasonable Soul out of things unreasonable. That is the pleasure worthy of a
man, not to glut his body, not to irritate those lusts, in whose qui^^^ess is
our safety. This is the constant Doctrine of all the Stoics.

Illa est voluptas and bomine and viro digna, non implere corpus, and saginare,
nec cupiditates irritare, quarum tutissima est quies. De Benef. l. 7. c. 11.
O what a shame is it to hear Heathenism out-brave Christianity, and Principles
of mere Morality enable men to live more soberly, temperately and abstemiously,
than those who enjoy the greatest Pattern and highest Motives in the Christian
Religion are found to do? Thou embracest pleasure, says the Heathen, but I
bridle it: thou enjoyest it, I only use it: thou think it thy chief good, I
esteem it not so much as good: thou do all things for pleasure sake, but I
nothing at all on that account. These therefore shall be your Judges.

2. Always remember sensual pleasures are but the baits with which Satan angles
for the precious Soul: there is a fatal hook under them. O if men were but
aware of this, they would never purchase pleasure at so dear a rate: Stolen
waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant; but he knows not
that the dead are there, and that her guests are in the depth of hell, Prove. 9
17, 18. Pliny tells us, That the Maremaids have most enchanting charming
voices, and frequent pleasant green Meadows, but heaps of dead men's bones are
always found where they haunt: that which tickles the fancy, stabs the Soul. If
the pain (as Anacreon well observes) were before the pleasure, no man would be
tempted by it; but the pleasure being first, and sensible, and the torment
coming after, and as yet invisible, this allures so many to destruction. At
last it biteth like a Serpent, and stingeth like an Adder, Prove. 23.32. If sin
did sting and bite at first, none would touch it; but it tickles first, and
wounds afterward. O what man that is in his wits would purchase eternal
torments for the sensual, Breve est quod delectat, aet^rnum quod cruciat.
brutish pleasures of a moment! But the pleasu^^s of sin bewitch the
affections, blind the judgment, stupefie the heart, so that sober and impartial
thoughts find no place. The heart is enticed, the lusts are enraged, cost what
it will, sinners will gratify their lusts.

3. If you are for pleasure, certainly you are out of the way to it, who seek
it in the fulfilling of your lusts. If your hear^s were once sanctified, and
brought under the government of the Spirit, you would quickly find a far more
excellent pleasure in the crucifying of your lusts, than now you seek in the
gratification and fulfilling of them: Romans 8. 13. If ye through the Spirit
mortify the deeds of the body* ye shall live: (i. e.) ye shall live the most
joyful, peaceful, comfortable life of all persons in the world, a life of
highest delight and true pleasure: For so far as your lusts are mortified, the
vigorous healthful frame and due temper of your Souls is restored, and your
evidences for Heaven cleared, both which are the springs of all spiritual
delight and pleasure. Can any Creature-enjoyment, or any beastly lust afford a
pleasure like this? Don't you find the life you live in sinful pleasures quite
beneath the dignity of a man? And are they not followed with bitter
after-reckonings, gripes, and flashes of Conscience? Even in the midst of
laughter the heart is sad, and the end of that mirth is heaviness. O ponder
seriously what a trifle it is you sell your precious Souls for: Is it not a
goodly price you value them at? the fugitive, empty, beastly pleasures of a
moment for the torments of Eternity!

The sixth way of losing the Soul opened.
VI. There are also innumerable Souls lost for ever by the distracting cares of
this world, which eat up all their time, thoughts, and studies, so that there
is no room for Christ, or one serious hour about Salvation. It is too true an
observation which Sir Walter Raleigh makes upon the common Mechanics and poor
Laborers, their bodies are the Anvils of pain, and their Souls the Hives of
unnumbred cares and sorrows, whilst the voluptuous and rich spend their time
and studies in purveying for new pleasures, and filling their heads with
projects of that nature; the poorer sort have their heads and hearts filled day
and night with anxious thoughts and cares how to get bread, pay their Rent or
debts, and struggle through the miserable necessities that pinch them on every
side; many Children it may be to provide for, and little or nothing out of
which to make it: here is Brick must be made, and no straw to make it of: he
borrows here to pay there; debts increase, and abilities decrease: he toils his
body all the day, and when his tired carcass calls for rest to enable him for
new work tomorrow, the cares of the world invade him upon his bed, and keep him
sighing or musing there, when poor man he had load enough before for one.

And now what room is there left for Salvation-work? or how can any spiritual
seed that is cast into such a brake of thorns prosper? The cares of this life
(says Christ) spring up and choke it, Mark 4.19. Tell not them of Heaven and
Christ, they must have bread; talk not to them of the necessity or comfort of a
pardon, they must pay their debts to men. O the confused buz and clutter that
these thoughts and cares make in their heads! so that no other voice can be
heard. And thus multitudes spend their whole life in a miserable servitude in
this world, and by that are cast upon a more miserable and restless state for
ever in the world to come, one Hell here, and another hereafter. And what shall
be done for them? Is there no way for their deliverance? O that God would
direct and bless the following considerations to them, if it may be expected
they may at any time get through the brake in which they are involved, and find
them at leisure to bethink themselves.

The sixth way to Hell shut up by five Considerations.
1. Bethink thy self, poor Soul, as much as thou art involved and plunged in
the necessities and distracting cares of this life, others, many others, as
poor, as necessitous, and every way as much embroiled in the cares of the world
as you are, have minded their Souls, and taken all care and pains for their
Salvation notwithstanding; yea, though millions of your rank and order are
destroyed by these snares of the Devil, yet God has a very great number,
indeed the greatest of any rank of men, among those that are low, poor, and
necessitous in the world. The Church is called the Congregation of the poor,
Psalm. 74.20. because it consists mostly of men and women of the lowest and
most despicable condition in this world. They are all poor in Spirit, and most
of them poor in purse. Hearken, my beloved Brethren, (says James) has not God
chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom? Jam.
2.5.

Now if others, many others, as much entangled in the necessities, cares, and
troubles of the world as you, have yet struggled through all those difficulties
and discouragements to Heaven, why should not you strive for Christ and
Salvation as well as they? Your Souls are as valuable as theirs, and their
discouragements and hindrances as great, and as many as yours.

2. Consider your poor and necessitous condition in the world, has something
in it of motive and advantage to excite and quicken you to a greater diligence
for Salvation, than is found in a more full, easy, and prosperous state; for
God has hereby embittered this world to you, and made you drink deeper of the
troubles of it than other men: they have the honey, and you the gall; they have
the flour, and you the bran. But then, as yo^ have not the pleasures, so you
have not the snares of a prosperous condition, and your daily troubles, cares,
and labors in it, do even prompt you to seek rest in Heaven, which you cannot
find on Earth. Can you think you were made for a worse condition than the
Beasts? what, to have two Hells, one here, and another hereafter? Surely as
low, miserable, and despicable as you are, you are capable of as much happiness
as any of the Nobles of the World, and in your low and afflicted condition
stand nearer to the door of hope than they do. Ah! methinks these thoughts do
even put themselves upon you, when your spirits are overloaded with the cares,
and your bodies tired with the labors of this life. Is this the life of
troubles I must expect on Earth? Has God denied me the pleasures of this
World? O then let it be my care, my study, my business to make sure of Christ,
to win Heaven, that I may not be miserable in both Worlds. How can you avoid
such thoughts? or put by such meditations which your very station and condition
even forces upon you?

3. Consider how all your troubles in this World would be sweetened, and all
your burdens lightened, if once your Souls were in Christ, and in Covenant with
God. O what heartsease would Faith give you! What sweet relief would you find
in Prayer! These things, like the opening of a Vein or Tumor when ripe, would
suddenly cool, relieve, and ease your spirits. Could you but go to God as a
Father, and pour out your hearts before him, and roll all your cares and
burdens, wants and sorrows upon him, you would find a speedy outlet to your
troubles, and an inlet to all peace, all comfort, and all refreshments, such as
all the riches, honors, and fullness of this world cannot give: you would then
find Providence engage it self for your supply, and issue all your troubles to
your advantage. Heb. 13.5. Isa. 41.17. Psalm. 34.9, 10. Psalm. 91.15. Romans 8.28.
You would suck the breasts of those Promises in the Margent, and say all the
dainties in the world cannot make you such another Feast. You would then see
your bread, your clothes, and all provisions for you and yours in Gods
promises, when you are brought to an exigence, and would certainly find
performances as well as promises all along the course of your life.

4. Say not you have no time to mind another world, God has not put any of you
under such an unhappy necessity: you have one whole day every week allowed you
by God and Man for your Souls: you have some spare time every day, which you
know you spend worse than in heavenly thoughts and exercises; yea, most
Callings are such as will admit of spiritual exercises of thoughts, even when
your hands are exercised in the affairs of this life. Besides, there are none
of you but have and must have daily some relaxations and rest from business;
and if your hearts were spiritual, and set upon Heaven, you would find more
time than you think on, without prejudice to your Callings, yea to the great
furtherance of them, to spend with God. I can tell you when and where I have
found poor Servants hard at work for Salvation, laboring for Christ, some in
the Fields, others in Barns and Stables, where they could find any privacy to
pour out their Souls to God in prayer. As Lovers will make hard shifts to
converse together, so will the Soul that is devoted to God, and in earnest for
Heaven. And though your opportunities be not so large, they may be as sweet as
successful, and to be sure sincere, as those whose condition affords them more
time, and greater external conveniences than you enjoy. More business is
sometimes dispatched in a quarter of an hour in prayer, yea let me say, in a few
hearty ejaculations of Soul to God in a few minutes, than in many long and
elaborate duties. If thou cast in thy two mites of time into the Treasury of
Prayer, having no more, thou may, as Christ said of the poor Widow, give more
than those that cast in of their great abundance of time and Talents.

5. Lastly, Consider, Jesus Christ is no Respecter of persons, the poorest and
vilest on earth are as welcome to him as the greatest. He chose a poor and mean
condition in this World himself, conversed mostly among the poor, never refused
any because of his poverty: God accepts not the persons of Princes, nor
regards the rich more than the poor; for they are all the work of his hands,
Job 34.19. and that both in respect of their natural constitution as men, and
their Civil condition as rich or poor men. Riches and poverty make a great
difference in the respects of men, but none at all with God. If thou be one of
Gods poor, he will accept, love, and honor thee above the greatest (if
graceless) person in the world. Poverty is no bar to Christ or Heaven, though
it be to the respects of men and pleasures of this life. Away then with all
vain pretenses against a life of godliness from the meanness of your outward
condition. Heaven was not made for the rich, and Hell only for the poor; no,
no: how hard soever you find the way thither, I am sure Christ says, It Is hard
for a rich man to enter into that Kingdom.

The seventh way of losing the Soul discovered.
VII. The seventh beaten path to destruction is by groundless presumption;
praesum^ndo sperant, and spirando per^unt; by presumption they have hope, and
by that hope they perish.

There are diverse objects of Presumption, amongst which these three are most
usual and most fatal: viz.

That they have 1. That Grace which they have not. 2. That Mercy in God they
will not find. 3. That Time before them which will fail them.


1. Many presume they have that Grace in them, which God knows they have not:
So did Laodicea, Rev. 3.17. Thou say, I am rich, and have need of nothing,
and know not that thou art wretched and miserable, poor, blind and naked.
Here is a dangerous Conspiracy betwixt a cunning Devil, and an ignorant proud
Heart, to ruin the Soul for ever: they stamp their common Grace for special:
they put the old Creature, by a general Profession, into the new Creatures
habit, and lay a confident claim to all the Privileges of the Children of God.

2. They presume upon such Mercy in God, as they will never find: they expect
pardoning and saving Mercy out of Christ, in an unregenerate state, when there
is not one drop of Mercy dispensed in any other way. The whole economy of
Grace is managed by the Mediator, Jude v. 21. all saving Mercies come through
him, upon all that are in him, and upon no others. God is indeed a merciful
God, and yet presumptuous sinners will find Judgment without Mercy, because
they are not found in the proper way and method of Mercy. Thousands and ten
thousands carve out and dispose the Mercy of God at their own pleasure, write
their own Pardons in what Terms they think fit; and if they had Gods Seal to
firm and ratify them, it were all well: but alas! it is but a night-vision, a
dream of their own brain.

3. But especially, men presume upon Time enough for Repentance hereafter: they
question not but there be as fit and as fair opportunities of Salvation to
come, as are already past; and in this snare of the Devil thousands are taken
in the very prime and vigor of their youth. That age is voluptuous, and loves
not to be interrupted with severe and serious thoughts and courses; and here is
a Salvo fitted exactly to suit their inclination, and quiet them in their way,
that they may pursue their lusts without interruption.

I cannot follow the sin of Presumption at present in all these its courses and
ways, and will therefore apply my self to the case last mentioned, which is so
common to the world.

The seventh way to destruction shut up by five weighty Considerations.
1. And in the first place, I would beg all those young voluptuous Sinners,
whose feet are fast held in the snare of this Temptation, seriously to bethink
themselves, whether they are not old enough to be damned, whilst they judge
themselves too young to be seriously godly. There are multitudes in Hell of
your age and size: you may find Graves in the Churchyard of your own length,
and Skulls of your own size. Men will not spare a nest of young Snakes, because
they are little. If you die Christless and unregenerate, it is the same thing
whether you be old or young: there is abundance of young Spray, as well as old
Logs, burning in the flames of Hell.

2. If you knew the weight and difficulty of Salvation-work, you would never
think you could begin too soon. Religion is a business will take up all your
time: Poenitet me, Domine, quod sero te amavi. Aug.
many have repented they began so late, none that they began too soon. Say not,
the penitent Thief found mercy at the last hour, for his Conversion was
extraordinary, and we must not hope for Miracles. Besides, he could never
encourage himself in sin with the hope and expectation of such a miraculous
Conversion. He was the only Example of a Sinner that was ever so recovered in
Scripture, and this was recorded not to nourish presumption, but to prevent
despair. If ten thousand persons died of the Plague, and one only of the whole
number infected with it escaped, it is no great encouragement that you shall
make the second. O think and think again, how many thousands now on earth have
been tugging and striving forty or fifty years together to make their Calling
and Election sure, and yet to this day it is not so sure as they would have it:
they are afraid after all, time will fail them for finishing, and you think
it is too early for beginning so great a work.

3. Others have begun sooner than you, and finished the great and main work
before you have done one stroke. Abijah was very young, scarce got out of his
childhood, when the Grace of God was found in him, 1 Kings 14.13. The fear of
God was in Obadiah when but a youth, 1 Kings 18.12. Timothy was not only a
Christian, but a Preacher of the Gospel in the morning of his life, 2 Timothy
3.15. What have you to plead for your selves, which they had not? Or what
arguments and motives to godliness had they, which you have not? You shall be
judged per pares, by those of your own age and size; their seriousness shall
condemn your vanity.

4. The morning of your life is the flower of your time, the freshest and
fittest of all your life for your great work: now your hearts are tender and
impressive, your affections flowing and tractable, your heads clear of
distracting cares and hurries of business, which come on afterward in thick
successions: Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, whilst the evil
days come not, Eccles. 12.1, 2. If a man have an important business to do, he
will take the morning for it, knowing if that be slipped, a crowd and hurry of
business will come on afterward to distract and hinder him. I presume if all
the Converts in the World were examined in this point, it would be found that
at least ten to one were wrought upon in their youth: that is the moulding age.

5. And if this proper, hopeful season be elapsed, it is very unlikely that
ever you be wrought upon afterward. How thin and rare in the world are the
instances and examples of Conversion in old age? Long continued customs in sin
harden the heart, fix the will, and root the habits of vice so deep in the
Soul, that there is no altering of them: your ears then are so accustomed to
the sounds of the Word, that Christ and Sin, Heaven and Hell, Soul and Eternity
have lost their awful sound and efficacy with you. But it is a question only to
be decided by the event, whether ever yo^ shall attain to the years of your
Fathers: it is not the sprightly vigor of your youth that can secure you from
death. What a madness then is it to put your So^ls and eternal happiness upon
such a blind adventure? What if your presumption of so many fair and proper
opportunities hereafter fail you, as it has failed millions (who had as
rational and hopeful a prospect of them as you can have) where are you then?
And if you should have more time and means than you do presume upon, are you
sure your hearts will be as flexible and impressive, as now they are? O beware
of this sin of vain presumption, to which the generality of the damned owe
their everlasting ruin.

The eighth way of losing the Soul opened.
VIII. The eighth way of ruining the precious Soul, is by drinking in the
Principles of Atheism, and living without God in the World.

Atheism stabs the Soul to death at one stroke, and puts it quite out of the
way of Salvation. Other Sinners are worse than Beasts, but Atheists are worse
than Devils, for they believe and tremble: these banish God out of their
thoughts, and what they can out of the world, living as without God in the
world, Ephesians. 2.12. It is a sin that quenches all Religion in the Soul: he that
knows not his Landlord, cannot pay his Rent: he that assents not to the Being
of a God, destroys the foundation of all religious Worship; he cannot fear,
love, or obey him, whose Being be believes not: this sin strikes at the Life of
God, and destroys the life of the Soul.

Some are Atheists in opinion, but multitudes are so in practice: The fool has
said in his heart there is no God, Psalm. 14.1. Though he has engraven his N^me
upon every Creature, and written it upon the Table of their own Hearts, yet
they will not read it: or if they have a slight fluctua^^^g notion, or a secret
suspicion of a Deity, yet they neither acknowledge his Presence nor his
Providence: Fingunt Deum talem qui nec videt, nec punit: They say, How does God
know? can he judge through the dark clouds? thick clouds are a covering to him,
that he sees not, Job 22.14.

Others profess to believe his Being, but their lives daily give their lips the
lie; for they give no evidence in practice of his fear, love, or dependence on
him. If they believe his Being, they plainly show they value not his favor,
delight not in his presence, love not his ways or people; but lie down and
rise, eat and drink, live and die without the worship or acknowledgment of him,
except so much as the Law of the Country, or Custom of the place extorts from
them. These dregs of time produce abundance of Atheists of both sorts: many
ridicule and hiss Religion out of all Companies into which they come; and
others live down all sense of Relion: they customarily attend indeed upon the
external Duties of it, hear the Word; but when the greatest and most important
Duties are urged upon them, their inward thought is, this is the Preachers
Calling, and the man must say something to fill up his hour, and get his
living. If they dare not put their thoughts into words, and call the Gospel
Fabula Christi, the Fable of Christ, as a wicked Pope once did, or say of Hell
and the dreadful Sufferings of the Damned, as Calderinus the Jesuit did, tunc
credam cum illuc venero, I will believe it when I see it: yet their hearts and
lives are of the same complexion with these men's words. They do not heartily
assent to the Truth of the Gospel which they hear; and though bare assent would
not save them, yet their dissent or non-assent will certainly damn them, except
the Lord heal their understandings and hearts by the light and life of
Religion. To this last sort I shall offer a few things.

The eighth way to Hell shut up by six weighty Considerations.
1. You that attend upon the Ordinances, but believe them no more than so many
dev^^^d Fables, nor heartily assent to the Truth of what you hear; know
assuredly, that the Word shall new(...) do your Souls good it can never come to
your hearts and affections in its regenerating and sanctifying efficacy, whilst
it is stopped and obstructed in your understandings in the act of assent. And
thus you may sit under the best Ordinances all your lives, and be no more the
better for them, than the Rocks are for all the showers of rain that fall upon
them: Heb. 4.2. The word preached did not profit them, not being mixed with
faith in them that heard it. This is Satan's chief strength and fastness,
wherein he trusts: he fears no Argument, whilst he can maintain this Post:
the Devil has no surer Prisoner than the Atheist: there is no escaping out of
his possession and power, whilst this bolt of Unbelief is shut home in the Mind
or Understanding. An unbelieved Truth never converted or saved one Soul from
the beginning of the world, nor never shall to the end of it. Those bodies that
have the Boulema, or Dog-appetite, whatever they eat, it affords them no
nourishment or satisfaction, they thrive not with the best fare: just so it is
with your Souls, no Duties, no Ordinances can possibly do them good: as in
Argumentation, no Conclusion, be it never so regularly drawn, and strongly
inferred, is of any force to him that denies Principles.

2. If you assent not to the Truth of the Gospel, you not only make God speak
to your Souls in vain, which is fatal to them; but you also make God a liar,
which is the greatest affront a Creature can put upon his Maker: 1 Ioh. 5.10.
He that believes not God, has made him a liar. Vile dust, dare thou rise up
against the God that made thee, and give him the lie! An affront which thy
Fellow Creature cannot put up or bear at thy hands. Dare thou at once stab
his Honor, and thy own Soul? Are not the things which thou look on as
Romances and golden Dreams, a mere Artifice neatly contrived to cheat and awe
the world? Are they not all built upon the Veracity of God? which is the
firmest foundation and greatest security in the world. Has he not intermingled
for our satisfaction, not only frequent assertions, but his asseverations and
Oath to put all beyond doubt? And yet dare any of you lift up your ignorant
blind Understandings against all this, and give him the lie? Surely the wrath
of God shall smoke against every Soul of man that does so, and his own bitter,
lamentable, doleful experience shall be his conviction shortly, except he
repent.

3. Dare any of you give the thoughts of your hearts as certain conclusions
under your hand, and stand by them to the last, and venture all upon them?

Wretched Atheist, bethink thy self, pause a while, examine thine own breast,
whatever thy vile Atheistical thoughts sometimes are, is there not at other
times a fear of the contrary? A jealousy that all these things which thou
deridest and sportest thy wicked fancy with, may and will prove true at last?
When thou read, or hear that Text, Ioh. 3.18. He that believes not, is
condemned already; His Mittimus is already made for Hell: Does not thy
Conscience give thee a secret gird, like a stitch in thy side? Dare you venture
all upon this issue, that if those things you find in the Word be true, you
will stand to the hazard of them? If that be a truth, Mark 16.16. He that
believes not, shall be damned, you will be content to be damned? Or if, Romans
8.13. be a truth, That they which live after the flesh shall dye, you will run
the hazard and bear the penalty of eternal death? If Heb. 12.14. prove true,
That without holiness no man shall see God, you will be content to be banished
from his presence for evermore? Speak your hearts in this matter, and tell us,
Don't you live betwixt Atheistical surmises, that all these are but cunning
artifices; and fears that at last they will prove the greatest Verities?

4. Has not God given you all the satisfaction you can reasonably desire of
the undoubted truth and certainty of his Word? What would you have, which you
have not already? Would you have a Voice from Heaven, the Scriptures you read
or hear are a more sure Word than such a Voice would be, 2 Pet. 1.19. or would
you have a Messenger from Hell? He that believes not the written Word, neither
would believe, if one should rise from the dead, Luke 16* 31. View the innate
Characters of the Scriptures, is it not altogether pure and holy? full of
Divine Wisdom and awful Majesty? and in every respect such as evidenceth its
Author to be the wise, holy, and just God who searches the hearts and reins?
Look upon the Seals and Confirmations of it, has not God confirmed it by
diverse Miracles from Heaven, a Seal which neither Men or Devils could
counterfeit? And don't you see the blessing and power of God accompanying it in
the Conversion and wonderful change of men's hearts and lives, which can be done
by no other hand than Gods? Say not, the Miracles which confirm the Gospel are
but uncertain Traditions, and except you your selves see them wrought, you
cannot believe them. There are a thousand things which you do believe, though
you never saw them; and what you require for your satisfaction, every man may
require the same for his, and so Christ must live in all parts of this World,
and repeat his Miracles over and over in all Ages to satisfy the unreasonable
incredulity of those that question their truth after the fullest Confirmation
and Seal has been given, that is capable to be given, or the heart of man can
desire should be given; and if all this should be done, you might be as far
from believing, as now you are; for many of those that saw and heard the things
wrought by Christ, contradicted and blasphemed, and so might you.

5. Satan who undermines your assent to these things, is forced to give his
own: he that tempts you to look on them as Fables, himself knows, and is
convinced that they are realities, the Devils also believe and tremble, Jam.
2.19. they know and feel the truth of these things, though it be their great
design and interest to shake your assent to them: they know Christ is the Son
of God, and that there will be a day in which he will judge the World in
righteousness, and that there are Torments prepared for themselves, and all
whom they seduce from God, Matthew. 8.29. If you ungod God, you must unman your
selves, yea, not only make your selves less than men, but worse than Devils.

6. In a word, let thy own heart, O Atheist, be Judge, whether these be real
doubts still sticking in your minds, after you have done all that becomes men
to do for satisfaction in such important cases? Or whether they be not such
Principles as you willingly ^oment and nourish in your hearts, as a protection
to your sensual lusts, whose pleasures you would fain have without
interruptions and over-awings by the fears of a Judgment to come, and a
righteous retribution from a just and terrible God! Examine your hearts in that
point, and you will soon find the cheat to be in that I here point you to: you
have not studied the word impartially, nor brought your doubts and scruples
with an humble, unbiassed, teachable spirit to those that are wise and able to
resolve them, much less prayed for the Spirit of Illumination; but willingly
entertained whatever Atheistical Wits invent, or the Devil suggests, as a
Defensative against the checks of Conscience, and fears of Hell in the way of
sin. You are loath those things should be true, which the Scriptures speak, and
are glad of any colorable argument or pretense to still your own Consciences.
Is not this the case? The Lord stop your desperate course, your paths lead to
Hell.

The ninth way of losing the precious Soul opened.
IX. Precious Souls are daily plunged into the gulf of perdition by
Profaneness and Debauchery. How many every where lie wallowing in this puddle?
glorying in their shame, and running into all excess of riot? The Hypocrite
steals to Hell in a private close way of concealed sin; but the profane gallop
along the public road at noonday: They declare their sin as Sodom, and hide
it not: Isa. 3.9. The show of their countenance testifies against them. The
Hypocrite has devotion in his countenance, and Heaven in his mouth; you know
not by his words or countenance whither he is going; but the profane hide it
not, they are past shame, and above blushing at the horridst impieties. Look as
God has some Servants more eminent, forward, and courageous in the ways of
Godliness than others; men that will not hide their Principles, or be ashamed
of the ways of Godliness in the face of danger; so the Devil has some Servants
as eminent for wickedness, who scorn to sneak to Hell by concealment of their
wickedness, but avow and own it without fear or shame in the open sight of
Heaven and Earth. Wherever they come, they defile the Air they breathe in with
horrid blasphemies and obscene discourses not to be named, and leave a strong
scent of Hell behind them.

This Age has brought forth multitudes of these Monsters, the reproach and
shame of the Nation that bred them. I have little hope to stop one of them in
the career and full speed to Hell. They have lost the sense of sin, the
restraints of Shame and fear; and then what is left to check them in their
course? I cannot hope that such a Discourse as this shall ever come into their
hands, except it be to sacrifice it to the flames: yet not knowing the ways of
Providence, which are unsearchable, and what use God may make upon one occasion
or another of these following Considerations, I will adventure to drop a few
words upon these forlorn Sinners, as far as they seem to be gone beyond
recovery; beseeching the Lord to make way for these things to their hands and
hearts, and make them the instruments of pulling some of them as brands out of
the burning.

The ninth way to Hell by Profaneness stopped.
1. And first, Let it be laid to heart, that though the case and state of many
thousand Souls be doubtful and uncertain, so that neither themselves nor any
other know what they are, or to whom they belong: yet our condition is without
controversy miserable and forlorn, all men know whose you are, and whither you
are going. The Apostle appeals in this case to the Bar of every man's Reason and
Conscience, as a thing allowed and yielded by all, Ephesians. 5.5. For this ye know
(says he) that no whoremonger, nor unclean person, nor covetous man, who is an
Idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God. This is a
clear case, there is no controversy about it. Many there be in a doubtful
case, but no doubt of these, they are fast and sure in the power of Satan; and
as sure as God is a God of Truth, they that die in this condition shall never
see his face. And to the same purpose again, 1 Cor. 6.9. Know ye not, that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither
fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of
themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor
revilers, nor extortioners shall inherit the kingdom of God. Know ye not? says
he, q. d. Sure you cannot be so ignorant and blind to think that there is any
room in Heaven for such wretches as these. If the righteous be scarcely saved,
where shall the sinner and the ungodly appear? If all strictness, holiness,
self-denial, diligence, be all little enough to win Heaven, what hope can there
be of those that not only cast off all duties of Religion, but also cast
themselves into all the opposite ways and courses which directly lead to
damnation? He that refuses his food, endangers his life; but he that drinks
poison, certainly and speedily destroys it.

2. As far as you are gone in a course of profaneness, you are not yet gone
beyond the reach of Mercy and all hopes of Salvation, if now at last, after all
your Debaucheries and prophan^ness, the Lord touch your hearts with the sense
of your sinful and miserable estate, and turn your feet to his Testimonies.
When the Apostle in 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. had told us the doom of such men, upon the
supposition of their perseverance in that course; yet presently he adds as a
motive to their repentance, an Example of Mercy upon such wretches as these:
And such were some of you, but ye are washed, v. 11. The golden Scepter of free
Grace has been held forth to many as profane and notorious sinners as you, to
a blaspheming Saul, to a Mary Magdalen, to a Manasseh. It Is not the greatness
of the sin, but the impenitence and infidelity of the sinner that ruins him.
Well then, there is a certainty of damnation if you go, and yet a possibility
of forgiveness and mercy before you, a mercy invaluable.

3. Nay, this is not all; but in some respect there is more probability and
hope of your return and repentance, than there is of many others who have led a
more sober, smooth, and civil life than you have done. Your profaneness has
more dishonored God; but the Morality and Civility of some men secures them
faster in the snare of the Devil: they have many things in themselves to build
up their presumptuous hopes upon, but you have nothing. It is hard for
conviction to reach that man's Conscience that has a righteousness of his own
to trust in; but methinks it should have an easier access to yours, whose
notorious courses lay your Consciences naked and bare before the word to be
wounded by it. Christ's Ministry had little success among the Pharisees who were
righteous in their own eyes, but it wrought effectually upon Publicans and
sinners. Hence Christ told them, Matt. 21.31. That Publicans and Harlots go
into the Kingdom of God before them. Publicans were esteemed the worst of men,
and Harlots the worst of women; yet the one and other, as vile as they were,
stood fairer for Conviction, and consequently for Salvation, than those that
thought they needed no repentance. All this is matter of hope, and runs into a
powerful motive and loud call to repentance: He that has an ear to hear, let
him hear.

The tenth way leading to Destruction marked.
X. Deep and fixed prejudices against Godliness and the sincere Professors
thereof, precipitate thousands of Souls into their own ruin and damnation.

It was not without a weighty reason that Christ denounced that woe upon the
world, Matt. 18.7. Woe unto the world, because of offenses. The poor world will
be ruined by scandals and prejudices; they will take such offenses at the ways
of Godliness, that they will never have good thoughts of them any more. This
Sect is every where spoken against, Acts 28.21. and so Christians are condemned
(...), because of the common reproach, as Justin Martyr complained. All the
scandals which fall out in the Church are so many Swords and Daggers put into
the hands of the wicked world to murder their own Souls withal. Some have
sucked in such Opinions of the ways of Godliness, as make them irreconcilable
Enemies to them, and fierce Opposers of them. And from hence are most of the
Persecutions that befall the People of God. When you see showers of slanders and
reproaches going before, expect storms of persecution coming after. Slanders
beget prejudices, and these prepare for persecutions. O how keen and fierce are
the minds of many against the upright and innocent Servants of God, whom they
have first represented to themselves in such an odious dress and Character as
the Devil has drawn them in upon their fancies and imaginations! So the
primitive Christians were represented to the Heathens as Monsters, and their
Conventions in the night, occasioned by the fury of Persecutors, was reported
to be for lascivious and barbarous ends, to deflower Virgins, and murder
innocent Children: and by this artifice the Heathens were secured against
conversion to Christ. This has been the policy of Hell from the beginning, and
it has prospered so much in the world, that Satan has reason to change his
hand. But how may this Plot of Hell be defeated? and the ruin of Souls
prevented?

The tenth way of destroying Souls shut up by two Counsels.
1. It will be impossible to prevent the ruin of a great part of the World by
prejudices against the ways of Godliness, except those that profess them, walk
more holily and conformably to the rule and pattern of Christ, whose Name is
called upon them. I therefore shall first address my Discourse to the
Professors of Religion, beseeching them in the bowels of Christ, to take pity
upon the multitudes of Souls which are daily ruined and destroyed by their
scandals and miscarriages. Did you live according to the rules you profess.
your well-doing would put to silence the ignorance of foolish men, 1 Pet. 2.15.
and consequently the ruin of many might be prevented. I remember Bernard
speaking of the lewd and loose life of the Priests of his time, sighs out this
just and bitter complaint to God about it; Bern. in Convers. Pauli. Ser. 1.
Misera eorum conversatio plebis tuae miserabilis subversio est: O Lord, says
he, their miserable conversation is the miserable subversion of thy people. O
of how many who glory in the Title of the Sons of the Church, Ecce qui jactant
se redemptos a tyrannide Satanae, qui praedicant se mortuos mundo, nihilominus
a cupiditatibus suis vincuntur. Salvian. Vbi est catholicalex quam credunt? ubi
pietatatis and castitatis exempla quae discant? Evangilia legant, and impudici
sunt; Apo^olos audiunt, and inebriantur.
may Christ say, as Jacob did of his two lewd Sons Simeon and Levi, Ye have
troubled me, to make me to stink among the Inhabitants of the Land, Genesis 34.30.

And how many Professors, who pretend to more than ordinary reformation and
holiness, do shed Soul blood by their scandalous conversations? Salvian brings
in the wicked of his Age upraiding the looseness of Christians in this manner:
Behold, those men who boast themselves redeemed from the Tyranny of Satan, and
profess themselves dead to the world, yet are conquered by the lusts of it. And
Cyprian long before his day, brings in the Heathens thus insulting over looser
Christians, Where is that Catholic Law which they believe? Where are the
Examples of Piety and Chastity which they should learn? They read the Gospel,
yet are immodest; they hear the Apostles, yet are drunk. O Professors, where
are your bowels to the poor Souls of sinners? If your Neighbors Ox or Ass fall
into the pit, you are bound to deliver him, if you can; and will you not do as
much for a precious Soul, as you would do for a Beast? Nay, you dig pits by
your scandalous lives to destroy them. If you sin, there are instruments enough
to spread it, and multitudes of Souls ready perpared to take the infection. Say
not, f they do, the fault is theirs; for though they are Principals in the
murder of their own Souls by taking the scandal, yet you are Accessaries in
giving it: he is a mad man that will kill himself with a Sword, and he no
better that will put it into his hand.

O therefore if you have any regard to the precious Souls of men, live up to
the rules of your Profession. O be blame, less and harmless, the Sons of God
without rebuke in the midst of a perverse and froward generation: let the
heavenliness of your Conversation stop those mouths that accuse you as men of a
worldly Spirit: let them see by your moderation in seeking it, your patience in
losing it, your readiness in distributing it, that it is a groundless calumny
under which your Names suffer. Let them see by your apparel, company, and
discourses you are not such proud lofty Spirits as you are represented to be.
Convince them by your flexibleness to all things that are lawful and expedient,
by manifesting as much as in you lies, that it is the pure bond and tie of
Conscience which keeps you from compliance in all other things, and by your
meekness in suffering for such noncompliance, that you are not such turbulent,
factious Incendiaries, as the wicked world slanderously reports you to be.
Convince the world by your exact righteousness in all your civil dealings, and
by the lip of truth in all your promises and engagements, that you have the
fear of God in your hearts, as well as the Livery of Christianity upon your
backs. In a word, so live that none may have just ground to believe the
impudent slanders the Devil raises in the world against you. Let your light so
shine before men, that they may glorify your Father which is in Heaven.
Without your care and circumspection, the shedding of a world of precious
Soul-blood can never be prevented.

2. Let me advise and beseech all men to be so just to others, and merciful to
their own Souls, as not to cast them away for ever, by receiving prejudices
against Godliness from the miscarriages of some that make more than a common
profession of it. If others stumble before you, and break their shins, don't
you stumble at them, and break your necks. To prevent this fatal effect of
scandal and prejudice at Religion, I desire a few particulars may be
impartially weighed.

First, Very many of those Scandals bandied up and down the World against the
Professors of Godliness, are devised and forged in Hell, as so many traps and
snares to catch and destroy men's Souls, to beget an irreconcilable aversation
and enmity in men to the ways of God. They devise deceitful matters (says the
Psalmist) against them that are quiet in the land, Psalm. 35.20. So Ier. 18.18.
Come, say they, let us devise devices against Jeremiah, and smite him with the
tongue. And there is as as little equity in the credulous receiver, as there is
honesty in the wicked forger of these slanders. With one arrow of censure you
wound no less than three, viz. the honor of God, your innocent Brother, and
your own Souls: as to the two former wounds, they will in due time be healed.
God will vindicate his own Name fully, and the reputation of his innocent
Servants shall be cleared and repaired abundantly; but mean time your Souls may
perish by the wounds, prejudices have given, so that you may never be
reconciled to Godliness and its Professors whilst you live, but turn Scoffers
and Persecutors of them.

Secondly, Examine whether the matters that are charged upon them as their
Crimes, be not their Duties. Sometimes it falls out to be so, and if so, you
fight more immediately and directly against God than men. This was David's case,
Psalm. 69.10. When I wept, and chastened my soul, that was to my reproach: my
piety was turned to reproach. They called his tears Crocodiles tears, and his
fastings hypocritical shadows of devotion and humility. Thus the very matter of
his duty was turned into reproach. And so it was with the primitive Christians,
their very owning of themselves to be Christians, was crime enough to condemn
them.

Thirdly, If Professors of Religion do in some things act unbecoming their holy
Profession, yet every slip and failing in their lives is no sufficient Warrant
for you to censure their persons as hypocrites, much less to fall upon Religion
it self, and condemn it for the faults of them that profess it. There Is many an
upright heart overtaken by temptation. You see their miscarriages, but you see
not their humiliations and self-condemnations before God for them. Foo^ and
fearful (says a grave Divine) was the scandal of David, Ier. Dyke of Scandal,
p. 33.
and what was the issue? Presently the Enemies of God and Godliness began to
lift their heads, and fall foul upon David's Religion, 2 Samuel 12. they
blasphemed the Name of God. O this is he that was so grand a Zealot, that the
zeal of Gods house did eat him up. This is the man that, out of his
transcendent zeal, danced before the Ark. This is he that prayed thrice a day,
at morning, noon, and night. This is he that was so precise and strict in his
family, that a wicked person should not dwell in his house. This your great
precise Zealot has defiled the Wife, and murdered the Husband. Now you see
what his Religion is, now you see what comes of this profession of so much
Holiness and Godliness.

O that men would seriously consider their evil in such censures as these. What
is all this to Religion? Does Religion any way countenance or patronize such
practices? Nay does it not impartially and severely condemn them? It is the
glory of the Christian Religion, that it is pure and undefiled, Iam. 1.27.
These practices flow from no Principle of Religion, nor are chargeable upon it,
for it teaches men the very contrary, Tit. 2.11, 12. If I see a Papist sin
boldly, or an Arminian slight Grace, I justly condemn their Principles in and
with their practices, because Popery sets Pardons to Sale, and Arminianism
exalts Nature into the place of Grace: but does the Doctrine of the Gospel lead
to any immoralities? Charge it, if you can.

Fourthly, And as senseless a thing it is to condemn all for the miscarriages
and faults of some, which yet is the common practice of the world. Are all that
profess Godliness loose and careless? No, no; many are an ornament to their
holy Profession, and the glory of Christianity. And why must the innocent be
condemned for the guilty? What is your reason and ground for that? Why might
not the Enemies of Christianity have condemned the Eleven Apostles upon the
fall of Judas? had they not as good Warrant for it as you have for this?

To conclude, You little know what a snare of the Devil is laid for your Souls
in all those prejudices and offenses you take at the ways and Professors of
Godliness; and what a woe you bring upon your own Souls by them. You speak evil
of persons and things you know not, and prejudice is like still to keep you in
ignorance of them. Woe to the world (says Christ) because of offenses, and
Blessed is he that is not offended at me.

The eleventh way of ruining the precious Soul opened.
XI. The eleventh way wherein abundance of precious Souls perish in the
Christianized and professing World, is the way of formal Hypocrisy in
Religion, and Zeal about the Externals of Worship. Such a generation of men
have in all Ages mingled themselves with the sincere Worshippers of God; and
the inducement to it is obvious, the form of Godliness is an honor, but the
power of it a burden. By the former earthly interests are accommodated, by the
latter they are frequently exposed and hazarded.

We find in the Jewish Church abundance of such chaff intermixed with the
wheat, which the Doctrine of Christ discovered and purged out of the floor,
Matthew. 3.9, 12. Such were the Pharisees, who were exceeding zealous for
Traditions and the external Rites and Ceremonies of the Law, but inwardly full
of all filthiness, Matthew. 15.7, 8, 9. men that honored the dead, and
persecuted the living Saints; that reverenced the material Temple, and
destroyed the living Temples; that strained at Gnats of Ceremonies, and
swallowed down the grossest immoralities.

And well had it been, if this generation had ended with that state and time of
the Church; but we find a Prophecy of the increase of these men in the later
days, 2 Timothy 3.5. which is every where sadly verified. Religion runs into stalk
and blade, into leaves and suckers, which should be concocted into pith and
fruit. Yea, it is of sad consideration, that amongst many high Pretenders to
Reformation, their Zeal which should nourish the vitals of Religion, and
maintain their daily work of Mortification and Communion with God, spends it
self in some by opinion, whilst practical Godliness visibly languisheth in
their Conversations. How many are there that hate doctrinal errors, who yet
perish by practical ones? who hate a false Doctrine, but mean time perish by a
false heart? It Is very difficult to reclaim this sort of men from the error of
their way, and thereby save their Souls from Hell. However, let the means be
used, and the success left with God.

The way to Hell by Formality barred up.
1. No sin intangles the Souls of men faster, or damns them with more certainty
and aggravation, than the sin of formal Hypocrisy. It holds the Soul fastest
on Earth, and sinks it deepest into Hell. There was no sort of men upon whom
the Doctrine of Christ and the Apostles had so little success and effect, as
the Scribes and Pharisees: they derided him, when Publicans and sinners
trembled and believed, Luke 16.14, 15. the form of Godliness wards off all
convictions: their zeal for the Externals of Religion secures them against the
fears of damnation, whilst in the mean while their Hypocrisy plunges them
deeper into Hell, than others that never made such shows of Sanctimony and
Devotion: He shall appoint him his portion with hypocrites, Matt. 24.51. that
is, he shall be punished in Hell as Hypocrites are punished, viz. with the
greatest and forest punishment. Hypocrisy is a double iniquity, and will be
punished with double destruction: their ungrounded hopes of Heaven serve but to
pully up their wretched Souls to a greater height of vain confidence, which
gives them the more dreadful jerk in their lamentable and eternal
disappointment.

2. Blind superstitious Zeal, which spends it self only about the Externals of
Religion, usually prepares and ingageth men in a more violent persecution of
those that are really godly and conscientious. The Lord opened a great door of
opportunity at Antioch to Paul, the whole City came together to attend the
discoveries of Christ in the first publication of the Gospel, and the poor
Gentiles began to taste the sweetness of the Gospel; but the Devil perceiving
his Kingdom begin to totter, immediately stirred up his instruments to
persecute the Apostles, and drive them out of the Country, and who more fit for
that work, than the devout and honorable women? Acts 13.15. these stirred up
their Husbands and all they had influence upon, Satan per costam, tanquam per
scalam, ad c^r ascendit, Gregor.
under a fair pretense of zeal for the Law, to obstruct the progress of the
Gospel. No Bird (says one) like the living Bird to draw others into the net.
Men of greatest names and pretensions to Religion, if graceless, are the most
dangerous instruments the Devil can employ to the ruin and extirpation of true
Godliness. Such a Zealot was Paul in his unregenerate state.

3. Nothing is more common than to find men hot and zealous against false
Worship, whilst their hearts are as cold as a stone in the Vitals and
Essentials of true Religion. Many can dispute warmly against Adoration of
Images, praying to Angels and Saints departed, who all the while are like those
dead Images which others worship. Iehu was a Zealot against Idolatry, and yet
the vital power of true Godliness was a stranger to his Soul, 2 Kings 10.15,
16. The Pharisees spared no pains to make a Proselyte, yet all the while were
the Children of the Devil themselves, Matt. 23.15.

This is a sad case, yet what more common? The Lord open the eyes of these men,
and convince them in season, that their Zeal runs in the wrong Chanel, and
spends it self upon things which shall never profit them. O if they were but as
much concerned to promote the love to God, and life of Godliness in themselves
and others, as they are about some external accidents and appendages of
Religion, what blessings would they be to the World, and what evidence would
they have of their own sincerity?

The twelfth way to Hell opened.
XII. The twelfth way to Hell, in which many Souls are carried on smoothly and
securely to their own destruction, is the way of mere Civility and moral
Honesty, wherein men rest, as in a safe state, never doubting but a civil life
will produce and issue into an happy death. Moral honesty is a lovely thing,
and greatly tends to the peace and order of the World; but it is not saving
Grace, nor gives any man a good Title to Christ and Salvation. Indeed there can
be no Grace in that Soul, in which Civility and moral Honesty is not found; but
this may be found in thousands that have no Grace.

That which ruins men's Souls, is not the exercise of moral Virtues, but their
reliance upon them: they use their Morality as a shield to secure their
Consciences from the convictions of the Word, which would show them their
sinful and miserable state by Nature. Thus the Pharisee, Luke 18.11, 12. God, I
thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers,
or even as this Publican: he blesses himself in the conceits of his own safety
and happiness: Let debauched and profane persons look to it, I am well enough;
though alas! poor man, his being less evil at best could but procure him a
cooler Hell or a milder flame. This was the case of the young Man, Matt. 19.20.
and like a young man indeed he reasons. He sums up all the stock of his civil
life, and thinks it strange, if that be not enough to make a purchase of
eternal life, What lack I yet? Alas! poor Soul, every thing necessary to
Salvation: the very first stone was not laid, when he thought the building was
finished: and this is the case of multitudes, both young and old: and that
which greatly confirms and settles them in this their dangerous security, is
the general, indistinct Doctrine of some, who pretend to be Guides to the Souls
of others; the scope of whose Ministry aims at no higher mark than to civilize
the people, and press moral Duties upon them, as if this were all that were
necessary to Salvation; nay, it is well if some do not industriously pull down
the pale of distinction betwixt Morality and Regeneration, and tell the world
in plain English, That there is no reason to put a difference betwixt men that
are baptized and live morally honest, and those that have saving Grace; and
they that do so, are only a few men who are highly conceited of themselves, and
censorious of all others, whom they please to vote formal and moral.

This indeed is the way to fix them where they are; if Christ had not taken
another method with Nicodemus, and his Ministers had not pressed the necessity
of Regeneration, and the insufficiency of moral honesty to Salvation, how thin
had the number of true Converts been, though at most they are but an handful in
comparison of the unregenerate.

O that God would bless what follows, to undeceive and save some poor Soul out
of this dangerous snare of the Devil.

The twelfth way to Damnation barred by three Considerations.
1. Blind not your selves with the luster of your own moral Virtues, a life
smoothly drawn with Civility through the World; for though it must be
acknowledged there is a loveliness and attracting sweetness in Morality and
Civility, yet these things rather respect Earth than Heaven, and are designed
for the conservation of the order and peace of this World, not for your
Salvation and Title to the World to come. Without Justice and Truth, Kingdoms
and Commonwealths would become Mountains of prey, and Dens of robbery. Where
there is no trust, there can be no traffic; and where there is no truth, there
can be no trust. Civility is the very Basis of humane Society, a world of good
accrues to men by it, and abundance of mischief is prevented by it; but it
never gave any man an interest in Christ, or a title to Salvation. The Romans
and Lacedaemonians, who perished in the darkness of Heathenism, excelled in
Morality: there is nothing of Christ or Regeneration in these things, how much
of excellency soever be ascribed to them. Paul the Pharisee was a blameless
person touching the Law, and yet at the same time, not only utterly ignorant of
Christ, but a bitter Enemy to him, and all that were his. Till you can find
another way to Heaven, than by Regeneration, Repentance, and Faith, never lean
upon such a deceitful and rotten prop as mere Civility is.

2. Civilized Nature is unsanctified Nature still; and without Sanctification
there is no Salvation, Heb. 12.14. Civility adorneth Nature, but does not
change it. Moral Virtues are so many sweet flowers strawed over a dead Corpse,
which hide the loathsomness of it, but inspire not life into it. Morality hides
and covers, Abscondit, non abscindit vitia. Lactant.
but never mortifies nor cures the corruptions of Nature; and mortified they
must be, or you cannot be saved. Take the best Nature in the world, and let it
be adorned with all the ornaments of Morality, (which they call Homilitical
Virtues) and add to these, all the common gifts of the Spirit, which are for
assistance and ministry; yet all this cannot secure that Soul from Hell, or be
the groundwork for a just claim to any promise of Salvation: all this is but
Nature improved, not regenerated. Morality is neither produced, as saving Grace
is, nor works such effects as Grace works. There are no pangs of Repentance
introducing it, it may cost many an aching head, but no asking heart for sin; no
such distressed outcries, as that Acts 2.37. Men and Brethren, what shall we
do? Nor does it produce such humility, self-abasement, heavenly tempers and
tendencies of Soul as Grace does. Cheat not your selves therefore in so
important a concern as Salvation is, with an empty shadow.

3. Civility is not only found in multitudes that are out of Christ, but may be
the cause and reason why they are Christless. Mistake not, I am not pleading
the Cause of Profaneness, nor disputing Civility out of the world; I heartily
wish there were more of it to be found in every place, it would exceedingly
promote the peace, order, and tranquillity of the world: but yet it is certain,
that the eyes of thousands are so dazzled with the luster of their own Morality,
that they see no need of Christ, nor feel any want of his Righteousness, and
this is the ruin of their Souls. Thus Christ brings in the Pharisee, with his
proud boast, that he is no Extortioner, Adulterer, nor unjust, or such an one
as that Publican, Luke 18.11. O what a Saint does he vote himself when he
compared his life with the others! Well then, beware you be not deceived by
thinking you are safe, because you are got out of the dirty road to Hell, when
all the while you are only stepped over the hedge into a cleaner path to
damnation. You have had a short account of some few of those many ways in which
the precious Souls of men are eternally lost; let us briefly apply it in the
following Inferences.

Inference I.
IF there be so many ways of losing the Soul, and such multitudes of Souls lost
in every one of them, then the number of saved Souls must needs be exceeding
small.

The number of the saved may be considered either absolutely, or comparatively.
In the first consideration they appear great and many, even a great multitude
which no man can number, Rev. 7.9. but if compared with those that are lost,
they make but a small remnant, Isa. 1.9. a little flock, Matt. 12.32. For when
we consider how vastly the Kingdom of Satan is extended, who is called the God
of this World, from the world of people who are in subjection to him; how small
a part of this earthly Globe is enlightened with the beams of Gospel Light, and
that Satan is the acknowledged Ruler of all the rest, Ephesians. 6.12. But when it
shall be farther considered, that out of this spot on which the light of the
Gospel is risen, the far greatest part are lost also: O what a poor handful
remains to Jesus Christ, as the Purchase of his Blood!

It Is of trembling consideration, how many thousands of Families amongst us are
mere Nurseries for Hell, Parents bringing forth, and breeding up Children for
the Devil, not one word of God (except it be in the way of blasphemy or
profaneness) to be heard among them. How naturally their ignorant and wicked
Education puts them in the course and tide of the world, which carries them
away irresistibly to Hell. How one sinner confirms and animates another in the
same sinful course, till they be all past hope or remedy. How the rich are
taken with the baits of sensual pleasures, and the poor lost in the brake of
distracting worldly cares, except here and there a Soul plucked out of the snare
of the Devil by the wonderful power and arm of God. On the one side, you may
see multitudes drowned in open profaneness and debauchery; and on the other
side, many thousands securely sleeping in the state of Civility and Morality.
Some key-cold, and without the least sense of Religion; others Hell-hot with
blind zeal and superstitious madness against true Godliness, and the sincere
Practitioners of it. Some living all their days under the Ordinances of God,
and never touched with any conviction of their sin or misery; others convinced,
and making some faint offers at Religion, but their convictions (like blossoms
nipt with a frosty morning) fall off, and no fruit follows. And as Rubies,
Saphires, and Diamonds are very few in comparison of the Pebbles and common
stones of the Earth; so are true Christians in comparison of multitudes that
perish in the snares of Satan.

Inference II.
HOW little reason have the Unregenerate to glory and boast themselves in their
earthly acquisitions and successes, whilst mean time their Souls are lost! they
have gotten other things, but lost their Souls. It Is strange to see how some
men by rolling a small Fortune up and down the World, (as Boys do a Snow-ball)
have increased the heap, and raised a great Estate, they have attained their
design and aim in the world, and hug themselves in the pleased thoughts of
their happiness: but alas! among all the thoughts of their gains, there is not
one thought of what they have lost. O if such a thought as this could find room
in their hearts, I have indeed gotten an Estate, but I have lost my Soul: I
have much of the world, but nothing of Christ: Gold and Silver I have, but
Grace, peace, and pardon I have not: my body is well provided for, but my Soul
is naked, empty, and destitute: such a thought, like the Sentence written on
the wall, would make their hearts quail within them. What a rapture and
transport of joy did the sight of a full Barn cast that Worldling into? Luke
12.19, 20. Soul, take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry; little dreaming
that death was just then at the door to take away the cloth, guest, and all
together; that the next hour his Friends would be scrambling for his Estate,
the Worms for his body, and the Devils for his Soul.

O how many have not only lost their Souls, whilst they have been drudging for
the world, but have sold their Souls to purchase a little of the world! parted
by consent with their best treasure for a very trifle, and yet think they have
a great bargain of it. Surely, if poor sinners did but apprehend what they have
lost, as well as what they have gained, their gains would yield them as little
comfort, as Judas his money did for which he sold both his Soul and Savior.
Instead of those pleasing Frolicks of wanton Worldlings, what a cold shiver
would run through all their bones and bowels, did they but understand what it
is to lose a gracious God and a precious Soul, and both eternally and
irrecoverably.

The just God remains still to avenge and punish the sinner; but the favor of
God, that friendly look is gone, the peace of God, that Heaven upon Earth is
gone, the Essence of the Soul remains still, but its purity, peace, joy, hope,
and happiness these are gone; and these being gone, what can remain, but a
tormenting piercing sight of those things for which you have sold them!

Inference III.
HEnce let us estimate the evil of sin, and see what a dreadful thing that is
which men commonly sport themselves with, and make so light of: it is not only
a wrong and injury to the Soul, but the loss and utter ruin of the Soul for
ever.

It is said, Prove. 8.36. He that sins against me, wrongeth his own soul: And
if this were all the mischief sin did us, it were bad enough, a wrong to the
Soul is a greater evil than the ruin of the body or estate, and all the
outward enjoyments of this life can be: but to lose the precious Soul, and
destroy it to all Eternity, O who can estimate such a loss! Now the result and
last effect of sin is death, the death of the precious Soul, Romans 6.21. The end
of those things is death. So Ezekiel. 18.4. The soul that sins shall dye.

Sin does not destroy the Being of the Soul by annihilation, but it does that
which the damned shall find and acknowledge to be much worse; it cuts off the
Soul from God, and deprives it of all its felicity, joy, and pleasure, which
consists in the enjoyment of him. Such is dolefulness and fearfulness of this
result and issue of sin, that when God himself speaks of it, he puts on a
passion, and speak of it with the most feeling concernment, Ezekiel 33.11. As I
live, says the Lord, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked: turn ye,
turn ye, for why will ye dye, O house of Israel? q. d. why will ye wilfully
cast away your own Souls? why will ye choose the pleasures of sin for a season
at the price of my wrath and fury poured out for ever? O think upon this, you
that make so light a matter of committing sin. We pity those who in the depth
of melancholy or desperation lay violent hands upon themselves, and in a
desperate mood cut their own throats; but certainly for a man to murder his own
Soul, is an act of wickedness as much beyond it, as the value of the Soul is
above the body.

Inference IV.
WHat an invaluable Mercy is Jesus Christ to the World, who came on purpose to
seek and to save such as were lost?

In Adam all were shipwrackt and cast away, Christ is the plank of Mercy let
down from Heaven to save some. The loss of Souls by the Fall had been as
irrecoverable as the loss of the fallen Angels, had not God in a way above all
humane thoughts and counsels contrived the method of their Redemption. It Is
astonishing to consider the admirable Harmony and glorious Triumph of all the
Divine Attributes in this great project of Heaven for the recovery of lost
Souls. It Is the wonder of Angels, 1 Pet. 1.21. the great Mystery of Godliness,
1 Timothy 3.16. the matter and burden of the triumphant Song of redeemed Saints,
Rev. 1.5. and well it may, when we consider a more noble Species of Creatures
finally lost, and no Mediator of reconciliation appointed betwixt God and them:
this is to save an earthen Pitcher, whilst the Vessel of Gold is let fall, and
no hand stretched out to save it.

But what is most astonishing is, that so great a Person as the Son of God,
should come himself from the Futhers bosom, to save us by putting himself into
our room and stead, being made a Curse for us, Gal. 3 13. he leaves the bosom
of his Father, and all the ineffable delights of Heaven, disrobes himself of
his Glory, and is found in fashion as man, yea becomes as a worm and no man,
submits to the lowest step and degree of abasement to save lost sinners. What a
low stoop does Christ make in his Humiliation to catch the Souls of poor
sinners out of Hell! Herein was love, that God sent his own Son to be the
propitiation for our sins, 1 Ioh. 4.10. and so God loved the world, Ioh. 3.16.
at this rate he was content to save lost sinners.

How seasonable was this work of Mercy, both in its general Exhibition to the
World in the Incarnation of Christ, and in its particular Application to the
Soul of every lost sinner by the Spirit! When he was first exhibited to the
world, he found them all as lost sheep gone astray, every one turning to his
own way, Isa. 53.6. he speaks of our lost estate by Nature, both collectively
or in general, we all went astray, and distributively or in particular, every
one turned to his own way, and then in the fullness of time a Savior appeared.

And how seasonable was it in its particular application? How securely were we
wandering onwards in the paths of destruction, fearing no danger, when he
graciously opened our eyes by conviction, and pulled us back by heart-turning
Grace! No Mercy like this: it is an astonishing act of Grace that stands alone.

Inference V.
IF there be so many ways to Hell, and so few that escape it, how are all
concerned to strive to the uttermost in order to their own Salvation.

In Luke 13.23. a certain person proposed a curious question to Christ, Lord,
are there few that be saved? He saw a multitude flocking to Christ, and
thronging with great zeal to hear him, and he could not conceive but Heaven
must fill proportionably to the numbers he saw in the way thither: but Christ's
answer, ver. 24. at once rebukes the curiosity of the Questionist, fully solves
the question propounded, and sets home his own duty and greatest concernment
upon him. It rebukes his curiosity, and is as if he should say, Be the number
of the saved more or less, what is that to thee? strive thou to be one of them.
It fully solves the question propounded, by distinguishing those that attend
upon the means of Salvation, into Seekers and Strivers. In the first respect
there are many who by a cheap and easy profession seek Heaven, but take them
under the notion of Strivers (i. e.) persons heartily engaged in Religion, and
who make it their business, and so they will shrink up into a small number; and
it presses home his great business and concern upon him, Strive to enter in at
the strait gate.

By Gate understand whatsoever is introductive to Blessedness and Salvation. By
the Epithet, strait, understand the difficulties and severities attending
Religion, all that suffering and self-denial which those that are bound for
Heaven must count and cast upon. And by striving understand the diligent and
constant use of all those means and duties, how hard, irksom, and costly soever
they be. The word (...) has a deep sense and Emphasis, and imports striving
even to an agony: and this duty is enforced two ways upon him, and every man
else, first by the indisputable Sovereignty of Christ from whom the command
comes; and also from the deep interest and concern every Soul has in the
commanded duty. It is not only a simple compliance with the will of God, but
what also involves our own Salvation and eternal Happiness in it: our great
duty and our great interest are twisted together in this command; your eternal
happiness depends upon the success of it. A man is not crowned, except he
strive lawfully, i. e. successfully and prevalently. O therefore so run, so
strive, that ye may obtain. If you have any value for your Souls, if you would
not be miserable to Eternity, strive, strive. Believe it, you will find that
the assurance of Salvation drops not down from Heaven in a night-dream, as the
Turks fable their Alcoran to have done in that lailato hanzili, night of
demission, as they call it; no, no, the righteous themselves are scarcely
saved: many seek, but few find; strive therefore as men and women that are
heartily concerned for their own Salvation. Sit not with folded arms, like so
many heaps of stupidity and sloth; whilst the door of Hope is yet open, and
such a sweet voice from Heaven calls to you, saying, Strive, Souls, strive; if
ever you expect to be partakers of the Blessedness that is here to be enjoyed,
strive to the uttermost of your abilities and opportunities. Such an Heaven is
worth striving to obtain; such an Hell is worth striving to escape; such an
invaluable Soul is worth striving to save.

I confess Heaven is not the purchase or reward of your striving! No Soul shall
boastingly say there, Is not this the Glory which my duties and diligence
purchased for me? And yet on the other side it is as true, that without
striving you shall never set foot there. Say not, it depends upon the pleasure
of God, and not upon your diligence; for it is his declared will and pleasure
to bring men to Glory in the way, though not for the sake of their own
striving: as in the works of your civil Calling, you know all the care, toil,
and sweat of the Husbandman avails nothing of it self, except the Sun and Rain
quicken and ripen the Fruits of the Earth; and yet no wise man will neglect
plowing and harrowing, sowing and weeding, because these labors avail not
without the influences of Heaven; but waits for them in the way of his duty and
diligence: rational hope sets all the world awork. Do they plow in hope, and
sow in hope, and will not you pray in hope, and hear in hope? You that know
your Souls to be hitherto strangers to Christ, and the regenerating work of the
Spirit; how is it, that you take them not aside sometimes out of the
distracting noise and hurries of the world, and thus bemoan them?

O my poor, graceless, Christless, miserable Soul, how sad a case art thou in!
others have, but thou never feltest the burden of sin; thousands in the World
are striving and laboring, searching and praying to make their Calling and
Election sure: whilst thou sit still with folded hands in a supine
regardlesness of the misery that is hastening on upon thee. Can thou endure
the devouring wrath of God? Can thou dwell with everlasting burnings? Have
thou fancied a tolerable Hell? Or is it easy to perish? Why do thou not cast
thy self at the feet of Christ, and cry as long as breath will last, Lord, pity
a sinful, miserable, undone, and self-condemning Soul? Lord, smite this rockie
heart, subdue this stubborn will, heal and save an undone Soul ready to perish.
The characters of death are upon it, it must be changed or condemned, and that
in a little time. Bowels of pity, hear the cry of a Soul distressed, and ready
to perish.

And you that do not understand the case and slate your Souls are in, you have
never a Bible near you? O turn to those places, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. where you will
presently find the more obvious marks and characters God has set upon the
children of perdition; and if you find not your self in that Catalogue among
the unrighteous, Fornicators, Idolaters, Adulterers, Effeminate, Thieves,
Covetous, Drunkards, Revilers, Extortioners, etc. then turn to Ioh. 3.3. and
solemnly ask thy own Soul this question, Am I born again? Am I a new Creature?
Or still in the same condition I was born in? What solid evidence of the new
birth have I to rely upon, if I were now within a few gasps of death? Am not I
the man or woman who live in the very same sins which the Word of God makes the
Symptoms and Characters of Damnation? And does not my Conscience witness
against me, that I am utterly void and destitute of all that saving Grace, and
a mere stranger to the regenerating work of the Spirit, without which there can
be no well-bottom'd hope of Salvation? And if so, are not the tokens of death
upon me? Am not I a person marked out for misery? And shall I sit still in a
state of so much danger, and not once strive to make an escape from the wrath
to come? Is this vile body worth so much toil and labor to support and
preserve it? And is not my (...) worth as much care and diligence to secure it
from the everlasting wrath of the great, just, and terrible God? O that the
consideration of the wrath to come, the multitudes all the world over preparing
as fuel for it, and the door of opportunity yet held open to Souls by the hand
of Grace to escape that wrath, might prevail with thy heart, Reader, to strive,
and that to the uttermost, to secure thy precious Soul from the impending ruin.

EPHESIANS. 5.16. -- Redeeming the time (or opportunity) because the days are evil.
TIme is deservedly reckoned among the most precious mercies of this life; and
that which makes it so valuable, are the commodious seasons and opportunities
for Salvation which are vouchsafed to us therein. Opportunity is the golden
spot of Time, the sweet and beautiful flower growing upon the stalk of Time. If
Time be a Ring of Gold, (...).
opportunity is the rich Diamond that gives it both its value and glory. The
Apostle well knew the value of Time; and seeing how prodigally it was wasted by
the most, does therefore in this place earnestly press all men to redeem, save,
and improve it with the utmost diligence. In this and the former Verse We have
1. The Duty enjoined, Walk circumspectly. We have 2. The Injunction explained
1. More generally, Not as fools, but as wise. 2. More particularly, Redeeming
the time. 3. The Exhortation strongly enforced, with a powerful Motive, Because
the days are evil.


Among these Particulars, my Discourse is principally concerned about the
Redemption of Time or Opportunities, which in this life are graciously
vouchsased us in order to that which is to come: and here it will be needful

To inquire 1. What the Apostle means by Time. 2. What by the Redemption of
Time.


1. Time is taken more largely or strictly according to the double acceptance
of the Hebrew word (...), which signifies sometimes Time, and sometimes
Occasion, Season, or Opportunity, and accordingly is expressed by (...) and
(...), Tempus and Tempestivitas; the latter is the word here used, and denotes
the commodiousness and fitness of some parts of Time above others for the
successful and prosperous management and accomplishment of our main and great
business in this world, which is to secure our interest in Christ, and glorify
God in a course of fruitful obedience. For these great and weighty purposes our
time is graciously lengthened out, and many fit opportunities presented to us
in the revolutions thereof.

2. By the Redemption of Time we must understand the study, (...).
care, and diligence of Christians at the rate of all possible pains; at the
expense of all earthly pleasures, ease, and gratifications of the flesh to
rescue their precious seasons both of Salvation and service out of the hands of
temptations which so commonly rob unwary Souls of them. Satan trucks with us
for our time, as we did at first with the silly Indians for their Gold and
Diamonds, who were content to exchange them for Glass-Beads and Tinsil Toys.
Many fair seasons are forced or cheated out of our hands by the importunity of
earthly cares, or deceitfulness of sensual pleasures; at the expense and loss
of these we must redeem and rescue our time for higher and better uses and
purposes. We must spend those hours in prayer, meditation, searching our
hearts, mortifying our lusts: which others do, and our flesh fain would spend
in sensual pleasures and gratifications of the fleshly appetite. If ever we
expect to win the Port of Glory, we must be as diligent and careful as Seamen
are to take every gale that blows directly or obliquely, to set them forward in
their Voyage. The note from hence is this:

DOCTRINE. That the wisdom of a Christian is eminently discovered in saving and
improving all opportunities in this World, for that World which is to come.
God hangs the great things of Eternity upon the small wyers of times and
seasons in this world: that may be done or neglected in a day, which may be the
groundwork of joy or sorrow to all Eternity. There is a nick of opportunity
which gives both success and facility to the great and weighty affairs of the
Soul, as well as body: to come before it, is to seek the bird before it be
hatched; and to come after it, is to seek it when it is fled. There is a twofold
season or opportunity of Salvation: 1. One was Christ's season for the Purchase
of it. 2. The other is ours for the Application of it.


1. Christ had a season assigned him for the impetration and purchase of our
Salvation; so you hear his Father bespeaking him, Isa. 49.8. Thus says the
Lord, In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I
helped thee: (...), in tempore opportuno voluntatis, vel placito. It was the
wisdom of the Lord Jesus Christ to set in with the Fathers time, to comply with
his season; and it became a day of Salvation, because it was the acceptable
time which Christ took for it.

2. Men have their seasons and opportunities for the application of Christ, and
his benefits to their own Souls: 2 Cor. 6.1, 2. We then as workers together
with God beseech you also, that you receive not the grace of God in vain; for
he says, I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of salvation
have I succored thee. Behold, now is the accepted time, now is the day of
salvation. He exhorts the Corinthians not to dally or trifle any longer in the
great concerns of their Salvation; for now, says he, is your day. Christ had
his day to purchase it, and he procured a day also for you to apply it, and
this is that day; you enjoy it, you live under it: that golden day is now
running, O see that you frustrate not the design thereof, by receiving the
Gospel Grace in vain.

Now two things concur to make a fit season of Salvation to the Souls of men.

1. The external Means and Instruments. 2. The Agency of the Spirit internally
by or with those external Means.
1. Men have then an opportunity for Salvation when God sends the means and
instruments of Salvation among them. When the Gospel is powerfully preached
among a people, then there is a door opened to them, 2 Cor. 2.12. When I came
to Troas to preach the Gospel, a door was opened to me of the Lord. God does as
it were unlock the door of Heaven by the preaching of the Gospel; Souls have
then an opportunity to step in and be saved.

2. But yet this is not a wide and effectual door, (^s the Apostle phraseth it,
1 Cor. 16.9.) till the Spirit of God joins with, and works upon the heart by
those external means and instruments. As the waters of the Pool of Bethesda had
no inherent fanative virtue in themselves, unti^ the Angel of the Lord
descended, and troubled them: but both together make a blessed season for the
Souls of men, then he stands at the door and knocks by convictions and
persuasions, Rev. 3.20. strives with men, as he did with the old world by the
Ministry of Noah, Genesis 6.3. Now the door of opportunity is indeed opened, but
this will not always last, there is a time when the Spirit cease to strive,
and when the door is shut, Luke 13.25.

There is a season when by the fresh impression of some Ordinance or Providence
of God, men's hearts are awakened, and their affections stirred! It is now with
the Souls of men as it is with Fruit Trees in the Spring when they put forth
blossoms, if they knit and set, f^uit follows; if they be nipt and blasted, no
fruit can be expected. For all convictions and motions of the affections are to
Grace, much the same thing as blossoms are to Fruit, which are but the rudiment
thereof, fructus imperfectus and ordinabilis, somewhat in order to it; and look
as that is a critical and hazardous season to Trees, so is this to Souls. I do
not say, it is in the power of any Soul to make the work of the Spirit
effectual and abiding, by adding his endeavors to the Spirits motions; for
then conversion would not be the free and arbitrary act of the Spirit, as it is
Ioh. 3.8. neither would Souls be born of God, but of the will of man, contrary
to Ioh. 1.13. And yet it is not to be thought or said, that men's endeavors and
strivings are altogether vain, needless, and insignificant; because, though
they cannot make the grace of God effectual, his Grace can make them effectual;
they are our duty, and God can bless them to our great advantage. Now there are
among others five remarkable essays, efforts, or strivings of a Soul under the
impression and hand of the Spirit, which greatly tend to the fixing, settling,
and securing of that great work upon the Soul: and it is seldom known that any
Soul miscarries in whom these things are found.

(1.) Deep, serious, and fixed consideration, which lets conviction deep into
the Soul, and settles it, and roots it fast in the heart: Psalm. 119.59. I
thought upon my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. There are close
and anxious debates in those Souls in whom convictions prosper to full
conversion: they sit alone, and think close to their great and eternal
concerns: they carry their thoughts back to the evils of their life past, then
smite on the thigh, and cry, What have I done? They run their thoughts forward
into Eternity, and that to a great depth, and then cry, What shall I do to be
saved? They deliberate and weigh in their most advised thoughts what is to be
done, and that speedily for the escaping of the wrath to come: thus they fix
those tender, weak, and hazardous motions, which dye away in multitudes of
Souls; and in the loss of them their seasons of Salvation are also lost.

(2.) The first stirrings and motions of the Spirit upon men's hearts do then
become a season of Salvation to them, when they are accompanied with spiritual,
fervent, and frequent prayer: so it was with Paul, Acts 9.11. Behold, he
prays. It Is a good sign when Souls get alone, and affect privacy and
retirement to pour out their fears, sorrows, and requests to God. It is in the
Espousals of a Soul to Christ, as it is in other Marriages; a third person may
make the motion, and bring the Parties together, but they only, betwixt
themselves, must conclude and agree the matter. Prayer is the first breath
which the new Creature draws in, and the last (ordinarily) it breaths out in
this world. This nourishes and maturates those weak and tender first motions
after God, and brings them to some consistence and fixedness in the Soul.

(3.) Then do those motions of the Spirit on men's hearts make a season of
Salvation to them, when they remain and settle in the heart, and are in them
per modum quietis, by way of rest and abode, following the man from place to
place, from day to day; so that whatever unpleasing diversions the necessities
and encumbrances of this world at any time give, yet still they return again
upon the heart, and will not vanish, or suffer any long suspension: but in
others who lose their blessed advantage and season, it is quite contrary, Iam.
1.23, 24. They are as one that sees his natural face in a glass, and goes
away, and forgets what manner of man he was: he sees some spot on his face,
or disorder in his band, which he purposes to correct, but one occurrence or
another chops in, and he forgets what he saw in the glass, and so goes all the
day with his spot upon him. This was an evanid light purpose, which came to
nothing for want of a present execution: just so it is with many in reference
to their great concerns; but if the impression abide in its strength, if it
return, and follow the Soul, and will not let it be quiet, it is like then to
prosper and prove the time of Mercy indeed to such Souls.

(4) An anxious solicitude and inquisitiveness about the means and ways of
Salvation, speaks an effectual door of Salvation to be set open to the Souls of
men, Acts 2.37. and 16.30. Sirs, what must I do to be saved? Men and brethren,
what shall we do? q. d. we are in a miserable condition. O you the Ministers of
Christ instruct, counsel, and show us what course to take. Is there no Balm in
Gilead? No door of hope in this Valley of Achor? Alas! we are not able to dwell
with our own fears, terrors, and presages of wrath to come. O for a Messenger,
one among a thousand, to teach us the way of Salvation. Thus the Lord rivets
and fixes those motions in some Souls, which vanish like a morning mist or dew
in others.

(5) Lastly, That which secures and compleats this work, is the execution of
those purposes and convictions, by falling without delay to the work of Faith
and Repentance in good earnest, dallying no more with so great a concernment,
standing no longer at shall I? shall I? when mean while time flies away, and
opportunities are in hazard to be lost: but bringing their thoughts and debates
to a peremptory resolution, as the Lepers at Samaria did; and seeing themselves
shut up to one only door of hope, there they resolve to take up their station,
lying at the feet of Jesus Christ, and casting their poor burdened Souls upon
him, whatever be the issue. When the Spirit of God ripens his first motions to
this, and carries them through that critical season thus far, then there is an
effectual door of opportunity opened indeed, this is an acceptable time, a day
of Salvation: but O how many thousands miscarry in this season, and like trees
removed from one soil to another, dye in the removal.

But certainly, it is the most solemn and important concern of every Soul to
watch upon all these seasons of Salvation, when God comes nigh to them by
convictions and motions of his Spirit, and to put the same value upon these
things which they do upon their Souls, and the Salvation of them. This is the
door of Hope set open, a fresh gale to carry you home to your Port of Glory.
Salvation is now come nigh to your Souls; there is but a little betwixt you and
Blessedness. Wise and happy is that Soul which knows and improveth its
season. To persuade and press men to discern and improve such seasons as these,
is the principal work of the Preachers of the Gospel, and that special work to
which I now address my self in the following Motives and Arguments.

Argument I.
AND first, who that has the free exercise of Reason, and the sense of a
future eternal Estate, would carelessly neglect any season of Salvation, whilst
he sees all the rational world so carefully attending and watching all
opportunities to promote and secure their lower concerns and designs for the
present life?

Is not the saving of a man's Soul as weighty a concern as the getting of an
Estate? You cannot but observe how care* Merchants are to nick the opportunity
which promises them a good turn. How yare poor Seamen look out for a wind to
wast them to their Port, and industriously shift their Sails to improve every
slaw that may set them on in their Voyage. How many miles Tradesmen will travel
to be in season at a Fair, to put off or purchase Goods to their advantage. No
entertainments, recreations, or importunities of friends can prevail with any
of these to lose a day on which their business depends: all things must give
way to their business: they all understand their seasons, and will not be
diverted. But alas, what childish toys are all these, compared with Salvation!
What is the loss of a little Money, to the loss of a man's Soul? If a man's life
depended upon his being at such a place, by such a precise hour, sure he would
not over-sleep his time that morning; and had he but the least fear of coming
too late, every stroke of the Clock would strike to his heart: and yet
remisness and carelessness in such a case as this, is infinitely more excusable
than in the matter of Salvation. Certainly the solicitude and care of all the
world for the interests thereof, yea, your own diligence and circumspection in
temporal things will be an uncontrollable and confounding self-conviction to
you in the day of your account, and leave you without Plea or Apology for your
supine neglects of the seasons of Salvation.

Argument II.
SEcondly, The consideration of the uncertainty and slippery nature of these
spiritual seasons must awaken in us all care and diligence to secure and
improve them. This nick of opportunity is tempus labile, a slippery season; it
is but short in it self, and very uncertain. To day* whilst it is said to day
(says the Apostle) if ye will hear his voice, Heb. 3.15. q. d. you have now a
short, uncertain, but most precious and valuable season for your Souls, lay
hold on it, whilst it is called to day; for if this season be let slip, the
time to come is called by another name; that is, not to day, but to morrow.
Your time is the present time, take heed of procrastinating and putting it off
till that which is called to day (which is your only season) be past and gone.
This precious inch of time, though it be more worth than all the other greater
parts and portions of your time; yet it is as much in fluxu, in hasty motion
and expense as other parts of time are: and being once lost, is never more to
be recalled or recovered. Few men know or understand it whilst it is current:
other seasons for natural or civil actions are known and stated, but the time
of Grace is not so easily discerned, and therefore commonly mistaken and lost:
and this comes to pass partly through 1. Presumptuous Hopes. 2. Discouraging
Fears.


1. Presumptuous Hopes, which put it too far forth, and persuade us this season
is yet to come; that we have before us, Praesumendo sperant, and sperando
per^unt.
and that to morrow shall be as to day. Thus through presumption men hope, and
by their presumptuous hopes they perish: this is the ruin of most Souls that
perish.

2. Discouraging Fears put it too far back, and represent it as long since past
and gone, whilst it is yet in being, and in our hands. By such pangs of
desperation Satan cuts the very nerves of industry and diligence, and causes
Souls to yield themselves as by consent for lost and hopeless, even whilst the
Gospel is opening their eyes to see their sin and misery, which is a part of
the work in order to their recovery. Thus the eyes of thousands are dazzled,
that they cannot discern the season of Mercy, and so it slides from them, as if
it had never been.

God came near them in the means of their Conversion, yea, and nearer than
that, in the motions of his Spirit upon their Consciences and Affections; but
they knew not the time of their visitation, and now the things of their peace
are hidden from their eyes. Had those Convictions been obeyed, and those
purposes that were begotten in their hearts been followed home by answerable
executions of them, happy had they been to all Eternity: but their careless
neglects have quenched them, and the door is shut, and who knows whether it may
be opened any more? O dally not with the Spirit of God, resist not his calls,
his motions upon the Soul are tender things, they may soon be quenched, and
never recovered.

Argument III.
NEglect not the seasons of Mercy, the day of Grace, because opportunity
facilitates the great work of your Salvation: it is much easier to be done in
such a season, than it can be afterward: an impression is easily made upon wax
when it is melted, but stay a while till it be hardened, and if you lay the
greatest weight upon the seal, it leaves not its impress upon it. Much so it is
with the heart, there is a season when God makes it soft and yielding, when the
affections are thawed and melted under the Word. Conscience is full of sense
and activity, the will pliable: now is the time to set in with the motions of
the Spirit: there is now a gale from Heaven, if you will take it; and if not,
it tarrieth not for man, nor waits for the sons of men. Neglect of the season
is the loss of the Soul. The heart, like melted wax, will naturally harden
again, and then to how little purpose are your own feeble essays? Heb. 3.15.
it is both easy and successful striving, when the Spirit of God strives in you
and with you; you are now workers together with God, and such work goes on
smoothly and sweetly: that which is in motion is easily moved; but if once the
heart be set, you may tug to little purpose.

Argument IV.
THE infinite importance and weight of Salvation is alone instead of all
motives and arguments to make men prize and improve every proper season for it.
It is no ordinary concern, it is your life, yea, it is your eternal life. The
solemnity and awfulness of such a business as this, is enough to swallow up the
spirit of a man. O what an awful found have such words as these, Ever with the
Lord! Suppose you saw the Glory of Heaven, the full reward of all the labors
and sufferings of the Saints, the blessed harvest of all their prayers, tears,
diligence, and self-denial in this world; or suppose you had a true
representation of the Torments of Hell, and could but hear the wailings of the
damned for the neglect of the season of Mercy, and their passionate, but vain
wishes for one of those days which they have lost; would you think any care,
any pains, any self-denial too much to save and redeem one of these
opportunities? Surely, you would have a far higher estimation of them than ever
you had in your lives.

A Trial for a man's whole Estate is accounted a solemn business among men, the
Cast of a Dye for a man's life is a weighty action, and seldom done without
anxiety of the mind, and trembling of the hand: yet both these are but
Childrens Play compared with Salvation-work.

Three things put an unspeakable solemnity upon this matter: it is the precious
Soul, which is above all valuation that lies at stake, and is to be saved or
lost. The saving or losing of it is not for a time, but for ever, and this is
the only season in which it will be eternally saved, or cast away: all hangs
upon a little inch of time, which being over-slipt and lost, is never more to
be recalled or recovered. Lord, with what serious spirits, deep and weighty
consideration, fears and tremblings of heart should men and women attend the
seasons of their Salvation!

Believe it, Reader, since thy Soul projected its first thought, there never
was a more weighty and concerning subject than this presented to thy thoughts.
O therefore let not thy thoughts trifle about it, and slide from it as they use
to do in other things of common concernment.

Argument V.
IF we set any value upon the true pleasure of life, or solid comfor^ of our
Souls at death, let us by no means neglect the special seasons and
opportunities of Salvation we now enjoy.

These two things, the pleasure of life, and comfort in death should be prized
by every man more than his two eyes: certainly no Being at all is more
desirable than a Being without these: take away the true spiritual pleasure of
life, and you level the life of man with the beast that perishes: and take
away the hope and comfort of the Soul in death, and you sink him infinitely
below the beast, and make him a Being only capable of misery for ever.

Now there can be no true spiritual pleasure found in that Soul that has
neglected and lost his only season of Salvation: all the solid delight and
comfort of life results from the settlement and security of a man's great
concern in the proper season thereof. The true mirth of the converted Prodigal
bears date from the time of his return and reconciliation to his Father, Luke
15.24. Two things are absolutely prerequisite to the comfort of life, viz. a
change of the state by Justification, and a change of the frame and temper of
the heart by Sanctification. To be in a pardoned state is matter of all joy,
Matt. 9.2. and to be spiritually minded is life and peace, Romans 8.6. no good
news comes to any man before this, and no bad news can sink a man's heart after
this.

And for hope and comfort in death, let none be so fond to expect it, till his
Soul have first complied with, and obeyed the Call of God in the time thereof;
a careless life never did nor ever will produce a comfortable death. What is
more common among all that dye not stupid and senseless, as well as unregenerate
and Christless, than the bitter dolorous complaints of their misspent time,
and losing their season of Mercy? Reader, if thou would not feel that anguish
thou have seen and heard others to be in upon this account, know the time of
thy visitation, and finish thy great work whilst it is day.

Argument VI.
NEglect no season of Salvation which is graciously afforded you, because your
time is short, Death and Eternity are at the door. You know that you must
shortly put off these Tabernacles, 2 Pet. 1.13, 14. that when a few years are
come, you shall go the way whence you shall not return, Job 16.22. All the
living are listed Soldiers, and must conflict hand to hand with that dreadful
Enemy Death, and there is no discharge in that War, Eccles. 8.8. It will be in
vain to say you are not willing to dye, for willing or unwilling, away you must
go when Death calls you. It will be as vain to say you are not ready, for ready
or unready, you must be gone when Death comes, your readiness to dye would
indeed be a Cordial to your hearts in death; but then you must improve and ply
the time of life, and husband your opportunities diligently: carelessness of
life and readiness for death are inconsistent and exclusive of each other: the
Bed is sweeter to none than to the hard Labourer, and the Grave comfortable to
none but the laborious Christian: you know nothing can be done by you after
death; the Compositum is then dissolved; you cease to be what you were, to
enjoy the means you had, and to work as you did. O therefore slip not the only
season you have both of attaining the end of life, and escaping the danger and
hour of death.

The USE.
I shall close all with a word of Exhortation, persuading (if it be possible)
the careless and unthinking Neglecters of their precious Time and Souls, to
awaken out of that deep and dangerous security in which they lie fast asleep
upon the very brink of Eternity: and to day, whilst it is yet called to day, to
hear the Voice of God calling them to Repentance and Faith, and thereby to
Christ and everlasting Blessedness. Behold, he yet stands at the door and
knocks, Rev. 3.20. the door of Hope is not yet finally shut, there are yet some
stirrings at certain times in men's Consciences; God comes near them in his
Word, and in some rouzing acts of Providence, the death of a near Relation, the
seizure of a dangerous Disease, the blasting and disappointment of a man's great
Design and Project for this World, a fall into some notorious Sin; these and
many such like Methods of Providence, as well as the convincing voice of the
Word, have the efficacy of an awaking voice to men's drowsy Consciences; and if
careless Sinners would but attend to them, and follow home those motions they
make upon their hearts, who knows to what these weak beginnings might arise and
prosper. The Souls of men are as it were embarked in the Calls of God, your
life is bound up in them; if these be lost, your Souls are lost; if these abide
upon you, and grow up to sound Conversion, you are saved by them. More
particularly consider, (1.) What a mercy it is to have your Lot providentially
cast under the Gospel? To be born under and bred up with the means and
instruments of Conversion and Salvation? We have lived from our youth up under
the Calls of God, and within the joyful sound of the Gospel: God has not dealt
so with other Nations, Psalm. 147.20. Though others should seek the means of
life, they cannot find them; and though you seek them not, you can hardly miss
them. (2.) How great a mercy is it to have your lives lengthened out hitherto
by the patience of God under the Gospel? That neither that golden Lamp, nor the
Lamp of your life (both which are liable to be extinguished every moment) are
yet put out. Thousands and ten thousands your Contemporaries are gone out of
the hearing of the voice of the Gospel, they shall never hear another Call, the
Treaty of God is ended with them, the Master of the house is risen up, and the
doors are shut: Your neglects and provocations have not been inferior to
theirs, but the patience and goodness of God has exceeded and abounded to you
beyond whatever it did to them. (3.) Bethink your selves what an aggravation of
your misery it will be to sink into Hell with the Calls of God sounding in your
ears! to sink into eternal misery betwixt the tender outstretched arms of
Mercy; this is the Hell of Hell, the Emphasis of Damnation; the racking Engine
on which the Consciences of the damned are tortured. And thou, Capernaum, which
art exalted to heaven, shall be brought down to hell, Matt. 11.23. Such a fall
after so high an exaltation is the very Strappado which will torment your
Consciences. Hell will prove a cooler and milder place to the Heathens that
never enjoyed your light, means, and mercies in this world, than it will to
you. None sink so deep into misery in the world to come, as they that fall from
the fairest opportunities of Salvation in this world. (4) Let no man expect
that God will hear his cries and entreaties in time of misery, who neglects and
slights the Calls of God in the time of Mercy. God calls, but men will not
hear, the day is coming when they shall cry, but God will not hear, Prove. 1.24,
25 will God hear his cry when trouble comes upon him? Job 27.9. no, no, he
will not: and this is but a just retribution from the righteous God, whose
calls and counsels men have set at naught; but whatever men now think of it, it
is certainly the greatest misery incident to man in all the world: for as no
words can make another fully sensible what a privilege it is to have the ear,
favor, pity, and help of God in a day of straits; so it is impossible for any
words to express the doleful state and case of that Soul whom God casts off in
trouble, and whose cries he shuts out. (5) Beware of neglecting any Call of
God, because that Call you are now tempted to neglect, may be the last Call
that ever God intends to give thy Soul. Sure I am there is a Call which will
be the last Call of God to rebellious Sinners, and after that no more Calls,
but an eternal deep silence: his Spirit shall not always strive with man; and
the more motions and calls you have already slighted, the more probable it is,
that this may be the last Voice of God in a way of Mercy to thy Soul: and what
if after this, God should seal up thy heart, and judicially harden it; make thy
will utterly inflexible, and thine ears deaf, as he threatens, Isa 6.10. What
an undone miserable man or woman art thou then! O beware of provoking the
forest of all Judgments, by persisting any longer in a course of rebellion
against Light and Mercy. (6) Whilst your hearts put off and neglect the Calls
of God, you can never by any means arrive to the evidence and assurance of your
Election; for your Election is only secured to you by your effectual calling, 2
Pet. 1.10. there is no way for men to discern their Names written in the Book
of Life, but by reading the work of Sanctification in their own hearts, Romans
10.8. I desire no miraculous Voice from Heaven, no extraordinary signs or
unscriptural notices and informations in this matter, Lord, let me but find my
heart complying with thy calls, my will obediently submitting to thy commands;
Sin my burden, and Christ my desire: I will never crave a fairer or surer
evidence of thy electing love to my Soul; and if I had an Oracle from Heaven,
an extraordinary Messenger from the other World, to tell me thou love me, I
have no reason to give credit to such a Voice, whilst I find my heart wholly
sensual, averse to God, and indisposed to all that is spiritual. (7.) What
reason have you why you should not presently embrace the Call of God, and
thankfully lay hold upon the first opportunity and season of Salvation?

Have you any greater matters in hand than the Salvation of your precious
Souls? Is there any thing in all this world that more concerns you? If the
affairs of this life be so indispensably necessary, and those of the world to
come so indifferent: if you think that meat and drink, trade and business, wife
and children be such great things, and Christ, Soul, and Eternity such little
things; or if you think the Salvation be a work of the greatest necessity, yet
it may safely enough be put off to a time of uncertainty, I may assure you, you
will not long be of this mind. How soon are all the mistakes of men in these
matters rectified in a few moments after death? Rectified, I say, but not
remedied; your opinion will be changed, but not your condition.

(8.) Do you not every day easily and readily obey the Calls of Satan and your
own Lusts, whilst God and Conscience are suffered to call and strive with you
in vain? If Satan or your Lusts call you to the Tavern, to the World, and your
sinful Pleasures, you speedily comply with their Call, and yield a ready
obedience: if Pride call, if Covetousness call, if Passion and Revenge call,
they need not call twice; and shall God call, and Conscience call only in vain?
Lord, what a Creature is Man become! If a vain Companion call, you have no
power to deny him; if God call, you have no ear to hear him. (9.) You cannot
but observe the obedience and diligence of many others, how seriously,
painfully, and assiduously they ply and follow on the work of their own
Salvation, and yet they are no more concerned in the events and consequences of
these things than you are. Does it not trouble you when you compare your selves
with them? Do not such thoughts as these sometimes arise in your hearts upon
such observations? Lord, what a difference is there like to be betwixt their
end and mine, when there is so apparent a difference in our course and
conversation? Does not God distinguish persons in this world by the frames of
their hearts and tenor of their lives, in order to the great distinction he
will make betwixt one and another in the Day of Judgment? Have not I as
precious a Soul to save, or lose, as any of them? What is the matter that I sit
with folded arms, whilst they are working out Salvation with fear and
trembling? Why should any man or woman in the world be more careful for their
Souls, than I for mine? Surely its capacity and excellency is equal with
theirs, though our care and diligence be so unequal. (10.) To conclude, God
will shortly give you an irresistible Call to the Grave, and after that his
Voice shall call to you in your Graves, Arise ye dead, and come to Judgment:
but woe be to you, woe and alas that ever you were born, if you should hear the
Call of God to dye, before you have heard and obeyed his Call to Christ. Will
your Deathbed be easy to you? Can you with any hope or comfort shoot the
Gulf of Eternity, before you have done one act for the securing your Souls
from the wrath to come? It Is a dreadful thing for a poor Christless Soul to sit
quivering up on the lips of a dying Sinner, not able to stay, nor yet to endure
a parting pull from the Body in such a case as it is.


In a word, if the God that made, and will shortly judge you; if the Redeemer
that shed his invaluable Blood, and now offers you the purchaces and benefits
of it; if you have any love to, or care of your own Souls, which are more worth
than the whole world; if you have any value for Heaven or dread of Hell, then
for Gods sake, for Christ's sake, for your precious Souls sake, trifle with
Heaven and Hell no longer, but be in earnest to work out your own Salvation
with fear and trembling. Could I think of any other means or motives that might
secure your Souls from danger, I would surely use them. Could I reach your
hearts effectually, I would deeply impress this great concern upon them^punc;
but I can neither do Gods part of the work, nor yours; it is some ease to me I
have in sincerity (though with much imperfection and feebleness) done part of
my own: the Lord prosper it by the Blessing of his Spirit on the hearts of them
that read it. Amen.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for, and Sold by Francis Tyton Bookseller at the
Three Daggers in Fleetstreet near the Temple-Gate.
Books in Folio.
SPeed's Maps and Geography of Great Britain and Ireland and of Foreign Parts.
G^illim's Display of Heraldry with large Additions. Roll's Abridgment French.
-- His Reports in 2 Vol. French. Cook's Reports in 3 Vol. English. Dalton's
Office of Sheriffs with many Additions. -- Country Justice. The Trial and
Condemnation of Edward Fitzharris Esquire for High Treason, at the Bar of the Court
of Kings Bench at Westminster, on Thursday, June 9. 1681. As also the Trial and
Condemnation of Dr. Oliver Plunket Titular Primate of Ireland, for High
Treason. The Arraignment and Plea of Edward Fitzharris Esquire, with all the
Arguments in Law, and Proceedings of the Kings Bench thereupon in Easter Term,
1681. Lawson's Theopolitica, or a Body of Divinity, containing the Rules of the
special Government of God, according to which he orders the immortal and
intellectual Creatures, Angels and Men, to their final and eternal Estate, etc.
Cradock's Harmony of the Four Evangelists. Strong's Discourse of the two
Covenants: wherein the nature, differences, and effects of the Covenant of
Works and of Grace are distinctly and practically discussed, etc. Bishop
Gauden's Tears, Sighs, Complaints, and Prayers of the Church of England.
Morris on the Sacrament. Lord Bacon's Advancement of Learning. Petavius's
History of the World. The History of the valorous and witty Knight Errant Don
Quixote. Habington's History of Edward IV. King of England. The History of the
Wars of Italy rendered into English by Henry Earl of Monmouth.
Books in Quarto.
Mr. Flavel's Fountain of Life opened: or a Display of Christ in his Essential
and Mediatorial Glory, etc. -- The Method of Grace in bringing home the Eternal
Redemption, continued by the Father, and carried on by the Son, through the
effectual Application of the Spirit unto Gods Elect, being the second part of
Gospel-Redemption. -- Discourse of the Immortality of the Soul. Dr. Patrick's
Parable of the Pilgrim. -- Two Sermons preached at the Funeral of Mr. Samuel
Iacomb and Mr. Greg. Dr. Tenison of Idolatry. -- A Sermon concerning the
discretion of giving of Alms, preached at St. Sepulchers Church, London,
instead of the Spittle, upon Wednesday in Easter-week, 1681. Mr. Baxter's
Saints Everlasting Rest. -- Reasons of the Christian Religion. -- Sermon of
Repentance. Murcot's Works. Strong's Gods Shepherd, or the Man God's Fellow. --
Vengeance of the Temple. -- Voice from Heaven. Blackwood on Matthew. Alleyn's
Scripture-Chronology. Buroughs on Gospel-Reconciliation. Sympson of Unbelief.
Gregory's Moot-Book Englished by Hughs. Crompton's Jurisdiction of Courts.
Swinburn of Wills. Spelman de Sepultura* Buck on the Beatitudes* Special
Law-Cases.
Books in Octavo.
Flavel's Divine Conduct, or the Mystery of Providence. Dr. Patrick's Jewish
Hypocrisy. -- Mensa Mystica, or a Discourse concerning the Sacrament of the
Lord's Supper. In which the Ends of its Institution are so manifested, our
Addresses to it so directed, our Behavior there and afterward so composed,
that we may not lose the benefits which are to be received by it. In which
several Prayers and Thanksgivings are now inserted to make it of more general
use. -- Divine Arithmetic, or the Art of Numbering our days: being a Sermon
preached June 17. 1659. at the Funeral of Mr. Samuel Iacomb, B. D. at St. Mary
Woolnoth, Lombardstreet. -- A brief Exposition of the Ten Commandments and the
Lord's Prayer. Iacomb's Catechism, with a brief Exposition of the Creed and Ten
Commandments. Baxter's right Method for a settled Peace of Conscience, and
spiritual Comfort, in 32 Directions. Lawson against Hobbs. Dr. Fowler's Design
of Christianity. Maynard's Law of God ratified. Row's Emmanuel. -- Saints
Temptations. Strong's Will of Man subjected to God's Will. Gale's Theophile, a
Treatise of Christ's Love. Gearing of Pride. Wotton's Remains. Alleyn's King
Henry VII. a Poem. Ianna Linguarum. Speed's Travelers Companion. Chamberlain's
Complete Justice. Zouch of the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty. Fitzherbert's
Natura Brevium.
Books in small 8^ 120 and 240
Dr. Patrick's Hearts Ease, or a Remedy against all Troubles, with a
consolatory Discourse particularly directed to those who are their Friends and
dear Relations. Flavel's Touchstone of Sincerity, or the signs of Grace, and
Symptoms of Hypocrisy, opened in a practical Treatise upon Rev. 3.17, 18.
being the second Part of the Saint indeed. Baxter's Universal Concord. --
Catholic Unity. -- The true Catholic. -- Mischief of self-Ignorance. Strong's
Worm that dies not, or the certainty of Hell Torments. -- Heavenly Creature.
Lawrence of Christ's Power over bodily Diseases. Whateley's Redemption of Time.
Vines on the Saints nearness to God. Row's Heavenly and Earthly Mindedness.
Sydenham on Infant Baptism, and singing of Psalms. Swafield of the Saints
Failings. The Life of Mr. John Row of Crediton in Devon. Gearing of Prayer. --
Of Providence. Perkin's Catechism The Calvinists Cabinet unlockt. The Spanish
Inquisition. The Schism of the Mass. Wotton's Letters. Chaucer's Ghost. The
Office of the Houswife. Loves Journal. Finche's Law in 4 Books Eng. Meriton's
Guide to Constables. A new Book of Instruments. Clayton's Reports. Fleetwood's
Justice. Sheppard's Office of a Justice. Britton. The History of Eurialus and
Lucretia. Horace with Minelius his Notes. Grotius de Veritate Christianae
Religionis, etc. Valerius Maximus. Quintus Curtius. The Christian Pattern by
Thomas a Kempis. The Wisdom of the Just.

