A LETTER FROM The Right Honorable Ferdinando Lord Fairfax, Sir Hugh Cholmley,
Sir Philip Stapleton, Sir Henry Cholmley, Committees of the Commons House of
Parliament residing at York.

Being a Relation of all the Passages at the great Meeting at York, on Thursday
the 12. of this instant May.

WITH The Names of those Gentlemen that Concurred with the King concerning a
Guard for his Sacred Person. And the Petition of the County, with his Majesty's
Answer to it.

ALSO, The Freeholders PROTESTATION, enclosed in the Letter from the said
Committee, to Master Speaker, and ordered by the said House to be forthwith
published in Print.

And the Votes against removing the next Term to York.

H. Elsing. Cler. Parl. Dom. Com.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Lownes, and are to be sold without Ludgate. 1642.

SIR,
IN our last Letter we gave you an account of our first and second waiting on
the King, we writ to you then, that his Majesty commanded us to attend him
yesterday being Thursday, to hear what he said to the Gentlemen, which a
little before the meeting he seconded by a particular Message. Being come
thither, his Majesty caused the several Messages between him and the
Parliament, mentioned in this enclosed paper printed to be read.

This was done with much humming and applause of the Kings Messages, by some
persons who had placed themselves near about where the King stood. But when
any thing from the Parliament came to be read, with so much hissing and
reviling the Parliament, that though in respect and duty to the Kings person we
could not resent it, as otherwise we should have done; yet have since
expostulated, and complained of it to his Majesty. Some were so bold as to say
openly, That the Parliament Men should set their houses in order, for many of
them should shortly have their heads off: One of which (as since we are
credibly informed) was one Hurst, a servant to one Master William Crofts. In
this which was said by the King, you will see what reason we had to vindicate
our selves, and therefore we immediately repaired to the Deanes house with all
the other Gentlemen, and there we took notice of the rough usage we had
received; We told them that it was neither indiscretion nor disobedience in us
(as his Majesty was pleased to call it) to deliver the Parliaments Message, or
to stay here though commanded to the contrary, since we conceived no man needed
to be satisfied in so clear a case as this. That every Member of each House
ought to obey their commands, when they were pleased to employ them. But since
his Majesty thought fit to bid them take heed of us, not knowing what doctrine
of disobedience we might preach to them, under color of obeying the
Parliament; we apppealed to every man, whether we had in word or deed, in
public or in private, done any thing that became not honest men, and persons
employed from the Parliament. That we had communicated our Instructions to his
Majesty, being that we would avow all our actions, and that we were confident
it would not be said we had transgressed them. This was very well taken and
justified by the Country. Yesterday there came diverse thousands of Freeholders
to this City, though none but the Gentry were summoned, but receiving a command
from the King not to come to Court, they forbore, and stayed in the Castle
yard, yet sent this Petition enclosed to his Majesty, and received the Answer
annexed thereunto. There was likewise a Committee of twelve Gentlemen appointed
yesternight to consider of drawing up an Answer to the Kings proposition
concerning a Guard: but nothing could be then done, because it was past 3. a
clock, before the Gentleman were admitted to the King. This morning the
Freeholders assembled again in the Castle yard, and there they made this
Protestation enclosed, of their right of voting in what concerns the Peace of
the country, as having their interest therein.

When we all met all this morning again at the Deans house, we who are your
Committees received this Message by Sir Edward Stanhope, That he came from his
Majesty to command us, that we should depart from this meeting; and if we did
stay, his Majesty would judge us guilty of that he spoke of yesterday, which
was, Tampering. Notwithstanding which Command, we read the fourth Article of
our Instructions to the whole Company, that being pertinent to the business
we were then upon; and desired them to consider, whether the Parliament had
not expressed therein such a care of the Kings safety, that there would be
little need of Guards: We told them that we had a good right of being there as
Freeholders of the County, but that in obedience to the King we would depart
for this time; but whenever there should be occasion of our being there, in
pursuance of our Instructions and Commands from the Parliament, we should be
ready. The whole Company received great satisfaction, and desired a Copy of
that instruction; which we gave them. We were the more willing at that time to
go from thence, because we should not only give obedience to the Kings
command, which otherwise he would have said we constantly disobeyed; but
because the Committee of Twelve appointed yesternight were then to withdraw; so
that there was nothing for the present for us to do: We immediately went to the
King, and besought him that since we were continually so discountenanced by
him, in the face of our Country, that he would be pleased to let us know in
particular wherein we had given the occasion; for we otherwise conceived we
were deprived of that Liberty, which was our due in respect of that Interest we
had here. His Majesty was pleased to tell us, that if we would lay aside that
Condition of Committees from the Parliament, he would not hinder us to be there
as Gentlemen of the Country: We humbly replied, That we could not lay that
down, nor could we be absent from any meeting where our presence was required,
for the service as Committees from the Parliament: To which his Majesty said,
That indeed he thought we could not lay it down, neither that it was reasonable
we should have Votes, and be in a double capacity. The Committee has been here
most part of this day, but not agreeing, six of them have drawn up this Answer
enclosed, which they have communicated to the Gentlemen and Freeholders: The
greater part of the Gentlemen, and all the Freeholders have agreed to, and
subscribed it. The other six have concluded upon this other Answer, consenting
to a guard of Horse; but this we do not hear they have gotten many names to,
nor can we get a Copy of those names as yet, though these be very few, yet
whether they can bring in any Horse or no, we cannot yet judge. The King has
received both these resolutions, which with his Answers to them you shall
likewise have here enclosed. His Majesty had declared himself yesterday, that
he would raise that Regiment which was Sir Robert Stricklands, for his foot
guard: But he has now laid aside that resolution. The Freeholders of the
County are now newly summoned to attend his Majesty about a week hence, the
three Ridings upon three several days; but for what service we know not.

Sir, you have here a large Narrative of the passages at this Meeting, what
dangers this poor Country lies under. We humbly refer it to you to judge, not
taking upon us to deliver any opinion. The business lasted so long, that is
hindered us from giving a more speedy account. Sir, this is what at this time
is sent from

Your assured friends and servants, Fer. Fairfax. Hu. Cholmley. Philip
Stapleton. He. Cholmley.

York 13, Maii 1642.
To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
WE Knights and Gentlemen whose names are subscribed do unanimously present
this our answer to your Majesty's propositions concerning the raising of a
guard of Horse for the security and defense of your sacred person.

To which proposition, as we conceive our selves bound by Allegiance, do
willingly concur. For that purpose humbly desiring that the aforesaid may be
raised by legal Authority: And likewise that it may consist of persons
unquestionable in their Religion, and Gentlemen.

The substance of his Majesty's Answer.
HIS Majesty gave them thanks, for it appeared as a satisfactory answer, and in
it they had showed great circumspection and wisdom, by choosing such whose
Loyalties could not be questioned, by excluding Recusants, and all suspected to
be disaffected.

Sir Thomas Fairefax Sir William Constable Sir Matthew Boynton Sir Thomas Gower
Sir Will. St. Quintin Sir Edward Rodes Sir William Crayley Sir Thomas Norcliffe
Sir Arthur Ingram Sir Richard Darley Sir Iarvas Cutler Sir William Fairefax Sir
Hugh Bethel Sir John Savell Sir William Lyster Sir Thomas Renington Master Tho.
Jopson Henry St. Quintin Arthur Noel Tobias Ienkins Henry Ienkins John Ferrer.
John West Henry Atkinson Henry Wythes William Bethell George Mountain Thomas
Stockdale William Gower Richard Trewman Sackvill Pope Thomas Heblethwait George
Eure George Marwood John Savile of Medlee John Saltmarshe William Copley
Lyonell Copley Edward Gower Cuthbert Creak William Cobb Doyley Gower Thomas
Rookeby John Calverley Francis Grimston John Anlaby Arthur Beckwith Christopher
Waters Matthew Beckwith Christopher Copley Thomas Croft William Parker George
Trotter Henry Westby William Iemimgs Thomas Bradford Richard Wilbore Job
Hackwod Matthew Allured Robert Sheppard John Acklam John Stillington Iervas
Hamand John Cholmeley Thomas Newark Henry Savile Lancelot Allured John Lambert
Francis Grimston Mr Stephen Quintin Willoughby Godfrey John Stillington John
Beverley Mr Bomton George Westby Benjamin Brown Charles Fairfax Henry
Arthington Henry Tempest.
These are the names subscribed in one sheet, there being many other sheets
filed together all of them subscribed, and amongst them many Gentlemen of note,
bu^ I took note only of the first sheet, having no more time.

To the Kings Most Excellent MAJESTY The Humble Petition of many thousands of
Your Majesty's peaceably affected Subjects of the County of YORK.
Humble shows, betwixt your Majesty and Parliament, whose grave, and loyal
Counsels are as we humbly conceive the visible way under God to put a speedy
end to the troubles of Ireland, and establish your Throne in righteousness.
And lastly, your Petitioners do most humbly supplicate that we may represent
our unfitness to become Judges betwixt your Majesty and Parliament in any
thing, or dispute the Authority of either, which they humbly conceive do
fortefie each other, it being most unfit for them to act any thing therein but
by their prayers for a right understanding between your Majesty and them,
which we shall heartily do, as also for your Majesty's long and prosperous
Reign, and as we are bound by our late Protestation shall be eady to maintain
your Majesty's just rights, the Privileges and power of Parliament and the
lawful liberties of the Subjects.

The Kings Answer to the Petition of the Coun^rey at the Court at York, May 13.
1642.
His Majesty
HAving with some care considered this Petition, being the first of this nature
that has been presented to him wherein any appearing well affected to his
service (though he has heard of many in the Contrary) have misdemeaned
themselves, has commanded me to give you this answer.

That he does totally discover proceedings complained in of the Petition, and
expects that you and all other his loyal Subjects shall rest satisfied with his
several Gracious Declarations and constant peaceable practice toward his
people to the contrary, and for further assurance upon just proof made against
any man who has committed any violence in words or actions (without just
provocation) full reparation shall be given to the parties injured. As for the
rest of this Petition, his Majesty says that it is so confused that he does
not well know what positive Answer to give it. And the rather because it is
grounded upon misinformation, both of his Majesty's proceedings and intentions,
as in particular, his Majesty says he never intended to have you to be judges
betwixt him and his Parliament. And for the other part of this Petition he
referres to his Messages, Declarations, and Answers, whereby it will clearly
appear that his desire and intention is only the preserving of the true
protestant profession, the laws of the land, the Liberty of his people, the
peace of the Kingdom: And the peace of this County in particular.

The Protestation of the Freeholders. May 1^. 1642.
Whereas his Majesty has been pleased to give Summons to the Gentry of this
County, to attend him at his Court at York the the twelfth of May instant, to
advise with him in some particulars, concerning the honor and safety of his
Majesty's person, and the well-being and peace of this our County, and in the
said summons was pleased to omit the Freeholders of this County, out of a
tender respect of putting them to any extraordinary charge, yet we, conscious
of our sincere Loyalty to his Majesty our Gracious Sovereign, and conceiving
our selves according to the proportions of our estates, equally intrested in
the common good of the the County, did take boldness to come in person to
York, and were ready to attend his Majesty's pleasure there. And whereas his
Majesty was pleased then to propound several things to the purpose aforesaid,
at the meeting of the Country, to consider a fit answer to return to his
Majesty thereupon, the doors of the meeting House were shut against us, we
utterly excluded, and in our absence a Referree of Knights and Gentlemen chosen
without our knowledge or consent to draw up the said Answer,

We the Freeholders who petitioned his Majesty the day abovesaid, concerning
our selves abundantly injured in the Election (not knowing any warrant by writ
or otherwise for the same) of the said Referree, and that we ought not however
to be concluded by any resolution of theirs without our assent in their
election, do absolutely protest and declare against the said election; and as
far as concerns us, disavow whatsoever shall be the result of their
Consultation thereupon, and do desire a new and fair Eleiction of a Referree
may be made, we admitted to our free Votes in the same, and some one or more to
be nominated by us, allowed to deliver our sense for us, at another Meeting:
And that we shall not make good in the least respect any thing whatsoever which
shall otherwise be concluded upon.

Die Martis, 17. Maii. 1642. Whereas the Lords in Parliament, have this day
been Informed, That the King is Resolved to adjourn the next Term from
Westminster to York; Upon which, The Lords sent a Committee to the Lord Keeper
of the great Seal of England, to know of him, whether he had received any
command touching the same, who acquainted the said Committee, That he had
received command from His Majesty, to issue Proclamations, and Writs, to that
purpose.

whereupon, this House taking the said matter into consideration, has Voted,
That the Kings removal of the Term to York, from Westminster, sitting this
Parliament, is Illegal.

And has further ordered, That the said Lord Keeper shall not issue out any
Writs, or Seal any Proclamation, for adjourning the said next Term from
Westminster to York, as aforesaid.

Joh. Brown, Cleric. Parl.

FINIS.

