MEMENTO MORI
ON THE DEATH OF THE Truly Valiant, and Loyal GEORGE, Duke of Albemarle, Late
General of his Majesty's Forces, AND Knight of the Honorable Order of the
Garter.

A Pindariqu' Ode.

By THOMAS FLATMAN.

-- Extinctus amabitur Idem. LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom, at the Gun, near
the West End of St. Paul's, 1670.



ON THE DEATH OF The Truly Valiant, and Loyal GEORGE, Duke of Albemarle.
A Pindariqu' Ode.

Stanza I.
NOw blush thy self into Confusion,
Ridiculous Mortality!
With Indignation to be trampled on
By them that court Eternity;
Whose generous deeds, and prosperous state
Seem poorly set within the reach of Fate:
Whose every Trophy, and each Laurel Wreath
Depends upon a little breath:
Confined within the narrow bounds of Time
And of uncertain Age,
With doubtful hazards they engage,
Thrown down, while Victory bids them higher clime,
Their Glories are eclipsed by Death;
Hard circumstances of Illustrious Men,
Whom Nature (like the Scythian Prince) detains
Within the Bodies Chains,
Nature that rigorous Tamberlain.
Stout Bajazet disdained the barbarous Rage
Of that insulting Conqueror;
Bravely himself usurped his own expiring Power,
By dashing out his Brains against his Iron Cage.
II.
But it is indecent to complain,
And wretched Mortals curse their Stars in vain;
In vain they waste their tears for them that dye?
Themselves involved in the same destiny.
No more with sorrow let it then be s'ed,
The Glorious Albemarle is dead:
Let what is said of him Triumphant be;
Words as gay as is his Fame,
And as manly as his Name,
An Epinicion not Elegy.
Yet why should thou (ambitious Muse) believe
Thy gloomy Verse can any splendors give,
Or make him one small moment longer live?
Nothing but what is vulgar thou can say,
And misbecoming numbers sing:
What tribute to his Memory can thou pay,
Whose Virtue saved three Realms, and could oblige a King
III.
Many a year distressed, Albion lay,
By her unnatural offspring torn,
Once the worlds terror, then its scorn,
At home a Prison, and abroad a Prey:
Her valiant Youth, her valiant Youth did kill,
And mutual Blood did spill:
Usurpers then, and many a Mushrome Peer
Within her Palaces did domineer;
There did the bloody Vultur build his nest,
There the Owls and Satyrs rest,
By Zim, and Ohim all possessed:
Till (Englands Angel-Guardian) thou
With pity, and with anger moved
For Albion thy beloved,
(Olive-chaplets on thy brow
With bloodless hands held'st up her drooping head,
And with thy Trumpets call'dst her from the dead.
Bright Phospher to the rising Sun!
That Royal Lamp by thee did first appear
Ushered into our happy Hemisphere:
O may it still shine warm, and clear!
No cloud, nor night approach It, but a constant Noon!
IIII.
Nor here did thy undaunted Valor cease,
Or wither with unactive peace:
Scarce were our civil Broils allay d,
While yet the wound of an intestine War
Had left a tender Scar;
When (of our new prosperities afraid)
Our jealous Neighbors fatal Arms prepare:
In floating Groves the Enemy drew near,
Loud did the Belgian Lion roar;
Upon our Coasts the Armada did appear,
And boldly durst attempt our native shore.
Till His victorious Squadrons checked their pride,
And did in triumph over the Ocean ride.
Under a gallant Admiral He fought
YORK whose success a taller muse must sing;
Who so his Country loved, that he forgot
He was the Brother of a King.
Whose daring courage might inspire
A meaner Soul than His with Martial Fire.
With Thunder, Lightning, and with Clouds of Smoke
He did their insolence restrain,
And gave His dreadful Law to all the Main,
Whose surly Billows trembled when He spoke,
And crouch'd their willing necks under His Yoke.
This the stupendous Vanquisher has done,
Whose high prerogative it was alone,
To raise a ruined, and secure an envied Throne.
V.
Then angry Heaven began to frown,
From Heaven a wasting Pestilence came down
On every side did Lamentations rise,
Baleful sigh, and heavy groan,
All was plaint, and all was moan!
The pious Friend with trembling love,
Scarce had his latest kindness done
In sealing up his dead Friends Eyes
E're with his own surprising Fate he strove,
And wanted one to close his own.
With Iron Scepter Death bore all the sway
Over our Imperial Golgotha.
Yet he with kind, tho undisturbed eyes,
Durst stay and see those numerous Butcheries.
He in the Field had seen Death's grisly Face,
Heard him in Niter talk aloud;
Beheld his grandeur in a glittering crowd,
And un-amaz'd seen him in Cannons Gape.
Ever unterrify'd his Valor stood
Like some tall Rock amidst a Sea of Blood.
'Twas Loyalty from Sword and Pest saved Him alive,
The safest Armor, and the best Preservative.
VI.
The Flaming City next implored His Aid,
Successfully it prayed
His Force against the Fire, whose Arms the Sea obeyed
Wide did the impetuous Torrent spread
Then those goodly Fabrics fell;
Temples themselves promiscuously there
Dropped down, and in the common Ruin buried were,
The City turned into one Mongibell.
That haughty Tyrant shook his curled head,
His breath with vengeance black, his face with red.
Then every cheek grew wan and pale,
Every heart began to fail:
And had not our Annointed's flame
(From heaven toward his Subjects sent.)
Out-blaz'd the furious Element,
What could the furious Element tame?
Naught but thypresence could it spower suppress,
Whose stronger light put out the less.
As London's noble structures rise
Together shall thy memory grow,
To whom that beauteous Town so much does owe
For its revived tranquillities:
London! joint-Favourite with Him thou were;
As Both took up a room within our heart,
So now with thine indulgent Sovereign join,
Respect His great Friend's Ashes, for he wept over thine.
VII.
Thus did the Duke conclude His mighty stage,
Thus did that Atlas of our state
With His prodigious acts amaze the Age,
While worlds of wonder on his shoulders sat:
Full of glories, and of years
He trod His shining, and immortal way,
Whilst Albion compassed with new Seas of tears
Besought His longer stay.
Saucy that pen that dares describe Thy bliss,
Or write Thine Apotheosis!
Whom Heaven, and thy Prince to pleasure strove,
Entrusted with their Armies, and their Love.
In other Courts it is dangerous to Deserve,
Thou did a kind, and grateful Master serve,
Who (to express his gratitude to Thee)
Scorned those ill-natured Arts of Policy.
Happy had Belisarius bin,
(Whose forward fortune was his Sin)
By many victories undone,
He had not lived neglected, died obscure,
If for Thy Prince those Battles he had won,
Thy Prince, magnificent above his Emperor.
VIII.
Among the Gods, those Gods that died like Thee,
As great as theirs, and full of Majesty
Thy sacred Dust shall sleep secure,
Thy Monument as long as theirs endure:
There, free from envy, Thou with them
Shall have Thy share of Diadem.
Amongst their Badges shall be set
Thy Garter and Thy Coronet:
Or (what is statelier) Thou shall have
A Mausolaeum in thy Princes breast,
There thine embalmed name shall rest;
That Sanctuary shall thee save
From the dishonours of the Grave:
And every wondrous History,
Read by incredulous Posterity,
That write's of Him, shall honorably mention Thee
Who by an humble Loyalty have shown
How much sublimer gallantry, and renown
It Is to Restore, than to Usurp, a Monarch's Crown,
FINIS.

