ESSAY OF A LOYAL BREAST; In four Copies of Verses, viz. I. To His Majesty,
CHARLES the 2d. II. To His two Houses of PARLIAMENT. III. To His General, the
Lord MONCK. IV. To that His good Angel, Madam JANE LANE.


By WILLIAM FAIREBROTHER, of Kings College in Cambridge.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN FIELD, 1660.

TO THE KING'S MOST SACRED MAJESTY.
ONce formerly, dread Sir, my Muse did Sing,
You our choice Prince in Parliament. A King
Then sat your Father there. But o! since then
A sad and long Parenthesis has been
'Twixt us and Regal-splendour; whilst your Youth
Has tossed been to and fro, because of Truth!
A Scene of twenty years! an heap too large
For my scant Ephah! it is an Homer's charge.
Ulysses and his ten years Travels now
Seem no less trifling, than Tom Thumb in the Cow:
'Twixt yours and his such difference I assign,
As was 'twixt Bottles of his Wind and Wine.
Wine? Wine not so chears the heart, as the sight
Of your blessed presence, who setst all aright.
A Welcom's thus to us. Then 'ts but our due,
To carol-out glad Welcoms unto you.
Whom Spain, France, Germany and Belgick-soil
With admiration gazed on, (as a spoil
Even forced into their hands, through Britains rage)
And now do court, as Mirror of this age;
Whom they must needs us envy, yet has Heaven
(Maugre all hellish plots) us again given,
Shall we not him adore? And so'ts our due,
To carol-out Hosannaes unto you.
I Have seen your Star; and worship: How it shon
Your Birth-day's-Ecce! It stood near the Sun
At its full- Zenith bright; whilst Thanks was given
On St. Paul's sacred ground to the King of Heaven
By the King your Father. 'Twas a glorious day!
The King then to the Temple led the way;
Sunday and Lord's Day both. Then be it our due,
To carol-out Hosannaes unto you.
But if Sighs must burst forth, and cloud a Day,
May they fly up t'expiate Sin away:
If Tears the cheeks bedew, let them be sent
From Hearts, that of past-villanies relent.
Thus may we blunt God's Ax: thus, next to God,
Even thou, O King, (I see) will spare thy Rod.
And thus we all may wear the Mourning-weed:
Few are the men, who not your Pardon need.
It Is wisest then for me, to point-out none;
Lest others numb'ring number me for one;
Perhaps, 'cause for Alleg'ance once I fled
From Cambridge, and at Oxford owned an Head,
But lost it soon again at Naseby-fight,
My self taken Prisoner. Were I silent-quite,
Your Grace may know, Who was the greatest Thief;
Who of the barbarous Actours were the Chief;
Who the stage-prompters, or Dark-Lanthorn-men,
That contrived most, though they themselves least seen,
White-powder Fiends, killing without a Noise;
(To crack thereon, speaks children or mere boys)
What Accessories live; Who, as with knives,
Did wound your righteous Cause, through debaucht Lives,
At home and eke abroad; and Who, more quaint,
Did null the Edicts of that Royal Saint,
Your murdered Father. Then, then may we all
Before You, as at God's Tribunal, fall.
Peace you pursue; Mercy you do proclaim:
Who craves them not, a second time's too blame.
To such a God who should not then impart
Gold, myrrh, with a frank-incense of the Heart?
The last can each one give; the most forlorn:
When I hav't given away, it is as Newborn.
Mine then on dayly-prostrate Knees shall crave
Of that One More-supream, that You may have
Firm Health; Allies most strong; a matchless Queen;
Subjects as Loyal, as e're Prince has seen;
Innum'rous People; a Church flourishing.
So (with your Leave i will cry) LONG LIVE THE KING.
And now ( great Sir and good) I fear, that I
A petty-treason make against Sovereignty,
Thus to detain your Person. But true Zeal
Dare even back unto your Throne appeal;
That with your thickest Pardons you would smother
This Crime of, YOURS the humblest,
FAIREBROTHER; Of Kings College in Cambridge; and Of the late Kings Army.

Anagram. CHARLES STUART. STET LAR CHARUS.
To the Right Honorable, the two HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT.
WHat Poets feign of Phaeton above,
(That, whilst he Sol's great Charet needs would move,
The World was plunged in Conflagrations,
Through Reins then too-too loose) these three Nations
Have late found true: As if Enceladus
Had from-below turned a fresh side on us,
To let-loose Aetna's flames; Or else, as if
These floating-Islands had (by Waves most stiff
And sturdy Winds) quite-lost their Anchor-hold,
So now on this side, now on that side rolled;
Whilst Sun and Moon were blended, and for Stars
We direful Meteors had, the late Heavens Scars.
But (blessed be God!) we are now once again
Under the kind Influence of CHARLES his-wain:
And may we ever be so; with a Train
Of lesser Lights, to spring about that main!
Let Harington here fix blind { Milton's / Fortune's} ROTA;
Nor let it stir the breadth of an Iota.
This Land I promise firm: Again if thus.
It must turn round, be he Copernicus;
And so my self I Would rather Stoic plight,
Than Peripatetick, or chief Stagyrite.
Strange Revolutions were, when Strickland's Holland
Did England, Scotland, Ireland slight, as no Land!
Then Tyranny and Rapine led the Van;
And who 'de not act so, was the dangerous man:
Then Ireland reakt with blood: and then Scot-free
Went Sacrilege: nor was it here Robbery,
To pocket up a Church or Lands-divine;
Because not diff'renc't with a Mine or Thine.
But now, I hope, w'ave met in Plato's Sphere,
Where harbor can nor Jealousy nor Fear;
Where Virtue shall court Virtue; where all vice
Shall be disowned, as 'twas in Paradise;
Where each man safely may enjoy his own.
And then, I Am sure, the King's to have a Throne,
And be obeyed too.
And now to what, Ye Representatives,
With whom entrusted are our very lives,
Shall we you represent? a Loyal Spark;
From billows saved a while, as in an Ark?
A Moses here? and there a Noah old?
Joseph's some others, by their brethren sold?
May ye get all off safe! may ye soon see
As blessed an Issue, as did all those three!
They all were big with blessings. Did they curse?
To whom they meant it, him they straight saw worse.
Such may your Terror be! and so perchance
No fouler Crime shall reign, than Ignorance.
In fine: We all have erred and gone astray,
Leaving (much worse than Sheep) the righter way.
Let Us therefore beg of that most powerful One,
That not to us or ours may ere be known
(That saddest of Diseases, called) King's Evil,
Since against a good War's have been more-than-civil.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORD GENERAL GEORGE MONCK.
A Civil War; more than a civil War:
How strangely now to me do those words jar!
W'ave rather Peace, that is civil, more than civil;
Mirac'lously it comes, in spite of the Devil
And his black Imps, who to cry do not cease,
That War may better be than present Peace.
A Monck! and from the North too! then (cry some)
As soon expected may be Good from Rome.
A Monck the Faith's Defender? Let Us again
Call-in Scot, Nevil, Haselrig and Vane:
Let them their Forces rally: so we shall
A new Creed straightway raise, or raze out all.
It Is that, that last, ( great Sir) those Atheists sought,
When they our Charles the first to Trial brought.
But timely you stept-in; Religion saved;
And count'nanc'd Arts, which we in vain had craved.
Sword and Pen kindly meet: Thou'st given thy Troth,
That Pallas now is again Goddess to both.
He Is a Plantagenet; (some others cried)
And so a Commonwealth will be defied:
A Single Person he will erect: so fight,
Whether for that name, or the True-names Right.
Double's their Charge: Let its last part be true;
And then, I think, you act but what is due.
Though The Greek word for Monarch has in it one sole Letter more, than has
the word for Monck in the same Language.
(...) with The Greek word for Monarch has in it one sole Letter more, than
has the word for Monck in the same Language.
(...) do show,
As Sibboleth with Shibboleth, I trow,
They Are not for Marks now, to discriminate
Kindness for the one sound; for the other, Hate.
Where words in but-one Letter disagree,
Let those men stand nearest in Unity:
Nay more; a York and Lancaster we see
In Virgins-cheeks make an Identity:
And the whole Nation owns now Red and White
For the King's Colors, and Monck's true delight.
Thus have you clad us, whilst you put to shame
The vast Temptations of a Royal-game:
And if Plantagenet give-up the Crown,
It may be said, it is now more Charles his own.
In earnest thus (what some made you in sport,
Y've found the right-high {STUART / Steward} of Hampton Court:
And thus y've stopped Rebels blasphemous Snarls,
Belcht-out against our first and second Charles.
Hail then to thee! so sounds every Lip,
Thou glorious piece of Self-denial-ship;
Thou Rump's Arch-traytor, but the Head's best Friend!
A Headpiece so; better than Breeches-end.
Right-welcome home! Let Us now erect an Arch
For thy so famous bloodless Countermarch.
Nor Steel nor Hemp then gaul'd: For such fair Quarter
The King now dubs thee with St. George's Garter.
And, if ( sans soloecism) it may be said,
That the heir apparent can (the Father dead)
To his own Subject be an Obligee,
Then may I safely say; to Monck't must be.
Be blessed in all your hopes of Wife and Son!
A meet-Help She, as you the Work have done:
With Reverence to her Honor, I shall say,
You're next to Numa, she is Egeria.
Live thus renowned! and whilst Charles shall Head stand,
May thou his Headpiece be by Sea and Land;
That, what so e're his Ancestors have lost,
He may by you regain with easy cost.
Thus, George-on-horse-back, (Sr. and St.) with Lance
Methinks I see you give a shake to France;
And your stout Troops proclaiming with drawn-swords,
King Charles! King Charles! King Charles! thrice-blessed words!
TO Mrs. JANE LANE.
Anagram. JANE LANE, An'ne JAEL?
This Copy was made a day or two before she was known to be in England.

MADAM,
YOur Name here starts a Question: so it is asked,
Whether our Jane Lane be not Jael-maskt.
So quadrate does each Story, whilst your Calls
Did summon-in two vanquished Generals!
And how in Covert bade ye them, good cheer,
Whilst God them-both unto you-both did steer!
Right-famous both! But yet who is it, not sees
An Interfering in your Histories?
She bold cut off, you bold did save, an Head:
Charles lived by you; Sifera's by her struck-dead.
Great Amazons of Truth! rather than shall
The just Cause perish, ye your selves would fall.
But God for such pure Love did well provide:
So Judeth too we will reckon on your side.
How fresh they two yet live! and so shall You
In lasting- Annals have as fresh an hue:
Where e're King Charles his Story's to be seen,
There shall be read, what you to him have been.
Your Names, as Phidias in Minerva's shield,
Must jointly shine, as in one common field
Never to be parted. -- But here brave Wilmot's Ghost
Steps-in to serve the Mistress of the roast,
Thanks your Relief of him and of his King.
That-now blessed Soul first kenn'd this happy thing.
Accost you then he did with pesiveness:
And you for that awhile can do no less:
Not that he grieves now; but that you not see
One half-part of your noblest Company.
Yet Thanks to Heaven; that Time, which changes all,
The Scene (at least) makes Tragicomical.
Romancers here must veil, true or but-feign'd;
W'ave now upon them, and above them, gained.
The Crown was lost, and as 'twere quite forsook:
But you again it found in the Sacred Oak.
You a King's Mistress chaste: the Lady Lane
Flies far above the fate of Edward's Jane;
No Concubine, nor an Herodia You;
Asking things most unjust, things much undue.
Nor Delilah were thou: Thou did not Him
(His hair then shorn-off) to that Philistim
Big with Success, deliver-up a Prize,
The yet-great Strength, and Light of Britain's Eyes.
His Safety thence you wrought: and that jeat-curl
You straight for Favors choicely up did furl.
That Black's indeed the Set-off; cal't not Foyl,
What Is kissed by Ladies of the purest-soyl.
And if such Homage is to the Excrement,
What then to's Person should be the full Extent?
No Virtue thus him left: yet Proselytes
You many gained have by such zealous Sleights:
They Are Presents fit for Queens: such Royal-Twists
Are not for all folks fingers, necks, or wrists.
Why then as of the Garter, so the Hair,
May not an Order be, and full as rare?
And why not breeded be thereon the Fancy
Of that our HONI SOIT, QUI MALY PENSE?
Return, great Voluntier of all the Exiles!
True Maid of Honor! Haste, to take the Smiles
OF the King and Subjects- good. Alive or dead,
Eternized thou shall be in Honour's-bed.
Let Virgins-all Garlands each-year prepare
Of Oak, with the enameld Maidenhair.
But, Lady of high Worth, I Have one word more;
(Nor does it differ from Herodia's score,
Only more-innocent you it may do)
That you would, if the Thought has e're took you
Of half a Kingdom, (or perhaps a larger)
Exchange it for a St. Johns-head in the Charger.
FINIS.

