Navigation Spiritualized: OR, A NEW COMPASS FOR SEAMEN Consisting of XXXII
Points Of Pleasant OBSERVATIONS, Profitable APPLICATIONS, and Serious
REFLECTIONS: All concluded with so many Spiritual Poems. Whereunto is now
Added, I. A Sober Consideration of the Sin of Drunkenness. II. The Harlot's
Face in the Scripture-Glass. III. The Art of Preserving the Fruit of the Lips.
IV. The Resurrection of Buried Mercies and Promises. V. The Sea-man's Catechism.
Being an Essay toward their much de^^^d Reformation from the Horrible and
Destable Sins of Drunkenness, Swearing, Uncleanness. Forgetfulness of Mercies,
Violation of Promises, and Atheistical Contempt of Death. Fit to be seriously
Recommended to their Profane Relations, whether Seamen or Others, by all such
as Unfeignedly desire their Eternal Welfare.

And they said, Come, let us cast Lots, that we may know for whose [cause] this
evil is come upon us, Jonah 1. 7. Knowing therefore the terrors of the LORD,
we persuade Men, 2 Cor. 5. 11. By John Flavel, Minister of the Gospel. The
Fourth Edition.

London, Printed for M. Fabian in Mercers Chapel at the lower end of
Cheapside, School.



What good might Seaman get if once they were
But heavenly (...)? if they could but steer
The Christ^^s course, the Soul might then enjoy
Sweet Peace, they might like Seas or-flow with Joy.
Were God our All, how would our Comforts double
Upon us! thus the Seas of all our trouble
Would be divinely sweet Men should endeavor
To see God now, and be with him for ever.


To All Masters, Mariners and Seamen:
Especially such as belong to the Borrough of Clifton, Dartmouth and Hardness,
in the County of Devon,
Sirs,
I Find it Story'd of Anacharsis, that when one Asked him, Whether the Living
or the Dead were more? He returned this Answer, You must first tell me (says
he) in which Number I must place Seamen; Intimating thereby, that Seamen are,
as it were, a Third sort of Persons, to be Numbered neither with the Living nor
the Dead; their Lives hanging continually in suspense before them. And it was
anciently accounted the most desperate Employment, and they little better than
lost Men that used the Seas. Through all my Life (says Aristotle) Three things
do especially repent me: First, That ever I revealed a Secret to a Woman.
Secondly, That ever I remained one day without a Will. Thirdly, That ever I
went to any place by Sea, whither I might have gone by Land. Nothing (says
another) is more miserable, than to see a Virtuous and Worthy Person upon the
Sea. And although Custom, and the great Improvement of the Art of Navigation,
have made it less formidable now, yet are you no further from death than you
are from the waters, which is but a remove of two or three inches. Now you that
border so nigh upon the confines of death and eternity every moment, may well
be supposed to be Men of singular Piety and Seriousness: For nothing more
composes the Heart to such a frame, than the lively apprehensions of Eternity
do: and none have greater external advantages for that, than you have. But
alas! for the generality, What sort (...) Men are more ungodly, and stupidly
insensible of eterna concernments? Living, for the most part, as if they had
made a Covenant with death, and with hell were at agreement. It was an ancient
saying, Qui nescit orare, discat navigare, He that knows not how to Pray, let
him go to Sea. But we may say now, (alas, that we may say so in times of
greater light) He that would learn to be pro^ane, to drink, and swear, and
dishonor God, let him go to Sea. As for Prayer, it is a rare thing among
Seamen, they count that a needless-business: they see the profane and vile
delivered as well as others; and therefore, What profit is there if they Pray
unto him? Mal. 3. 4. As I remember, I have read of a profane Soldier, who was
heard swearing, though he stood in a place of great danger; and when one that
stood by him warned him, saying, Fellow-souldier, do not Swear, the Bullets
fly; he answered, They that swear come off as well as they that pray* Soon
after a shot hit him and down he fell. Plato diligently admonisht all Men to
avoid the Sea; For (says he) it is the Schoolmaster of all Vice and
Dishonesty. Sirs! it is a very sad consideration to me, that you who float upon
the great deeps, in whose bottom so many Thousand poor miserable Creatures lie,
whose sins have sunk them down, not only into the bottom of the Sea, but of
Hell also, whither divine vengeance has pursued them: That you (I say) who
daily float, and hover over them, and have the roaring waves and billows that
swallowed them up, gaping for you as the next prey, should be no more affected
with these things. Oh what a Terrible Voice does God utter in the Stroms! It
breaks the Cedars, shakes the Wilderness, makes the Hinds to Calve, Psalm. 29.
5. And can it not shake your hearts This Voice of the Lord is full of Majesty,
but his Voice in the Word is more efficacious and powerful, Heb. 4. 12. to
convince and rip up the heart. This Word is exalted above all his Name, Psalm.
138. 3. and if it cannot awaken you, it is no wonder you remain secure and
dead, when the Lord utters his Voice in the most dreadful storms and tempests.
But if neither the Voice of God uttered in his dreadful Works, or in his
glorious Gospel, can effectually awaken and rouse, there is an Euroclidon, a
fearful storm coming, which will so awaken your souls, as that they shall never
sleep any more, Psalm. 11. 6. Upon the wicked he shall reign Snares, Fire and
Brimstone, and an horrible Tempest: This is the portion of their Cup. You that
have been at Sea in the most Violent storms, never felt such a storm as this,
and the Lord grant you never may; no Calm shall follow this Storm. There are
some among you, that, I am persuaded, do truly fear that God in whose hand
their Life and Breath is; Men that fear an Oath, and are an honor to their
Profession; who drive a Trade for Heaven, and are diligent to secure the
happiness of their Immortal souls, in the Insurance-Office above: but for the
generality, alas! they mind none of these things. How many of you are coasting
to and fro, from one Country to another? but never think of that Heavenly
Country above, nor how you may get the Merchandise thereof, which is better
than the Gold of Ophir. How often do you tremble to see the foaming V,Vaves dance
about you, and wash over you? yet consider not how terrible it will be to have
all the waves and billows of God's wrath to go over your souls, and that for
ever. How glad are you, after you have been long tossed upon the Ocean, to
descry Land? And how yare and eagerly do you look out for it? who yet never had
your hearts warmed with the consideration of that Joy which shall be among the
Saints, when they arrive at the Heavenly Strand, and set foot upon the shore of
Glory.

O Sirs! I beg of you, if you have any regard to those precious immortal Souls
of yours, which are also imbarqued for Eternity, whither all winds blow them,
and will quickly he at their Port of Heaven or Hell, that you will seriously
mind these things, and learn to steer your course to Heaven, and improve all
Winds (I mean opportunities and means) to waft you thither.

Here you venture life and liberty, run through many Difficulties and Dangers,
and all to compass a perishing Treasure; yet how often do you return
disappointed in your Designs? or if not, yet it is but a fading short-lived
Inheritance, which like the flowing Tide, for a little while, covers the shore,
and then returns, and leaves it naked and dry again: And are not Everlasting
Treasures worth venturing for? Good Souls, be wise for Eternity: I here present
you with the Fruit of a few spare Hours, redeemed for your sakes, from my other
Studies and Employments, which I have put into a new Dress and Mode. I have
endeavored to cloth Spiritual Matters in your own Dialect and Phrases, that
they might be the more intelligible to you; and added some pious Poems, with
which the several Chapters are concluded, trying by all means to assault your
several Affections, and as the Apostle speaks, to catch you with guile. I can
say nothing of it; I know it cannot be without its manifold imperfections,
since I am conscious of so many in my self: Only this I will adventure to say
of it, That how defective or empty soever it be in other respects, yet it is
stuffed and filled with much true love to, and earnest desires after the
salvation and prosperity of your Souls. And for the other defects that attend
it, I have only two things to offer, in way of excuse: It is the first Essay
that I ever made in this kind, wherein I had no President: And it was hastened,
for your sakes, too soon out of my hands, that it might be ready to wait upon
you, when you undertake your next Voyage; so that I could not revise and polish
it. Nor indeed was I sollicitous about the style; I consider, I writ not for
Critical and Learned Persons: my design is not to please your Fancies any
further, than I might thereby get advantage to profit your Souls. I will not
once question your welcome Reception of it: If God shall bless these
Meditations to the Conversion of any among you, you will be the Gainers, and my
heart shall rejoice, even mine. How comfortably should we shake hand with you,
when you go abroad, were we persuaded your Souls were interested in Christ, and
secured from perishing, in the New Convenant? What life would it put into our
Prayers for you, when you are abroad, to consider that Jesus Christ is
interceeding for you in Heaven, whilst we are your Remembrancers here on Earth?
How quiet would our hearts be, when you are abroad in Storms; did we know you
had a special Interest in him whom Winds and Seas obey? To conclude, what Joy
would it be to your Godly Relations, to see you return new Creatures? Doubtless
more than if you came home laden with the Riches of both Indies.

Come, Sirs! set the heavenly Jerusalem upon the Point of your New Compass;
make all the Sail you can for it; and the Lord give you a prosperous Gale, and
a safe Arrival in that Land of Rest.

So prays Your most Affectionate Friend to serve you, in Soul-Concernments.
JOHN FLAVEL.

IMPRIMATUR,

Geo. Stradling, S. T. P. Rev. in Christo Pat. D. Gilb. Archiepisc. Cant. a.
Sac. Domest.

Ex Aed. Lamb. Dec. 14. 1663.
To every Seaman Sailing Heavenward.
Ingenious Seaman,
THE Art of Navigation, by which Islands especially are enriched, and preserved
in safety from Forensical Invasions; and the wonderful Works of God in the
great Deep, and Foreign Nations are most delightfully and fully beheld, etc. is
an Art of exquisite excellency, ingenuity, rarity, and mirability: But the Art
of Spiritual Navigation is the Art of Arts. It is a gallant thing to be able to
carry a Ship richly laden round the World: but it is much more gallant to carry
a Soul (that rich loading, a Pearl of more worth than all the Merchandise of
the world) in a body (that is liable to leaks and bruises as any Ship is)
through the Sea of this World (which is as unstable as water, and has the same
brinish taste and salt gust which the waters of the Sea have) safe to Heaven
(the best Haven) so as to avoid splitting upon any Soulsinking Rocks, or
striking upon any Soul-drowning Sands. The Art of Natural Navigation is a very
great mystery; but the Art of Spiritual Navigation is by much a greater
mystory. Humane wisdom may teach us to carry a Ship to the Indies; but the
Wisdom only that is from above can teach us to steer our course aright to the
Haven of Happiness. This Art is purely of Divine Revelation. The truth is,
Divinity (the Doctrine of living to God) is nothing else, but the Art of
Soul-Navigation, revealed from Heaven. A mere man can carry a Ship to any
desired Port in all the World, but no mere man can carry a Soul to Heaven. He
must be a Saint, he must be a Divine (so all Saints are) that can be a Pilot to
carry a Soul to the fair Haven in Emanuel's land. The Art of Natural Navigation
is wonderfully improved since the coming of Christ, before which time (if there
be truth in History) the use of the Loadstone was never known in the world; and
before the virtue of that was revealed unto the Mariner, it is unspeakable with
what uncertain wanderings Seamen floated here and there, rather than sailed the
right and direct way. Sure I am, the Art of Spiritual Navigation is wonderfully
improved since the coming of Christ: it owes its clearest and fullest
discovery to the coming of Christ. This Art of Arts is now perfectly revealed
in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament; but the Rulers thereof are
dispersed up and down therein. The collecting and methodizing of the same,
cannot but be a work very useful unto Souls: Though when all is done, there is
an absolute necessity of the teachings of the Spirit, and of the anointing that
is from above, to make Souls Artists in sailing Heavenward. The Ingenious
Author of the Christians Compass, or the Mariners Companion, makes three Parts
of this Art (as the Schoolmen of Divinity,) viz. Speculative, Practical, and
Affectionate. The principal things necessary to be known by a Spiritual
Seaman, in order to the steering rightly and safely to the Port of Happiness,
he reduces to four Heads, answerable to the four general Points of the
Compass; making God our North; Christ our East; Holiness our South; and Death
our West Points. Concerning God, we must know, 1. That he is, Heb. 11. 6. and
that there is but one God, 1 Cor. 8. 5, 6. 2. That this God is that Supreme
Good, in the enjoyment of whom all true happiness lies, Psalm. 4. 6, 7. Mat. 5.
8. -- 18. 20. 3. That (Life eternal lying in God, and he being incomprehensible
and unconceivable in Essence, as being a Spirit) our best way to eye him is in
his Attributes, Exodus 34. 5, 6, 7. and works, Romans 1. 20. and especially in his
Son, 2 Cor. 4. 6. 4. That as God is a Spirit, so our chiefest, yea only way of
knowing, enjoying, serving, and walking with him, is in the Spirit likewise,
Ioh. 4. 24. Concerning Christ, we must know, 1. That he is the true Sun which
arises upon the World, by which all are enlightened, John 1. 9. Mal. 3. 2. Luke
1. 78, 79. 2. That God alone is in him, reconciling himself to the World, 2
Cor. 5. 19. 1 Cor. 1. 30. John 14. 6. 3. That Jesus Christ is only made ours by
the union and in-dwelling of himself in us through the spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10.
and 6. 17. Ioh. 16. 8, 9. 1 Cor. 12. 3. 13. 4. That the way of the spirits
uniting us to Christ, is by an act of Power on his part, and by an act of Faith
on our parts, John 3. 16. last 5. 29. Ephesians. 3. 17. Concerning Holiness, we must
know, 1. That whoever is in Christ is a new creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. 1 Cor. 6.
11. 2. Holiness is the Souls highest luster, Exodus 15. 11. when we come to
perfection in Holiness, then is our Sun at the height in us. 3. Holiness, is
Christ filling the Soul; Christ our Sun is at highest in our hearts, when they
are most holy. 4. This Holiness is that which is directly opposite to sin: sin
eclipses holiness, and holiness scatters sin, Heb. 7. 26. Phil. 2. 15. 2 Pet.
3. 11. Concerning Death, we must know, 1. Death is certain: the Sun of our Life
will set in Death: when our days come about to this Westernpoint, it will be
night, Heb. 9. 27. Psalm. 49. 7, 9. 2. If we die in our sins out of Christ, we
are undone for ever, Job 8. 24. Phil. 1. 21. 3. It is our benighting to die,
but it is not our annihilating, 1 Cor. 15. Rev. 20. 12. 4. After Death comes
Judgment; all that die shall arise to be judged, either for life or death the
second time, Heb. 9. 27. Mat. 25. Heb. 6. 2. These four heads, and the
particulars under them are as necessary to be known in Spiritual Navigation, as
the four Points of the Compass are in Natural Navigation. The things which we
ought to do, in order to our arrival to our Happiness, our Author makes as many
as there be Points in the Compass. And for an help to memory, we may begin
every particular with initial known Letters on the Points of the Compass. 1. N.
Never stir or steer any course, but by ^ight from God, Psalm. 119. 105. Isa. 8.
10. 2. N. and by E. Never Enter upon any Design, but such as tends toward
Christ, Act. 10. 43. 3. N. N. E. Note Nothing Enviously, which thrives without
God, Psalm. 73. 12, 13. 4. N. E. and by N. Never Enterprise Not-warrantable
courses, to procure any the most prized or conceited advantages, 1. Tim. 6. 9,
10. 5. N. N. E. Now Entertain the sacred Commands of God, if hereafter thou
expect the sovereign consolations of God, Psalm. 119. 48. 6. N.E. and by E.
Never Esteem Egypt's Treasures so much, as for them to forsake the People of
God, Heb. 11. 26. 7. E. N. E. Err not, Especially in soul-affairs, Ia. 1. 16. 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20. 2 Timothy 2. 18. 8. E. and by N. Eschew Nothing but sin, 1 Pet. 3.
11. Job 1. 7, 8-31. 34. 9. E. Establish thy heart with grace, Heb. 13. 9. 10.
E. and by S. Eye Sanctity in every action, 1 Pet. 1. 15. Zech. 14. 29. 11. E.
S. E. Ever Strive Earnestly to live under, and to improve the means of Grace.
12. S.E. and by E. Suffer Every Evil of punishment of sorrow, rather than leave
the ways of Christ and Grace. 13. S.E. Sigh Earnestly for more enjoyments of
Christ. 14. S.E. and by S. Seek Evermore some Evidences of Christ in you the
hope of glory. 15. S.S.E. Still Set Eternity before you, in regard of enjoying
Jesus Christ, Ioh. 17. 24. 16. S. and by E. Settle't Ever in your soul, as a
principle which you will never depart from, that holiness and true happiness
are in Christ and by Christ. 17. S. Set thy self always as before the Lord,
Psalm. 16. 8. Acts 2. 25. 18. S and by W. See Weakness hastening thee to death,
even when thou art at the highest pitch or point. 19. S. S. W. See Sin Which is
the sting of Death, as taken away by Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56. 20. S.W. and by
S. Store up Wisely Some provisions every day for your dying day. 21. S.W. Set
Worldly things under your feet, before death come to look you in the face. 22.
S.W. and by W. Still Weigh and Watch with loins girded and lamps trimmed, Luke
12. 35, 36, 37. 23. W. S. W. Weigh Soul-Works, and all in the balance of the
Sanctuary. 24. W. and by S. Walk in Sweet communion with Christ here, and so
thou may die in peace, Luke 2. 29. 25. W. Whatsoever thy condition be in this
world, eye God as the disposer of it, and therein be contented, Phil. 4. 11.
26. W. and by N. Walk Not according to the course of the most, but after the
example of the best. 27. W.N. W. Weigh Not What men speak or think of thee, so
God approve thee, 2 Chro. 10. 18. Romans 2. 28, 29. 28. N. W. and by W. Never
Wink at, but Watch against small sins, nor neglect little duties, Ephesians. 5. 15.
29. N.W. Never Wish rashly for death, nor love life too inordinately, Job 3. 4.
30. N. W. and by N. Now Work Nimbly ere night come, Ioh. 12. 35, 36. Eceles. 9.
10. 31. N. N. W. Name Nothing When thou pleadest with God for thy Soul, but
Christ and Free Grace, Dan. 9. 17. 32. N. and by W. Now Welcome Christ, if at
death thou will be welcomed by Christ. A tender, quick, enlivened, and
enlightened Conscience, is the only Point upon which we must erect these
Practical Rules of our Christian Compass, Heb. 13. 1. 2 Cor. 1. 12. Our Memory,
that is the Box in which this Compass must be kept, in which these Rules must
be treasured, that we may be as ready and expert in them, as the Mariner is in
his Sea-compass. So much for the speculative and practical parts of the Art of
Soul-Spiritual-Navigation. The Affectionate part does principally lie in the
secret motions or movings of the Soul toward God, in the Affections which are
raised and warmed, and especially appear active in Meditation: Meditation being
as it were the Limbeck or Still in which the Affections heat and melt, and as
it were drop sweet spiritual Waters. The affectionate Author of the Christians
Compass does indeed, in the third and last part of his Undertaking, hint at
several Meditations which the spiritual Seaman is to be acquainted with, unto
which thou have an excellent Supplement in this New Compass for Seamen. This
Collection is prefixed, that at once thou may view all the Compasses (both
the Speculative, Practical, and Affectionate) by which thou must steer
Heavenward. What further shall be added by way of Pre^^^e, is not to commend
this New Compass, which indeed (2 Cor. 3. 1.) needs no (...), Letters of
Commendation, or any Panegyric to usher it into any honest heart: but to stir
up all, especially Seamen, to make conscience of using such choice helps for
the promoting the sanctification and salvation of their Souls, for the making
of them as dexterous in the Art of Spiritual Navigation, as any of them are in
the Art of Natural Navigation, Consider therefore.

1. What rich Merchandise thy Soul is. Christ assures us, one Soul is more
worth than all the world. The Lord Jesus does as it were put the whole world in
one scale, and one soul in the other, and the world is found too light, Mat.
16. 26. Should thou by skill in Natural Navigation carry safe all the
treasures of the Indies into thine own Port, yea, gain the whole world, and for
want of skill in spiritual Navigation lose thy soul, thou would be the
greatest loser in the world. So far will thou be from profiting by any of thy
Sea-voyages. There is a plain (...) in those words of Christ, What is a man
profited if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall
a man give in exchange for his soul? More is meant, than is spoken.

2. What a leaking Vessel thy body is in which this unspeakable inconceivable
rich Treasure, Erasmi Chiliad, p. 299.
thy soul, is embarked! O the many diseases and distempers in the humors and
passions, The smallest Pore is a Leak wide enough to let in Death, and sink thy
Vessel.
that thy body is subject to! It is above 2000 years ago, that there have been
rekoned up 300 Names of Diseases; and there be many under one name, and many
nameless, which pose the Physicians not only how to cure them, but how to call
them. And for the affections and passions of the Mind, the distempers of them
are no less deadly to some, than the diseases of the body. But besides these
internal causes, there are many external causes of Leaks in this Vessel, as In
Nubia, quae est Aethiopia, venenum est cu^us grani unias decima pars ^ominem,
vel unum granum december homines, Dan, Senert. Hypom. Phys. Cap. 2. p. 47.
poisonous malignities, wrathful hostilities, and casual mishaps; very small
matters may be of great moment to the sinking of this Vessel. The least Gnat in
the Air may choke one, as it did Adrian, a Pope of Rome; a little hair in Milk
may strangle one, as it did a Counselor in Rome; a little stone of a Raisin
may stop ones breath, as it did the Poetical Poet Anacreon. Thus you see what a
leaking Vessel you sail in. Now the more leaky any ship is, the more need there
is of skill to steer wisely.

3. Consider what a dangerous Sea the World is, in which thy Soul is to sail in
the leaking ship of thy body. As there are not more changes in the Sea, than
are in the World, the world being only constant in inconstancy, The fashion of
this world passes away, 1 Cor. 7. 31. so there are not more dangers in the Sea
for ships, than there are in the world for souls. In this world Souls meet with
Rocks and Sands, Sirens and Pirates. Worldly Temptations, worldly Lusts, and
worldly Company cause many to drown themselves in perdition, 1 Timothy 6. 9. The
very things of this world endanger our Souls. By worldly Objects we soon grow
worldly. It is hard to touch Pitch, and not be defiled. The lusts of this world
stain our glory, and the men of t^is world pollute all they converse with. A
man that keeps company with the men of this world, is like him that walks in
the Sun, tanned insensibly. Thus you have hinted the dangerousness of the Sea
wherein you are to sail. Now, the more dangerous the Sea is, the more requisite
it is the Sailer be an Artist.

4. Consider, what if through want of skill in the heavenly Art of spiritual
Navigation, thou should not steer thy C^^rse aright! I will instance only in
two consequents thereof. 1. Thou will never arrive at the Haven of Happiness.
2. Thou shall be drowned in the Ocean of God's wrath. As true as the Word of
God is true; as sure as the Heavens are over thy head, and the Earth under thy
feet; as sure as thou yet live and breathest in this Air: so true and certain
it is, thou shall never enter into Heaven, but sink into the depth of the
bottomless pit. Am I not herein a Messenger of the saddest Tidings that ever
yet thy Ears did hear? Possibly now thou make a light matter of these things,
because thou do not know what it is to miss of Heaven, and what it is for
ever to lie under the wrath of God: but hereafter thou will know fully, what it
is to have thy Soul lost eternally, so lost, as that God's mercies, and all the
good there is in Christ, shall never save it; and as God has set and ordered
things, can never save it. Hereafter thou will be perfectly sensible of the
good that thou might have had, and of the evil that shall be upon thee (this
is God's peculiar Prerogative, to make a Creature as sensible of Misery as he
pleases,) then thou will have other thoughts of these things than now thou
have. Ignis Gehenne lucebit miseris, ut vi^eant under doleant. Insid. de sum.
bon. l. 1.
Then the thoughts of thy mind shall be busied about thy lost Condition, both
as to the pain of loss, and the pain of sense; so that thou shall not be able
to take any ease any moment: then, that thy torments may be increased, they
acknowledge, the truth of thy apprehensions, yea. the strength of them, shall
be increased; thou shall have true and deep apprehensions of the greatness of
that good that thou shall miss of, and of that evil which thou shall procure
unto thy self; and then thou shall not be able to choose, but to apply all thy
loss, all thy misery to thy self, which will force thee to roar out, O my loss!
O my misery! O my unconceivable unrecoverable loss and misery! Yea, for the
increasing of thy torments, thy Affections and Memory shall be enlarged. O
that, to prevent that lose and misery, these things may now be known and laid
to heart! O that a blind Understanding, a stupid Judgment, a bribed Conscience,
a hard Heart, a bad Memory, may no longer make Heaven and Hell to seem but
trifles to thee! Thou will then easily be persuaded to make it thy main
business here, to become an Artist in Spiritual Navigation. But to shut up this
Preface, I shall briefly acquaint Seamen, why they should, of all others, be
Men of singular Piety and Heavenliness, and therefore more than ordinarily
study the heavenly Art of Spiritual Navigation. O that Seamen would therefore
consider,

1: How nigh they border upon the Confines of Death and Eternity every moment.
There is but a step, but an inch or two between them and their Graves
continually. The next Gust may over-set them; the next Wave may swallow them
up. In one place lies lurking dangerous Rocks, in another perilous Sands, and
everywhere stormy Winds, ready to destroy them. Well may the Seamen cry out,
Terror ubique tremor, timor un^eque and undique terrari. Ovi.
Ego crastinum non habui: I have not had a Morrow in my hands these many Years.
Should not they then be extraordinary serious and heavenly continually?
Certainly (as the Reverend Author of this New Compass well observes) nothing
more composeth the heart to such a frame, than the lively apprehensions of
Eternity do; and none have greater external advantages for that, than Seamen
have.

2. Consider ( Seamen) what extraordinary help you have by the Book of the
Creatures; Mundi creatio est Scriptur a Dei, Clemens. Vniversus mundus est D^us
explicatus.
the whole Creation is God's Voice, it is God's excellent Handwriting, or the
Sacred Scriptures of the Most High, to teach us much of God, and what reasons
we have to bewail our Rebellion against God, and to make conscience of obeying
God only, naturally and continually. The Heavens, the Earth, the Waters, are
the three great Leaves of this Book of God, and all the Creatures are so many
Lines in those Leaves. All that learn not to fear and serve God by the help of
this Book, will be left inexcusable, Romans 1. 20. How inexcusable then will
ignorant and ungodly Seamen be? Seamen should, in this respect, be the best
Scholars in the Lord's School, seeing they do more, than others, see the Works
of the Lord, and his Wonders in the great Deep, Psalm. 107. 24.

3. Consider how often you are nearer Heaven than any People in the World. They
mount up to heaven, Psalm. 107. 26. It has been said of an ungodly Minister,
that contradicted his Preaching in his Life and Conversation, That it was pity
he should e're come out of the Pulpit, because he was there as near Heaven as
ever he would be. Shall it be said of you, upon the same account, That it is
pi^y you should come down from the high-towring Waves of the Sea? Should not
Seamen, that in stormy Weather have their feet (as it were) upon the
Battlements of Heaven, look down upon all earthly Happiness in this World but
as base, waterish, and worthless? The great Cities of Campania seem but small
Cottages to them that stand on the ^lpes. Should not Seamen, that so often mount
up to Heaven, make it their main business here, once at last to get into
Heaven? What ( Seamen) shall you only go to Heaven against your Wills? When
Seamen mount up to Heaven in a storm, the Psalmist tells us, That their souls
are melted because of trouble. O that you were continually as unwilling to go
to Hell, as you are in a storm to go to Heaven!

4. And lastly, Consider what engagements lie upon you to be singularly holy,
from your singular deliverances and salvations. They that go down to the Sea in
Ships, are sometimes in the Valley of the shadow of Death, by reason of the
springing of perilous Leaks; and yet miraculously delivered, either by some
wonderful stopping of the Leak, or by God's sending some Ship within their
sight, when they have been far out of sight of any Land; or by his bringing
their near-perishing Ship safe to shore. Sometimes they have been in very great
danger of being taken by Pirates, yet wonderfully preserved, either by God's
calming of the Winds in that part of the Sea where the Pirates have sailed, or
by giving the poor pursued Ship a strong gale of Wind to run away from their
Pursuers; or by sinking the Pirates, etc. Sometimes their Ships have been cast
away, and yet they themselves wonderfully got safe to shore upon Planks, Yards,
Masts, etc. I might be endless in enumerating their Deliverances from Drowning,
from Burning, from Slavery, etc. (Sure Seamen) your extraordinary Salvations
lay more than ordinary engagement upon you, to praise, love, fear, obey, and
trust in your Savior and Deliverer. I have read, that the enthralled Greeks
were so affected with their Liberty, procured by Flaminius the Roman General,
that their shrill Acclamations of (...), A Savior, a Savior, made the very
Birds fall down from the Heavens astonished. O how should Seamen be affected
with their Sea-Deliverances! Many that have been delivered from Turkish
Slavery, have vowed to be Servants to their Redeemers all the days of their
Lives. Ah, Sirs, will not you be more than ordinarily God's Servants all the
days of your Lives, seeing you have been so often, so wonderfully r^deemed from
Death it self by him? Verily, do what you can, you will die in God's Debt. As
for me, God forbid, that I should sin against the Lord, in ceasing to pray for
you, 1 Samuel 12. 23, 24. That by the perusal of this short and sweet Treatise,
wherein the jucicious and ingenious Author has well mixed utile dulci, profit
and pleasure, you may learn the good and right way, even to fear the Lord, and
serve him in truth with all your hearts, considering how great things he has
done for you: This is the hearty Prayer of

Your Cordial Friend, earnestly desirous of a prosperous Voyage for your
precious and immortal Souls, T.M.

The AUTHOR to the READER.
WHen Dewy-cheek'd Aurora does display
Her Curtains, to let in the Newborn Day,
Her heavenly Face looks Red, as if it were
Died with a modest Blush, 'twixt Shame and Fear.
Sol makes her blush, suspecting that he will
Scorch some too much, and others leave to chill,
With such a Blush, my little Newborn Book
Goes out of hand, suspecting some may look
Upon it with Contempt, while others raise
So mean a Piece too high, by flattering Praise.
Its Beauty cannot make its Father dote;
It Is a poor Babe, clad in a Seagreen Coat.
Its gone from me too young, and now is run
To Sea, among the Tribe of Zebulun.
Go, Little Book, thou many Friends wilt find
Among that Tribe, who will be very kind;
And many of them Care of Thee will take,
Both for thy own, and for thy Father's sake.
Heaven save it from the dangerous Storms and Gusts.
That will be raised against it by Men's Lusts.
Guilt makes Men angry, Anger is a Storm;
But Sacred Truth's thy shelter, fear no harm.
On Times, or Persous, no Reflection's found;
Though with Reflections few Books more abound.
Go, Little Book, I have much more to say,
But Seamen call for thee, thou must away.
Yet e're you have it, grant me One Request;
Pray do not keep it Prisoner in your Chest.
BOOKS Lately Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and Three Crowns at the
lower end of Cheapside*
MR. Flavel's Fountain of Life opened, or a Display of Christ in his Essential
and Mediatorial Glory, in 42 Sermons, Quarto.

-- His Treatise of the Soul of Man, Quarto.

-- Divine Conduct, or Mystery of Providence.

Burgesses Golden Snuffers, a Sermon Preached to the Society for Reformation of
Manners.

Sylvester's Reformation Sermon.

How Is Reformation Sermon.

Singing of Psalms Vindicated from the Charge of

Novelty, in Answer to Dr. Russel, Mr. Marlow, etc.

Bury's Looking-Glass for the Unmarry'd.

Discourses upon the Rich Man and Lazarus, by Mr. Timothy Cruso.

BOOKS Printed for and Sold by M. Fabian in Mercers Chapel at the lower end of
Cheapside. Viz.
Hymen's Praeludia or Loves Masterpiece, being that so much admired Romance,
called Cleopat^a.

Gouges Word to Saints and Sinners.

-- Christian directions.

The Protestant School or a Spelling-book, by Moses Lane Schoolmaster, being
the most copious extant.

The Pastoral Letters of the Incomparable Iurieu, directed to the Protestants
in France groaning under the Babylonish Tyranny translated: Wherein the
Sophistical arguments and unexpressible Cruelties made use of by the Papists
for making Converts; are laid open and exposed to just abhorrence. Unto which
is added a brief account of the Hungarian Persecution.

The History of Scotland from the year 1423 to 1542 containing the Lives and
Reigns of James the 1 2 3 4 and 5 with several memorials of State during the
Reigns of James the 6 and Charles the 1. Illustrated with their Effiges in
Copper Plates, by W. Drummond of Hauthornden With a Prefatory Introduction
taken out of the Records of that Nation by Mr. Hall of Grays Inn. The 2 Edition
with a brief account of the Authors Life.

Collyers Compendions Discourses.

-- Self denial.

Bampfields reply to Dr. Wallis.

Gosnold of Baptism.

Post with a Packet of Letters.

School for Princes.

Spiritual guide to disentangled Souls, by P. Molino.

Learnings Foundation firmly laid in a short method of teaching to read
English, more exact and easy than ever was yet published by any: comprehending
all things necessary for the perfect and speedy attaining the same: Whereby any
one of discretion may be brought to read the Bible truly in the space of a
Month though he never knew a Letter before, the truth whereof has been confirmed
by manifold experience, by George Robertson Schoolmaster.

A New Compass for Seamen: OR, Navigation Spiritualized.
CHAP. I.
The Launching of a Ship plainly sets forth
Our double State, by First and Second Birth.

OBSERVATION.
NO sooner is a Ship built, launched, rigged, victualled, and manned, but she
is presently sent out into the boisterous Ocean, where she is never at rest,
but continually fluctuating, tossing and laboring, until she be either
overwhelmed and wrecked in the Sea, or through Age, knocks and bruises, grows
leaky and unserviceable; and so is haled up, and ripped abroad.

APPLICATION.
No sooner come we into the World as Men, or as Christians, by a natural, or
supernatural Birth; but thus we are tossed upon a Sea of Troubles, Job 5. 7. Yet
Man is born to trouble, as the sparks fly upwards. The spark no sooner comes
out of the fire, but it flies up naturally; it needs not any external force,
help, or guidance, but ascends from a principle in it self: So naturally, so
easily, does trouble rise out of sin. There is radically all the misery,
anguish, and trouble in the World, in our corrupt Natures. As the spark lies
close hid in the coals, so does misery in sin: Every sin draws a rod after it.
And these sorrows and troubles fall not only on the Body, in those breaches,
flaws, deformities, pains, aches, diseases to which it is subject, which are
but the groans of dying Nature, and its crumbling, by degrees, into dust again;
but on all our Employments and Callings also, Genesis 3. 17, 18, 19. These are
full of pain, trouble, and disappointment. Hag. 1. 6. We earn Wages, and put it
into a Bag with holes, and disquiet our selves in vain; all our Relations full
of trouble. The Apostle speaking to those that Marry, says, 1 Cor. 7. 28. Such
shall have trouble in the flesh. Upon which words one glosseth thus: Flesh and
Trouble are Married together, whether we Marry or no: But they that are
Married, Marry with, and Match into new troubles: See Mr. Whatelie's Care-Cloth
All Relations have their burdens, as well as their comforts. It were endless
to enumerate the sorrows of this kind; and yet the troubles of the Body, are
but the body of our troubles: The spirit of the Curse falls upon the spiritual
and noblest part of Man. The Soul and Body, like to Ezekiel's Roll, are written
full with sorrows, both within and without. So that we make the same report of
our lives, when we come to die, that old Jacob made before Pharaoh, Genesis 47. 9.
Few and evil have the days of the years of our lives been. For what has Man of
all his labor, and of the vexation of his heart, wherein he has labored
under the Sun? For all his days are sorrows, and his travel grief, yea, his
heart takes no rest in the night: This is also vanity, Eccles. 2 22, 23.

Neither does our New Birth free us from troubles, though then they be
sanctified, sweetened, and turned into blessings to us. We put not off the
Humane, when we put on the Divine Nature; nor are we then freed from the sense,
though we be delivered from the sting and curse of them. Grace does not
presently pluck out all those Arrows that sin has shot into the sides of
Nature, 2 Cor. 7. 5. When we were come into Macedonia, our Flesh had no rest,
but we were troubled on every side: without were fightings, and within were
fears, Rev. 7. 14. These are they that come out of great tribulations. The
first cry of the Newborn Christian (says one) gives Hell an alarm, and awakens
the rage, both of Devils and Men against him. Hence Paul and Barnabas
acquainted those new Converts, Act. 14. 22. That through much tribulation, they
must enter into the Kingdom of God: And we find the state of the Church, in
this World, set out ( Isa. 54. 11.) by the similitude of a distressed Ship at
Sea: O thou afflicted [and tossed] with Tempests, and not comforted. [Tossed]
as Iona's Ship was; for the same word is there used, Jonah 1. 11. 13. as a
Vessel at Sea, stormed, and violently driven without Rudder, Mast, Sail, or
Tacklings. Nor are we to expect freedom from those Troubles, until harbored in
Heaven, see 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7. O what large Catalogues of Experiences do the Saints
carry to Heaven with them, of their various Exercises, Dangers, Trials, and
mavelous Preservations and Deliverances out of all! And yet all these
Troubles without, are nothing to those within them; from Temptations,
Corruptions, Desertions, by Passion and Compassion: Besides their own, there
comes daily upon them the Troubles of others; many Rivulets fall into this
Channel and Brim, yea often overflow the Banks, Psalm. 34. 19. Many are the
afflictions of the righteous.

REFLECTION.
Hence should the graceless heart thus reflect upon it self. O my Soul! into
what a Sea of troubles art thou lanched forth! And what a sad case thou art in!
Full of Trouble and full of Sin, and these do mutually produce each other. And
that which is the most dreadful Consideration of all, is, That I cannot see the
end of them. As for the Saints, they suffer in the World as well as I; but it
is but for a While, 1 Pet. 5. 10. and then they shall suffer no more, 2 These.
1. 7. But all tears shall be wiped away from their eyes, Rev. 7. 17. But my
Troubles look with a long Visage: Ah! they are but the beginning of sorrows,
but a parboiling before I be roasted in the flames of God's eternal wrath. If I
continue as I am, I shall but deceive my self, if I conclude I shall be happy
in the other World, because I have met with so much sorrow in this: For I read,
Jude 7. that the Inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrha, though consumed to ashes,
with all their Estates and Relations, (a sorer Temporal Judgment than ever yet
befell me) do, notwithstanding that, continue still in everlasting Chains, under
Darkness, in which they are reserved unto the Judgment of the Great Day. The
Troubles of the Saints are sanctified to them, but mine are fruits of the
Curse. They have spiritual Consolations to balance them, which flow into their
Souls in the same height and degree, as Troubles do upon their Bodies, 2 Cor.
1. 5. But I am a stranger to their Comforts, and intermeddle not with their
Ioys, Prove. 14. 10. If their hearts be surcharged with Trouble, they have a God
to go to; and when they have opened their Cause before him, they are eased,
return with comfort, and their Countenance is no more sad, 1 Samuel 1. 18. When
their Belly is as Bottles full of new Wine, they can give it vent by pouring
out of their Souls into their Father's Bosom: But I have no interest in, nor
acquaintance with this God; nor can I pray unto him in the Spirit. My griefs
are shut up like fire in my bosom, which preys upon my spirit. This is my
^orrow, and I alone must bear it. O my Soul, look round about thee! What a
miserable case art thou ^n? Rest no longer satisfied in it, but look out for a
Christ also. What though I be a vile, unworthy wretch? yet he promises to love
freely, Hos. 14. 4. and invites such as are heavy laden to him, Mat. 11. 28.

Hence also should the gracious Soul reflect sweetly upon it self after this
manner: And is the World so full of trouble? O my Soul, what cause have thou to
stand admiring at the indulgence and goodness of God to thee! Thou have
hitherto had a smooth ^assage comparatively to what others have had. How has
Divine Wisdom ordered my Condition, and cast my Lot? Have I been chastised with
Whips? others with Scorpions: Have I had no peace without: Some have neither
had peace without nor within, but terrors round about: Or have I felt trouble
in my flesh and spirit at once? Yet have they not been extreme, either for time
or measure, And has the World been a Sodom, an Egypt to thee? Why then do
thou thus linger in it, and hanker after it? Why do I not long to be gone, and
sigh more heartily for Deliverance? Why are the thoughts of my Lord's coming no
sweeter to me, and the day of my full deliverance no more panted for? And why
am I no more careful to maintain peace within, since there is so much trouble
without? Is not this it that puts weight into all outward troubles, and makes
them sinking, that they fall upon me when my spirit is dark or wounded?

THE POEM.
My Soul, art thou besieged
with troubles round about?
If thou be wise, take this Advice,
to keep these troubles out.
Wise Men will keep their Conscience as their eyes;
For in their Conscience their best Treasure lies.
See you be tender of your inward peace;
That shipwrackt, then your Mirth and Joy must ceas.
If God from you your outward Comforts rend,
You Will find what need you have of such a Friend.
If this be not by sin destroyed and lost,
You need not fear, your Peace will quit your cost.
If youl'd know How to sweeten any grief,
Though never so great, or to procure relief
Against the afflictions, which like deadly Darts.
Most fatal are to Men of carnal hearts,
Reject not that, which Conscience bids you chusc,
And choose not you, what Conscience says, Refuse.
If sin you must, or Misery under lie,
Resolve to bear, and choose the Misery.
CHAP. II.
In the vast Ocean Spiritual Eyes des^ry
God's boundless Mercy, and Eternity.

OBSERVATION.
THE Ocean is of a vast extent and depth, though supposedly measurable, yet not
to be sounded by Man. It compasses about the Whole Earth, which in the account
of Geographers, is Twenty one thousand and six hundred Miles in compass; yet
the Ocean invirons it on every side, Psalm. 104. 25. and Job 11. 9. Suitable to
which is that of the Poet.

Tum freta diffudit, rapidisque tumescere ventis
Iussit and ambitae circumdare littora terrae.
Ovid He spread the Seas, which then he did command,
To swell with Winds, and compass round the Land.
And for its Depth, who can discover it? The Sea in Scripture is called, The
Deep, Job 38. 30. The Great Deep, Genesis 7. 11. The gathering together of the
Waters into one place, Genesis 1. 9. If the vastest Mountain were cast into it, it
would appear no more than the head of a Pin in a Tun of Water.

APPLICATION.
This in a lively manner shaddows forth the infinite and incomprehensible Mercy
of our God; whose Mercy is said to be over all his works, Psalm. 145. 9. In how
many sweet Notions is the Mercy of God represented to us in the Scripture. He
is said to be Plenteous, Psalm. 4. 5. Abundant, 1 Pet. 1. 3. Rich, Ephesians. 2. 4. in
mercy; then, that his Mercies are unsearchable, Ephesians. 3. 8. High as the Heaven
above the Earth, Psalm. 10. 4. Which are so high and vast, that the whole Earth
is but a small point to them: yea, they are not only compared to the Heavens,
but to come home to the Metaphor, to the Depths of the Sea, Mic. 7. 19. which
can swallow up Mountains as well as Mole-hills; and in this Sea God has
drowned sins of a dreadful height and aggravation, even Scarlet, Crimson (i.
e.) deep dyed with many intensive aggravations, Isa. 1. 18. In this Sea was the
sin of Manasseh drowned; and of what magnitude that was, may be seen, 2 Chronicles.
33. 3. Yea, in this Ocean of Mercy, did the Lord drown and cover the sins of
Paul, though a Blasphemer, a Persecutor, Injurious, 1 Timothy 1. 13. None, says
Augustine, more fierce than Paul among the Persecutors; and therefore none
greater among sinners: to which himself willingly subscribes, 1 Timothy 1. 1^^ yet
pardoned. How has Mercy rode in triumph, and been glorified upon the vilest of
Men! How has it stop^ the slanderous mouth of Men and Devils! It has yearned
upon Fornicators, Idol^ters, Adulterers, Thieves, Covetous, Drunkards,
Revilers, Extortioners; to such has the Scepter of Mercy been stretched forth,
upon their unfeigned repentance and submission, 1 Cor. 6. 9. What does the
Spirit of God aim at, in such a large accumulation of Names of Mercy? But to
convince poor sinners of the abundant fullness and riches of it, if they will
but submit to the terms on which it is tendered to them.

In the vastness of the Ocean, we have also a lively Emblem of Eternity. Who
can comprehend or measure the Ocean, but God? And who can comprehend Eternity,
but he that is said to inhabit it? Isa. 57. 15. Though shallow Rivers may be
drained and dried up, yet the Ocean cannot. And though these transitory Days,
Months, and Years will at last expire and determine; yet Eternity shall not. O!
it is a long World! and amazing Matter! What is Eternity, but a constant
permanency of Persons and Things, in one and the same State and Condition for
ever; putting them beyond all possibility of change? The Heathens were wont to
shadow it by a Cricle, or a Snake twisted round. It will be to all of us,
either a perpetual Day or Night, which will not be measured by Watches, Hours,
Minutes. And as it cannot be measured, so neither can it ever be diminished.
When thousands of years are gone, there is not a minute less to come. Gerhard
and Drexelius do both illustrate it by this known similitude: Suppose a Bird
were to come once in a thousand years; to some vast Mountain of Sand, and carry
away in her Bill one Sand in a thousand years; O what a vast time would it be,
e're that immortal Bird, after that rate, had recovered the Mountain! and yet
in time this might be done. For there would be still some diminution; but in
Eternity there can be none. There be three things in Time, which are not
competent to Eternity: In Time there is a Succession, one Generation, Year, and
Day passes, and another comes; but Eternity is a fixed [now.] In Time there is
a Diminution and wasting; the more is past, the less to come: But it is not so
in Eternity. In time there is an Alteration of condition and states: A Man may
be poor to day, and rich to morrow; sickly and diseased this week, and well the
next; now in contempt, and anon in honor: But no change passes upon us in
Eternity. As the Tree falls at Death and Judgment, so it lies for ever. If in
Heaven, there thou art a Pillar, and shall go forth no more, Rev. 3. 12. If in
Hell, no Redemption thence, but the smoke of their torments ascends for ever
and ever, Rev. 19. 3.

REFLECTION.
And is the Mercy of God, like the great Deeps, an Ocean, that none can fathom?
What unspeakable Comfort is this to me? may the pardoned Soul say. Did Israel
sing a Song, when the Lord had overwhelmed their corporal Enemies in the Seas?
And shall not I break forth into his Praises, who has drowned all my sins in
the depth of Mercy? O my Soul, bless thou the Lord, and let his high praises
ever be in thy mouth. May not thou say, that he has gone to as high an
extent and degree of Mercy, in pardoning thee, as ever he did in any? Oh my
God, who is like unto thee! that pardonest Iniquity, Transgression and Sin.
What mercy, but the Mercy of a God, could cover such abominations as mine!

But O! what terrible Reflections will Conscience ^ake from hence, upon all the
Despisers of Mercy, when the sinners eyes come to be opened too late for Mercy,
to do them good! We have heard in^eed, that the King of Heaven was a merciful
King, ^ut we would make no address to Him, whilst that Scepter was stretched
out. We heard of Balm in Gilead, and a Physician there, that was able and
willing to cure all our wounds, but would not commit our seives to him. We read
that the Arms of Christ were open to embrance and receive us, but we would not.
O unparalled folly! O Soul-destroying madness? Now the Womb of Mercy is shut
up, and shall bring forth no more Mercies to me for ever. Now the Gates of
Grace are shut, and no cries can open them.

Mercy acted its part, and is gone off the Stage; and now Justice enters the
Scene and will be glorified for ever upon me. How often did I hear the Bowels
of Compassion sounding in the Gospel for me? But my hard and impenitent heart
could not relent; and now, if it could, it is too late. I am now past out of
the Ocean of Mercy, into the Ocean of Eternity, where I am fixed in the midst
of endless Misery, and shall never hear the Voice of Mercy more.

O dreadful Eternity! Oh Soul-confounding Word ^ An Ocean indeed, to which this
Ocean is but as a drop; for in thee no Soul shall see either Bank or Bottom. If
I lie but one Night under strong pains of body, how tedious does that Night
seem! And how do I tell the Clock, and wish for day! In the World I might have
had Life, and would not; And now, how fain would I have Death, but cannot ^ How
quick were my sins in execution? And how long is their punishment in duration?
O, how shall I dwell with everlasting Burnings? Oh that God would but vouchsafe
one treaty more with me! Bu^ alas, all tenders and treaties are now at an end
with me. On Earth peace, Luke 2. 13. but none in Hell O my Soul! consider these
things: come, let us debate this matter seriously, before we launch o^ into
this Ocean.

THE POEM.
Who from some high-rais'd Tower views the ground,
His heart does tremble, and his head does round:
Even so my Soul, whilst it does view and think
On this Eternity, upon whose brink
It borders, stands amazed, and does cry,
O boundless! bottomless Eternity!
The Scourge of Hell, whose very Lash does rend
The damned Souls in twain: What! never end?
The more thereon they ponder, think and pore,
The more, poor wretches, still they howl and roar.
Ah! though more years in torments we should lie,
Than Sands are on the Shore, or in the Sky
Are twinkling Stars: yet this gives some relief,
The hope of ending. Ah! but here is the grief!
A thousand Years in Torments past and gone,
Ten Thousand more afresh are coming on;
And when these Thousands all their course have run,
The end's no more than when it first begun.
Come then, my Soul, let us discourse together
This weighty Point, and tell me plainly whether
You for these short-lived Ioys, that come and go,
Will plunge your self and me in endless woe.
Resolve the Question quickly, do not dream
More Time away. Lo, in an hasty stream
We swiftly pass, and shortly we shall be
Ingulphed both in this Eternity.
CHAP. III.
Within these smooth-faced Seas strange Creatures crawl;
But in Man's Heart, far stranger than them all.

OBSERVATION.
IT was an unadvised saying of Plato, Mare nil memorabile producit: The Sea
produces nothing memorable. But surely there is much of the Wisdom, Power, and
Goodness of God manifested in those Inhabitants of the Watery Region:
Notwithstanding the Seas azure and smiling face, Strange Creatures are bred in
its Womb. O Lord (says David) how manifold are thy works? In wisdom have thou
made them all; the Earth is full of thy riches. So is this great and wide Sea,
wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small and great Beasts, Psalm
104. 24, 25. And we read, Lam. 4. 3. of Sea Monsters, which draw out their
Breasts to their young. Pliny and Purchase tell incredible stories about them.
About the Tropic of Capricorn, our Seamen meet with flying Fishes, that have
Wings like a Rere-mouse, but of a Silver-colour; they fly in flocks like
Stares. There are Creatures of very strange Forms and Properties; some
resembling a Cow, called by the Spaniards, Manates, by some supposed to be the
Seamonster spoken of by Jeremy. In the Rivers of Guiana, Purchase says, there
are Fishes that have four Eyes, bearing two above and two beneath the Water
when they swim: Some resembling a Toad, and very poisonous. How strange both in
shape and property is the Sword-fish and Thrasher, that fight with the Whale?
Even our own Seas produce Creatures of strange shapes, but the commonness takes
off the wonder.

APPLICATION.
Thus does the heart of Man naturally swarm and abound with strange and
monstrous lusts and abominations, Romans 1. 29, 30, 31, Being filled with all
unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, fuil of
envy, murder, debate, deceit, malignity, whisperers, back-bit^rs, haters of
God, despiteful, proud, boasters, inventors of evil things, disobedient to
Parents, without understanding, covenant-breakers, without natural affection,
implacable, unmerciful. O what a swarm is here! and yet there are multitudes
more, in the depths of the heart! And it is no wonder, considering that with
this Nature, we received the spawn of the blackest and vilest abominations.
This original lust is productive to them all, Iam. 1. 14. 15. Which lust,
though it be in every Man numerically, different from that of others, yet it is
one and the same speciffically, for sort and kind, in all the Children of Adam:
even as the reasonable Soul, though every Man has his own Soul, viz a Soul
individually distinct from another Man's, yet is it the same for kind in all
men. So that whatever abominations are in the hearts and lives of the vilest
Sodomites, and most profligate Wretches under Heaven; there is the same matter
in thy heart out of which they were shaped and formed. In the depths of the
heart they are conceived, and thence they crawl out of the eyes, hands, lips,
and all the members, Mat. 15. 18. 19. Those things (says Christ) which proceed
out of the mouth, come forth from the heart, and defile a man. For out of the
heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts,
false-witness, blasphemies: Even such Monsters, as would make a gracious heart
tremble to behold. What are my Lusts, (says Fuller's Medone) but so many Toads
spitting of Venom, tations, p 11. and spawning of Poison; croaking in my
Judgment, creeping in my Will, and crawling into my Affecttions? The Apostle in
1 Cor. 5. 1. tells us of a sin, Not to be named; so monstrous, that Nature it
self startles at it: Even such Monsters are generated in the depths of the
heart. Whence comes evils? was a Question that much puzzled the Philosphers of
old. Now here you may see whence they come, and when they are begotten.

REFLECTION.
And are there such strange abominations in the heart of Man? Then how is he
degenerated from his Perfection and Glory! His streams were once as clear as
Crystal, and the Fountain of them pure, there was no unclean Creature moving
in them What a stately Fabric was the Soul at first! And what holy Inhabitants
possessed the several rooms thereof! But now (as God speaks of Idumea) Isai.
34. 11. The line of confusion is stretched out upon it, and the stones of
emptiness. The Cormorant and Bittern posses it; the Owl and the Raven dwell in
it. Yea, as Isai. 13. 21. 22. The wild beasts of the desert lie there; is is
full of doleful creatures, the Satyrs dance in it, and Dragons cry in those
sometimes pleasant places. O sad change! how sadly may we look back toward our
first state! and take up the words of Job, O that I were as in months past, as
in the days of my youth; when the Almighty was yet with me, when I put on
righteousness, and it clothed me; when my glory was fresh in me, Job 29. 2, 4.
5.

Again, think, O my Soul, what a miserable condition the Unregenerate abide in*
Thus swarmed and overrun with hellish Lusts, under the dominion and vassalage
of diverse Lusts, Tit. 3. 3. What a tumultuous Sea is such a Soul! How do these
Lusts rage within them! how do they contest and scuffle for the Throne! and
usually take it by turns. For as all Diseases are contrary to health, yet some
contrary to each other, so are Lusts. Hence poor Creatures are hurried on to
different kinds of servitude, according to the Nature of that imperious Lust
that is in the Throne; and like the Lunatic, Mat. 17. are sometimes cast into
the Water, and sometimes into the Fire. Well might the Prophet say, The wicked
is like a troubled Sea that cannot rest. Isai. 57. 20. They have no peace now
in the serve ice of sin, and less they shall have hereafter, when they receive
the wages of sin. There is no peaec to the wicked, says my God. they indeed
cry Peace, peace; but my God does not say so. The last issue and result of this
is Eternal Death; no sooner is it delivered of its deceitful pleasures, but
presently it falls in travel again, and brings forth death, Iam. 1, 15.

Once more: And is the Heart such a Sea, abounding with monstrous abominations?
then stand astonished, O my Soul, at that Free Grace which has delivered thee
from so sad a Condition! O fall down, and kiss the feet of Mercy that moved so
freely and seasonably to thy rescue! Let my heart be enlarged abundantly here.
Lord, what am I, that I should be taken, and others left? Reflect, O my Soul,
upon the Conceptions and Births of Lusts, in the days of Vanity, which thou now
blushest to own. O what black imaginations, hellish desires, vile affections,
are lodged there! Who made me to differ? Or, how came I to be thus wounderfully
separated? Surely, it is by thy Free Grace, and nothing else, that I am what I
am: And by that Grace I have escaped (to mine own astonishment) the corruption
that is in the World through Lust. O that ever the holy God should set his eyes
on such an one; or cast a look of love toward me, in whom were Legions of
unclean Lusts and Abominations!

THE POEM.
My Soul's the Sea, wherein from day to day,
Sins like Leviathans do sport and play.
Great Master-Lusts, with all the lesser fry,
Therein increase. and strangely multiply.
Yet strange it is not, sin so fast should breed,
Since with this Nature I received the Seed
And Spawn of every Species, which was shed
Into its Caverns first, then nourished
By its own native warmth; which like the Sun,
Has quickened them, and now abroad they come,
And like the Frogs of Egypt creep and crawl
Into the closest Rooms within my Soul.
My Fancy swarms, for there they frisk and play,
In Dreams by Night, and foolish Toys by day.
My Iudgment's clouded by them, and my Will
Perverted, every corner they do fill.
As Locusts seize on all that is fresh and green,
Unclothe the beauteous Spring, and make it seem
Like drooping Autumn; so my Soul, that first
As Eden seemed, now is like a Ground that is cursed.
Lord purge my Streams, and kill those Lusts that lie
Within them; if they do not, I must die.
CHAP. IV.
Seas purge themselves, and cast their filth ashore
But Graceless Souls retain, and suck in more.

OBSERVATION.
SEas are in a continual motion and agitation; they have their Flux and Reflux,
by which they are kept from putrefaction: like a Fountain it cleanses it self,
Isai. 57. 20. It cannot rest, but cast up mire and dirt; whereas Lakes and
ponds, whose Waters are standing, and dead, corrupt and stink. And it is
observed by Seamen hat in the Southern parts of the World, where the Sea in
more calm and settled, it is more corrupt and unfit for use; so is the Sea of
Sodom called, The Dead Sea,

APPLICATION.
Thus do regnerate Souls purify themselves, and work out corruption that
defiles them, they cannot suffer it to settle there, 1 Job 3. 3. He purifieth
himself, even as he is pure. Keeps himself, that the wicked one touches him
not, 1 John 5. 18. scil. Tacta qualitativo, with a Qualitative Touch, as the
Lodestone touches Iron, leaving an Impression of its Nature behind it. They
are Doves delighting in cleanness, Isai. 33. 15. He dispiseth the gain of
opression, he shakes his hands from holding of bribes, stops his ears from
hearing blood, and shuts his eyes from seeing evil. See how all Senses and
Members are guarded against sin: But it is quite contrary with the wicked;
there no principle of Holiness in them, to oppose or expel corruption. It lies
in their hearts as Mud in a Lake or Well, which settles and corrupts more and
more. Hence Ezec. 47. 11. their Hearts are compared to myrie or marish places,
which cannot be healed, but are given to Salt: The meaning is, that the purest
streams of the Gospel. which cleanse others, make them worse than before, as
abundance of Rain will a myrie place. The reason is, because it meets with an
obstacle in their souls; so that it cannot run through them and be glorisied,
as it does in gracious Souls. All the means and endeavors used to cleanse
them, are in vain; all the grace of God they receive in vain: They hold fast
deceit, they refuse to let it go, Jer. 8. 5. Sin is not in them as floating
Weeds upon the Sea, which it strives to expel and purge out, but as Spots in
the Leopard's Skin, Ier. 13. 21. or Letters fashioned and engraven in the very
substance of Marble or Brass, with a pen of Iron, and point of a Diamond, Ier.
17. 1, Or as Ivy in an old Wall, that has gotten rooting into its very
intrails. Wickedness is sweet in their mouths, they roll it under their
tongues, Job 20. 12. No threats nor promises can divorcethem from it.

REFLECTION.
Lord! this is the very frame of my heart, may the graceless Soul say: My
corruptions quietly settle in me, my heart labors not against it: I am a
stranger to that conflict which is daily maintained in all the Faculties of the
regenerate Soul. Glorified Souls have no such conflict, because Grace in them
stands alone, and is perfectly triumphant over all its opposites; and graceless
Souls can have no such conflict, because in them corruption stands alone, and
has no other principle to make opposition to it. And this is my case, O Lord:
I am full of vain hopes indeed, but had I a living and wellgrounded hope to
dwell for ever with so holy a God, I could not but be daily purifying my self.
But O! what will the end of this be? I have cause to tremble at that last and
dreadfullest Curse in the Book of God, Rev. 22. 11. Let him that is filthy be
filthy still. Is it not as much as if God should say, Let them alone, I will
spend no more rods upon them, no more means shall be used about them; but I
will reckon with them for all together in another World; O my Soul! what a
dismal reckoning will that be! Ponder with thy self in the mean while, those
terrible and awaking Texts, that if possible, this fatal issue may be
prevented. See Isai. 1. 5. Hos. 4. 14. Jer. 6. 29, 30, Heb. 6. 8.

THE POEM.
My Heart's no Fountain, but a standing Lake
Of putrid Waters; if therein I rake,
By serious search, O! what a noisome smell,
Like Exhalations rising out of Hell;
The stinking Waters pumped up from the Hole,
Are as perfumes to Seamen: but my Soul
Upon the same account that they are glad,
(Its long continuance there) is therefore sad.
The Scripture says, No Soul God's face shall see
Till from such filthy Lusts it cleansed be.
Yet though unclean, it may that way be rid,
As Hercules the Augean Stable did.
Lord turn into my Soul that cleansing Blood,
Which from my Savior's side flowed us a Flood.
Flow, sacred, brim my Banks; and flow
Till you have made my Soul as white as Snow.
CHAP. V.
Seamen foresee a Danger, and prepare:
Yet few of greater Dangers are aware.

OBSERVATION
HOW watchful and quick sighted are Seamen, to prevent Dangers? If the Wind
die away, and then fresh up Sourtherly; or if they see the Sky hezy, they
provide for a Storm: If by the Prospective-Glass they ken a Pirate at the
greatest distance, they clear the Gun-room, prepare for fight, and bear up, if
able to deal with him; if not, they keep close by the Wind, make all the Sail
they can, and bear away. If they suppose themselves by their reckoning near
Land, how often do they sound? And if upon a Coast with which they are
unacquainted, how careful are they to get a Pilot that knows and is acquainted
with it?

APPLICATION
Thus watchful and suspicions ought we to be in Spiritual Concernmets. We
should study, and be acquainted with Satan's Wiles and Policy: The Apostle
takes it for granted, that Christians are not ignorant of his devices, 2 Cor.
2. 11. The Serpent's eye (as one says) would do well in the Dove's head: The
Devil is a cunning Pirate, he puts out false Colors, and ordinarily comes up
to the Christan in the disguise of a friend.

O the manifold depths and stratagems of Satan, to destroy Souls! Though he
have no Wisdom to do himself good, yet policy enough to do us mischief. He
lies in ambush behind our lawful comforts and employments: Yet for the most of
men, how supine and careless are they, suspecting no danger; Their Souls, like
Laish, dwell carelessly; their Senses unguarded. O what an easy prize and
conquest does the Devil make of them!

Indeed, if it were with us, as with Adam in innocence, or as it was with
Christ in the days of his flesh (who by reason of that overflowing fullness of
Grace that dwelt in him, the purity of his Person, and the Hypostatical Union,
was secured from the danger of all temptations) the case then were otherwise;
but we have a Traitor within, Jam. 1. 14, 15. as well as a Tempter without 1
Pet. 5. 8. Our adversary the Devil goes about as a roaring Lion, seeking whom
he may devour. And like the Beasts of the Forest, poor Souls, lie down before
him, and become his prey, All the lagacity, wit, policy and foresight of some
Men, is summoned in to serve their Bodies, and secure their fleshly enjoyments.

REFLECTION.
Lord! how does the care, wisdom, and vigilance of Men in temporal and external
things, condemn my carelessness in the deep and dear concernments of my precious
Soul! What care and labor is there to secure a perishing life, liberty, or
treasure! When was I thus sollicitous for my Soul, though its value be
inestimable, and its dangers far greater? Self-preservation is one of the
deepest Principles in Nature. There is not the poorest Worm or Fly, but will
shun danger if it can: Yet I am so far from shunning those dangers to which my
Soul lies continually exposed, that I often run it upon temptations, and
voluntarily expose it to its enemies. I see, Lord, how watchful, Jealous and
laborious thy People are, what Prayers, Tears, and Groans, searching of Heart,
Mortification of Lusts, guarding of Senses: and all accounted too little by
them. Have not I a Soul to save or lose eternally, as well as they? Yet I
cannot deny one fleshly lust, nor withstand one temptation. O, how am I
convinced, and condemned; not only by others care and vigilance, but my own
too, in lesser and lower matters!

THE POEM.
I am the Ship, whose Bills of Lading come
To more than Man's or Angels art can sum.
Rich fraught with Mercies, on the Ocean, now
I float, the dangerous Ocean I do plow.
Storms rise, Rocks threaten, and in every Creek
Pirates and Pickeroons their Prizes seek.
My Soul should watch, look out, and use its Glass,
Prevent Surprizals timely; but alas!
Temptations give it chase, it is grappled sure,
And boared whilst it thinks it self secure.
It sleeps like Jonah, in the dreadful'st storm,
Although its case be dangerous and forlorn.
Lord, rouse my drowsy Soul, lest it should knock
And split it self upon some dangerous Rock.
If it of Faith and Conscience shipwreck make,
I am undone for ever: Soul, awake!
Till thou arrive in Heaven, watch and fear;
Thou may not say till then, the Coast is clear.
CHAP. VI.
How small a matter turns a Ship about?
Yet we against our Conscience stand it out.

OBSERVATION
IT is just matter of admiration, to see so great a body as a Ship is, and when
under Sail too, before a fresh and strong Wind, by which it is carried, as the
Clouds, with mavelous force and speed, yet to be commanded with ease, by so
small a thing as the Helm is. The Scripture takes notice of it as a matter
worthy our consideration, Jam. 3. 4 Behold also the ships, which though they be
great, and driven of fierce winds; yet they are turned about with a small Helm,
whithersoever the Governor lists. Yea, Aristotle himself, Ariftot. secund^.
(...), c. 5.
that Eagle eyed Philosopher, could not give a reason of it, but looked upon it
as a very mavelous and wounderful thing.

APPLICATION.
To the same use and office has God designed Conscience in Man, which being
rectified and regulated by the Word and Spirit of God, is to steer and order
his whole Conversation. Conscience is as the Oracle of God, the Judge and
Determiner of our Actions, whether they be good or evil? and it lays the
strongest obligatons upon the creature to obey its dictates, that is
imaginable: For it binds under the reason and consideration of the most
Absolute and Sovereign Will of the great God. So that as often as Conscience
from the Word convinces us of any sin or duty, it lays such a bond upon us to
obey it, as no power under Heaven can relax, or dispense with. Angels cannot do
it, much less Man; for that would be to exalt themselves above God. Now
therefore it is an high and dreadful way of sinning, to oppose and rebel
against Conscience, when it convinces of sin or duty. Conscience sometimes
reasons it out with Men, and shows them the necessity of changing their way and
course; arguing it from the clearest and most allowed Maxims of right Reason,
as well as from the indisputable Sovereignty of God.

As for instance: It convinces their very Reason, that things of Eternal
Duration, are infinitely to be preferred to all momentary and perishing things,
Romans 8. 18. Heb. 11. 26. And it is our duty to choose them, and make all secular
and temporary concernments to stand aside, and give place to them. Yet though
Men be convinced of this, their stubborn Will stands out* and will not yield up
it self to the conviction.

Further, It argues from this acknowledged truth, That all the delights and
pleasures it this World, are but a miserable portion, and that it is the
highest folly to adventure an immortal soul for them, Luke 9. 25. Alas, what
remembrance is there of them in Hell? They are as the waters that pass away.
What have they left of all their mirth and jollity, but a tormenting sting? It
convinces them clearly also that in matters of deep concernment, it is an high
point of wisdom, to apprehend and improve the right seasons and opportunities
of them Prove. 10. 5. He that gathers in summer is a wise Son. Eccles. 8. 5. A
wise man's heart discerns both time and judgment. There is a season to every
purpose, Eccles. 3. 1. viz. A nick of time, an happy juncture; when if a Man
strikes in, he does his work effectually, and with much facility. Such Seasons
Conscience convinces the Soul of, and often whispers thus in its ear: Now,
Soul, strike in close with this motion of the Spirit, and be happy for ever;
thou may never have such a gale for Heaven any more. Now, though these be
allowed Maxims of Reason, and Conscience enforce them strongly on the soul, yet
cannot it prevail; the proved stubborn Will rebels, and will not be guided by
it. See Ephesians. 2. 3. Job 34. 37. Isai. 46. 12. Ezekiel. 2. 4. Ier. 44. 16.

REFLECTION.
Ah Lord! such an heart have I had before thee; thus obstinate, thus
rebellious, so uncomptrolable by Conscience. Many a time has Conscience thus
whispered in mine ear; many a time has it stood in my way, as the Angel did in
Balaams, or the Cherubims that kept the way of the Tree of Life, with flaming
swords turning every way. Thus has it stood to oppose me in the way of my
Lusts. How often has it calmly debated the Case with me alone? And how sweetly
has it expostulated with me? How clearly has it convinced of sin, danger,
duty, with strong demonstration? How terrible has it menaced my soul, and set
the point of the threating at my very breast? And yet my headstrong affections
will not be remanded by it. I have obeyed the voice of every lust and
temptation. Tit. 3. 3. But Conscience has lost its Authority with me* Ah Lord!
what a sad condition am I in, both in respect of sin and misery? My sin
receives dreadful aggravations; for rebellion and presumption are hereby added
to it. I have violated the strongest bonds that ever were laid upon a Creature.
If my Conscience had not thus convinced and warned, the sin had not been so
great and crimsoncoloured, Iam. 4. 17. Ah! this is to sin with an high hand,
Numb. 15. 30. to come near to the great and unpardonable trasgression, Psalm.
19. 13. O how dreadful a way of sinning is this, with opened eyes! And as my
sin is thus out of measure sinful so my punishment will be out of measure
dreadful, if I persist in this rebellion. Lord, thou have said, Such shall be
beaten with many stripes, Luke 12. 48. Yea, Lord, and if ever my Conscience,
which by rebellion is now grown silent, should be in judgment awakened in this
life, Oh what an Hell should I have within me! how would it thunder and roar
upon me, and surround me with terrors!

Thy word assures me, that no length of time can wear out of its memory what I
have done, Genesis 42. 21. No violence or force can suppress it, Mat. 27. 4. No
greatness of power can stifle it; it will take the mightiest Monarchy by the
throat, Exodus 10. 16. Dan. 5. 6. No music, pleasures, or delights, can charm
it Job. 20. 22. O Conscience! thou art the sweetest friend, or the dreadfullest
enemy in the World; Thy Consolations are incomparably sweet, and thy terrors
insupportable. Ah let me stand it out no longer against Conscience; the very
Ship in which I sail, is a confutation of my madness, that rush greedily into
sin against both Reason and Conscience, and will not be commanded by it;
Surely, O my Soul, this will be bitterness in the end.

THE POEM.
A Ship of greatest burden will obey
The Rudder; he that sits at Helm may sway
And guide its motion: If the Pilot please,
The Ship bears up against both Wind and Seas,
My Soul's the Ship, Affections are its Sails,
Conscience the Rudder. Ah! but Lord what ails
My naughty heart, to shuffie in and out,
When its convictions bid it tack about?
Temptations blow a counter-blast, and drive
The Vessel where they please, though Conscience strive.
And by its strong persuasions, it would force
My stubborn Will to steer another course.
Lord, if I run this course, thy Word does tell
How quickly I must needs arrive at Hell.
Then rectify my Conscience, change my Will;
Fan in thy pleasant Gales, my God, and fill
All my affections; and let nothing carry
My Soul from its due course or make it vary;
^hen if the Pilots work thou would perform,
(...) should bear bravely up against a storm.
CHAP. VII.
Through many fears and dangers Seamen run
But all is forgotten when they do return.

OBSERVATION
WE have an elegant and lively description of their fears and dangers, Psalm.
107. 25, 26, 27. He commands and raises the stormy Winds, which lists up
the Waves thereof: They mount up to Heaven, they go down again to the depths;
their soul is melted because of trouble; they reel to and fro, they stagger
like a drunken (...); they are at their wits end. Or, as it is in the Hebrew,
All Wisdom is swallowed up. Suitable to which is that of the Poet. Rector in
incerto est, nec quid fugiative petotive
Invenit, ambiguis ars stupet ipsa malis.
Ovid. The Pilot knows not what to choose or flee,
Art stands amazed in ambiguity.
O what strange and miraculous Deliverances have many Seamen had? How often
have they yielded themselves for dead Men, and verily thought the next Sea
would have swallowed them up? How earnestly then do they cry for Mercy? And
like the Cymbrians, can pray in a storm, though they regarded i^ not at other
times, Psalm. 107. 28. Iona 1. 5, 6.

APPLICATION.
These dreadful storms do at once discover to u^ the mighty Power of God in
raising them, and the abundant Goodness of God in preserving poor Creatures in
them.

1. The Power of God is graciously manifested i^ raising them: The Wind is one
of the Lord's Wonders Psalm. 107. 24, 25. They that go down to the Sea, see the
works of the Lord, and his [wonders] in the deep; for he commands and raises
the stormy winds. Yea, Verse 18. God appropriates it as a peculiar work of his;
He causes [His wind to hlow.] Hence, He is said in Scripture, to bring them
forth of his treasury, Psalm. 137. 7. There they are locked up and reserved, not
a gust can break forth, till he command and call for it to go and excute his
pleasure: Yea, He is said to hold them in his fist, Prove. 30. 4. What is more
incapable of holding than the Wind; yet God holds it, Although it be a strong
and terrible creature, He controuls and rules it. Yea, the Scripture sets forth
who God, As riding upon the wings of the wind, Psalm. 18. 10. It is a borrowed
speech from the manner of Men, when they would show their pomp and greatness,
ride upon some stately Horse or Chario: so the Lord to manifest the greatness
of his Power, rides upon the Wings of the wind, and will be admired in so
terrible a creature.

And no less of his glorious Power appears in remanding them, than in raising
them. The Heathens ^scribe this power to their god Aeolus; but we know this is
the Royalty and sole Prerogative of the true God, who made Heaven and Earth; it
is He that makes the storm a clam, Psalm, 107. 29. And it is He that shifts and
changes them from Point to Point as He pleases; for he has appointed them
their Cir^uits, Eccles. 1. 6. The winds goes toward the South, and turns
about unto the North; it whirleth about continually, and returns again
according to its Circuits.

2. And as we should adore his Power in the winds, (...) ought we to admire his
Goodness in preserving Men in the height of all their fury and violence. O what
a mavelous work of God is here! That Men should be kept in a poor weak
Vessel, upon the wild and stormy Ocean, where the Wind has its full stroke
upon them, and they are driven before it as a wreck upon the Seas; yet, I say,
that God should preserve you there, is a work of infinite goodness and power.
That those Winds which do rend the very Earth, Mountains, and Rocks, 1 Kings
29. 11. Breaks the Cedars, yea, the Cedars of Lebanon, shakes the Wilderness
and makes the Hinds, to calve: which Naturalists say, bring forth with greatest
difficulty, Psalm. 29. 5, 8, 9. Surely your preservation in such Tempests, is an
astonishing work of Mercy. O how dreadful is this Creature, the Winds,
sometimes to you? And how does it make your hearts shake within you? If but a
Plank spring, or a Bolt give way, you are all lost. Sometimes the Lord for the
magnifying of the riches of his goodness upon you, drives you to such
exigencies, that, as Paul speaks in a like case, Acts 17. 20. All hopes of
being saved is taken away: Nothing but Death before your eyes. The Lord
commands a Wind out of his Treasury, bids it go and lift up the terrible Waves;
look you in upon the shore, and drive you upon the Rocks, so that no Art can
save you; and then sends you a piece of Wreck, or some other means to land you
safe: And all this to give you an experiment of his goodness and pity, that you
may learn to fear that God, in whose hand your Soul and Breath is.

And it may be for present, your hearts are much affected: Conscience works
strongly, it smites you for sins formerly committed, such cannsels of Ministers
or Relations slighted. Now, says Conscience, God is come in this storm to
reckon with thee for these things. But alas, all this is but a morning-dew; no
sooner is that storm without allayed, but all is quiet within too. How little
of the goodness of God abides kindly and effectually upon the heart?

REFLECTION.
How often has this glorious power and goodness of God passed before me in
dreadful storms and tempests at Sea? He has uttered his Voice in those stormy
Winds, and spoken in a terrible manner by them; yet how little have I been
affected with it? The Lord has his way in the whirlwind, and in the storm,
Nah. 1. 3. To some he has walked in ways of Judgment and Wrath, sending them
down in a moment to Hell; but to me in a way of forbearance and mercy. Ah, how
often have I been upon the very brink of Eternity? Had not God shifted or
allaid the Wind, in a moment, I had gone down into Hell. What workings of
Conscience were at present upon me? And what terrible apprehensions had I then
of my eternal condition? What Vows did I make in that distress? and how
earnestly did I then beg for Mercy? But Lord, though thy Vows are upon me, yet
have I been the same; yea, added to, and filled up the measure of my sins.
Neither the bonds of Mercy thou have laid upon me, nor the sacred and solemn
Vows I have laid upon my self, could restrain me from those ways of iniquity,
which then appeared so dreadful to me.

Ah Lord, what an heart have I? What love, pity, and goodness have I sinned
against? If God had but respited Judgment so long what a mercy were it! Sure I
am, the damned would account it so; but to give me such a space to repent, Ah
what an invaluable Mercy is this! And do I thus requite the Lord, Deuteronomy. 32. 6.
and pervert and abuse his goodness thus? Surely, O my Soul, if this be the
fruit of all thy preservations, they are rather reservations to some further
and sorer judgment. How dreadfully will Justice at last avenge the Quarrel of
abused Mercy? Josh. 24. 20. How grievously did God take it from the Israelites,
that they provoked him at the Sea, even at the Red Sea? Psalm. 106. 7. where God
had wrought there deliverance in such a miraculous way. Even thus have I sinned
after the similitude of there transgressions; not only against the Laws of
God, but against the Love of God. In the last storm he shot off his
VVarning-piece; in the next, he may discharge his Murdering-piece against my
Soul and body. O my Soul! has he given thee such deliverances as these, and
dare thou again break his Commandments; Ezra 9. 13, 14. O let me pay the Vows
that my lips have uttered in my distress, lest the Lord recover his glory from
me in a way of Judgment.

THE POEM.
The Ship that now sails trim before a Wind,
E're the desired Port it gains, may find
A tedious passage: Gentle Gales awhile,
Do fill its Sails, the flattering Seas do smile,
The Face of Heaven is bright, on every side
The wanton Porpice tumbles on the Tide.
Into their Cahbins now the Seamen go,
And then turn out again, with, What cheer ho?
All on a sudden darkened are the Skies,
The Lamp of Heaven abscur'd, the Winds do rise;
Waves s^ell like Mountains: Now their Courage flags,
The Masts are cracked, the Canvas torn to rags.
The Vessel works for life; anon one cries,
The Main mast's gone by the Board: another plies
The ^ump, until a third do strike them blank
With, Sirs, prepare for Death, w' have sprung a Plank.
Now to their Knees they go, and on this wise
They beg for Mercy with their loudest Cries:
Lord, save us but this once, and thou shall see
What Persons for the future we will he:
Our former ^im's misspent, but with a Vow
We will engage, if thou will save us now;
To mend what is amiss. The gracious Lord,
Inclined to pity, takes them at their word;
The Winds into their Treasures he does call,
Rebukes the stormy Sea, and brin^s them all
To their desired Haven: once ashore,
And then their Vows are never remembered more.
Thus Souls are shipwrackt, tho the Bodies live,
Unless in time thou true Repentance give.
CHAP. VIII.
The Navigator shifts his Sails, to take
All Winds, but that which for his Soul does make.

OBSERVATION.
THE Mariner wants no Skill and wisdom to improve several Winds, and make them
serviceable to his eud; A bare side-wind, by his skill in shifting and managing
the Sails, will serve his turn: He will not lose the advantage of one breath or
gale that may be useful to him, I have many times wondered to see two Ships
failing in a direct countermotion, by one and the same wind. Their skill and
wisdom herein is admirable.

APPLICATION.
Thus prudent and skilful are Men in secular and lower matters, and yet how
ignorant and unskilful in the great and everlasting affairs of their Souls! All
their Invention, Judgment, Wit, and Memory seem to be pressed for the service of
the flesh. They can learn an Art quickly, and arrive to a great deal of
exactness in it; but in soul-matters, no knowledge at all. They can understand
the Equator, Meridian, and Horizon: By the first they can tell the Latitude of
any place, South or North, measuring it by the degrees in the Meridian; by the
second, they can tell you the Longitude of a place, East and West, from the
Meridian, measuring it by the degrees of the Equator: And by the third, they
can discern the diverse risings and settings of the Stars. And so in other Arts
and Sciences, we find men endowed with rare abilities, and singular sagacity.
Some have piercing Apprehensions, solid Judgments, stupendous Memories, rare
Invention, and excellent elocution: But put them upon any spiritual pernatural
matter, and the weakest Christian, even a babe in Christ, shall excel them
therein, and give a far better account of Regeneration, the Work of Grace, the
Life of Faith than these can. 1 Cor. 1. 26. Not many wise men after the flesh,
etc. But God has chosen the ^oolish things of this world, etc.

REFLECTION.
How inexcusable then art thou, O my Soul! and how mute and confounded must
thou needs stand before the bar of God, in that great day? Thou had a Talent
of natural parts committed to thee, but which way have they been improved? I
had an Understanding indeed, but it was not sanctified; a Memory, but it was
like a Sieve, that let go the Corn, and retained nothing but Husks and Chaff;
Wit and Invention, but alas none to do my self good. Ah! how will these rise in
judgment against me, and stop my mouth! What account shall I give for them in
that day?

Again: Are men (otherwise prudent and skillful) such sots and fools in
spiritual things? Then let the poor weak Christian, whose natural parts are
blunt and dull, admire the riches of God's Free grace to him. O what an
astonishing consideration is this! That God should pass by Men of the
profoundest Natural parts, and choose me, even poor me, whose Natural Faculties
and Endowments, compared with theirs, are but as Led to Gold! Thus under the
Law he past by the Lion and Eagle, and chose the Lamb and Dove. O, how should
it make me to advance Grace, as Christ does upon the same account, Matthew. 11.
25. I thank thee, Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these
things from the wise and prudent, and revealed them to babes. And let it ever
be an humbling consideration to me; For who made me to differ? Is not this one
principal thing God aims at, in calling such as I am; that boasting may be
excluded, and himself alone exalted?

THE POEM.
One thing does very much affect my mind,
To see the Seaman husband every Wind;
With exc'llent Art he shifts the Sails and knows
How to improve the barest VVind that blows.
If a direct or fore-right gale he want,
A side-wind serves his turn, though never so scant,
And will not this one day in judgment rise
Against your Soul? Ah! can you be so wise
In smaller matters; what, and yet not know
How to improve fresh gales of Grace that blow?
Fast mor'd in sin your wind-bound Souls can lie,
And let these precious gales rise, blow, and die.
Sometimes on your Affections you may feel
Such gracious breathings: Ab, but hearts of steel,
They move you not, nor cause you to relent,
Though able, like Elijah's VVind, to rent
The Rocks asunder: If you do not prize
Those breathings, other Winds will shortly rise,
And from another quarter; those once gone,
Then next look out for an Euroclydon.
A dreadful storm: how soon no Man can tell;
But when it comes, 'twill blow such Souls to Hell.
CHAP. IX.
If Seamen lose a gale, there they may lie:
The Soul, when once becalmed, in sin may die.

OBSERVATION.
Seamen are very watchful to take their opportunity of Wind and Tide; and it
much concerns them so to be: The neglect of a few hours, sometimes loses them
their passage, and proves a great detriment to them. They know the Wind is an
uncertain variable thing; they must take it when they may; they are unwilling
to lose one flow, or breath, that may be serviceable to them. If a prosperous
Gale offer, and they not ready, it repents them to lose it, as much as it would
repent us to see a Vessel of good Wine or Beer tapt and run waste.

APPLICATION.
There are also seasons and gales of Grace for our Souls; golden opportunities
of Salvation afforded to men, the neglect of which proves the loss and ruin of
Souls. God has given unto men a day of Visitation, which he has limited, Heb.
4. 7. and keeps an exact account of every Year, Month, and Day, that we have
enjoyed it, Luke 13. 7. Ier. 25. 3. Luke 19. 42. The longest date of it can be
but the time of this Life: This is our day to work in, Job 9. 4. and upon this
small wyre, the weight of Eternity hangs. But sometimes the season of Grace is
ended, before the night of Death comes; the accepted time is gone, men
frequently outlive it, Luke 19. 44. 2 Cor. 6. 2. Or, if the outward means of
Salvation be continued, yet the Spirit many times withdraws from those means,
and ceases any more to strive with Men; and then the Blessing, Power and
Efficacy is gone from them, and instead thereof a Curse seizes the Soul, Heb.
6. 7, 8. and Ier. 6. 29.

Therefore it is a matter of high importance to our Souls, to apprehend these
seasons. How pathetically does Christ bewail Jerusalem, upon this account? Luke
19. 42. O that thou had known, at least in this thy day, the things of thy
peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes. If a company of Seamen be set
ashore upon some remote, uninhabited Island, with this advice, to be a-board
again exactly at such an hour, else they must be left behind: How does it
concern them to be punctual in their time? The lives of those men depend upon a
quarter of an hour. Many a Soul has perished eternally (the Gospel leaving
them behind in their sins) because they knew not the time of their Visitation.

REFLECTION.
What golden Seasons for Salvation have thou enjoyed, O my Soul? What
Halcyon-days of Gospel Light and Grace have thou had? How have the precious
Gales of Grace blown to no purpose upon thee! and the Spirit waited and striven
with thee in vain? The Kingdom of Heaven (being opened in the
Gospel-dispensations) has suffered violence. Multitudes have been pressing
into it in my days, and I my self have sometimes been almost persuaded, and not
far from the Kingdom of God: I have gone as far as conviction of sin and
misery; yea, I have been carried by the power of the Gospel, to resolve and
purpose to turn to God, and become a new Creature; but sin has been too subtle
and deceitful for me: I see, my resolutions were but as an early Cloud, or
Morning-Dew; and now my heart is cold and dead again, settled upon its Lees. Ah!
I have cause to fear and tremble, lest God has left me under that Curse, Rev.
20. 11. Let him that is filthy, be filthy still. I fear I am become as that
myrie place, Ezekiel. 47. 11* that shall not be healed by the streams of the
Gospel, but given to salt, and cursed into perpetual barrenness. Ah Lord, will thou leave me so! and shall thy Spirit strive no more with me? Then it had been
good for me that I had never been born. Ah, if I have trifled out this Season,
and irrecoverably lost it, then I may take up that lamentation, Ier. 8. 20. and
say, My Harvest is past, my Summer is ended, and I am not saved.

Every Creature knows its time, even the Turtle, Crane, and Swallow, know the
time of their coming, Ier. 8. 7. How brutish am I, that have not known the time
of my Visitation! O thou that art the Lord of Life and Time, command one
gracious Season more for me, and make it effectual to me, before I go hence,
and be seen no more!

THE POEM.
A fresh and whisking Gale presents to day,
But now the Ship's not ready; Winds must stay,
And wait the Sea-mens leisure. Well, to morrow
They will put out; but then, unto their sorrow,
That Wind is spent, and by that means they gain
Perchance a Month's Repentance, if not twain.
At last another offers, now they are gone;
But e're they gain their Port, the Market's done.
For every work and purpose under Heaven,
A proper time and season God has given.
The Fowls of Heaven, Swallow, Turtle, Crane,
Do apprehend it, and put us to shame.
Man has his season too: but that misspent,
There Is time enough his folly to repent.
Eternity's before him, but therein
No more such golden hours as these have been.
When these are past away, then you shall find
That Proverb true, Occasion's bald behind.
Delays are dangerous; see that you discern
Your proper seasons. O that you would learn
This Wisdom from those Fools that comes too late
With fruitless cries, when Christ has shut the gate.
CHAP. X.
By Navigation one place stores another;
And by Communion we must help each other.

OBSERVATION.
THE most wise God has so dispensed his Bounty to the several Nations of the
World, that one standing in need of another Commodities, there might be a
sociable Commerce and Traffic maintaintain'd amongst them all, and all
combining in a common League, may, by the help of Navigation, exhibit mutual
succors to each other. The Staple-Commodities proper to each Country, I find
thus expressed by the Poet, Bart. Coll.

Hence come our Sugars from Canary Isles,
From Candy Currants, Muskadels, and Oils;
From the Moluccoes, Spices; Balsamum
From Egypt; Odours from Arabia come;
From India Gums, rich Drugs and Ivory;
From Syria Mummy; Black, Red Ebony
From burning Chus; from Peru, Pearl and Gold;
From Russia Furs, to keep the Rich from Cold.
From Florence Silks; from Spain Fruit, Saffron, Sacks;
From Denmark Amber, Cordage, Firs, and Flax;
From Holland Hops; ^orse from the Banks of Rhine;
From England Wool: all Lands, as God distributes,
To the World's Treasure pay their sundry Tributes.
APPLICATION.
Thus has God distributed the more rich and precious Gifts and Graces of his
Spirit among his People: Some excelling in one Grace, some in another, though
every Grace, in some degree, be in them all; even as in Nature, though there be
all the Faculties in all, yet some Faculties are in some more lively and
vigorous than in others; some have a more vigorous eye* others a more ready
ear, others a more voluable tongue; so it is in Spirituals. Abraham excelled in
Faith, ^ob in Patience, John in Love. These were their peculiar excellencies.
All the elect Vessels are not of one quantity; yet even those that excel others
in some particular Grace, come short in other respects of those they so
excelled in the former, and may be much improved by converse with such as in
some respects are much below them. The solid, wise, and judicious Christian may
want that liveliness of affections, and tenderness of heart, that appears in
the weak; and one that excels in gifts and utterance, may learn Humility from
the very Babes in Christ.

And one principal Reason of this different distribution, is to maintain
fellowship among them all, 1 Cor. 12. 21. The Head cannot say to the Feet I
have no need of you. As in a Family, where there is much business to be done,
even the little Children bear a part, according to their strength, Jer. 7. 18.
The children gather wood, the fathers kindle the fire, the women knead the
dough. So in the Family of Christ, the weakest Christian is serviceable to the
strong.

There be precious Treasures in these Earthen Vessels, for which we should
trade by mutual communion. The preciousness of the Treasure, should draw out
our desires and endeavors after it; and the consideration of the brittleness
of those Vessels in which they are kept, should cause us to be the more
expeditious in our trading with them, and make the quicker Returns: For when
those Vessels (I mean the Bodies of the Saints) are broken by Death, there is
no more to be gotten out of them. That Treasure of Grace which made them such
profitable, pleasant. and desirable companions on Earth, then Ascends with them
into Heaven, where every Grace receives its adolescence and perfection: And
then, though they be Ten thousand times more excellent and delightful than ever
they were on Earth, yet we can have no more communion with them, till we come
to Glory our selves. Now therefore it behooves us to be enriching our selves by
communication of what God has dropped into us, and improvement of them; as one
well Notes.

We should do by Saints, Mr. Gurnal.
as we use to do by some choice Book lent us for a few days, we should fix in
our Memories, or transcribe all the choice. Notions we meet with in it, that
they may be our own when the Book is called for, and we can have it no longer
by us.

REFLECTION.
Lord, How short do I come of my Duty in communicating to, or receiving good by
others! My Soul is either empty and barren, or if there be any Treasure in it,
yet it is but as a Treasure locked up in some Chest, whose Key is lost, when it
should be opened for the use of others. Ah Lord! I have sinned greatly, not
only by vain words, but sinful silence. I have been of little use in the World.

How little also have I gotten by communion with others? Some, it may be, that
are of my own size, or judgment, or that I am otherwise obliged to, I can
delight to converse with: But O, where is that largeness of heart, and general
delight I should have to, and in all thy People? How many of my old dear
Acquaintance are now in Heaven, whose Tongues were as Choice silver, while they
were here, Prove. 10. 20. And, blessed Souls, how communicative were they of
what thou gave them? O what an improvement had I made of my Talent this way,
had I been diligent! Lord pardon my neglect of those sweet and blessed
advantages. O let all my delight be in thy Saints, who are the excellent of the
earth. Let me never go out of their company, without an heart more warmed,
quickened, and enlarged, than when I came amongst them.

THE POEM.
To several Nations God does so distribute
His bounty, that each one must pay a tribute
Unto each other. Europe cannot vaunt,
And say, Of Africa I have no want.
America and Asia need not strive,
Which of it self can best subsist and live.
Each Countries want, in something, does maintain
Commerce betwixt them all. Such is the aim
And end of God, who does dispense and give
More Grace to some, their Brethren to relieve.
This makes the Sun Ten thousand times more bright,
Because it is diffusive of its Light,
Its Beams are gilded gloriously; but then
This property does gild them over again.
Should Sun, Moon, Stars, impropriate all their light,
What dismal darkness would the World benight?
On this account Men hate the Vermin brood,
Because they take in much, but do no good.
What harm, if I at yours my Candle light?
Except thereby I make your Room more bright.
He that, by Pumping, sucks and draws the Spring,
New streams, and sweeter, to that Well does bring.
Grace is a Treasure in an Earthen Pot;
When Death has dashed it, no more can be got
Out of that Vessel: Then while it is whole,
Get out the Treasure to enrich your Soul.
CHAP. XI.
The Rocks abide, though Seas against them rage;
So shall the Church, which is God's Heritage.

OBTERVATION.
THE Rocks, though situate in the boisterous and tempestuous Ocean, yet abide
firm and immovable from Age to Age: The impetuous Waves dash against them with
great violence, but cannot remove them out of their place. And although
sometimes they wash over them, and make them to disappear, yet there they
remain fixed and impregnable.

APPLICATION.
This is a lively Emblem of the condition of the Church, amidst all dangers and
oppositions wherewith it is encountered and assaulted in this World. These
Metaphorical Waves roar and beat with violence against it, but with as little
success as the Sea against the Rocks, Matthew. 16. 18. Upon this Rock will I
build my Church, and the [gates] of Hell shall not prevail against it. The
Gates of Hell, are the power and policy of Hell; for it is conceived to be an
allusive speech to the Gates of the Jews wherein their Ammunition for War was
lodged, which also were the Seats of Judicature, there sat the Judges: but
yet, these Gates of Hell shall not prevail. Nay, this Rock is not only
invincible in the midst of their violence, but also breaks all that dash
against it, Zech 12. 3. In that day I will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone
for all people: all that burden themselves with it, shall be cut in pieces,
though all the people of the Earth be gathered together against it. An Allusion
to one that assays to roll some great stone against the Hill, which at last
returns upon him, and crushes him to pieces.

And the reason why it is thus firm and impregnable, is not from it self; for
alas; so considered, it is weak, and obnoxious to ruin; but from the almighty
Power of God, which guards and preserves it day and night, Psalm. 46. 5, 6. God
is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved: God shall help her, and that
right early. Vatab. Dum espieit mane. When the morning appears. Which notes
(says Calvin) God's assiduous and constant help and succor, which is extended
in all dangers, as constantly as the Sun arises. And this assiduous succor to
his people, and their great security thereby, is set forth in the Scriptures by
a pleasant variety of Metaphors and Emblems, Zech. 2. 5. I (says the Lord)
will be a Wall of Fire round about it. Some think this phrase alludes to the
Cherubims, that kept the way of the Tree of Life with flaming swords: Others,
to the fiery Chariots round about Datham, where Elisha was: but most think it
to be an allusion to an ancient custom of Travelers in the Deserts; who to
prevent the assaults of wild Beasts in the night, made a Circular fire round
about them, which was as a Wall to them. Thus will God be to his people, a wall
of fire, which none can scale. So Exodus 3. 3, 4, 5. We have an excellent Emblem
of the Churches low and dangerous condition, and admirable preservation. You
have here, both a Marvel and a Mystery: The Marvel was to see a bush all on
fire, and yet not consumed. The Mystery is this: the Bush represented the sad
condition of the Church in Egypt; the Fire flaming upon it, the grievous
Afflictions, troubles, and bondage it was in there; the remaining of the Bush
unconsumed, the strange and admirable preservation of the Church in those
troubles. It lived there as the three noble Jews, untouched in the midst of a
burning fiery Furnace: And the Angel of the Lord in a flame of fire in the
midst of the Bush, was nothing else but the Lord Jesus Christ, powerfully and
graciously present with his people, amidst all their dangers and sufferings.
The Lord is exceeding tender over them, and jealous for them, as that
Expression imports, Zech. 2. 8. He that touches you, touches the apple of mine
eye. He that strikes at them, strikes at the Face of God; and at the most
excellent part of the Face, the Eye; and at the most tender and precious part
of the Eye, the Apple of the Eye. And yet (as a Learned Modern observes) this
people of whom he uses this tender and dear expression, were none of the best
of Israel neither; but the residue that staid behind in Babylon, when their
Brethren were gone to reb^ild the Temple; and yet over these, is he as tender,
as a man is over his eye.

REFLECTION.
And is the security of the Church so great! and its preservation ^o admirable,
amidst all Storms and Tempests! Then why art thou so prone and subject to
despond, O my Soul, in the day of Sions trouble? Sensible thou wast, and
ought to be; but no reason to hang down the head through discouragement,
much less to forsake Sion in her distress, for fear of being ruined with her.

What David spoke to Abiathar, 1 Samuel 22. 23. that may Sion speak to all her
Sons and Daughters in all their distresses: Though he that seeks thy life,
seeks mine also; yet with me shall thou be in safeguard. God has entailed
great Salvation and Deliverances upon Sion; and blessed are all her Friends and
Favorers; the Rock of ages is its defense. Fear not therefore, O my Soul,
though the Hills be removed out of their place, and cast into the midst of the
Sea. O let my Faith triumph, and my Heart rejoice upon this ground of comfort.
I see the same Rocks now, and in the same place and condition they were many
years ago. Though they have endured many storms, yet there they abide; and so
shall Sion, when the proud waves have spent their fury and rage against it.

THE POEM.
Mesopotamia, s^^tuate in the Seas,
May represent the Church, or if you please,
A Rock, over which the Waves do wash and swill,
May figure it; choose either, which you will.
Winds strive upon those Seas, and make a noise,
The lofty Waves sometimes lift up their voice,
And swelling high, successively do beat
With violence against it, then retreat.
They break themselves, but it abides their shock;
And when their Rage is spent there stands the Rock.
Then they are out, that do affirm and vote,
Peace, Pomp, and Splendor is the Churches Note.
And they deserve no less reproof, that are
In Zion's Troubles ready to despair.
This Rock amidst far stronger Rocks does lie,
Which are its fence, so deep, so thick, so high,
They cannot be batterr'd, scaled, or undermined:
And these, environed by them, daily find
Their Bread ascertained; Waters too secured
Then shout and sing, ye that are thus Immured.
CHAP. XII.
What Dangers run they for a little gains,
Who, for their Souls, would never take half the pains!

OBSERVATION.
HOw exceeding solicitous and adventurous are Seamen for a small portion of
the World? How prodigal of strength and life for it? They will run to the ends
of the Earth, engage in a Thousand dangers, upon the hopes and probability of
getting a small Estate. Per mare per terras, per mill pericula currunt. Hopes
of gain makes them willing to adventure their liberty, yea, their life; and
encourages them to endure Heat, Cold, and Hunger, and a Thousand streights and
difficulties, to which they are frequently exposed.

APPLICATION.
How hot and eager are Men's affections after the World? And how remiss and cold
toward things eternal? They are careful, and troubled about many things, but
seldom mind the great and necessary matters, Luke 10. 40. They can rise early,
go to bed late, eat the bread of carefulness: But when did they so deny
themselves for their poor Souls? Their heads are full of designs and projects
to get or advance an Estate: We will go into such a City, continue there a
year, and Buy and Sell, and get gain, Jam. 4. 13. This is the (...), the
Master-design, which engrosseth all their time, studies and contrivances. The
Will has past a Decree for it, the Heart and Affections are fully let out to
it, They will be rich, 1 Timothy 6. 9. This Decree of the Will, the Spirit of God
takes deep notice of it; and indeed it is the clearest and fullest discovery of
a Man's portion and condition: For, look what is highest in the estimation,
first and last in the thoughts, and upon which we spend our time and strength
with delight; certainly, that is our Treasure, Mat. 6. 20, 21. The Heads and
Hearts of Saints are full of solicitous cares and fears about their Spiritual
Condition: The great design they drive on, to which all other things are but
[(...),] things on the by, is to make sure their Calling and Election. This is
the [Pondus,] the weight and bias of their Spirit: if their hearts stray and
wander after any other thing, this reduces them again.

REFLECTION.
Lord, this has been my manner from my Youth, may the Carnal minded Man say; I
have been laboring for the Meat that perishes; disquieting my self in vain,
full of designs and projects for the World, and unwearied in my endeavors to
compass an earthly treasure; yet therein I have either been checked and
disappointed by Providence; or if I have obtained, yet I am no sooner come to
enjoy that Content and Comfort I promised my self in it, but I am ready to
leave it all, to be stripped out of it by Death, and in that day all my thoughts
perish. But in the mean time What have I done for my Soul? When did I ever
break a Night's sleep, or deny and pinch my self for it? Ah fool that I am! to
nourish and pamper a vile Body, which must shortly lie under the Clods, and
become a loathsome Carcass; and, in the mean time, neglect and undo my poor
Soul, which partakes of the Nature of Angels, and must live for ever. I have
kept others Vineyards, but mine own Vineyard I have not kept: I have been a
perpetual drudge and slave to the World; in a worse condition has my Soul
been, than others that are Condemned to the Mines. Lord change my Treasure, and
change my Heart: O let it suffice that I have been thus long laboring on the
fire, for very vanity. Now gather up my heart and affections in thy self, and
let my great design now be, to secure a special interest in thy Blessed Self,
that I may once say, To me to live is Christ.

THE POEM.
The Face of Man impressed and stamped on Gold,
With Crown and Royal Scepters we behold.
No wonder that an humane Face it gains,
Since Head, Heart, Soul, and Body it obtains.
Nor is it strange a Scepter it should have,
That to its Yoke the World does so enslave.
Charmed with its chinking Note, away they go
Like Eagles to the Carcass, ride and row.
Through worlds of hazards foolish creatures run
That into its embraces they may come.
Poor Indians in the Mines my heart condoles,
But seldom turns aside to pity Souls,
Which are the slaves indeed, that toil and spend
Themselves upon its service. Surely, Friend,
They are but Sextons to prepare and make
Thy Grave within those Mines, whence they do take
And dig their Ore. Ah! many Souls, I fear,
Whose Bodies live, yet lie entombed there.
Is Gold so tempting to you? Lo, Christ stands,
With length of days, and riches in his hands.
Gold in the fire tried he freely proffers;
But few regard or take those Golden Offers.
CHAP. XIII.
Millions of Creatures in the Seas are fed:
Why then are Saints in doubt of daily bread?

OBSERVATION.
THere are multitudes of Living Creatures in the Sea. The Psalmist says, There
are in it things creeping innumerable, both small and great beasts, Psalm. 104.
25. And we read, Genesis 1. 20. that when God blessed the Waters he said, Let the
Waters bring forth abundantly, both Fish and Fowl, that move in it, and fly
about it. Yet all those multitudes of Fish and Fowl, both in Sea and Land, are
cared and provided for, Psalm. 145. 15, 16. Thou give them their meat in due
season; thou openest thy hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living thing.

APPLICATION.
If God take care for the Fishes of the Sea, and the Fowls of the Air, much
more will he care and provide for those that fear him. When the poor and needy
seeks water, and there is none, and their tongue fails for thirst; I the
Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them, Isai. 41. 17.
Take no thought for your life (says the Lord) what ye shall eat, or what ye
shall drink; or for the body, what ye shall put on: Which he backs with an
Argument from God's Providence over the Creatures, and enforces it with a
[much rather) upon them, Matthew. 6. 25, 31. God would have his people be without
carefulness (i. e.) anxious care, 1 Cor. 7. 32. And to cast their care upon
him, for he cares for them, 1 Pet. 5. 7. There be two main Arguments suggested
in the Gospel, to quiet and satisfy the hearts of Saints in this particular:
The one is, that the Gift of Jesus Christ amounts to more than all these things
come to; yea, in bestowing him, he has given that which virtually and eminently
comprehends all these inferior mercies in it, Romans 8. 32. He that spared not
his own Son, but delivered him up for us all? how, shall he not with him freely
give us all things? And 1 Cor. 3. 22. All things are yours, and ye are
Christ's, and Christ is God's. Another Argument is, That God gives these
Temporal Things to those he never gave his Christ unto, and therefore there is
no great matter in them: Yea, to those, which in a little while, are to be
thrust into Hell, Psalm. 17. 14. Now, if God cloth and feed his enemies, if (to
allude to that, Luke 12. 28.) he cloth this Grass, which to day is in its
pride and glory in the Field, and to morrow is cast into the Oven, into Hell.
How much more will he cloth and provide for you that are Saints?

This God that feeds all the Creatures, is your Father, and a Father that never
dies; and therefore you shall not be as exposed Orphans, that are the Children
of such a Father. For he has said, I will never leave you, nor forsake you,
Heb. 13. 3. I have read of a good woman, that in all wants and distresses, was
wont to encourage herself with that word, 2 Samuel 22. 47. The Lord lives. But
one time being in a deep distress, and forgetting that consolation, one of her
little Children came to her, and said, Mother, Why weep ye so? What, is God
dead now? Which words from a Child, shamed her out of her unbelieving fears,
and quickly brought her Spirit to rest. O Saint, whilst God lives, thou can
not want what is good for thee.

How sweet a Life might Christians live, could they but bring their hearts to a
full subjection to the disposing Will of God! to be content not only with what
he commands and approves, but also with what he allots and appoints. It was a
sweet Reply, that a gracious Woman once made upon her Deathbed, to a Friend
that asked her, Whether she were more willing to live or die? She answered, I
am pleased with what God pleases. Yea, said her Friend, but if God should
refer it to you, which would you choose? Truly, (says she) if God should refer
it to me, I would refer it to him again. Ah blessed Life, when the Will is
swallowed up in the Will of God, and the heart at rest in his care and love,
and pleased with all his appointments!

REFLECTION.
I remember my fault this day, may many a gracious Soul say. Ah how faithless
and distrustful have I been notwithstanding the great security God has given
to my Faith, both in his Word and Works! O my Soul, thou have greatly sinned
therein, and dishonored thy Father! I have been worse to my Father, than my
Children are to me. They trouble not their thoughts with what they shall eat or
drink, or put on, but trust to my care and provision for that: Yet I cannot
trust my Father, though I have ten thousand times more reason so to do, than
they have to trust me, Mat. 7. 21. Surely, unless I were jealous of my Father's
affection, I could not be so dubious of his provision for me. Ah, I should
rather wonder that I have so much, than repine that I have no more. I should
rather have been troubled that I have done no more for God, than that I have
received no more from God. I have not proclaimed it to the World by my
Conversation, that I have found a sufficiency in him alone, as the Saints have
done, Hab. 3. 17, 18. How have I debased the Faithfulness and All Sufficiency
of God, and magnified these earthly trifles, by my anxiety about them? Had I
had more Faith, a light Purse would not have made such an heavy heart. Lord,
how often have thou convinced me of this folly, and put me to the blush, when
thou have confuted my unbelief; so that I have resolved never to distrust thee
more, and yet new exigencies renew this corruption? How contradictory also has
my heart and my prayers been? I pray for them conditionally, and with
submission to thy Will; I dare not say to thee, I must have them; yet this has
been the language of my heart and life. O convince me of this folly!

THE POEM.
Variety of curious Fish are caught
Out of the Sea, and to our Tables brought;
We pick the choicest bits, and then we say,
We are sufficed; come, now take away.
The Table's voided, you have done; but fain
I would persuade to have it brought again.
The sweetest bit of all remains behind
Which through your want of skill, you could not find.
A bit for Faith, have you not found it? Then
I have made but half a meal; come taste again,
Have thou considered (O my Soul) that hand
Which feeds those multitudes in Sea and Land?
A double mercy in it thou should see;
It fed them first, and then with them fed thee.
Food in the Waters we should think were scant
For such a multitude, yet none do want.
What numerous flocks of Birds above me fly?
When saw I one, through want fall down and die?
They gather what his hand to them does bring,
Though but a Worm, and at that Feast can sing.
How full a Table does my Father keep?
Blush then, my naughty heart, repent and weep;
How faithless and distrustful have thou been,
Although his care and love thou often have seen?
Thus in a single dish you have a feast,
Your first and second course, the last the best.
CHAP. XIV.
Sea-waters drained through the earth, are sweet;
So are the afflictions which God's People meet.

OBSERVATION.
THE Waters of the Sea in themselves, are brackish and unpleasant, yet being
exhaled by the Sun, and condensed into Clouds, they fall down into pleasant
Showers; or if drained through the Earth, their property is thereby altered;
and that which was so salt in the Sea, becomes exceeding sweet and pleasant in
the Springs. This we find by constant experience, the sweetest crystal Spring
came from the Sea, Eccles. 1. 7.

APPLICATION.
Afflictions in themselves are evil, Amos 2. 6. Very bitter and unpleasant, See
Heb. 12. 11. Yet not morally and intrinsically evil, as sin is; for if so, the
holy God would never own it for his own act, as he does, Mic. 3. ^2. but always
disclaimeth sin, Iam. 1. 3. Besides, if it were so evil, it could in no case,
or respect, be the object of our election and desire; as in some cases it ought
to be, Heb. 11. 25. But it is evil, as it is the fruit of sin, and grievous
unto sense, Heb. 14. 11. But though it be thus brackish and unpleasant in
itself, yet passing through Christ, and the Covenant, it loses that ungrateful
property, and becomes pleasant in the fruits and effects thereof unto
believers, Heb. 12. 11.

Yea, such are the blessed fruits thereof, that they are to account it all joy,
when they fall into diverse afflictions, Iam. 1. 2. David could bless God, that
he was afflicted; and many a Saint has done the like. A good woman once
compared her afflictions to her children: For (says she) they put me in pain
in bearing them; yet as I know not which child, so neither which affliction I
conld be without.

Sometimes the Lord sanctifies affliction to discover the corruption that is in
the heart, Deuteronomy. 8. 2. It is a furnace to show the dross. Ah! when a sharp
Affliction comes, then the pride, impatiency, and unbelief of the heart
appears. Matura vexata prodit seipsam. When the Water is stirred, then the mud
and filthy sediment that lay at the bottom rises. Little (says the afflicted
Soul) did I think, there had been in me that pride, self-love, distrust of God,
carnal fear, and unbelief, as I now find. O where is my Patience, my Faith, my
Glory in tribulation? I could not have imagined the sight of Death would have
so appalled me, the loss of outward things so have pierced me. Now what a
blessed thing is this, to have the heart thus discovered?

Again: Sanctified Afflictions discover the emptiness and vanity of the
Creature. Now the Lord has stained its pride, and veiled its tempting
splendor, by this or that affliction; and the Soul sees what an empty,
shallow, deceitful thing it is. The World (as one has truly observed) is then
only great in our eyes, when we are full of sense and self: But now Affliction
makes us more spiritual, and then it is nothing. It drives them nearer to God*
makes them see the necessity of the Life of Faith, with multitudes of other
benefits.

But yet these sweet fruits of Affliction do not naturally, and of their own
accord, spring from it: No, we may as well look for Grapes from Thorns, or Figs
from Thistles, as for such Fruits from Affliction, till Christ's sanctifying
Hand and Art have past upon them.

The reason why they become thus sweet and pleasant (as I noted before) is,
because they run now into another channel; Jesus Christ has removed them from
Mount Ebal to Gerezim; they are no more the effects of vindictive Wrath, but
paternal Chastisement. Correction, Instruction,. page. 182.
And (as Mr. Case well notes) A teaching affliction is to the Saints, the
result of all the Offices of Jesus Christ. As a King, he chastens; as a
Prophet, he teaches, viz. by chastening; and as a Priest, he has purchased
this grace of the Father, that the dry Rod might blossom, and bear fruit.
Behold then, a sanctified affliction is a Cup, whereinto Jesus Christ has
wrung and pressed the juice and virtue of all his Mediatory Offices. Surely, that
must be a Cup of generous, Royal Wine, like that in the Supper, a Cup of
Blessing to the people of God.

REFLECTION.
Hence may the unsanctified Soul draw matter of fear and trouble, even from its
unsanctified troubles. And thus it may reflect upon it self; O my Soul, what
good have thou gotten by all, or any of thy afflictions? God's Rod has been
dumb to thee, or thou deaf to it. I have not learned one holy Instruction from
it: My troubles have left me the same, or worse than they found me; my Heart
was proud, earthly, and vain before, and so it remains still: They have not
purged out, but only given vent to the pride, murmur, and atheism of my heart.
I have been in my afflictions, as that wicked Ahaz was in his, 2 Chronicles. 28. 22.
Who in the midst of his distress, yet trespassed more and more against the
Lord. When I have been in storms at Sea, or troubles at home, my Soul within me
has been as a raging Sea, casting up mire and dirt. Surely this Rod is not the
Rod of God's Children. I have proved but dross in the Furnace, and I fear the
Lord will put me away as dross, as he threatens to do by the wicked, Psalm. 119.
119.

Hence also should gracious Souls draw much encouragement and comfort amidst
all their troubles. O these are the fruits of Gods fatherly love to me! Why
should I fear in the day of evil? or tremble any more at affliction? though
they seem as a Serpent at a distance, yet are they a Rod in hand. O blessed be
that skilful and gracious hand, that makes the Rod, the dry Rod to blossom,
and bear such precious fruit.

Lord! what a mystery of love lies in this dispensation! That sin which first
brought afflictions into the world, is now it self carried out of the world by
affliction, Romans 5. 12. Isa. 7. 9. O what can frustrate my Salvation, when
those very things that ^eem most to oppose it, are mad subservient to it; and
contrary to their own nature do promote and ^urther it?

THE POEM.
^Tis strange to hear what different censures fall
Upon the same affliction; some do call
Their troubles sweet, some bitter; others meet
Them both midway, and call them bitter-sweet.
But here is the question still, I fain would see,
Why sweet to him, and bitter unto me?
Thou drink'st them Dregs and all, but others find
Their troubles sweet, because to them refined,
And sanctified; which difference is best,
By such apt Si^ilies as these expressed.
From Salt and Brackish Seas Fumes rise and fly
Which into Clouds condensed, obscure the sky,
Their property there altered in few hours
Those brackish fumes fall down in pleasant showers:
Or as the dregs of Wine and Beer distilled
By Limbeck, with ingredients, does yield
A Cordial water, though the Lees were bitter,
From whence the Chemist did extract such liquor.
Then marvel not that one can kiss that Rod,
Which makes another to blaspheme his God.
O get your troubles sweet'ned and refined
Or else they will leave bitter effects behind.
Saints troubles are a Cord, let down by love,
To pully up their hearts to things above.
CHAP. XV.
The Seas within their bounds the Lord contains;
He also Men and Devils holds in Chains.

OBSERVATION.
IT is a wonderful work of God, to limit and bound such a vast and furious
Creature, as the Sea; which according to the judgment of many Learned Men, is
higher than the Earth; and that it has a propension to overflow it, is
evident, both from its nature and motion; were it not, that the great God had
laid his Law upon it. And this is a work wherein the Lord glories, and will be
admired, Psalm. 104. 9. Thou have set a bound that they may not pass over, that
they turn not again to cover the Earth. Which it is clear they would do, were
they not thus limited. So Job 38. 8. 10. 11. Who shut up the Seas with doors,
when it break forth, as if it had issued out of the Womb? I brake up for it
my decreed place, and set bars and doors, and said Hitherto shall thou come,
but no further; and here shall thy proud Waves be staid.

APPLICATION.
And no less is the glorious Power and Mercy of God discovered in bridling the
rage and fury of Satan and his Instruments, that they break not in upon the
Inheritance of the Lord, and destroy it. Surely, the wrath of man shall praise
thee, and the remainder of wrath thou shall restrain, Psalm. 76. 10. By which it
is more than hinted, that there is a World of Rage and Malice in the hearts of
wicked men, which fain would, but cannot vent itself, because the Lord
restrains, or as the Hebrew, Girds it up. Satan is the envious one, and his
rage is great against the people of God, Rev. 12. 12. But God holds him and all
his Instruments in a Chain of Providence; and it is well for God's People, that
it is so.

They are limited as the Sea, and so the Lord in a providential way speaks to
them, Hitherto shall you go, and no further. Sometimes he ties them up so
short, that they cannot touch his people, though they have the greatest
opportunities and advantages, Psalm. 105. 12, 13, 14, 15. When they were but a
few men in number, yea, very few, and strangers in it; when they went from one
Nation to another, from one Kingdom to another people: He suffered no man to do
them wrong; yea, he reproved Kings for their sakes, saying, Touch not mine
Anointed, and do my Prophets no harm. And sometimes he permits them to touch
and trouble his People, but then sets bounds and limits to them, beyond which
they must not pass. That is a pregnant Text to this purpose, Revel. 2. 10.
Behold, the Devil shall cast some of you into prison, that you may be tried,
and ye shall have trihulation ten days.

Here are four remarkable limitations upon Satan and his Agents, in reference
to the People of God: A limitation as to the Persons, not all, but some: A
limitation of the Punishment, a Prison, not a Grave, not Hell: A limitation
upon them as to the end; for trial, not ruin: And lastly, as to the Duration;
not as long as they please, but ten days.

REFLECTION.
O my Soul, what Marrow and Fatness, Comfort, and Consolation, may thou suck
from the Breast of this Truth, in the darkest day of trouble? Thou see how
the flowing Sea drives to over-whelm the Earth. Who has arrested it in its
course, and stopped its violence! Who has confined it to its place? Certainly
none other but the Lord. When I see it threaten the shore with its proud,
furious, and insulting Waves, I wonder it does not swallow up all: but I see it
no sooner touch the Sands, which God has made its bounds, but it retires, and
as it were with a kind of submission, respects those limits which God has set
it.

Thus the fiercest Element is represt by the feeblest things; Thou see also,
how full of wrath and fury wicked men are, how they rage like the troubled Sea,
and threaten to over-whelm See the Turks Letter to the Emperor of Germany,
lately published by Authority.
thee, and all the Lord's Inheritance: and then the floods of ungodly men make
thee afraid, yet are they restrained by an invisible gracious hand, that they
cannot execute their purpose, nor perform their enterprise. How full of Devils
and devillized Men, is this lower World? Yet in the midst of them all have thou
hitherto been preserved. O my Soul, admire and adore that glorious power of
God, by which thou art kept unto Salvation. Is not the preservation of a Saint
in the midst of such hosts of enemies, as great a Miracle, though not so
sensible, as the preservation of those three Noble Jews in the midst of the
fiery Furnace, or Daniel in the Den of Lions? For there is as strong a
propension in Satan, and wicked men, to destroy the Saints; as in the fire to
burn, or a Lion to devour. O then let me cheerfully address my self to the
faithful discharge of my duty, and stand no longer in a slavish fear of
creatures, who can have no power against me, but what is given them from above,
John 19. 11. And no more shall be given than shall turn to the glory of God,
Psalm. 76. 10. and the advantage of my Soul, Romans 8. 28.

THE POEM.
This World's a Forest, where from day to day,
Bears, Wolves, and Lions range and seek their prey,
Amidst them all poor harmless Lambs are fed,
And by their very Dens in safety led.
They roar upon us, but are held in Chains:
Our Shepherd is their Keeper, he maintains
Our Lot. Why then should we so trembling stand?
We meet them, true, but in their Keeper's hand.
He that to ranging Seas such Bounds has put,
The mouths of ravenous Beasts can also shut.
Sleep in the Woods, poor Lambs your selves repose
Upon his Care, whose Eyes do never close.
If unbelief in you don't loose their chain,
Fear not their struggling, that is but all in vain.
If God can check the Waves by smallest Sand,
A Twined Thread may hold these in his hand.
Shun Sin, keep close to Christ; for other evils
You need not fear, though compast round with Devils.
CHAP. XVI.
To Sea without a Compass none dare go;
Our Course without the Word is even so.

OBSERVATION.
OF how great use and necessity is the Compass to Seamen? Though they can
coast a little way by the Shore, yet they dare not venture far into the Ocean
without it. Its their Guide, and directs and shapes their Course for them: And
if by the violence of Wind and Weather they be driven beside their due Course,
yet by the help of this, they are reduced and brought to Rights again. It is
wonderful to consider, how by the help of this Guide they can run in a direct
Line many hundred Leagues, and at last fall right with the smallest Island;
which is in the Ocean, comparatively, but as the head of a small Pin upon a
Table.

APPLICATION.
What the Compass, and all other Mathematical Instruments are to the Navigator,
that and much more is the Word of God to us in our course to Heaven. This is
our Compass to steer our course by, and it is truly touched; he that orders his
conversation by it, shall safely arrive in Heaven at las^. Gal. 6. 16. As many
as walk according to this rule, Peace be on them, and mercy.

This Word is as necessary to us in our way to Glory, as a Lamp or Lanthorn is
in a dark night, Psalm. 119. 105. This is a light shining in a dark place, till
the day dawn, and the day star arise in our hearts, 2 Pet. 1. 19. If any that
profess to know it, and own it as a Rule, miss Heaven at last; let them not
blame the Word for misguiding them, but their own negligent and deceitful
hearts, that shuffle in and out, and shape not their course and conversation
according to its prescriptions.

What blame can you lay upon the Compass, if you steer not exactly by it? How
many are there, that neglecting this Rule, will coast it to Heaven by their own
Reason? No wonder such fall short and perish in the way. This is a faithful
Guide, and brings all that follow it to a blessed end, Thou shall guide me with
thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory, Psalm. 73. 24. The whole
hundredth and nineteenth Psalm is spent in commendation of its transcendent
excellency and usefulness. Luther professed, that he prized it so highly, that he
would not take the whole World in exchange for one Leaf of it. Lay but this
Rule before you, and walk accurately by it, and you cannot be out of your way
to Heaven, Psalm. 119. 30. I have chosen the way of truth, (or the true way;)
thy Judgments have I laid before me. Some indeed have opened their detracting
blasphemous mouths against it; as Julian, that cursed Apostate, who feared not
to say, There was as good matter in Phocillides as in Solomon, in Pindarus his
Odes, as in David's Psalms.

And the Papists generally slight it, making it a lame imperfect Rule; yea,
making their own Trad^tions the Touchstone of Doctrines, and Foundation of
Faith. Montanus tells us, that although the Apostle would have Sermons and
Service celebrated in a known Tongue, yet the Church, for very good cause, has
otherwise ordered it. Gilford called it, The Mother of Heresies. Boner's
Chaplain judged it worthy to be burnt as a strange Doctrine. They set up their
Inventions above it, and frequently come in with a Non obstante against
Christ's Institutions. And thus do they make it void, or, as the word (...)
signifies, Matthew. 15. 6. unlord it, and take away its authority as a Rule. But
those that have thus slighted it, and followed the bypath unto which their
corrupt Hearts have led them, they take not hold of the paths of Life, and are
now in the depths of Hell. All other Lights, to which men pretend, in the
neglect of this, are but false fires, that will lead Men into the Pits and Bogs
of Destruction at last.

REFLECTION.
And is thy Word a Compass, to direct my course to Glory. O where am I then
like to arrive at last, that in all my course have neglected it, and steered
according to the counsel of my own heart! Lord, I have not made thy Word the
Man of my counsel, but consulted with flesh and blood; I have not enquired at
this Oracle, nor studied it, and made it the guide of my way; but walked after
the sight of my eyes, and the lust of my heart. Whither Lord, can I come at
last, but to Hell, after this rate and reckoning? Some have slighted thy Word
professedly, and I have slighted it practically. I have a poor Soul embarked
for Eternity, it is now floating on a dangerous Ocean, Rocks and Sands on every
side, and I go a drift before every Wind of Temptation, and know not where I
am. Ah Lord, convince me of the danger of this condition. O convince me of my
Ignorance in thy Word, and the fatal consequence and issue thereof. Lord, let
me now resolve to study, prize, and obey it; hide it in my heart, that I may
not sin against it. Open my understanding, that I may understand the
Scriptures: Open my heart to entertain it in love. O thou that have been so
gracious to give a perfect Rule, give me also a perfect heart to walk by that
Rule to glory!

THE POEM.
This World's a Sea, wherein a numerous Fleet
Of Ships are under sail. Here you shall meet
Of every Rate and Size; Frigates, Galleons,
The nimble Ketches, and small Pickeroons:
Some bound to this Port, some where Winds and VVeather
Will drive them, they are bound they know not whither.
Some steer away for Heaven, some for Hell;
To which some steer, themselves can hardly tell.
The Winds do shape their course, which though it blow
From any Point, before it they must go.
They are directed by the VVind and Tide,
That have no Compass to direct and guide:
For want of this, must run themselves a-ground,
Brave Ships are cast away, poor Souls are drowned.
Thy Word our Compass is, to guide our way
To Glory; it reduces such as stray.
Lord, let thy Word dwell richly in my heart,
And make me skilful in this heavenly Art,
O let me understand and be so wise,
To know upon what Point my Country lies.
And having se^ my Course directly thither,
Great God preserve me in the foulest Weather.
By Reason some will coast it: but I fear
Such Coasters never will drop Anchor there.
Thy Word is truly touched, and still directs
A proper Course, which my base heart neglects.
Lord, touch mine Iron heart, and make it stand
Pointing to thee, its Loadstone. To that Land
Of Rest above, let every Tempest drive
My Soul, where it would rather be than live.
CHAP. XVII.
Look as the Sea by turns does ebb and flow
So their Estates, that use it, come and go.

OBSRRVATION.
THE Sea has its alternate Course and Motion, its Ebbings and Flowings: No
sooner is it High Water, but it begins to Ebb again, and leave the Shore naked
and dry, which but a little before it covered and over-flowed. And as its
Tides, so also its Waves are the Emblem of Inconstancy, still rouling and
tumbling, this way and that, never fixed and quiet. Instabilis unda: As fickle
as a VVave, is common to a Proverb. See Iam. 1. 6. He that wavereth is like a
Wave of the Sea, driven with Winds, and tossed. So Isai. 57. 20. It cannot rest.

APPLICATION.
Thus mutable and inconstant are all outward things, there is no depending on
them: Nothing of any substance, or any solid consistence in them, 1 Cor. 7. 31.
The fashion of this world passes away. It is an high point of folly to depend
upon such vanities, Prove. 23. 5. Why will thou set, (or, as it is in the
Hebrew) cause thine eyes to fly upon that which is not? For riches certainly
make themselves wings, and fly away, as an Eagle toward Heaven. In flying to
us (says Augustine) they have Alas vix quidem passerinas, scarce a Sparrow's
wings; but in flying from us, wings as an Eagle. And those Wings they are said
to make to themselves, ( i. e.) The cause of its transitoriness is in itself;
the Creature is subjected to Vanity by sin: they are sweet flowers, but
withered presently, Iam. 1. 10. As the flower of the grass, so shall the rich
man fade away. The man is like the stalk or grass, his riches are the flower of
the grass; his glory and outward beauty, the stalk is soon withered, but the
flower much sooner. This is either withered upon, or blown off from it, while
the stalk abides. Many a man out-lives his estate and honor, and stands in the
world as a bare dry stalk in the field, whose flower, beauty, and bravery is
gone: One puff of wind blows it away, one churlish easterly blast shrivels it
up, 1 Pet. 4. 24.

How mad a thing is it then, for any man to be lifted up in pride, upon such a
vanity as this is; to build so lofty and over-jetting Roof upon such a feeble,
tottering Foundation? We have seen Meadows full of such curio^s flowers, mown
down and withered, men of great Estates impoverished suddenly: And when, like a
Meadow that is mown, they have begun to recover themselves again (as the phrase
is) the Lord has sent Grasshoppers in the beginning of the shooting-up of the
latter growth,, Amos 7. 1. Just as the Grasshoppers and other Creatures devour
the second tender Herbage, as soon as the Field begins to recover its verdure:
So men, after they have been denuded and blasted by Providence, they begin
after a while to flourish again, but then comes some new affliction, and blasts
all. None have more frequent experience of this, than you that are Merchants
and Seamen, whose estates are floating: and yet such as have had the highest
security in the eye of Reason, have notwithstanding experienced the vanity of
these things. Henry the Fourth, a potent Prince, was reduced to such a low ebb,
that he petitioned for a Prehends place in the Church of Spire. Gallimer, King
of the Vandals, was brought so low, that he sent to his Friend for a sponge, a
Loaf of Bread and an Harp: a Sponge to dry up his tears, a Loaf of bread to
maintain his life, and an Harp to solace himself in his misery. The story of
Bellisarius is very affecting: He was a man famous in his time, General of an
Army, yet having his eyes put out, and striped of all earthly comforts, was led
about, crying, Date abolum Bellisario, Give one penny to poor Ballisarius.
Instances in History of this kind are infinite. Men of the greatest estates
and honors, have nevertheless become the very Ludibria Fortunae, as one
speaks, The very scorn of Fortune.

Yea, and not only wicked men, that have gotten their Estates by rapine and
oppression, have lived to see them thus scattered by Providence: But sometimes
godly Men have had their Estates, how justly soever acquired, thus scattered by
Providence also. Who ever had an estate better gotten, better bottomed* or
better managed, than Job? yet all was overthrown and swept away in a moment:
though in mercy to him, as the issue demonstrated.

Oh then! what a vanity is it to set the heart and let out the affections on
them! You can never depend too much upon God, nor too little upon the creature,
1 Timothy 6. 17. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not
high-minded and trust in uncertain riches.

REFLECTION.
Are all earthly things thus transitory and vain? Then what a reproach and
shame is it to me, that the men of this world should be more industrious and
eager in the prosecution of such vanities, then I am to enrich my Soul with
solid and everlasting Treasure? O that ever a sensual lust should be more
operative in them then the love of God in me! O my Soul, thou do not lay out
thy strength and earnestness for Heaven, with any proportion to what they do
for the World. I have indeed higher Motives, and a surer Reward than they: But
as I have an advantage above them herein, so have they an advantage above me in
the strength and intireness of the principle by which they are acted. What they
do for the World, they do it with all their might; they have no contrary
principle to oppose them; their thoughts, strength, and affection, is entirely
carried in one Channel: But I find a Law in my Members warring against the Law
of my Mind; I must strive through a thousand Difficulties and Contradictions,
to the discharge of a Duty. O my God! Shall not my heart bemore enlarged in
Zeal, Love, and Delight in thee, than theirs are after their Lusts? O let me
once find it so.

Again, is the Creature so vain and unstable, then why are my Affections so hot
and eager after it? And why am I so apt to dote upon its beauty, especially
when God is staining all its pride and glory! Ier. 45. 5, 6. Surely it is
unbecoming the spirit of a Christian at any time; but at such a time we may say
of it, as Hushai of Ahitophel's Counsel, It is not good at this time.

O that my Spirit were raised above them, and my conversation more in Heaven! O
that like that Angel, Revel. 10. 1, 2. which came down from Heaven and set one
foot upon the Sea, and another upon the Earth, having a Crown upon his head* so
I might set one foot upon all the cares, fears, and terrors of the World, and
another upon all the tempting splendor and glory of the World; treading both
under foot in the dust, and crowning my self with nothing but spiritual
excellencies and glory!

THE POEM.
Judge in thy self (O Christian) is it meet
To set thy heart on what Beasts set their feet?
It Is no Hyperbole, if you be told,
You dig for Dross with Mattocks made of Gold.
Affections are too costly, to bestow
Upon the fair-fac'd Nothings here below.
The Eagle scorns to fall down from on high
(The Proverb says) to catch the silly Fly.
And can a Christian leave the Face of God:
TO embrace the Earth, or dote upon a Clod?
Can earthly Things thy heart so strangely move,
To tempt it down from the Delights above;
And now to court the World at such a time
When God is laying Judgment to the Line?
It Is just like him that does his Cabin sweep
And trim, when all is sinking in the Deep:
Or like the silly Bird, that to her Nest
Does carry straws, and never is at rest,
Till it be feathered well, but does not see
The Axe beneath that is hewing down the Tree.
If on a Thorn thy heart it self repose
With such delight, what if it were a Rose?
Admire, O Saint, the Wisdom of thy God,
Who of the self-same Tree does make a Rod,
Lest thou should surfeit on forbidden Fruit,
And live not like a Saint, but like a Brute.
CHAP. XVIII.
Like hungry Lions, Waves for Sinners gape:
Leave then your Sins behind, if you will escape.

OBSERVATION.
THE Waves of the Sea are sometimes raised by God's Commission, to be
Executioners of his Threatenings upon sinners. When Jonah fled from the presence
of the Lord to Tarshish, the Text says, The Lord sent out a great Wind into
the Sea, and there was a mighty Tempest, so that the Ship was like to be
broken, Joh. 1. 4. These were God's Bailiffs, to arrest the Runaway Prophet.
And Psalm. 148. 8. The stormy winds are said to fulfill his word; not only his
word of Command, in rising when God bids them, but his word of threatening also.
And hence it is called a destroying wind, Jer. 51. 1. and a stormy wind in
God's fury, Ezekiel. 13. 13.

APPLICATION.
If these be the Executioners of the Lord's threatenings, how sad then is their
condition that put forth to Sea under the guilt of all their sins? O, if God
should commissionate the Winds to go after and arrest thee for all thou owe
him, where art thou then? How dare you put forth under the power of a Divine
threat, before all be cleared betwixt God and thee? Sins in Scripture are
called debts, Mat. 6. 12. They are debts to God; not that we owe them to him,
or ought to sin, but Metonymically, because they render the Sinner obnoxious to
God's Judgments, even as pecuniary debts oblige him that has not wherewith to
pay, to suffer punishment. All sinners must undergo the Curse, either in their
own person, according to the express letter of the Law, Genesis 2. 17. Gal. 3. 10.
or their surety, according to the tacit intent of the Law, manifested to be
the mind of the Lawgiver, Genesis 3. 15. Gal. 3. 13, 14.

Now he that by Faith has Interest in his Surety, has his Discharge, his
Quietus est, sealed in the Blood of Christ; all Process at Law, or from the
Law, is stopped Romans 8. 1. But if thou be an impenitent, persisting sinner, thy
debt remains upon thine own score. And be sure thy sin will find thee out,
wherever thou go, Number. 32. 23. ( i. e.) God's revenging hand for sin will
be upon thee: Thou may lose the sight and memory of thy sin, but they lose
not the sight of thee; they follow after, as the Hound does the fleeting game
upon the scent, till they have fetched thee up: And then consider, How fearful a
thing it is to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 10. 31. How soon may
a storm arrest, and bring thee before the Bar of God?

REFLECTION.
O my Soul, what a case art thou in, if this be so? Are not all thy sins yet
upon thine own score? Have not thou mane light of Christ, and that precious
Blood of his, and hitherto persisted in thy Rebellion against him? And what can
the issue of this be at last, but ruin? There is abundant mercy indeed for
returning sinners; but the Gospel speaks of none for persisting and impenitent
sinners. And though many who are going on in their sins are overtaken by Grace,
yet there is no Grace promised to such as go on in sin. O, if God should arrest
me by the next Storm, and call me to an account for all that I owe him, I must
then lie in the Prison of Hell to all Eternity; for I can never pay the debt;
nay, all the Angels in Heaven cannot satisfy for it. Being Christless, I am
under all the Curses in the Book of God; a Child of Hagar. Lord, pity and spare
me a little longer! O discover thy Christ unto me, and give me Faith in his
Blood, and then thou art fully satisfied at once, and I discharged for ever. O
require not the debt at my hand, for then thou will never be satisfied, nor I
acquitted. What profit, Lord, is there in my Blood! O my soul, make have to
this Christ, thy Refuge-City; thou know not how soon the avenger of Blood
may overtake thee.

THE POEM.
Thy sins are debts, God puts them to account:
Can tell, poor wretch, to what thy debts amount?
Thou fill'st the treasure of thy sins each hour.
Into his Vials God does also pour
Proportionable wrath: Thou see it not;
But yet assure thy self, there is drop for drop.
For every Sand of Patience running out,
A drop of Wrath runs in. Soul, look about.
God's Treasure's almost full, as well as thine:
When both are full, O then the dreadful time
Of Reckoning comes; thou shall not gain a day
Of patience more, but then there hastes away
Heaven's Pursivant, who comes upon the wing
With his Commission sealed, to take and bring.
Do still reject Christ's tenders? Well, next storm
May be the Bailiff ordered to perform
This dreadful office. O then restless be,
Till God in Christ be reconciled to thee.
The Sum is great, but if a Christ thou get,
Fear not, a Prince can pay a Beggar's debt.
Now if the Storm should rise, thou need not fear;
Thou art, but the Delinquent is not there.
A pardoned Soul to Sea may boldly go:
He fears not Bailiffs, that does nothing owe.
CHAP. XIX.
To save the Ship, rich Ladings cast away.
Thy Soul is Shipwrackt if thy Lusts do stay.

OBSERVATION.
IN Storms and Distresses at Sea, the Richest Commodities are cast overboard;
they stand not upon it, when Life and all is in jeopardy and hazard. Jonah 1.
5. The Mariners cast forth the Wares that were in the Ship into the Sea, to
lighten it. And Act. 27. 18, 19. they cast out the very tacklings of the Ship.
How highly soever Men prize such Commodities, yet reason tells them, It were
better these should perish, than Life. Satan himself could say, Job 1. Skin for
skin, and all that a Man has, will he give for his Life.

APPLICATION.
And surely, it is every way as highly reasonable, that Men should mortify,
cast out, and cut off their dearest Lusts, rather than their Immortal Souls
should sink and perish in the Storm of God's wrath. Life, indeed, is a precious
Treasure, and highly valued by Men: You know what Solomon says, Eccles. 9. 4.
That a Living Dog is better than a Dead Lion. And we find Men willing to part
with their Estates, Limbs, or any outward Comfort, for the preservation of it.
The Woman in the Gospel spent all she had on the Physicians for her Health, a
degree below Life. Some Men indeed do much overvalue their Lives, and part with
Christ and Peace of Conscience for it; but he that thus saves it, shall lose
it. Now if Life be so much worth, What then is the Soul worth? Alas! Life is
but a vapor, which appears for a little while, and then vanishes away, Jam.
4. 14.

Life indeed is more worth than all the World, but my Soul is more worth than
Ten thousand Lives. Nature teaches you to value the first so high, and Grace
should teach you to value the second much higher, Mat. 19. 26. Now here is the
case: Either you must part with your Sins, or with your Souls; if these be not
cast out, both must sink together. If ye live after the flesh, ye must die,
Romans 8. 13. God says to you in this case, as to Ahab, when he spared Benhadad,
1 King. 20. 40. Because thou have let go a Sin, which God has appointed to
destruction, therefore thy Life shall go for his Life. Guilt will raise a Storm
of Wrath, as Jonah did, if not cast out.

REFLECTION.
And must Sin or the Soul perish? Must my Life, yea, my Eternal Life go for it,
if I spare it? O then let me not be cruel to mine own Soul, in sparing my Sin;
O my Soul, this foolish pity, and cruel Indulgence will be thy ruin: If I
spare it, God has said, He will not spare me, Deuteronomy. 26. 20. It is true, the
pains of Mortification are sharp, but yet it is easier than the pains of Hell.
To cut off a right hand, or pluck out a right eye, is hard; but to have my Soul
cut off eternally from God, is harder. Is it as easy (O my Soul!) to burn for
them in Hell, as to Mortify them on Earth? Surely, it is profitable for me,
that one member perish, rather than that all be cast into Hell, Mat. 5. 24. I
see the Merchant willing to part with rich Wares, if embarked with them in a
Storm: And those that have Gangreen'd Legs or Arms, willingly stretch them out
to be cut off, to preserve Life: And shall I be willing to endure no
difficulties for my Soul? Christ reckoned Souls worth his Blood; And is it not
worth my Self-denial? Lord, let me not warm a Snake in my Bosom, that will at
last sting me to the heart.

THE POEM.
Thy Soul's the Ship, its Lading is its Lusts,
God's Judgments stormy Winds and dangerous gusts,
Conscience the Master; but the stubborn Will
Goes Supra Cargo, and does keep the Bill.
Affections are the Men, the Winds do rise,
The Storm increases: Conscience gives Advice
To throw those Lusts o're-board, and so to ease
The Vessel, which else cannot keep the Seas.
The Will opposes, and the Affections say,
The Master's Counsel they will not obey.
The case is dangerous, that no man can doubt,
Who sees the storm within, and that without.
Lusts and Affections cannot part, no, rather
They are resolved to swim or sink together.
Conscience still strives, but they cannot abide
That it, or Reason should the Case decide.
Lust knows what Reason in like cases still
Determines well: Then choose ye whom ye will.
Shall's make the Devil Judge? This case has been
Before him, and he judged, That skin for skin,
And all men have, they will part with for their life.
Then how unreasonable is this strife?
They that their sins do with their persons ship,
Do for their Souls prepare a dreadful whip.
CHAP. XX.
Christ with a word can surging Waves appease;
His Voice a troubled Soul can quickly ease.

OBSERVATION.
WHen the Sea works, and is tempestuous, it is not in the power of any Creature
to appease it. When the Egyptians would by their Hieroglyphics express an
Impossibility, they did it by the Picture of a Man treading upon the Waves. It
is storied of Canute, an ancient Danish King, That when a mighty storm of
Flattery arose upon him, he appeased it by showing that he could not appease
the Sea: But one of his Courtiers told him, as he rode near the Seaside, That
he was Lord of the Sea, as well as Land. Well, said the King, we shall see that
by and by: and so went to the Waterside, and with a loud Voice cried, O ye
Seas and Waves, come no further, touch not my feet. But the Sea came up,
notwithstanding that charge, and confuted the flattery. But now Jesus Christ
has the command of them indeed: It is said of him, Mat. 8. 26. That he rebuked
them. And Mark. 4. 38. He quiets them with a word, Peace, be still: as one
would hush a Child, and it obeyed him.

APPLICATION.
Conscience, when awakened by the terrors of the Lord, is like a raging
tempestuous Sea; so it works, so it roars; and it is not in the power of all
the Creatures to hush or quiet it. Spiritual Terrors, as well as spiritual
Consolations, are not known till felt. O when the Arrows of the Almighty are
shot into the Spirit, and the Terrors of God set themselves in array against
the Soul; when the Venom of those Arrows drink up the Spirits, and those
Armies of Terrors charge violently and successively upon it, as Job 6. 4. What
Creature then is able to stand before them! Even God's own dear Children have
felt such Terrors, as have distracted them, Psalm. 81. 15. Conscience is the
seat of Guilt. It is like a Burning-glass, so it contracts the Beams of the
Threatenings, twists them together, and reflects them on the Soul, until it
smoke, scorch, and flame. If the wrath of a King be like the roaring of a Lion,
then what is the Almighties wrath! which is burning wrath, Job 19. 11. Tearing
wrath, Psalm. 50. 22. Surprising wrath, Job 20. 23. And abiding wrath, Job 3. 36.

In this case no Creature can relieve, all are Physicians of no value; some
under these terrors, have thought Hell more tolerable, and by a violent hand
have thrust themselves out of the World into it, to avoid these gnawings: Yet
jesus Christ can quickly calm these mystical Waves also, and hush them with a
word; yea, he is the Physician, and no-other. It is the sprinkling of his
Blood, which, like a cooling Fomentation, allays those heats within: That Blood
of sprinkling speaks Peace, when all other have practiced upon the Soul to no
purpose; and the reason is, because he is a Person in whom God and Man, Justice
and Mercy meet, and kiss each other, Ephesians. 2. 14. And hence Faith fetches in
peace to the Soul, Romans 5. 1.

REFLECTION.
Can none appease a troubled Conscience, but Christ? Then learn, O my Soul, to
understand, and daily more and more to savor that glorious Name, even Jesus,
that delivers not only from the wrath to come, but that which is felt here
also. Oh if the foretaste of Hell be so intolerable, if a few drops let fall on
the Conscience in this life, be so scalding and insufferable; what is it to
have all the Vials poured out to Eternity, when there shall be nothing to
divert, mitigate, or allay it?

Here men have somewhat to abate those Terrors, some hopes of Mercy, at least
a possibility; but there is none. O my Soul! how art thou loaded with Guilt!
And what a Magormissabib would thou be, should God rouse that sleepy Lion in
thy bosom* My condition is not at all the better, because my Conscience is
quiet. Ah, the day is coming, when it must awake, and will lighten and thunder
terribly within me, if I get not into Christ the sooner. O Lord, who knows the
power of thy wrath? O let me not carry this guilt out of the World with me, to
maintain those everlasting flames? let me give no sleep to mine eyes, nor
slumber to my eyelids, till I feel the comfort of that Blood of Sprinkling,
which alone speaks Peace.

THE POEM.
Amongst the dreadful works of God, I find
No Metaphors to paint a troubled Mind.
I think on this, now that, and yet will neither
Come fully up, though all be put together.
It Is like the raging Sea, that casts up mire,
Or like to Aetna, brea^hing smoke and fire;
Or like a rouzed Lion fierce and fell,
Or like those Furies that do howl in Hell.
O Conscience! Who can stand before thy power,
Endure thy gripes and twinges but an hour?
Stone, Gout, Strapado, Racks, whatever is
Dreadful to Sense, is but a toy to this.
No Pleasures, Riches, Honors, Friends can tell
How to give ease: in this it is like to Hell,
Call for the pleasant Tymbrel, Lute, and Harp;
Alas! The Music howls, the pain's too sharp
For these to charm, divert or lull asleep:
These cannot reach it, no, the wound's too deep.
Let all the Promises before him stand,
And set a Barnabas at his right hand;
These in themselves no comfort can afford,
It Is Christ, and none but Christ, can speak the word.
And he no sooner speaks, but all is still,
The storm is over, and the mind tranquil.
There goes a power with his Majestic Voice,
To hush the dreadful'st storm, and still its noise.
Who would but fear and love this glorious Lord,
That can rebuke such Tempests with a Word?
CHAP. XXI.
Our Food out of the Sea God does command;
Yet few therein take notice of his hand.

OBTERVATION.
THE Providence of God in furnishing us with such plenty and variety of Fish,
is not slightly to be past over. We have not only several sorts of Fish in our
own Seas, which are caught in their Seasons; but from several parts, especially
the Western parts of England, many Sail of Ships are sent yearly to the
American parts of the World; as New Foundland, New England, etc. Whence every
Year is brought home, not only enough to supply our own Nation, but many
thousand pounds worth also yearly returned from Spain, and other Countries; by
which Trade many thousand Families do subsist.

APPLICATION.
But, now, what ret^rns do we make to Heaven for these Mercies? O what notice
is taken of the good hand of Providence, which thus supplies and feeds us with
the Blessings of the Sea? I fear there are but few that own, act in submission
to it, and are careful to return according to received benefit. Men do not
consider, That their works are in the hand of God, Eccles. 9. 1. And even those
that have the most immediate dependence upon Providence, as Merchants and
Seamen, yet are very prone to undertake designs in the confidence of their
own wisdom and industry; not looking higher for the blessing, Iam. 4 13. They
often sacrifice to their own net, and burn incense to their drag, because by
them their portion is fat, and their meat plenteous, Hab. 1. 16. viz. They
attribute what is due to God, unto the creature. Now this is a sin highly
provoking to the Lord: for look in what degree the heart cleaves to the second
cause, in the same degree it departs from the living God, Ier. 10. 5.

And how do you think the blessed God will take it, to see himself thus
debased, and the creature thus exalted into his place; to see you carry your
selves to the creature as to a God, and to the Blessed God, as to a creature.
Surely, it is a great and common evil, and such as will blast all, if not
timely discovered and lamented. If we make flesh our arm, it is just with God to
wither and dry up the arm. Do we not, my Brethren, look upon second causes, as
if they had the main stroke in our business? And with a neglective eye pass by
God, as if he came in but collaterally, and on the by, into it? But certainly,
all endeavors will be unsanctified, if not succes^ess, in which God is not
eyed and engaged.

It is in vain for you to rise up early, and sit up late, and eat the bread of
sorrows; for so he gives his beloved sleep, Psalm. 127. 2. (i. e.) It is to no
purpose for men to beat their brains, tire their spirits, and rack their
Consciences for an estate. The true way of acquiring and enjoying the Creature,
is by submitting quietly to the Will of God, in a prudent and diligent, yet
moderate use of lawful means: Nothing can thrive with us till then.

REFLECTION.
Why then should I disquiet my self in vain; and rob my self of my peace, by
these unbelieving cares and distractions? O this has been my sin! I have
acted; as if my condition had been at my own dispose; I have eyed creatures and
means too much, and God too little. How have my hands hanged down with
discouragement, when second Causes have disappeared, or wrought cross to my
designs in the World, ready to transfer the fault on this thing, or that! And
again, how apt am I to be vainly lifted up in carnal confidence, when I see my
self competently furnished with Creature-munition and provision? Oh, what a God
provoking wickedness is this! How often has Providence checked my carnal
presumption, and dashed many hopeful projects? yet have I not owned it, as I
ought, and submitted to it. Oh, it is a wonder this has not closed the hand of
Providence against me, and pulled down a Curse upon all! Ah Lord, let me now
learn to acquaint myself with thee, then shall I decree a thing, and it shall
be established, Job 22. 28.

THE POEM.
In all the Gifts of God we should advance
His glorious Name; not say, It came by chance.
Or to the Idol of our Prudence pay
The tribute of his praise, and go our way.
The waves do clap their hands, and in their kind
Acknowledge God; And what, are they more blind
That float upon them? yea, for what they get,
They offer Sacrifices to their Net.
This is your manner, thus to work you go:
Confess the naked truth; say, Is It not so?
This Net was wisely cast, it is full, it is full:
O well done Mates, this is a gallant pull.
Thus what is due to God, you do apply
Unto your selves most Sacrilegiously.
I cannot wonder such come empty home,
That are so full of self and sin: yet some
I hope look higher, and on God reflect
Due praise. A Blessing such may well expect.
CHAP. XXII.
Whilst thou by art the silly Fish do kill,
Perchance the Devils Hook sticks in thy Gill.

OBSERVATION.
THere is skill in Fishing; they that go to Sea in a Fishing Voyage, use to go
provided with their Craft (as they very fitly call it) without which they can
do nothing. They have their Lines, Hooks of several sizes, and their Bait. They
carefully observe their Seasons; when the Fish falls in, then they ply their
business day and night.

APPLICATION.
But how much more skilful and industrious is Satan to ensnare and destroy
Souls? The Devil makes a Voyage as well as you; he has his Baits for you, as
you for the Fish: he has his Devices and Wiles to catch Souls, 2 Cor. 2. 11.
Ephesians. 6. 11. He is a Serpent, an old Serpent, Rev. 12. 9. Too crafty for Man
in his perfection, much more in his collapsed and degenerated State, his
understanding being cracked by the Fall, and all his Faculties poisoned and
perverted.

Divines observe four steps, or degrees of Satan's tempting Power.

First. He can find out the Constitution-evils of Men; he knows to what sin
their Natures are more especially prone and inclinable.

Secondly. He can propound suitable objects to those Lusts, he can exactly and
fully hit every Man's humor. As Agrippina mixed her Poison in that Meat her
Husband loved best.

Thirdly. He can inject and cast motions into the Mind, to close with those
tempting objects; as it is said of Judas, Joh. 13. 2. The Devil put it into his
heart.

Fourthly. He can solicit, irritate, and provok^ the Heart, and by those
continual restless solicitations weary it; and hereby he often draws Men to
commit such things as startled them in the first motion.

All this can he do, if he find the work stick, and meet with rubs and
difficulties; yet does he not act to the utmost of his skill and power, at all
times and with all persons; neither indeed need he so to do, the very
propounding of an object, is enough to some, without any further solicitation:
The Devil makes an easy conquest of them.

And beside all this, his Policy much appears in the election of place, time
and instruments to tempt by: And thus are poor Souls caught, as Fishes in an
evil Net, Eccles. 9. 12. The carnal Man is led by Sense, as the Beast; and
Satan handles and fits him accordingly. He uses all sorts of Motives, not only
internal, and intellective, but external and sensitive also; as the sparkling
of the Wine, when it gives its color in the Glass: the Harlot's beauty, whose
eyelids are snares; hiding always the Hook, and concealing the issue from
them. He promises them gain and profit, pleasure and delight, and all that is
tempting, with assurance of Secrecy. By these he fastens the fatal Hook in
their Jaws, and thus they are led captive by him at his Will.

REFLECTION.
And is Satan so subtle and industrious to entice Souls to sin? Does he thus
cast out his golden baits, and allure Souls with pleasure to their ruin? Then
how does it behove thee, O my Soul, to be jealous and wary! How strict a guard
should I set upon every sense! Ah, let me not so much regard how sin comes
toward me in the Temptation, as how it goes off at last. The day in which
Sodom was destroyed, began with a pleasant Sun shine, but ended in Fire and
Brimstone. I may promise my self much content in the satisfaction of my Lusts:
But O, how certainly will it end in my ruin! Ahab doubtless promised himself
much content in the Vineyard of Naboth, but his blood paid for it in the
portion of Iezreel. The Harlots Bed was perfumed to entice the simple young
man, Prove. 7. 17. But those Chambers of Delight proved the Chambers of Death,
and her House the way to Hell. Ah, with what a smiling face does sin come on
toward me in its temptations! How does it tickle the carnal fantasy, and
please the deceived heart? But what a dreadful Catastrophe and Upshot has it?
The delight is quickly gone, but the guilt thereof remains to amaze and
terrify the Soul with ghastly forms, and dreadful representations of the wrath
of God: As sin has its Delights attending it to enter and fasten it, so it
has its horrors and stings to torment and wound: And as certainly as I see
those go before it to make away, so certainly shall I find these follow after,
and tread upon its heels. No sooner is the Conscience awakened, but all those
Delights vanish as a Nightvision, or as a Dream when one awakes; and then I
shall cry, Here is the Hook, but where is the Bait? Here is the guilt and
horror, but where the delight that I was promised! And I, whether shall I now
go? Ah my deceitful Lusts! You have enticed and left me in the midst of all
miseries.

THE POEM.
There Is skill in Fishing, that the Devil knows;
For when for Souls Satan a fishing goes,
He Angles cunningly: He knows he must
Exactly fit the Bait unto the Lust.
He studies Constitution, Place, and Time,
He guesses what is his delight, what thine;
And so accordingly prepares the Bait;
Whilst he himself lies closely hid to wait
When thou will nibble at it. Do incline
To drunken Meetings? then he baits with Wine:
Is this the way; if unto this he will smell,
He Will shortly pledge a Cup of Wrath in Hell.
To Pride or Lust is thy vile Nature bent?
An Object suitable he will present.
O think on this, when you cast in the hook,
Say, Thus for my poor Soul does Satan look.
O play not with Temptations; do not swallow
The sugared Bait, consider what will follow.
If once he hitch thee, then away he draws
Thy captive Soul close Prisoner in his paws.
CHAP. XXIII.
Does Trading fail, and Voyages prove bad?
If you cannot discern the cause, it is sad.

OBSRRVATION.
THere are many sad Complaints abroad (and I think not without cause) that
Trade fails, nothing turns to account. And though all Countries be open, and
free for Traffic, a general Peace with all Nations, yet there seems to be a
Dearth, a secret Curse upon Trading. You run from Country to Country, and come
losers home. Men can hardly render a reason of it; few hit the right cause of
this Judgment.

APPLICATION.
That prosperity and success in Trade is from the blessing of God, I suppose
few are so Atheistical, as once to deny or question. The Devil himself
acknowledges it, Job 1. 10. Thou have blessed the work of his hands, and his
substance is increased in the Land. It is not in the power of any man to get
Riches, Deuteronomy. 8. 18. Thou shall remember the Lord thy God, for it is He that
gives thee power to get wealth. It is his Blessing that makes good men rich,
and his Permission that makes wicked men rich. That Maxim came from Hell,
Quisque fortunae suae faber: Every man is the Contriver of his own Condition:
Certainly, The good of man is not in his own hand, Job 21. 16. Promotion comes
not from the East or West, Psalm. 76. 6, 7.

This being acknowledged, it is evident, that in all disappointment, and want
of success in our Callings, we ought not to stick in second cause, but to look
higher, even to the hand and dispose of God: For, whose it is to give the
Blessing, his also it is to withold it. And this is as clear in Scripture as
the other. It is the Lord that takes away the Fishes of the Sea, Hos. 4. 3.
Zeph. 1. 3. It is he that curses our blessings, Mal. 2. 2.

This God does as a punishment for sin, and the abuse of mercies: And therefore
in such cases, we ought not to rest in general complaints to, or of one
another, but search what those sins are that provoke the Lord to inflict such
Judgments.

And here I must request your patience, to bear a plain and close word of
Conviction. My Brethren, I am persuaded these are the sins, among many other,
that provoke the Lord to blast all your Employments.

1. Our undertaking designs without Prayer. Alas, how few of us begin with God?
Interest him in our dealings, and ask counsel and direction at his mouth.
Prayer is that which sanctifies all employments and enjoyments, 1 Timothy 4. 5.
The very Heathen could say, A Jove Principium, They must begin with God O that
we had more Prayers and fewer Oaths.

2. Injustice and Fraud in our dealings. A sin to which Merchants are prone, as
appears by that expression, Hos. 12. 7. This is that which will blast all our
enjoyments.

3. An over-earnest endeavor after the World. Men make this their business,
they will be rich: And hence it is, they are not only unmerciful to
themselves, in wearing and wasting their own spirits with carking cares, but to
such also as they employ; neither regarding the Souls or Bodies of Men: Scarce
affording them the liberty of the Lord's Day (as has been too common in our
New Foundland Employments;) or if they have it, yet they are so worn out with
incessant Labors, that that precious time is spent either in sleep or
idleness. It is no wonder God gives you more rest than you would have, since
that day of Rest has been no better improved. This over-doing has not been
the least cause of our undoing.

Lastly, Our abuse of Prosperity, when God gave it; making God's Mercies the
Food and Fuel of our Lusts. When we had an a^fluence and confluence of outward
Blessings, this made us kick against God, as Deuteronomy. 32. 15. Forget God, Deuteronomy. 4.
14. Yea, grow proud of our strength and riches, Ezekiel. 16. 15. and Ier. 2. 31.
Ah! How few of us in the days of our prosperity, behaved our selves as good
Iehosaphat did? 2 Chronicles. 17. 5, 6. He had silver and gold in abundance, and his
heart was lifted in the way of God's Commandments; not in pride and insolence.

REFLECTION.
Are these the sins that blast our Blessings, and wither our Mercies? O then
let me cease to wonder it is no better, and rather admire that it is no worse
with me; that my neglect of Prayer, injustice in dealings, Earthly-mindedness,
and abuse of former Mercies, have not provoked God to strip me naked out of all
my enjoyments. Let me humbly accept from the Lord the punishment of my
Iniquities, and lay my hand upon my mouth. And O that these disappointments
might convince me of the Creatures vanity, and cause me to drive on another
trade for Heaven; then shall I adore thy wisdom in rending from me those
idolized enjoyments. Ah Lord, when I had them, my heart was a perpetual drudge
to them. How did I then forget God, neglect duty, and not mind my eternal
concernments! Oh, if these had not perished, in all probability I had perished.
My God, let my Soul prosper, and then a small portion of these things shall
afford me more comfort than ever I had in their greatest abundance. A little
that a righteous man has, is better than the riches of many wicked, Psalm. 37.
16.

THE POEM.
There Is great Complaint abroad that Trading's bad;
You shake your head, and cry, It Is sad, it is sad.
Merchants lay out their stock, Seamen their pains,
And in their eye they both may put their gains.
Your Fishing fails, you wonder why it is so,
It Is this (says one) or that: but I say No;
'Twill never be well, till you confess and say,
It is our sin that frights the Fish away.
No wonder all goes into Bags with Holes,
Since so the Gospel has been in your Souls.
We kicked, like Jesurun, when the flowing Tide
Of Wealth came tumbling in, this nourished Pride.
'Twixt Soul and Body, now I wish it may
Fare, as betwixt the Jews and us this day.
O that our outward want and loss may be
To us a Soul-enriching Poverty!
If disappointments here, advance the Trade
For Heaven, then complain not; you have made
The richest Voyage, and your empty Ships
Return deep laden with Soul-benefits.
CHAP. XXIV.
In Seas the greater Fish the less devour:
So some Men crush all those within their power.

OBSERVATION.
THere are Fishes of Prey in the Sea, as well as Birds and Beasts of Prey on
the Land. Our Seamen tell us, how the devouring Whales, Sharks, Dolphins, and
other Fishes follow the Caplein, and other smaller Fish, and devour multitudes
of them. It is frequent with us, in our own Seas, to find several smaller
Fishes in the Bellies of the greater ones; yea, I have often heard Seamen say,
That the poor little Fry, when pursued, are so sensible of the danger, that
they have sometimes seen multitudes of them cast themselves upon the Shore, and
perish there, to avoid the danger of being devoured by them.

APPLICATION.
Thus cruel, merciless, and oppressive are wicked Men, whose tender mercies are
cruelty, Prove. 22. 10. We see the like cruelty in our Extortioners, and
overreaching Sharks ashore, who grind the faces of the Poor, and regard not
the Cries of the Fatherless and Widows, but fill their Houses with the gain of
Oppression. These are, by the Holy Ghost, compared to the fishes of the Sea,
Hab. 1. 13, 14. This is a crying sin, yea, it sends up a loud cry to Heaven for
Vengeance, Exodus 22, 23. If thou afflict the widow and the fatherless, and they
cry unto me, I will surely hear their cry. And Verse 27. I will hear his cry,
for I am gracious. Nay, God will not only hear their Cry, but avenge their
Quarrel. That is a remarkable Text, 1 These. 4. 6. That no man go beyond and
defraud his brother in any matter, because that the Lord is the [Avenger] of
all such. This word Avenger, is but once more used in the New Testament, (...).
Romans 13. 4. And there it is applied to the Civil Magistrate, who is to see
Execution done upon Offenders. But now this is a Sin that sometimes may b^ out
of the reach of man's Justice, and therefore God himself will be their Avenger.
You may overpower the Poor in this World, and it may be they cannot contend
with you at man's Bar, therefore God will bring it before his Bar.

Believe it, Sirs, it is a sin so provoking to God, that he will not let it
'scape without severe punishment, sooner or later. The Prophet Habbakkuk, Chap.
1. verse 13. wondered how the holy God could forbear such till the general day
of reckoning, and that he did not take exemplary Vengeance on them in this
Life. Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and can not look upon
Iniquity: Wherefore then look thou upon them that deal treacherously, and
hold thy tongue when the wicked devours the man that is more righteous than
he? And Prove. 23. 10, 11. Enter not into the Fields of the Fatherless, i. e. Of
the poor and helpless. But why is it more dangerous violently to invade their
right, than another? The reason is added, For their Redeemer is mighty, and he
shall plead their cause with thee. It may be they are not able to retain a
Counsel to plead their cause here; therefore God will plead their cause for
them.

REFLECTION.
Turn in upon thy self (O my Soul) and consider, Have thou not been guilty of
this crying sin? Have I not (when a Servant) overreached and defrauded others,
and filled my Master's House with Violence and Deceit? and so brought myself
under that dreadful threatening, Zeph. 1. 9. Or since I came to trade and deal
upon mine own account, have not the Balances of Deceit been in my hand? I have
(it may be) kept many in my service and employment; have not I used their
labors without reward, and so am under that woe? Ier. 22. 13. Or not given
them Wages proportionable to their work? Isai. 58. 3. Or by bad Payment and
unjust Deductions and Allowances, defrauded them of a part of their due? Mal.
3. 5. Or at least delayed payment, ou^ of a covetous disposition to gain by it;
whilst their necessities in the mean time cried aloud for it; and so sinned
against God's express commands, Deuteronomy. 24. 14, 15. Levit. 19. 30. Or have I not
persecuted such as God has smitten? Psalm. 69. 26. And rigorously exacted the
uttermost of my due, though the hand of God has gone out against them,
bre^king their estates? O my Soul, examine thy self upon these particulars;
rest not quiet, until this guilt be ^emoved by the application of the Blood of
Sprinkling. Has not the Lord said, Jam. 2. 13. That they shall have judgment
without mercy, that has showed no mercy? And is it not a fearful thing to fall
into the hands of the living God, who has said, He will take vengeance for
these things?

THE POEM.
Devouring Whales and ravenous Sharks do follow
The lesser Fry, and at one gulp do swallow
Some hundreds of them, as our Seamen say:
But we can tell far stranger things than they.
For we have Sharks ashore, in every Creek,
That to devour poor Men do hunt and seek.
No Pity, Sense, or Bowels in them be,
Nay, have they not put off Humanity?
Extortioners and Cheaters, whom God hates,
Have dreadful open Mouths, and through those Gates
Brave Persons with their Heritages pass
In Funeral-state, Friends crying out Alas!
O give me Agur's wish, that I may never
Be such my self, or feel the hands of either.
And as for those that in their paws are gripped,
Pity and rescue, Lord, from that sad plight.
When I behold the squeaking Lark, that is born
In Falcon's Talons, crying, bleeding, torn;
I pity its sad case, and would relieve
The Prisoner, if I could, as well as grieve.
Fountain of Pity, hear the piteous Moans
Of all thy Captive and Oppressed Ones.
CHAP. XXV.
In Storms to spread much Sail endangers all:
So carnal Mirth, if God for Mourning call.

OBSERVATION.
IN Storms at Sea, the wise Navigator will no^ spread much Sail; that is the
way to lose Masts and all; They use then to furl up the Sails, and lie a Hull,
when not able to bear a Knot of Sail; or else to lie a Try, or Scud before the
Wind and Seas* It is no time then to hoist up the Top and Top-gallant, and show
their bravery.

APPLICATION.
When the Judgments of God are abroad in the earth, it is no time then to make
mirth, Ezekiel. 21. 10, 11. Should we [then] make mirth? It contemns the rod of
my son as every tree. (i. e.) As if it were a common Rod, and ordinary
affliction; whereas the Rod of my Son is not such as may be had of every Tree,
but it is an Iron Rod to such as despise it, Psalm. 2. 9. O it is a provoking
evil, and commonly God severely punishes it. Of all persons, such speed worst
in the common calamity, Amos 6. 1. VVo to them that are at ease in Sion, that
are not grieved for the afflictions of Joseph, as ver. 4. It may be (as one
observes upon the Text) they did not laugh at him, or break Jests upon him; but
they did not condole with him. And what shall be their punishment? See verse. 7.
Therefore now shall they go captive with the first that go captive: God will
begin with them first. Solomon tells us, Eccles. 3. 4. There is a time to weep,
and a time to laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance: Only (as Master Trap
notes upon the Text) we must not invert the order, but weep with Men, that we
may laugh with Angels. To be merry and frolic in a day of tribulation, is to
disturb the order of seasons. That is a terrible Text, Isai. 22. 12. which
should make the hearts of such as are guilty in this kind to tremble: In that
day did the Lord of Hosts call to mourning, and to girding with sackcloath; and
behold, joy and gladness, slaying Oxen, killing Sheep, drinking Wine, etc.
Well, what is the issue of this? Surely, this iniquity shall not be purged from
you, till ye die. O dreadful word! Surely (my Brethren) Sympathy is a debt we
owe to Christ Mystical. Whatever our Constitution, Condition, or Personal
Immunities be, yet when God calls for Mourning, we must hear and obey that
call. David was a King, an expert Musician, a Man of a sanguine and cheerful
constitution; yet who more sensible of the evil of those times, than he? Rivers
of water ran down his eyes at the consideration of them. Melancthon was so
affected with the Miseries of the Church in his days, that he seemed to take
little or no notice of the death of his Child, whom he entirely loved. At such
a time we may say of laughter, Thou art mad, and of mirth, What does it?

REFLECTION.
Blush then, O my Soul! for thy levity and insensibility under God's angry
Dispensations. How many of the precious Sons and Daughters of Sion, lie in
Tears abroad, while I have been Nourishing my heart, as in a day of slaughter?
The voice of God has cried to the City, and Men of understanding have heard
its voice, Mic. 6. 9. But I have been deaf to that cry. How loath (my God) have
I been to urge my sensual Heart to acts of Sorrow and Mourning! Thou have bid
me weep with them that weep but my vain heart cannot comply with such commands.
Ah Lord! if I mourn not with Sion, neither shall I rejoice with her.

O, were mine eyes opened, and my heart sensible and tender, I might see cause
enough to melt into Tears; and like that Christian Niobe, Luke 7. 38. to lie
weeping at the feet of Christ. Lord, What stupidity is this? Shall I Laugh when
thou art Angry, and thy Children weeping and trembling? Then I may justly fear,
lest when they shall sing for joy (...) heart, I shall howl for vexation of
spirit, Isai. 65. 13* 14. Surely, O my Soul! such laughter will be turned into
mourning, either here or hereafter.

THE POEM.
In troublous Times, Mirth in the Sinners face
Is like a Mourning-Cloak with Silver Lace.
The Lion's roaring makes the Beasts to quake;
God's roaring Judgments cannot make us shake.
What Belluine Contempt is this of God,
To laugh in's face, when he takes up the Rod?
Such laughter God in tears will surely drown.
(Unless he hate thee) e're he lay it down.
These Rods have Voices; if thou hear them well:
If not, another Rod's prepared in Hell.
And when the Arm of God shall lay it on,
Laugh if thou can; no, then thy Mirth is gone.
All Sion's Children will lament and cry,
When all her beauteous Stones in dust do lie;
And he that for her then laments and mourns,
Shall want no joy, when God to her returns.
CHAP. XXVI.
A little Leak neglected, dangerous proves:
One Sin connived at, the Soul undoes.

OBSERVATION.
THE smallest Leak, if not timely discovered and stopped, is enough to sink a
Ship of the greatest burden: Therefore Seamen are wont frequently to try what
Water is in the Hold; and if they find it fresh, and increasing upon them, they
ply the Pump, and presently set the Carpenters to search for it and stop it;
and till it be found they cannot be quiet.

REFLECTION.
What such a Leak is to a Ship, that is the smallest sin neglected to the Soul;
it is enough to ruin it eternally. For as the greatest sin, discovered,
lamented, and mourned over by a Believer, cannot ruin him; so the least sin
indulged, covered, and connived at, will certainly prove the destruction of the
sinner. No sin, though never so small, is tolerated by the pure and perfect Law
of God, Psalm. 119. 96. The command is exceeding broa^; not as if it gave Men a
latitude to walk as they please, but broad, i. e. extending it self to all our
words, thoughts, actions, and affections: Laying a Law upon them all; conniving
at no evil in any Man, 1 Pet. 2. 1.

And as the word gives no allowance for the least sin, so it is the very nature
of sincerity and uprightness, to set the heart against [ every] way of
wickedness, Psalm. 139. 23, 24. Job 4. 23. And especially against that sin which
was its darling in the days of his vanity, Psalm. 18. 23. True hatred (as the
Philosopher observes, is of the whole (...).
kind: He that hates sin, as sin, and so does every upright Soul, hate all sins
as well as some.

Again, the Soul that has had a saving sight of Jesus Christ, and a true
discovery of the evil of sin, in the Glass both of the Law and Gospel, can
account no sin small. He knows the demerit of the smallest sin is God's eternal
wrath, and that not the least sin can be remitted, without the shedding and
application of the Blood of Christ, Heh. 9. 22. which Blood is of infinite
value and price* 1 Pet. 1. 19.

To conclude, God's People know, that little as well as great sins are
dangerous, deadly and destructive in their own nature: A little poison will
destroy a Man. Adrian was choakt with a Gnat; Caesar stabbed with Bodkins. A
man would think Adam's sin had been no great matter, yet what dreadful work did
it make! It was not as a single Bullet to kill himself only; but as a
Chain-shot, which cut off all his poor miserable Posterity. Indeed, no sin can
be little, because its object against whom it is committed is so great, whence
it receives a kind of infiniteness in it self, and hecause the price paid to
redeem us from it is so invaluable.

REFLECTION.
And is the smallest sin not only damning in its own nature, but will certainly
prove the ruin of that Soul that hides and covers it? O then let my spirit
accomplish a diligent search. Look to it, O my Soul! that no sin be indulged by
thee. Set these considerations as so many flaming Swords in the way of thy
carnal delights and lust: Let me never say of any sin, as Lot did of Zoar, It
is a little one, spare it. Shall I spare that which cost the Blood of Jesus
Christ? The Lord would not spare him, When he made his Soul an offering for
sin, Romans 8. 32. Neither will he spare me, if I defend and hide it, Deuteronomy. 29.
20. Ah! If my Heart were right, and my Conversion sound, that lust whatever it
be, that is so favored by me, would especially be abhorred and hated, Isai. 2.
20. and 30. 22. Whatever my convictions and reformations have been, yet if
there be but one sin retained and delighted in, this keeps the Devils interest
still in my Soul: And though for a time he seem to depart, yet at last he will
return with seven worse spirits, and this is the sin will open the door to him,
and deliver up my Soul, Matthew. 12. 43, 44. Lord, let me make through work of
it: let me cut it off, and pluck it out, though it be as a right Hand, or Eye.
Ah, shall I come so near the Kingdom of God, and make such a fair offer for
Christ, and yet stick at a small matter, and lose all for want of one thing?
Lord, let me ^^ed the blood of the dearest lust, for his sake that shed his
dearest blood for me.

THE POEM.
There Is many a Soul eternally undone
For sparing sin, because a little one.
But we are much deceived; no sin is small,
That wounds so great a God, so dear a Soul.
Yet say it were, the smallest Penknife may
As well as Sword or Lance dispatch and slay.
And shall so small a matter part and sever
Christ and thy Soul? What make you part for ever?
Or will thou stand on Toys with him, when he
Denied himself in greatest things for thee?
Or will it be an ease in Hell, to think
How easily thy Soul therein did sink!
Are Christ and Hell for trifles sold and bought?
Strike Souls with trembling, Lord, at such a thought.
By little sins, beloved, the Soul is lost,
Unless such sins do great repentance cost.
CHAP. XXVII.
Ships make much way when they a Trade-wind get;
With such a VVind the Saints have ever met.

OBSERVATION.
THough in most parts of the World the Winds are variable, and sometimes blow
from every point of the Compass, by reason whereof, sailing is ^low and
dangerous; yet about the Equinoctial, Seamen meet with a Trade-wind, blowing
for the most part one way; and there they Sail jocund before it, and scarce
need to Lore a Top-sail, for some hundreds of Leagues.

APPLICATION.
Although the People of God meet with many seeming Rubs and Set-backs in their
way to Heaven, which are like contrary Winds to a Ship; yet are they from the
Day of their Conversion, to the day of their complete Salvation, never out of a
Trade-winds way to Heaven, Romans 8. 21. We know that all things work together
for good, to them that love God, to them that are the called according to his
purpose. This is a most precious Scripture, pregnant with its Consolation to
believers in all conditions, a Pillar of comfort to all distressed Saints: Let
us look a little nearer to it.

( We know) Mark the certainty and evidence of the Proposition, which is not
built upon a guess or remote probability, but upon the knowledge of the Saints:
we know it, and that partly by divine Revelation, God has told us so; and
partly by our own experience, we find it so.

(That all things) Not only things that lie in a natural and direct tendency to
our good; as Ordinances, Promises, Blessings, etc. but even such things as have
no natural fitness and tendency to such an end; as afflictions, temptations,
corruptions, desertions, etc. All these help onward. They

(Work together.) Not all of them directly, and of their own nature and
inclination; but by being overruled, and determined to such an issue by the
gracious hand of God: Nor yet do they work out such good to the Saints, singly
and apart, but as adjuvant causes or helps, standing under and working in
subordination to the supreme and principal cause of their happiness.

Now the most seeming opposite things, yea sin in itself, which in its own
nature is really opposite to their good, yet eventually contributes to it.
Afflictions and Desertions seem to work against us; but being once put into the
rank and order of Causes, they work together with such blessed instruments, as
Word and Prayer, to an happy issue. And though the faces of these things, that
thus agree and work together* look contrary ways; yet there be, as it were,
secret chains and connections of Providence betwixt them, to unite them in
their issue. There may be many instruments employed about one work, and yet not
communicate coun^els, or hold intelligence with each other. Ioseph's Brethren,
the Midianites, Potiphar, etc. knew not one another mind, nor aimed at one
end, (much less the end that God brought about by them:) one acts out of
Revenge* another for gain, a third out of Policy; yet all meet together at
last, in that issue God had designed to bring about by them, even Ioseph's
advancement. Even so it is here, Christian, there be more instruments at work
for thine eternal good, than thou art aware of*

REFLECTION.
Cheer up then, O my Soul, and lean upon this Pillar of Comfort in all
distresses. Here is a promise for me (if I be a called one) that, like the
Phillosophers Stone, turns all into Gold it touches. This promise is my
security, however things go in the world. My God will do me no hurt, Jer. 25.
6. Nay, he will do me good by every dispensation. O that I had but an heart to
make all things work for his glory, that thus causes every thing to work for
my good. My God, do thou turn every thing to my advantage? O let me return
all to thy praise; and if by every thing thou work my eternal good, then let me
in every thing give thanks.

But ah! How foolish and ignorant have I been? even as a beast before thee. How
has my heart been disquieted, and apt to repine at thy dispensations, when
they have crossed my Will! not considering that my God faithfully pursues my
good, even in those things that cross, as well as in that which pleases me.

Blessed Lord! What a blessed condition are all thy people in, who are within
the Line of this promise? All things friendly and beneficial to them, Friends
helpful, Enemies helpful, every thing conspiring and conducing to their
happiness. With others it is not so; nothing works for their good; nay, every
thing works against it: Their very mercies are snares, and their Prosperity
destroys them, Prove. 1. 32. Even the blessed Gospel it self is a savor of
death to them: When evil befalls them, it is an only evil, Ezekiel. 7. 5. that is,
not turned into good to them; and as their evils are not turned into good, so
all their good is turned into evil. As this Promise has an influence into all
that concerns the people, so the curse has a influence into all the enjoyments
of the wicked. O my soul, bless the Lord, who has cast thy lot into such a
pleasant place, and given thee such a glorious heritage, as this promise is.

THE POEM.
When once the Dog star rises many say,
Corn ripens then apace, both night and day.
Souls once in Christ, that Morning Star lets fall
Such influences on them then, that all
Gods dispensations to them, sweet or sour,
Ripens their Souls for Glory every hour.
All their afflictions, rightly understood,
Are blessings; every Wind will blow some good.
Sure at their troubles Saints would never grudge,
Were Sense deposed, and Faith made the Judge.
Falls make them waryer, amend their pace;
When gifts puff up their hearts, and weaken Grace.
Could Satan see the issue and the event
Of his temptations, he would scarcely tempt.
Could Saints but see what fruits their troubles bring,
Amidst those troubles they would shout and sing.
O sacred Wisdom! who can but admire
To see how thou do save from fire, by fire!
No doubt but Saints in glory wondering stand
As those strange Methods few now understand.
CHAP. XXVIII.
Storms make discovery of the Pilots skill.
Gods Wisdom in affliction triumphs still.

OBSERVATION.
IN fair Weather, when there is Sea-room enough, then every common person can
guide the Ship, the Pilot may then lie down and take his rest; but in great
storms and stress of weather, or when near the dangerous shore, then the most
skilful Pilot is put to it: Then he shows the utmost of his Art and Skill, and
yet sometimes all is too little. They are (as the Scripture speaks) at their
wits end, know not what to do more, but are forced to commit all to the mercy
of God and the Seas.

APPLICATION.
In the Storms and Tempests of Affliction and Trouble, there are the most
evident and full Discoveries of the Wisdom and Power of our God: It is indeed
continually active for his people in all conditions, Isai. 27. 3. Lest any hurt
it, I will keep it night and day. Psalm. 121. 4. He that keeps Israel, neither
stumbereth nor sleeps. His peoples dangers are without intermission,
therefore his preservations are so too. But now, when they come into the
Straight of Affliction, and deadly dangers, which threaten like Rocks on every
side; now the Wisdom of their God rides triumphantly and visibly upon the waves
of that stormy Sea. And this infinite Wisdom is then especially discovered in
these particulars.

1. In leaving them still somewhat in the lieu and room of those Comforts that
they are deprived of; so that they see God does exchange their comforts, and
that for the better; and this supports them. So John 14. 1, 2, 3. Christ's
bodily presence is removed, but the Spirit was sent in the room of it, which
was better.

2. In doubling their strength, as he doubles their burdens. It is observed,
that the Saints have many times very strong and sweet Consolation, a little
before their greatest Trials: And this is so ordinary, that commonly, when they
have had extraordinary Consolations from God, they have then looked for some
eminent Trial. The Lord appeared to Abraham, and sealed the Covenant to him,
and then put him upon that great trial of his Faith. So the Disciples, Luke 24.
49. It was commanded them that they should tarry in Jerusalem, till they were
endowed with power from on high. The Lord knew what an hard providence they
were like to have, and what great oppositions and difficulties they must
encounter, in publishing the Everlasting Gospel to the World; and therefore
first prepares, and endows them with power from on high, viz. with eminent
measures of the Gifts and Craces of the Spirit; as Faith, Patience,
Self-denial, etc. So Paul had first his Revelations, then his Buffetings.

3. In coming in so opportunely in the time of their great distress, with
relief and comfort, 1 Pet. 4. 14. Then the Spirit of Glory, and of God rests
on them. As that Martyr cried out to his friend Austin, at the very stake, He
is come, he is come.

4. In appointing and ordering the several kinds of afflictions to several
Saints; and allotting to every one, that very Affliction, and no other, which
is most suitable to his condition: Which Afflictions, like so many Portions of
Physic, are prepared for that very malignant humor that predominates most in
them. Peter's sin was self-confidence, God permits him to fall by denying
Christ: which doubtless was sanctified to his good, in that particular.
Hezekiah's sin was vainglory; therefore Spoilers are sent to take away his
Treasures.

5. In the duration of their Troubles; they shall not lie always upon them,
Psalm. 125. 3. Our God is a God of Judgment, Isai. 30. 18. Knows the due time of
removing it, and is therein punctual to a day, Rev. 2. 10.

REFLECTION.
If the Wisdom of God do thus triumph and glorify itself in the Distresses of
the Saints, then why should I fear in the day of evil! Psalm. 49. 4. Why does my
heart faint at the foresight and apprehension of approaching trouble? Fear none
of those things that thou shall suffer, O my Soul; if thy God will thus be with
thee in the fire and water, thou can not perish. Though I walk through the
Valley of the shadow of Death, yet let me fear no evil, whilst my God is thus
with me. Creatures cannot do what they please; his wisdom limits and overrules
them all, to gracious and sweet ends. If my God cast me into the Furnace, to
melt and try me, yet I shall not be consumed there; for he will sit by the
Furnace himself all the while I am in it, and curiously pry into it, observing
when it has done its work, and then will presently withdraw the fire. O my
Soul, bless and adore this God of Wisdom! who himself will see the ordering of
all thine Afflictions, and not trust it in the hands of Men or Angels!

THE POEM.
Though tossed in greatest Storms, I Will never fear,
If Christ will sit at Helm to guide and steer.
Storms are the triumph of his Skill and Art;
He cannot close his Eyes, nor change his Heart.
Wisdom and Power ride upon the Waves,
And in the greates^ danger helps and saves
From dangers, it by dangers does deliver,
And wounds the Devil out of his own Quiver;
It countermines his Plots, and so does spoil,
And make his Engines on himself recoil
It blunts the Politicians restless Tool,
And makes Ahitophel the veriest Fool:
It shows us how our Reason us misled,
And if we had not, we had perished.
Lord, to thy Wisdom I will give the Reins,
And not with Cares perplex and vex my brains.
CHAP. XXIX.
Things in the bottom are unseen: No eye
Can trace God's Paths, which in the Deeps do lie.

OBSERVATION.
THE Ocean is so deep, that no Eye can discover what lies in the bottom
thereof. We use to say proverbially of a thing that is irrecoverably lost, It
is as good it were cast into the Sea. What lies there, lies obscure from all
eyes, but the Eye of God.

APPLICATION.
Thus are the Judgments of God, and the Ways of his Providence, profound and
unsearchable, Psalm. 36. 16. The Righteous is like the great Mountains, and thy
Judgments are a great Deep: (i. e.) his Providence are secret, obscure, and
unfathomable; but even then, and in those Providence, his Righteousness stands
up like the great Mountains, visible and apparent to every eye. Though the
Saints cannot see the one, yet they can clearly discern the other, Ier. 12. 1.
Jeremiah was at a stand; so was Job in the like case, Job 12. 7. So was Asaph,
Psalm. 73.* and Habbakkuk, Chap. 1. 3. These Wheels of Providence are dreadful
for their height, Ezekiel. 1. 18. There be deep Mysteries of Providence, as well
as of Faith. It may be said of some of them, as of Paul's Epistles, That they
are hard to be understood. Darkness and Clouds are round about the Throne of
God: No man can say what will be the particular issue and event of some of his
dispensations. Luther seemed to hear God say to him, when he was importunate to
know his mind in some particular Providence, Deus sum non sequax: I am a God
not to be traced. Some Providence, like Hebrew Letters, must be read backward,
Psalm. 92. 7. Some Providence pose Men of the greatest parts and graces. His
way is in the Sea, his paths in the great Waters, and his footsteps are not
known, Psalm. 77. 19. Who can trace Footsteps in the bottom of the Sea? The
Angels, Ezekiel. 1. Have their hands under their wings. The hand is either,
Symbolum roboris, The Symbol of strength; or Instrumentum Operationis, The
Instrument of Action: Where these hands are put forth, they work effectually,
yea, but very secretly, they are hid under their wings. There be some of God's
Works that are such Secrets, as that they may not be enquired into; they are to
be believed and adored, but not pryed into, Romans 11. 33. Others that may be
enquired after, but yet are so profound, that few can understand them, Psalm.
111. 2. The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all those that have
pleasure therein. When we come to Heaven, then all those mysteries, as well in
the Works, as in the Word of God, will lie open to our view.

REFLECTION.
O then, why is my heart disquieted, because it cannot sometimes discern the
way of the Lord, and see the connection and dependence on his providential
dispensations? Why art thou so perplexed, O my Soul, at the Confusions and
Disorders that are in the world! I know that Goodness and Wisdom sits at the
Stern: And though the Vessel of the Church be tossed and distressed in Storms
of Trouble, yet it shall not perish. Is it not enough for me, that God has
condescended so far for my satisfaction, as to show me plainly the ultimate and
general issue of all these mysterious Providence, Ephesians. 1. 22. Romans 8. 28.
unless I be able to take the height of every particular? Shall I presume to
call the God of Heaven to account? Must he render a reason of his ways, and
give an account of his matters to such a worm as I am? Be silent (O my Soul)
before the Lord; subscribe to his Wisdom, and submit to his Will, whatsoever he
does. However it be, yet God is good to Israel; the event will manifest it to
be all over a design of love. I know not how to reconcile them to each other,
or many of them to the Promise; yet are they all harmonious betwixt themselves,
and the certain means of accomplishing the Promises. O what a favor is this,
that in the midst of the greatest confusions in the world, God has given such
abundant security to his people, that it shall be well with them? Amos 9. 8.
Eccles. 8. 12.

THE POEM.
Lord! how stupendous, deep, and wonderful,
Are all thy draughts of Providence! So full
Of puzling Intricacies, that they lie
Beyond the ken of any mortal eye.
A Wheel within a Wheel's the Scripture Notion.
And all those Wheels transverse, and cross in motion.
All Creatures serve it in their place; yet so,
As thousands of them know not what they do.
At this or that, their aim they do direct;
But neither this, nor that, is the effect:
But something else they do not understand,
Which sets all Politicians at a stand.
Deep Counsels, as the birth, this hand does break,
And deeper things performs by the weak.
Men are like ^orses, set at every stage,
For Providence to ride from age to age;
Which like a Post spurs on, and makes them run
From stage to stage until their Iourney's done;
Then take a fresh: But they the business know,
No more than Horses the Post-Letters do.
Yet though its work be not concealed from sight,
'Twill be a glorious piece, when brought to light.
CHAP. XXX.
Millions of Men are sunk into the Main:
But it shall not those Dead always retain.

OBSERVATION.
WHat multitudes of Men has the Sea devoured! Thousands have made their Graves
in it. What numbers of Men have been ingulfed together in Sea Fights, or
Storms, or Inundations, whereby whole Towns have been swallowed up! Certainly
the dead which are there are innumerable.

APPLICATION.
But though the Sea have received so many thousand Bodies of Men into its
devouring Throat, yet is it not the absolute Lord or Proprietor of them, but
rather a Steward entrusted with them, till the Lord require an account of them;
and then it must deliver up all it has received, even to a person. Revel. 20.
11, 12. And I saw the Dead, small and great stand before God: and the books
were opened: and another book was open, which is the book of life; and the dead
were judged out of those things which were written in the Books, according to
their works. And the Sea gave up the dead which were in it.

The Doctrine of the Resurrection of the Body, is a Doctrine full of singular
Consolations to Believers, 1 Cor. 15. and most clearly asserted in Scripture,
Acts 26. 8. Job 19. 25. 1 Cor. 15, etc. And it is well for us this point is so
plainly revealed; because, as it is a most comfortable Truth to the people of
God, so there is scarce any truth that lies under more prejudice as to Sense or
Reason, and is more difficult to receive, than this is. The Epicures and
Stoics laughed Paul to scorn when he preached it to them, Acts 17. 32. The
Familists and Quakers at this day reject it as a Fable. The Socinians say the
same Body shall not rise, but an aerial Body. And indeed if Men set up Reason
as the only Judge of supernatural things, it is incredible to think that a
Body should be restored that has been burnt to ashes, and those ashes
scattered in the wind, as History tells us was frequently done by the Bodies of
the Saints in Dioclesian's Reign! Or when drowned in the Sea, and there
devoured by several Fishes, and those again devoured by others. But yet this is
not to be objected to the Almighty Power of God, that gave them their first
being. Difficulties and Impossibilities are for Men, but not for him. Why
should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God should raise the
dead? Acts 26. 8.

REFLECTION.
And must I rise again, wherever my body fall at death? Then, Lord, how am I
concerned to get union with Christ while I live? by virtue thereof only, my
Resurrection can be made comfortable and blessed to me! Ah, let my body lie
where it will, in Earth or Sea; let my bones be scattered, and flesh devoured
by Worms or Fish, I know thou can and wilt reunite my scattered parts; and in
this body I must stand before thine awful Tribunal, to receive according to
what I have done therein, 2 Cor. 5. 10. Thou that command me to stand forth
amongst the noblest rank of Creatures, when I had no being, and saw my
Substance, being yet imperfect, can as easily reduce me to that Being again.

What though Reason vote impossible, and Sense incredible? Though all these
Difficulties and Encumbrances grow upon my Faith, yet I know my body is not
lost for ever; the sound of thy last and dreadful Trumpet shall awaken me; and
thy mighty Power, to which all things are possible, shall bring me before thy
Bar.

O Lord, I know that I shall stand in that great Assembly at the last day, when
multitudes, multitudes, even all the sons and daughters of Adam shall appear
together. O! if I die Christless, it were good for me that there were no
Resurrection: for then those eyes that have been windows of Lust, must behold
Christ the Judge, not as a Redeemer, but as a Revenger. That tongue that has
vented so much of the filthiness of my heart, will then be struck speechless
before him; and this flesh which I so pampered and provided for, condemned to
everlasting flames. O my God, let me make sure work for such a day. If I now
get real union with thy Son, I shall awake with singing out of the dust: And
then, as thou said to Jacob, so to me, when I go down into the Sea or Grave,
Genesis 46. 3, 4. Fear not to go down into the deep; for I will surely bring thee
up again.

THE POEM.
It should not seem incredible to thee,
That God should raise the dead in Seas that be:
We see in VVinter, Swallows, Worms, and Flies
Deprived of Life, yet in the Spring they rise.
What though you Bodies several Fish devour,
Object not that to the Almighty power.
Some Chemists in their Art are so exact,
That from one Herb they usually extract
Four different Elements: what think ye then,
Can pose that God, who gave this Skill to men?
The Gardener can distinguish thirty kinds
Of seeds from one another, though he finds
Them mixed together in the self-same dish;
Much more can God distinguish Flesh from Fish.
They seem as lost, but they again must live;
The Sea's a Steward, and Stewards account must give.
Look what you are, when in the Ocean drowned,
The very same at Judgment you will be found*
I would not care where my vile body lies,
Were I assured it should with comfort rise.
CHAP. XXXI.
The Sea-man's greatest danger's near the Coast;
When we are nearest Heaven, the danger's most.

OBTERVATION.
THough Seamen meet with violent Storms, yet if they have Sea-room enough,
they are not much dismayed; but if they find themselves near the shore, they
look upon their condition as very dangerous. The sight of the Shore is to them
(as Soloman speaks of the Morning in another case) like the shadow of death, if
not able to Weather it. For one Ship swallowed up in the Ocean, may perish upon
the Coast.

APPLICATION.
The greatest Streights and Difficulties that many Saints meet with in all
their lives, is when they come nearest to Heaven, and have almost finished
their Course. Heaven indeed is a glorious Place, the Spacious and Royal Mansion
of the great King; but difficilia quae pulchra. It has a straight and narrow
entrance, Luke 13. 24. O the difficulty of arriving there! How many hard tugs
in Duty! What earnest contention and striving, even to an Agony, as that word
imports! Luke 13. 24. Multitudes put forth, and by profession are bound, for
this fair Haven; but of the multitudes that put out, how few do arrive there? A
man may set out by a glorious profession, with much resolution, and continue
long therein; he may offer very fair for it, and not be far from the Kingdom of
God, and yet not be able to enter at the last, Matthew. 7. 22.

Yea, and many of those who are sincere in their profession, and do arrive at
last, yet come to Heaven (as I may say) by the gates of Hell; and put in, as a
poor Weather-beaten Vessel comes into the Harbor, more like a Wrack than a
Ship, nor Mast nor Sail left. The righteous themselves are scarcely saved, (
i. e.) they are saved with very much difficulty. They have not all an abundant
entrance, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 1. 11.

Some Persons (as one well notes) Manton on Jude are afar off, Ephesians. 2. 23. (i.
e.) touch p. 119. with no care of Religion: Some come near, but never enter; as
Semiconverts, see Matthew. 12. 34. Others enter, but with great difficulty; they
are saved as by fire, 1 Cor. 3. 13. Make an hard shift. But then there be some
that go in with full sail before a VVind, and have an abundant entrance: They
go triumphing out of the world. Ah! when we come into the Narrow Channel, at
the very point of entrance into life, the Soul is then in the most serious
frame, all things look with a new face. Conscience scans our evidence most
crittically; then also Satan falls upon us, and makes his sorest assaults and
batteries. It is the last encounter; it they escape him now, they are gone out
of his reach for ever: And if he cannot hinder their Salvation, yet if he can
but cloud their Evening, and make them go groaning and haling out of the world,
he reaches another end by it, even to confirm and prejudice the wicked, and
weaken the hands of others that are looking toward Religion.

REFLECTION.
If this be so, how inevitable is my perdition, may the careless Soul say; if
they that strive so much, and go so far, yet perish at last; and if the
righteous themselves are scarcely saved, then where shall such an ungodly
Creature, as I appear? O Lord! if they that have made Religion their business,
and have been many years pursuing a work of Mortification, have gone mourning
after the Lord Jesus, and walked humbly with God; yet if some of these have
such an hard tug at last, then what will become of such a vain, sensual,
careless, Flesh-pleasing Wretch as I have been?

Again, Do Saints find it so straight an entrance? Then, though I have
well-grounded Hopes of safe arrival at last; yet let me look to it, that I do
not increase the difficulty. Ah! they are the things that are now done, or
omitted, that put Conscience into such an agony then; for when it comes to
review the life with the most serious eye. O, let me not stick my Deathbed
full of Thorns, against I come to lie down upon it. O that I may turn to the
Wall, in that hour, as Hezekiah did, 2 Kings 20. 2, 3. and say, Remember now, O
Lord, I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart,etc.

THE POEM.
After a tedious Passage, Saints descry
The glorious Shore, Salvation being nigh;
Death's Long boat's launched, ready to set ashore
Their panting Souls. O, how they tug at Oar,
Longing to be at rest! but then they find,
The hardest Tug of all is yet behind.
Just at the Harbors mouth, they see the Wrach
Of Souls there cast away, and driven back.
A world of dangerous Rocks before it lie;
The Harbors barred, and now the Winds blow high*
Thoughts now arise* fears multiply apace;
All things about them have another face
Life blazes just like an expiring light;
The Soul's upon the lip, prepared for flight.
Death, till the Resurrection, tears and rends
Out of each other's arms, two parting Friends,
The Soul and Body. Ah! but more than so,
The Devil falls upon them ere they go,
With new temptations, backed with all his power,
And scruples kept on purpose for that hour.
This is the last encounter, now or never.
If he succeeds not now, they are gone for ever.
Thus in they put, with hardship at the last,
As Ships out of a Storm, nor Sail, nor Mast:
Yet some go in before a Wind, and have
Their Streamer of Assurance flying brave.
Lord, give me easier entrance, if thou please;
Or if I may not there arrive with ease,
Yet I beseech the set me safe ashore,
Though stormy Winds at Harbors mouth should roar.
CHAP. XXXII.
How glad are Seamen, when they make the Shore
And Saints no less, when all their Danger's over,

OBSERVATION.
WHat Joy is there among Seamen, when at last, after a tedious and dangerous
Voyage, they descry Land, and see the desied Haven before them? Then they turn
out of their loathed Cabbins, and come upon open Deck with much joy, Psalm. 107.
30. Then they are glad, because they be quiet: So he brings them to their
desired Haven. Now they can reflect with comfort upon the many dangers they
have past, Olim haec meminisse juvabit; It is sweet to recount them.

APPLICATION.
But O, what transcendent Joy, yea, ravishing, will ove-run the hearts of
Saints, when after so many Conflicts, Temptations, and Afflictions, they arrive
in glory, and are harbored in Heaven, where they shall rest for ever! 2. These.
1. 7. The Scripture says, They shall sing the Song of Moses, and of the Lamb,
Rev. 15. 3. The Song of Moses was a triumphant Song, composed for the
celebration of that glorious Deliverance at the Red Sea. The Saints are now
fluctuating upon a troublesome and tempestuous Sea; their hearts sometime ready
to sink and die within them, at the apprehension of so many and great dangers
and difficulties. Many an hard storm they ride out, and many streights and
troubles they here encounter with: But at last they arrive at their desired and
long expected Haven, and then Heaven rings and resounds with their joyful
acclamations. And how can it be otherwise, when as soon as ever they set foot
upon that glorious Shore, Christ himself meets and receives them with a Come ye
blessed of my Father? Matthew. 25. 34. O joyful voice! O much desired Word?
(says Par^us) What tribulation would not a man undergo for his Words sake!

Besides, then they are perfectly freed from all evils, whether of sin or
suffering, and perfectly filled with all desired good. Now they shall join with
that great Assembly, in the high praises of God. O what a day will this be! if
(says a worthy Divine) Diagoras died away with an excess of Joy,
Morning-Exercise, p. 651.
whilst he enbraced his three Sons that were crowned as Victors in the Olympic
Games in one day: And good old Simeon, when he saw Christ but in a body subject
to the insirmities of our natures cried out, Now let thy Servant depart in
peace; what unspeakable joy will it be to the Saints, to behold Christ in his
glory, and see their godly relations also, (to whose conversion, perhaps, they
have been instrumental) all crowned in one day with everlasting Diadems of
bliss! And if the stars did (as Ignatius says) make a Quire, as it were, about
that star that appeared at Christ's incarnation, and there be such joy in
Heaven at the conversion of a sinner: no wonder then, the Morning-stars sing
together, and the Sons of God shout for Joy, when the general Assembly meet in
Heaven; O how will the Arches of Heaven ring and echo, when the high praises
of God shall be in the mouth of such a Congregation! then shall the Saints be
joyfbl in glory, and sing aloud upon their Beds of everlasting Rest.

REFLECTION.
And is there such a day approaching for the Sons of God indeed! and have I [
authority] to call my self one of the number! John 1. 12. O then let me not
droop at present difficulties, nor hang down my hands when I meet with
hardships in the way. O my Soul, what a joyful day will this be! for at present
we are tossed upon an Ocean of troubles, fears, temptations; but these will make
Heaven the sweeter.

Cheer up then, O my Soul, thy Salvation is now nearer, than when thou first
believedsts Romans 13. 11. And it will not now be long ere I receive the end of
my Faith, 1 Pet. 1. 9. And then it will be sweet to reflect even upon these
hardships in the way. Yet a few days more, and then comes that blessed day thou
have so long waited and panted for. Oppose the glory of that day (O my Soul) to
thy present abasures and sufferings, as blessed Paul did, Ram. 1. 18. And thou
shall see how it will shrink them all up to nothing. Oppose the Inheritance
thou shall receive in that day, to thy losses for Christ now; and see how
joyfully it will make thee bear them, Heb. 10. 34. Oppose the honor that will
be put upon thee in that day, to thy present reproaches; and see how easiei^
will make them to thee, 1 Cor 4. 5. What condition can I be in, wherein the
believing thoughts of this blessed day cannot relieve me?

Am I poor, Here is that which answers Poverty, Jam. 3. 5. Hearken, my beloved
Brethren, has not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in Faith, and heirs
of the Kingdom?

Am I tempted? Here is relief against that, Revel. 12. 16. Now is come
Salvation and strength; for the Accuser of our Brethren is cast down, etc.

Am I deserted? Here is a remedy for that too, Revel. 22. 5. And there shall be
no night there, etc. Come then, my Soul, let us enter upon our Inheritance by
degrees, and begin the Life of Heaven upon Earth.

THE POEM.
When Solomon in Isreal first was King,
Heaven's Arches, Earth's Foundations seemed to ring
With joyful Exclamations! How much more
Will Heaven resound, when Saints are come ashore!
How will the ravished Souls transported be
At the first glimpse of Christ! Whom they shall see
In all his glory; and shall live and move
Like Salamanders, in the fire of love,
A flood of tears conveyed them to the Gate,
Where endless Ioys received them. Now the date
Of all their Sorrow's out; henceforth they walk
In Robes of Glory. Now there is no more talk
Of fears, temptations, of that snare, or this:
No Serpent in that Paradise does hiss.
No more desertions, troubled thoughts or tears;
Christ's full enjoyment supersedes those fears.
Delights of Princes Courts are all but toys
To these delights, these are transcendent joys,
The joys of Christ himself; and what they are,
An Angel's Tongue would stammer to declare.
Were our Conceptions clear, did their Tongues go
Unto their Ela, yet the Note's too low.
What! Paint the Son too bright! it cannot be;
Sure Heaven suffers no Hyperbole.
My thoughts are swallowed up, my Muse does does tire
And hang her Wings, Conception soars no higher.
Give me a place among thy Children there,
Although I lie with them in Dungeons here.
A Concluding Speech.
I Have now done, and am looking to Heaven for a blessing upon these weak
Labors: what use you will make of them, I know not; but this I know, that the
day is coming, when God will reckon with you for this, and all other helps and
means afforded to you. And if it be not improved by you, be sure it will be
produced as a witness against you. Sirs, I beg you in the Name of Christ,
before whom both you and I must shortly appear, that you receive not these
things in vain. Did I know what other lawful means to use that might reach your
hearts, they should not be in vain to you; but I cannot do God's part of the
work, nor yours. Only I request you all, both Masters, common Men, and all
others, into whose hands this shall come, that you will lay to heart what you
read; pray unto him that has the Key of the House of David, that opens and
no man shuts, to open your hearts to give entertainment to these truths.
Alas! If you apply it not to your selves, I have Iaboured to no purpose, the
Pen of the Scribe is in vain: But God may make such an application of them, in
one Storm or another, as may make your hearts to tremble. O Sirs! when Death
and Eternity look you in the face, Conscience may reflect upon these things to
your horror and amazement, and make you cry out, as Prove. 5. 12, 13. How have I
hated knowledge, and my heart despised reproof? And have not obeyed the voice
of my Teacher, nor inclined my ears to them that instructed me? And O what a
dreadful shriek will such Souls give, when the Lord opens their eyes, to see
that misery that they are here warned of! But if the Lord shall bless these
things to your Conversion, then we may say to you, as Moses did to Zebulun, the
Mariner's Tribe Deuteronomy. 33. 12. Rejoice Zebulun, in thy going out. The Lord will
be with you which way soever you turn you selves; and being in the bosom of
the Covenant, you are safe in the midst of all dangers. O! thou that art the
Father of Spirits, that formedst, and can easily reform the heart, open thou
the blind eye, unstop the deaf ear, let the Word take hold upon the heart. If
thou will but say the word, these weak Labors shall prosper, to bring home
many lost Souls unto thee. Amen.

FINIS
A Pathetical and Serious DISSWASIVE From the Horrid and Detestable Sins OF
Drunkenness, Swearing, Uncleanness, Forgetfulness of Mercies, Uiolation of
Promises; and Atheistical Contempt of Death. APPLIED By way of CAUTION to
Seamen, and now added as an APPENDIX to their NEW COMPASS. Being an Essay
toward their much desired Reformation: Fit to be seriously recommended to their
Profane Relations, whether Seamen or others, by all such as unfeignedly desire
their Eternal Welfare. By JOHN FLAVEL, Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

2 Cor. 5. 19. Knowing therefore the terrors of the LORD, we persuade men.
Ezekiel. 3. 19. Yet if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not from his wickedness,
nor from his wicked way, he shall die in his iniquity; but thou have delivered
thy soul. LONDON, Printed by Tho. Parkust and M. Fabian. School.

To the Right Worshipful Sir John Frederick, Knight, One of the Worshipful Aldermen
of the City of LONDON, and their Honorable BURGESS in the present PARLIAMENT.
And to the truly Religious and ever Honored, Mr. John Lovering, Of the City
of London, MERCHANT.
Much honored and esteemed,
ALthough Dedications are too often abused to a vain flattery, yet is there an
excellent use and advantage to be made of them: Partly to encourage Persons of
VVorth and Eminency to espouse the Interest of Religion themselves; and partly
to oblige those Readers, for whom such Books are principally intended, to a
diligent perusal of them, by interesting such Persons in them, for whom they
have great Respects, o^ on whom they have any dependence.

Upon the first account, a Dedication would be needless to you: for I am
persuaded, you do not only in your Judgment approve the Design I here manage,
viz. The Reformation of the profane and looser sort of our Seamen; but are
also heartily willing to improve your Interest to the uttermost for the
promotion of it. I cannot look upon you as Persons acted by that low and common
spirit that the most of your Profession are acted by, who little regard, if
they be good Servants to them, whether God have any Service from them, or no,
and if they pay them the Wages due for their work never think of the Wages they
are to receive for their sin. You are judged to be Persons of another spirit,
who do not only mind, but advance Christ's Interest above your own, and
negotiate for his Glory, as well as for your own gain: And yet, herein you
consult your own Interest as well as God's: Subordinata non pugnant. Your
Interest is never more prosperously managed, or abundantly secured, than when
it is carried on in a due subordination to God's. Their Reformation will
apparently tend to your advantage. Those sins of theirs, against which I have
here engaged, are the Jonahs in your Ships: it is sin that sinks them, and
drives them against the Rocks. One sinner destroys much good, Eccles. 8. 11.
How much more a lewd Crew of them conspiring to provoke God! The death of their
Lusts, is the most probable means to give life to your Trade. And as these
Counsels prosper in their hearts, so will your Business thrive in you hands.
Piety and Prosperity are married together in that Promise, Psalm. 1. 3. Onesimus
was never so profitable a Servant to Philemon, as when he became his Brother in
a Spiritual, as well as his Servant in a Civil Capacity. Philem. verse. 11. and
16. compared. And yet if your Interest were forced to step back, to give way to
Christ's; I hope you would (notwithstanding) rejoice therein. So that my
present business is, not so much to persuade you, whose hearts, I hope, God
ha^h already persuaded, to so good a work; as to make your Fames and Respects,
which are great among them, an innocent Bait to tempt them to their Duty. And
if either your Name or Interest may be useful to such an end, I presume I may
use them freely, and welcome: for, sure I am, they can never be put to a better
use.

Well then, I will make bold to send this small Adventure in your Ships; and
if the Return of it be but tke Conversion of one Soul to God, I shall reckon
that I have made a better Voyage than you, let your Returns be never so rich.

How these things will affect them, I know not. I do suppose it will produce
different effects upon them, according to the different tempers of their
spirits, and according as God shall command, or suspend the Blessing. Possibly
some will storm at the close and cutting Rebukes of the Word, (for most men's
Lusts are a great deal more sensible and tender than their Consciences) and
will fondly imagine that this necessary plainness tends to their reproach. But
if none but the guilty can be supposed to be angry at them, they will thereby
reproach themselves a great deal more than ever I intend to do.

I confess it is a bitter Pill, and compounded of many ^perative and strong
Ingredients, which do acute it; ^ut not a jot more than is necessary. I shall
beg the ^ssistance of your Prayers to God for them, and of your ^rave
Admonitions and Exhortations to them for God; which will much help its
Operation, and facilitate my Design, to do their Souls a piece of everlasting
Service; ^ith which Design I can truly say I even travel in pain (...) them.
Your assistance therefore in this good Work, ^ill put the highest Obligation
upon

Your most affectionate Friend and Servant to be commanded, JOHN FLAVEL.

A Sober Consideration Of the SIN of DRUNKENNESS.
IN the former Treatise I have endeavored to Spiritualize earthly Objects, and
elevate your thoughts to more sublime and excellent Contemplations; that
earthly things may rather be ^^ step, than a stop to Heavenly. You have therein
my best advice to guide you in your Course to that Po^^ of your Eternal Rest
and Happiness.

In this, I have given warning of some dangero^^ Rocks and Quicksands that lie
upon your left hand^ upon which millions of Souls have perished, and ^^thers
are wilfully running to their own preditio^^ Such are the horrid Sins of
Drunkenness, Uncleanness profane Swearing, Violation of Promises and
Engagements made to God, and Atheistical slighting and contempt of Death and
Eternity. All which I have (...) given warning of, and held forth a Light to
d^cover where your danger is. If after this you ^^^stinately prosecute your
Lusts, and will not be ^^^claimed; you perish without Apology, I have fre^^
mine own Soul.

Let none interpret this necessary plainness, as^^ reproach to Seamen, as if I
represented them (...) the world worse than they are. If upon that^^ count any
of them be offended, methinks these three or four Considerations should remove
that offense.

First, that if this close and plain dealing be necessary in order to your
Cure, and you will be offended thereat, it is better you should be offend^d than
God. Ministers are often put upon lamentable streights, they sail betwixt Sylla
and Charibdis; the wrat^ of God upon one side, if we do not speak (...), and
home, as the necessity of the Case ^equires; and Man's wrath, if we do: What
shall we do in this straight? Either God or you, it seems, must be offended;
and if it cannot be avoided, I shall rather hazard your anger than Gods, and
think it far more tolerable.

Secondly, If you did but see the necessity and end of this manner of dealing
with your Souls, you would not be offended. But put it into a more sensible
case, and you will see and acknowledge it presently. If I should see an
high-bult Wall giving way, and ready to fall upon you; would you be angry with
me, if by plucking you out of the danger, I should pluck your arm out of joint?
Certainly you would not. Why this is the case here: See Isa. 30. 13. Therefore
this Iniquity shall be unto you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a
high Wall, whose breaking comes suddenly, at as instant.

Thirdly, What a madness is it to abide in a condition over which all Woes and
Curses hang, and yet not be able to endure to hear of it! Why what will it
profit you to have your misery hid from your eyes, and kept from your ears a
little while? You must see this wrath, and hear louder vollies of Woes from
your own Consciences, If you remain in this condition. You cannot bear that
from us, which your Conscience will one of these days preach themselves to you,
and that in a more dreadful dialect than I have used here.

Fourthly, I do not charge these sins indifferently upon all Seamen. No, I
know there are some choice and good men amongst your men, that fear an Oath,
and hate even the garments spotted with the flesh, who are (I question not) the
credit and glory of our English Nation, in the eyes of Strangers that converse
with them. Nor yet do I think, that all that are wicked amongst them, are
equally guilty of all these evils; for though all that are graceless, be
equally under the dominion of Original Corruption, yet it follows not from
thence, that therefore actual sins must reign alike in them: There is great
difference, even among ungodly men themselves, in this respect; which
difference arises from their various Customs, Constitutions, Abilities,
Educations, and the different Administrations of the Spirit, in enlightening,
convincing, and putting checks upon Conscience: For though God be not the
Author, yet he is the Orderer of sin. And this makes a great disparity, even
among wicked men themselves. Some are persons of good Morals, though not
Gracious Principles, which produce a civil and sober, though not a holy and a
religious Life. And others, though they live in some one of these Lusts, yet
are not guilty of some others of them. For it is with Original Corruption, just
as it is with the sap of the Earth, which though it be the matter of all kind
of Fruits, yet in some ground it sorts better with one grain than with another:
And so in Plants, in one tree it becomes a Apple, in another a Cherry; even so
it is with this Original Corruption: In one man it runs most into Swearing, in
another into Uncleanness, in a third into Drunkenness. Lust is nothing else but
the corrupt appetite of the Creature to some sinful object: and therefore look
as it is with the Appetite with respect to Food, so it is with the vitiated
Appetites of Souls to sin. One man loves this Food best, and another that;
there is endless variety in that, and so in this.

Having spoken thus much to remove offense, I shall now beg you to peruse the
following Discourse. Consider what evidence these things carry with them.
Search the alleged Scriptures, see if they be truly recited and applied to the
case in hand: And if so, Oh tremble at the truth you read; bring forth your
Lusts that they may die the death: Will you not part with these abominable
practices till Death and Hell make the separation? Ah how much better is it for
you, that Grace should do it! And because many of you see not the danger, and
therefore prize not the Remedy, I do here Request all those that have the
Bowels of Pity in them for their poor Relations, who are sinking, drowning,
perishing, to spread these following Cautions before the Lord for a Blessing,
and then put them into their hands. And oh that all pious Masters would
persuade those that are under their charge to buy this ensuing Treatise, and
diligently peruse it. And the first Caution I shall give them, is this.

I. CAUTION.
TAke heed and beware of the detestable Sin of Drunkenness, which is a beastly
sin a voluntary madness, a sin that unmans thee, and makes thee like the beast
that perishes; yea, sets thee below the brute beasts, which will not drink to
to excess; or if they do, yet it is not their sin. One of the Ancients calls it,
Turbution capitis, subversio sensus tempestas linguae, procella corporis,
naufragium virtutus, amissio temporis, ins^nia voluntaria, blande demon, dulce
venenum, suave peccatum, quam quihabet, seipsum no habet, quam qui fecit,
peccatum non fecit, sed ipse totus est peccatatum. Aug. ad lacr. Viginis.
A distemper of the Head, a subversion of the senses, a tempest in the tongue,
a storm of the body, the shipwreck of virtue, the loss of time, a wilful
madness, a pleasant devil, a sugared poison, a sweet sin, which he that has,
has not himself, and he that commits it, does not only commit Sin, but he
himself is altogether sin. It is a Sin at which the most sober Heathens
blushed. The Spartans brought their Children to loath it, by showing them a
Drunkard, whom they gazed at as a-Monster: even Epicurus himself, who esteemed
happiness to consist in Pleasure, yet was temperate, as Cicero observes: Among
the Heathens, he was accounted the best man, that spent more Oil in the Lamp,
than Wine in the Bottle. Christianity could once glory in its professors:
Tertullian says of the Primitive Christians, They sat not down before they
prayed, they eat no more than might suffice hunger, they drank no more than was
sufficient for temperate men; they did so eat and drink, as those that
remembered they must pray afterward. But now it may blush to behold such beastly
sensualists adorning themselves with its name, and sheltring themselves under
its wings.

And amongst those that profess Christianity, how ordinarily is this sin
committed by Seamen? This insatiable Dropsy is a Disease that reigns
especially among the inferior and ruder sort of them. Some of them have gone
aboard drunk, and laid the ^oundation of their Voyage in sin. O what a
preparation is this! They know not whether ever they shall see the Land of
their Nativity any more; the next Storm may send them into Eternity: yet this
is the Farewe^ they take; this is their preparation to meet the Lord. And so in
their returns, notwithstanding the terrible and astonishing Works of the Lord,
which they have beheld with their eyes, and their mavelous preservation iu so
great and terrible extremities; yet thus do they requite the Lord, as soon as
their dangers are over, as if they had been delivered to commit all these
abominations. But a few hours, or days since, they were reeling to and fro upon
a stormy Ocean, and staggering like drunken men, as it is Psalm. 107. 27. and
now you may see them reeling and staggering in the streets, drowning the sense
of all those precious Mercies and Deliverances in their drunken Cups.

Reader, If thou be one that is guilty of this sin, for the Lords sake, bethink
thy self speedily and weigh, with the reason of a man, what I shall now say, in
order to thy Conviction, Humiliation and Reformation. I need not spend many
words, to open the nature of this sin to you: we all grant, that there is a
lawful use of Wine and strong Drink, Qui dedit aquam, dedit vinum.
to support Nature, not to clog it; to cure Infirmities, not to cause them.
Drink no longer water, but use a little Wine, for thy stomachs sake, and thine
often infirmities, says Paul to Timothy, 1 Timothy 5. 23. mark; drink not water,
but wine, sed modice (i. e.) medice; pro remedio, non pro delicius, says
Ambrose: that is, use it modestly, viz. Medicinally, not for pleasure, but for
Remedy. Yea, God allows it, not noly for bare necessity, but for cheerfulness
and alacrity, that the body may be more fit and expedite for duty, Prove. 31. 7.
But further no man proceeds, without the violation of Sobriety. When men sit
till Wine have inflamed them, and reason be disturbed (for Drunkenness is the
privation of reason, caused by immoderate drinking) then do they come under the
guilt of this horrid and abominable Sin. To the Satisfaction and refreshment of
nature, you may drink; for it is a part of the Curse, to drink, and not be
satisfied: but take heed you go no further, For Wine is a [mocker] strong Drink
is raging, and whosoever is deceived thereby is not wise, Prove. 20. 1. The
Throat is a slipery place; how easily may a sin slip through it into the Soul?
these sensual Pleasures have a kind of enchanting power upon the Soul; and by
custom gain upon it, till they have enslaved it, and brought it under their
power. Now this is the sin against which God has delivered so many Precepts,
and denounced so many Woes, in his Word: Ephesians. 5. 18. Be not drunken with wine
wherein is excess, Romans 13. 18. Not in rioting and drunkenness. not in
chambering and wantonness, Isa. 5. 11. Woe to them that rise early in the
morning, that they may follow strong drink; that continue until night, till
wine inflame them; with many other of dreadful importance. Now to startle thee
for ever from this abominable and filthy lust, I shall here propound to thy
Consideration these ten ensuing Arguments: and oh that they might stand in the
way, as the Angel did in Balaam's, when thou art in the prosecution of thy
sensual Pleasures! And the first is this.

Arg. 1. It should exceedingly dissuade from this Sin, to consider that it is
an high abuse of the Bounty and Goodness of God, in affording us those sweet
Refreshments, to make our Lives comfortable to us upon earth. In Adam we
forfeited all right, to all earthly, as will as heavenly Mercies. God might
have taken thee from the Womb, when thou wast a Sinner but of a span long, and
immediately have sent thee to thine own place: thou had no right to a drop of
water, more than what the bounty of God gave thee. And whereas he might have
thrust thee out of the world, as soon as thou came into it, and so all those
days of mercy thou have had on earth, might have been spent in howling and
unspeakable misery in Hell: Behold the Bounty and Goodness of God in thee; I
say, behold it, and wonder: He has suffered thee for so many years to live
upon the earth, which he has prepared and furnished with all things fit for
thy necessity and delight; out of the earth on which thou treadest, he brings
forth thy food and [VVine] to make glad thy heart, Psalm. 104. 14, 15. And do
thou thus requite the Lord? Has Mercy armed an enemy to fight against it with
its own Weapons? Ah that ever the Riches of his Goodness, Bounty, and Long
s^ffering (all which are arguments to lead thee to repentance) should be thus
abused! If God had not been so bountiful, thou could not have been so sinful.

Arg. 2. It degrades a man from the honor of his Creation, and equalizeth him
to the beast that perishes. Wine is said to take away the heart, Hos. 4. 11.
(i. e.) the wisdom and ingenuity of a man, and so brutifies him; as
Nebuchadnezzar, who lost the heart of a man, and had the heart of a beast given
him, Dan. 4. 32. The heart of a man has is generosity and sprightliness, brave
vigorous spirit in it, capable of, and fitted for noble and worthy actions and
employments; but his lust effeminates quenches and drowns that masculine vigor
in the puddle of excess and sensuality. For no sooner is a man brought under
the dominion of this Lust, but the government of Reason is renounced, which
should exercise a coercive power over the Affections; and all is delivered up
into the hand of Lust and Appetite; and so they act, not by discretion and
reason, but by Lust and Will, as the Beasts do by Instinct. The spirit of Man
entertains it self with intellectual and chaste Delights, the soul of a Beast is
only fitted for such low, sensitive and dreggie Pleasures. Thou have something
of the Angel, and something of the Beast in thee; thy Soul partakes of the
nature of Angels, thy Body of the nature of Beasts: Oh how many pamper the
Beast, while they strave the Angels! God in the first Chaper, put all the
Creatures in subjection to thee; by this Lust thou put thy in self
Subjection to the creature, and art brought under his power, 1 Cor. 6. 12. If
God had given thee the feet or head of a beast, Oh what a misery would thou
have esteemed it! And is it nothing to have the heart of a Beast? Oh consider
it sadly.

Arg. 3. It is a Sin by which thou greatly wrongest and abuses thine own Body.
The Body is the Souls Instrument, it is as the Tools are to a skilful
Artificer, this Lust both dulls and spoils it, so that it is utterly unfit for
any service of him that made it. Thy body is a curious piece. not made by a
word of command, as other Creatures, but by a word of counsel, I am fearfully
and wonderfully made, and curiously wrought, (says the Psalmist) Psalm. 139.
14. or as the Vulgar: Ace pictus sum, Painted as with a Needle, like a Garment
of Needlework of diverse colors, richly embroydered. Look how many members, so
many wonders. There are Miracles enough (says one) betwixt head and foot, to
fill a volume. There is (says another) such curious workmanship in the eye,
that upon the first sight of it some Atheists have been forced to acknowledge a
God; especially that fifth Muscle in the eye is wonderful, whereby (as a
learned Columb. de re Anat.
Author observes) Man differs from all other Creatures, who have but four;
one to turn the eye downward, a second to hold it forward, a third to move it
to the right hand, a fourth to the left; but none to turn it upward as a man
has. Now judge in thy self, did God frame such a curious piece, and enliven it
with a Soul, which is a spark, a ray of his own light, whose motions are so
quick, various and indefatigable, whose flights of reason are so transcendent,
did God, think thou, send down this curious piece, the top and glory of the
Creation, the Index and Epitome of the whole world, Eccl. 12. 2. did God (I
say) send down this picture of his own perfection, to be but as a striner for
meats and drinks, a spung to suck in Wine and Beer? Or can thou answer for
the abuse and destruction of it? By this excess thou fillest it with
innumerable diseases under which it languisheth; and at last thy life, like a
lamp extinguisnt, being drowned with to much Oil. Infinite Diseases are
begotten by it (says Zanch.) hence come Apoplexies, Infinitae morborum gener^^
inden^scuntur, Apple^^^, Paralyses, Ar^^rides, etc. Ille op^imus me dicus sibi,
qui modicus cibi. Aug.
Gouts, Palfies, sudden Death, trembling of the hands and legs; herein they
bring Cain's curse upon themselves, says Ambrose. Drunkenness slays more then
the Sword. Oh! what a terrible thing will in be to consider upon a Deathbed,
that these pangs and aches are the fruits of thy Intemperance and Excess! Who
has woe* Who has sorrows Who has contention? Who has babbling? Who has
wounds without cause? Who has redness of eyes? They that tarry long at Wine,
they that go to seek mixed Wine, Prove. 23. 29, 30. By this Enumeration, and
manner of Interrogation, he seems to make it a difficult thing to recount the
miseries that Drunkenness loads the outward man with: for look as Vermin
abound where there is store of Corn, so do Diseases in the bodies of Drunkards,
where crudities do so abound: Now methinks if thou have no regard to thy poor
Soul, or the glory of God; yet such a sensible Argument as this, from thy body,
should move thee.

Arg. 4. Drunkenness wastes and scatters thine estate, Proverty attends excess:
the Drunkard shall be clothed with Rags, and brought to a morsel of bread.
Solomon has read thy fortune, Prove. 21. 17. He that loves Wine and Oil shall
not be rich, Luxury and Beggary are seldom far asunder. When Diogenes heard a
Drunkards house cried to be sold; I thought, quoth he, it would not be long ere
he vomited up his house also. The Hebrew word (...) and the Greek word (...),
which signify Luxury; the former is compounded of two words, which signify,
Thou shall be poor; and the latter signifies the losing of the possession of
that good which is in our hand. The Drunkard and the Glutton shall surely come
to poverty, Prove. 23. 21. In the Hebrew it is, He shall be disinherited, or
disposessed. It does not only dispossess a man of his Reason, which is a rich
and fair inheritance given to him by God, but it also dispossesses him of his
estate: it wastes all that either the provident care of thy Progenitors, or the
blessing of God upon thine own industry, has obtained for thee. And how will
this sting like and Adder, when thou shall consider it? Apicius the Roman,
hearing that there were seven hundred Crowns only remaining of a fair estate,
that his Father had left him, fell into a deep Melancholy, and fearing want,
hanged himself, says Seneca. And not to mention the miseries and sorrows they
bring hereby upon their Families, drinking the tears, yea, blood of their Wives
and Children: Oh what an account will they give to God, when their reckoning
day comes! Believe it, Sirs, there is not a shilling of your estates, but God
will reckon with you for the expense thereof. If you have spent it upon your
lu^ts, while the necessity of your families, or the poor, called upon you for
it; I should be loath to have your account to make, for a thousand times more
than ever you possessed. O woeful expense, that is followed with such dreadful
reckonings!

Arg. 5. Consider what vile and ignominious Characters the Spirit of God has
put upon the subjects of this sin. The Scripture every where notes them for
infamous, and most abominable persons. When Eli supposed Hannah to be drunken,
Count not thy handmaid a daughter of Belial, said she, 1 Samuel 1. 16. Now a Son
or daughter of Belial is, in Scripture Language, the vilest of men or women. So
Psalm. 69. 12. They that sit in the gate, speak against me, and I am the Song of
Drunkards, (i. e.) of the basest and vilest of men, as the opposition plainly
shows; for they are opposed to them that sit in the gate, that is, honorable
persons. The Lord would have his people shun the society of such, as a pest.
Not to eat with them, 1 Cor. 5. 11. Yea, the Scripture brands them with
Atheism; they are such as have lost the sense and expectation of the Day of
Judgment; mind not another world, nor do they look for the coming of the Lord,
Matthew. 24. 27, 28. He says the Lord delayeth his coming, and then falls a
drinking with the drunken. The thoughts of that day will make them leave their
Cups, or their Cups will drown the thoughts of such a Day. And will not all the
contempt, shame and infamy, which the Spirit of God has poured on the head, of
this sin, cause thee to abhor it? Do not all Godly, yea Moral Persons, abhor
the Drunkard? Oh methinks the shame that attends it, should be as a fence to
keep thee from it.

Arg. 6. Sadly consider, there can be nothing of the sanctifying Spirit in a
soul that is under the dominion of this lust; for upon the first discovery of
the Grace of God, the Soul renounces the Government of Sensuality. The Grace of
God that brings Salvation, teaches men to live soberly, Tit. 2. 11, 12. That
is one of its first effects. Drunkenness indeed may be found among Heathens,
that are lost in the darkness of Ignorance; but it may not be once named among
the Children of the Day. They that be drunken are drunken in the night; but let
us that are of the day be sober, 1 These. 5. 7, 8. And the Apostles often oppose
Wine and the Spirit as things incompatible, Ephesians. 5. 16. Be not drunk with Wine
wherein is excess, but be filled with the Spirit. So Jude 19. Sensual, not
having the Spirit. Now what a dreadful Consideration is this: If any man have
not the Spirit of Christ the same is none of his, Rom 8. 9. Sensual persons
have not the Spirit of Christ, and so can be none of his. It Is true, Noah, a
Godly man, once fell into this sin, but as Theodoret says, and that truly, it
proceeded ab inexperientiae non ab intemperantia, from want of experience of
the force and power of the Grape, not from Intemperance; and besides, we find
not that ever he was again overtaken with that sin; but thou know it, and
yet persistest. O wretched Creature! the Spirit of Christ cannot dwell in thee.
The Lord help thee to lay it to heart sadly.

Arg. 7. It Is a Sin over which many direful woes and threats hang in the Word,
like so many lowering clouds, ready to power down vengeance upon the heads of
such Sinners. Look as the condition of the Saints is compassed round with
Promises, so is yours with Threatenings, Isai. 5. 11. Woe to them that rise up
early in the morning, that they may follow strong drink, and continue until
night, until Wine inflame. So Isai. 28. 1, 2. Woe to the Crown of Pride, to the
Drunkards of Ephraim, etc. With many other, too long to enumerate here. Now
consider what a fearful thing it is to be under these woes of God: Sinner, I
beseech thee, do not make light of them, for they will fall heavy: assure thy
self, not one of them shall fall to the ground: they will all take place upon
thee, except thou repent.

There are woes of Men, and woes of God: Gods woes are true woes, and make
their condition woeful to purpose on whom they fall. Other woes (as one says)
do but touch the skin; but these strike the Soul; other woes are but temporal,
these are eternal; others do only part betwixt us and our outward comforts,
these betwixt God and us for ever.

Arg. 8. Drunkenness is a leading sin, which has a great retinue and attendence
of other sins waiting on it, it is like a sudden Land-flood, which brings a
great deal of dirt with it. So that look as Faith excels among the Graces,
because it enlivens, actuates, and gives strength to them; so is this among
sins. It is not so much a special sin against a single Precept of God, as a
general violation of the whole Law, (says accurate Amesius.) It does not only
call off the guard, but warms and quickens all other Lusts, and so exposes the
Soul to be prostituted by them. (1.) It gives occasion, yea, is the real cause
of many contentions, and fatal quarrels, Prove. 23. 29. Who has Woe* Who has
sorrow, Who has [contention] babbling, wounds without cause? They that tarry
long at the wine, etc. Contentions and Wounds are the ordinary effects of
drunken meetings: when Reason is deposed, and Lust heated, what will not men
attempt? (2.) Scoff and reproaches of the ways and people of God. Psalm. 69. 12.
David was the Song of the Drunkards. (3.) It Is the great incendiary of Lust:
You shall find rioting and drunkenness joined with chambering and wantonness,
Romans 13. 13. Nunquam ego ebrium castum putabo, says Hierome, I will never
think a drunkard to be chaste. Solomon plainly tells us, what the issue will
be, Prove. 23. 33. Thine eyes shall behold a strange woman, and thy heart shall
utter perverse things, speaking of the Drunkard. It may be called Gad, for a
troop follows it. Hence one aptly calls it, The Devils bridle, by which he
turns the sinner which way he pleases: he that is overcome by it, can
overcome no other sin.

Arg. 9. But if none of the former Considerations can prevail, I hope these two
last may, unless all sense and tenderness be lost. Consider therefore in the
9th place, That Drunkards are in Scripture marked out for Hell: the Characters
of Death are upon them. You shall find them pinioned with other Sons of death,
1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Know ye not, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God? Be not deceived: Neither Fornicaters, nor Idolaters, nor
adulterers, nor effeminate, nor Abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor
Thieves, nor Covetous, nor [Drunkards,] nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall
inherit the Kingdom of God. Oh dreadful thunderbolt! He is not asleep but dead,
that is not startled at it. Lord, how are guilty sinners able to face such a
Text as this is! Oh Soul! Dare thou for a superfluous Cup adventure to drink a
Cup of pure unmixed wrath? Oh think when the Wine sparkles in the glass, and
gives its color, think, I say, what a Cup of trembling is in the hand of the
Lord for thee. Thou will not now believe this; Oh but the day is coming, when
thou shall know the price of these brutish pleasures. Oh it will then sting
like an Adder. Ah! this short-lived beastly pleasure is the price for which
thou sellest Heaven, and rivers of pleasure that are at Gods right hand.

Obj. But I hope I shall repent, and then this Text can be no bar to my
Salvation.

Sol. True, if God shall give thee Repentance, it could not. But in the last
place, to awaken thee thoroughly, and startle thy secure Conscience, which
Sensuallity has brawned and cauterized, let me tell thee.

Arg. 10. That it is a sin out of whose power few or none are ever rescued or
reclaimed. On this account it was that Saint Augustine called it the Pi^ of
Hell: he that is addicted to this Sin, becomes incurable (says a Reverend
Divine) for seldom, or never, have I known a Drunkard recalled. Ames, de con^^*
p. 139.
And its power to hold the soul in subjection to it, lies in two things
especially: (1) as it becomes habitual; and habits are not easily broken; be
pleased to view an Example in the case, Prove. 23. 35. They have stricken me,
shall thou say, and I was not sick; they have beaten me and I felt it not. When
I shall awake, I will seek it yet again. (2.) As it takes away the heart, Hos.
4 11. that is, the understanding, reason and ingenuity of a man, and so makes
him incapable of being reclaimed by counsel. Upon this account it was, that
Abigail would not speak less or more to Nabal, till the Wine was gone out of
him, 1 Samuel 25. 36, 37. plainly intimating, that no wholesome counsel can get
in, till the Wine be gone out. When one asked Cleostratus, whether he were not
ashamed to be drunken, he tartly replied; And are not you ashamed to admonish a
Drunkard? intimating that no wise man would cast away an admonition upon such
an one. And it not only renders them incapable of council for the time, but by
degrees it besots and infatuates them; which is a very grievous stroke from God
upon them, making way to their eternal ruin. So then you see upon the whole,
what a dangerous gulf the sin of Drunkenness is. I beg you for the Lords sake,
and by all the regard you have to your souls, bodies, and estates, beware of
it. Oh consider these ten Arguments I have here produced against it. I should
have proceeded to answer the several Pleas and Excuses you have for it. But I
mind brevity, and shall shut up this first Caution, with a very pertinent and
ingenious Poem of Mr. George Herbert, in his Temple.

Drink not the third glass, which thou can not tame
When once it is within thee; but before
May rule it as thou list, and pour the shame
which it will pour to thee, upon the floor.
It is most just to throw that on the ground,
Which would throw me there, if I kept the round.
He that is drunken may his Mother kill,
lie with his Sister; he has lost the Reins;
Is outlawed by himself: all kind of ill
did with the liquor slide into the veins.
The Drunkard forfeits Man, and does divest
All worldly right, save what he has by Beast.
Shall I to please another wine-sprung mind,
lose all my own? God has given me a measure
Short of his Can, and Body: must I find
a pain in that wherein he finds a pleasure?
Stay at the third glass; if thou lose thy hold,
Then thou art modest, but the wine grows bold.
If Reason move not Gallants, quit the room,
(all in a shipwreck shipped their several way.)
Let not a common Ruin thee entomb;
be not a Beast in courtesies, but stay;
Stay at the third Glass, or forgo the place;
Wine above all things does Gods stamp deface.
II. CAUTION.
THe Second Evil I shall deal with, is the evil of the Tongue, which, as St.
James says, is full of deadly Poison, Oaths, Curses, Blasphemies: and this
poison it scatters up and down the World in all places; an untamed member that
none can rule, Iam. 3. 7, 8. The fiercest of beasts have been tamed by Man, (as
the Apostle there observes) which is a relic of his old superiority and
dominion over them; But this is an unruly Member that none can tame, but he
that made it: no beast so fierce and crabbed as this is. It may be, I may be
bitten by it for my labor and endeavors to put a restraint upon it: but I
shall adventure it. My design is not to dishonor or exasperate you: But if my
faithfulness to God and you should accidentally do so, I cannot help that.

Friends, Providence oftentimes confines many of you together within the narrow
limits of a Ship, where you have time enough, and if your hearts were
sanctified, many choice advantages of edifying one another. O what transcendent
subjects does Providence daily present you with, to take up your discourses!
How many experiences of extraordinary mercies and preservations have you to
relate to one another, and bless the Lord for! Also, how many works of wonder
do you daily behold, who go down into the deeps? O what heavenly employment is
here for your Tongues! How should they be talking of all his wonders! How
should you call upon each other, as David did, Psalm. 66. 16. Come hither, and I
will tell you what God has done for my soul, at such a time, in such an
extremity. How should you call upon one another, to pay the vows your lips have
uttered in your distress? Thus should one provoke another to this Angelical
Work, as one lively Bird sets the whole Flock a Chirping.

But tell me, Sirs, Should a Man come abaord you at Sea, and ask of you, as
Christ did of those two Disciples going to Emmaus, Luke 24. 17. What manner of
communication is this that ye have hy the way? O what a sad account would he
have from most of you! It may be he should find one Jesting, and another
Swearing, a third Reviling Godliness and the Professors of it, so that it would
be a little Hell for a serious Christian to be confined to your Society. This
is not (I am confident) the manner of all. We have a company of more sober
Seamen, and blessed be God for them; but surely thus stands the case with most
of you. Oh what stuff is here from persons professing Christianity, and
bordering close upon the confines of Eternity, as you do!

It is not my purpose to write of all the diseases of the Tongue; that would
fill a Volume, and is inconsistent with my intended brevity. Who can recount
the evils of the Tongue? The Apostle says, It is a world of Iniquity, Jam. 3.
6. And if there be a world of Sin in one member, Who can number the Sins of all
the members? Laurentius reckons as many sins of the Tongue, as there are
Letters in the Alphabet. And it is an observable Note that one has upon Romans
3. 13, 14. That when Paul anatomizeth the natural Man there, he insisteth
longer upon the Organs of Speech, than all the other members. Their throat is
an open sepulcher, with their tongues they have used deceit, the poison of Asps
is under their Lips, their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness.

But to be short, we find the Spirit of God in Scripture comparing the Tongue
to a Tree, Prove. 15. 4. A wholesome Tongue is a Tree of Life. And words is the
fruit of the Tree, Isa. 57. 12. I create the fruit of the Lips. Some of these
Trees bear precious fruits, and it is a lovely sight to behold them laden with
them in their seasons, Prove. 25. 11. A word fitly spoken, is like Apples of
Gold in Pictures of Silver. Such a Tongue is a Tree of Life. Others of these
Trees bear evil Fruit, Grapes of Sodom, and Clusters of Gomorrah. I shall
only insist upon two sorts of these fruits, viz. (1.) Withered sapless fruit;
I mean, idle and unprofitable words. (2.) Rotten and corrupt fruit; I mean,
profane Oaths, and prophanations of the sacred Name of God. No fruit in the
world so apt to corrupt and taint, as the fruits of the Lips. When it is so,
the Scripture calls it (...), corrupt ^r rotten communication, Ephesians. 4. 29. To
prevent this, the Spirit of God prescribes an excellent way to season our
words, and keep them sweet and sound, that they may neither wither nor become
idle and sapless, nor putrify and become rotten, as profane words are, Col.
4. 6. Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt, that you may
know how to answer every man. Oh if the salt of Grace were once cast into the
fountain, the Heart, the streams must needs become more savory and pleasant, as
the waters of Marah when they were healed. My present work is to attempt the
cure of this double evil, of idle words, and profane Oaths, whereof thousands
among you are deeply guilty. I shall begin with the first, viz.

1. IDLE WORDS: that is, useless Chat, unprofitable Talk, that is not referred
any way to the glory of God: This is a common evil, and little regarded by most
men, but yet a sin of severer aggravations than the most imagine. Light words
weigh heavy in Gods balance.

Arg. 1. For first, the evil of them is exceedingly aggravated by this: They
abuse and prevert the Tongue, that noble member, from that employment and use
which God by the law of Creation designed it to. God gave not to man the Organs
and power of Speech (which is his excellency above the Beasts) to serve a
passion, or vain humor, to vent the froth and vanity of his spirit: but to
extol his Creator, and render him the praise of all his admirable and glorious
works. For though the Creation be a curious well tuned Instrument, yet man is
the Musician that must touch it and make the melody; this was the end of God in
forming those Instruments and Organs: but now hereby they are subject to Satan
and Lust, and employed to the dishonor of God that made them. God is pleased
to suspend the power of Speech (as we see in Children) till Reason begin to bud
in them; they have not the liberty of the one, till they have the use of the
other: which plainly shows, that God is not willing to have our words run waste.

Arg. 2. It is a sinful wasting of our precious time, and that puts a further
aggravation upon it. Consider, Sirs, the time of Life is but a little spot
betwixt two eternities. The long-suffering God wheels about those glorious
Celestial Bodies over your heads in a constant revolution, to beget time for
you; and the preciousness of every minute thereof results from its use and end:
It is intended and afforded as a space to you to repent in, Rev. 2. 21. And
therefore great things depend upon it: no less than your eternal Happiness or
Misery, hangs upon those precious opportunities. Every minute of it has an
influence into Eternity. How would the damned value one hour of it, if they
might enjoy it! The business you have to do in it, is of unspeakable weight and
concernment; this great work, this Soul-work, and Eternity-work lies upon your
hands, you are cast into streights of time about it. And if so, Oh what an evil
is it in you, to waste it away thus to no purpose!

Arg. 3. It Is a sin that few are sensible of, as they are of other sins, and
therefore the more dangerous. It Is commonly committed, and that without checks
of Conscience. Other sins, as Murder and Adultery, though they be horrid sins,
yet are but seldom committed, and when they are, Conscience is startled at the
horridness of them: Few, except they be prodigious wretches indeed, dare make
light of them. But now for idle and vain words, there are inumerable swarms of
these every day, and few regard them. The intercourse betwixt the heart and
tongue is quick; they are quickly committed, and as easily forgotten.

Arg. 4. And then 4thly, They have mischievous effects upon others. How long
does an idle word or foolish jest stick in men's minds, and become an occasion
of much sin to them? The froath and vanity of thy Spirit, which thy tongue so
freely vents among thy vain Companions, may be working in their minds, when
thou art in the dust, and so be transmitted from one to another; for unto that
no more is requisite than an objective existence of those vain words in their
memories. And thus may thou be sinning in the persons of thy Companions, when
thou art turned into dust. And this is one reason that Suarez gives for a
general Judgment, after men have past their particular judgment, immediately
after their death, Because (says he) after this, multitudes of sins by their
means will be committed in the world,, for which they must yet be judged to a
fuller measure of wrath. So that look as many of the precious Servants of God
now in glory, have left many weighty and holy Sayings behind them, by which
many thousands of souls have been benefitted, and God glorified on Earth, after
they had left it* So thou leavest that vanity upon the mind of others behind
thee, by which he may be dishonored to many generations.

And then 2. For PROFANE OATHS, the corrupt fruit of a graceless heart; Oh
how common are these among you! yea, the habit of swearing (...) so
strengthened in some, that they have lost all Sens^^^ and Conscience of the
sin. Now, Oh that I might prevail with you to repent of this wickedness, an^
break the force of this customary evil among you* Will you but give me the
reading of a few page^ more; and weigh with the reason of men, what yo^ read?
If you will not hearken to counsel, it is a fat^ sign, 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16. and
you shall mourn for the obstinacy hereafter, Prove. 5. 12, 13. Desperate that
evil that scorns the remedy. And if you ha^^ patience to read it, the Lord give
you an heart (...) consider what you read, and obey the Counsels of God; or
else it were better thine eyes had never ^een these lines. Well then, I beseech
you consider,

Arg. 1. That profane Oaths are an high abuse of the dreadful and sacred Name
of God, which should neither be spoken or thought of without the ^^eepest awe
and reverence. It is the taking of that ^acred Name in vain, Exodus 20. 7. Now
God is ^xceeding tender and jealous over his Name: it is ^ear to him: his Name
is dreadful and glorious, Malac. 1. 14. I am a great King, and my Name is
^readful among the Heathens. The Heathen would ^ot ordinarily mention the names
of such as they ^everenced. Suetonius says, that Augustus pro^ibited the
common use of his name: he thought it (...) indignity to have his name tossed up
and down in ^very one's mouth. Yea, says Dr. Willet on Exodus (...). it was a
use among them to keep secret such ^ames as they would have in reverence. They
durst ^ot mention the name of Demogorgon, whom they ^eld to be the first God:
They thought when he ^as named, the earth would tremble. Also the ^^me of
Murcurius Trismegistus was very sparingly ^ed, because of that reverence the
people had for (...). Now consider, shall poor worms be so tender (...)
preserving the reverence of their names? Shall (...) Heathens dare to use the
names of their Idols; (...) shall the sacred and dreadful name of the true
(...) be thus bandied up and down by tongues of his (...) Creatures? Will not
God be avenged for these ^ses of his Name? Be confident, it shall one day (...)
sanctified upon you in judgment, because ye did (...) sanctify it according to
your duty.

Arg. 2. Swearing is a part of the Worship of (...), and therefore profane
swearing can be no less than the profanation of his worship, and robbing^^ him
of all the glory he has thereby, Deuteronomy. 6. 13.^ Thou shall fear the Lord thy
God, and serve him, and shall swear by his Name. So Jer. 4. 2. Thou shall
swear, the Lord lives, in Truth, in Judgment, and (...) Righteousness. If a
man swear by God after thi^ manner, God is exceedingly glorified thereby* Now
that you may see what revenue of Glory Go^^^ has from this part of his
worship, and how it be^omes a part of Divine Worship; you must know* That an
Oath is nothing else, but The asking o^ desiring a Divine Testimony, for the
confirmation of the truth of our testimony. Heb. 6. 16. For men veril^ swear by
the greater, and an Oath for [ confirmation] is to them an end of all strife.
The corruption o^ humane nature by the fall, has made man such a fals^ and
^ickle creature, that his single testimony cannon be sufficient Security for
another, (especially i^ weighty Cases) to rest upon: and therefore i^ swearing,
he calls ^od for a witness of the trut^ of that he affirms, or promises. I
say, calls Go^ to be a witness of the truth of what he says, becau^^ he is
Truth it self, and cannot lie, Heb. 6. 18. No^ this calling for, or asking of a
Testimony from Go^ makes an Oath become a part of Gods Worshi^ and gives him a
great deal of Glory and Honor* For hereby he that swears, acknowledges
(...) Omnisciency, and Infallible Truth and Righteousne^^^ His Omnisciency is
acknowledged; for by this appe^^ to Him, we imply and acknowledge him to be
(...) Searcher of the hearts and reins; that he knows (...) secret intents and
meaning of our spirits. His (...) preme and Infallible Truth is also
acknowledged; (...) this is manifestly carried in an Oath, That thoug^ am a
false and deceitful Creature, and my affirmati^^ cannot obtain universal and
full credence, yet that is greater than I, by whose Name I swear, cannot
deceive. And lastly, his Righteousness is acknowledged in an Oath: for he that
swears does either expressly or implicitly put himself under the curse and
wrath of God, if he swear falsely, Every Oath has ^n execration or imprecation
in it, Neh. 10. 29. They entered into a curse and an oath to walk in Gods law.
And so 2 Cor. 1. 23. I call God for a record upon my soul. And the usual form
in the Old Testament was, The Lord do so to me, and more also. Now hereby God
has the Glory of his Righteousness and Justice given him by the Creature, and
therefore it is a ^hoice part of the Divine Worship, or of that homage which a
creature owes to his God. And if this ^e so, then how easily may the sin of
rash and pro^ane Oaths be hence argued and aggravated? The more excellent any
thing is by an institution of God, ^y so much more horrid and abominable is the
abuse ^hereof. O how often is the dreadful Majesty of Heaven and Earth called
to witness to frivolous things! and often to be a witness of our rage and fu^y!
as 1 Samuel 14. 39. Is it a light thing to rob him of his peculiar Glory, and
subject poor souls to his ^urse and wrath, who has said, He will be a swift
wit^ess against you? Mal. 3. 5. Your tongues are nimble (...) committing this
sin, and God will be swift in pun^shing for it.

Arg. 3. It is a sin which God has severely threatn^d to punish, and that with
temporal and corporal ^lagues: For by reason of Oaths, the land mourns, Hos. ^.
2, 3. That is, it brings the heavy Judgment of God upon whole Nations, under
which they shall ^ourn. And in Zech. 5. 2, 3, 4. you have there (...) Roll of
cuses, (i. e.) a Catalogue of judgments and ^oes, the length thereof twenty
Cubits (i. e. ten yards.) ^o set out the multitude of woes contained in it*
it is a long Catalogue: and A flying Rill, to denote the swiftness of it; it
flies toward the house of the Swearer, it makes haste. The Judgments that are
written in it linger not, but are even in pain to be delivered. And this flying
Roll full of dreadful Woes, flies and enters into the house of the Swearer: and
it shall therein remain, says the Lord, it shall cleave to his family; none
shall claw off these woes from him: And it shall consume the Timber thereof,
and the Stones thereof, ( i. e.) bring utter subvertion, ruin, and desolation
to his House. O dreadful sin! What a desolation does it make! Your Mouths are
full of Oaths, and your Houses shall be full of Curses. Woe to that wretched
Family into which this flying Roll shall enter; Woe, I say, to the wretched
Inhabitants thereof. The Curse of the Lord (says Solomon) is in the house of
the wicked; but He blesses the [habitation] of the just, Prove. 3. 33.
Tuguriolum, (i. e.) says Mercer, his poor little Tenement or Cottage. There is
a Blessing, the promises like Clouds of Blessing, dwell over it, and drop
mercies on it: but a Curse is in the house of the wicked. Ah, how many stately
Mansious are there, in which little other language but Oaths and Curses are
heard! and these are as so much Gunpowder laid under the foundation of them,
which when Justice shall set fire to, Oh what work will it make! Woe to the
Inhabitants thereof. Well then, break off this sin by Repentance, unless you
intend to ruin your Families, and bring all the Curses of God into your
Houses. If you have no pity for your selves, yet pity your Posterity; have
mercy for your Wives and Children, don't ruin all for the indulgence of a lust*

Arg. 4. But that is not all; It brings Soul-judgments and spiritual plagues
upon you: It brings Hel^ along with it. And if thou be not afraid to sin, yet
methinks thou should be afraid to burn if the love of God can work nothing
upon thy brawny heart, yet methinks the Terrors of the Lord should startle and
affright it. To this purpose, I beseech you, weigh these Scriptures; and
methinks, unless God has lost all his Authority with you, and Hell all its
Terrors, it should startle you. The first is that dreadful Scripture, James 5.
12. But above all things, my Brethen, swear not; neither by Heaven, neither by
the Earth, neither by any other oath, but let your yea, be yea; and your nay,
nay; lest ye fall into [Condemnation.] O view this Text seriously. Methinks it
should be like the ^ingers that came forth and wrote upon the wall, that
dreadful Sentence that changed the Countenance of a King, and that in the
height of a frolic humor, and made his Knees smite together. Mark, [ Above
all things] a form of vehemence and earnestness, like that, Ephesians. 6. 16. But
above all, taking the shield af Faith. As Faith has a prelation there before
all the Graces, so Swearing here before all other Vices. [ Swear not] (i. e.)
vainly, rashly, profanely; for otherwise it is a lawful thing, and a part of
Gods worship, as I have showed: but swear not vain Oaths, by the Creatures,
Heaven, or Earth, etc. Which is to advance the creature into the room of God. A
sin to which the Jews were much addicted. But, Let your yea, be yea! and nay,
nay? (i. e.) accustom your selves to short and plain Affirmations and
Negations, to a simple and candid expression of your minds. And the thundering
Argument that backs it, is this; [ lest ye fall into Condemnation] (i. e.) lest
for these things the Judge of Heaven and Earth pass a Sentence of condemnation
to Hell upon you. Oh Sirs Dare you touch with this hot iron? Dare you from
henceforward commit that Sin, that you know will bring you under the
condemnation and judgment of God? Do you know what it is for a soul to be cast
at Gods bar? Did you never see a poor malefacter tried at the Assizes, and
observe how his face gathers paleness, how his Legs tremble, and Death displays
its colors in his cheeks, when sentence is given upon him? But what is that to
Gods condemnation? What is a Gallous to Hell? Another Text I would commmend to
your consideration is that Exodus 20. 7. The Lord will not hold him guiltless
that takes his Name in vain. Where vain Oaths are especially included. Now
what does God mean, when He says, He will not hold him guiltless? The meaning
is plain, his sins shall be reckoned and imputed to him, they shall lie upon
his Soul; he shall be bound over to answer God for them. O terrible sentence!
What Soul can bear it, or stand before it! Blessed is the man (says David) to
whom the Lord imputes not inquity. Surely then, cursed is that man, to whom
God will impute them. And to the Swearer they shall all be imputed, if he break
not off his sin by repentance, and get a Christ the sooner. O Soul! How dare
thou think of going before the Lord with the guilt of all thy sins upon thee?
When Christ would administer the very spirit of Joy in one sentence to a poor
Sinner, Matthew. 9. 4. He said, Son be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven. And
when God would contract the sum of all misery into one word, He says, His sins
shall lie down with him in the dust, Job 20. 11. Ah soul! One of these days
thou shall be laid on thy Deathbed, or see the waves that shall entomb thee
leaping and roaring upon every side; and then thou will surely have other
thoughts of the happiness that lies in remission of sin, than thou have now.
Observe the most incorrigible Sinner then; hark how he sighs, and groans, and
cries; Ah Lord! and must I die? And then see how the tears trickle down his
Cheeks, and his heart ready to burst within him. Why, what is the matter? Oh,
the Lord will not pardon him, he holds him guilty. If he were sure his sins
were forgiven, then he could die; but oh! to appear before the Lord in them,
appalls him, daunts him, kills the very heart of him. He would fain cry for
mercy, but Conscience stops his mouth. Oh, says Conscience, how can thou
move that tongue to God in prayer for mercy, that has so often rent and torn
his glorious Name, by Oaths and Curses? Sirs! I pray you, do not make light of
these things: they will look wishly upon you one of these days, except ye
prevent it by sound conversation.

Arg. 5. And then lastly, to name no more, I pray you consider, that a custom
of vain words and profane Oaths, is as plain an indication and discovery of an
unregenerate Soul, as any in the world. This is a sure ^ign thou art none of
Christ's, nor have any thing to do with the promises and privileges of his
people: for by this the Scripture distinguishes the state of Saints and
Sinners, Eccl. 9. 2. There is one event to the righteous, and to the wicked; to
the clean, and to the unclean; to him that sacrifices* and to him that
sacrifices not: as is the good, so is the sinner: and he that swears, as he
that fears an Oath. Mark; he that swears, and he that fears an Oath, do
as manifestly distinguish the Children of God from wicked men, as clean and
unclean, righteous and wicked, sacrificing* and not sacrificing This fruit of
the tongue plainly shows what the tree is that bears it, Isai. 2. 6. The vile
person will speak of villainy; and out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth
speaks. Loquere, ut videam, said one; Speak, that I may see what you are. Look
what is in the heart that is vented by the Tongue: where the treasures of Grace
are in the Heart, words ministering Grace will be in the Lips, Psalm. 37. 30. The
mouth of the righteous speaks wisdom, and his tongue talks of Judgment; for
the law of the Lord is in his heart. To this sense we must understand that
Scripture, at. 12. 27. By thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words
thou shall be condemned. Certainly, Justification and Condemnation, in the day
of Judgment, shall not pass upon us merely for the good or bad words we have
spoken; but according to the state of the Person, and frame of the heart. But
the meaning is, that our words shall justify or condemn us in that day, as
evidence of the state and frame of the Soul. We use to say, such Witnesses
hanged a man; the meaning is, the Evidence they gave cast and condemned him. O
think seriously of this; if words evidence the state of the Soul, what an woeful
state must thy Soul needs be in, whose mouth overflows with Oaths and Curses!
How many witnesses will be brought in, to cast thee in the great Day? Your own
tongue shall then fall upon you, as the expression is, Psalm. 64, 8. And out of
your own mouth, God will fetch abundant evidence to condemn you. And thus I
have opened unto you the evil of vain words, and profane Oaths; and presented
to your view their several aggravations. If by these things there be a
relenting pang upon thy heart, and a serious resolution of reformation, then I
shall commend these few helps or means to thy perusal, and conclude this Head.
And the first help is this.

Help. 1. Seriously fix in thy thoughts that Scripture, Matthew. 12. 36. But I
say unto you, that every idle word that Men shall speak, they shall give an
account thereof in the day of Judgment. Oh let it soun^ in thine ears day and
night! Oh ponder them in thy heart. [ I say unto you] I that have always been
in the Fathers bosom, and do fully know his mind, I that am constituted the
Judge of quick and dead, and do fully understand the rule of Judgment; and the
whole process thereof, I say, and do assure you, that [ every idle word that
men shall speak,] (i. e.) every word that has not a tendency and reference to
the Glory of God though there be no other obliquity or evil in them than this,
that they want a good end. How much more then scurrilous Words, bloody Oaths
and Blasphemies! [ Men shall give an account thereof] that is, shall be cast
and condemned to suffer the wrath of God for them; as appears by that parallel
Scripture, 1 Pet. 4. 4, 5. For as the Learned observe, there is plainly a
Matalepsis in these words; The Antecedent, to give an account, is put for the
Consequent, punishment, and condemnation to hell fire; the certainty whereof
admits but of this one exception, viz. intervenient repentance, or a pardon
obtained through the blood of Christ here, before you be presented at that
judgment seat. Oh then, what a bridle should this Text be to thy extravagant
tongue! I remember Hierom was wont to say, Whether I eat or drink, or whatever
I do, methinks I still hear the sound of these words in mine ear, Arise ye
dead, and come to judgment. O that the sound of the words may be always in your
ears!

Help. 2. Consider before you speak* and be not rash to utter words without
knowledge. He th^^ speaks what he thinks not, speaks Hipocitically (...) he
that thinks not what to speak, sperks inconsi^^rately. You have cause to weigh
your words, before you deliver them by your tongue; for whether you do, or do
not, the Lord pondereth them. Records are kept of them; else you could not be
called to an account for them, as I showed you you must.

Help. 3. Resign up your Tongues to God every day, and beg him to guide and
keep it. So did David, Psalm. 141. 3. Set a watch, O Lord before my mouth, and
keep thou the door of my lips. Beg him to keep you from provocations and
temptations; or if you fall into them, entreat him for strength to rule your
spirits in them, that you may not be conquered by temptations.

Help. 4. But above all, labor to get your Souls cleansed and purified by
Faith, possessed with saving and gracious Principles: All other means will be
ineffectual without this. Oh see the vileness of thy nature, and the necessity
of a change to pass upon it* First make the tree good, and then his fruit good:
a new Nature will produce new words and actions. To bind your souls with Vows
and resolutions, while you are strangers to a regenerate work, is to bind
Sampson with green withs, whilst his locks remain upon his head. I will shut up
this with the Advice of that divine Poet, Mr. George Herbert it may be it may
affect thee, and run in thy thoughts when thou art alone.

Take not his Name, who made thy mouth, in vain;
it gets thee nothing, and has no excuse.
Lust and wine, plead a pleasure; avarice gain:
but the cheap Swearer, though his open sluice,
Lets his Soul run for naught, as little fearing.
Were I an Epicure, I could hate swearing.
When thou do tell another jest, therein
Omit the Oaths, which true Wit cannot need;
Pick out of tales the mirth, but not the sin.
He pares his apple, that will cleanly feed.
Play not away the virtue of that Name,
Which is thy best stake, when grief makes thee tame.
The cheapest sins most dearly punished are,
because to shon them also is so cheap:
For we have wit to mark them, and to spare.
O crumble not away thy Souls fair heap.
If thou will die, the gates of Hell are broad.
Pride, and full sins, have made the way a road.
III. CAUTION.
THe next danger I shall give you warning of, is the sin of Uncleanness; with
which, I fear, too many of the rude and looser sort of Seamen defile
themselves; and possibly, the temptations to this sin are advantaged, and
strengthened upon them more than others, by their condition and employments.
Let no Man be offended that I here give warning of this evil; I intend to
asperse no Man's person, nor raise up jealousy against any: but would
faithfully discharge my duty to all, and that in all things. It was the
complaint of Salvian many hundred years ago, Guber, Dei, lib. 4. salv.
that he could not speak against the Vices of men, but one or other would thus
object, There he meant me, he hit me; and so storm and fret. Alas (as he
replieth) it is not we that speak to you, but your own Conscience; we speak to
the Order, but Conscience speaks to the Person. I shall use no other Apology in
this case. That this Sin is a dreadful Gulf, a Quick-sand that has sucked and
destroyed thousands, is truly apparent, both from Scripture and Experience.
Solomon tells us, Prove. 22. 14. That it is a deep ditch, into which such as are
abhorred of the Lord shall fall. Oh the multitudes of dead that are there! And
if so, I cannot in duty to God, or love to you, be silent, where the danger is
so great. It is both needless, and besides my intention, here to insist largely
upon the explication of the particulars in which uncleanness is distributed:
the more ordinary and common sins of this kind are known by the names of
Adultery and Fornication: the latter is, when single persons come together, out
of the state of marriage; the former is, when at least one of the persons
committing uncleanness is contracted in marriage. This now is the evil I shall
warn you of. And that thou may never fall into this pit, I shall endeavor to
fence and hedge up thy way to it, by these ensuing Arguments: And Oh that the
light of every Argument may be powerfully reflected upon your Conscience! Many
men are very wise in generals, but very vain (...), in the reasonings, or
imaginations, as the Apostle calls them, Romans 1. 22. ( i. e.) in their
practical inferences. They are good at speculation, but bunglers at
application. But it is truth in the particulars, that, like an hot Iron,
pierces; and Oh that you might find these to be such in your Soul! To that end,
consider.

Arg. 1. The names and titles by which this sin is known in scripture, are very
vile and base. The Spirit of God, doubtless, has put such odious names upon
it, on purpose to deter and affright men from it. In general, it is called Lust;
and so (as one notes) it bears the name of its mother. It is Uncleanness in
the abstract, Nu^b. 5. 19. Filthiness it self; An abomination; Ezekiel. 22. 11.
And they that commit are called abominable, Revel. 21. 8. Varro says, the word
imports that which is not lawful to mention; or rather, abominable persons are
such as are not fit for the society of men, such as should be ^usht out of all
men's company: They are rather to be reckoned to beasts than man. Yea, the
Scripture compares them to the filthiest of beasts. even to Dogs: When
Ishbosheth charged this sin upon Abner, 2 Samuel 3. 8. Am I a Dogs head, (says
he) that thou chargest me with a fault concerning this woman? And in Deuteronomy. 23.
18. The hire of a whore, and the price of a dog, are put together. The
expression of this lust in words or gesture, is called neighing, Jer. 5. 8.
Even as fed horses do, that scatter their lust promiscuously. Or if the
Scripture speaks of them as men, yet it allows them but the external shape of
men, not the unde^standing of men. Among the Jews they were called Fools in
Israel, 2 Samuel 13. 13. and so Prove. 6. 32. Whosoever commits adultery with a
woman, lacks understanding. And sinners, Luke 7. 37. And behold a woman that
was a [ ^inner;] that is, an eminent notorious sinner: by which term, the
Scripture deciphers an unclean person; as if among sinners there were none of
such a prodigious stature in sin as they. And we find that when the spirit of
God would set forth any sin by an odious name, he calls it Adultery; so
Idolatry is called Adultery, Ezekiel. 16. 32. And indeed this spiritual and
corporal Adultery, oftentimes are found in the same persons. They that give
themselves up to the one* are by a righteous hand of God given up to the other,
as it is too manifestly and frequently exemplified in the World. So
earthly-mindedness has this name put upon it, o^ purpose to affright men from
it, Iam. 4. 4. Now certainly, God would never borrow the name of this sin to
set out the evil of other sins, if it were not most vile and abominable. It Is
called the sin of the Gentiles, or heathen, 1 These. 4. 5. And oh that we could
say, it were only among them that know not God! Now then, are you able to look
these Scriptures in the face, and not blush? Oh what a sin is this! Art thou
willing to be ranked with Fools, Dogs, Sinners, Heathens, and take thy lot with
them? God has planted that affection of shame in thy nature, to be as a guard
against such filthy lusts; it is a sin that has filthiness enough in it, to
defile the tongue that mentions it, Ephesians. 5. 3.

Arg. 2. It is a sin that the God of Heaven has often prohibited, and severely
condemned in the Word, which abundantly declares his abhorrence of it. You have
prohibition upon prohibition, and threatening upon threatening in the Word
against it. Exodus 20. 14. Thou shall not commit adultery. This was delivered
upon Mount Sinai, with the greatest solemnity and terror, by the mouth of God
himself. Turn to, and ponder the following Scriptures, among many others, Prove.
5. 2, 3, 4. Acts 5. 29. Romans 1. 24, 29. Romans 13. 13. 1 Cor. 6. 13, 14, 15, 16,
18. 2 Cor. 12. 21. Gal. 5. 29. Ephesians. 5. 3. Col. 3. 5. 1 These. ^* 2, 3, 4, 5.
Heb. 12. 16. Heb. 13. 4. All these, with many others, are the true sayings of
God; By them thou shall be tried in the last day. Now consider how terrible it
will be* to have so many words of God, and such terrible ones too, as most of
those are, to be brought in and pleaded against thy Soul in that day: mountains
and hills may depart, but these words shall not depart; He^ven and Earth shall
pass away, but not one tittle of the Word shall pass away. Believe it, Sinner,
as sure as the Heavens are over thy head, and the Earth under thy seet, they
shall one day take hold of thee, though we poor worms who plead them with thee,
die and perish, Zech. 1. 5, 6. The Lord tells us it shall not fall to the
ground. Which is a borrowed speech from a Dart that is flung with a weak hand;
it goes not home to the mark, but falls to the ground by the way. None of these
words shall so fall to the ground.

Arg. 3. It is a sin that defiles and destroys the body, 1 Cor. 6. 18. He that
commits adultery, sins against his own body. In most other sins the body
is but the Instrument, here it is the Object against which the sin is
committed; that body of thine, which should be the Temple of the holy Ghost, is
turned into a stye of filthiness; yea, it not only defiles, but destroys it.
Job calls it a fire that burns to destruction, Job 31. 12. or as the
Septuagint reads it, a fire that burns in all the Members. It is a sin that
God has plagued with strange and terrible diseases; that Morbus Gallicus, and
sudor Anglicus, and that Plica Polonica whereof you may read in Bolton's four
last things, page 30. and Sclater on Romans 1. 30. These were judgments sent
immediately by Gods own hand, to correct the new sins and enormities of the
world; for they seem to put the best Physicians besides their Books. Oh how
terrible is it to lie groaning under the sad effects of this sin? As Solomon
tells us, Prove. 5. 11. And thou mourn at the last, when thy flesh and thy body
are consumed. To this sense some expound that terrible Text, Heb. 13. 4.
Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled; but Whoremongers and
Adulterers God will judge: (i. e.) with some remarkable judgment inflicted on
them in this world: if it escape the punishment of men, it shall not escape the
vengeance of God. Ah! with what comfort may a man lie down upon a sick bed,
when the sickness can be looked upon as a Fatherly Visitation coming in Mercy?
But thou that shortenest thy life, and bring sickness on thy self by such a
sin, art the Devils Martyr; and to whom can thou turn in such a day for
comfort?

Arg. 4. Consider what an indelible blot it is to thy nature, which can never
be wiped away: though thou escape with thy life, yet as one says, thou shall be
burnt in the hand, yea, branded in the forehead. What a foul scar is that upon
the face of David himself, which abides to this day? He was upright in all
things, save in the matter of Uriah. And how was he slighted by his own
Children and servants after he had committed this sin? Compare 1 Samuel 2. 30.
with 2 Samuel 12. 10, 11. A wound and dishonor shall he get; and his reproach
shall not be wiped away. This is to give thine honor to another, Prove. 5. 9.
The shame and reproach attending it, should be a preservative from it. Indeed
the Devil tempts to it by hopes of secrecy and concealment; but though many
other sins lie hid, and possibly shall never come to light, until that day of
manifestation of all hidden things, yet this is a sin that is most usually
discovered. Under the Law, Cod appointed an extraordinary way for the discovery
of it, Numb. 5. 13. And to this day the Providence of God does often very
strangely bring it to light, though it be a deed of darkness. The Lord has
many times brought such persons either by terrors of Conscience, Frenzy, or
some other means, to be the publishers and proclaimers of their own shame. Yea,
observe this, says Reverend Mr. Hildersham on the Fourth of John, even those
that are most cunning to conceal and hide it from the eyes of the world, yet
through the just judgment of God, every one suspects and condemns them for it,
this dashes in pieces, at one stroke, that Vessel in which the precious
Ointment of a good name is carried. A fool in Israel shall be thy title; and
even Children shall point at thee.

Arg. 5. It scatters thy substance, und roots up the foundation of thy state.
Job 31. 12. It roots up all the increase. Strangers shall be filled with thy
wealth, and thy labors shall be in the house of a stranger. Prove. 5. 10. For
by means of a whorish woman, a man is brought to a morsel of bread. Prove. 6.
26. It gives rags for its Livery (says one:) and though it be furthered by the
fullness, yet it is followed with a morsel of bread. This is one of those
temporal Judgments with which God punishes the unclean person in this life. The
word Delilah, which is the name of an Harlot, is conceived to come from a root
that signifies^to exhaust, drain, or draw dry. This sin will quickly exhaust
the fullest estate; and oh what a dreadful thing will this be, when God shall
require an account of thy Stewardship in the great day! How righteous is it,
that that man should be fuel to the wrath of God, whose health and wealth have
been so much fuel to maintain the flame of Lust! Oh how lavish of their estates
are sinners to satisfy their Lusts! If the Members of Christ be sick, or in
Prison, they may there perish and starve, before they will relieve them; but to
obtain their Lusts, Oh how expensive! Ask me never so much and I will give it,
said S^echem, Genesis 34. 12. Ask what thou will, and it shall be given thee, said
Herod to the daughter of his Herodias. Well, you are liberal in spending
treasures upon you lusts; and believe it, God will spend treasures of wrath to
punish you for your Lusts. It had been a thousand times better for thee, thou
had never had an estate, that thou had begged thy bread from door to door,
than to have such a sad reckoning as thou shall shortly have for it.

Arg. 6. Oh stand off from this sin, because it is a pit out of which very few
have been recovered that have fallen therein. Few are the footsteps of
returners from this den. The longer a man lives in it, the less power he has
to leave it. It is not only a damning, but an infatuating sin. The danger of
falling this way must needs be great, and the fall very desperate, because few
that fall into it do ever rise again. I shall lay two very terrible Scriptures
before you to this purpose, either of them enough to drive thee speedily to
Christ, or to drive thee out of thy wits: the one is that, Eccles. 7. 26. And I
find more bitter than death, the woman whose heart is snares and nets, and
whose hands are bands: Whosoever pleases God shall escape from her; but the sinner
shall be taken by her. The Argument which the spirit of God uses here to
dissuade from this Sin, is taken from the subject; they that fall into it, for
the most part, are persons in whom God has no delight, and so in judgment are
delivered up to it, and never recovered by Grace from it. The other is that in
Prove. 22. 14. The mouth of a strange woman is a deep pit; he that is abhorred
of the Lord shall fall therein. Oh terrible word! able to daunt the heart of
the the securest sinner; your whores embrace you, yea, but God abhors you; you
have their love, oh but you are under Gods hatred! What say you to these two
Scriptures? If you are not Athiests, methinks such a word from the mouth of
God, should strike like a Dart through thy Soul. And upon this account it is
that they never are recovered, because God has no delight in them. If this be
not enough, view one Scripture more, Prove. 2. 18, 19. For her house inclines
unto Death, and her paths unto the Dead: None that go to her reture again,
neither take they hold of the paths of life. Reader, if thou be a person
addicted to this sin, go thy ways, and think seriously what a case thou art in.
None return again (i. e.) a very few of many: the examples of such as have been
recovered are very rare. Pliny tells us, the Mermaids are commonly seen in
green Meadows, and have enchanting Voices; but there are always found heaps of
dead men's bones lying by them. This may be but a fabulous Story: But I am sure
it is true of the Harlot, whose Syren-Songs have allured thousands to their
inevitable destruction. It Is a captivating sin, that leads away the sinner in
triumph; they cannot deliver their souls: Prove. 7. 22. He goes after her
straightway, as an Ox goes to the slaughter, or as a [Fool] to the correction
of the stocks. Mark; a Fool: it dementates and befools men, takes away their
understanding: the Septuagint renders it, (...), As a dog to the Collar, or,
like as we use to say, a dog in a string. I have read of one, that having by
this sin wasted his body, was told by Physicians, that except he left it, he
would quickly lose his Eyes; he answered, If it be so, then Vale lumen amicum,
Farewell sweet light. And I remember Luther writes of a certain Nobleman in his
Country, who was so besotted with the sin of Whoredom, that he was not ashamed
to say, That if he might live here for ever, and be carried from one stews to
another, he would never desire any other Heaven. The greatest Conquerors that
have subdued Kingdoms, and scorned to be commanded by any, have been miserably
enslaved and captivated by this Lust. O think sadly upon this argument; God
often gives them up to Impenitency, and will not spend a rod upon them to
reclaim them. See Hos. 4. 14. Revel. 22. 11.

Arg. 7. And then in the 7th place, Those few that have been recovered by
Repentance out of it, oh how bitter has God made it to their souls! I find it
(says Solomon) more bitter than death, Eccles. 7. 26. Death is a very bitter
thing; Oh what a struggling and reluctance is there in Nature against it? But
this is more bitter. Poor David found it so, when he roared under those bloody
lashes of Conscience for it, in Psalm 51. Ah! when the Lord shall open the poor
Sinner's eyes, to see the horrid guilt he has hereby contracted upon his own
poor soul, it will haunt him as a Ghost, day and night, and terrify his soul
with dreadful forms and representations. O dear-bought pleasure, if this were
all it should cost. What is now become of the pleasure of sin? Oh! what gall
and wormwood will thou taste, when once the Lord shall bring thee to a sight of
it, the Hebrew word for Repentance [ Nacham] and the Greek word [ Metamelia]
the one signifies an irking of the Soul, and the other signifies After grief.
Yea, it is called A renting of the heart, as if it were torn in pieces in a
man's breast. Ask such a poor soul, what it thinks of such Courses now? Oh now
it loathes, abhors it self for them. Ask him, if he dare sin in that kind again?
You may as well ask me (will he answer) whether I will thrust my hand into the
fire. Oh it breeds an indignation in him against himself. That word [(...)] 2
Cor. 7. 11. signifies the rising of the stomach with very rage, and being sick
with anger. Religious wrath is the fiercest wrath. Oh what a furnace is the
breast of the poor penitent! what fumes, what heats do abound in it, whilst the
sin is even before him, and the sense of guilt upon him? One night of carnal
pleasure will keep thee many days and nights upon the rack of horror, if ever
God give thee repentance unto life.

Arg. 8. And if thou never repent, as indeed but ^ew do that fall into this
sin, then consider how God will follow thee with eternal vengeance. Thou shall
have flaming Fire for burning Lust. This is a sin that has a scent of fire and
brimstone with it, wherever you meet with it in Scripture. The Harlots guests
are lodged in the depths of Hell, Prove. 9. 18. No more perfumed beds; they must
now lie down in flames. Whoremongers shall have their part in the Lake that
burns with fire and brimstone; which is the second death, Rev. 21. 1. Such
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God and Christ, 1 Cor. 6. 9. No Dog shall come
into the new Jerusalem; there shall in no wise enter in any thing that
defiles, or that works abomination. You have spent your strength upon sin,
and now God sets himself a work to show the glory of his Power in punishing,
Romans 9. 22. The wrath of God is transacted upon them in Hell by his own
immediate hand, H^b. 10. 30. Because no Creature is strong enough to convey all
his wrath, and it must all be poured out upon them, therefore he himself will
torment them for ever with his own immediate Power; now he will stir up all his
wrath, and sinners shall know the price of their pleasures. The punishment of
Sodom, is a little Map of Hell, as I may say. Oh how terrible a day was that
upon those unclean wretches! but that fire was not of many days continuance;
when it had consumed them, and their houses, it went out for want of matter:
but here, the breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone, kindles it. The
pleasure was quickly gone, but the sting and torment abide for ever. Who
knows the power of his anger? Even according to his fear, so is his wrath,
Psalm. 90. 11. Oh consider, how will his Almighty Power rack and torment thee!
Think on this, when sin comes with a smiling face toward thee in the
temptation. Oh think! If the humane nature of Christ recoyled, when his cup of
Wrath was given him to drink; if he were fore amazed at it, how shall thou a
poor worm, bear and grapple with it for ever?

Arg. 9. Consider further, how closely soever thou carriest thy wickedness in
this world, tho it should never be discovered here, yet there is a day coming
when all will out, and that before Angels and men. God will rip up thy secret
sins, in the face of that great Congregation at the day of judgment: then that
which was done in secret shall be proclaimed as upon the housetop, Luke 12. 3.
Then God will judge the [secrets] of men, Romans 2. 16. the hidden things of
darkness will be brought into the open light. Sinner, there will be no sculking
for thee in the Grave, no declining this Bar; thou refusedst indeed to come to
the Throne of Grace, when God invited thee, but there will be no refusing to
appear before the Bar of Justice, when Christ shall summon thee. And as thou
can not decline appearance, so neither can thou then palliate and hide thy
wickedness any longer: for then shall the Books be opened; the Book of God's
Omniscience, and the Book of thine own Conscience, wherein all thy secret
Villainy is recorded; for though it ceased to speak to thee, yet it ceased not
to write and record thy actions. If thy shameful sins should be divulged now,
it would make thee tear off thy hair in indignation; but then all will be
discovered. Angels and men shall point at thee, and say, Lo, this is the Man,
this is he that carried it so smoothly in in the world. Mr. Thomas Fuller
relates a story of Ottocar King of Bohemia, who refusing to do his homage to
Rodolphus the first, Emperor, being at last sorely chastised with war,
condescended to do him homage privately in a Tent: but the Tent was so
contrived by the Emperors Servants, (says the Historian) that by drawing one
cord it was all taken away, and so Ottocar presented on his knees, doing Homage
to the Emperor, in the view of three Armies. O Sirs, you think to carry it
closely, you wait for the Twilight: that none may see you; but alas! it will be
to no end, this day will discover it; and then what confusion and everlasting
shame will cover thee! Will not this work then?

Arg. 10. Lastly, consider but one thing more, and I have done. By this sin
thou do not only damn thine own soul but, drawest another to hell with thee.
This sin is not as a single bullet that kills but one, but as a chain-shot, it
kills many, two at least, unless God give repentance. And if he should give
thee repentance, yet the other party may never repent, and so perish for ever
through thy wickedness; and oh, what a sad consideration will that be to thee,
that such a poor soul is in Hell, or likely to go thither by thy means! Thou
have made fast a snare upon a Soul which now thou can not untie; thou have
done that which may be matter of sorrow to thee as long as thou live; but
though thou can grieve for it, thou can not remedy it. In other sins it is
not so; If thou had stoll'n another Goods, restitution might be made to the
injured party, but here can be none. If thou had murdered another, thy sin
was thine own, not his that was murdered by thee; but this is a complicated
sin, defiling both at once; and if neither repent, then oh what a sad greeting
will these poor wretches have in hell^! h^w will they curse the day, that ever
they saw each others face! Oh what an aggravation of their misery will this be!
For look, as it will be matter of joy in Heaven, to behold such there as we
have been instrumental to save; so must it needs be a stinging aggravation of
the misery of the damned, to look upon those that have been the instruments and
means of their damnation. Oh, methinks, if there be any tenderness at all in
thy Conscience, if this sin have not totally brawned and stupefied thee, these
Arguments should pierce like a sword, through thy Guilty Soul. Reader, I
beseech thee, by the mercies of God, if thou have defiled thy Soul by this
abominable sin, speedily to repent. Oh get the blood of sprinkling upon thee;
there is yet mercy for such a wretch as thou art, if thou will accept the terms
of it. Such were some of you, but you are washed, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Publicans and
Harlots may enter into the Kingdom of God, Matthew. 21. 31. Though but few such
are recovered, yet how know thou but the hand of mercy may pull thee, as a
brand out of the fire, if now thou will return and seek it with tears? Though
it be a fire that consumes unto destruction, as Job calls it, Job 1. 12. yet
it is not an unquenchable fire, the blood of Christ can quench it.

And for you whom God has kept hitherto, from the contagion of it, O bless the
Lord, and use all Gods means for the prevention of it. The seeds of this sin
are in thy nature; no thank to thee, but restraining grace, that thou art not
delivered up to it also. And that thou may be kept out of this Pit,
conscionably practice these few Directions.

Direct. 1. Beg of God a clean heart, renewed and sanctified by saving grace;
all other endeavors do but palliate a cure: the root of this is deep in thy
nature, Oh get that mortified, Matthew. 15. 9. Out of the heart proceed
fornication, adulteries, 1 Pet. 2. 11, 12. Abstain from fleshly lust -- having
your Conversation honest. The lust must first be subdued, before the
conversation can be honest.

Direct. 2. Walk in the fear of God all the day long, and in the sense of his
Omniscient eye, that is ever upon thee. This kept Joseph from this sin, Gen 39.
9. How can I do this wickedness, and sin against God? Consider, the darkness
hides not from him, but shines as the light. If thou could find a place
where the eye of God could not discover thee, it were somewhat: Thou dare not
to act this wickedness in the presence of a Child, and will thou adventure to
commit it before the face of God? See that Argument, Prove. 5. 20 And why will thou my Son, be ravished with a strange woman, and embrace the bosom of a
stranger? For the ways of man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth
all his goings.

Direct. 3. Avoid lewd Company, and the Society of unclean persons; they are
but panders for Lust. Evil communication corrupts good manners. The tongues of
sinners do cast fireballs into the hearts of each other, which the corruption
within is easily kindled and enflamed by.

Direct. 4. Exercise thy self in thy Calling diligently. It will be an
excellent means of preventing this sin. It is a good observation that one has;
That Israel was safer in the Brick-kilns in Egypt, than in the Plains of Moab,
2 Samuel 11. 2. And it came to pass in the even-tide, that David arose from off
his bed, and walked on the roof of the Kings house; and this was the occasion
of his fall. See 1 Timothy 5. 11, 13.

Direct. 5. Put a restraint upon thine appetite: feed not to excess. Fullness of
bread and idleness were the sins of Sodom, that occasioned such an exuberancy
of Lust. They are like fed horses every one neighing after his neighbors Wife.
Sine Cerere and Baccho frige^ venus.
When I had fed the^ to the full, then they committed Adultery, and assembled
themselves by troops in the Harlots houses, Jer. 5. 7, 8. This is a sad
requital of the bounty of God, in giving us the enjoyment of the Creatures, to
make them fuel to lust, and instruments of sin.

Direct. 6. Make choice of a meet Yoke Fellow, and delight in her you have
chosen; This is a lawful Remedy; See 1 Cor. 7. 9. God ordained it, Genesis 2. 21.
But herein appears the corruption of nature, that men delight too tread
by-pathes, and forsake the way which God has appointed; as that Divine Poet
Mr. Herbert says: If God had laid all common, certainly,
Man would have been the closer: but since now
God has impaled us, on the contrary,
Man breaks the fence, and every ground will plow.
O what were Man, might he himself misplace!
Sure, to be cross he would shift feet and face.


Stolen waters are sweeter to them, than those waters they might lawfully
drink at their own fountain: but withal know, it is not the having, but the
delighting in a lawful Wafe, as God requires you to do, that must be a ^ence
against this sin. So Solomon, Prove. 5. 19. Let her be as the loving Hind, and
pleasant Roe; Let her breasts satisfy thee at all times, and be thou ravished
always with her love.

Direct. 7. Take heed of running on in a course of sin, (especially
Superstition and Idolatry) in which cases, and as a punishment of which evils,
God often gives up men to these vile affections, Romans 1. 25, 26. Who changed
the truth of God into a lie [worshipped] and served the Creature more than the
Creator, who is blessed for ever, Amen. [For this cause] God gave them up to
vile affections, etc. They that defile their Souls by Idolatrous practices, God
suffers as a just recompense their bodies also to be defiled with uncleanness,
that so their ruin may be hastened. Let the admirers of Traditions beware of
such a judicial Tradition as this is. Woe to him that is thus delivered by the
hand of an angry God: No punishment in the world like this, when God punishes
sin with sin. When he shall suffer those (...) those common notices of
Conscience to be quenched, and all restraints to be moved out of the way of
sin, it will not be long ere that sinner come to his own place.

IV. CAUTION.
IN the next place, I shall make bold to expostulate a little with your
Conscience concerning the precious mercies you have received, and the solemn
promises you have bound your selves withal for the obtaining of those mercies.
I fear God has many bankrupt debtors among you, that have dealt slipperily and
unfaithfully with him, that have not rendered to the Lord according to the
great things he has done for them, nor according to those good things they
have vowed to the Mighty God of Jacob: But truly, if thou be a despiser of
mercy, thou shall be a pattern of wrath; God will remember them in fury, who
forget him is his favors. I will tell you what a grave and eminent Minister
once told his people (dealing with them about this sin of unthankfulness for
mercy) and I pray God it may affect you duly: Let us all mourn (says he) and
take on; Mr. Lockyer on Col. 1. p. 113.
we are all behindhand with God: The Christian world is become bankrupt, quite
broke, makes no return to God for his love. He is issuing out process to seize
upon body, goods, and life, and will be put off no longer: Bloody Bailiffs are
abroad for bad debtors all the^ world over. Christians are broke, and make no
return, and God is breaking all. He cannot have what he would have, what he
should have; he will take what he can get: for money, he will take goods,
limbs, arms, legs; he will have his own out of your skin, out of your blood,
out of your bodies and souls. He is setting the Christian world as light and as
low as they have set his love. Ah Lord! what a time do we live in?
Long-suffering is at an end, Mercy will be righted in Justice, Justice will
have all behind, it will be paid to the utmost farthing; 'twill set abroach
your blood, but 'twill have all behind, etc.

Do you hear, Souls? Is not this sad news to some of you, who have received
vast sums of mercy, and given God your bond for the repayment of him in praise
and answerable fruit, and yet forfeited all, and lost your credit with God? Oh
how can you look God in the face, with whom you have dealt so perfidiously? I
am now come in the Name of God to demand his due of you; to call to remembrance
the former receipts of mercy which you mind not, but God does, and there is a
witness in your bosom that does, and will one day witness to your faces, that
you have dealt perfidiously with your God; your souls have been the graves of
mercy, which should have been as so many gardens where they should have lived
and flourished. I am come now to open those graves, and view those mercies that
your unthankfulness has killed and buried, to lay them before your eyes, and
see whether your ungreatful hearts will bleed upon them. Buried mercies are not
lost for ever; they shall as certainly have a day of There is a double
resurrection of Mercy: A resurrection of Mercy in Mercy, and a resurrection of
Mercy in Wrath. It is the first I now labor for, and that to prevent the
second (...)
Resurrection as thy self: It were better for thee they should have a
Resurrection now in thy heart, than to rise as witnesses against thee, when
thou shall rise out of the dust that will be a terrible Resurrection indeed,
when they shall come to plead against thy Soul: nothing pleads more dreadfully
against a Soul* than abused mercy does. But I shall come to the particulars
upon which I interrogate your Consciences, and I pray deal truly and
ingenuously in answering these Queries.

Quer. 1. And first I shall demand of you, Whether you never had experience of
the power and goodness of God, in restoring you to Health from dangerous
Sickness and Diseases? Have you not sometimes had the sentence of Death in your
selves? and that possibly when you have been in remote parts far from your
Friends and Relations, and destitute of all means and accommodations. Did you
not say in that condition, as Hezekiah did in a like case? Isai. 38. 10, 11,
12. I said in the cutting off of my days, I shall go to the gates of the grave,
I am deprived of the residue of my years. I said, I shall not see the Lord,
even the Lord in the land of the living; I shall behold man no more with the
inhabitants of the world. Remember thy self, man, can not thou call to mind
the day when the Arrows of death came whisking by thee, and it may be hit those
next thee; took away those that were as lively and as lusty as thy self, when
you began your Voyage, and yet they were cast for death, thou for life, and
that when there was but an hairs breadth betwixt thee and the grave? Tell me,
Soul, What friend was that stood by thee then, when thou wast forsaken of all
friends? When it may be thy Companions stood ready to throw thee overboard,
Who was it that pitied and remembered thee in thy low estate? Who was it that
rebuked thy disease? of (as one very aptly expresses it) restrained the humors
of thy body, Mr. Tho. Goodwin.
from overflowing and drowning thy life? for when they are let out in a
sickness, they would overflow and drown it, as the Waters would the earth, if
God should not say to them, Stay you proud waves. Who was it, man, that when
thy body was brought low and weak, and like a crazy rotten Ship in a storm,
took in water on all sides, so that all the Physicians in the World could not
have stopped those Leaks; consider, what hand was that which quieted and calmed
the tempestuous Sea, careened and mended thy crazy Body, and launched thee into
the World again, as whole, as sound, as strong as ever? Was it not the Lord,
that has done all this for thee? Did not he keep back thy Soul from the Pit,
and thy Life from perishing? Yea, when thou wast chastened with pain upon thy
Bed (as Elihu speaks) Job 33. 19, 20, 21. and the multitude of thy bones with
strong pains, so that thy life abhorred bread, and thy Soul dainty meat; thy
flesh consumed away that it could not be seen, and thy bones that were not seen
stuck out: yet then, as it is, verse. 28. he delivered thy Soul from going down
into the Pit, and caused thy Life to see the Light. Had the Lamp of life been
then extinguished, thou had gone into endless Darkness; Hell had shut her
mouth upon thee. Now tell me, Soul, What have thou done with this precious
mercy? Have thou walked before the Lord in a deep sense thereof, and answered
his end therein, which was, to lead thee to Repentance? Or has thy stupid or
disingenious heart forgotten it, and lost all sense of it, so that God's end is
frustrated, and thy Salvation not a jot furthered thereby? O* If it be so, woe
to thee; for the blood of this Mercy, which thy Ingratitude has murdered,
like the blood of Abel, cries to God against thee. What a Wretch art thou thus
to requite the Lord for such a Mercy! He saw thy Tears, and heard thy groans,
and said within himself, He shall not die, but live; Alas, poor Creature, if I
cut him off now, he is eternally lost: I will send him back a few years more
into the World; I will try him once more, it may be he will bear some fruits to
me from this deliverance; and if so, well; if not, I will cut him down
hereafter: He shall be set at liberty upon his Good Behavior a little longer.
And is all this nothing in thine eyes? Wretch that thou art, Do thou forget
and flight such a favor as this? Is it worth no more in thine eyes? Well, it
would be worth something in the eyes of the poor Damned Souls, if they might
have so many years cut out of their Eternity, for a mere intermission of their
Torments, much more as a time of patience and mercy. O consider, what pity and
goodness thou have abused.

Quer. 2. Wast thou never cast upon miserable streights and extremities,
wherein the good Providence of God relieved and supplied thee? How many of you
have been beaten so long at Sea, by reason of contrary winds, and other
accidents, till your Provisions have been even exhausted and spent? To how
short allowance have you been kept? And what a mercy would you have esteemed
it, if you could but have satisfied Nature with a full draught of Water?
Certainly, this has been the case of many of you. Oh what a price and vallue
did you then set upon those common Mercies, which at other times have been
slightly overlooked! and when you have seen no hopes of relief, Have you not
looked sadly one upon another? and it may be said as that Widow of Zarephtah
did to the Prophet, 1 King. 17. 12. And she said, As the Lord thy God lives, I
have not a cake, but a handful of meal in a barrel, and a little oil in a
cruse: and behold, I am gathering two sticks that I may go in and dress it for
me and my son, that we may eat it, and die. Even such has been your case; yet
has that God, whose Mercies are over all his Works, heard your sorrows, and
provided Relief for you* either by some Ship, which Providence sent to relieve
you in that distress; or by altering the Winds, and sending you safe to the
Land, before all your Provisions have been spent. And have thou kept no Records
of these gracious Providence? yea, Do thou abuse the Creature, when thou art
brought again to the full enjoyment of it? and possibly receivest the Creatures
(whose worth thou so lately have seen in the want of them) without
thanksgiving, or a sensible acknowledgment of the goodness of God in them? I
say, do thou thus answer the expectations of God? Well, beware lest God teach
such an unworthy Creature, by woeful experience, that the opening of his hand to
give thee a Mercy, is worth the opening thy Lips to bless him for it. Beware
lest that unthankful Mouth, that will not bless the Lord for Bread and Water,
have neither the one or the other to bless him for. I can give you a sad
instance in the case, and I have found it in the Writing of an eminent Divine,
who says he had it from an eye and ear-witness of the truth of it. A young Man
lying upon his Sickbed, was always calling for meat, but when the meat he
called for was brought unto him, he shook and trembled dreadfully at the sight
of it, and that in every part of his body; and so continued, until his food was
carried away. And thus he did, as often as any food was brought into his
presence; and not being able to eat one bit, pined away: but before his death,
he freely acknowledged the Justice of God in this punishment; For, said he, in
the time of my Health, I ordinarily received my meat without thanksgiving. O!
Let the abusers and despisers of such Mercies, fear and tremble.

Quer. 3. Have you not been eminently protected and saved by the Lord, in the
greatest dangers and hazards of life; in fights at Sea, when men have dropped
down at your right hand and at your left, and yet the Lord has covered your
heads in the day of battle? And though you have been equally obnoxious to Death
and Danger with others, yet your name was not found among theirs in the list of
the dead? Or in Shipwracks, ah, how narrowly have some of you escaped! A plank
has been cast in, you know not how, to save you, when your Companions, for
want of it, have gone down to the bottom; or you have been enabled to swim to
the Shore, when others have fainted in the way, and perished. In what a variety
of strange and astonishing Providence has God walked toward some of you, and
what returns have you made to God for it? Oh Sirs, I beseech you, consider but
these two or three things, that I shall now lay before you to consider of.

Consid. 1. An Heathen will do more for a dung-hil-Deity, than thou, that
call thy self a Christian, wilt do for the true God, that made Heaven and
Earth, Dan. 5. 4. They praised the Gods of Silver, and of Gold, and of Brass,
of Iron, Wood, and Stone. When the Philistines were delivered from the hand of
Sampson, the Text says, Judge. 16. 24. They praised their God, etc. Then Dagon
must be extolled. Oh let shame cover they face!

Consid. 2. That the abuse of Mercy and Love, is a sin that goes near to the
heart of God. O! he cannot bear it. It is not the giving out of mercy that
troubles him, for that he does with delight; but the recoyling of his mercies
upon him by the creatures ingratitude, this wounds. Be astonished, O ye
heavens, at this, and be ye horribly afraid. And again, Hear O heavens, and
give ear O earth, Isa. 1. 2. q. d. O you innocent Creatures which inviolably
observe the law of your Creation, be you all astonished and clothed in black,
to see Nature cast by sin so far below it self; and that in a Creature so much
superior to you as Man, who in the very womb, was crowned a King, and admitted
into the highest Order of Creatures, and set as Lord and Master over you; yet
does he act not only below himself, but below the very beasts. The Ox knows
his owner, (i. e.) There is a kind of gratitude in the beasts, by which they
acknowledge their benefactors that feed and preserve them. Oh! What a
pathetical exclamation is that, Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Do ye thus requite the Lord, O
foolish people, and unwise?

Consid. 3. It is a sin that kindles the wrath of God, and will make it burn
dreadfully against thee unthankful sinner; it stirs up the anger of God, in
whomsoever it be found, though in the person of a Saint, 2 Chronicles. 32. 25. But
Hezekiah rendered not again according to the benefit done unto him: for his
heart was lifted up: therefore there was wrath upon him, and upon Jerusalem.
And so you read, Romans 1. That the Heathen, because they were not thankful, were
given up to vile affections; the ^orest Plague in the world. It is a sin that
the God of Mercy scarce knows how to pardon, Ier. 5. 7. How shall I pardon thee
for this? This forgetting of the God that saves us in our extremities, is a sin
that brings desolation and ruin, the effects of God's high displeasure, upon
all our temporal enjoyments. See that remarkable Scripture, Isa. 17. 10, 11.
Because thou have [forgotten] the God of [thy salvation] and have not been
[mindful] of the rock of [thy strength*] Therefore shall thou plant pleasant
plants, and shall set it with strange slips; in the day shall thou make thy
plant to grow, and in the morning shall thou make thy seed to flourish, but the
Harvest shall be an heap in the day of grief and desperate sorrow. The meaning
is, that God will blast and curse all thine employments, and thou shall be
under desperate sorrow, by reason of the disappointments of thy hopes.

Consid. 4. It Is a sin that cuts off Mercy from you in future straits: if you
thus requite the Lord for former mercies, never expect the like in future
distresses. God is not weary of his blessings, to cast them away upon such
Souls that are but graves to them. Mark what a reply God made to the
Israelites, when they cried unto him for help, being invaded by the Amorites,
Judge. 10. 11, 12, 13. Did not I deliver you from the Egyptians, and from the
Amorites, from the Children of Ammon, and from the Philistines? The Zidonians
also, and the Amalekites, and ye cried unto me, and I delivered you out of
their hands; yet ye have forsaken me, and served other Gods; wherefore I will
deliver you no more. O sad word! It is (as if the Lord had said) I have tried
what mercy and deliverance will do with you, and I see you are never the better
for it; deliverance is but seed sown upon the Rocks: I will cast away no more
favors upon you; now look to your selves, shift for your selves for time to
come, wade through your troubles as well as you can. O brethren, there is
nothing more quickly works the ruin of a People, than the abuse of mercy. O
methinks this Text should strike terror into your hearts. How often has God
delivered you? Remember thy eminent deliverance at such a time, in such a
Country, out of such a deep distress: God was gracious to thy cry then; thou
have forgotten and abused this mercy; what now, if God should say, as in the
Text* Therefore I will deliver thee no more. Ah poor Soul! What would thou
do then, or to whom will thou turn? It may be thou will cry to the Creatures
for help and pity; but alas, to what purpose? they will give as cold and as
comfortless an answer, as Samuel gave unto Saul, 1 Samuel 28. 15, 16. And Samuel
said to Saul, Wherefore have ^hou disquieted me, to bring me up? And Saul
answered, I am sore distressed; for the Philistines make war against me, and
God is departed from me, and answers me no more, neither by Prophets, nor by
Dreams; therefore have I called thee etc. Then said Samuel, Wherefore then
do thou ask of me, seeing the Lord is departed from thee, and become thine
enemy? O! thou will be a poor shiftless creature, if once by abusing mercy thou
make it thy Enemy.

Secondly. For the breach of Vows made in distress to obtain these mercies, and
easily forgotten and violated by thee when thou have obtained thy desire: A
word or two to convince you what a further evil lies in this, and how by this
consideration thy sins come to be boyed up to a greater height, and aggravation
of finfulness; and then I have done with this Head.

A Vow, is a promise made to God, in the things of God. The Obligation of it is
by Casuists judged to be as great as that of an Oath. It is a sacred and solemn
bond, wherein a Soul binds it self to God in lawful things: and being once
bound by it, it is a most heinous evil to violate it. It is an high piece of
dishonesty to fail in what we have promised to men, Case of Consc.
says Dr. Hall; but to disappoint God in our Vows, is no less than Sacrilege.
The act is free and voluntary; but if once a just and lawful vow or promise
has past your lips (says he) you may not be false to God in keeping it. It is
with us for our vows, as it was with Ananias and Saphirah, for their substance:
Whilst it remained (says Peter) was it not thine own? He needed not to sell
and give it; but if he will give, he may not reserve; it is death to save some:
he lies to the Holy Ghost, that defalks from that which he engaged himself to
bestow. If thou have vowed to the mighty God of Jacob, look to it that thou be
faithful in thy performance, for he is a great and jealous God, and will not be
mocked.

Now I am confident, there be many among you, that in your former distresses
have solemnly engaged your Souls thus to God; that if he would deliver you out
of those dangers, and spare your lives, you would walk more strictly, and live
more holy lives than ever you did. You have, it may be, engaged your Souls to
the Lord against those sins, as Drunkenness, Lying, Swearing, Uncleanness, or
whatsoever evil it was that your Conscience then smote you for: the vows of God
(I say) are upon many of you. But have you performed those vows that your lips
have uttered? Have you dealt truly with God? or have you mocked him, and lied
unto him with your lips, and omitted those very duties you promised to perform,
and returned to the self-same evils you promised to forsake. I only put the
question, let your Consciences answer it. But if it be so indeed, that thou art
a person that make light of thy engagements to God, as indeed Seamens Vows,
and Sick men's Promises are, for the most part, deceitful and slippery things,
being extorted from them by fear of Death, and not from any deep resentment of
the necessity and weight of those Duties to which they bind their Souls: I say,
if this sin lie upon any of your Souls, I advise you to go to God speedily, and
bewail it; humble your self greatly before him, admire his patience in
forbearing you, and pay unto him what your lips have promised. And to move you
thereunto, let these Considerations, among many other, be laid to heart.

Consid. 1. Think seriously upon the greatness of that Majesty whom thou have
wronged, by lying to him, and falsifying thy engagements. Oh think sadly on
this: It is not man whom thou have abused, but God; even that God in whose hand
thy life and breath is. For although (as one truly observes) there be not in
every vow a formal invocation of God, (God being the proper Correlate, and as
it were a party to every vow, and therefore not formally to be invoked for the
contestatio^ of it) yet there is in every vow an implicit calling God to
witness; so that certainly the Obligation of a Vow is not one jot beneath that
of an Oath. Now if God be as a party to whom thou have past thy promise, and
its obligation on that ground be so great, oh what have thou done? for a poor
worm to mock with the most glorious majesty of Heaven, and break Faith with
God, what a dreadful thing is that? If it were but to thy fellow creature,
though the sin would be great yet not like unto this. Let me say to thee, as
the Prophet Isai. 7. 13. It is a small thing for you to weary men, but you will
weary my God also? If you dare to deceive and abuse men, dare you do so by God
also? Oh if the exceeding villainies of the sin do not affect thee, yet methinks
the danger of provoking so dreadful a Majesty against thee should. And
therefore consider,

Consid. 2. Secondly, That the Lord will most certainly be avenged upon thee
for these things, except thou repent. O read and tremble at the word of God,
Eccles. 5. 4. When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it: for he has
no pleasure in fools; pay that which thou have vowed. But better it is that
thou should not vow, than that thou should vow and not not pay. Suffer
not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin, neithey say thou before the Angel,
that it was an error; wherefore [should God be angry] at thy vice, and
[destroy] the works of thy hands? Mark, God will be angry, and in that anger he
will destroy the Work of thy hand, (i. e.) says Diodate, Bring thee and all
thy actions to naught, by reason af thy perjury. Now the anger of God, which
thy breach of promise kindles, as appears by this Text, is a dreadful fire. Oh
what Creature can stand before it! as Asaph speaks, Psalm. 76. 7. Thou, even
thou art to be feared: and who may stand in thy sight when once thou art angry?

Consid. 3. Consider, thirdly, that all this while thou sinnest against
knowledge and Conviction: for did not thy Conscience plainly convince thee,
when imminent danger opened its mouth, that the matter of thy neglected vow was
a most necessary duty; If not, why did thou bind thy Soul to forsake such
practices, and to perform such duties? Thou did so look upon them then; by
which it appears, thy Conscience is convinced of thy duty, but Lust masters and
overrules: And it so, poor sinner, what a case art thou in, to go on from day
to day sinning against Light and Knowledge? Is not this a fearful rate of
sinning? And will not such sinners be plunged deeper into Hell than the poor
Indians that never saw the evil of their ways, as thou do* Ponder but two or
three Scriptures in thy thoughts, and see what a dreadful way of sinning this
is: Romans 2. 9. 'Tribtlation, anguish and wrath to every Soul of man that does
evil, to the [Iew first] and also to the Gentile. To the Jew first ( i. e.) to
the Jew especially and principally; he had a precedence in means and light, and
so let him have in punishment. So Iam. 4. 17. To him thrt knows to do good,
and does it not, to him it is sin (i. e.) Sin with a witness, horrid sin, sin
that surpasses the deeds of the wicked. So Luke 12. 47. And that servant that
knew his Lords will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his
will, shall be beaten with many stripes. Which is a plain allusion to the
Custom of the Jews in punishing an offender who being convicted, the Judge was
to see him bound fast to a Pillar, his clothes stripped off, and an Executioner
with a Scourge to beat him with so many stripes: But now those stripes came but
from the arm of a Creature; these that the Text speaks of, are set on by the
omnipotent arm of God. Of the former there was a determinate number set down in
their law, as forty stripes, and sometimes they would remit one of that number
too, in mercy to the offender, as you see in the example of Paul, 2 Cor. 11.
24. Of the ^ews I received forty stripes save one; but in Hell no mitigation at
all, nor allay of mercy. The arm of his power supports the Creature in its
being, while the arm of his justice lays on eternally. Soul, consider these
things; do thou not persist any longer then in such a desperate way of sinning,
against the clear conviction of thine own Conscience, which in this case must
needs give testimony against thee.

Well then; go to God with the words of David. Psalm. 66. 13, 14. and say unto
him, I will pay thee my vows which my lips have uttered, and my tongue has
spoken when I was in trouble. Pay it, Soul, and pay it speedily unto God, else
he will recover it by Justice, and fetch it out of thy bones in Hell. O trifle
not any longer with God, and that in such serious matters as these are.

And now I have done my endeavor to give your former Mercies and Promises a
Resurrection in your Consciences; Oh that you would sit down and pause s^ while
upon these things, and then reflect upon the past Mercies of your lives, and on
what has past betwixt God and your Souls, in your former straights and
trou^bles! Let not these plain words work upon thy spleen^ and make thee say,
as the Widow of Sarephta did to the Prophet Elijah, 2 Kings 17. 18. What have I
to do wit^ thee, O thou man of God? Art thou come to call my sin to
remembrance? But rather let it work kindly on thy heart, and make thee say as
David to Abigail, 1 Samuel 25. 32. 33. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which
sent thee this day to meet me, and blessed be thy advice.

V. CAUTION.
THe fifth and last danger I shall warn you of, is, Your contempt and slighting
of Death. Ah how light a matter do many of you (at least in words) make of it?
It seems you have little reverential fear of this King of terrors; not only
that you speak slightly of it, but also because you make no more preparation
for it, and are no more sensible of your preservations and deliverances from
it. Indeed, the heathen Philosophers did many* of them profess a Contempt of
Death, upon the account of Wisdom and Fortitude; and they were accounted the
bravest men, that most despised and slighted it: But alas, poor Souls, they saw
not their enemy against whom they taught, but skirmisht with their eyes shut.
They saw indeed its pale face, but not its sting and dart. There is also a
lawful contempt of death: we freely grant, that in two Cases a believer may
contemn it; first, when it is propounded to them in a temptation, on purpose to
scare them from Christ and duty, then they should slight it; as Rev. 12. 11.
They loved not their lives to the death. Secondly, When the natural evil of
death is set in Competition with the enjoyment of God in Glory, then a believer
should despise it, as Christ is said to do, Heb. 12. 2 though his was a
shameful death. But upon all other accounts and considerations, it is the
height of stupidity and security to despise it.

Now to the end that you might have right thoughts and apprehensions of death,
which may put you upon serious preparation for it; and that when ever your turn
comes to conflict with this King of terrors, under whose hand the Pompeys,
Caesar's, and Alexanders of the world, who have been the terrors of Nations,
have bowed down themselves; I say, that when your turn and time comes (as the
Lord only knows how soon it may be) you may escape the stroke of its dart and
sting, and taste no other b^tterness in death, than the natural evil of it: To
this end I have drawn the following Questions and Answers which, if you please,
may be called, The Sea-man's Catechism. And Oh that you might not dare to
launch forth into the deeps, until you have seriously interrogated and
examined your hearts upon those particulars* Oh that you would resolve, before
you go forth, to withdraw your selves a while, from all clamours and
distractions, and calmly and seriously Catechize your own selves in this manner.

Quest. 1. What may the issue of this Voyage be?

Answ. Death. Prove. 27. 1. Boast no^ thy self of to morrow, for thou know
not what a day may bring forth. Jam, 4. 13, 14. Go to now, ye that say, To day,
or to morrow, we will go into such a City, and continue there a year, and buy
and sell, and get gain: Whereas you know not what shall be on to morrow, for
what is your Life? It is even a vapor that appears for a little time, and
then vanishes away.

Quest. 2 What is Death?

Ans. Death is a separation of Soul and Body, till the Resurrection, 2 Cor. 5.
1. We know that if our earthly house of this T^bernacle be dissolved. Job 14.
10, 11, 12. Read the words.

Quest. 3. Is Death to be despised and slighted if it be so?

An. O no! It Is one of the most weighty and serious things that ever a creature
went about. So dreadful does it appear to some, that the fear of it subjects
them to Bondage all their lives, Hebr. 2. 15. And to deliver them who through
fear of death were all their lives subject to bondage. And in Scripture It Is
called, the King of terrors, Job 18. 14. Or the black Prince, as some
translate. Never had any Prince such a title before. To some it has been so
terrible, that none might mention its Name before them.

Quest. 4. What makes it so terrible and affrighting to Men?

Answ. Several things concur to make it terrible to the most of Men* As first,
its Harbingers and Antecedents which are strong Pains, Conflicts, and Agonies.
Secondly, its office and work it comes about, which is to transfer us into the
other world. Hence Rev. 6. 8. It Is set forth by a Pale Horse: An horse, for its
use and office, to carry you away from hence into the upper or lower region of
Eternity; and a pale horse, for it is gastliness and terror. Thirdly, but above
all, it is terrible in regard of its consequence; for it is the door of Eternity,
the parting point betwixt the present world and that to come; the utmost line
and boundary of all temporal things. Hence Heb. 9. It Is appointed for all men
once to die, and after that the Judgment. Rev. 6. 8. And I looked, and behold a
pale Horse, and his name that sat on him was Death: and Hell followed him. Ah
it makes a sudden and strange alteration upon men's conditions, to be plucked out
of house, and from among friends, and honors, and so many delights, and
hurried in a moment into the Land of Darkness, to be clothed with flames, and
drink the pure wrath of the Almighty for ever. This is it, that makes it
terrible.

Quest. 5. If Death be so weighty a matter, am I prepared to die?

Answ. I doubt Not; I am afraid I want many things that are necessary to a due
preparation for it.

Quest. 6. What are those things wherein a due preparation for Death consists?

Answ. Many things are necessary. First, Special and Saving Union with Jesus
Christ. This is it that disarms it of its sting; O Death, where is thy sting?
Thanks be to God who has given [us] the victo^y through [our] Lord Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 15. 55, 56. So Joh. 11. 26. Who soever [liveth] and]
[believeth] in me, shall never die. Whosoever lives ( i. e.) is quickened with
a new spiritual Life and Principle, and so puts sorth the principal act of that
life, viz. Faith, he shall never die, ( i. e.) eternally; This hornet, Death,
shall never leave its sting in his sides. Secondly, To entertain Death
comfortably, the evidence and knowledge of this Union is necessary, 2 Cor. 5.
1. ^or we [know] that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved,
we have a building of God, etc. And then he cannot only be content, but groan
to be uncloathed, verse. 2. A mistake in the former will cost me my Soul; and a
mistake here will lose me my peace and comfort. Thirdly, In order to this
evidence* it is necessary that I keep a good conscience in all things, both
toward God and Man, 2 Cor. 1. 12. This is our rejoicing, even the testimony of
our Conscience, that in sincerity, and godly simplicity, not in fleshly wisdom,
but by the Grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world. This good
Conscience respects all and every part of our work and duty to be done, and all
and every sin to be renounced and denied: So that he that is early united unto
Christ by Faith, has the clear evidence of that Union; and the evidence fairly
gathered from the testimony of a good Conscience, witnessing his faithfulness
as to all duties to be done, and sins to be avoided, he is fit to die; Death
can do him no harm: but alas, these things are not to be found in me.

Quest. 7. But what if I die without such a preparation as this is, what will
the consequence of that be?

Answ. Very terrible; even the separation of my Soul and Body from the Lord to
all Eternity, John 3. 36. He that believes on the Son, bath everlasting life;
and he that believes not the Son, shall not see life: but the wrath of God
abides on him. He shall not see life: there is the privative part of his
misery, separation from the blessed God. And the [wrath] mark it, not anger,
but wrath; not the wrath of a man, bat of [ God] at whose rebukes the Mountains
skip like frighted men, and the Hills tremble: The wrath of God not only
flashes out upon him, as a transient flash of lightinng, but [ abideth] dwells,
sticks fast, there is no power in the world can loose the soul from it. [ Upon
him] not the body only, nor the soul only, but on [ him] (i. e.) the whole
person, the whole Man. Here is the principal positive part of that man's misery.

Quest. 8. Can I bear this misery?

Answ. No: My heart cannot endure, nor my hand be strong, when God shall have
to do with me upon this account. I cannot bear this wrath; Angels could not
bear it; it has sunk them into the depths of misery. Those that feel but a few
sparks of it in their Consciences here, are even distracted by it, Psalm. 88.
15. Christ himself had never born up under it, had he not been subported by the
infinite power of the* divine nature, Isai. 42. 1. Behold my servant whom I
uphold. How then shall I live when God does this? what will be done to the dry
tree? Oh! there is on abiding of it, it is insufferable. The sinners in Zion
are afraid, trembling surprizeth the hypocrite: who among us shall dwell with
the devouring fire? who can endure the everlasting burning? Isai. 33. 14.

Quest. 9 If it cannot be born, is there any way to prevent it?

Answ. Yes; there is hope in I srael concerning this thing. And herein I am in
better case than the damned; I have the [may-be's] of mercy, and they have not.
Oh what would they give for a possibility of Salvation! Isai. 1. 16, 17, 18.
Wash ye, make ye clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes;
cease to do evil, learn to do well, etc. Come now, let us reason together: and
though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as snow. Isai. 55. 7. Let the
wicked for sake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: and let him
return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he
will abundantly pardon. Though my disease be dangerous, it is not desperate, it
does not scorn a remedy. Oh there is Balm in Gilead, and a Physician there.
There is yet a possibility, not only of recovering my Primitive glory, but to
be set in a better case than ever Adam was.

Quest. 10, How may that be?

Answ. By going to the Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 8. 1. There is therefore now no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. Romans 8. 33, 34. Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of God's elect? It is God that justifies: Who is he
that condemns? It is Christ that died, yea, rather that is risen again.

Quest. 11. But what is it to go to Christ?

Asw. To go to Christ, is to John 1. 12.
embrace him in his John 3. 36.
Person, and 1 Cor. 1. 30.
Offices, and to rest 1 Acts 4. 12.
intrely and closely upon him for Acts 12. 29.
pardon of sin, and Isai. 45. 22.
eternal life; being deeply Acts 2. 37.
sensible of the want and worth of him. Joh. 1. 12. To as many as [received]
him, he gave power to become the sons of God, even to as many as believed on
his Name. John 3. 36. He that believed [on the Son] has life. 1 Cor. 1. 30.
And of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. Acts 4. 12. Neither is there
Salvation in any other, etc. Acts 13. 39. And by him all that believe are
[Iustified from all things] from which ye could not be Justified by the Law of
Moses. Isai. 45. 22. Look unto me, and be ye saved. Acts 2. 37. Now when they
heard this, they were pricked to the heart, etc.

Quest. 12. B^t will Christ receive me, if I go unto him?

Answ. Yes, yes; He is more ready to receive thee, than thou are to come to
him. Luke 15. 20. And he, ^^ose and came to his Father. But when he was yet a
great way off, his Father saw him, and had compassion on him, and ran and fell
on his neck and kissed him. The Son does but go, the Father ran: if he had but
received him into the house, it had been much; but he fell on his neck, and
kissed him. He bespeaks him much after that rate he expressed himself to
returning Ephraim. My Bowels are troubled for him: I will surely have mercy on
him, Jerem. 31. 20. There is not the least Parenthesis in all the pages of Free
Grace, to exclude a Soul that is sincerely willing to come to Christ.

Quest. 13. But how may it appear that he is willing to receive me?

Answ. Make trial of him thy self. If thou did but know his heart to poor
sinners, you would not question it. Believe what he says in the Gospel; there
thou shall find that he is a willing Savior: for therein thou have, First his
most serious invitations, Matthew. 11. 28. Come unto me ye that are weary and
heavy laden. Isai. 55. 1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters.
These serious Invitations are, Secondly, backed and confirmed with his Oath,
Ezekiel. 35. 11. As I live I desire not the death of a sinner. Thirdly, amplified
with pathetical wishes, sighs and groans, Matthew. 23. 29. Oh that thou had
known, even thou, at least in this thy day. Fourthly, Yea, delivered to them in
undissembled tears, Matthew. 23. 37, 38. He wept over it, and said, O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem. Fifthly, Nay, he has shed not only tears, but blood, to convince
thee of his willingness. View him in his dying posture upon the Cross,
stretching out his dying arms to gather thee, hanging down his blessed head to
kiss thee: every one of his wounds was a mouth opened to convince thee of the
abundant willingness of Christ to receive thee.

Quest. 14. But my sins are died in grain: I am a sinner of the blackest hue;
will he receive and pardon such an one?

Answ. Yea, Soul, if thou be willing to commit thy self to him, Isai. 1. 18.
Come, now let us reason together: Though your sins he as scarlet, I will make
them as snow; though they be red like crimson, I will make them as wool. See p.
10, 11.

Quest. 25. This is comfortable news; but may I not delay my closing with him
for a while, and yet not hazard my eternal happiness, seeing I resolve to come
unto him at last?

Ans. No. There must be no delays in this case: Ps. 119. 60. I made have and
delayed not to keep thy commandments.

Quest. 16. Why may I not defer it, at least for a little while?

Ans. For many weighty reasons this work can bear no delays. First, the offers
of Grace are made to the present time, Heb. 3. 15. Wbile it is said to day,
harden not your heart. There may be a few more days of God's patience, but that
is unknown to thee. Secondly, your Life is immediate uncertain; how many
thousands are gone into Eternity since the last Night? If you can say to
sickness when it comes, Go, and come again another time, it were somewhat.
Thirdly, Sin is not a thing to be dallied whith. Oh! who would be willing to
lie down one Night under the guilt of all his sins? Fourthly, delays increase
the difficulty of Conversion: Sin still roots itself deeper, habits are the
more strengthened, and the heart still more hardened. Fifthly, There be
thousands now in Hell, that perish through delays: Their Consciences often
urged and pressed hard upon them, and many resolutions they had, as thou have
now; but they were never perfected by answerable executions, and so they
perished. Sixthly, Thy way of sinning now is desperate; for every moment thou
art acting against clear light and conviction; and that is a dreadful way of
sinning. Seventhly, There can be no solid reason for one hours delay; for thou
can not be happy too soon: And be sure of it, if ever thou come to taste the
sweetness of a Christian Life, nothing will more pierce and grieve thee than
this, that thou enjoyedst it no sooner.

Qu. 17. Oh, but the pleasures of sin engage me to it, how shall I break these
cords and snares?

Ans. That snare may be broken by considering solemnly these five things.
First, that to take pleasure in sin, is an argument of a most deplorable and
wretched state of Soul. What a poysonful nature does it argue in a Toad, that
is sucking in nothing but poison and filth wherever he crawls! Oh what an heart
have thou! have thou nothing to find pleasure in, but that which makes the
Spirit of Christ sad, and the hearts of Saints ache and groan; which dug
Hell, and let in endless miseries upon the world? Secondly, think that the
misery it involves thee in, is infinitely beyond the delights it tempts thee
by: It does but delight the sensual part and that but with a brutish pleasure;
but will torment thy immortal Soul, and that for ever. The pleasure will
quickly go off, but the sting will remain behind. I tasted but a little honey
on the top of my rod (said Jonathan) and I must die, 1 Samuel 14. 43. Thirdly,
Nay, that is not all; but the Lord proportions wrath according to the pleasures
souls have had in sin, Rev. 18. 7. How much she has lived deliciously, so much
torment and sorrow give unto her. Fourthly, What do thou pay, or, at least,
pawn, for this pleasure? Thy soul, thy precious soul, is laid to stake for it:
and in effect thus thou say, when thou deferrest the closing with Christ
upon the account of enjoying the pleasures of sin a little longer: Here, Devil,
take my Soul into thy possession and power; if I repent, I will have it again;
if not, it is thine for ever. Oh dearb ought pleasures!

What is the the world? A great exchange of ware,
Wherein all Sorts and Sexes cheapning are:
The Flesh, the Devils, sit and, cry What lack ye?
When most they fawn, they most intend to rack ye.
The wares are cups of joy, and beds of pleasure;
There Is goodly choice, down-weight, and flowing measure.
A soul's the price, but they give time to pay
Upon the Deathbed, or the Dying-day.
Hard is the bargain, and unjust the measure,
When as the price so much outlasts the pleasure.
Quarles. Lastly, It Is thy gross mistake to think thou shall be bereaven of all
delights and pleasures, by coming under the government of Christ: For one of
those things in which his Kingdom consists, is joy in the Holy Ghost, Romans 14.
17. Indeed, it allows no sinful pleasures to the subjects of it, nor do they
need it; but from the day thou closest in with Christ, all thy pure, real, and
eternal pleasures and delight begin and bear date* When the Prodigal was
returned to his Father, then, says the Text, They began to be merry, Luke 15.
24. See Acts 8. 5, 6. No, no, Soul, thou shall want no joy; for the Scripture
says, They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and
thou shall make them drink the rivers of thy pleasures; for with thee is the
fountain of light, etc. Psalm. 36. 8, 9.

Qu. 18. But how shall I be able to undergo the severities of Religion? There
are difficult Duties to be done, and an heavy cross to be taken up; these be
the things that daunt me.

Ans. If Pain and Suffering daunt thee, how is it thou art not more out of love
with sin than with Religion? For it is most certain, that the Sufferings for
Christ are nothing to Hell, the just reward and certain issue of sin: the pains
of Mortification are nothing to the pains of Damnation. There is no compare
betwixt suffering for Christ, and suffering from Christ, Matthew. 5. 29. If thy
right hand, or eye offend thee, cut it off, and pluck it out: It is profitable
for thee that one member suffer, than that the whole body be cast into Hell.
Secondly, thou ^eest the worst, but not the best of Christ. There be Joys and
Comforts in those difficult Duties and Sufferings, that thou see not. Col. 1.
24. Who now rejoice in my sufferings. Jam. 1. 2. My Brethren, count it all joy
when ye fall into diverstemptations, etc. Thirdly, Great shall be thy
assistance from Christ, Phil. 4. 13. I can do all things through him that
strengthens me. The Spirits helps our infirmities, takes the other end of the
burden, Romans 8. 26. What meanest thou to stand upon such terms, when it is
Heaven or Hell, eternal Life or Death, that lie before thee?

Qu. 19. But to what purpose will all my endeavors to come to Christ be?
unless I be elected, all will be to on purpose.

Ans. True: If thou be not elected, thou can not obtain him, or happiness by
him: But yet, that is no discouragement to strive. For in thy unconverted
state, thy Election or Non-election is a secret to thee; the only way to make
it sure, is by striving and giving all diligence in the way of duty, 2 Pet. 1.
10. And if you ponder the text well, you will find, that Election is not only
made sure in the way of diligence and striving; but Calling is put before it,
and lies in order to it. First secure thy effectual Calling, and then thine
Election.

Qu. 20. But I have no strength of my own to come to Christ by; and is it not
absurd to urge me upon Impossibilities in order to my Salvation?

Ans. First, Certainly you are more absurd in pleading and pretending your
impotence against your duty: for you do think you have a power to come to
Christ, else how do you quiet your Conscience with Promises and solves of
Conversion hereafter? Secondly, Though it be true, that no saving Act can be
done without the concurrence of special Grace; yet this is as true, that thy
inability to do what is above thy power, does not excuse thee from doing what
is in thy power to do. Can thou not forbear, at least, many external acts of
sin? And can thou not perform, at least, the external acts of duty? Oh, if
thou can not come to Christ, yet, as the blind man, lie in the way of Christ;
do what thou can do, and confess and bewail thine impotency that thou can
do no more. Can thou not take thy Soul aside in secret, and thus bemoan it;
My poor Soul, what will thou do? Oh what will become of thee, thou art
Christless, Covenantless, Hopeless, and, which is most sad, senseless and
bowelless. O! thou can not bear the infinite Wrath of the Eternal God, whose
Almighty Power will be set on work to torment such as thou art, and yet thou
take no course to prevent it. Thou see the busy diligence of all others,
and how the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence by them; and art not thou as
deeply engaged to look to thy own happiness, as any in the world? Will Hell be
more tolerable to thee than others? Oh what a composition of stupidity and
sloth art thou? Thou live after such a rate, as if there were neither Fire in
Hell to torment thee, nor Glory in Heaven to reward thee. If God and Christ,
Heaven and Hell, were but dreams and fables, thou could not be less affected
with them. Ah, my Soul! my Soul! my precious Soul! Is it easy to perish? Will thou die as a fool dies? Oh that men would but do thus, if they can do no more!

And now, Soul, you see what death is, that you have made so slight of; and
what is the only way that we, poor Sons of Death, have to escape its sting. You
have here seen the vanity of all your pleas and pretenses against Conversion,
and the way to Christ prepared and cast up for you. Now, Sirs, I beg you in the
name of God that made you, and as if I made this request upon my bended Knees
to you, that you will now, without any more delays, yield your selves to the
Lord. Soul! I beseech thee, have thee into thy ^hamber, shut thy door, and
bespeak the Lord after some such manner as this, before thou dare to launch
out into the Deeps again:

O dreadful and glorious Majesty! thou have bowels of mercy, as well as beams
of glory: I have heard the sounding of these bowels for me this day. Lord, I
have now heard a representation of the grim and ghastly face of Death! Ah! I
have now seen it as the King of Terrors, as the door of Eternity, as the
Parting-point, where sinners take their eternal farewell of all their delights.
I have seen this black Prince mounted on his pale Horse, and Hell following
him. I have been convinced this day, that if he should come and fetch away my
Soul in that condition it is, Hell would follow him indeed. Lord! I have now
heard of the Prince of Life also, in whose bleeding side Death has left and
lost its envenomed sting; so that though it may kill, yet it cannot hurt any of
his Members. To this glorious Redeemer I have now been invited; all my
pretenses against him have been confuted, and my Soul in his Name assured of
welcome, if I come unto him, and cast my self upon him. And now, Lord, I come,
I come, upon thy call and invitation; I am unfeignedly willing to avouch thee,
this day to be my God, and to take thee for my portion. Lord Jesus, I come unto
thee; thy Clay, thy Creature moves toward the Fountain of pity, look hitherto:
Behold a spectacle of misery. Bowels of mercy, hear, behold my naked Soul, not
a rag of righteousness to cover it; behold my starving Soul, not a bit of bread
for you to eat; ah! it has fed upon wind and vanity hitherto: Behold my wounded
soul bleeding at thy foot; every part, Head and Heart, Will and Affections, all
wounded by sin. O thou compassionate Samaritan, turn aside, and pour thy
Sovereign blood into these bleeding wounds, which like so many opened mouths
plead for pity. Behold a returning submitting Rebel, willing to lay down the
weapons of unrighteousness, and to come upon the knee for a pardon. Oh I am
weary of the service of sin; I can endure it no longer. Lord Jesus, thou wast
anointed to preach glad tidings to the meek, and to proclaim liberty to the
^aptives, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound. Come now, and
knock off those fetters of unbelief; Oh set my soul at liberty that it may
praise thee! For so many years Satan has cruelly tyrannized over me, oh that
this might be the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of the salvation of
my God! Lord, thou wast lifted up to draw Men unto thee; and indeed thou art a
drawing Savior, a lovely Jesus. I have hitherto slighted thee, but it was
because I did not know thee: mine eyes have been held by unbelief, when thou
wast opened in the Gospel; but now I see thee as the chiefest of ten thousands.
Thou art the glory of Heaven, the glory of Earth, the glory of Sion; and oh
that thou would be the glory of my Soul! I confess, I am not worthy that thou
should look upon me; I may much rather expect to be trampled under the feet
of Justice, than to be embraced in thine arms of Mercy; and that thou should
rather shed my polluted blood, than sprinkle thine own upon me. But Lord, what
profit is there i^ my blood? Will thou pursue a dried leaf? Shall it ever be
said, that the merciful King of Heaven hanged up a poor soul that put the rope
about its own neck, and so came selfcondemningly to him fot mercy? O my Lord! I
am willing to submit to any terms, be they never so hard and ungrateful to the
flesh. I am sure whatever I shall suffer in thy service, cannot be like to what
I have suffered, or am like to fuffer by sin: henceforth be thou my Lord and
Master; thy service is perfect freedom; be thou my Priest and Prophet, my
Wisdom and Righteousness, I resign up my self unto thee: my poor Soul with all
its faculties, my body with all its members, to be living instruments of thy
glory. Let Holiness to the Lord be now written upon them all; let my tongue
henceforth plead for thee, my hands be lifted up unto thy testimonies, my feet
walk in thy ways. Oh let all my affections, as willing servants, wait upon
thee, and be active for thee. Whatever I am, let me be for thee; whatever I
have; let it be thine; whatever I can do, let me do for thee; whatever I can
suffer, let me suffer for thee. O that I might say before I go hence, My
beloved is mine, and I am his! Oh that what I have begged on Earth, might be
ratified in Heaven! My Spirit within me says, Amen. Lord Jesus, say thou. Amen.

FINIS.

