FIVE LOOKS Over the PROFESSORS of the ENGLISH BIBLE.

Wherein is showed the infinite indiscreet Invention, of inconsiderate,
inveterate dissension, about the exaltation of the Propagation of that Gospel,
which we all say, we do Profess to believe.

Whereunto is added, the English Protestants Resolution.

Published by LEVEK HUNARRY.

Whilst we about nice points of Scripture strive,
The Pope would us quite of the Scripture shrive.


(...). (...). ^ondon Printed for George Lindsey. 1642

Five LOOKS over the Professors of the English Bible.
The Emblem which you see on the title of this Book, does very fitly represent
unto the view of all m^n, the present condition of the Church of England, as it
now is full of distraction, and trouble. In the view whereof, whosoever
pleases to (...) their eyes on the Bible; as it there stands opened (which is
verb^m Dei, Gods o^ world revealed unto us, to teach us, for the salvation of
our soul) to be veiled with so black a mist, that there is now great
difficulty found in the true reading thereof; even as there was many
difficulties under the Law, till the (...) was taken away, so is there now so
great a veil, or rather vanity, of humerous ^nventions under the Gospel at
this day in the Church of England, that (whi^ they remain) the true Protestant
Religion, is exceeding diffic^ to be ^uly pro^essed. Is it not (...) miserable
thing that when England is at peace with all the world* she should the quarr^
with her self? and labor with the Spider to weave out her own bowe^ls* what
England that h^th the most absolute Prince of Piety in (...) the world! art
thou so ev^ to be at enmi^y with thy self? thou that have called the wi^ (...)
ever ^ate; art tho^ ^ed? thou that h^st the (...) preac^d ^o ^rely to ^e, art
thou so rude! Oh E^ the g^y of the world* (...) thou make thy se^e the (...) of
(...)* what wan^ ^ou (that other Na^ (...) do thee good! or (...) thou desire
more o^ God, th^n he has done for thee* O then take heed poor Engla^ ^at t^u
do not pr^ke God to leave thee, and (...) love from thee: lo^ ^e tr^* (...)
peace, and learn (...) ^rve God.

I. On the right hand at the bottom of the Picture, you may behold an
Anabaptist, laying claim to the Bible with one hand, and holding an Olive
branch in the other; his laying hold to pull the Bible to him, does show that
he makes Religion his pr^tence, and desires the Bible to be the judge of his
cause: And the Olive branch in the other hand does declare unto us that great
Maxim of their doctrine: for the Anabaptists teach, that whereas they seek to
have a government of the Church in England, to be as it is in Holland, by Lay
Elders independent to the Church of England, and that none but believers shall
be of their congregation; nor infants baptized until they can give a reason of
their faith etc. yet they hold it not lawful to seek it by the sword by
blood, or by disobeying authority: but only to use the lawful spiritual
arms and weapons of a Christian, namely faith and patience, and by prayers to
call upon God that it may be so.

II. The Picture at the foot on the left hand of this Emblem does likewise
demonstrate unto us, that the Brownists do^ also pretend Religion for all their
tenants, actions, ways, who are verily persuaded that they are the true Church
and therefore do admit no unsanctified person to be of their congregation,
they desire to have liberty of conscience, to serve God without Ceremonies, or
precepts of men* and to the end they may not be hindered; they desire an
independent Church where they may freely assemble, and exercise after their own
discipline, in the pursuit whereof* the club that is in his hand does show that
he will fight for the Religion which he profess^th; and though he suffer never
so much for his conscience, yet i^ he no whit discouraged thereat* but counts
^t (...) ^our to suffer for Religion, being mightily persuaded that all who ar^
not of his opinion* are ungodly and reprobates.

III. The great Ar^an, that stands on the left hand of the E^eme does show by
his pulling of the Bible, that he (...) pretends to seek to do all things
according to the (...) God; and these tenants he stands out stoutly for, viz.

1 That Bishops, be they never so wicked, are Iure Divino.

2 That the government of the Church of England, as it now stands by
Archbishops, Bishops, etc. is so holy a government, that it is a sin to alter
it.

3 That the discipline which the Prelates establish, be it what it will, is
Iure Divino.

4 That all the Ceremonies of the Church of England, bind the consciences of
the people to be subdued under them.

5. That Christ is not originally God, some of them have taught.

6. That the Scriptures are not the only means, concerning God, of all that
profitably we know, and that therefore we must build our faith on that
construction which the Prelates of the Church make of the Scripture, to prevent
private construction thereof: as the Bishop of Yorkes Chaplain, and diverse
others have affirmed.

7. That man's will is apt naturally, (without grace) to take or refuse any
particular object, whatsoever presented unto it; and so consequently to
believe, that men's natural works, or to do that which Nature tells us
(without grace) must needs be acceptable to God; as some of our Bishops have
taught.

8. That the Word of God can not assure us, that it is the Word of God, and
from thence to draw arguments to take all things upon trust from the Church,
whatsoever they establish. How dangerous this doctrine is to overthrow the
Fundamentals, and principles of a Christians faith, let all men judge?

9 That a man may do works, in themselves absolutely good, and acceptable in
the sight of God, as they all maintain.

10 That the Minister has power to absolve sin verily, and indeed, where
according to his judgment he finds a person, as he conceives to repent, and
believe; a proud Arogan^.

11 That a Minister has power to damn a man that is not conformable to the
Ceremonies of the Church: as a Lecturer in Cornhill, and others have taught.

12 That to be preserved from all sin in this life, is not impossible.

13 That the Church of Rome (as it now stands) is the family of Christ, and
some members of that Church amongst us, are the Kings best subjects, as Master
Squire of Shoreditch, and others have preached.

14 That Idolatrous wicked Heretics are members of the visible Church, if they
be not excommunicated, as it has bin often taught in Paul's by some of the
Arminians.

15 That there is in Orders given an indeleble Character.

16 That we ought to receive the Communion upon an Altar, and not on a Table.

17 That the real presence of Christ is visible in the Bread and Wine after
Consecration.

18 That the Latin Service ought to be in Churches, as it began to be used in
S. John's College in Cambridge.

19 That Sacraments do give and confer grace, and are instruments of
Justification, that they are as necessary in their place, and no less required
then belief it self; as they often have declared in their Sermons.

20 That Sunday is no Sabbath, as Doctor Poclington has writ.

These and many other things have they labored to bring into the Church,
contrary both to the Scripture, and the true Protestant Religion, professed and
taught in the Church England, Scotland, and all other Reformed Churches.

The Sword which the Arminian bears in his hand does show, that he is a man
that delights in blood, who for the a^ncing of his own humor, cares not how
much blood is spilt. The Arminian in a word) is one, who having gotten both
Swords into his hands over the Protestants; would soon fight for the Pope with
the one, and against the Protestant with the other; he is like the Tartars, to
the O^ House amongst the Turks, and fights for Rome, expecting to be a Roman; I
pray God root them out of the Church of England, and grant us peace.

IIII. On the right side of the Picture you may see an honest-hearted
Protestant weeping; whose tender eyes send forth abundance of tears meekly
kneeling upon his knees* who being grieved to see Religion clouded thus by
cavilling, ^ee labors to know God truly out of his holy word, and therefore
labors to remove the veyle, that obscures it from our eyes, he is not grieved
for himself alone, but for the dishonor done to God, neither does he weep
because he is grieved, but because the Church of God is so distracted; he
^lies not to men, but to God, prays not for blood, but peace; being grieved
to see poor England thus languish.

V. The Pope which you see behind the Bible, does the^ unto us what a danger
the Church of God may be exposed to (if God do not help us) for the Pope is
glad of these distractions amongst us, and would now take the opportunity to
snatch away the Bible from us; he would feign take our Religion away; but we
hope to send him back again to R^e with a powder; not like that in the
Bishops Canons, (...) with nothing but Paper* but the sword of the Spirit of
God, with which we hope he (both root and branch) will be utterly rooted out of
the Church of England, which God grant. Amen.

The Protestants Resolution.
OH England, thou that (...) so rich, and happy Nation,
God c^ls on th^e, and offers Love, Peace, and Salvation;
G^d ^okes from heaven high, beholding every thing,
F^ll d^e and pray aloud, the Lord bless Charles (...) King.
Religion in thy Churches has been taught ^ost free,
A^ve this fourscore years, and still it is ^e ^e,
S^ that the Romish Rabble, have not power (...) bring
Their doctrine in, then pray, the Lord bless Charles our King.
L^ng time this Land has now been filled with peace and plenty,
Now we are full, do we forget? are we so dainty,
That we shall quite neglect our selves? no I will sing,
Whilst I have days to live, the Lord bless Charles our King.
King Charles, thou art a Royal Prince, and does ^are
To all the world, thy goodness, virtue, love, and care,
All Princes stand amazed to hear thy praise to r^g,
Al^ true hearts daily pray, the Lord bless Charles (...) King*
(...) is a blessing great that God ^th England sent
To t^ee so grave, so godly, wise, a Parliament;
C^ England more desire, then thus in every thing,
Blessed to be, Oh pray, the Lord bless Charles our King.
Oh England, would to God, thou d^st consider well,
The ev^, where home War, has to the Church befell,
Nothing b^ ^w and misery it still does bring,
Then pray for (...), and say, the Lord bless Charles our King.
Come let us all ^plore, and pray to God for peace,
That all Domesticke wars, and troubles soon may ^ase,
Amen, Amen, O Lord, Oh let u^ always sing,
And pray with all our hearts, the Lord bless Charles our King.
Amen.
The Protestants Sacrifice.
Oh Lord my God for Engl^nd I ^mplore,
Which in thy Wrath thou now have wounded s^re,
Thy will be done, Lord we submit,
For Mercy Lord, (...) make us fit,
That we may live,
And prays^s give,
To thee always,
Oh hear our prayer,
And do us spare,
That are but ^lay,
O send us peace good God,
Remove thy heavy rod,
And r^concile us unto thee,
An happy union let us s^,
Lord give us all g^ ^o rep^nt, and bless (...) King (...).
FINIS.

