SACRAMENTAL MEDITATIONS Upon diverse select places OF SCRIPTURE WHEREIN
Believers are assisted in preparing their hearts, and exciting their affections
and graces, when they draw nigh to God in that most awful and solemn Ordinance
of the Lords Supper. By Jo. FLAVEL, Minister of Christ in DEVON.

Cant. 4. 16. Awake, O North wind, and come thou South, blow upon my Garden,
that the spices thereof may flow out. Let my Beloved come into his Garden and
eat his pleasant fruit. London, Printed for Jacob Sampson next door to the
Wonder Tavern in Ludgate Street, 1679.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
CHrist may be said to be Crucified three ways; by the Jews actually, in the
Sacrament Declaratively, and by Unbelievers at his Table Interpretatively.
Among sins, Blood-guiltiness is reckoned one of the most heinous, and of all
Blood-guiltiness to be guilty of the Blood of Christ, is a sin of the deepest
guilt, and will be avenged with the most dreadful punishment, 1 Cor. 11. 27,
29. If Vengeance be taken sevenfold on him that Slew Cain, what Vengeance shall
be taken on him that Crucifies afresh the Lord of glory?

The heaviest blow of Divine Justice is still ready to avenge the Abuse of the
best mercy. What can the heart of man concei^e more solemn, more sacred, or
more deeply affective than the representation of the greatest love of the
Father, and the most grievous passions of the Son? What sin can be more
provoking to God, than the slight and contempt of those most awful mysteries?
and what punishment can be more terrible, than for such a wretched soul to eat
and drink Damnation to it self?

Melancthon records a very dreadful example of God's righteous Judgment upon a
Company of Profane wretches, who in a Tragedy intended to act the death of
Christ upon the Cross. He that acted the Soldiers part, instead of piercing
with his Spear a Bladder full of blood hid under the Garment, wounded him to
death that was upon the Cross; who falling down, killed him, who (in a
disguise) acted the part of the Woman that stood wailing under the Cross. His
Brother who was first slain, slew the Murderer, who acted the Soldiers part;
and for staying him, was himself hanged by order of Justice. Thus did the
Vengeance of God speedily overtake them, and hanged them up in Chains, for a
warning to all that should ever dare to dally with the great and jealous God.

These are terrible strokes, and yet not so terrible as those which are more
ordinarily, but less sensibly inflicted upon the inner man for the Abuse of
this Ordinance.

To prevent these Judgments, and obtain those blessings which come through this
Ordinance, great regard must be had to two things, viz.

1. The Inbeing of true Grace. 2. The Activity of true Grace.
1. Examine thy self Reader, whether there be any gracious principle planted in
thy soul, whereby thou art alive indeed unto God. It was an ancient abuse of
the Sacrament (condemned and cast out by the Carthaginian Council) to give it
unto dead men. Council Carthag. Can. 6. Placuit ^t defunctorum corporibus non
detur Eucharistia, etc.
Dead souls can have no Communion with the living God; no more benefit from
this Table, than the Emperors Guests had from his Table, where Loaves of Gold
were set before them to eat. There is more than a show of grace in the
Sacrament; it has not only the visible sign, but the spiritual grace also
which it represents. See that there be more than a show and visible sign of
grace also in thy soul, when thou come nigh to the Lord in that Ordinance.

See to the exercise and activity, as well as to the truth and sincerity of thy
grace. Even a Believer himself does not eat and drink worthily, unless the
grace that is in him be excited and exercised at this Ordinance. It is not
Faith inhereing, but Faith realizing, applying and powerfully working. It is
not a disposition to humiliation for sin, but the actual thawing and melting of
the heart for sin, whilst thou look on him whom thou have pierced, and
mournest for him, as one that mourns for his only Son, for his Firstborn.
Nor is it a disposition or principal of love to Christ that is only required,
but the stirring up of that fire of love, the exciting of it into a vehement
flame.

I know the excitations and exercises of grace are attended with great
difficulties. They are not things within our command, and at our beck. O! it is
hard it is hard indeed, Reader, even after God has taken the heart of stone out
of thee, and given thee an heart of flesh, to mourn actually for sin, even when
so great an occasion and call is given thee to that work at the Lords Table;
for the same power is requisite to excite the act that was required to plant
the habit. Gratia gratiam postulat.

However, the duty is thine, though the power be Gods; why else are his people
blamed, because they stirred not up themselves to take hold of him? Isa. 64. 7.

To assist thee in this work, some help is offered in the following
Meditations. It Is true, it is not the reading of the best Meditations another
can prepare for thee, that will alter the temper of thy heart, except the
Spirit of God concur with these truths, and bless them to thy soul: But yet
these helps must not be slighted, because they are not self-sufficient. Man
lives not by Bread alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of
God; yet it were a fond Vanity and Sin for any man upon that ground to cast
away Bread, and expect to live by a miracle without it. We must lift up our
hearts to God for a Blessing, and then eat; do the same here, first pray, then
read, and the Lord quicken thee by it for duty.

There are two things of special concernment to the Reader, when thou art to
address thy self to any solemn duty, especially such as this:

1. Prepare for thy duty diligently.

2. Rely not upon thy preparations.

First: Prepare with all diligence for thy duty; take pains with thy dull
heart, cleanse thy polluted heart; compose thy vain heart; remember how great a
presence thou art approaching. If Augustus thus reproved Non putabam me tibi
tam familiarem.
one that entertained him without suitable preparation, saying, I did not think
we had been so familiar; much more may thy God reprove thee for thy careless
neglect of due preparation for him.

Secondly: But yet take heed on the other side, that thou rely not upon thy
best preparations. It is an ingenious and true note of Luther, speaking to this
very point of preparation for the Sacrament; never are men more unfit, than
when they Tunc pessime* dispositus quando aptisime.
think themselves most fit, and best prepared for their duty; never more fit,
than when most humbled and ashamed in the sense of their own unfitness.

That the blessing of God, and the breathings of his good Spirit, may accompany
these poor labors to tby soul, is the hearts desire of

Thy Servant in Christ, JOHN FLAVEL.

SACRAMENTAL MEDITATIONS, etc.
The First Meditation UPON
Psalm. 89. 7. God is greatly to be feared in the Assembly of his Saints, and to
be had in Reverence of all that a^re about him.
THERE are special Seasons wherein the Saints approach near unto God in this
Life, and wherein the Lord comes near unto them.

It pleases the Majesty of Heaven sometimes to admit poor Worms of the Earth
to such sensible and sweet perceptions of himself, as are found above all
expressions, and seems to be a transient glance upon that glory, which
glorified eyes more steadily behold above, Believing we rejoice with joy
unspeakable, and full of glory, or glorified joy, (...), Inennarabile and
glorificata. Montan.
as it is, 1 Pet. 1. 8. And yet how sweet and excellent soever these foretasts
of Heaven are, Heaven it self will be an unspeakable surprise to the Saints,
when they shall come thither.

Now among all those Ordinances, wherein the Blessed God manifests himself to
the Children of Men, none are found to set forth more of the joy of his
Presence, than that of the Lords Supper: At that blessed Table are such
sensible embraces betwixt Christ and Believers, as do afford a delight and
solace beyond the joy of the whole Earth.

And where such special manifestations of God are, suitable dispositions and
preparations should be found on our part to meet the Lord.

And certainly, we shall find reason enough for it, if we well consider the
importance of this Scripture before us, God is greatly to be feared in the
Assembly of his Saints, and to be had in Reverence of all that are round about
him; wherein we have

The 1. Object 2. Subject 3. Mode
of divine Worship.

First, The Object of Worship, God; 1.
God is to be feared: In all divine Worship Men and Angels have to do with God.
All things (says the Apostle) are open and naked to the eyes of him, with whom
we have to do, Heb. 4. 13. with whom we have speech or business. So it may be
sensed, when we Worship, we draw nigh to God, and that about the greatest
concerns and weightiest business in the world.

Secondly, The Subject, or the Persons 2.
that approach unto God in his worship, his Saints, and all that are about him.
By Saints, many Interpreters do in this place understand the Angels, called
Saints from the purity and holiness of their Nature; and so make the next
clause exegetical of this. Those that before were called Saints in respect of
their Nature, are in the next words said to be such as are round about him; his
Satellites, Attendants, or those that stand as Servants about him, to do his
pleasure where they are described by their Office; and both these seem to be
grounded upon the precedent Verses. Who in the Heaven can be compared to the
Lord? Who among the Sons of the Mighty (or of God) so the Angels are called,
Job 1. 6. can be likened to the Lord? And though it be true, that the Angels
worship and serve the Lord with greatest reverence and dread (for these are his
nigh Ones, or such as are round about him) yet there is no necessity to limit
this Scripture so narrowly, by excluding the people of God on Earth; they also
are his Saints, and more frequently so styled, though they be Saints of a lower
Class and Order; and they also are round about him as well as the Angels, and
when they worship him, he is in the midst of them, Matthew. 18. 20. and the place
where they Assemble to worship, is called the place of his Feet, Isa. 60. 13.
But if we find not the Saints on Earth in the direct and immediate sense of
this Text, yet we must needs meet them in the rebound and consequence: For if
Creatures so much above us as the Angels, do perform their Service, and pay
their Homage to the highest Majesty with so much fear and reverence, shall not
inferior Creatures, the poor Worms of the Earth, tremble at his presence? And
this brings us to the third thing.

Namely, the Mode, or manner in which the Worship of God is to be performed, 3.
viz. With great fear and reverence. God is greatly to be feared; Piscator
Translates it Vehementer formidandus, to be vehemently feared; and opposes it
to that formal, careless, trifling, vain spirit, which too often is found in
those that approach the Lord in the duties of his Worship.

The Observation from hence will be this.

Observation.
That the greatest composedness and seriousness of spirit is due to God, from
all those that draw nigh unto him in his Worship.

And this is no more than what the Lord expressly requires at our hands, Levit.
10. 3. I will be Sanctified in them that come nigh unto me: So Heb. 12. 28. Let
us have Grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably, with reverence and Godly
fear, for our God is a Consuming fire.

And as this disposition and temper of spirit is due to every act and part of
Gods Worship, so (to accommodate this general to our particular occasion) it is
especially due to this great and solemn Ordinance of the Lords Supper.

It is the Observation of the Casuists, that Sacramentum and mortis articulus
aequiparantur, the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, and the very point of death
require equal seriousness; a man's spirit should be as deeply solemn and
composed at the Lords Table, as upon a Dead-bed: We should go to that
Ordinance, as if we were then going into another world.

The Primitive Christians used to sit up whole Nights in Meditation and Prayer,
before their participation of the Lords Supper; and these Nights were called
Vigiliae, their Watches. Such was the Reverence the Saints had for this
Ordinance (which they usually call d mysterium tremendum, a tremendous
Chrysostom. lib. 3. de Sacerdot.
Mystery) that they would not give sleep to their eyes, or slumber to their
eyelids, when so great and solemn a day drew near.

And that all this solemn preparation is no more than needs, will convincingly
appear to us upon the following grounds and reasons.

First, From the solemn nature and Reas. 1.
ends of this Ordinance; for what is the express design and use of it, but a
lively representation of the Lords death, 1 Cor. 11. 26. As often as ye eat
this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lords death till he come. Jesus
Christ is therein set forth Crucified before us, and not to make a bare
representation of it to us, as a thing wherein we have no personal interest or
concernment, but to represent his death lively, and seal our title to it
firmly: This is my body which is broken for you, ver. 24.

Now which of these is to be attended with a dead, careless, and slight spirit?
Is It the representation of Christ's death? God forbid. O, if there be any
subject of Meditation in the world able to drink up the very spirits of a man,
this is it.

The Sun fainted, the Heavens mourned in black, the very Rocks rent in pieces
when this Tragedy was acted; and shall our hearts be more senseless and
obdurate than they at the representation of it? But lo, here is more than a
representation; Christ is set forth in this Ordinance as Crucified for you, as
suffering and enduring all this in your room and stead: Now,

Suppose, Reader, thy self to be justly Condemned to the torture of the Rack,
or Strappado; and that thy Father, Brother, or dearest Friend preferring thy
life to his own, would become thy (...), Ransomer, by undergoing the torment
for thee; and all that is left for thee to suffer, were only by way of Sympathy
with him? Suppose now thy self standing by that Engine of Torture, and
beholding the members of thy dear Friend distorted, and all out of joint,
hearing the doleful groans extorted by the extremity of anguish; and under all
these torments, still maintaining a constant love to thee, not once repenting
his torments* for thee; could thou stand there with dry eyes? could thy heart
be unaffected and stupid at such a sight? Write him rather a Beast, a Stone,
than a Man, that could do so.

But this is not all: The Believers interest in Christ is Sealed, as well as
the sufferings of Christ represented in this Ordinance.

And is a Sealed Interest in Christ, so cheap or common a thing, as that it
should not engage, yea, swallow up all the powers of thy soul! O what is this!
What is this?

The Seal of God set to the Soul of a poor Sinner, to confirm and ratify its
title to the Person of Christ, and the inestimable treasures of his Blood!
Surely as the Sealing up of a man to Damnation, is the sum of all misery, and
that poor Creature that is so Sealed has cause enough to mourn and wail to
Eternity: So the sealing up of a soul to Salvation, is the sum of all mercy and
happiness; and the Soul that is so sealed, has cause enough to lie at the feet
of God, overwhelmed with the sense of so invaluable a mercy.

Secondly: As the nature and ends 2. Reas.
of the Ordinance call for the greatest composedness of spirit, so the danger
of unworthy receiving should work our hearts to the most serious frames: For if
a man be here without his Weddinggarment, if he eat and drink unworthily, it is
at the greatest peril of his soul that he does so, 1 Cor. 11. 27. Wherefore
whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily,
shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord.

To profane and undervalue that Body and Blood of the Lord, is a sin above
measure sinful, and the punishments of such sins will be most dreadful; for
still, the more excellent the Blessings are that come by any Ordinance, the
more dreadful the Curses are that avenge the abuse of such mercies. How soon
may a man draw fearful guilt upon his soul, and dreadful judgments upon his
body, by an heedless management of such sacred mysteries! For this cause many
are weak and fickly among you, and many sleep, ver. 30.

It is a most weighty Note that a Mr. Tho. Goodwins Epistle to Mr. Fenners
Sermon.
worthy Pen sets upon this Scripture; they discerned not the Body of his Son
Jesus Christ in his Ordinances; but instead of that holy, reverend, and
deepdyed behavior which was due to it, both from their inner and outward man,
as being a Creature of the highest and deepest Sanctification that ever God
Sanctified; Sanctified not only to a more excellent and glorious condition, but
also to many ends and purposes, of far higher and dearer concernment, both for
the glory of God, and benefit of men themselves, than all other Creatures
whatsoever, whether in Heaven or Earth: they handled and dealt by it in both
kinds, as if it had been a common or unsanctified thing: Thus they discerned
not the Lords Body.

And as they discerned not his Body, so neither did God (in some sense) discern
theirs; but in those sore Strokes, and heavy Judgments which he inflicted on
them, had them in no other regard or consideration, than as if they had been
the bodies of his Enemies, the bodies of wicked and sinful men. Thus drawing
the model and platform of their punishment (as usually he does) from the
structure and proportion of their sin.

Thus the Just and Righteous God builds up the breaches that we make upon the
honor belonging to the body of his Son, with the ruins of that honor which he
had given unto ours, in health, strength, life, and many other outward comforts
and supports.

O then what need is there of a most awful and composed spirit, when we
approach the Lord in this Ordinance!

Thirdly: As the danger of unworthy receiving should compose us to the greatest
seriousness, so the remembrance of that frame and temper Christ's spirit was in,
when he actually suffered those things for us, should compose our spirits into
a frame more suitable and agreeable to his; when we see his death, as it were,
acted over again before our eyes, was his heart roving and wandering in that
day? Did he not sense and mind the work he was going about? Was his heart like
thine, stupid and unaffected with these things? Look but upon that Text, Luke
22. 44. and you shall see whether it were so or no. It Is said (when this
Tragedy drew nigh, and his Enemies were ready to seize him in the Garden) That
being in an Agony, he prayed more earnestly, and his sweat was, as it were,
great drops of Blood falling down to the ground: And Matthew. 26. 38. he says,
My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death. His soul was full of sorrow,
and is thine full of stup^y? God forbid.

If thy heart be cold, Christ's was hot: If thou can not shed a tear, he
poured out clods of blood from every part. Oh! how unsuitable is a dry eye, and
an hard heart to such an Ordinance as this!

Fourthly: As the frame Christ's spirit 4. Reas.
was in, at his death, should command the most solemn frame upon our spirits,
at the recognizing of it, so the things here represented, require and call for
the highest exercise of every grace of the spirit in our souls; for we come not
thither as idle Spectators, but as active Instruments to glorify God by
exercising every grace upon Christ, as Crucified for us.

Behold here among the rest,

1. The proper object of Faith. 2. The flowing spring of Repentance. 3. The
powerful attractive of Love.
First: The proper object of Faith is 1.
here. This Ordinance, as a glass, represents to thine eye that glorious
Person, of whom the Father said, This is my Beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased, Matthew. 17. 5. Of whom he said, I have laid help upon one that is
mighty. This was he that was made Sin for us, who had no Sin, that we might be
made the Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Who trod the Winepress
alone, and is here to be seen in his red Garments: Every drop of his precious
Blood has a tongue calling for Faith to behold it, poured forth as a Sacrifice
to God for sin. This (says he) is the cup of the New Testament in my Blood,
which was shed for many for the remission of sin.

And what footing could thy Faith find for Pardon and Salvation any where else?
It Is Christ Crucified that Faith claspes as the last and only hope, and refuge
of a poor Sinner. Here all Believers drop Anchor: This is that blessed object
on whom they take the dead gripe, or last grasp, when their eye-strings and
heart strings are breaking. When you see the Blood of Christ flowing forth, how
can Faith be silent in thy soul? When he bids thee, as it were, to put thy
finger into his side, shows thee his hands and his feet there, it will cry out
in thy soul, my Lord, and my God.

Secondly: The flowing spring of Repentance is here, if there be any fire 2.
that can melt, or hammer that can break a hard heart, here it is, Zech. 12.
10. They shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and mourn. Nothing lays a
gracious soul lower in it self, than to see how low Christ was laid in his
Humiliation for it.

Here the evil of sin is also represented in the clearest glass that ever the
eye of man saw it in. The sufferings of the Son of God discover the evil of sin
more than the everlasting torments of the Damned can do. So that if there be
but one drop of Spiritual sorrow in the heart of a Christian, here methinks it
should be seen dropping from the eye of Faith.

Thirdly: The most attractive object 3.
of love is here: Put all Created Beauties, Excellencies and Perfections
together, and what are they but blackness and deformity compared with lovely
Jesus? My Beloved (says the enamored Spouse) is white and ruddy, Cant. 5. 10.
Behold him at the Table in his perfect Innocence, and unparalled sufferings.
This is he who was rich, but for our sakes became poor, that we through his
poverty might be rich, 2 Cor. 8. 9. This is he that parted with his honor
first, and his life next; yea, he parted with his honor in his Incarnation,
that he might be capable to part with his life for our Redemption.

Behold here the degrees of his Sufferings, and by them measure the degrees of
his Love. Behold in his death, as in the Deluge all the Fountains beneath, and
the Windows of Heaven above opened; the Wrath of God, the Cruelty of Men, the
fury of Hell breaking in together upon him, and his soul surrounded with
sorrow: And how can this be represented, and thy soul not astonished at this
amazing matchless love of Christ? Surely one flame does not more naturally
produce another, than the love of Christ thus represented to a gracious soul,
does produce love to Christ, and that in the most intense degree.

Use 1.
How naturally does this Doctrine shame and humble the best hearts for 1. Use.
their sinful discomposures, vanity, and deadness; for the rovings and
wanderings of their hearts, even when they come near the Lord in such a solemn
Ordinance as this is?

The Holiest man upon Earth may lay his hand upon his breast, and say, Lord,
how unsultable is this heart of mine, to such an object of Faith as is here
presented to me? Does such a temper of spirit suit thine awful presence? Should
the represented Agonies and sufferings of Christ for me, be beheld with a
spirit no more concerned, pierced and wounded for sin? O how can I look upon
him whom I have pierced, and not mourn, and be in bitterness for him, as for an
only Son, a Firstborn! O the stupifying and benumming power of sin! Oh the
efficacy of Unbelief!

It was charged upon the Israelites, as the great aggravation of their sin,
that they provoked God at the Sea, even at the Psalm. 106. 7.
red Sea, the place where their miraculous Salvation was wrought. But Lord
Jesus, my hard heart provokes thee in an higher degree, even at the red Sea of
thy precious invaluable Blood, by which my eternal Salvation was wrought. O my
God, what a heart have I? Did the Blood of Christ run out so freely and
abundantly for me, and cannot I shed one tear for my sins that pierced him? O
let me never be Friends with my own heart, till it love Christ better, and hate
sin more.

Use 2.
This Scripture has also an awaking Use 2.
voice to all that come nigh to God in any of his Ordinances, especially in
this Ordinance. O Christians! bethink your selves where you are, and what you
are doing: Know you not that the King comes in to see the Guests? Yea, you do
know that God is in this place; an awful Majesty beholds you. All the Churches
shall know that I am he that searches the heart and the reins, and will give
to every one as his work shall be, Rev. 2. 23.

Thy business, Christian, is not with Men, but with God, and the solemnest
business that ever thy thoughts were versant about. Thou art here to recognize
the sufferings of thy Redeemer, to take the seals and pledges of thy Salvation
from the hand of his spirit; imagine the same thing which is now to be done
spiritually, and by the ministry of Faith, were but to be performed visibly and
audibly by the ministry of thy sense.

Suppose Jesus Christ did personally show himself at this Table, and were
pleased to make himself known in breaking of Bread, as once he did to the
Disciples. Suppose thou saw him appear at this Table, as he now does appear
in Heaven, as a Lamb that had been slain? Imagine thou heardest him say,
Believer, this precious Blood of mine was shed for thee; there be Millions of
Men and Women in the world naturally as good as thee, that shall have no
interest in it, or benefit by it: But for thee it was shed, and for the
remission of thy sins; my Blood was the only thing in the world that was equal
to the demerit of thy sins, and it has made full satisfaction to God for them
all: Thy sins which are many, are therefore forgiven thee; my Blood has
purchased the eternal Inheritance of glory for thee; and this day I am come to
del^er the seals and pledges thereof into thine hand. Take then the seals of
eternal Salvation this day: Take thine own Christ with all that he is and has
in thine arms: Whatever I have suffered, done, or procured for any of my
Saints, I have suffered, done, and procured the same for thee. Why, all this is
here to be done as really and truly, though in a more spiritual way, at this
Table; and shall not such business as this is fully fix and engage thy heart?
What then shall do it?

Awake Faith; awake Repentance; awake Love; yea, let all the powers of my soul
be thoroughly awakened this day, to attend the Lord.

THE SECOND MEDITATION UPON
Jer. 12. 2. Thou art near in their mouth, and far from their reins.
THIS Scripture gives us the Character and description of an Hypocrite, and he
is here described two ways, viz. 1. By what he has. 2. By what he has not.

First: The Hypocrite is described by what he has; he has God in his 1.
mouth: Thou art near in their mouth, (i. e.) they profess with a full mouth,
that they are thy People, says Piscator; or, they speak much about the Law (as
another senses it) God, and his Temple, Religion with its rites are much talked
of among them, they have him in their prayers and duties; and this is all that
the Hypocrite has of God. Religion only sanctifies his tongue that seems to be
dedicated to God, but it penetrates no farther; and therefore,

Secondly: He is described by that he has not, or by what he wants; And, 2.
or but thou art far from their reins, (i. e.) they feel not the powers and
influences of that name which they so often invocate and talk of, going down to
their very reins, and affecting their very hearts; so we must understand this
Metaphorical expression here, as the opposition directs. For the reins having
so great and sensible a sympathy with the heart, which is the seat of
affections and passions, upon that account it is usual in Scripture, to put the
reins for those intimate and secret affections, thoughts, and passions of the
heart, with which they have so near cognation, and so sensible a sympathy. When
the heart is under great consternation, the loins or reins are seized also, as
Dan. 5. 6. Then that Kings Countenance was changed, and his thoughts troubled
him, and the joints of his loins were loosed. On the contrary, when the heart
is filled with delight and gladness, the reins are said to rejoice, Prove. 23.
16. Yea, my reins shall rejoice when thy lips speak right things, totus
laetitia dissiliam. I shall even leap for joy. So then, when the Prophet says,
God is far from the reins of the Hypocrite, the meaning is, he feels not the
heart-affecting influence and power of Religion upon his heart and affections,
as Gods People do. And hence the Note will be.

That God comes nearer to the hearts and reins of his People in their duties,
Doct.
than he does to any Hypocritical, or formal Professor.

By Gods nearness, we understand not his Omnipresence, that neither comes nor
goes; nor his love to his People, that abides, but the sensible sweet
manifestations and out-lets of it to their souls. So in Psalm. 145. 18. The Lord
is nigh unto all that call upon him, unto all that call upon him in truth.

Note the restriction and limitation of this glorious privilege; it is the
peculiar enjoyment of sincere, and upright-hearted Worshippers. Others may have
Communion with duties, but not with God in them.

But that God comes nigh, very nigh to upright hearts in their duties, is a
truth as sensibly manifest to spiritual persons, as that they are nigh the fire
when they feel the comfortable heat of it refreshing them in a cold season,
when they are almost starved and benumed with cold.

Three things make this evident.

First: Sincere souls are sensible of 1.
Gods accesses to them in their duties; they feel his approaches to their
spirits. Lam. 3. 57. Thou drewest near in the day that I called upon thee; thou
said, fear not. And what a surprise was that to the Church? Cant. 2. 8. It is
the Voice of my Beloved, behold he comes, etc. Certainly there is a felt
presence of God, which no words can make another to understand; they feel the
Fountain flowing abundantly into the dry pits, the heart fills apace, the empty
thoughts swell with a fullness of spiritual things which strive for vent.

Secondly: They are sensible of Gods 2.
recesses, and withdrawments from their spirits, they feel how the ebb follows
the flood, and how the waters abate. So you find it in Cant. 5. 6. I opened to
my Beloved, but my Beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone, my soul failed
when he spoke: I sought him, but I could not find him; I called, but he gave me
no answer. The Hebrew is very Pathetical, He was gone, he was gone. A sad
change of the frame of her heart quickly followed.

Thirdly: The Lords nearness to the 3.
hearts and reins of his People in their duties, is evident to them from the
effects that it leaves upon their spirits. For look as it is with the Earth and
Plants, with respect to the approach or remove of the Sun in the Spring and
Autumn: So it is here as Christ speaks, Luke 21. 29. When ye see the Fig Tree
and all the Trees shoot forth, we know that Summer is nigh at hand. An
appoaching Sun renews the face of the Earth, and makes Nature smile. The Trees
bud and blossom, the Fishes rise, the Birds sing, it is a kind of Resurrection
to Nature from the dead. So is it when the Lord comes near the Dr. Preston,
when dying, said, I shall change my place, not my Company.
hearts and reins of men in duty: For then they find that

First, A real taste of the joy of the Lord is here given to men, the fullness
whereof is in Heaven; hence called, 2 Cor. 1. 22. The earnest of his Spirit:
And 1 Pet. 1. 8. Glorified Joy; or a short Salvation. O, what is this? What is
this? Certainly it is something that has no Affinity with flesh, or gross
corporeal pleasures; but is of another nature, something which transcends all
that ever was felt or tasted in this world, since we were first conversant
among sensible objects.

Secondly: A mighty strength and power coming into their souls, and actuating
all its faculties and graces. When God comes near, new powers enter the soul;
the feeble is as David, Psalm. 138. 3. In the day that I cried, thou Cant. 1.
12. Whilst the King siteth at his Table, my Spikenard, ^c.
answeredst me, and strengthenedst me with strength in my soul: Hope was low,
and Faith was weak, little strength in any grace, except desires; but when the
Lord comes, strength comes with him. Then as it is Neh. 8. 10. The joy of the
Lord is your strength. O the vigorous sallies of the heart to God! Psalm. 63. 8.
O the strength of Love, Cant. 8. 6. Duties are other manner of things than they
were wont to be. Did not our hearts burn within us, Luke 24. 32.

Thirdly: A remarkable transformation and change of spirit follows it.

These things are found to be marvelously assimilating. The sights of God, the
felt presence of God, is as fire which quickly assimilates what is put into it,
to its own likeness. So 2 Cor. 3. 18. They are said to be changed from glory to
glory. It always leaves the mind more refined and abstracted from gross
material things, and changed into the same Image. They have a similitude of God
upon them, who have God near unto their hearts and reins.

Fourthly: A vigorous working of the heart Heavenward: A mounting of the soul
upwards. Now the soul shows that it has not forgot its way home again. It is
with such a soul as sensibly embraces Christ in the arms of Faith, as it was
with Simeon, when he took him bodily into his Arm. Now (says he) let thy
Servant depart in peace, for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation. O! it would
have the wings of a Dove to fly away from this polluted world, this unquiet
world, and be at rest.

1. Infer.
Then certainly there is an Heaven and 1. Infer.
a state of glory for the Saints. Heaven is no dream or night Vision. It is
sensibly tasted and felt by thousands of Witnesses in this world; they are sure
it is no mistake. God is with them of a truth, in the way of their duties. They
do not only read of a glorified eye, but they have something of it, or like it
in this world. The pure in heart do here see God, Matthew. 5. 8. The Saints have
not only a Witness without them in the Word, that there is a state of glory
prepared for Believers, but they have a witness in themselves. These are not
the Testimonies of crazed brains, but of the wisest and most serious of men;
not a few, but a multitude of them; not conjecturally delivered, but upon
taste, feeling, and trial. O, blessed be God for such sensible Confirmations,
such sweet praelibations.

2. Infer.
But, O, what is Heaven! and what 2. Infer.
that, state of glory reserved for the Saints: Does a glimps of Gods presence
in a duty, go down to the heart and reins? O, how unutterable then must that be
which is seen and felt above, where God comes as near to men as can be? Rev.
22. 3, 4. The Throne of God and the Lamb shall be in it, and his Servants shall
serve him; and they shall see his face. And 1 These. 4. 17. And so shall we be
ever with the Lord. O, what is that! Ever with the Lord. (...) Christians, what
you feel and taste here by Faith, is part of Heavens glory; but yet Heaven will
be an unspeakable surprizal to you, when you come thither for all that: It does
not yet appear what we shall be, 1 John 3. 1, 2.

3. Infer.
See hence the necessity of casting 3. Infer.
these very bodies into a new mold by their Resurrection from the dead,
according to that, 1 Cor. 15. 41. It is sown in weakness, but raised in power.
How else could it be a Co-partner with the soul in the ineffable joys of that
presence above.

Certainly my Friends, that which is to be a Vessel to contain such strong
liquor as this, had need be strongly hooped; lest it fly to pieces, as old
Bottles do when fill^d with new Wine. The state of this Mortality cannot bear
the fullness of that joy. Hold Lord, stay thy hand (said a choice Christian
once) thy Creature is but a clay Vessel, and can hold no more. If a transient
glimpse of God here, be felt in the very reins; if it so work upon the very
body by sympathy with the soul, O, what vigorous spiritual bodies does the
state of glory require! And such they shall be, Phil. 3. 21. like unto Christ's
glorious Body.

4. Infer.
Is God so near to his People above 4. Infer.
all others in the world? how good is it to be near them that are so near to
God. O, it would do a man's heart good to be near that Person who has lately
had God near to his soul. Well might David say; Psalm. 16. 3. All my delight is
in the Saints, and in the Excellent of the Earth. And again, Psalm. 119 63. I am
a Companion of all such as fear thee. O, this is the beauty of Christian
fellowship; this is the glory of that Society; not the communication of their
gifts, but the Savor of God on their Spirits. If any thing be alluring in this
World, this is, 1 John 1. 3. That ye may have fellowship with us, and truly our
fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Christ Jesus. It Is said, Zech.
8. 23. of the Jews, the time shall come when there shall be such a presence of
God among that People, that ten men out of all Languages shall take hold of the
skirt of him that is a Jew; saying, we will go with you, for we have heard that
God is with you.

Christians; if there were more of God upon you, and in you, others would not
be tempted to leave your Society, and fall in with the Men of the World; they
would say, we will go with you, for God is with you.

5. Infer.
If God be so near to the heart and 5. Infer.
reins of his People in their duties, O, how assiduous should they be in their
duties? It Is good for me to draw nigh to God, Psalm. 73. 28. Good indeed; the
World cannot reward the expense of time at this rates, with all its glory, Jam.
4. 8. Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you: Thou meetest him that
rejoices and works Righteousness; those that remember thee in thy ways, Isa.
64. 5.

It would be an encouragement indeed, Ob.
if I might thus meet God in the way of duty, but that is but seldom I can so
meet God there, in sensible powerful out-lets of his grace and love. I am
mostly dead and cold there. I feel not Communion with God going down to my
heart and reins.

First, you draw nigh to God; but Sol.
is it in truth, or in mere formality? God is only nigh to such as call in
truth upon him, Psalm. 145. 18.

Secondly: If your hearts be sincere, yet are they not sluggish? Do you stir up
your selves to take hold of God? many there be that do not, Isa. 64. 7. and
Cant. 5. 3, 5.

Thirdly: Have you not grieved the Spirit of God, and caused him to withdraw
from you? O, remember what Pride and Vanity has been in you after former
manifestations, Ephesians. 4. 30.

Fourthly: Nevertheless wait for God in his ways; his coming upon our souls is
oftentimes, yea, mostly a surprizal to us, Cant. 6. 12. Or ever I was aware, my
soul made me as the Chariots of Aminadab.

6. Infer.
What steady Christians should all 6. Infer.
real Christians be? For lo, what a Seal and Witness has Religion in the
breast of every sincere Professor of it? True Christians do not only hear by
report, or learn by Books the reality of it, but feel by experience, and have a
sensible proof of it in their very hearts and reins; their reins instruct them,
as it is Psalm. 16. 7. They learn by spiritual sense and feeling, than which
nothing can give greater confirmation in the ways of God.

There are two sorts of knowledge among men, one Traditional, the other
Experimental: This last, the Apostle calls a knowing in our selves, Heb. 10 34.
and opposes it to that traditional knowledge which may be said to be without
our selves, because borrowed from other men.

Now this experience we have of the powers of Religion in our souls, is that
only which fixes a man's spirit in the ways of Godliness. It made the Hebrews
take joyfully the spoiling of their goods; no arguments or temptations can
wrest truth out of the hand of experience, non est disputandum de gustu. For
want of this, many Professors turn aside from truth in the hour of trial. O,
Brethren, labor to feel the influences of Religion upon your very hearts and
reins; this will settle you better than all Arguments in the world can do: By
this the ways of God are more endeared to men, than by any other way in the
world. When your hearts have once felt it, you will never forsake it.

THE THIRD MEDITATION UPON
Romans 7. 21. I find then a Law, that when I would do good, evil is present with
me.
THIS Chapter is the very Anatomy of a Christians heart, and gives an account
of the most secret frames and inward workings of it, both as to Graces and
Corruptions; and this Verse is a Compendium of both; for the words are a
mournful complaint, uttered with a deep sense of an inward pressure, by reason
of Sin; wherein we are to consider three things.

1. The person complaining, 2. The matter of complaint. 3. The discovery of
that matter.
First: The person complaining I 1.
find: I Paul, though I come not behind the chiefest of all the Apostles,
though I have been ^rapt into the third Heaven, and heard things unutterable;
yet I for all that, find in me a Law. Never was any mere man more deeply
sanctified; Never any lived at an higher rate of Communion with God; never any
did Christ more service in this world; and yet he found a Law of sin in himself.

Secondly: The matter of the complaint 2.
which consists in a double evil he groaned under, viz.

1. The presence of sin at all times. 2. The operation of sin, especially at
some time.
First: The presence of sin at all times. Evil (says he) is present with me,
it follows me as my shadow does. By evil we must understand no other evil but
sin, the evil of evils; which in respect of power and efficacy, he also calls a
Law, because as Laws by reason of their annexed rewards and punishments, have a
mighty power and efficacy upon the minds of men; so sin, in-dwelling sin, that
root of all our trouble and sorrow, has a mighty efficacy upon us.

And this is the mournful matter of his complaint: It Is not for outward
Afflictions, though he had many; nor for what he suffered from the hands of
men, though he suffered many grievous things; but it is sin, dwelling and
working in him, that swallows up all other troubles, as Rivers are lost in the
Sea; this evil was always with him, the constant residence of sin was in his
heart and nature.

Secondly: And what further adds to his burden, as it dwelt in him at all
times, so it exerted its efficacy more especially at some times, and those the
special times and principal seasons in his whole life: When I would do good Cum
ad optima quaeque contendo, experio aliam legem tunc maximi in surgit and
percipitar lex carnis. Tolletus.
(says he) any spiritual good; and among the rest, when I address my self to
any spiritual duty, or Heavenly employment; when I design to draw near to God,
and promise my self comfort and redress in Communion with him, then is Evil
present. O, if I were but rid of it in those hours, what a mercy should I
esteem it, though I were troubled with it at other times! Could I but enjoy my
freedom from it in the seasons of duty and times of communion with God, what a
comfort would that be? But then is the special season of its operation. Never
is sin more active and busy than at such a time; and this, O, this is my
misery and burden.

Thirdly: The next thing to be heeded here, is the discovery of this evil to
him, over which he so mourns and laments. I find then a Law, says he, I find
it (i. e.) by inward sense feeling and sad experience. He knew there was such a
thing as Original sin in the Natures of men, when he was an Unregenerated
Pharisee; but though he had then the notion of it, he had not the sense and
feeling of it as now he had; he now feels what before he traditionally
understood and talked of. I find a Law. q. d. What or how others find, I know
not, I examine not; some may boast of their gifts, and some may talk more than
becomes them of their graces; they may find excellencies in themselves, and
admire themselves too much for them: But for my part, I find a Law, that when I
would do good, evil is present. I am sure I find a bad heart in the best
season, a proud dead, wandering, hard heart. I find it woefully out of order God
knows, and this is my misery.

Hence Note.

Doct.
That the best Christians do sensibly feel, Doct.
and sadly bewail the workings of their corruptions; and that in the very
seasons and opportunities of their communion with God.

Bring thy thoughts Reader close to this point, and sadly ponder these three
things in it.

First: In what special acts Christians use to feel the working of their
corruption in the season of their Communion.

Secondly: Why is it that Corruption stirs and troubles them more at such
times, than at others.

Thirdly: Upon what account this is so great a burden to every gracious heart.

1.
First: As to the first of these, namely, 1.
the special actings of Corruption in the seasons of Communion, they are such
as have a natural aptitude and design to destroy all Communion betwixt God and
the soul, Gal. 5. 17. The flesh lusts against the spirit. It Is contrary to
the spirit, and by reason of that contrariety, a poor Christian cannot do the
things that he would.

How many times have some Christians lamented this upon their knees, with
bleeding hearts and weeping eyes? Lord I came hither to enjoy thee; I hoped for
some light, strength, and refreshment in this duty. I promised my self a good
hour; my heart began to warm and melt in duty; I was nigh to the expectation
and desire of my soul; but the unbelief, deadness, and vanity of my heart has
separated betwixt me and my God, and withheld good things from me.

Three things are requisite to Communion with God in duties.

First: Composedness of thoughts.

Secondly: Activity of Faith.

Thirdly: Excitation of affections, and all these are sensibly obstructed by
innate Corruption: For by in-dwelling sin.

First: The order of the soul is disturbed by sending forth multitudes of 1.
vain and impertinent thoughts to infest and distract the soul in its
approaches to God; the sense of this evil gave occasion to that prayer, Psalm.
86. 11. Unite my heart to fear thy Name. How much have we to do with our own
hearts upon this account every day? Abundance of rules are given to cure this
evil; but the corruption of the heart makes them all necessary.

Secondly: The activity of Faith is 2.
clogged by natural unbelief: O, what difficulties is every work of Faith
carried through? Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief, Mark. 9. 24. It cramps
the hand of Faith in every part of its work; the soul sensibly feels it self
bound and fettered by its own unbelief, so that it cannot assent with that
fullness, clearness, and determinatness that it would. It cannot apply with that
strength, certainty, and comfort it desires; and thus are the wings of Faith
pinioned, that when we should soar aloft in the highest acts of sweet communion
with God, we can but flutter upon the Earth, and make some weak essays and
offers Heavenward, which often times are frustrated and put by, through the
unbelief that is in us.

Thirdly: The excitation of the affection is rendered difficult by reason of
that natural deadness and hardness that is in the heart. Alas! It Is naturally
an heart of stone, and as easy it is to dissolve or melt the Rocks into a
sweet syrup, as the heart into spiritual and Heavenly affections toward God.
There is scarce any one thing in this world that Christians more passionately
bewail, and are more sensibly afflicted for, than the deadness and hardness of
their own hearts. Nothing is found sufficient sometimes to effect, and raise
them; and yet if they be not excited out of their torpor and stupidity, they
cannot have Communion with God in duties,

2.
Secondly: And if we enquire into the reasons why poor Christians find 2.
themselves more infested by natural Corruption in the seasons of duty, than at
other times, the reasons are obvious to him that considers,

That 1. Duty irritates it. 2. Satan excites it. 3. God permits it to be so.

First: Corruption is irritated by 1.
duty, its provoked by that which bridles and purges it: Nothing is found more
destructive to Sin, than Communion with God is, and therefore nothing makes a
fiercer opposition to all fellowship and communion betwixt the soul and its
God, than sin does. As Waters swell and rage when they are obstructed by a dam,
so do our Corruptions, when obstructed and checked by duty. Sin would fain make
men leave praying, and Prayer would fain make men leave sinning.

Secondly: As Duty irritates it, so Satan excites it, especially in such
seasons. 2.
When Joshua, the High Priest, stood before the Lord, Satan was seen standing
at his right hand to resist him, Zech. 3. 1. How hard is it for a Christian
then to be dexterous, apt, and ready for spiritual works, whilst Satan stands
at his right hand, the working hand, to make resistance.

The Devil is aware that one hour of close spiritual and hearty converse with
God in Prayer, is able to pull down what he has been contriving and building
many a year. Now this envious Spirit having an easy access to to the fancy,
that busy and unruly power of the soul, will not be wanting to create such
figments and notions in it, as like a rapid stream shall carry away the soul
and all its thoughts from God in duty. Oh, what ado have most Christians to
prevent the sallies and excursions of their hearts from God at such times!

Thirdly: As Satan exercises it, so 3.
the Wise and Holy God, for good ends to his People, permits it to be so.

This Thorn in the Flesh keeps them humble; these lamented destructions and
corruptions in their duties destroys their dependence upon them, and glorying
in them. For if we be so prone to pride and confidence in our duties, amidst
such sensible workings and minglings of Corruption with them, what should we be
if they were more pure and excellent? These things also make the Saints weary
of this World, and to groan within themselves after the more perfect state,
wherein God shall be enjoyed and seen in more perfection and satisfaction. But

3.
Thirdly: This in the mean time 3.
cannot but be a very grievous affliction and pressure to the gracious soul, to
be thus clogged and infested by its own Corruptions in the very season of its
communion with God. For,

First: By this the soul is rendered very unsuitable to that holy presence it
approaches, Hab. 1. 13. Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and can
not look upon Iniquity. Must the great and blessed God wait upon a poor Worm
till it be at leisure to attend him? Must he be forsaken for every trifle that
comes in the way of its fancy? Oh, how provoking an evil is this! Surely God
hears not Vanity, neither will the Almighty regard it, Job 35. 13. This
unsuitableness of our spirits to the Lord, cannot do less than cover our faces
with shame, as it did, Ezra. 9. 6. O my God I am ashamed, and even blush to
look up unto thee.

Secondly: By this those benefits and comforts are intercepted, which are
better than life: There is a sensible presence of God, there are manifestations
of pardon, peace, and love; there are reviving influences and fresh anointings
of the spirit; there are a thousand mercies of this kind, that in their seasons
are communicated to men in the way of duty; and would it not grieve a man to
the very heart and soul, to be defeated of those inestimable treasures, by the
breaking forth of the Unbelief, Pride, or Vanity of his own heart, when such
mercies are almost in his hand? Your Iniquites (says the Prophet) have
separated betwixt you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you
that he will not hear, Isa. 59. 2. O cruel covering! O dismal Cloud! that hides
the face of God from his People, that they cannot behold it. Wherefoream I come
from Geshur (says Absalom) if I may not see the Kings face?

What do I here upon my knees, says a Christian, if I may not see God. Duties
are nothing to me without God: The World and all its comforts are dry and
tasteless things to me without God: His manifested favor, and sealed love are
the very life of my life, and from this the corruptiun of my own heart have cut
me off.

Thirdly: By these things the beauty and excellency of duties are defaced.
These dead flies spoil that excellent Ointment; for wherein consists the beauty
and true excellencies of duties, but in that spirituality and Heavenly temper
of soul, with which they are performed? This makes them suitable to their
object, Joh. 4. 24. take away spirituality from duties, and then you may number
them among your sins, and the matters of your shame and sorrow. Take away the
heart from duty, and what remains but a dead carcass, without life or beauty?

Fourthly; By these things gracious souls are greatly puzzled and perplexed
about their estate and condition. This is the fountain of their fears and
doubtings. O, when a man feels such deadness in his heart toward God, such
stiffness in his will to the will of God, such a listless careless temper to
all that is spiritual? How (thinks he) can this consist with a renewed state
and temper? Sure no Christian is troubled with such an heart as mine is;
especially when it shall be found in its ordinary course so free, nimble, and
indefatigable in its persuits and entertainments of things sensual and earthly.
There it is as the Chariots of Aminadab, but here, like Pharoahs Chariots;
there it as much needs the Curb, as it does the Spur here. Lord, says the poor
soul, I know not what to do: If I do not look into my heart I cannot be
sincere; and if I do, I can have no comfort. This is a sad perplexity indeed.

Fifthly and lastly: By these things the Spirit of God is grieved, and that
which grieves him cannot but be a grief and burden to us: His motions are
quenched by these Corruptions, his sanctifying designs (as much as lies in us)
obstructed by them, surely then there is cause enough why a Christian should
follow every vain thought with a deep sigh, and every stirring of unbelief with
a sad tear.

The usefulness of this point is great, and exceeding seasonable, when we are
to draw nigh to God, and address our selves to spiritual duties; It may to
great purpose be improved by ways.

Of 1. Information. 2. Direction. 3. Consolation.

We may greatly improve it for our Information in the following particulars.

1.
Hence we may take our measures of the wonderful and astonishing grace 1.
and condescension of God to his People, who notwithstanding all that evil
which is present with them in the good they do, will not reject their persons
or duties for all that.

How does free grace make its own way through swarms of Vanity! How does it
break through all the deadness, infidelity and hardness of our hearts to do us
good! Though evil be present with us, our gracious God will not be absent from
us notwithstanding that.

How greatly was the Spouse amazed at the unexpected condescension and grace of
Christ in this matter? Cant. 2. 8. It is the voice of my Beloved, behold he
comes leaping over the Mountains, skipping over the Hills. It is the Voice of
my Beloved.] That abrupt cutted expression shows a perfect surprise. She saw
mountains of guilt and unworthithiness betwixt Christ and her Soul, and yet
behold he comes skipping over all those mountains and hills: O free grace! rich
and admirable grace, which with so many notwithstandings, and neverthelesses,
will save and comfort the poor unworthy soul!

2.
How little reason have any of us to be proud of our best performances! 2.
There is not a just man upon Earth, that does good and sins not, says
Solomon, Eccles. 7. 20. If there be something supernaturally good in our
duties, yet there is abundance of natural evil commixed with that good; the
evil is wholly ours, the good wholly Gods: we have no reason then to glory in
our best performances.

It has been a question with some, whether some short transient act of a
regenerate soul may not be free from sin; but it was never questioned whether
any continued act, much less a course of actions could be without sin. Evil
will be present with us in all we do, 'twill be with us in our Closets, present
even in the awful presence of the holy God, in the most high and solemn duties
of Religion, in the most pure and spiritual actions that pass from us; cease
then as from dependence, so from Pride and Conceitedness in all you do. Whilst
our natures are sanctified but in part, and our principles mixed, our duties and
performances can never be pure. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean?
Not one, Job 14. 4.

3.
How are we all obliged to bless God for Jesus the Mediator, to make us and 3.
our sinful duties acceptable to God? Sad were our case if this High Priest did
not bear the Iniquity of our holy things, as it is, Exodus 28. 38. It Is his
Oblation and Intercession that obtains and continues ou^ pardon for our
Prayersins, our Hearing-sins, our Sacramentsins: These alone would eternally
damn us, if we had no other, did not free grace make us accepted in the
Beloved, Ephesians. 1. 6. When evil is present with us, then is Christ, our Advocate,
present with the Father for us; and thence it is that we are not destroyed upon
our knees, and that the jealousy of God breaks not forth as fire to devour us
in our very duties.

4.
If evil be present with us, yea, inherent in us, in our best duties, what 4.
need had Christians then to watch against the external occasions of sin, and
to keep a close guard upon their senses, especially when they have to do with
God!

There Is danger enough from within, you need not open another door from
without. This natural corruption is too active in it self, if there be no
irritation by any external occasion; how much more when the eye and ear are
open and unguarded, and occasions are offered it from without. Watching is half
the work of a Christian, whilst he is praying, Ephesians. 6. 18. The Arabian Proverb
is as instructive as it is mystical; shut the Windows that the House may be
light.

5.
If evil be present when we would do good, if it infest us in our best duties;
5.
then certainly there is no rest to be expected for any of Gods People in this
world. Where shall we go to be free from sin; if any where, let us go to our
Closets, to our knees, to the Ordinances of God; yea, but even there evil is
and will be present with us, if we cannot be free from evil there, it is in vain
to expect it elsewhere in this world. Only in Heaven Believers rest from sin,
when once they are absent from the body, and present with the Lord, sin shall
no more be present with them; which should make all that hate sin, long for
Heaven, and be willing to be dissolved, and be with Christ.

2. For Direction.
Let all that experimentally sense and feel what the Apostle here mourns over,
carefully attend such directions as may prevent the spoil of their duties by
the working of their corruptions in them.

Though no rules are found sufficient to prevent wholly the influence of our
Corruptions upon our duties, yet own it as a special mercy, if it may in any
measure be prevented, or restrained; in order whereunto, I shall hint briefly
these following rules, which the experience of many Christians has recommended
as exceeding useful in this case.

First: Be more diligent in preparation for your duties, if you would meet with
1. Rule.
less interruption in your duties. The very light of nature teaches solemn
preparation to all important and weighty business, and is there more solemn and
concerning business in all the world, than that which thou transactest with God
in duties? Angels approach not this God with whom thou have to do, without
profound respects to his immense greatness and awful holiness, Esa. 6. 3. When
you stretch forth your hands, it is required that you first prepare your
hearts, Job 11. 13.

Secondly: Realize the presence of 2. Rule.
God in all your duties, and awe your hearts all that you are able by that
consideration. O, think what a piercing holy eye beholds thy heart, and tries
thy reins. Would thou not be really ashamed; if thy thoughts were but vocal
to men, and the workings and wanderings of thy heart visible to those that join
with thee in the same duty? O, if the presence of God were more realized,
certainly your hearts would be better secured against the incursions of your
Corruptions!

Thirdly: Labor for a deeper measure 3. Rule.
and degree of Sanctification; many other rules are but Spiritual Anodynes, to
give present ease; but this is the way to a real Cure: a thousand things may be
found helpful to put by a vain thought for the present, but then it returns
again, and it may be with more strength: This is the proper method to dry the
spring, when others are but attempts to divert the stream. If habits of grace
were more deeply radicated, acts of grace would be more easy to us, and flow
more freely from us.

Lastly: Consider what an aggravation it is to your evil, to vent it self in
the special 5. Rule.
presence of God in duties. See how Paul mourns over it in the Text. It is not
only a sin but an affronting of God to his Face; this grieving of his Spirit,
the spoil of thy duty; it is (as one aptly calls it) obex infernalis, an
hellish Bar or Remora to all sweet and free intercourse of the soul with God.

3. Consolation.
But whilst I am representing the evil of it to some, it may be there are
others 3.
overwhelmed with the sorrowful sense of it, even to discouragement and
despondency: Poor Christian, is this thy case? Are all the Afflictions in the
world nothing to thee in comparison with this evil which is present with thee,
when thou would do good. Well, though thou can not do the good thou
would, nor free thy self yet from the evil thou would rather than live be
freed from: There are four things that may be much relief to thy pensive soul.

First: Though the presence of evil even 1.
in thy best duties be sad, yet thy grief and affliction for it is sweet. That
is a sad sin, but this is a sweet sign: It is not heart-evils, heart-wandrings
in duties, hardness, and unbelief that Hypocrites mourn for, but more gross and
external evils. Let this trouble for sin comfort thee, when the presence of sin
grieves thee.

Secondly: God accepts through Jesus 2.
Christ, what you do sincerely, though you can do nothing purely and perfectly,
Cant. 5. 1. Your sincerity is your Evangelical perfection; the evil that is
present is not imputed; the good that is present, is (notwithstanding that
commixed evil) accepted, which is strong consolation.

Thirdly: You find your case was the 3.
case of blessed Paul, a man of eminent Sanctity. And if you consult all the
Saints, one by one, you will find them all sick of this disease; so that your
case is not singular.

Fourthly: Your Justification is perfect, and without spot, though your
Sanctification be not so; and the time is coming when your Sanctification shall
be as your Justification is; and after that no more complaints.

THE FOURTH MEDITATION UPON
Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom also, after that ye believed, ye were Sealed with the holy
Spirit of Promise.
FROM his doxology and solemn Thanksgiving, ver. 3. the Apostle enumerates the
principal Christian privileges that gave the occasion of that thanksgiving,
among which, this in the Text is not the least, though last named.

In this one verse we have the two noble acts of Faith displaid; its direct act
called Trusting, and its reflex act, which in order of nature and time follows
it, and is implied in the word Sealing.

In the latter clause (to which I shall confine my Meditations) four things
must be remarked, viz.

The Subject of Assurance. The Nature of Assurance. The Author of Assurance.
The Quality of Assurance.
The Subject of Assurance, which is and can be no other than a soul that 1.
has closed with Christ by Faith, reflex acts necessarily presuppose direct
ones. Never was any Unbeliever Sealed, except to Damnation: Assurance is
peculiarly the Prerogative of Believers.

The Nature of Assurance, he calls it Sealing; an apt metaphor to express 2.
the nature of it. For Assurance like a Seal, both confirms, declares, and
distinguishes; it confirms the grant of God, declares the purpose of God, and
distinguishes the person so priviledg'd from othermen.

The Author of Assurance, which is the Spirit, he is the Keeper of the great 3.
Seal of Heaven, and it is his Office to confirm and seal the Believers right
and interest in Christ and Heaven, Romans 8. 16.

Lastly: The quality of this Spirit 4.
of Assurance, or the Sealing Spirit, he Seal^ in the quality of an holy
Spirit, and of the Spirit of promise, as an holy Spirit, relating to his
previous sanctifying work upon the sealed soul. As the Spirit of promise,
respecting the medium or instrument, made use of by him in this his Sealing
work; for he Seals by opening and applying the promises to Believers from the
Spirits order.

The Note will be this.

Doct.
That the privilege of Sealing follows the duty of Believing. Doct.


There is no season more proper to treat of the Sealing of the Spirit, than at
a Sealing Ordinance; nor can I handle the Spirits sealing work in a more
profitable method, than in satisfying these five Queries particularly; and then
applying the whole.

1. What is the Spirits Sealing, and how performed?

2. Why none are Sealed till they Believe?

3. Whether all Believers are Sealed?

4. What is the privilege of being Sealed?

5. What are the effects of the Spirits Sealing?

1. Query. First: What is the Spirtts Sealing 1 Query.
wor^ and how is it performed?
Answer. The Sealing of the Spirit, is his giving a sure and certain testimony
to the reality of that work of grace he has wrought in our souls, and to our
interest in Christ and the Promises; thereby satisfying our fears and doubts
about our estate and condition.

Every matter of weight and concernment is to be proved by two sufficient
Witnesses, Deuteronomy. 19. 15. our sincerity and interest in Christ are matters of
the deepest concernment to us in all the world, and therefore need a farther
witness to confirm and clear them than that of our own spirits; the spirit it
self therefore bears witness with our spirits, Romans 8. 16. Three things concur
to the spirits Sealing work.

He Sanctifies the soul.

He irradiates and clears that work of Sanctification.

He enables it thereby to apply Promises.

The first, is his material or objective Seal, the latter his formal Sealing.

None but the Spirit of God can clear and confirm our title to Christ, for he
only searches the deep things of God; 1 Cor. 2. 10. and it is his office, Romans
8. 16. (...), to witness with our spirits.

This Seal or Witness of the Spirit must needs be true and certain, because
Omniscience and Truth are his essential properties: He is Omniscient, 1 Cor. 2.
10. and therefore cannot be deceived himself: He is the Spirit of Truth, Joh.
14. 17. and therefore cannot deceive us; so that his testimony is more
infallible and satisfactory than a Voice from Heaven, 2 Pet. 1. 19.

If an Angel should appear and tell us Christ had said to him, Go and tell such
a man, that I love him, that I shed my blood for him, and will save him; it
could never give that repose and satisfaction to the mind as the internal
Witness or Seal of the spirit does; for that may be a delusion, but this
cannot. The witness of our own heart may amount to a strong probability; but
the witness of the spirit is demonstration, 1 John 4. 24.

So that as it is the design and work of Satan to cast in doubts and fears into
gracious hearts,: to perplex and entangle them, so oppositely it is the work of
the Spirit to clear and settle the sanctified soul, and fill it with peace and
joy in believing, Joh. 16. 7. Romans 14. 17.

In Sealing he both attests the fidem quae creditur, the doctrine or object of
Faith; and the fidem qua creditur, the infused habit, or grace of Faith: Of the
former he says, this is my Word, of the latter, this is my Work; and his Seal
or Testimony is evermore agreeable to the written word, Isa. 8. 20. So that
what he speaks in our hearts, and what he says in the Scripture, are ever-more
concordant and harmonious testimonies.

To conclude, in Sealing the Believer, he does not make use of an audible
Voice, nor the Ministry of Angels, nor immediate and extraordinary revelations;
but he makes use of his own graces implanted in our hearts, and his own
promises written in the Scriptures; and in this method he usually brings the
doubting trembling heart of the Believer to rest and comfort.

2. Query. Why are none Sealed till after Believing? 2. Query.

Answ. It cannot be denied but that many persons in the state of nature and
unbelief, may have ungrounded confidences, and false comforts built thereupon.
This is evident from Matthew. 7. 22. Many will say unto me in that day, Lord,
Lord, have not we Prophesied in thy Name. And Joh. 8. 54, 55. of whom ye say
that he is your God, and yet ye have not known him. And beyond all is that
startling Scripture, Heb. 6. 4, 5. -- Who were once enlightened, and have tasted
of the Heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have
tasted the good Word of God, and the powers of the World to come, if they fall
away, etc.

But for any except real Believers to have those Witnesses and Sealings of the
Spirit described above, is utterly impossible, and will evidently appear to be
so, whether we consider

The Author Nature Object Mediums End and design.
of this work.

First: Consider the Author of this work, the Spirit of God, who is an Holy 1.
Spirit, as the Text calls him, and the Spirit of Truth, as Christ calls him,
Joh. 14. 17. and it cannot be that ever he should give testimony to a lie, or
give a false witness, quite cross to the very tenor of the written word, as he
must do, should he Seal an Unbeliever. What though they be Elect, yet whilst
Unregenerate, they have no actual interest in Christ and the Promises, and
therefore can have none Sealed by the Spirit. Prius est praedicare de esse quam
de cognosci; we must be Saints befose we can be known to be so.

Secondly: Consider but the nature 2.
of this work, and it cannot be, that ever an Unbeliever should be Sealed by
the Spirit: For assurance is produced in our souls by the reflexive acts of our
Faith. The Spirit helps us to reflect upon what has been done by him formerly
upon our hearts. Hereby we know that we know him, 1 John 2. 3. To know that we
know, is a reflex act; now it is impossible there should be a reflex before
there has been a direct act. No man can have the evidence of his Faith, before
the habit be infused, and the vital act first performed.

Thirdly: Consider the object matter, 3.
to which he Seals, and it will be found to be his own Sanctifying operations
upon our hearts, and consequently to our privileges in Christ, Romans 8. 16. 1 John 3. 24. The thing or matter attested is, that Christ abides in us, and
that we are the Children of God. But no such thing can be Sealed till we
believe, for neither our Adoption nor Sanctification can be before Faith.

Fourthly: Consider the mediums or 4.
instruments used by the Spirit in his Sealing work, the promises are his
sealing instruments, and on that account he is called the Spirit of Promise in
the Text: Not only because he is the Spirit promised, but as the Promises
contain the spirit, so the Spirit'uses the Promises (i. e.) clears them to our
understandings, and helps us to apply them to our souls; but this he never
does, nor can do, till the soul by Faith have union with Christ; for till then
it has no right in the Promises.

Fifthly and lastly: Consider the end 5.
and design of this work of the Spirit, which is to secure to the soul its
peace, pardon, and salvation in Christ, he seals Believers to the day of
Redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. (i. e.) to their complete Salvation: So then it must be
equally impossible for an Unbeliever to be sealed as to be saved.

3. Query. The next enquiry is, whether all Believers 3. Query.
are Sealed by the Spirit?
Answ. The resolution of this Query will depend upon several distinctions that
must be made upon this matter.

1. Distinction.
We must distinguish the different kinds of the Spirits sealing; all his 1.
Sealing work is not of one kind, nor to one and the same use and end.

There is an Objective Seal which distinguishes the person, and a Formal Seal
which clears and ratifies his interest in Christ and Salvation. The first he
does in Sanctifying us; the second in Assuring us.

When he Seals us Objectively, that is, when he Sanctifies us really by the
infusion of grace, he Seals us by way of distinction from other men, which is
one end of Sealing; for though in respect of Gods decree and purpose there was
a difference betwixt us and others before time, 2 Timothy 2. 19. And although in
regard of Christ's intention in his death, there was a difference betwixt us and
others, Joh. 17. 9. yet all this while there is no personal, actual difference
betwixt us and others, till Sanctification do make one, Ephesians. 2. 3. and 1 Cor.
6. 11. But the Sanctification of the Spirit makes a real difference in the
state and temper of the person, 2 Cor. 5. 17. and manifests that difference
which Election put betwixt us and others before-time, 1 These. 1. 4, 5. And yet
all this while a man may not be formally Sealed (i. e.) his Sanctification may
be very doubtful to himself, and he may labor under great fears about it.

2. Distinction.
The seasons of the Spirits sealing, must be distinguished; and these are 2.
to some,

First: Immediately upon the souls first closing with Christ at Conversion,
especially when Conversion is wrought at riper age, and is ushered in by a
greater degree of the spirit of bondage, and deep inward terrors. Thus the
Prodigal (the emblem of a Convert so brought home to God) was entertained with
the fatted Calf and Music, but all find not this presently, as some do.

Secondly: Times of eminent Communion with God are Sealing times: There are
extraordinary out-lets of Peace, Joy, and Comfort, at some seasons in duty,
which makes the state of the soul very clear; and banishes all scruples and
fears from the heart.

Thirdly: Others are Sealed upon some eminent hazard they have been exposed to
for Christ, or some extraordinary sufferings they have undergone for Christ;
wherein they have carried it with eminent meekness, patience, and self-denial,
2 Cor. 1. 4, 5. Thus the Martyrs were many times Sealed in the depth of their
sufferings.

Fourthly: It Is usually found that a Sealing time follows a dark day of
desertion, and sore combats with temptation. Post Nubila Phoebus. So that Text,
Rev. 2. 17. is expounded by some, To him that overcomes will I give the white
stone, and the new name.

Fifthly: Dying-times prove Sealingtimes to many souls, if their whole life
have been like that day described by the Prophet, Zech. 14. 17. neither dark
nor light, a life betwixt hopes and fears, yet at Evening-time it has been
light.

3. Distinction.
Lastly: We must distinguish the several 3.
ways and manners of Sealing. Some are extraordinary and immediate, vouchsafed
only to some persons, at some special times and seasons. Thus Zacheus was in an
extraordinary and immediate way ascertained of his Salvation, Luke 19. 9. This
day is Salvation come to this House. And so the Palsieman, Mark. 2. 5. Son
(says Christ) thy sins be forgiven thee. But these immediate ways are ceased;
no man may now expect by any new Revelation or Sign from Heaven, by any Voice,
or extraordinary Inspiration to have his Salvation sealed, but must expect that
mercy in Gods ordinary way and method, searching the Scriptures, examining our
own hearts, and waiting on the Lord in Prayer.

The Learned Gerson gives an instance of one that had been long upon the
borders of despair, and at last sweetly assured and settled; and being asked how
he attained that Assurance, he answered, Non ex nova aliqua revelatione, etc.
Not by any new revelation, but by subjecting my understanding to, and comparing
my heart with the written word.

And Mr. Roberts in his Treatise of the Covenants, speaks of another that so
vehemently panted after the Sealings and Assurance of the love of God to his
soul, that for a long time he earnestly desired some Voice from Heaven; and
sometimes walking in the solitary Fields, earnestly desired some miraculous
voice from the Trees or Stones there: This was denied him, but in time a better
was afforded in a scriptural way.

Now to resolve the Query out of these distinctions.

First: Though all Believers have not the formal Sealings of the Spirit, yet
they have the objective, or material Seal; that is, the Spirit is in them as a
sanctifying spirit, putting a real difference betwixt them and others, when he
is not with them by way of evidence and assurance of sanctification.

Secondly: Though all Believers are not Sealed at one and the same time, yet
there are few, if any Believers, but do meet with one season or other in this
life, wherein the Lord does Seal them; if not at their first close with Christ,
as many have been Sealed, yet in some choice and eminent season of communion
with God, such golden spots of time, such precious seasons most Christians can
speak of. Though as Bernard speaks, it be rara hora, brevis mora. Seldom but
sweet: Or if not in the course of their active obedience, it is a thousand to
one but they shall meet it in the way of their passive obedience, if God
exercise them eminently under the cross, or after a dark cloud of desertion, or
in a dying hour.

Thirdly and lastly: Though God now Seals not men in an extraordinary and
immediate way by Revelation, immediate Inspiration, or Voices from Heaven, yet
most Christians are sealed in the ordinary way of the Spirit, under one
Ordinance or other, in one duty or other.

4. Query. What is the privilege of being Sealed by the Spirit?
Answ. Much every way, words cannot express the riches of this mercy; for let
us but consider the four following particulars, and you will admire the mercy.

First: Consider whose act and proper 1.
work Sealing is. God does not send Angels upon this Errand; though if he did,
that would be a great honor to poor dust and ashes, but he sends his Spirit to
do it. Oh, the Condescension of the great God to men! this is a greater honor
than if millions of Angels were employed about it.

And then as to certainty and satisfaction, it is beyond all other ways and
methods in the world; for in miraculous Voices and Inspirations it is poss^ble
there may subesse falsum, be found some Cheat or Imposture of the Devil; but
the spirits witness in the heart, suitable to his revelation in the Scripture,
cannot deceive us.

Secondly: The conclusion or truth 2.
sealed, is ravishing and transporting. All Christians vehemently pant for it,
few have the enjoyment of it for any long continuance. But whilst they do enjoy
it, they enjoy Heaven upon Earth, a joy beyond all the joys of this world. To
have this conclusion surely Sealed, -Christ is mine, my sin is pardoned, I
shall be saved from wrath, through him: O, what is this! what is this!

Thirdly: Consider the subject, or person Sealed, a poor sinful wretch that 3.
have ten thousand times over grieved the good Spirit of God, by whom
notwithstanding thou art Sealed to the day of Redemption: Thou have by every
sin deserved to be sealed up to Damnation: Thou have reason to account and
esteem thy self much inferior in graces and duties to many thousands of the
Saints that are panting after this privilege, and cannot obtain it: O, the
riches of the goodness of God!

Fourthly and lastly, Consider the designs and aims of the Spirit in his 4.
Sealing thy soul, which are

1. To secure Heaven to thee for ever.

2. As intermediate thereunto, to bring very much of Heaven into thy soul, in
the way to it; indeed to give thee two Heavens, whilst many others must suffer
two Hells.

5. Query. Lastly: We will enquire what are the effects of the Spirits sealing
upon 5. Query.
our souls, by which we may distinguish and clearly discern it from all
delusions of Satan, and all Impostures whatsoever?
Answ. The genuine and proper effects and fruits of Sealing, are

1. Inflamed Love. 2. Renewed Care. 3. Deep Abasements. 4. Increase of
Strength. 5. A desire to be with the Lord. 6. Improved Mortification to the
world.
Wheresoever these are found consequent to our Communion with God, and his
manifestations of himself to us therein, they put it beyond all doubt, that it
was the Seal of his own blessed Spirit, and no delusion.

First: The Sealings of the Spirit 1.
cannot but inflame the love of the soul in a very intense degree toward God:
One flame does not more naturally beget another, than the love of God does
kindle the love of a gracious soul to him. We have known and believed the love
that God has to us, 1 John 4. 16. 19. When Christ had forgiven much to that
poor Woman that had sinned much, and manifested pardoning mercy to her soul; O,
how much was her love to Christ inflamed thereby? Luke 7. 47.

Secondly: Renewed care and diligence follows the Sealings of the Spirit. 2.
Now is the soul at the foot of Christ, as Mary was at the Sepulcher, with fear
and great joy. He that Travels the Road with a rich treasure about him, is
afraid of a Thief in every bush. This is exemplified in the Spouse, who had
endured many a sad day and night in Christ's absence, and sought him sorrowing;
but when she had regained his felt and sensible presence, it is said, Cant. 3.
4. I found him whom my soul loves; I held him, and would not let him go.

She does not (as one speaks) lay by Durham in Loc.
diligence, as if all were done; but is of new taken up with as great care to
retain and improve this mercy, as before she was solicitous to obtain it.
Whether a Believer want or have, whether he be seeking or enjoying, there is
still matter of exercise for him in his condition.

Thirdly: Deep abasement and great 3.
humblings use to follow the eminent appearances of God to the souls of men.
Lord (said that Disciple) how is it that thou will manifest thy self to us and
not unto the world, Joh. 14. 22. When God Sealed the Covenant to Abraham, to be
a God to him, at this Abraham fell upon his face, Genesis 17. 1, 2, 3. Never does
a soul lie lower in the dust, and abhor it self, than when the Lord makes the
most signal manifestations of his grace and love to it.

Fourthly: Increased strength follows 4.
the sealings of the Spirit. New powers enter into the soul, and a sensible
improvement of its abilities for duty, or ever I was aware (says the Spouse)
my soul made me as the Chariots of Aminadab, Cant. 6. 12.

Now the wheels of the soul being oyled with the joy and comfort of the Spirit
run nimbly in the ways of obedience. The joy of the Lord is your strength.

Fifthly: Sealings of the Spirit, inflames 5.
the desires of the soul after Heaven, and makes it long to go home. Nothing
makes death so undesirable to the Saints, as the doubts and fears that hang
upon their Spirits about their condition. Were their evidences for Heaven
clear, and their doubts resolved, they would as the Apostle speaks, desire to
be dissolved, and to be with Christ, Phil. 1. 23. If once the great question of
our interest in Christ be thoroughly decided, and all be clear betwixt us and
our God, we shall find Life the matter of Patience, and Death the object of
desire.

Sixthly and lastly: Improved Mortification 6.
to the world, flows naturally from the Sealings and Assurances of the love of
God to our souls. It is with our souls after such a view of Heaven, and a
sealed interest therein, as it is with him that has been gazing upon that
glorious Creature the Sun, when he comes to cast his eye again upon the Earth,
all things seem dark and cloudy to him. He sees no beauty in any of those
things, because of that excellent luster which he lately beheld. We know (says
the Apostle) that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we
have a building of God, an House not made with hands; eternal in the Heavens,
there is Assurance or Sealing: For in this we groan earnestly, desiridg to be
clothed upon with our House which is from Heaven. There Is the natural effect
of it, 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2.

Uses.
The point speaks to three sorts of persons, viz.

1. To those that have not yet been Sealed. 2. To those that once had, but now
want this comfort. 3. To those that enjoy the comforts of it.
First: To those that yet want this 1.
mercy, who have not been formally Sealed by any assurance of their title to
Christ, but all their days have been clogged with fears and doubts of their
condition. To such my Counsel is.

First: That you be not quiet under these uncertainties, but pant after the
assurance of peace and pardon. Say unto Christ as the Spouse did, Cant. 8. 6.
Set me as a Seal upon thy heart, as a Seal upon thine arm: Pant after it as
David did, Psalm. 35. 3. Say unto my soul, I am thy Salvation.

How can you look upon such precious promises, and not dare to taste them? How
can you hear others speak of their satisfaction, peace, and assurance, and be
quiet until you also have attained it? What is it that hinders this mercy that
it cannot come home to your souls? Is it your neglect of duty? O, stir up your
selves to take hold of God. Is it want of a through search and examination of
your estate? O, let not thine eyes find rest, till that be fully done: Is it
some special guilt upon thy soul that grieves the Spirit of God? Be restless
till it be removed. I know this mercy is not at your command, do what you can
do; but yet I also know when God bestows it, he usually does it in these ways
of our duty.

Secondly: To those that once had, 2.
but now want this blessing, who say as Job 29. 2, 3. O that it were with me as
in days past! The darkness is the greater to you, because you have walked in
the light of the Lord. The sum of Christ's Counsel in this case is given in
three words, Rev. 2. 5. Remember, Repent, Reform.

First: Remember (i. e.) ponder, consider, compare time with time, and state
with state, how well it once was, how sad it now is.

Secondly: Repent, mourn over these your sinful relapses; sure you may
challenge the first place among all the mourners in the world. Your loss is
great. O, better to have lost the light of your eyes, than this sweet light of
Gods countenance; your sin has separated betwixt you and your God, O mourn
over it.

Thirdly: Reform. Do your first works again. O Christian, consider thy heart is
sunk deeper into the world than it was wont to be. Thy duties are fewer, and
thy zeal and affection to God much abated. Return, return, O backsliding soul,
and labor to recover thy first love to Christ, whatever pains it cost thee.

Lastly: To those that do enjoy 3.
these choice and invaluable mercies, the Sealings of the Spirit.

First: Take heed that you grieve not the good Spirit of God, by whom you are
Sealed to the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. He has comforted you, don't you
grieve him: The Spirit is a tender and delicate thing, you may quickly deprive
your selves of his joy and peace.

Secondly: Be humble under this advancement and dignity. If your hearts once
begin to swell, look out for humbling dispensations quickly, 2 Cor. 12. 7. This
treasure is always kept in the Vessel of a contrite and humble heart.

Thirdly: Keep close to duty; yea, tack one duty to another by intermediate
Ejaculations. If care of duty be once remitted, you are not far from a sad
change of your condition.

Fourthly: Improve all Ordinances, especially this great Sealing Ordinance for
your farther confirmation and establishment. Act your Faith to the uttermost of
its ability upon Christ Crucified, and comfort will flow in: The more the
direct acts of Faith are exercised, the more powerful and sweet its reflex acts
are like to be.

THE FIFTH MEDITATION UPON
Joh. 1. 29. Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the Sins of the World.
THE scope of this Chapter is to prove the Divinity and Eternal Godhead of
Jesus Christ. One of those Arguments, by which this great Article of Faith is
confirmed and proved, is the Testimony of John. This testimony of John is the
more remarkable, because it was before Prophesied of him, that when the Messiah
should come, this Messenger should go before his face to prepare the way for
him, Mal. 3. 1.

Now among all the Testimonies that ever John gave of Christ, none ever was, or
could be more full and clear than this in the Text.

Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the Sin of the World.

In which words are remarkable,

1. The Preface to his Testimony. 2. The Testimony itself.
First: The Preface or Introduction to John's Testimony; Behold, there is 1.
a double use in Scripture of this word. Sometimes it is used by way of
In^ication, and sometimes by way of Excitation. In the first it points out the
person; in the last it raises our affections to him. In this place it has both
these Uses.

Behold the Lamb of God. q. d. This is the great ^xpectation and hope of all
Ages. This person whom you behold, is the desire of all Nations. Lo, this is
God manifest in flesh. This is the great Sacrifice, the Lamb of God. Never did
humane eyes behold such an object before.

Secondly: The testimony it self, 2.
which must be considered two ways, as it respects, 1. The truth and reality 2.
The virtue and dignity
of Christ its object.

First: John's Testimony respects the the truth and reality of the object; this
is (...), the Lamb of God, the very Antitype to which all legal Sacrifices had
respect, and from which they derived all their value and virtue, grace and
truth came by Christ, as he had said before, ver. 17. The Paschal Lamb, and
Lamb for daily Sacrifice, were but the Types and Shadows of this Lamb of God.

Secondly: His Testimony respects the virtue and dignity of Christ and his
Blood. He takes away the Sin of the World. The Greek word, (...) (as a Learned
Critic observes) answers De Dieu.
both the Hebrew words (...) and Isa. 53. and signifies not only to bear, but
to bear away portando expiat, expiando ausert, efficitque ut remittatur. By
bearing sin, he expiates it; and by expiating, takes it away, or procures the
mission of it. The expression seems to allude to the escape Goat, mentioned,
Levit. 16. 22. Thus Christ really and wholly takes away the sin of the world,
(i. e.) the sin of all Believers in the world, for whom he was Sacrificed, as
Drusius well expounds it, concurrent with the stream of sound Expositors.

So that this is a very full Testimony which John gives to Christ, and it is
given with great affection and admiration of him: Behold, yea, admire in
beholding the Lamb of God which takes away the sin of the world; behold him
with affections suitable to such an object. Ecce persona a Deo ordinata Grotius.
in victimam ad expiandum peccata. Behold the person appointed, by God for a
Sacrifice to expiate sin. Now though this Scripture be very fruitful in
practical observations, yet it is not my purpose at this time to note or
prosecute any of them, except this one, which rises from the praefatory
particle, or that note of admiration, with which John's Testimony of Christ is
ushered in. Behold the Lamb of God. And the note thence will be this:

Doct.
That Jesus Christ the Lamb of God, is to be beheld with admiration and
affection suitable to such an object.

Christ is beheld by men three ways.

First: Carnally, with an eye of flesh. So men saw him in the days of his 1.
flesh, and despised him, Isa. 53. 2. Carnal eyes saw no beauty in him that he
should be desired.

Secondly: Fiducially, by the eye of Faith, believing is seeing Christ, Joh. 2.
6. 40. Faith is to the Saints instead of eyes; by it they make Christ present,
though the Heavens have received him out of our carnal sight.

Thirdly: Beatifically, by the glorified eye. So the spirits of just men made 3.
perfect, do by their mental eye see him in glory, and all the Saints after the
Resurrection, shall with these Corporeal eyes, see their Redeemer, according to
Job 19. 26, 27.

The sight of Christ by Faith (which is all the sight of him that any man now
has, or can have in this world) as it is much more excellent than the first,
for blessed are they that have not seen and yet believe, Joh. 20. 29. So it is
much inferior to the last, 1 Cor. 13. 12. For now we see darkly through a
glass, but then face to face. But though it be an inferior Vision, in respect
of that which is immediate and perfect, yet the eye of Faith is a precious eye,
and the Visions of Christ by Faith, are ravishing Visions; and he that beholds
Christ, the Lamb of God, by a steady fixed eye of faith, cannot but admire, and
be deeply affected with such a sight of him. The views of Christ by Faith are
ravishing and transporting views, 1 Pet. 1. 8. Whom having not seen, ye love,
in whom though now ye see him not; yet believing, ye rejoice with joy
unspeakable, and full of glory.

It is a disparagement to so glorious an object as Christ, to behold him and
not wonder; to see, and not love him. Certainly the admiration, love, delight,
and joy of our hearts, are all at the command of Faith: For let us but consider
what ravishing excellencies are in Christ, for the eye of a Believer to behold
and admire.

First: God is in Christ, 2 Cor. 5. 19. He is God manifest in the flesh, 1 Timothy
1.
3. 16. A God Incarnate, is the worlds wonder: Here is Finite and Infinite
joined in one; Eternity matched with Time; the Creator and Creature making but
one Person. The Lord has Created a new thing in the Earth, a Woman shall
compass a Man, Jer. 31. 22. It Is an argument of weakness to admire little
things, and of stupidity not to admire great things. Many Miracles (says one)
were wrought by Christ in the flesh; but the greatest of all Miracles was his
assumption of Flesh.

Secondly: The Wisdom of God is in Christ; yea, in him are hid all the
treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, Col. 2. 3. Never did the Divine Wisdom
display its glorious beams in the eyes of Men and Angels in any work of God,
since the beginning of time, as it has done in the designation of Christ, to
be the Lamb of God, a Sacrifice for sin. Behold the Lamb of God; and in him,
behold the unsearchable Wisdom of God, in recovering the Elect perfectly from
all the danger of sin, and yet making sin more dreadful to them by the way of
their recovery from it, than ever it could be made by any other consideration.

Infinite Wisdom in suiting the Sinners remedy to the cause of his disease. The
Disease was the Pride of Man; the Remedy was the Humiliation of the Son of God.
Man affected to be as God, that ruined him; God comes down, assumes flesh, and
will be found in fashion as a man; that saved him.

O profound Wisdom, which from the loss and ruin of our Primitive glory, which
was the undoing of us, soul and body, takes the occasion of raising us to a far
better state, and settles us in it, with a much better security than the former.

Who but Jesus Christ, the Wisdom of God (as he is called, 1 Cor. 1. 24.) could
ever have ordered and overruled the worst of evils, so as by occasion of the
breach of the Law to raise more glory to God than ever could have been given to
him, by the most punctual observation of its commands, or by the most rigorous
execution of its penalties. O the astonishing depth of Wisdom.

Thirdly: The love of God is in 3.
Christ. Behold the Lamb of God! and in him, behold the love of God in the
highest and most triumphant discovery that ever was or can be made of it in
this world, 1 John 4. 10. Herein is love, not that we loved him, but that he
loved us, and sent his Son to be the Propitiation for our sins. O here, here is
the love of God to Sinners; he manifests love to us in our daily provisions,
protections, deliverances, and comforts. That we have health when others groan
under pains, therein is love. That we have bread to eat, when others are ready
to perish, therein is love. O, but to have Christ to be a Propitiation for us,
when the Angels that fell were left desperate, therein was love indeed. All the
love that breaks out in the variety of providence for us in this world, in our
Health and Estates, in our Relations and Comforts, is nothing compared with
this love. Herein is love indeed.

Fourthly: The tender mercies of God over poor Sinners are in Christ, as 4.
Christ is the mercy promised, Luke 1. 72. the capital mercy, so he is the
Chanel through which all the streams of Gods mercy flow freely to the Sons of
men, Jude 21. the mercy of God to Eternal life, or his saving mercies are only
dispensed to us through Jesus Christ. Behold the Lamb of God! A Lamb prepared
by the astonishing mercy of God, a Sacrifice for us, when no Sacrifice is laid
out for fallen Angels. Mercy alone has made this difference; mercy opened its
tender eye, and looked through Christ upon us in the depth of our misery. In
Christ it is that the milder attribute of mercy is exercised upon us, whilst
severe Justice punishes them.

Fifthly: All the hopes of poor Sinners are in Christ, Col. 1. 27. Take away 5.
Christ, and where is the hope of our souls? 1 Timothy 1. 1. It Is by the Blood of
the Lamb that we have hope toward God: In his Oblation and no where else our
hope of Salvation finds footing. On him it is the Anchor of hope is fixed, and
the soul stayed when the storms of fear and inward trouble do arise and beat
violently upon it.

Sixthly: The Salvation of our souls 6.
to Eternity is in Christ, Acts 4. 12. Neither is there any other name given
under Heaven, by which we must be saved. He is the Ark in whom we are
preserved, Jude ver. 1. Look as the sprinkling of the Blood of the Paschal Lamb
upon the Door-posts of the Israelites was that which preserved them from the
destroying Angel, so the Blood of Christ the Lamb of God Typified by that
Blood, saves Believers from the wrath to come.

But who can open the unsearchable riches, or recount the ravishing
excellencies found in Christ? Angels and the Spirits of just men made perfect
behold and admire for ever-more the incomparable excellencies of Christ. Heaven
would be no Heaven to them, if they could not behold Christ there, Psalm. 73. 25.

But my business rather lies in improving this point, than endeavoring farther
to unfold it; for new wonders will appear in Christ, if we behold him to
Eternity.

And all the improvement I shall Use.
make of it shall be in one use of Exhortation, bespeaking every one of you
what ever your present condition and estate be, to behold the Lamb of God,
which takes away the sin of the world. And

First: If there be found among you 1.
any that are sensible of a stony hard heart which cannot relent and mourn for
all the wrong done to Jesus Christ by sin, whose affections are benumbed and
stupefied by sin; so that no considerations they can urge upon their own
hearts, are able to thaw them, and cause a relenting pang for sin. To such I
would direct the words of this Text, as the most effectual means to melt such
hearts. Look hither hard heart, Behold the Lamb of God. Consider, believe and
apply what is here sensibly represented, and thy heart is hard indeed if it
relent not upon such a view of Christ. It Is said Zech. 12. 10. They shall look
upon me, whom they have pierced, and mourn. Behold the Son of God brought as a
Lamb to the Slaughter for thee a vile polluted Sinner: Behold the invaluable
Blood of this Sacrifice shed for thee: Bring thy thoughts close to this
subject; think who it is that was made a Lamb for Sacrifice, for whom he
endured all his unspeakable sufferings, how meekly and willingly he endured all
the wrath of God and men; standing in his perfect Innocence to be slain for
thee: Behold, he was made sin for thee, who had no sin; that thou who had no
Righteousness, might be made the Righteousness of God in him. O, who ever
loved thee at that rate Christ has done? Who would endure that misery that
Christ did endure for thy sake? Would thy Father, or the Wife of thy bosom, or
thy Friend that is as thy own soul, be content to feel that for thee (though
but one hour) which Christ felt when his sweat was as it had been great drops
of Blood falling down to the ground! Nay, thou would never taste such a cup
for the saving of thine own Child, as Christ drank off, when he cried, My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? Behold how he loved thee?

Surely if the Rocks rent asunder at his passion, thy heart is harder than a
Rock, if it thaw not at such a sight as this. Fix thine eyes a while here, and
thine eye will affect thy heart.

Secondly: Is there any among us that make too light of sin, and are easily 2.
overcome by every temptation to the commission of it. O come hither and behold
the Lamb of God, and you cannot possibly have slight thoughts of sin after such
a sight of Christ. See here the price of sin, behold what it cost the Lord
Jesus Christ to expiate it. Did he come into the world as a Lamb, bound with
the bands of an irreversible decree to die for sin? Did he come from the Bosom
of the Father to be our Ransomer, and that at the price of his own life? Did
the hand of severe Justice shed the Heart-blood of this Immaculate Lamb to
satisfy for the wrong thy sins have done to God? and yet can thou look upon
sin as a light matter? God forbid.

I remember when the Worthies of Israel brake through the Host of the
Philistines, and brought unto David the waters of the well of Bethlehem: It Is
said, 2 Samuel 23. 17. he would not drink thereof, but pouered it out before the
Lord, and said, Be it far from me that I should do this; is not this the Blood
of the men that went in Jeopardy of their lives.

He longed for it, and yet would not taste it, how pleasant soever it would
have been to him, considering what hazard was run to obtain it.

Ah Christian, it was but the hazard of their Blood that gave cheque to David's
appetite to the water; and if the water had cost an equal quantity of their
blood, yet it had been but a low argument to dissuade him from drinking it, to
this consideration that now lies before thee. Thy sin actually cost the Blood
of Christ, one drop whereof is more valuable than all humane blood; and yet
will thou not deny thy Lusts, nor resist a temptation for his sake? Behold the
Lamb of God slain for thy sin, and thou can never have slight thoughts of it
any more.

Thirdly: Is there any among you that droop, and are discouraged in their
spirits, because of their manifold aggravated Iniquities? who being
over-weighed with the burdensome sense of sin, despond and sink in their minds:
to such I would apply the words of my Text as a sovereign Cordial to revive
their hearts and hopes. Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the sin of the
world.

If the Blood of the Lamb can take away the sin of the world, it can take away
thy sin, though there be a world of sin in thee: For do but consider Christ as
designed from Eternity to be our Propitiation, Joh. 6. 27. Him has God the
Father Sealed, as Sacrificed in our room in the fullness of time, 1 Cor. 5. 7.
Christ our Passover is Sacrificed for us; as accepted by the Father with
greatest content and pleasure; even as a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5. 2. as
publicly justified and discharged by God the Creditor at his Resurrection, 1 Timothy 3. 16. and John 16. 9. And lastly, Consider him as now in Heaven, where he
appears before God for us, as a Lamb that had been slain, Rev. 5. 6. bearing
the very marks of his death, and presenting them before God, as the most
effectual and moving plea to procure pardon and mercy for his people. Let these
things, I say, be duly pondred, and nothing will be found more effectual to
relieve the despondent minds of poor Believers against the sinking sense of
their sin.

He that represents himself in the Sacrament as wounded for you, shows at the
same time, to the Father in Heaven, the real Body that was wounded; than which,
nothing more effectually moves mercy, or stays the sliding feet of a poor
Believers hope: And that whether we consider,

First: The dignity of that body which was wounded, the most h^llowed and
deeply sanctified thing that ever was created, Luke 1. 35. That holy thing.

Secondly: Or his Vicegerency in suffering, He was wounded for our
Transgressions, Isa. 53. 5. It was for that hard, proud, vain, dead heart that
thou complainest of: Or

Thirdly: The end and design of those wounds which was to repair the Honor of
God, and the violated Law; the language of that blood (which is said to speak
better things than the blood of Abel, Heb. 12. 24.) is this.

Father, have these poor souls wounded thy Name, thine Honor, thy Law? Behold
the wounds thy Justice has inflicted on me for reparation of all that wrong
they have done thee! Oh how sweetly does the Blood of the Lamb settle the
Conscience of a poor drooping Believer!

Fourthly: Is there any among you that are faint-hearted and ready to 4.
shrink away from any sufferings for Christ, as unable to bear and endure any
thing for his sake? To such I would say in the words of this Text. Behold the
Lamb of God. Did Christ suffer such grievous things for you, and cannot you
suffer small matters for him? Alas, what is the wrath of man to the wrath of
the great and terrible God! Beside, he was an Innocent Lamb, and deserved not
to suffer the least degree of penal evil upon his own account, but thou have
deserved Hell, and yet shrinkest under the sufferings of a moment. Did he
suffer so much for you, and can you suffer nothing for him? Surely he in
suffering for you has left you an example that you should follow his steps, 1
Pet. 2. 21. What is our Blood compared in dignity to the Blood of Christ? What
are our sufferings compared in kind or degree, to the sufferings of Christ?
Nothing is found to fortify a man's spirit for sufferings, as the Meditation of
Christ's sufferings for us does.

Fifthly: Is there any among you that are impatient under your own 5.
personal trials and troubles, apt to howl under common afflictions from the
hand of God, or swell with revenge under injuries from the hands of men? To
such I would say, Behold the Lamb of God. Was Christ a Lamb for meekness, and
art thou a Lion for fierceness? Was he silent, not once opening his mouth when
he suffered most vile things from the hands of Sinners, and can you bear
nothing? He suffered patiently, and deserved it not; you suffer impatiently,
and have deserved infinitely more.

O that you would learn to be more Christ-like in all your trials and
afflictions. Let it not be said that Christ carried it as a Lamb, when he was
tried; and we like Swine grumbling, or houling when we are tried. O get a
Christ-like temper.

Sixthly: Is there any among you that stagger at the promises through ^.
unbelief? That cannot rely upon a word of promise, because their own
unbelieving hearts fill them with unworthy suspicions of the power,
faithfulness, or willingness of God to perform them to them. O that such would
behold the Lamb of God, as represented in this Ordinance! Are not all the
promises of God Sealed to Believers in the Blood of this Lamb, Heb. 9. 17, 18,
19, 20. Are not all the promises of God in Christ, Yea, and Amen to all that
are in him? 2 Cor. 1. 20. Or is there any thing put into any promise of greater
value than the Blood of the Lamb that was shed to purchase it? Or is not the
giving of Christ to die for us, the accomplishment of the greatest promise that
ever God made to us? And after the fulfilling thereof, what ground remains for
any to doubt the fulfiling of lesser promises?

Lastly: Is there any among you that 7.
desire to get up your affections at this Table; to have your hearts in a
melting temper, to awaken and rouse up all the powers of your souls in so great
an occasion for it as this. Behold the Lamb of God, and this will do it.

Christ calls off your eyes and thoughts from all other objects to himself,
Isa. 65. 11. I said, behold me, behold me. Fix the eye of Faith here, and you
will feel a pang quickly coming upon your hearts like that, Cant. 2. 5. Stay me
with Flaggons, comfort me with Apples, I am sick with love. Your eye will
affect your hearts: Whilst you behold, your hearts will melt within you.

THE SIXTH MEDITATION UPON
Romans 8. ver. 32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us
all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things?
THIS Scripture contains a most weighty argument to encourage and confirm the
Faith of Christians in the expectation of all spiritual and temporal mercies.
It proceeds from the greater to the lesser affirmatively. He that delivered his
Son for us, what can he deny us after such a gift? every word has its weight.

Did not God spare (i. e.) abate any thing which his justice could inflict upon
his Son, his own Son, opposed here to his adopted Sons, as being infinitely more
excellent than they, and most dear to him above and beyond all others; but on
the contrary, delivered him up, how dear soever he was unto him, to
Humiliation, contradiction of Sinners, to all sorrows and temptations, yea to
death, and that of the Cross, and all this for us, for us Sinners, for us
Enemies to God, for us unlovely Wretches: How shall he not with him also freely
give us all things? How is it imaginable that God should withold after this,
spirituals or temporals from his people? How shall he not call them
effectually, justify them freely, sanctify them thoroughly, and glorify them
eternally? How shall he not cloth them, feed them, protect and deliver them?

Surely if he would not spare or abate to his own Son one stroke, one tear, one
groan, one sigh, one circumstance of misery; it can never be imagined that ever
he should after this deny or withhold from his people, for whose sakes all this
was suffered, any mercies, any comforts, any privilege spiritual or temporal,
which is good for them, and needful to them.

So that in the words we find,

1. A Proposition. 2. An Inference from it.
The Proposition opens the severity of Gods justice to Christ; the Inference
declares the riches of his mercy to us in Christ.

First: We have here before us a Proposition containing the severity of 1.
Divine Justice toward Christ: And this is expressed two ways.

Viz. 1. Negatively, he spared him not. 2. A^irmatively; he delivered him up
for us.

First: Negatively: He spared not his own Son. There is a threefold 1.
mercy in God, viz. Preventing mercy, which steps between us and trouble.
Delivering mercy, which takes us out of the hand of trouble: And Sparing mercy,
which though it do not prevent nor deliver, yet it mitigates, allays, and
graciously moderates our troubles; and though sparing mercy be desirable and
sweet, yet it is the least and lowest sort of mercy that God exercises toward
any. Though it be mercy to have the time of sufferings shortened, or one degree
of suffering abated; yet these are the lowest and least effects of mercy, and
yet these were denied to Jesus Christ, when he stood in our room to satisfy
for us. God spared not one drop, he abated not one degree of that wrath which
Christ was to suffer for us.

Secondly: Affirmatively. But on the contrary, he delivered him up for us 2.
all.

He delivered him, as a Judge by sentence of Law delivers up the Prisoner to be
Executed. It Is true, Pilate delivered him to be Crucified, and he also gave
himself for us; but betwixt Gods delivering, Pilates delivering, and his own,
there is this difference to be observed.

In God it was an Act of highest Justice.

In Pilate an Act of greatest wickedness.

In himself, an Act of wonderful obedience.

God, as by an act of highest Justice, delivered him up for us. For us, notes
the Vicegerency of his sufferings, not only for our good as the final cause,
nor only for our sins as the meritorious cause, but for us (i. e.) in our room,
place, or stead, according to 1 Pet. 3. 18. and 2 Cor. 5. 14.

Secondly: We have also here before us a most sweet and comfortable inference
and conclusion from this proposition. If God have so delivered him, how shall
he not with him freely give us all things? For Christ comprehends all other
mercies in himself, therefore in giving him for us, all other mercies are
necessarily with him given to us.

And these mercies the poorest weakest Believer in the world may warrantably
expect from God. For as God delivered him for us all, so the treasures of all
spiritual and temporal mercies are thereby freely opened to us all, to the weak
as well as to the strong.

He says not Christ was delivered for all absolutely, but for us all, (i. e.)
all that Believe, all that are Elected and called, in whose person it is
manifest the Apostle here speaks, as Pareus, on the place well observed.

Hence these two doctrinal conclusions fairly offer themselves.

1. Doct.
That the rigor and severity of Divine Justice was executed upon Jesus Christ,
when he suffered for us.

2. Doct.
That Believers may strongly infer the greatest of mercies to themselves, from
the severity of Gods Justice to Jesus Christ.

I would willingly speak to both these points at this time; each affording such
proper matter of meditation to us in such a season as this.

To begin therefore with the first observation.

1. Doct.
That the rigor and severity of Divine Justice was executed upon Jesus Christ;
when he suffered for us: God did not spare him.

In Zach. 13. 7. you have Gods Commission given to the Sword of Justice, to
smi^ his own Son, and that without pity. Awake, O Sword, against my Shepherd,
and against the man that is my fellow, smite the Shepherd, etc. And when this
Commission came to be executed upon Christ, the Text tells us, God did not
spare him. All the Vials of his wrath were poured out to the last drop.

Two things require our attention in this point.

1. Wherein the severity of Justice to Christ appeared.

2. Why must Justice be executed on him in such rigor and severity? Why there
could be no abatement, mitigation, or sparing mercy shown him in that day.

First: Wherein the severity of Divine Justice to Christ appeared. 1.


And this will manifest it self in the consideration of the following
particulars.

First: Let us consider what Christ suffered, and we shall see the severity of
Justice in his sufferings, for he suffered all kinds of miseries, an^ ^at in
the most intense degrees of them. His sufferings were from all hands, from
Heaven, Earth, and Hell: From his EneEnemies who Condemned him, Buffeted him,
Reviled, Scourged and Crucified him. From his own Disciples and followers, one
of whom perfidiously betrayed him, another openly denied him, and all in the
hour of his greatest trouble forsook and abandoned him.

He suffered in his Body the most exquisite torments; the Cross was a cruel
Engine of torment, and more so to him than any other, by reason of the
excellent Crasis and temperament of his Body, and his most acute and delicate
sense; for as the Schoolmen truly say, He was optime complectionatus, of the
most exact and exquisite Complexion; and his senses remained acute and
vigorous, no way blunted, during the whole time of his sufferings, but full of
life and sense to the last gasp, as may be gathered from Mark. 15. 39. When the
Centurion which stood over against him, saw that he so cried out, and gave up
the ghost; he said, Truly this was the Son of God.

He suffered in his soul; yea, the sufferings of his soul, were the very soul
of his sufferings; he felt in his inner man the exquisite torments and
inexpressible anguish of the wrath of God. Hence was that preternatural bloody
sweat in the Garden; and hence that heart-rending outcry upon the Cross, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?

In all which sufferings from Heaven, from Earth, from Hell, from Friends, from
Enemies, there was no allay or abatement of the least degree of misery. God
spared not his own Son (says the Text) but delivered him up. Wherein the
severity of Divine Justice to Jesus Christ is displayed in these five
remarkable considerations following.

First: God spared not: If mercy, pity, and forbearance might be expected 1.
from any hand, surely it might be expected from God. He is the Fountain of
mercy. The Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy, says the Apostle, Jam.
5. 11. The most melting and tender compassions of a Mother to her Sucking
Child, are but cruelty in comparison with divine tenderness and mercy, Isa. 49.
15. Can a Woman forget her sucking Child, that she should not have compassion
upon the Son of her Womb; yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee.

Can a Woman, the more affectionate Sex forget her sucking Child, her own
Child, and not a Nursing child only; her own Child whilst it hangs on her
breast, and with the Milk from her breast, draws love from her heart? Can such
a thing as this be in Nature? Possibly it may; some such cruel Mothers may be
found, but yet I will not forget thee, says God. Though humane corrupt Nature
may be so vitiated, yet from the Divine nature compassion and mercy are
inseparable. It flows as waters flow from their Fountain; only here it
restrained it self, and let not out one drop to Jesus Christ in the day of his
sufferings. God, the God of mercy spared not.

Secondly: God spared not, says the Text (i. e.) he abated not any thing 2.
which Justice could inflict. Christ was not spared one stroke, one tear, one
groan, one drop, one sigh, one shame, one circumstance, no not the least, which
Justice could demand as satisfaction for man's sin.

There be diverse kinds of mercy in God; there is in him, preventing mercy,
delivering mercy, and sparing mercy. Now sparing mercy (as one well observes)
is the lowest mercy of all the Caryl on Job.
three. It Is less mercy to be spared or abated some degree or circumstance of
misery, than to have misery prevented by mercies stepping in betwixt us and it.
It Is less also than to be wholly delivered out of the hand of misery. Either of
these are greater acts of mercy than to abate a degree, or shorten an hour of
our trouble; the least abatement of any one circumstance of misery had been
sparing mercy, though it had been but the least and lowest act of mercy; and
yet even this was denied to Christ, he was not abated one minute of time, or
the least degree of sorrow God spared not.

Thirdly: He spared not his own Son, 3.
(...). So styled Signanter his own or his proper Son, in a special and
peculiar manner nearer and dearer to him than the Angels, who are his Sons by
Creation, Jo^ 1. 6. or any of the Saints who are his Sons by grace, in the way
of Regeneration and Adoption, Joh. 1. 12, 13. This was his own Son by Nature, a
Son of an higher rank and order, Psalm. 2. 7. begotten in an ineffable manner
from all Eternity in his own divine essence; and so is his Son by Nature,
having the same Essence and Nature with the Father, being coequal,
co-essential and coeternal with the Father.

No relation in nature is so intimate strict and dear as this; our Children are
not so much our own Children, our bodies are not so much our own bodies, as
Christ was Gods own Son; and yet though he were so dear to him, his other Self,
his express Image, his own dear Son, he spared him not. God spared not his own
Son.

Fourthly: And that which makes a farther discovery of Divine severity toward
4.
Jesus Christ, is this; that God spared not his own Son in the day of his
greatest distress, when he cried to his Father in an Agony, that if it were
possible the cup might pass from him: For of that day this Scripture is mainly
to be understood, the day when he fell to the ground and prayed, That if it
were possible, the hour might pass. When he said, Abba, Father; all things are
possible to thee, take away this Cup from me, Mark 14. 35, 36. He beheld his
own dear Son sweltering under the heaviest pressure of his wrath, sweating
great drops of Blood; crying, If it be possible, let this hour, this cup pass,
and yet it could not be granted: O the severity of God! He heard the cry of
Ahab, and spared him; he heard the Ninevites cry, and spared them: He heard the
cries of Hagar and Ishmael, and spared them: Yea, he hears the young Ravens,
when they cry, and feeds them: But when his own Son cried with the most
vehement cry, that the Cup might pass, he cannot be excused, he must drink it
up, even the very dregs of the Cup of trembling, and that to the last drop. O
the Justice and Severity of God!

Fifthly and lastly; Consider what the Father of mercies did instead of 5.
sparing the Son of his love, and the Text will inform you, that he delivered
him up for us all. So it is noted in Act. 2. 23. Him being delivered by the
determinate Counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and with wicked
hands have Crucified and Slain.

There was a Concession or Permission to those wicked Instruments that shed his
Blood, a loosing of the chain to those Ban-dogs, that compassed him about. Such
a Concession as was never given them before, for still they were tied up from
perpetrating their wickedness, and executing their malice till now, and this
was the hour which he often spoke of; My hour is not yet come. But O, what a
dismal hour was it, when it did come! when Providence let loose both Devils and
Men upon Christ! delivered him over to the will of his Enemies. And this was
not all, Christ was not only delivered up into the hands of the worst of men,
but which was much more terrible, into the severe hands of Divine Justice, to
grapple with the pure, unmixed, and unallayed Wrath of the great and terrible
God.

Lastly: We will improve this point in a double Use, by way of Information, and
Exhortation.

1. Use of Information.
First: The Severity of Gods Justice 1 Use.
to Jesus Christ informs us what a dreadful evil sin is, which so incenses the
Wrath of God, even against his own Son, when he bare our sins, and stood before
the Bar of God as our Surety.

Come hither, hard hearts, (hard indeed, if this cannot break them) you
complain you cannot see the evil of sin, so as to be deeply humbled for it; fix
your eyes a while here, and intently consider the point in hand: Suppose you
saw a tender and pitiful Father come into open Court with fury in his face, to
charge his own, his only, and his most beloved Son; and prosecute him to death,
and nothing able to satisfy him, but his blood; and be well pleased when he
sees it shed: Would you not say, O, what horrid evil has he done, it must be
some deep wrong, some heinous crime that he is guilty of, else it could never
be that his own Father could forget his bowels of pity and mercy; yet thus did
the Wrath of God break forth against his dear Son, when he stood before the Bar
as our Surety charged with the guilt of our sins.

Secondly: Learn hence, what a fearful 9.
thing it is to fall into the hands of the living God. Well might Luther cry
out, Nolo Deum absolutum. Let me have nothing to do with an absolute God. Woe
to them that stand before God in their own persons, without Christ; how will
Justice handle them! For if these things were done in the green Tree, what
shall be done in the dry Tree? Luke 23. 31. Did the Son of God fear, tremble,
sweat clods of Blood? Did he stand amazed, and fall into such an Agony of soul
when he drank that cup, which he knew in a few hours he should drink up, and
then never taste the bitterness of it more: How sad is their case, that must
drink of that Cup for ever, a Cup that has Eternity to the bottom!

Thirdly: How incomprehensible and ravishing is the love of God to 4.
men, that would rather be so severe to Jesus Christ, the darling of his soul,
than make us the objects of his Wrath for ever! Which of you (though there be
infinitely less tenderness in your hearts than in Gods) would lay your hands
upon a Child, the worst Child you have, and put him to death, for the sake of
the best Friend you have in the world! But God with his own hand delivered his
Son, his only Son, that from everlasting was the delight of his soul, who never
offended him, to death, the most cursed and cruel death, and all this for
Enemies; how unspeakable is this love, and past finding out!

Fourthly: Did not God spare his 4.
own Son; then let none of us spare our own sins. Sin was that Sword which
pierced Christ: O let sorrow for sin pierce your hearts; if* you spare sin, God
will not spare you, Deuteronomy. 29, 20. We spare sin when we faintly oppose it, when
we excuse, cover, and defend it; when we are impatient under just rebukes and
reproofs for it; but all kindness to sin, is cruelty to our own souls.

Fifthly and lastly: If God did not 5.
spare Christ, certainly he intends to spare Believers for his sake.

The Surety could not be spared, that the Principal might be spared for ever.
If God had spared him, he could not have spared us; if he afflicts his People,
it is not for satisfaction to himself, but profit to us, Heb. 12. 10. Should
God spare the rod of Affliction, it would not be for our advantage. So many
sanctified afflictions as are spared or abated, so many mercies and spiritual
advantages are withheld from us. But as for those strokes of Justice that are
the effects of Gods Vindictive wrath, they shall never be felt by Believers for
ever. All the Wrath, all the Curse, all the Galland Wormwood was squeezed into
Christ's Cup, and not one drop left to imbitter ours.

2. Use of Exhortation.
Did not God spare his own Son, but give him up to death for us all? Then
possess your hearts fully in the assurance of this great truth, That the
greatest and best of mercies shall not be denied or withheld from you, if you
be in Christ. Lay it down as a sure conclusion of Faith, and build up your hope
and comfort upon it This takes in the second Observation, and surely never was
any truth better fortified, never any inference more strongly inferred.
Henceforth may infer Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal mercies; all must be
yours if you be Christ's, 1 Cor. 3. 21, 22, 23. Oh make sure that Christ is
yours, and never hesitate at any other mercy: For

First: God has certainly a value and esteem for his own Son infinitely above
all other things: He is his own Son, his dear Son, Col. 1. 13. the Beloved,
Ephesians. 1. 6. The delight of his soul, Isa. 42. 1. Nothing is valued by God at
that rate that Christ is valued. If therefore he spare not the most excellent
mercy, but parts with the very darling of his soul for us, how shall he deny or
withold any lesser inferior mercy? It is not to be imagined he is the mercy
Emphatically so called, Luke 1. 72.

Secondly: Jesus Christ is a Comprehensive mercy, including all other mercies
in himself; he is the Tree of Life, all other mercies are but the fruits
growing on him; he is the Son of Righteousness, and whatever comfort spiritual
or natural refreshes your souls or bodies, is but a Beam from that Sun, a
Stream from that Fountain. If then God part with Christ to you, and for you, he
will not withold other mercies; he will not give the whole Tree, and deny an
Apple; bestow the Fountain it self, and deny you the Streams. All spiritual
mercies are in him, and given with him, Ephesians. 1. 3. Blessed be the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual
blessings, in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus. All Temporals are in him, and
given with him, Matthew. 6. 33. they are additionals to that great mercy.

Thirdly: If God spared not Christ, the best mercy, but delivered him up for us
all when we were his Enemies, then certainly he will not deny lesser mercies
when we are reconciled and made Friends to him. And this is the forcible reason
of the Apostle, which even compels assent, Romans 5. 9. Much more being now
justified by his Blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. In a word.

Fourthly and lastly: If it were the very design and intention of God in not
sparing his own Son, to open thereby a door for all mercies to be let in upon
us, then it is not imaginable he should withold them. He will not lose his
design, nor lay so many stripes upon Christ in vain: Some shall surely have the
benefit of it, and none so capable as Believers.

When God spared not his own Son, this was the design of it, and could you know
the thoughts of his heart, they would appear to be such as these.

I will now manifest the fierceness of my Wrath to Christ, and the fullness of
my Love to Believers. The pain shall be his, that the ease and rest may be
theirs; the stripes his, and the healing balm issuing from them, theirs. The
Condemnation his, and the Justification theirs. The Reproach and Shame his, and
the Honor and Glory theirs. The Curse his, and the Blessing theirs. The Death
his, and the Life theirs. The Vinegar and Gall his, the sweet of it theirs. He
shall groan, and they shall triumph: He shall mourn, that they may rejoice: His
heart shall be heavy for a time, that theirs may be light and glad for ever. He
shall be forsaken, that they may never be forsaken: Out of the worst of
miseries to him, shall spring the sweetest of mercies to them. O Grace, Grace,
beyond the conception of the largest mind, the expression of the tongues of
Angels.

THE SEVENTH MEDITATION UPON
Mark. 9. 24. And straightway the Father of the Child cried and said, with
tears, Lord I Believe, help my Unbelief.
THE occasion of these words is to be gathered from the Context, and briefly it
was this; A tender Father brings a possessed Child to Christ to be cured, with
a Sipotes, a doubting question, If thou can do any thing, have compassion
upon us, and help us. Words imparting much natural affection and tender love to
his Child. Have Compassion [upon us] and [help us] If the Child be sick, the
Parent is not well. What touches the Child is felt by his Father.

And as they import his natural affection to his Child, so also, his own
spiritual disease, or the weakness of his Faith. His Child was possessed with a
dumb Devil, and himself with unbelieving doubts and suspicions of Christ's
ability to cure his Child: The Child had a sick body, and the Father an infirm
soul. Satan afflicted one by a possession, and the other by temptation, ver. 22.

Christ returns his doubting language upon himself, ver. 23. If thou can
believe, all things are possible to him that believes. q. d. Do thou doubt
of my ability to heal thy Child? question rather thy own ability to believe for
his cure: If he be not healed, the cause will not be in my inability, but in
thine own infidelity: Which he speaks not to insinuate that Faith was in his
own power, but to convince him of his weakness, and drive him to God for
assistance, which effect it obtained; for immediately, he cried out and said
with tears, Lord I believe, help thou mine unbelief.

O how good is it for men to be brought into the straights of affliction
sometimes? Had not this man fallen into this distress, it is not like that he
had (at least not so soon) arrived either to the sense of his grace, or the
weakness of it.

In the words we may note these three parts.

First: A profession of his Faith, Lord I believe.

Secondly: A sense of the weakness 2.
of his Faith, Help thou my unbelief.

Thirdly: The affection with which 3.
both were uttered, He cried out, and said with tears. If these tears proceeded
from the sense and feeling of divine power inabling him to believe, as some
think, than they were tears of joy, and would inform us of this great truth.

That the least and lowest measure of true Faith is matter of joy, unspeakable
to Doct. 1.
the possessor of it.

If they proceeded from the sense of the weakness of his faith, then they give
us this note.

That the remainders of unbelief in the people of God, do cost them many tears,
they Doct. 2.
are the burdens and sorrows of gracious souls.

1. Doct.
That the least and lowest measure of Faith, is matter of joy unspeakable to
the possessor of it.

The Apostle in the 2 Pet. 1. 1. calls it precious Faith, and it well deserves
that Epithet; for the least and lowest degree of saving Faith is of invaluable
excellency, as will appear in these particulars.

First: The least degree of saving 1.
faith truly unites the soul to Jesus Christ, and makes it as really a branch
or member of him, as Moses, Abraham, or Paul were.

All saving Faith receives Christ, Joh. 1. 12. Indeed the strong Believer
receives him with a stronger and stedier hand than the weak one does, who
staggers, doubts, and trembles, but yet receives him, and consequently is as
much interessed in the blessed privileges flowing from Union, as the greatest
Believer in the world. Such are Christ's complacency in our persons and duties,
his sympathy with us in our troubles and affections, and our interest in his
person and purchase. And is not this matter of exceeding joy? Is it not enough
to melt, yea, overwhelm the heart of a poor Sinner to discover and feel that in
his own heart, which entitles him to such mercies.

Secondly: From the least degree of saving faith we may infer'as plenary a 2.
remission of sin, as from tht strongest. The weakest Believer is as completely
pardoned as the strongest, Act. 10. 43. By him all that believe are justified
from all things. All that believe without difference of sizes, strength, or
degrees, the least as well as the greatest, the Believer of a day old, as well
as the Fathers and Worthies of greatest name and longest standing.

Lo then the least measure of faith intitles thee as really to the greatest
blessing, as the highest acts of faith can do. It Is true, the stronger the
acting of faith is, the clearer the evidence usually is, but interest in the
privilege is the same in both. If then thou can discern but the weakest act,
and smallest measure of faith in thy soul, have thou not reason with him in the
Text, to cry out and say with tears, Lord I belive. Can thou receive and read
this Pardon, the pardon of such and so many sins, and not wet it with thy
tears: O it is matter of joy unspeakable.

Thirdly: The least degree of saving faith infers thy Election of God; and if
that be not matter of melting and transporting consideration, nothing is? O,
it is matter of more joy, that our names are written in the Book of Life, than
that the Devils are subject to us, Luke 10. 20. From hence it may be inferred,
that we are chosen of God, Act. 13. 48. As many as were ordained to eternal
life, believed.

Fourthly: The least measure of 4.
saving faith is a mercy greater than most men ever partake of.

It Is true, God is rich and bountiful in the gifts of Providence to others,
they have the good things of this life, many of them more than their hearts can
wish, Psalm. 73. 7. He enricheth many of them also with endowments of the mind,
natural and moral knowledge and wisdom, yea, and adorns them with Homilitical
Virtues, that render them very desirable and lovely in their converses with
men; but there are but few, to whom he gives saving faith, Isa. 53. 1.
Believers are but a small remnant among men.

Fifthly and lastly: He that has any, the least degree of saving faith, has
that which shall never be taken away from him, all other excellencies go away
at death, Job 4. 21. But this is a spring that never fails, it springs up into
everlasting life, Joh. 4. 14. A man may outlive his Friends and Familiars, his
Estate and Health, his Gifts and Natural parts, but not his Faith, how great
matter of joy and comfort is wrapped up in the least degree of Faith.

1. Use of trial.
It concerns us then to examine our selves whether our Faith be true, be it
more or less, stronger or weaker, and till we discern its truth, it will yield
us but little comfort.

I confess weak Believers are under great disadvantages to comfort, small and
weak things being usually very inevident and undiscernable; but yet in this
example before us, we find weak faith was made evident, though much unbelief
was mixed with it. Lord I believe, help thou my unbelief. In which words, many
very useful signs of true, though weak faith, did appear, and they are very
relieving to weak Believers to consider them. O that we might find the like in
us.

First: His Faith gave him a tender melting heart. He cried out, and said with
tears. Does your faith melt your hearts, either in the sense of your own
vileness, or of the riches of free grace to such vile Creatures?

Secondly: His Faith gave him a deep sense of his remaining unbelief, and
burdened his heart with it, Help my unbelief: And sure so will yours, if it be
but as a grain of Mustard Seed in you.

Thirdly: His weak Faith carried him to Christ in servent prayers and cries for
his help to subdue unbelief in him, and so will yours if your Faith be right.
Oh how often do the People of God go to the Throne of Grace upon that Errand!
Help Lord, my heart is dead, vain, and very unbelieving; there is no dealing
with it in my own strength: Father, help me.

Fourthly: His Faith made him hunger and thirst after greater measures of it.
Help my unbelief, (i. e.) Lord cure it, that I may believe with more strong and
steady acts os Faith; that I may not question thy power any more, or say, If
thou can do any thing. Why thus will it be with you, if you be true
Believers, Luke 17. 5. Lord (said the Disciples) increase our Faith.

Fifthly: There was a conflict in his soul betwixt Faith and Infidelity, Grace
and Corruption, and this very sensible to him, faith inclining him one way, and
unbelief carrying him another; and hence he speaks like a man greatly
distressed betwixt the workings of contrary principles in his own soul, and so
you will also find it in your selves, Gal. 5. 17. The flesh lusts against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, so that ye cannot do the things that
ye would.

2. Use of Consolation.
Well then, bless the Lord for the least degree of saving Faith, and be not 2.
Use.
so discouraged at its imperfections as to overlook and slight the smalest
working of faith in your souls. This poor man was deeply sensible of his
unbelief, and yet at the same instant truly thankful for a small measure of
Faith, and so should you. For

First: The least measure of saving Faith is more than all Creatures power
could produce: It Is the faith of the operation of God, Col. 2. 12. it is the
work of God that ye believe, Joh. 6. 29. Yea, it is the exceeding greatness of
his power to usward, who believe according to the working of his mighty power,
Ephesians. 1. 19, 20. No Ministers of Christ, how excellent soever their gifts are,
no duties or ordinances; no labor or diligence of your own, without this
mighty power of God, can ever bring you to Faith.

Secondly: It Is just matter of wonder and astonishment that ever one spark of
faith was kindled in such an heart as thine is; an heart which had no
predisposition or inclination in the least to believe; yea, it was not rasa
tabula, like clean paper, vo^d of any impression of faith, but filled with
contrary impressions to it; so that it is marvelous that ever your hearts
received the stamp or impression of faith on them.

It was wonderful that fire should fall from Heaven, and burn upon the Altar,
when Elijah had laid the wood in order upon it, but much more when he poured so
much water upon it, as not only wet all the wood, but filled the Trenches, 1
King. 18. 33. Just so was the case of thy soul Reader, when God came to kindle
faith there. Thy heart was dark and ignorant, neither acquainted with God or
thy own condition; yea, thy heart was a proud heart, full of self-righteousness
and self-conceitedness, Rev. 3. 17. Romans 10. 3. a heart that would rather
venture Eternal Damnation, than deny Self, and submit to Christ; and yet the
light of the Lord must shine into this darkness, and the pride and stiffness of
thy heart must be broken and brought to yield, or there is no believing.

Beside: How many and mighty Enemies did oppose the work of Faith in thy soul?
Among which Satan, and thy own carnal reasonings were the principal, 2 Cor. 10.
4. By them what strong holds and sortifications were raised to secure thee from
the strokes of conviction, and made way for Faith. Let but the state of thine
own heart as it was by nature, be considered; and thou will say, it is the
wonderful work of God that ever thou wast brought in any degree to believe.

Thirdly: Though thy Faith be weak, yet it is growing, if it be saving faith.
The largest Tree was once but a Kernel or Acorn: The most famous Believer at
first but a weak and doubting one. Be not discouraged therefore, God will
fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness in you, and the work of faith with
power. It were certainly much better for you to be blessing God for a little
faith, praying for the increase of faith, and diligently attending those means
by which it may be improved and made flourishing in your souls, than by a
sinful, ungrateful and prejudicial despondency, at once to dishonor God, and
thus wrong your selves.

2. Doct.
That the remains of unbelief in gracious hearts do cost them many tears and
sorrows. 2. Doct.


There are many things that afflict and grieve the People of God from without,
but all their outward troubles are nothing to these troubles that come from
within.

There are many inward troubles that make them groan, but none more than this,
the unbelief they find in their own hearts. This sin justly costs them more
trouble than other sins; because it is the root from which other sins do
spring; a root of bitterness, bearing wormwood and gall to the imbittering of
their souls. For,

First: The remains of unbelief in the Saints greatly dishonor God; and what
is a great dishonor to God, cannot but be a great grief and burden to them.
For look as faith gives God special honor above all other graces, so unbelief
in a special manner, both wrongs and grieves him above all other sins. Unbelief
in dominion makes God a liar, 1 John 5. 10. and even the relics thereof in
Believers, does shake their assent to his truths and promises, and nourishes a
vile suspicion of them in the heart; and how do those base jealousies reflect
upon his honor? Certainly it cannot but be a grief to gracious hearts to see
God dishonored by others, Psalm. 119. 36. and a much greater to dishonor him
our selves, hinc illae lacrimae. Upon this ground we may justly cry out and say
with tears, Lord help our unbelief.

Secondly: The remains of unbelief in the Saints, does not only dishonor God,
but defaces and spoils their best duties, in which they at any time approach
unto God. Is the face of God clouded from us in prayer, hearing, or receiving.
Examine the cause and reason, and you will find that cloud raised from your own
unbelieving hearts. Are your affections cold, flat, and dead in duty? dig but
to the root, and you will find this sin to lie there. If the word do not work
upon you as you desire and pray it might, it is because it is not mingled with
faith, Heb. 4. 2. No Duties, no Ordinances, no Promises can give down their
sweet influences upon your souls, because of this sin. Now Communion with the
Lord in duties, is the life of our life: These things are dearer to the Saints
than their eyes. Justly therefore do they bewail and mourn over that sin, which
obstructs and intercepts their sweetest enjoyments in this world.

Thirdly: The remains of unbelief gives advantage and success to Satan's
temptations upon us. Does he at any time affright and scare us from our dudy,
or draw and entice us to the commission of sin, or darken and cloud our
condition, and fill us with inward fears and horror, without cause; all this he
does by the mediation of our own unbelief. The Apostle in Ephesians. 6. 16. calls
Faith the souls Shield against temptation: And 1 John 5. 4. it is called the
Victory by which we overcome, (i. e.) the Sword or Weapon by which we Atchieve
our Victories: And if so, then unbelief disarms us both of Sword and Shield,
and leaves us naked of defense in the day of Battle, a prey to the next
temptation that befalls us.

Fourthly: The remains of unbelief hinder the thriving of all graces; it is a
worm at their root; a plant of such a malignant quality, that nothing which is
spiritual can thrive under the droppings and shadow of it. It Is said Heb. 4.
2. that the Gospel was Preached to the Israelites, but it did not profit them,
not being mixed with faith in them that heard it. No Ordinances nor Duties, be
they never so excellent, will make that soul to thrive, where unbelief
prevails: You Pray, you Hear, you Fast, you Meditate, and yet you do not
thrive, your spiritual food does no good: You come from Ordinances as dead,
careless, and vain-as-you went to them; and why is it thus, but because of
remaining unbelief?

Use 1.
Let all the People of God bewail and tenderly mourn over the remainders Use. 1.
of insidelity in your own hearts. There, there is the root of the disease; and
surely Reader, thy heart is not free of such symptoms of it, as appear in other
men's hearts. For do but consider,

First: What is our Impatiency to 1. Sympt.
wait for mercy, and despondency of spirit, if deliverance come not quickly in
the outward or inward straights of soul or body, but a plain symptom of
unbelief in our hearts. He that believes will not make have, Isa. 28. 16. He
that can believe, can also wait Gods time, Psalm. 27. 14.

Secondly: And what does our readiness to use sinful mediums to prevent, 2.
Sympt.
or extricate our selves out of trouble but a great deal of Infidelity lurking
still in our hearts; might but Faith be heard to speak, it would say in thy
heart, let me rather die ten deaths than commit one sin. It Is sweeter and
easier to die in any integrity, than to live with a defiled or wounded
Conscience. It Is nothing but our unbelief that makes us so ready to put forth
our hands to iniquity, when the rod of the Wicked rests long upon us, or any
eminent danger threatens us, Psalm. 125. 3.

Thirdly: Does not the unbelief of 3. Sympt.
your hearts show it self in your deeper thoughtfulness and great auxieties
about earthly things, Matthew. 6. 30. We pretend we have trusted God with our
souls to all Eternity, and yet cannot trust him for our daily bread. We bring
the evils of to morrow upon to day; and all because we cannot believe more.

O Reader, how much better were it to hear such questions as these from thee;
how shall I get an heart suitable to the mercies I do enjoy? How shall I duly
improve them for God? What shall I render to the Lord for all his goodness?
This would better become thee, than to afflict thy self with what shall I eat,
what shall I drink, or wherewithal shall I be clothed?

Fourthly: What does the slavish fear of death speak, but remains of unbelief
still in our hearts? Are there not many faintings, tremblings, despondencies of
mind under the thoughts of death? O, if faith were high, thy spirit could not
be so low, 2 Cor. 5. 1, 2, 3. The more bondage of fear, the more infidelity.

Fifthly: To conclude what is the 5. Sympt.
voice of all those distractions of thy heart in religious duties, but want of
faith, weakness in faith, and the actual prevalence of unbelief? You come to
God in prayer, and there a thousand Vanities beset you; your heart is carried
away, it roves, it wanders to the ends of the earth: Conscience smites for
this, and says, Thou do but mock God, thy soul will smart for this; thou
feel neither strength nor sweetness arising out of such duties. You enquire
for remedies, and fill the ears of Friends with your complaints, and it may be
see not the root of all this to be in your own unbelief: But there it is, and
till that be cured, it will not be better with you.

Use 2.
Yet let not poor Christians so mourn Use 2.
as those that have no hope or ground of comfort, even in this case: For,

First: Though there be remains of unbelief in you, yet you have infinite cause
to bless God that they are but remains. You once were in unbelief 1 Timothy 1. 13.
(i. e.) under the full power and dominion of it. Had God cut you off in that
state, you mast certainly have perished. This is the disease, but that was the
death of your souls.

Secondly: Though unbelief be in you, yet it is not in you per modum quietis;
by way of rest, as it is in all unbelievers, but by way of daily conflict, and
as a burden too heavy to be borne. Now though the sin be sad, yet the sorrow
for it is sweet; and your conflicts with it brings you under a very comfortable
sign of grace, Romans 7. 21.

Thirdly: This is a disease under which all Christians do labor more or less.
There is not a heart so holy in all the world, but is in some degree tainted
and infected with this disease. And this has been evident, not only in all
Christians of all sizes, but in all the acts of their faith. Jobs faith
triumphed in cap. 13. 15. yet had its eclipse and fainting fit, in cap. 19. 20.
Abraham was a most renowned Believer, a great pattern and example of faith; oh,
how high a pitch did his faith mount to, in Genesis 22. 3. and yet there was a
time when it fainted, and failed him as at Gerar. Genesis 20. 2, 9, 10, 11. David
in Psalm. 27. 1. 23. was not like David in 1 Samuel 27. 1. The faith of Peter
shone out like the Sun in a glorious confession, Matthew. 16. 16. and yet was not
only beclouded, but seemed to be gone down and quite set in Matthew. 26. 69.
though it afterward recovered it self.

Forthly: It Is not this or that degree of unbelief that damnes a man, but the
power and dominion of it that damnes him. Indeed your comfort much depends upon
the strength of your faith, but your salvation depends upon the truth of it.
Most Christians come to Heaven with a weak and doubting faith, but few with
their sails filled with a direct and fresh wind of assurance.

Fifthly: There is enough in Christ to help thy unbelief. Lord, said this poor
man, help my unbelief. He is an excellent Physician, and knows how to relieve
and cure thee: Go to him and groan out thy complaint, tell him thy heart is
pained and troubled with this disease; thou shall find him a faithful, skilful
and merciful Savior.

Sixthly: It Is but a little while before this, with all other diseases bred by
it in thy soul, shall be perfectly healed; Sanctification is a cure begun,
Glorification is the cure performed and completed: The former has destroyed
the dominion, the latter will destroy the existence of it in thy soul: When you
come to Heaven, and never till then will you find your selves well, and at ease
in every part.

And thus much of the second point.

There are some general observations arising from both parts of my Text,
considered together, viz. The thankful acknowledgment of his faith, and the
sorrowful sense of his unbelief. It shall suffice for a conclusion to this
Meditation only to note them, and they are these,

First: That the deepest sense of sin must not exclude an humble and thankful
acknowledgment of the grace of God in his People. It Is the fault of most to
hide their sins, and the fault of some to hide their graces.

Secondly: Acceptance of our persons and duties is a pure act of grace. There Is
no duty performed in a perfect act of faith; all is mixed with unbelief in some
degree, the Honey and the Comb are mixed together, Cant. 2. 8. No duty as it
comes from us is pure.

Thirdly: Justly may we suspect that faith for a false faith, which boasts of
its own strength, but never mourns in the sense of unbelief. Where there are no
conflicts with sin, there can be no sound evidence of sincerity.

Fourthly: Believers must not wonder to find strange vicissitudes and
alterations in the state of their souls. Sometimes a clear, and sometimes a
cloudy day. Sometimes they have their Songs in the night, and sometimes their
bitter Lamentations. If you ask why is it thus, the answer is, there are twins
within you, contrary principles struggling in your souls, and it is no wonder at
all to find peace and trouble* hope and fear, light and darkness, taking their
turns, and sharing your time betwixt them.

THE EIGHTH MEDITATION UPON
Psalm. 40. ver. 8. I delight to do thy will, O my God; yea thy Law is within my
heart.
CAsting my eye upon this precious Text, I find it perplexed and darkened with
variety, yea, contrariety of expositions. The Jews and Socinians generally
refer all to David, denying Christ to be the person here spoken of. Others
refer the whole Psalm to Christ, but the best expositors refer it partly to
David, and partly to Christ. That this Paragraph in which my Text lies, refers
to Christ, is plain from the Apostles allegation of it, in Heb. 10. 5, 6, 7. In
this and the two former verses there lie three great points of truth, which you
may take up in this order.

First: The insufficiency and rejection 1.
of all legal Sacrifices, as things of no virtue in themselves to satisfy God,
or save men, ver. 6. these thou would not, (i. e.) thou never did appoint
them to be the means of salvation farther than they signified and pointed at
me; and now must vanish when I come in a body of flesh, according to that, Col.
2. 17.

Secondly: The introduction of a 2.
complete and sufficient means of redemption, ver. 7. Lo I come.

Thirdly: The suitableness and agreeableness of this work of redemption 3.
to the heart and will of Jesus Christ, verse. 8. I delight to do thy will, O my
God; yea, thy Law is within my heart; or as it is in the Hebrew, in the midst
of my bowels.

In the words we are to note two things, viz. First, The rise and spring of
man's redemption.

Secondly: The acceptableness and suitableness of it to the heart of Christ.

First: The rise and first spring of 1.
man's redemption, the will and pleasure of God. So it pleased the Lord to
appoint and order it, that a remnant of poor lost Sinners should be saved.

The execution and accomplishment of this good pleasure of God, was that part
which by agreement and consent was committed to the Son, and is here called a
Law, or command laid upon him. And answerably the death of Christ is
represented as an act of obedience, Phil. 2. 8. and respected Gods command for
it, Joh. 10. 18. This Commandment have I received from my Father, referring to
the Covenant of Redemption, which was betwixt them from everlasting; and this
was the rise and first spring of our Redemption by Christ.

Secondly: You have here the gratefulness 2.
and suitableness of this work to the heart of Christ. I delight to do it, it
is in my heart. Lo, I come.

The Hebrew words note not simple consent or willingness, but the highest
pleasure and complacency that can be; a work which ravishes his soul with the
delights of it. I delight to do thy will. And that other expression, Thy Law is
within my heart, or bowels; has as deep a sense and signification, as the
former. It notes the greatest care, solicitude and intention of mind, in
keeping the most precious treasure that was committed to him, for so the phrase
is used in Prove. 4. 21. And so did our Redeemer esteem and reckon this work
which was by the Father demandated and committed to him. Hence the note is,

Doct.
That the will of God to redeem Sinners by the incarnation and death of Jesus
Christ, was most grateful and pleasing to the very heart of Christ.

It is said, Prove. 8. 31. when he was sollacing himself in the sweetest
enjoyment of his Father, whilst he lay in that blessed bosom of delights, yet
the very prospect of this work gave him pleasure: Then were his delights with
the Sons of men. And when he was come into the world, and had endured many
abasures and injuries, and was even now come to the most difficult part of the
work; yet, how am I straightned, or pained (says he) till it be accomplished,
Luke 12. 50.

Two things might call our thoughts to stay upon them in this point.

First: The decency of it, why it ought to be so.

Secondly: The reasons of it, whence it came to be so.

First: Why it ought to be a pleasant and grateful thing to Christ to take a
body of flesh, and lay it down by death again for the redemption of Sinners.

First: It became Christ to go about 1.
this work with cheerfulness and delight, that thereby he might give his death
the nature and formality of a sacrifice.

In all Sacrifices you shall find that God had still a regard, a special
respect to the will of the offerer. See Exodus 35. 5. 21. and Levit. 1. 3. the
voluntariness and cheerfulness with which it is given, is of great regard with
God.

Secondly: It ought to be so, in regard of the unity of Christ's will with the
Fathers. The work of our redemption is called, the pleasure of the Lord, Isa.
53. 10. And what was the Fathers pleasure, could not be displeasing to him, who
is one with the Father. It Is impossible their wills can clash, whose nature is
one.

Thirdly: This was necessary to magnify and commend the love of Jesus Christ
to us, for whom he gave himself. That he came into the world to die for us, is
a mercy of the first magnitude, but that he came in love to our souls, and
underwent all his sufferings with such willingness for our sakes, this
heightens it above all apprehension. O this is the most taking, the most
ravishing, the most astonishing consideration of all: He loved me, and gave
himself for me, Gal. 2. 20. He loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own
blood, Rev. 1. 5. Here love is in its highest exaltation.

Fourthly: It was necessary to be so, for the regulating of all our obedience
to God according to this pattern. That seeing and setting this great example of
obedience before us, we might never grutch nor grumble at any duty or suffering
that God should call us to, You know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ; how
that though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor. Says the Apostle,
when he would press the Corinthians to their duty, 2 Cor. 8. 9. and when he
would effectually urge the Philippians to their duty; this is the argument, Let
this mind be in you, which also was in Christ Jesus, Phil. 2. 5. So that it
became and behooved Christ thus to undertake this great service.

Secondly: Next let us consider and examine whence it came to be so pleasant 2.
and acceptable to Jesus Christ to come into the world and die for poor Sinners.

And we shall find, that although the sufferings of Christ were exceeding
sharp, and the cup of Gods wrath unspeakably bitter; yet that which made it
pleasant and desirable to Jesus Christ, was the prospect he had of the sweet
results and issues of his sufferings, Isa. 53. 10, 11. He shall see of the
travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied, (i. e.) he shall have great
content and pleasure from the issues and fruits of his sufferings, as Psalm.
128. 2. Thou shall eat the labor of thy hands, (i. e.) the fruit of thy
labors. So here, He shall see the travail of his soul, (i. e.) the fruit and
effects of his travail; and to see this, shall be to him the reward and
recompense of all his sufferings. Now among the sweet results of the sufferings
of Christ, there are especially these three which he foresaw with singular
content and delectation.

First: That in his sufferings there would be made a glorious display and
manifestation of the divine Attributes; yea, such a glorious display of them as
never was made before to Angels or to men, nor ever shall be any more in this
world. For though,

First: The Wisdom of God had made it self visible to men in the Creation of
the world, yet there it shone but in a faint and languishing beam, compared
with this. Here divine Wisdom put it self as it were into a visible form, and
represented it self to the life. See 1 Cor. 1. 24. and Ephesians. 30. 10. Behold in
the death of Christ the Wisdom of God in its highest exaltation and glory. O
the manifold Wisdom of God! O the depth of his unsearchable wisdom. Which I
touched in some particulars before, p. 102.

Behold here the Wisdom of God raising more glory to himself by occasion of the
breach of the Law, than could ever have risen to him from the most punctual
observation of its commands, or the most rigorous execution of its
threatenings; from the occasion of the fall (which was our undoing) raising us
to a far better estate, and with a much better security to enjoy it than that
from which we fell. Yea, behold and wonder, God by the death of Christ,
recovering his Elect from all the danger and mischief of sin, and yet making
the way and manner of their recovery the fairest glass to represent the horror
and evil of sin to them, that ever was shown them in this world. Oh, the
triumph of divine Wisdom!

Secondly: Though the love of God had appeared before in our Creation,
Protection, and Provision, yet nothing to what it does in our Redemption by the
death of Christ: Lo, here is the love of God in its strength and glory, 1 John
4. 10. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent
his Son to be the Propitiation for our sins. Herein is love (i. e.) here is the
highest expression of Gods love to the Creature; not only that ever was, but
that ever can be made; for in love only God acts to the uttermost: What ever
his power has done, it can do more; but for his love it can go no higher; he
has no greater thing to give than his Christ. It Is true, in giving us a being,
and that in the noblest rank and order of Creatures on Earth; herein was love.
In feeding us all our life long, by his assiduous tender providence; herein is
love. In protecting us under his wings from innumerable dangers and mischiefs;
herein is love, much love: And yet set all this by his Redeeming love in
Christ, and it seems nothing. When we have said all, Herein is the love of God,
that he sent his Son, etc. This was free love to undeserving, to ill deserving
Sinners. Preventing love; not that we loved him, but that he loved us. Just as
an Image in the glass (says Ficinus) that is imprinted there by the face
looking into it, the Image does not look back upon the face, except the face
look forward upon the Image; and in that the Image does seem to see the face,
its nothing else, but that the face does see the Image. O, the unexpressable
glory of the love of God in Christ!

Thirdly: Though God had given several sad marks of his Justice before, both
upon the Angels that fell, clapping upon them the chains of darkness, in the
overthrow of Sodom, and the neighboring Cities, turning them to Ashes; as you
may read in Jud. ver. 6, 7. yet never was the exactness and severity of Justice
so manifested before, nor ever shall be any more, as it was at the death of
Christ. Christ did not only satisfy it fully, but he also honored it highly,
making that Attribute which was once a bar, now to be a bottom of our peace,
Romans 3. 25. Never did such a Person as Christ stand at the Bar of Justice
before: The Blood of God was poured out to appease and satisfy it. When Christ
suffered, he did both give and take satisfaction; he gave it to the justice of
God in dying; he took it in seeing Justice so honored in his death.

Secondly: Another delightful prospect Christ had of the fruit of his
sufferings, was the recovery and salvation of all the Elect by his death. And
though his sufferings were exceeding bitter, yet such fruit of them as this,
was exceeding sweet. Upon this account he assumed his Name Jesus, Matthew. 1. 21.
yea, and his humane Nature also, Gal. 4. 4, 5. Souls are of great value in his
eyes: One soul is of more worth in his account than all the world, Mark 8. 36.
What a pleasure then must it be to him, to save so many souls from the
everlasting wrath of the great and terrible God? Add to this

Thirdly: The glory which would redound to him from his redeemed ones to all
Eternity. For it will be the everlasting pleasant employment of the Saints in
Heaven to be ascribing glory, praise, and honor to the Redeemer. To him that
loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own Blood, and has made us Kings
and Priests to God and his Father; to him be glory and dominion for ever and
ever, Rev. 1. 5, 6.

The improvement of all this will be in a word or two.

1. Use for Conviction.
This truth then in the first place, may convince, shame, and humble the 1 Use.
very best of Christians, who find so little delight in the most easy, sweet,
and spiritual duties of obedience; when Christ undertook and went through the
most difficult task for them with such cheerfulness and readiness, Lo I come,
thy Law is in my heart, I delight to do thy will. And yet the work he so
applied himself to, was a work full of difficulty, attended with reproach and
shame, as well as anguish and pain.

Did Christ find pleasure in abasement and torment, in suffering and dying for
me, and can I find no pleasure in Praying, Hearing, Meditating, and enjoying
the sweet duties of Communion with him? Did he come so cheerfully to Die for
me, and do I go so dead heartedly to Prayers and Sacraments to enjoy fellowship
with him? Was it a pleasure to him to shed his Blood, and is it none to me to
apply it, and reap the benefits of it? Oh Lord, what an heart have I? How
unsuitable is this frame of heart to the Nature of God, whose essential
excellencies make him the supreme delight, the sweet repose, solace, and rest
of souls! Psalm. 16. 11.

How unsuitable to the principles of regeneration and holiness purposely
planted in the soul, to make spiritual performances a pleasure to it!

How unsuitable to the future expected state of glory, which brings the
sanctified soul to a sweet complacential rest and satisfaction in God! In a
word, how unsuitable is this temper of spirit to the heart of Jesus Christ! O,
me thinks I hear Christ thus expostulating with me this day.

Is this thy zeal and thy delight in the duties of obedience? Is it rather the
awe of Conscience than the pleasure of Communion that brings thee to this duty?
Does thy heart need so many arguments to persuade it even to the sweetest,
easiest, and most pleasant duties in Religion? Well, I did not love thee at
that rate; my heart readily echoed to the Fathers call to die for thee, to
drink the very dregs of the cup of trembling for thee. I come, I come. I
delight to do thy will, thy Law is in the midst of my bowels.

2. Use for Exhortation.
If it be so, how great a motive have the People of God before them, to 2. Use.
make them apply themselves with all cheerfulness and readiness of mind to all
the duties of active and passive obedience? O let there be no more grumblings,
lazy excuses, shiftings off duty, or dead-hearted and listless performances of
them after such an example as this. Be ready to do the will of God; yea, be you
also ready to suffer it. Let the same mind be in you, which also was in Christ
Jesus. The more pleasure and delight you find in doing or suffering the will of
God, the more of Christ's spirit is in you, and the more of his Image is upon
you. Are not all holy duties expressed in Scripture by the Saints walking with
God, Genesis 17 1. and is not this an Angelical life? Can it be a burden to the
ear to hear sweet ravishing strains of melody; or to the eye, to behold variety
of pleasant and lively colors; or to the palate to relish the delicious
sweetness of meats and drinks.

Oh Reader, were thy heart more spiritual, more deeply sanctified, and
Heavenly, it would be no more pain to thee to Pray, Hear, or Meditate on the
things of God, than it is to a Bird to carry and use his own wings, or to a
Man, to eat the most pleasant food when he is an hungry. I have rejoiced (says
David) in the way of thy Commandments, as much as in all riches, Psalm. 119. 14.

And as to sufferings for Christ, they should not be grievous to Christians,
that know how cheerfully Christ came from the bosom of the Father to die for
them. What have we to leave, or lose, in comparison with him? What are our
sufferings to Christ's? Alas, there is no compare; there was more bitterness in
one drop of his sufferings, than in a sea of ours.

To conclude, your delight and readiness in the paths of obedience, is the very
measure of your sanctification.

THE NINETH MEDITATION UPON
Zech. 22. part of ver. 10. And they shall look upon me whom they have pierced,
and they shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only Son, and shall be in
bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his firstborn.
THIS promise is confessed to have a special respect to the Jews Conversion to
Christ. It was in part accomplished in the Apostles days, Acts 2. 37. yet that
was but a specimen or handsel of what shall be, when the body of that Nation
shall be called.

But yet it cannot be denied that all Christians find the same pierceing
sorrows, and wounding sense of sin, when God awakens them by convictions, and
brings them to see the evil of sin, and the grace of Christ, that is here
expressed concerning them at their conversion.

The words present us with three very remarkable particulars in Evangelical
repentance, viz.

First: The spring and principle of it.

Secondly: The effects and fruits of it.

Thirdly: The depth and measure of it.

First: The spring and principle of Repentance expressed in these words, 1.
They shall look upon me whom they have pierced. This looking upon Christ, is
an act of faith, for so it is described in Scripture, Joh. 6. 40. Isa. 45. 22.
and it respects Christ crucified as its proper object; yea, and that by them,
not only as their Progenitors involved them in that guilt, by entailing it on
them, but as their own sins were the meritorious cause of his death and
sufferings. They shall look upon me whom they have pierced.

Secondly: The effects and fruits of 2.
such an aspect of faith upon Christ is here also noted. They shall mourn and
be in bitterness, (i. e.) it shall melt and thaw them into Godly sorrow; it
shall break their hard and stony hearts to pieces: The eye of faith shall
affect their hearts; for indeed Evangelical sorrows, are hearty and
undissembled, tears dropping out of the eye of faith.

Thirdly and lastly: The depth and measure of their sorrow is here likewise 3.
noted. And it is compared with the greatest and most piercing sorrows men are
acquainted with in this world, even the sorrow of a tenderhearted Father
mourning over a dead Son, yea, an only Son, and his first born, than which no
earthly sorrow is more penetrating and sharp, Jer. 6. 26.

Hence the Note will be,

Doct.
That the sufferings of Christ are exceeding prwerful, to melt Believers hearts
into Doct.
Godly sorrow.

The eye of faith is a precious eye, and according to its various Aspects upon
Christ, it produces various effects upon the hearts of men. Eying Christ as
our complete Righteousness, so it pacifies and quiets the heart; eying him as
our pattern, so it directs and regulates our actions; eying him as our
sacrifice, offered up to divine Justice for our sins, so it powerfully thaws
the heart, and melts the affections.

By meltings, I do not only understand tears, as if they only were expressive
of all spiritual sorrow; for it is possible the waters of sorrow may run deep
in the heart, when the eye cannot yield a drop.

There be two things in Repentance, Trouble and Tears. The first is Essential,
the last Contingent. The first flows from the influence of faith upon the soul;
the last much depends upon the temper and constitution of the body. It is a
mercy when our tears can flow from an heart filled with sorrow sor sin, and
love to Christ; and yet it often falls out that there is an heavy heart, where
the eyes are dry. But that there is efficacy in faith to melt the heart, by
looklng upon the sufferings of Christ for sin, is undoubted; and how it becomes
so powerful an instrument to this end, I will show you in the following
particulars.

First: Faith eyes the dignity of the Person of Christ, who was pierced for 1.
us; how excellent and glorious a Person he is. In the Captivity, it was for a
lamentation that Princes were hanged up by the hands, and the faces of Elders
were not reverenced, Lam. 5. 12. We read also the Lamentation of David, 2 Samuel
3. 38. as he followed Abners Hearse. A Prince and a great man is fallen in
Israel to day.

But what was Abner, and what were the Princes of Israel to the Son of God? Lo
here by faith the Believer sees the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, the only
begotten of the Father, equal to God in nature and dignity, he whom all the
Angels worship, hanging dead upon the cursed Tree. Faith sees Royal Blood, the
Blood of God poured out by the Sword of Justice for satisfaction and
reconciliation; and this cannot but deeply affect the believing soul.

Secondly: Faith represents the severity of Divine Justice to Jesus Christ, and
the extremity of his sufferings; and this sight is a melting sight.

The Apostle tells us, Gal. 3. 13. he was made (...), a Curse, and Execration
for us: It relates to the kind and manner of his death upon the Cross, which
was the death of a Slave, servile supplicium; a free man was priviledg'd from
that punishment. It looks upon, and well considers the sad plight and condition
Christ was in, in the days of his Humiliation for us. It Is said of him, Matthew.
26. 38. he was (...) undequaque tristis, surrounded with griefs, exactly
answerable to his name, Isa. 53. 3. a man of sorrows. Let him look which way he
would, outward or inward, upward or downward, to Friends or Enemies, he could
behold nothing but sorrow, and what might increase his misery. Another
Evangelist says he was sore amazed, Mark. 14. 33. (...) It notes such a
consternation as makes the hair of the head stand upright, horripilatio. A
third tells us his s^ul was troubled, Joh. 12. 27. (...), Unde Tartarus, a word
from whence Hell is derived, and denoting the anguish and troubles of them that
are in that place of torments.

And the fourth tells us he was in an Agony, Luke 24. 44. all expressing in
several emphatical notions and metaphors, the extremity of Christ's anguish and
torment. This cannot but greatly affect and break the Believers heart.

Thirdly: But then, that which most affects the heart, is Christ's Undergoing
all this, not only in love to us, but in our room and stead. He suffered not
for any evil he had done, for there was no guile found in his mouth, Isa. 53.
4, 5. but the Just suffered for the Unjust, 1 Pet. 3. 18. It was for me, a vile
wretched worthless Sinner. It was my Pride, my Earthliness, the hardness of my
heart, the corruption of my nature, the innumerable evils of my life, that
brought him down to the dust of death. He was made sin for us, who knew no sin,
2 Cor. 5. 21.

Who can believingly eye Christ, as suffering such pains, such wrath, such a
curse in the room of such a Sinner, such a Rebel; so undeserving, and so
ill-deserving a Creature, and not mourn as for an only Son, and be in
bitterness as for a firstborn?

Fourthly: Faith melts the heart by considering the effects and fruits of the
sufferings of Christ, what great things he has purchased by his Stripes and
Blood for poor Sinners; a full and final pardon of sin, a well-settled peace
with God, a sure title and right to the eternal Inheritance; and all this for
thee, a Law-condemned, a Self-condemned Sinner. Lord, what am I, that such
mercies as these should be purchased by such a price for me; for me, when
thousands and ten thousands of sweeter dispositions must burn in Hell for ever!
Oh, what manner of love is this!

Fifthly: Faith melts the heart by exerting a threefold act upon Christ
Crucified.

First: A realizing act, representing all this in the greatest certainty and
evidence that can be. These are no devised fables, but the sure and
infallireports of the Gospel.

Secondly: An appying act; he loved me, and gave himself for me, Gal. 2. 20. He
loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own Blood, Rev. 1. 5.

Thirdly and lastly: By an inferring or reasoning act. If Christ died for me,
then I shall never die: If his Blood were paid down for me, then my sins which
are many, are forgiven me. If he was Condemned in my room, I am acquitted, and
shall be saved from wrath to come, through him. O how weighty do these thoughts
prove to believing souls.

1. Use for information.
1. Then sure there is but little faith, 1. Use.
because there is so much deadness and unaffectedness among Professors. A
believing sight of Christ will work upon a gracious heart, as a dead Son, a
beloved and only Son, uses to do upon a tender Fathers heart.

Reader, was it ever thy sad lot to look upon such an heart-rending object?
Did thou ever feel the pangs and commotions in thy bowels, that some have
felt upon such a sight? Why so will thy heart work toward Christ; if ever thou
believingly look on him whom thou have pierced.

2. Infer.
Then the acting and exercising of faith is the best expedient to get a tender
heart, and raise the dead affections. We are generally full of complaints, how
hard, how dead and stupid our hearts are; we are often putting such cases as
these, How shall I get a broken heart for sin? How shall I raise my dead heart
in duty? Why this is the way; no expedient in all the world like this. Look
upon him whom thou have pierced. It Is the melting Argument.

2. Use of Examination.
But that which I especially aim at in this point, is for the trial and
examination 2. Use.
of thy heart, Reader, in the point of true Evangelical Repentance, which is
thy proper business at this time: And I will go no further than the Text for
rules to examine and try it by.

1. Rule.
All Evangelical Repentance has a supernatural spring, I will pour out the 1.
Rule.
spirit of grace, and they shall mourn. Till the spirit be poured out upon us,
it is as easy to press water out of a Rock, as to make our hearts relent and
mourn. There are indeed natural meltings the effects of an ingenuous Temper,
but these differ, in kind and nature, from Godly sorrow.

2. Rule.
Godly sorrows are real, sincere, and undissembled. They shall mourn as 2. Rule.
for an only Son. Parents need not the help of an Onion to draw tears on such
accounts: O! their very hearts are pierced; they could even die with them.
Sighs, groans, and tears are not hanged out as false signs of what is not to be
found in their hearts.

3. Rule.
Evangelical sorrow is very deep; so 3. Rule.
much the mourning for an only Son, a firstborn, must import. These waters,
how still soever they be, run deep, very deep, in the bottom channel of the
soul. See Act. 2. 27. They were cut to the heart.

4. Rule.
Faith is the instrument employed in 4. Rule.
breaking the heart. They shall look and mourn. This is the Burning glass that
contracts the beams, and fires the affections.

5. Rule.
Lastly: The Wrong sin has done to God, and the sufferings it has brought 5.
Rule.
Christ under, are the piercing and heart-wounding considerations. They shall
look upon me whom they have pierced, and mourn. The piercing of Christ by our
sin, is that must pierce thy soul with sorrow.

THE TENTH MEDITATION UPON
John 6. ver. 55. For my flesh is meat indeed, and my blood is drink indeed.
IN this context our Lord Jesus Christ makes a most spiritual and excellent
discourse to the Jews, about the nature and necessity of faith in him, taking
the occasion thereof from the Bread, which a little before he had so
miraculously multiplied, and fed them with, raising up their minds to more
sublime and spiritual things, and letting them know that Bread, how sweet
soever it was, was but a shadow of himself, infinitely more sweet and
necessary.

These words are a proposition, in which are these three things observable.

First: The subject, my Flesh and my Blood.

Secondly: The Predicate, it is Meat and Drink.

Thirdly: The manner of Predication, it is Meat indeed, and Drink indeed.

First: The subject, my Flesh, and my Blood, (i. e.) my Humanity; this is meat
and drink, true spiritual food. If it be demanded why he had not said, I am
meat and drink indeed; but rather chooses to say, my flesh and blood is so; the
reason is evident, says Learned Camero, because if you take away Flesh and
Blood from Christ, he cannot be Food or Life to us. For in order to his being
so, he must satisfy God for us, and obtain the Remission of our sins; but
without shedding of Blood there is no Remission. Now for as much as by the
offering up of his Body, and shedding of his Blood, he has obtained pardon and
life for us; therefore his Flesh and Blood is called our Meat and our Drink,
that by which our souls live. Which brings us to the second thing.

Secondly: The Predicate, it is meat and drink, (i. e.) it is to our souls of
the same Use and necessity that meat and drink is to our natural life, which
cannot be sustained or continued without them.

The life of our souls as necessarily depends upon the Flesh and Blood of
Christ, as our natural life does upon meat and drink. Yet beware of a mistake
here; the Flesh and Blood, or the Humanity of Christ is not the Fountain of our
spiritual life, but the Channel rather, through which it flows to us from his
Divinity. By reason of his Incarnation and Death, Righteousness and Life comes
to us.

Thirdly: The manner of Predication is very Emphatical, it is meat indeed, and
drink indeed; which notes two things.

First: Reality, in opposition to all legal shaddows and types.

Secondly: Transcendent excellency, far surpassing all other food, even Mannah
it self, which for its excellency is styled Angels food. My Flesh is meat
indeed (i. e.) true, substantial, and real food to souls, and choice excellent
and incomparable food.

Hence observe.

Doct.
That what meat and drink is to our bodies, that, and much more than that, the
Flesh and Blood of Christ is to believing souls.

Two things require explication in this point.

First; Wherein the resemblance or agreement lies betwixt the Flesh and Blood
of Christ, and Meat and Drink.

Secondly: Wherein the former transcends and excels the latter.

1. Query. Wherein lies the resemblance and agreement 1. Query.
betwixt the Flesh and Blood of Christ, and material Meat and Drink?
Sol. The agreement is manifest in the following particulars.

First: Meat and Drink is necessary to support Natural life, we cannot live
without it. Upon this account Bread is called the Staff and Stay, (i. e.) the
support of the natural spirits which do as much lean and depend upon it, as a
feeble man does upon his staff, Isa. 3. 1. But yet how necessary soever it be,
the Flesh and Blood of Christ is more indispensibly necessary for the life of
our souls, Joh. 6. 53. Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of man, and drink his
Blood, ye have no life in you. Our souls have more absolude need of peace and
pardon by Christ, than our bodies have of meat and drink. Better our bodies
were starved and famished, than our souls damned and lost for ever.

Secondly: Meat and Drink are ever most sweet and desirable to those that are
hungry and thirsty. It is hunger and thirst that gives value and estimation to
meat and drink, Prove. 27. 7. To the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet;
and so it is in our esteem of Christ, Joh. 7. 37. If any man thirst, let him
come to me and drink. When God by illumination and conviction makes men deeply
sensible of their miserable lost and perishing condition, then ten thousand
worlds for a Christ. All is but dung and dross in comparison of the excellency
of Christ Jesus.

Thirdly: Meat and drink must undergo an alteration, and lose its own form
before it actually nourishes the body. The Corn is ground to pieces in the
Mill, before it be made Bread to nourish us. And Christ must be ground betwixt
the upper and neither Milstones of the wrath of God, and malice of men, to be
made Bread for our souls. The Prophet says, Isa. 52. 14. His Visage was marred
more than any man's. He did not look like himself, the beauty and glory of
Heaven, but the reproach of Men, and despised of the People. Oh what an
alteration did his Incarnation and Sufferings make upon him, Phil. 2. 6, 7.
Quantum mutatus ab illo?

Fourthly: Natural food must be received into our bodies, and have a natural
Union with them; and Christ must be received into our souls, and have a
spiritual Union with them by faith, or else we can have no nourishment or
benefit by him. An empty Profession, a mere talkative Religion nourishes the
inner man just as much as the sight of meat, and our commending of it, does our
outward man. It Is Christ's dwelling in our hearts by faith, Ephesians. 3. 17. our
receiving of him, Joh, 1. 12. our eating his Flesh and drinking his Blood, Joh.
6. 53. (i. e.) the effectual application of Christ to our souls by faith, that
makes us partakers of his benefits.

Fifthly: Meat and drink must be taken every day, or else natural life will
languish, and spiritual life will never be comfortably maintained in us without
daily communion with Jesus Christ: If a gracious soul neglect or be interrupted
in its course of duties, and stated times of prayer, it will be quickly
discernable by the Christian himself in the deadness of his own heart, and by
others also, in the barrenness of his discourses. And in these things stands
the Analogy and agreement of the Flesh and Blood of Christ with meat and drink.

2. Query.
The next thing is to open the transcendent excellency of Christ's Flesh 2.
Query.
and Blood, above all other food in the world; and this appears in four
particulars:

First: This Flesh and Blood was assumed into the nearest Union with the second
Person in the blessed Trinity, and so is not only dignified above all other
created Beings, but becomes the first receptacle of all grace intended to be
communicated through it to the Children of men, Joh. 1. 14.

Secondly: This Flesh and Blood of Christ was offered up to God as the great
Sacrifice for our sins, and Purchase of our peace, Col. 1. 20. Ephesians. 5. 2. and
so it is of inestimable price and value to Believers. The humane Nature of
Christ was the Sacrifice, the divine Nature was the Altar on which it was
offered up, and by which it was dignified and sanctified, and made an Offering
of a sweet smelling savor to God, Ephesians. 5. 2.

Thirdly: This Flesh and Blood of Christ is the great medium of conveyance of
all blessings and mercies to the souls and bodies of Believers. It lies as a
vast pipe at the Fountainhead of blessings, receiving and conveying them from
God to Men, Col. 1. 14. 19.

So then, it being united to the second Person, and so become the Flesh and
Blood of God, it being the Sacrifice offered up to God for Atonement and
Remission of sins, and the medium of conveying all grace and mercy from God the
Fountain to the souls and bodies of Believers; how sweet a relish must it have
upon the palate of faith? Here faith may taste the sweetness of a Pardon, a
full, free, and final pardon of sin, than which nothing in this world can be
sweeter to a Sin-burdened Conscience.

Here it tastes the incomparable sweetness of Peace with God, a Peace which
passes Understanding; the breach Sin made, is by this Sacrifice made up for
ever, Col. 1. 20.

Here it tastes the unexpressible sweetness of acceptance with God, and an
interest in his favor; a mercy which a poor convinced soul would give ten
thousand worlds for, were it to be purchased. Yea, here it rellisheth all the
sweet Promises in the Covenant of grace, as confirmed and ratified by this
Sacrifice, Heb. 9. 5. So that well might he say, my Flesh is meat indeed, and
my Blood is drink indeed, the most excellent New Testament-food for Believers.

1. Use of Information.
First: See here the love of a Savior, that Heavenly Pelli^an, who feeds us 1.
Use.
with his own Flesh and Blood. You read Lam. 4. 10. of pitiful Women who eat
the flesh of their own Children; but where have you read of Men or Women that
gave their own flesh and blood for meat and drink to their Children? Think on
this you that are so loath to cross and deny your flesh for Christ; he suffered
his Flesh to be rent, and his Blood set abroach for you; what love like the
love of Christ?

Secondly: Learn hence a ground of Content in the lowest and poorest condition
allotted to any Believer in this world. It may be some of you live low in the
world, you have hard fare, and are abridg'd of many of those sweet comforts in
the Creature, which the Enemies of God abound in; but still remember, you have
no cause to envy their dainties, and be dissatisficd with your own lot and
portion, when not many Nobles or mighty in the world feed as your souls do
feed. O what a feast have you! What dainties do your souls taste by faith!
Whilst others do but feed upon Ashes and Husks, what is the flesh of Lambs and
Calves out of the Amos 6. 4, 5, 6.
Stall, to the Flesh of Christ? What is Wine in bowls, and the chief Ointment
to the Blood of Christ, and the anoyntings of his Spirit? O be satisfied with
your outward lot, however God has cast it, whilst he has dealt so bountifully
with your souls.

Thirdly: Learn hence the necessity of faith, in order to the livelihood and
subsistence of our souls. What is a Feast to him that cannot taste it? And what
is Christ to him that cannot believe? That cannot by faith eat his Flesh and
drink his Blood?

It Is not the Preparation made for souls in Christ, but the Application of him
by faith, that gives us the sweetness and benefit of him. Faith is the souls
mouth or palate; the Unbeliever tastes no sweetness in Christ, he can relish
more sweetness in money, meat, drink, carnal mirth, or any sensual enjoyment
than Christ.

Fourthly: How excellent are Gospel Ordinances? What sweetness is there to be
found in them by true Believers? For there Christ is prepared, and as it were
served in for them to feed upon. It is your Ministers work to cook and prepare
for you all the week long, and to furnish for you a feast of fat things. Lo,
here is a Table spread and furnished this day with the costliest dainties that
Heaven affords. O prize these mercies, sit not here with flat or wanton
appetites, lest God call to your Enemies, and bid them take away.

2. Use of Exhortation.
Is the Flesh and Blood of Christ Meat and Drink indeed, then let me exhort 2.
Use.
you Brethren.

First: To come to this Table with sharp and hungry appetites. Have you ever
tasted that the Lord is gracious, and do you not hunger and thirst to taste it
again. Surely where the Carcass is, thither will the Eagles be gathered, Math.
24. 28. There is a two fold appetite, a dainty, and an hungry appetite; beware
of a nice and dainty appetite, that can relish nothing in the most solid and
spiritual duties, except the dish be garnisht with flowers of Rhetoric, or the
matter served in with art and elegancy: This has been the great sin of the
Professors of this Generation. O Christians, no more of that I pray you. Were
you really an hungered and athirst for Christ, you would come to his Ordinances,
as famishing men to a feast.

Secondly: To feed heartily upon Christ in every Ordinance, and in every
Sacrament especially. O that your souls might hear and answer that invitation
this day, Cant. 5. 1. Eat, O Friends, drink, yea, drink abundantly, O Beloved.

For Motives I will only hint these three following:

First: Christ is the matter of this Feast. God has prepared him for your
souls. Is any thing in Heaven or Earth so sweet as Christ Sacrificed is? Do not
the Angels and Saints in Heaven feast upon him? Surely one drop of Christ's
Blood has more sweetness and excellency in it, than the whole Ocean of all
Creature Comforts.

Secondly: Don't your graces need it? Have you not a languishing love, a
staggering faith, dull and sluggish desires? Look into your hearts, and see
what need there is of strengthening the things that are in you, which are ready
to die. O feed upon Christ, that your graces may be revived and strengthened.

Thirdly: Do you know how many days you are to go in the strength of this
meal? How long it may be ere you sit again at the Lords Table? Surely even
these as well as your inferior temporal comforts stand upon terms of greatest
uncertainty. Ah Christians! Consider well the times you live in, the Enemy that
stands ready to take away the cloth, and remove your spiritual food from you.
It Is said of Peter Martyr, that being in Oxford when Q. Mary came in, and
hearing the first Mass-bell ring, he was struck to the heart, and said, haec
una notula omnem meam doctrinam evertit. This one tinkling Bell overthrows all
the labors of my Ministry at once.

God grant we may hear none of that Music in England any more; but it is like
to be according to your estimation and improvement of Christ's precious
Ordinances.

Thirdly: Commend the experiensed sweetness of Christ to others. Don't conceal
his loveliness and excellency. Thus the fair and enamoured Spouse charges or
adjures others, Cant. 5. 9. Be not content to feast upon Christ alone, whilst
others souls are starving, and perhaps the souls of your dear natural
Relations. Say to them as David, Psalm. 34. 8. O, taste and see how good the
Lord is.

Fourthly and lastly: See that your appetite to Christ be right, and truly
spiritual. Such an hunger and thirst, upon which blessedness is entailed by
promise; and you may conclude it so, when

First: It is a sharp and strong appetite, Psalm. 42. 1. Let your thoughts run
upon Christ night and day, like the desires of a longing Woman.

Secondly: When it is a Universal appetite, after every thing in Christ, his
Holiness as well as his Righteousness, his Commands as well as his Promises,
for he is altogether lovely, Cant. 5. 16.

Thirdly: When it is a continual appetite; I mean not that the pulse of your
desires should keep an even stroke at all times, but that there be real and
sincere workings of heart after him always, Psalm. 119. 20.

Fourthly: When it is an industrious appetite, awakening the soul to the Use of
all means and practice of all duties in order to satisfaction, Psalm. 27. 4. One
thing have I desired of the Lord, and that will I seek after.

Fifthly and lastly: It Is then aright, when it is an insatiable appetite, never
to be allaid with any thing besides Christ, Psalm. 73. 25. No, nor with Christ
himself, till thou come to the full enjoyment of him in Heaven. The Believer
knows, how sweet soever his Communion with Christ is in this world, yet that
Communion he shall have with Christ in Heaven far excels it; there it will be
more intimate and immediate, 1 Cor. 19. 12. more full and perfect, even to
satisfaction, Psalm. 17. 15. more constant and continued, not suffering such
interruptions as it does here, Rev. 21. 25. More pure and unmixed. Here our
Corruptions work with our graces, Romans 7. 21. but there grace shall work alone.
In a word, more durable and perpetual: We shall be ever with the Lord, 1 These.
4. 7. Long therefore to drink that new Wine in the Fathers Kingdom. The Spirit
and the Bride say came; and let him that hears, say come, even so come Lord
Jesus, come quickly.

THE ELEVENTH MEDITATION UPON
Cant. 8. v. 6. Set me as a Seal upon thy heart, as a Seal upon thine arm; for
love is strong as death, jealousy is cruel as the grave; the coals thereof are
coals of fire, which has a most vehement flame.
THIS Book is a sacred Allegory, the sense thereof is deep and spiritual. Our
unacquaintedness with such Schemes and figures of speech, together with the
want of spiritual light and experience, makes it difficult to be understood;
but the Allegory being once unfolded by reason of its affinity with the fancy
truth is more easily and affectingly transmitted both to the mind and heart.

St. Augustine assigns this reason why we are so much delighted with Metaphors
and Allegories, because they are so much proportioned to our senses, with which
our reason has contracted an intimacy and familiarity. And therefore God to
accommodate his truth to our capacity, does as it were embody it in earthly
expressions, according to that of the ancient Gaballists, lumen supremum
nunquam descendit sine in dument^. Heavenly truth never discendeth to us
without its vail and covering.

The words before us are the request of the Spouse to Jesus Christ, and consist
of two parts, viz.

1. Her Suit, which is earnest. 2. Her Argument, which is weighty.
Her earnest suite or request to Jesus Christ, Set me as a Seal upon thy heart,
1.
as a Seal upon thine arm. The heart of Christ notes his most dear, inward, and
tender affection; his Arm notes his protecting and preserving care and power:
The last naturally follows the first; what men dearly affect, they tenderly and
carefully protect. And by setting her as a Seal upon his heart and arm, she
means a sure and a well-confirmed interest, both in his love and power; This
she would have firmly sealed and ratified; and that this is her meaning, will
plainly appear from

The Argument with which she enforces her request For love is strong as 2.
death, jealousy is cruel as the grave, etc.

By Jealousy, we must understand her fears and suspicions of coming short of
Christ and his love, q. d. What if after all, I should be deceived? What if
Jesus Christ do not love me with a special love. O these fears and suspicions
are intolerable torments to her, she cannot bear them; they are cruel as the
grave, insufferable as coals of fire, which have a most vehement flame. q. d.
Lord, if thou leave me in the midst of these jealousies of thy love, I shall be
but a torment to my self: I shall live as one upon the rack, or in the flames.
Hence the note is.

Doct.
That there is nothing in this world which true Christians more earnestly
desire, than to be well assured and satisfied of the love of Jesus Christ to
their souls.

In the meditation of this point, two things must be inquired into.

1. Why this assurance is so desirable. 2. How it may be obtained.
Why the assurance of the love of 1.
Christ is so desirables in the eyes of true Christians. And among others,
there are two things that especially make it so, viz.

1. The sweetness of its enjoyment. 2. The difficulty of its attainment.
The sweetness of its enjoyment, which is unexpressable and inconceivable; 1.
for it is a mercy above all estimation.

It is 1. The riches of faith. 2. The rest and ease of the heart. 3. The
pleasure of life. 4. A Cordial in death. 5. A sweet support in all troubles.

1. It is the very riches of faith, the most pleasant fruit which grows upon
the top branches of faith. The Scripture tells us of an assurance of
Understanding, hope, and faith: All these graces are precious in themselvcs,
but the assurance of each of them is the most sweet and pleasant part.
Knowledge above knowledge is the full assurance of knowledge: Hope above hope,
is the full assurance of hope; and faith above faith, is the full assurance of
faith. The least and lowest act of saving faith is precious, and above all
value; what then must the highest and most excellent acts of faith be?
Certainly, there is a sweetness in the assurance of faith, that few men have
the privilege to taste; and they that do, can find no words able to express it
to another Understanding. The weakest Christian is exalted above other men,
but the assured Christian has a preference before all other Christians.

2. It is hearts ease, the very Sabbath and sweet repose of the soul. Thousands
of poor Christians would part with all they possess in this world, to enjoy it,
but it flies from them. The life that most of them live, is a life betwixt
hopes and fears; their interest in Christ is very doubtful to them. Sometimes
they are encouraged from sensible working^ of grace, then all is dashed again,
by the contrary stirrings and workings of their own corruptions. Now the Sun
shines out clear, by and by the Heavens are over-cast and clouded again: But
the assured Christian is at rest from those tormenting fears and jealousies,
which my Text speaks of, that are as cruel as the grave, and as insufferable as
coals of fire in a man's bosom. He can take Christ into the arms of his faith,
and say, My Beloved is mine, and I am his. Return to thy rest, O my soul, for
the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee.

3. It is the pleasure of life; yea, the most rational, pure, and transporting
pleasure. What is life without pleasure? And what pleasure is there in the
world comparable to this pleasure? For let the sealed and assured Believer
consider, and compare, and he must needs find a joy and pleasure beyond the joy
of the whole Earth. If he consider well what he is assured of, it is no common
mercy, but Christ himself, and his love; a mercy incomprehensible by Men or
Angels, Ephesians. 3. 19. Put Christ into the sensible possession of a Believer, and
joy is no more under his command for that time; he can no more refuse to
rejoice, than he that is tickled can forbear to laugh; and especially when his
thoughts are exercised in comparing states and conditions, either his own with
other men's, or his own now with what it was, and what it shall be. To think
with thy self thus, I am assured of Christ and his love, my interest in him is
sealed; but this is a mercy few enjoy besides me. There be millions of souls of
equal value with mine by nature, that shall never enjoy such a mercy as this.
Yea, the time was when I my self was far from it, in my unregenerate estate.
Lord, how is it I had not then been sealed to Damnation? O, it is well with me
for present, that I can call Christ my own; and yet it will be better and
better. My condition will mend every day. I am now in Christ, and it is but a
little while before I shall be with Christ, and arrive at the full satisfaction
of my very heart. O, what pleasure does every glance backward or forward give
to the sealed soul!

4. It is a Cordial in death, and there is none like it. This will make the
soul triumph over the grave, take death cheerfully by the cold hand, welcome
its grim Messengers, and long to be gone, and be with Christ. Dark and doubting
Christians may indeed shrink back from it, and be afraid of the exchange; but
the assured soul longs to be gone, and needs patience to live, as other men do
to die. When one was asked if he were willing to die, his answer was, Illius
est nolle mori, qui nolit ire ad Christum. Let him be loath to die, that is
loath to go to Christ. The sugar of assurance sweetens the bitter cup of death,
and makes it delectable to a Believers relish.

5. In a word, it is a sweet support in all the troubles and afflictions on
this side the grave. Let the assured soul be cast into what condition the Lord
pleases, be it upon a bed of sickness; yet this gives his soul such support and
comfort, that he shall not say, I am sick, sin being forgiven; the soul is
well, when the body is in pain, Isa. 33. 24. Let him be cast in to a Prison,
here is that will turn a Prison into a Paradise, Act. 5. 41. Let him be pincht
with any outward want, this will supply all, As having nothing, and yet
possessing all things, 2 Cor. 6. 10. Thus you see how desirable it is for its
own excellency.

And as it is desirable for the sweetness 2.
of its own enjoyment, so also from the difficulty of its attainment; all
excellencies are locked up under many difficulties; but none like this, it is
indeed easy to presume an interest in Christ, and cheat a man's own soul with a
dream and fancy of our own Creation; but sure it is hard to get a sealed clear
title to Christ and his benefits; and there be among others three things that
make it difficult.

(1.) The corruptions that remain, and daily work in the best hearts, these are
evermore puzling and scaring the poor soul with fears and doubts about its
condition. Grace teaches men due severity to themselves, and fear of their own
deceitfulness makes them think no hearts are like their hearts, especially
whilst they compare other men's outside with their own inside, as generally they
do. O, how do our own corruptions every moment raise mists and clouds, that it
is a wonder we ever should have one clear beam of assurance shining into such
hearts as our hearts are.

(2.) The multitudes of mistakes and cheats that are frequently committed and
found in this matter, makes upright hearts the more suspicious and doubtful of
their own conditions. O, when they read Matthew. 7. 22. that many will say to
Christ in that day, Lord, Lord, we have Prophesied in thy Name, etc. It scares
them lest they also be deceived.

(3.) The grand importance of the matter makes poor souls fearful of concluding
certainly about it. O, when a man considers that the whole weight of his
eternal happiness or misery depends upon the resolution of these Questions: Am
I in Christ? or am I not? It will mak^ him tremble to determine. In a word,
assurance is not in our power, or at our command. There be many holy humble,
diligent, and longing souls, to whom it is denied. It is arbitrarily dispensed
by the pleasure of the spirit, to whom he will, and such favors are rare even
among true believers, the more therefore it is to be valued and desired by all,
as the Spouse does in this place: And so much to the first thing. Upon what
account the assurance of Christ's love is so desirable in the eyes of Chrians.

In the last place, let us consider how this mercy which is so desirable, may
be 2.
obtained; and this is our proper work and business at this time.

You are now come to a sealing Ordinance, instituted on purpose for this noble
end and Use. O, that we could pray and plead for it as the Spouse here does.
Set me as a seal upon thine heart, as a seal upon thine arm, for love is strong
as death, jealousy is cruel as the grave, etc. Now in order to the attainment
of this most desirable mercy, take a few necessary hints of your present work
and duty in the following directions.

1. Direction.
Would you be well secured of Christ's love to you, and that you are set as a 1.
seal upon his heart; then exercise and manifest more love to Christ, and let
him be much upon your hearts. If it be clear to you, that you have true love to
Jesus Christ, you need not at all to doubt, but you are in his heart and in his
love. I love them that love me, Prove. 8. 17. And surely you have now before you
the greatest motive in the world, to inflame your love to Jesus Christ. Behold
him as he here represented to you, wounded for your iniquities, yea, sacrificed
to the wrath of God for your Peace, Pardon, and Salvation. O, what manner of
love is this? Behold how he loved thee! If Christ's love draw forth thine, it
will so far clear thy interest in his love, as it shall engage thy heart in
love to him.

2. Direction.
But seeing the activity of your love will be according to the activity of your
faith, therefore in the next place I advise you to make it the main work and
business of this hour to exercise your faith upon Jesus Christ; set your selves
this day to believe; the more strong the direct acts of your faith shall be,
the more clear and comfortable its reflex acts are like to be. There are three
distinct offices or employments for your faith at this Table, viz. 1. To
realize 2. To apply 3. To infer from
the sufferings of Jesus Christ.

(1.) Realize the sufferings of Christ for you, and behold them here
represented in a true glass to the eye of faith. See you that Bread broken, and
that Wine poured out? As sure as this is so, Jesus Christ endured the Cross,
suffered the Wrath of the great and terrible God in his Soul, and in his Body
upon the cursed Tree, for and in the room of poor Condemned Sinners. Your faith
for the one has as much, yea, more certainty, than your sense has for the
other. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus
Christ came into the world to save Sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15. and without
controversy, great is 1 Timothy 3. 16.
the mystery of Godliness, God was manifest in the flesh, etc.

2. Apply the sufferings of Christ this day to thine own soul. Believe all this
to be done and suffered in thy room, and for thy sake: He offered not this
Sacrifice for his own sins, but ours, Isa. 53. 9. Heb. 7. 27. He was Incarnate
for you. Isa. 9. 6. For us a Child is born; to us a Son is given. His death was
for you, and in your stead, Gal. 3. 13. He was made a Curse for us; and when he
rose from the dead, he rose for our justification, Romans 4. 25. and now he is in
glory at the right hand of God, he is there for us, Heb. 7. 25. He ever lives
to make Intercession for us: It was the pride, passion, earthliness, and
unbelief of thy heart which Jesus Christ groaned, bled, and died to procure a
pardon for.

3. Infer from the sufferings of Christ those conclusions of faith that tend to
assurance. As thus, Did Christ die for me when I was an Enemy? then surely
being reconciled, I shall be saved by his life, Romans 5. 10. Again, Is Christ
dead for me, then I shall never die eternally: Nothing shall separate me from
the love of God, it is Christ that died, Romans 8. 34.

3. Direction.
Mourn over all those sins that cause the Lord to hide his Face from your
souls. Have you grieved the Spirit by your sin, O, be grieved for it this day
at your very hearts; cover the Table of the Lord with tears: Look upon him whom
you have pierced, and mourn as for an only Son. Though there be no merit, yet
there is much mercy in a broken heart for sin; and there is no such advantage
to get your hearts broken as this is, which is now before you. When the shows
of Repentance is fallen, the Heavens over thee may be clear, and the Sun shine
out in its brightness upon thy soul.

4. Direction.
In a word, pour out thy soul to God in hearty desires for a sealed and clear
interest in his love this day; tell him, it is a mercy thou valuest above life,
Thy favor is better than life, Psalm. 63. 3. Tell him, thou art not able to
live with the jealousies and suspicions of his love; thou art but a torment to
thy self, whilst thy interest in his love abides under a cloud. Beseech him to
pity thy poor afflicted soul, which has lain down and risen so long with these
fears and tremblings, and been a stranger to comfort for so many days. Tell him
how weak thy hands have been, and still are in duties of obedience, for want of
this strength and encouragement. Engage thy soul to him this day to be more
active, cheerful, and fruitful in his service, i^ it will please him now to
free thee from those fears and doubts that have clogged thee in all thy former
duties. O, cry unto him in the words, and with the deep sense of the Spouse in
this Text. Set me as a seal upon thy heart, as a seal upon thine arm, for love
is strong as death, jealousy is cruel as the grave, the coals thereof are
coals of fire, etc.

THE TWELFTH MEDITATION UPON
Ephesians. 3. 19. -- And to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge.
THE knowledge of Christ, and of his love is deservedly in this place set down
among the desiderata Christianorum, the most desirable enjoyments of Believers
in this world. This love of Christ had centred the Apostles heart, he was
swallowed up in the meditation and admiration of it, and would have all hearts
inflamed and affected with it, as his was.

Some think the Apostle speaks Extatically in this place, and know not how to
make the parts of his discourse consistent with each other, when he puts them
upon endeavors to know that love of Christ, which himself confesses to pass
knowledge.

But though his heart was ravished with the love of Christ, yet there is no
contradiction or inconsistency in his discourse. He does earnestly desire for
the Ephesians, that they may know the love of Christ, (i. e.) that they might
experimentally know his love, which passes knowledge; that is, as some expound
it, all other sorts and kinds of knowledge; yea, and all knowledge of Christ
which is not practical and experimental.

Or thus, Labor to get the clearest and fullest apprehensive knowledge of
Christ and his love, that is attainable in this world, though you cannot arrive
to a perfect comprehensive knowledge of either. Men's humana hoc and capit, and
non capit; atque in eo capit, quod rapitur in admirationem, as others reconcile
it. The note from it is,

Doct.
That the love of Christ surpasses and ^anscends the knowledge of the most
illu^inated Believers.

The love of Christ is too deep for ^y created understanding to fathom; ^is
unsearchable love, and it is so in ^ivers respects.

It is unsearchable in respect of its 1.
^tiquity. No Understanding of man ^an trace it back to its first spring it
^ows from one Eternity to another: ^e receive the fruits and effects of it ^ow;
but O, how ancient is that root ^at bears them! He loved us before ^is world
was made, and will conti^ue so to do, when it shall be reduced ^to ashes. It is
said, Prove. 8. 30, 31. ^hen he gave the Sea his decree, when he ^ppointed the
foundations of the Earth, ^en was I by him, as one brought up with ^im, and I
was daily his delight, rejoicing ^lways before him, rejoicing in the habita^le
parts of his Earth, and my delights ^ere with the Sons of men.

The freeness of the love of Christ 2.
passes knowledge: No man knows, nor can any words express how free the love of
Christ to his people is: It is said Isa. 55. 8. My thoughts are not your
thoughts. The meaning is, My Grace, Mercy, and Love to you is one thing, as it
is in my thoughts, and quite another thing when it comes into your thoughts. In
my thoughts it is like it self, free, rich, and unchangeable; but in your
thoughts it is limited and narrowed, pincht in within your straight and narrow
conceptions, that it is not like it self, but altered according to the model
and platform of Creatures, according to which, you draw it in your minds. Alas,
we do but alter and spoil his love, when we think there is any thing in us, or
done by us, that can be a motive, inducement, or recompense to it. His love is
so free, that it pitched it self upon us, before we had any loveliness in us at
all. When we were in our blood, he said unto us, live, and that was the time of
love. It did not stay till we had our Ornaments upon us, but embraced us in our
blood, in our most loathsome state; and of all seasons, that is the season of
love, the chosen time of love, Ezekiel. 16. 7, 8. Christ loved us not upon the
account of any foreseen excellency in us, or upon any expectation of
recompense from us: Nay, he loved us not only without, but against our deserts.
Nothing in nature is found so free as the love of Christ is; our thoughts
therefore of this love going beyond all examples and instances that are found
among men, quickly lose themselves in an immense Ocean of free grace, where
they can find neither bank nor bottom.

The bounty and liberality of the love of Christ to his People, passes
knowledge* Who can number or value the fruits of his love? They are more than
the Sands upon the Seashore. It would weary the arm of an Angel to write down
the thousandth part of the effects of his love, which come to the share of any
particular Christian in this World. Who can tell how many sins it pardons? The
free gift is of many offenses unto justification, Romans 5. 16. How many dangers
it prevents, or how many wants it supplies? This we know, that of all his
fullness, we all receive grace for grace, Joh. 1. 16. But how full of grace
Christ is, and how many mercies have, and shall flow to us out of that Fountain
of love, this is unknown to men, to the best, wisest, and most observant men.
O! if the records of the mercies of our lives were or could be gathered and
kept, what vast volumns would they swell to? It Is true indeed, you have the
total sum given you in 1 Cor. 3. 22. All are yours, but it is such a number as
no man can number.

The Constancy of Christ's love to his People passes knowledge: No length 4.
of time, no distance of place, no change of condition, either with him, or us;
can possibly make any alteration of his affections toward us. He is the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever, Heb. 13. 8. It is noted also by the
Evangelist, Joh. 13. 1. That having loved his own which were in the world, he
loved them to the end. It Is true, his condition is altered, he is no more in
this world conversing with his People, as he did once in the days of his Flesh:
He is now at the right hand of God, in the highest glory; but yet his heart is
the same that ever it was, for love and tenderness to his People. Our
conditions also are often altered in this world, but his love suffers no
alteration. Yea, which is much more admirable, we do many things daily that
grieve him, and offend him, yet he takes not away his loving kindness from us,
nor suffers his faithfulness to fail. We pour out so much cold water of
unkindness and provocation as is enough to cool and quench any love in the
world, except His love; but notwithstanding all, he continues unchangable in
love to us. This Peter found, notwithstanding that great offense of his: No
sooner was the Lord risen from the dead, but he greets him in the style of his
former love and ancient respect. Go tell the Disciples, and tell Peter.

So then, the love of Christ is a love transcending all Creature-love, and
humane Understanding. We read in Romans 5. 7, 8. That peradventure, for a good
man, some would even dare to die: But we never find where any beside Jesus
Christ would lay down his life for Enemies. It is recorded as an unparalled
instance of love in Damon and Pithias, the two Sicilian Philosophers, that each
had courage enough to die for his friend; for one of them being Condemned to
die by the Tyrant, and desiring to give the last farewell to his Family; his
Friend went into Prison for him, as his Surety to die for him, if he returned
not at the appointed time; but he did not die; yea, he had such a confidence in
his Friend, that he would not suffer him by default to die for him; and if he
had, yet he had died for his Friend: But such was the love of Christ, that it
did not only put him into danger of death, but put him actually unto death;
yea, the worst of deaths, and that for his Enemies. O what manner of love is
this! We read of the love that Jacob had for Rachel, and how he endured both
the cold of Winter, and heat of Summer for her sake: But what is this to the
love of Jesus, who for us endured the heat of God's Wrath? Beside, she was
Beautiful, but we unlovely. David wished for Absalom his Son, Would God I had
died for thee. But it was but a wish, and had it come to the proof, David would
have shrinkt from death, for all the affection he bare his beautiful Son. But
Christ actually gave his life for us, and did not only wish he had done it. O
love, transcending the love of Creatures; yea, and surmounting all
Creatureknowledge.

The Uses follow.
If the love of Christ pass knowledge, 1.
O! then admire it; yea, live and die in the wonder and admiration of the love
of Christ. As it is a sign of great weakness to admire small and common things,
so it speaks great stupidity not to be affected with great and unusual things.
O Christian, if thou be one that conversest with the thoughts of this love,
thou can not but admire it; and the more thou studiest, the more still will thou be astonished at it. And among the many Wonders that will appear in the
love of Christ, these two will most of all affect thee, viz.

1. That ever it pitched at first on thee. 2. That it is not by so many sins
quenched toward thee.
(1.) It Is admirable that ever the love of Christ pitched at first upon thee;
for are there not millions in the world of sweeter tempers, and better
constitutions than thy self, whom it has past by, and yet embraced thee? Lord
(said the Disciples) how is it that thou will manifest thy self unto us, and
not unto the world? Joh. 14. 22. Surely he did not set his love upon thee, nor
choose thee, because thou wast better than others, but because he loved thee.

(2.) It is admirable that his love to thee is not extinguished by so many sins
as thou have committed against him. Lay thy hand, Christian, this day, upon thy
heart, and be think thy self how many have been the provocations, wrongs, and
dishonours thou have been guilty of against thy God, and that since he called
thee by his grace, and set his love upon thee: What! and yet love thee still!
Yea, notwithstanding all, he is still thy God, and loves thee with an
unchangeable love. O! with how many notwithstandings is his love continued to
thy soul? All this is just matter of admiration and wonder for ever.

Is the love of Christ past knowledge? an unsearchable love? then learn whence
and why it is that the souls of Believers never are, not can be tired in
beholding and enjoying Jesus Christ. We use to say, one thing is tiresome; and
it is very true, if it be an earthly thing, it will be so, how sweet or
excellent soever it seems at first; and the reason is, because the b^t
Creature-enjoyment is but a shallow thing, and a few thoughts will sound it to
the bottom; and there being no supply of new matter to feed the hungry soul
upon, it is quickly sated and cloyed with the repetition of the same thing over
and over, but it is far otherwise in Christ; for though he be but one, yet in
that one thing, all things are virtually and eminently contained, so that every
day he seems a new Christ for sweetness, and yet is the same Christ still. And
in Heaven the Redeemed shall view him with as much wonder, and love him with as
much ardour after millions of years, as they did at their first sight of him.
O! there is no bottom in the love of Christ; it passes knowledge.

3. In a word, bestow your best and chiefest love upon Christ, whose love to
you passes all knowledge. Let no creature be loved equally with Christ, but as
his love to you passes all Creature-love, so let yours to him be a matchless
love.

Believer, Christ loves thee with an unsearchable love, he loves thee more than
the dearest friend, that is, as thine own soul loves thee. He loves thee more
than thou love thy Child, or the Wife of thy bosom; more than thy soul loves
thy body, with which it is so intimately united: And will thou content thy self
with such poor narrow remiss affections to Jesus Christ. O look upon him this
day in his red Garments, behold him in the strength of his love breaking
through the Curse of the Law, the Wrath of God, the Agonies of Death, to bring
home the fruits of his eternal love to thy soul. And whilst thou art beholding
and musing upon it, let thy heart melt, thy eyes drop, and thy very soul cry
out.

Behold how he loved me!

Blessed be God for Jesus Christ.

FINIS.
A HYMN UPON Romans 5. ver. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
Verse
6.
WHen we were destitute of strength,
our selves to help or save,
Christ for ungodliness at length,
his Life a Ransom gave.
7.
For one that is Righteous, we would grutch
to lay our life to stake,
And for a good man, it were much,
such an exchange to make.
8.
But God his matchless love commends
in that Christ Jesus dies
For us, when we were not his friends,
but wretched Enemies.
9.
Much more being justified and free,
through his own Blood from sin,
From wrath to come we saved shall be,
even by the life of him.
10.
For if when Enemies for us,
Christ's death did end the strife:
Much more when reconciled thus,
He Will save us by his life.
11.
Yea; more than so, we triumph now
in God with one Accord,
Having received Atonement through
Christ Jesus our own Lord.
Wherefore to him, who is the first
begotten of the dead,
Who over earthly Princes must,
be supreme Lord and Head:
Ev^ to him who loved us so,
to wash us in his Blood,
And make us Kings, and Priests unto
his Father, and his God.
To him Dominion therefore,
by us be given, when
This present world shall be no more:
To which, we say,
Amen.
ERRATA.
PAge 6. line 17. for dead, read deathbed; p. 36. l. 4. for wrapped r. rapt; p.
46. l. 14. for effect, r. affect; p. 55. l. 15. add, is the spoil; p. 64. l.
16. for grounded r. ungrounded; p. 99. l. 26. for hollowed, r. hallowed; p.
128. l. 24. for ar^ r. is; p. 135. l. 29. for and made, r. that make; p. 140.
l. 11. for your r. their; p. 141. l. 6. for any, r. my; p. 152. l. 3. blot out
might; p. 171. l. 25. r. applying; p. 185. l. 26. r. f^ast; p. 206. l. 19. r.
shower; p. 214. l. 2. blot out all; p. 216. l. 19. for unto r. under.


