Five remarkable passages, which have very lately happened between His
MAJESTY, And the High Court of PARLIAMENT.

1. The Humble Petition of the Gentry and Commons of York, presented to His
Majesty, April 22. 1642. 2. His Majesty's Message sent to the Parliament* April
24. 1642. concerning Sir John Hotham's refusal to give His Majesty entrance
into Hull. 3. The Parliaments resolution concerning the said Sir Ioh. Hotham 4.
A Declaration from both Houses of Parliament concerning the stopping of
passages between Hull and the Parliament. 5. The true Catalogue of all the
names of the Divines approved of by both Houses of Parliament, for each
several County in this Kingdom of England and Wales; as fit persons to be
consulted with by the Parliament, touching the Reformation of
Church Government, and the Liturgy. Together with an Order from both Houses to
the same effect. 28. of April 1642.
London, Printed for F. Cowlet, and T. Bates.

Die Sabbati, 9 April. 1642.
THe Lords and Commons do declare, that they intend a due and necessary
reformation of the government and Liturgy of the Church, and take away nothing
in the one or other, but what shall be evil, and justly offensive, or at least
unnecessarie and burdensome: And for the better effecting thereof, speedily to
have consultation with godly and learned Divines. And because this will never
of it self attain the end sought therein, they will therefore use their
utmost endeavors to establish learned and preaching Ministers, with a good and
sufficient maintenance thorowout the whole Kingdom, wherein many dark corners
are miserably destitute of the means of Salvation, and many poor Ministers
want necessary provision.

H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Die Martis 26 April. 1642.
ORdered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That the Sheriffs of the
Counties of York and Lincoln, and likewise the Lords Lieutetenants of the said
Counties, and in their absence, their Deputies allowed by Parliament, and the
Justices of Peace, and all other his Majesty's Officers, shall suppress all
Forces that shall be raised, or gathered together in th^se Counties, either to
force the town of Hull; to stop the passages to, and from the same; or in any
other way to disturb the peace of the Kingdom.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, That this Orde^ shall be
printed and published forthwith.

Io. Brown Cler. Parl.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
The humble Petition of the (...) and Commons of the County of YORK.
Most Royal Sovereign:
ENcouraged by your Majesty's many Testimonies of Your gracious goodness to us
and our County, which we can never sufficiently acknowledge; We in all duty
and loyalty of heart address our selves to Your Sacred Majesty, beseeching
You to cast Your eyes and thoughts upon the safety of your own Person, and
Your Princely Issue, and this whole County, a great means of which we
conceive does consist in the Arms and Ammunition at Hull, placed there by Your
Princely care and charge, and since upon general apprehension of dangers from
foreign parts represented to your Majesty, thought fit as yet to be
continued. We for our parts, conceiving our selves to be still in danger, do
most humbly beseech your Majesty that you will be pleased to take such course
and order, that your Magazine may still there remain, for the better securing
of these and the rest of the Northern parts. And the rather because we think
it fit, that that part of the Kingdom should be best provided, where your
Sacred Person does reside, your Person being like David's, The light of Israel,
and more worth than ten thousands of us.

Who shall daily pray, etc.

His Majesty's Message sent to the Parliament, April 24. 1642.
Concerning Sir John Hothams Refusal to give His Majesty Entrance into Hull.
HIs Majesty having received the Petition enclosed from most of the chief
Gentry near about York, desiring the stay of His Majesty's Arms and Munition
in His Magazine at Hull, for the safety (not only of his Majesty's Person and
children, but likewise of all these Northern parts: The manifold rumors of
great Dangers inducing them to make their said supplication) thought it most
fit to go Himself in Person to His town of Hull, to view his Arms and
Munition there, that thereupon He might give directions, what part thereof
might be necessary to remain there, for the security and satisfaction of his
Northern Subjects, and what part thereof might be spared for Ireland, the
arming of his Majesty's Scots Subjects that are to go thither, or to replenish
his chiefest Magazine of the Tower of London; Where being come, upon the 23 of
this instant April, much contrary to his expectation, he found all the Gates
shut upon him, and the Bridges drawn up, by the express command of Sir John
Hotham, (who for the present commands a Garrison there) and from the walls
flatly denied His Majesty entrance into His said Town, the reason of the said
denial being as strange to his Majesty, as the thing it self, it being that
he could not admit his Majesty without breach of trust to His Parliament; Which
did the more incense his Majesty's anger against him, for that he most
seditiously and traitorously would have put his disobedience upon his Majesty's
Parliament; Which His Majesty being willing to clear, demanded of him if he
had the impudence to aver, that the Parliament had directed him to deny his
Majesty entrance and that if he had any such order, that he should show it in
writing, for otherwise His Majesty could not believe it; which he could no way
produce, but maliciously made that false interpretation according to his own
Inferences, confessing that he had no such positive Order, which His Majesty
was ever confident of: But his Majesty not willing to take so much pains in
vain, offered to come into that His Town only with 20. horse, finding that
the maine of his pretense lay, That His Majesty's train was able to command
the Garrison: Notwithstanding, His Majesty was so desirous to go thither in a
private way, that He gave warning thereof but overnight, which he refusing, but
by way of condition (which His Majesty thought much below him) held it most
necessary to declare him Traitor (unless upon better thoughts, he should
yield obedience) which he doubly deserved, as well for refusing entrance to his
natural Sovereign, as by laying the reason thereof groundlesly and
maliciously upon his Parliament.

One circumstance His Majesty cannot forget, that his Son the Duke of York,
and his Nephew the Prince Elector, having gone thither the day before, Sir John
Hotham delayed the letting of them out to His Majesty till after some
consultation.

Hereupon His Majesty has thought it expedient to demand Justice of His
Parliament against the said Sir John Hotham, to be exemplarily inflicted on him
according to the Laws, and the rather because His Majesty would give them a fit
occasion to free themselves of this imputation, by him so injuriously cast upon
them, to the end His Majesty may have the easier way for the chastising of so
high a disobedience.

The Names of those Divines that are nominated by the Knights and Brugesses of
each County, for the Consultation, or Assembly.
Bedfordshire. MAster Dillingham. Mr. Boldes.
Buckinghamshire. Mr. Henry Wilkinson. Mr. Valentine.
Berkshire. Dr. Twisse. Mr. Rayner.
Cambridgeshire. Doctor Thomas Wincop. Mr. Thomas Goodwin.
Cambridge University. Doctor Brounrig, Bishop. Doctor Ward.
Cornwall. Master Gamon. Master Hicks.
Cheshire. Master John Lea. Master Thomas Case.
Cumberland. Doctor Hoyle. Master Bridges.
Durham. Master Iennison. Master Morton.
Derbyshire. Doctor Love. Doctor Gouge.
Devonshire. Master Pine. Master Whiting.
Dorsetshire. Master White. Master Peele.
Essex. (...) Marshall
Glocestershire. Master Mew. Master Dunning.
Huntingtonshire. Master Backhurst. Master Philip Nigh.
Hartfordshire. Doctor Smith. Doctor Burges.
Herefordshire. Master Green. Master Gower.
Kent. Master Wilson. Master Tailor.
Lincolnshire. Master Tuckney. Master Coleman.
Lancashire. Master Herles. Master Herrick.
Leicestershire. Master Clayton. Master Gibs.
Middlesex. Doctor Calibute Downing. Master Buroughs.
London. Master Calamy. Master George Walker. Master Seaman. Master Caryll.
Munmouthshire. Doctor Harris. Master George Morley.
Northamptonshire. Master Edward Reynolds. Master Hall.
Nottinghamshire. Doctor Robert Saunderson. Master Foxcroft.
Northumberland. Master John Iackson. Master William Carter.
Norfolk. Master Thoroughgood. Master Arrow-Smith.
Oxfordshire. Master Robert Harris. Master Cross.
Oxford University. Archbishop of Armagh. Doctor Styles.
Rutlandshire. Master Samuel Gibson. Master Whitaker.
Somersetshire. Master Samuel Crook. Master Cunnet.
Shropshire. Master Edward Corbet. Master Hildersham.
Surrey. Doctor Stainton. Doctor Daniel Featley.
Staffordshire. Master Francis Cook. Master Lightfoot.
Hampshire. Master Langley. Master Tisdale.
Suffolk. Master Tho. Young. Master John Philips.
Sussex. Master Pickering. Master Henry Nigh.
Westmorland. Master Hall. Master Hutton.
Wiltshire. Master Henry Scudder. Master Baily.
Worcestershire. Master Salmay Doctor Prideaux, Bishop.
Warwickshire. Master Burges. Master Vines.
Yorkshire. Master Level. Master Michlethwait.
Anglesey. Master Buckley.
Brecknockshire. Doctor Temple.
Cardiganshire. Master Jos. Shute.
Carmarthenshire. Master Nichols.
Carnarvanshire. Master Thomas Gataker.
Denbyshire. Doctor Rich.
Flintshire. Doctor Parsley.
Glamorganshire. Master Tozer. Merioneth shire. Master Sp^rstow.
Pembrookshire. Master Francis Channel.
Montgomeryshire. Master Ellis.
Radnorshire. Doctor Hackwell.
Island of Gernesy. Master de la Marse.
Island of Iernesey. Master de Lasser.

Die Martis 26. April 1642.
Resolved upon the Question.

THAT Sir John Hotham Knight, according to this relation, has done nothing but
in obedience to the Command of both Houses of Parliament.

Resolved upon the Question.

That this declaring of Sir John Hotham Traitor, being a Member of the House of
Commons, is a high breach of the privilege of Parliament.

Resolved upon the Question.

That this declaring of Sir John Hotham Traitor without due process of Law, is
against the liberty of the Subject, and against the Law of the Land.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that these Votes shallbe
printed, and sent to the Sheriffs, and the Justices of the Peace to be
published in all the Market Towns of the Counties of York and Lincoln.

Io. Brown Cler. Parliament.

Die Martis 26. April 1642.
IT is declared by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that the stopping of
the passages between Hull and the Parliament, and the intercepting of
Messengers employed from the Parliament to Hull, or from any that are in the
Service of the Parliament, or any Letters whatsoever sent by any to, or from
the Parliament, is a high breach of the privilege of Parliament, which by the
Laws of this Kingdom, and the Protestation, we are bound to defend with our
Lives and Fortunes, and to bring the violater to condign punishment.

And hereby all Lords Lieutenants, and their Deputies authorized by the
Ordinance of both houses of Parliament, all Sheriffs, Justices, Majors,
Bailiffs, Constables, and other Officers whatsoever, are required to give their
uttermost aid and assistance to all that are employed in the said Service, for
their better and more speedee free and safe passage: And to apprehend all such
as by color of any warrant or other authority whatsoever, shall endeavor on
(...) about to hinder any that are employed about the same, and them to
apprehend, and in safe custody to send up to the Parliament.

Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that this Declaration shall be
forthwith printed and published.

John Brown Cler. Parl.

FINIS.

