FLAGELLVM POETICVM: OR, A SCOURGE FOR A Wild Poet.

BEING An Answer to Dr. Robert Wild's Letter, Directed to his Friend Mr. J. J.

Upon Occasion of His Majesty's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience.

LONDON, Printed for J. L. Anno Dom. 1672.

SIR,
I Am so far from not believing you (as you say) a Merry Fellow, that I am
desirous to dispossess all from that belief, from the relation you claim to a
Beggar; and those sins you secretly exclaim against, which have registered you
in the number of Cripples; but give me leave to tell you, you are more merrily
disposed than the gravity of your Function can allow of. I do not see wherein
you can further contribute to the jolly blush of your cheeks, than what you
have done; had you been so much a lover of that pottage you pretend, you would
have looked more like a milksop than you do: I like the man that carries in his
face the tincture of that bloody banner he fights under, and would not have any
man's countenance prove so much an Hypocrite to cross a French Proverb: His Nose
plainly proves,
What Pottage he loves.


I am sorry you discover the worst symptom of a bad nature in your disrespect
to Music; if that excellent Philosopher spoke true, he cannot be inclined to
Virtue, that is not a lover of Harmony: And yet I perceive you are no enemy to
Psalm-tunes well whistled; I pretend to no skill therein, wherefore I shall
leave it to your judgment; it may be for the tunes sake you admire the Psalms
too, so composed as if Hopkins had designed therein to justle out the Lyturgie.

Psalms, which if David, from his seat of bliss,
Should hear, he would little think they are meant for his.
And now Sir, with a bob at Hierarchy, you come to a good King for your money;
I hope you do not intend thereby to revive the old trade of King-selling; but
let that pass, and let us see what account you give of his Majesty's
Declaration: but hold, I must traduce my observations on yours with this
digression. The Gentleman, who read your Letter to the Company, wherein I was,
had run over three Pages; but coming to that place, wherein you gave so exact
an Account of the hour of the Day, by Mortals Maws yawning for Morsels, and how
much concerned your own were, in the pains you took your self, for their speedy
satisfaction, I had then a brimmer of Claret at my Mouth; though that was full,
my ears were open, and some small-head Louse entered, which tickled them so
Violently, that being forced into a Laughter, open flew the floodgates of my
Chops, and drowned the Eyes of my gentle Reader with Claret; this un-advised
Laughter made his Eyes look Blood-shot, and his Band looked as if it had been
washed in the Red Sea; not knowing how to take this accident, he asked, What
might occasion this my strange disorder; I could not so compose my self, but my
Answer was interrupted several times with Laughing; so that brokenly, I told
him, that my fancy was fixed strongly on the Doctors posture, as he sat holding
the Pan over the fire; sometimes I resembled him to the hungry Ghost of Friar
Bacon; sometimes a New England grave Elder, who as he turned the Herrings, did
patiently suffer the sparks of persecution to fly about him unconcerned, so
that the appetite of Carnal satisfaction might have no cause to complain; but
that which moved me most to laughter, was, the consideration of this Carnal
man's fearful desertion; that that man, who was accustomed after the outrageous
heats of the Pulpit were over, to be immediately put to Bed, with nine Caps to
keep in his remaining Wit (too fleet of foot) and a quart of Muld Sack to lull
him asleep, now to be left alone to the fury of a sputtering drying pan,
without the commiseration of a tender -- hearted Petticoat. However I am sorry
for your slender attendance, and your being coursly dealt withal as to a
Table-cloath; look not on it as any great penance, to have your Table covered
with an Horse-cloath, since it may be, at that very time when it belonged to
your Horse, many Houses of God were then turned into Stables. But why so angry
Dr. with the Bishops? What, is it because your Sleeves are not of the same
complexion with theirs; if so, we have cause to believe that Holland has
raised all this difference; it is thought Father -- mouth, with a Bishopric,
had been silenced for ever railing so bitterly against the Prelates; but I have
more charity for you, than to believe that the wind of Profit can blow your
Weathercock where it list. And now I must commend your manners in lowering your
Top-sale to the Kings Arms; sure 'twas no Steeple-crown'd Hat you wear, having
an aversion to Steeples, and therefore have left them with the Ropes to the
Sons of our Church, for which I must Ring you a peal, for stiling our Reverend
Clergy Jack-daws, with other foul reflections, as if you intended to write your
good old cause in Masquerade. What? upon the merry pin again, here is laughing
with all my heart, but at what I pray? His Majesty's Declaration shorn, or
clipped, and looking like a poll'd Amsterdam Divine, or one of the Geneva Cut;
sure Sir, methinks this object should be so far from procuring laughter in
you, that it should rather extract tears from the remembrance of your Quondam
Brethrens Sufferings, whose Busie-Heads, and saucy Tongues, were chastised by
the loss of their Ears; I hope yours ere long will lie more open to a better
understanding. But now lets see what he observes in this Declaration: Why he
acknowledges it is all goodness to their Party; then why do you thus snarle Mr.
Dr? Since the Royal Clemency has given both you, and us, his leave to choose
our way to our Everlasting Rest; let us not Justle one the other by the way,
since we are all mixed (as in the Ark) together, let us not dispute who are the
Clean, and who the Unclean. And now give me leave to Laugh too; I perceive,
you highly applaude the Month of March, for introducing your Years of Jubilee,
the Fifteenth of that Month you esteem above all other Holy Days; from whence I
observe, that though you slight those the Church has enjoined us to observe,
yet you will not neglect the observance of one of your own making. But whither
do I Ramble? Hold, let me see; what feats of Activity the Dr. has learned;
Bartholomew Fair, is not far off: it is well he begins to practice, and may act
his well for ought I know; since he confesses himself as nimble as the
Gentleman that Dances on the High Rope; dancing on the High Rope is improper;
yet though he is ignorant of the terms, he may better come to understand the
Rope hereafter. And are you then so nimble? Had you been troubled with the
Kings-Evill, it might have been stroak'd out of you; but of all the Remedies I
have read of, that of a Plaster of Liberty of Conscience, applied hot to the
Patient, is, I find the most speedy cure for a Gouty Distemper. This digression
had like to have made me forget what account he gives of his Minister, a pious,
and prudent Man, and discovers no grimace's at the Lyturgie, as if he were
drinking a Potion, nor in his Sermons make's other make^faces as if he were
giving them one. It is well that this good Gentleman's Face is not rumpled as
most of his Brethrens are, by drawing their mouths this way and that way, and
opening their Jaws so wide, as if they would swallow the Lid of the Pulpit, and
then suddenly shut them, as if they were snapping at Flies. Doctor, you may be
ignorant of the Carriage and ridiculous Gestures of some of your Brethren in
their Sermons, and therefore be pleased to mind in the concluding of this
Pamphlet, what I lately observed in one of your Congregations.

At last to conclude, you say mocking is catching, and that there is Dirt
enough in every street to be dawb one another with; it is very true, and I am
very sorry you flung the first Handful; you may be pelted with enough, if all
were of a mind. The discharging of your Gun, in Garrison, at this unseasonable
time, ought to Alarm the Vigilent to stand upon their Guard; have a care of
over-charging your Blunderbuss, it may one time or other put your Shoulder out.
Rail against the Pope as long as you please, it is safe enough, being far
enough off; no Language is too bad for him, call him Crafty Knave (for he goes
by several Names) it is all one to me; but trample not on the Ashes of the
Reverend Prelates, lately deceased; nor do not go about to extenuate the Light,
of those glorious Lamps, that in spite of Hell, will shine eminently in our
Churches: De Mortuis nil nisi bonum,
De vivis nil nisi verum.


Licentia Poetica: or, Observations on a late Silenced Minister.
IS, lately was, (I now may name the place)
(A pretty Covert for the Babes of Grace,)
Where silenced Ministers enough were met,
To make a Synod; and may make one yet.
Their blessed Liberty they have found at last,
And talked for all those years, of silence past.
Like some half-pin'd, and hunger-starved men,
Who, when they next get Victuals, surfeit then.
In this Assembly, one, to avoid contest,
Did mount the Pulpit, there to teach the rest.
Where that we men, more patiently might hear
Nonsense, to Heaven at first, he spoke it there.
First whin'd, then whispered, then aloud did rore;
Now drew his long words, and then leapt'em over.
Such various tones, that I admired, and said,
Sure all the Congregation in him prayed.
'Twas the most tedious Soul, the Divelest He
That ever came to Doctrnies Twenty-three
And Nineteen Uses, how he drew his Hum,
And quartered Haws, talked naught but Opium.
No Fever a man's eyes could open keep;
All Argus body he would have preached asleep.
For half an hour, naught but O Lord he cries,
Puk't warmness, and this melts the Sisters eyes:
They snob'd aloud, then did I loudly snore,
Till a kind Psalm told me the dangers over.
Being out of doors, one told me I must dine
With him, and to encourage, he had store of wine.
I by this frien'd to his large Hall was led,
Where some Grave Clergymen I saw, well fed,
But by a newer style distinguished;
Whether most renowned Batchelours they be
Of Art, or reverend Sophs of no Degree.
Now they discourse, some stories here relate
Of bloody Papists, Plots against the State;
But against Bishops they all railed, and I
Said boldly I Would defend the Hierarchy.
To the Hierarchy they meant no harm at all,
But root and branch against Bishops; to it we fall:
I like a Fool, with Reasons, and these men
With wrested Scripture; a slye Teacher then
Thrust in his ears, so speaks the Apostle too:
How speaks he Friend? not through the nose like you.
A hideous form was ready to begin,
When by most blessed fates the meat came in.
But then so long, so long a Grace was said,
That a good Christian, when he goes to bed,
Would be contented with a shorter Prayer;
O how the Saints enjoyed the Creature there!
Three Pasties in the minute of an hour,
Large, and well wrought, they root and branch devour.
They tooth a' nail fell to it; no lazy hand,
In vain the lesser Pyes hope to withstand.
On Geese, and Capons, with what zeal they feed,
And wondering cry, a goodly Bird indeed.
Their stomachs crammed (as greedy as their eyes)
All study now, who shall appear most wise.
Their spirits warmed, yet from'em no Jests came,
But what like Cripples halted, and were lame.
At length says one, I think the Declaration
Has changed the doom of damning this whole Nation.
Sweet Liberty of Conscience makes me hate
All the supporters of usurped State.
Our freedom is enlarged, and that is a thing,
Will make me love, the once loathed Name of King.
He spoke for all the rest, and now I-tro,
It Is time to feed our Souls; to Church we go.
Sans complement the pious man begins;
The suffering Pulpit groans for Isreal's sins.
Sins, which in number many though they be,
And crying ones, are yet less loud than He.
Half melted, but more out of breath, he cries;
Not knowing what to say, he wipes his eyes.
Then this pretends, prolixity to shun,
But one word more beloved, and I have done.
Would it were so, thought I, but much I fear,
That all will not be done these two hours here.
Now, now, he com's to it, as you will find it writ;
Repeats his Text, and takes his leave of it.
And straight to's Sermon in such furious wise,
As made it what 'twas called, an Exercise.
The Pulpit's his hot Bath; the Brethren's cheer,
Roast Beef, and larded Turkeys break out here.
He dares not now, as thirteen years ago,
When superstitious decency did grow,
He feared, too much in fashion, whet his fist
Against the name of Altar, and of Priest.
Paul and St. Peter sure had had their Doom,
Had this same Frantic known they would been at Rome.
And now at last, that he may raise new fears,
And make his Gang shake their mysterious ears;
All is not well he doubts, and then begins
To tell, great punishments attend great sins.
If he don't put us into frights, it is much,
And style those Judgments Ours, which waits the Dutch.
At length, long Time, which does consume and wast
All things, t'an end his Sermon brought at last.
Thus Sir, you have my Story, but am sorry,
( Taunton excuse) it is no better for you.
However read it, as you Pease are shelling;
For you will find, it is not worth the telling.
Excuse this boldness, for I cannot avoid
Thinking sometimes, you are but ill imployd.
Fishing for Souls, more fit, then frying fish;
That makes me throw Pease-shellings in your dish*
You have a Study, Books wherein to look;
How com's it then the Doctor's turned a Cook?
Well Doctor Cook, pray be advised, hereafter
Don't make your Wife the subject of our laughter.
I find She Is careless, and your maid a Slut
To let you grease your Cassock for your Gut.
You are all three in fault, by all that is blessed;
Mend you your manners first, then teach the rest.
One use of Exhortation Doctor to your Sisters, and I Have done.
PRay don't complain, you now United are;
And are not straited in your Gospel fair.
Let not Pluralty's then be t'ane away,
Though men learn thence, to keep two Wives, you say.
And let not Schollarship I pray go down;
O fie, your Sex so cruel to the Gown.
You don't the kindness of some Scholars know;
The Cambridg-Women would not have it so.
Learning's the Lamp of the Land, which shines so bright
You Are not s'immodest to put out the light.
These things you are grieved at; but I pray what next?
O with our Churches solemn forms you are vexed.
The Sign of the Cross, the forehead must not bear;
'Twas only you were born to plant Signs there.
No Surplices. Why none I pray do you crave?
They Are Rags of Rome. I know what y'ould have.
Y'oud Preach I warrant? Do so, for no doubt,
A finer Preaching Age, y'oul never find out;
You Have got the Sp'rit, nay fiery tongues, I troe,
And by your talk, they should be double too.
O Times, O Manners! But methinks I stay
Somewhat too long, take so much for to day;
Hereafter more, hence be not thus beguiled,
You Will find we'ave Muses too, as well as Wild.
FINIS.

