A Flattering ELEGY Upon the death of King Charles: The clean contrary way.

With a Parallel something significant.

Printed in the Year 1649.

A flattering ELEGY, etc.
Were all the flattery in the world in me,
Yet (Royal soul) I could not flatter thee:
Celestial joys thy blessed spirit includes
In full fruition of Beatitudes.
Immortal Martyred Monarch, to thy Hearse
I dedicate my poor unpollish'd Verse:
I flattering flatter not, but I commend
Those Villains that procured thy glorious end:
Those holy men that vowed to quell Oppressors,
And make thee greater then thy Predecessors:
I flatter none but such, and still I pray
They may be blessed the clean contrary way.
It Is wonder how these Atheists dare to frame
Their prayers to God; or call upon his name,
When they believe there is no God at all;
But that (by nature) all things stand or fall:
For to know God is trust in him alone,
And to believe Gods word and God are one:
And as sure as his Word and he are true,
So sure damnation is the Rebels due: Romans 13.

Their Humiliations and Hypocrisy
Can never expiate their perjury:
Their feigned Fasts and seeming penitence
Were mockeries of Gods high omnipotence:
Days of Thanks giving were in use no further,
But to praise God for their committing murder;
Or when they had done mischief to the King,
Then would they give God thanks, and Bells should ring:
Some good those wicked Imps of Hell have done,
We may choose our Religion all, or none;
Or any that will please our fancies well;
We may be Pagan, Jew, Turk, Infidel;
Or the Religion of a Horse or Mule,
(Where God commands not, where no King does rule)
We may be Protestants again (they say)
Pr^vided that we will no King obey:
Let Us never strive more to be Christians then,
Since Godless Villains are held best of men.
England was sick of too much ease and wealth;
The Devil was sick too, and to gain his health,
He took from's Doctor and Apothecary
A Vomit, Clister, and Suppositary:
The Physic would not work, which grieved him more;
His Grip^s and pangs made him make Hell to roar^.
At last to England he a journey makes
And turned our happy Kingdom to his Jakes:
His damned Physic here wrought up and down,
In Church, Court Country, City, Village, Town.
Here (from his Hellish throat) he spawl'd and spewed
Of Sectaries a cursed Multitude,
Presbyters, Independents, Agitators,
Thieves, Murderers, rude Rebels, and false Traitors,
And from his gut beneath he vented out
An ill looked vermin with a fiery snowt,
Who as he squirted from's infernal Breech,
It scalded him and made his Divelship screech.
A mighty blackfac'd worm he eke did void,
And those two have our happiness destroyed.
And thus the Devils excrements did vent
A cursed Army, and a Parliament.
Thus did this vomit, and this purge defile,
With putrefaction, this most famous I Will:
That stinking stuff, bred Frogs, Toads, Caterpillars;
(The worst of vermin, Traitors and King-killers)
The noy some favor of these foul contagions
Flew into every Kingdom, Lands and Regions;
That now our names and fames stink every where,
And will not soon be sweet again I fear.
Thus have they beggered Englands common weal,
And all good men may either beg or steal,
Or starve; choose which of all those three:
Or hazard Newgate and the Tryple tree,
Whilst they surprise the goods of any man's,
And ride in pomp in Coaches and Sedans.
Like Sea and Hell are their insatiate Mawes,
They have devoured Church, Kingdom, King and Laws:
Of Sequestrations, four score thousand, odd,
And (if they could) they would Sequester God.
All the Kings jewels, Scepter, and his Crown,
Lands and all goods which Kings have held their own;
All the Revenues they have swallowed clear,
(Worth fifteen hundred thousand pounds a year)
All Forests, and Kings woods, all Churches lands,
They 've gripped into their Avaricious hands,
All plundrings, Contributions, and Excise,
Free Loanes, forced Loanes, Taxes and penalties;
Pole moneys, weekly meals and Subsidies, 50.
All these cannot their greedy guts suffice.
An hundred millions they 've near spent and lost,
And not one penny of it of their cost:
Yet still they owe some millions of arreares:
With great engagements more as it appears
The Public Faith is now so faithless found,
Lenders would take five shillings in the pound;
And maney for arreares right glad would be,
For every twenty shillings to have three.
But there are cheaper ways to pay arrears,
To starve or hang 'em up all reckoning clears;
Death quits all scores, let them be long delayed,
And they 'le be killed, or hanged, and then all is paid.
For wealth, and pride, and power, their souls they have sold,
And never will be filled with blood and gold:
Thus they imagine mischief every day,
Prayed for and blessed the clean contrary way.
The year full sixteen hundred and two score,
King CHARLES from Scotland came, and never more
Was flattry used with great magnificence,
The City London entertained their Prince,
Mark how the cursed Jews Hosanna cried
When Christ into Jerusalem did ride;
With boughs they decked their doors, and in their street
They threw their garments, trampled under feet:
These flattring duties then those Jews did show,
To whom both heaven and earth obedience owe;
Yet few days after their malicious strife,
Did crucify our glorious Lord of life.
Much like to this was Londons fading flame
Of love, when royal CHARLES from Scotland came,
They rang the Bells, and Bonefires were consumed;
Thousands were sick with Healths, and the air perfumed,
With Cannons thundering roar and chimneis reake;
Yea all that heart could think or tongue could speak:
By flattring Loyalty was then expressed
With the entertainment of a mighty Feast.
This did brave London do, yet pray but note,
In three days after they would cut his throat;
For thousands of them did like fiends conjoyn,
To spend their lives, their souls, their goods, and coin,
And many a Thimble, Bodkin, and a Ring,
They offered up to sacrifice their King:
Oh faithless trust! accursed with flattry varnisht,
Like to a rotten Sepulcher new garnisht:
And as the City has this mischief bought,
For which the Parliament our ruins brought;
So a seditious Army base and scurvy
Has turned the Parliament quite topsie turvy:
So Parliament and City dare not act,
Except great TOM and NOL approve the fact.
Some wonders do but last a nine days space;
But this is not our murdered Sovereigns case,
For God (whose dreadful voice is more then thunder)
Will make King CHARLES his blood ten ages wonder:
So wise, so just, so merciful, so good,
So happy, (had he well been understood)
That we had all been happy, had we bin
So blessed as not to kill him with our sin.
As sure as man dies when he ath lost his head,
So with one blow three Kingdoms are struck dead:
The ignorant accused JEWS SANHEDRIM
Were not so guilty of selfe-knowing sin.
Great PONTIUS PILATE on's Tribunal Throne,
To judge the High eternal THREE in ONE,
He did not know what then our Savior was,
Yet did corrupt unwilling censure pass:
He was a Heathen and from him was hid
Such knowledge that he knew not what he did:
He was not bribed with thousands, gold, or gain,
As BRAD SHAVV was to judge his SOVEREIGN:
PILATE had full authority and power
From great TIBERIUS, Romes high Emperor:
But our usurping President did know
His power was false and that himself did owe
(With all his fellow Knaves) obedience
To him that stood arraigned by false pretense:
You knew, but would not know; then here is your lot,
Depart from me for now I know you not.
But yet when Heavens just Judge shall all decide
Those Jews before you shall be justified;
You sinned against your consciences, you knew
Your King (the best of Kings) was in your view:
He unto whom you plighted had your troaths
By Protestation, Covenant and Oaths
Of true Allegiance and Supremacy,
And that you would make him great most gloriously.
You knew the King was innocent and right,
You knew your cursed hearts were full of spite:
You knew your malice against his life conspired,
You knew false witnesses suborned and hired:
You knew that BRADSHAVV and COOK (INCUBUS)
Were Villains, both the sons of CERBERUS.
You knew not one amongst your damned Crew
Was friend unto the King this you all knew:
You knew that by the Laws it plain appears
That every man, should be tried by his Peers;
For in my life I never yet have heard it,
But common men, had common Juries Verdict:
Peers tried by Peers, but no Record yet brings
But Kings should be a Jury unto Kings:
This is the thing that all our lives enslaves,
That Tapsters, Drawers, Firkin men (proud knaves)
Were by a foisting Parliament appointed
To judge and doom to death the Lords Anointed.
You knew the accursed wealth you 'aue raked and pulled
From three rich Kingdoms basely cheated, gulled:
And you did fear if CHARLES should once more Reign,
You should restore your theevish gains again.
You knew your guilt of such transcendency,
You durst not trust offended Majesty:
For which we know, your want of wit and grace
Have glorified him in a better place.
For this black deed, I Will tell what will ensue,
Three Kingdoms spoil, damnation unto you:
All Christendom will hold you most abhorred
For murdering of your gracious Sovereign Lord:
In any Country where this crime is known,
An English man dares not his Country own.
Turks, Pagans Heathens, Jews, and rugged Tartars,
In all wars willgive English men no quarters:
As you accursed have lived, accursed dye,
Or else repent, or damn perpetually.
FINIS.

