FLEMSTADTS Most Strange and Wonderful PROPHECY.

Foretelling what may be the Wonderful Effects and Continuance OF THIS Present
Frost.

AND Great Snow: With an Historical Account of the several Great FROSTS, since
the Conquest.

Constable thou Bind the sweet Influences of Pleidades? Or loose the Bands of Orion,

Job 38. verse 31. Licensed according to Order.

London, Printed for E. Golding, 1695.

Observations on this Present Frost, and Great SNOW.
IT is a Truth so undeniable Demonstrable, that there is an America of
Knowledge yet to be discovered, chiefly in the Celestial Kingdom, that even
the Sacred Oracles themselves assure us of its Verity, Day unto Day, and Night
unto Night, teaches Knowledge. And there is a kind of Necessity, that there
should be a plus ultra in Science, for the sati^faction of the curious
Inquisitor(...) shall appear in Ages to come: But so prevalent is the Spirit of
Ignorance, that the greater part of Mankind, rather Scoff at, than Admire the
Works of Gods Creation. All People know there is a Moon, but few believe her
Influence, although they daily feel it. It Is pity the commonness of things
truly Excellent, should render them Contemptible; yet such is the Misery unto
which Humanity is Obnoxious, that it ever does (...). He who truly studies the
Works of God, will find that Frost and Snow, Hail, Rain, and Wind, etc. come
not by Chance, or from any unaccountable Motion of Matter, but at set and
determinate periods and Revolations of the Planitary Bodies. Ptolemy has so
great a regard to the Moon's Influence, That he tells us, all things Animate
and Inanimate, receive her Impression.

Now, there are several Ingenious and Lear ^^d Men, ready enough to allow of
the Moon's Influence, who nevertheless, will be apt to argue, that we live in
an Island which has no manner of Correspondency with the Continent, and
therefore the Pretense of our Prognostics of Frost, Snow, Hail, Rain, from the
Moon, is not to be allowed; but alas, as the Incomparably Ingenious, and most
Elaborate Student i^ the Changes, of the Weather, the Learned Dr. Goad, well
Remarks, This is but a mere excuse; for the New, and also the full Moon, has
the same Influence here and there, and all the World over, Observatis,
Observandis, in the prime product be sure, and also in its Consequents,
according to the capacity of the Region or Country, and Season of the Year; and
what more can Reason expect?

This Fourth, last, and worst Quarter of all the Year, commenced with the Snn's
entrance into the first Scruple of the Tropic of Capricorn; at which time the
Inhabitants of this Earthly Globe, receive the least Portion of the Sun's Rays
and Light, which is one main Reason of Frost and Snow, and other extremity of
Weather.

In the Month of January, 1694. (though December threatn^d us with some
pinching Frost) is the Month Assigned by the Influence of the Colder Planets
and destined for Winter, t^ Exercise his Tyrany in: Capri^orn the Celestial
Sign governing, has many great Conjunctions in it, and the cold Moon that
mainly Influences the Air, and the Sea comes to her New with sharp and pointed
Horns; and m^lancholly Saturn ^oins to (...) over the Earth, w^^th Frost and
Snow, to Pinch and Pine poor Mortals: so that this Year not only begins with a
hard and Niping Frost, nor gives any Prospect from the Continuance of these
Celestial Influences, but that it will go out with the like. So that Rivers and
other Great Waters, may be condensed to that hardness, that we need not wade,
or go about for Bridges. And many Poor People put to great straights, and
necessities; and some of them no doubt Dye, unless timely relieved with
necessaries, by the Charity of well disposed Persons, which this weather no
doubt will move to compassionate them.

February, Comes hastily, ushered in by Jupiter, he being on the place of the
Conjunction of the last Month; and Mars and Mercury in oppositions, and Sol and
Luna, at the Lunation are in opposition to Jupiter, from all which we cannot
gather but the Weather will Continue very Cold, and if their be r^lentings, we
cannot but guess it may have fits of Re^urnings, the Circuling Wi^ds being
threatened to be fixed for some time, in the North, North-East, and South West;
so that from Cold Greenland, and Es^^^iland, Furious Boreas, threatens to bring
Frost and Snow on his broad spread Wings, and throw them over these Parts of
the World; yet at last a soft relutin^ South Wind, shall blow it away, and a
warm Spring and a Plentious prospect of a large Harvest Ensues.

Yet let us mind those that are Rich once more,
In these hard Months to feed the Starving Poor;
That Hungry Souls may bless them for their care,
Granting them Plenty and enough to spare.
And our hopes are, that we shall not have such another Frost, and Snow as in
the Year 168^ when for 13. Weeks together, the Thames was Frozen over, and a
kind of a Fair kept thereon, called Blaket-Fair, from the Numerous Company of
Blankets used for to cover their Huts or Tents, where both Men, Women, and
Children, Horses, Carts and Coaches, went thereon as on dry ground; the latter
carrying the Lawyers in Term-Time, from the Temple to Westminster Hall, and
Foot-Passengers went as thick as in any Street in London. There were also
several Diversions, as Bull-baiting, Nine-Pin-Playing. etc. a whole Ox Roasted
on the Ice against White Hall; and likewise a Printing Press was kept in a
Booth over against York-Stairs, where many thousands had their Names Printed.

In the Reign of King Edward the Third, (according to the Account of Sir
Richard Baker.) a Frost last^d from the midst of September, to the Month of
April, and a great part of the time with great Violence.

In the seventh Year of Queen Elizabath, on the 21 st of December began a
Frost, so extreme, that on New-Years-Eve, People passed over the Thames on
Foot: some played at Football, some shot at Pricks, as if it had been firm
G^ound. Yet the great Frost, the third of January at Night, began to thaw, and
by the Fifth Day, there was no Ice at all to be seen; which Sudden Thaw, caused
great Inundations.

In the Sixth Year of the Reign of King James the First, Anno Dom. 1608, a
Frost began in December, which continued till April following, with such
Violence, that not only the Thames was so Frozen, that Carts laden, were driven
over as on Dry-Land, but many Fowls and Birds perished; as also, much Herbage
in Gardens, especially Artichoaks and Rosemary, were destroyed.

In the Ninth Year of the Reign of King Henry the Fourth, there was so sharp a
Winter, and so great a Frost, with such Abundance of Snow, continuing December,
January, February, and March, that great Quantities of Cattle and large Fowl
died, and almost all, small Birds perished through Hunger.

In the Reign of King Edward the Confessor, in the Month of January, such
abundance of Snow fells continuing to the middle of March following, that
almost all Cattle and Fowl Perished, and therewithal an excessive Dearth
followed.

FINIS.

