Five QUESTIONS PROPOUNDED To the People of England.
1. IF the present King came for the good of England, and not for his own ends
at the Nations Cost; Why then did he not embrace and improve the happy occasion
of King James's voluntary return from Feversham, since it is plain, he could
have no other thing in his Eye, by his coming and message to King William, and
Invitation of him to St James's, then an Accommodation, for he put himself
thereby into King William's hands and had hardly any other use of his own then
to sign a National Agreement?

2. Whether since that very time the Hand of God has not eminently shown it
self against King William for that unnatural Ambitious, and destructive
refusal, and treatement of his Father, first by the perplextity that fell
immediately upon him about the very thing he desired, viz. the Crown, witness
the hot contest in the Convention, and with what Clossetting Threats, Bribes,
Promises, etc. he carried it, and with that small advantage of Votes above his
opposers, that any Law would stand loosely that had no better concurance at its
making; In the next place, by the Baffles upon his Forces by Sea and Land by
the hand of Man, and by the visible severe Hand of God, insomuch that no time
or age, these six Hundred Years, can parralel such a Years loss of Men,
Treasure and Shipping, as this poor Kingdom has sustained since the coming of
this present King. Lastly, the many factions and great instability of Councels,
such as God is accustomed to bring upon those that devise mischief, or seek
themselves, or abuse the providence of God?

3. Whether yet it be too late to retrive this matter, and recover this
bleeding Nation, in case King William and Queen Mary would return to their
natural and Christian Duty to their Father, and incline to forgo their present
untimely and perplexed Dignity; and that thereby a good agreement may not be
made for our Religion, Laws and Liberties, without more Blood, Treasure and
Misery?

4. Whether if King William and Queen Mary, will not do this, the People for
their own sakes, ought not to think of the next best expedient, to compel them
to it, as by addressing them for their Fathers return, and by Refusing their
Purses in the maintenance of their unjust quarrel against him, and
perticularly, by oppressing foreign Mercinary Forces, that are half of them of
that very Religion their Lawful King is expelled for professing, and which are
all of them brought in without Advice or Consent of Parliament, and a
Parliament then setting: A thing without president for above a Thousand Years,
and what was never done by the greatest and most arbitrary of our lawful and
undoubted Kings of England, and never attempted but by Vortigern, the last
British King, who to uphold his usurpation of the Crown, called in the Saxons,
by which the Kingdom became a Conquest to that People?

5. Whether if the People of England shall suffer themselves to be so far
imposed upon, that against the Eminent Hand of God and their own Intrest, they
will persevere in the upholding the title of King William and Queen Mnry for
that is the quarrel, and so it is, must and will be stated, all other things
being by King James already granted in his soft and gracious Letter to the
Convention, this time twelve Month, which they would not vouchsafe to read, but
has often been made public, containing the correction of past Errors, the
oblivion of our present Faults, the Establishment of the Protestant Religion,
by secureing the Church of England in her Rights, and the Dissenters in their
Liberty, desiring no more for his own Friends then in their own Houses, and
refering the whole to a free Parliament?

Whether I say the Blood, Misery and Destruction that shall follow an obstinate
opposition to a lawful King, offering these Good and Gracious Terms, will not
lie at our doors, before God and Men, and so make it Just in him, to acquire
his Kingdoms at any price, and rule them, if he Succeed, how he pleases?

Hear, Fear and Beware.

