Husbandry Spiritualized: OR, The HEAVENLY USE OF Earthly Things.

Consisting of many Pleasant OBSERVATIONS, Pertinent APPLICATIONS, and serious
REFLECTIONS, and each Chapter concluded with a Divine and suitable POEM.

Directing HUSBANDMEN to the most Excellent Improvements of their common
Employments.

Whereunto are added, by way of Appendix, several choice OCCASIONAL
MEDITATIONS, upon Birds, Beasts, Trees, Flowers, Rivers, and several other
Objects; fitted for the help of such as desire to walk with God in all their
Solitudes and Recesses from the World.

Hos. 12. v. 10. I have used Similitudes by the Ministry of the Prophets. Genesis
24 v. 63. And Issac went out to meditate in the Fields. Experto creed, aliquid
amplius invenires in sylvis, quam in angulis; linga and lapides decebunt te
quod a Magistris audire non possis. Bernard Simul and jucunda, and idonea
dicere vitae.
Lectorem delectando, pariterque monendo.
Horace. By JOHN FLAVELL Minister of the Gospel in Devon.

THE THIRD EDITION.

London, Printed and are to be sold by Robert Boulter, at the Turks-Head, over
against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, MDCLXXIV.

THE Epistle Dedicatory.
To the Worshipful Robert Savery, and William Savery, of Slade, Esquires.
Honored Friends,
IT has been long since observed, That the world below, is a Glass to discover
the World above; Seculum est speculum. And although I am not of their opinion,
the say, The Heathens may spell Christ out of the Sun, Moon and Stars; yet this
I know, That the irratoinal and inanimate, as well as rational creatures have a
Language; and though not by Articulate speech, yet in a Metaphorical sense,
they preach unto man the wisdom, Power, and goodness of God, Romans 1. 20. There
is (says the Psalmist, Psalm. 19. 3.) No speech, nor Language where their voice
is not heard. Or (as Iunius renders) there is no Speech, nor Words, yet without
these their voice is understood; and their Line (i. e. says Deodate) their
writing in gross and plain draughts, is gone out through all the earth.

As man is compounded of a fleshly and spiritual substance, so God has endowed
the creatures with a spiritual, as well as fleshly usefulness; they have not
only a natural use in Alimental and Physical respects, but also a spiritual
use, as they bear the figures and similitudes of many sublime and heavenly
mysteries. Believe me (says contemplative Bernard) thou shall find more in the
Woods, than in a corner; Stones and Trees will teach thee what thou shall not
hear from learned Doctors. By a skilful and industrious improvement of the
creatures (says Mr. Baxter excellently) we might have a fuller taste of Christ
and Heaven, in every bit of Bread that we eat, and in every draught of Beer
that we drink, than most men have in the use of the Sacrament.

And as the Creatures teach divine and excellent things, so they teach them in
a perspicuous and taking manner: Duo illa nos maxim movent similitudo, and
exemplum, Cicero.
says the Orator; These two things, similitude and example, do especially move
us. Notions are more easily conveyed to the understanding, by being first
clothed in some apt Similitude, and so represented to the sense. And therefore
Jesus Christ the great Prophet, delighted much in teaching by Parables; and the
Prophets were much in this way also, Hos. 12. 10. I have used Similitudes by
the Ministry of the Prophets. Those that can retain little of a Sermon, yet
ordinarily retain an apt Similitude.

I confess it is an humbling consideration, That man, who at first was led by
the knowledge of God to the knowledge of the Creature, must now by the
Creatures learn to know God. That the Creatures (as one says) like Balaams
Ass, should teach their Master. But though this be the unhappiness of poor man
in his collapsed state, yet it is now his wisdom to improve such Helps; and
whilst others by the abuse of Creatures, are furthering their Perdition, to be
the spiritual improvement of them, promoting our own Salvation.

It Is an excellent Art to discourse with Birds, Beasts and Fishes, about
sublime and spiritual Subjects, and make them answer to our Questions; yet this
may be done, Job 12. 7, 8. Ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee, and
the Fowls of the Air, and they shall tell thee, or speak to the Earth, and it
shall teach thee, and the Fishes of the Sea shall declare unto thee. That is
(says neat and accurate Caryl) Caryl in loc.
the creatures teach us when we think of them; They teach us, though not
formally, yet vertually; the answer and resolve the question put to them,
though not explicitly to the ear, yet convincingly to the conscience. So then,
we ask the creatures, when we diligently consider them, when we search out the
perfections and virtues that God has put into or stamped upon them. To set our
mind thus upon the creature, is to discourse with the creature; the questions
which man ask of a beast, are only his own Meditations. Again, the creatures
teach us, when we in Meditation make out collections, and draw down a
demonstration of the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of God in making them, or of
the frailty of man in needing them; Such Conclusions and Inferences, are the
teachings of the creatures.

Common objects (says another) may be improved two ways; Mr. Manton.
viz. In an argumentative, and in a Representative way; by reasoning from them,
and by viewing the resemblance that is betwixt them and spiritual matters.

First, In Meditation argue thus, as in the

Secondly, in Meditation, make the resemblance ^re it can bring forth with any
increase. Our hopes are hidden, light is sown for the righteous; all our
comforts are buried under the clods, and after all this there must be long
waiting, we cannot sow and reap in a day; effects cannot follow, till all
necessary causes have first wrought. It Is not in the power of Husbandmen to
ripen fruits at pleasure, our times are in the hands of God, therefore it is
good to wait; a long-suffering patience will reap the desired fruit. Thus you
have some hints of this heavenly Art of improving the Creatures.

The Motives inducing me to this undertakement, was the Lords owning, with some
success my labors of a like nature, Navigation Spiritualized.
together with the desire and inclination (stirred up in me (I hope, by the
Spirit of the Lord) to devote my vacant hours to his service in this kind. I
considered, that if the Pharisees in a blind zeal to a faction, could compass
Sea and Land to Proselyte men to their party, though thereby they made them
sevenfold more the children of the Devil than before: How much more was I
obliged by true love to God, and zeal to the everlasting happiness of souls, to
use my utmost endeavors, both with Seamen and Husbandmen, to win them to
Christ, and there by make them more than seventy-seven-fold happier than
before? Not to mention other encouragements to this work, which I received from
the earnest desires of some Reverend and worthy Brethren inviting thereunto;
all which I hope the event will manifest to be a call from God to this work.

I confess I met with some discouragement in my first attempt, from my
unacquaintedness with rural affairs; and because I was to travel in a path (to
me) untrodden; but having once engaged in it, those discouragements were soon
overcome; and being now brought to what you here see, I offer to your hands
these first fruits of my spare hours.

I presume you will account it no disparagement, that I dedicate a Book of
Husbandry to Gentlemen of your quality. This is Spiritual Husbandry, which is
here taught you; and yet I must tell you, that great persons have accounted
that civil employment (which is must inferior to this) no disparagement to
them. The King himself is served by the field, Eccl. 5. 9. Or as Montanus
renders the Hebrew Text, Rex agro fit servus; The King himself is a servant to
the field. And of King Uzziah it is written, (2 Chronicles. 26. 10.) That he loved
Husbandry. And Amos 7. 1. we read of the Kings mowings. Yea, Pliny has
observed, That Corn was never so plentiful at Rome, as when the same men tilled
the Land that ruled the Commonwealth. Quasi gauderet terra laureato vomere,
scilicat and aratore triumphali; As though the earth it self rejoiced in the
Laurel Plowshare, and the triumphant Plowman.

What pleasure you will find in reading it, I know not; but to me it has been
a pleasant path, from first to last, who yet have been at far greater expense
of time and pains in compiling it, than you can be in reading it. The
Husbandmans work you know, is no easy work, and the Spiritualizing of it has
greater difficulties attending it; but yet the pleasure has abundantly
recompensed the pains. I have found Erasmus his Observation experimentally
true; Qui literis addicti summus, animi lassitudinem a studiis gravioribus
contractam; ab iisdem studiis, sed amaenioribus recreamus; Those that are
addicted to study, (says he) when they have wearied their spirits with study,
can recreate them again with study, by making a diversion from that which is
severe and knotty, to some more facile and pleasant Subject.

But to hear that God has used and honored these papers to the good of any
soul, will yield me the highest content and satisfaction imaginable.

May you but learn that Lesson, which is the general Scope and Design of this
Book, viz. How to walk with God from day to day, and make the several Objects
you behold, Scalae and alae, Wings and Ladders to mount your souls nearer to
Him, who is the Center of all blessed Spirits. How much will it comfort me, and
confirm my hope, that it was the Call of God indeed which out me upon these
endeavors!

O Sirs! What an excellent thing would it be for you, to make such holy
improvements of all these earthly Objects which daily incur your senses, and
cause them to proclaim and preach to you Divine and heavenly Mysteries, whilst
others make them groan, by abusing them to sin, and subjecting them to their
lusts. A man may be cast into such a condition, wherein he cannot enjoy the
blessing and benefit of a pious and powerful Ministry; but you cannot
(ordinarily) fall into such a condition wherein any thing (except a bad heart)
can deprive you of the benefits and comforts of those excellent Serm^ns, and
Divinity Lectures, which the creatures here offer to preach and read to you.

Content not your selves, I beseech you, with that natural sweetness the
creatures afford; for thereof the beasts are capable, as much, if not more,
than you; but use them to those spiritual ends you are here directed, and they
will yield you a sweetness for transcending that natural sweetness you ever
relished in them; and indeed, you never use the creatures as their Lord's, till
you come to see your Lord, in and by them. I confess the discoveries of God in
the Word are far more excellent, clear and powerful; He has magnified his Word
above all his Name. And therein are the unsearchable riches of Christ, or rich
discoveries of that grace that has no footsteps in nature, as the Apostles
expression signifies, Ephesians. 3. 8.

And if that which might be known of God by the Creatures, leave men without
excuse; as it is manifest, Romans 1. 20. How inexcusable then will those be, who
have received not only the teachings of the creature, but also the grace of the
Gospel in vain! How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation? They
that are careless in the day of grace, shall be speechless in the day of
judgment.

I am sensible of many defects in these Papers (as well as in my self;) they
have doubtless a taste of the distractions of the times wherein they were
written; nor was I willing to keep them so long underhand, as the accurateness
and exactness with which such a subject ought to be handled did require. Had I
designed my own credit, I should have observed that counsel -- Nonnumque
prematur in annum, (i. e.) To have kept in much longer under the file, before I
had exposed it to public view; but I rather inclined to Solomon's counsel,
Whatever thy hand finds out to do, do it with all thy might; for there is no
wisdom, nor knowledge, nor device in the grave, whither thou art going, Eccles.
9. 10.

I apprehended a necessity of some such means to be used, for the instruction
and conviction of country people; who either are not capable of understanding
truth in another Dialect, or at least, are less affected with it. The
Proposition in every Chapter consists of an Observation in Husbandry; Wherein,
if I have failed in using any improper expression, your candor will cover it,
and impute it to my unacquaintedness in rural affairs -- In magnis voluisse sat
est.

The Reddition, or Application, you will find (I hope) both pertinent and
close. The Reflections serious, and such (as I hope) your Consciences will
faithfully improve. I have shut up every Chapter with a Poem, an innocent Bait
to catch the Readers Soul.

That of Herbert is experimentally true.

A Verse may find him that a Sermon flies.
And turn delight into a Sacrifice.
I should never have been persuaded (especially in this scribbling Age, wherein
we may complain with the Poet.

Scribimus indocti, doctique poemata passim) To have set my dull fancy upon the
Rack to extort a Poem to entertain my Reader; for I cannot say with Ovid,
Sponte sua carmen, etc. but that I have been informed, that many Seamen induced
by the pleasure of a Verse, have taken much pains to learn the Poems in their
Compass by heart; and I hope both the Children at home, and the Servants in the
fields, will learn to exercise themselves this way also. O, how much better
will it be so to do, than to stuff their memories with obscene Ballads and
filthy Songs, which corrupt their minds, and dispose them to much wickedness,
by irritating their natural corruption! But these are purer flames, you will
find nothing here of such a tendency.

It Is guilt, not Poetry, to be like those
Whose wit in Verse, D. Dig.
is downright sin in Prose.
Whose studies are profaneness, as if then
They only were good Poets, when bad men.
I shall add no more, but to beg that God who instructs the Husbandman in his
civil Calling, to teach him wisdom spiritually to improve it; and particularly,
that you may reap a crop of much spiritual benefit, from that seed which is
here sown by the hand of the Lords unprofitable servant, and in him,

Your very affectionate Friend and Servant, JOHN FLAVELL.


TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
THere are three things wherein (as it has been said, long before my day) the
exercise of Godliness does chiefly consist: Prayer, Temptation, Meditation.
Meditation is the Subject of this following Manual. The Object of Meditation is
twofold. First, The Word: Secondly, The Works of God. The Works of God are
twofold. First, Internal. Secondly, External. The External Works of God are
twofold. First, Of Creation: Secondly, of Providence. The works of Providence
are likewise twofold. First, In things Civil, the Lord ordering and overruling
all the affairs and motion of single Persons, Families and Nations, in a
subserviency to his own most holy Ends, Designs and Purposes: Secondly, In
things Natural, the Lord instructing the Husbandman to discretion, and teaching
him how to Dress and Till the Earth, that it may give Seed to the Sower, and
Bread to the Eater; as also how to breed up and manage the Beasts of the field,
both greater and lesser Cattle, for the use and service of Man.

Meditation upon this lower part of the Works of God, and his wonderful
Providence about them, may raise our souls very high; and while we wisely
consider these natural things, we may grow more and more wise, in and for
Spirituals and Eternals.

The worthy and ingenious Author of the ensuing Discourse, has supplied us
with an excellent help, for the Spiritualizing of the providential Works of God
in natural things, by godly Meditation; we chiefly want the help of the holy
Spirit (without which all other helps and helpers are altogether insufficient)
to frame and wind up our hearts, for this, both profitable and delightful duty;
yet the help which the Lord is pleased to give us for our direction in it, by
the Ministry of man, is not only, not to be refused, but thankfully received
and improved; and all little enough to bring our minds to, or keep them at this
work: The best of Saints (on this side heaven) have (though they are not
earthly minded) much earth in their minds, which like a heavy clog at their
heels, or a weight at their hearts, presses them down when they would make an
Essay to mount upward in Meditation. We find it no easy matter to keep off
earthly thoughts, when we are most seriously engaged in heavenly work; how hard
is it then to get in, and be fixed upon heavenly thoughts while we are engaged
about earthly work; yea, are (for so is the Husbandman) working the very earth,
and raking in the bowels of it. It Is a great part of our holiness to be
spiritually minded, while we are conversing with God through Jesus Christ in
spiritual duties; but to be spiritually minded, and to mind spiritual things,
when we are conversing with the clods of the earth, and the furrows of the
field, when we have to do with Corn and Grass, with Trees and Plants, with
Sheep and Oxen, when we behold the birds and fowls of the Air, the worms, and
all that creep upon the ground, then (I say) to be spiritually minded, and
thence to have our thoughts ascending and soaring up to God, in heart-affecting
and quickening contemplations, witnesses an high degree of holiness, and of
gracious seize. To make a ladder out to earthly materials, for the
raising of our selves in spirit up to heaven, is the Art of Arts. Holy and
happy indeed are they! who (being taught of God) have learned this Art, and
live in the daily practice of it. Earthly objects usually hinder us in our way,
sometimes turn us quite out of our way to heaven. Many plow and sow, dig and
delve the earth, till their hearts become as earthly as the earth it self: many
deal about the beasts of the field, till themselves become even brutish. Is it
not then a blessed design which this Author aims and drives at, so to
spiritualize all sorts, or the whole compass of earthly Husbandry, that all
sorts of husbandmen may become spiritual and heavenly? It seems to me a taken
for good, that God has an intendment of some special good to the souls of such
as are by profession proper Husbandmen, Mr. Richard Steel, and this Author.
seeing he has lately put it into the hearts of two faithful Ministers (who
with all of that profession, are Husbandmen in a figure to undertake though in
a different way, this Subject, and to publish their labors in print, that they
may be of use, not only for the present age, but for posterity.

And that the Husbandman may be pleased, as well as profited, in perusing the
labors of this Author, he has, with singular aptness and acuteness, contrived
and contracted the sum or scope of every Chapter into an elegant Distich or
pair of Verses, placed at the head of it, and concluded it with a choice
melodious Poem suitable to, and dilating upon the whole matter of it. These the
Husbandman, who can but read, may quickly learn and sing for his solace,
instead of those vain Ballads and corrupting Rimes, which many of that rank are
apt to buy, and solace themselves withal, without any benefit, yea, much to
their hurt, making their hearts more corrupt, carnal and vain thereby.

Let me add one word more to the Reader. This Book of Husbandry Spiritualized,
is not calculated only for the common Husbandman; persons of any calling or
condition, may find the Author working out such searching Reflections and
strong Convictions, from almost every part and particular of the Husbandmans
work, as may prove, if faithfully improved, very useful to them; to some for
their awakening, to consider the state of their souls, whether in grace or in
nature; to others for their instruction, consolation and encouragement in the
ways of grace, as also of their proficiency and growth in those ways. That
the blessing of the Lord, and the breathings of his good Spirit may go out with
it, for all those gracious purposes, is the hearts desire and prayer of him,
who is,

Christian Reader, A sincere well-wisher to thy precious and immortal soul:
JOSEPH CARYL.

To his Reverend and learned Friend, Mr. John Flavell, on his Spiritual
Navigation and Husbandry.
LEtters of Mart of his dear Servant given,
By him that fists the ruffling winds of heaven:
To fight, and take all such as would not daign
T'acknowledge him the Seas great Sovereign.
He lanch'd his little Pinace, and began
T'attaque the vassals of Leviathan.
Auspicious gales swelling his winged Sails,
Searches all creeks, and every Bark he hails,
That scarce a Ship our Western Coasts afford
Which this brave Pinace has not laid aboard.
And what among our riddles some might count,
Was seen at once at Barwick, and the Mount.
Yea, in more Ports has in one luster been,
Than Hawkins, Drake, or Cavendish have seen,
And Prizes of more worth brought home again,
Than all the Plate-Fleets of the Kings of Spain.
But that which makes the wonder swell the more,
Those whom he took were Beggars all before.
But rests he here? No, no, our friend does know
It Is good to have two strings unto his Bow.
Our rare Amphibion loves not to be pent
Within the bounds, of one poor Element,
Besides the learned Author understood,
That of an idle hand there comes no good,
The Law to him no Pulpit does allow,
And now he cannot Preach, he means to Plow
Though Preaching were a crime, yet the foresaw
Against the Plowman there could be no Law.
Nor stays he on resolves, but out of hand
He yoaks his Teem, plows up the stubborn Land:
Sows it with precious Seed, harrows again
The tougher clods: takes pleasure in his pain.
Whilst Orph'us like, (which does his Art advance)
Rocks, Fields, and Woods after his pipe do dance.
Industrious spirit, to what a rich account
With thy blessed Lord, will all these labors mount?
That every nerve of thy blessed soul do ply,
To further heavens Spiritual Husbandry.
This kind of Tillage which thou teach us,
Was never dreamt of by Triptolemus.
Go Reader, turn the leaves; and me allow
To pray (whilst at thy work) God speed the Plow.
NICHOLAS WATTS.

In Authoris OPERA.
LEt Paracelsius and Van-Helmonts name,
No more ride triumph on the wings of fame.
Lo, here is a Chemist whose diviner skill
Does hallowed, from unhallowed things distill.
Spiritualizeth Sea affairs, again,
Makes the rude ground turn Tutor unto men.
Shows Mariners as by a Compass how
They may unto the Port of Glory row.
Teaches the Plowmen from their work to know
What duties unto God and man they ow.
Rare Artist! who when many tongues are mute
Make things that are inanimate, confute
The Ages sins; by preaching unto eyes,
Truths which in other modes their ears despise.
Prosper his pious Labors, Lord! howe'r
Do not forget to crown the labourer.
Sic raptim canit, DAN. CONDY.

To his Reverend and Invaluable Friend Mr. I. F. upon his Husbandry
Spiritualized.
INgenious Sir, what do I see? what now!
Are you come from the Pulpit to the Plow?
If so, then pardon me if I profess;
The Plow deserves to be sent to the Press.
It Is not long since you went to Sea they say,
Composed a Navigation Spiritualized.
Compass which directs the way
And steers the course to heaven, O blessed Art!
And bravely done, that you did that impart
To us, who take it kindly at your hand,
And bless the Lord that you are come to Lord.
To be an Husbandman wherein your skill
With admiration does your Readers fill.
One grain will yield increase, it is ten times ten,
When th'earth's manured by such Husbandmen.
We may expect rich harvests, and full crops,
When heavenly dew descends in such drops
Of spiritual rain, to water every field
That it full helps of grace to God may yield.
I must adore the wisdom of that God
That makes men wise, who even from a clod
Of earth can raise such heavenly Meditation
Unto a pitch of highest elevation.
Besides, I mark the goodness of the Lord
Performing unto us his faithful Word,
That all shall work for good unto the Saints
Which in some measure lessens our complaints.
For though our Pulpit mercies be grown less,
We have some gracious helps yet from the Press.
And herein all the world may plainly see,
That faithful servants will not idle be.
We have some bricks, although the straw be gone.
The Church at last shall be of polisht stone.
What ever men or Devils act, or say,
Sion at last will have a glorious day.
The wretched muck-worm that from morn to night
Labors as if 'twere for an heavenly weight,
And when he has got all he can, the most
Amounts to little more than a poor crust
To feed his tired carkase, if himself
Have by his carking got a little pelf
Leave it he must, to one he knows not whom,
And then must come to eternal doom;
And hear his poor neglected wretched soul
Tell him at last that he has played the fool.
But here he is taught how he before he dye
May lay up treasure for eternity.
Wherein he may be rich, yea, much much more
Than they that do possess whole mines of Oar.
When earth's more worth than heaven, and gold than grace
Then let the worldling run his brutish race,
But not before unless he do intend
To meet with soul-destruction in the end.
But I must leave him, and return again
To gratulate the author for his pain.
And here I cannot forbear to let my pen
To tell the world of all the Husbandmen
That er'e I met, he, he has hit the vein
To recompense the Laborers hard pain,
And taught him how to get the greatest gain.
Wherein he treads a path not trod before,
By which indeed his skill appears the more.
I might Encomiums give him great and true,
And yet come short of what is his due.
But I must not walk in forbidden ways
For thereby I am sure I should displease
His pious mind, who does and freely can
Give all the praise to the great Husbandman.
Who will his graces in his servants own,
But does expect himself to wear the Crown,
Farewell dear Sir, In take my leave, and now
Will say no more but this, God speed the plow.
EDWARD IEFFERY.

Reader this Emblem darkly represents
The Books chief scope, and principal contents,
Yet since these Birds, Beasts, Heart, Stone, String, and Tree
Do more imply than at first glance you see,
Our courteous Muse which cannot be unkind,
Intends more plainly to divulge her mind.
You see the Shadows, would you see the Things
She couches under them? then view her Wings.
A gracious heart here learns the art
Of soaring up on high
Upon the Wings of earthly things
That Underfoot do lie
Noe Bird that flies beneath the skies
But by this holy craft will lend a feather
To help it thither And give the heart a waft.
The string and stone shows every one
When faith mounts up and sings
How carnal sense can draw it hence
Pinnion and clip its wings
Birds beasts and trees teach mysteries
If sinners be not blocks
They Will quickly mend when God does send
Teachers in droves and Flocks


T Cross sculpsit



THE EPISTLE TO THE Intelligent Country READER.
THOU have here the fruit of some of my spare hours, which were thus employed,
when by a sad providence I was thrust from the society of many dear friends,
into a solitary country dwelling. I hope none will envy me these innocent
delights, which I made out of my lonely walks, whereby the Lord sweetened my
solitudes there. It Is like thou will find some passages here, that are
harmlesly pleasant; yet, I assure thee, I know of none that the most Cynical
Reader can censure as sinfully light and vain. I must acknowledge to the praise
of God, that I have found some of those (which possibly some of my Readers will
call the slightest and most trifling subjects of meditation) to be the
Ordinances for Instruction, Caution, and Consolation to my own soul: yea, such
a degree of comfort, I do profess, to have found by these things, as has much
endeared the country life to me, and made me much better to understand that
saying of Horace, than when I learned it at school, Novistine locum potiorem
rure beato? Hor. Sat 6.

Est ubi plus tapeant hyems? ubi gracior aura?
O rus, quando te ad spiciam? quandoque licebit
Nunc veterum libris, nunc somno, and inertibus hortis
Ducere solicitae jucunda oblivio vitae, (i. e.)
What life can with the Country life compare?
Where breaths the purest, and most healthful Air.
Where undisturbed, my studies I pursue;
And when I sleep, bid all my cares adieu.


And what I have found so beneficial to my self, I cannot but think may be so
to others. I assure thee Reader, I am not fond of any of these conceptions; and
yet I think I may modestly enough say, that the emptiest leaf in this book, may
serve for more and better uses than a mere diversion, when thou can find
leisure to peruse it. I know your troubles and cares are many, and though your
condition of lif has many innocent comforts, and outward mercies to sweeten
it, yet I believe most of you have found, that ancient saying of Anaxion
experimentally true, (...).

Some bitter troubles Country men do meet,
Wherewith the Lord does intermix their sweet.
The cares of your minds, are commonly no less than the pains of your Bodies;
it concerns you therefore, to sweeten what you cannot avoid; and I know no
better way for that than what is here directed to. O friends! what advantages
have you, for a spiritual life? Why may you not have two harvests every year?
one for your Souls, another for you bodies; if you could thus learn to husband
your Husbandry. Methinks spiritual Meditations do even put themselves upon you.
Husbandmen of old were generally presumed to be honest and good men; what else
means that saying of Menander, (...).

Profess thy self an Husbandman,
And wicked too! believed that can.
What you are, godly or wicked is not for me (that am a stranger to most of
you) to determine; but if you are not godly, its my desire and design to make
you so; and I could not think on a more probable means to accomplish this
honest design, than what I have here used. Methinks it should be a pleasure to
you, when you come weary out of the fields from plow, or any other labor, to
sit down in the evening, and read that chapter which concerns that particulars
business, and refresh your Souls even from that which has wearied your bodies.
Were your hearts but heavenly, and more time allowed for spiritual husbandry
your inward comforts, would be much more, and your out ward gains not a jot
less; for it the success of all your civil labors and employments depend upon
the pleasure and will of God; (as all that are not Atheists do acknowledge)
then certainly, your business can succeed never the worse, for your endeavors
to please him, upon whose pleasure it so entirely depends. I have many times
li^ted up my heart to heaven, whilst these papers were under my hand, for a
special blessing to accompany them, when they should be in yours. If the Lord
accomplish my desires by them upon your souls, you shall enjoy two heavens, one
here, and another hereafter. Would not that be sweet? The Historian tells us,
that Altitius Serarius was sowing corn in the field, when Q. Cincinnatus came
to him bare headed, with letters from the Senate, signifying that he was chosen
to the Dictatorship. I hope the Lord will so bless and succeed these labors,
that many of you will be called from holding the Plow on earth, to wear the
Crown of glory in heaven; which is the sincere desire

Of Your hearty Well-wisher, JOHN FLAVELL.

THE AUTHOR TO THE READER
COme you whose listening ears do even itch,
To hear the way prescribed of growing rich;
I Will show you how to make your Tenements
Ten thousand times more worth, and yet your rents
Not raised a farthing; here my Reader sees,
A way to make his dead and barren trees;
Yield precious fruit, his Sheep though never so bad
Bear golden fleeces, such never Jason had.
In every thing your gain shall more than double,
And all this had with far less toil and trouble.
Methinks, I hear thee say this cannot be,
I Will never believe it: well, read on and see.
Reader, had thou but senses exercised
To judge aright; were spiritual things but prized
At their just value, thou would quickly say
It Is so indeed; thou would not go thy way
Like one that is disappointed, and so fling
The book aside, I though 'twas some such thing.
Time was when Country Christians did afford,
More hours and pains about God's holy Word;
Witness the man who did most gladly pay
For some few leaves his whole Cart load of Hay.
And time shall be when heavenly truth that warms
The heart shall be preferred before your Farms.
When HOLINESS as sacred Scripture tells,
Shall be engraven on the Horses bells.
Lord hasten on those much desired times;
And to that purpose bless these rural Rimes.
THE PROEM.
1 COR. 3. 9.
Ye are God's Husbandry.
THE scope and design of the following Chapters, being the spiritual
improvement of Husbandry, it will be necessary by way of Proem, to acquaint the
Reader with the Foundation and general Rules of this Art in the Scriptures,
thereby to procure greater respect unto, and prevent prejudice against
composures of this kind.

To this end I shall entertain the Reader a little while upon what this
Scripture affords us, which will give a fair Introduction to the following
Discourse.

The Apostle's scope in the context being to check and repress the vain glory
and emulation of the Corinthians, who instead of thankfulness for, and an
humble and diligent improvement of the excellent blessings of the Ministry;
turned all into vain ostentation and emulation, one preferring Paul, and
another Apollos, in the maan time depriving themselves of the choice blessings
they might have received from them both.

To cure this growing mischief in the Churches, he checks their vanity, and
discovers the evil of such practices; by several Arguments, amongst which this
is one.

Ye are God's Husbandry, q. d.
Whar are ye, but a field, or plot of ground, to be manured and cultivated for
God? and what are Paul, Apollo, and Cephas, but so many workmen and laborers,
employed by God, the great Husbandman, to plant and water you all?

If then, you shall glory in some, and despise others, you take the ready way
to deprive your selves of the benefits and mercies you might receive from the
joint Ministry of them all. God has used me to plant you, and Apollo to water
you; you are obliged to bless him for the Ministry of both, and it will be your
sin if you despise either. If the workmen be discouraged in their labors,
it is the field that loses and suffers by it; so that the words are a
similitude, serving to illustrate the Relation.

1. Which the Churches have to God. 2. Which God's Ministers have to the
Churches.
Fideles vocantur dei, (...), quia a Deo per pastores, tanquam arvum
excoluntur. Rav.
Arable, or that plot of ground which God manures by the ministry of Pastors
and Teachers.

It serves to illustrate the relation that the Ministers of Christ sustain to
the Churches, which is like that of the Husbands

Or more briefly thus.

The Church is God's Husbandry, about which his Ministers are employed.

I shall not here observe my usual Method, (intending no more but a Preface to
the following Discourse) but only open the particulars wherein the resemblance
consists, and then draw some Corrolaries from the whole. The first I shall
dispatch in these twenty particulars following.

The Husbandman purchases his fields, 1. Prop.
and gives a valuable consideration for them, Ier. 32. 9, 10.

So has God purchased his Church with a full valuable price, Reddit.
even the precious blood of his own Son, Act. 20. 28. Feed the Church of God,
which he has purchased, or acquired with his own blood. O dear-bought
inheritance, how much does this bespeak its worth? or rather, the high esteem
God has of it, to pay down blood, and such blood for it; never was any
inheritance bought at such a rate: every particular elect person, and none but
such as are comprehanded in this purchase, the rest still remain in the devils
right. Sin made a forfeiture of all to justice, upon which Satan entered and
took possession, and as a strong man armed, still keeps it in them, Luke 11.
21. but upon payment of this sum to justice, the Elect (who only are intended
in this purchase) pass over into God's right and propriety, and now are neither
Satan's, Acts 26. 18. nor their own, 1 Cor. 6. 19. but the Lord's peculiar. 1
Pet. 2. 6. And to show how much they are his own, you have two possessives in
one verse, Cant. 8. 12. My vineyard, which is mine is before me. Mine, which is
mine.

Husbandmen divide and separate their own Lands from other men's, 2. Prop.
they have their Landmarks and boundaries, by which propriety is preserved,
Deuteronomy. 27. 17. Prove. 22. 28.

So are the people of God wonderfully separated, Reddit.
and distinguished from all the people of the earth, Psalm. 4. 3 The Lord has
set apart him that is godly for himself, and the Lord knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2. 19 It is a special act of grace, to be enclosed by God out of the waste
howling wilderness of the world, Deuteronomy. 33. 16. This God did intentionally, in
the decree before the world was; which decree is executed in their
sanctification and adoption.

Cornfieldsd are carefully fenced by the Husbandman with hedges and ditches, 3.
Prop.
to preserve their fruits from beasts that would otherwise overrun and destroy
them -- Non minus est virtus quam querere parta tueri. It is as good Husbandry
to keep what we have, as to acquire more than we had.

My well-beloved has a vineyard in a very fruitful hill and he fenced it,
Reddit.
Isa. 5. 1, 2. No inheritance is better defended and secured, than the Lords
inheritance, Psalm. 125. 2. As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the
Lord is round about his people. So careful is he for their safety, that he
creates upon every dwelling place of mount Sion, and upon her assemblies, a
cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night; for upon
all the glory shall be a defense, Isa. 4. 5. Not a particular Saint, but is
hedged about and enclosed in arms of power and love, Job 1. 10. Thou have made
a hedge about him. The Devil sain would, but by his own confession could not,
break over that hedge to touch Job, till Gods permission made a gap for him:
Yea, he not only makes an hedge, but a wall about them, and that of fire, Zech.
2. 5. Sets a guard of Angels to encamp round about them that fear him, Psalm.
34. 7. and will not trust them with a single guard of Angels neither, though
their power be great, and love to the Saints as great; but watches over them
himself also, Isa. 27. 2, 3. Sing ye unto her, a vineyard of red wine, I the
Lord do keep it, I will water it every moment; lest any hurt it, I will keep it
night and day.

Husbandmen carry out their Compost; to fertilize their arable ground, 4. Prop.
they dung it, dress it, and keep it in heart; and in these Western parts are
at great charges to bring lime, and salt water sand to quicken their thin and
cold soil.

Lord, Reddit
let it alone this year also, till I shall dig about it and dung it; and if it
bear fruit well, if not, cut it down, Luke 13. 8. O the rich dressing which God
bestows upon his Churches! they are costly fields indeed, dressed and fertilized,
not only by precious Ordinances and Providence, but also by the sweat, yea,
blood of the dispensers of them. Lo^kier in Co^o^ p. 5 52.
You Londoners (says Mr. Lockier) are trees watered choicely indeed; it is
storied of the Palm Tree, that at its first transplanting into Italy, 'twas
watered with wine, I cannot say (says he) that you have been so watered by me,
I dare not; but this I can humbly and truly say, that if our choicest strength
and spirits may be named instead of water, wine; or if the blessing which has
gone along with these waters, at any time, has turned them into wine, in
vigor upon your souls; then has God by me, watered your roots with wine.

The Husbandman builds his house, 5. Prop.
where he makes his purchase, dwells upon his Land, and frequently visits it;
he knows, that such as dwell far from their Lands; are not far from loss.

So does God; Reddit.
wherever he plants a Church there does he fix his habitation, intending
there to dwell, Psalm. 46. 5. God is in the midst of her, she shall not be
moved. Thus God came to dwell upon his own Fee and Inheritance, in Judea,
Levit. 26. 11, 12. And I will set my tabernacle amongst you, and will be your
God, and ye shall be my people. Which promise is again renewed to his Churches
of the New Testament, 2 Cor. 6. 16. And when the Churches shall be in their
greatest flourish, and purity, then shall there be the fullest and most
glorious manifestation of the divine presence among them, Rev. 21. 3. And I
heard a great voice out of heaven, saying, Behold the tabernacle of God is with
men, and he will dwell with them, and be their God. Hence the Assemblies are
called, the places of his feet -- And there they behold the beauty of the Lord,
Psalm. 27.

Husbandmen grudge not at the cost they are at for their tillage; 6. Prop.
but as they lay out vast sums upon it, so, they do it cheerfully.

And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, Reddit.
judge I pray you, betwixt me and my vineyard; what could have been done more
to my vineyard, that I have not done in it? And as he bestows upon his
heritage, the choicest mercies, so he does it with the greatest cheerfulness;
for the says, Ier. 32. 41. I will rejoice over them, to do them good; and I
will plant them in this Land assuredly, with my whole heart and with my whole
soul. It is not the giving out of mercy (says one) that grieveth God, but the
recoyling of his mercies back again upon him by the creatures ingratitude.

When Husbandmen have been at cost and pains about their Husbandry, 7. Prop.
they expect fruit from it, answerable to their pains and expenses about it:
Behold (says James) the Husbandman waits for the precious fruits of the
earth, Iam. 5. 7.

And he looked that it should bring forth fruit, Reddit.
, Isa. 5. 2. This heavenly Husbandman waits for the fruits of his fields also;
never did any Husbandman long for the desired Harvest, more than God does for
the fruits of holiness from his Saints; great are the expectations of God from
his people: And when the time of the fruit drew near, he sent his servants to
the Husbandmen, that they might receive the fruits of it.

Husbandman are much delighted, 8. Prop.
to see the success of their labors, it comforts them over all their hard
pains, and many weary days, to see a good increase.

Much more is God delighted, Reddit.
in beholding the flourishing graces of his people; it pleases him to see his
plants laden with fruit, and his valleys sing with corn, Cant. 6. 2. My beloved
is gone down into his garden, into his beds of spices, to feed in the gardens,
and to gather lillies. These beds of spices (say Expositors) are the particular
Churches, the companies of Believers; Pascitur Christus quando suorum virtutes
videt, lillia decerpit, quando optimum quemque ex hac vita traducit. Trap. in
loc.
he goes to feed in these gardens, like as men go to their gardens to make
merry, or to gather fruit, Cant. 4. 16. He eats his pleasant fruit, viz. His
peoples holy performances, sweeter to him than any Ambrosia; thus he feeds in
the gardens, and he gathers lillies when he translates good souls into his
Kingdom above; For the Lord takes pleasure in his Saints, and will beautify
the meek with salvation.

The Husbandman is exceedingly grieved, when he sees the hopes of a good crop
disappointed, 9. Prop.
and his fields prove barren, or blasted.

So the Lord expresses his grief for, Reddit.
and anger against his people, when they bring forth no fruits, or wild
fruits, worse than none, Hos. 9. 16. Ephraim is smitten, their root is dried
up. Christ was exceedingly displeased with the fig tree, and cursed it for its
barrenness; it grieves him to the heart when his servants return to him with
such complaints as these, We have labored in vain, we have spent our strength
for naught.

Husbandmen employ many laborers to work in their fields, 10. Prop.
there is need to many hands for such a multiplicity of business.

God has diversity of workmen also in the Churches, Reddit.
whom he sends forth to labor in his spiritual fields, Ephesians. 4. 12. He gave
some Apostles, some Prophets, and some Evangelists; and some Pastors and
Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints for the work of the Ministry. Amos
3. 7. I have sent [my servants] the Prophets. It Is usual with the Apostles to
place this title of servant among their honorary titles, though a profane
mouth once called it, Probosum artificium, a sordid artifice. Christ has
stamped a great deal of dignity upon his Ministers, in retaining them for the
nearest service to himself, 1 Cor. 4. 1. Let a man so account of us, as the
Ministers of Christ; they are workers together with God: the Husbandman works
in the field among his laborers, and the great God disdaineth not to work in
and with his poor servants in the work of the Ministry.

The work about which Husbandmen employ their servants in the field, 11. Prop.
is toylsom and spending. You see they come home at night as weary as they can
draw their legs after them.

But Gods workmen have a much harder task than they. Reddit.
Hence they are set forth in Scripture by the laborious ox, 1. Cor. 9. 9. Rev.
4. 7. Some derive the word (...).
Deacon from a word that signifies dust, to show the laboriousness of their
employment, laboring till even, choked with dust and sweat. It Is said of
Epaphroditus, Phil. 2. 13. That for the work of Christ he was sick, and nigh
unto death; not regarding his life to supply their lack of service. The
Apostles expression, Col. 1. ult. is very emphatical, (...).
Whereunto I also labor, striving according to his working; which works in
me mightily. The word signifies, such spending labor as puts a man into an
agony; and blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he comes small find so
doing.

The immediate end of the Husbandmans labor, 12. Prop.
and his servants labor, is for the improvement of his Land, to make it more
flourishing and fruitful.

The scope and end of the Ministry is for the Churches benefit and advantage.
They must not lord it over God's heritage, Reddit.
as if the Church were for them, and not they for the Church; nor serve
themselves of it, but be the Churches servants for Jesus sake, 2 Cor. 4. 6. the
power they have received being for edification, and not for destruction, 2 Cor.
10. 8. Christ has given them to the Churches, their gifts, their time, their
strength, and all their Ministerial talents are not their own, but the Churches
stock and treasure.

The workmen that labor in the fields, are accountable for their work to him
that employed them. 13. Prop.


Church Officers are also accountable to God for all the souls committed to
them. Reddit.
They are Stewards of the Mysteries of God, 1. Cor. 4. 1. and Stewards are
accountable. We watch for your souls (says the Apostle) as they that must give
an account, Heb. 13. 7. If these servants be unfaithful in their work and
trust, the blood of souls shall be required at their hands, Ezekiel. 3. 17, 18.
which are fulmina, non verba (says Erasmus) thunderbolts, rather than words.
The guilt of blood is the greatest guilt; and of all blood, the blood of souls.

Those that spend their time and strength all their days, in manuring, 14.
Prop.
and plowing the fields, do maintain themselves and their families by their
labors; their hands are sufficient for themselves and theirs.

Even so has God ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, Reddit.
should live of the Gospel, 1. Cor. 9. 14. The workman is worthy of his meat,
Mat. 10. 10. It Is is sad thing, if those who break the bread of life to souls,
should be suffered to want bread themselves. God would not have the mouth of
the ox muzled that treads out the corn, but have liberty to eat, as well as
work: Yet, if any pretender to the Ministry be like the Heifer that loves to
tread out the corn, (i. e.) cares to do no work, but such as brings in present
pay* he therein sufficiently discovers his beast-like disposition. Ministers
must be faithful in their Masters work, and if men do not, God will reward
them. For, He is not unrighteous to forget their work, and labor of love, Heb.
6. 10.

It is a great trouble to Husbandmen in a busy time, 15. Prop.
to be put off from their labors by stormy weather, which drives them out of
the fields, and makes them let all lie, till it clear up again; yet,
meanwhile, they are not idle, but employ themselves in home work.

Even so in God's Husbandry, Reddit.
it is an unspeakable affliction to God's workmen to be rendered useless and
unserviceable to the Churches, by those storms of trouble, which drive them
from their public Ministerial work. With what a heavy heart did Paul go off
from his work at Ephesus, Act. 20. It spends a Minister to preach, but more to
be silent. It Is a loud speaking judgment, when God shall say to them as to
Ezekiel, Son of man, I will make thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth,
and thou shall be dumb, Ezekiel. 3. 26. Such silencing providence, speaking
thundering language to gracious hearts, yet even then, the keepers of the
vineyard have a private vineyard of their own to look after, they have much
homework when no out-work.

There is a vast difference betwixt those fields which have been well
husbanded, 16. Prop.
and dressed by a skilful and diligent Husbandman; and those that have been long
out of husbandry. How fragrant is the one! how dry and barren the other? When
you pass by a field well dressed and fenced, every thing prosperous and in
exquisite order, you may know without farther enquiry, that a good Husband
lives there.

Thus stands the case betwixt those places which God has blessed with a faithful
painful Ministry, Reddit.
and such as have none, or worse than none: For as the Husbandmans cost and
pains appears in the verdant, and fragrant hew of his fields; so a Ministers
pains and diligence is (ordinarily) seen in the heavenly lives, and flourishing
graces of the people. The Churches of Corinth and Thessalonica, where Paul and
other holy instruments spent much of their time and pains became famous and
flourishing Churches, 2 Cor. 9. 2. A special blessing comes along with a godly
Minister, to the place where special providence assigns him. Such places like
Gideon's fleece, have the dew of heaven lying on them, whiles others round
about are dry and barren.

The Husbandman is not discouraged, 17. Prop.
though the seed lie long under the clods, he knows it will spring up at last,
and reward him, or those that come after him, for their pains and patience in
waiting for it.

Ministers should not be presently discouraged in their work, Reddit.
because they see but little or no appearance, of all the seed they have sown
among the people. The servant of the Lord must be patient toward all, waiting
if at any time God will give them repentance, 2 Timothy 24. 25. And if it never
spring up in his time, it may after his death; and if so, he shall not fail of
his reward, Job. 4. 36, 37. And he that reapeth, receives wages, and gathers
fruit unto life eternal, that both he that someth, and he that reapeth may
rejoice together; and herein is that saying true, one sows, and another
reapeth. Though Ministers die, yet their words live; yea, their words take hold
of men when they are in the dust, Zech. 1. 6.

Husbandmen find low ground and valleys, 18. Prop.
most fertile. Hills, how loftily soever, they overtop the lower grounds, yet
answer not the Husbandmans pains, as the valleys do. These are best watered and
secured from the scorching heat of the Sun.

Experience shows us, that the humblest Saints are most fruitful under the
Gospel. Reddit.
These are they that receive with meekness* the ingraffed word, Iam. 1. 21.
whose influences abide in them, as the rain does in the low valleys. Happy is
that Minister, whose lot falls in such a pleasant valley. Blessed are they that
sow beside all such waters, that send forth thither the feet of the ox and the
ass, Isa. 32. 20. Among these valleys run the pleasant springs, and purling
brooks, which fertilize the neighboring ground. Heavenly Ordinances there,
leave fruitful influences.

The first Crop is usually the best; and the longer the Husbandman tills his
ground, 19. Prop.
the less it produces. After a few years its vigor and strength if spent.

The first entertainment of the Gospel is commonly the best; Reddit.
and what good is done by the Ministry, is often done at its first entrance.
New things are pretty, and very taking. John at first was to the Jews a burning
and a shining light, and they were willing [for a season] to rejoice in his
light, Ioh. 5. 35. Paul. was highly valued among the Galatians at first: such
was their zeal, that they could have plucked out their eyes and have given them
to him; but how quickly did this full tide ebb again? for he complains, Gal. 4.
15. Where then is the blessedness ye spoke of.

Lastly, When fields prove barren, and will not quit the Husbandmans cost, 20.
Prop.
nor answer the seed he sows in them, he plucks up the hedges, and lays it
waste.

So when Churches grow formal and fruitless, Reddit.
the Lord removes his Gospel-presence from them; plucks up the hedge of his
protection from about them, and lays them open, as waste ground, to be
overrun by their enemies, Ier. 7. 12. Go to Shiloh, and see what I did unto
it. What is become of those once famous and flourishing Churches of Asia? Are
they not laid waste, and trodden down by infidels? And now go to (says the
great Husbandman) I will tell you what I will do to my vineyard; I will pull up
the hedge thereof, and it shall be laid waste, Isa. 5. 5.

Thus you see the Allegory opened in its particulars: from the whole, I shall
present you with these five ensuing Corrolaries.

The First Corrolary.
How great then are the dignities and privileges of the Churches of Jesus
Christ, whom he has appropriated to himself, above all the people of the
earth, to be his peculiar inheritance? The rest of the world is a waste
wilderness; all other places, how pleasant soever, in respect of their natural
amaenity and delights, are truly enough called, the dark places of the earth;
dismal, solitary cells, where Ziim and Iim, Bitterns, Cormorants, and every
doleful creature dwells. But the Church is the Paradise of the earth, a garden
enclosed, Cant. 4. 12. in whose hedges the Gospel-birds chirp and sing
melodiously, Cant. 2. 12. Its beds, are beds of spices, Cantt. 6. 2. and
betwixt its pleasant banks, a Crystal River of living water runs, Rev. 22. 1.
The streams whereof make glad the City of god; in the midst thereof the Lord
himself delights to walk. O Sion! with what pleasures do thou abound! If
Bernard were so ravished with the delights of his Monastery, because of its
green banks, and shady bowers, and herbs, and trees, and various objects to
feed his eyes, and fragrant smells, and sweet and various tunes of birds,
together with the opportunities of devout contemplation, that he cried out
admiringly, Lord! what delights do thou provide, even for the poor! How much
more should we be ravished with Sion's glory? for beautiful for situation, is
mount Zion. Of whom it may much more truly be said, Speeds Chron.
what a Chronicler of our own once said of England, that it is the fortunate
Island, the Paradise of Pleasure, the Garden of God, whose valleys are like
Eden, whose hills are as Lebanon, whose springs are as Pisgah, whose Rivers are
as Jordan, whose wall is the Ocean, and whose defense is the Lord Jehovah.
Happy art thou, O Israel, who is like unto thee? Who can count the privileges
wherewith Christ has invested his Churches? O let it never seem a light thing
in our eyes, that we grow within his blessed enclosure. How sweet a promise is
that, Exodus 19. 5. Ye shall be to me a peculiar treasure above all people; for
all the earth is mine.

The Second Corrolary.
Hence it follows, That spiritual barrenness is a great reproach and shame to
Christians. Shall God's Husbandry, which is so planted, watered, fenced, filled
with favors and mercies, be like the barren heath in the desert? Surely it
should be said of every soul that grows here, as the Historian says of Spain,
that there is nihil infructuosum, nihil sterile; nothing barren or unfruitful
in it. God's vineyard is planted in a very fruitful hill, Isa. 5. 1. And surely
they that are planted in the house of the Lord, should flourish in the Court of
our God; they should bring forth fruit, even in old age, to show that God is
upright, Psalm. 92. 13, 14. They are created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
which God has ordained they should walk in, Ephesians. 2. 10. They are married unto
Christ, that they might bring forth fruit to God, Romans 7. 4. An empty branch is
a dishonor to the root that bears it, a barren field to the Husbandman that
owns it; God cannot endure that in his fields, which he suffers in the
wilderness.

The third Corrolary.
If the Church be God's Husbandry, then there is such a special gracious
presence of the Lord in his Churches, as is not to be found in all the world
beside. Where may you expect to find the Husbandman, but in his own fields?
there lies his business, and there he delights to be. And where may we expect
to find God, but in the Assemblies of his Saints? He walks amongst the golden
Candlesticks, Rev. 2. 1. I. will walk among you (says he) and be your God, 2
Cor. 6. 16. Upon this account the Church is called Jehovah Shamah; the Lord is
there, Ezekiel. 48. ult. You may see the footsteps of God in the creatures; but
the face of God is only to be seen in his Ordinances. Hence Psalm. 27. 4. David
longed for the Temple, that he might see the beauty of the Lord. Now, what is
beauty, but a symetry and proportion of parts? In the works of Creation, you
see one attribute manifested in one thing, and another, in another thing; but
in the Sanctuary you may see beauty, even in all the attributes of God
displayed there: And indeed, we find in Scripture such astonishing expressions
about the visio^s of God in his Church, that in reading them, a man can see
little difference betwixt it and heaven; for as the Church is called heaven,
Mat. 25. 1. so its description is like that of heaven, Heb. 12. 22, 23. You are
come to the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels, etc.
And Rev. 4. 22. They shall see his face, and his name shall be written in their
foreheads. And v. 24. The Saints are represented, standing nearer to the throne
of God, than the Angels themselves. Hence also Ordinances are called Galleries,
in which both Saints and Angels walk, beholding the glory of him that sits upon
the throne, Zech. 3. 7. If you will keep my ways, I will give you Galleries to
walk in, among them* that stand by.

The Fourth Corrolary.
If the Church be God's Husbandry, then those that be employed in Ministerial
work, ought to be men of great judgment and experience in soul affairs; for
these are the laborers whom God, the mystical Husbandman imploys and entrusts
about his spiritual Husbandry. Should Husbandmen employ ignorant persons, that
neither understand the rules, nor proper seasons of Husbandry; how much would
such workmen damnifie and prejudice him? he will not employ such to weed his
fields, as know not wheat from tares; or to prune his trees, that think
Midsummer as fit for that work as December; much less will God. He qualifies
all that he sends, with wisdom for their work. His workmen approve themselves
workmen indeed, such as need not be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of
truth, 2 Timothy 2. 15. As Bezaleel was furnished with wisdom, before he was
employed in Tabernaclework, so Christ instructs his servants, with skill and
insight, before they are employed in Ministerial-work. He gives them a mouth
and wisdom, Luke 21. 15. indues them with power from on high: as Christ was
filled abundantly with the Spirit for his work, so according to proportion, are
those that are sent by him, Ioh. 20. 21, 22. As my Father has sent me, so send
I you. And as for those that run before they are sent, and understand not the
Mysteries of the Gospel, I shall say no more of them, but this; Father, forgive
them, for they know not what they do.

The Fifth Corrolary.
To conclude, If the Church be God's Husbandry, that is, if Husbandry have so
many resemblances of Gods works about the Church in it, then how inexcusable is
the ignorance of Husbandmen, in the things of God, who besides the word of the
Gospel, have the teachings of the Creatures; and can hardly turn their hands to
any part of their work, but the Spirit hints one spiritual use or other from it
to their souls? How do the Scriptures abound with Parables, and lively
similitudes taken from Husbandry? from the field, the seed, the plow, the barn,
from threshing and winnowing; similitudes also from planting, graffing, and
pruning of trees; and not a few from the ordering of Cattle. So that, to what
business soever you turn your hands, in any part of your calling, still God
meets you, with one heavenly instruction or other. But alas! How few are able
to improve their civil employments to such excellent ends? These things are but
briefly hinted in the Scriptures, and those hints scattered up and down, that
they know not where to find, them; and if they could, yet would it be difficult
so to methodize them, as it is necessary they should be, in order to their due
improvement, by Meditation.

And therefore I judged it necessary to collect and prepare them for your use;
and in this manner to present them to you, as you find them in the following
Chapters. Read, consider, and apply; and the Lord make you good Husbands for
your own souls.

THE FIRST PART OF HUSBANDRY Spiritualized.
CHAP. I.
In the laborious Husbandman you see, Upon the industry of the Husbandman.

What all true Christians are, or ought to be.
OBSERVATION.
The employment of the Hsbandman is by all acknowledged, to be very laborious;
there is a multiplicity of business incumbent on him. The end of one work, is
but the beginning of another. Every season of the year brings its proper work
with it: Sometimes you find him in his Fields, dressing, plowing, sowing,
harrowing, weeding, or reaping; and sometimes in his Barn, threshing, or
winnowing; sometimes in his Orchard, planting, graffing, or pruning his trees,
and sometimes among his Cattle: so that he has no time to be idle. And as he
has a multiplicity of business, so every part of it is full of toil, and
spending labor: He eats not the bread of idleness, but earns it before he eats
it; and as it were, dips it in his own sweat, whereby it becomes the sweeter to
him. Though sin brought in the Husbandmans sweat, Genesis 3. 19. yet now not to
sweat would increase his sin, Ezekiel. 16. 49.

APPLICATION.
BEhold here the life of a serious Christian, shadowed forth to the life. As
the life of a Husbandman, so the life of a Christian is no idle, or easy life.
They that take up Religion for ostentation, and not for an occupation; and
those that place the business of it in notions, and idle speculations, in
forms, gestures, and external observances, may think, and call it so: but such
as devote themselves unto it, and make Religion their business, will find it no
easy work to exercise themselves to godliness. Many there are, that affect the
reputation and sweet of it, who cannot endure the labor, and sweat of it. If
men might be indulged to divide their hearts betwixt God and the World, or to
cull out the cheap and easy duties of it, and neglect the more difficult and
costly ones, it were an easy thing to be a Christian: but surely to have
respect to all God's commandments, to live the life, as well as speak, the
language of a Christian: to be holy in all manner of conversation, is not so
easy. This will be evident, by comparing the life of a Christian, with the
life of a Husbandman, in these five particulars: Wherein it* will appear that
the work of a Christian, is by much the hardest work of the two.

Psalm. 119. 96. The commandment is exceeding broad; of a vast extent and
latitude, comprizing not only a multitude of external acts, and duties, and
guiding the Offices of the outward man about them, but also taking in every
thought and motion of the inner man within its compass.

You find in the Word, a world of work cut out for Christians; there is hearing
work, praying work, reading, meditating, and self-examining work; it puts him
also upon a constant watch over all the corruptions of his heart. Oh, what a
world of work has a Christian about them? For of them he may say, as the
Historian does of Hannibal, They are never quiet, whether conquering, or
conquered. How many weak languishing graces has he to recover, improve, and
strengthen? There is a weak faith, a languishing love, dull and faint desires
to be quickened and invigorated. And when all this is done, what a multitude of
work do his several relations exact from him? he has a world of business
incumbent on him, as a parent, child, husband, wife, master, servant, or
friend; yea, not only to friends, but enemies. And beside all this, how many
difficult things are there to be born and suffered for Christ? and yet will not
God allow his people in the neglect of any one of them: neither can he be a
Christian that has not respect to every command, and is not holy, in all
manner of conversation, Psalm. 119. 6. 2 Pet. 3. 11. every one of these duties,
like the several spokes in a wheel come to bear in the whole round of a
Christians conversation: so that he has more work upon his hands than the
Husbandman.

The Husbandman's work is confessed to be Spending Augustus said of the young
Roman, is verified in the true Christian, Quicquid vult valde vult. Whatsoever
he does in Religion, he does to purpose. Under the Law, God rejected the Snail
and the Ass, Levit. 11. 30. Exodus 13. 13. And under the Gospel, he allows no
sluggish lazy Professor, 1 Timothy 5. 11, 13. Sleepy duties are utterly unsuitable
to the living God; he will have the very spirits distilled and offered up to
him in every duty, Ioh. 4. 24. he bestows upon his people the very substance
and kernel of mercies, and will not accept from them the shells and shadows of
duties; not the skin, but the inwards, and the fat that covers the inwards,
was required under the Law, Exodus 29. 30. And every sacrifice under the Gospel,
must be sacrificium medullatum, a sacrifice full of marrow; observe the manner
in which their work is to be performed.

Romans 12. 11. in serving God, servent in spirit, or hissing hot.

2 Pet. 1. 10. in securing salvation, diligent; or doing it thoroughly, and
enough.

1 Timothy 4. 7. in godliness, exercising, or stripping themselves, as for a race.

Luke 13. 24. in the pursuit of happiness, striving, even to an agony.

Act. 26. 7. in prayer, serving God instantly; or in a stretched-out manner;
yea, pouring out their hearts before him, Psalm. 62. 8 as if the body were left
like a dead corpse upon the knees, whilst the spirit is departed from it, and
ascended to God. This is the manner of his work: judge then how much harder
this work is, than to spend the sweat of the brow in manual labor.

Zech. 3. 1. when he would do good, evil (the evil of his own heart and nature)
is present with him.

but requires him to be always abounding in the work of the Lord, 1 Cor. 15.
58. When one duty is done, another calls for him; the Lord's day is a day of
rest to the Husbandman; but no day in the week so laborious to the Christian. O
it is a spending day to him. When he has gathered in the crop of one duty; he
is not to sit down satisfied therewith, or say as that rich worldling did, Luke
12. 19. Soul take thine ease, thou have goods laid up for many years, but must
to plow again, and count it well if the Vintage reach to the seed-time, Lev.
26. 5. I mean, if the strength, influence, and comforts of one duty, hold out
to another duty; and that it may be so, and there be no room left for idleness,
God has appointed ejaculatory prayer, to fill up the intervals, betwixt stated
and the more solemn duties. These are to keep in the fire, which kindled the
morning, sacrifice, to kindle the evening sacrifice. When can the Christian sit
down and say, now all my work is ended, I have nothing to do, without doors, or
within?

Lastly, There is a time when the labor of the Husbandman is ended; old age
and weakness takes him off from all employment; they can only look upon their
laborers, but cannot do a stroke of work themselves; they can tell you what
they did in their younger years, but now (say they) we must leave it to younger
people; we cannot be young always: but the Christian is never super-annuated as
to the work of Religion; yea, the longer he lives, the more his Master expects
from him. When he is full of days, God expects he should be full of fruits,
Psalm. 9. 14. They shall bring forth fruit in old age, they shall be fat and
flourishing.

REFLECTIONS.
HOw hard have I labored for the meat that perishes? The worldlings
Reflection.
and labored as in the very fire, and yet is the Christians work harder than
mine? Surely then, I never yet understood the work of Christianity. Alas! my
sleepy prayers, and formal duties, even all that ever I performed in my life,
never cost me that pains, that one hour at plow has done. I have either wholly
neglected, or at best, so lazily performed religious duties, that I may truly
say, I offer to God what cost me nothing. Woe is me poor wretch! How is the
judgment of Corah spiritually executed upon me? The earth opened her mouth, and
swallowed up his body, but it has opened its mouth and swallowed up my heart,
my time, and all my affections. How far am I from the Kingdom of God!

The Formalists Reflection.
Will an empty (though splendid) profession save me? How many brave Ships have
perished in the storms, notwithstanding their fine names, the Prosperous, the
Success, the Happy return? A fine name could not protect them from the rocks,
nor will it save me from hell. I have done by Religion, as I should have done
by the world; prayed, as if I prayed not; and heard as if I heard not. I have
given to God but the shadow of duty, and can never expect from him a real
reward.

The Reflection of a slothful Christian.
though upright in the main, yet how little zeal and activity do thou express
in thy duties? Awake love and zeal, feast thou not the toil and pains men take
for the world? how do they prevent the dawning of the day? and labor as in the
very fire till night; and all this for a trifle! should not every drop of sweat
which I see trickle from their brows, fetch (as it were) a drop of blood from
my heart? who am thus convinced and reproved of shameful laziness, by their
indefatigable diligence. Do they pant after the dust of the earth? Amos 2. 7.
and shall not I pant after God? Psalm. 42. 1. Ah, my soul! It was not wont to be
so with thee, in the days of my first profession. Should I have had no more
communion with God in duties then, it would have broken my heart: I should have
been weary of my life. Is this a time for one to stand idle, who stands at the
door of eternity? What, now slack-handed, when so near to my everlasting rest!
Romans 13. 11. or have thou found the work of God so unpleasant to thee? Prove. 3.
17. or the trade of godliness so unprofitable? Psalm. 19. 11. Or know thou
not, that millions now in hell perished for want of serious diligence in
Religion? Luke 13. 34. or does my diligence for God, answer to that which
Christ has done and suffered, to purchase my happiness? or to the preparations
he has made in heaven for me? or do thou forget that thy Masters eye is
always upon thee, whilst thou art lazing and loytering? or would the damned
live at this rate, as I do, if their day of grace might be recalled? for shame
(my soul) for shame! rouse up thy self, and fall to thy work, with a diligence
answerable to the weight thereof: for it is no vain work concerning thee, it is
thy life.

The Poem.
Religion WHEN advanced in power, Ephesians. 5. 15.

Will make you HUSBAND every hour.
'Twill make MEN strive with all their might,
And therein FIND a sweet delight. Luke 13. 24.

If there were NAUGHT besides that pay, Psalm. 119. 47.

Christ gives TO cheer us in our way; Psalm. 19. 9.

Should we not DO the best we can?
For there is NO such reward from man. Psalm. 73. 25.

Shall others WORK, Amos 2. 7.
and not regard
Their strength; TO get a small reward? Eccles. 6. 7.

Whilst we TURN slugs, and loyter thus?
Oh that THEIR zeal might quicken us! Psalm. 4. 6.

Why are our HANDS, and feet so slow, Romans 12. 11.

When we UNTO our business go?
How can we THEN Christ's pay expect, Gal. 6. 16.

And yet the CHRISTIANS work reject?
If this, Heb. 12. 24.
then ALSO that embrace
Them both: IF not, we both disgrace.
Some if THEY could these two divide, Mat. 20. 21, 22.

It Would PLEASE them well, with Christ to side,
But if they MAY not, Mat. 19. 22.
then it were
As good CEASE pleading, they will not hear.
Rouse up FROM sloth, Gal. 6. 9.
(my soul) betake
Thee to thy WORK, no cavils make
O strive, AND try! Saints say that even
The pain they TAKE, Luke 13. 24.
has much of heaven. Psalm. 19. 10.

But yet THEIR best wine's kept till last, Ioh. 20. 10.

Their rest, and EASE comes all so fast. Heb. 4. ult.

CHAP. II.
The hardest laborers, are the thriving men.
If you will have thriving souls, be active then.
OBSERVATION.
INdustry and diligence is the way to thrive and grow rich in the world. Upon
the thriftiness of the Husbandman.
The earth must be manured, or its increase is in vain expected; Qui fugit
molam, fugit farinam; he that refuses the mill, refuses the meal, (says the
Proverb) the diligent soul shall be made fat. Solomon has two proverbs
concerning thriftiness and increase in the world. In Prove. 10. 4. he says, The
hand of the diligent makes rich. And v. 22. he says, The blessing of the Lord
makes rich. These are not contradictory, but confirmatory each of other; one
speaks of the principal, the other of the instrumental cause. Diligence without
Gods blessing will not do it; and that blessing cannot be expected without
diligence; therefore Husbandmen ply their business with unwearied pains, they
do even lodge in the midst of their labors, as that good Husband Boaz did,
Ruth 2. 3. they are parsimonious of their time, but prodigal of their sweat and
strength, because they find this to be the thriving way.

APPLICATION.
AS nature opens her treasures to none but the diligent, so neither does grace.
He that will be rich, must be a painful Christian; and whosoever will closly
ply the trade of godliness, shall comfortably and quickly find, That in keeping
Gods commands there is great reward, Psalm. 19. 11. God is a bountiful rewarder
of such as diligently seek him, Heb. 11. 6. They must not indeed work for
wages, Non mercurii sed operarii.
nor yet will God suffer their work to go unrewarded; yea, it sufficiently
rewards it self, 1 Timothy 6. 6. and its reward is twofold, (1) present, and in
part; (2) future and in full, Mark 10. 29, 30. Now in this time an
hundredfold, even from suffering, which seems the most unprofitable part of
the work, and in the world to come, life everlasting. If you ask what present
advantage Christians have by their diligence? I answer, as much and more than
the Husbandman has from all his toyls and labors. Let us compare the
particulars, and see what the Husbandman gets, that the Christian gets not
also. Compare your gains, and you will quickly see the odds.

You get credit and reputation by your diligence; it is a vessels of honor, as
they are fitted for the Masters use, 2 Timothy 2. 21. Wherein consists the honor
of Angels, but in this; that they are ministering spirits, serviceable
creatures? And all the Apostles gloried in the title of servants. The lowest
office in which a man can serve God, even that of a Nethinim, or doorkeeper,
which was the lowest order or rank of officers in the house of God, Ezekiel. 44.
10, 11. is yet preferred by David before the service of the greatest Prince on
earth, Psalm. 84. 10. It Is no small honor to be active for God.

You have this benefit by your labor, that thereby you God is with them, while
they are with him, 2 Chronicles. 15. 2. Communion with God in the way of duty, is a
great preservative against temptations. The Schoolmen put the question, how
the Angels and glorified Saints become impeccant? and resolve it thus: That
they are secured from sin, by the beatifical vision; and sure-I am, that the
visions of God, not only in glory, but now also in duty, are mavelous
defenses against sin; and they that are most active for God, have the fullest
and clearest visions of God, Ioh. 14. 21.

You have this benefit by your labor, that it tends much The way of the Lord
is strength to the upright, Prove. 10. 29. As those that follow their daily
labors in the field, have much more health than Citizens that live idly, or
Scholars that live a sedentary life. So the active Christian enjoys more
spiritual health, and is troubled with fewer complaints than others.

Bailiffs trouble not such men's doors; they usually have the fore-foot of their
neighbors. And by activity and diligence for God, souls are kept from
backsliding, and running back in their graces and comforts. Remissions and
intermissions in our duties, are the first steps and degrees by which a soul
declines and wastes, as to his spiritual estate.

Eccl. 5. 12. Rest is sweet to a laboring man, whether he eat little or much.
But the diligent life of a Christian makes the clods of the valley, his grave
sweet unto him, 2 Cor. 1. 12. 2 King. 20. 3. Remember now, O Lord, how I have
walked before thee, etc. Think Christian, how sweet it will be for thee when
thou come to dye; to say then as thy Redeemer did, when near his death, Ioh.
17. 4, 5. I have finished the work thou gave me to do; and now, O Father,
glorify me with thine own self.

Prove. 3. 14.

So that compare these laborers as to all their advantages, and you shall see,
that there is no trade like that which the diligent Christian drives.

REFLECTIONS.
Reflections of the slothful soul.
which is attended with so many spiritual wants! and can I wonder at it, when I
refuse the painful way of duty, in which the precious fruits of Godliness, are
only to be found? If these fruits lay upon the surface of duty, or could be had
with wishes, I should not want them; but to dig deep and take pains I cannot.
My desires, like those of the sloathful man, kill me, because my hands refuse
to labor, Pro. 21. 25. If every duty were to be rewarded presently with gold,
would I not have been more assiduous in them, than I have been? And yet I know
that a heart full of the grace and comfort of the holy Ghost, is better than a
house full of gold and silver. O what a composition of stupidity and sloth am
I! I have been all for the short cut to comfort, when constant experience
teaches, that the farther way about, by painful duty, is the nearest way to
it. What pains do Husbandmen take? what perils do Seamen run, for a little
gain? O sluggi^h heart! will thou do nothing for eternal treasures?

Secondly, if there be such great rewards attending diligence Isa. 12. 3. there
is a golden vein in the mount of duty, but it lies deep; and because I meet not
with it as soon as I expect, my lazy heart throws by the shovel, and cries, Dig
I cannot.

Thirdly, if this be indeed the rich and thriving trade, The worldlings
Reflection.
why

Is this the end of thy wonderful creation? Does God whirl about the heavens in
endless revolutions, to beget time for this? or does he not rather expect that
the weightiest work should engross thy greatest strength, and choicest hours?
O, that I could once consider, what a good Master Christians serve, who will
not only abundantly reward them at night; but brings them their food into the
field to encourage them in their labor! What pity is it, that so good a Master
should be so badly served as he has been by me! Hark, how he pleads to gain
my heart.

The POEM, by way of Dialogue betwixt Christ and the world.
CHRIST. O Why so free of sweat and time?
For what e're long will not be thine. John 6. 27.

Or if it might, 1 Cor. 7. 31.
thou sell'st to loss,
A precious soul for lasting dross. Mat. 16. 26.

Those weary hands, and toyling brains,
Might be employed for better gains.
Would thou but work as hard for me, 1 Timothy 6. 6.

As for the world, Mark 4. 19.
which cozens thee?
Thy gains should be a thousand fold:
For my revenues more then gold. Prove. 8. 19.


WORLD. Soul, I have always found thee willing;
Rather by me to earn a shilling;
Than trust uncertain things which lie,
Beyond thee in eternity.
Shall things unseen now tempt thee? tush,
A bird in hand's worth two in the bush:
I pay thy wages down in hand,
This thou can feel, taste, understand.
O let not such a vain pretense,
Prevail against thy very sense.

CHRIST Thus beasts are led, Job 35. 11.
thus birds are snared,
Thus souls for ruin are prepared. Eccles. 11. 9.

What? John 20. 29.
trust no farther then you see,
You Will trust a thief as far as me.
Deluded wretch, will naught but fight
And sense convince thee? 2 Timothy 3. 13.
O how right
How just is God? Romans 2. 5.
whose direful scourge
Such Arguments in hell shall urge. Mark 6. 16.


WORLD. Christ threatens wrath to come, but I
Do threaten thee with poverty.
And why will thou thy self, and those
That are so dear, to want expose?
Come, s^e the Saints; for all their brags:
How well they thrive, they are clothed with rags.

CHRIST. If my dear Saints in rags do go,
It Is not Religion clothes them so; 1 Timothy 4. 8.

But by such wants the Lord prepar^s 1 Cor. 1. 28, 29.

Their souls, against thy killing snares, 1 Timothy 6. 9.

They all are heirs, though under age; James 2. 5.

Expectants of their heritage. Jude 21.

Kept short for present, yet contemn
A change with those that scoff at them. Psalm. 17. 13, 14.


WORLD. It is in vain to plead, for I
With present things charm powerfully.
What e're thou offer'st, they will despise;
I hold them prisoners by their eyes.

CHRIST. If they will serve no other Lord, Luke 19. 27.

Then let it stand upon record Isa. 30. 8, 9.

Against their souls that they refused
My wages, Jude 5.
and my grace abused.
Remember this when they shall see
All turned to ashes that is in thee. 2 Pet. 3, 7.


ANOTHER. NOne will deny, but those are blessed pains,
Which are attended with the richest gains.
Grant this, and then most. clearly it is inferred,
Soul-work to all deserves to be preferred.
This is an unknown trade, Oh, who can count,
To what the gains of godliness amount?
For one poor shilling, O, what resks some run?
Some toyling as in the fire, from Sun to Sun!
Whereas one hour spent with God brings in
Such heavenly treasures, that poor souls have been
Enriched for ever. Even as you see
A Princes Favorite upon the knee,
Can in an hours time more wealth obtain,
Than all your lives by labor you can gain.
Prayer gains are great, and quick returns are made,
Sure then the Christian drives the richest trade.
It Is true, the hypocrite that never drove
A serious trade for heaven may bankrupt prove;
But holy souls which mind, and closely ply
Their business, greatly are enriched thereby.
The difference 'twixt the one, and to others best
By such a Simile as this expressed.
As in a Summers day you often see,
The wanton Butterfly and painful Be;
On fragrant flowers fix, whence one does strive
To bear his precious burden to the Hive:
The others pains no profit with it brings,
His time is spent in painting of his wings.
When winter comes, the Be has full supplies,
The other creeps into an hole and dies.
Like different events shall be betwixt
The painful Saint, and lazy Notionist.

CHAP. III.
The plowman sings and whistles though he sweat, Upon the cheerfulness of the
Husbandman.

Shall Christians droop, because their work is great?
OBSERVATION.
THough the labors of Husbandmen are very great and toylsom, yet with what
cheerfulness do they go through them? It is very delightful to hear the melody
they make by whistling, as they follow the Plow; yea, the very horses have
their Bells, which make a pleasant noise. Horses (says Mr. Fuller) will do
more for a whistle, than a whip; and their Bells do as it were, gingle away
their weariness. I have been often delighted with this Country music, whereby
they sweeten their hard labors with an innocent pleasure, and verify the
saying of the Poet:

Ovid. Tempus in agrorum cultu confumere dulce est.
Although they plow from morning until night.
Time steals away with pleasure and delight.

APPLICATION.
BUt how much greater cause have the people of God to address themselves unto
his work, with all cheerfulness of spirit? And indeed, so far as the heart is
spiritual, it delights in its duties. It Is true, the work of a Christian is
painful, and much more spending than the Husbandmans (as was opened Chap. 1.)
but then it as much exceeds in the delights and pleasures that attend it. What
is the Christians work, but with joy to draw water out of the wells of
salvation? Isa. 12. 3. You may see what a pleasant path the path of duty is, by
the cheerfulness of those that have walked in them, Psalm. 119. 14. I have
rejoiced in the way of thy judgment, as much as in all riches. And by the
promises that are made to such, Psalm. 13 8. 5. Yea, they shall sing in the ways
of the Lord, for great is the glory of the Lord. And again, You shall have a
song as in the night, when an holy solemnity is kept, and gladness of heart, as
when one goes with a pipe, to come to the mountain of the Lord, to the mighty
one of Israel, Isa. 30. 29.

And lastly, by the many commands, whereby joy in the ways of the Lord is made
the duty of the Saints. Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous, for praise is comely
for the upright, Psa. 97. 12. Rejoice, and again I say rejoice. Phil. 4. 4.
Where the command is doubled; yea, not only simple rejoicing, but the highest
degree of that duty comes within the command, Psalm. 132. 9, 16. Shout for joy,
all ye that are upright in heart. And Luke 6. 22, 23. they are bid, to leap for
joy, when about the difficult'st part of their work, and that you may see there
is sufficient ground for it, and that it is not like the mad mirth of sinners,
be pleased to consider,

Genesis 17. 1. Can any life compare with this for pleasure? Can they be chill,
that walk in the Sunshine? or sad, that abide in the fountain of all delights?
and walk with him whose name is the God of all comfort, 2 Cor. 1. 3. In whose
presence is the fullness of joy, Psalm. 16. 11. O what an Angelical life does a
Christian then live!

varietas delectat. Change of employment, takes off the tediousness of Labor.
Variety of voices please the ear: variety of colors delight the eye; the same
meat prepared several ways, pleases the palate more, and clogs it less. B^t O
the variety of choice dishes wherewith God entertains his people in a S^bbath!
as the Word, Prayer, Sacraments, etc. Isa. 58. 13. If thou call the Sabbath thy
delights; or as Tremelius renders it. thy delicate things. My soul (says
David) shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness, Psalm. 63. 5.

Or, lastly, if we consider the suitableness of this work, to a regenerate
soul. Is it any pain for a bird to fly? or a fish to swim? Is the eye tired
with beautiful objects? or the Romans 7. 22. I delight in the Law of God, after
the inner man. Gravia non gravitant in eor^m loco (says the Philosopher)
weighty things are not heavy in their own element, or center. And surely, God
is the center of all gracious spirits. A Saint can sit from morning to night to
hear discourses of the love and loveliness of Jesus Christ. The fight of your
thriving flocks and flourishing fields, cannot yield you that pleasure which an
upright soul can find in one quarter of an hours communion with God. They that
are after the flesh (says the Apostle Romans 8. 5.) do mind the things of the
flesh, and they that are after the spirit, the things of the spirit. But then,
look how much heavenly objects transcend earththly ones, and how much the soul
is more capable of delight in those objects, than the gross and duller senses
are in theirs; so much does the pleasure arising from the duty, excel all
sensitive delights on earth.

REFLECTIONS.
How am I cast and condemned by this, The carnal hearts Reflection.
may I say; who never favored this spiritual delight in holy duties. When I am
about my earthly employments; I can go on unweariedly, from day to day; all the
way is down hill to my nature: and the wheels of my affections being oyled with
carnal delight, run so fast, that they have need most times of trigging. Here I
rather need the curb, than the spur. O, how fleet and nimble are my spirits, in
these their pursuits! But O, what a slug am I in religious duties! Sure if my
heart were renewed by grace, I should delight in the law of God, Romans 7. 22.
All the world is alive in their ways, every creature injoyes his proper
pleasure; and is there no delight to be found in the paths of holiness? Is
godliness only a dry root, that bears no pleasant fruits? No, no, there are
doubtless incomparable pleasures to be found therein: but such a carnal heart
as mine favors them not.

I cannot say, but I have found delight in Religious duties but they have been
only such as rather sprang from the ostentation of gifts and applauses of men,
The hypocrites. Reflection.
than any sweet and real communion I have had with God through them; they have
rather proved food and fuel to my pride, than food to my soul. Like the
Nightingale I can sing sweetly, when I observe others to listen to me, and be
affected with my music. O, ^alse deceitful heart, such delight as this will
end in howling! were my spirit right, it would as much delight in retirements
for the enjoyment of God, as it does in those duties that are most exposed to
the observation of man. Wilt such a spring as this maintain a stream of
affections; when carnal motives fail? What will thou answer (O my soul) to that
question, Io^ 27. 9, 10. Will God hear his cry when trouble comes upon him?
Will he delight himself in the Almighty? Will he always call upon God? What
will thou reply to this question? Deceive not thou thy self, O my soul! thou will doubtless be easily persuaded to let go that thou never delightedst in;
and from an hypocrite in Religion, quickly become an Apostate from Religion.

From all this, The upright hearts Reflection.
the upright heart takes advantage to rouse up its delight in God, and thus it
expostulateth with it self: Does the Plowman sing amidst his drudging labors,
and whistle away his weariness in the fields, and shall I droop amidst such
heavenly employment? O my soul, what want thou here, to provoke thy delight?
if there be such an affection as delight in thee, methinks, such an object, as
the blessed face of God in Ordinances should excite it. Ah, how would this
ennoble all my services, and make them Angellike! how glad are those blessed
creatures to be employed for God? No sooner were they created, but they sang
together, and shouted for joy, Job 38. 7. How did they fill the Air with
heavenly melody, when sent to bring the joyful tidings of a Savior to the
world? Ascribing glory to God in the highest, even to the highest of their
powers: yea, this delight would make all my duties Christ-like; and the nearer
that pattern, the more excellent. He delighted to do his Fathers will, it was
to him meat and drink, Psalm. 40. 7 John 4. 32, 34.

Yea, it would not only ennoble, but facilitate all my duties, and be to me as
wings to a bird flying, or fails to a a ship in motion, Non tardat uncta rota;
oyled wheels run freely; Or ever I was aware, my soulmade me like the chariots
of Aminadab. O, what is the reason (my God) my delight in thee should be so
little? Is it not, because my unbelief is so great? Rouse up my delights, O
thou fountain of pleasure! and let me swim down the stream of holy joys in
duty, into the boundless Ocean of those immense delights that are in thy
presence, and at thy right hand for evermore.

The Poem.
O What a Isa. 68. 7.
dull, despondent heart is mine?
That takes no more Ps. 94. 19.
delight in things divine,
When all the Creatures both in heaven and earth:
Enjoy their Ps. 145. 10.
pleasures, and are big with mirth.
Rev. 5. 11, 12, 13.
Angels and Saints that are before the Throne;
In ecstasies, and raptures every one.
Perpetually is heled: Each blessed spirit
The purest Mat. 25. 21.
highest joys; does there inherit.
The Saints on earth, in their imperfect state;
Those Peerless joys by 1 Pe^. 1. 8, 9.
faith do antedate.
To natural men, who favor not this pleasure;
Yet bounteous nature does unlock her treasure
Of Act. 14. 17.
sensitive delights, Yea, strange to tell;
Bold sinners Job. 2^. 11.
rant it all the way to hell.
Like fifh that play in Iordans silver stream;
So these in sensual lusts: and never dream
Of that dead Sea, to which the stream does tend:
And to their pleasures puts a Iam. 5. 18.
fatal end.
Yea Ps. 10. 4. 12.
birds, and Ps. 104 11.
beasts as well as men, enjoy
Their innocent delights. These Chirp and play;
The cheerful birds among the branches sing*
And make the neighboring groves with music ring.
With various warbling notes they all invite,
Our ravished ears, with pleasure and delight.
The new fallen Lambs Ps. 11. 4. 6.
will in a Sunshine day,
About their feeeding dams jump up and play
Are Ier. 2. ^3.
Cisterns sweet? and is the fountain bitter?
Or can the Sun be dark, when glowworms glitter?
Have Isa. 30. 29.
instruments, their sweet melodious airs?
All creatures their delights, and Saints not theirs?
Yea, theirs Psalm. 4. 7.
transcend these sensual ones, as far;
As noon day Phoebus does a twinkling star,
Why droop I then, may any creature have
A Life like mine for pleasure? Who ere gave
The like Ioh. 15. 11.
encouragement that Christ has given,
To do his will on earth, as it is in heaven?
CHAP. IV.
Corn Land must neither be too fat, Upon the due quality of arable Land.
nor poor?
The middle state suits best with Christians sure.
OBSERVATION.
HUsbandmen find by experience, that their arable Lands may be dr^ft too much,
as well as too little. If the soil be over rank, the seed shoots up so much
into the stalk, tha^ it seldom ears well; and if too thin and poor, it wants
its due nutriment, and comes not to perfection. Therefore their care is to keep
it in heart, but not to overdress or underdress its. The end of all their cost
and pains about it is fruit; and therefore reason tells them, that such a
state and temperament of it, as best fits it for fruit, is best both for it and
them.

APPLICATION.
AND does not spiritual experience teach Christians, that a mediocrity and
competency of the things of this life, best fits them for the fruits of
obedience, which is the end and excellency of their beings? A man may be
overmercied as well as over afflicted. Rare fumant foelicibus arae, the altars
of the rich seldom smoke. When our outward enjoyments are by providence shaped
and fitted to our condition, as a suit is to the body, that fits close and
neat, neither too curt nor long; we cannot desire a better condition in this
world. This was it that wife Agur requested of God. Prove. 30. 8, 9. Give me
neither Poverty nor Riches, but feed me with food convenient for me, least I be
full and deny thee? and say who is the Lord, or lest I be poor and steal, and
take the name of my God in vain. Against both he prays equally, not
absolutely; that had been his sin, but comparatively and submissively to the
will of God. He had rather, if God see it fit, to avoid both these extremes;
but what would he have then? Why food convenient. Or, according to the Hebrew,
give me my prey or statute bread; which is a Metaphor from birds that fly up
and down to prey for their young, and what they get they distribute among them;
they bring them enough to preserve their lives, but not more than enough to lie
mouldering in the nest. Such a proportion Agur desired; and the reason why he
desired it, is drawn from the danger of both the extremes. He measured (like a
wise Christian) the convenience or inconveniency of his estate in the world, by
its suitableness or unsutableness to the end of his being; which is the service
of God. He accounted the true excellency of his life to consist in its
reference and tendency to the glory of his God; and he could not see how a
redundancy or too great a penury of earthly comforts, could fit him for that,
but a middle estate equally removed from both extremes, best fitted that end^
And this was all that good Jacob, who was led by the same spirit looked at, Genesis
28. 20. And Jacob vowed a vow saying* if God will be with me, and keep me in
the way that I go, and will give me bread to eat and raiment to put on so that
I come again to my fathers house in peace then shall the Lord be my God. Poor
Jacob, he desires no great matters in the world, food and raiment will satisfy
him; in spiritual things his desires are boundless; he is the most greedy and
unsatisfied man in the world, Hos. 12. 4. but in the matters of this life, if
he can get from God but off am and aquam, a morsel of meat, and a mouth full of
water, he will not envy the richest Craesus or Crassus upon earth. Meat and
drink are the riches of Christians, Divitiae sunt adleg em natura composita
paupertas (says Pomponius Attius) cibus and potus sunt Divitiae Christianorum.
riches are such a poverty or mediocrity as has enough for natures uses; and
such a state is best accommodated, both to the condition and to the desires of
a Saint.

David professed himself, Psalm. 119. 19. I am'a stranger in this earth. And so
those worthies, who are now at home in heaven, Heb. 11. 13. they professed
themselves to be strangers and Pilgrims upon earth, and to seek a Country; a
viaticum contents a traveller, he will not cumber himself with superfluous
things which would rather clog and tire, than expedite and help him in his
journey.



Deuteronomy. 6. 12. Hos. 13. 6. It Is hard, in the midst of so many tempting objects,
to keep the golden bridle of moderation upon the affections. The heart of a
Christian, like the Moon, commonly suffers an eclipse when it is at the full,
and that by the interposition of the earth.

It was Solomon's fullness that drew out and dissolved his spirits, and brought
him to such a low ebb in spirituals, that it remains a question with some,
Whether he ever recovered it to his dying day. As it is the misery of the poor
to be neglected of men, so it is the misery of the rich to neglect God. Who can
be poorer than to have the world, and love it? Or richer, than to enjoy but
little of it, and live above it?

And on the other side, extreme poverty is no less exposed to sin and danger,
Levit. 6. 2, 3, 4. As high and lofty trees are subject to storms and tempests,
so the lowest shrubs to be brows'd on by every beast: and therefore, a Saint
desires a just competency as the fittest, because the freest estate.

A gracious person desires no more but a competency, because there is most of
God's love and care discovered in giving Egypt and Canaan; Egypt was watered
with the foot from the River Nilus, and little of God was seen in that mercy;
but Canaan depended upon the dews and showers of heaven; and so, every shower
of rain was a refreshing shower to their souls, as well as bodies. Most men
that have a stock of creature comforts in their hands, look upon all as coming
in an ordinary natural course, and (...) very little of God in their mercies.
Pope Adrian built a College at Lovain, and caused this inscription to be
written, in letters of Gold on the gates thereof; Trajectum plantavit, Lovanium
rigavit, Caesar dedit incrementum. (i. e.) Vtrecht planted me, Lovain watered
me, and Caesar gave the increase. One to reprove his folly, wrote underneath,
Hic Deus Nihil fecit; Here God did nothing. Carnal men, they sow, and reap, and
eat, and look no farther.

But now, when a man sees his mercies come in by the special and assiduous care
of God for him, there is a double sweetness in those mercies; the natural
sweetness which comes from the creature it self, every one, even the beasts can
taste that as well as thee; but besides that, there is a spiritual sweetness,
far exceeding the former, which none but a believer tastes: and much of that
comes from the manner in which he receives it, because it comes (be it never so
course or little) as a Covenant mercy to him. He has given bread to them that
fear him, he is ever mindful of his Covenant, Psalm. 111. 5. Luther, who made
many a meal upon a broiled Herring, was wont to say, Mendicato pane hic
vivamus, an non hoc ^ulchre sarcitur in eo, quod pascimur pane cum angelis and
vita aeterna, Christo and Sacramentis; Let us be content with course fare here,
have we not the bread that came down from heaven? do we not feed with Angels; a
pregnant instance of the sweetness of such mercies is given us by a worthy
Divine of our own, Epistle to the Earl of Bedford ante ultima.
Mr. Isaac Ambross, For mine own part (says he) however the Lord has seen
cause to give me but a poor pittance of outward things (for which I bless his
name) yet in the income thereof, I have many times observed so much of his
peculiar providence, that thereby they have been very much sweetened, and my
heart has been raised to admire his grace. When of late under an hard
dispensation (which I judge not meet to mention, wherein I suffered with inward
peace conscienciously) all streams of wonted supplies being stopped, the waters
of relief for my self and family did run low. I went to bed with some
staggerings and doubtings of the fountains letting out its ^elt for our
refreshing, but ere I did awake in the morning, a Letter was brought to my
bedside, which was signed by a choice friend, Mr. Anthony Ash, which reported
some unexpected breakings out of God's goodness for my comfort. There are some
of his lines -- Your God, who has given you an heart thankfully to record your
experiences of his goodness, does renew experiences for your encouragement. Now
I shall report one which will raise your spirit toward the God of your mercy.
etc. whereupon he sweetly concludes, One morsel of God's Provision, (especially
if it come unexpected, and upon Prayer, when wants are most) will be more sweet
to a spiritual relish, than all former full enjoyments were.

Many mercies come unasked for, and they require thankfulness; but when mercies
come in upon prayer, and as a return of prayer, their sweetness more than
doubles; for now its both God's blessing upon his own institution, and a seal
set to his promise at once, Psalm. 66. 16, 17. Doubtless Hannah found more
comfort in her Samuel, and Rachel in her Naphthali, (the one being asked of
God, and the other wrastled for with God as their names import) than mothers
ordinarily do in their Children.

REFLECTIONS.
Do the people of God desire only so much of the Creature as may fit them for
the service of God; The reflection of the designing Hypocrite.
what a wretch then am I that have desired only so much of Religion as may fit
me to gain the creature! As God's people have subjected all their creature
enjoyments to Religion, so oppositely, O my soul, thou have subjected Religion
to thy wordly interest and designs. Instead of eating and drinking to serve
God, I have served God that I might eat and drink; yea, I have not only acted
below Religion, but below reason also; for reason dictates plainly, that the
means must never be more excellent than the end. Wretch taht I am, to make
Religion a slave to my lust, a stirrup to advancement, an artifice to carry on
my carnal designs, verily I have my reward; and this is all the good I am ever
like to get by it.

And no less should be worldling tremble, to consider how he has cast off the
duties of religion, The Worldlings Reflection.
made them stand aside and give place to the world. Instead of desiring so much
only as might make him serviceable to God, he thrusts aside the service of God
to get as much of the world as he can, who is so far from making godliness the
end of his creaturecomforts, that he rather looks upon it as an obstacle and
hinderance to them. May not the very heathens make me blush? could Aristotle
deliver this as a true rule to prosperity, to make Religion our first and chief
care? could Aristippus say, he would rather neglect his means than his mind?
his Farm than his soul? Will the very Mahometans, how urgent soever their
business be, lay it all aside, five times in the day to pray? yea, is it common
to a Proverb among the very Papists that Mass and meat hinders on man, and yet
I that prosess my self a Christian, thrust out duty for every trifle? Oh
wretched soul! how has the God of this World blinded mine eyes? can the world
indeed do that for me, that Christ can do? has it ever proved true to them
that trusted it and doted on it? Has it not at last turned them off as men
turn off a Sumpter horse at night, that has been a drudge to carry their Gold
and silver for them all day, and at last is turned out with an empty belly and
a galled back? O how righteous will that sentence of God be? Go cry to the gods
whom thou have served!

And may not many gracious hearts turn in upon themselves with shame and
sorrow, The gracious. soul's reflection.
to consider how unsatisfied they have been in that condition, that others have
preferred and esteemed as the greatest of all outward mercies? I have indeed
been fed with food convenient, but not contented: How has my heart been
tortured from day to day with anxious thoughts, what I shall eat and drink, and
wherewith I and mine should be clothed? I pretend indeed that I care but for a
competency of the world, but sure I am, my cares about it have been
incompetent. Come my distrustful earthly heart, let me propound a few questions
to thee about this matter, and answer truly to what I shall now demand of thee.

Have thou here a continuing City? 1. Quest.
or art thou at home, upon thy journey, that thou art so solicitous about the
world? thy profession indeed speaks thee a stranger upon earth, but thy
conversation a home-dweller. Erasmns said he desired honors and riches, no
more than a weary horse does a heavy Cloak-bag. Would thou not account him a
fool that would victual his Ship, as much to cross the Channel to France, as if
she were bound for the East Indies? Alas! it will be but a little while, and
then there will be no more need of any of these things. It Is sad, that a soul
which stands at the door of eternity, should be perplexing it self about food
and raiment.

Or, 2. Quest.
2ly. Which of all the Saints have thou known to be the better for much of the
world? it has been some men's utter ruin. Seldom does God suffer men to be
their own carvers, but they cut their own fingers. To give riches and pleasures
to an evil man (says Aristotle is but to give wine to one that has a Fever.
Where there is no want, there is usually much wantonness. What a sad story was
that of Pius Quintus; When I was in a low condition (said he) I had some
comfortable hopes of my salvation, but when I came to be a Cardinal, I greatly
doubted of it; but since I came to the Popedom, I have no hope at all. Though
this poor undone wretch spoke it out, and others keep it in, yet doubtless he
has many thousand fellows in the world, that might say as much would they but
speak the truth.

And even Gods own people, though the world has not excluded them out of
heaven, yet it has sorely clogged them in the way thither. Many that have been
very humble, holy and heavenly in a low condition, have suffered a sad ebb in a
^ull condition. What a cold blast have they felt coming from the cares and
delights of this life, to chill both their graces and comforts! it had been
well for some of God's people if they had never known what prosperity meant.

Is not this a sad simptom of a declining state of soul, 3. Quest.
to be so hot, eager and anxious about the superfluous trifles of this life.
Think thou, O my soul! that one who walks in the views of that glory above,
and maintains a conversation in heaven, can be much taken with these vanities?
do not the visions of God vail the tempting splendor of the creature! It was
the opinion of some of the Schoolmen, that the reason why Adam in Paradise was
not sensible of is nakedness, was because he was wholly taken up in conversing
with God, But this is certain, lively and sweet communion with God, blunts and
duls the edge of the affections to earthly things; and can thou be satisfied
my soul with such gains as are attended with such spiritual losses;

To conclude, 4. Quest.
is it not dishonorable to God, and a justification of the way of the world,
for me that profess my self a Christian to be as eager after riches as other
men? After all these things do the nations seek, Mat. 6. 32. If I had no father
in heaven, nor promise in the word, it were another matter, but since my
heavenly father knows what I have need of, and has charged me to be careful in
nothing, but only tell him my wants, Phil. 4. 6. How unbecoming a thing is it
in me to live and act as I have done! Let me henceforth learn to measure and
estimate my condition, rather by its usefulness to God than its content and
ease to my flesh.

The Poem.
IF Isa. 5. 2.
fruit and service be indeed the end
To which my being and edemption tend,
Reason concludes, that state of all the rest
Which is most serviceable to be best.
And such a state experience shows to lie,
'Twixt Prove. 30. 7, 8, 9.
fullness, and a pinching poverty.
This golden Mean, is worth a golden Mine;
He that has this, should be Heb. 13. 5.
ashamed to whine.
The full-fed Christian like the Deu. 32. 15.
Ox in the stall,
Is no way fit to work or plow withal.
And Prove. 30. 9.
penury like Pharaob's leaner kine,
Devours the fattest portions of our time.
That man with whom this earthly Luke 8. 14.
pleasure's found,
Or in whose heart those anxious Luke 8. 14.
cares abound;
And yet can walk by Scripture rule and line,
Will need a better head and heart than mine.
A single Mark 6. 8.
staff the traveller many find
Of use, and service; but if you should bind
A bundle of them to his back, they will make
Him stack his pace and cry my shoulders Hab. 2. 6.
ache.
I am a Ps. 119. 19. Heb. 11. 13, 14.
traveller, this world's my way.
A single staff may be of use to stay
My feeble body, if it do not crack,
By too hard Job 8. 15. Isa. 36. 6.
leaning on it; but my back
Will bear no more: Alas, I soon should tire:
And more than Heb. 13. 5.
one I cannot well desire.
Lord, to Job 21. 22.
prescribe to thee becomes me not,
I rather do Isa. 47. 4.
submit unto my Psa. 1^. 6, 7.
lot;
But yet let condescending grace admit
Thy servants Genesis 18. 32
suit this once, and this is it.
The staff of bread Prove 30. 8.
convenient let me have,
And manage it Eccl. 6. 2.
discreetly; so 'twill save
Thy feeble servant from the mire and Prove 30. 9.
dirt.
But more or less than this may do me hurt.
Or if thou say thy servant shall have none,
Then strengthen faith that I may go Hab. 3. 17.
alone.
CHAP. IV.
Spent barren Land you can restore and nourish. Upon the improvement of bad
ground.

Decayed Christians God can cause to flourish.
OBSERVATION.
WHen Land is spent out by ^illage, or for want of manuring, the careful
husbandman has many ways to recover and bring it in heart again. He lets it
lie follow to give it rest, and time to recover it self, carries out his sand,
lime and compost, to refresh and quicken it again, and in pasture and meadow
ground, will wash it (if possible) with a current of water, or the float of the
ways after a fall of rain, which is to the earth as a spring of new blood to a
consumptive body. He cuts down and kills the weeds that suck it out, and cause
them to make restitution of what they have purloined from it, by rotting upon
the place where they grew. As careful are they to recover it when it is spent,
as an honest Physician is of his patient in a languishing condition, for the
knows his field will be as grateful to him, and fully requite his care and cast.

APPLICATION.
AS man's, so God's Husbandry is sometimes out of case, not by yielding too
many crops, but too few. The mystical Husbandman has some fields (I mean
particular societies and persons) who were once fragrant and fruitful like a
field which God had blessed, but are now decayed and grown barren; whose
gleanings formerly, were more than their vintage now; the things that are in
them are ready to dye, Rev. 3. 3. 'Tispossible, yea, too common for gracious
souls to be reduced to a very low ebb, both of graces and comforts; how low I
will not say: Our British Divines tell us, That grace indeed cannot be totally
intermitted; Gratia nec totaliter intermittitur, nec finalitur amittit^r. How
far true grace in a believer may fail.
Actus omittitur, habit^s non amittitur. Actio pervertitur, sides non
subvertitur. Concutitur, non excutitur. De^luit fructus, latet succus. Ius ad
regnum amittunt demeritorie, non effective. Effectus justificationis
suspenditur, at status justificati non dissolvitur,. Suff. Britt.
nor finally lost; but there may be an omission of the act, though not an
amission of the habit: the act may be perverted, though the faith cannot be
subverted; it may be shaken in, though not shaken out; its fruits may fall, but
its sap lies hid in its root; they demerit the loss of the kingdom, but lose it
not effectively; the effect of justification may be suspended, but the state of
the justified cannot be dissloved.

Certain it is, one that like Paul has been rapt up with joy, even to the
third heavens, and cried, I am more than a conqueror, who can separate me from
the love of God? May at another time lie mourning as at the gates of death,
crying, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? One that has walked in sweet communion with God, sunning himself in the
light of his countenance, may afterward walk in dark ness, and see no light,
Isa. 50. 10. He that has cast anchor within the vail, and rode securely in the
peaceful harbor of assurance, may seem to feel his anchor of hope come home to
him, and go adrift into the stormy Ocean again, crying with the Church, Lam. 3.
18. My hope is perished from the Lord. His calm and clear Air may be overcast
and clouded, yea filled with storms and tempests, lightnings and thunders; his
graces, like underground flowers in the Winter, may all disappear, and hide
their beautiful heads.

To God he may say, I am cast out of thy sight; I know thou can do much, but
will thou show wonders to the dead?

To the Promises he may say, you are sweet things indeed, but what have I to do
with you? I could once indeed rejoice in you, as my portion; but now I doubt I
grasped a shadow, a fancy instead of you. To Saints he may say, turn away from
me, labor not to comfort me, O do not spill your precious ointment of
consolation upon my head, for what have I to do with comfort? to former
experiences, he may say in his haft, you are all liars. To the light of God's
countenance, he may say, farewell sweet light, I shall behold thee no more. To
Sa^an, he may say, O mine enemy, thou ha^t at last prevailed against me, thou
art stronger than I, and haft overcome, To duties and ordinances, he may say,
where is the sweetness I once found in you? you were once sweeter to me than
the honey comb; but now as tastless, as the white of an egg. O sad relaspe?
deplored change! quantum mutatus ab illo?

But will God leave his poor creatures helpless in such a case as this? Shall
their leaf fall, their branches wither, their joy, their life, their heart
depart? will he see their graces fainting, their hopes gasping, the new
creature panting, the things that are in them ready to dye, and will he not
regard it? yes, yes, There is hope of a tree if it be cut down, and the root
thereof wax old in the earth, yet by the scent of water it will bud, and bring
forth boughs, like a plant, Job 14. 89. This poor declined soul, as sad as it
sits at the gates of hell, may rouse up it self at last, and say to Satan that
stands triumphing over him, Rejoice not over me, O mine enemy, for though I
fall, yet I shall arise; though I sit in darkness, the Lord will be a light
unto me, Mich. 7. 8. He may raise up himself upon his bed of languishing for
all this, and say to God, though thou have chastened me sore, yet have thou not
given me over unto death. He may turn about to the Saints, that have mourned
for him and with a lightsome countenance say, I shall not dye but live, and
declare the works of the Lord. He may say to the Promises, you are the true and
faithful sayings of God, my unbelief did belly you; I said in my have you were
liars, but I eat my words, I am ashamed of my folly. Surely, O Soul, there is
yet hope in thine end, thou may be restored, Psalm. 23. 3. Thou may yet
recover thy verdure, and thy dew be as the dew of herbs. For,

as a father pities his own Children, so will thy God pity thee, Psalm. 103.
12, 13. He Will spare thee, as a father spares his own son that serves him,
Mal. 3. 17. Hark, how his bowels yearn? I have surely heard Ephraim bem^aning
himself, it not Ephraim my dear son? is he not a pleasant child? for since I
spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him still, I will surely have mercy
on him, Ier. 31. 20.

Thy days will consume like smoke, whilst thy heart is smitten and withered
like grass, Psalm. 102. 3, 4. Thy months will be months of vanity, they will fly
away and see no good, Job 7. 3. If he will but quicken thee again, then thou
must call upon his name, Psalm. 80. 18. but in a dead and languishing condition,
thou art no more fit for any work of God, than a sick man is for manual
labors; and surely he has not put those precious and excellent graces of his
Spirit within thee for nothing; they were planted there for fruit and service,
and therefore doubtless he will revive thee again.

thy Spirit would fail before him, and the soul which he has made, Isa. 57.
16. David told him as much, in the like condition, Psalm. 143. 7, 8. Hear me
speedily, O Lord, for my spirit fails; hide not thy face from me, lest I be
like unto those that go down into the pit; q. d. Lord, make have and recover my
languishing soul; otherwise, whereas thou have now a sick child, thou will
shortly have a dead child.

And in like manner Job expostulated with him, Job 6. 1, 2, 3, 11, 12,. My
grief is heavier than the sand of the Sea, my words are swallowed up, for the
arrows of the Almighty are within me; and the poison thereof drinks up my
spirits: the terrors of God do set themselves in array against me, what is my
strength that I should hope? is my strength the strength of stones? or are my
bones of brass? So Chap. 7. 12. Am I a Sea, or a Whale? etc. Other troubles a
man may, but this he cannot bear, Prove. 18. 14. And therefore doubtless
seasonable and gracious revivings will come, He will not stir up all his wrath,
for he remembers thou art but flesh; a wind that passes away, and comes not
again, Psalm. 78. 38. 39. He has ways enough to do it, if he do but unvail his
blessed face and make it thine again upon thee, thou art saved, Psalm. 80. 3.
the manifestations of his love, will be to thy soul, as showers to the parched
grass; thy soul that now droops, and hanges the wing, shall then revive and
leap for joy, Isa. 61. 1. A new face shall come upon thy graces, they shall bud
again, and blossom as a Rose; if he do but send a spring of auxiliary grace
into thy soul, Gratia gratiam postulat.
to actuate the dull habits of inherent grace, the work is done; then shall
thou return to thy first works again, Rev. 2. 4, 5. and sing, as in the days
of thy youth.

REFLECTIONS.
O this is my very case, says many a poor Christian; thus my soul languishes
and droops from day to day: it is good new indeed, that God both can and will
restore my soul but sad that I should fall into such a state. How unlike am I
to what once I was? Surely, as the old men wept, when they saw how short the
second Temple came of the glory of the first, so may I sit down and weep
bitterly, to consider how much my first love, and first duties excelled the
present* For.

Is my heart so much in heaven now, as it was wont to be? A convictive
Reflection
O my soul! do thou not remember, when like the beloved Disciple thou layest
in Jesus bosom? how did thou sweeten communion with him? how restless and
impatient wast thou in his absence! Divine withdrawments were to thee as the
hell of hell: What a burden was the world to me in those days! Had it not been
for conscience of my duty, I could have been willing to let all lie, that
communinion with Christ might suffer no interruption. When I awaked in the
night, how was the darkness enlightened by the heavenly glimpses of the
countenance of my God upon me? How did his company shorten those hours, and
beguile the tediousness of the night? O my soul, speak thy experience, is it
now as it was then! No, no, those days are past and gone, and thou become much
a stranger to that heavenly life. Art thou able with truth to deny this charge?
When occasionally I pass by those places, which were once to me as Jacob's
Bethel to him; I sigh at the remembrance of former passages betwixt me and
heaven there; and say with Job, Chap. 29. O that it were with me as in months
past, as in the days when God preserved me, when his candle shined upon my
head, when by his light I walked through darkness, when the Almighty was yet
with me, when I put on righteosness and it clothed me, when my glory was fresh
in me! when I remember these things, my soul is poured out within me.

Is thy obedience to the commands of Christ, and motions to duty, as free and
cheerful as they were wont to be? Call Seek my face, how did my spirit echo to
his calls? saying, Thy face Lord will I seek, Psalm. 27. 8. If God had any work
to be done, how readily did I offer my service? Here am I lord, send me. My
soul made me as the chariots of Aminadab; love oyled the wheels of my
affection, and his commandments were not grievous, 1 John 5. 3. Non tardat
uncta rota. There were no such quarrellings with the command, no such excuses
and delays as there are now. No, such was my love to Christ, and delight to do
his will, that I could no more keep back my self from duty, than a man that is
carried away in a crowd.

Or lastly, tell me, O my soul, do thou bemoan thy self, or grieve so
tenderly for sin, and for grieving the holy Spirit of God, as hou wast wont to
do? When formerly I had fallen by the hanbd of a temptation, how was I wont to
lie in tears at the Lord's feet, bemoaning my self? how did I hasten to my
closet, and there cry like Ezra, Chap. 9. 6. O my God, I am ashamed, and blush
to look up unto thee. How did I sigh and weep before him, and like Ephraim,
smite upon my thigh, saying, What have I done? Ah my soul how did thou work,
strive, and cast about, how to recover thy self again? have thou forgotten, how
thou would sometimes look up and sigh bitterly; Ah! what a God have I
provoked? whjat love and goodness have I abused? sometimes look in and weep,
Ah! what motions did I withstand? what a good spirit have I grieved? Ah! my
soul thou would have abhorred thy self, thou could never have born it, had
thy heart been as stupid and as relentless then as now. If ever a poor soul had
reason to dissolve it self into tears for its sad relapses, I have.

But yet mourn not, A supporting Reflection.
O my soul, as one without hope. Remember, There is hope in Israel concerning
this thing. As low as thy condition is, it is not desperate, it is not a
disease that scorns a Remedy; many a man that has been stretched out for dead,
has revived again, and lived many a comfortable day in the world; many a tree
that has cast both leaf and fruit, by the skill of a prudent Husbandman, has
been recovered again, and made both flourishing and fruitful. Is it not easier
think thou, to recover a languishing man to health, than a dead man to life?
and yet this God did for me, Ep^. 2. 1. Is any thing too hard for the Lord?
Though my soul draw nigh to the pit, and my life to the destroyers, yet he can
send me a messenger, one among a thousand, that shall declare to me my
uprightness then shall be deliver me from going down into the pit, my flesh
shall be fresher than a Childs, and I shall return to the days of my youth,
Job 33. 21. Though my flourish, and much of my fruit too be gone, and I am a
withering tree; yet as long as the root of the matter is in me, there is more
hope of such a poor decayed withered tree, than of the hypocrite that wants
such a root, in all his glory and bravery. His Sun shall set, and never rise
again; but I live in expectation of a sweet morning, after this dark night.

Rouse up therefore, O my soul, set thy faith awork on Christ for quickening
grace, for he has life in himself, and quickens whomsoever he will, Io^. 7.
38. Stir up that little which remains Rev. 3. 2. Has thou not seen lively
flames proceed from glimmering and dying sparks, when carefully collected and
blown up? get amongst the most lively and quickening Christians; as iron
sharpens iron, so will these set an edge upon thy dull affections, Prove. 27.
17. Acts 18. 15. But above alL, cry mightily to the Lord for quickening, he
will not despise thy cry. The moans of a Distressed Child, work upon the bowels
of a tender father. And be sure to keep within thy view, the great things of
eternity, which are ready to be revealed; live in the believing and serious
contemplations of them, and be dead if thou can. It Is true, thou have reason
enough from they condition, to be for ever humbled; but no reason at all from
thy God, to be in the least discouraged.

The Poem.
THou art the Ioh, 15. 1.
Husbandman, and I
A worthless plot of 1 Cor. 3. 9.
Husbandry,
Whom special love did ne'retheless
Divide Psa. 4. 3.
from natures wilderness.
Then did the Job 29. 3, 4.
Sunshine of thy face
And sweet Hos. 14. 5, 6
illapses of thy grace
Like Hos. 6. 3.
April showers, and warming gleams
Distill its dews, reflect its beams.
My dead Ier. 2. 3.
affections then were green,
And hopeful Cant. 7. 12.
buds on them were seen:
These into duties soon were Acts 9. 11.
turned
In which my heart within me Lu. 24. 32.
burned:
O halcyon days! Thrice happy slate!
Each place was Genesis 28. 16. 17.
Bethel, heavens gate.
What sweet discourse! What heavenly Exodus 34. ^9.
talk!
Whilst with thee I did daily Genesis 6. 7.
walk!
Mine eyes overflow, my heart does Psa. 42. 6.
sink;
As often as on those days I think.
For Cant. 5. 6.
strangeness now is got between
My God and me, as may be seen
By what is Rev. 2. 5.
now, and what was then;
It Is just as if I were 2 Chr. 17. 3.
two men.
My fragrant branches Psa. 102. 4.
blasted be,
No fruits like those that I can see.
Some Isa. 59. 2.
Canker-worm lies at my root.
Which Isa. 64. 6.
fades my leaves, destroys my fruit.
My soul is Psa. 88. 6, 14.
banished from thy ^ight,
For this it Psalm. 77. 2.
mourns day and night.
Yet why do thou Psa. 42. 11.
desponding lie?
With Ion. 2, 4.
Jonah cast a backward eye.
Sure in thy God help may be had,
There Is precious Ier. 8. 22.
balm in Gilead.
That God that made me spring at first,
When I was barren, Eze. 16. 4.
and accursed;
Can much more easily Psa. 23. 3.
restore
My soul to what it was before.
'Twas Psalm. 88.
Haman's Job 14.
Job's Psa. 30.
and David's case,
Yet all recovered were by grace.
A word, a Psa. 80. 3.
smile on my poor soul;
Will make it perfect, sound, and whole.
A Luke 22. 61, 62.
glance of thine has soon dissolved
A soul in sin, and grief involved.
Lord, if thou Ier. 22. 17.
can not work the cure,
I am contented to endure.
CHAP. VI.
No skill can mend the miry ground, Upon the uncurableness of some bad ground.
and sure
Some souls the Gospel leaves as past a cure.
OBSERVATION.
ALthough the industry and skill of the Husbandman can make some ground that
was useless and bad, good for tillage or pasture, and improve that which was
barren, and by his cost and pains make one Acre worth ten; yet such is the
nature of some rocky or miry ground, where the water stands, and there is no
way to cleanse it, that it can never be made fruitful. The Husbandman is fain
to let it alone, as an incurable piece of wast and worthless ground; and though
the Sun and clouds shed their influences on it, as well as upon better Land,
yet that does not at all mend it. Nay, the more showers it receives, the worse
it proves. For these do no way fecundate or improve it; nothing thrives there,
but worthless flags and rushes.

APPLICATION.
MAny also there are under the Gospel, who are given over by God to judicial
blindness, hardness of heart, a reprobate sense, and perp^^ual barrenness; so
that how excellent soever the means are which they enjoy, and how efficacious
soever, to the conve^sion, edification and salvation of others; yet they shall
never do their souls good, Ezekiel. 47. 9, 11. Every thing wheresoever the River
comes shall live but the miry places thereof, and the marshes thereof shall
never be healed but be given to sal^; (i. e.) given to an obstinate and
everlasting barrenness. Compare Deuteronomy. 9. 23. By these waters, says judicious
Mr. Strong, understand the doctrine of the Gospel; Spiritual barrenness, p. 8.
as Rev. 21. 2. a River of water of life, clear as Crystal. Hic fluvius est
uberima doctrina Christi, says Mr. Brigh^man. This River is the most fruitful
doctrine of Christ, yet these waters do not heal the miry marish places, ( i.
e.) men that live unfruitfully under Ordinances, who are compared to miry and
marish places in three respects.

(1) In miry places the water has not free passage, but stands and settles
there. So it is with these barren souls; therefore the Apostle prays, that the
Gospel may run and be glorified, 2 These. 3. 1. The word is said to run, when it
meets wi^h no stop, Cum libere propagatur, when it is freely propagated and
runs through the whole man; when it meets with no stop either in the mou^h of
the speaker, or hear^s of the hearers, as it does in these.

(2) In a miry place, the earth and water is mixed together; this mixture makes
mire. So when the truths of God do mix with the corruptions of men, that they
either hold some truths, and yet live in their lusts, or else when men do make
use of the truths of God to justify and plead for their ^in^. Or,

(3) When as in a miry place, the longer the water stands in it, the worse it
grows; so the longer men abide under Ordinances, the more filthy and polluted
they grow: These are the miry places that cannot be healed, their disease is
incurable, desperate.

O this is a sad case, and yet very common! Many persons are thus given over;
as incorrigible and hopeless, Rev. 22. 1^. Let him that is filthy, be filthy
still. Ier. 6. 29. Reprobate silver shall men call them, for the Lord has
rejected them, Isa. 6. Go make the heart of this people fat, their ears dull,
etc.

Christ executes by the Gospel that curse upon many souls, which he denounced
against the figtree, Mat. 21. 19. Let no fruit grow on thee henceforth for
ever, and immediately the figtree withered away. To be given up to such a
condition, is a fearful judgment indeed, a curse with a witness; the sum of
all plagues, miseries and judgments, a fatal stroke at the root it self. It Is a
woe to have a bad heart, (says one) but it is the depth of woe, to have a heart
that shall never be made better. To be barren under the Gospel is a sore
judgment, but to have that pertinax sterilit^s, a pertinacious barrenness;
this is to be twice dead, and plucked up by the root, as Jude speaks.

And to show you the woeful and miserable state and plight of such men, let the
following particulars be weighed. (1) Its a stroke at the soul it self, an
inward spiritual judgment; and by how much the more inward and spiritual any
judgment is, by so much the more dreadful and lamentable. As soul mercies, are
the best of mercies; so, soul-judgements, are the saddest of all judgments. If
it were but a temporal stroke upon the body, the loss of an eye, an ear, a
hand, a foot, though in it self it would be a considerable loss; yet it were
nothing to this. Omnia Deus dedit duplicia (says Chrysostom) speaking of
bodily members; God has given men double members, two eyes, if one be lost,
the other supplies its wants; two hands, two ears, two feet, that the failing
of one, may be supplied by the help of the other; animam vero unam; but one
soul, if that perish, there is not another to supply its loss. The soul, says
a Heathen, is the man, that which is seen is not the man. The Apostle calls the
body a vile body, Phil. 3. 21. and so it is compared with the soul; and Daniel
calls it the Sheath, which is but a contemptible thing to the sword, which is
in it. O it were far better that many bodies perish, than one soul; that every
member were made the seat, and subject of the most exquisite torture, than such
a judgment should fall upon the soul.

(2) It Is the severest stroke God can inflict upon the soul in this life, to
give it up to barrenness; because it cuts off all hopes, frustrates all means,
nothing can be a blessing to him. If one come from the dead, if Angels should
descend from heaven to preach to him; there is no hope of him. If God shut up a
man, who can open? Job 12. 14. As there was none found in heaven or earth, that
could open the seals of that book, Rev. 5. 5. so is there no opening by the
hand of the most able and skilful Ministry, those seals of hardness, blindness
and unbelief, thus impressed upon the spirit. Whom j^stice so locks up, mercy
will never let out. This is that which makes up the Anathema Maranatha, 1 Cor.
16. 22. which is the dreadfullest curse in all the book of God, cacursed till
the Lord come.

(3) It Is the most indiscernable stroke to themselves, that can be, and by that
so much the more desperate. Hence there is said to be powered out upon them the
spirit of slumber, Isa. 29. 10. The Lord has powered out upon you the spirit of
deep sleep, and has closed your eyes. Montanus renders it, The Lord has
mingled upon you the spirit of deep sleep. And so it is an allusion to a
soporiferous Medicine mingled and made up of opium and such like stupifactive
ingredients, which casts a man into such a dead sleep, that do what you will to
him* he feels, he knows it not. Make their eyes heavy, and their ears dull;
lest they should see, and hear, and be converted, Isa. 6. 9, 10. This is the
heart which cannot repent, which is spoken of, Romans 2. 5. For men are not
sensible at all of this judgment, they do not in the least suspect it, and that
is their misery. Though they be cursed trees which shall never bear any fruit
to life, yet many times they bear abundance of other fair and pleasant fruits
to the eye, excellent gifts and rare endowments? And these deceive and undo
them. Mat. 7. 22. We have prophesied in thy name; this makes the wound
desperate, that there is no finding of it, no probe to search it.

(4) It Is a stroke that cuts off from the soul all the comfort and sweetness of
Religion. A man may pray, h^ar, and confer, but all those duties are dry stalks
unto him, which yield no meat, no solid substantial nutriment; some common
touches upon the affections he may sometimes find in duty, the melting voice or
Rhetoric of the Preacher may perhaps strike his natural affections, as another
Tragical story pathetically delivered may do; but to have any real communion
with God in Ordinances, any discoveries or views of the beauty of the Lord in
them, that he cannot have; for these are the special effects and operations of
the Spirit, which are always restrained.

God has said to such, as he did to them. Genesis 6. 3. My spirit shall no longer
strive with them; and then what sweetness is there in Odinances? What is the
word separated from the Spirit, but a dead Letter? it is the Spirit that
quickens, 2 Cor. 3. 2. Friend, thou must know that the Gospel works not like a
natural cause upon those that hear it; if so, the ef^^ct would always follow,
unless miraculously stopped and hindered; but it works like a moral instituted
cause, whose efficacy and success depends upon the arbitrary concurrence of the
Spirit with it. The wind blows where it lists, so is ev^ry one that is born
of the Spirit, Ioh. 3. 8. Of his own will begat he us by the word of truth.
Ordinances are as the pool of Bethesda, which had its healing virtue only when
the Angel moved the waters; but the spirit never moves savingly upon the waters
of Ordinances, for the healing of these souls, how many years soever they lie
by them. Though others feel a Divine power in them, yet they shall not. As the
men that traveled with Paul, when Christ appeared to him from heaven, they saw
the light, but heard not the voice, which he heard to salvation: So it is with
these, they see the Ministers, hear the words, which are words of salvation to
others, but not so to them. Concerning these miserable Souls, we may sigh and
say to Christ, as Martha did concerning her brother Lazarus; Lord, if thou
had been here, in this Sermon, or in this prayer, this soul had not remained
dead. But here is the woe that lies upon him, God is departed from the means,
and none can help him.

(5.) It Is such a stroke upon the spirit of man, as is a fearful sign of his
eternal reprobation. It Is true we cannot positively say of a man in this life,
he is a reprobate, one that God will never show mercy to; but yet there are
some probable marks of it upon some men in this world, and they are of a
trembling consideration wherever they appear? of which this is one of the
saddest, 2 Cor. 4. 3. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to those that are lost, in
whom the God of this world has blinded the minds of them which believe not;
lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God,
should shine unto them. So Act. 13. 48. As many as were ordained unto eternal
life believed. Ye believe not, because ye are not of my sheep, Ioh. 10. 26. And
again, Mat 13. 11. To you it is given to know the mysteries of the Kingdom, but
to them it is not given. There cannot be a more dreadful Character of a person
marked out for wrath, than to continue under the Ordinances, as the Rocks and
miry places do under the natural influences of heaven. What blessed
opportunities had Iudus? he was under Christ's own Ministry, he often heard the
gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth; he was night and day in his
company, yet never the better; and why? because he was the son of perdition;
that is, a man appointed to destruction and wrath.

(6) And lastly, to add no more. It Is such a stroke of God upon the souls of
men, as immediately foreruns hell and damnation, Heb. 6. 8. But that which
bears thorns and briars is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is
to be burnt. So that look as some Saints in this world, have had a prelibation
or foretaste of heaven, which the Scripture calls the earnest of the Spirit; so
this is a precursor of hell, a sign of wrath at the door. We may say of it, as
it is said of the pale horse in the Revelation, that hell follows it. If a man
abide not in me (says Christ, John 156.) he is cast forth as a branch and
withered; which is the very state of these barren, cursed souls, And what
follows? Why, says he, men gather them, and cast them into the fire, and they
are burned. Lo this is the vengeance which the Gospel executes upon this barren
ground.

REFLECTIONS.
Well then, blessed be God that made me feel the saving The sincere souls
Reflection.
let God be exalted for ever for this mercy! that how defective soever I am in
common gifts, though I have a dull understanding, a leaking memory, a
stammering tongue; yet I have felt, and do feel the power of the Gospel upon my
heart. I bless thee (my God) that although I labor under many spiritual
infirmities, yet I am not sick of this incurable disease. I have given thee
indeed just cause to inflict and execute this dreadful curse upon me also, but
thou have not only dealt with me after my deserts; but according to the riches
of thy mercy. Some little fruit I bring forth* and what it is, is by virtue of
my union with Jesus Christ, Romans 7. 4. And this has more in it as to my
comfort, than all the glittering gifts and splendid performances of the most
glorious hypocrite can yield to him. If I might have my choice (says one) I
would choose and prefer the most despicable and ^ordid work of a rustic
Christian, before all the victories of Alexander and triumphs of Caesar.
Blessed therefore be the Lord who has abounded unto me, in all spirt^ual
blessings, in heavenly things in Christ Jesus.

I cannot remember a Sermon as another can, but blessed be God that I am able
to s^vour it, and feel it; that I have an heart to love, and a will to obey,
all that God discovers to be my duty.

The formal Professors Reflection,
then, how little cause have I to make my boast of Ordinances, and glory in my
external privileges, who never bear spiritual fruit under them? If I well
consider my condition, there is matter of t^embling, and not of glorying in
these things. It may be, while I have been glorying in them, and listing up my
secure heart upon them, the Lord has been secretly blasting my soul under
them, and insensibly executing this horrible curse by them. Shall I boast, that
with Capernaum, I am lifted up to heaven, since I may with her at last be cast
down to hell? And if so, Lord, what a hell will my hell be? It will be more
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrab than for me. It drew tears from the eyes of
Christ, when he was looking upon Jerusalem, under the same consideration that I
doubt I have cause to look upon my own soul, Luke 19. 41. He wept over it,
saying, if thou had known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things
which belong to thy peace but now they are hid from thine eyes. So long I have
been a hearer, a Professor of the Gospel, so many years I have enjoyed its
distinguishing Ordinances, but have they not been all dry and empty things to
me? has not the spirit of formality acted me in them? Have not self ends, and
worldly respects lain at the bottom of my best duties? Have not my discourses
in communion with the Saints been Trade words, speaking what I have learnt, but
not felt? sad is my condition now; but it would be desperate and irre^overable,
should thou execute this curse upon me.

And what may I think of my condition? Lord, I acknowledge my unprofitableness
under the means has been shameful; The less fruitful Christians Reflection.
I have often trembled for fear, lest my root had been blasted by such a curse;
but if so, whence is this trembling? whence these fears and sorrows about it?
does such fruit grow in that soil which thou have crused? I am told but now,
that on whom this judgment falls, Romanae leges poenam pregnanti defer^nt.
Chrysostom.
to them thou give an heart that cannot repent. Lord, I bless thee for these
evidences of freedom from the curse; for the fruits of fear, sorrow, and holy
jealousy. The laws of men spare for the fruits sake, and wilt not thou spare
me also my God, if there be found in me a blessing in the bud, Isa. 65. 8.

To conclude, what a serious Reflection should this occasion in every dispenser
of the Gospel? how should he say The Gospel Preachers Reflection.
I am now going to preach that word, which is to be a savor of life or death
to these souls; upon how many of my poor hearers may the curse of perpetual
barrenness be executed this day! O how should such a thought melt his heart
into compassion over them, and make him beg hard, and plead earnestly with God
for a better issue of the Gospel than this upon them?

The Poem.
YOu that besides your pleasant fruitful fields,
Have useless bogs, and rocky ground that yields
You no advantage, nor does quit your cost,
But all your pains and charges on them's lost,
Hearken to me, I Will teach you how to get
More profit by them, than if they were set
At higher Rents than what your Tenants pay
For your most ^ertile Lands; and here is the way
Think when you view them, why the Lord has chose
These, as Eze. 47. 11*
Emblems to decipher those
That under Gospel Grace grow worse and 2 Timothy 3. 13.
worse;
For means are fruitless; where the Lord does Heb. 6. 8.
curse.
Sweet showers descend, the Sun his beams reflects
on both Mat. 5. 45.
alike; but not with like effects.
Observe, and see how after the sweet showers
The grass and corn 2 Samuel 23. 4.
revive; the fragrant Cant. 2. 12.
flowers
Shoot forth their beauteous heads, the valleys Psalm. 65. 13.
sing,
All fresh, and green as in the verdant spring.
But rocks are barren still, and Eze. 47. 11.
bogs are so;
Where naught but flags, Job 8. 11.
and worthless rushes grow.
Upon these marish grounds there lies this curse,
The more rain falls; by so much more the worse.
Even so the Deuteronomy. 22. 2.
dews of grace, that sweetly fall,
From Gospel Isa. 5. 6.
clouds, are not 2Cor. 2. 16.
alike to all.
The gracious soul does Psa. 92. 13.
germinate and bud,
But to the Reprobate it does Isa. 6. 9, 10.
no good.
He Is like the withered Mar. 11. 20.
fig tree void of fruit;
Afearful curse has smote his very Isa. 5. 24.
root.
The heart's made ^at, the Isa. 6. 10.
eyes with blindness sealed;
The piercingst truths the Gospel ere revealed,
Shall be to him but as the Sun and rain
Are to obdurate rocks: Luke 8. 14. Ier. 17. 5, 6.
fruitless and vain.
Be this your meditation when you walk
By rocks, and fenny grounds, thus learn to talk
With your own souls: and let it make you fear
Lest that is your case ^ha^ is described here.
This is the best improvement you can make.
Of such bad ground: good soul, I pray thee take
Some pains about them; though they barren be,
Thou see how they may yield sweet fruits to thee.
CHAP. VII.
The Plowman guides his Plow with care and skill. Upon the plowing of C^rn-land.

So does the Spirit, in sound conviction still.
OBSERVATION.
IT requires not only strength, but much skill and judgment, (...)
to manage and guide the plow. The Hebrew word which we translate to plow,
signifies to be intent, as an Artificer is about some curious piece of work.
The plow must neither go too shallow nor too deep in the earth; it must not
indent the ground by making crooked furrows, nor leap and make baulks in good
ground; but be guided as to a just depth of earth, so to cast the furrow in a
straight line, that the floor or surface of the field may be made plain. As it
is Isa. 28. 25. And hence that expression, Luke 9. 62. He that puts his hand to
the plow, and looks back, is not fit for the Kingdom of Heaven. The meaning is,
that as he that plows, must have his eyes always forward, to guide and direct
his hand in casting the furrows straight and even; (for his hand will be
quickly out when his eye is off). So he that heartily resolves for heaven, must
addict himself wholly and intently to the business of Religion, and not have
his mind entangled with the things of this world, which he has left behind
him; whereby it appears, that the right management of the plow, requires as
much skill as strength.

APPLICATION.
THis Observation in nature, serves exc^llently to shadow forth this
proposition in Divi^ity. That the work of the Spirit in convincing and humbling
the heart of a sinner, is a work wherein much of the wisdom, as well as power
of God is discovered. The work of repentance and saving contrition, Glassius
Rhet. sacra, p. 300.
is set forth in Scripture by this Metaphor of plowing, Ier. 4. 3. Hos. 10. 12:
Plow up your fallow ground; that is, Caryl on Job, Chap. 4. v. 8.
be convinced, humbled, and broken hearted for fin. And the resemblance betwixt
both these works, appears in the following particulars.

(1) It Is a hard and difficult work to plow, it is reckoned one of the
pain^ullest manual labors. It is also a very hard thing to convince and humble
the heart of a secure, stout, and proud sinner, indurate in wickedness. What
Luther says of a dejected soul, That it is as easy to raise the dead as to
comfort such a one. The same I may say of the secure, confident sinner. It Is as
easy to rend the rocks, as to work saving contrition upon such a heart. Citius
exp^mice aquam; all the melting language and earnest entreaties of the Gospel,
cannot urge such a heart to shed a tear: Therefore it is called a heart of
stone, Ezekiel. 36. 26. A firm rock, Amos 6. 12. Shall horses run upon the Rock?
will one plow there with Oxen? yet when the Lord comes in the power of his
Spirit, these rocks do rend and yield to the power of the word.

(2) The plow pierces deep into the bosom of the earth, makes (as it were) a
deep gash or wound in the heart of it. So does the Spirit upon the hearts of
Sinners, he pierces their very souls by conviction, Act. 2. 37. When they heard
this they were pricked (or pierced point blank) (...) punctim cedo pungendo
penetro.
to the heart. Then the word divides the soul and Spirit, Heb. 4. 12. It comes
upon the conscience with such pinching dilemma's, and tilts the sword of
conviction so deep into their souls, that there is no stenching the blood, no
healing this wound, till Christ himself come and undertake the cure. H^re^
lateri lethalis arundo; this barbed arrow cannot be pulled out of their hearts
by any but the hand that shot it in. Discourse with such a soul about his
troubles, and he will tell you, that all the sorrows that ever he had in this
world, loss of estate, health, children, or whatever else, are but flea-bitings
to this; this swallows up all other troubles. See how that Christian Niobe,
Luke 7. 38. is dissolved into tears. N^w deep calls unto deep at the noise of
his water spouts, when the waves and billows of God go over the soul. Spiritual
sorrows are deep waters, in which the stoutest and most magnanimous soul would
sink and drown, did not Jesus Christ by a secret and supporting hand, hold it
up by the chin.

(3.) The plow rends the earth in parts and pieces, which before was united,
and makes those parts hang loose, which formerly lay closs. Thus does the
spirit of conviction rend in sunder the heart, and its most beloved lusts,
Joel. 2. 13. Rent your hearts, and not your garments; that is, rather then your
garments; for the sense is comparative, though the expression be negative. And
this rending implies, not only acute pain; flesh cannot be rent asunder without
anguish; nor yet only force and violence; the heart is a stubborn and knotty
piece and will not easily yield, but it also implies a disunion of parts
united: as when a garment, or the earth, or any continuous body is rent; those
parts are separated which fomerly cleaved together. Sin and the Soul were
glewed fast together before, there was no parting of them, they would as soon
part with their lives, as with their lusts; but now when the heart is rent for
them truly; it is also rent from them everlastingly, Ezekiel. 7. 15. to 19.

(4) The plow turns up, and discovers such things as lay hid in the bosom of
the earth before, and were covered under a fair green surface, from the eyes of
men. Thus when the Lord plows up the heart of a sinner by conviction, then the
secrets of his heart are made manifest, 2 Cor. 14. 24, 25. the most secret and
shameful sins will then our; for the word of God is quick and powerful, sharper
than any two edged sword, piercing even to the dividing of the soul and spirit,
the joints and merrow, and is a quick discerner of the thoughts, and secret
intents of the heart, Heb. 4. 12. It makes the fire burn inwardly, so that the
soul has no rest till confession give a vent to trouble. Fain would the
shuffling sinner conceal and hide his shame; but the word follows him through
all his sinful shifts, and brings him at last to be his own, both accuser,
witness and judge.

(^) The work of the plow is but opus ordinabile: a preparative work in order
to fruit. Should the Husbandman plow his ground never so often, yet if the seed
be not cast in and quickened, in vain is the Harvest expected. Thus conviction
also is but a preparative to a farther work upon the soul of a sinner. If it
stick there, and go no farther, it proves but an abortive or untimely birth.
Many have gone thus far, and there they have stuck; they have been like a field
plowed, but not sowed, which is a matter of trembling consideration; for hereby
their sin is greatly aggravated, and their eternal misery so much the more
increased. O when a poor damned creature shall with horror reflect upon himself
in hell, how near was I once under such a Sermon, to conversion? My sins were
set in order before me, my conscience awakened and terrified with the guilt of
them; many p^rposes and resolves I had then to turn to God, which had they been
perfected by answerable executions, I had never come to this place of torment;
but there I stuck, and that was my eternal undoing. Many souls have I known so
terrified with the guilt of sin, that they have come roaring under horrors of
conscience to the Preacher; so that one would think such a breach had been made
between them and sin, as could never be reconciled; and yet, as angry as they
were in that fit with sin, they have hugged and embraced them again.

(6) It Is best plowing when the earth is prepared and mollified by the showers
of rain, then the work goes on sweetly and easily. And never does the heart so
kindly melt, as when the Gospel clouds dissolve, and the free grace and love of
Jesus Christ comes sweetly showing down upon it; then it relents and mourns
ingeniously, Ezekiel. 16. 63. That thou may remember, and be confounded, and
never open thy mo^th any more of thy shame, when I am pocified toward thee for
all that thou have done. So it was with that poor penitent, Luke 7. 38. when
the Lord Jesus had discovered to her the super-abounding riches of his grace,
in the pardon of her manisold abominations; her heart melted within her, she
washed the feet of Christ with tears. And indeed, there is as much difference
betwixt the tears which are forced by the terrors of the law, and those which
are extracted by the grace of the Gospel, as there is betwixt those of a
condemned malefactor, who weeps to consider the misery he is under, and those
of a pardoned malefactor, that receives his pardon at the foot of the ladder,
and is melted by the mercy and clemency of his gracious Prince toward him.

(7) The plow kills those rank weeds that grow in the field, turns them up by
the roots, buries and rots them. So does saving conviction kill sin at the
root, makes the soul sick of it, begets indignation in the heart against it, 2
Cor. 7. 11. The word there signifies the rising of the stomach, (...).
any being angry even unto sickness; Religious wrath is the fiercest wrath, now
the soul cannot endure sin, trembles at it. I find a woman more bitter than
death (says penitent Solomon) Eccl. 7. 26. Conviction like a sur^et, makes the
soul to loath what it formerly loved and delighted in.

(8) That field is not well plowed, where the plow jumps and skips over good
ground, and makes baulks, it must turn up the whole field alike; and that heart
is not savingly convicted where any lust is spared and lest untouched. Saving
Conviction extends it self to all sins, not only to sin in general, with this
cold conf^ssion, I am a ^^nner? but to the particulars of (...), yea, to the
particular circumstances and aggravations of time; place, manner, occasions,
thus and thus have I done; to the sin of nature, as well as practice, behold I
was shapen in iniquity, Psalm. 51. 5. There must be no baulking of any sin; the
sp^ring of one sin, is a sure argument thou art not truly humbled for any sin.
So far is the convinced soul from a studious concealment of a beloved sin, that
it weeps over that, more than over any other actual sin.

(9) New ground is much more easily plowed than that which by long lying out of
tillage, is more consolidated and clung together, by deep rooted thorns and
brambles, which render it difficult to the Plowman. This old ground is like an
old sinner, that has layn a long time hardening under the means of grace. O
the difficulty of convincing such a person! Sin has got such rooting in his
heart, he is so habituated to the reproofs and calls of the word, that ^ew such
are wrought upon. How many young persons are called, to one obdurate,
inveterate sinner? I do not say but God may call home such a soul at the
eleventh hour; but I may say of these compared with others, as Solomon speaks,
Eccles. 7. 28. One man among a thousand have I found etc. Few that have long
^esisted the Gospel, that come afterward to feel the saving efficacy thereof.

REFLECTIONS.
The true Converts Reflection.
yea, mine, when he has lest so many of more tender, ingenious, sweet, and
melting tempers without any culture or means of grace. O blessed Gospel! heart
dissolving voice! I have felt thine efficacy, I have experienced thy divine and
irresistible power, thou art indeed sharper than any two edged sword, and
woundest to the heart; but thy wounds are the wounds of a friend. All the
wounds thou have made in my soul, were so many doors opened to let in Christ,
all the blows thou gave my consciences, were but to beat off my soul from
sin, which I embraced and had retained to my everlasting ruin, had thou not
separated them and me. O wise and merciful Phy^^^ian, thou did indeed bind me
with cords of conviction and sorrow; but it was only to cut out that stone in
my heart, which had killed me if it had continued there. O how did I struggle
and oppose thee, as if thou had come with the sword of an enemy, rather than
the lanc^ and probe of a skilful and tender hearted Physician? Blessed by the
day wherein my sin was discovered and imbittered! O happy sorrows which
prepared for such matchless joys! O blessed hand: which turned my salt waters
into pleasant wine! and after many pangs and sorrows of sou^ did ^ring forth
the man child of deliverance and peace (...)

But O, what a Rock of Adamant is this (...) of mine The stuborn hearts
Reflection.
or melting voice of the Gospel! long have I sate-under the word, but when did
I feel a relenting pang? O my soul! my stupefied soul! thou have got an
Antidote against repentance* but have thou any against ^ell? thou can keep
out the sense of sin now, but art thou able to keep off the terrors of the Lord
hereafter? If thou could turn a deaf ear to the sentence of Christ in the day
of judgment, as easily as thou do to the entreaties of Christ in the day of
grace, it were somewhat; but surely there is no defense against that. Ah, fool
that I am, to quench these convictions, unless I knew how to quench those
flames* they warn me of.

And may not I challenge the first place among all the mourners in the world,
who have lost all those convictions The Miscarrying souls Reflection.
I have been often awakened by it, and filled with terrors and tremblings under
it; but those troubles have soon worn off again, and my heart (like water
removed from the fire) returned to its native coldness. Lord, what a dismal
case am I in? Many convictions have I choked and strangled, which it may be
shall never more be revived, until hou revive them against me in judgment. I
have been in pangs, and brought forth nothing but wind; my troubles have
wrought no deliverance, neither have my lusts fallen before them, my conscience
indeed has been sometimes sick with sin, yea, so sick as to vomit them up by
an external partial reformation: but then with the dog have I returned again to
my vomit, and now I doubt am given over to an heart that cannot repent. Oh that
those traveling pangs could be quickened again! but alas! they are ceased. I
am like a prisoner escaped, and again recovered, whom the Iaylor loads with
double Irons. Surely, O my soul! if thy spiritual troubles return not again,
they are but gone back, to bring eternal troubles. It is with thee, O my soul!
as with a man whose bones have been broken and not well set; who must, (how
terrible soever it appear to him) endure the pain of breaking and setting them
again, if ever he be made a sound man. O that I might rather choose to be the
Object of thy wounding mercy, than of thy sparing cruelty! if thou plow not up
my heart again by compunction, I know it must be rent in pieces at last by
desperation.

The Poem.
There Is Isa. 28. 25. 26.
skill in plowing, that the Plowman knows
For if too Mat. 13. 5.
shallow, or too deep he goes;
The seed is either buried, or else my
To Mat. 13. 4.
^ooks and Daws become an easy prey.
This as a lively emblem, fitly may
Describe the blessed spirits work and way:
Whose work on souls, with this does symbolize;
Betwixt them both, thus the resemblance lies.
Souls are the Mat. 13. 38.
soil, conviction is the Act. 2. 37.
plow.
Gods workmen 2 Cor. 6. 1.
draw, the spirit shows them how.
He guides the work, and in good ground, does 1 Cor. 3. 5.
bless
His workmens pains, with sweet and fair success.
The heart prepared, he scatters in the seed
Which in it is season springs, no fowl nor weed
Shall pick it up, or choke this springing co^n;
Till it be Phil. 1. 6.
housed in the heavenly barn.
When thus Ioh. 16. 8.
the spirit plows up the ^allow ground,
When with such fruits, his servants work is 1 These. 2. 19
crowned;
Let all the Luke 15. 11.
friends of Christ, and soul say now;
As they pass by these fields 2 Cor. 9. 10, 11.
God speed the plow.
Sometimes this plow Mat. 13. 6.
thin, shelfy ground does turn.
That little seed which springs, the Sunbeams burn.
The rest uncovered lies, which fowls devour,
Alas! their hearts were 1 These. 1. 5.
touched, but not with power.
The Mar. 8. 14.
cares and pleasures of this world have drowned
The seed, before it peeped above the ground,
Some springs indeed, the Heb. 6. 5.
scripture says that some
Do taste the powers of the world to come.
These Luke 8. 14.
Embroy's never come to timely birth,
Because the seed that is sown wants depth of earth.
Turn up, O God, the bottom of my heart;
And to the seed that is sown, do thou impart
Thy choicest blessing. Though I Psalm. 126. 6.
weep and mourn;
In this wet seed-time; if I may return
With sheaves of joy; these fully will reward
My pains, and sorrows, be they never so hard.
CHAP. VIII.
The Choicest wheat is still reserved for seed, Upon the seed Corn.

But gracious principles are Choice indeed.
OBSERVATION.
HUsbandmen are very careful and curious about their Seed-corn, that it may not
only be clean and pure, but the best and most excellent in its kind, Isa. 28.
25. He easteth in the principal Wheat. If any be more full and weighty than
other, that is reserved for Seed. It Is usual with Husbandmen to pick and lease
their Seed-corn by hand, that they may separate the Cockel and Darnel, and all
the lighter and hollow grains from it, wherein they manifest their discretion,
for according to the vigor and goodness of the Seed, the fruit and production
is like to be.

APPLICATION.
THe choice and Principal Seed-corn with which the fields are sowed, after they
are prepared for it, does admimirably shadow forth those excellent principles
of grace infused into the regenerate soul. Their agreement, as they are both
seed, is obvious in the ten following particulars, and their excellency above
other principles in seven more.

The earth at first naturally brought forth Corn, and every Seed yielding
fruit, without humane industry; but since the or else his nature is as void of
holiness as the barren and untilled desert is of Corn.

Timothies singular advantage, that he knew the scriptures of a Child.

These. 1. 6. And you became followers of us and of the Lord, having received
the word in much affliction. But if they have fair weather then, to be sure
they shall meet with weather hard enough afterward, Heb. 10. 32: But call to
remembrance the former days, in which after ye were illuminated, ye endured a
great fight of afflictions.

Heb. 12. 2. And of this they may be confident, that he that has begun a good
work in them, will perform it unto the day of Christ. The care of God over the
graces of his people, is like the covering of the seed for security.

Seed-Corn is in its own nature, of much more value and The seed of God, 1 John
3. 9. The Divine nature, 2 Pet. 1. 4. One dram o and grace is far beyond all
the glory of this world; its more precious than gold which perishes, I Pet. 1.
7. The price of it is above rubies, and all that thou can desire is not to be
comp^red with it, Pro. 3. 15.

There is a great deal of Spirit and vigor in a little Seed, Ioh. 5. 4.
Whatsoeve is born of God, overcomes the world. They totally alter and change
the person in whom they are. He that persecuted us in times past, now preaches
the faith which once he destroyed. They enable the soul to do and suffer great
things for God, Heb. 11. 33, 34, 35.

The stalk and ^ar are potentially and virtually in a small

The fruitfulness of the seed depends upon the Sun and

The seed is fruitful in some soyls more than in others, Your faith grows
exceedingly, 2 These. 1. 3. Whilst the things that are in others are ready to
die, Rev. 3. 2. Though no man's heart be naturally a kind soil to grace, yet
doubtless grace is more advantaged in some dispositions than in others.

And lastly, their agreement as Seed appears in this, the and equally as may
be. So is grace diffused into all the faculties, judgment, will, and all the
affections are sowed with these new principles, The God of peace sanctify you
wholly, 1 These. 5. 23.

And thus you see, why principles of grace are called seed. Now in the next
place, (which is the second thing promised and mainly designed in this Chapter)
to show you the choiceness and excellency of these holy principles with which
sanctified souls are embellisht and adorned, and to convince you that true
grace excels all other principles, by which other persons are acted, even as
the principal wheat does the chaff, and refuse stuff. I shall here institute a
comparison betwixt grace, and the most splendid common gifts in the world, and
its transcendent excellency above them all will evidently appear in the seven
following particulars.

The most excellent common gifts come out of the common Ioh. 3. 6. That which
is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which is born of the spirit is spirit.
When a soul is sanctified by them, he partakes of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.
4. Is born not of flesh, nor of blood, nor of the will of man, but of God, Ioh.
1. 13. In this respect they differ from gifts, as the heavenly Manna which was
rained down from heaven, differs from common bread, which by pains and
industry the earth produces in a natural way.

Pet. 1. 8. Believing we rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory: light
is sown for the righteous, and joy for the upright in heart. All true pleasures
and delights are seminally grace, Psalm. 97. 11. they are sown for them in these
divine and heavenly graces, which are glory in the bud.

Gifts adorn the person, but do not secure the soul from Hebrews, and not
tremble to think in what a forlorn case a soul may be, though set off and
accomplished with the rarest endowments of this kind, Mat. 7. 22. Like a
precious stone in a toads head.
We read, that many shall say to Christ in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy name, and in thy name cast out devils, etc. and yet
themselves at last cast out as a prey to Devils. How divinely and rhetorically
did a Balaam speak and prophecy, Number. 23. What rare and excellent parts had
the Scribes and Pharisees? Who upon that account were styled principes seculi,
the Princes of the world, 1 Cor. 2. 8. What profound and excellent parts had
the Heathen Sages and Philosophers? These things are so far from securing the
soul against the wrath to come, that they often expose it unto wrath, and are
as oil to increase the eternal burnings, but now gracious principles are the
(...), as the Apostle calls them, Heb. 6. Things that accompany and have
salvation in them. These are the things on which the promises of Salvation run;
and these treasures are never found but in elect vessels. Glory is by promise
assured and made over to him that possesses them. There is but a little point
of time, betwixt him and the glorified spirits above. And how inconsiderable a
matter is a little time, which contracts and winds up apace? For now is our
salvation nearer than when we believed. And hence the scriptures speaks of them
as already saved, Romans 8. 24. We are saved by hope, because its as sure as if
we were in heaven. We are made to sit in heavenly places.

Gifts may damnifie the person that possesses them; and it Knowledge (says the
Apostle) Puffs up. 1 Cor. 8. 1. makes the soul proud and flatulent. It Is a
hard thing to know much, and not to know it too much. The Saints knowledge is
better than the Scholars; for he has his own heart instead of a Commentary to
help him. Aristotle said a little knowledge about heavenly things, though
conjectural, is better than much of earthly things, though certain. The world
by wisdom knew not God (says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1. 21.) (i. e.) their
learning hanged in their light, they were too wise to submit to the simplicity
of the Gospel. The excellent parts of the old Heretics, did but serve to
midwi^e into the world the monstrous birth of soul-damning heresies. Cupit abs
te ornari diabolus, as Austin said to that ingenious young Scholar; The devil
desires to be adorned by thee. But now grace in its self is not subject to such
abuses, it cannot be the proper univocal cause of any evil effect: It cannot
puff up the heart, but always humbles it; nor serve the devils designs, but
ever opposes them.

Gifts may be given a man for the sake of others, and not dona ministrantia non
sanctificantia, ministering but not sanctifying gifts, proceeding not from the
good will of God to him that has them, but to those he benefits by them. And
oh, what a sad consideration will this be one day to such a person, to think, I
helped such a soul to heaven, while I my self must lodge in hell?

Sin in the reign and power of it, may cohabit with the Angel, and the heart of
a Devil. The wisdom of the Philosoph^rs (says Eactantius) non excindit vitia
sed abscondit, did not root out, but hide their vices. The learned Pharisees
were but painted sepulchers; gifts are but as a fair glove drawn over a foul
hand. But now grace is incompatible with Sin in dominions it purifies the
heart, Act. 15. 9 cleanses the conscience, Heb. 9. 14. Crucifies the affections
and lusts of the flesh, Gal. 5. 24. is not content with the concealment, but
ruin of corruptions.

Lastly, Gifts must leave us at last. Whether there be knowledge, Isa. 40. 6,
8. Many times they leave a man before death. One knock, if it hit right (as one
says) may make a wise man a fool, but to be sure, they all leave us at death.
Does not his excellency which is in him, go away? Job 4. 21. yea, then all
natural excellency departs. Death strips the soul of all those splendid
ornaments, then the rhetorical tongue is struck dum; the nimble wit and curious
fancy, shall entertain your ears with no more pleasant discourses. Nunquam
j^cos dabis, as Adrian said to his departing soul; but grace ascends with the
soul into eternity, and there receives its perfection and accomplishment. Gifts
take their leave of the soul, as Orpha did of Naomi; but grace says, then as
Ruth, where thou go I will go, and where thou lodgest I will lodge, and
nothing shall separate thee and me. Now p^^ all this together and then judge
whether the Apostle spoke hyperbolyes, when he said, Covet earnestly the best
gifts, and yet I show unto you a more excellent way, 1 Cor. 12. ult. And thus
you have the choiceness of these principles also.

REFLECTIONS.
The lines are fallen to me in a pleasant place, The gracious souls Reflection.
may the gracious soul say. How defective soever I am in gifts yet blessed be
the Lord, who has sown the seeds of true grace in my heart. What though I am
not famed and honored among men, let it suffice me that I am precious in the
eyes of the Lord. Though he has not abounded to me in gifts of nature, yet
blessed be the God and Father of my Lord Jesus Christ who has abounded to me
in all spiritual blessings, in heavenly places, in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 1. 3. Is
not a true jewel, though spurn'din the dirt, more precious than a false one,
though set in gold? Why art thou troubled, O my soul, for the want of these
things which reprobates may have? and art not rather admiring and blessing God
for those things which none but the darlings and favorites of heaven can have?
is not an ounce of pure gold more valuable than many pounds of gilded brass?
what though the dews of Helicon descend not upon my head, if in the mean time
the sweet influences of Sion fall upon my heart? O my God! How much soever
others are elated by the light of their knowledge, I have cause with humility
to adore thee for the heavenly heat with which thou have warmed my affections,

Pause a while my soul opon this point. With what seed is my heart sown, The
deceived souls Reflection.
and of what kind are those things wherein I excel others? are they indeed
special seeds of grace, or common gifts and natural excellencies? If the
latter, little cause have I to pride my self in them, were they ten thousand
times more then they are. If these things be indeed the things that accompany
salvation, the seed of God, the true and real work of grace, Then (1) how comes
it to pass that I never found any throws or traveling pangs in the production
of them? Its affirmed, and generally acknowledged that the new creature is
never brought forth without such pains, and compunctions of heart, Act. 2. 37.
I have indeed often felt an aching head, whilst I have read and studied to
increase my knowledge; but when did I feel an aching heart for Sin? Oh, I begin
to suspect, that it is not right. Yea, (2) and my suspicion increases whiles I
consider that. grace is of an humbling nature, 1 Cor. 15. 10. Lord, how have I
been elated by my gifts and valued my self above what was meet? O how have I
delighted in the noise of the Pharisees trumpet! Mat. 6. 2. No music so sweet
as that Say, O my consicience, have I not delighted more in the Theater, than
the closet? in the praise of men, than the approbation of God? Oh, how many
evidences do thou produce against me? Indeed these are sad symptoms that I
have showed thee, but there is yet another which renders thy case more
suspicious yet; yea, that which thou can make no rational defense against,
even the ineffectualness of all thy gifts and knowledge to mortify any one of
all thy lusts. It Is beyond all dispute, that gifts may, but grace cannot
consist without mortification of sin, G^l. 5. 24. Now what lust has fallen
before these excellent parts of mine? Does not pride, passion, covetousness,
and indeed the whole body of ^in live and thrive in me as much as ever? Lord, I
yield the cause, I can defend it no longer against my conscience, which ca^ts
and condemns me by full proof, to be but in a wretched, cursed lamentable
state, notwithstanding all my knowledge and flourishing gifts. O show me a more
excellent way Lord! That I had the sincerity of the poorest Saint; though I
should lose the applause of all may parts: with these I see I may go to hell,
but without some better thing, no hope Of heaven.

The Poem.
GReat difference betwixt that seed is found,
With which you sow your several plots of ground.
Seed-wheat does far excel in Isa. 28. 25.
dignity,
The cheper Barley, and the cour^er Rye.
Though in themselves they good and wholesome are;
Yet these with choicest wheat may not compare,
Men's hearts like fields are sowed with different grain;
Some baser, some more noble; some again
Excelling Prove. 12. 26
both the former: more than wheat
Excels that grain, your swine, and horses eat.
For principles of mere morality,
Like Cummin, Barley, Fitches, Pease, or Rye:
In those men's hearts are often to be ^ound,
Whom yet the Scripture calls Mat. 19. 20.
cursed ground.
And nobler principles than these sometime
Called Heb. 6. 9.
common grace, and spiritual gifts which shine
In some men's heads, where is their habitation;
Yet they are no companions of Salvation.
These purchase 1 Cor. 1. 26.
honor both from great and small;
But I must tell thee that if this be all;
Though like an 1 Cor. 13. 1.
Angel in these gifts thou shine,
Amongst blind mortals, for a little time:
The days's at hand, when such as thou must take
Thy lot with Mat: 7 22.
devils in the infernal lake.
But principles of special saving grace,
Whose seat is in the Romans 10. 10
heart, not head or face:
Like sollid wheat, sown in a fruitful field
Shall spring and flourish, and at last will yield.
A glorious Gal. 6. 8.
harvest of eternal rest,
To him that nourished them within his breast.
O grace! how orient art thou! how divine!
What is the glory of all 1 Cor. 12. 31.
gifts to thine!
Disseminate this seed within my heart,
My God I pray thee, though thou should impart
The less of gifts; then I may truly say,
That thou have showed me, the more excellent way.
CHAP. IX.
By heavens influence, Upon springing weather afte Seed time
Corn and plants do spring,
Gods showers of grace do make his valleys sing.
OBSERVATION.
THe earth after that it is plowed and sowed, must be watered and warmed with
the dews and ifluences of heaven, or no fruit can be expected. If God do not
open to you his good treasure, the heavens to give rain unto the Land in its
season, and bless all the work of your hands, as it is, Deuteronomy. 28. 12. The earth
cannot yield her increase, The order and dependence of natural causes in the
productions of fruit, is excellently described, Hos. 2. 21. 22. I will hear the
heavens, and they shall hear the earth; and the earth shall hear the corn, and
wine, and Oil, and they shall hear Iezreel. Iezreel must have corn, and wine,
and Oil, or they cannot live; they cannot have it, unless the earth bring it
forth, the earth cannot bring it forth without the heavens, the heavens cannot
yield a drop unless God hear them; that is; unlock and open them. Natura nihil
al^^d est qua^ divinorum operum ordo.
Nature and natural causes are nothing else b^t the order in which God works.
This some Heathe^s by the light of nature acknowledged, and therefore when they
went to plow in the morning, Brentius.
they did lay one hand upon the plow (to speak their own part to be
painfulness) and hold up the other hand to Ceres the Goddess of Corn, to show,
Weems Cerem. Law.
that their expectation of plen^y was from their supposed Deity. I fear many
Christians lay both hands to the plow, and seldom lift up heart or hand to God,
when about that work. There was an husbandman (says Mr. Smith) that always
sowed good Seed, but never had good Corn; Smiths Essex Dove.
at last a neighbor came to him, and said, I will tell you what probably may
be the cuse of it? It may be (said he) you do not steep your Seed; no truly
said the other, nor ever did I hear that Seed must be steeped; yes surely, said
his neighbor, and I will tell you how, it must be steeped in prayer. When the
party heard this, he thanked him for his counsel, reformed his fault, and had
as good Corn as any man whatsoever, Surely, it is not the Husbandmans, but God
steps that drop fatness. Alma Matter terra, the earth indeed is a fruitful
mother, but the rain which ^ecundates and fertilizes it, has no other father
but God, Job 38. 28.

APPLICATION.
As impossible it is (in an ordinary way) for souls to be made fruitful in
grace and holiness, without the dews and influences of Ordinances and the
blessing of God upon them, as for the earth to yield her fruit without the
natural influences of heaven; for look, what dews, showers, and clear shinings
after ^ain are to the fields, that the word and Ordinances of God are to the
souls of men. My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distill as the
dew, as the ^ina^ rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass,
Deuteronomy. 3^. 2. For as the rain and snow comes down from heaven and waters the
earth, and makes it bring forth and bud; so shall my word be that goes forth
of my mouth, Isa. 55. 10, 11. And as the doctrine of the Gospel is rain, so
Gospel Ministers are the clouds in which those heavenly vapors are bound up.
The resemblance lies in the following particulars.

Acts 14. 17. He gave us rain from heaven and fruitful seasons, etc. The
doctrine of the Gospel is also of an heavenly extraction and descent, they are
heavenly truths which are brought to you in earthen vessels things that were
hid in God, and come from his bosom, Ephesians. 3. 9. What Nicodemus said of Christ,
is in a proportion true of every faithful dispenser of the Gospel, Thou art a
teacher come from God, Ioh. 3. 2. You are not to look upon the truths which
Ministers deliver, as the mere effects and fruits of their inventions and
parts, they are but the Conduits through which those celestial waters are
conveyed to you. It Is all heavenly, the Officers from heaven, Ephesians. 4. 12. Their
Doctrine from heaven, Ephesians. 3. 8, 9. The efficacy and success of it from heaven,
1 Cor. 3. 3. What I received of the Lord (says Paul) that have I delivered
unto you, 1 Cor. 11. 23. The same may every Gospel Minister say too. That Is the
first.

And then (2ly) The rain falls by divine direction and He causes it to rain
upon one city and not upon another, Amos, 4. 7. You shall often see a cloud
dissolve and spend it self upon one place, when there is not a drop within a
few miles of it. Thus is the Gospel sent to shed its rich influences upon one
place, and not upon another; It pours down showers of blessings upon on Town or
Parish, whilst others are dry like the ground which lay near to Gideons wet
fleece. To you is the word of this salvation sent, Act. 13. 26. Sent it comes
not by chance, but by Commission and appointment, and its sent to you by
special direction. Ministers can no more go whither they please, than the
failing clouds can move against the wind. Paul and Timothy, two fruitful clouds
(that sent down many sweet refreshing showers upon every place whither they
came) the Lord sent them through Phrygia and Galatia but forbad them to preach
the word in Asia, Acts. 16. 6. And when they essayed to go into Bit^ynia, the
spirit suffered them not, v. 7. But a man of Macedonia appears to Paul in a
vision, and prayed him, saying, come over to Macedonia and help us, v. 9. Thus
you see, how the mystical, as well as the natural clouds, are moved according
to divine counsel; and though Ministers are not now disposed to their
respective places, in such an extraordinary way, yet there is still a special
hand of the Spirit guiding their motions, which is seen partly in qualifying
them or such a people, and partly in drawing out their hearts to elect and call
them, and inclining their hearts to accept the call.

There is a great deal of difference in showers of rain the small rain, and the
former, the great rain of his strength, Job 37. 6. So it is in these spiritual
showers, the effects of some sermons, (like a sudden spout of rain^) are very
transient; that touch the heart a little for present by way of conviction or
comfort, but it fleets away immediately, I^m. 1. 23. At other times the Gospel
like a settled moderate rain, soaks to the root, to the very heart. So did that
sweet shower which sell, Acts 2. 37. It searches the root, it went to the
heart; the influences' of it are sometimes abiding, and do much longer remain
in, and refresh the heart, than the rain does the earth. There be effects left
in some hearts, by some Sermons and duties, that will never out of it so long
as they live. I will never forget thy precepts, for by them thou have quickened
me, Psalm. 119. 92.

The rain is most beneficial to the earth, when there come a clear shining
after rain, 2 Samuel 23. 4. by which the seminal virtue of the earth is drawn
forth, and then the herbs and flowers, and Corn sprout abundantly. So it is
with Gospel showers, when the Sun of righteousness opens upon poor souls under
the word, darting down the beams of grace and love upon them, whilst they are
attending on it, (just as you sometimes see a sweet shower fall while the Sun
shines out) O how comfortable is this! And effectual to melt the heart! and as
the warm rain is most refreshing, so when the word comes warmly, from the
melting affections of the Preacher, who imparts not only the Gospel, but his
own soul with it, 1 These. 2. 8. This does abundantly more good than that which
drops coldly from the lips of the unaffected speaker.

Showers of rain do exceedingly refresh the earth, as a man Psalm. 65. 12, 13.
but never was shower of rain so sweetly refreshing to the thirsty earth, as
Gospel-showers are to gracious hearts, Col. 4. 8. It comforts their very
hearts. What joy was there in Samaria, when the Gospel came to that place? Acts
8. 8. It revives the soul, its mel in ore, melos in aure, jubilum in cord,
honey in the mouth, melody in the ear, and a very Iubilee in the heart.

Rain is necessary at Seed-time, to make ready the earth, Psalm. 65. 9, 10. Thou
visitest the earth, and waterest it; thou greatly ^nrichest it with the river
of God, which is full of water; thou preparest them co^n, when thou ^ast so
provided for it; thou waterest the ridges thereof abundantly, thou sett^st the
furrows thereof, thou make it soft with showers, thou bl^ssest the springing
thereof. And this the Scripture calls the former rain. And as this is necessary
about Seed-time, so the latter rain is as need^ul about ^a^ing time, to
disclose the ear, and to bring it to perfection; both these are great blessings
to the earth, and conduce to a plentiful harvest, Joel 2. 23, 24. Beglad then
ye Children of Sion, and r^joyce in the Lord your God, for he has given you
the former rain mod^rately, and he will cause to come down for you the rain,
the former and the latter rain in the first month, and the floors shall be full
of wheat, and the faces shall overflow with wine and Oil. Thus the Gospel has
a double use and benefit also. It Is necessary as the former rain at Seed-time,
it causes the first spring of grace in the heart, Psalm. 19. 7. And there could
be, (in an ordinary way) no spring of grace without it, Prove. 29. 18. And as
this former rain is necessary to cause the first spring of grace, so also it
has the use of the latter rain to ripen those precious fruits of the Spirit in
the souls of Belivers, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. He gave some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and teachers, for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry for the edifying of the
body of Christ, till we all come in the unity of the faith, and the knowledge
of the Son of God, to a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ. Were all the elect converted unto God, yet still there would
be a necessity of a Gospel Ministry.

After a great glut of rain, usually there comes a drought; Wet and dry pay one
another. And truly when a people are glutted with a fullness of Gospel-mercies,
it is usual with God to shut up and restrain the Gospel-clouds, that for a time
(at least) there be no dews upon them, and thereby teach them to prize their
despised (because common) mercies at an higher rate. For as a good man once
said, mercies are best known by the back, and most prized when most wanted. In
those days the word of the Lord was precious, there was no open vision, 1 Samuel
3. 1. It is with spiritual as with temporal food, slighted when plenteous, but
if a famine once come, then every bit of bread is precious. Jerusalem remembered
in the days of her affiction, and of her misery, all her pleasant things that
she had in the days of old, Lam. 1. 7. It Is both a sinflul and dangerous thing
to wantonize with Gospel-mercies, and d^spise the plainest (if faithful)
Minis^e^s of the Gospel. The time may come when you may be glad of the plainst
Sermon, from the mouth of the meanest Ambassador of Christ.

To conclude, the prayers of Saints are the keys that open out, or withold
their influences, James 5. 18. Elias was a man subject to like passions as we
are, and he prayed earnestly that it might not rain, and it rained not on the
earth, by the space of three years and six months; and he prayed again, and the
heavens gave rain, and the earth brought forth fruit. God has subjected the
works of his hands, to the prayers of his Saints, Isa. 45. 11.

Prayer is also the golden key which opens these mystical Gospel clouds, and
dissolves them into sweet gracious showers. God will have the whole work of the
Ministry carried on by the prayers of his people, they first obtain their
Ministers by prayer, Luke 10. 2. Pray ye the Lord of the Harvest to s^nd forth
laborers into the vineyard. It is by the help of prayer, that they are carried
on, and enabled to exercise their Ministry. They may tell their people as a
great General once told his Soldiers. That he flew upon their wings. Pray for
me (says the great Apostle) that utterance may be given me, that I may open my
mouth boldly, to make known the Mysteries of the Gospel, Ephesians. 6. 19. Yea, by
the Saints prayers it is, that Ministers obtain the success and fruits of their
labors, T^fse. 3. 1. Finally brethren, pray for us, that the word of the Lord
my have free course, and ^e glorified, even as it is with you. And thus you
have the Metaphor opened. Now, Oh! That these truths migh come down in sweet
showers upon the hearts both of Ministers and people, in the following
Reflections.

REFLECTIONS. 3. Reflections for Gospel Ministers.

Acts 7. 52. He that will not let men alone to be quiet in their lusts, must
expect but little quiet from men in this life. But it is enough Lord, that
arest remains for thy servant, let me be so wise to secure a rest to come,
and not so vain to expect it on earth.

And, O that I might study those instructing clouds, from in the fullness of the
blessing of the Gospel of Christ, Romans 15. 29. O let not those thirsty souls
that wait for me as for the rain, Job 29. 23. Return like the Troops of Tema,
ashamed with their heads covered. Job 6. 19. O that my lips might refresh many!
let me never be like those empty clouds, which deceive the hopes of thirsty
souls; but let my doctrine descend as the rain and distill as the dew, and let
that plot of thine inheritance which thou have assigned to me, be as the field
which the Lord has blessed.

Once more, lift up thine eyes to the clouds, and behold, to how great an
height the Sun has mounted them, for by Mat. 24. 30. Lord, let me be a cloud
of heaven too! Let my heart and conversation be both there! Who is more
advantaged for an heavenly life than I? heavenly truths are the subjects of my
daily study, and shall earthly things be the objects of my daily delights and
loves? God forbid, that ever my earthly conversation should contradict and
shame my heavenly calling and profession. Shine forth thou glorious Su^ of
righteousness, and my heart shall quickly be attracted and mounted above these
visible clouds, yea, and above the aspectable heavens.

Is the Gospel rain, 3 Reflections for private Christians.
and its Ministers clouds? Woe is me then, that my habitation is upon the
mountains of Gilboa, Gideons dry fleece, For those that want a Gospel Ministry.
whilst the ground round about me is wet with the dew of heaven! O thou that
command the clouds above, and openest the windows of heaven; remember, and
refresh this parched wilderness, wherein I live, with showers o grace, that we
may not be as the heath in the desert, which sees not when good comes, nor
inhabit the parched places of the wilderness.

O Lord, thou have caused the heavens above me to be black For those that enjoy
a Gospel Ministry.
thou openest the celestial casements from above, and daily sendest down
showers of Gospel-blessings; O that I might be as the parched earth under them!
not for barrenness, but for thirstiness. Let me say, My soul longs, yea, even
faints for the Courts of the lord: that I might there see the beauty of the
Lord. Does the spungy earth so greedily suck up the showers, and open as many
mouths as there are clefts in it, to receive what the clouds despense? and
shall those precious soul-inriching showers fleet away unprofitably from me? if
so, then,

What an account have I to make for all those Gospel-blessings For unprofitable
hearers.
for all those Gospel-dews and showers wherewith I have been watered! Should I
be found fruitless at last, it will ^are better with the barren and
uncultivated wilderness, than with me, more tolerable for Indians and
Barbarians, that never heard the Gospel, than for me that have been so
assiduously and plenteously watered by it. Lord, what a difference will thou
put in the great day, betwixt simple and pertinacious barrenness! Surely, if my
root be not rottenness, such heavenly waterings and influences as these, will
make it sprout forth into fruits of obedience.

The Poem.
THe Isa. 44. 14.
vegetables here below depend,
Upon those Deuteronomy. 28. 12.
treasures which the heavens do spend
Most bounteously upon them: to preserve
Their being, and their beauty. This may serve
To shadow forth a heavenly mystery,
Which thus presents it self before your eye.
As when the Sun draws near us in the spring,
All creatures do Cant. 2. 1^. 12.
rejoice, birds, chirp and sing.
The face of nature smiles, the fields Psalm. 104. 30.
^dorn
Themselves, with rich embroyderies. ^he corn
Revives, and shoots up, the warm sw^^t rain
Makes trees, and herbs Psalm. 65. 11.
sprout forth and spring amain,
Walk but the fields in such a fragrant m^^n,
How do the Psalm. 10. 4* 12.
birds your ears with music charm!
The Cant. 2. 12.
flowers, their flaming beauty's do present
Unto your captived eyes: and for their scent,
The sweet Arabian gums cannot compare;
Which thus perfume, the circumambient air.
So, when the Gospel sheds its cheering beams,
On gracious souls; like those sweet warming gleams,
Which God ordaines in nature; to draw forth
The virtue seminal that is in the earth:
It warms their Col. 48.
hearts, their languid graces cheers;
And on such souls, a Psalm. 52. 8.
spring-like face appears.
The gracious showers these spiritual clouds do yield,
Inriches them with Romans 15. 29.
sweetness; like a field
Which God has blessed. Oh! it is exceeding sweet,
When gracious hearts, and Romans 10. 15
heavenly truths do meet.
How should the hearts of Saints within them spring,
When they behold Acts 8. 8.
the messengers that bring
These gladsom tidings? Yea, their very feet
Are beautiful; because their message sweet.
O what a mercy do those Psalm. 147. 19, 20.
souls enjoy
On whom such Gospel-dews fall day by day!
Thrice happy Land which in this pleasant spring,
Can hear these Turtles, in her hedges ^ing.
O prize such mercies, if you ask me why?
Read on, you will see, there is Reason by and by.
CHAP. X.
If God restrain the showers, Upon a dearth through want of rain.
you howl and cry;
Shall saints not mourn, when spiritual clouds are dry?
OBSERVATION.
It Is deservedly accounted a sad judgment, when God shuts up the heavens over
our heads, and makes the earth as brass under our feeet, Deuteronomy. 28. 23. Then the
Husbandmen are called to mourning, Joel. 1. 11. All the fields do languish, and
the bellowing cattle are pined with thrist. Such a sad state the prophet
rhetorically describes, Ier. 14. 3, 4, 5, 6. The Nobles have sent their little
ones to the waters, they came to the pits and found no water; they returned
with their vessels empty, they were ashamed, and confounded, and covered their
heads; because the ground is chapt, for there is no rain in the earth, the
Plowmen were ashamed, they covered their heads: yea, the Hind also calved in
the field and forsook it, because there was no grass: and the wild asses did
stand in the high places, they s^uffed up the wind like dragons, their eyes
failed because there was no grass.

And that which makes the want of rain so terrible a judgment, is the famine of
bread, which necessarily follows these e^traordinary droughts and is one of the
sorest temporal judgments which God inflicts upon the world.

APPLICATION.
ANd truly, as much cause have they to weep and tremble, over whose souls God
shuts up the spiritual clouds of the Gospel, and thereby sending a spiritual
famine upon their souls. Such a judgment the Lord threatens in Amos 8. 11.
Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will send a famine in the Land,
not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water; but of hearing the word of the
Lord. The meaning is, I will send a more fearful judgment, than that of the
famine of bread; for this particle [not] is not exclusive, but excessive*
implying, that a famine of bread is nothing, or but a light judgment, compared
with the famine of the word. Parallel to which is that Text, Isa. 5. 6. I will
lay it wast (says God of the fruitless Church) sit shall not be pruned nor
dug; but there shall come up briars, and thorns; I will also command the
clouds, that they rain not upon it. And we find both in humane and sacred
Histories, that when God has shut up the spiritual clouds, removing or
silencing his Ministers; sensible Christians have ever been deeply affected
with it and reckoned it a most tremendous judgment. Thus the Christians of
Antioch, when Chrysostom their Minister was b^nished Satius est ut sol non
luc^at, quam ut non aoc^at Chrysostomus.
they judged it better to lose the Sun out of the firmament, than lose that,
their Minister. And when Nazianzen was taking his leave of Constantinople, as
he was preaching his farewell-Sermon, the people were exceedingly affected with
his loss; and among the rest, an old man in the Congregation fell into a bitter
passion, and cried out, Aude pater, and tecum trinitatem ipsam ejice. (i. e.)
Go farther, if you dare, and take away the whole Trinity with you; meaning,
that God would not stay when he was gone. How did the Christians of Antioch
also weep and lament, when Paul was taking his farewell of them? Act. 20. 37,
38. He had been a cloud of blessings to that place, but now they must exp^ct no
more show^r^ from him. O, they knew not how to giv^ up such a Minister! When
the Ark of God (which was the Symbol of the divine presence among the Jews)
was taken, all the City cried out, 1 Samuel 4. 13. O, the loss of a Gospel
Ministry is an inestimable loss! not to be repaired but by its own return, or
by heaven. Mr. Greenham tells us, that in the times of Popish persecution, when
godly Ministers were haled away from their flocks to Martyrdom, the poor
Christians would meet them in the way to the prisons or stake, with their
little ones in their arms, and throwing themselves at their feet, would thus
bespeak them: What shall be our estate, now you are gone to Martyrdom? who
shall instruct these poor Babes? Who shall ease our afflicted consciences? Who
shall lead us in the way of life? recompense unto them, O Lord! as they have
deserved, who a^e the causes of this, Lord give them sad hearts. Quis talia
fando, temperet a lachrymis? And to let you see, there is sufficient ground for
this sorrow, when God restrains the influences of the Gospel, solemnly consider
the following particulars.

Ephesus, when he did but threaten to come against her, and remove the
Candlestick out of its place, Rev. 2. 5. It Is a stroke at the soul, a blow at
the root; usually the last, and therefore the worst of judgments. There is a
pedigree of judgments, first Gomer bears Iezreel, next Loruhamah, and at last
brings forth Loammi, Hos. 1. 4, 6, 8, 9.

Mat. 9. 36. What an easy conquest does the devil now make of them? how fast
does hell fill in such times? poor souls, being driven thither in droves, and
none to rescue them! Matthew Paris tells us, that in the year 1072. when
preaching was suppressed at Rome, letters were then framed as coming from hell;
wherein the devil gave them thanks for the multitude of souls they had sent to
him that year. But truly we need not talk of letters from hell, we are told
from heaven, how deplorable the condition of such poor souls is. See Prove. 28.
19. Hos. 4. 6. Or,

Romans 3. 2. the principal thing in which the peculiar glory of Israel consisted
was this, That unto them was committed the Oracles of G^d On that account is
was called the glorious Land, Dan. 11. 16. This made them greater than all the
Nations rou^^ about them. Deuteronomy. 4. 7. 8. (2) By losing the Ordinances, they
lose their quickenings, comforts, and soulrefreshments; for all these are sweet
streams from the Gospel fountain, Psalm. 119. 50. Col. 4. 8. No wonder then to
hear the People of God Complain of dead hearts, when the Gospel is removed. (3)
In the loss of the Gospel they lose their defense and safety. This is there is
their hedge, their w^ll of protection, Isa. 5. 5. Walls and hedges (says
Musculus in loc.) are the Ordinances of God, which serve both ad se perationem
and munitionem, to distinguish, and to defend them. When God plucks up this
hedge, and breaks down this wall all mischiefs break in upon us presently. 2 Chronicles. 15. 3, 4, 5* 6. Now for a long season Israel has been without the true
Go^, and without a teaching Priest, and without Law -- And in those times there
was no peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in, but great vexations
were upon all the inhabitants of the Countiries and Nations was destroyed of
Nation, and City of City; for God did vex them with all adversity. How long did
Jerusalem remain, after that voice was heard in the Temple, migremu^ hinc? Let
us be gone. (4) With the Gospel, we lose our temporal enjoyments and creature
comforts: These usually come and go with the Gospel. When God had once written
Loammi upon Israel, the next news is this, I will recover my wool and my flax,
Hos. 2. 9. (5) and lastly to come up to the very case in hand, they love with
it their spiritual food; and soul-subsistence; for the Gospel is their feast of
fat things; Isa, 25. 6. their spiritual wells, Isa. 12. 3. a dole distributed
among the Lords poor. Romans 1. 11. In a word, it is as the rain and dews of
heaven, as has been showed, which being restrained, a spiritual famine
necessarily follows: a famine of all the most terrible. Now to show you the
analogy betwixt this and a temporal famine, that therein you may see what
cause* you have to be deeply affected with it, take it in thse six following
particulars.

A famine is caused by the failing of bread, or that which is in the stead, and
has the use of bread. D^inties and superfluous rarities may fail, and yet men
may subsist comfortably. As long as people have bread and water* they will not
famish; but take away bread once, and the spirit of man fails: Upon this
account bread is called a staff, Psalm. 105. 16. because what a staff is to an
aged or feeble man, that bread is to the faint and feeble spirits, which even
so do lean upon it. And look what bread is to the natural spirits, that, and
more than that, the word is to gracious spirits, Job 23. 12. I have esteemed
the words of thy mouth, more than my necessary food. If once God break this
staff, the inner man, that hidden man of the heart, will quickly begin to fail
and faulter.

panis nutrimentum, the nourishing virtue of bread, that it shall signify no
more as to the end of bread, than a chip, Hag. 1. 6. as by taking away panem
nutrientem, bread it self, Isa. 3. 1. And so it is in a spiritual famine, which
is occasioned either by Gods removing all the Ordinances, and making vision
utterly to ^ail; or else, though there be preaching prayer and other Ordinances
left, (at least, the names and shadows of them) yet the presence of God is not
with them. There is no marrow in the bone, no milk in the breast; and so, as to
soul-subsistance, it is all one, as if there were no such things.

Prove. 27. 7 It Is the Dutch Proverb, and a very true one, hunger is the best
Cook.

Iejunus stomachus raro vulgaria temnit. Horat*
In time of famine coursest fare contents,
The barking stomach strains no complements.
It Is storied of Artaxerxes Memor, that when he was flying before his enemies,
he fed hungrily upon barley bread, and said, Cujusmodi voluptatis hactenus in
expernus fuit? Oh, what pleasure have I hitherto been ignorant of; when great
Darius drank the pudled water, that had been defiled with dead carcases which
had been slain in that famous battle, he professed he never drank more pleasant
drink. And famous Hunniades said, he never fared more daintily, than when (in a
like exigence) he supped upon bread, onions, and water, with a poor Shepherd
in his cottage.

Just so, does the famine of the Word raise the price and esteem, of vulgar and
despised truths. O what would we give for one of those Sermons, one of those
Sabbaths we formerly enjoyed? In those days the word of the Lord was precious.
When God calls to the enemy to take away and remove his contemned, but precious
dainties, from his wanton Children, and a spiritual famine has a little
pinched them, they will then learn to prize their spiritual food at a higher
rate.

In time of famine some persons suffer more than others. It falls heaviest and
pincheth hardest upon the poorer sort, as long as any thing is to be had for
money, the rich will have it. So it falls out in a spiritual famine; although
the most experienced, and best furnished Christians, will have enough to do to
live in the absence of Ordinances, yet they are like to subsist much better,
than weak, ignorant, and unexperienced ones. Some Christians have Husbanded
their time well, and like Joseph in the seven years plenty, laid up for a
scarcity. The Word of God dwells richly in them. Some such there are, as John
calls young men, who are strong, and the word of God remains in them, of whom
it may be said, as Ierom spoke of Nepotianus, that by long and assiduous
meditation of the Scriptures, he had made his breast the very Library of
Christ. But others are babes in Christ; and though God will preserve that good
work which he has begun in them, yet these poor babes will soonest find, and
be most concerned in the loss of their spiritual Fathers and Nurses.

All he^ People sigh, Lam. 1. 11. Yea, the poor little ones are brought in, v.
12. crying to their Mothers, where is the Corn and wine? and then pouring out
their souls into their Mothers bosom. Just so it is in a famine of the Word;
poor Christians everywhere sighing and crying, O where are our godly
Ministers? Our sweet Sabbaths, Sermons, Sacraments, my Fathers, my Fathers, the
Chariots of Israel and the horsemen thereof? How beautiful were your feet upon
the mountains! And then weeping, like the people at Paul's departure, to think
they shall see their faces no more.

They have given their pleasant things, for meat to relieve their souls, Lam.
1. 11. And doubt less when a spiritual famine shall pinch hard, those that have
been close-handed to maintain a-Gospel Ministry, will account it a choice mercy
to enjoy them again at any rate. Though the Lord feed you with the bread of
affliction, and give you the watres, of adversity, yet it will sweeten that
bread and water to you, if your teachers be no more removed into corners, Isa.
30. 20.

REFLECTIONS.
Is the famine of the word such a fearful judgment? The ungrateful souls
reflection.
then Has not God made of one blood, all the Nations of men, to dwell on the
face of the earth? and determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of
their habitation Act. 17. 26. Many of these great and populous Nations are
involved in gross darkness. Now that of all the several ages of the world, and
places in it; God should espy the best place for me, and bring me forth into
it, in such an happy nick of time, as can hardly be paralleld in History, for
the plenty of Gospel-mercies, that this age and Nation has enjoyed; that my
Mother did not bring me forth in the deserts of Arabia, or wastes of America,
but in England where God has made the Sun of the Gospel to stand still, as the
natural Sun once did over Gibeon; and that such a mercy should no more affect
my soul, let shame cover my face for this, and trembling seize my heart.

Is the Gospel indeed departed? The deprived Christians Reflection.
its sweet influences restrained? Alas! for the day, for it is a great day, so
that none is like it; it is even the day of Jacob 's trouble. Woe is me, that
ever I should survive the Gospel, and the precious liberties and mercies of it!
What horrid sins have been harbored amongst us, for which the Lord contends,
by such an unparalleld judgment? Lord, let me justify thee even in this severe
dispensation; the provocation of thy Sons, and of thy daughters have been very
great, and amongst them none greater than mine. May we not this day read our
sin in our punishment? O what nice and wanton appetites, what curious and
itching ears, had thy people in the days of plenty? Methods, tones and
gestures, were more regarded than the excellent treasures of divine truths. Ah
my soul! I remember my fault this day? little did I then consider, that Sermons
work not upon hearts, as they are thus elegant, thus admirable, but as they are
instruments in the hand of God appointed to such an end. Even as Austin said of
the Conduits of water, though one be in the shape of an Angel, another of a
beast, yet the water refreshes as it is water, and not as it comes from such a
Conduit: By this also, O Lord, thou rebukest the supiness and formality of thy
people. How drowsy, dull, and careless have they been under the most excellent
and quickening means? few more then I. Alas! I have often presented my body
before the Lord in Ordinances, (...); but my soul has been wandering abroad, as
Chrysostom speaks. I should have come from under every Sermon as a sheet comes
from the press, with all the stamps and lively impressions of the truths I
heard upon my heart. But Alas! If it had been demanded of me, as once it was of
Aristotle, after a long and curious Oration, how he liked it, I might have
answered as he did, Truly I did not hear it, for I was all the while minding
another matter. Righteous art thou, O Lord, in all that is come upon us.

The silent Ministers Reflection.
ready to perish. Thou have said to me as once to Ezekiel, Son of man, behold,
I will make thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth, and thou shall be dumb.
This is a heavy judgment, but thou must be justified and cleared in it.
Although men may not, yet God, if he please, may put a lighted candle under a
bushel. And herein I must acknowledge thy righteousness. Many times have I been
sinfully silent, when both thy glory and the interest of souls engaged me to
speak. Most justly therefore have thou made my tongue to cleave to its roof.
Little did I consider the preciousness of souls, or the tremenduous account to
be given for them, at the appearing of the great Shepherd. I have now time
enough to sit down and mourn over former miscarriages, and lost opportunities.
Lord restore me once again to a serviceable capacity, to a larger sphere of
activity for thee, for I am now become as a broken vessel. It grieves me to the
heart, to see thy flock scattered, to hear thy people cry to me, as once to
Joseph, Give us bread, for why should we dye in thy presence? Thy word is like
fire, shut up in my bones, and I am weary with forbearing. O, that thou would
once again open the doors of thine house, that there may be bread enough in
thine house for all thy children.

The Poem.
When God does make the Deuteronomy. 28. 23
heavens above us brass,
The earth's lke iron. Flowers, herbs and grass
Have lost their fragrant green; are turned Joel ^. 19.
yellow,
The brooks are dry, the pining cattle Joel 1. 20. Ier. 14. 56.
bellow.
The fat and flowery meadows scorcht and burned,
The Countries mirth is into Joel. 1. 11.
mourning turned.
The clefted earth, her thirsty mouth Ier. 14. 4
sets open,
Unto the empty clouds; as 'twere in hope
Of some refreshing drops, that might allay
Her fiery thirst: but they soon pass away.
The pensive Amos 5. 16.
Husbandman with his own eyes,
Bedews his Land, because he sees the skies:
Refuse to do it, Amos 8. 11.
just so stands the case,
When God from souls, removes the means of grace.
God's Ministers are clouds, their doctrine Deuteronomy. 32. 2. Heb. 6. 7, 8
rain;
Which when the Lord in judgment shall restrain:
The peoples souls in short time will be found
In such a case, as this dry parched ground.
When this Hos. 9. 12.
sad judgment falls on any Nation,
Let Saints therein take up this lamentation.
O dreadful, dark, and dismal day!
How is our glory fled away.
Our Sun gone down, our stars o'recast;
God's heritage is now laid wast.
Our pining souls no bread can get,
With wantons God has justly met,
When we are fed unto the full,
This man was tedious; that was dull.
But they are gone, and there remain
No such occasions to complain.
Stars are not now for lights, but signs;
God knows of what heartbreaking times.
Sure heaven intends not peace, but wars;
In calling home Ambassadors.
How long did Sodom's judgment stay?
When righteous Lot was snatched away.
How long remained that stately Hall,
When Sampson made the pillars fall?
When Horsemen, and Commanders fly;
Woe to the helpless Infantry.
This is a sad and fatal blow,
A public loss and overthrow.
You that so long have wished them gone,
Be quiet now; the thing is done.
Did they torment you ere your day?
God has removed them out o'th'way.
Now sleep in sin, and take your ease;
Their doctrine shall no more displease.
But Lord! what shall become of us?
Our Teacher's gone, and left us thus!
To whom shall we our selves address,
When conscience labors in distress
O, who shall help us at our need?
Or pour in Balm, when wounds do bleed?
Help Lord, for unto thee our eyes
Do pour out tears; our groans, our cries
Shall never cease: till thou restore,
The mercies which we had before.
Till Sions paths where grass now grows,
Be trodden by the feet of those
That love thy name: and long to enjoy
The mercies they have sinned away.
CHAP. IX.
Seeds dye and rot, Upon the corrupting of the Seed before it spring.
and then most fresh appear,
Saints bodies rise more orient then they mere.
OBSERVATION.
AFter the seed is committed to the earth, it seems to perish and dye, as our
Savior speaks, John. 12. 24. Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and
die, it abides alone; but if it die, it brings forth much fruit. The death of
the Corn in the earth is not a total death, but only the corruption or
alteration of it: for if once the seminal life and virtue of it were quite
extinguished, it could never put forth blade or ear without a miracle. Yet,
because that alteration is a kind of death, therefore Christ here uses it as a
fit illustration of the resurrection. And indeed there is nothing in nature
more apt to illustrate that great mystery. What a fragrant, green and beautiful
blade do we ^ee spring up from a corrupted seed? how black, and moldy is that?
how beautiful and verdant is this?

APPLICATION.
EVen thus shall the bodies of the Saints arise in beauty and glory at the
resurrection. They are sown in dishonor, they are raised in glory; they are
sown natural bodies, they are raised spiritual bodies, 1 Cor. 15. 43, 44. The
Husbandman knows, that though the seed rot in the earth, yet it will rise
again. And the believer knows, That though after his skin worms destroy his
body, yet in his flesh he shall see God, Job 19. 25, etc. and the resemblance
betwixt the seed sown, and springing up; and the bodies of the Saints dying,
and rising again, lies in these following particulars.

Romans 8. 10. Though Christ be in him, yet the body is dead; that is, sentenced
to death, because of sin, Heb. 6. ult, It is appointed for all men once to dye.

Cor. 9. 10. Were there not a resurrection of it expected, the Husbandman would
never be willing to cast away his Corn. The bodies of Saints are also committed
to the grave in hope, I These. 4. 13, 14. But I would not have you to be
ignorant brethren, concerning those which are asleep, as them which have no
hope; for if we believe that Jesus dyed and rose again, even so also them which
sleep in Jesus shall the Lord bring with him. This blessed hope of a
resurrection, sweetens, not only the troubles of life, but the pangs of death.

Ioh. 5. 26. Thou shall come to thy grave in a full age, as a shock of corn
comes in, in its season. They always dye in the fittest time, though
sometimes they seem to dye immaturately. The time of their death was from all
eternity prefixed by God, beyond which they cannot go, and short of which they
cannot come.

Even so man lies down, and rises not again till the heavens be no more, Job
14. 12. The days of darkness in the grave are many.

Rev. 20. 13.

to what it was before. Thus rise the bodies of Saints, marvellously improved,
beautified and perfected with spiritual qualities and rich endowments; in
respect whereof they are called spiritual bodies, I Cor. 15. 43. not properly,
but analogically spiritual; for look as spirits subsist without food, ra^ment,
sleep, know no lassitude, weariness or pain; so our bodies after the
resurrection shall be above these necessities and distempers; for we shall be
as the Angels of God, Mat. 22. 30. Yea, our vile bodies shall be changed, and
made like unto Christ's glorious body; which is the highest pitch, and ascent of
glory and honor, that an humane body is capable of, Phil. 3. 21. Indeed the
glory of the soul shall be the greatest glory; that is the orient invaluable
jem; but God will bestow a distinct glory upon the body, and richly enammel the
very case in which that precious jewel shall be kept. In that glorious morning
of the resurrection, the Saints shall put on their new fresh suits of flesh,
richly laid and trimmed with glory. Those bodies which in the grave were but
dust and rottenness, when it delivers them back again, shall be shining and
excellent pieces, absolutely and everlastingly freed. (1) From all natural
infirmities and distempers; death is their good Physician, which at once freed
them of all diseases. It Is a great Affliction now to many of the Lord's people,
to be clogged with so many bodily infirmities which render them very
unserviceable to God. The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak. A
crazy body retorts and shoots back its distempers upon the soul with which it
is so closely conjoined; but though now the soul (as Theophrastus speaks) pays
a dear rent for the Tabernacle in which it dwells, yet when death dissolves
that Tabernacle, all the diseases and pains under which it groaned shall be
buried in the rubbish of its mortality; and when they come to be reunited
again, God will bestow rich gifts and dowries, even upon the body, in the day
of its re-espousals to the soul. (2) It shall be freed from all deformities,
there are no breaches, flaws, monstrosities in glorified bodies; but of them it
may much rather be said, what was once said of Absalom, 2 Samuel 14. 25. That
from the crown of his head, to the sole of his foot; there was no blemish in
him. (3ly.) It shall be freed from all natural necessities, to which it is now
subjected in this its animal state. How is the soul now disquieted and tortured
with cares and troubles, to provide for a perishing body? Many unbelieving and
unbecoming fears, it is now vexed with. What shall it eat? and what shall it
drink? and wherewithal shall it be clothed? But meats for the belly, and the
belly for meats; God shall destroy both it and them, 1 Cor. 6. 13. (i. e.) as
to their present use and office; for as to its existence, so the belly shall
not be destroyed. But even as the Masts, Poop and Stern of a Ship abide in the
harbor after the voyage is ended, so shall these bodily members, as Tertullian
excellently illustrates it. (4ly.) They shall be freed from death, to which
thenceforth they can be subject no more; that formidable adversary of nature
shall affault it no more. For they which shall be accounted worthy to obtain
that world, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry nor are given in
marriage, neither can they dye any more; for they shall be equal to the Angels,
and are the children of God, being the children of the resurrection, Luke 20.
35, 36 Mark it [equal to the Angels] not that they shall be separate, (...).
and single spirits without bodies, as the Angels are, but equal to them in the
way and manner of their living and acting. We shall then live upon God, and act
freely, purely, and delightfully for God; for all kind of living upon, and
delighting in creatures, seems in that Text (by a Synechdoche of the part which
is ordinarily in Scripture put for all creature-delights, dependencies, and
necessities) to be excluded. Nothing but God shall enamour and fill the soul,
and the body shall be perfectly subdued to the spirit. Lord, what have thou
prepared for them that love thee?

REFLECTIONS.
The healthful Saints Reflection.
then Lord let me never be unwilling to use my body now for the interest of thy
glory, or my own Salvation. Now, O my God, it grieves me to think how many
precious opportunities of serving and honoring thee, I have lost under
pretense of endangering my health.

I have been more solicitous to live long and healthfully, than to live
usefully and fruitfully; and like enough my life had been more serviceable to
thee, if it had not been so fondly overvalued by me.

Foolish soul, has God given thee a body for a living tool or instrument, and
art thou afraid to use it? wherein is the mercy of having a body, if not in
spending and wearing it out in the service of God? to have an active vigorous
body, and not to employ and exercise it for God, for fear of endangering its
health, is as if one should give thee a handsome and sprightful horse, upon
condition thou should not ride or work him. O! if some of the Saints had
enjoyed the blessing of such an healthy active body as mine, what excellent
services would they have performed to God in it?

If my body shall as surely rise again in glory, vigor and The sickly Saints
reflection.
why should not this comfort me over all the pains, weaknesses and dullness with
which my soul is now clogged? Thou know my God, what a grief it has been to
my soul, to be fettered and entangled with the distempers and manifold
indispositions of this vile body. It has made me sigh and say, with holy
Anselme, when he saw the mounting bird weighed down by the stone hanging at her
leg, Lord, thus it fares with the soul of thy servant! fain would I serve,
glorify, and enjoy thee, but a distempered body will not let me. However, it
is reviving to think, that though I am now forced to crawl like a worm in the
discharge of my duties, I shall shortly fly like a Seraphim in the execution of
thy will. Cheer up drooping soul, the time is at hand, when thou shall be made
more willing than thou art, and thy flesh not so weak as now it is.

And is it so indeed? then let the dying Saint like Jacob The dying Saints
Reflection.
Let him say with holy dying Musculus, Why tremblest thou (O my soul) to go
forth of this Tabernacle to the Land of rest? has thy body been such a
pleasant habitation to thee, that thou should be so loath to part with it,
though but for a time? and with assurance of receiving it again with such a
glorious improvement? I know (O my soul) that thou have a natural inclination
to this body, resulting from the dear and strict union which God himself has
made betwixt thee and it! yea, even the holiest of men do sometimes sensibly
feel the like in themselves; but beware thou love it not immoderately of
inordinately; it is but a creature, how dear soever it be to thee: yea, a fading
creature, and that which now stands in thy way to the full enjoyment of God.
But say my soul, why are the thoughts of parting with it so burdensome to thee?
Why so loath to take death by its cold hand? Is this body thy old and dear
friend? True, but yet thou partest not with it upon such sad terms, as should
deserve a tear at parting. For may thou not say of this departure, as Paul
of the departure of Onesimus, Philem. v. 15. It therefore departs for a
season that thou may receive it for ever. The day of re-espousals will
quickly come, and in the mean time as thy body shall not be sensible of the
tedious length of interposing time, so neither shall thou be solicitous about
thine absent friend: for the fruition of God in that thine unbodied state,
shall fill thee with infinite satisfaction and rest.

Or is it not so much simply for parting with it, as for the manner of thy
parting, either by the slow and lingering approaches of a natural, or the quick
and terrible approaches of a violent death: Why, trouble not thy self about
that; for if God lead thee through the long dark lane of a tedious sickness,
yet at the end of it is thy fathers house. And for a violent death it is not so
material, whether friends or enemies stand weeping or triumphing over thy dead
body. Nihil corpus sentit in nervo cum anima sit in coelo. When thy soul shall
be in heaven, 'twill not be sensible how the body is used on earth.

The ungodly souls reflection
how will this soul and body blush, yea tremble when they meet, who have been
copartners in so much guilt? I damned my soul, to please my flesh, and now have
ruined both thereby: had I denied my flesh to serve Christ, worn out my body in
the service of my soul; I had thereby happily provided for them both, but I
began at the wrong end, and so have ruined both eternally.

The Poem.
BAre seeds have no great beauty, but inhum'd
That which they had is lost; and quite consumed
They soon Ioh. 12. 24.
corrupt, and grow more base by odds
When dead; and buried underneath the clods.
It falls in 1 Cor. 15. 43.
baseness, but at length does rise
In glory; which delights beholders eyes.
How great a difference have a few days made
Betwixt it, in the bushel, and the blade!
This lovely, lively emblem aptly may
Type out the glorious Resurrection day.
Wherein the Saints that in the dust do lie,
Shall rise in glory, vigor, dignity.
With singing in that Psa. 49. 14.
morning they arise,
And Mat. 13. 43.
dazzling glory, such as mortal eyes
Never viewed on earth. The sparkling buties here,
No more can equalize their splendour there:
Than glimmering glowworms do the fairest star,
That shines in heaven; or the stones that are
In every street, may competition hold
With glittering diamonds in rings of gold.
For unto Phil. 3. 21.
Christ's most glorious body they
Shall be conformed in glory, at that day;
Whose luster would, should it on mortals fall;
Transport a Stephen, and confound a Paul.
It Is now a course, and crazy house of clay:
But O! how dear do souls for lodging pay!
Few more than I, for thou my soul have bin
Within these tents of Kedar cooped in.
Where with distempers clogged, thou make thy moans,
And for deliverance with tears and groans;
Have often sued, cheer up, the Rev. 7. 17.
time will be
When thou from all these troubles shall be free.
No jarring humors, cloudy vapors, rheum,
Pains, aches, or what ever else consumes
My days in grief; whilst in the Christian race,
Flesh lags behing; Mat. 26. 41.
and cannot keep equal pace
With the more willing spirit: none of these,
Shall thenceforth clog thee, or disturb thine ease.
CHAP. XII.
As wheat resembled is by viler tares, Upon the resemblance of wheat and tares.

So vile hypocrisy like grace appears.
OBSERVATION.
It is Ieroms Observation, that wheat and tares are so much alike in their
first springing up, that it is exceeding difficult to distinguish the one from
the other. These are his words, Inter triticu^ and lolium quamdiu herba est,
and nondum culmus venit ad spicam; grandis similitudo est: and indiscernendo
aut nulla, aut perdifficilis distantia. The difference (says he) between them
is either none at all, or wonderful difficult yo discern, which those words of
Christ, Mat. 13. 30. plainly confirm. Let them both alone till the Harvest;
thereby intimating, both the difficulty of distinguishing the tares and wheat;
as also, the unwarrantable rashness of bold and hasty censures of men's
sincerity or hypocrisy, which is there shadowed by them.

APPLICATION.
HOw difficult soever it be to discern the difference betwixt wheat and tares;
yet doubtless the eye of sense can much easier discriminate them, than the most
quick and piercing eye of man can discern the difference betwixt special and
common grace: for all saving graces in the Saints have their counterfeits in
hypocrites. There are similar works in these, which a spiritual and very
judicious eye may easily mistake for the saving and genuine effects of the
sanctifying Spirit.

Does the Spirit of God convince the consciences of his people, of the evil of
sin? Romans 7. 9. Hypocrites have their convictions too, Exodus 10. 16. Then
Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron in have, and he said, I have sinned against
the Lord your God, and against you. Thus was Saul also convicted, 1 Samuel 15. 24.

Does true conviction and compunction work reformation of life, in the people
of God? even hypocrites also have been famous for their reformations. The
unclean spirit often goes out of the formal hypocrite, by an external
reformation; and yet still retains his propriety in them, Mat. 12. 43, 44. For
that departure is indeed no more than a politic retreat. Many that shall never
escape the damnation of hell, have yet escaped the pollutions of the world, and
that by the knowledge of the Son of God, 2 Pet. 2. 20.

Does the Spirit of the Lord produce that glorious and supernatural work of
faith, in convinced and humbled souls? in this also the hypocrite apes and
imitates the believer, Acts 8. 13. Then Simon himself believed also, Luke 8.
13. These are they which for a while believe, and in time of temptation fall
away.

Does the precious eye of faith, discovering the transcendent excellencies that
are in Christ, inflame the affections of the believing soul with vehement
desires and longings after him? Strange motions of heart have also been found
in hypocrites toward Christ and heavenly things, John 6. 34. Lord evermore
give us this bread, Mat. 25. 8. Give us of your oil, for our lamps are gone
out. With what a rapture was Balaam transported, when he said, Let me dye the
death of the righteous, and my last end be like his? Numb. 23. 10.

Does the work of faith in some believers bear upon its top branches, the full
ripe fruits of a blessed assurance? Lo! What strong confidences, and high-built
persuasions of an interest in God, have sometimes been found, even in
unsanctified ones? Ioh. 8. 54. Of whom you say, that he is your God, and yet ye
have not known him. To the same height of confidence arrived those vain souls,
mentioned in Romans 2. 19. Yea, so strong may this false assurance be, that they
dare boldly venture to go to the judgment seat of God, and there defend it,
Mat. 7. 22. Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name?

Does the Spirit of God fill the heart of the assured believer with joy
unspeakable and full of glory, giving them through faith a prelibation or
foretaste of heaven it self, in those first fruits of it? How near to this
comes that which the Apostle supposes may be found even in Apostates! Heb. 6.
8, 9. who are there said, to taste the good word of God, and the powers of the
world to come. What shall I say if real Christians delight in Ordinances, those
that are none may also delight in approaching to God, Ezekiel. 33. 32. It may be
you will say, though the difference be not easily discernable in their active
obedience; yet, when it shall come to suffering, there every eye may discern
it: the false heart will then flinch, and cannot brook that work. And yet, even
this is no infallible rule neither; for the Apostle supposes, that the
Salamander of hypocrisy may live in the very flames of Martyrdom, 1 Cor. 13.
3. If I give my body to be burnt, and have not charity. And it was long since
determined in this cafe, Non paena, sed causa facit Martyrem; so that without
controversy, the difficulty of distinguishing them is very great.

And this* difference will yet be more subtle and undiscernable, if I should
tell you, that as in so many things, the hypocrite resembles the Saint: so
there are other things in which a real Christian may act too like an hypocrite.
When we find a Pharaoh confessing, an Herod practicing, as well as hearing, a
Judas preaching Christ, an Alexander ventring his life for Paul; and on the
other side, shall find a David condemning that in another, which he practiced
himself; an Hezekiah glorying in his riches, a Peter dissembling, and even all
the Disciples forsaking Christ in an hour of trouble and danger. O then! how
hard is it for the eye of man to discern betwixt chaff and wheat? how many
upright hearts are now censured, whom God will clear? how many false hearts are
now approved, whom God will condemn? men ordinarily have no clear convictive
proofs, but only probable symptoms, which at most can beget but a conjectural
knowledge of another state. And they that shall peremptorily judge either way,
may possibly, wrong the generation of the upright; or on the other side,
absolve and justify the wicked. And truly, considering what has been said it
is no great wonder that dangerous mistakes are so frequently made in this
matter. But though man cannot, the Lord both can, and will perfectly
discriminate them. The Lord knows who are his, 2 Timothy 2. 19. He will have a
day perfectly to sever the tares from the wheat, to melt off the varnish of the
most resplendent and refined hyocrite, and to blow off the ashes of
infirmities, which have covered and obscured the very sparks of sincerity in
his people. He will make such a division as was never yet made in the world,
how many divisions soever there have been in it. And then shall men indeed
return, and discern betwixt the righteous and the wicked, betwixt him that
serves God, and him that serves him not. Mean while (my soul) thou can not
better employ thy self, whether thou be sound or unsound, than in making these
reflections upon thy self.

REFLECTIONS.
ANd is this so? then Lord, The censorious souls reflection
pardon the rashness and precipitancy of my censorious spirit; for I have often
boldly anticipated thy judgment, and assumed thy prerogative, although thou
have said, Why do thou judge thy brother? and why do thou set at naught thy
brother? we shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ; for it is
written, as I live (says the Lord) every knee shall bow to me, and every
tongue shall confess to God. Let ut not therefore judge one another any more,
Romans 14. 10, 11, 12, 13. And again. He that judges me is the Lord. Let us
therefore judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and make manifest the counsels of
the heart; and then shall every man have praise of God, 1 Cor. 4. 4, 5.

What if God will own some of them for his Sons, to whom I refuse to give the
respect of brethren? I may pass hasty and headlong censures upon others, but
where is my commission for so doing? I want not only a commission, but fit
qualifications for such a work as this. Can I pierce into the heart as God? can
I infallibly discover the hidden motives, ends, and principles of actions?
Besides, O my soul! thou art conscious of so much falsness in thy self, that
were there no other consideration, that alone might rest in a thee from all
uncharitable and hasty censures. If others knew but what I know of my self,
would they not judge as severely of me, as I do of others?

The presumptuous souls Reflection.
which is doubtless a more necessary and concerning work to me. For since every
saving grace in a Christian has its counterfeit in the hypocrite, how needful
is it, for thee, (O my soul) to make a stand here, and solemnly to ponder this
great question! whether those things whereon I depend as my best evidences for
the life to come, be the real, or only the common works of the Spirit? whether
they be such as can now endure the test of the Word, and abide a fair trial at
the bar of my own conscience?

Come then, my soul! set the Lord before thee, to whom the secrets of all
hearts are manifest; and in the awful sense of that great day, make true answer
to these heart-discovering queries; for though thou can not discern the
difference betwixt these things in another, yet thou may and ought to
discern it in thy self; for what man knows the things of a man, save the spirit
of man that is in him?

First, Is my obedience uniform? am I the same man Psalm. 119. 6. the hypocrite
is no closet-man, Mat. 6. 5.

Secondly, Does that which I call grace in me, oppose Gal. 5. 17. No, not the
bosom darling-corruption, Psa. 18. 23.

Thirdly, Does that which I call my grace, humble, Cor. 15. 10. But the soul
which is lifted up, is not upright; Hab. 2. 4.

Lastly, Can thou (my soul) rejoice and bless God for Christ be carried on in
world by other hands? or rather, do thou not envy those that excel thee, and
carest for no work in which thou art not seen?

But stay my soul, it is enough: If these be the substantial differences
betwixt special and common grace, I more than doubt, I shall not endure the day
of his coming, Whose fan is in his hand. Do not those spots appear upon me,
which ^re not the spots of his children? Woe is me, poor wretch, the characters
of death are upon my soul! Lord, add power to the form, life to the name to
live, practice to the knowledge, or I perish eternally! O rather give me the
Saints heart, than the Angels tongue; the poorest breathing of thy Spirit, than
the richest ornaments of common gifts! let me neither deceive my self or
others, in matters of so deep and everlasting consequence!

The Poem.
IN Eastern Countries, as good Authors write,
Tares in their springing up appear to sight;
Not like it self, a weed; but real wheat;
Whose shape, and form it counterfeits so neat;
Though 'twould require a most judicious eye,
The one from the other to diversifie.
Till both to some maturity be grown,
And then the difference is easily known,
Even thus Mat. 13. 30.
hypocrisy that cursed weed,
Springs up so like true grace, that he will need
More than a common insight in this case,
That says this is not, that is real grace.
Never did the cunning Actor, though a slave
Arrayed in princely robes; himself behave
So like a King; as this does act the part
Of saving grace, by its deep hellish art.
Do gracious souls Luke 7. 38.
melt, mourn and weep for sin?
The like in Sam. 15. 24.
hypocrites observed has been.
Have they their 1 Pet 1. 8
comforts, joys, and raptures sweet?
With them in comforts Ioh. 5. 33.
hypocrites do meet.
In all religious duties, they can go
As far as Saints; in some things farther too.
They speak like Angels, Number 24. 4.
and you will think within
The very spirit of Christ; and grace has bin.
They come so near, that some like Isaac take
Jacob for Esau; this, for that mistake.
And boldly call (their eyes with his being dim)
True grace hypocrisy, and duty sin.
Yea, many also Jacob like embrace
Leah for Rachel, common gifts for grace.
And in their bosoms hug it, till the light
Discover their mistake; and clear their sight.
And then like him, confounded they will cry,
Alas! it is Leah, cursed hypocrisy.
Guide me my God, that I may not in stead
Of saving grace, nurse up this cursed weed.
O let my heart by thee at last be found
Sincere, and all thy workings on it sound.
CHAP. XIII.
Fowls, weeds, and blastings do your corn annoy, Upon the dangers incident to
corn* from seed-time to Harvest.

Even so corruptions would your grace destroy.
OBSERVATION.
THere are (amongst many others) three critical and dangerous periods, betwixt
the seed-time and Harvest. The first, when corn is newly committed to the
earth, all that lies uncovered is quickly picked up by the birds; and much of
that which is but slightly covered, is stockt up as soon as it begins to
sprout, by Rooks and other devouring fowls, Mat. 13. 4. but if it escape the
fowls, and gets root in the earth, yet then is it hazarded by noxious weeds,
which purloin and suck away its nourishment, whilst it is yet in the tender
blade. If by the care of the vigilant Husba^dman it be freed from choking
weeds; yet lastly, as great a danger as any of the former still attends it; for
oftentimes, whilst it is blowing in the ear, blastings, and mildews, smite it
in the stalk, which cuts off the juice and sap that should ascend to nourish
the ear; and so shrivels and dries up the grain whilst it is yet immature,
whereby it becomes like those ears of corn in Pharaohs vision, which were thin,
and blasted with the East Wind;* or like the ears the Psalmist speaks of upon
the house top, wherewith the reaper fills not his arms.

APPLICATION.
TRue grace from the infancy to the perfection thereof, conflicts with far more
greater dangers, amongst which it answerably meets with three dangerous periods
which marvellously hazard it: So that it is a much greater wonder that it ever
arrives at its just perfection. For (1) no sooner has the great Husbandman
disseminated these holy seeds in the regenerate heart, but multitudes of
impetuous corruptions immediately assault, and would cetainly devour them like
the fowls of the air, did not the same arm that sowed them, also protect them.
It fares with grace, as with Christ its Author, whom Herod sought to destroy in
his very infancy. The new creature is scarce warm in its seat, before it must
fight to defend its self. This conflict is excellently set forth in that famous
Text, Gal. 5. 17. The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against
the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other; so that ye cannot do
the things that ye would.

By flesh here, understand the corruption of nature by original sin, and the
sinful motions thereof; by spirit, not the soul, or natural spirit of man, but
the Spirit of God in man, viz. those graces in men which are the workmanship of
the Spirit, and therefore called by his name. The opposition betwixt these two
is expressed by lusting ( i. e.) desiring the mutual ruin and destruction of
each other; for even when they are not acting, yet then they are lusting, there
is an opposite disposition against each other; which opposition is both a
formal and an effective opposition. There are two contrary forms to men in
every Saint, Col. 3. 9, 10. From hence an effective opposition must needs
follow, for as things are in their natures and principles, so they are in their
operations and effects* workings always follow beings; fire and water are of
contrary qualities, and when they meet, they effectively oppose each other. Sin
and grace are so opposite, that if sin should cease to oppose grace, it would
cease to be sin; and if grace should not oppose sin, it would cease to be
grace. And this does much more endanger the work of grace, than any other enemy
it has; because it works against it more inwardly, constantly, and
advantagiously, than any thing else can do. (1) More inwardly; for it has its
being and working in the same soul where grace dwells, yea, in the self same
fame faculties, so that is not only sets one faculty against another, but the
same faculty against it self, the understanding against the understanding, and
the will against the will, so that ye cannot do the good, nor yet the evil that
ye would; not the good that ye would, because when the spirit moves to good,
and beats upon the heart by divine pulsations, exciting it to duty, the flesh
crosses and opposes it there; and if it cannot totally hinder the performance
of a duty, yet it lames the soul upon the working hand, whereby the performance
is not so spiritual, free and composed, as it desires; nor yet the evil that
you would commit, if grace were not there, because when lust stirs in its first
motions, grace puts a rub in its way. How can I do this great wickedness, and
sin against God? Genesis 39. 9. And if it cannot (which for the most part it does)
hinder the acting of sin, yet it so engages the will against it, that it is not
committed with complacency and full consent, Romans 7. 15. What I do, I allow
not. (2) It opposes it more constantly, it is like a continual drooping: a man
can no more fly from this enemy, than from himself. There is a time when the
devil leaves tempting, Mat. 4. 11. but no time when corruption ceases from
working. And lastly, it opposes grace more advantagiously than any other enemy
can do, for it is not only always in the same soul with it, but it is there
naturally; it has the advantage of the soil which suits with it. And yet, oh
the wonder of free grace! it is not swallowed up in victory, it escapes this
hazard.

But (2ly.) it soon meets with another, though it escape this, even by
temptations which strike desperately at the very life of it; for these like the
weeds, with seemingly loving embraces, clasp about it; and did not the faithful
God now make a way to escape, instead of an Harvest, we should have an heap:
For, alas, what are we! to wrestle with principalities and powers, and
spiritual wickednesses in high places?

Lastly, sad relapses like blasts and rustings do often fade and greatly
endanger it, when it is even ready for the Harvest. Thus it fell out with David,
whose last ways were not like his first; and yet by this, these holy fruits
are not utterly destroyed, because it is the seed of God; and so is immortal, 1
John 5. 4, 5. and also because the promises of perseverance and victory made to
it, cannot be frustrated; amongst which these are excellent, Isa. 54. 10. Ier.
34. 40. 1 Cor* 1. 8. Psalm. 1. 3. Psalm. 125. 1. Ioh. 4. 14. So that here is
matter of unspeakable comfort; though the flesh say, Ego deficiam, I will fail
thee; though the world say, Ego decipiam, I will deceive thee; though the devil
say, Ego eripiam, I will snatch thee away; yet as long as Christ says, I will
never leave thee nor forsake thee; thy graces are secure, in the midst of all
these enemies.

REFLECTIONS.
The Apostates Reflection.
and sown (as I thought) with the seed of God. In those days many purposes and
good resolutions began to chink and bud forth, promising a blessed Harvest: But
O! (with what consternation and horror should I speak it;) the cares and
pleasures of this life, the lusts and corruptions of my base heart springing
up, have quite destroyed and choakt it; by which it appears, it was not the
seed of God, as I then imagined it to be; and now my expected Harvest shall be
an heap, in the day of grief, and desperate sorrow, Isa. 17. 11. I had
convictions, but they are gone: troubles for sin, conscience of duties, but all
is blasted, and my soul is now as a barren field, which God has cursed.

Woe is me! I have revolted from God, and now that dreadful word, Ier. 17. 5, 6.
is evidently fulfilled upon me; For I am like the heath in the desert, that
sees not when good comes; my soul inhabits the parched places of the
wilderness. Alas! all my formal and heartless duties were but as so many
scare-crows in the field, which could not defend these slight workings from
being devoured by the infernal fowls. Had these principles been the seed of
God, no doubt they would have continued and overcome the world, 1 Ioh. 2. 19.
Wretched soul! thy case is sad, it will be better with the uncultivated
wilderness, than with such a miscarrying soil, unless the great Husbandman plow
thee up the second time, and sow thy heart with better seed.

And are the corruptions of my heart to grace, what fowls, The careless souls
reflection
and mildews are to the corn? O what need have I then to watch my heart, and
keep it with all diligence; for in the life of that grace is wrapped up the life
of my soul. He that carries a candle in his hand in a blustering stormy night,
had need to cover it close, lest it be blown out, and he left in darkness. O
let me never say, God has promised it shall persevere, and therefore I need
not be so solicitous to preserve it; for as this inference is quite opposite to
the nature of true grace and assurance, which never encourage to carelessness,
but provoke the soul to an industrious use of means to preserve it. So, it is
in it self an irrational and senseless conclusion, which will never follow from
any Scripture promise: for although it is readily granted, that God has made
many comfortable and sweet promises to the graces of his people, yet we must
expect to enjoy the benefits and blessings of all those promises, in that way
and order in which God has promised them; and that is in the careful and
diligent use of those means which he has prescribed, Ezekiel. 36. 36, 37. for
promises do not exclude, but imply the use of means, Act. 27. 31. I know my
life is determined to a day, to an hour, and I shall live out every minute God
has appointed; but yet, I am bound to provide food, raiment and physic to
preserve it.

To conclude, let all doubting Christians reflect seriously The doubting souls
reflection
and suck marrow and fatness out of it to strengthen and establish them against
all their fears; your life, your spiritual life, has for many years hanged in
suspense before you; and you have often said with David, I shall one day fall
by the hand of Saul. Desponding, trembling soul, lift up thine eyes and look
upon the fields; the corn lives still, and grows up: though birds have watched
to devour it, snows have covered it, beasts have cropped it, weeds have almost
choakt it, yet it is preserved. And has not God more care of that precious seed
of his own spirit in thee, than any Husbandman has of his corn? has he not
said, That having begun the good work in thee; he will perfect it to the day of
Christ? Phil. 2. 6. Has he not said, I give unto them eternal life, and they
shall never perish? John 12. 28. Have thou not many times said, and thought of
it, as thou do now, and and yet it lives? O, what matter of unspeakable joy
and comfort is this to upright souls! Well then, be not discharged, for thou
do not run as one uncertain, nor fight as one that beats the air, 1 Cor. 9.
26. but the foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, the Lord knows who
are his, 2 Timothy 2. 19. Though thy grace be weak, thy God is strong* though the
stream seem sometimes to fail, yet it is fed by an everflowing fountain.

The Poem.
It Is justly wondered that an ear of corn,
Should come at last in safety to the Barn.
It runs through many hazards, threatening harms
Betwixt the sowers hands, and reapers arms.
The earth no sooner takes it from the sack
But you may see behind the sowers back
A troop of Mat. 13. 4, 5
thieves, which would at once destroy
That seed in which lies hid the seed of joy.
This dangerous period past, it soon does fall
Into a second, no less critical.
It shoots forth the tender blade, and then
The noxious Mat. 13. 7.
weeds engender it again.
These clasp about it till they kindly choke
The corn, as flattering Ivy does the oak.
Are weeds destroyed, and all that danger past?
Lo now another comes, the worst at last.
For when in the ear it blow, begins to kern,
As mildew Hag. 2. 16, 17.
smites it which you cannot discern;
Nor any way prevent, till all be lost;
The corn destroyed, with all your hopes and cost.
Thus saving grace, that precious seed of joy;
Which hell and nature plot Gal. 5. 17.
how to destroy,
Escapes ten thousand Rev. 3. 2.
danger's first and last.
O who can say now all the danger's past?
It Is like a crazy bark tossed in a storm,
Or like a taper which is strangely born
Without a lanthorn, in a blustering night;
Or like to glimmering sparks whose dying light
Is still preserved: The roaring waves swell high
Like moving mountains in the darkened sky
On their proud back, the little bark is even
Mounted unto the battlements of heaven,
From thence dismounted to the deeps does slide
Receiving water upon every side;
Yet he whose voice the proudest waves obey
Brings it at last into the quiet key.
The blustering winds strive with a fatal puff,
To bring the tapor to a stinking snuff;
Their churlish blasts extinguish it, and then;
Our gentle breath recovers it again.
The fainting sparks beneath the ashes lie,
Where choakt; and smothered they begin to dye;
But these collected, we do gently blow,
Till from faint sparks to lively flames they grow.
Even thus is grace preserved, thus kept alive;
By constant wonders, Grace does live and thrive.
CHAP. XIV.
Our Husbandmen for Harvest wait and stay, Upon the parience of the Husbandman
for the harvest

O let not any Saint do less than they.
OBSERVATION.
THe expectation of a good Harvest at last, makes the Husbandman with untired
patience to digest all his labors. He that plows, plow in hope, 1 Cor. 6. 19.
and they are not so irrational to think, they shall presently be partakers of
their hope, nor so foolish to anticipate the Harvest, by cutting down their
corn before it be fully ripened, but are content to plow, sow and weed it; and
when it is fully ripe, then they go forth into their fields and reap it down
with joy.

APPLICATION.
CAn a little Corn cause men to digest so many difficult labors, and make them
wait with invincible patience till the reaping time come? much more should the
expectation of eternal glory steel and fortify my spirit against all
intercurrent hardships and difficulties. It least of all becomes a Christian to
be of a hasty and impatient spirit. Light is sown for the righteous, and joy
for the upright in heart, Psalm. 92. 11. Behold the Husbandman waits, etc.
Iam. 5. 7. Be patient therefore my Brethren, for the coming of the Lord draws
near. There are three great Arguments to persuade Christians to a
long-suffering and patient frame under sufferings. (1) The example of Christ,
Isa. 53. 7. to think how quietly he suffered all injuries and difficulties with
invincible patience, is sufficient to shame the best of Christians, who are of
such short Spirits. I have read of one Elezarius a noble man, that when his
wife wondered at his exceeding great patience in bearinig njuries; he thus
answered her, You know sometimes my heart is ready to rise with indignation
against such as wrong me, but I presently begin to think of the wrongs that
Christ suffered, and say thus to my self, although thy servant should pluck thy
beard, and smite thee on thy face, this were nothing to what thy Lord suffered:
he suffered more and greater things; and assure your self (wife) I never leave
off thinking on the injuries done to my Savior, till such time as my mind be
still and quiet. To this purpose it was well noted by Bernard, speaking of
Christ's humiliation; was Christ the Lord of glory thus humbled and emptied of
his fullness of glory? and shall such a worm as I swell? (2) The desert of sin,
Lam. 3. 39. Why does the living man complain? It was a good saying of blessed
Greenham: When sin lies heavy, affliction lies light. And it is a famous
instance which Dr. Tailor Dr. Tailors great Exemplar, p. 103.
gives us of the Duke of Condey; I have read (says he) when the Duke of Condia
had voluntarily entered into the incommodities of a religious poverty and
retirement; he was one day spied and pitied by a Lord of Italy, who out of
tenderness wished him to be more careful and nutritive of his person; the good
Duke answered, Sir, be not troubled, and think not, that I am ill provided of
conveniences, for I send an Harbinger before me that makes ready my lodgings,
and takes care that I be royally entertained. The Lord asked him, who was his
Harbinger? he answered, the knowledge of my self, and the consideration of what
I deserve for my sins, which is eternal torments; and when with this knowledge
I arrive at my lodging, how unprovided soever I find it, methinks it is ever
better than I deserve; and as the sense of sin, which merits hell, sweetens
present difficulties: So, (to come home to the present similitude) do the
expectations, and hopes of a blessed harvest, and reward in heaven. This made
Abraham willing to wander up and down many years as a stranger in the world;
for he looked for a City that has foundations, whose builder and maker is God.
The hopes of such a harvest is encouragement enough to work hard, and wait
long; yet some Christians are so impatient of it, that they would fain be
reaping before the time; but as God has by an unalterable law of nature,
appointed both the seasons of seed time and harvest (which are therefore called
the appointed we^ks of the harvest) Ier. 5. 24. and these cannot be hastened;
but when we have done all that we can on our part, must wait till God send the
former and latter rain, and given every natural cause its effect. So is it in
reference to our spiritual harvest; we are appointed to sweat in the use of all
God's appointments, and when we have done all, must patiently wait till the
divine decrees be accomplished, and the time of the promise be fully come; In
due time we shall reap, if we faint not. To which patient expectation, and
quiet waiting for the glory to come, these following considerations are of
excellent use.

It is but yet a little while, and he that shall come will come, and will not
tarry, Heb. 10. 37. And that now his salvation is nearer than when he first
believed, Romans 13. 11. What a small point of time is our waiting time, compared
with eternity? yet a few days more, and then comes the long expected and
welcome harvest.

I think it meet (says Peter) as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir up
your minds, knowing shortly, that I must put off this tabernacle, 2 Pet. 1. 13,
14. q. d. I know I have but a little time to work among you, I am almost at
heaven; and therefore am willing to husband this present moment as well as I
can for you. O Christians! you need not stand idle, look round about you upon
the multitude of forlorn sinners, speak now to them for God, speak now to God
for them; for shortly you shall so speak more, you shall see them no more till
you see them at Christ^s Bar; God leaves you here for their sakes, up and be
doing: If you had done all you were to do for your selves and them, he would
have you to heaven immediately, you should not wait a moment longer for your
glory.

Husbandmen know, though they cannot yet gather in the decree, Mat. 25. 34. by
an act of creation, Heb. 11. 10. by the death of Christ, which made a purchase
of it, Heb. 10. 19, 20. and by his ascension into it, Ioh. 14. 2, 3. So the
reason why we are kept here, is in order to our sitting for it. Heaven is
ready, but we are not fully ready; the Barn is fit to receive the corn, but the
corn is not yet fit to be gathered into it. But for this self same thing God is
now working us, 2 Cor. 5. 5. he is every day at work, by Ordinances, and by
providence, to perfect his work in us; and as soon as that is finished, we
shall hear a voice like that, Rev. 11. 12 Come up hither, and immediately we
shall be in the spirit: for how ardently soever we long for that desirable day,
Christ longs for it more than we can do.

The Husbandman is glad of the first fruits, that incourages Romans 8. 23. Romans
5. 2. 1 Pet. 8. 9. O how might the interposing time, even all the days of your
patience here, be sweetened with such prelibations of the glory to come!

Husbandmen know it is best to reap, when it is fit to reap; green, but he might
gather it easier, and taste it sweeter, by tarrying longer for it. We would
fain be glorified per saltum. When we have got a taste of heaven, we are all in
have to be gone. Then, O that I had wings as a dove! I would fly away, and be
at rest. Then we cry to God for our selves, as Moses for his sister Miriam,
Heal her [now] O God, I beseech thee, Number. 12. 13. Clorifie me now, O Lord, I
pray thee! But surely, as God has contrived thy glory in the best of ways, so
he has appointed for thee the fittest of seasons; and when ever thou art
gathered into glory, thou shall come as a shock of corn in its season.

REFLECTIONS.
I Have waited for thy salvation, O God! Having received thy first fruits, my
soul longs to fill its besome with the As the Heart pants for the water
brooks, The longing ^ouls reflection
so pants my soul for thee, O God! O, when shall I come and appear before
God? I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. When shall I see that
most lovely face? When shall I hear his soul-transporting voice? Some need
patience to dye, I need it as much to live! Thy sights, O God, by faith, have
made this world a burden, this body a burden, and this soul to cry like thirsty
David, O that one would give me of the waters of Bethlehem to drink! The
Husbandman longs for his Harvest, because it is the reward of all his toil and
labor; but what is his harvest to mine? what is a little corn to the enjoyment
of God? What is the joy of harvest, to the joy of heaven? what are the
shoutings of men in the fields, to the acclamations of glorified spirits in the
kingdom of God? Lord, I have gone forth bearing more precious ^eed that they;
when shall I return rejoyceing, bringing my sheaves with me? Their harvest
comes when they receive their corn, mine comes when I leave it. O much desired
harvest! O day of the gladness of my heart! How long Lord! How long! Here I
wait as the poor man Bethesda's pool, looking when my turn will come, but every
one steps into heaven before me; yet Lord, I am content to wait till my time be
fully come. I would be content to stay for my glorification, till I have
finished the work of my generation; and when I have done the will of God, then
to receive the promise. If thou have any work on earth to use me in, I am
content to abide: Behold, the Husbandman waits, and so will I; for thou art a
God of judgment, and blessed are are all they that wait for thee.

But how does my sloathful soul sink down into the flesh, The lingering souls
reflection
How does it hug, and wrap up it self in the garment of this mortality, not
desiring to be removed hence, to the more perfect and blessed state? The
Husbandman indeed is content to stay till the appointed weeks of the Harvest;
but would he be content to wait always? O my sensual heart! is this life of
hope as contentful to thee, as the life of vision will be? Why do thou not
groan within thy self, that this mortality might be swallowed up of life? Does
not the scripture describe the Saints by their earnest looking for the mercy of
our Lord Jesus unto eternal life? Jude 21. By their hastening unto the coming
of the day of God, 2 Pet. 3. 12. What is the matter that my heart hangs back?
does guilt lie upon my conscience? Or have I gotten into a pleasant condition
in the world which makes me say as Peter on the Mount, It Is good to be here? Or
want I the assurance of a better state? Must God make all my earthly comforts
die, before I shall be willing to die? Awake Faith, awake my Love; heat up the
drowzy desires of my soul, that I may say, make have my Beloved, and come away.

The Poem.
NO prudent Husbandman expects
the fruit of what he sows,
Till every cause have its effects;
and John 4. 35.
then he reaps and mows.
He works in 1 Cor. 9. 10
hope the year throughout,
and counts no labor lost;
If when the season comes about
His harvest 1 Cor. 9. 10.
quits his cost.
This rare Iam. 5. 7.
example justly may
rebuke, and put to shame;
My soul which sows its seed one day,
and looks to reap the same.
Is cursed Gal. 5. 17.
nature now become
so kind a soil to grace,
That to perfection it should come
within so short a space.
Grace springs not up with speed and 1 Pet. 4. 18.
ease
like mushrooms in a night
But rather by Romans 1. 7.
degrees increase
as does the Prove. 4. 18.
morning light.
Is corn so dear to Husbandmen?
much more is Psalm. 4. 6, 47.
heaven to me,
Why should not I have patience then?
to wait as well as he.
To promises Acts 7. 17.
appointed years,
by God's decrees are set;
These once expired beyond its fears
my soul shall quickly get.
How Heb. 13. 14.
small a part of hasty time
Which Heb. 17. 710.
quickly will expire,
Does me within this world confine,
and then comes my desire.
Come Lord, Rev. 22. 17.
how long! my soul has gasp'd
faith my affections Heb. 11. 13.
warms.
O when shall my poor ^oul be clasped,
in its redeemers arms.
The time seems Romans 8. 23.
long, yet here I Will lie
till thou my God do call,
It is enough, eternity
will make Romans 8. 18.
amends for all.
CHAP. XIX.
Corn fully ripe, Upon the harvest season.
is reaped, and gathered in.
So must your selves when ripe in grace or sin.
OBSERVATION.
When the fields are white to harvest, then Husbandmen walk through them, rub
the ears, and finding the grain full and solid, they presently prepare their
Sithes and Sickles, send for their harvestmen, who quickly reap and mow them
down; and after these follow the binders, who stitch it up; from the field
where it grew, it is carried to the Barn where it is threshed out; the good
grain gathered into an heap, the chaff separated and burnt, or thrown to the
dunghill, how bare and naked do the fields look after harvest which before were
pleasant to behold? When the harvest men enter into the field, it is (to allude
to that, Joel 2. 3.) before them, like the garden of Eden, and behind them a
desolate wilderness; and in some places its usual to set fire to the dry
stubble, when the corn is housed; which rages furiously, and covers it all with
ashes.

APPLICATION.
THe Application of this, I find made to my hands, by Christ himself in Mat.
13. 38, 39. The field is the world, the good seed are the Children of the
kingdom, the tares are the children of the wicked one, the enemy that sowed
them is the devil, the harvest is the end of the world, the reapers are the
Angels.

The field is the world; there both the godly and ungodly live and grow
together, till they be both ripe, and then they shall both be reaped down by
death; death is the Sickle that reaps down both. I will open this Allegory in
the following particulars.



So does God the great Husbandman, he hurries the Saints into their graves,
when judgments are coming upon the world, Isa. 57. 1. The righteous perish and
no man lays it to heart, and merciful men are taken away; none considering
that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come. Methusalah died the
year before the flood, Augustine a little before the sacking of Hippo, Pareus
just before the taking of Heidleberge, Luther a little before the Wars brake
out in Germany; but what speak I of single Saints? Sometimes the Lord houses
great numbers together, before some sweeping judgment comes. How many bright
and glorious stars did set almost together, within the compass of a few years
to the astonishment of many wise and tender hearts in England. I find some of
them ranked in a Funeral Elegy.

The learned Twisse went first, (it was his right)
Then holy Palmer, Buroughs, Love, Gouge, White,
Hill, Whitaker, grave Gataker and Strong,
Per^e, Marshal, Robinson, all gone along.
I have not named them half, their only strife,
Has been (of late) who should first part with life.
These few who yet survive, sick of this age
Long to have done their par^s and leave the stage.
The Lord sees it better for them to be under ground than above ground; and
therefore by a merciful providence sets them out of harms way.

Neither the corn* or tares, can possibly resist the sharp Ecclis. 8. 8. No man
can keep alive his own soul in the day of death, and there is no discharge in
that war. The frail body of man is as unable to withstand that stroke, as the
weak reeds, or feeble^stalks of the corn are to resist the keen Sith and sharp
Sickle.

The reapers receive the wheat which they cut down, into Psalm. 129. 7. Let them
be as the grass upon the house top which withers before it grows up, wherewith
the mower fills not his hand, nor be that binds sheaves his bosom. Such
withered grass are the wicked, who are never taken into the reapers bosom; but
as soon as Saints are cu^ down by death, they fall into the hands and bosoms of
the Angels of God, who bear them in their arms and bosoms to God their father,
Luke 16. 22. For look, as these blessed spirits did exceedingly rejoice at
their conversion, Luke 15. 10. and thought it no dishonor to minister to them
whilst they stood in the field Heb. 1. 14. So when they are cut down, by death,
they will rejoice to be their convoy to heaven.

When the corn and weeds are reaped or mowed down Job 7. 9, 10. As the cloud is
consumed and vanishes away; so he that goes down to the grave, shall come up
no more; he shall return no more to his house, neither shall his place know him
any more.

Lastly, (to come home to the particular object of this Chapter (the reapers
are never sent to cut down the harvest till it be fully ripe; neither will God
reap down Saints or sinners, till they be come to a maturity of grace or
wickedn^ss. Saints are not reaped down till their grace be ripe, Job. 5. 26.
Thou shall come to thy grave in a full age, as a shock of corn comes in in his
season. Not that every godly man dies in such a full old age (says Mr. Caryl
on the place) but yet in one sense it is an universal truth, and ever
fulfilled; for whenever they die, they die in a good age; yea, though they
die in the spring and flower of their youth, they die in a good old age ( i.
e.) they are ripe for death when ever they die: When ever a godly man dies,
it is harvest time with him, though in a natural capacity he be cut down while
he is green, and cropped in the bud or blossom; yet in his spiritual capacity, he
never dies before he be ripe. God ripens his speedily, when he intends to taks
them out of the world speedily; he can let out such warm rays and beams of his
spirit upon them, as shall soon maturate the seeds of grace into a preparedness
for glory.

The wicked also have their ripening time for hell, and judgment; God does
with much long^suffering endure the vessels of wrath, prepared for destruction.
Of their ripeness for judgment the scripture often speaks, Genesis 15. 16. The sin
of the Amorites is not yet full. And of Babylon, it is said, Ier. 51. 13. O thou
that dwell upon many waters, thine end is come and the measure of thy
covetousness.

It Is worth remarking, that the measure of the sin, and the end of the sinner
come together. So Joel 3. 13. Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest of the
earth is ripe, for the press is full, the fats overflow, for their wickedness
is great. Where note, sinners are not cut down till they be ripe and ready.
Indeed they are never ripe for death, nor ready for the grave; that is, fit to
die: yet they are always ripe for wrath, and ready for hell before they die.
Now as Husbandmen judge of the ripeness of their harvest, by the color and
hardness of the grain; so may we judge of the ripeness both of Saints and
Sinners, for heaven or hell, by these following signs.

Three Signs of the maturity of grace.
When the Corn is near ripe, it blows the head, and Paul had one foot in
heaven, when he called himself the chiefest of sinners, and least of Saints, 1 Timothy 1. 15. Ephesians. 3. 8. A Christian in the progress of his knowledge and grace,
is like a vessel cast into the Sea, the more it fills the deeper it sinks.
Those that went to study at Athens (says Plutarch) at first coming, seemed to
themselves to be wise men; afterward, only lovers of wisdom, and after that,
only thetoricians, such as could speak of wisdom, but knew little of it, and
last of all Idiots in their apprehensions; still with the increase of learning,
laying aside their pride and arrogance.

When harvest is nigh, the grain is more solid and pithy Phil. 1. 9. The limbs
of a Child are more active and pliable, but as he grows up to a perfect state,
the parts are more consolidated and firmly knit. The fingers of an old Musician
are not so nimble, but he has a more judicious ear in music, than in his
youth.

When Corn is dead ripe, it is apt to fall of its own accord the groanings and
hastenings of ready Christians to their expected glory; they hasten to the
coming of the Lord, or as Montanus more (...) renders it, they hasten the
coming of the the Lord; ( i. e.) they are urgent and instant in their desires
and cries to hasten his coming; their desires sally forth to meet the Lord,
they willingly take death by the hand; as the corn bends to the earth, so do
these souls to heaven. This shows their harvest to be near.

Six signs of the maturity of Sin.
WHen ^inners are even dead ripe for hell, these ^igns appear upon them, or by
these at least, you may conclude those souls not to be far from wrath, upon
whom they appear.

Gentiles, among whom Satan had such a plentiful harvest; the patience of God
suffered them to grow till their consciences were grown seared and past
feeling, Ephesians. 4. 19. When a member is so mortified, that if you lan^e and cut
it never so much, no fresh blood, or quick flesh appears, nor does the man feel
any pain in all this, then it is time to cut it off.

When men give themselves over to the satisfaction of their lusts, to commit
sin with greediness, then are they grown to a maturity of sin; when men have
slipped the reins of conscience and rush headlong into all impiety, then the last
sands of Gods patience are running down. Thus Sodom and Gomorrah, and the
Cities about them in like manner gave themselves over to wickedness and strange
sins; and then justice quickly trussed them up for an example, suffering the
vengeance of eternal fire.

of ^in, a designer, a studentin wickedness; one would think it strange, that
any man should set his invention on work, upon such a subject as sin is; that
any should study to become a dexterous artist this way, and yet the Scripture
frequently speaks of such, whose bellies prepare deceit, Job 15. 35. who travel
in pain to bring forth, this deformed birth, ver. 20. who wink with their eyes,
whilst plodding wickedness, as men use to do when they are most intent upon the
study of any knotty problem, Prove. 6. 13. These have so much of hell already in
them, that they are more than half in hell already.

He that of a forward Professor, is turned a bitter persecutor, Judas turns
Traitor to his Lord, he is quickly sent to his own place. Such as are again
entangled and overcome of those lusts they once seemed to have clean escaped,
these bring upon themselves swift damnation, and their Judgment lingers not, 2
Pet. 2. 3, 20.

He that can endure no reproof or control in the way of Prove. 29. 1. He that
being often reproved hardens his neck shall suddenly be destroyed and that
without remedy. This is a death spot, a hell spot, where ever it appears. From
this very sypmtom the Prophet plainly predicted the approaching ruin of
Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25. 16. I know that God has determined to destroy thee,
because thou have done this, and have not hearkened to my voice. He that will
not be timely counseled, shall be quickly destroyed.

Lastly, when a man comes to glory in his sin, and boast whose end is
destruction, whose glory is in their shame, Phil. 3. 16. This is a braving, a
daring of God to his face, and with whomsoever he bears long, to be sure, these
are none of them.

You see now, what are the signs of a full ripe sinner; and when it comes to
this, either with a Nation, or with a single person, then ruin is near, Joel.
3. 13. Genesis 15. 16. It is in the filling up of the measure of sin, as in the
filling of a vessel cast into the Sea, which rowls from side to side, taking in
the water by little and little, till it be full, and then down it sinks to the
bottom. Mean while, admirable is divine patience, which bears with these
vessels of wrath, whilst fitting for destruction.

REFLECTIONS.
The Reflection of a growing Christian.
O my soul! with the heart strengthening bread of this divine meditation. Let
faith turn every drop of this truth into a soul-reviving cordial. God has sown
the precious seed of grace upon my soul, and though my heart has been an
unkind soil which has kept it back and much hindered its growth; yet blessed
be the Lord, it still grows on, though by slow degrees; and from the springing
of the seed, and shootings forth of those gracious habits, I may conclude an
approaching harvest: Now is my salvation nearer than when I believed; every day
I come nearer to my salvation, Romans 13. 11. O that every day I were more active
for the God of my salvation! grow on my soul, and add to thy faith virtue, to
thy virtue knowledge, etc. Grow on from faith to faith; keep thy self under the
ripening influences of heavenly Ordinances; the faster thou growest in grace,
the sooner thou shall be reaped down in mercy, and bound up in the bundle of
life, 1 Samuel 25. 29. I have not yet attained the measure and proportion of
grace assigned to me, neither am I already perfect, but am reaching forth to
the things before me, and pressing toward the mark for the prize of my
heavenly calling, Phil. 3. 12, 13. O mercy to be admired! that I who lately had
one foot in hell, stand now with one foot in heaven!

But the case is far different with me, The reflection of a decaying Christian.
whilst others are ripening

Thy case, The Reflection of a hardening sinner.
O declining Saint, is sad! but not like mine; treasuring up to my self wrath,
against the day of wrath, Romans 2. 5. Time was, when I had some tender sense of
sin, when I could mourn and grieve for it, now I have none at all. My heart is
grown stupid and sottish. Time was when I had some conscientious care of duty,
and my heart would smite me for the neglect of it; but now none at all.
Wretched soul! what will thou do? thou art gone far indeed, a few steps farther
will put thee beyond hope; hitherto I stand in the field, the long-suffering
God does yet spare me; yea, spare me, whiles he has cut down many of my
companions in sin round about me. What does this admirable patience, this
long-suffering drawn out to a wonder, speak concerning me? Does it not tell me,
that the Lord is not willing I should perish, but rather come to repentance? 2
Pet. 3. 9. And what argument is like his pity and patience, to lead a soul to
repentance? Romans 2. 4. O that I may not frustrate at last, the end of a long
suffering God! lest he proportion the degrees of his wrath, according to the
length of his patience.

The Poem.
WHen fields are John 4. 35.
white to harvest, forth you go
With Sith's and Rev. 14. 15.
Sickles; to reap down and mow.
Down go the laden ears, flat to the ground;
Which those that follow having stitcht and bound;
It Is carted home unto the Barn, and so
The fields are rid; where lately corn did grow.
This world's the Mat. 13. 38.
field, and they that dwell therein;
The ibid.
Corn and ibid.
tares; which long have ripening been.
Angels the Mat. 13. 39.
reapers, and the judgment day
The time of ibid.
harvest when like Corn and hay;
The sading flower of 2 Pet. 3. 10.
earthly glory must
Be mowed down, and levelled with the dust.
The Mat. 13. 30.
Barns are heaven and hell; the time draws nigh
When through the darkened Rev. 1. 7.
clouds, and troubled sky
The Lord shall break, a dreadful 1 These. 4. 16.
trumpet shall
Sound to the dead, the stars from heaven fall.
The rolling spears with 2 Pet. 3. 10.
horrid flames shall burn,
And then the Tribes on earth shall Mat. 24. 30.
wail and mourn.
The judgment set, before Christ's awful throne
All flesh shall be 2 Cor. 5. 10.
convened, and every one
Receive his doom: which done, the just shall be
Bound in life's bundle; Mat. 13. 30.
even as you see
The full ripe ears of wheat bound up, and born
In sheaves with joy; unto the owners barn.
This done, the Angels next in ibid.
bundles bind
The tares together, as they did combinde
In acting sin, so now their lot must be
To burn together in one misery.
Drunkards with drunkards pinioned, shall be sent
To hell together in one 1 Cor. 6. 9.
Regiment.
Adulterers and swearers there shall lie
In flames, among their old society.
O dreadful Mat. 13. 41, 42.
howlings! O the hideous moans
Of ^etter'd sinners! O the tears! the groans!
The doleful lamentations as they go
Chained fast together, to their place o^ we.
The world thus cleared, as fields when harvest's in,
Shall be no more a stage for acting sin.
With purifying 2 Pet. 3. 10.
flames it shall be burned,
Its stately fabrics into ashes turned.
Cease then my soul, to dote on, or admire
This splendid world, which is reserved for fire.
Decline the company of sinners here,
As thou would not be shackel'd with them there.
CHAP. XVI.
Your winter store in Summer you provide; Upon the care of Husbandmen to
provide for winter.

To Christian prudence this must be applied.
OBSERVATION.
GOod husbands are careful in Summer to provide for Winter, then they gather in
their Winter store; food and fuel for themselves, and fodder for their cattle.
He that gathers in Summer is a wise son, but be that sleeps in harvest is a son
that causes shame, Prove. 10. 5. A well chosen season is the greatest advantage
to any action, which as it is seldom found in haste, so it is often lost by
delay. It Is a good proverb which the frugal Dutch have among them; Bonus
Servatius, facit bonum Bonifacium; a good Saver, will make a good Benefactor.
And it is a good Proverb of our own; He that neglects the occasion, the occasion
will neglect him. Husbandmen know that Summer will not hold all the year,
neither will they trust to the hopes of a mild and favorable Winter, but in
season provide for the worst.

APPLICATION.
What excellent Christians should we be, were we but as provident and
thoughtful for our souls? it is doubtless a singular point of Christan wisdom,
to foresee a day of spiritual straits and necessities, and during the day of
grace to make provision for it. This great Gospel truth is excellently shadowed
forth in this natural Observation, which I shall branch out into these seven
particulars.

Genesis 8. 22. Whilst the earth remains, seed time and harvest, cold and heat,
winter and summer, day and night, shall not cease.

And Christians know, that there are changes in the right hand of the most
High, in referrence to their spiritual seasons. If there be a Spring time of
the Gospel, there will also be an Autmn; if a day of prosperity, it will set in
a night of adversity; for God has set the one over aginst the other, Eccles.
7. 14. In heaven there is a day of everlasting serenity, in hell a night of
perfect and endless horror and darkness; on earth, light and darkness take
their turns, prosperity and adversity, even to souls as well as bodies, succeed
each other. If there be a Gospel day, a day of grace now current, it will have
its period and determination, Genesis 3. 6.



And spiritual wisdom should teach Christians to exercise their foreseeing
faculties, and not suffer them to feel evil before they fear it. But O the
stupifying nature of sin! Though the Stork in the heavens knows her appointed
time, and the Turtle, Crane and Swallow the time of their coming, yet man, whom
God has made wiser than the fowls of the air, in this acts quite below them,
Ier. 8. 7.

The end of Gods ordaining a summer season, and sending

And God's design in giving men a day of grace, is to furnish them with an
opportunity for the everlasting happiness and salvation of their souls, Rev. 2.
21. I gave her a space to repent. It is not a mere reprieval of the soul, or
only a delay of the execution of threatened wrath, though there be much mercy in
that; but the peculiar aim of this patience and bounty of God, is to open for
them a way to escape the wrath to come, by leading them to repentance, Romans 2.
4.

The Husbandman does not find all harvest seasons alike favorable, sometimes
they have much fair weather, and meet with no hindrance in their business;
other times it is a catching harvest, but now and then a fair day, and then they
must be nimble or all is lost.

There is also great difference in Soul-seasons, some have Noah. Long did God
wait on the gainsaying Israelites, Isa. 42. 14. I have a long time held my
peace, I have been still and refrained myself. Others have a short and catching
season, all lies upon a day, upon a nick of time, Act. 17. 30.

A proper season neglectd and lost, is irrecoverable. Many

It Is even so as to spiritual seasons. Christ neglected, and grace despised, in
the season when God offers them, are irrecoverably lost, Prove. 1. 28. then
(that is, when the season is over) they shall call upon me but I will not hear.
O, there is a great deal of time in a short opportunity! that may be done or
prevented, in an hour rightly timed, which cannot be done or prevented in a
man's lifetime afterward. There was one resolved to kill Julius Caesar such a
day; the night before, a friend sent him a letter to acquaint him with it, but
he being at supper, and busy in discourse, said, to morrow is a new day, and
indeed it was, dies novissima, his last day to him; whence it became a Proverb
in Greece. To morrow is a new day. Our glass runs in heaven, and we cannot see
how much or little of the sand of God's patience is yet to run down; but this
is certain, when that glass is run, there is nothing to be done for our souls,
Luke 19. 42. O that thou had known at least in this thy day, the things that
belong to thy peace, but now they are bid from thine eyes.

Isa. 65. 13. A day of death will come, and that will be a day of straits to
all negligent souls; but then the diligent Christian shall enjoy the peace and
comfort that shall flow in upon his heart, from his holy care and sincere
diligence in duties? as 2 Cor. 1. 12. This is our rejoicing, the testimony of
our conscience, that in all sincerity and godly simplicity, we have had our
conversation in this world. So Hezekiah, 2 King. 20. 3. Remember now, O Lord,
how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart. A day of
judgment will come, and then ^oolish virgins, who neglected the season of
getting oil in their lamps, will be put to their shifts; then they come to the
wife, and say, give us of your oil, Mat. 25. 8, 9. but they have none to spare,
and the season of buying is then over.



And no wise Christian will lose a present season for his soul, upon the hopes
of much more time yet to come; but will rather say, now is my time, and I know
not what will be hereafter; hereafter I may wish to see one of the days of the
Son of man, and not see it, Luke 17. 22. It Is sad to hear how cunning some men
are to dispute themselves out of heaven, as if the devil had hired them to
plead against their own souls; sometimes urging the example of those that were
called at the eleventh hour, Mat. 20. 6. and sometimes that of the penitent
thief: But, O! to how little purpose is the former pleaded; they that were
called at the eleventh hour were never called before, as these have been, no
man had hired; that is, called or invited them to Christ, and for the thief,
(as Mr. Fenner rightly observes) it was a singular and extraordinary example.
It was done when Christ hanged on the Cross, and was to be inaugurated; then
Kings manifest such bounty, and pardon such crimes, as are never pardoned
afterward. Besides, God was then in a way of working miracles; then he rent
the rocks, opened the graves, raised the dead, and converted this thief; but
God is now out of that way.

REFLECTIONS.
I Have indeed been a good Husband for the world; The careless souls reflection
with my child, such will be the case of thee, my soul, Mat. 16. 26. Besides
how easy will my conviction be at the Bar of Christ? will not my providence
and care for the things of this life, leave me speechless and self-condemned in
that day? What shall I answer when the Lord shall say, Thou could foresee a
Winter, and seasonably provide for it? yea, thou had so much care of thy very
beasts, to provide for their necessities, and why tookest thou no care for thy
soul? was that only not worth the caring for?

The presumptuous souls Reflection.
who have suffered many such seasons to die away in my hand, upon a groundless
hope of future opportunities! Ah, deluded wretch! what if that supposition
fail? where am I then? I am not the Lord of time, neither am I sure, that he
who is, will ever vouchsafe an hour of grace in old age, to him that has
neglected many such hours in youth; neither indeed is it ordinary for God so to
do. It Is storied of Caius Marius Victorius, who lived about 300 years after
Christ, and to his old age continued a Pagan, but at last being convinced of
the Christian verity, he came to Simplicianus and told him, he would be a
Christian; but neither he, nor the Church could believe it, it being so rare an
example for any to be converted at his age: But at last seeing it was real,
there was a shouting and gladness, and singing of Psalms in all Churches, the
people crying Caius Marius Victorius is become a Christian. This was written
for a wonder, and what ground have I to think, that God will work such wonders
for me, who have neglected his ordinary means of salvation?

The industrious souls Reflection.
O my soul! who gave thee a season, a day for eternal life, which is more than
he has done for thousands; yea, bless the Lord for giving thee an heart to
understand and improve that season, I confess I have not improved it as I
ought; yet, this I can (through mercy) say* that how ever it fare in future
times, with my outward man, though I have no treasures or stores laid up on
earth, or if I have, they are but corruptible, yet I have a blessed hope laid
up in heaven, Col. 1. 5. I have bags that wax not old. Whilst worldlings
rejoice in their stores and heaps, I will rejoice in these eternal treasures.

The Poem.
OBserve in Summers sultry heat,
how in the Job 7. 2.
hottest day:
The Husbandman does toil and Genesis 3. 19.
sweat:
about his Corn and Hay.
If then he should not reap and mow,
and Prove. 10. 5.
gather in his store;
How should he live, when for the snow
he cannot move out of door?
The little Prove. 6. 6, 7
Ants, and painful Bees;
by natures instinct led;
These have their Summer granaries,
for Winter furnished.
But thou my soul, whose Summers day
is almost past and gone;
What soul-provision do thou Mat. 6. 20.
lay
in 1 Timothy 6. 10.
stock, to spend upon?
If Ier. 8. 7.
nature teaches to prepare
for temporal life, much rather
Grace should provoke to Man. 16. 26.
greater care,
soul food in time to gather.
Days of affliction, and distress
are Zeph. 2. 2, 3
hasting on apace,
If now I live in carelessness;
how sad will be my case!
Unworthy of the name Isa. 32. 9.
of man
who for that soul of thine;
Wilt not do that which others can
do for their very kine.
Think frugal Farmers, when you see
your mows of Corn and Hay;
What a Luke12. 18, 20.
conviction this will be
to you, another day.
Who never were up before the Sun,
nor break an hours rest;
For your poor souls, as you have done
so often, for a beast.
Learn once to see the difference;
betwixt 2 Cor. 4. 18.
eternal things;
And these poor 1 Cor. 7. 31
transient things of sense:
that fly with Prove. 23. 5.
eagles wings.
CHAP. XVII.
When from Tare seeds, Upon reaping the same we sow.
you see choice Wheat to grow,
Then from your lusts, may joy and comfort flow.
OBSERVATION.
GOd gives to every seed its own body, 1 Cor. 15. 38. At first he created every
Tree and herb of the field, having its seed in it self, for the conservation of
the species; and they all inviolably observe the Law of their Creation. All
fruits naturally rise out of the seeds, and roots proper to them. Men do not
gather grapes of thorns, nor figs of thistles. Such productions would be
monstrous in nature and although the juice or sap of the earth be the common
matter of all kind of fruits, yet it is specificated according to the different
sorts of Plants and seeds it nourishes. Where Wheat is sown, it is turned into
Wheat; in an apple Tree, it becomes an apple; and so in every sort of Plants or
seeds, it is concocted into fruit proper to the kind.

APPLICATION.
TRanslate this into spirituals, and the proposition shadowed forth by it, is
fully expressed by the Apostle, Gal. 6. 7. What a man sows, that shall be reap;
they that sow to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; and they that
sow to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting. And as sure as
the harvest follows the seed-time, so sure shall such fruits and effects result
from the seeds of such actions. He that sows iniquity, shall reap vanity,
Prove. 22. 8. And they that now go forth weeping, and bearing precious seed,
shall doubtless come again rejoicing bringing their sheaves with them, Psalm.
126. 5. The sum of all is this, That our present actions have the same respect
and relation to future rewards and punishments, as the seed we sow in our
fields, has to the harvest we reap from it. Every gracious action is the seed
of joy, and every sinful action the seed of anguish and sorrow, to the soul
that sowed it. Two things are sensibly presented to us in this ^imilitude.

That as the seed sown, is presently covered from our sight physically
transient, and perhaps forgotten, yet are not lost, but after a time shall
appear again in order to a retribution.

If this were not so, all good and holy actions would be to the loss of him
that performed them. All the self-denial, spending duties, and sharp sufferings
of the people of God, would turn to their damage, though not in point of
honesty, yet in point of personal utility; and then also, what difference would
there be betwixt the actions of a man and a beast, with respect to future good
or evil? yea, man would then be more feared and obeyed than God, and souls be
swayed in all their motions, only by the influence of present things; and where
then would Religion be found in the world? It Is an excellent note of
Drexellius; Our works (says he) do not pass away as soon as they are done,
Drexellius de aeternitate prope fin.
but as seed sown, shall after a time rise up to all eternity; whatever we
think, speak or do, once spoken, thought or done, is eternal, and abides for
ever.

What Zeuxes the famous Limner said of his work, may be truly said of all our
works; Aeternitati pingo, I paint for eternity. O, how careful should men be of
what they speak and do, whilst they are commanded so to speak, and so to do, as
those that shall be judged by the perfect law of liberty, Iam. 2. 12. What more
transient than a vain word? and yet for such words, men shall give an account
in the day of judgment, Mat. 12. 36. That Is the first thing; Actions like seed,
shall rise and appear again in order to a retribution.

Cor. 5. 10. Then Dionisius shall retract that saying, Ecce quam prospera
navigatio a Deo datur sacrilegis; Behold how God favors our sacrilege.
Sometimes indeed (though but rarely) God causes sinners to reap in this world,
the same that they have sown; as has been their sin, such has been their
punishment. It was openly confessed by Adonibezek, Judge. 1. 7. as I have done,
so has God requited me.

Socrates in his Church History furnishes us with a pertinent passage to this
purpose, concerning Valens the Emperor, who was an Arrian, and a bitter
persecutor of the Christians: This man, when eighty of the Orthodox Christians
failed from Constantinople to Nicomedia, to treat with him about the points of
Arrianism, and to settle the matter by way of dispute; the Emperor hearing of
their arrival, while they were yet in the Harbor, and not a man landed, caused
the Ships to be fired wherein they were, and so consumed them all. Not long
after, in his Wars against the Goths, he was overthrown; and hiding himself in
a little Cottage* the enemy coming by, burnt in and him together. Thus this
wretch reaped what he sowed, burning for burning, the very same in kind paid
him again; it is not always so in this world, but so it shall be in that to
come; the Table shall then be turned, Cum video mala sata bonis, ignoscite
queso: solicitor nullos esse putare Deos. Ovid.
and the Scene altered; for shall not the Judge of all the world do
righteously? Diogenes was tempted to think, that God had cast off the
government of the world, when he saw the wicked prosper in their wickedness. On
the same ground, many have been tempted to Atheism; but then the world shall
see distributive justice shining out in its glory. Tribulation, anguish and
wrath, to every soul of man that does evil; but glory, honor and peace, to
every man that works good, Romans 2. 9, 10. Then 'twill appear what seed we
sowed, what lives we lived; for God shall bring every work into judgment, with
every secret thing, whether it be good or evil, Eccles. 12. 14.

REFLECTIONS.
THis Meditation may be to me what the handwriting The profane persons
Reflection.
Dan. 5. 5, 6. and a like effect it should have upon me; for if all the actions
of this life be seed sown for the next, Lord, what a crop, what a dreadful
harvest am I like to have? how many oaths and curses, lies and vain words, have
I sown with my tongue, how have I wronged, oppressed, and overreached in my
dealings? rushed into all profaneness, drunkenness, uncleanness,
Sabbath-breaking, etc. as the horse rusheth into the battle; and what shall I
reap from such seed as this, but vengeance and fury? These sins seemed pleasant
in the commission, but O, how bitter will they be in their account? What shall
I do when God rises up? and when he visits, what shall I answer him? Job 31.
14. It is not reasonable and just, (O my soul) that thou should eat the
fruit of thine own planting, and reap what thou have sown? I thought nothing
but profit, and pleasure would spring from my lusts, but now I see it is a root
bearing gall and wormwood, Deuteronomy. 29. 18. Wretched soul, what shall I do? if
these actions be not, then am I undone. I have been the author of mine own
ruin, 'twisted an halter with mine own fingers, for the execution of mine own
soul! O, let me rather taste the bitterness of sin, by repentance now, that
enjoy its present pleasures, which betray the soul to endless wrath!

The moral man's Reflection.
I verily thought that glory and immortality would have been the fruit and
product of my moral honesty and righteousness, that joy and peace had been
seminally contained in those actions; but now I see such fruit can spring from
no other root but special grace. Glory is disclosed from no other bud but
holiness. Alas! all my planting and sowing was to little purpose, because I
sowed not the right kind of seed; the best fruit I can expect from this, is but
a lesser degree of damnation.

The holy souls Reflection.
thy seed is no better than what the moral Heathens sowed; and do I expect
better fruit than what they reaped? Civility without Christ, is but a freer
slavery; and Satan holds me as fast in captivity by this, as he does the
profane by the pleasure of their lusts; either I must sow better seed, or look
to reap bitter fruit.

Mean while, bless the Lord (O my soul) who enabled thee to sow better seed!
who kept thee watching, humbling thy self and praying, whilst others have been
swearing, drinking and blaspheming. This will yield thee the fruit of joy in
the world to come; yea, it already yields present peace to thy conscience.
These revenues are better than gold, sweeter than the honey, and the
honeycomb; not that such fruits are meritoriously contained in these actions,
I sow to my self in righteousness, but I reap in mercy, Hos. 10. 12. This is
the way in which God will save and glorify me. O then, let me be ever
abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing that my labor shall not be in vain
in the Lord.

The Poem.
'TWould be a strange and monstrous thing the sea
Cherries, or Plums grow on an apple Tree.
Who ever gathered from the Mat. 7. 16.
thistle Figs?
Or fruitful Grapes from off the worthless twigs
Of pricking thorns? in nature still we find
All its productions Genesis 1. 1^.
answering to their kind.
As are the Plants we set, or seeds we sow;
Such is the Job 4. 7.
fruit we shake, and corn we mow.
And can thou think that from corruptions root,
Thy soul shall pluck the sweet and pleasant fruit
Of spiritual peace? who ever that was wise,
Abused himself with such Iam. 1. 22.
absurdities?
Look what you sow, the very same you will reap.
The fruit of what you plant, be sure you will eat.
How are they Gal. 6. 7.
baffled by a subtle devil?
That hope for heaven, whilst their ways are evil.
Such reasonings here their credulous souls beguil,
At which in other things, themselves would smile.
Our present acts though slightly passed by,
Are so much Gal. 6. 7.
seed, sown for eternity.
The seeds of prayers, secret groans and tears;
Will shoot at last into the full blown ears,
Of peace and joy. Psalm. 126. 5.
Blessed are they that sow
Beside these waters, yea, thrice blessed that go
Bearing such precious seed; though now they mourn,
With joyful sheaves, they shortly shall return.
Needs must the full ripe fruits in heaven be good,
When as the seed was glory in the bud.
But O, the Deuteronomy. 29. 18
bitter, baneful fruits of sin!
When all the Heb. 11. 25
pleasure sinners have therein
Like faded blossoms to the ground shall fall,
Then they will taste the wormwood and the gall.
What God and conscience now of sin report,
You slight, and with their dreadful threatenings Prove. 14. 9
sport.
But he will convince you then, your ways were naught,
As Gideon the men of Judge. 8. 7.
Succoth taught.
If Sermons cannot, fire and brimstone must
Teach men how good it is to pamper lust.
When conscience Mark 9. 44.
takes thee by the throat and cries
Now wretch, now sinner, thou that did despise
My warnings; learn, and ever learning be
That Lesson, which thou never would learn of me.
The stoutest sinner then will howl and roar,
O sin! I never saw thy face before.
Is this the fruit of sin? is this the place
Where I must lie? is this indeed the case
Of my poor soul! must I be bound in chains
With these companions? Oh, is this the gains
I get by sin! poor wretch, I that would never
See this before, am now undone for ever.
CHAP. XVIII.
Great is the joy of Harvest men, Upon the joy of Harvest men
yet less
Than theirs, whom God does with his favor bless.
OBSERVATION.
AMong all earthly joys, these four sorts are noted in Scripture, as the most
excellent and remarkable, (1) Nuptial joys, the day of Espousals is the day of
the gladness of a man's heart, Cant. 3. 11. (2) The joy of children. Though now
it seem but a common mercy to most, and a den to some; yet the people of God
were wont to esteem it a choice mercy, and rejoiced greatly in it. John. 16.
21. there is joy that a man is born into the world. (3) The joy of conquests and
victories, when men divide the spoil. And lastly, The joy of Harvest; these two
we find put together as principal matters of joy, Isa. 9. 3. They joy before
thee, according to the joy in Harvest, and as men rejoice when they divide the
spoil. The joy of Harvest is no small joy; Gaudium messis, est messis gaudii,
the joy of harvest, is the harvest of their joy. It Is usual with men, when they
have reaped down their harvest, (or cut the neck, as they call it) to
demonstrate their joy by shoutings, and loud acclamations.

APPLICATION.
THus, and unspeakably more than thus, do Saints rejoice and shout for joy,
when they reap the favor and love of God, for which they labored in many a
weary duty. This joy of harvest, as great as it is, and as much as carnal
hearts are lifted up with it, is but a trifle, a thing of naught, compared with
yours; after they have sown to themselves in righteousness, and waited for the
effects and returns of their duties with patience, and at last come to reap in
mercy, either the full harvest in heaven, or but the first fruits of it on
earth, yet rejoice, with joy unspeakable and full of glory, 1 Pet. 1. 8. This
puts more gladness into their hearts, than when corn and wine increases, Psalm.
4. 7. Carnal joys are but soul-Fevers, the Agues of the inner-man; there is as
great difference betwixt the unnatural inflammations of a feverish body which
wastes their spirits, and drinks up the radical moisture, and that kindly
well-tempered heat of an healthy body; and as much between the sweet, serene
and heavenly joys, which flow from the bosom of Christ into the hearts of
believers, and those earthly delights which carnal hearts in a sensual way suck
out of creature-enjoyments. I will show you the transcendency of spiritual
joys, above the joy of harvest, in these eight particulars following.

You that joy with the joy of harvest, are glad, because now you have food for
your selves and families to live upon all the year; but the Christian
rejoices, because he has bread to eat, that the world knows not of, Rev. 2.
17. Christ is the food of his soul, and his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood
drink indeed, John 5. 55. ( i. e.) the most real and excellent food You read,
Psalm. 78. 25. that man did eat angels food ( i. e.) Manna, which was such
excellent bread, that if Angels did live upon material food, this would be
chosen for them; and yet this is but a type and dark shadow of Jesus Christ,
the food of believers.



Romans 8. 1. O, what matter of joy is this!

You rejoice, because now your corn is out of danger, all

Your joy is but in a gift of common providence. Turks Heathens can rejoice
with your joy, but the joy of a Christian is a peculiar favor and gift of God.
Corn is given to all Nations, even the most barbarous and wicked have store of
it; but Christ is the portion but of a few, and those the dearly beloved of
God. Luther said of the whole Turkish Empire (where is the best and greatest
store of corn) that it is but a crumb which the Master of the Family throws to
the dogs. He that had more corn than his Barns could hold, now wants a drop of
water to cool his tongue. Christ is a gift bestowed only upon God's Elect.

Your joy will have an end; the time is coming, that when

God an separate your joy from these ejoyments, even Eccles. 5. 19, 20. But now
the joy of Christians is a thing inseparable from their enjoyment of Christ:
Indeed the sense of their interest may be lost, and so the acts of their joy
intermitted; but they always have it in the seed, if not in the fruit, Psalm.
97. 11. Joy is sown for the upright; he has it still in the principle, and in
the promise.

The joy of Harvest-men, for the most part, is only in their joy ceases.
Earthly hearts are acquainted with no higher comforts; but the people of God
can joy in him, and take comfort in their earthly enjoyments too; and what
comfort they take in these things, is much more refined and sweet than yours;
for they enjoy all these things in God, and his love in giving them, puts a
sweetness into them, that you are unacquainted with. Thus you see, how far your
joy falls short of theirs.

REFLECTIONS.
A Reflection for one that has a full Barn but no Christ.
and pleased my self with a vanity? God has blessed me in my fields, and in my
stores; but not with spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ. My Barns
are full of corn, but my soul is empty of grace; common bounty has given me a
fullness of the things of this life, but what if the meaning of it should be to
fat me for the day of slaughter? what if this be the whole of my portion from
the Lord? what if the language of his providence to my soul should be this?
Lo, here I have given thee (with Ishmael) the fatness of the earth: Thou shall
not say, but thou have tasted of thy Creator's bounty; but make the most of it,
for this is all that ever thou shall have from me: There be others in the
world, to whom I have denied these things, but for them I have reserved better;
for the most part they are poor in this world, but rich in faith, and heirs of
the Kingdom? Is not this enough to damp all my carnal mirth? Should my
conscience give me such a memento, as Abraham in the parable gave to Dives;
Remember that thou in thy life time receivedst thy good things. Ah, what a cut
would that be to all my comforts? A man in a Fever has a lively color, but a
dying heart. I have an appearance, a shadow of comfort, but a sad state of soul.

Blessed be the God and father of my Lord Jesus Christ, A Reflection for one
that has Christ but no Barn.
who has blessed me with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ,
Ephesians. 1. 3. Though he has not seen fit to give me much of this world in hand,
yet it has pleased him to settle a rich inheritance upon me by promise; the
hopes and expectations whereof, yield my soul more true comfort than all the
present enjoyments of this world could have done. Blessed be the Lord, who has
not given me my portion in this life, that by keeping me from the enjoyment,
has also preserved me from the snares of a prosperous estate.

Lord Jesus, I have no bags, I have no Barns; but thou shall be to me instead
of all those things. When others rejoice in the fullness of their earthly
comforts, I will rejoice in the fullness of my Christ; they have that which
(though I have not) I shall not want; and I have that which all their riches
cannot purchase. Bless the Lord, O my soul!

But Lord, A Reflection for one that has a full Barn and Christ too.
how am I obliged, above thousands, to love and

Oh, what an unhappy wretch am I! that have nothing A Reflection for one that
has neither a Barn, nor a Christ.
or in hope; am miserable here, and like to be so for ever: Had I but an
interest in Christ, as the godly poor have, that would sweeten all present
troubles, and show me the end of them. But alas! I am poor and wicked,
contemned of men, and abhorred of God; an object of contempt, both to heaven
and earth. Lord, look upon such a truly miserable object with compassion, give
me a portion with thy people in the world to come, if thou never better my
outward condition here! O sanctify this poverty! bless these straits and
wants, that they may necessitate my soul to go to Christ; make this poverty the
way to glory, and I shall bless thee to eternity, that I was poor in this world.

The Poem.
Often have I seen when harvest's almost in,
The last load coming; how some men have bin
Rapt up with joy, as if that welcome cart
Drew home the very Isa. 9. 3.
treasure of their heart.
What joyful shoutings! hooping! hollowing noise,
With mingled voices both of men and boys?
To carnal minds there is no Psalm. 4. 7.
greater mirth,
No higher joy; nor greater heaven on earth.
He speaks pure Paradoxes, that shall say
These are but trifles; to what Saints enjoy.
But they Prove. 29. 27.
despise your sparks, as much as you
Contemn their Sun. Some that could never show
A full stuffed Luke 16. 20, 21.
Barn, on which you set yourt hear;
But glean perhaps the ears behind your cart;
Yet are the gleanings of their comfort more;
Than all your harvest, and admired store.
Your mirth is Job 20. 23.
mixed with sorrow, theirs, is pure
Yours like a shadow Job 20. 5.
fleets, but theirs endure.
God gives to you the husk, to them the pith;
And no heart-string sorrow Prove. 10. 22
adds therewith.
Though at the gates of death they sometimes mourn,
No sooner does the Lord to them return;
But sorrow's banished from their pensive breast;
Joy triumphs there, and Psalm. 42. 11.
smiles their cheeks invest.
Have you beheld when with perfumed wings,
Out of the balmy East bright Phoebus springs;
Mounting the Olympic hill, with what a grace
He views the throne of darkness; and does chase
The shades of night before him? having hurled
His golden beams about this lower world,
How from sad Groves, and solitary Cells
Where horrid darkness and confusion dwells,
Batts, Owls, and doleful creatures fly away,
Resigning to the cheerful birds of day,
Who in those places now can sit and chaunt,
Where lately such sad creatures kept their haunt.
Thus grief resigns to joy, sighs, groans and tears,
To songs triumphant when the Lord appears.
O matchless joy! O countenance divine!
What are those trifles, to these smiles of thine!
May I with poor Mephibosheth be blessed
With these sweet smiles, let Ziba take the rest.
My life, my treasure, thou shall never be sold
For silver hills, or rivers paved with gold.
Were thou but known to worldlings, they would scorn,
To stoop their hearts to such poor things as corn.
For so they do, because thou art above
That sphere wherein their low conceptions move.
CHAP. XIX.
More solid grain with greater strength you thrash, Upon the thrashing out of
Corn.

The ablest Christians have the hardest lash.
OBSERVATION.
HUsbandmen having to do with diverse sorts of grain some more tough and
stubborn; others more free and tender, do not beat all alike in the threshing
floor; but as they have threshals of several sizes, so they bestow on some
grain more, on other fewer strokes, according to the different qualities of the
grain to the threshed. This observation the Prophet Isaiah has, Chop. 28. v.
27. The Fitches are not thereshed with a threshing instrument, neither is the
Cart-wheel turned about upon the Cummin, but the Fitches are beaten out with a
staff, and the Cummin with a rod. The manner of beating out the corn in ancient
times, was far different from that which is now in use among us; they had the
Cart-wheel, which was full of iron spokes or teeth, and the hoofs of beasts for
the harder sort of grain, as Wheat, Rye and Barley, a staff or flail for the
Fitches, and a rod or twig for the Cummin; all which instruments were
proportioned according to the nature of the grain.

APPLICATION.
GOd having to do in a way of correction with diverse sorts of offenders, does
not use the like severity with them all, but proportions his correction to
their abilities and strength, Ier. 30. 11. I will not make a full end of thee,
but will [correct thee in measure] and will not leave thee altogether
unpunished, ( q. d.) afflicted thou must be, my respect to my own glory and thy
good, puts a necessity upon that; but yet I will do it moderately, I will not
lay on without measure or mercy, as I intend to do upon the enemies; but will
mete out your sufferings in a due proportion, even as a careful Physician in
prescribing pills or potions to his Patients, has regard as well to the
ability of the Patient as to the nature and quality of the disease; even so thy
God, O Israel, will not afflict thee according to the greatness of his power
and his wrath; answerable thereunto, Psalm. 90. 11. that would break thee to
pieces, Psalm. 78. 38. Nor yet will he afflict thee according to the demerit of
thy sin. As it shall be much less than what I could inflict; so it shall be
less than thine iniquities deserve, Ezra. 9. 13. Neither my power, nor thy
desert, shall be the rule of my proceedings; but I will do it with moderation
and mercy, as thou art able to bear. I that have instructed the Husbandman to
proportion his instruments to the quality of the grain before him, will
exercise the like wisdom and mildness toward the thee, and the similitude
betwixt the Husbandmans threshing his corn, and the Lords afflicting his
people, stands in these particulars.

The Husbandmans end in threshing the corn, is to separate Isa. 27. 9. In
measure when it shoots forth, he will debate with it, ( i. e.) he will
moderately correct them; and what the end of those corrections are, the next
words inform us; By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and
this is all the fruit to take away his sin. God uses afflictions, as we use
soap, to cleanse away filthiness, and fetch out spots, Dan. 11. 35. he aims
not at the destruction of their persons, but of their lusts.

If the Husbandman have cockle, darnel, or pernicious Isa. 41. 15. The daughter
to Babylon is like a threshing floor; it is time to thresh her, Ier. 51. 33. And
when that time is come, then (in allusion to the beast, that was to tread out
the corn) Sion's horn shall be of iron, and her hoofs brass, Mich. 4. 13. He
smites not his people, according to the stroke of them that smote them; the
meaning is, his strokes on them shall be d^adly strokes. They showed no mercy
to Sien, and God will show no mercy to them.

When the husks and chaff are perfectly separated from

Though the Husbandman lays on, and beats his corn, as if he were angry with
it, yet he loves and highly prizes it, and though God strike and afflict his
people, yet he sets a great value upon them? and it is equally absurd to infer
God's hatred to his people from his afflicting of them, as the Husbandmans
hatred of his corn, because he threshes and beats it Heb. 12. 6. Whom the Lord
loves he corrects, and chasteneth every son whom he receives.

Ier. 25. 6. Some need more rods that others, but none shall have more than
they can bear; the Lord knows the measures and degrees of his servants faith
and patience, and accordingly shall their trials be, Psalm. 103. 13, 14. Like as
a father pities his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him; for he
knows their frame, he remembers they are but dust; he makes a way to escape,
that they may be able to bear it, 1 Cor. 10. 13. This care and tenderness of
God over ^is afflicted, is eminently discovered in three particulars.

(1) In not exposing them to, till he have prepared them for their trials, Luke
24. 49. Tarry ye at Jerusalem until ye be endued with power from on High. He
gives them sometimes eminent discoveries of his love immediately before, and as
a preparative to their sufferings; in the strength whereof, they are carried
through all.

(2) Or if not so, then he intermixeth supporting comfort with their troubles,
as you sometimes see the Sun shine out while the rain falls. 'Twas so with
Paul, Act. 27. 23. This night (and it was a sad night indeed) there stood by me
the Angel of the Lord, whose I am.

3. In taking off the affliction, when they can bear it no longer, 1 Cor. 10.
13. He makes a way to escape, that they may be able to bear it. Psalm. 125. 3.
The rod is taken off, when the righteous is even ready to put forth his hand to
iniquity. It Is a Jewish Proverb, When the bricks are doubled, then comes Moses,
And it is a Christian experience, When the spirit is ready to fail, then comes
Jesus; according to that promise Isa. 57. 16.

REFLECTIONS.
HOw unlike am I to God, A reflection for persecutors
in the afflicting of his people? Psalm. 17. 14. or as his rod to afflict them,
Ier. 10. 7. but his end and mine have widely differed in that action, Isa. 10.
7. I am but the Scullion, or rather the wisp so S^our and cleanse these vessels
of glory, and when I have done that dirty work, those bright souls shall be set
up in heaven, and I cast into the fire. If he shall have judgment without
Mercy, that showed no mercy; how can I expect mercy from the Lord, whose people
I have persecuted mercilesly for his sake?

Is the Lord's Wheat thus threshed in the floor of affliction? A reflection for
such as meet with no afflictions.
Let them alone, Hos. 4. 17. but miserable is their condition; notwithstanding
their impunity; for what is the interpretation but this? I will come to a
reckoning with them for altogether in hell. Lord, how much better is thy
afflicting mercy, than thy spa^ing severity! Better is the condition of an
afflicted child, than of a rejected bastard. Heb. 12. 7. O, let me rather feel
thy rod now, as the rod of a loving father, than feel thy wrath hereafter, as
the wrath of an omnipotent avenger.

Well then, A Reflection for an afflicted Saint.
despond not, O my soul, thou hear the Husbandman much. If affliction then
be the way to heaven, blessed be God for affliction. The threshing strokes of
God have come thick upon me, by which I may see, what a tough and stubborn
heart I have; if one stroke would have done the work, he would not have lifted
up his hand the second time. I have not had a stroke more than I had need of, 1
Pet. 1. 6. and by this means he will purge my sin, blessed be God for that. The
damned have infinitely more and harder strokes than I, and ^et their sin shall
never be separated by their sufferings. Ah, sin, cursed sin, I am so much out
of love with thee, that I am willing to endure more than all this to be well
rid of thee; all this I suffer for thy sake, but the time is coming when I
shall be rid of sin and suffering together. Mean while I am under my own
fathers hand, smite me he may, but hate me he cannot.

The Poem.
THe sacred records tell us, heretofore
God had an Alter in a 2 Samuel 24. 22.
threshing floor;
Where threshing instruments devoted were
To sacred service, so you find them here.
I now would teach the thresher to beat forth,
A notion from his threshold much more worth
Than all his corn; and make him understand
That soul-instructing engine in his hand.
With fewer Isa. 28. 27.
strokes, and lighter you will beat
The Oats and Barley? than the stubborn wheat,
Which will require and endure more blows,
Than freer grain. Thus deals Isa. 27. 7, 8.
the Lord by those
Whom he afflicts. He does not use to strike
Offending children, with his rod alike.
But on the Ioh. 1. 1. 12.
ablest shoulders does impose,
The heaviest burdens; and the Ier. 30. 11.
less on those
Of weaker grace. He shows himself a God
Of judgment, in his handling of the rod.
God has a Rev. 3. 8.
rate book by him, wherein he
Keeps just accounts, how rich his people be;
What ^aith, experience, patience more or less
Each one possesses, and does them assess
According to their stock. Such as have not
A Martyrs faith, shall have no Martyrs lot.
The Rev. 2. 10.
kinds, degrees, and the continuance
Of all their sufferings, to a circumstance;
Prescribed are by him who wisely swayes
The world, Job 34. 23.
more than's right on no man lays.
Be man or devil the apothecary,
God's the Physician; who can then miscarry
In such a hand? he never did, or will
Suffer the least addition to his bill.
Nor measure, nor yet mercy he observes
In threshing Isa. 41. 15.
Babylon, for the deserves
His heaviest strokes; and in his floor she must
Be beaten shortly with his flail to dust.
But Sion's God Isa. 27. 7.
in measure will debate,
his children he may smite; but cannot hate.
He beats them, true, to make their chaff to fly;
That they like purged golden grains may lie
In one fair heap, with those blessed souls that here
Once in like manner thrash'd, and winnowed were.
CHAP. XX.
The fan does cause light chaff to fly away, Upon the winnowing of corn.

So shall the ungodly, in Gods winnowing day.
OBSERVATION.
WHen the Corn is threshed out in the floor, where it lies mingled with empty
ears, and worthless chaff, the husbandman carries it out altogether into some
open place, where having spread his sheet for the preservation of the grain, he
exposes it all to the wind; the good grain, by reason of its solidity, remains
upon the sheet, but the chaff being light and empty, is partly carried quite
away by the wind, and all the rest separated from the good grain into a
distinct heap; which is carried away, either to the fire of the dunghill, as a
worthless thing.

APPLICATION.
MEn have their winnowing days, and God has his; a day to separate the chaff
from the wheat, the godly from the ungodly, who shall both be held up to the
wind, but only the wicked shall be driven away by it. Such a day God has in
this world, wherein he winnows his wheat, and separates the chaff. There is a
double fanning or winnowing of men here in this world; one is doctrinally, in
which sense I understand that Scripture, Mat. 3. 12. spoken of Christ, when he
was entering into his Ministerial work, His fan is in his hand, and he shall
thoroughly purge his floor, and gather his wheat into the garner, but he will
brun up the chaff with unquenchable fire. The preaching of the Gospel is as a
fan in Christ's hand, and it is as much as if John had thus told the Jews, that
though there were the many hypocrytical ones among them, that had now a place
and name among the people of God, and gloried in their Church Priviledges, yet
there is a purging blast of truth coming, which shall make them fly out of the
Church, as fast as chaff out of the floor. Thus Christ winnows or fans the
world doctrinally: The other is judicially, by bringing sore and grievous
trials and sufferings upon the Churches, for this very end, that those which
are but chaff, ( i. e.) empty and vain Professors may be such winds as these,
be separated from his people.

The Church increases two ways, and by two diverse means extensively, in
breadth and numbers, and intensively, in vigor and power; peace and prosperity
cause the first, sufferings and adversity the last; and well may a day of
persecution be called a winnowing day, for then were the people of God tossed
to purpose, as corn in the si^ve, though nothing but chaff be l^st thereby. Of
such a winnowing day the Prophet speaks, Amos 9. 9, 10. I will sift the house
of Israel among all Nations, like as corn is sifted in a sieve, yet shall not
the least grain fall upon the earth, all the sinners of my people shall die.
(q. d.) I will cause great agitations and tossings among you by the hands of
the Assyrians and Babylonians, into whose Countries you shall be dispersed and
scattered, yet I will so govern those your dispersions by my providence, that
not one good grain, one upright soul shall eternally perish; but the sinners of
my people, the refuse stuff, that shall perish.

To the same purpose speaks another Prophet, Zeph. 1. 1, 2. Gather your selves
together, (or as some read) fan your selves, yea, fan your selves, before the
decree bring forth, and the day pass as the chaff. He does not mean, that the
time shall pass as the chaff, but there is a day of affliction and distress
coming in which the wicked shall pass as the chaff before the wind; and yet
notwithstanding, all these winnowings upon earth, much chaff will still abide
among the corn; therefore God has appointed another day for the winnownig of
the world, even the day of judgment, in reference to which it is said, Psalm. 1.
4, 5. The ungodly are not so, but are like the chaff which the wind drives
away; therefore the ungodly shall not stand in judgment, nor sinners in the
congregation of the righteous; (i. e.) God has a day wherein he will fifth the
world, like corn in a sieve, and then the wicked shall appear to be but chaff,
which God will eternally separate from his wheat. I will not strain the
similitude, but fairly display it in these seven particulars.

The chaff and wheat grow together in the same field, and Mal. 1. 2. was not
Esau, Jacobs brother; yet the one was wheat, the other chaff. Instances of this
are infinite.

Sodom, Isa. 1. 9.

Prove. 10. 20. The heart of the wicked is little worth. The heart is the
principal part of the man, and yet that is but chaff, no worth in it; his lands,
his clothes, etc. are worth somewhat, but his heart is worth nothing.

Rev. 12. 16. The earth helped the woman, ( i. e.) worldly men for carnal ends
helped the Church, when a flood of persecution was poured out. The Church often
helps the world, it receives many benefits from the people of God; and
sometimes God overrules the world to help his Church.

Mat. 3. 12.

judge the secrets of men, 2 Cor. 16. He will then bring to light the hidden
things of darkness, and make manifest the counsels of the heart, I Cor. 4. 5.

Lastly, after corn and chaff are separated by the winnowing Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God, but themselves
thrust out; there is no chaff in heaven.

REFLECTIONS.
AM I an empty vain Professor, A Reflection for a close Hypocrite.
that want the pith and Lo, this is the man that made not God his hope; how
shall I abide the day of his coming? Christ is the great heart-Anatomist;
things shall not be carried then, by names and parties, as they are now; every
one shall be weighed in a just balance, and a Mean Tekel, written upon every
false heart; great will be the perspicuity of that trial, my own conscience
shall join with my Judge, and shall then acknowledge, that there is not one drop
of injustice in all that Sea of wrath; and though I am damned, yet I am not
wronged; the chaff cannot stand before the wind, nor I before the judgment of
Christ.

Is there such a fanning time coming; A Reflection for one that neglects
self-examination.
why do not I then befriend me? and studying every advantage to my self? and
yet, what a vast difference is there between man's bar and Gods? between a trial
for my life, and for my soul? Lord, rouse up my sluggish heart by awful and
solicitous thoughts of that day, left I be found among that chaff, which shall
be burnt up with unquenchable fire!

Fear not, O my soul! though there be a blast coming A Reflection for a sincere
soul.
yet it shall blow thee no harm. I know that when he has tried me, I shall
come forth as gold, Job 23. 10. I confess I have too much chaff about me, but
yet I am not altogether chaff? there is a solid work of grace upon my soul,
that will abide the trial: let the judgment to come be as impartial and exact
as its possible to be, yet a grain of sincerity cannot be lost in it; for God
will not cast away a perfect (i. e.) an upright hearted) man, Job 8. 20. He
that is appointed to judge the world is mine; and his imputed righteousness will
make me full weight in the balance. Bless the Lord (O my soul) for sincerity;
this will abide, when common gifts and empty names will flee as the chaff
before the wind.

The Poem.
THe winnowing wind first Psalm. 35. 5.
drives the chaff away,
Next light, and hollow grains; those only stay
Whose weight, and solid substance can endure
This trial, and such grains are counted pure.
The corn for use Mat. 3. 12.
is carefully preserved,
The useless chaff Mat. 3. 12.
for burning flames reserved.
No wind but blows some good, a Proverb is;
Glad shall I be, if it hold true in this.
O, that the wind when you to winnowing go,
This spiritual good unto your souls might blow!
To make you pause, and sadly ruminate
In what a doleful plight and wretched state
Their souls are in, who cannot Psalm. 1. 5.
hope to stand
When he shall come, whose Mat. 3. 12.
fan is in his hand.
His Rev. 1. 14.
piercing eyes infallibly disclose,
The very reins, and 1 Cor. 4. 5.
inward parts of those
Whose outside seeming grace so neatly paints,
That with the Mat. 7. 22.
best, they pass for real Saints.
No hypocrite with God Job 13. 16.
acceptance finds,
But like the chaff dispersed by furious winds:
Their guilt shall not that searching day endure,
Nor they approach Psalm. 1. 5.
th'assemblies of the pure.
Have you observed in Autumn, Isa. 17. 13.
thistle-down
By howling Enrus scattered up and down
About the fields? even so Gods ireful storm
Shall chase the hypocrite, who now can scorn
The breath of close reproofs; and like a rock
Repel reproofs, and just reprovers mock.
How many that in Mat. 25. 7.
splendid garments walk
Of high professions! and like Angels talk,
Shall God divest; and openly proclaim
Their secret guilt, to their eternal shame!
This is the day, wherein the Lord will rid
His Church of those false friends, which now lie hid.
Among his people. There will not be one
False heart remian, to lose our love upon.
O, blessed assembly! glorious state! when all
In their uprightness walk, and ever shall.
O make my heart sincere, that I may never
Prove such light chaff as then thy wind will sever.
From solid grain! O let my soul detest
Unsoundness? and abide thy strictest test.
An Introduction TO THE Second PART OF HUSBANDRY.
HOw is it reader? have I tired thee?
Whilst through these pleasant fields thou walk'st with me,
Our path was pleasant, but if length of way
Do weary thee, we will slack our pace, and stay;
Let Us sit a while under the cooling Shade
Of fragrant trees; were for shadow made.
Lo here a pleasant grove, whose shade is good;
But more than so, 'twill yield us fruit for food.
No dangerous fruits do on these branches grow,
No snakes among the verdant grass below.
Here we will repose a while, and then go view
The pleasant herds and flocks: and so adieu.
CHAP. I.
Vngraffed Trees can never bear good fruit, Upon the ingraffing of fruit Trees.

Nor we till graffed on a better root.
OBSERVATION.
A Wild tree naturally springing up in the wood or hedge, and never graffed or
removed from its native soil, may bear some fruit, and that fair and beautiful
to the eye, but it will give you no content at all in eating, being always
harsh, sower and unpleasant to the taste; but if such a stock be removed into a
good soil, and graffed with a better kind, it may become a good tree, and yield
store of choice and pleasant fruit.

APPLICATION.
UNregenerate men who never were acquainted with the mystery of spiritual union
with Jesus Christ but still grow upon their natural root, old Adam, may by the
force and power of natural principles bring forth some fruit, (which like the
wild hedge fruit we speak of) may indeed be fair and pleasant to the eyes of
men, but God takes no pleasure at all in it; its sower, harsh, and distasteful
to him, because it springs not from the spirit of Christ, Isa, 1. 13. I cannot
away with it, it is iniquity, etc. but that I may not entangle the thread of my
discourse, I shall (as in the former Chapters) set before you a parallel betwixt
the best fruits of natural men, and those of a wild ungraffed tree.

manured and ordered aright, it is turned wild: So all the fruits of
unregenerate men ^low from the first Adam, a corrupt and degenerate root; he
was indeed planted a right seed, but soon turned a wild and degenerate plant;
he being the root from which every man naturally springs, corrupts all the
fruit that any man bears from him. It Is observed by Gregory, pertinent to my
present purpose, Genus humanum in parente primo, velut in radice putruit;
Mankind was putrified in the root of his first parent, Matt. 7. 18. A Corrupt
tree cannot bring forth good fruit.

This corrupt root spoils the fruit, by the transmission of Adam, is expressed
by a quick and smart Interrogation, Job 14. 4. Who can bring a clean thing out
of an unclean? not one. The sense of it is well delivered us (by Mr. Caryl in
loc.) This question (says he) may undergo a threefold construction; First,
thus: Who can bring a morally clean person, out of a person originally unclean?
and so he lays his hand upon his birth-sin: Or, secondly, (which speaks to my
purpose) it may refer to the action of the same man, man being unclean, cannot
bring forth a clean thing; ( i. e.) a clean or holy action; that which is
originated, is like its Original. And that this sower sap of the first stock (I
mean Adams sin) is transmitted into all mankind, not only corrupting their
fruit, but ruining and withering all the branches; the Apostle shows us in that
excellent parallel betwixt the two Adams, Romans 5. 12. Wherefore as by one man]
one, not only in individuo, sed in specie, one representing the whole root or
stock, sin entered into the world] not by imitation only, but by propagation?
and this brought death and ruin upon all the branches.

Although these wild hedge-fruits be unwholsom and unpleasant to the taste, yet
they are fair and beautiful to the eye; a man that looks upon them, and does
not know what fruit it is, would judge it by its show and color to be
excellent fruit; for it makes a fairer show oftentimes, than the best and most
wholesome fruit does: Even so, those natural gifts and endowments which some
unregenerate persons have, seem exceeding fair to the eye, and a fruit to be
desired. What excellent qualities have some mere natural men and women? what a
winning affability? humble condescension, meekness, righteousness, ingenious
tenderness and sweetness of nature! As it was (hyperbolically enough) said of
one, In hoc homine, non peccavit Adam; Adam never sinned in this man; meaning,
that he excelled the generality of Adams children in sweetness of temper and
natural endowments. What curious fantasies, imble wits, solid judgments,
tenacious memories, rare elocution, etc. are to be found among mere natural
men? by which they are assisted in discoursing' praying, preaching and writing,
to the admiration of such as know them! But that which is highly esteemed of
men, is abomination to God, Luke 16. 15. it finds no acceptance with him,
because it springs from that cursed root of nature and is not the production of
this own spirit.

If such a stock were removed into a better soil, and gra^^ed Tertullian,
Origin, and Jerome, that they came into Canaan, laden with Egyptian gold, ( i.
e.) they came into the Church full of excellent humane learning, which did
Christ much service.

When the Husbandman cuts down his woods or hedges, John 3. 3. Except you be
regenerate and born again, you cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. And
again, Heb. 12. 14. Without holiness, no man (be his natural gifts never so
excellent) shall see God. Imbellished nature, is nature still; That which is
born of the flesh, is but flesh, however it be set off with advantage to the
eye of man.

REFLECTIONS.
TO what purpose then do I glory in my natural accomplishments? A reflection
for an accomplished Naturalist.
yet it is a cursed nature still. These sweet qualities and excellent gifts, do
only hide, but not kill the corruption of nature. I am but a rotten post gilded
over, and all my duties but hedge fruit, which God makes no account of. O
cutting thought! that the unlearned shall rise and take heaven, when I with all
my excellent gifts shall descend into hell. Heaven was not made for Scholars,
as such, but for believers; as one said, when they comforted him upon his
deathbed, that he was a knowing man, a Doctor of Divinity: O, said he, I shall
not appear before God as a Doctor, but as a man; I shall stand upon a level
with the most illiterate, in the day of judgment; what does it avail me that I
have a nimble with, whilst I have none to do my self good? Will my Judge be
charmed with a rhetorical tongue? Things will not be carried in that world, as
they are in this. If I could with Berengarius discourse de omni scibile, of
every thing that is knowable; or with Solomon unravel nature, from the Cedar to
the Hysop, what would this advantage me, as long as I am ignorant of Christ,
and the mystery of Regeneration? My head has often aked with study, but when
did my heart ache for sin? Methinks, O my soul, thou trimmest up thy self in
these natural ornaments to appear before God, much as that delicate Agag did,
when he was to come before Samuel, and fondly conceitest that these things will
procure favor, or (at least) pity from him? but yet, think not for all that,
the bitterness of death is past; say not within thy self, Will God cast such a
one as a I into hell? Shall a man of such parts be damned? Alas! justice will
hew thee to pieces, as Samuel did that spruce King, and not abate thee the
least, for these things; many thousand branches of nature, as fair and fruitful
as thy self, are now blazing in hell, because not transplanted by regeneration
into Christ; and if he spared not them, neither will he spare thee.

A reflection for a true, but weak believer.
which have no beauty at all in me, and yet such a one has the Lord chosen to
transplant into Christ, whilst he left many fragrant branches standing on their
native stock, to be fuel of his wrath to all eternity! O grace for ever to be
admired! Ah, what cause have I to be thankful to free grace, and for ever to
walk humbly with my God: the Lord has therefore chosen an unlikely, rugged,
unpolisht creature as I am, that pride may for ever be hid from mine eyes, and
that I may never glory in his presence, 1 Cor. 1. 29. I now have the advantage
of a better root and soil than any carnal person has, it will therefore be
greater shame to me, and a reproach to the root that bears me, if I should be
out-stript and excelled by them; yet Lord, how often do I find it so? I see
some of them meek and patient, whilst I am proud and passionate; gentle and
affable, whilst I am rough and surly; generous and noble, whilst I am base and
penurious. Truly, such a branch as I am, is no honor to the root that bears it.

The Poem.
I Am a branch of that fair Eden Tree
Which to 1 Cor. 10. 45.
mankind God had ordained to be
The common stock, his Eccl. 7. 9.
situation good,
His Deuteronomy. 32. 8.
branches many, of himself a wood.
And like a Cedar by the River fed,
Unto the clouds his ample branches spread.
Sin smote Romans 5. 12.
his root, then justice cut him down;
And levelled with the earth his lofty Crown.
What hope of branches, when the Romans 5. 18
tree's o'return'd?
But like ^ohn 15. 6.
dry faggots to be bound and burned.
It had been so, had not Ioh. 3. 16.
transcendent love,
Which in a sphere above our thoughts does move
Prepared a better 1 Cor. 15. 47.
stock, to save and nourish
Transplanted twigs, which in him thrive and flourish.
In Adam all are Gal. 3. 10.
cursed, no saving fruit
Shall ever spring, from that sin-blasted root.
Yea all the branches that in him are found,
How Heb. 12. 14.
flourishing soever must be bound
And pil'd together, horrid news to tell!
To make an everlasting blaze in Hell.
God takes no pleasure in the sweetest bud
Disclosed by nature, for the root's not good.
Some Mark 10. 20, 21.
boughs indeed richly adorned are
With natural fruits, which to the eye are fair,
Rare Heb. 6 4, 5.
Gifts, sweet dispositions, which attracts
The love of thousands, and from most exacts
Honor, and admiration, You Will admire
That such as these, are fuel for the fire.
Indeed ten thousand pities it is to see
Such lovely creatures in this case to be.
Did they by true. Regeneration draw
The sap of life from Iesses root, Romans 1. 2.
the Law
By which they now to wrath condemned are
Would cease to curse, and God such buds would spare.
But out of him, there is none of these can move
His unrelenting heart, or draw his love.
Then cut me off, from this accursed Tree;
Le^t I for ever be cut off from thee.
CHAP. II.
When ere you bud or graft, Upon the union of the graff with the stock.
therein you see;
How Christ, and souls must here united be.
OBSERVATION.
WHen the Husbandman has prepared his graffs in the season of the year, he
carries them, with the tools that are necessary for that work, to the tree or
stock he intends to ingraft; and having cut off the top of the limb, in some
strait smooth part, he cleaves it with his knife or chissel, a little beside
the pith; knocks in his wedge to keep it open, then (having prepared the graff,
he carefully sets it into the cleft joining the inner side of the barks, of
graff and stock together (there being the main current of the sap) then pulls
out his wedge, binds both together (as in barking) and clayes it up, to defend
the tender graff and wounded stock, from the injuries of the Sun and rain.

These tender cyences quickly take hold of the stock, and having immediate
coalition with it, drink in its sap, concoct it into their own nourishment,
thrive better, and bear more and better fruits than ever they would have done
upon their natural root, yea, the smallest bud, being carefully inocculated and
bound close to the stock, will in short time become a flourishing and fruitful
limb.

APPLICATION.
THis carries a most sweet and lively resemblance, of the souls union with
Christ by faith; and indeed there is nothing in nature that shadows forth this
great Gospel-mystery like it: It Is a thousand pities, that any who are employed
about, or are but spectators of such an action, should terminate their thoughts
(as too many do) in that natural object, and not raise up their hearts to these
heavenly meditations, which it so fairly offers them.

When a twig is to be ingraffed, or a bud inocculated, it is

And when the Lord intends to graft a soul into Christ, the first work about it
is cutting work, Acts 2. 37. their hearts were cut by conviction and deep
compunction; no cyence is ingraffed without cutting, no soul united with Christ
without a cutting sense of sin and misery, John 16. 8, 9.

When the tender shoot is cut off from the Tree, there are

Even so it is in the removing or transplanting of a soul by conversion, it
leaves many behind it in the state of nature, as likely and promising as it
self, but so it pleases God to take this soul, and leave many others; yea,
often such as grew upon the same root; I mean, the immediate parent, Mal. 1. 2.
was not Esau, Jacob's brother (says the Lord) yet I loved Jacob, and I hated
Esau.

When the graffs are cut off, in order to this work, it is a

So when souls are under a work of conviction, it is a critical time with them;
many a one have I known then to miscarry, and never recovered again; they have
indeed for a time stood like dead graffs in the stock, by an external dead
hearted profession, but never came to any thing; and as such dead graffs,
either fall off from the stock, or moulder away upon it, so do these, 1 John 2.
19.

The Husbandman when he has cut off graffs, or tender ingraffing souls into
Christ, to make all the haste they can, to bring the convicted sinner to a
closure with Christ. As soon as ever the trembling Iaylor cried out, What shall
I do to be saved? Paul and Silas immediately direct him to Christ, Act. 16. 30,
31. They do not say, it is too soon for thee to act faith on Christ, thou art
not yet humbled enough, but believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be
saved.

Venerit insitio, fac ramum ramus adoptet. (i. e.) To graffs, no living sap the
stocks impart;
Unless you wound, and cut them near the heart.


Such an incision or wound was made upon Christ, in order to our ingraffing
into him, John 19. 34. the opening of that deadly wound gives life to the souls
of believers.



There is also a most closs and intimate union betwixt Christ, and the soul
that believes in him. It is emphatically expressed by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6.
17. He that is joined to the Lord, is one spirit. The word imports, the
nearest, clossest and strictest union. Christ and the soul cleave together in a
blessed oneness, as those things do that are glewed one to another; so that,
look as the graff is really in the stock, and the spirit or sap of the stock is
really in the graff, so a believer is really (though mystically) in Christ; and
the Spirit of Christ is really communicated to a believer. I live, says Paul,
yet not I, but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2. 20. He that dwells in love,
dwells in God, and God in him, 1 Ioh. 4. 16.



The believing soul is also fastened to Christ, by bands which will secure it
from all danger of being loosed off from him any more. There are two bonds of
this union; the Spirit on God's part, this is the firm bond of union, without
which we could never be made one with Christ, Romans 8. 9. If any man have not
the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his; and faith on our part, Ephesians. 3. 17.
That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith. These hold strongly.

Though the stock be one and the same, yet all graffs do Christ; all do not
flourish alike in him, the faith of some grows exceedingly, 2. These. 1. 3. the
things that be in others are ready to die, Rev. 3. 2. and such souls must
charge the fault upon themselves. Christ sends up living sap enough, not only
to make all that are in him living, but fruitful branches.

REFLECTIONS.
IS it so indeed betwixt Christ and my soul, Four comfortable Reflections for a
regenerate soul.
as it is betwixt Behold! what manner of love is this! 1 Ioh. 3. 1.

Look again upon the ingraffed cyences, O my soul! and stock, they live as long
as there is any sap in the root; and because he lives, I shall live also, for
my life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3. 3. The graff is preserved in the
stock, and my soul is even so, preserved in Christ Jesus, Jude 1.

Am I joined to the Lord as mystical part, or branch of Ephesians. 1. 6. All is yours
(says my God) for ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, 1 Cor. 3. 23.

Once more, draw matter of instruction, as well as comfort

The Poem.
OH what considering serious man can see
The close conjunction of the graff and tree;
And whilst he contemplates he does not find,
This meditation graffed on his mind?
I am the Ioh. 15. 5.
branch, and Christ the vine
thy gracious hand did pluck
Me from that native Romans 11. 17
stock of mine,
that I his sap might suck.
The bloody Ioh. 19. 34.
spear did in his heart
a deep incision make,
That grace to me he might impart,
And I thereof partake.
The spirit Romans 8. 9. Ep. 3. 17
and faith is that firm band,
which binds us fast together;
Thus we are clasped Cant. 2. 16.
hand in hand;
and Romans 8. 35
nothing us can sever.
Blessed be that hand which did remove,
me from my native place,
This was the r Ioh. 3. 1.
wonder of thy love;
the triumph of thy grace.
That I a wild To. 11. 17.
and cursed plant,
should thus preferred be;
Who all those Mat. 11. 25.
ornaments do want,
thou may in others ^ee.
As long as e're the root does live,
the branches are not dry;
Whilst Christ has grace, and life to give;
my soul can never Ioh. 14. 19.
dye.
O blessed Savior! never could
a graff cleave to the tree,
More Cant. 8. 6.
closs than thy poor creature would
united be with thee.
My soul, dishonor not thy root,
'twill be a shame for thee;
To want the choicest sorts of fruit,
and yet thus graffed Isa. 5. 4.
be.
Thus you may shake from graffs before they blow,
More precious fruit than e're on trees did grow.
CHAP. III.
When Trees are shak'd, Upon the gathering in of fruits in Autumn.
but little fruit remains;
Just such a remnant to be Lord pertains.
OBSERVATION.
IT is a pleasant sight in Autumn, to see the fruitful branches hanging full of
clusters, which weigh the boughs to the ground.

Aspice curvatos pomorum pondere ramos
Vt sua quod peperit vix ferat arbor onus.
Which I may thus English,
O what a pleasant sight it is to see,
The fruit^ul clusters bowing down the tree.
But these laden branches are soon eased of their burden, for as soon as they
are ripe, the Husbandman ascends the tree, and shaking the limbs with all his
might, causes a fruitful shower to fall like hailstones upon the ground below,
which being gathered to a heap, are carried to the pound, broken all to pieces
in the trough; and squeezed to a dry lump in the press, whence all their juice
and moisture runs into the Fat. How few escape thi^ Fat, of all those
multitudes that grew in the Orchard? If you now look upon the Trees, you may
possibly see here one, and there another, two or three upon the outmost
branches, but nothing in comparison to the vast numbers that are thus used.

APPLICATION.
THis small remains of fruit, which are either left upon the tree, or gathered
in for an hoard, do well resemble that small number of Gods elect in the world,
which free grace has reserved out of the general ruin of mankind. Four things
are excellently shadowed forth to us by this similitude.

You see in a fruitful Autumn, the trees even oppressed and Romans 8. 22. the
creatures are in bondage, and by an elegant Prosopopeia, are said, both to
groan and wait for deliverance. The original sin of man brought an original
curse, which burdens the creature, Genesis 3. 17. Cursed is the ground for thy
sake; and the actual sin of man brings actual curses upon the creature, Psalm.
107. 34. Thus the inhabitants of the world load and burden it, as the limbs of
a tree are burdened, and sometimes broken with the weight of their own fruit.

You may observe it in your Orchards every year, what abundance of fruits daily
fall, either by storms; or of their

When fruits are shaken down from their trees; then the Husbandman separates
them; the far greatest part for the Almighties wrath, and others preserved for
glory.

Those fruits which are preserved on the tree, or in the hoard, are
comparatively but an handful to those that are broken in the pound. Alas! it is
scarce one of a thousand, and such a small remnant of Elected souls has God
reserved for glory.

I look upon the World as a great Tree, consisting of four large limbs or
branches; this branch or division of it on which we grow, has doubtless a
greater number of Gods elect upon it, than the other three; and yet when I look
with a serious and considering eye upon this fruitful European branch, and see
how much rotten and withered fruit there grows upon it, it makes me say as
Chrysostom did of his populous Antioch, Ah, how small a remnant has Jesus
Christ among these vast numbers! Many indeed are called, but, ah, how few are
chosen! Mat. 20. 16. Alas! they are but as the gleanings when the vintage is
done; here and there one upon its outmost branches. To allude to that, Isa. 17.
6. it was a sad Observation which that searching Scholar (Mr. Brierwood) long
since made upon the world, that dividing it into thirty equal parts, he found
no less than nineteen of them wholly overspread with Idolatry and Heathenish
darkness! and of the eleven remaining parts, no less than six are Mahumetans;
so that there remain but five of thirty, which profess the Christian Religion
at large; and the far greater part of these remaining five, are invellop'd and
drowned in Popish darkness; so that you see the reformed Protestant Religion is
confined to a small spot of ground indeed. Now, if from these we substract all
the grossly ignorant, openly profane, merely civil, and secretly hypocritical;
judge then in your selves, how small a scantling of the world falls to Christ's
share!

Well might Christ say, Mat. 7. 14. Narrow is the way, and strait is the gate,
that leads unto life, and few there be that find it. And again, Luke 12. 32.
Fear not, little, little flock. The large piece goes to the devil, a little
remnant is Christ's, Romans 9. 27. Saints in Scripture are called jewels, Mal. 3.
17. Precious pearls and diamonds, which the Latins call Uniones. Quia nulli
duo simul reperiuntur (says Pliny) because nature gives them not by pairs, but
one by one. How many pebbles to one pearl? Suitable to this notion, is that
complaint of the Prophet, Mich. 7. 1, 2. W^ is me; for I am as when they have
gathered the Summer fruits, as the grape gleanings of the vintage, there is no
cluster to eat; my soul desired the first ripe fruits; the good man is perished
out of the earth, and there is none, (i. e. none comparatively) upright among
men. The Prophet alludes to a poor hungry man, that after the gathering time is
past, comes into an Orchard, desiring some choice fruits to eat, but alas! he
finds none; there is no cluster; possibly here and there a single Saint, like a
single apple, here and there one after the shaking time. True Saints are the
worlds rarities.

REFLECTIONS.
WHat then will be my lot, A Reflection for one that follows the example of the
multitude.
when that great shaking

And how little better is my condition? A Reflection for an abuser of mercy.
who have often race of Adam, he had done them no wrong; yea, there is more
mercy in saving but one man, than there is of severity and rigor in damning
all: how many drunkards and adulterers have lived and dyed with thy plea in
their mouths? God is a merciful God; but yet his word expressly says, Be not
deceived, such shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9. God indeed,
is a God of infinite mercy; but he will never exercise his mercy to the
prejudice of his truth.

A Reflection for an elect soul.
that when millions perish, I with a few more should escape that perdition. Was
it the Fathers good pleasure to bestow the kingdom upon a little flock, and to
make me one of that number? What singular obligations has mercy put upon my
soul! the fewer are saved, the more cause have they that are, to admire their
Savior! If but one of a thousand had been damned, yet my salvation would have
been an act of infinite grace; but when scarce one of a thousand are saved,
what shall I call that grace, that cast my lot among them!

The Poem.
HE that with spiritual eyes in Autumn sees
The heaps of fruit which fall from shaken trees,
Like storms of hailstones; and can hardly find
One of a thousand that remains behind.
Methinks this Meditation should awake
His soul; and make it like those trees to shake.
Of all the clusters which so lately grew
Upon these trees, how few can they now show?
Here one Isa. 17. 6.
and there another; two or three
Upon the outmost branches of the tree.
The greatest numbers to the pound are born,
Squeezed in the trough; and all to pieces torn:
This little handful's left, to shadow forth
To me Gods Romans 9. 27.
remnant in this peopled earth.
If over the whole terrestrial globe I look,
The Gospel visits but 1 Ioh. 5. 19. Psalm. 147. 20.
a little nook.
The rest with horrid Psalm. 74. 20.
darkness overspread,
Are fast asleep; yea, in transgressions dead,
Whole droves to hell, the devil daily drives;
Not one amongst them once 2 Timothy 2. 2^
resists or strives.
And in this little heaven-inlightned spot,
How vast an interest has Satan got?
But few of holiness profession make,
And if from those that do prosess I take
The self-deluding hypocrites, I fear
To think how few Mat. 7. 14.
remain that are sincere.
O tax not mercy that it saves so few,
But rather wonder that the Lord should show
Mercy to any; Romans 9. 2Z.
quarrel not with grace,
But for they self Gods gracious terms embrace.
When all were Romans 5. 16.
Shipwrackt, thou should wonder more
To find thy self so strangely cast ashore
And there to meet with any that can tell
How narrowly they also 1 Pet. 4. 18.
escaped from hell.
The smaller numbers mercy saves, the higher
Engagements lie on thee Ioh. 14. 22.
still to admire.
Had the whole species perished in their sin,
And not one individual saved bin;
Yet every Romans 9. 18.
tongue before him must be mute,
Confess his righteousness; but not dispute.
Or had the hand of mercy which is Romans 5. 15.
free
Taken another, and passed over me;
I still must justify him, and my tongue
Confess my maker had done me no wrong.
But if my Heb. 12. 23.
name he please to let me see
Enrolled among those few that saved be,
What admiration should such mercy move!
What thanks, and Rev. 1. 5, 6.
praise, and everlasting love!
CHAP. IV.
Dead barren Trees you for the fire prepare, Upon the cutting down of dead
trees.

In such a case, all fruitless persons are.
OBSERVATION.
AFter many years patience, in the use of all means to recover a fruit Tree, if
the Husbandman see it be quite dead, and that there can be no more expectation
of any fruit from it, he brings his ax and hews it down by the root; and from
the Orchard its carried to the fire, it being then fit for nothing else; he
reckons it imprudent to let such a useless tree abide in good ground, where
another might be planted in its room, that will better pay for the ground it
stands in. I my self once saw a large Orchard of fair, but fruitless trees, all
rooted up, rived abroad, and ricked up for the fire.

APPLICATION.
THus deals the Lord by useless and barren Professors who do but cumber his
ground, Mat. 3. 10. And now also, the ax is laid to the root of the trees;
therefore every tree that brings not forth good fruit, is hewn down and cast
into the fire. And Luke 13. 7. Then said the dresser of the vineyard, Behold,
this three years I came seeking fruit on this ^ig-tree, and find none, cut it
down, why cumbereth it the ground? These three years, alluding to the time of
his Ministry, he being at that time entering upon his last half year, as one
observes, by harmonizing the Evangelists; so long he had waited for the fruit
of his Ministry, among those dead-hearted Jews: now his patience is even at an
end, cut them down (says he) why cumber they the ground? I will plant others,
( viz. the Gentiles) in their room. This hewing down of the barren tree does in
a lively manner shadow forth Gods judicial proceedings against formal and empty
Professors under the Gospel; and the resemblance clearly holds in these
following particulars.

The tree that is to be hewn down for the fire, stands in Mat. 3. 8. 9. Bring
forth fruits meet for repentance, and think not to say within your selves, we
have Abraham to our father. Neither Abraham, nor Abraham's God, will acknowledge
such degenerate children; if Abraham's faith be not in your hearts, it will be
no advantage that Abraham's blood runs in your veins. 'Twill be a poor plea for
Judas, when he shall stand before Christ in judgment, to say, Lord, I was one
of thy family, I preached for thee, I did eat and drink in thy presence. Let
these Scriptures be consulted, Mat. 7. 22. Mat. 25. 11, 12. Romans 2. 17. ad 25.

The Husbandman does not presently cut down the tree Pet. 3. 9. Thus the
long-suffering of God waited in the days of Noah upon those dry trees, who are
now smoking and flaming in hell, 1 Pet. 3. 20. He waits long on sinners, but
keeps exact accounts of every year and day of his patience, Luke 13. 7 These
three years. And Ier. 25. 3. These 23 years.

When the time is come to cut it down, the dead tree cannot down, Eccles. 8. 8.
There is no man that has power over the Spirit, to retain the Spirit; neither
has he power in the day of death, and there is no discharge in that war. When
the pale horse comes, away you must into the land of darkness; Though thou cry
with Adrian, O my poor soul, whither art thou going! die thou must, thou barren
Professor; though it were better for thee to do any thing else than to die.
What a dreadful screech will thy conscience give, when it sees the ax at thy
root! and say to thee, as it is, Ezekiel. 7. 6. An end is come, the end is come;
it watches for thee, behold it is come. O, said Henry Beauford, (that rich and
wretched Cardinal, Bishop of Winchester, and Chancellor of England, when he
perceived whereto he must) wherefore must I die? If the whole Realm would save
my life, I am able either by policy to get it, or by riches to buy it. Fie
(quoth he) will not death be hired? will riches do nothing? No, neither riches
nor policy can then avail.

Eccles. 11. 3. So it fares with these mystical trees; I mean fruitless
Professors. Had their hearts and affections inclined and bended heavenward
whilst they lived, that way no doubt they had fallen at their death; but as
their hearts inclined to sin, and ever bended to the world; so when God gives
the fatal stroke; they must fall hell-ward, and wrath-ward; and how dreadful
will such a fall be?

Mat. 8. 11, 12. I say unto you, that many shall come from the East and West,
and North and South, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in the
Kingdom of heaven; but the children of the Kingdom shall be cast forth into
outer darkness, there shall be weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth.

When the dead tree is carried out of the Orchard, the The Lord of that servant
will come in a day, when he looks not for him, and will cut him asunder; he
shall be diffected, or cut abroad, Luke 12. 46.

Now therefore consider this, ye that forget God, le^t I tear (or rend) you in
pieces, Psalm. 50. 22. O direful day! when the same hand which planted, pruned,
and watered thee so long, and so tenderly, shall now strike mortal strokes at
thee, and that without pity: For be that made them will not have mercy on them,
and be that formed them will show them no favor, I^a. 27. 11. For the day of
mercy is over, and the day of his wrath is fully come.

When this tree is cleav'd abroad, then itsi rotten, hollow

Lastly, the fruitless tree is cast into the fire. This also is John 15. 6. He
is cast forth as a branch, and is withered, and men gather them and cast them
into the fire, and they are burned. This is an undou^t^d truth, That there is
no plant in Gods vineyard, but he will have glory from it by bearing fruit, or
glory on it by burning in the fire. In this fire shall they lie, gnashing their
teeth, Luke 13. 38. and that both in indignation against the Saints, whom they
shall see in glory, and against Jesus Christ, who would not save them; and
against themselves, for losing so foolishly the opportunities of salvation. Do
you behold when you sit by the fire, the froth that boyles out of those flaming
logs? O think of that some and rage of these undone creatures, foaming and
gnashing their teeth in that fire which is not quenched, Mark 9. 44.

REFLECTION.
HOw often have I passed by such barren trees, A Reflection ^or a formal
Hypocrite.
with a more barren heart? as little thinking such a tree to be the emblem of
my self, as Nebuchadnezz^r did, when he saw that tree in a dream which
represented himself, and shadowed forth to him his ensuing misery, Dan. 4. 13.
But, Oh my conscience! my drousie, sleepy conscience! were thou but tender and
faithful to me, thou would make as round and terrible an application of such
a spectacle to me as the faithful Prophet did to him, v. 22. And thus would
thou, O my soul, bemoan thy condition!

Poor wretch, here I grow for a little time, among the trees of righteousness,
the plants of renown; but I am none of them, I was never planted a right seed;
some green and flourishing leaves of profession indeed I have, which deceive
others, but God cannot be deceived; he sees I am fruitless and rotten at the
heart. Poor soul, what will thine end be but burning! Behold the axlyeth by thy
root, and wonder it is, that there it should lie so long, and I yet standing!
still mercy pleads for a fruitless creature; Lord, spare it one year longer.
Alas! he need strike no great blow to ruin me, his very breath blows to
destruction, Job 4. 9. a frown of his face can blast and ruin me, Psalm. 80. 6.
he is daily solicited by his justice to hew me down, and yet I stand. Lord,
cure my barrenness; I know thou had rather see fruit, than fire upon me.

The Poem.
IF after pains and patience, you can see
No hopes of fruit Luke 13. 7.
down goes the barren tree:
You will not suffer trees that are unsound,
And barren too, to cumber useful ground.
The fatal ax is Mat. 3. 10.
laid unto the root
It Is fit for fire, when unfit for fruit.
But though this be a dead, and barren tree;
Reader, I would not have it so to thee.
May it to thee this serious thought suggest,
In all the Orchard this dead tree's the best.
Think on it sadly, lay it close to heart;
This is the case in which thou wast, or art.
If so thou wast, but Ephesians. ^. 1.
now do live and grow,
And bring forth fruit, what praise, and thanks do ow
To that wise Husbandman that made thee so!
O think when justice listed up its hand, John 15. 1.

How Luke 13. 8.
mercy did then interceding stand!
How pity did on thy behalf appear,
To beg reprieval for another year.
Stop Lord, forbear him; all hope is not past,
He can but be for fire at the last.
Though many Sermons, many a gracious call
He has resisted like a brazen wall.
The next Romans 22. 4.
may win him, then thy grace shall raise
Unto it self a Luke 15. 7.
monument of praise.
How should this meditation thaw and melt
The heart of him that has such mercy felt.
But if thou still remain a barren tree,
Then here as in a mirror; thou may see
Thy wretched state, when justice at a blow,
Requites Gods patience in thine overthrow.
And can thou Psalm. 76. 7.
bear it? can thy heart endure.
To think of everlasting burnings? sure
This must thy lot, thy fearful portion be;
If thou continue still a barren tree.
An Introduction TO THE Third PART OF HUSBANDRY
NOw from the pleasant Orchard let us walk
A turn in the fields, and there converse and talk
With Cows and Horses, they can teach us some
Choice Lessons, though irrational and dumb.
My Reader's weary, yet I do not fear
To be forsaken by one Reader here.
He Will doubtless stay to hear what questions I
Propound to beasts, and how they make reply.
The fatted Ox, and pampered horse you ride;
Their careless Master for his care thus chide.
CHAP. I.
More care for Horse and Oxen many take
Than for their Souls, Upon the Husbandmans care for his cattle.
or dearest Childrens sake.
OBSERVATION.
MAny Husbandmen are excessively careful about their cattle, rising themselves
early, or causing their servants to rise betimes to provender and dress them.
Much time is spent in some Countries, in trimming and adorning their Horses
with curious trappings and plumes of feathers; and if at any time a beast be
sick, what care is taken to recover and heal them? you will be sure they shall
want nothing that is necessary for them; yea, many will choose rather to want
themselves, than suffer their Horses so to do; and take a great deal of comfort
to see them thrive and prosper under their hands.

APPLICATION.
What one said of bloody Herod, who slew so many children at Bethlehem, That
it were better to be his swine, than his Son, may be truly enough applied to
some Parents and Masters, who take less care for the saving the souls of their
children and servants, than they do for the bodies of those beasts which daily
feed at their stalls and cribs. Many there be who do in reference to their
souls, as Jacob did, with respect to the preservation of their bodies, when he
put all the herds of cattle before, and his Wives and little ones behind, as he
went to meet his brother Esau. It Is a weighty saying of a grave Author; It Is
vile ingratitude to rejoice when cattle multiply, Ienk. on Jude par. 2. p. 170.
and repine when children increase; its Heathenish distrustfulness, to fear,
that he who provides for your beasts, will not provide for your children; and
it is no less than unnatural cruelty to be careful of the bodies of beasts, and
careless of the souls of children. Let us but a little compare your care and
diligence in both respects, and see in a few particulars, whether you do indeed
value your own, or your children and servants souls, as you do the life and
health of a beast.

Your care for your very Horses is expressed early, whilst

It Is observed of the Persians, Clarks Mir. p. 506.
that they put out their children to School as soon as they could speak, and
would not see them in seven years after, lest their indulgence should do them
hurt.

You keep your constant set times, morning and evening,

The end of your care, cost and pains about your cattle is, that you have fully
discharged the duty of parents; if they will learn to hold the Plow, that you
are willing to teach them: But when did you spend an hour to teach them the way
of salvation?

Now to convince such careless Parents of the heinousness of their sin, let
these four Queries be solemnly considered.

Whether this be a sufficient discharge of that great duty which God has laid
upon Christian Parents, Qu. 1.
in reference to their families? That God has charged them with the souls of
their families is undeniable, Deuteronomy. 6. 6, 7. Ephesians. 6. 4. If God had not clothed
you with his authority, to command them in the way of the Lord; he would never
have charged them so strictly to yield you obedience as he has done, Ephesians. 6.
1. Col. 3. 20. Well, a great trust is reposed in you, look to your duty, for
without dispute you shall answer for it.

Whether it be likely, Qu. 2.
if the time of youth (which is the moulding age) be neglected, they will be
wrought upon to any good afterward? Husbandmen, let me put a sensible case to
you; Do yo not see in your very horses, that whilst they are young, you can
bring them to any way; but if once they have got a false stroke, and by long
custom it be grown nutural to them, then there is no breaking them of it: yea,
you see it, in your very Orchards, you may bring a tender twig to grow in what
form you please; but when its grown to a sturdy limb, there is no bending it
afterward to any other form than what it naturally took. Thus it is with
children, Prove. 22. 6. Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is
old he will not depart from it.

Whether, Qu. 3.
if you neglect to instruct them in the way of the Lord, Satan, and their own
natural corruptions, will not instruct them in the way to hell? Consider this
ye careless Parents; if you will not teach your children, the Devil will teach
them; if you show them not how to pray; he will show them how to curse and
swear, and take the name of the Lord in vain; if you grudge time a pains about
their souls, the Devil does not. Oh, it is a sad consideration, that so many
children should be put to School to the devil!

Qu. 4.
What comfort are you like to have from them when they are old, if you bring
them not up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord when they are young? Many
Parents have lived to reap in their old age, the fruit of their own folly and
careless^ess, in the loose and vain education of their children. By Lieurgus
his Law, no Parent was to be relieved by his children in age, if he gave them
not good education in their youth; and it is a Law at this day among the
Switzers, that if any child be condemned to die for a capital offense, the
Parents of that child are to be his executioners; these Laws were made to
provoke Parents to look better to their charge. Believe this as an undoubted
truth; That that child which becomes (through thy default) an instrument to
dishonor God, shall prove sooner or later, a son or daughter of sorrow to thee.

REFLECTIONS.
GOd has found out my sin this day. A Reflection for careless Parents.
This has been my

But unhappy wretch that I am, A Reflection for the disobedient child of a
gracious Parent
God cast a better lot for poured out to God for me, both in my hearing as well
as in secret; many holy and wholesome counsels have they from time to tome dropped
upon me; many precious examples have they set in their own practice before me;
many a time when I have sinned against the Lord, have they stood over me with a
rod in their hands, and tears in their eyes, using all means to reclaim me; but
like an ungracious wretch I have slighted all their counsels, grieved their
hearts, and imbittered their lives to them, by my sinful courses. Ah, my soul!
thou art a degenerate Plant; better will it be with the offspring of infidels,
than with thee, if repentance prevent not; now I live in one family with them,
but shortly I shall be separated from them, as far as hell is from heaven; they
now tenderly pity my misery, but then they shall approve and applaud the
righteous sentence of Christ upon me: So little privilege shall I then have
from my relation to them, that they shall be produced as witnesses against me,
and all their rejected coun^els, reproofs, and examples, charged home upon me,
as the aggravations of my wickedness; and better it will be, when it shall come
to that, that I had been brought forth by a beast, than sprang from the loins
of such Parents.

The Poem.
YOur cattle in fat pastures thrive and grow,
There Is nothing wanting; that should make them so.
The pampered horse commends his Masters Isa. 1. 3.
care,
Who neither pains, or cost, does grudge of Genesis 24. 31, 32.
spare.
But art not thou mean while, the veriest fool;
That pamper'st beasts, and starv'st thy precious soul?
'Twere well, if you could Eccl. 31. 21
dye, as now you live
Like beasts; and had no more account to give.
O that these lines, your folly might detect!
Who both your own, and childrens souls neglect.
To care for beasts. O man, prepare to hear
The doleful'st language, that e're pierced thine ear!
When you your children once in hell shall meet,
And with such language their damned parents greet,
"O cursed father, wretched mother, why
"Was I your offspring? would to God that I
"Had sprung from Tigers, who more Nah. 2. 12. Lam. 4. 3.
tender be
"Unto their young, than you have been to me.
"How did you spend your thoughts, time, care and cost
"About my body? whilst my soul was Mat. 16. 26.
lost.
"Did you not know I had a soul that must
"Live, Eccl. 3. 21.
when this body was resolved to dust?
"You could not choose but understand if I,
"Without an interest in Christ did dye,
"It needs must Mar. 16. 16
come to this; O how could you
"Prove so remorsless, and no pity show!
"Oh cruel parents! I may curse the day
"That I was born of such as did betray
"Their child to endless torments. Now must I
"With, and through you, in flames for ever lie.
Let this make every parent tremble, lest
He lose his child, whilst caring for his beast.
Or lest his own poor soul do starve and pine
Whilst he takes thoughts for Horses, Sheep and kine.
CHAP. II.
When under loads your beasts do groan, Upon the hard labor and cruel usage of
beasts.
think then
How great a mercy it is that you are men.
OBSERVATION.
THough some men be excessively careful and tender over their beasts (as was
noted in the former Chapter) yet others are cruel and merciless toward them,
not regarding how they ride or burden them. How often have I seen them fainting
under their loads? wrought off their legs, and turned out with galled backs
into the fields, or highways, to shift for a little grass? many times have I
heard and pitied them, groaning under unreasonable burdens, and beaten on by
merciless drivers, till at last by such cruel usage they have been destroyed,
and then cast into a ditch for dogs meat!

APPLICATION.
SUch sights as these should make men thankful for the mercy of their Creation,
and bless their bountiful Creator, that they were not made such creatures
themselves. Some beasts are made ad esum, only for food, being no otherwise
useful to man, as swine,etc. these are only fed for slaughter we kill and eat
them, and regard not their cries and struglings when the knife is thrust to
their very hearts; others are only ad usum, for service, whilst living, but
unprofitable when dead; as Horses, these we make to drudge and toil for us from
day to day, but kill them not; others are both ad esum, and usum, for food when
dead, and service whilst alive, as the Ox. These we make to plow our fields,
draw our carriages, and afterward prepare them for slaughter.

But man was made for nobler ends, created Lord of the lower world; not to
serve, but to be served by other creatures; a mercy able to melt the hardest
heart into thankfulness. I remember, Luther pressing men to be thankful, that
they are not brought into the lowest condition of creatures, Luth^r in 3.
pre^^pt.
and to bless God that they can see any creature below themselves, gives us a
famous instance in the following story: Two Cardinals (says he) riding in a
great deal of pomp to the Council of Constance, by the way they heard a man in
the fields; weeping and wailing bitterly, they rode to him, and asked what he
ailed? perceiving his eye intently fixed upon an ugly toad, he told them that
his heart was melted with the consideration of this mercy, that God had not
made him such a deformed and loathsome creature, though he were formed out of
the same clay with it: Hoc est quod amare fleo, said he, This is that, that
makes me weep bitterly. Whereupon one of the Cardinals cries out, Well said the
Father, the unlearned will rise and take heaven, when we with all our learning
shall be thrust into hell. That which melted the heart of this poor man, should
melt every heart when we behold the misery to which these poor creatures are
subjected, And this will appear a mercy of no slight consideration, if we but
draw a comparison betwixt our selves, and these irrational creatures, in these
three particulars.

Though they and we were made of the same mould and David speaking of the
curious frame of the body, says, I am wonderfully made, Psalm. 139. 14. or as
the vulgar reads it, painted as with a needle; like some rich piece of
needle work curiously embroydered with nerves and veins. Was any part of the
common lump of clay thus fashioned? Galen gave Epicu^us an hundred years time
to imagine a more commodious situation, configuration, or composition of any
one part of a humane body; and (as one says) of all the Angels in heaven had
studied to this day, they could not have cast the body of man into a more
curious mould.

How little ease or rest have they? they live not many our rest; but fresh or
weary, they must stand to it, or sink under it from day to day.



REFLECTIONS.
A Reflection for an unthankful sinner
for such a common, but choice mercy of Creation, and provision for me in this
world? There is no creature made worse by kindness, but man. There is a kind of
gratitude which I may observe even in these bruit beasts; they do in their way
acknowledge their benefactors; The Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters
Crib. How ready are they to serve such as feed and cherish them? but I have
been Both unthankful and unserviceable to my Creator and Benefactor, that has
done me good all my days; those poor creatures that sweat and groan under the
loads that I lay upon them, never sinned against God, nor transgressed the Laws
of their Creation as I have done; and yet God has dealt better with me than
with them. Oh that the bounty of God, and his distinguishing mercy between me
and the beasts that perish, might move and melt my heart into thankfulness! O
that I might consider seriously what the higher and more excellent end of my
Creation is, and might more endeavor to answer and live up to it! Or else (O
my soul) it will be worse with thee than with the beasts. It Is true, they are
under bondage and misery; but it is but for a little time, death will end all
their pains, and ease them of all their heavy loads; but I shall groan to all
eternity, under a heavier burden than ever they felt; they have no account to
give but so have I. What comfort is it that I have a larger capacity than a
beast has? that God has endowed me with reason, which is denied to me? Alas!
this will but augment my misery, and enlarge me to take in a greater measure of
anguish.

But how many steps (O my soul) may thou ascend in the A Reflection for an
elect soul.
when thou considerest the mercies that God has bestowed upon thee! not only
in that he made thee, not a stone or tree without sense, or an horse, or dog
without reason; but that thou art not an infidel without light, or an
unreg^nerate person without grace. What! to have sense, and all the delights of
it, which stones have not; reason, with the more high and noble pleasures of
it, which beasts have not; the light and knowledge of the great things of the
Gospel, which the Heathens have not; and such an expectation and hope of
unconceivable glory and felicity, which the unsanctified have not. O my soul!
how rich! how bountiful has thy God been to thee! these are the overflowings
of his love to thee, who wast molded out of the same lump with the beasts,
that groan on earth, yea with the damned that howl in hell; well may I say that
God has been a good God to me.

The Poem.
WHen I behold a tired Jade put on
With whip and spur; till all his strength be gone.
See streams of sweat run down his bleeding sides,
How little marcy's shown by him that rides.
If I more thankless to my God don't prove,
Than such a Rider's merciless, 'twill move
My soul to praise, for who sees this, and can
But bless the Lord, that he was made a man.
And such a sight the Rider ought to move,
This Meditation duly to improve.
What has this creature done, that he should be
Thus beaten, wounded, and tired out by me?
He is my fellow creature, it is mere grace;
I had not been in his, he in my case.
Ungrateful, stupid man; God might have made
Me bear the saddle, as I see this Jade.
He never sinned, but for my sin does lie
Subjected unto all this misery.
Lord, make my heart relent; that I should be
To thee more useless, than my horse to me.
He did his utmost, went as long as ever
His legs could bear him: but for me I'never
Thus spent my strength for God; but often have bim
Too prodigal thereof, in ways of sin;
Though he is the horse and I the man; 'twill be
Far better with my horse, one day than me:
Unless thy grace prevent, and super-add
A new Creation; unto that I had.
Could every Rider fix a serious thought
On such a subject, and hereby he taught
To spiritualize it, and improve it thus;
How sweet, would tedious journeys be to us?
But such a task, a graceless heart dogs out
More than the tired horse, I write about.
CHAP. III.
When seeking your lost Cattle, Upon the seeking of lost Cattle.
keep in mind
That thus Christ Jesus seeks, your souls to find.
OBSERVATION.
WHen Cattle are strayed away from your fields; you use all care and diligence
to recover them again, tracing their footsteps, crying them in Market Towns,
sending your servants abroad, and inquiring your selves of all that you think
can give news of them. What care and pains men will take in such cases, was
exemplified in Saul, 1 Samuel 9. 4, 5. who with his servant passed through Mount
Ephraim, to seek the Asses that were strayed from his father, and through the
Land of Shalisha, and through the Land of Shalim, and they were not there, and
through the Land of the Benjamites, but found them not.

APPLICATION.
THe care and pains you take to recover your lost cattle, carries a sweet and
lively representation of the love of Jesus Christ, in the recovery of lost
sinners. Jesus Christ came on purpose from heaven upon a like errand, to seek
and to save that which was lost, Mat. 18. 11. There are several particulars in
which this glorious design of Christ, in seeking and saving lost man, and the
care and pains of Husbandmen in recovering their lost cattle, do meet and
touch, though there be as many particulars also in which they differ; all which
I shall open under the following heads.

We sometimes find that cattle will break out of those very Eccles. 7. 29. Lo
this only have I found, that God made man upright, but he sought out to himself
many inventions. He was not content and satisfied with that blessed state God
had put him into, but would be trying new conclusions to the loss and ruin,
both of himself and his posterity.

Strayers are evermore sufferers for it; all they get by it, God, he lost the
rectitude and holiness of his nature; (like a true strayer) he is all dirty and
miry, overspread and besmeared both in soul and body, with the odious
filthiness of sin; he lost the liberty and freedom of his will to good; a
precious jewel of inestimable value: This is a real misery incurred by the
fall, though some have so far lost their understandings and humility, as not to
own it; he has lost his God, his soul, his happiness, and his very bowels of
compassion toward himself in this miserable state.

Jesus Christ, who in the forecited place, Mat. 18. 12. compares himself to
such a Shepherd; he left heaven it self, and all the blessed Angels there, to
come into this world to seek lost man. O the precious esteem, and dear love
that Christ had to poor man! How did his bowels yearn toward us in our lost
state! How did he pity us in our misery! As if he had said, Poor creatures,
they have lost themselves, and are become a prey to the devil, in a perishing
state; I will seek after them, and save them. The Son of man is come to seek
and to save.

Yea, there is more joy in heaven over one sinner that repents, than ninety
nine just persons that need no repentance. What demonstrations of joy and
gladness did the father of the Prodigal give, when he found his Son that was
lost, Luk^ 15. 20.

Cor. 12. 7.

But then there are five particulars in which Christ seeking lost souls, and
your seeking lost cattle differ.

return to you of their own accord; but lost man never did, nor can do so; he
was his own destroyer, but can never be his own Savior; it was impossible for
him to have lost his God, but having once lost him, can never find him again of
himself. Alas! his heart is bent to backsliding, he has no will to return.
Hear how Christ complains, Ioh. 5. 40. Ye will not come unto me. Man's recovery
begins in God, not in himself.

Your servants can find, and bring back your lost cattle as discover, but
cannot recover them; they daily see, but cannot save them; lament them they
can, but help them they cannot; entreat and beg them to return they can and do,
but prevail with them they cannot. Melancthon thought when he began to preach,
to persuade all; but old Adam was too hard for young Melancthon.

You seek all the cattle that are strayed from you, especially Jesus Christ
only seeks poor lost man. There were other creatures, and such as by nature
were more excellent, that lost their God and themselves; I mean, the Apostate
Angels; but he came not to seek them: Herein his singular love to man appears.

When you have recovered and brought home your lost All that thou ^ast given me
I have kept, and not one of them is lost, but the son of perdition; and he was
never savingly found, Ioh. 17. 12.

Though you prize your cattle, yet you will not venture Jesus Christ not only
ventured, but actually laid down his life to recover, and save lost man: He
redeemed them at the price of his own blood; he is that good Shepherd that laid
down his life for the Sheep. O the surpassing love of Christ to lost souls!

REFLECTIONS.
A Reflection for a lost soul.
an undone soul; and herein lies my misery, that I have not only lost my God,
but have no heart to return to him! Nay, I fly from Christ, who is come on
purpose from heaven to seek and to save me; his Messengers are abroad seeking
for such as I am, but I avoid them, or at least refuse to obey their call and
persuasions to return. Ah, what a miserable state am I in! every step I go is a
step toward hell; my soul, with the Prodigal is ready to perish in a strange
Country! but I have no mind with him to return home; wretched soul, what will
the end of this be? If God have lost thee, the Devil has found thee; he takes
up all strayers from God: yea, death, and hell will shortly find thee, if
Christ do not; and then thy recovery (O my soul!) will be impossible. Why sit I
here perishing and dying! I am not yet as irrecoverably lost as the damned are.
O let me delay no longer, lest I be lost for ever!

A Reflection for one that was lost, but is found.
for ever bless and admire the love of Jesus Christ, who came from heaven to
seek and save, such a lost soul as I was. Lord, how mavelous, how matchless
is thy love! I was lost, and am found. I am found, and did not seek; nay, I am
found by him from whom I fled. Thy love, O my Savior! was a preventing love, a
wonderful love; thou lovedst me much more than I loved my self; I was cruel to
my own soul, but thou wast kind; thou soughtest for me, a lost sinner, and not
for lost Angels; thy hand of grace caught hold of me, and has let go
thousands, and ten thousands, as good as my self by nature. Like another David,
thou did rescue my poor lost soul out of the mouth of the destroyer; yea,
more than so, thou did lose thine own life to find mine: And now, dear Jesus,
since I am thus marvellously recovered, shall I ever straggle again from thee?
O, let it for ever be a warning to me, how I turn aside into bypaths of sin any
more!

The Poem.
When cattle from your fields are gone astray,
and you to seek them through the Country ride;
Enquiring for them all along the way; 1 Samuel 9. 4, 5.

tracking their footsteps, where they turned aside.
One servant this way sent, another that;
searching the fields, and country round about:
This meditation now falls in so pat;
as if God sent it to enquire you out.
My beasts are lost, and so am Luke 15. 32.
I by sin;
my wretched soul from God thus wandering went,
And I seek them, so was Mat. 18. 11.
I sought by him
who from the John. 1. 18.
fathers bosom forth was sent.
Pursued by Sermons, Followed close by grace;
and strong convictions Christ has sought for me,
Yea though I John. 5 40.
shun him still he gives me chase,
as if resolved I should not damned be.
When Heb. 2. 16.
Angels lost themselves it was not so,
God did not seek, or once for them enquire;
But said, let these Apostate creatures go,
I Will plague them for it Jude 6.
with eternal fire.
Lord, what am 1 Cor. 1. 27.
I, that thou should set thine eyes
and still seek after such a wretch as I?
Whose matchless mercy, and rich grace Psa. 68. 18.
despise,
as if in spite thereof resolved to die.
Why should I shun thee, blessed Savior, why
should I avoid thee thus? thou do not chase
My soul to Luke 9. 56.
slay it; O that ever I
should fly a Savior that is so full of grace!
Long have thou sought me, Lord, I now return;
O let thy bowels of compassion sound,
For my departure, I sincerely mourn;
and let this day, thy wandering sheep be found.
CHAP. IV.
Fat beasts you kill, Upon the feeding of fat Cattle.
the lean you use to save
God's dispensations, some such meaning have.
OBSERVATION.
IT is a good Observation of a Father, and well applied* Vituli triturantes
quotidie ligantur, vituli mactandi quotidie in pascuis libere relinquntur. Oxen
for use are daily yoaked and kept short, whilst those that are designed for the
shambles, are let loose in green pastures, to fed at pleasure. Store beasts
fare hard, and are kept lean and low; feeding beasts are excused from the yoke,
whilst others are labored and wrought hard every day; the one has more than
he can eat, the other would eat more if he had it.

APPLICATION.
THus deals the Lord oft-times with his own elect, whom he designs for glory;
and with the wicked, who are preparing for the day of wrath. Thus are they
filled with earthly prosperity, and creature-enjoyments, like res^y and wanton
beasts turned out at liberty in a fat pasture, whilst poor Saints are kept hard
and short, Amos. 1. 4. Hear this word ye kine of Bashan, that are in the
mountains of (...)* which oppress the poor, and crush the needy. These
metaphorical kine are the prosperous oppressors of the world, full fed, and
wanton wicked men. 'This true, heaven has not all the poor, nor hell all the
rich; but its a very common dispensation of providence, to b^stow most of the
things of this world upon them that have no portion in heaven; and to keep them
short on earth, for whom that kingdom is provided. Let me draw forth the
similitude in a few particulars.

The beasts of slaughter have the f^ttest pastures; so have the Their eyes
stand out with fatness, they have more than heart could wish, Psalm. 73. 7.
their hearts are as fat as grease, Psalm. 119. 7. These be they that fleet off
the cream of earthly enjoyments, whose bellies are filled with hidden
treasures, Psalm. 17. 14. The earth is given into the hand of the wicked, Job 9.
24. O, what full estates? what an affluence of earthly delights has God cast
in upon some wicked men? there is much wantonness, but no want in their
dwellings: Some that now know not which way to turn themselves in hell, once
knew not where to bestow their goods on earth.

Feeding beasts grow wanton in their full pastures; there Job. 21. 11, 12, 13.
They send forth their little ones like a flock, and their children dance; they
take the timbrel, and harp, and rejoice at the sound of the Organ; they spend
their days in wealth, and in a moment go down to the grave. The same character
does the Prophet Amos give of them, Amos 6. 4, 5, 6. They stretch themselves
upon beds of Ivory drink Wine in bowls, etc. and no sorrow goes to their
hearts. These are they that live in pleasures upon earth, as a fish in the
water, Iam. 5. 5.

These fat pastures do but the sooner hasten the death of i. e.) it shall be
the means and instruments of heating and hightening their lusts, and thereby
fitting them for destruction; their prosperity is ^ood and fuel to their
corruptions. Many wicked men had not been so soon ripe for hell, had they not
grown in the Sunshine of prosperity.





Such a design of preservation is carried on in all those outward straits,
wants and hardships which the Lord exposes his people to. I confess, such
dispensations, for present, are very stumbling and puzling things, even to
gracious and wise persons. To see wicked men, not only exempted from their
troubles, but even oppressed with prosperity; to see a godly man in wants and
straits, and a wicked man have more than his heart can wish, is a case that
poses the wisest Christian, till he consider the design and issues of both
those providence, and then he acquiesces in the wisdom of God so ordering it,
Psalm. 73. 5, 14, 18, 23.

REFLECTIONS.
A Reflection for a voluptuous worldling.
and prepare me for the day of slaughter? little cause have I then to glory in
it, and lift up my heart upon these things. Indeed, God has given, (I cannot
say-blessed me with) a fullness of creature-enjoyments; upon these my carnal
heart seizes greedily and securely, not at all suspecting a snare lying in
these things, for the ruin of my soul. What are all these charming pleasures,
but so many rattles to quiet my soul, whilst its damnation steals insensibly
upon it? What are all my busin^^^es and employments in the world, but so many
diversions from the business of life? There are but two differences betwixt me,
and the poorest slave the devil has on earth; such are whipped on to hell by
outward miseries, and I am coached to hell in a little more pomp and honor;
these will have a less, and I a greater account in the day of reckoning. O that
I had never known prosperity! I am now trumbling in a green pasture, and
shortly shall be hanging up in the shambles in hell; if this be the best fruit
of my prosperity, if I were taken capitive by cruel Canibals, and fed with the
richest fare, but withal understood, that the design of it were, to ^at me up
like a beast for them to feed upon; how little stomach should I have to their
dainties? O my soul! it were much better for thee to have a sanctified poverty,
which is the portion of many Saints, than an ensnaring prosperity, set as a
trap to ruin thee for ever.

The wisdom of my God has allotted me but short commons A Reflection for a
poor Christian.
his providence feeds me, but from hand to mouth; but I am (and well may be)
contended with my present state; that which sweetens it, is, that I am one of
the Lords preserved. How much better is a morsel of bread, and a draught of
water here, with an expectancy of glory hereafter, than a fat pasture given in,
and fitting for the wrath to come? Well, since the case stands thus, blessed be
God for my present lot; though I have but little in hand, I have much in hope;
my present troubles will serve to sweeten my future joys? and the sorrows of
this life will give a luster to the glory of the next; that which is now hard
to suffer, will them be sweet to remember; my songs then will be louder than my
groans now.

The POEM.
THose beasts which for the shambles are designed.
In fragrant flowery Meadows you shall find;
Where they abound with rich and plenteous fare;
Whilst others graze in commons thin and bare,
Those live a short and pleasant life; but these
Protract their lives, in dry, and shorter leas.
Thus live the wicked, Job 21. 13.
thus they do abound,
With earthly glory, and with honor crowned.
Their lofty heads unto the stars aspire,
And radiant beams, their shining brows attire.
The Job 21. 13.
fattest portion's served up in their dish,
Yea ibid.
they have more than their own hearts can wish.
Dissolved in Iam. 4. 5.
pleasures, crowned with buds of May;
They for a time, in these fat pastures play;
Frisk, dance and leap, like full fed beasts; and even
Turn up their Psalm. 73. 9.
wanton heels against the heaven.
Not understanding that this pleasant life
Serves but to fit them for the Butchers knife.
In fragrant Meads, they tumbling are to day,
Tomorrow to the Job 11. 13.
slaughter led away.
Their pleasure's gone, and vanished like a bubble
Which makes their future torments on them Rev. 18. 7.
double.
Mean while, Gods little flock is Iam. 2. 5.
poor and lean;
Because the Lord did never intend, or mean
This for their portion: and besides does know
Their souls ibid.
prove best, where shortest grass does grow.
Cheer up poor flock although your fare be thin
Yet here is something to take comfort in:
You here securely feed, and need not fear
The Infernal butcher cannot approach you here.
It Is somewhat that, but O, which far transcends!
Your glorious Shepher'ds coming; who intends
To lead you hence, unto that fragrant hill
Where with green pastures he his flocks will Psalm. 17. 15.
fill.
On which he from celestial casements pours
The sweetest dews, and constant gracious s^owres.
Along whose banks, rivers of pleasures slide
There his blessed flocks, for ever shall abide.
O envy not the worldlings present joys
Which to your future mercies are but toys.
Their pasture now is green, yours dry, and burned:
But then the Isa. 65. 13, 14.
Scene is changed, the tables turned.
CHAP. V.
Good Husbands labor for posterity, Upon the husbandmans care for posterity.

To after ages; Saints must have an eye.
OBSERVATION.
PRovident and careful Husbandmen do not only labor to supply their own
necessities while living, but to lay up something for their posterity when they
are gone; they do not only leave to their children what their progenitors left
them, but they desire to leave it improved and bettered. None but bad husbands
and spend-thirfts are of the mind with that Heathen Emperor Tiberius, who
having put all into such confusions in the Empire, that it might be thought the
world would end with him; yet pleased himself with this apprehension, that he
should be out of the reach of it; and would often say, When I am dead, let
heaven and earth mingle; if the world will but hold my time, let it break when
I am gone: But provident men look beyond their own time, and do very much
concern themselves in the good or evil of their posterity.

APPLICATION.
What careful Husbands do, with respect to the provisions they make for their
children, that all prudent Christians are bound to do, with respect to the
truths committed to them, and do them, to be transmitted to succeeding Saints.

In the first age of the world, even till the Law was given, faithful men were
instead of books and records; they did by oral tradition convey the truths of
God to posterity; but since the sacred truth has been consigned the writing,
no such tion (except full consentient with that written word) is to be received
as authentic; but the truths therein delivered to the Saints, are by verbal
declarations, open confessions, and constant sufferings, to be preserved and
delivered from age to age. This was the constant care of the whole cloud of
witnesses, both ancient and modern, who have kept the word of Gods patience,
and would not accept their own lives, liberties or estates; no, nor the whole
world in exchange, for that invaluable treasure of truth; they have carefully
practiced Solomon's counsel, Prove. 23. 23. Buy the truth, but sell it not; they
would not alienate that fair inheritance, for all the inheritances on earth.
Upon the same reasons, that you are refuse to part with, or embezel your
estates, Christians also refuse to part with the truths of God.

Luther professed, he would not take the whole world for one leaf of his Bible.
Though some profane persons may say with Pilate, What is truth? yet know, that
any one truth of the Gospel, is more worth than all the inheritances upon
earth; they are the great things of Gods Law, and he that sells them for the
greatest things in this world, makes a soul-undoing bargain.



a Christian accounts it the highest reproach in the world, to be a traitor to,
or an Apostate from the truths of God, When the primitive Saints were strictly
required to deliver up their Bibles, those that did so, were justly branded and
hushed out of their company, under the odiou title of Traditores, or deliverers.

You are so loath to part with your ^states, because you Antichrists hands,
without great wrestlings, and much blood. The Church may call every point of
reformed doctrine and discipline so recovered, her Nap^^alies; for with great
wrestlings, she has wrestled for them. Earnestly contending for the faith,
once delivered to them, Jude 3.

To conclude, rather than you will part with your estates, Martyrologies will
inform you, what their sufferings have been, to keep the word of Gods patience;
they have boldly told their enemies, that they might pluck their hearts out of
their bodies, but should never pluck the truth out of their hearts.

REFLECTIONS.
BAse unbelieving heart! A Reflection for cowardly and fainthearted Professors.
how have I flinched and shrunk that would rather venture to look a wrathful
God, than an angry man in the face. I would not own and preserve the truth, and
the God of truth will not own me, 2 Timothy 2. 12. If we deny him, he will deny us.

A Reflection for such as suffer for truth.
unto me have thou committed the precious treasure and trust of truth; and as I
received it, so do I desire to deliver it to the generations to come, that the
people which are yet unborn, may praise the Lord. God forbid I should ever part
with such a fair inheritance, and thereby beggar my own, and thousands of
souls! Thou have given me thy truth, and the world hates me, I well know that
is the ground of the quarrel; would I but throw truth over the walls, how soon
would a retreat be sounded to all presecutors? But Lord! thy truth is
invaluably precious; what a vile thing is my blood, compared with the least of
all thy truths? Thou have charged me to sell it, and in thy strength I resolve
never to lift a fine, and cut off that golden line, wherey thy truths are
entailed upon thy people, from generation to generation: My friends may go, my
liberary go, my blood may go; but as for thee, precious truth, thou shall never
go.

A Reflection for such as are in quiet possession of truth.
how little has it cost us? We are entered into their labors; we reap in
peace, what they sowed in tears; yea, in blood. O the grievous sufferings that
they chose to endure! rather than to deprive us to such an inheritance, those
noble souls, heated with the love of Christ, and care for our souls, made many
bold and brave adventures for it; and yet at what a low rate do we value, what
cost them so dear? like young heirs, that never knew the getting of an estate,
we spend it freely. Lord, help us thankfully and diligently to improve thy
truths, while we are in quiet possession of them. Such intervals of peace and
rest, are usually of no long continuance with thy people.

The Poem.
A Public spirit scorns to plant no root
But such from which himself may gather fruit.
For thus he reasons, if I reap the gains
Of my Laborious predecessors pains;
How equal is it, that posterity
Should reap the fruits of present industry?
Should every age but serve its turn, and take
No thought for future times? it soon would make
A Bankrupt world, and so entail a curse
From age to age, as it grows worse and worse.
Our Christian predecessors careful thus
Have been Rev. 3. 10.
to leave an heritage to us,
Christ precious truths Rev. 12. 11.
conserved in their blood,
For no less price those truths our fathers stood.
They have transmitted, would not Heb. 11. 37.
alienate
From us their children such a fair estate.
We eat what they did set, and shall truth fail
In our days? shall we cut off the entail?
Or end the line of honor? nay, what is worse
Give future ages cause to hate, and curse
Our memories? like Nabot^, 1 King. 21. 2.
may this age
Part with their blood, sooner than heritage.
Let pity move us, let us think upon
Our Ps. 102. 18.
childrens souls; when we are dead, and gone;
Shall they poor souls, in darkness grope, when are
Put out the light, by which they else might see
The way to glory? yea, what is worse? shall it
Be said in time to come Jude 3.
Christ did commit
A precious treasure, purchased by this blood;
To us, for ours; and for our Childrens good?
But we like cowards, false, perfidious men;
For carnal ease, lost it, our selves, and them.
O let us leave to after ages more,
Than we received from all that went before.
That those to come may bless the Lord, and keep
Our names alive, when we in dust shall sleep.
CHAP. VI.
Deeds for your Lands you prove, and keep with care; Upon the Husbandmans care
to prove and preserve his Deeds.

O that for heaven you but as careful were.
OBSERVATION.
WE generally find, men are not more careful in trying gold, or in keeping it,
than they are in examining their Deeds, and preserving them; these are
virtually their whole estate, and therefore it concerns them to be careful of
them: If they suspect a flaw in their Lease or Deed, they repair to the ablest
Counsel, submit it to his judgment, make the worst of their cause, and query
about all the supposeable dangers with him; if he tell them their case is
suspicious and hazardous, how much are they perplexed and troubled? they can
neither eat, drink, or sleep in peace, till they have a good settlement; and
willing they are to be at much cost and pains to obtain it.

APPLICATION.
THese cares and fears, with which you are perplexed in such cases, may give
you a little gimpse of those troubles of soul, with which the people of God are
perplexed about their eternal condition, which perhaps you have been hitherto
unacquainted with, and therefore slighted them, as phansi^s and whimsies, I
say, your own fears and troubles, i^ ever you were engaged by a cunning and
powerful adversary in a Lawsuit for your estate, may give you a little glimpse
of spiritual troubles; and indeed it is no more but a glimpse of it: For as the
loss of a earthly (though fair) inheritance is but a trifle to the loss of God,
and the soul to eternity; so you cannot but imagine, that the cares, fears, and
solicitudes of souls about these things, are much, very much beyond yours. Let
us compare the cases, and see how they answer to each other.

You have evidences for your estates, and by them you hold in capite, by virtue
of their intermarriage with Jesus Christ; they come to be enstated in that
glorious inheritance, con^ained in the Covenant of grace. You have their tenure
in that Scripture, 1 Cor. 3. 22, 23. All is yours, for ye are Christ's, and
Christ is Gods. Faith unites them to him; and after they believe, they are
sealed by the Spirit of promise, Ephesians. 1. 13. They can lay claim to no promise
upon any other ground; this is their title to all that they own as theirs.

It often falls out, that after the fealing and executing of

All the while that a Suit in Law is depending about your things, but what if
they be none of ours? Ah! how little does the doubting Christian make of his
large and rich inh^ritance?

Psalm. 39. 23, 24. Search me, O God, and know my heart; try me, and know my
thoughts, and see if there be any way of wickedness in me.

Psalm. 77. 4. Such fears as these are frequently returning upon their hearts.
What if I should be found a self-deceiver at last? What if I do but hug a
phantasm instead of Christ? how can this, or that, consist with grace? Their
meat and drink does them little good; their bodies are often macerated, by the
troubles of their souls.



yea, not only eased, but overjoyed; though not in that degree, nor with the
same kind of joy, that the hearts of Christians are overflowed, when the Lord
speaks peace to their souls. O welcome the sweet morning light, after a tedious
night of darkness; now they can eat their bread with comfort, and drink their
wine (yea if it be but water) with a merry heart, Eccles. 9. 7.

REFLECTIONS.
O How has spirit been tossed and hurried, The careless souls reflection
when I

O my soul! why art thou so unwilling to examine how matters stand betwixt God
and thee? art thou afraid to look into thy condition? least by finding thine
hypocrisy, thou should lose thy peace; or rather thy security. To what
purpose will it be to shut thine eyes against the light of conviction, unless
thou could also find out a way to prevent thy condemnation? Thou see other
souls, how attentively they wait under the word, for any thing that may speak
to their conditions. Doubtless thou have heard, how frequently and seriously
they have stated their conditions, and opened their cases to the Ministers of
Christ. But thou, O my soul! have no such cases to put, no doubts to be
resolved; thou will leave all to the decision of the great day, and not trouble
thy self about it now. Well, God will decide it, but little to thy comfort.

I have heard how some have been perplexed by litigious The doubtin^ souls
reflectio^^
but I believe none have been so tossed with fears, and distracted with doubts,
as I have been about the state of my soul. Lord what shall I do? I have often
carried my doubts and scruples to thine Ordinances, waiting for satisfaction to
be spoken there. I have carried them to those I have judged skillfull and
faithful, begging their resolution and help, but nothing will stick. Still my
fears are daily renewed. O my God do thou decide my case! tell me how the state
stands betwixt thee and me; my days consume in trouble, I can neither do, or
enjoy any good, whilst things are thus with me; all my earthly enjoyments are
dry and uncomfortable things; yea, which is much worse, all my duties and thine
Ordinances prove so too, by reason of the troubles of my heart! I am no
ornament to my profession, nay, I am a discouragement and stumbling block to
others! I will hearken and hear what God the Lord will speak, O that it might
be peace! if thou do not speak it none can; and when thou do, keep thy
servant from returning again to solly, lest I make fresh work for an accusing
conscience, and give new matter to the adversary of my soul!

The assured Christians Reflection.
who has not only given thee a sound title, but also the clear evidence and
knowledge thereof. I am gathering, and daily feeding upon the full ripe fruits
of assurance, which grow upon the top boughs of faith, whilst many of my poor
brethren drink their own tears, and have their teeth broken with gravel stones.
Lord, thou have set my soul upon her high places, but let me not exalt my self,
because thou have exalted me; nor grow wanton because I walk at liberty, lest
for the abuse of such precious liberty, thou clap my old chains upon me* and
shut up my soul again in prison.

The Poem.
MEn cannot be quiet till they be assured
That their estate is good, and well secured.
To able Counsel they their Deed submit
Entreating them with care t'examine it
Fearing some clause an enemy may wrest,
Or find a flaw; whereby he may divest
Them, and their children. O who can but see
How wise men in their generation be! Luke 16. 8.

But do they Act. 18. 17.
equal cares fears express
About their everlasting happiness?
In spiritual things 'twould grieve ones heart to see
What Isa. 32. 9. 10, 11.
careless fools; these careful men can be.
They act like men of common sense bereaven,
Secure their Lands; and they will trust God for heaven.
How many cases ave you to submit,
To Lawyers judgments? Hos. 11. 2.
Ministers may sit
From week to week, and yet not see the face
Of one that brings a soul concerning Case.
Yea, which is worse; how seldom do you cry
To God for counsel? Psalm. 139. 23.
or beg him to try
You^ heart^; and strictest inquisition make
Into your state, discover your mistake.
O stupid souls! clouded with ignorance,
Is Christ, and heaven no phil. 3. 8, 9.
fair inheritance
Compared with yours? or is 2Cor. 4. 18.
eternity
A shorter term than yours? that you should ply
The one so close, and totally neglect
The other; as not worth your least respect.
Perhaps the D^vil whose plot from you's concealed
Persuades your title's good; and firmly sealed
By G^^'s own Spirit, though you never found
One act of saving grace Ephesians. 1. 13.
to lay a ground
For that persuasion. Soul he has thee fast,
Though he will not let thee know it till the last.
Lord waken sinners, make them understand
'Twixt thee, and them; how rawly matters stand.
Give them no quiet rest, until they see
Their souls secured, better than Lands can be.
Occasional Meditations UPON BIRDS, BEASTS, TREES, FLOWERS, RIVERS, and other
objects.
MEDITATIONS on BIRDS.
MEDIT. I.
Upon the singing of a Nightingale.
WHO that hears such various, ravishing, and exquisite melody, would imagine
the bird that makes it, to be of so small and contemptible a body, and feather?
her charming voice engaged not only mine attentive ear, but my feet also, to
make a nearer approach to that shady bush, in which that excellent Musician
sat veiled; and the nearer I came, the sweeter the melody still seemed to be,
but when I had described the bird her self, and found her to be little bigger,
and no better feathered than a sparrow, it gave my thoughts the occasion of
this following application.

This Bird seems to me the lively emblem of the formal hypocrite, (1) In that
she is more in found than substance, a loud and excellent voice, but a little
despicable body; and it recal'd to my thoughts the story of Plutarch, who
hearin^ a Nightingale, desired to have one killed to feed upon, not questioning
but she would please the pallat as well as the ear; but when the Nightingale
was brought him, and he saw what a poor little creature it was, truly said he,
thou art vox and preterea nihil, a mere voice and nothing else: So is the
hypocrite; did a man hear him something in more public duties and discourses,
O thinks he, what an excellent man is this! what a choice and rare spirit is he
of? but follow him home, observe him in his private conversation and
retirements, and then you will judge Plutarchs note as applicable to him as the
Nightingale. (2) This Bird is observed to charm most sweetly, and set her
spirit all on work, when she perceives she has engaged attention; so does the
hypocrite, who lives and feeds upon the applause and commendation of his
admirers, and cares little for any of those duties which bring in no returns of
praise from men; he is little pleased with a silent melody and private pleasure
betwixt God and his own soul.

Scire tuum nihil est nisi te scire hoc sciat alter.
Alas! his knowledge is not worth a pin,
If he proclaim not what he has within.
He is more for the Theater than the Closet, and of such Christ says, Verily
they have their reward. (3) Naturalists observe the Nightingale to be an
ambitious Bird, that cannot endure to be out-vied by any, she will rather choose
to die than be excelled; a notable instance whereof we have in the following
pleasant Poem, translated out of Strada; concerning the Nightingale and a
Lutanist.

Now the declining Sun did downward bend
From higher heavens, and from his locks did send
A milder flame, when near to Tibers flow
A Lutanist allayed his careful woe,
With sounding charms, and in a greeny seat
Of shady Oak, took shelter from the heat
A Nightingale o'reheard him that did use
To sojourn in the neighbor Groves, the muse
That filled the place, the Syrene of the wood
(Poor harmless Syrene) stealing near she stood
Close lurking in the leaves attentively
Recording that unwonted melody.
She con'd it her self, and every strain
His fingers played, her throat returned again.
The Latanist perceived an answer sent
From th'imitating Bird, and was content
To show her play, more fully, then in haste.
He tryes his Lute and giving her a taste
Of the ensuing quarrel, nimbly beats
On all his strings, as nimbly she repeats
And wildly ranging over a thousand keys
Sounds a shrill warning of her after lays;
With rolling hand the Lutanist then plyes
The trembling threeds sometimes in scornful wise
He brushes down the strings and strikes them all
With one even stroke, then takes them several
And culls them over again, his sparkling joints
With busy descant mincing on the points
Reach back again with nimble touch, then stays.
The Bird replies, and art with repays.
Sometimes as one unexpert, and in doubt
How she might weild her voice, she draws out
Her tone at large, and does at first prepare
A solemn strain nor wear'd with winding air,
but with an equal pitch, and constant throat
Makes clear the passage for her gliding note;
Then cross division diversely she plays
And loudly chanting out her quickest lays
Poyses the sound, and with a quivering voice
Falls back again: he wondering so choice
So various harmony could issue out
From such a little throat, does go about
Some harder Lessons, and with wondrous art
Changing the strings does up the treble dart
And downward smite the Base, with painful stroke
He beats; and as the Trumpet does provoke
Sluggards to fight, even so his wanton skill
With mingled discord joins the hoarse and shrill,
The Bird this also tunes, and whilst she cuts
Sharp notes with melting voice, and mingled puts
Measures of middle sound, then suddenly
She thunders deep and jugs it inwardly
With gentle murmur, clear and dull she sings
By course, as when the martial warning rings;
Believed the Minstrel blushed, with angry mood
Inflamed (quoth he) thou Chantress of the wood
Either from thee I Will bear the price away
Or vanquished, break my Lute without delay.
Unimitable accents then he strains
His hand flies on the strings, in one he chains
Far different numbers, chasing here and there
And all the strings he labors every where;
Both flat and sharp he strikes, and stately grows
To prouder strains, and backward as he goes
Doubly divides, and closing up his lays
Like a full Quire, a shivering consort plays;
Then pausing stood in expectation
Of his corrival, nor durst answer on.
But she, when practice long her throat had whet
Enduring not to yield, at once does set
Her Spirits all to work, and all in vain;
For whilst she labors to express again
With Natures simple voice such diverse keys
With slender pipes such losty notes as these
Over matched with high designs, over matched with woe,
Just at the last encounter of her foe
She saints, she dies, falls on his instrument.
That conquered her, a fitting monument.
So far even little souls are driven on
Struck with a virtuous emulation.
And even as far are hypocrites driven on by their ambition and pride, which is
the spur that provokes them in their religious duties.

MEDIT. II.
Upon the sight of many small Birds chirping about a dead Hawk.
HEaring a whole quire of Birds chirping and twinking together, it engaged my
curiosity a little to enquire into the occasion of that convocation, which mine
eye quickly informed me of; for I perceived a dead Hawk in the bush, about
which they made such a noise, seeming to triumph at the death of their enemy;
and I could not blame them to sing his knell, who like a Cannibal was wont to
feed upon their living bodies; tearing them limb from limb, and scaring them
with his frightful appearance. This Bird which living was so formidable, being
dead the poorest Wren or Titmouse fears not to chirp or hop over. This brings
to my thoughts the base and ignoble ends of the greatest Tyrants and greedy
ingroffers of the world, of whom (whilst living) men were more afraid than
birds of a Hawk, but dead became objects of contempt and scorn. The death of
such Tyrants is both inglorious and unlamented; When the wicked perish, there
is shouting, Prove. 11. 10. Which was exemplified to the life at the death of
Nero of whom the Poet thus sings, Cum mors crudelem rapuisset saeva Neronem
Credibile est multos Roman agitasse jacos.
When cruel Nero died the Historian tells.
How Rome did mourn with Bonefires, plays and bells.


Remarkable for contempt and shame have the ends of many bloody Tyrants been;
so Pompey the great, of whom Clau dian the Poet sings, Nudus pascit aves jacet
en qui p^ssidet orbem
Exiguae telluris inops --
Birds eat his flesh, lo now he cannot have
Who ruled the world, a space to make a grave.


The like is storied of Alexander the great, who lay unburied thirty days, and
William the Conqueror, with many other such Birds of prey; whilst a beneficial
and holy life is usually closed up in an honorable and much lamented death.

For mine own part, I wish I may sooder my conversation in the world, that I
may live when I am dead in the affections of the best, and leave an honorable
testimony in the consciences of the worst; that I may oppress none, do good to
all, and say when I dye, as good Ambrose did, I am neither ashamed to live, nor
afraid to dye.

MEDIT. III.
Upon the sight of a Blackbird taking sanctuary in a bush from a pursuing Hawk.
When I saw how hardly the poor Bird was put to it to save her self from her
enemy, who hovered just over the bush in which she was fluttering and
squeeking, I could not but hasten to relieve her, (pity and succor being a due
debt to the distressed) which when I had done, the bird would not depart from
the bush, though her enemy were gone; this act of kindness was abundantly
repaid by this Meditation, with which I returned to my walk. My soul, like this
Bird, was once distressed, pursued, yea, seized by Satan, who had certainly
made a prey of it, had not Jesus Christ been a sanctuary to it in that hour of
danger. How ready did I find him to receive my poor soul into his protection?
then did he make good that sweet promise to my experience, Those that come unto
me, I will in no wise cast out. It called to mind that pretty and pertinent
story of the Philosopher, who walking in the fields a Bird pursued by a Hawk,
flew into his bosom; her took her out, and said, Poor bird, I will neither
wrong thee, nor expose thee to thine enemy, since thou came unto me for
refuge. So tender, and more than so, is the Lord Jesus to distressed souls,
that come unto him. Blessed Jesus! how should I love and praise thee? glorify
and admire thee, for that great salvation thou have wrought for me. If this
Bird had fallen into the claws of her enemy, she had been torn to pieces indeed,
and devoured, but then a few minutes had dispatched her, and ended all her pain
and misery; but had my soul fallen into the hand of Satan, there had been no
end of its misery.

Would not this scared Bird be flusht out of the Bush that secured her, though
I had chased away her enemy? and will thou (my soul) ever be enticed or scared
from Christ thy refuge? O let this for ever engage thee to keep close to
Christ, and make me say with Ezra; and now, O Lord! since thou have given me
such a deliverance as this, should I again break thy commandments?

MEDIT. IV
Upon the sight of diver Lennets intermingling with a flock of Sparrows.
ME thinks these Birds do fitly resemble the gaudy Gallant, and the plain
peasants; how spruce and richly adorned with shining and various colored
feathers, (like scarlet, richly laid with gold and silver lace) are those? how
plainly clad, in a homespun country russet are these? Fine feathers (says
our proverb) make proud Birds; and yet the feathers of the Sparrow, are as
useful and beneficial, both for warmth and flight, though not so gay and
ornamental as the others; and if both were stripped out of their feathers, the
Sparrow would prove the better Bird of the two; by which I see, that the
greatest worth does not always lie under the finest clothes. And besides, God
can make mean and homely garments as useful and beneficial topoor despised
Christians, as the ruffling and shining garments of wanton Gallants are to
them, and when God shall strip men out of all external excellencies, these will
be found to excel their glittering neighbors, in true worth and excellency.

Little would a man think such rich treasures of grace, wisdom, humility, etc.
lay under some russet coats Saepe sub attrita latitat sapientia vest.
Under poor garments more true worth may be,
Than under silks that whistle, who but he?


Whilst on the other side, the heart of the wicked (as Solomon has observed)
is little worth, how much sover his clothes be worth. Alas! it falls out two
frequently among us, as it does with men in the Indies, who walk over the rich
veins of gold and silver Oar, which lies hid under a ragged and barren surface,
and know it not. For my how p^rt, I desire not to value any man by what is
extrinsecal and worldly, but by that true internal excellency of grace, which
makes the face to shine in the eyes of God and good men: I would contemn a vile
person, though never so glorious in the eye of the world; but honor such as
fear the Lord, how sordid and despicable soever to appearance.

MEDIT. V.
Upon the sight of a Robbin-red-breast picking up a worm from a molehill then
raising.
OBserving the Mole working industriously beneath, and the Bird watching so
intently above; I made a stand to observe the issue. When in a little time the
bird descends and seizes upon a worm, which I perceived was crawling apace from
the enemy below that hunted her, but fell to the share of another which from
above waited for her. My thoughts presently suggested these Meditations from
that occasion; me thought this poor worm seemed to be the Emblem of my poor
soul, which is more endangered by its own lusts of pride and covetousness, than
this worm was by the Mole and Bird; my pride, like the aspiring Bird watches
for it above; my covetousness, like this subterranean Mole, digging for it
beneath. Poor soul! what a sad Dilemma art thou brought to? If thou go down
into the caverns of the earth, there thou art a prey to thy covetousness that
hunts thee; and if thou aspire, or but creep upward, there thy pride waits to
ensnare thee. Distressed soul! whither will thou go? ascend thou may, not by
a vain elation, but by a heavenly conversation, beside which, there is no way
for thy preservation; the way of life is above to the wise, etc.

Again, I could not but observe the accidental benefit this poor harmless Bird
obtained by the labor of the Mole, who hunting intentionally for her self,
unburroughed and ferrited out this worm for the Bird, who possibly was hungry
enough, and could not have been relieved for this time, but by the Mole, the
fruit of whose labors she now fed upon. Even thus the Lord oft-times makes
good his word to his people: The wealth of the wicked is laid up for the just.
And again, The earth shall help the woman. This was fully exemplified in David,
to whom Nabal that churlish muck-worm speaks all in possessives. Shall I take
my bread etc. and give it to one I know not whom; and yet David reaps the fruit
of all the pains and toil of Nabal at last. Let it never encourage me to
idleness, that God sometimes gives his people the fruit of uthers sweat; but if
povidence reduce me to necessity, and disable me from helping my self, I doubt
not then but it will provide instruments to do it. The Bird was an hungry and
could not dig.

MEDIT. VI.
Upon the shooting of two Finches fighting in the Air.
HOw soon has death endeed the quarrel betwixt these two little Combatants!
had they agreed better, they might have lived longer; 'twas their own
contention, that gave both the opportunity and provocation of their death; and
though living they could not, yet being dead they can lie quietly together in
my hand.

Foolish birds, was it not enough that birds of prey watched to devour them,
but they must peck and scratch one another? Thus have I seen the birds of
Paradise (Saints I mean) tearing and wounding each other, like so many birds of
prey, and by their unchristian contests giving the occasion of their common
ruin; yea, and that not only when at liberty, as these were, but when incaged
also; and yet, as one welll observes, if ever Christian will agree, 'twill
either be in a prison, or in heaven; for in a prison their quarrelsome lusts
lie low, and in heaven they shall be utterly done away.

But O! what pity is it, that those who shall agree so perfectly in heaven,
should bite and devour each other upon earth? that it should be said of them,
as one ingeniously observed, who saw their carcases lie together, as if they
had lovingly embraced other, who fell together by a Duel, Quanta amicitia se
invicem amplectuntur; qui mutna and implacabili inimicitia perierunt?

Embracing one another, now they lie
who by each others bloody hands did dye.
Or as he said, who observed how quietly and peaceably the dust and bones, even
of enemies did lie together in the grave; Non tanta vivi pace conjuncti
effetis; you did not live together so peaceably. If conscience of Christ;
command will not, yet the consideration of common safety should powerfully
persuade to unity and amity.

MEDIT. VII.
Upon the singing of a blind Finch by night.
A Dear friend, who was a great observer of the works of God in nature, told
me, That being entertained with a sight of many rarities at a friends house in
London; among other things, his friend showed him a Finch, whose eyes being put
out, would frequently sing, even at midnight. This Bird in my opinion, is the
lively Emblem of such careless and unconcerned persons, as the Prophet
describes, Amos 6. 4, 5, 6. who chant to the viol, when a dismal night of
trouble and affliction has overshadowed the Church. You would have thought it
strange to have heard this Bird sing in the night, when all others are in a
deep silence; except the Owl, an unclean Bird, and the Nightingal which before
we made the Emblem of the Hypocrite. And as strange it is, that any except the
profane and hypocritical, should so unseasonably express their mirth and
jollity; that any of Sions children Should live in pl^^sure, whilst she her
^elf lies in tears. The people of God in Psalm. 137. tell us, in what postures
of sorrow they sat; even like birds, with their heads under their wings,
during the night of their Captivity. How shall we sing the Lords song in a
strange land? It Is like enough, such as can sing and chaunt in the night of the
Churches trouble, have well feathered their nests in the days of her
prosperity; however let them know, that God will turn their unseasonable mirth
into a sadder note; and those that now sit sad and silent, shall shortly sing
for joy of heart, when the winter is past, the rain over and gone, the flowers
appear again upon the earth, and the time of the singing of Birds is come.

MEDIT. VIII.
Upon the comparing of two Birds nests.
It Is pretty to observe the structure and commodiousness of the habitations of
these little architects, who though they act not by reason and counsel, but
only by natural instinct, yet reason it self could hardly have contrived a
neater building of such simple materials, How nea^ly has the Thrush ceiled of
plaistered his nest, with admirable art and industry? how warmly has the Finch
matted his? and both well fenced against the injury of the weather.

How comfortably has nature provided convenient habitations, for these weak
and tender young ones, who have warm lodging, and variety of provisions hourly
brought them, without their care or pains? This trifling object suggests to my
thoughts, a more excellent and serious contemplation, even the wonderful and
unparalled abasement of Jesus Christ, who for my sake voluntarily submitted
himself to a more destitute and neglected state, than these Birds of the Air;
for Mat. 8. 20. he says, The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have
nests; Heins. in loc.
but the Son of man has not where to lay his head.

Vulpibus in saltu rupes excisa latebras
Pruebet, and aereis avibus dat silua quietem:
Ast hominis Nato nullis succedere tectis
Est licitum --
The craggy rock to foxes holes affords,
The pleasant woods, a resting place to birds,
For Christ no fixed habitation's found
But what was borrowed, or the naked ground.
O melting consideration! that the glorious Son of God, Ioh, 1. 14. The Lord of
glory, Iam. 2. I. The brightness of his fathers glory. Heb. 1. 3. Who was rich,
2 Cor. 8. 9. And it no robbery to be equal with God. Phil. 2. 8. who from all
eternity was infinitely and ineff^bly delighting and rejoicing in the bosom of
his father, Prove. 8. 30. That he, I say, should manifest himself in flesh, 2 Timothy 3. 16. yea, in the likeness of sinful flesh, Romans 8. 3. that is in flesh,
that had the marks and effects of sin upon it, as hunger, thirst, pain,
weariness and mortality; and not only so, but to choose such a state of outward
meanness and poverty, never being poss^ssed of a house in this world; but
living as a stranger in other men's houses, and stooping in this respect to a
lower condition than the very birds of the Air, Quanto pro me velior, tanto
mihi Charior. Bern.
and all this for enemies. O let it work, both admiration and thankfulness in
my soul! my body is better accommodated than the body of my Lord. Deal Jesus!
by how much the viler thou made thy self for me, by so much the dearer shall
thou be to me.

MEDIT. IX.
Upon the early singing of birds.
HOw am I reproved of sluggishness by these watchful Birds! which cheerfully
entertain the very dawning of the morning, with their cheerful and delightful
warblings! they set their little spirits all awork betimes, whilst my nobler
spirits are bound with the bonds of soft and downy slumbers. For shame my soul!
suffer not that Publican sleep to seize so much of thy time, yea, thy best and
freshest time; reprove and chide thy sluggish body, as a good Bishop once did,
when upon the same occasion he said, Surrexerunt passeres, and ster^unt
Pontifices.

The early chirping Sparrows may reprove
Such lazy Bishops as their beds do love.
Of many sl^ggards it may be said, as Tully said of Verres, the Deputy of
Sicily, Quod nunquam solemn nec orientem, nec occidentem viderat; that he never
saw the Sun rising, being in bed after, nor setting, being in bed before.

It Is pity, that Christians of all men should suffer sleep to cut such large
thongs out of so narrow a hide, as their time on earth is. But alas! it is not
so much early rising, as a wise improving those fresh and free hours with God,
that will enrich the soul; else, as our Proverb says, a man may be early up,
and never the near; yea, far better it is to be found in bed sl^eping, than to
be up doing nothing, or that which is worse than nothing. O my soul! learn to
prepossess thy self every morning with the thoughts of God, and suffer not
those fresh and sweet operations of thy mind, to be prostituted to earthly
things; Mr. Case in Epist, to the morn. Lect.
for that is experimentally true which one in this case has pertinently
observed; That if the world get the start of Religion in the morning, it will
be hard for Religion to overtake it all the day after.

MEDIT. X.
Upon the haltering of birds with a grain of hair.
Observing in a snowy season, how the poor hungry Birds were haltred and drawn
in by a grain of hair cunningly cast over their heads, whilst poor creatures
they were busily feeding, and suspected no danger; and even whilst their
companions were drawn away from them, one after another, all the interruption
it gave the rest, was only for a minute or two, whilst they stood peeping into
that hole through which their companions were drawn, and then fell to their
meat again, as busily as before. I could not choose but say, Even thus
surprizingly does death steal upon the children of men, whilst they are wholly
intent upon the cares and pleasures of this life, not at all suspecting its so
near approach. These Birds saw not the hand that ensnared them, nor do they see
the hand of death plucking them one after another into the grave.

Ovid. Omnibus obscur as injecit illa manus
Death's steps are swift, and yet no noise it makes;
Its hand unseen, but yet most surely takes.

And even as the surviving Birds for a little time seemed to stand affrighted,
peeping after their companions, and then as busy as ever to their meat again:
Just so it fares with the careless inconsiderate world, who see others daily
dropping into eternity round about them, and for the present are a little
startled, and will look into the grave after their neighbors, and then fall as
busily to their earthly employments and pleasures again as ever, till their own
turn comes.

I know, my God! that I must die as well as others; but, O let me not die as do
others, let me see death before I feel it, and conquer it before it kill me;
let it not come as an enemy upon my back, but rather let me meet it as a friend
half way! Die I must, but let me lay up that good treasure before I go, Mat. 6.
19. carry with me a good conscience when I go, 2 Timothy 4. 6, 7. and leave behind
me a good example when I am gone, and then let death come and welcome!

MEDITATIONS upon Beasts.
MEDIT. I.
Upon the clogging of a straying Beast.
HAd this Bullock contented himself, and remained quietly within his own
bounds, his Owner had never put such an heavy clog upon his neck; but I see the
prudent Husbandman chooses rather to keep him with his clog, than lose him for
want of one What this clog is to him, that is affliction and trouble to me; had
my soul kept close with God in liberty and prosperity, he would never thus have
clogged me with adversity; yea, and happy were it for me, if I might stray from
God no more, who has thus clogged me with preventive afflictions. If with
David I might say, Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now I have kept
thy word, Psalm. 119. 67. O my soul! it is better for thee, to have thy pride
clogged with poverty, thy ambition with reproach, thy canal expectancies with
constant disappointments, than to be at liberty to run from God and duty.

It Is true, I am sometimes as weary of these, troubles, as this poor Beast is
of the clog he draws after him, and often wish my self rid of them; but yet, if
God should take them off, for ought I know I might have cause to wish them on
again, to prevent a greater mischief. It Is storied of Basil, that for many
years he was sorely afflicted with an inveterate headache, (that was his clog)
he often prayed for the removal of it, al last God removed it; but instead
thereof he was sorely exercised with the motions and temptations of lust, which
when he perceived, he as earnestly desired his headache again, to prevent a
greater evil. Lord! if my corruptions may be prevented by my affliction, I
refuse not to be clogged with them; but my soul rather desires thou would
hasten the time when I shall be for ever freed from them both.

MEDIT. II.
Upon the love of a Dog to his Master.
HOw many a weary step through mire and dirt has this poor Dog followed my
horse to day? and all this for a very poor reward, for all be gets by it at
night, is but bones and blows, yet will he not leave my company, but is content
upon such hard terms, to travel with me from day to day.

O my soul! what conviction and shame may this leave upon thee? who art often
times even weary of following thy Master Christ, whose rewards and encourage
ments of obedience are so incomparably sweet and sure. I cannot beat back this
dog from following me, but every inconsiderable trouble is enough to discourage
me in the way of my duty. Ready I am to resolve as that Scribe did, Mat. 8. 19.
Master, I will follow thee whithersoever thou go; but how does my heart
faulter when I must encounter with the difficulties of the way? O! let me make
a whole heart-choice of Christ, for my portion and happiness! and then I shall
never leave him, nor turn back from following him, though the present
difficulties were much more, and the present incouragments much less.

MEDIT. III.
Upon the fighting of two Rams.
TAking notice how furiously these Sheep which by nature are mild and gentle,
did yet like bulls push each other taking their advantage by going back to meet
with a greater rage and fury. Methought I saw in this a plain Emblem of the
unchristian contests and animosities which fall out amongst them that call
themselves the people of God, who in Scripture are also styled Sheep; for their
meekness and innoceny; and yet, through the remaining corruptions that are in
them, thus do they push each other; (as one long since complained) non secus ac.

Cum duo conversis inimica in praelia tauri,
Frontibus incurrunt --
Shall Christians one another wound and push,
Like furious Bulls, when they together rush?
The fighting of these sheep does in two respects, notably comport with the
sinful practices of contending Christians, (1) That in this fight they engage
with their heads one against another; and what are they but those head-notions
or opposition of Sciences, falsely so called, that have made so many broyls and
uproars inthe Christian world? O! What clashings have these heady opinions
caused in the Churches? first heads, and then hearts have clashed. Christians
have not distinguished betwixt adversarius litis, and personae; an adversary to
the opinion, and to the person; but dipped their tongues and pens in vinegar and
gall, shamefully aspersing and reproaching one another because their
understandings were not cast into one mould, and their heads all of a bigness.
But (2) that which Contrymen observe from the fighting of Sheep, That is
presages soul and stormy weather, is much more certainly consequent upon the
fighting of Christ's Sheep. Do these clash and push? Surely it is an infallible
prognos^ick of an ensuing storm, Mal. 4. 6.

MEDIT. IV.
Upon the catching of a Horse in a fat Pasture.
WHen this Horse was kept in poor short leas, where he had much scope, but
little grass how gentle and tractable was he then? he would not only stand
quiet to be taken, but come to hand of his own accord, and follow me up and
down the field for a crust of bread, or handful of Oa^s; but since I turned him
into this fat pasture, he comes no more to me, nor will suffer me to come near
him; but throws up his heels wantonly against me, and flies from me, as if I
were rather his enemy than Benefactor. In his I behold the carriage of my own
heart toward God, who the more he has done for me, the seldomer does he hear
from me, in a low and afflicted state, how tractable is my heart to duty? Then
i^ comes to the foot of God voluntarily; but in an exalted condition, how
wildly does my heart run from God and duty? With this ungrateful requital God
faulted his own people, Ier. 2. 31. teachable and tractable in the wilderness,
but when fatted in that rich pasture Canaan, then, we are Lords we will come no
more to thee. How soon are all Gods former benefits forgotten? and how often is
that ancient observation verified, even in his own people?

(...)
Post munera cito consenescit gratia.
No sooner do we gifts on some bestow,
But presently our gifts gray headed grow.
But that is a bad Tenant, that will maintain a Suit at Law against his
Landlord, with his own rent; and a bad heart that will fight against God, with
his own mercies, I wish it may be with my heart, as it is reported to be with
the waters in the Kingdom of Congo, that are never so sweet to the taste, as
when the tide is at the highest.

MEDIT. V.
Upon the hunting of a Deer.
THe full-mouthed cry of these Dogs, which from the morning have nunted this
poor tired Deer, which is now no longer able to stand before them, but is
compassed round with them, who thirst for, and will presently such her blood;
brings to my thoughts the condition and state of Jesus Christ, in the days of
his flesh, who was thus hunted from place to place by blood-thirsty enemies.
Upon this very account, the 22. Psalm. which treats of his death, is inscribed
with the title of Aijeleth Shahar, which signifies the Hind of the morning and
fully imports the same notion, which this occasion presented me with; for look,
as the Hind or Deer which is intended to be run down that day, is rouzed by the
Dogs early in the morning. So was Christ, in the very morning of his infancy,
by bloody Herod, and that cruel pack confederated with him. Thus was he chased
from place to place, till that was fulfilled which was prophetically written of
him in ver. 16. of the forecited Psalm; For Dogs have compassed me about, the
assembly of the wicked have enclosed me; they pierced my hands and my feet.

And can thou expect, O my soul! to fare better than he did, or escape the
rage off bloody men? Surely, if the Spirit of Christ dwell in thee; if his
holiness have ^avoured thee, these Dogs will wind it and give thee chase too;
they go upon the scent of holiness still, and would hunt to destruction every
one, in whom there is aliquid Christi, any thing of Christ, if the gracious
providence of the Lord did not sometimes rate them off: For it is no less a
pleasure, which some wicked ones take in hunting the people of God, than what
Claudian the Poet observes men use to take, in hunting wild beasts.

Venator defessa thoro quum membra reponit
Men's tamen ad Sylvas,and sua lustra redit.
Whilst weary Huntsmen in the night do sleep,
Their fancies in the woods; still hunting keep.
Lord! should I with the hypocrite decling the profession and practice of
holiness, to escape the rage of persecuting enemies, at what time they cease,
my own conscience would begin to hunt me like a Blood-hound; let me rather
choose to be chased by men than God, to flee before pursuing enemies, than be
dogged from day to day with a guilty conscience.

MEDITATIONS upon Trees.
MEDIT. I.
Upon the fall of blossoms, nipt by a frosty morning.
BEholding in an early Spring, fruit Trees embossed with beautiful blossoms of
various colors, which breathed forth the delicious odours into the circumambi^
(...) and adorned the branches on which they grew, like so many rich jewels, or
glittering pendents; and further observing, how these persumed blossoms dropped
off, being bitten with the frost and discolored all the ground, as if a shower
of snow had fallen; I said, within my self, these sweet and early Lord, in the
days of my first acquaintance with him. Oh! what fervent love? panting desires,
and heavenly delights beautified my soul in those days! the odoriferous scent
of the sweetest blossoms, the morning breath of the most fragrant flowers, has
not half that sweetness with which those my first affection were enriched. O!
happy time, thrice pleasant Spring! my soul has it still in remembrance, and
is humbled within me; for these also were but blossoms which now are nipt and
saded, that first flourish is gone; my heart is like the Winters earth, because
thy face, Lord, is to me like a Winter Sun. Awake, O Northwind! and come, South
wind, blow upon my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out, then let my
beloved come into his garden and eat his pleasant fruit!

MEDIT. II.
Upon the knitting or setting of fruit.
I Have often observed, that when the blossoms of a tree, set and knit, though
the flourish thereof be gone, and nothing but the bare rudiment of the expected
fruit be left; yet then the fruit is much better secured from the danger of
frosts and winds, than whilst it remained in the flower or blossom; for now it
has past one of those critical periods, in which so many trees miscarry and
lose their fruit. And methought, this natual Observation fairly led me to this
Theological Proposition. That good motions and holy purposes in the soul are
never secured and past their most dangerous Crisis, till they be turned into
fixed resolutions, and answerable execution, which is as the knitting and
setting of them.

Upon this Proposition my melting thoughts thus dilated, Happy had it been for
thee, my soul! had all the blessed motions of the Spirit been thus knit and
fixed in thee. O, how have mine affections blown and budded under the warm
beams of the Gospel! but a chill blast from the cares, troubles and delights of
the world without, and the vanity and deadness of the heart within have blasted
all; my goodness has been but as a morning dew, or early cloud that vanishes
away: And even of divine Ordinance I may say, what is said of humane
Ordinances, They have perished in the using. A blossom is but fru^tus
imperfectus, and ordinabilis, an imperfect thing in it self, and something in
order to fruit; a good motion and holy purpose, is but opus imperfectum, and
ordinabile, an imperfect work, in order to a complete work of the Spirit, When
that primus impetus, those first motions were strong upon my heart, had I then
pursued them in the force and vigor of them, how many difficulties might I
have overcome? Revive thy work, O Lord! and give not to my soul a miscarrying
womb, or dry breasts.

MEDIT. III.
Upon the sight of a fair spreading Oak.
WHat a lofty flourishing Tree is here? It seems rather to be a little Wood,
than a single Tree; every limb thereof having the dimensions and branches of a
Tree in it; and yet as great as it is, it was once but a little slip; which one
might pull up with two fingers; this vast body was contained virtually and
potentially in a small Acorn. Well then, I will never despise the day of Small
things, nor despair of arriving to an eminency of grace, though at present it
be but as a bruised reed, and the things that are in me, be ready to dye. As
things in nature, so the things of the Spirit grow up to their fullness and
perfection, by flow and insensible degrees. The famous and heroical acts of the
most renowned believers, were such as themselves could not once perform, or it
may be think they ever should. Great things both in nature and grace, come from
small and contemptible beginnings.

MEDIT. IV.
Upon the sight of many sticks lodged in the branches of a choice fruit Tree.
HOw is this Tree battered with stones, and loaded with sticks that have been
thrown at it? whilst those that grow about it being barren, or bearing harsher
fruit, escape untouched! Surely, if its fruit had not been so good, its usage
had not been so bad: and yet it is affirmed, that some trees, as the Walnut
etc. bear the better, for being thus bruised and battered.

Even thus it fares, in both respects with the best of men; the more holy, the
more envied and persecuted; every one that passes by will have a fling at them.
Methinks I see, how devils and wicked men walk round about the people of God
whom he has enclosed in arms of power, like so many boys about an Orchard,
whose lips water to have a fling at them. But God turns all the stones of
reproach into precious stones to his people, they bear the better for being
thus battered.

And in them is that ancient observation verified.

Creseunt virtutem palmae, crescuntque Coronae
Mutantur mundipraelia, pace Dei.
The Palms and Crowns of virtue thus increase;
Thus persecution's turned into peace.
Let me be but fruitful to God in holiness, and ever abounding in the work of
the Lord, and then, whilst devils and men are flinging at me, either by hand or
tongue persecutions, I will sing amidst them all with the divine Poet, What
open force, Herb. Poem. p. 125.
or hidden charm
Can blast my fruits, or bring me harm
Whilst the enclosure is thine arm.


MEDIT. V.
Upon the gathering of choice fruit, from a scrubbed unpromising Tree.
Would any man think to find such rare delicious fruit upon such an unworthy
Tree to appearance as this is? I should rather have expected the most delicious
fruit from the most handsome and flourishing Trees; but I see I must neither
judge the worth of Tree or Men, by their external form and appearance. This is
not the first time I have been deceived in judging by that rule; under fair and
promising outsides I have found nothing of worth, and in many deformed
despicable bodies, I have found precious richly furnished souls. The sap and
juice of this scrubbed Tree is concocted into rare and excellent fruits, whilst
the juice and sap of some other fair, but barren Trees, serves only to keep
them from rotting, which is all the use that many souls which dwell in
beaut^u^l bodies serve for; they have (as one says) animam pro sale; their
souls are butsalt to their bodies. Or thus, The only use to which their souls
do serve
Is but like salt, their bodies to preserve.


If God have given me a sound soul, in a sound body, I have a double mercy to
bless him for; but whither my body be vigorous and beautiful or not, yet let my
soul be so: For as the esteem of this Tree, so the esteem and true honor of
every man rises rather from his fruitfulness and usefulness, than from his
shape and form.

MEDIT. VI.
Upon an excellent, but irregular Tree.
SEeing a Tree grow somewhat irregular, in a very neat Orchard, I told the
Owner it was pity that Tree should stand there; and that if it were mine. I
would root it up, and thereby reduce the Orchard to an exact uniformity. It was
replied to this purpose. that he rather regarded the fruit than the form; and
that this slight inconveniency was abundantly preponderated by a more
considerable advantage. This Tree said he, which you would root up, has
yielded me more fruit than many of those Trees which have nothing else to
commend them, but their regular situation. I could not but yield to the reason
of this answer, and could wish it had been spoken so loud, that all our
Uniformity men had heard it, who will not stick to root up many hundred of the
best bearers in the Lords Orchard, because they stand not in an exact order
with other more conformable, but less beneficial Trees, who do perdere
substanitiam propter accidentia, destroy the fruit, to preserve the form.

Not much unlike such foolish men are those
That strive for shadows, and the substance lose.
MEDITATIONS upon a Garden.
MEDIT. I.
Upon the new modelling of a Garden.
A Gentlewoman who had lately seen a neat and curious Garden, returns to her
own with a greater dislike of it th^n ever; resolves to new model the whole
plot, and reduce it to a better form, is now become so curious and neat, that
not a weed or stone is suffered in it, but all must lie in exquisite order; and
what ever ornament she had observed in her neighbors, she is now restless till
she see it in her own.

Happy were it thought I, if in an holy emulation, every one would thus
endeavor to rectify the disorders of their own conversation, by the excellent
graces they behold in the more heavenly and regular lives of others. Some
Christians there are (I wish their number were greater) whose actions lie in
such a comely and beautiful order, that few of their neighbors con look upon
their examples without self-conviction and shame; but few are so happy to be
provoked unto self-reformation but such rare patterns. I see, it is much easier
to pull up many weeds out of a Garden, than one corruption out of the heart,
and to procure an hundred flowers to adorn a knot, than one grace to beautify
the soul. It Is more natural to corrupt man to envy, than to imitate the
spiritual excellencies of others.

MEDIT. II.
Upon the pulling up of a Leek.
A White head, and a green tail! how well does this resemble an old wanton
Lover! whose green youthful lusts are not extinguished, though his white head
declares that nature is almost so. Gray hairs should be always matched with
grave deportments, and the ^ins of youth should rather be the griefs, than
pleasures of old age. It Is sad when the sins of the soul, like the diseases of
the body grow stronger, as nature grows weaker. And it recals to my mind that
ancient Observation of Menander.

(...).
Senex amore captus, ultimum malum
It is the worst of evil to behold
Strong youthful lusts to rage in one that is old.
It Is a thousand pities, that those who have one foot in the grave, should live
as if the other were in hell! that their lusts should be so lively, when their
bodies are three parts dead. Such sinful practices bring upon them more
contempt and shame, than their ho^ry heads and reverend faces can procure them
honor.

Magna fuit capitis quondam reverentia cani, Ovid. 5. Fast.

Inque suo pretio ruga senilis erat.
Gray hairs, and aged wrinckles did of old
Procure more reverence than bags of gold.
But alas! how little respect or reverence can the hoary head obtain amongst
wise men, except it be ^ound in the way of righteousness? I think, the lowest
esteem is too much for an old servant of the devil; and the highest honor
little enough ^or an ancient and faithful servant of Christ.

MEDIT. III.
Upon a heedless tread in a curious Garden.
PAssing through the small divisions of a curious knot, which was richly
adorned with rare Tulips, and other: beautiful flowers, I was very careful to
shun those flowers, which indeed had no other worth to commend them, but their
exquisite colors, and unadvisedlytrod upon and spoiled an excellent choice
herb, which though it grew obscurely, yet had rare physical virtues in it.

When I was made sensible of the involuntary trespass I had committed, I
thought I could scarsely make the Owneer a better compensation, than by telling
him, that herein (though against my will) I did but tread in the footsteps of
the greatest part of the world, who are very careful (as I was) to keep their
due distance from splendid, though worthless Gallants; mean while trampling
upon, and crushing ununder foot, the obscure, but most precious servants of God
in the world. As little do they heed these most excellent persons, as I did
this precious herb.

Summa ingenia in occulto saepe latent, says Plautus,
Rare wits and herbs sometimes do sculk and shrink
In such blind holes, as one would little think.
For my own part, I desire to tread upon no man with the foot of contempt and
pride, much less upon any good man; and that I may not, it concerns me to look
before I step; I mean, to consider, before I censure: Had I done so by this
rare Herb, I had never hurt it.

MEDIT. IV.
Upon a withered Posey taken up in the way.
FInding in my walk a Posey, of once sweet and fragrant, but now dry and
withered flowers, which I supposed to be thrown away by one that had formerly
worn it: Thus said I, does the unfaithful world use its friends, when
providence has blasted and withered them; whilst they are rich and honorable,
they will put them into their bosoms, as the Owner of this Posey did, whilst it
was fresh and fragrant; and as easily throw them away, as useless and worthless
things, when thus they come to be withered. Such usage as this Petronius long
since complained of.

Cum fortuna manet vultum servatis amici,
Cum cecedit turpi vertitis or a fuga. ( i. e.)
Are they in honor? then we smile like friends,
And with their fortunes all our friendship ends.
But this loose and deceitful friendship stinks so odiously in the very
nostrils of nature, that a Heathen Poet severily taxes, and condemns it as most
unworthy of a man.

Turpe sequi casum, and fortunae cedere, amicum
Et nisi sit foelix esse negare suum. ( i. e.)
It Is base to change with fortune, and deny
A faithful friend, because in poverty.
And is this indeed the friendship of the world? Does it ^hus use them whom
once it honored? Then Lord! let me never seek its friendship. O, let me esteem
the smiles and honors of men less, and thy love and favor more. Thy love is
indeed unchangeable, being pure, free, and built upon nothing that is mutable;
thou never servest thy friends as the world does its darlings.

MEDIT. V.
Upon the sudden withering of a Rose.
Being with my friend in a Garden, we gathered each of us a Rose; he handled
his tenderly, smel'd to it but seldom and sparingly, I always kept it to my
nose, or squeezed it in my hand, whereby in a very short time, it lost both
color and sweetness, but his still remained as sweet and fragrant as if it had
been growing upon its own root. These Roses said I, are the true emblems of the
best and sweetest creature-enjoyments in the world; which being moderately and
cautiously used and enjoyed, may for a long time yield sweetness to the
Possessor of them; but if once the affections seize too greedily upon them, and
squeeze them too hard, they quickly wither in our hands, and we lose the
comfort of them; and that either through the souls surfeiting upon them, of the
Lord's righteous and just removal of them, because of the excess of our
affections to them; earthly com^orts, like pictures, show best at a due
distance. It was therefore a good saying of Homer, (...) etc.

Mihi nunquam is placet hospes
Qui valde preterque modum odid vel amat.
I like him not who at the rate
Of all his might does love or hate.
It Is a point of excellent wisdom to keep the golden bridle of moderation, upon
all the affections we exercise upon earthly things, and never to slip those
reins, unless when they move toward God, in whose love there is no danger of
excess.

MEDIT. VI.
Upon the sudden withering of beautiful flowers.
HOw fresh and orient did these Flowers lately appear, when being dashed over
with the morning dew, they stood in all their pride and glory, breathing out
their delicious odours, which perfumed the air round about them, but now are
daver'd and shrivelled up, and have neither any desirable beauty, of savor in
them.

So vain a thing is the admired beauty of creatures, which so captivates the
hearts, and exercises a pleasing tyranny over the affections of vain man, yet
is as suddenly blasted as the beauty of flower.

Form^ bonum fragile est quantumque a^^^dit ad annos,
Fit minor and spacio carpitur ipsa suo.
Nec semper violae, nec semper lilia florent
Et riget amissa spina relicta rosa
Tempus erit quo vos speculum vidisse pigebit,
I am veniunt rugae quae tibi corpus arent, etc.
How frail is beauty? in how short a time
It fades! like Roses which have past their prime.
So wrinckled age the fairest face will plow,
And cast deep ^urrows on the smoothest brow.
Then where is that lovely tempting face? alas!
Your selves would blush to view it in a glass,
If then thou delightest in beauty (O my soul!) choose that which is lasting,
There is a beauty which never fades, even the beauty of holiness upon the inner
man; this abides fresh and orient for ever, and sparkles gloriously when thy
face (the seat of natural beauty) is become an abhorrent and loathsome
spectacle. Holiness enammels and sprinkles over the face of the soul with a
beauty upon which Christ himself is enammour'd, even imperfect holiness on
earth is a Rose that breaths sweetly in the bud; in heaven it will be full
blown, and abide in its prime to all eternity.

MEDIT. VII.
Upon the tenderness of some choice Flowers.
HOw much care is necessary to preserve the life of some Flowers? They must be
boxed up in the Winter, others must be covered with glasses in their springing
up, the finest and richest mould must be sifted about the roots, and
assiduously watered, and all this little enough, and sometimes too little to
preserve them, whilst other common and worthless flowers grow without any help
of ours; yea, we have no less to do, to rid our gardens of them, than we have
to make the former gr^w there.

Thus stands the case with our hearts, in reference to the motions of grace and
sin. Holy thoughts of God must be assiduously watered by prayer, earthed up by
Meditation, and defended by watchfulness; and yet all this is sometimes too
little to preserve them alive in our souls. Alas! the heart is a soil that
agrees not with them, they are tender things, and a small matter will nip and
kill them. To this purpose is the complaint of the divine Poet.

Who would have thought a joy so coy? Herbert.

To be offended so, and go
So suddenly away.
Hereafter I had need take heed.
Joys among other things have wings,
And watch their opportunities of flight,
Converting in a moment day to night.
But vain thoughts, and unholy suggestions, these spread themselves, and root
deep in the heart, they naturally agree with the soil; so that it is almost
impossible at any time to be rid of them. It Is hard to forget what is our sin
to remember.

MEDIT. VIII.
Upon the strange means of preserving the life of Vegetables.
I Observe that plants and herbs are sometimes killed by frosts, and yet
without frosts they would neither live nor thrive; they are sometimes drowned
by water, and yet without water they cannot subsist; they are refreshed and
cheered by the heat of the Sun, and yet that heat sometimes kills and scorches
them up. Thus lives my soul, troubles and afflictions seem to kill all its
comforts; and yet without these, its comforts could not live. The Sun-blasts of
prosperity sometimes refresh me, and yet those Sun-blasts are the likeliest way
to wither me; By what seeming contradictions is the life of my spirit
preserved? what a mystery? what a Paradox is the life of a Christian?

Welcome my health, this sickness makes me well
Medicines adieu:
When with diseases, I have list to dwell,
I Will wish for you.
Welcome my strength, this weakness makes me able.
Powers adieu:
When I am weary grown of standing stable,
I Will wish for you.
Welcome my wealth, this loss has gained me more
Riches adieu:
When I again grow greedy to be poor
I Will wish for you.
Welcome my credit, this disgrace is glory:
Honors adieu:
When for renown and fame I shall be sorry:
I Will wish for you.
Welcome content, this sorrow is my joy.
Pleasures adieu,
When I desire such grief as may annoy:
I Will wish for you.
Health, strength, and riches, credit, and content
Are spared best sometimes, when they are spent,
Sickness, and weakness, loss, disgrace, and sorrow
Lend most sometimes, when most they seem to borrow.
And if by these contrary and improbable ways, the Lord preserves our souls in
life, no marvel then we find such strange and seemingly contradictory motions
of our hearts, under the various dealings of God with us, and are still
restless in what condition soever he puts us; which restless frame was
excellently expressed in that pious Epigram of reverend Gattaker, made a little
before his death.

I thirst for thirstiness, I weep for tears;
well pleased I am to be displeased thus:
The only thing I fear is want of fears:
suspecting I am not suspicious.
I cannot choose but live, because I dye
And when I am not dead how glad am I?
Yet when I am thus glad for sense of pain
and careful am lest I should careless be
Then do I grieve for being glad again,
and fear lest carelessness take care for me.
Amidst these restless thoughts, this rest I find.
For those that rest not here, there is rest behind
Iam tetigi portum valete.
FINIS,
A TABLE of the Contents of this Treatise, both Natural and Spiritual.
Natural. Spiritual. A
ABuse of Cattle Page 205, 206 Actions and seed resembled 147, 148
Accountableness of workmen to their Masters 8 Arable Land, how qualified 36, 37
Altitude of the clouds 87
B
Barns when full, fill carnal hearts with joy 156. Some have no Barns, yet much
joy 156 Beasts, their bondage by sin 205, 206 Blastings, incident to Corn 115
Buildings, where ^rected 5
C
Capacity of beasts how narrow 208 Cha^^ grows with Wheat, its usefulness to
it^ its worthlessness in it self, its separation from the Corn 167, 168 Corn
cannot resist the Sickle 131. Received into the Reapers bosom, 131. Corn not to
be reaped till ripe; signs when it is so 132, 133. Crop, the first usually best
10
D*
Death of seeds, how to be understood 101 Deeds for estates, how carefully
proved and preserved 226 Diligence, the thriving way 24 Diligence, a credit to
men 25 Disappointments, grievous to Husbandman 6 Dressing of ground 4 Drought
follows a glut of rain 85
E
Ease, how little the beasts have 207 Enclosures, the end of them 3 End of all
Husbandry 7 Estates increased and preserved, how 26 Expectation of Harvest,
122. the grounds and encouragements of it 124, 125
F
Famine, occasioned by drought, 90. Its effects terrible 91, 92 Fowls, enemies
to seed 155 Frosts conduce to a good Harvest, how 72 Fruits shaken, and when
186, 187
G
Gathering in of fruit, the Emblem of the end of the world 186, 187 Graffing,
the manner of it shown 180 Graffs, their danger till they take hold of the
stock, 181, All do not thrive alike in the stock. 183
H
Harvest, the joy thereof described 158 159 Harvest when catching, what
Husbandmen do 130 H^rrow, its use in Husbandry 72 H^dges, their use 4 H^alth
preserved by labor 56 Horses how carefully fed and dressed 200 Husbandmen
their work spending, 1^ yet have some resting days 20
I
Influences of heaven necessary to produce and ripen fruits 81, 82, ^oy
natural, four of it 152, 153 Joy of Harvest; the causes and grounds of it 154,
155, 156, 157 Joy of Harvest; but a gift of common providence 155
L
Laborers, their bands sufficient for them and theirs 8 Land when spent, how
recovered 45 Labors of Husbandmen ends at, and sometimes before death, 21. It
sweetens their bed 26 Lost Cattle how recovered 210, 211
M
Mowing when and what it represents 138 Multiplicity of work and work^men in
Husbandry 7, 18 Miry places barren, 54. What causes Mire 55
N
Natural, and natural causes, what 81 Negligence in Summer, upon presumption of
fair weather, a folly 142
O
Occasion to be eyed by Husbandmen 140 Opportunities of plowing, sowing,
reaping once lost, irrecoverable for that year 140, 141
P
Pleasure much in Husbandry 31 Plowing, requires judgment, 63. It Is hard work
84 Plow rends the earth, discovers things hid under the surface 65 Plowing a
preparatory and respective work 66. It kills weeds, 67. best after rain 67
Plowman must make no baulks in good ground 67 Posterity to be provided for 221
Poverty when extreme, a snare 39 Providence in Husbandmen commendable 139
R
Rain is from heaven, falls by divine appointment, great difference in it, warm
rain most beneficial, former and latter both needful, obtained by prayer 82,
83, 84 85 Reaping the fit season thereof 129
S
Seed-corn, how qualified and prepared, 71. Advantaged by early sowing, 72 much
vigor in a small seed 73 Seeds produce their own kind 146 Springing of seeds
and plants, whence 81, 82. cannot be hindered when the time comes, 102 Sowing
done in hope, and in season 102 Stalk potentially in a small seed 73 Summer why
appointed 141
T
Tares, their resemblance to wheat 108 Threshing the ancient manner of it, 160
the use and end of it 161 Threshing corn, what is resembles, 162 Trees when
dead, cut down 192 Trees how laden with fruit, 186, 187 as they leaned, so they
fall 194
V
Valleys most fruitful 10 Variable weather in Harvest 141 Ungraffed fruit
harsh, 147. The cause thereof 176 Vexation to Husbandmen to be ^indred in their
business 9 Union with the graff and stock 180
W
Weariness of laborers at night 7 Weeds pernicious to Corn 115 Winnowing, its
use and end, 165, 166 Winter sweetened by Summers providence 142
A
ACtions eternal in their effects Page 147, 148 Account of Ministers great 8
Afflictions paralleled with threshing, in five things 160, 161, etc. Afflicted
Saints Reflections 163 Apostates Reflections 69, 118
B
Barrenness, the Christians reproach, 12 Its causes 55. its danger 56, 57, 58
Beauty of glorified bodies 103 Body of man, its noble structure, commodious
situation, and excellent configuration 207 Business of a Christian, and of the
Husbandman, paralleled in four things 18, 19, 20
C
Carelessness reproved by the worldlings deligence 143 Caius Mar^us Victorius
his strange conversion 144 Duke of Condy his rare saying 123 Censorious persons
reproved 111 Church* Gods ^ee, 5. how purchased 3. how dressed, 4. what
expected from it, 6. its dignities 11 Christ a sufficient portion to the poor
156 Childrens souls neglected, how sinful 201, 202 Comforts for declining
Christians 48, 49 Competency best for Christians 37, 38, 39, 40 Conviction
paralleled with plowing, in nine particulars 64 65, 66 67 Conversion in old age
a wonder 144
D
Declining of grace, how far 46, 47 Deceived souls, their reflections 78 Death
and reaping paralleled, in five things 131, 132 Decays in grace lamented 137
Diligence in religion, honorable, safe, beneficial and comfortable 25, 26
Delight spiritual, whence it flows 32, 33 Discouragement should not seize on
Ministers, though they see no present fruit 46 47 Disobedient Children, their
sin aggravated 203
E
Earthly employments suit earthly hearts 33 Elezarius his excellent saying to
his wife 122 Elect souls Reflection 190 Examination of our selves needful 166
Example of the multitude no plea 189 Evidences for heaven, and Land compared,
in seven things 24
F
Famine spiritual* the sorest of judgments 91, 92. 93. 94* 95, Few saved, and
their Emblem in nature 188, 189 Feeding beasts, their plenty and liberty 216
Formalists Reflections 60, 196
G
Gifts, how excelled by grace 74, 75, 76 Gospel, its first entertainment best
10 Removed by reason of barrenness 11 Grace carried through many dangers 116,
117, 118, Gracious principles paralleled with seed 71, 72, 73 Gracious and
growing souls Reflections 42, 77, 136
H
Harvest of glory, what, and when 125 Healthful Christians Reflection 104
Humble hearers profit most 10 Hypocrisy paralleled with chaff 166, 167. It
acts like grace 109, 110, 111, 112 Hypocrites their Reflections 34, 41, 169
Hypocrites inside opened at death 195
I
Ignorance inexcusable in Husbandmen 14 15 Joy spiritual, how excellent, 153*
154. It Is perfected when natural joy is finished, 154. Peculiar mercies, the
grounds of it, 155. God its object, 155 Ingratitude for the mercy of our
creation, how great at sin 206, 207* 208
L
Learning no plea before God 177 Lingering Saints Reflection 127 Longing for
heaven, what, and by whom 126 Lost sinners paralleled with Straying Cattle; in
five particulars 211, 212 Lycurgus his Law for Parents, what 203
M
Maintenance due to Ministers 8 Maturity of grace, three signs of it 133
Maturity of sin, six signs of it 134, 135 Ministers must be judicious, 14.
Compared with clouds, in three particulars, 86, 87. Their Reflections 61, 86,
87 Ministry its scope and end, what 8 Moral persons reflections 150
N
Names, what vain things in Religion 22 Neglecting soul seasons dangerous 142,
143
O
Obedience must be free and cheerful 50 Ordinances, their influences, what, and
whence 81, 82, 97 Original sin compared with sop 175
P
Parents convinced of their sin 203 Pains of Ministers visible, sometimes in
the peoples lives 9 Patience of Saintsits, grounds 122, 123 124, 125, Poor, if
godly, encouraged greatly 219 Presumptuous persons Reflections 112, 113, 144,
Presence of God singular in his Church 13 Pro^ane persons Reflection 149
Persecutors Reflections 163 Prayer* the golden key to open mystical clouds 8
Professors barren, fuel for hell 193, 194 Prosperous sinners, and feeding
beasts paralleled in five particulars 217 218 Prudence in Christians commended
and urged 14, 141
R
Regenerate souls their reflections 183 184 Recovery of lost sinners by Christ
opened and paralleled with seeking of lost Cattle 210, 211, 212 Resurrection
paralleled with springing Corn 101, 102 Resurrection the glory of that state
107 108
S
Seed-corn how to be steeped before it be sown 81 Sickly Christians their
comfort 105 Sincere souls Reflection 59, 170 77 Sloth inexcusable in Christians
22, 23 26 Straying from God its emblem 211 Stock advantaged to be removed from
our natural stock 176 Support for declining souls 51
T
Tree, the emblem of the world 188 Toad, how the sight of a Toad affected a
shepherd 206 Thief on the cross, no president to careless ones 143 To morrow a
new day, the first ground of that proverb in Greece 141, 142
V
Unregenerate persons cannot bring forth good fruit 174, 175 Ungodly persons
Reflections 106 Voluptuous sinners Reflections 218 Upright ones, Reflections 34
Union with Christ, in eight resemblances 181, 182, 283
W
Wages, what offered by Christ and the world 28, 29 Weak gifts sanctified,
yield strong consolation 178 Winnowing of souls by judgment 166, 167 Worldlings
Reflections 27, 41


FINIS

