Flagellum Dei: OR, A Collection of the several Fires, Plagues, and
Pestilential Diseases that have happened in London especially, and other parts of
this Nation, from the Norman Conquest to this present, 1668.

Lam. 4. The Lord has accomplished his indignation, he has poured out his
fierce wrath, he has kindled a Fire in Zion, which has devoured the
Foundations thereof.



LONDON, Printed for C. VV. 1668.

Flagellum Dei, etc.
In William the Conquerors time.
IN the 20 th. Year of his Reign, so great a Fire happened in Bakers Chron.
London, that from the West-gate to the Eastgate it consumed Houses and
Churches all the way, and among the rest the Church of St. Paul, the most
grievous Fire that ever happened in that City. After this ensued a great
mortality of Men and Cattle.

In William the 2ds. time.
IN the 4 th. Year of his Reign, on St. Lukes day, above six hundred Houses in
London were thrown down with Tempest, and the roof of St. Mary Bow Church in
Cheapside was so raized, that in the fall six of the beams, being 27 foot long,
were driven so deep into the ground (the streets being not then paved with
Stone) that not above 4 foot remained in sight, and yet stood in such rank and
order as the Workmen had placed them upon the Church.

In Henry the firsts time.
FIrst Chichester with the principal Monastery was burnt to the ground. From
Westcheap in London to Aldgate a long tract of buildings was consumed with
Fire. Worcester also and Rochester, even in the Kings presence; then
Winchester, Bath, Gloucester, Lincoln, Peterborough, and other places did also
partake of this calamity, that there could be no charging the Fire with any
partiality.

In King Stephens time, no casualty of Fire, nor any Pestilential Disease are
recorded.

In Henry the seconds time.
IN the 18 th. Year of his Reign, the Church of Norwich, with the Houses
thereto belonging, was burnt. In the 24 th. Year, the City of York was burnt:
Also in the same Year, on the 10 th. day of April, the Church of St. Andrews in
Rochester, was consumed with fire. In the 28 th. Year of his Reign, Barnwel,
with the Priory near Cambridge, was burnt. In the 30 th. Year of his Reign, the
Abbey of Glastenbury was burnt, with the Church of St. Julian; and on the 20
th. of October, in the Year 1180. the Cathedral Church of Chichester, and all
the whole City was burnt. The 20 th. of Sept. 1188. the Town of Beverley, with
the Church of St. John there, was burnt.

In Richard the firsts time.
IN his time the Town of Mawling in Kent, with the Nunnery, was consumed with
fire; and then followed so great a Mortality of men, that the Living scarce
sufficed to bury the Dead.

In King John's time, no Casualty of Fire.

In Henry the thirds time.
THe Church of St. Mildred in Canterbury, and a great part of the City was
burnt: Also the Town of Newcastle upon Tine was burnt, Bridge and all. And in
this Kings Reign 20000 people in London were starved for want of Food.

In Edward the firsts time.
IN the 17 th. Year of his Reign, the City of Carlisle, and the Abbey, with all
the Houses belonging to the Friars Minors, was consumed with fire. In his one
and twentieth Year, a great part of the Town of Cambridge, with the Church of
our Lady, was also burnt. In the 27 th. Year of his Reign, his Palace at
Westminster, and the Monastery adjoining, were consumed with fire. The
Monastery of Gloucester was also burnt to the ground.

In Edward the seconds time.
IN the fourth Year of his Reign, the Church of Middleton in Dorsetshire, with
all the Monuments, was consumed with Lightning; and soon after followed a great
Pestilence.

In Edward the thirds time.
NO casualty of fire; but so contagious a Pestilence, that between the first of
January and the first of July, in the two and twentieth Year of his Reign,
there died in London 57374 persons, and in Yarmouth in one Year 7052. And in
the 35 th. Year of his Reign, another Pestilence, whereof diverse of the
Nobility died.

In Richard the seconds time.
NO casualty of fire; but in his third Year so great a Mortality afflicted the
North parts of England, that the Country became almost desolate.

In Henry the fourths time.
IN the 7 th. year of his Reign, the Town of Royston in Hartfordshire was burnt.

In Henry the fifths time.
IN the fifth year of his Reign, a great part of the City of Norwich was burnt,
with all the House of the Friars preachers, and two Friars of that Order.

In Henry the sixths time.
NO casualty of Fire or Pestilence in his Reign; but the Postern Gates of
London by East-Smithfield against the Tower, sank by Night more than seven foot
in the Earth.

In Edward the fourths time.
IN his third Year, the Minster of York, and the Steeple of Christchurch in
Norwich, were burnt; And in his 17 th. and 19 Years, two great Pestilences
reigned in England, of which innumerable people dyed.

In Edward the fifths, and Richard the thirds time.
THere is no Record of any Fire or Pestilence.

In Henry the sevenths time.
IN this Kings Reign, the Sweating Sickness took away many thousands.

22 August 1485. A great fire happened in Breadstreet in London, in which were
burnt the Parson of St. Mildreds, and another Man.

21 December. In his 13 th. Year, suddenly in the night brake out a fire in the
Kings Lodgings, being then at his Manor in Streen, by violence whereof, a
great part of the old Building was burnt, with Hangings, Beds, Apparel, Plate,
and many Jewels, to a great value.

In his 15 th. Year, the Town of Braham in Norfolk was burnt; and the same Year
30000 persons dyed of the Plague in London.

In his 22 th. Year, the City of Norwich was well near consumed with fire.

In Henry the eights time.
IN his 9 th. Year, happened a Sweating Sickness, whereof infinite multitudes
both of the Nobility and others, in many parts of England dyed.

In his 13 th. Year, was likewise a great Mortality.

In his 20 th. Year, another Sweating Sickness which insected the whole Realm.

In his 33 th. Year, was another great Mortality in the Realm, by hot Agues and
Fluxes.

In his 36 th. Year, was a great Plague in Lnodon.

In Edward the sixths time.
IN his second Year, St. Annes Church within Aldersgate, was burnt.

In his fifth Year, a Sweating Sickness infected most parts of the Realm.

In Queen Mary's time.
IN her fourth Year, hot burning Agues, and other distempers, took away much
people, among which, 7 Aldermen of London.

In her fifth Year, in Harvest time, was a great Mortality.

In Queen Elizabeth's time.
IN her 3 d. Year, the Spire of the Cathedral Church of Paul's being 520 foot
from the ground, and 260 from the square Steeple where it was placed, and was
made of wooden materials, but covered with Lead, was with Lightning burnt down,
together with the Roofs of that large Church, and that within the space of 5
hours.

In her 6 th. Year, was a great Pestilence, especially in London, where in one
Year there dyed 21 500 persons.

In her 8 th. Year, in the Town of Oswestry in Shropshire, 200 houses were
consumed with fire, in the space of two hours.

In her 36 th. Year, was a great Plague in London, so as there dyed 17890.
besides the Lord Mayor, and 3 Aldermen.

In King James his time.
IN the first Year of his Reign, there dyed of the Plague in London 30578.
persons.

In his 4 th. Year, 160 houses in St. Edmundsbury were by chance set on fire
and burnt.

In the Year 1613. the Town of Dorchester was totally consumed by fire: About
the same time, the Playhouse called the Globe on the Bankside was consumed by
fire, and soon after the Fortune Playhouse was burnt down.

In the Year 1614. the Town of Stratford upon Avon was burnt.

In King Charles the firsts time.
IN his first Year, there dyed of the Plague in London 4463 persons.

In his 8 th. Year, a fire brake out on London Bridge, by which most of the
houses that were built upon it were consumed, and burnt down.

Not to mention several smaller fires, at VVilbleton-house, in Fleetstreet,
Westminster, Limestreet, Holborn, and other parts of London, which happened
almost yearly, but the growth of them were still happily suppressed by the care
and industry of the Neighbors, and those in Authority.

These several Fires are mentioned in our Chronicles, under the Title of
Casualties, without any suspicion of being occasioned by the Plot or
Contrivance of any Malignant or Discontented persons, though few Kings Reigns
were without both Domestic and Foreign Enemies: But none of the above
mentioned Mortalities were equal to that which happened in the year 1665. nor
any Fire so deplorable and outrageous as that in the year 1666. which we are
next to relate.

In King Charles the seconds time.
IN the 17 th. Year of his Majesty's Reign, the Pestilence raged most violently
in the City of London, but especially in the Suburbs, in so much as there dyed
of the Plague that Year within the Bills of Mortality 68596 persons. The
Insection was so general, that a poor Woman Keeping Hens in Hatton-garden, the
Hens laid Eggs that had large Plague Spots on them; which when she saw, she
cried out the Lord had Visited her House, and soon after her Daughter, and then
her self dyed.

And in the 18 th. Year of his Majesty's Reign, there happened a most Dismal
and Deplorable Fire in London, which began at a Bakers House in Pudding-Lane,
on Sunday 2 Sept. See Rege Sincera's Observations on this Fire.
1666. at one of the Clock in a dark Morning, in a Quarter of the City, so
close Built with Wooden, Pitched, and old Ruinous Buildings, the Streets
narrow, abundance of Combustible and Bituminous Matter, the foregoing Summer
extraordinary hot and dry, a violent Eastern Wind, and the want of Engines and
Water, concurring as it were unanimously to the production of this wonderful
Conflagration, and to do in three days, what three Armies of Enemies (not
opposed) could scarcely have done in six, it spread it self so far before day,
and with such distraction to the Inhabitants, that care was not taken for the
timely preventing the further diffusion of it, by pulling down Houses, as ought
to have been. So that in three days and three nights, of about 460 Acres of
ground on which the City of London stood, it destroyed 350, which is at the
rate of four parts in five, it consumed about 12000 Houses, 87 Parish Churches,
besides 6 or 7 consecrated Chapels, and the magnificent Cathedral Church of
St. Paul, the public and most excellent Buildings of the Exchange, Guild Hall,
Custom-house, and almost all the Halls belonging to every private Company,
besides an innumerable quantity of Goods of all sorts, etc.

Diverse Strangers, Dutch and French, were during the Fire apprehended, upon
suspicion, that they contributed most mischievously to it, who were all
Imprisoned, and Informations prepared to make a severe inquisition thereupon by
my Lord chief Justice Keeling, assisted by some of the Lords of the Privy
Council, and some principal Members of the City; notwithstanding which
suspicions, the manner of the burning all along in a train, and so blown
forwards in all its ways by strong winds, makes us conclude the whole was an
effect of an unhappy chance, or to speak better, the heavy hand of God upon us
for our Rebellion, Pride, Whoring, Drunkenness, Gluttony, Cheating, etc.
SINS, showing us the terror of his Judgments in thus raising the Fire, and
immediately after, his miraculous and never enough to be acknowledged Mercy, in
putting a stop to it, when we were in the last despair, and that all attempts
for the quenching it, however industriously pursued, seemed insufficient.

It is observable, that the Suburbs, where the Plague reigned most, was in a
great measure spared by the Fire, and the City it self, where the Fire was most
active, suffered little by the Pestilence; As if it were designed by Divine
Providence, that each part should have its punishment, and none a double one.

From Plagues, Pestilence, and Fires; Good Lord deliver us.

FINIS.

