THOMAS FLATMAN.
portrait of Thomas Flatman

POEMS AND SONGS, BY THOMAS FLATMAN.

The Fourth Edition, With many Additions and Amendments.

-- -- Me quoque vatem
Dicunt Pastores, sed non Ego credulus illis.
Virgil. LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Took, at the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1686.

TO HIS GRACE THE DUKE OF ORMOND Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, etc. In humble
acknowledgment of His Princely Favors The POEMS are with all Dutiful Respect
DEDICATED By his GRACE's Ever Obliged, and most Obedient Servant, Thomas
Flatman.

To the READER.
WHen I was prevailed upon to make a Fourth Publication of these Poems with a
great many Additions, it was told me, That without a Preface the Book would be
unfashionable; Universal Custom had made it a Debt, and in this Age the Bill of
Fare was as necessary as the Entertainment. To be Civil therefore, and to
Comply with Expectation, instead of an elaborate Harangue in Commendation of
the Art in general, or what, and what Qualifications go to the making up of a
Poet in particular, and without such artificial Imbellishments as use to be the
Ornament of Prefaces, as Sayings of Philosophers, Ends of Verses, Greek, Latin,
Hungarian, French, Welsh, or Italian, Be it known unto the Reader, That in my
poor Opinion Poetry has a very near Resemblance to the modern Experiment of the
Ambling-Saddle; It Is a good Invention for smoothing the Trott of Prose; That Is
the Mechanical use of it. But Physically it gives present Ease to the Pains of
the Mind, contracted by violent Surfeit of either good or bad Usage in the
World. To be serious, it is an Innocent Help to Sham a Man's time when it lies
on his hands and his Fancy can relish nothing else. I speak but my own
Experience; when any Accident has either pleased or vexed me beyond my power
of expressing either my Satisfastion or Indignation in downright Prose, I found
it seasonable for Rhiming; and I believe from what follows it may be discerned
when 'twas Fair Weather, when Changeable, and when the Quicksilver fell down to
Storm and Tempest. As to the Measures observed by me, I always took a peculiar
delight in the Pindarique strain, and that for two Reasons, First, it gave me a
liberty now and then to correct the saucy forwardness of a Rhyme, and to lay it
aside till I had a mind to admit it; And secondly, if my Sense fell at any time
too short for my Stanza, (and it will often happen so in Versisying) I had then
opportunity to fill it up with a Metaphor little to the purpose, and (upon
occasion) to run that Metaphor stark mad into an Allegory, a practice very
frequent and of admirable use amongst the Moderns, especially the Nobless of
the Faculty. But in good earnest, as to the Subjects, which came in my way to
write upon, I must declare that I have chosen only such as might be treated
within the Rules of Decency, and without offense either to Religion or good
Manners. The Caution I received (by Tradition) from the Incomparable Mr.
Cowley, and him I must ever acknowledge but to imitate, if any of the ensuing
Copies may deserve the name of Good or Indifferent. I have not vanity enough to
prescribe how a Muse ought to be Courted, and I want leisure to borrow from
some Treatises I have seen, which look like so many Academies of Complements
for that purpose. I have known a man, who when he was about to write would
screw his face into more disguises than Scaramuccio, or a Quaker at a Meeting
when his Turn came to mount; his breast heaved, his hair stood on end, his eyes
star'd, and the whole man was disordered; and truly when he had done, any body
at first reading would conclude that at the time he made them he was possessed
with an evil Spirit. Another that seemed like Nostradamus (when the Whim took
him in the head to Prophecy,) he sat upon his Divining Tripos, his elbow on
his knee, his Lamp by his side, all the avenues of light stopped, full of
expectation when the little faint flames should steal in through a crevice of
the Shutters; This Gentleman indeed writ extreme Melancholy Madrigals. I have
had the happiness to hear of a Third too, whose whole life was Poetical, he was
a Walking Poem, and his way was this; finding that the fall of the Leaf was
already upon him, and prudently foreseeing that in the Winter of his old Age he
might possibly want Fodder, he carried always about him one of Raimund' Lully's
Repositories, a piece of Mathematical Paper, and in what Company soever he
came, the Spoon was always ready for the Civet-Cat, nothing escaped him that
fell from a Wit: At night his custom was to digest all that he had pirated that
Day, under proper Heads; This was his Arsenal, his inexhaustible Magazine; so
that upon occasion he had no more to do, than to give a snap, or two to his
Nails; a rub or two upon the sutures of his Head, to turn over his Hint-Book,
and the Matter was at hand, his business (after that piece of Legerdemain) was
only Tacking, and Tagging: I never saw but One of this Author's Compositions,
and really It troubled me, because It put me in mind, how much time I had
misspent in Coffee-Houses, for there was nothing in It, but what I could find a
Father for There; Nay, (with a little recollection,) a man might name most of
the Birds from whence he had plucked his Feathers. Some there are that Beseech,
Others that Hector their Muses: Some that Diet their Pegasus, give him his
Heats and Ayrings for the Course; Others that endeavor to stop up his broken
wind with Medicinal Ale and Bisquet; But these for the most part are men of
Industry; Rhiming is their proper Business, they are fain to labor hard, and
use much Artifice for a poor Livelihood, I wish 'em good Trading. I profess I
never had design to be incorporated into the Society; my utmost End was merely
for Diversion of my self and a few Friends whom I very well love: and if the
question should be asked why these Productions are exposed, I may truly say, I
could not help it; One unlucky Copy, like a Bellweather, stole from me into the
Common, and the rest of the Flock took their opportunity to leave the
Enclosure. If I might be proud of any thing, it should be the first Copy of the
Book, but therein I had the greatest advantage given me that any Noble Subject
could afford. And so much for Preface and Poetry, till some very powerful Star
shall overruled my present Resolution.

On the Excellent POEMS Of my most Worthy Friend, Mr. THOMAS FLATMAN.
YOU happy Issue of a happy Wit,
As ever yet in charming numbers writ,
Welcome into the Light, and may we be
Worthy so happy a Posterity.
We long have wished for something Excellent;
But never till now knew rightly what it meant:
For though we have been gratified it is true,
From several hands with things both fine and new,
The Wits must pardon me, if I profess,
That till this time the over-teeming Press
Never set out Poesy in so true a dress:
Nor is ti all, to have a share of Wit,
There must be Judgment too to manage it;
For Fancy's like a rough, but ready Horse,
Whose mouth is governed more by skill than force;
Wherein ( my Friend) you do a Maistry own,
If not particular to you alone;
Yet such at least as to all eyes declares
Your Pegasus the best performs his Airs.
Your Muse can humor all her Subjects so,
That as we read we do both feel and know;
And the most firm impenetrable breast
With the same passion that you write's possessed.
Your Lines are Rules, which who shall woll observe
Shall even in their Errors praise deserve:
The boiling Youth, whose blood is all on fire,
Pushed on by Vanity, and hot desire,
May learn such Conduct here, men may approve
And not excuse, but even applaud his Love.
Ovid, who made an ART of what to all
Is in it self but too too natural,
Had he but read your Verse, might then have seen
The Style of which his Precepts should have been;
And (which it seems he knew not) learnt from thence
To reconcile Frailty with Innocence.
The Love you write, Virgins and Boys may read,
And never be debaucht but better bred;
For without Love, Beauty would bear no price,
And Dullness, than Desire's a greater vice:
Tour greater Subjects with such force are writ
So full of sinewy Strength, as well as Wit,
That when you are Religious, our Divines
May emulate, but not reprove your Lines:
And when you reason, there the learned Crew
May learn to speculate, and speak from you.
You no profane, no obscene language use
To smat your Paper, or defile your Muse.
Your gayest things, as well expressed, as meant
Are equally both Queint, and Innocent.
But your Pindarique Odes indeed are such
That Pindar's Lyre from his own skilful touch,
Never yielded such an Harmony, nor yet
Verse keep such time on so unequal feet.
So by his own generous confession
Great Tasso by Guarini was outdone:
And (which in Copying seldom does befall)
The Ectype's better thanth' Original.
But whilst your Fame I labor to send forth,
By the ill-doing it I could your worth,
In something all mankind unhappy are,
And you as mortal too must have your share;
It Is your misfortune to have found a Friend,
Who hurts and injures where he would commend.
But let this be your comfort, that your Bays
Shall flourish green, maugre an ill couched Praise.
CHARLES COTTON Esquire;

To my Friend Mr. THOMAS FLATMAN Upon the Publication of his POEMS.
I.
As when a Prince his Standard does erect,
And calls his Subjects to the Field,
From such as early take his side,
And readily obedience yield,
He is instructed where he may suspect,
And where he safely may confide;
So mighty Friend;
That you may see
A perfect evidence of Loyalty,
No business I pretend;
From all the Encumbrances of humane life,
From nourishing the sinful peoples strife,
And the increasing weaknesses of Age.
II.
Domestic Care, the Minds incurable Disease
I am resolved I will forget,
Ah! could I hope the restless pain
Would now entirely cease,
And never more return again,
My thoughts I would in other order set;
By more than protestations I would show,
Not the Sum total only of the Debt,
But the particulars of all I owe.
III.
This I would do: But what will our desire avail
When active heat and vigor fail?
It Is well thou have more youthful Combatants than I,
Right able to protect thy Immortality:
If Envy should attaque thy spotless name,
(And that attaques the best of things
And into rigid Censure brings
The most undoubted Registers of Fame)
Their fond Artillery let them dispense,
Piercing Wit and Murdering Eloquence,
Noble Conceit and manly Sense,
Charming Numbers let 'em shine
And dazzle dead in every line
The most malicious of thy Foes,
Though Hell it self should offer to oppose;
I (thy decrepit Subject) only can resign
The little life of Art is left, to ransom thine:
Fumbling's as bad in Poetry,
And as Ridiculous, as it is in Gallantry:
But if a Dart I may prevent,
Which at my Friend's repuce was meant
Let them then direct at Me;
By dying in so just a War,
I possibly may share
In thy Infallible Eternity.
IV.
But dearest Friend
(Before it be too late)
Let us a while expostulate,
What heat of Glory called you on,
Your learned Empire to extend
Beyond the Limits of your own Dominion?
At home, you were already crowned with Bays:
Why Foreigh Trophies do you seek to raise?
Poets Arcana's have of Government,
And though the Homagers of your own Continent
Out of a Sense of duty do submit,
Yet Public Print, a jealousy creates
And intimates a laid design
Unto the Neighboring Potentates.
Now into all your secret Arts they pry,
And weigh each hint by rules of policy,
Offensive Leagues they twine,
In Councils, Rota's, and Cabals they sit,
Each Petty Burgess thinks it fit
The Corporation should combine,
Against the Universal Monarchy of Wit,
And straight declare for quite abjuring it.
V.
Hence then must you prepare for an Invasion:
Tho not from such as are reclaimed by Education;
In the main points all European Wits agree,
All allow Order, Art, and Rules of Decency,
And to be absolutely perfect, never was yet
A Beauty such, or such a Wit.
I fear the Pagan and the Barbarous,
A Nation quite Antipodes to us;
The Infidel unlettered Crew (I mean)
Who call that only Wit,
Which is indeed but the Reverse of it;
Creatures in whom Civility never shone,
But (unto Nature's contradiction)
It is their Glory to be so obscene,
You 'ld think the Legion of the unclean
Were from the Swine, (to which they were condemned) released.
And had these verier Swine, (than them) possessed.
VI.
If these should an advantage take
And on thy Fame a Depredation make,
You must submit to the unhappiness;
These are the common Enemies of our Belief and Art,
And by hostility possessed
The World's much greater part:
All things with them are measured by success:
If the Battle be not won;
If the Author do not sell;
Into their dull capacities it will not sink,
They cannot with deliberation think
How bravely the Commander led them on,
No nor wherein the Book was written well:
When, ('it is a thing impossible to do,)
He cannot find his Army courage, (Sir) nor you
Your Readers, Learning, Wit, and Judgment too.
Robert Thompson
LL. D.
To my Friend Mr. THOMAS FLATMAN, On the Publishing of these his POEMS.
LEt not (my Friend) the incredulous Sceptick Man
Dispute what Potent Art and Nature can!
Let him believe, the Birds that did bemoan
The loss of Zeuxis Grapes in Queru'lous Tone,
Were Silenced by a Painted Dragon, found
A Telesme to restrain their chatt'ring sound,
And that one made a Mistress could enforce
A Neighing sigh, even from a Stallion Horse!
Let old Timanthes now unveil the Face
Of his Atrides, thou't give Sorrow grace!
Now may Parrhasius let his Curtain stand!
And great Protogenes take off his Hand!
For all that Lying Greece and Latium too
Have told us of, Thou (only thou) make true.
And all the Miracles which they could show,
Remain no longer Faith; but Science now.
Thou do those things that no man else durst do,
Thou Paint'st the lightning, and the thunder too!
The Soul and Voice!
Thou Wilt make Turks, Jews, with Romanists consent,
To break the Second great Commandment:
And them persuade an Adoration giv'd
In Picture, will as grateful be to Heaven
As one in Meter. The Art is in Excess;
But yet thy Ingenuity makes it less.
With Pen and Pencil thou do all outshine,
In Speaking Picture, Poesy Divine.
Poets, Creators are! You made us Know
Those are Above, and Dread those are Below;
But 'tisno Wonder you such things can Dare,
That Painter, Poet, and a Prophet are.
The Stars themselves, think it no scorn to be
Placed, and Directed in their Way by Thee.
Thou Know their Virtue, and their Situation,
The Fate of Years, and every great Mutation,
With the same Kindness let them look on Earth;
As when they gave thee first thy happy Birth!
To sober Saturn Aspects, Cynthia bright,
Resigning Hers, to give us thy New Light.
The Gentle Venus rose with Mercury,
(Presage of Softness in thy Poesy)
And Jove, and Mars in Amicable Trine
Do still give Spirit to thy Polished Line.
Thou may do what thou will without control:
Only thy self and Heaven can Paint thy Soul.
FRAN. BARNARD
M. D.
To his esteemed Friend Mr. THOMAS FLATMAN, Upon the Publishing of his POEMS.
YOur Poems (Friend) come on the public Stage
In a Debauched, an a Censorious Age;
Where nothing now is counted Standard Wit,
Bu what is Profane, Obscene, or 's bad as it.
For our great Wits, like Gallants of the times,
(And such they are) court only those loose Rhimes,
Which, like their Misses, Patched and Painted are;
But scorn what Virtuous is and truly Fair;
Such as your Muse is, who with Careful Art
For all but such, has wisely framed a Part.
One while (methinks) under some Gloomy Shade.
I see the Melancholy Lover laid,
Pleasing himself in that his Pensive Fit
With what you have on such Occasion writ.
Another while (methinks) I seem to hear
Amongst those, who sometimes will unbend their Care,
And steal themselves out from the busy Throng,
Your pleasant Songs in solemn Consort Sung.
Again (methinks) I see the grave Divine
Lay by his other Books, to look on thine,
And from thy serious and Divine Review
See what our Duty is, and his own too.
Yet, worthy Friend, you cannot but guess what doom
Is like to pass on what you 've writ, by some;
But there are others, now your Book comes forth,
Who (I am sure) will prize it as it is worth,
Who know it fully fraught with Staple Ware,
Such as the Works of the great Cowly are,
And amongst our rarest English Poems, Thine
Next unto His, immortally shall shine.
RICH NEWCOURT.

To my Worthy Friend Mr. THOMAS FLATMAN, Upon the Publishing of his POEMS.
Rude, and unpolished as my lines can be,
I must start forth into the world with Thee.
That which, yet Private, did my wonder raise,
Now it is made Publiqu' challenges my praise:
Such miracles thy charming Verse can do,
Where e're it goes, It draw's me with it too.
This is a kind of Birthday to thy Muse!
Transported with delight I cannot choose
But bid Her Welcome to the Light, and tell,
How much I value what is writ so well;
Though Thou reap'st no advantage by my Rhyme,
More than a Taper helps the Day to shine.
Thus in dull Pomp does the empty Coach attend
To pay respect to some departed Friend!
The difference of Regard in this does lie,
That Honors Dust, Mine that which cannot Die:
For what can blast the labors of thy Pen,
While Wit and Virtue are allowed by men?
Thou entertain'st the World with such a Feast,
So cleanly and so elegantly dressed,
So stored with laudable varieties
As may a modest Appetite suffice;
Whoever is thy Guest is sure to find
Something or other that may please his mind.
Sometimes in pious flames thy Muse aspires
Her bosom warmed with supernat'ral fires;
In noble flights with Pindar, soars above;
Dallies sometimes with not-indecent Love,
Thence down into the Grave does humbly creep,
And renders Death desirable as Sleep.
The Debonair, the Melancholy here
Find matter for their Mirth, ease for their Care.
Since such Provision's made for all that come,
He must be squeamish that goes Empty home;
If these Refections cannot do him good,
It Is 'cause his Stomach's vicious, not the Food.
FRANCIS KNOLLYS Esquire;

TO THE AUTHOR On his excellent POEMS.
I.
STrange Magic of thy wit, and style,
Which to their griefs mankind can reconcile!
Whilst thy Philander's tuneful voice we hear
Condoling our disastrous state,
Touched with a sense of our hard fate,
We sigh perhaps, or drop a tear,
But he the mournful Song so sweetly sings,
That more of Pleasure than Regret it brings.
With such becoming grief
The Trojan Chief
Troy's Conflagration did relate,
Whilst even the suff'rers in the Firedrew near
And with a greedy ear
Devoured the story of their own subverted state.
II.
Kind Heaven (as to her darling Son) to Thee
A double Portion did impart,
A gift of Painting and of Poesy:
But for thy Rivals in the Painters Art,
If well they Represent, they can effect
No more, nor can we more expect.
But more than this Thy happy Pencils give;
Thy draughts are more than Representative,
For, if we will credit our own eyes, they Live!
Ah! worthy Friend could thou maintain the State
Of what with so much ease thou do Create,
We might reflect on Death with Scorn!
But Pictures like the Originals decay!
Of Colors those consist, and these of Clay;
A like composed of Dust, to Dust alike return!
III.
Yet it is our Happiness to see
Oblivion, Death, and adverse Destiny
Encountered, Vanquished, and Disarmed by thee.
For if thy Pencils fail,
Change thy Artillery
And You Are secure of Victory,
Employ thy Quill and thou shall still prevail.
The Grand Destroyer, greedy Time, reveres
Thy Fancy's Imag'ry, and spares
The meanest thing that bears
The Impression of thy Pen;
Though coarse and cheap their natural metal were,
Stamped with thy verse he knows the are sacred then'
He knows them by that Character to be
Predestinate and set apart for Immortality.
IV.
If native Luster in thy Theams appear,
Improved by thee it shines more clear:
Or if thy Subject's void of native Light,
Thy Fancy need but dart a beam
To guild thy Theme,
And make the rude mass beautiful and bright.
Thou vary'st often thy Strains, but still
Success attends each strain:
Thy verse is always lofty as the Hill,
Or pleasant as the Plain.
How well thy Muse the Pastoral Song improves!
Whose Nymphs and Swains are in their Loves
As innocent, and yet as kind as Doves.
But most She moves our Wonder and Delight,
When She performs her loose Pindariqu' flight,
Often to their outmost reach She will extend
Her towering Wings to soar on high,
And then by just degrees descend:
Often in a swift strait Course She glides,
Obliquely often the air divides,
And often with wanton play hangs hovering in the Sky
V.
Whilst Sense of duty into my artless Muse
The ambition would infuse
To mingle with those Nymphs that Homage pay,
And wait on Thine in her Triumphant way,
Defect of merit checks her forward pride,
And makes her dread t'approach thy Chariot side;
For 'twere at least a rude Indecency
(If not Profane) t'appear
At this Solemnity,
Crowned with no Laurel wreath (as others are)
But this we will presume to do,
At distance, to attend the show,
Officious to gather up
The Scattered Bays, if any drop
From others Temples, and with those
A plain Plebeian Coronet compose.
This, as your Livery, she would wear, to hide
Her Nakedness, not gratify her Pride!
Such was the Verdant dress
Which the Offending Pair did frame
Of platted Leaves, not to express
Their Pride in the Novel-Garb, but to conceal their shame.
N. TATE

To my dear Friend Mr. THOMAS FLATMAN, Upon the Publication of his POEMS.
Pindariq' Ode.
I.
WIthin the haunted thicket, where
The feathered Choristers are met to play;
And celebrate with voices clear,
And Accents sweet, the praise of May:
The Ouzel, Thrush, and speckled Lark,
And Philomel, that loves the dawn and dark:
These ( the inspired throng)
In numbers smooth, and strong
Adorn their noble Theme with an immortal Song,
While Woods, and Vaults, the Brook and neighboring Hill,
Repeat the varied close, and the melodious Trill.
II.
Here feast your Ears, but let their Eye
Wander, and see one of the lesser fry
Under a leaf, or on a dancing twig,
Ruffle his painted feathers, and look big,
Pirk up his tail, and hop between
The boughs; by moving, only to be seen,
Perhaps his troubled breast he prunes,
As he does meditate his tunes:
At last ( composed) his little head he rears,
Toward (what he strives to imitate the Spheres;
And chirping then begins his best,
Falls on to Pipe among the rest;
Deeming that all is not worth a rush,
Without his Whistle from the bush.
III.
The harmonious sound did reach my ear,
That echoed Thy clear Name,
Which all must know, who e're did hear,
Of Cowley or Orinda's fame;
I heard the Genius, with surprising Grace,
Would visit us with his fair offspring, gay
As is the morning spring in May;
But fairer much, and of immortal race.
IV.
Delighted greatly, as I listening stood,
The sound came from each corner of the wood;
It both the Shrubs, and Cedars shak'd,
And my drowsy Muse awaked;
Strange that the sound should be so shrill,
That had its passage through a Quill.
Then I resolved Thy praises to rehearse,
The wonders of Thy Pen, among the Crowd
Of thy learned Friends that sing so loud:
But 'twas not to be sung, or reached in verse.
By my weak notes, scarce to be heard,
Or if they could, not worth regard;
Desisting therefore I must only send
My very kind well wishes to my Friend.
Octav. Pulleyn.

THE CONTENTS.
On the Death of the Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Ossory. Pindarique Ode 1
To the Memory of the Incomparable Orinda. Pindarique Ode 8 The review to Dr. W.
S. Pindarique Ode 14 To my Worthy Friend Mr. Sam. Woodford on his Excellent
Version of the Psalms. Pindarique Ode 27 On the Death of the Truly Valiant
George Duke of Albermarle. Pindarique Ode 32 The Retirement. Pindarique Ode,
made in the time of the great Sickness 1665. 43 Translated out of a part of
Petronius Arbiter's Satyricon 48 A thought of Death 55 Psalm 39. verses 4, and
5. 56 Hymn for the Morning 57 Anthem for the Evening 58 Death. ASong 59 The
Happy Man 61 On Mr. Johnson's several Shipwracks 62 An Explanation of an Emblem
engraven by U. H. 64 For Thoughts 6^ Against Thoughts 70 A Dooms-Day-Thought 76
Virtus sola manet, caetera mortis erunt 80 Translated 82 Psalm the 15.
Paraphrased 85 Job 88 Nudus Redibo 89 An Elegy on the Earl of Sandwich 90 An
Epitaph on the Earl of Sandwich 93 Pastoral Ibid. On the Death of Mr. Pel.
Humfries, a Pastoral Song 98 The Mistake 99 The Incredulous 100 Weeping at
parting, Song 101 The Desperate Lover 103 The Fatigue, A Song 106 The Resolve,
Song 107 Love's Bravo, Song 110 The Expectation, Song 111 Coridon converted,
Song 112 The Humourist, Song 113 Fading Beauty, Song 114 A Dialogue, Chloris
and Parthenissa 118 A Dialogue, Orpheus and Eurydice Ibid. The Batchelor's Song
120 The Batchelor's Song, Second part 121 An Appeal to Cats in the business of
Love 122 Advice to an Old Man of 63 about to marry a Girl of 16, Song 123 The
Slight, Song 124 The Penitent, Song 126 The Defiance, Song 127 The Surrender,
Song 129 The Whim, Song 130 The Renegado, Song 131 Phyllis withdrawn 132 The
Malecontent, Song 134 The Indifferent, Song 135 The Harbor, Song 136 The
Unconcerned, Song 137 The Immovable, Song 138 The Wish, Song 139 The Cordial
made in the year 1637. 141 Celadon on Delia singing, Song 143 The Advice, Song
144 To Mr. Sam. Austin of Wadham Coll. Oxon, on his most unintelligible Poems
146 To my ingenious Friend Mr. William Faithorn on his Book of Drawing,
Etching, and Graving 149 On the Commentaries of Messire Blaize de Montluc, to
the Worthy Translator Charles Cotton Esquire; 150 A Character of a Belly-God,
Catius and Horace 152 The Disappointment, Pindarique Ode 160 On Mrs. E.
Mountagues Blushing in the Cross Bath. A Translation 162 Il infido 163 Il
Immaturo, Epitaph 165 On Mrs. Dove, Epitaph 166 Lucretius 166 Paraphrased 167
On Dr. Brown' s Travels 168 On Poverty 169 Urania to her Friend Parthenissa. A
Dream 171 On the Death of the Earl of Rochester, Pastoral 173 On Dr. Woodford's
Paraphrase on the Canticles 176 Laodamia to Protesilaus: One of Ovid's Episties
Translated 179 To the Excellent Master of Music Signior Pietro Reggio, on his
Book of Songs 189 In the Temple Church. Epitaph on Sir John King 191 On the
Death of my dear Brother Mr. Richard Flatman. Pindarique Ode 193 A Song on
New-years-day before the King 201 On the King's return to Whitehal after his
Summers Progress 1684. 203 To Mr. Isaac Walton on his publication of Thealma
206 Pastoral Dialogue, Castara and Parthenia 208 Castabella going to Sea, Song
211 On the Death of my Worthy Friend Mr. John Oldham, Pindarique Pastoral Ode
212 On Sir John Micklethwaits Monument in St. Botolphs Aldersgate Church London
217 On the Death of the Illustrious Prince Rupert, Pindarique Ode 221 Poema in
obitum illustrissimi principis Ruperti Latin redditum 230 On the much Lamented
Death of our late Sovereign Lord King Charles II. of blessed Memory, Pindarique
Ode 239 To his Sacred Majesty King James II. 247
ODES of HORACE.
Book the Second, Ode 19. 251 Book the Third, Ode 8. 253 Book the Third, Ode 9.
255 Book the Third, Ode 12. 256 Book the Third, 17. 257 Book the Third, Ode 19.
258 Book the Third, Ode 20. 260 Book the Third, Ode 21. 261 Book the Third, Ode
22. 262 Book the Third, Ode 3. 263 Book the Fourth, Ode 1. 264 Book the Fourth,
Ode 10. 266 Book the Fourth, Ode 11. 267 Epode the Third, 269 Epode the Sixth,
270 Epode the Tenth, 271
POEMS.
On the DEATH of the RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS EARL of OSSORY. Pindarique Ode.
Stanza i.
No more! -- Alas that bitter word, No more!
The Great, the Just, the Generous, the Kind,
The universal Darling of Mankind,
The Noble OSSORY is now No more!
The Mighty Man is fallen --
From Glory's lofty Pinnacle,
Meanly like one of Us, He fell,
Not in the hot pursuit of Victory,
As Gallant Men would choose to die;
But tamely, like a poor Plebeian, from his Bed
To the dark Grave a Captive led;
Emasculating Sighs, and Groans around,
His Friends in Floods of Sorrow drowned;
His awful Truncheon, and bright Arms laid by,
He bowed his glorious Head to Destiny.
II.
Celestial Powers! how unconcerned you are!
No black Eclipse, or Blazing-Star
Presaged the Death of this Illustrious Man,
No Deluge, no, nor Hurricane;
In her old wonted course Nature went on,
As if some common thing were done,
One single Victim to Deaths Altar's come,
And not in OSSORY an whole Hecatombe.
Yet, when the Founder of Old Rome expired,
When the Pellean Youth resigned his Breath,
And when the great Dictator stooped to Death,
Nature and all her Faculties retired:
Amazed she started when amazed she saw
The breaches of her ancient Fundamental Law,
Which kept the World in aw:
For men less brave than Him, her very heart did ache,
The laboring Earth did quake,
And Trees their fixed Foundations did for sake;
Nature in some prodigious way
Gave notice of their fatal Day:
Those lesser Griefs with pain she thus expressed,
This did confound, and overwhelm her Breast.
III.
Shrink ye Crowned Heads, that think your selves secure,
And from your mouldring Thrones look down,
Your greatness cannot long endure,
The King of Terrors claims you for his own;
You are but Tributaries to his dreadful Crown:
Renowned, Serene, Imperial, most August,
Are only high and mighty Epithets for Dust.
In vain, in vain so high
Our towering expectations fly,
While the Blossoms of our hopes, so fresh, so gay,
Appear, and promise Fruit, then fade away.
From valiant OSSORY'S ever Loyal Hands,
What did we not believe!
We dreamed of yet unconquered Lands
He to his Prince could give,
And neighboring Crowns retrieve:
Expected that he would in Triumph come
Laden with Spoils, and Afric Banners home,
As if an Hero's years
Were as unbounded as our fond Desires.
IV.
Lament, Lament, you that dare Honor love,
And court her at a Noble rate
(Your Prowess to approve,)
That dare religiously upon Her wait,
And blush not to grow Good, when you grow Great,
Such Mourners suit His Virtue, such His State.
And you, brave Souls, who for your Countrie's good
Did wondrous things in Fields, and Seas of Blood,
Lament the undaunted Chief that led you on:
Whose exemplary Courage could inspire
The most degenerate Heart, with Martial-English Fire.
Your bleeding wounds who shall hereafter dress
With an indulgent tenderness;
Touched with a melting Sympathy,
Who shall your Wants supply?
Since He, your good Samaritan is gone.
O Charity! thou richest Boon of Heaven,
To Man, in pity given!
(For when well-meaning Mortals give,
The Poor's, and their own Bowels they relseve;)
Thou make us with alacrity to die,
Missed and bewailed like Thee, large-hearted O S. SORT.
V.
Arise, ye blessed Inhabitants above,
From your Immortal Seats arise,
And on our Wonder, on our Love
Gaze with astonished Eyes.
Arise! Arise! make room,
The exalted Shade is come.
See where He cones! what Princely Port He bears!
How God-like He appears!
His shining Temples round
With Wreaths of everlasting Laurels bound!
As from the bloody Field of Mons He came,
Where He out-fought the Hyperboles of Fame.
See how the Guardian-Angel of our Isle
Receives the Deifi'd Champion with a Smile!
Welcome, the Guardian-Angel says,
Full of Songs of Joy, and Praise,
Welcome Thou art to me,
And to these Regions of Serenity!
Welcome, the Winged Choir resounds,
While with loud Euge's all the Sacred place abounds.
To the Memory of the Incomparable ORINDA. Pindarique Ode.
Stanza I.
ALong Adieu to all that is bright,
Noble or brave in Womankind;
To all the Wonders of their Wit,
And Trophies of their Mind:
The glowing heat of the holy fire is gone:
To the Altar, whence 'twas kindled, flown;
There Is naught on earth, but Ashes left behind;
Ever since the amazing sound was spread,
Orinda's dead;
Every soft and fragrant word,
All that Language could afford;
Every high and lofty thing
That Is wont to set the Soul on wing,
No longer with this worthless world would stay.
Thus, when the death of the great Pan was told,
Along the shore the dismal tidings rolled;
The lesser Gods their Fanes forsook,
Confounded with the mighty stroke,
They could not overlive that fatal day,
But sighed and groaned their gasping Oracles away.
II.
How rigid are the Laws of Fate!
And how severe that black Decree!
No sublunary thing is free,
But all must enter the Adamantine Gate:
Sooner, or later must we come
To Nature's dark retiring Room:
And yet it is pity, Is it not?
The Learned, as the Fool should die,
One, full as low, as the other lie,
Together blended in the general lot!
Distinguished only from the common Crowd
By an hindg'd Coffin or an Holland Shroud,
Though Fame and Honor speak them never so loud
Alas Orinda! even Thou,
Whose happy Verse made others live,
And certain Immortality could give;
Blasted are all thy blooming Glories now,
The Laurel withers over thy brow:
Methinks it should disturb Thee to conceive
That when poor I, this artless breath resign,
My dust should have as much of Poetry as Thine!
III.
Too soon we languish with desire
Of what we never could enough admire.
On the billows of this World sometimes we rise
So dangerously high,
We are to Heaven too nigh:
When all in rage,
(Grown hoary with one minute's age,)
The very self-same fickle wave,
Which the entrancing Prospect gave,
Swollen to a Mountain, sinks into a Grave.
Too happy Mortals, if the Powers above
As merciful would be,
And easy to preserve the thing we love,
As in the giving they are free!
But they too often delude our wearied eyes,
They fix a flaming Sword 'twixt us and Paradise!
A weeping evening blur's a smiling day,
Yet why should heads of Gold have feet of clay?
Why should the man that waved the Almighty wand,
That led the murmuring Crowd
By Pillar and by Cloud,
Shivering a-top of Aerie Pisgah stand
Only to see, but never, never tread the Promised Land.
IV.
Throw your Swords and Gauntlets by,
You daring Sons of War!
You cannot purchase ever you die
One honorable Scar,
Since that fair hand that gilded all your Bays;
That in Heroic numbers wrote your praise,
That you might safely sleep in Honors Bed,
It self, alas! is withered, cold, and dead:
Cold and dead are all those charms
That burnished your victorious arms;
Those useless things hereafter must
Blush first in Blood, and then in Rust:
No oil, but that of her smooth words can serve
Weapon and Warrior to preserve.
Expect no more from this dull Age
But folly or Poctick rage,
Short-lived nothings of the Stage,
Vented to day, and cried to morrow down;
With her the Soul of Poesy is gone,
Gone, while our expectations flew
As high a pitch, as she has done,
Exhaled to Heaven like early dew,
Betimes the little shining drops are flown,
E're the drowsy world perceived that Manna was come down.
V.
You of the Sex that would be fair,
Exceeding lovely, hither come,
Would you be pure as Angels are,
Come dress you by Orinda's Tomb,
And leave your flattering Glass at home.
Within that Marble Mirror see,
How one day such as she
You must, and yet alas! can never be!
Think on the heights of that vast Soul,
And then admire, and then condole.
Think on the wonders of her generous Pen,
'Twas she made Pompey truly Great;
Neither the purchase of his sweat
Nor yet Cornelia's kindness made him live again:
With envy think, when to the grave you go,
How very little must be said of you,
Since all that can be said of virtuous Woman was her due.
The Review. Pindarique Ode to the Reverend Dr. WILLIAM SANCROFT, now Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury.
Stanza 1.
WHen first I stepped into the alluring Maze
To tread this world's mysterious ways
Alas! I had nor guide, nor clue,
No Ariadne lent her hand,
Not one of Virtue's Guards did bid me stand,
Or asked me what I meant to do,
Or whither I would go:
This Labyrinth so pleasant did appear,
I lost my self with much content,
Infinite hazards underwent,
Out straggled Homer's crasty Wanderer,
And ten years more than he, in fruitless Travels spent;
The one half of my life is gone,
The shadow the Meridian past;
Death's dismal Evening drawing on,
Which must with damps and mists be over cast,
An Evening, that will surely come,
It Is time, high time to give my self the welcome home.
II.
Had I but heartily believed,
That all the Royal Preacher said, was true,
When first I entered on the Stage,
And Vanity so hotly did pursue;
Convinced by his experience, not my age,
I had my self long since retrieved,
I should have let the Curtam down,
Before the Fool's part had begun:
But I throughout the tedious Play have been
Concerned in every busy Scene;
Too too inquisitive I tried
Now this, anon another Face,
And then a third, more odd, took place,
Was every thing, but what I was.
Such was my Protean folly, such my pride,
Befooled through all the Trage-Comedy,
Where others met with hissing, to expect a Plaudite.
III.
I had a mind the Pastoral to prove,
Searching for happiness in Love,
And finding Venus painted with a Dove,
A little naked Boy hard by,
The Dove, which had no gall,
The Boy no dangerous Arms at all;
They do thee wrong (great Love) said I,
Much wrong, great Love! -- scarce had I spoke
Ere into my unwary bosom came
An inextinguishable flame:
From fair Amira's eyes the lightning broke,
That left me more than Thunder struck;
She carries tempest in that lovely name:
Love's mighty and tumultuous pain
Disorder's Nature like an Hurricane.
Yet could n't I believe such storms could be,
When I launched forth to Sea;
Promised my self a calm, and easy way,
Though I had seen before,
Piteous ruins on the shore,
And on the naked Beach Leander breathless lay.
IV.
To extricate my self from Love
Which I could ill obey, but worse command,
I took my Pencils in my hand,
With that Artillery for Conquest strove,
Like wise Pygmalion then did I
My self design my Deity;
Made my own Saint, made my own Shrine:
If she did frown, one dash could make her smile,
All bickerings one easy stroke could reconcile,
Plato feigned no Idea so divine:
Thus did I quiet many a froward day,
While in my eyes my Soul did play,
Thus did the time, and thus my self beguile;
Till on a day, but then I knew not why,
A tear fallen from my eye,
Washed out my Saint, my Shrine, my Deity:
Prophetique chance; the lines are gone,
And I must mourn over what I doted on:
I find even Giotto's Circle has not all perfection.
V.
To Poetry I then inclined;
Verse that emancipates the mind,
Verse that unbends the Soul;
That Amulet of sickly same,
Verse that from wind articulates a Name;
Verse for both Fortunes fit, to smile and to condole.
'Ere I had long the Trial made,
A serious thought made me afraid:
For I had heard Parnassus sacred Hill,
Was so prodigiously high,
It Is barren Top so near the sky;
Thd Ether there
So very pure, so subtle, and so rare,
'Twould a Chamaeleon kill,
The Beast that is all Lungs, and seeds on Air:
Poets the higher up that Hill they go,
Like Pilgrims, share the less of what is below:
Hence it is they ever go repining on,
And murmr more than their own Helicon.
I heard them curse their Stars in ponderous Rhimes
And in grave numbers grumble at the times;
Yet where the Illustrious Cowley led the way,
I thought it great discretion there to go astray.
VI.
From liberal Arts to the litigious Law,
Obedience, not Ambition, did me draw;
I looked at awful Quoif, and Scarlet Gown
Through others Optics, not my own:
Unty the Gordian Knot that will,
I see no Rhetoric at all
In them that learnedly can brawl,
And fill with mercenary breath the spacious Hall;
Let me be peaceable, let me be still.
The solitary Tisbite heard the wind,
With strength and violence combined,
That rent the Mountains, and did make
The solid Earth's Foundations shake,
He saw the dreadful fire, and heard the horrid noise,
But found what he expected in the small still voice.
VII.
Nor here did my unbridled fancy rest,
But I must try
A pitch more high,
To read the starry Language of the East;
And with Chaldean Curiosity
Presumed to solve the Riddles of the Sky;
Impatient till I knew my doom,
Dejected till the good direction come,
I ripped up Fate's forbidden Womb,
Nor would I stay till it brought forth
An easy and a natural birth,
But was solicitous to know
The yet misshapen Embrio,
(Preposterous crime!)
Without the formal Midwifry of time:
Fond man! as if too little grief were given
On Earth, draws down inquietudes from Heaven!
Permits himself with fear to be unmann'd,
Belshazzar-like, grows wan and pale,
His very heart begins to fail,
Is frighted at that Writing of the hand,
Which yet nor he, not all his learned Magicians understand.
VIII.
And now at last what is the result of all?
Should the strict Audit come,
And forth' Account too early call;
A numerous heap of Ciphers, would be found the total Sum.
When incompassionate Age shall plow
The delicate Amira's brow,
And draw his furrows deep and long,
What hardy Youth is he
Will after that a Reaper be,
Or sing the Harvest Song?
And what is Verse, but an effeminate vent
Either of Lust or Discontent?
Colors will starve, and all their Glories die,
Invented only to deceive the eye;
And he that wily Law does love,
Much more of Serpent has than Dove,
There Is nothing in Astrology,
But Delphick ambiguity;
We are misguided in the Dark, and thus
Each Star becomes an Ignis fatuus:
Yet pardon me ye glorious Lamps of light,
'T was one of you that led the way,
Dispelled the gloomy night,
Became a Phosphor to the Eternal day,
And showed the Magi where the Almighty Infant lay.
IX.
At length the doubtful Victo y's won,
It was a cunning Ambuscade
The World for my felicities had laid;
Yet now at length the day's our own,
Now Conquerour-like let us new Laws set down.
Henceforth let all our Love Seraphick
The sprightly and the vigorous slame
On the Altar let it ever burn,
And sacrifice its ancient name:
A Tablet on my heart, next I Will prepare
Where I would draw the Holy Sepulcher,
Behind it a soft Landscape I would lay
Of melancholy Golgotha!
On the Altar let me all my spoils lay down,
And if I had one, there I Would hang my Laurel Crown.
Give me the Pandects of the Law Divine,
Such was the Law made Moses face to shine.
Thus beyond Saturn's heavy Orb I Will tower,
And laugh at his malicious power:
Raptured in Contemplation thus I Will go
Above unactive Earth, and leave the Stars below.
X.
Tossed on the wings of every wind,
After these hoverings to and fro;
(And still the waters higher grow)
Not knowing where a resting place to find,
Whither for Sanctuary should I go
But (Reverend Sir) to you?
You that have triumphed over the impetuous flood,
That Noah-like, in bad times durst be good,
And the stiff Torrent manfully withstood,
Can save me too;
One that have long in fear of drowing bin,
Surrounded by the rolling waves of sin;
Do you but reach out a propitious hand
And charitably take me in,
I will not yet despair to see dry land,
It Is done; -- and I no longer fluctuate,
I Have made the Church my Ark, and Sions Hill my Ararat,
To my Reverend Friend, Dr. SAM. WOODFORD, On his Excellent Version of the
PSALMS. Pindarique Ode.
Stanza I.
SEe (worthy Friend) what I would do;
(whom neither Muse nor Art inspire)
That have no Friend in all the sacred Quire,
To show my kindness for your Book, and you,
Forced to disparage, what I would admire;
Bold man, that dares attempt Pindarique now,
Since the great Pindar's greatest Son
From the ungrateful Age is gone,
Cowley has bid the ungrateful Age adieu;
Apollo's rare Columbus, he
Found out new worlds of Poesy:
He, like an Eagle, soared alost,
To seize his noble Prey;
Yet as a Dove's, his Soul was soft,
Quiet as Night, but bright as Day:
To Heaven in a fiery Chariot he
Ascended by Seraphique Poetry;
Yet which of us dull Mortals since can find
Any inspiring Mantle, that He left behind?
II.
His powerful numbers might have done you right;
He could have spared you immortality,
Under that Chieftain's Banners you might fight
Assured of Laurels, and of Victory
Over devouring Time, and Sword, and Fire,
And Jove's important Ire:
My humble Verse would better sing
David the Shepherd, than the King:
And yet methinks it is stately to be one
(Though of the meaner sort,)
Of them that may approach a Princes Throne,
If 'twere but to be seen at Court.
Such (Sir) is my ambition for a Name,
Which I shall rather take from you, than give,
For in your Book I cannot miss of Fame,
But by contact shall live.
Thus on your Chariot Wheel shall I
Ride safe, and look as big as Aesop's Fly,
Who from the Olympian Race new come,
And now triumphantly flown home,
To's neighbors of the swarm, thus, proudly said,
Don't you remember what a dust I made!
III.
Where e're the Son of Jesse's Harp shall sound,
Or Israel's sweetest Songs be sung,
(Like Sampson's Lion sweet and strong)
You and your happy Muse shall be renowned,
To whose kind hand the Son of Jesse owes
His last deliverance from all his Foes.
Blood thirsty Saul less barbarous than they,
His person only sought to kill;
These would his deathless Poems slay,
And sought immortal blood to spill,
To sing whose Songs in Babylon would be
A new Captivity:
Deposed by these Rebels, you alone
Restored the Glorious David to his Throne.
Long in disguise the Royal Prophet lay,
Long from his own thoughts banished,
Never since his death 'till this illustrious day
Was Scepter in his hand, or Crown placed on his Head:
He seemed as if at Gath he still had bin
As once before proud Achish he appeared,
His Face besmeared,
With spittle on his sacred Beard,
A laughing stock to the insulting Philistine.
Dressed in their Rhimes, he looked as he were mad,
In Tissue you, and Tyrian Purple have him clad.
On the Death of the truly valiant GEORGE Duke of ALBEMARLE. Pindarique Ode.
Stanza
NOw blush thy self into confusion,
Ridiculous Mortality!
With indignation to be trampled on
By them that court Eternity;
Whose Generous Deeds, and Prosperous State
Seem poorly set within the reach of Fate,
Whose every Trophy, and each Laurel wreath
Depends upon a little Breath;
Confined within the narrow bounds of Time,
And of uncertain Age,
With doubtful hazards they engage,
Thrown down, while victory bids them higher climb;
Their Glories are eclipsed by Death.
Hard circumstances of Illustrious Men
Whom Nature (like the Scythian Prince) detains
Within the Bodies chains.
(Nature, that rigorous Tamberlain.)
Stout Bajazet disdained the barbarousrage
Of that insulting Conqueror,
Bravely himself usurped his own expiring power,
By dashing out his Brains against his Iron Cage.
II.
But it is indecent to complain,
And wretched Mortals curse their Stars in vain,
In vain they waste their tears for them that die,
Themselves involved in the same destiny,
No more with sorrow let it then be said
The glorious Albemarle is dead.
Let what is said of Him triumphant be,
Words as gay, as is His Fame,
And as manly as his Name,
Words as ample as his Praise,
And as verdant as his Bays,
An Epinicion, not an Elegy.
Yet why should thou, ambitious Muse, believe
Thy gloomy Verse can any splendors give,
Or make him one small Moment longer live?
Nothing but what is vulgar thou can say;
Or misbecoming numbers sing;
What Tribute to his memory can thou pay,
Whose Virtue saved a Crown, and could oblige a King?
III.
Many a year distressed Albion lay
By her unnatural Offspring torn,
Once the Worlds terror, then its scorn,
At home a Prison, and abroad a Prey:
Her valiant Youth, her valiant Youth did kills
And mutual blood did spill;
Usurpers then, and many a Mushroom Peer
Within her Palaces did domincer;
There did the Vulture build his Nest,
There the Owls, and Satyrs rest,
By Zim and Ohim all possessed;
Till England's Angel Guardian, Thou,
With pity, and with anger moved
For Albion thy beloved,
(Olive Chaplets on thy brow)
With bloudless hands upheld'st her drooping head,
And with thy Trumpets call'st her from the dead.
Bright Phosphor to the rising Sun!
That Royal Lamp, by Thee did first appear
Ushered into our happy Hemisphere;
O may it still shine bright and clear!
No Cloud, nor Night approach it, but a constant Noon!
IV.
Nor thus did thy undaunted Valor cease,
Or wither with unactive peace:
Scarce were our Civil broils allayed,
While yet the wound of an intestine War
Had left a tender Scar,
When of our new Prosperities afraid,
Our jealous Neighbors fatal Arms prepare;
In floating Groves the Enemy drew near.
Loud did the Belgian Lion roar,
Upon our Coasts the Armada did appear,
And boldly durst attempt our Native Shore,
Till his victorious Squadrons checked their pride,
And did in Triumph over the Ocean ride.
With thunder, lightning, and with clouds of smoke
He did their Insolence restrain,
And gave his dreadful Law to all the Main,
Whose surly Billows trembled when he spoke,
And put their willing necks under his Yoke.
This the stupendous Vanquisher has done,
Whose high Prerogative it was alone
To raise a ruined, and secure an envied Throne.
V.
Then angry Heaven began to frown,
From Heaven a dreadful Pestilence came down,
On every side did Lamentations rise;
Baleful sigh, and heavy groan,
All was plaint, and all was moan!
The pious Friend with trembling love,
Scarce had his latest kindness done,
In sealing up his dead Friends eyes,
E're with his own surprising Fate he strove,
And wanted one to close his own.
Death's Iron Scepter bore the sway
Over our Imperial Golgotha;
Yet he with kind, though unconcerned eyes,
Durst stay and see those numerous Tragedies.
He in the field had seen Death's griesly shape,
Heard him in Volleys talk aloud,
Beheld his Grandeur in a glittering Crowd,
And unamaz'd seen him in Cannons gape:
Ever unterrified his Valor stood
Like some tall Rock amidst a Sea of Blood:
'Twas Loyalty from Sword and Pest kept him alive,
The safest Armor, and the best Preservative.
VI.
The flaming City next implored his Aid,
And seasonably prayed
His force against the Fire, whose Arms the Seas obeyed;
Wide did the impetuous torrent spread,
Then those goodly Fabrics fell,
Temples themselves promiscuously there
Dropped down, and in the common ruin buried were,
The City turned into one Mongibel:
The haughty Tyrant shook his curled head,
His breath with vengeance black, his face with fury red.
Then every cheek grew wan and pale
Every heart did yield and fail:
Naught but thy Presence could its Power suppress.
Whose stronger light put out the less.
As London's noble Structures rise,
Together shall His Memory grow,
To whom that beauteous Town so much does owe.
London! joint Favorite with Him Thou were;
As both possessed a room within one heart,
So now with thine indulgent Sovereign join,
Respect his great Friends ashes, for He wept over Thine.
VII.
Thus did the Duke perform his mighty Stage,
Thus did that Atlas of our State,
With his Prodigious Acts amaze the Age,
While Worlds of wonders on his shoulders fate;
Full of Glories, and of Years,
He trod his shining, and immortal way,
Whilst Albion compassed with new floods of tears
Besought his longer stay.
Profane that Pen, that dares describe thy bliss,
Or write thine Apotheosis!
Whom Heaven and thy Prince to pleasure prove,
Entrusted with their Armies and their Love.
In other Courts it is dangerous to deserve,
Thou did a kind and grateful Master serve,
Who, to express his Gatitude to Thee,
Scorned those ill-natured arts of Policy.
Happy had Bellisarius bin
(Whose forward fortune was his sin)
By many Victories undone,
He had not lived neglected, died obscure,
If for thy Prince those Battles he had won,
Thy Prince, magnificent above his Emperor.
VIII.
Among the Gods, those Gods that died like Thee,
As great as theirs, and full of Majesty
Thy sacred Dust shall sleep secure,
Thy Monument as long as theirs endure:
There, free from Envy, Thou with them,
Shall have thy share of Diadem;
Among their Badges shall be set
Thy Garter and thy Coronet;
Or (which is statelier) thou shall have
A Mausolaeum in thy Prince's breast,
There thine embalmed name shall rest,
That Sanctuary shall thee save,
From the dishonours of a Regal Grave:
And every wondrous History,
Read by incredulous Posterity,
That writes of him, shall honorably mention thee
Who by an humble Loyalty have shown,
How much sublimer gallantry, and renown
It Is to restore, than to usurp a Monarch's Crown.
The Retirement. Pindarique Ode made in the time of the Great Sickness, 1665.
Stanza I.
IN the mild close of an hot Summers day,
When a cool Breeze had fanned the Air,
And Heaven's face looked smooth and fair;
Lovely as sleeping Infants be,
That in their slumber smiling lie
Dandled on their Mothers Knee,
You hear no cry,
No harsh, nor inharmonious voice,
But all is innocence without a noise:
When every sweet, which the Sun's greedy Ray
So lately from us drew,
Began to trickle down again in dew;
Weary, and faint, and full of thought,
Though for what cause I knew not well,
What I ali'd, I could not tell,
I sat me down at an aged Poplar's root,
Whose chiding leaves excepted and my breast,
All the impertinently busi'd-wolrd inclined to rest.
II.
I list'ned heedfully around,
But not a whisper there was found.
The murmuring Brook hard by,
As heavy, and as dull as I,
Seemed drowsily along to creep;
It ran with undiscovered pace,
And if a Pebble stopped the lazy race,
'Twas but as if it started in its sleep.
Echo her self, that ever lent an ear
To any piteous moan,
Wont to groan with them that groan,
Echo her self was speechless here.
Thrice did I sigh, Thrice miserably cry,
Ai me! the Nymph ai me! would not reply,
Or churlish, or she was asleep for company.
III.
There did I sit and sadly call to mind
Far and near, all I could find,
All the Pleasures, all the Cares,
The Jealousies, the Fears,
All the incertainties of thirty years,
From that most inauspicious hour
Which gave me breath;
To that in which the fair Amira's power
First made me wish for Death:
And yet Amira's not unkind;
She never gave me angry word,
Never my mean address abhorred;
Beauteous her face, beauteous her mind:
Yet something dreadful in her eyes I saw
Which ever kept my faultring tongue in aw,
And gave my panting Soul a Law.
So have I seen a modest Beggar stand,
Worn out with age, and being often denied,
On his heart he laid his hand;
And though he looked as if he would have died
The needy Wretch no Alms did crave:
He durst not ask for what he feared he should not have
IV.
I thought on every pensive thing,
That might my passion strongly move,
That might the sweetest sadness bring;
Often did I think on Death, and often of Love,
The triumphs of the little God, and that same ghastly King
The ghastly King, what has he done?
How his pale Territories spread!
Strait scantlings now of consecrated ground
His swelling Empire cannot bound,
But every day new Colonies of dead
Enhance his Conquests, and advance his Throne.
The mighty City saved from storms of War,
Exempted from the Crimson Flood,
When all the Land o're-flow'd with blood,
Stoop's yet once more to a new Conqueror:
The City which so many Rival bred,
Sackcloath is on her loins, and ashes on her head,
V.
When will the frowning Heaven begin to smile?
Those pitchy clouds be overblown,
That hide the mighty Town,
That I may see the mighty Pyle!
When will the angry Angel cease to slay;
And turn his brandished Sword away
From that illustrious Golgotha,
London, the great Aceldama!
When will that stately Landscape open lie,
The mist withdrawn that intercepts my eye!
That heap of Pyramids appear,
Which now, too much like those of Egypt are:
Eternal Monuments of Pride and Sin,
Magnificent and tall without, but dead men's bones within.
Translated out of a Part of Petronius Arbiter's Satyricon.
I.
AFter a blustering tedious night,
The winds now hushed and the black tempest over,
Which the crazy vessel miserably tore,
Behold a lamentable sight!
Rolling far off, upon a briny wave,
Compassionate Philander spied
A floating Carcass ride,
That seemed to beg the kindness of a Grave.
II.
Sad, and concerned Philander then
Weighed with himself the frail, uncertain state
Of silly, strangely disappointed men,
Whose projects are the sport of Fate.
Perhaps (said he) this poor man's desolate Wife
In a strange Country far away,
Expects some happy day,
This ghastly thing, the comfort of her life:
III.
His Son it may be dreads no harm,
But kindly waits his Fathers coming home,
Himself secure, he apprehends no storm,
But fancies that he sees him come.
Perhaps the good old man, that kissed this Son,
And left a blessing on his head,
His arms about him spread,
Hopes yet to see him e're his Glass be run.
IV.
These are the Grand Intrigues of Man,
These his huge thoughts, and these his vast desires
Restless, and swelling like the Ocean
From his birth till he expires,
See where the naked, breathless body lies
To every puff of wind a slave,
At the beck of every Wave,
That once perhaps was fair, rich, slout, and wise!
V.
While thus Philander pensive said,
Touched only with a pity for Mankind,
At nearer view, he thought he knew the Dead,
And called the wretched Man to mind:
Alas, said he, art thou that angry Thing,
That with thy looks did threaten Death,
Plagues and Destruction breath,
But two days since, little boneath a King!
VI.
Ai me! where is thy fury now,
Thine insolence, and all thy boundless power,
O most ridiculously dreadful thou!
Exposed for Beasts and Fishes to devour.
Go sottish Mortals, let your Breasts swell high,
All your Designs laid deep as Hell,
A small mischance can quell,
Outwitted by the deeper Plots of Destiny.
VII.
This haughty Lump a while before
Soothed up it self, perhaps with hopes of Life,
What it would do, when it came safe on shore,
What for It Is Son, what for It Is Wife;
See where the Man, and all his Politics lie.
Ye Gods! what Gulphs are set between,
What we have, and what we ween,
Whilst lulled in dreams of years to come, we die!
VIII.
Nor are we liable alone,
To misadventures on the merciless Sea,
A thousand other things our Fate bring on,
And Shipwrack'd every where we be.
One in the tumult of a Battle dies
Big with conceit of Victory,
And routing the Enemy,
With Garlands decked, himself the Sacrifice.
IX.
Another, while he pays his vows
On bended knees, and Heaven with tears invokes,
With adorations as he humbly bows,
While with Gums the Altar smoaks,
In the presence of his God, the Temple falls;
And thus religious in vain
The flattered Bigot slain,
Breaths out his last within the sacred Walls.
X.
Another with Gay Trophies proud,
From his triumphant Chariot overthrown,
Makes pastime for the Gazers of the Crowd,
That envied him his purchased Crown.
Some with full meals, and sparkling Bowls of Wine,
(As if it made too long delay)
Spur on their fatal Day,
Whilst others, (needy Souls) at theirs repine.
XI.
Consider well, and every place
Offers a ready Road to thy long home,
Sometimes with frowns, sometimes with smiling face
The Ambassadors of Death do come.
By open force or secret Ambuscade,
By unintelligible ways,
We end our anxious days,
And stock the large Plantations of the Dead.
XII.
But (some may say) it is very hard
With them, whom heavy chance has cast away,
With no solemnities at all interred,
To roam unburi'd on the Sea:
No -- it is all one where we receive our doom,
Since, somewhere, it is our certain lot.
Our Carcases must rot,
And they whom heaven covers need no Tomb.
A Thought of DEATH.
When on my sick Bed I languish,
Full of sorrow, full of anguish,
Fainting, gasping, trembling, crying,
Panting, groaning, speechless, dying,
My Soul just now about to take her flight
Into the Regions of eternal night;
Oh tell me you,
That have been long below,
What shall I do!
What shall I think, when cruel Death appears,
That may extenuate my fears!
Methinks I hear some Gentle Spirit say,
Be not fearful, come away!
Think with thy self that now thou shall be free,
And find thy long expected liberty;
Better thou may, but worse thou can not be
Than in this Vale of Tears, and Misery.
Like Caesar, with assurance then come on,
And unamaz'd attempt the Laurel Crown,
That lies on the other side Death's Rubicon.
Psalm XXXiX. Verse. 4, 5.
VERSE IV.
Lord let me know the Period of my Age,
The length of this my weary Pilgrimage,
How long this miserable Life shall last,
This Life that stays so long, yet flies so fast!
VERSE V.
Thou by a Span measur'st these days of mine,
Eternity's the spacious bound of Thine:
Who shall compare his little Span with thee,
With Thine Incomprehensibility.
Man born to trouble leaves this World with pain,
His best Estate is altogether vain.
Hymn for the Morning.
Awake my Soul! Awake mine eyes!
Awake my drowsy faculties;
Awake and see the new born Light
Spring from the darksom womb of Night!
Look up and see the unwearied Sun,
Already has his Race begun:
The pretty Lark is mounted high,
And sings her Matins in the Sky.
Arise my Soul! and thou my voice
In Songs of Praise, early rejoice!
O Great Creator! Heavenly King!
Thy Praises let me ever sing!
Thy Power has made, thy Goodness kept
This fenceless Body while I slept,
Yet one day more have given me
From all the Powers of darkness free:
O keep my heart from Sin secure,
My life unblameable and pure,
That when the last of all my Days is come,
Cheerful and I may wait my Doom.
Anthem for the Evening.
Sleep! downy sleep! come close my eyes,
Tired with beholding Vanities!
Sweet slumbers come and chase away
The tolis and follies of the day:
On your soft bosom will I lie,
Forget the World, and learn to die.
O Israel's watchful Shepherd spread
Tents of Angels round my Bed;
Let not the Spirits of the Air,
While I slumber, me ensnare;
But save thy Suppliant free from harms,
Clasped in thine everlasting Arms.
Clouds and thick darkness is thy Throne,
Thy wonderful Pavilion:
Oh dart from thence a shining Ray,
And then my midnight shall be Day!
Thus when the morn in Crimson dressed,
Breaks through the Windows of the East,
My hymns of thankful Praises shall rise
Like Incense or the morning Sacrifice.
DEATH.
SONG.
Oh the sad day,
When Friends shall shake their heads and say
Of miserable me,
Hark how he groans, look how he pants for breath,
See how he struggles with the pangs of Death!
When they shall say of these poor eyes,
How hollow, and how dim they be!
Mark how his Breast does swell and rise,
Against his potent Enemy!
When some old Friend shall step to my Bedside,
Touch my chill face, and thence shall gently slide,
And when his next Companions say,
How does he do? what hopes? shall turn away,
Answering only with a lift up hand,
Who can his Fate withstand?
Then shall a gasp or two do more
Than e're my Rhetoric could before,
Persuade the peevish world to trouble me no more!
The Happy Man.
PEaceful is he, and most secure,
Whose heart, and actions all are pure;
How smooth and pleasant is his way.
Whilst Life's Meander slides away
If a fierce Thunderbolt do fly,
This Man can unconcerned lie;
Knows it is not levelled at his head,
So neither noise, nor flash can dread:
Though a swift Whirlwind tear in sunder
Heaven above him, or Earth under;
Though the Rocks on Heaps do tumble,
Or the World to Ashes crumble,
Though the stupendous Mountains from on high
Drop down, and in their humble Valleys lie;
Should the unruly Ocean roar,
And dash its Foam against the Shore;
He finds no Tempest in his Mind,
Fears no Billow, feels no Wind:
All is serene, and quiet there,
There Is not one blast of troubled Air,
Old Stars may fall, or new ones blaze,
Yet none of these his Soul amaze;
Such is the man can smile at irksome death,
And with an easy sigh give up his breath.
ON Mr. JOHNSON'S Several Shipwracks.
HE that has never yet acquainted been
With cruel Chance, nor Virtue naked seen.
Stripped from the advantages (which Vices wear)
Of happy, plausible, successful, fair;
Nor learnt how long the lowering cloud may last,
Wherewith her beauteous face is overcast,
Till she her native glories does recover,
And shines more bright, after the Storm is over;
To be informed, he need no further go,
Than this Divine Epitome of woe.
In Johnson's Life, and Writings he may find,
What Homer in his Odysses designed,
A virtuous Man, by miserable fate,
Rendered ten thousand ways unfortunate;
Sometimes within a leaking Vessel tossed,
All hopes of life, and the loved Shore quite lost,
While hidden Sands, and every greedy Wave,
With horror gaped themselves into a Grave:
Sometimes upon a Rock with fury thrown,
Moaning himself, where none could hear his moan;
Sometimes cast out upon the barren sand,
Exposed to the mercy of a Barbarous Land:
Such was the Pious Johnson, till kind Heaven
A blessed End to all his toils had given:
To show that virtuous men, though they appear
But Fortune's sport, are Providence's care.
An Explanation of an EMBLEM Engraven by V. H.
See thou those Rays, the Light 'bove them?
And that gay thing the Diadem?
The Wheel and Balance, which are tied
To the Gold, black Clouds on eitherside?
See thou the winged Trumpetters withal,
That kick the World's blew tottering Ball?
The flying Globe, the Glass thereon,
Those fragments of a Skeleton?
The Bays, the Palms, the Fighting men,
And written Scroul? -- Come tell me then,
Did thy o're-curious eye e're see
An apter Scheme of Misery?
What Is all that Gold, and what those sparkling Stones
To that bald Scull, to those Eross Bones?
What mean those Braves (whom we adore)
To stain the Earth with purple gore?
Sack stately Towns, silk Banners spread,
Gallop their Coursers over the Dead?
Far more than this? and all to sway
But till those sands shall glide away.
For when the Bubble World shall fly
With stretch'd-out Plumes, when the brisk eye
Shall close with anguish, sink with tears,
And the Angels Trumpets pierce our ears,
What Is haughty Man, or those fine things,
Which Heaven calls Men, though Men style Kings?
Vain World adieu! and farewell fond renown!
Give me the Glory, that is above the Crown!
For THOUGHTS.
I.
THoughts! What are they?
They are my constant Friends,
Who, when harsh Fate its dull brow bends,
Uncloud me with a smiling Ray,
And in the depth of midnight force a day.
II.
When I retire, and slay
The busy throngs of Company!
To hug my self in privacy;
O thediscourse! the pleasant talk,
Twixt us (my thoughts) along a lonely walk!
III.
You, like the stupifying Wine
The dying Malefactors sip
With shivering lip,
TO abate the rigor of their Doom,
By a less troublous cut to their long home;
Make me slight Crosses, though they pil'd up lie,
All by the enchantments of an ecstasy.
IV.
Do I desire to see
The Throne and Majesty
Of that proud one,
Brother and Uncle to the Stars and Sun?
Those can conduct me where such Toys reside,
And waft me cross the Main, sans Wind and Tide.
V.
Would I descrie
Those radiant Mansions 'bove the Sky,
Invisible by Mortal eye?
My Thoughts, my Thoughts can lay
A shining Track thereto,
And nimbly fleeting go:
Through all the eleven Orbs can shove away,
These two, like Jacob's Ladder, are
A most Angelick thorough-fare.
IV.
The Wealth that shines
In the Oriental Mines;
Those sparkling Gems which Nature keeps
Within her Cabinets, the Deeps,
The Verdant Fields,
The Rarities the rich World yields;
Rare structures, whose each gilded spire
Glimmers like Lightning; which, while men admire,
They deem the neighboring Sky on fire,
These can I gaze upon, and glut mine eyes
With Myriads of varieties.
As on the front of Pisgah, I
Can the Holy Land through these my Optics spy.
VII.
Contemn we then
The peevish rage of men,
Whose violence never can divorce
Our mutual amity;
Or lay so damned a Curse
As Non-addresses, 'twixt my thoughts and me:
For though I sigh in Irons, They
Use their old freedom, readily obey;
And when my bosome-friends desert me, stay.
VIII.
Come then, my darlings, I Will embrace
My Privilege; make known
The high prerogative I own,
By making all allurements give you place;
Whose sweet society to me,
A Sanctuary and a Shield shall be
Against the full Quivers of my Destiny.
Against THOUGHTS.
I.
INtolerable Racks!
Distend my Soul no more,
Loud as the Billows when they roar,
More dreadful than the hideous thunder cracks.
Foes inappeasable! that slay
My best contents, around me stand,
Each like a Fury, with a Torch in hand;
And fright me from the hopes of one good Day.
II.
When I seclude my self, and say
How frolic will I be,
Unfettered from my Company
I Will bath me in felicity!
In come these Guests,
Which Harpy like defile my Feasts:
Oh the damned Dialogues, the cursed talk
'Twixt us (my Thoughts) along a sullen walk.
III.
You, like the poisonous Wine
The Gallants quaff
To make 'em laugh,
And yet at last endure
From thence the tortures of a Calenture,
Fool me with feigned refections, till I lie
Stark raving in a Bedlam ecstasy.
IV.
Do I dread
The Starry Throne and Majesty
Of that High God,
Who batters Kingdoms with an Iron Rod,
And makes the Mountains stagger with a Nod?
That sits upon the glorious Bow,
Smiling at changes here below.
These goad me to his grand Tribunal, where
They tell me I with horror must appear,
And antedate amazements by grim fear.
V.
Would I descry
Those happy Souls blessed Mansions 'bove the Sky,
Invisible by mortal eye,
And in a noble speculation trace
A journey to that shinning place?
Can I afford a sigh or two,
Or breath a Wish that I might thither go:
These clip my Plumes, and chill my blazing Love
That, O, I cannot, cannot soar above.
VI.
The Fire that shines
In Subterranean Mines,
The Crystall'd streams,
The Sulphur Rocks that glow upon
The torrid banks of Phlegeton;
Those sooty Fiends which Nature keeps,
Bolted and barred up in the deeps;
Black Caves wide Chasms which who see confess
Types of the Pit so deep, so bottomless!
These mysteries, though I fain would not behold,
You to my view unfold:
Like an Old Roman Criminal, to the high
Tarpeian Hill you force me up, that I
May so be hurried headlong down, and Die.
VII.
Mention not then
The strength, and faculties of men;
Whose Arts cannot expel
These anguishes, this bosome-Hell.
When down my aching head I lay,
In hopes to slumber them away;
Perchance I do beguile
The Tyranny a while,
One or two minutes, then they throng again,
And reassault me with a trebled pain:
Nay though I sob in Fetters, they
Spare me not then; perplex me each sad day,
And whom a very Turk would pity, slay.
VIII.
Hence, hence, (my Jaylors) Thoughts be gone,
Let my Tranquillities alone.
Shall I embrace
A Crocodile, or place
My choice affections on the fatal Dart,
That stabs me to the heart?
I hate your cursed proximity,
Worse than the venomed arrows heads that be
Crammed in the quivers of my Destiny.
A Doomsday Thought. Anno 1659.
Judgment! two Syllables can make
The haughtiest Son of Adam shake.
It Is coming, and 'twill surely come,
The dawning to that Day of Doom;
O, the morning blush of that dread day,
When Heaven and Earth shall steal away,
Shall in their pristine Chaos hide,
Rather than the angry Judge abide.
It Is not far off; methinks I see
Among the Stars some dimmer be;
Some tremble, as their Lamps did fear
A neighboring Extinguisher,
The greater Luminaries fail,
Their Glories by Eclipses vail,
Knowing e're long their borrowed Light
Must sink in the Universal Night,
When I behold a Mist arise,
Strait to the same astonished Eyes,
The ascending Clouds do represent,
A Scene of the smoking Firmament.
Often when I hear a blustering Wind
With a tempestuous murmur joined,
I fancy, Nature in this blast,
Practices how to breath her Last,
Or sighs for poor Man's misery,
Or pants for fair Eternity.
Go to the dull Churchyard and see
Those Hillocks of Mortality.
Where proudest Man is only found
By a small swelling in the Ground?
What Crowds of Carcasses are made
Slaves to the Pickax and the Spade!
Dig but a foot, or two, to make
A Cold Bed, for thy dead Friends sake,
It Is odds but in that scantling room,
Thou roob'st another of his Tomb,
Or in thy delving smit'st upon
A Shinbone, or a Cranion.
When the Prison's full, what next can be
But the Grand Jail-delivery?
The Great Assize, when the pale Clay
Shall gape, and render up its Prey;
When from the Dungeon of the Grave
The meager Throng themselves shall heave,
Shake off their Linen Chains, and gaze
With wonder, when the world shall blaze,
Then climb the Mountains, scale the Rocks,
Force open the Deep's Eternal Locks,
Beseech the Clifts to lend an Ear,
Obdurate they, and will not hear.
What? ne'rea Cavern never a Grot
To cover from the common Lot?
No quite forgotten Hold, toly
Obscured, and pass the reckoning by?
No -- There Is a quick all-piercing Eye
Can through the Earth's dark Center pry,
Search into the bowels of the Sea,
And comprehend Eternity.
What shall we do then, when the voice
Of the shrill Trump with strong fierce noise
Shall pierce our Ears, and summon all
To the Universe wide Judgment-Hall?
What shall we do, we cannot hide,
Nor yet that Scrutiny abide:
When enlarged Conscience loudly speaks,
And all our bosomsecrets breaks;
When flames surround, and greedy Hell
Gapes for a Booty, ( who can dwell
With everlasting Burnings!) when
Irrevocable words shall pass on Men;
Poor naked Men, who sometimes, thought
These frights perhaps would come to naught!
What shall we do! we cannot run
For Refuge, or the strict Judge shun.
It Is too late Then to think what Course to take;
While we live Here, we must Provision make.
Virtus sola manet, caetera mortis erunt.
I.
NVnquam sitivi, quae vehit aureo
Pactolus alveo flumina; quo magis
Potatur Hermus, tanto avarae
Mentis Hydrops sitibundus ardet.
II.
Frustra caduci carceris incola
Molirer Arces; quilibet angulus
Sat ossa post manes reponet;
Exiguum satis est Sepulchrum.
III.
Nil stemma penso, nil titulos moror,
Cerasve aviti sanguinis indices,
Sunt ista fatorum, inque Lethes
Naufragium patientur undis.
IV.
Ergo in quieto pectoris ambitu
Quid men's anhelas fulgura gloriae,
Laudesque inanes, and loquacem
Quae populi sedet ore, famam.
V.
Letho superstes gloria, somnii
Dulcedo vana est, fama malignior,
Nil tangit umbras, nec feretrum
Ingreditur Popularis Aura.
VI.
Mansura sector, sola sed invidi
Expers Sepulchri sydera trajicit,
Spernensque fatorum tumultus
Pellit humum generosa Virtus.
VII.
Praeceps novorum caetera mensium
Consumet aetas, seraque temporis
Delebit annosi vetustas
Utopicae nova Regna Lunae.
Translated.
I.
I Never thirsted for the Golden Flood,
Which over Pactolus wealthy sands does roll,
From whence the covetous mind receives no good,
But rather swells the dropsy of his Soul.
II.
On Palaces why should I set my Mind,
Imprisoned in this Body's mouldring clay?
Ere long to poor six foot of Earth consigned,
Whose bones must crumble at the fatal day.
III.
Titles and Pedigrees, what are they to me,
Or honor gained by our Forefathers toil,
The sport of Fate, whose gaudiest Pageantry
Lethe will wash out, dark Oblivion soil?
IV.
Why then (my Soul) who fain would be at ease,
Should the Worlds glory dazzle thy bright Eye?
Thy self with vain applause why should thou please,
Or dote on Fame, which Fools may take from Thee?
V.
Praise after death is but a pleasant dream,
The Dead fare never the worse for ill report;
The Ghosts below know nothing of a Name,
Nor ever Popular caresses court.
VI.
Give me the lasting Good, Virtue, that flies
Above the Clouds, that tramples on dull Earth,
Exempt from Fates tumultuous Mutinies,
Virtue, that cannot need a second Birth.
VII.
All other things must bend their heads to Time,
By Ages mighty Torrent born away,
Hereafter no more thought on than my Rhyme,
Or Faery Kingdoms in Vtopia.
Psalm XV. Paraphrased.
VERSE I.
WHo shall approach the dread Jehovah's Throne
Or dwell within thy Courts, O Holy One!
That happy man whose feet shall tread the Road
Up Sion's Hill, that holy Hill of God!
VERSE II.
He that is devout and strict in all he does,
That through the sinful world uprightly goes,
The desperate heights from whence the great ones fall
(Giddy with Fame) turn not his head at all:
Stands firm on Honors Pinnacle, and so
Fears not the dreadful Precipice below.
Of Conscience, not of Man, he stands in aw,
Just to observe each tittle of the Law!
His words and thoughts bear not a double part,
His breast is open, and he speaks his heart.
VERSE III.
He that reviles not, or with cruel words
(Deadly as venom, sharp as two-edged swords)
Murders his Friends repute, nor dares believe
That Rumor which his neighbor's soul may grieve:
But with kind words embalms his bleeding Name,
Wipes off the rust, and polishes his fame.
VERSE IV.
He in whose eyes the bravest sinners be
Extremely vile, though robbed in Majesty;
But if he spies a righteous man (though poor)
Him he can honor, love, admire, adore:
In Israel's humble Plains had rather stay,
Than in the Tents of Kedar bear the sway:
He that severely keeps his sacred Vow,
No mental reservation dares allow,
But what he swears, intends; will rather die,
Lose all he has, than tell a solemn Lie.
VERSE V.
He that extorts not from the needy Soul,
When Laws his Tyranny cannot control;
He whom a thousand Empires cannot hire,
Against a guiltless person to conspire.
He that has these perfections, needs no more;
What Treasures can be added to his store?
The Pyramids shall turn to dust, to hide
Their own vast bulk, and haughty Founders pride.
Leviathan shall die within his Deep;
The eyes of Heaven close in eternal sleep;
Consusion may over whelm both Sea, and Land;
Mountains may tumble down, but he shall stand.
JOB.
FEw be the days that feeble man must breath,
Yet frequent Troubles antedate his death:
Gay like a flower he comes, which newly grown,
Fades of it self, or is untimely mown:
Like a thin Aerie shadow does he fly,
Lengthning and shortning still until he die.
And does Jehovah think on such a one,
Does he behold him from his mighty Throne?
Will he contend with such a worthless thing,
Or Dust and Ashes into Judgment bring?
Unclean, unclean is man even from the Womb,
Unclean he falls into his drowzy Tomb.
Surely, he cannot answer God, nor be
Accounted pure, before such purity.
Nudus Redibo.
NAked I came, when I began to be
A man among the Sons of Misery,
Tender, unarmed, helpless, and quite forlorn,
E're since 'twas my hard fortune to be born:
And when the space of a few weary days
Shall be expired; then must I go my ways.
Naked I shall return, and nothing have,
Nothing wherewith to bribe my hungry Grave.
Than what is the proudest Monarch's glittering Robe,
Or what is he, more than I, that ruled the Globe?
Since we must all without distinction die,
And slumber both stark naked, He and I.
AN ELEGY On the EARL of SANDWICH.
IF there were ought in Verse, at once could raise,
Or tender pity, or immortal praise,
Thine Obsequies, brave Sandwich would require
What ever would our nobler thoughts inspire;
But since thou find'st by thy unhappy fate,
What it is to be unfortunately Great,
And purchase Honor at too dear a rate:
The Muses best attempt, how e're designed,
Cannot but prove impertinently kind,
Thy glorious Valor is a Theme too high
For all the humble Arts of Poesy,
To side with chance, and Kingdoms overrun
Are little things Ambitious Men have done;
But on a flaming Ship thus to despise
That life, which others did so highly prize;
To fight with Fire, and struggle with a Wave,
And Neptune with unwearied Arms out-brave,
Are deeds surpassing fab'lous Chronicle.
And which no future Age shall parallel;
Leviathan himself's outdon by Thee,
Thou greater wonder of the Deep, than he:
Nor could the Deep thy mighty Ashes hold,
The Deep that swallows Diamonds and Gold,
Fame even thy sacred Relics, does pursue,
Richer than all the Treasures of Peru:
While the kind Sea thy breathless body brings
Safe to the bed of Honor and of Kings.
AN EPITAPH On the EARL of SANDWICH.
Here lies the Dust of that illustrious Man,
That triumphed over the Ocean;
Who for his Country nobly courted Death,
And dearly sold his glorious Breath,
Or in a word, in this cold narrow Grave
Sandwich the Good, the Great, the Brave,
(Oh frail Estate of Sublunary things!)
Lies equal here with Englands greatest Kings.
PASTORAL.
I.
At break of day poor Celadon
Hard by his Sheepsolds walked alone,
His Arms across, his Head bowed down,
His Oaten Pipe beside him thrown,
When Thirsis hidden in a Thicket by,
Thus heard the discontented Shepherd cry.
II.
What is it Celadon has done,
That all his Happiness is gone!
The Curtains of the dark are drawn,
And cheerful morn begins to dawn,
Yet in my breast it is ever dead of night,
That can admit no beam of pleasant light.
III.
You pretty Lambs may leap and play
To welcome the new kindled day,
Your Shepherd harmless, as are you,
Why is he not as frolic too?
If such disturbance the Innocent attend,
How differs he from them that dare offend!
IV.
Ye Gods! or let me die, or live,
If I must die, why this reprieve?
If you would have me live, O why
Is it with me as those that die!
I faint, I gasp, I pant, my eyes are set,
My Cheeks are pale, and I am living yet.
V.
Ye Gods! I never did withhold
The fattest Lamb of all my Fold,
But on your Altars laid it down,
And with a Garland did it crown.
Is it vain to make your Altar smoke?
Is it all one, to please, and to provoke?
VI.
Time was that I could sit and smile,
Or with a dance the Time beguile:
My soul like that smooth Lake was still,
Bright as the Sun behind you Hill,
Like yonder stately Mountain clear, and high,
Swist, soft, and gay as the same Butterfly.
VII.
But now Within there is Civil War,
In Arms my rebel Passions are,
Their old Allegiance laid aside,
The Traitors now in Triumph ride;
That, many-headed Monster has thrown down
Its lawful Monarch Reason from its Throne.
VIII.
See unrelenting Sylvia, see,
All this, and more is long of Thee:
For e're I saw that charming face,
Uninterrupted was my peace,
Thy glorious beamy eyes have struck me blind,
To my own Soul the way I cannot find.
IX.
Yet is it not thy fault nor mine
Heaven is to blame, that did not shine
Upon us both with equal Rays,
It made thine bright, mine gloomy days;
To Sylvia beauty gave, and riches store,
All Celadon's offense is, he is poor.
X.
Unlucky Stars poor Shepherds have,
Whose Love is fickle Fortune's Slave:
Those golden days are out of date,
When every Turtle chose his Mate:
Cupid that mighty Prince then uncontrolled,
Now like a little Negro's bought and sold.
On the Death of Mr. Pelham Humfries.
Pastoral Song.
Did you not hear the hideous Groan,
The Shrieks, and heavy Moan
That spread themselves over all the pensive Plain;
And rent the breast of many a tender Swain?
'Twas for Amyntas, Dead and gone.
Sing ye forsaken Shepherds, sing His Praise
In careless Melancholy Lays,
Lend Him a little doleful Breath:
Poor Amyntas! cruel death!
'Twas Thou could make Dead words to live,
Thou that dull Numbers could inspire
With charming Voice, and tuneful Lyre,
That Life to all, but to Thy self could give;
Why could Thou not thy wondrous Art bequeath?
Poor Amyntas! Cruel Death!
Sing pious Shepherds, while you may,
Before the approaches of the Fatal Day:
For you your selves that sing this mournful Song,
Alas! e're it belong,
Shall, like Amyntas, Breathless be,
Though more forgotten in the Grave, that He.
The Mistake.
SONG.
I Heard a young Lover in terrible pain,
From whence if he pleased, he might soon be re
He swore, and he vowed again and again,
He could not out live the turmoils of his breast;
But, alas, the young Lover I found
Knew little how cold Love would prove under ground;
Why should I believe, prithee Love tell me why,
Where my own Flesh and Blood must give me the Lie!
Let Them rant while they will, and their Destinies brave,
They Will find their flames vanish on this side the grave;
For though all addresses on purpose are made
To be huddled to bed, -- it is 'nt meant, with a spade!
The Incredulous.
SONG.
I Will never believe for Strephon's sake
That Love, (what ever its fond pretenses be)
Is not a slave to mutability.
The Moon and that alike of change partake:
Tears are weak, and cannot bind;
Vows, alas! but empty wind:
The greatest Art that Nature gave
To the Amorous Hypocrite to make him kind,
Long e're he dies will take its leave.
Had you but seen, as I have done,
Strephon's tears, and heard his moan,
How pale his Cheek, how dim his Eye,
As if with Chloris he resolved to dye;
And when her spotless Soul was fled
Heard his amazing praises of the Dead;
Yet in a very little time address
His flame to another Shepherdess,
In a few days giving his Love the Lie,
You Would be as great an Infidel as I.
Weeping at Parting.
SONG.
I.
Go, gentle Oriana, go,
Thou feast the Gods will have it so;
Alas! Alas! it is much in vain
Of their ill usage to complain,
To curse them when we want relief,
Lessens our courage, not our grief:
Dear Oriana, wipe thine Eye,
The Time may come, that thou, and I
Shall meet again, long, long to prove
What Vigor absence adds to love,
Smile Oriana then, and let me see,
That look again, which stole my liberty.
II.
But say that Oriana die,
And that sad moment may be nigh;
The Gods that for a year can fever,
If it please them can part us ever;
They that refresh, can make us weep,
And into Death can lengthen sleep.
Kind Oriana should I hear
The thing I so extremely fear,
'Twill not be strange, if it be said,
After a while, I too, am dead.
Weep Oriana, weep, for who does know,
Whether we ever shall meet again below.
The Desperate Lover.
I.
O Mighty King of Terrors, come!
Command thy Slave to his long home:
Great Sanctuary, Grave! to thee
In throngs the miserable fly;
Encircled in thy srozen arms,
They bid defiance to their harms,
Regardless of those ponderous little things,
That discompose the uneasy heads of Kings.
II.
In the cold Earth the Prisoner lies
Ransomed from all his miseries,
Himself forgotten, he forgets
His cruel Creditors, and Debts;
And there in everlasting peace
Contentions with their Authors cease.
A Turf of Grass or Monument of Stone
Umpires the petty Competition.
III.
The disappointed Lover there,
Breaths not a sigh, nor sheds a tear;
With us (fond fools) he never shares
In sad perplexities and cares;
The Willow near his Tomb that grows
Revives his Memory, not his Woes;
Or rain, or shine, he is advanced above
The affronts of Heaven, and stratagems of Love.
IV.
Then, mighty King of Terrors, come,
Command thy Slave to his long home.
And thou, my Friend, that love me best,
Seal up these eyes that brake my rest;
Put out the Lights, bespeak my Knell,
And then eternally farewell.
It Is all the amends our wretched Fates can give,
That none can force a desperate man to Live.
The Fatigue.
A SONG.
ADieu fond World, and all thy Wiles,
Thy haughty frowns, and treacherous smiles,
They that behold thee with my eyes,
Thy double dealing will despise:
From thee, false World, my deadly Foe,
Into some Desert let me go;
Some gloomy melancholy Cave,
Dark and silent as the Grave,
Let me withdraw; where I may be
From thine impertinencies free:
There when I hear the Turtle groan,
How sweetly would I make my moan!
Kind Philomel would teach me there
My sorrows pleasantly to bear:
There could I correspond with none
But Heaven, and my own breast alone?
The Resolve.
SONG.
I.
HAd Phyllis neither Charms, nor Graces
More than the rest of women wear,
Levelled by Fate with common faces,
Yet Damon could esteem her fair.
II.
Good natured Love can soon forgive
Those petty injuries of Time,
And all the affronts of years impute
To her Misfortune, not her Crime.
III.
Wedlock puts Love upon the Rack,
Makes it confess it is still the same
In Icy Age, as it appeared,
At first when all was lively flame.
IV.
If Hymen's slaves, whose ears are boar'd,
Thus constant by compulsion be,
Why should not Choice indear us more
Than them their hard Necessity?
V.
Phyllis! it is true, thy Glass does run,
But since mine too keeps equal pace,
My silver hairs may trouble thee,
As much as me thy ruined Face.
VI.
Then let us constant be as Heaven,
Whose Laws inviolable are,
Not like those rambling Meteors there
That foretell ills, and disappear.
VII.
So shall a pleasing calm attend
Our long uneasy Destiny,
So shall our Loves, and Lives expire
From Storms and Tempests ever free.
LOVE's Bravo.
SONG.
WHy should we murmur, why repine,
Phyllis, at thy Fate, or mine?
Like Prisoners, why do we those Fetters shake;
Which neither thou, nor I can break?
There is a better way to baffle Fate,
If Mortals would but mind it,
And it is not hard to find it:
Who would be happy, must be desperate;
He must despise those Stars that fright
Only Fools that dread the night;
Time and chance he must out-brave;
He that crouches is their Slave.
Thus the wise Pagans ill at ease,
Bravely chastised their surly Deities.
The Expectation.
SONG.
I.
WHy did I ever see those glorious eyes
My famished Soul to Tantalize?
I hoped for Heaven, which I had lately seen,
But never perceived the Gulf between:
In vain for bliss did my presumptions seek,
My love so strong
I could not hold my tongue,
My heart so feeble that I durst not speak.
II.
Yet why do I my constitution blame;
Since all my heart is out of frame!
'Twere better (sure) my passions to appease,
With hope to palliate my disease:
And 'twill be something like Tranquillity,
To hope for that
I must not compass yet,
And make a Virtue of Necessity.
CORIDON Converted.
SONG.
I.
WHen Coridon a Slave did lie,
Entangled in his Phyllis Eye,
How did he sigh! how did he groan!
How melancholy was his tone!
He told his Story to the Woods,
And wept his Passion by the Floods;
Then Phyllis, cruel Phyllis, too too blame,
Regarded not his sufferings, nor his flame.
II.
Then Coridon resolved no more
His Mistress Mercy to implore;
How did he laugh, how did he sing!
How did he make the Forest ring!
He told his Conquests to the Woods,
And drowned his passions in the Floods:
Then Phyllis, cruel Phyllis, less severe
Would have had him, but he would none of her.
The Humourist.
SONG.
I.
GOod faith I never was but once so mad
To dote upon an idle woman's Face,
And then alas! my fortune was so bad
To see another chosen in my place;
And yet I courted her, I Am very sure,
With Love as true as his was, and as pure.
II.
But if I ever be so fond again
To undertake the second part of Love,
To reassume that most unmanlike pain,
Or after shipwreck do the Ocean prove;
My Mistress must be gentle, kind, and free,
Or I Will be as indifferent as she.
Fading Beauty.
SONG.
I.
AS poor Aurelia sat alone,
Hard by a Rivulets flowery side;
Envious at Nature's newborn pride,
Her slighted self, she thus reflected on.
II.
Alas! that Nature should revive
These flowers, which after Winter's snow
Spring fresh again, and brighter show,
But for our fairer Sex so ill contrive!
III.
Beauty like theirs a short-lived thing,
On us in vain she did bestow,
Beauty that only once can grow,
An Autumn has, but knows no second Spring.
A DIALOGUE. Chloris and Parthenissa.
C. WHy do thou all address deny?
Hard hearted Parthenissa, why?
See how the trembling Lovers come,
That from thy lips expect their doom,

P. Cloris! I hate them all, they know,
Nay I have often told them so;
Their silly Politics abhorred:
I scorn to make my Slave my Lord:

C. But Strephon's eyes proclaim his Love
Too brave, tyrannical to prove.

P. Ah Cloris! when we lose our power
We must obey the Conqueror.

C. Yet where a Gentle Prince bears sway,
It is no bondage to obey.

P. But if like Nero, for a while,
With arts of kindness he beguile;
How shall the Tyrant be withstood!
When he has writ his Laws in blood!

C. Love, Parthenissa, all commands,
It fetters Kings in charming bands;
Mars yields his Arms to Cupid's darts,
And Beauty softens savage hearts,

Chorus.
If nothing else can pull the Tyrant down,
Kill him with kindness, and the day's your own.
A DIALOGUE. Orpheus and Eurydice.
Orpheus. EVrydice, my fair, my fair Eurydice!
My love, my joy, my life, if so thou be
In Pluto's Kingdom answer me; appear
And come to thy poor Orpheus. --

Eur. Oh I hear,
I hear, dear Orpheus, but I cannot come
Beyond the bounds of dull Elysium.
I cannot --

Or. And why will thou not draw near?
Is there within these Courts a Shade so dear
As he that calls thee?

Eur. No, there cannot be
A thing so lovely in mine eyes as thee.

Orph. Why comes not then Eurydice?

Eur. The Fates,
The Fates forbid, and these eternal Gates
Never unbarr'd, to let a Prisoner go,
Deny me passage; nay, grim Cerberus too
Stands at the door --

Orph. But cannot then
They that over Lethe go, return again?

Eur. Never, oh never! --

Orph. Sure they may, let us try
If Art can null the Laws of Destiny.
My Lays compacted Thebes, made every Tree
Loosen its roots to caper; come let us see
What thou and I can do.

Chor. Perchance the throng
Of Ghosts may be enchanted with a Song,
And moved to Pity. --

Eur. Hark the Hinges move.
The Gate's unbarr'd, I come, I come, my Love.

Chorus.
'Twas Music, only Music, could un-spel
Helpless, undone Eurydice from Hell.
The Batchelors Song.
LIke a Dog with a Bottle, fast tied to his tail,
Like Vermin in a Trap, or a Thief in a Jail,
Like a Tory in a Bog,
Or an Ape with a Clog:
Such is the man, who when he might go free,
Does his liberty loose,
For a Matrimony noose,
And sells himself into captivity.
The Dog he does howl, when the Bottle does jog,
The Vermin, the Thief, and the Tory in vain
Of the Trap, of the Jail, of the Quagmire complain.
But welfare poor Pug! for he plays with his Clog;
And though he would be rid on it rather than his life,
Yet he lugs it, and he hugs it, as a man does his Wife
The Second Part.
SONG.
HOw happy a thing were a Wedding
And a Bedding,
If a Man might purchase a Wife
For a twelve month and a day;
But to live with her all a man's life,
For ever and for ay,
Till she grow as gray as a Cat,
Good faith, Mr. Parson, I thank you for that.
An Appeal to Cats in the business of Love.
A SONG.
YE Cats that at midnight spit love at each other,
Who best feel the pangs of a passionate Lover,
I appeal to your scratches, and your tattered furr,
If the business of Love be no more than to Purr.
Old Lady Grimalkin with her Goosberry eyes,
Knew something when a Kitten, for why she was wise;
You find by experience the Love fit's soon o'r,
Puss! Puss! lasts not long, but turns to Cat whore.
Men ride many Miles,
Cats tread many Tiles,
Both hazard their necks in the Fray,
Only Cats, when they fall
From a House, or a Wall,
Keep their feet, mount their Tails, and away.
Advice to an Old Man of sixty three, about to Marry a Girl of sixteen.
SONG.
I.
NOw fie upon him! what is Man,
Whose life at best is but a span?
When to an Inch it dwindles down,
Ice in his bones, Snow on his crown,
That he within his crazy brain,
Kind thoughts of Love should entertain,
That he, when Harvest comes should plow,
And when it is time to reap, go sow,
Who in imagination only strong,
Though twice a Child, can never twice grow young.
II.
Nature did those design for Fools,
That sue for work, yet have no Tools.
What fellow*feeling can there be
In such a strange disparity?
Old age mistakes the youthful breast,
Love dwells not there, but Interest:
Alas Good Man! take thy repose,
Get Ribband for thy Thumbs, and Toes.
Provide thee Flannel, and a sheet of Lead,
Think on thy Coffin, not thy Bridal Bed.
The SLIGHT.
SONG.
I.
I Did but crave that I might kiss,
If not her Lip, at least her Hand,
The coolest Lover's frequent bliss,
And rude is she that will withstand
That inoffensive liberty:
She (would you think it?) in a fume
Turned her about and left the Room;
Not she, she vowed, not she.
II.
Well Chariessa then said I,
If it must thus for ever be,
I can renounce my slavery,
And since you will not, can be free,
(Many a time she made me die,)
Yet (would you think it?) I loved the more,
But I Will not take it as heretofore,
Not I, I Will vow, not I.
The PENITENT.
SONG.
I.
HAd I but known some years ago
What wretched Lovers undergo,
The tempests and the storms that rise
From their Beloved's dangerous eyes,
With how much torment they endure
That Ague, and that Calenture;
Long since I had my error seen,
Long since repented of my sin:
Too late the Soldier dreads the Trumpets sound
That newly has received his mortal wound.
II.
But so adventurous was I
My Fortunes all alone to try,
Needs must I kiss the burning light,
Because it shined, because 'twas bright,
My heart with youthful heat on fire,
I thought some God did me inspire;
And that blind zeal emboldned me,
TO attempt Althea's Deity.
Surely those happy Powers that dwell above,
Or never courted, or enjoyed their love.
The Defiance.
SONG.
I.
BE not too proud, imperious Dame,
Your charms are transitory things,
May melt, while you at Heaven aim,
Like Icarus's Waxen Wings;
And you a part in his misfortune bear,
Drowned in a briny Ocean of despair.
II.
You think your beauties are above
The Poets Brain, and Painters Hand,
As if upon the Throne of Love
You only should the World command:
Yet know, though you presume your title true,
There are pretenders, that will Rival you.
III.
There Is an experienced Rebel, Time,
And in his Squadrons Poverty;
There Is Age that brings along with him
A terrible Artillery:
And if against all these thou keep'st thy Crown,
Th'Usurper Death will make thee lay it down.
The surrender.
SONG.
I Yield, I yield! Divine Althaea, see
How prostrate at thy feet I bow,
Fondly in love with my Captivity,
So weak am I, so mighty thou!
Not long ago I could defy,
Armed with Wine and Company,
Beauties whole Artillery:
Quite vanquished now by thy miraculous Charms,
Here fair, Althaea, take my Arms,
For sure he cannot be of Humane Race,
That can resist so bright, so sweet a Face.
The WHIM.
SONG.
I.
WHy so serious, why so grave?
Man of business, why so muddy?
Thy self from Chance thou can not save
With all thy care and study.
Look merrily then, and take thy repose;
For it is to no purpose to look so forlorn,
Since the World was as bad before thou were born,
And when it will mend who knows?
And a thousand year hence it is all one,
If thou lay'st on a Dunghill, or sat'st on a Throne.
II.
To be troubled, to be sad,
Carking Mortal it is a folly,
For a pound of Pleasure's not so bad
As an ounce of Melancholy:
Since all our lives long we travel toward Death,
Let us rest us sometimes, and bait by the way,
It Is but dying at last; in our Race let us stay,
And we shall not be so soon out of breath.
Sit the Comedy out, and that done,
When the Play's at an end, let the Curtain fall down.
The RENEGADO.
SONG.
I.
Removed from fair Vrania's eyes
Into a Village far away:
Fond Astrophil began to say,
Thy Charms Urania I despise;
Go bid some other Shepherd for thee die,
That never understood thy Tyranny.
II.
Returned at length the amorous Swain,
Soon as he saw his Diety,
Adored again, and bowed his knee,
Became her Slave, and wore her Chain.
The Needle thus that motionless did lie,
Trembles, and moves, when the loved Loadstone's nigh.
PHYLLIS withdrawn.
I.
I Did see her, and she is snatched away,
I find I did but happy seem;
So small a while did my contentments stay,
As short and pleasant as a dream:
Yet such are all our satisfactions here,
They raise our hopes, and them they disappear.
II.
Ill natured Stars, that evermore conspire
To quench poor Strephon's flame,
To stop the progress of his swift desire,
And leave him but an Aerie Name;
Why art thou doomed (of no pretenses proud)
Ixion-like thus to embrace a Cloud?
III.
Yet why should Strephon murmur, why complain,
Or envy Phyllis her delight,
Why should her pleasures be to him a pain,
Easier perhaps out of his sight?
No, Strephon, no! If Phyllis happy be,
Thou should rejoice, what ever becomes of Thee.
IV.
Amidst the charming Glories of the Spring
In pleasant Fields and goodly Bowers
Indulgent Nature seems concerned to bring
All that may bless her innocent hours,
While thy disastrous Fate has tied thee down
To all the noise and tumult of the Town.
V.
Strephon that for himself expects no good
To Phyllis wishes every where,
A long serenity without a Cloud,
Sweet as these smiles of the Infant year.
May Halcyons in her bosom build their Nest,
What ever storms shall discompose my Breast.
The Malecontent.
SONG.
PHyllis, O Phyllis! Thou art fondly vain,
My wavering thoughts thus to molest,
Why should my pleasure be the only pain,
That-must torment my easy breast?
If with Prometheus I had stoll'n fire,
Fire from above,
As scorching, and as bright, as that of Love,
I might deserve Jove's ire,
A Vultur then might on my Liver feed,
But now eternally I bleed,
And yet on Thee, on Thee lies all the blame,
Who freely gav'st the Fuel and the Flame.
The Indifferent.
SONG.
PRithee confess for my sake, and your own,
Am I the Man or no?
If I am he, thou can not do it too soon,
If not, thou can not be too slow.
If Woman cannot love, Man's folly's great
Your Sex with so much zeal to treat;
But if we freely proffer to pursue
Our tender thoughts and spotless love,
Which nothing shall remove,
And you despise all this, pray what are you?
The HARBOR.
SONG.
OTedious hopes! when will the storm be over!
When will the beaten Vessel reach the shore!
Long have I striv'n with blustering winds and tides,
Clouds over my head, Waves on my sides!
Which in my dark adventures high did swell,
While Heaven was black as Hell,
O Love, tempestuous Love, yet, yet at last,
Let me my Anchor cast,
And for the troubles I have undergone,
O bring me to a Port which I may call my own.
The Vnconcerned.
SONG.
NOw that the World is all in a maze,
Drums, and Trumpets rending Heavens,
Wounds a bleeding, Mortals dying,
Widows and Orphans piteously crying;
Armies marching, Towns in a blaze,
Kingdoms and States at sixes and sevens:
What should an honest Fellow do,
Whose courage, and fortunes run equally low!
Let him live, say I, till his glass be run,
As easily as he may;
Let the Wine, and the Sand of his Glass slow together,
For Life's but a Winters day.
Alas from Sun to Sun,
The time's very short, very dirty the weather,
And we silently creep away,
Let him nothing do, he could wish undone;
And keep himself safe from the noise of Gun.
The Immovable.
SONG.
I.
WHat though the Sky be clouded over,
And Heavens influence smile no more?
Though Tempests rise, and Earthquakes make
The giddy World's foundation shake?
A gallant breast contemns the feeble blow
Of angry Gods, and scorns what Fate can do.
II.
What if Alarms sounded be,
And we must face our Enemy,
If Cannons bellow out a death,
Or Trumpets woo away our breath!
It Is brave amidst the glittering Throng to die,
Nay, Sampson-like, to fall with Company.
III.
Then let the Swordman domineer,
Ican, nor Pike, nor Musket fear;
Clog me with Chains, your envies tire,
For when I will, I can expire;
And when the puling sit of Life is gone,
The worst that cruel man can do, is done.
The WISH.
SONG.
I.
NOt to the Hills where Cedars move
Their cloudy head, not to the Grove
Of Myrtles in the Elysian shade,
Nor Tempe which the Poets made;
Not on the spicy Mountains play;
Or travel to Arabia:
I aim not at the careful Throne,
Which Fortune's darlings sit upon;
No, no, the best this fickle world can give,
Has but a little, little time to live,
II.
But let me soar, O let me fly
Beyond poor Earths benighted eye,
Beyond the pitch swift Eagles tower,
Above the reach of humane Power;
Above the Stars, above the way,
Whence Phoebus darts his piercing Ray.
O let me tread those Courts that are,
So bright, so pure, so blessed, so fair,
As neither thou, nor I must ever know
On Earth, it is thither, thither would I go.
The CORDIAL. In the Year 1657.
SONG.
I.
DId you hear of the News (O the News) how it thunders!
Do but see, how the block-headed Multitude wonders!
One fumes, and stamps, and stares to think upon
What others wish as fast, Confusion.
One swears we are gone, another just agoing,
While a third sits and cries,
'Till his half-blinded eyes,
Call him pitiful Rogue for so doing.
Let the tone be what 'twill that the mighty Ones utter,
Let the cause be what 'twill why the poorer sort mutter;
I care not what your State-confounders do,
Nor what the stout repiners undergo:
I cannot whine at any alterations.
Let the Swede beat the Dane,
Or be beaten again,
What am I in the Crowd of the Nations?
II.
What care I if the North and South Poles come together;
If the Turk, or the Pope's Antichristian, or neither;
If fine Astroea be (as Naso said)
From Mortals in a peevish fancy fled:
Rome, when 'twas all on fire, her People mourning,
'Twas an Emperor could stand
With his Harp in his hand,
Sing and play, while the City was burning.
Celadon on Delia singing.
ODelia! for I know it is she,
It must be she, for nothing less could move
My tuneless heart, than something from above.
I hate all earthly Harmony:
Hark, hark ye Nymphs, and Satyrs all around!
Hark how the bafled Echo faints; see how she dies,
Look how the winged Choir all gasping lies
At the melodious sound;
See, while she sings
How they droop and hang their wings!
Angelick Delia, sing no more,
Thy Song's too great for mortal ear;
Thy charming Notes we can no longer bear:
O then in pity to the World give over,
And leave us stupid as we were before.
Fair Delia take the fatal choice,
Or veil thy beauty, or suppress thy Voice.
His passion thus poor Celadon betrayed,
When first he saw, when first he heard the lovely Maid*
The Advice.
SONG.
I.
POor Celia once was very fair,
A quick bewitching Eye she had,
Most neatly looked her braided hair,
Her dainty Cheeks would make you mad,
Upon her Lip did all the Graces play,
And on her Breasts ten thousand Cupids lay.
II.
Then many a doting Lover came
From seventeen till twenty one,
Each told her of his mighty flame,
But she (forsooth) affected none.
One was not handsome, the other was not fine,
This of Tobacco smelt, and that of Wine.
III.
But the other day it was my Fate,
To walk along that way alone,
I saw no Coach before her Gate,
But at the Door I heard her moan:
She dropped a tear, and sighing, seemed to say,
Young Ladies marry, marry while you may!
TO Mr. SAM. AUSTIN Of Wadham Coll. OXON, On his most unintelligible Poems.
SIR,
IN that small inch of time I stole, to look
On the obscure depths of your mysterious Book,
(Heaven bless my eyesight!) what strains did I see!
What Steropegeretick Poetry!
What Hieroglyphick words, what all,
In Letters more than Cabalistical!
We with our fingers may your Verses scan,
But all our Noddles understand them can
No more, than read that dungfork, pothook hand
That in The Devils handwriting in Queen's Coll. Library at Oxford.
Queen's College Library does stand.
The cutting Hanger of your wit I cannot see,
For that same scabbard that conceals your Fancy:
Thus a black Velvet Casket hides a Jewel;
And a dark woodhouse, wholesome winter Fuel;
Thus John Tradeskin starves our greedy eyes,
By boxing up his newfound Rarities;
We dread Actaeons Fate, dare not look on,
When you do scowre your skin in Helicon;
We cannot ( Lynceus-like) see through the wall
Of your strong* Mortar'd Poems; nor can all
The small shot of our Brains make one hole in
The Bulwark of your Book, that Fort to win.
Open your meanings door, O do not lock it!
Undo the Buttons of your smaller Pocket,
And charitably spend those Angels there,
Let them enrich and actuate our Sphere.
Take off our Bongraces, and shine upon us,
Though your resplendent beams should chance to tan us.
Had you but stolen your Verses, then we might
Hope in good time they would have come to light;
And felt I not a strange Poetic heat
Flaming within, which reading makes me sweat,
Vulcan should take 'em, and I Would not exempt 'em,
Because they are things Quibus lumen ademptum.
I thought to have commended something there,
But all exceeds my commendations far:
I can say nothing; but stand still, and stare,
And cry, O wondrous, strange, profound, and rare.
Vast Wits must fathom you better than thus,
You merit more than our praise: as for us
The Beetles of our Rhimes shall drive full fast in,
The wedges of your worth to everlasting,
My Much Apocalyptiqu' friend Sam. Austin.
TO MY Ingenious Friend Mr. WILLIAM FAITHORN On his Book of Drawing, Etching,
and Graving.
Should I attempt an Elogy, or Frame
A Paper-structure to secure thy name,
The lightning of one Censure, one stern frown
Might quickly hazard that, and thy renown,
But this thy Book prevents that fruitless pain.
One line speaks purelier Thee, than my best strain.
Those Mysteries (once like the spiteful mold,
Which bars the greedy Spaniard from his Gold.)
Thou do unfold in every friendly Page,
Kind to the present, and succeeding age.
That Hand, whose curious Art prolongs the date
Of frail Mortality, and baffles Fate
With Brass and Steel, can surely potent be,
To rear a lasting Monument for thee:
For my part I prefer (to guard the Dead)
A Copper-Plate beyond a Sheet of Lead.
So long as Brass, so long as Books endure,
So long as neat wrought Pieces, Thou 'rt secure.
A [ Faithorn sculpsit] is a charm can save
From dull oblivion, and a gaping grave.
On the Commentaries of Messire Blaize de MONTLUC. To the Worthy Translator,
CHARLES COTTON, Esquire;
He that would aptly write of warlike men,
Should make his Ink of Blood, a Sword his Pen;
At least he must their Memories abuse,
Who writes with less than Maro's mighty Muse:
All (Sir) that I could say of this great Theme
(The brave Montluc) would lessen his esteem;
Whose Laurels too much native verdure have
To need the Praises vulgar Chaplets crave:
His own bold hand, what it durst write, durst do,
Grappled with Enemies, and Oblivion too;
Hewed his own Monument, and engraved thereon,
It Is deep and durable inscription.
To you ( Sir) whom the valiant Author owes,
His second Life, and Conquest over his Foes;
Ill natured Foes, Time and Detraction,
What is a Stranger's Contribution!
Who has not such a share of vanity,
To dream that one, who with such industry
Obliges all the World, can be obliged by me.
A Character of a BELLY-GOD: Catius and Horace.
Horace. WHence Brother Case, and whither bound so fast?

Ca. O, Sir, you must excuse me, I Am in have,
I dine with my (Lord Mayor) and cannot allow
Time for our eating Directory now:
Though I must needs confess, I think my Rules
Would prove Pythagoras and Plato Fools.

Hor. Grave Sir, I must acknowledge, it is a crime
To interrupt at such a nick of time;
Tet stay a little Sir, it is no Sin;
You're to say Grace ere Dinner can begin;
Since you at food such Virtuoso are,
Some Precepts to an hungry Poet spare.

Ca. I grant you Sir, next pleasure ta'n in eating
Is that (as we do call it) of repeating;
I still have Kitchen Systems in my mind,
And from my Stomach's fumes a Brain well lined.

Hor. Whence, pray Sir, learnt you those ingenuous Arts,
From one at home, or hired from foreign parts?

Ca. No names Sir (I beseech you,) that is foul play,
We never name Authors, only what they say.
1.
'For Eggs choose long, the round are out of fashion,
'Unsavoury and distasteful to the Nation:
'E're since the brooding Rump, they are addle too,
'In the long Egg lies Cock a doodle-doo.
2.
'Chuse Coleworts planted on a soil that is dry,
'Even they are worse for the wetting (verily.)
3.
'If Friend from far shall come to visit, then
'Say thou would treat the Wight with mortal Hen,
'Do n't thou forthwith pluck off the cackling head,
'And impale Corpse on Spit as soon as dead;
'For so she will be tough beyond all measure,
'And Friend shall make a trouble of a pleasure.
'Steept in good Wine let her her life surrender,
'O then she will eat most admirably tender.
4.
' Mushromes that grow in meadows are the best;
'For ought I know, there is Poison in the rest.
5.
'He that would many happy Summers see,
'Let him eat Mulberries fresh off the Tree,
'Gather'd before the Sun's too high, for these
'Shall hurt his Stomach less than Cheshire Cheese.
6.
' Aufidius (had you done so't had undon ye)
'Sweetned his morning's draughts of Sack with Honey;
'But he did ill, to empty veins to give
'Corroding Potion for a Lenitive.
7.
'If any man to drink do thee inveigle in,
'First wet thy whistle with some good Metheglin.
8.
'If thou art bound, and in continual doubt,
'Thou shall get in no more till some get out,
'The Muscle or the Cockle will unlock
'Thy Bodies trunk, and give a vent to nock.
'Some say that Sorrel steept in Wine will do
'But to be sure, put in some Aloes too.
9.
'All shellfish (with the growing Moon increast)
'Are ever, when she fills her Orb, the best:
'But for brave Oysters, Sir, exceeding rare,
'They are not to be met with every where.
'Your Wain-fleet Oysters no man will prefer
'Before the juicy Grass-green Colchester.
' Hungerford Crawfish, match me, if you can,
'There's no such Crawlers in the Ocean.
10.
'Next for your Suppers, you (it may be think)
'There go's no more to it, but just eat and drink;
'But let me tell you Sir, and tell you plain,
'To dress'em well requires a man of brain:
'His Palate must be quick, and smart, and strong.
'For Sauce, a very Critic in the Tongue.
11.
'He that pays dear for Fish, nay though the best,
'May please his Fishmonger, more than his Guest,
'If he be ignorant what sauce is proper,
'There's Machiavel in the Menage of a Supper.
12.
'For Swines-flesh, give me that of the Wild Boar,
'Pursu'd and hunted all the Forest over;
'He to the liberal Oak never quits his love,
'And when he finds no Acorns, grunts at Jove.
'The Hampshire Hog with Pease and Whey that is fed
'Sty'd up, is neither good alive nor dead.
13.
'The tendrels of the Vine are Sallads good,
'If when they are in season understood.
14.
'If Servants to thy Board a Rabbet bring,
'Be wise, and in the first place carve a Wing.
15.
'When Fish and Fowl are right, and at just age,
'A Feeders curiosity to assuage,
'If any ask, who found the Mystery?
'Let him enquire no further, I am he.
16.
'Some fancy Bread out of the Oven hot:
'Variety's the Glutton's happiest lot.
17.
'It's not enough the wine you have be pure,
'But of your Oil as well you ought be sure.
18.
'If any fault be in the generous Wine,
'Set it abroad all night, and 'twill refine,
'But never strein't, nor let it pass through Linen,
' Wine will be worse for that, as well as Women.
19.
'The Vintner that of Malaga and Sherry
'With damned ingredients patcheth up Canary,
'With segregative things, as Pigeons eggs,
'Strait purifies, and takes away the dregs.
20.
'An o're-charg'd Stomach roasted shrimps will ease,
'The Cure by Lettuce is worse than the Disease.
21.
'To quicken Appetite it will behove ye
'To feed courageously on good Anchovie.
22
' Westphalia Ham, and the Bolognia Sawsage,
'For second or third course will clear a passage,
'But Lettuce after Meals! fie on it, the Glutton
'Had better feed upon Ram-ally* Mutton.
23.
'Twere worth one's while in Palace or in Cottage,
'Right well to know the sundry sorts of Pottage;
'There is your French Pottage, Nativity broth,
'Yet that of Fetter-lane exceeds them both;
'About a limb of a departed Tup
'There may you see the green herbs boiling up,
'And fat abundance over the furnace float,
'Resembling Whale-Oyl in a Greenland Boat.
24.
'The Kentish Pippin's best, I dare be bold,
'That ever Blew-Cap Costard-monger sold.
25.
'Of Grapes, I like the Raisins of the Sun.
'I was the First immortal Glory won,
'By mincing Pickled Herrings, with these Raisin
'And Apples; 'Twas I set the world a gazing,
'When once they tasted of this Hogan Fish,
'Pepper and Salt enamelling the Dish.
26.
''Tis ill to purchase great Fish with great matter,
'And then to serve it up in scanty Platter;
'Nor is it less unseemly some believe,
'From Boy with greasy fist drink to receive,
'But the Cup foul within's enough to make
'A squeamish creature puke and turn up stomach.
27.
'Then Brooms and Napkins and the Flanders Tyle,
'These must be had too, or the Feast you spoil,
'Things little thought on, and not very dear,
'And yet how much they cost one in a year!
28.
'Would'st thou rub Alabaster with hands sable,
'Or spread a Diaper Cloth on dirty Table?
' More cost, more worship: Come: be a la mode
'Embellish Treat, as thou would do an Ode.
Hor. O learned Sir, how greedily I hear
This elegant Diatriba of good cheer!
Now by' all that is good, by all provant you love,
By sturdy Chine of Beef, and mighty Jove;
I do conjure thy gravity, let me see
The man that made thee this Discovery;
For he that sees the Original' s more happy
Than him that draws by an ill favored Copy,
O bring me to the man, I so admire!
The Flint from whence brake forth these sparks of fire,
What satisfaction would the Vision bring?
If sweet the stream, much sweeter is the spring.

The Disappointed. Pindarique ODE.
Stanza I.
Often have I pondered in my pensive heart,
When even from my self I Have stolen away,
And heavily considered many a day,
The cause of all my anguish, and my smart:
Sometimes besides a shady grove,
(As dark as were my thoughts, as close as was my Love,)
Dejected have I walked alone,
Acquainting scarce my self with my own moan.
Once I resolved undauntedly to hear,
What 'twas my Passions had to say,
To find the reason of that uproar there,
And calmly, if I could, to end the fray:
No sooner was my resolution known
But I was all Confusion.
Fierce Anger, flattering Hope, and black Despair,
Bloody Revenge, and most ignoble Fear,
Now altogether clamorous were;
My breast a perfect Chaos grown,
A mass of nameless things together hurled,
Like the formless Embrio of the unborn world,
Just as it is rouzing from eternal night,
Before the great Creator said, Let there be Light.
II.
Thrice happy then are beasts, said I,
That underneath these pleasant Coverts lie,
They only sleep, and eat, and drink,
They never meditate, nor think;
Or if they do, have not the unhappy art
To vent the overflowings of their heart;
They without trouble live, without disorder, die
Regardless of Eternity.
I said, I would like them be wise,
And not perplex my self in vain,
Nor bite the uneasy Chain,
No, no, said I, I will Philosophize!
And all the ill natured World despise:
But when I had reflected long,
And with deliberation thought
How few have practiced, what they gravely taught
(Though it is but folly to complain)
I judged it worth a generous disdain,
And brave defiance in Pindarique Song.
ON Mrs. E. MONTAGVEs Blushing in the Cross-Bath.
A Translation.
I.
A Midst the Nymphs (the glory of the flood)
Thus once the beauteous Aegle stood,
So sweet a tincture ere the Sun appears,
The bashful ruddy morning wears:
Thus through a Crystal wave the Coral glows,
And such a Blush sits on the Virgin Rose.
II.
Ye envied Waters that with safety may
Around her snowy Bosom play,
Cherish with gentle heat that Noble Breast
Which so much Innocence has blessed,
Such Innocence, as hitherto never knew
What Mischief Venus, or her Son could do.
Then from this hallowed place
Let the profane and wanton Eye withdraw,
For Virtue clad in Scarlet strikes an aw
From the Tribunal of a lovely Face.
Il Infido.
I Breath it is true, wretch that I am, it is true;
But if to live, be only not to die;
If nothing in that bubble Life be gay,
But all to a Tear must melt away;
Let Fools and Stoics be cajoled, say I:
Thou that like Ease and Love, like me
When once the world says, farewell both, to thee,
What have thou more to do
Than in disdain to say, Thou foolish world, Adieu!
II.
There was a time, Fool that I was! when I
Believed there might be something here below,
A seeming Cordial to my drooping Heart
That might allay my bitter smart:
I called it Friend: -- but O the Inconstancy
Of humane things! I tried it long,
It Is Love was fervent, and I fancied strong:
But now I plainly see,
Or it is withdrawn, or else 'twas all Hypocrisy.
III.
I saw thy much estranged eyes, I saw
False Musidore thy formal altered Face,
When thou betray'dst my seeming happiness,
And coldly took'st my kind Address:
But know that I will live; for in thy place
Heaven has provided for me now
A constant Friend, that dares not break a vow,
That Friend will I embrace,
And never more my overweening Love misplace.
Il Immaturo. EPITAPH.
BRave Youth, whose too too hasty Fate
His Glories did anticipate,
Whose active Soul had laid the great design
To emulate those Heroes of his Line!
He showed the world how great a Man
Might be contracted to a Span;
How soon our teeming expectations fail,
How little tears and wishes can prevail:
Could life hold out with these supplies
He Would lived still in his Parents eyes,
And this cold stone had never said, Here he lies.
ON Mrs. Dove, Wife to the Reverend Dr. Henry Dove. EPITAPH.
It Is thus -- and thus farewell to all
Vain Mortals do Perfection call;
To Beauty, Goodness, Modesty,
Sweet temper, and true Piety.
The rest an Angels Pen must tell;
Long, Long, beloved Dust farewell.
Those blessings which we highliest prize
Are soonest ravished from our Eyes.
Lucretius.
SEd jam nec Domus accipiet te laeta, nec Vxor
Optima, nec dulces occurrent oscula nati
Praeripere, and tacita pectus dulcedine tangent.
Paraphrased.
WHen thou shall leave this miserable life,
Farewell thy house, farewell thy charming Wife,
Farewell for ever to thy Souls delight,
Quite blotted out in everlasting night!
No more thy pretty darling Babes shall greet thee
By thy kind Name, nor strive who first shall meet thee.
Their Kisses with a secret pleasure shall not move thee!
For who shall say to thy dead Clay, I love thee!
On the Eminent Dr. EDWARD BROWN'S TRAVELS.
THus from a foreign Clime rich Merchants come,
And thus unlade their Rarities at home:
Thus, undergo an acceptable toil,
With Treasures to enrich their native Soil.
They for themselves, for others you unfold
A Cargo swollen with Diamonds and Gold.
With Indefatigable Travels, they
The trading World; the Learned you survey;
And for renown with great Columbus vie,
In subterranean Cosmography.
ON POVERTY.
I.
OPoverty! thou great and wise man's School!
Mistress of Arts! and scandal to the Fool!
Heavens sacred Badge, which the Heroes heretofore,
(Bright Caravans of Saints and Martyrs) wore,
To the Host Triumphant valiant Souls are sent
From those we call the Ragged Regiment:
Sure Guide to everlasting Peace above,
Thou do the impediments remove;
The unnecessary Loads of Wealth and State,
Which make men swell too big for the strait Gate.
II.
Thou happy Port, where we from storms are free,
And need not fear (false world) thy Pyracy.
Hither for ease and shelter did retire
The busy Charles, and wearied Casimire;
Abjured their Thrones, and made a solemn Vow,
Their radiant heads to thee should ever bow.
Why should thy Tents so terrible appear
Where Monarchs Reformadoes were?
Why should men call that state of Life forlorn,
Which God approves of, and which Kings have born?
III.
Mad Luxury! what do thy Vassals reap
From a Life's long debauch, but late to weep!
What the cursed Miser, who would fain Ape thee,
And wear thy Livery, Great Poverty!
The prudent Wretch for future Ages cares,
And hoards up sins for his impatient Heirs!
Full little does he think the time will come
When he is gone to his long Home,
The Prodigal Youth for whom he took such pains
Shall be thy Slave* and wear thy loathed Chains.
IV.
Fair handmaid to Devotion, by whose aid,
Our souls are all disrobed, all naked laid,
In thy true Mirror men themselves do see
Just what they are, not what they seem to be.
The flattering World misrepresents our face,
And cheats us with a Magnifying Glass,
Our meanness nothing else does truly show,
But only Death, but only Thou,
Who teach our minds above this Earth to fly,
And pant, and breath for Immortality.
Urania to her Friend Parthenissa. A DREAM.
IN a soft Vision of the night,
My Fancy represented to my sight
A goodly gentle Shade;
Methought it moved with a Majestic Grace,
But the surprising sweetness of it is Face
Made me amazed, made me afraid:
I found a secret shivering in my heart,
Such as Friends feel that Meet or Part:
Approaching nearer with a timorous eye,
Is then my Parthenissa Dead, said I?
Ah Parthenissa! if thou yet are kind,
As kind as when like me, Thou mortal were,
When thou, and I had equal share in either's heart,
How can thou bear that I am left behind!
Dear Parthenissa! O those pleasant hours,
That blessed our innocent Amors!
When in the common Treasury of one Breast,
All that was Thine or Mine did rest.
Dear Parthenissa! -- Friend! what shall I say?
Ah speak to thy Urania!
O envious Death! nothing but thee I feared,
No other Rival could estrange
Her Soul from mine or make a Change.
Scarce had I spoke my passionate fears,
And overwhelmed my self in tears:
But Parthenissa smiled, and then she disappeared.
On the Death of the Earl of ROCHESTER. Pastoral.
I.
A Son his deathbed gasping Strephon lay,
Strephon the wonder of the Plains,
The noblest of the Arcadian Swains;
Strephon the Bold, the Witty, and the Gay:
With many a sigh and many a tear he said,
Remember me, ye Shepherds, when I Am dead.
II.
Ye trifling Glories of this world, Adicu,
And vain applauses of the Age;
For when we quit this Earthly Stage,
Believe me, Shepherds, for I tell you true;
Those pleasures which from virtuous deeds we have,
Procure the sweetest slumbers in the Grave.
III.
Then since your fatal Hour must surely come,
Surely your heads lie low as mine,
Your bright Meridian Sun decline;
Beseech the mighty Pan to guard you home,
If to Elyzium you would happy fly,
Live not like Strephon, but like Strephon die.
In obitum illustrissimi, ingeniosissimique JOANNIS, Comitis ROFFENSIS, Carmen
Pastorale, Versu Leonino redditum.
I.
LEcto prostratus Strephon moribundus,
Planitierum Strephon decus
Princeps curantium pecus,
Audax, facetus, Strephon and jucundus,
Lugens pastoribus sic est affatus
Memimini mei cum migratus.
II.
Honores mundi futiles valete,
Plaudite aevi and fucata,
Mortali scena nam mutata
Fidem veriloquo adhibete
Voluptas profluens ex virtute
Sold obdormiscit cum salute.
III.
Cum nulla in mortem sit medela,
In terram capita cuncta incurvabunt,
Soles micantes declinabunt,
Pan supplicetor pro tutela
Beatorum ut recipiant chori:
Strephon non doceat vivere sed mori.
ON Dr. WOODFORD'S PARAPHRASE ON THE CANTICLES.
I.
WEll! since it must be, so let it be,
For what do Resolutions signify,
When we are urged to write by Destiny?
II.
I had resolved, nay, and I almost swore,
My bedrid Muse should walk abroad no more:
Alas! it is more than time that I give over.
III.
In the Recesses of a private Breast,
I thought to entertain your charming Guest,
And never to have boasted of my Feast.
IV.
But see (my friend) when through the world you go,
My Laquy-Verse must shadow-like pursue,
Thin, and Obscure to make a Foil for you.
V.
It Is true, you cannot need my feeble Praise,
A lasting Monument to your Name to raise,
Well-known in Heaven by your Angeliqu' Lays.
VI.
There in indelible Characters they are writ,
Where no pretended Heights will easy sit,
But those of serious consecrated Wit.
VII.
By immaterial defecated Love,
Your Soul its Heavenly Origin does prove,
And in least dangerous Raptures soars above.
VIII.
How could I wish (dear Friend!) unsaid again
(For once I ranked my self with tuneful men)
Whatever dropped from my unhallowed Pen!
VIII.
The trifling Rage of youthful heat, once past,
Who is not troubled for his wit misplaced!
All pleasant Follies breed regret at last.
X.
While Reverend Donn's, and noble Herbert's Flame
A glorious immortality shall claim,
In the most durable Records of Fame,
XI.
Our modish Rhimes, like Culinary Fire,
Unctuous and Earthy, shall in smoke expire;
In odorous Clouds your Incense shall aspire.
VII.
Let the Pagan-world your pious verse defy,
Yet shall they envy when they come to die,
Your wiser Projects on Eternity.
LAODAMIA to PROTESILAUS. ONE OF OVID'S Epistles Translated.
The ARGUMENT.
Protesilaus lying Windbound at Aulis, in the Grecian Fleet, designed for the
Trojan War, his Wife Laodamia sends this following Epistle to him.

HEalth to the gentle Man of War, and may
What Laodamia sends, the Gods convey.
The Wind that still in Aulis holds my Dear,
Why was it not so cross to keep him here?
Let the Wind raise an Hurricane at Sea,
Were he but safe and warm ashore with me.
Ten thousand kisses I had more to give him,
Ten thousand cautions, and soft words to leave him:
In have he left me, summoned by the Wind,
(The Wind to barbarous Mariners only kind.)
The Seamans pleasure is the Lovers pain,
( Protesilaus from my bosom taken!)
As from my faultering tongue half speeches fell,
Scarce could I speak that wounding word Farewell,
A merry Gale (at Sea they call it so)
Filled every Sail with joy, my breast with woe,
There went my dear Protesilaus --
While I could see Thee, full of eager pain,
My greedy eyes epicuriz'd on Thine,
When Thee no more, but thy spread Sails I view,
I looked, and looked, till I had lost them too;
But when nor Thee, nor them I could descry,
And all was Sea that came within my eye,
They say (for I have quite forgot) they say
I strait grew pale, and fainted quite away;
Compassionate Iphiclus, and the good old man,
My Mother too to my assistance ran;
In have cold water on my Face they threw,
And brought me to my self with much ado.
They meant it well, to me it seemed not so,
Much kinder had they been to let me go;
My anguish with my Soul together came,
And in my heart burst out the former flame:
Since which, my uncomb'd locks unheeded flow,
Undrest, forlorn, I care not how I go;
Inspired with Wine, thus Bacchus frolic rout
Staggered of old, and straggled all about.
Put on, put on, the happy Ladies say,
Thy Royal Robes, fair Laodamia.
Alas! before Troys Walls my Dear does lie,
What pleasure can I take in Tyrian die?
Shall Curls adorn my head, an Helmet thine?
I in bright Tissues, thou in Armor shine?
Rather with studied negligence I Will be
As ill, if not disguised worse than thee.
O Paris! raised by ruins! may thou prove
As fatal in thy War, as in thy Love!
O that the Grecian Dame had been less fair,
Or thou less lovely had appeared to Her!
O Menelaus! timely cease to strive,
With how much blood will thou thy loss retrieve?
From me, ye Gods, avert your heavy doom,
And bring my Dear, laden with Laurels home:
But my heart fails me, when I think of War,
The sad reflection costs me many a tear:
I tremble when I hear the very name
Of every place where thou shall fight for fame;
Besides the adventurous Ravisher well knew
The safest Arts his Villainy to pursue;
In noble dress he did her heart surprise,
With gold he dazzled her unguarded Eyes,
He backed his Rape with Ships and armed Men,
Thus stormed, thus took the beauteous Fortress in.
Against the power of Love and force of Arms
There Is no security in the brightest Charms.
Hector I fear, much do I Hector fear,
A Man (they say) experienced in War,
My Dear, if thou have any love for me,
Of that same Hector prithee mindful be;
Fly him be sure, and every other Foe,
Lest each of them should prove an Hector too.
Remember, when for fight thou shall prepare,
Thy Laodamia charged thee, Have a care;
For what wounds thou receiv'st, are given to her.
If by thy valor Troy must ruined be,
May not the ruin leave one Scar on thee;
Sharer in the honor, from the danger free!
Let Menelaus fight, and force his way
Through the false Ravishers Troops to his Helena.
Great be his Victory, as his Cause is good.
May he swim to her in his Enemies Blood.
Thy Case is different. -- may thou live to see
(Dearest) no other Combatant but me!
Ye generous Trojans, turn your Swords away
From his dear Breast, find out a nobler Prey,
Why should you harmless Laodamia slay?
My poor good natured Man did never know
What it is to fight, or how to face a Foe;
Yet in Loves Field what wonders can he do?
Great is his Prowess and his Fortune too;
Let them go fight, who know not how to woo.
Now I must own, I feared to let thee go,
My trembling Lips had almost told thee so.
When from thy Father's house thou did withdraw,
Thy fatal stumble at the door I saw,
I saw it, sighed, and prayed the sign might be
Of thy return a happy Prophecy!
I cannot but acquaint thee with my fear,
Be not too brave, -- Remember, -- Have a care,
And all my dreads will vanish into Air.
Among the Grecians some one must be found
That first shall set his foot on Trojan ground;
Unhappy she that shall his loss bewail,
Grant, O ye Gods, thy courage then may fail.
Of all the Ships be thine the very last,
Thou the last Man that lands; there needs no have
To meet a potent, and a treacherous Foe;
Thou Wilt land I fear too soon, though never so slow.
At thy Return ply every Sail and Oar,
And nimbly leap on thy deserted shore.
All the day long, and all the lonely night,
Black thoughts of thee my anxious Soul affright:
Darkness, to other Women's pleasures kind,
Augments, like Hell, the torments of my mind.
I court even Dreams, on my forsaken Bed,
False Joys must serve, since all my true are fled.
What Is that same aerie Phantom so like thee!
What wailings do I hear, what paleness see?
I wake, and hug my self, it is but a Dream. --
The Grecian Altars know I feed their flame,
The want of hallowed Wine my tears supply,
Which make the sacred fire burn bright and high.
When shall I clasp thee in these Arms of mine,
These longing Arms, and lie dissolved in thine?
When shall I have thee by thy self alone,
To learn the wondrous Actions thou have done?
Which when in rapturous words thou have begun*
With many, and many a kiss, prithee tell on,
Such interruptions grateful pauses are,
A Kiss in Story's but an Halt in War.
But, when I think of Troy, of winds and waves,
I fear the pleasant dream my hope deceives:
Contrary winds in Port detain thee too,
In spite of wind and tide why would thou go?
Thus, to thy Country thou would hardly come,
In spite of wind and tide thou went from home.
To his own City Neptune stops the way,
Revere the Omen, and the Gods obey.
Return ye furious Grecians, homeward fly,
Your stay is not of Chance, but Destiny:
How can your Arms expect desired success,
That thus contend for an Adulteress?
But, let not me forespeak you, no, -- set Sail,
And Heaven be friend you with a prosperous gale!
Ye Trojans! with regret methinks I see
Your first encounter with your Enemy;
I see fair Helen put on all her Charms,
To buckle on her lusty Bridegroom's Arms;
She gives him Arms, and kisses she receives,
(I hate the transports each to other gives.)
She leads him forth, and she commands him come
Safely victorious, and triumphant home;
And he (no doubt) will make no nice delay,
But diligently do what e're she say.
Now he returns! -- see with what amorous speed
She takes the ponderous Helmet from his head,
And courts the weary Champion to her Bed.
We Women, too too credulous alas!
Think what we fear will surely come to pass.
Yet, while before the Leaguer thou do lie,
Thy Picture is some pleasure to my Eye;
That, I caress in words most kind and free,
And lodge it on my Breast, as I would Thee.
There must be something in it more than Art,
'Twere very Thee, could it thy mind impart;
I kiss the pretty Idol, and complain,
As if (like Thee) 't would answer me again.
By thy return, by thy dear Self, I swear,
By our Loves Vows, which most religious are,
By thy beloved Head, and those gray Hairs
Which time may on it Snow in future years,
I come, where ever thy Fate shall bid Thee go,
Eternal Partner of thy Weal and Woe,
So thou but live, tho all the Gods say No.
Farewell, -- but prithee very careful be
Of thy beloved Self (I mean) of me.
TO THE Excellent Master of MUSIC SEIGNIOR PIETRO REGGIO, On His BOOK of SONGS.
THo to advance thy Fame, full well I know
How very little my dull Pen can do;
Yet, with all deference, I gladly wait,
Enthrong'd amongst the attendants on thy State:
Thus when Arion, by his Friends betrayed,
Upon his Understanding- Dolphin played,
The Scaly People their Resentments showed
By pleased Levaltoes on the wondering sloud.
Great Artist! Thou deserve our loudest Praise
From the Garland to the meanest branch of Bays;
For Poets can but Say, Thou make them Sing,
And the Embrio-words do to Perfection bring;
By us the Muse conceives, but when that is done,
Thy Midwifry makes fit to see the Sun;
Our naked Lines, dressed, and adorned by Thee,
Assume a Beauty, Pomp, and Bravery;
So awful and majestic they appear,
They need not blush to reach a Prince's ear.
Princes tho to poor Poets seldom kind,
Their Numbers turned to Air, with pleasure mind.
Studied and labored tho our Poems be
Alas! they die unheeded without Thee,
Whose Art can make our breathless Labors live,
Spirit and everlasting Vigor give.
Whether we write of Heroes and of Kings,
In Mighty Numbers, Mighty Things,
Or in an humble Ode express our Sense
Of the happy state of Ease and Innocence;
A Country Life where the contented Swain
Hugs his Dear Peace, and does a Crown disdain;
Thy dextrous Notes with all our Thoughts comply,
Can creep on Earth, can up to Heaven fly;
In Heights and Cadences, so sweet, so strong.
They suit a Shepherds Reed, an Angels Tongue.
-- But who can comprehend
The raptures of thy voice, and miracles of thy hand?
EPITAPH On the Incomparable Sir JOHN KING IN THE Temple-Church.
HEic juxta jacet
Johannes King Miles,
Serenissimo Carolo Secundo
In Legibus Angliae Consultus,
Illustrissimo Jacobo Duci Eboracensi
Sollicitator Generalis.
Qualis, Quantusve sis Lector,
Profundum obstupesce;
Labia digitis comprime,
Oculos lachrymis suffunde.
En! ad pedes tuos
Artis and Naturae suprema Conamina,
Fatorum Ludibria!
Non ita pridem
Erat Iste Pulvis omnifariam Doctus,
Musarum Gazophylacium,
Eloquentiam calluit, claram, puram, innocuam,
Legibus suae Patriae erat Instructissimus,
Suis charus, Principibus gratus, Omnibus urbanus,
Sui saeculi
Ornamentum illustre, Desiderium irreparabile.
Hinc disce Lector,
Quantilla Mortalitatis Gloria
Splendidissimis decorata Dotibus.
Dulcem soporem agite
Dilecti, Eruditi, Beati Cineres!
Obiit Junii 29. 1677. Aetat. 38.

ON THE DEATH Of my Dear Brother Mr. RICHARD FLATMAN. Pindariqu' Ode.
Stanza I.
UNhappy Muse! employed so often
On melancholy thoughts of Death,
What have Thou left so tender, and so soft
As thy poor Master fain would breath
Over this lamented Hearse?
No usual flight of fancy can become
My sorrows over a Brothers Tomb.
O that I could be elegant in Tears,
That with Conceptions, not unworthy Thee,
Great as Thy merit, Vigorous as Thy years,
I might convey Thy Elegy
To the Grief, and Envy of Posterity!
A gentler Youth never Crowned his Parents cares,
Or added ampler Joy to their gray Hairs:
Kind to his Friends, to his Relations Dear,
Easei to all. -- Alas what is there Here
For Man to set his heart upon,
Since what we dote on most, is soonest gone!
Ah me! I Have lost a sweet Companion
A Friend, A Brother All in One!
II.
How did it chill my Soul to see thee lie
Struggling with pangs in thy last Agony!
When with a manly courage thou did brave
Approaching Death, and with a steady mind
(Ever averse to be confined)
Did triumph over the Grave.
Thou made no womanish moan,
But scorn'dst to give one groan:
He that begs pity is afraid to Die,
Only the Brave despise their Destiny.
But when I call to mind how thy kind Eyes
Were passionately fixed on mine,
How, when thy faultring Tongue gave over,
And I could hear thy pleasing Voice no more;
How, when I laid my Cheek to thine,
Kissed thy pale lips, and pressed thy trembling Hand,
Thou, in return, smil'dst gently in my Face,
And hugg'dst me with a close Embrace;
I am amazed, I am unmann'd.
Something extremely kind I sain would say,
But through the tumult of my Breast,
With too officious Love oppressed,
I find my feeble words can never force their way.
III
Beloved Youth What shall I do!
Once my Delight, my Torment now!
How immaturely a^t thou snatched away!
But Heaven shines on thee with many a glorious ray
Of an unclouded, and immortal day,
Whilst I lie grovelling here below
In a dark stormy Night.
The blustering storm of Life with thee is over,
For thou art landed on that happy Shore,
Where thou can Hope, or Fear no more;
Thence with compassion thou shall see
The Plagues, the Wars, the Fires, the Scarcity,
The Devastations of an Enemy,
From which thy early Fate has set thee free;
For when thou went to thy Long home,
Thou were exempt from all the ills to come,
And shall hereafter be
Spectator only of the Tragedy
Acted on frail Mortality.
So some one lucky Mariner
From shipwreck saved by a propitious Star,
Advanced upon a neighboring Rock looks down,
And sees far off his old Companions drown.
IV.
There in a state of perfect ease,
Of never interrupted happiness,
Thy large illuminated mind
Shall matter of eternal Wonder find;
There do thou clearly see, how, and from whence
The Stars communicate their influence,
The methods of the Almighty Architect,
How he consulted with himself alone
To lay the wondrous Cornerstone,
When He this goodly Fabric did erect.
There, Thou do understand
The motions of the secret hand,
That guides the invisible Wheel,
Which here, we never shall know, but ever seel;
There Providence, the vain man's laughing stock,
The miserable good-mans stumbling block,
Unfolds the puzling Riddle to thy eyes,
And it is own wise contrivance justifies.
What timorous Man would n't be pleased to die,
To make so noble a discovery?
V.
And must I take my solemn leave
Till time shall be no more!
Can neither sighs, nor tears, nor prayers retrieve
One cheerful hour!
Must one unlucky moment sever
Us, and our hopes, us and our joys for ever! --
Is this cold Clod of Earth that endeared Thing
I lately did my Brother call?
Are these the Artful Fingers that might vie
With all the Sons of harmony
And overpower them all!
Is this the studious comprehensive head
With curious Arts so richly furnished!
Alas! Thou, and thy glories all are gone,
Buried in darkness, and oblivion.
It Is so -- and I must follow thee,
Yet but a little while, and I shall see thee,
Yet but a little while I shall be with thee,
Then some kind friend perhaps may drop one tear for me.
CORIDON On the death of his dear ALEXIS, Ob. Jan. 28. 1682/3. Pastoral SONG.
Set by Dr. BLOW.
ALexis! dear Alexis! lovely Boy!
O my Damon! O Palaemon! snatched away,
To some far-distant Region gone,
Has left the miserable Coridon
Bereft of all his comforts, all alone!
Have you not seen my gentle Lad,
Whom every Swain did love,
Cheerful, when every Swain was sad,
Beneath the melancholy Grove?
His face was beauteous as the dawn of day,
Broke through the gloomy shades of night:
O my anguish! my delight!
Him (ye kind Shepherds) I bewail,
Till my eyes, and heart shall fail.
It Is He that is landed on that distant shore,
And you and I, shall see him here no more.
Return Alexis! O return!
Return, return, in vain I cry;
Poor Coridon shall never cease to mourn
Thy too untimely, cruel destiny.
Farewell for ever charming Boy!
And, with Thee, all the ttansports of my Joy!
Ye powers above, why should I longer live,
To waste a few uncomfortable years,
To drown my self in tears,
For what my sighs, and prayers can never retrieve?
A SONG ON Newyears-day before the King, Car. 2. Set by Dr. BLOW, 1682/3,
My trembling Song! awake! arise!
And early tell thy tuneful Tale,
Tell thy great Master, that the Night is gone;
The feeble Phantoms disappear,
And now the New Tear's welcome Sun
Over spreads the Eastern Skies;
He smiles on every Hill, he smiles on every Vale.
His glories fill our Hemisphere;
Tell him Apollo greets Him well,
And with his fellow Wanderers agrees
To reward all his labors, and lengthen his days.
In spite of the politic follies of Hell,
And vain contrivance of the destinies.
Tell Him a Crown of Thorns no more
Shall His sacred temples gore,
For all the rigours of His life are over.
Wondrous Prince! designed to show
What noble minds can bravely undergo,
You are our wonder, you our love;
Earth from beneath, Heaven from above,
Call loud for Songs of Triumph, and of praise,
Their voices, and their souls they raise;
IO PAEAN do we sing*
Long Live, Long Live the King!
Rise mighty Monarch, and ascend the Throne,
It Is yet, once more your own,
For Lucifer, and all his Legions are o'rthrown:
Son of the Morning, firstborn Son of Light,
How were thou tumbled headlong down,
Into the dungeons of Eternal night!
While the Loyal Stars of the Celestial Quire
Surrounded with immortal beams,
Mingle their unpolluted flames,
Their just Creator to admire:
With awful reverence they adore Him,
Cover their faces, and fall down before Him;
And night and day for ever sing
Hosannach, Hallelujah to the Almighty King!
ON The Kings Return to White Hall, after his Summers Progress, 1684.
SONG.
Set by Mr. Henry Purcell.
From those serene, and rapturous joys
A Country life alone can give,
Exempt from tumult, and from noise,
Where Kings forget the troubles of their reigns,
And are almost as happy as their humble Swains,
By feeling that they live:
Behold the indulgent Prince is come
To view the Conquests of His mercy shown
To the new Proselytes of His mighty Town,
And men, and Angels bid Him welcome Home;
Not with an Helmet, or a glittring Spear
Does He appear.
He boast no Trophies of a cruel Conqueror,
Brought back in triumph from a bloody War;
But with an Olive branch adorned,
As once the long expected Dove returned.
Welcome as soft refreshing showers:
That raise the sickly heads of drooping flowers:
Welcome as early beams of light
To the benighted Traveller,
When he descries bright Phosphorus from afar,
And all his fears are put to flight.
Welcome, more welcome does He come
Than life to Lazarus from his drousie Tomb,
When in his winding sheet, at his new birth,
The strange surprising word was said -- Come forth!
Nor does the Sun more comfort bring,
When he turns Winter into Spring,
Than the blessed Advent of a peaceful King.
Chorus.
With Trumpets and Shouts we receive the Worlds Wonder,
And let the Clouds echo His welcome with thunder,
Such a Thunder as applauded what mortals had done,
When they fixed on His Brows His Imperial Crown.
TO Mr. ISAAC WALTON. On his Publication of THEALMA.
Long had the bright Thealma lain obscure,
Her beauteous charms that might the world
Lay like rough Diamonds, in the Mine, unknown
By all the sons of folly trampled on,
Till your kind hand unveiled her lovely face,
And gave her vigor to exert her rays:
Happy old man, whose worth all mankind knows,
Except thy self, who charitably shows
The ready road to Virtue, and to Praise,
The way to many long, and happy days;
The noble art of generous Piety,
And how to compass an Euthanasie!
Hence did he learn the skill of living well,
The bright Thealma was his Oracle;
Inspired Her, he knows no anxious cares
In near a Century of happy years;
Easy he lives, and easy shall he lie
On the soft bosom of Eternity.
As as long Spencers noble flames shall burn,
And deep devotion shall attend his urn;
As long as Chalk hill's venerable name
With humble emulation shall enslame
Posterity, and fill the Rolls of fame,
Your memory shall ever be secure,
And long beyond our short-lived praise endure;
As Phydias in Minerva's shield did live,
And shared that immortality he alone could give.
Pastoral Dialogue. CASTARA and PARTHENIA.
Parthenia. MY dear Castara, the other day
I heard an ancient Shepherd say,
Alas for me! my time draws nigh,
And shortly, shortly I must die!
What meant the man? for lo! apace
Torrents of tears ran down his face.

Castara. Poor harmless Maid! why would thou know,
What known, must needs create thee woe?
'Twill cloud the Sunshine of thy days,
And in thy soul such trouble raise,
Thou Wilt grieve, and tremble, and complain,
And say that all thy beauty's vain.

Parthenia. Ah me! sure it is some dreadful thing
That can so great disorder bring,
Yet tell me, prithee tell me, do,
For it is some ease the worst to know.

Castara. To die, ( Parthenia) is to quit
The World, and the Suns glorious light,
To leave our flocks, and fields for ever,
To part, and never meet again, O never!
After that cruel hideous hour,
Thou, and I shall sing no more;
In the cold Earth they will thee lay,
And what thou dot'st on shall be Clay.

Parthenia. Alas! why will they use me so,
A Virgin that no evil do?

Castara. Roses wither, Turtles die,
Fair, and kind as Thou and I.

Chorus amb. Then, since it is appointed to the dust we must go;
Let us innocently live, and virtuously do,
Let us love, let us sing, it is no matter, it is all one,
If our Lamps be extinguished at midnight or noon.

CASTABELLA Going to Sea.
SONG.
Set by Mr. JAMES HEART.
I.
HArk hark! methinks I hear the Seamen call,
The boistrous Seamen say,
Bright Castabella, come away!
The Wind sits fair, the Vessels stout and tall,
Bright Castabella come away!
For Time and Tide can never stay.
II.
Our mighty Master Neptune calls aloud,
The Zephyrs gently blow,
The Tritons cry you are too slow,
For every Sea-nymph of the glittering Crowd,
Has Garlands ready to throw down
When you ascend your watery Throne.
III.
See, see! she comes, she comes, and now adieu!
Let Us bid adieu to shore,
And to all we feared before;
O Castabella! we depend on you,
On you our better fortunes lay,
Whose eyes and voice the winds and Seas obey.
On the Death of my worthy friend Mr. JOHN OLDHAM. Pindarique Pastoral Ode.
Stanza I.
UNdoubtedly it is thy peculiar fate,
Ah miserable Astragon!
Thou art condemned alone
To bear the burden of a wretched life,
Still in this howling wilderness to roam,
Whilst all thy bosom friends unkindly go,
And leave thee to lament them here below.
Thy dear Alexis would n't stay,
Joy of thy life, and pleasure of thine eyes,
Dear Alexis went away,
With an invincible surprise;
The angelick Youth early disliked this state,
And innocently yielded to his fate;
Never did Soul of a Celestial birth,
Inform a purer piece of Earth:
O! that 'twere not in vain,
To wish what is past might be retrieved again!
Thy dotage, thy Alexis then
Had answered all thy vows and prayers,
And crowned with pregnant joys thy silver hairs,
Loved to this day amongst the living sons of men.
II.
And thou, my friend, have left me too,
Menalcas! poor Menalcas! even Thou!
Of whom so loudly Fame has spoke
In the Records of her eternal book,
Whose disregarded worth, ages to come,
Shall wail with indignation over thy Tomb.
Worthy were thou to live, as long as Vice,
Should need a Satyr, that the frantic Age
Might tremble at the lash of thy Poetic rage.
The untutour'd world in after times
May live uncensur'd for their crimes,
Freed from the dreads of thy reforming Pen,
Turn to old Chaos once again.
Of all the instructive Bards, whose more than The. ban lyre
Could salvage souls, with manly thoughts inspire,
Menalcas worthy was to live:
Tell me ye mournful Swains,
Say you his fellow-shepherds that survive,
Has my adored Menalcas left behind
On all these penfive Plains
A gentler shepherd with a braver mind?
Which of you all did more Majestic show,
Or wore the garland on a sweeter Brow?
III.
But wayward Astragon resolves no more
The death of his Menalcas to deplore,
The place to which he wisely is withdrawn
Is altogether blessed.
There, no clouds o'rewhelm his breast,
No midnight cares shall break his rest,
For all is everlasting cheerful dawn.
The Poets charming bliss,
perfect ease and sweet recess,
There shall he long possess.
The treacherous world no more shall him deceive,
Of hope and fortune he has taken leave;
And now in mighty triumph does he reign
Over the unthinking Rabbles spite
(His head adorned with beams of light)
And the dull wealthy fools disdain.
Thriee happy he, that dies the Muses friend,
He needs no Obelisque, no Pyramid
His sacred dust to hide,
He needs not for his memory to provide,
For well he knows his praise can never end.
ON Sir JOHN MICKLETHWAIT'S MONUMENT In S. Botolphs-Aldersgate-Church, London.
M. S.
Heic juxta, spe plena resurgendi situm est
Depositum mortale
JOANNIS MICKLETHW AITE Equitis,
Serenissimo Principi Carolo II a Medicina,
Qui cum primis solertissimus, fidissimus, felicissimus,
In Collegio Medicorum Londinensium
Lustrum integrum, and quod excurrit
Praesidis Provinciam dignissime ornavit:
Et tandem emenso aetatis tranquillae stadio,
Pietate sincera,
Inconcussa vitae integritate,
Benigna morum suavitate,
Sparsa passim Philanthrophia
Spectabilis;
Miserorum Asylum,
Maritus optimus,
Parens indulgentissimus
Suorum luctus,
Bonorum omnium Amor, and Deliciae,
Septuagenarius senex,
Caelo maturus,
Fato non invitus cessit
IV Kal. Augusti Anno salutis MDCLXXXII.
Caetera loquantur
Languentium deploranda suspiria,
Viduarum, ac Orphanorum
Propter amissum Patronum profundi gemitus,
Pauperumque,
Nudorum jam, arque esurientium
Importuna Viscera,
Monumenta, hoc marmore long perenniora.
Maerens posuit pientissima Conjunx.
M. S.
Heic juxta jacet
THOMAS ROCK Armg. Salopiensis,
Vita functus Januarii 3. Aetat. 62. 1678.
En Lector!
Cinerem non vulgarem,
Virum vere magnum,
Si prisca fides, pietasque primaeva,
Si amicitiae faedera strictissima,
Si pectus candidum, and sincerum,
Ac integerrima Vita,
Virum vere magnum conflare poterint.
En hominem Cordatum!
Calamitosae Majestatis
(Furente nupera perduellium rabie)
Strenuum assertorem,
Obstinalum Vindicem!
En animae generosae quantillum Ergastulum!
O charum Deo Depositum!
Vestrum undequaquam Inopes,
Vestrum quotcunque Viri praestantiores,
Dolorem inconsolabilem,
Desiderium, in omne aevum, irreparabile!
On the DEATH OF THE ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE RUPERT: Pindarique Ode.
STANZA I.
MAn surely is not what he seems to be;
Surely our selves we over-rate,
Forgetting that like other Creatures, we
Must bend our heads to Fate.
Lord of the whole Creation, MAN,
(How big the Title shows!)
Trifles away a few uncertain Years,
Cheated with Hopes, and rackt with Fears,
Through all Life's little Span,
Then down to silence, and to darkness goes;
And when we Die, the Crowd that trembling stood
E're while struck with the terror of a Nod,
Shake off their wonted reverence with their Chains,
And at their pleasure use our poor Remains.
Ah mighty Prince!
Whom lavish Nature, and industrious Art
Had fitted for Immortal Fame,
Their utmost Bounty could no more impart;
How comes it that Thy venerable Name
Should be submitted to my Theme?
Unkindly baulkt by the prime skilful men,
Abandoned to be fully'd by so mean a Pen!
Tell me, ye skilful men, if you have read
In all the fair Memorials of the Dead,
A Name so formidably Great,
So full of Wonders, and unenvi'd Love,
In which all Virtues, and all Graces strove,
So terrible, and yet so sweet;
Show me a Star in Honors Firmament,
(Of the first magnitude let it be)
That from the darkness of this World made free,
A brighter luster to this World has lent.
Ye men of reading, show me one,
That shines with such a beam as His.
Rupert's a Constellation,
Outvies Arcturus, and the Pleiades.
And if the Julian Star of old out-shone
The lesser Fires, as much as them the Moon,
Posterity perhaps will wonder why
An Hero more divine than He
Should leave (after his Apotheosis)
No Gleam of light in all the Galaxie
Bright as the Sun in the full blaze of Noon.
III.
How shall my trembling Muse thy Praise rehearse!
Thy Praise too lofty even for Pindar's Verse!
Whence shall she take her daring flight,
That she may soar aloft
In numbers masculine and soft,
In numbers adaequate
To thy Renowns Celestial height!
If from thy Noble Pedigree,
The Royal Blood that sparkled in thy Veins
A low Plebeian Eulogy disdains,
And he blasphemes that meanly writes of Thee.
If from thy Martial Deeds she boldly rise,
And sing thy valiant Infancy,
Rebellious Britain after felt full well,
Thou from thy Cradle were a Miracle.
Swadled in Armor, Drums appeased thy Cries,
And the shrill Trumpet sung thy Lullabies.
The Babe Alcides thus, gave early proof
In the first dawning of his Youth,
When with his tender hand the Snakes he slew,
What Monsters in his riper Years he would subdue.
IV.
Great Prince, in whom Mars and Minerva joined
Their last efforts to frame a mighty Mind,
A Pattern for Brave men to come, designed:
How did the Rebel Troops before thee fly!
How of thy Genius stand in aw!
When from the sulphurous Cloud
Thou in Thunder gav'st aloud
Thy dreadful Law
To the presumptuous Enemy.
In vain their traitorous Ensigns they displaid,
In vain they fought, in vain they prayed,
At thy victorious Arms dismayed.
Till Providence for Causes yet unknown,
Causes mysterious and deep,
Connived a while, as if asleep,
And seemed its dear Anointed to disown;
The prosperous Villainy triumphed over the Crown,
And hurled the best of Monarchs from his Throne.
O tell it not in Gath, nor Ascalon!
The best of Monarchs fell by impious Power,
The unspotted Victim for the guilty bled.
He bowed, he fell, there where he bowed he fell down dead;
Baptized Blessed Martyr in his sacred gore.
V.
Nor could those tempests in the giddy State,
O mighty Prince, thy Loyalty abate.
Though put to slight, thou fought'st the Parthian way,
And still the same appear'dst to be
Among the Beasts, and scaly Fry,
A Behemoth on Land, and a Leviathan at Sea;
Still, were thou Brave, still were thou Good,
Still firm to thy Allegiance stood
Amidst the foamings of the popular sloud.
( Cato with such a constancy of mind,
Espoused that Cause which all his Gods declined.)
Till gentler Stars amazed to see
Thy matchless and undaunted Bravery,
Blushed and brought back the murdered Father's Son,
Lest thou should plant him in The Imperial Throne,
Thou with thy single hand alone.
He that forgets the Glories of that Day,
When CHARLES the Merciful returned,
Never felt the transports of glad Sion's Joy,
When she had long in dust and ashes mourned:
He never understood with what surprise
She opened her astonished eyes
To see the goodly Fabric of the second Temple rise.
VI.
When CHARLES the Merciful his Entrance made
The Day was all around serene,
Not one ill-boding Cloud was seen
To cast a gloomy shade
On the triumphal Cavalcade.
In that, his first, and happy Scene,
The Powers above foretold his Halcyon Reign,
In which, like them, He evermore should prove
The kindest methods of Almighty Love:
And when black Crimes His Justice should constrain,
His pious Breast should share the Criminals pain:
Fierce as the Lion can he be, and gentle as the Dove.
Here stop my Muse, -- the rest let Angels sing,
Some of those Angels, who with constant care
To His Pavilion, near attendants are,
A Lifeguard given him by the Omnipotent King,
The Omnipotent King, whose Character He bears,
Whose Diadem on Earth he wears;
And may he wear it long, for many, many years.
VII.
And now (illustrious Ghost!) what shall we say?
What Tribute to thy precious memory pay?
Thy Death confounds, and strikes all Sorrows dumb.
Kingdoms and Empires make their moan,
Rescued by thee from Desolation;
In Pilgrimage hereafter shall they come,
And make their Offerings before thy Tomb,
Great Prince, so feared abroad, and so adored at home.
Jove's Bird that durst of late confront the Sun,
And in the wanton German Banners played,
Now hangs her Wing, and droops her Head,
Now recollects the Battles thou have won,
And calls too late to thee for aid.
All Christendom deplores the loss,
Whilst bloody Mahomet like a Whirlwind flies,
And insolently braves the ill-befriended Cross.
Europe in blood, and in confusion lies,
Thou in an easy good old age,
Removed from this tumultuous Stage,
Sleep'st unconcerned at all its Rage,
Secure of Fame, and from Detraction free:
He that to greater happiness would attain,
Or toward Heaven would swifter fly,
Must be much more than mortal man,
And never condescend to Die.
Dec. 13. 1682.
POEMA In OBITUM ILLUSTRISSIMI PRINCIPIS RUPERTI LATIN REDDITUM Non carmine
PINDARICO (ut illud) sed, (ut vocatur,) LAPIDARIO (Quod est medium inter
Oratoriam and Poesin) Videsis Emanuelem Thesaurum, in Patriarchis. AUTHORE
ANONYMO.
I.
PRoculdubio non sumus quod videmur,
Et nosmet ipsos aequo plus aestimamus,
Obliti quod, veluti Creatis omnibus,
Et nobis etiam Fato succumbendum.
Homo, totius Terrarum Orbis Dominus,
(Heu quam superbe, quam fastuose sonat!)
Paucos and incertos illudit annos,
Nunc spe deceptus, nunc metu cruciatus,
Per angustum Vitae curriculum,
Tandem ad taciturnas labitur Tenebras.
Et quando morimur, quam cito Turba tremula,
Jamdudum Natus terrore percita,
Venerationem solitam (cum Catenis) exuunt
Et, ad libitum despectas tractant Reliquias.
Potentissime Princeps!
Quem prodiga Natura, and Ars industria
Ad celebritatem immortalem adaptassent,
Cui plus addere non valuit ipsius ultima Benignitas;
Vnde venit quod Nomen tuum Venerandum,
Themati meo prostitueretur?
Per Viros Doctiores ingrate neglectum,
Et indocta mea Musa deliniri relictum!
II.
Dicite mihi, Viri peritiores, si legistis
In pulchris Mortuorum Catalogis,
Nomen adeo formidate Magnum,
Tantis Miraclis and inaemulo amore refertum;
In quo omnes Charites and Virtutes concertarunt.
Adeo terribile, and adeo dulce Nomen.
Ostendire mihi Stellam in Firmamento Honoris
(Sit etiam Primoe Magnitudinis)
Quae a tenebris hujus Mundi erepta
Majorem Mundo fulgorem praestitit;
O Viri eruditi, ostendite mihi unam,
Quae tam splendido Radio effulget.
Rupertus, est, Constellatio,
Praelucens Arcturum and Pleiades.
Et si olim Stella Juliana praefulsit
Ignes minores, quantum illos Luna,
Posteritas forsitan mirabitur, quare
Hero illos multo Divinior,
Nullum (post ejus Apotheosin)
In Galaxia jubar relinqueret
Sole clarius Meridionali.
III.
Quo pacto Musa mea tremens lauds tuas recitabit?
Lauds tuas, etiam Pindari Carmine excelsiores!
Vnde volatum sumet audacem,
Vt in altum sublevetur
In Numeris Masculis and Blandis,
In numeris adaequatis
Coelesti Famae tuae sublimitati?
Si a Nobili tua Genealogia
Sanguis Regalis in Venis tuis scintillans
Humilem and Plebeiam dedignatur Eulogiam,
(Nam de Te modice loquens Blasphemat)
Si a claris Bellicis facinoribus incipiet,
Et Virilia incunabula decantet,
Rebellis jamdudum sentivit Britannia,
Quantis Mirandis Cunae tuae claruere,
Loricis fasciatus, Tympana lachrymas demulserunt,
Et Tubarum clangores somnum allicierunt:
Sic olim Alcides praematurum dedit specimen
In primo Infantiae Diluculo,
Angues teneribus collidens manibus
Qualia in aetate provecta superaret Monstra.
IV.
Auguste Princeps, in quo Mars and Minerva suas
Vires contulere ingentem formare Animum
Praeclaris Posteris in Exemplar designatum,
Quoties Turmae Rebels coram te profugerunt
Genii tui Numine terrefactae?
Cum de Nube Sulphurea
Fulminibus dedisti sonoris
Leges tuas tremendas
Perduellibus insolentibus,
Frustra vexilla explicarunt perfida
Frustra pugnarunt, frustra fuderunt preces,
Armis tuis Victricibus attonitae.
Donec Superi, causis adhuc incognitis
Causis secretis and profundis
Connivere paulisper, quasi obdormientes,
Et peramatum Christum suum dereliquisse videbantur.
In Coronam triumphavit prosperum Nefas
Et Regum optimum a Solio deturbavit,
Ne annuntietis hoc in Gath aut Ascalon,
Monarcharum optimus impia vi corruit,
Immaculata Victima pro Sontibus fudit sangninem;
Inclinavit se, cecidit, ubi inclinaverat cecidit mortuus
Martyr beatus in Sacro suo Cruore Baptisatus.
V.
Nec valuerunt Turbines in Anarchia ista vertiginosa,
Invicte Princeps, fidelitatem tuam vibrare,
Nam retrocedens pugnasti more Parthico,
Et semper Idem remansisti,
Inter pecora, and pisces squammosas,
In terra Behemoth, in mari Leviathan:
Infractus adhue and adhuc Bonus
Fidelitati firmiter perseverasti
Inter fremitus Fluctuum Popularium.
Sic olim Cato pari animi constantia
Causam desponsavit, quam Dii omnes repudiarunt.
Donec Planetae benigniores, stupentes aspicere
Imparilem and impavidam tuam fortitudinem,
Erubuerunt, and Percussi Patris filium reduxerunt,
Ne tu illum in Solio Imperiali collocares,
Tu unica tua manu solus.
Qui Solis istius splendores oblitus fuerit
Quo Clementissimus redivit Carolus,
Nunquam sentivit laetae Sionis gaudia
Cum diu pulvere and cineribus lugisset;
Nunquam intellexit quali Raptu
Oculos extollebat attonitos
Templi Secundi Structuram renascentem videns.
VI.
Cum Carolus Clemens introitum fecit
Caelum erat undique serenum,
Nulla male-ominosa Nubes apparuit
Vmbram dare tenebricosam,
In Equitatum istum Triumphalem.
In illa prima and felici Scena
Praedixere Superi Regimen ejus Halcyoneum
In quo sicut illi, in aeternum probaret
Benignissimas Methodos praepotentis Amoris.
Et cum magna flagitia Vindictam ejus provocarent;
Pectus ejus humanius Rei compateretur poenas.
Vt Leo ferox, mitis ut Columba.
Hic sileat Musa -- quod reliquum est Angeli praedicent
Angeli isti qui assidua cura
Tentorio ejus quam proxime inserviunt
Samotophylaces a Rege Omnipotente delegati,
A Rege Omnipotente, cujus Majestatem praefert,
Cujus in terra gerit Diadema
Et diu gerat per multos, multos annos.
VII.
Quid autem, (Illustris Anima) quid dicemus?
Quale Tributum Piae tuae Memoriae solvemus?
Mors tua obtundit and mutum reddit Dolorem.
Regna and Imperia lugubres planctus faciunt
Ab extrema Ruina per te redempta.
Posthac e long Peregrinantes venient,
Et ad Tumulum tuum Oblationes tribuent,
O Magne Princeps foris verende, and domi venerate!
Jovis Ales, qui dudum Solemn tentare ausus est,
Et in mollibus Germanorum lusit vexillis,
Nunc alas demittit, and caput declinat,
Nunc repetit Victorias a Te potitas,
Et sero nimis tuum implorat auxilium.
Orbis Christianus deplorat Damnum,
Dum truculentus Mahomet Turbinis instar volat
Et impotenter bacchatur in male-sustentatam Crucem.
Sanguine and ruina volutans Europa jacet.
Tu in tranquilla and plena senectute
Semotus a tumultuoso Mundi Theatro
Rabiosa ejus insania intactus dormis,
Famae securus and ab omni obtrectatione liber.
Qui ampliorem attineret felicitatem,
Vel usque ad Coelos ocyus volaret,
Oportet esse plusquam Mortalem,
Nec unquam prorsus dignari mori.
On the much lamented DEATH OF OUR LATE SOVEREIGN LORD King Charles II. OF
BLESSED MEMORY. A Pindarique Ode.
STANZA I.
ALas! Why are we tempted to complain,
That Heaven is deaf to all our cries!
Regardless of poor Mortals miseries!
And all our fervent Prayers devoutly vain!
It Is hard to think the immortal Powers attend
Human affairs, who ravish from our sight
The Man, on whom such Blessings did depend,
Heavens, and Mankinds Delight!
The Man! O that opprobrious word, The Man!
Whose measure of duration's but a Span,
Some other name at Babel should have been contrived
(By all the vulgar World to have been received)
A Word as near as could be to Divinity,
Appropriate to Crowned Heads, who never ought to Die;
Some signal Word that should imply
All but the scandal of Mortality.
It Is fit, we little lumps of crawling Earth,
Derived from a Plebeian birth,
Such as our frail Foresathers were,
Should to our primitive Dust repair;
But Princes (like the wondrous Enoch) should be free
From Death's unbounded Tyranny,
And when their Godlike Race is run,
And nothing glorious left undone,
Never submit to Fate, but only Disappear.
II.
But, since the eternal Law will have it so,
That Monarchs prove at last but finer Clay,
What can their humble Vassals do?
What Reverence; What Devotion can we pay,
When these, our earthly Gods, are snatched away?
Yes, we can mourn, Yes, we can beat our breast,
Yes, we can call to mind those happy days
Of Pleasure, and of Rest,
When CHARLES the Merciful did reign,
That Golden Age, when void of cares,
All the long Summer's day,
We Atoms in His beams might sport, and play:
Yes, we can teach our Children to bewail
His fatal Loss, when we shall fail,
And make Babes learn in after days
The pretty way of stammering out His Praise,
His merited praise, which shall in every Age
With all advantage flame,
In spite of Furies, or infernal Rage,
And imp the Wings, and stretch the Lungs of Fame.
III.
Excellent Prince, whom every Mouth did bless,
And every bended knee adore,
On whom we gazed with exstasie of Joy
(A Vision which did satisfy, but never cloy)
From whom we dated all our happiness,
And from above could ask no more,
Our gladsome Cup was filled till it ran over.
Our Land (like Eden) flourished in His time,
Defended by an Angels Sword,
A terror 'twas to those abroad,
But all was Paradise to those within:
Nor could the Old Serpent's Stratagem
Ever supplant His well-watch'd Diadem.
Excellent Prince, of whom we once did say
With a triumphant noise,
In one united voice,
On that stupendous Day,
Long live, Long live the King!
And Songs of IO PAEAN sing,
How shall we bear this Tragical Surprise,
Now we must change Long Live, for Here He lies?
IV.
Have you forgot? (but who can Him forget?)
You watchful Spirits that preside
O'r sublunary things,
Who, when you look beneath, do ost deride,
Not without cause, some other petty Kings;
Have you forgot the greatness of His mind,
The bravery of His elevated Soul,
(But He had still a Goshen there)
When darkest Cares around His Royal heart did wind,
As Waves about a steady Rock do roll:
With what disdain He viewed
The fury of the giddy multitude,
And bare the Cross, with more than manly fortitude,
As He had learned in Sacred Lore,
His mighty Master had done long before.
And you must ever own
(Or else you very little know
Of what we think below)
That when the Hurricanes of the State were o'r,
When in His noontide blaze He did appear,
His gentle awful brow
Added fresh luster to the Imperial Crown,
By Birthright, and by Virtue, more than once His own.
V.
He was! -- but what He was, how great, how good,
How just, how He delighted not in blood,
How full of pity, and how strangely kind,
How hazardously constant to His Friend,
In Peace how glorious, and in War how brave,
Above the charms of Life, and terrors of the Grave:
When late Posterity shall tell:
What He has done shall to a Volume swell,
And every Line abound with Miracle
In that prodigious Chronicle.
Forgive ( unbody'd Sovereign) forgive,
And from your shining Mansion cast an Eye
To pity our officious Blasphemy,
When we have said the Best we can conceive.
Here stop (presumptuous Muse!) thy daring flight,
Here hide thy baffled head in shades of night,
Thou too obscure, thy dazzling Theme too bright,
For what thou should have said, (with grief struck dum)
Will more emphatically besupply'd
By the joint Groans of melancholy Christendom.
TO HIS SACRED MAJESTY King James II.
DRead Prince! Whom all the world admires and fears,
By Heaven designed to wipe away our tears,
To heal our wounds, and drooping spirits raise,
And to revive our former Halcyon days,
Permit us to assure our selves, that You,
Your happy Brothers fortune will pursue,
For what great thing is that You dare not do?
Whose long known, unexampled Gallantry
So ost has shaken the Earth, and curbed the haughty Sea.
And may those Stars, that ever o'r You shone,
Double their influence on Your peaceful Throne.
May You in honorable Deeds outshine
The brightest Heroes of Your Royal Line,
That when Your Enemies shall the Scepter see
Grasped in a hand enured to Victory,
The Rebels may like Lucifer fall down,
Or fly, like Phantoms from the rising Sun.
Extremum Hunc Arethusa mihi concede Laborem. Virgil. ODES OF HORACE
PARAPHRASED BY THOMAS FLATMAN.
BOOK II. ODE XIX. Being half foxt he praises BACCHUS.
IN a blind corner jolly Bacchus taught
The Nymphs, and Satyrs Poetry,
My self (a thing scarce to be thought)
Was at that time a stander by.
And ever since the whim runs in my head,
With heavenly frenzy I Am on fire;
Dear Bacchus let me not be punished
For raving, when thou did inspire.
Extatically drunk, I now dare sing
Thy bigot Thyades, and the source
Whence thy brisk Wine, Honey, and Milk did spring,
Enchanell'd by thy Scepters force.
Bold as I am, I dare yet higher fly,
And sing bright Ariadne's Crown,
Rejoice to see bold Pentheus destiny,
And grave Lycurgus tumbled down.
Rivers, and Seas thine Empire all obey,
When thou thy standard do advance,
Wild Mountaineers, thy Vassals, trim, and gay
In tune and time stagger and dance.
Thou when great Jove began to fear his throne;
(In no small danger then he was)
The mighty Rhoecus thou did piss upon,
And of that Lion made an Ass.
It Is true, thy Talent is not War, but mirth;
The Fiddle, not the Trumpet, thine;
Yet did thou bravely lay about thee then,
Great Moderator, God of Wine.
And when to Hell in triumph thou did ride
'Ore Cerberus thou did prevail,
The silly Curr, Thee for his Master owned,
And like a Puppy wagg'd his tail.
Book III. ODE VIII. To MAECENAS.
LEarned Maecenas, wonder not that I,
(A Bachelor) invoke that Deity,
Which at this Feast the married rout adore,
And yearly do implore.
They pray the gods to make their burden light,
And that their yoke-fellows may never fight:
I praise them, not for giving me a Wife,
But saving of my life.
By heaven redeemed, I escaped a falling Tree,
And yearly own that strange delivery,
Yearly rejoice, and drink the briskest Wine,
Not spill it at their shrine.
Come (my Maecenas) let us drink, and thus
Cherish that life, those Powers have given us:
A thousand Cups to Midwife this new birth,
With inoffensive mirth,
No State Affairs near my Maecenas come,
Since all are fallen that fought victorious Rome.
By Civil broils the Medes, our foes, will fall.
The weakest to the Wall.
Our fierce, and ancient Enemy of Spain
Is now subdued, and tamely bears our chain.
The Savage Scythian too begins to yield,
About to quit the field.
Bear they the load of Government that can;
Thou, since a private, and good natured man,
Enjoy the advantage of the present Hour,
For why should thou look sour?
BOOK III. ODE IX. HORACE and LYDIA.
Hor. WHile I was lovely in thine eye,
And while no soft embrace but mine
Encircled thy fair Ivory neck,
I did the Persian King outshine.

Lyd. While Horace was an honest Lad,
And Chloe less than Lydia loved,
Lydia was then a matchless Lass,
And in a sphere 'bove Ilia moved.

Hor. But Chloe now has vanquished me,
That Lute and Voice who could deny?
Methinks might I but save her life,
I could my self even dare to die.

Lyd. Young Calais is my Gallant,
He burns me with his flaming Eye,
To save the pretty villians life,
'Twice over I could dare to die.

Hor. But say I Lydia loved again,
And would new-braze Loves broken chain?
Say I should turn my Chloe off,
And take poor Lydia home again?

Lyd. Why then though He a fixed Star,
Thou lighter than a Cork should be,
Mad, and unquiet as the Sea,
Yet would I live, and die with thee.

Book III. ODE XII.
NO more Love's subjects, but his slaves they be,
That dare not over a Glass of Wine be free,
But quit, for fear of friends, their liberty.
Fond Neobule? thou art lazy grown,
Away thy Needle, Web, and Distaff thrown,
Thou hop'st thy work by Hebrus will be done,
A sturdy Youth, and a rank Rider he,
Can run a race, and box most manfully,
Swim like a Duck, and caper like a Flea.
He hunts the Stag, and all the Forest over
With strength and craft pursues the savage Boar:
He minds the sport, and thou desir'st no more.
Book III. ODE XVII. To AELIUS LAMIA.
BRave Aelius, sprung from an Heroic line,
Whose Pedigree in long descents do shine,
That add'st new glories to the Lamian Name,
And rear'st fresh Trophies to their fame!
Descended from Prince Lamus, whose command
Reach from the Formian walls, over Sea and Land;
Well was he known our Ancestors among,
Where gentle Lyris slides along.
Great as thou art, time will not thee obey:
Tomorrow's like to be a blustering day,
Some tempest too is threatened from the East,
As by the unlucky Crow I guest:
It Is dry to day! Now lay thy feuel in,
'Ere the unwelcome Season do begin,
Good Victtuals get, and frolic friends together,
Armor of proof against ill weather.
Book III. ODE XIX. To TELEPHUS.
1.
THou por'st on Helvicus, and studiest in vain,
How many years past betwixt King, and Kings reign,
To make an old woman even twitter for joy
At an Eighty eight story, or the scuffle at Troy:
But where the good wine, and best fire is
When the cruel North wind does blow,
And the Trees do penance in Snow;
Where the Poets delight and desire is,
Thou pitiful Book-worm never troublest thy brain.
2.
Come Drawer some Claret, we will drown this new Moon.
More Candles to improve this dull night into noon:
Let the Healths, let the House, and the Glasses turn round,
But no Tears, except those of the Tankard abound.
Come! here is a good health to the Muses,
Three brimmers to the three times three,
And one to each Grace let there be;
The tripple skull'd Dog bite him that refuses.
3.
Let Us be mad as March-hares, call the Minstrels and Singers,
Strike up there! -- kick that Rogue -- he has Chilblains on's fingers,
Let that whoreson our neighbor, on his bags that lies thinking,
Bear a part in the storm, but not the calm of our drinking.
Come! bring us a Wench, or two, prithee,
Thou Telephus look pretty fair,
And have a good thick head of hair,
Fetch him Chloe, she is buxom, and loves to trade with thee;
Call Glycera to me, for I am one of her Swingers.
Book III. ODE XX. To PYRRHUS.
DRy Pyrrhus, little do thou know,
What it is to make a Whelp forgo
His Lioness, -- faith 'twill not do!
It will be so.
Nearchus understands his game,
If he resolves to quit his fame,
What Is that to you? To save his name
You Will purchase shame.
If before Peace, you War prefer,
Shoot at his Butt -- you will find from her
A Rowland for your Oliver,
That I dare swear.
He is a gay, and sanguine Man,
His Periwig the wind does fan,
And she will hug him, now and than,
Do what you can.
Book III. ODE XXI. To his Wine-Vessels.
KInd Brother Butt! as old, and brisk, as I,
(For we had both the same Nativity,)
Whether to mirth, to brawls, or desperate Love,
Or sleep, thy gentle power does move;
By what, or name, or title dignified;
Thou need'st not fear the nicest test to 'bide:
Corvinus, health since we may not refuse,
Give down amain thy generous juice.
Corvinus though a Stoic, will not balk
Thy charms, for he can drink, as well as talk.
Old Cato, tho he often were morose,
Yet he would sometimes take a Dose.
O Wine! thou make the thick-skull'd fellow soft;
Easest the Statesman, vexed with cares full often;
Unriddlest all intrigues with a free Bowl,
Thou arrant pick-lock of the Soul!
Thou do our gasping, dying hopes revive,
To Pesants, souls as big as Princes, give;
Inspired by thee they scorn their slavish fears,
And bid their Rulers shake their ears.
All this, and more (great Bacchus) thou can do,
But if kind Venus be assistant too,
Then bring more Candles to expel the night;
Till Phoebus puts the Stars to flight.
Book III. ODE XXII. Upon DIANA.
GEntle Diana, Goddess bright,
Who midwiv'st Infants into light,
The Mountains Deity tripartite,
And Queen of Night,
To thee I consecrate my Pine,
Henceforth it shall be ever thine,
Yearly I Will offer at this shrine
The blood of Swine.
Book III. ODE III. To VENUS.
It Is true, I was a sturdy Soldier once,
And bravely under Cupid's banners fought:
Disbanded now, his service I renounce,
My warlike weapons serve for naught.
Here! take my Helmet, Sword and Shield,
My Bow, my Quiver, my Artillery;
Chloe has beaten me quite out of the field,
And leads me in captivity.
Great Venus! thou that know what I have been,
How able, and how true a friend to Smocks!
Revenge my quarrel on the imperious Queen,
And pay her with a Pox!
Book IV. ODE I. To VENUS.
NO more of War: -- Dread Cytherea, cease;
Thy feeble Soldier sues for Peace.
Alas I am not now that man of might,
As when fair Cinara bad me fight.
Leave Venus, leave! consider my gray hairs
Snow'd on by fifty tedious years.
My Forts are slighted, and my Bulwarks down:
Go, and beleaguer some strong Town.
Make thy attempts on Maximus; there is game
To entertain thy Sword, and Flame.
There Peace and Plenty dwell: He Is of the Court,
Ignorant what it is to storm a Fort:
There found a charge; he is generous and young,
He Is unconcerned, lusty and strong:
He of thy silken Banners will be proud,
And of thy Conquests talk aloud,
His bags are full: the Lad thou may prefer
To be thy Treasurer in War.
He may erect Gold Statues to thy name:
And be the Trumpet of thy same:
Thy Deity the zealous youth will then invoke,
And make thy beauteous Altars smoke.
With Voice, and Instruments thy praise shall sound;
Division he, and Love the ground,
There, twice a day the gamesome company
Of Lads and Lasses in debvoir to thee,
Like Mars's Priests their numbers shall advance,
And sweetly sing, and nimbly dance.
But as for me! I Am quite dispirited,
I court nor Maid, nor Boy to bed!
I cannot drink, nor bind a Garland on,
Alas! my dancing days are done!
But hold -- Why do these tears steal from my Eyes?
My lovely Ligurinus, why?
Why does my fault'ring tongue disguise my voice
With rude, and inarticulate noise?
O Ligurin! it is thou that break'st my rest,
Methinks I grasp thee in my breast:
Then I pursue thee in my passionate dreams
Over pleasant fields, and purling streams.
Book IV. ODE X. To LIGURINUS, a beauteous Youth.
It Is true, thou yet art fair (my Ligurine)
No Down as yet environs cheek, or chin:
But when those hairs which now do flow, shall fall,
And when thy Rosy Cheeks turn wan and pale:
When in thy Glass another Ligurine thou
Shall spy, and scarce thy bearded self shall know;
Then thou (despised) shall sing this piteous Song;
Why am I old? or why was ever young?
Book IV. ODE XI. To PHILLLIS.
COme Phillis, gentle Phillis! prithee come,
I have a Glass of rich old Wine at home,
And in my Garden curious Flowers do grow,
That languish to adorn thy brow.
The Ivy, and the yellow Crowfoot there
With verdant Chaplets wait to braid thy hair;
With silver Goblets all my house does shine,
And Vervain round my Altar twine,
On which the best of all my flock shall bleed;
Come, and observe with what officious speed
Each Lad, and Lass of all my house attends
Till to my roof the smoke ascends.
If thou would know why thou must be my guest,
I tell thee it is to celebrate a Feast,
The Ides of April, which have ever been
Devoted to the Cyprian Queen.
A day more sacred, and more fit for mirth
Than that which gave me (worthless mortal) birth:
For on that day Mecaenas first saw light,
Born for out wonder, and delight.
My Phyllis, since thy years come on apace,
Substitute me in Telephus his place,
He Is now employed by one more rich, more fair,
And proudly does her shackles wear.
Remember what became of Phaeton;
Remember what befell Bellerophon;
That by Ambition from his Fathers Throne,
And this, by Pegasus thrown down.
Content thy self with what is fit for thee,
Happy that couple that in years agree!
Shun others, and accept my parity,
And I will end my Loves with thee.
Thou art the last whom I intend to court,
Come then; and (to prepare thee for the sport)
Learn Prick-song, and my merry Odes rehearse,
Many a Care is charmed by Verse.
EPODE III. To MAECENAS.
IN time to come, if such a crime should be
As Parricide, (foul villainy!)
A Clove of Garlic would revenge that evil;
(Rare dish for Plough-men, or the Devil!)
Accursed root! how does it jounce and claw!
It works like Rats-bane in my maw.
What Witch contrived this strat'gem for my breath!
Poisoned at once, and stunk to death;
With this vile juice Medaea (sure) did anoint
Jason (her Love) in every joint;
When untamed Bulls in yokes he led along,
This made his manhood smell so strong:
This gave her Dragon venom to his sting,
And set the Hagg upon the wing.
I burn, I parch, as dry as dust I am,
Such drought on Puglia never came.
Alcides could not bear so much as I,
He ost was wet, but never dry.
Mecaenas! do but taste of your own Treat,
And what you gave your Poet, eat;
Then go to Bed, and court your Mistress there,
She Will never kiss you I dare swear.
EPODE VI. Against Cassius Severus, a revileful and wanton Poet.
THou Village-Curr! why do thou bark at me?
A Wolf might come, and go, for thee.
At me thou open'st wide, and think that I
Will bark with thee for company.
I Am of another kind, and bravely dare,
(Like the Mastiff) watch my flock with care:
Dare hunt through snow, and seize that savage beast
That might my darling folds molest:
Thou (only in the noise thou make) robust
Leave off the chase; leap'st at a crust,
But have a care! for if I vent my spleen,
I (for a shift) can make thee grin:
I Will make thee (if Iambicks once I sing)
To die, like Bupalus, in a string.
When any man insults over me, shall I
Put finger in mine eye, and cry?
EPODE X. Against MAEVIUS a Poet.
ANd art thou shipped, friend Dogrel! -- get thee gone
Thou pest of Helicon.
Now for an Hurricane to bang thy sides
(Cursed Wood) in which he rides!
An East Wind tear thy Cables, crack thy Oars,
While every billow roars.
With such a Wind let all the Ocean swell
As wasted Noll to Hell:
No friendly Star over all the Sea appear
While thou be'st there;
Nor kinder destiny there may thou meet,
Than the proud Grecian Fleet,
When Pallas did their Admiral destroy
Returned from ruined Troy.
Methinks I see the Mariners saint, and thee
Look somewhat scurvily:
Thou call'st on Jove, as if great Jove had time
To mind thy Grub street Rhyme,
When the proud waves their heads to Heaven do rear
Himself scarce free from fear:
Well! -- If the Gods should thy wreckt carcass share
I Will sacrifice to them, that they may know
I can be civil too.
EPODE XI. To Pettius his Chamber-fellow.
AH Pettius! I have done with Poetry,
I Have parted with my liberty,
For Cupid's slavery.
Cupid that peevisn God has singled out
Me, from among the Rhyming rout,
For Boys and Girls to flout:
December now has thrice stripped every Tree,
Since bright Inachia's Tyranny
Has laid its chains on me.
Now fic upon me! all about the Town
My Miss I treated up and down,
I for a Squire was known.
Lord what a whelp was I! to pule and whine,
To sigh, to sob, and to repine!
For thy sake (Mistress mine!)
Thou did my Verse, and thou my Muse despise,
My want debased me in thine eyes.
Thou wealth, not wit, did prize.
Fuddled with Wine, and Love my secrets flew,
Stretched on those racks, I told thee true,
What did my self undo.
Well! -- plague me not too much, imperious Dame,
Lest I blaspheme thy charming name,
And quench my former flame.
I can give others place, and see thee die
Damned with their prodigality,
If I on it, so stout am I.
Thou know (my Friend) thus have I often said,
When, by her sorceries misled,
Thou bad'st me home to bed:
Even then my practice gave my tongue the lie,
I could not her cursed house pass by:
I feared, but could not fly.
Since that, for young Lyciscus I Am grown mad;
Inachia such a face never had,
It is a lovely Lad.
From his embraces I shall never get free,
Nor friends advice, nor infamy
Can disintangle me:
Yet if some brighter Object I should spy
That, might perhaps debauch my Eye,
And shake my constancy.
EPODE XV. To his Sweetheart Neaera.
IT was a lovely melancholy night;
The Moon, and every Star shone bright;
When thou did swear thou would to me be
And do as I would have thee do:
False Woman! round my neck thy arms did twine,
Inseparable as the Elm, and Vine:
Then did thou swear thy passion should endure
To me alone sincere and pure,
Till Sheep and Wolves should quit their enmity,
And not a Wave disturb the Sea.
Treacherous Neaera! I have been too kind,
But Flaccus can draw off thou wilt find;
He can that face (as thou do him) forswear,
And find (it may be) one as fair:
And let me tell thee, when my fury's moved,
I hate devoutly, as I loved.
But thou (blessed Gamester) whosoe'r thou be
That proudly do my drudgery,
Did thou abound in numerous Flocks, and Land,
Were heir to all Pactolus Sand;
Though in thy brain thou bor'st Pythagoras,
And carriedst Nereus in thy face,
She Would pick another up, and shab thee off,
And then 'twill be my turn to laugh.
EPODE XVII. To Canidia.
I Yield Canidia to thy Art,
Take pity on a penitent heart:
By Proserpine Queen of the Night,
And by Diana's glimmering light,
By the mysterious Volumes all,
That can the Stars from Heaven call;
By all that is sacred I implore
Thou to my wits would me restore.
The brave Achilles did forgive
King Telephus, and let him live*
Though in the field the King appeared,
And War with Mysian bands prepared.
When on the ground dead Hector lay,
Exposed, to Birds, and Beasts a prey;
The Trojan Dames in pity gave
Hector an honorable grave.
Ulysses Mariners were turned to Swine,
Transformed by Circe's charms divine;
Yet Circe did their doom revoke,
And straight the grunting mortals spoke:
Each in his pristine shape appears,
Fearless of Dogs to lug their Ears.
Oh! do not my affliction scorn!
Enough in Conscience I have born!
My youth, and fresh complexion's gone,
Dwindled away to skin and bone.
My hair is powd'red by thy care,
And all my minutes busy are.
Day Night, and Night the Day does chase,
Yet have not I a breathing space!
Wretch that I am! I now believe,
No power can from thy charms reprieve:
Now I confess thy Magic can
Reach head, and heart, and un man Man.
What would thou have me say? what more?
O Seas! O Earth! I scorch all over!
Hercules himself never burnt like me,
North' flaming Mount in Sicily:
O cease thy spells, lest I be soon
Calcined into a Pumice-stone!
When wilt th'ha'done? What must I pay?
But name the sum, and I obey:
Say: Will thou for my ransom take
An Hecatomb? or shall I make
A baudy Song to advance thy Trade,
Or court thee with a Serenade?
Would thou to Heaven, and be a Star?
I Will hire thee Cassiopeia's Chair.
Castor to Helen a true friend
Struck her defaming Poet blind;
Yet he, good natured Gentleman,
Gave the blind Bard his eyes again.
Since this, and much more thou can do,
O rid me of my madness too!
From noble Ancestors thy race,
No vulgar blood purples thy face:
Thou searchest not the Graves of the poor,
But Necromancy do abhor:
Generous thy breast, and pure thy hands,
Whose fruitful womb shall people lands,
And e're thy Childbed-linnen's clean,
Thou shall be up and to it again.
CANIDIA's Answer.
GO -- hang thy self: -- I will not hear,
The Rocks as soon shall lend an ear
To naked Mariners that be
Left to the mercy of the Sea.
Marry come up! -- Shall thy bold pride
The mysteries of the Gods deride?
Presumptuous fool! commit a rape
On my repute, and think to escape?
Make me a Town-talk? Well! ever thou die
Cupid shall vengeance take; or I.
Go, get some Rats-bane! -- 'twill not do,
Nay, drink some Aquafortis too:
No Witch shall take thy life away;
Who dares say, Go, when I bid Stay?
No! -- I Will prolong thy loathed breath,
And make thee wish in vain for death.
In vain does Tantalus espy
Fruits, he may taste but with his Eye.
In vain does poor Prometheus groan,
And Sisyphus stop his rolling stone:
Long may they sigh, long may they cry
But not control their Destiny.
And thou in vain from some high wall,
Or on thy naked Sword may fall,
In vain, (to terminate thy woes)
Thy hands shall knit the fatal noose:
For on thy shoulders then I Will ride,
And make the Earth shake with my pride.
Think thou that I, who when I please
Can kill by waxen Images,
Can force the Moon down from her Sphere,
And make departed Ghosts appear,
And mix Love potions! -- thinks thy vanity,
I cannot deal with such a worm as thee?
FINIS.

