Colonel Fitz-Waters HIS PETITION To the Honorable House of COMMONS assembled
in PARLIAMENT: Desires Auxiliary Forces for the assistance of our poor
Brethren in IRELAND. Who being there Resident, was both a Partaker, and an
eyewitness of their Miseries.

Whereunto is added the lamentable estate they are like to fall into, without
some sudden supply of men for their defense against the Rebels.

IN DOMINO CONFIDO
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Printed. 1642.

Colonel Fitz-Waters HIS PETITION TO THE Honorable House of COMMONS assembled
in PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable,
THere are two manifest instigations which importune the sequel of my words.
First, the equity of your proceedings hitherto, giving me boldness and
courage. Secondly the ground and principal motives instigating me to this my
proposition and request. For I behold in all your intendments a singularity of
proceedings grounded upon discretion and goodness, your consultations being
steered and balanced as well by charity and compassionate lenity toward the
reflecting sorrows of others miseries, as extremity of Justice toward
delinquents. And my wishes are and shall be for the continuance of this wisdom,
which redounds to the glory of God and unexpressible joy of the Subject. But
not to digress too far from the matter I intended to speak of, hopeing that
your this days resolution concerning my intended motion will prove as happy as
I conceive: the proposition which now moves me to speak is seasonable and
necessary. The order of your noble favor and gracious aspect to such as have
been formerly petitioners unto you, together with the importunity of the
subject, has given me so much confidence in your Honors as to solicit an
extention of the last and late mentioned petition for the poor protestants in
Ireland who are persecuted, massacred, and miserably distressed by the Rebels
there, whose malice extends not only to the taking of any one particular
town or county, nor content to dispossess the poor inhabitant protestants
taken by them, but pursuing them with unheard of Severity, to the imbrewing
their murderous, and most wicked hands in their blood, endeavoring by all
means to embesill his Majesty's Regal authority by using their chiefest
cruelty to his Majesty's most true and loyal Subjects. My desire and humble
petition to your honors therefore is, that there may be some speedy and sudden
course taken for the expediting and dispatching of some more auxiliary forces
toward the assistance of our aforesaid brethren. Your honors cannot upon sage
and mature consideration but conceive the convenience, necessity and pitiful
extremity they are, and will daily be more and more plunged into without it. As
for my part, I that have formerly engaged my self for my King and countries
good, am now ready, nay more willing then ever, to adventure both life, estate,
liberty, and whatsoever else I may term mine, for the good of the Kingdom
and advancing of his Majesty's honor against any foreign or civil enemy, under
the pleasing shade of whose Crown we have ever gathered the fruits of Justice,
and upon whose happiness the welfare of the whole Commonwealth principally
depends, our hopes principally consisting in his royal pleasure, and you who
are his graund Counsel to determine of things for the benefit of the
Commonwealth and advancing of his honors. This of Irelands derogating and
rebelling against his Majesty, persecuting his Subjects, it must needs be a
point of great indignity and dishonor to our Realm of England, who may well
be taxed with cowardice, in that we are so tardie, slow and disrespectfull of
our poor distressed brethren; so patient and favorable, as not to assist and
revenge their wrongs ere they had come to so high a head; and so forgetful, as
to endanger the loss of His Majesty's Prerogative, and our own credit by
their unrepelled insurrection, who now exalt themselves through their strength,
and give glory to their arm of flesh, but I hope that I am really and verily
persuaded that their joy will be soon extinct, and their sacrilegious pleasures
will prove but momentany, and of no continuance. It is in your pleasures to
crown my expectation with a joyful Reply to this my indigent though indulgent
Petition. It is you that only can, and I hope will stand their friend in this
their sorrowful and deplorable extremity. Yea, upon you are their eyes fixed,
their hearts grounded, and on your mature and sage consideration their
principal, yea only hopes depend, who (both I and they) with such Forces as
your Honors shall be pleased to grant as Auxiliaries, shall be ready to venture
life and limb for regaining of our lost honor, and the maintenance of true
Religion and Virtue.

FINIS.

