An Impartial RELATION Of the whole Proceedings AGAINST St. Mary Magdalen
COLLEGE In OXON, In the Year of our LORD 1687. CONTAINING Only Matters of Fact
As they Occurred.

Printed in the Year 1688.

A TABLE.
A Narrative of the Election of Dr. Hough President of St. Mary Magdalen
College, Oxon, 1687. Page 1 A Copy of the King's Mandate to the Fellows of
Magdalen College 3 A Copy of Magdalen Colledge's Petition ibid. A Copy of the
Lord Sunderland's Letter to the Fellows 4 The Case of the Vice President and
Fellows of St. Mary Magdalen College in Oxon, in their Election of a President
ibid. A Copy of a Letter to the Duke of Ormond, April the 18th, 1687. 5 A Copy
of the Bishop of Winton's Letter to the President of the Council, ibid. A Copy
of the Citation to the Vice President and Fellows, for to appear at White Hall,
June the 6th, 1687. 6 The Answer of the Vice President, and other Fellows of
Magdalen College in Oxon, who were deputed by the said College, to the
Question propounded by the Right Honorable and Right Reverend the Lords
Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Affairs, VIZ. Why they did not Obey His
Majesty's Letter requiring them to Elect and Admit Mr. Anthony Farmer President
of the said College? ibid. The Fellows* Reasons why they Elected not Mr.
Farmer, etc. 8 Copies of Letters and Certificates delivered to the Lords
Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Affairs, June 27, 1687. 9 Some Clauses of
particular Statutes to which the Case relates 11 Part of the Oath which every
Fellow takes when admitted 12 A Copy of Dr. Hough's Deprivation, by His
Majesty's Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Affairs, etc. ibid. A Copy of Dr.
Aldworth's and Dr. Fairfax's Suspension. 13 A Copy of the King's Inhibition to
Magdalen College ibid. A Copy of His Majesty's Mandate for the Bishop of Oxon
to be President 14 A Copy of the Lord Sunderland's Letter to the Seniour Fellow
of St. Mary Magdalen College in the University of Oxon, or in his absence, to
the Seniour Fellow residing there ibid. A Copy of the Bishop of Oxon's Letter
to the Seniour Fellow of St. Mary Magdalen College in the University of Oxon,
or in his absence, to the Seniour Fellow residing there 15 An Account of what
passed at Christ's Church, Oxon, September the 4th, 1687. ibid. A Copy of the
Petition offered at Oxford, Sept. the 4th, 1687. 16 A Copy of the Address which
the Fellows of St. Mary Magdalen College gave to the Lord President of the
Council, Sept. the 6th, 1687, and which was delivered His Majesty at the Bath
17 A Copy of a Letter directed to Dr. Bailey, Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxon,
supposed to be Written by Mr. W -- P -- ibid. The Answer to the aforementioned
written Letter, Dated October the 3d, 1687. 18 Some Queries sent to the Fellows
of Magdalen College from Windsor, Sept. 15. 1687. 20 An Answer to several
Queries to the Vice President and Fellows of Magdalen College in Oxon, sent
from Windsor, Dated the 25th of September, 1687. ibid. An Account of the
Visitation of St. Mary Magdalen College in Oxon 22 Dr. Fairfax's Case before
the Commissioners at Oxon, Oct. 22. 1687. 27 Dr. Hough's Protestation 28 A Copy
of Dr. Stafford's and Dr. Fairfax's Plea 29 Dr. Fairfax's Expulsion 31 His
Protestation ibid. The Fellows Submission which they offered, and was refused
by the Lords Commissioners 33 The Suspension of Mr. George Fulham 34 The Lord
Bishop of Chester's Speech ibid. The Form of the Submission tendered by their
Lordships, but was refused by the Fellows 37 The Expulsion of Dr. Charles
Aldworth, and twenty four Fellows 39 The Decree that Incapacitates them from
receiving any Benifices ibid. The Expulsion of fourteen Demies by the Bishop of
Oxon 40
Note, This should follow the Letter to the Duke of Ormond, page 5.
The Bishop of Winton's LETTER to the Lord President of the Council.
My Honored Lord,
THE Obligation I have upon me as Visitor of St. Mary Magdalen College in
Oxon, occasions this Address: For I am informed that great endeavors are used
with his Majesty to recommend one Mr. Farmer, who is not at present, nor ever
was Fellow of the College, to be President of it; which is directly contrary
to the Statutes of the Founder, (as I am confident some who promote Mr.
Farmer's interest, cannot be ignorant of:) And were there not many Persons now
actually Fellows, and several who have been (in particular the Bishop of Man,
and Dr. Jesop) very eminent for Learning and Loyalty, and every way quallified
according to the Statutes, I should not press your Lordship to lay the Concern
of the College (which has upon all occasions expressed its Zeal and forwardness
in Defense of the Crown, and (as I particularly know) in the great Affairs of
the Succession) before his Majesty; who, I hope, will leave them to their Rules
as the Statutes, which have hitherto (excepting in the times of Rebellion) been
concientiously observed, and which will be the heighest satisfaction to the
truly Loyal University, and promote his Majesty's Service, which has always
been the Endeavor of

Your Lordships Most Humble Servant.

ERRATA
PAge 3. line 2. read all and singular. p. 5. in the Letter to the Duke of
Ormond. l. 1. r. and Fellows of. p. 7. l. 39. read April 18th. p. 11. l. 27. r.
before he can give his Vote in. p. 12. l. 8. r. if it shall happen that. p. 26.
l. 38. for which r. what. p. 30. l. 27. dele which Letters is as follows. p.
37. l. 13. Paper all.

A NARRATIVE OF THE Election of Dr Hough, President to St Mary Magdalen
College, OXON. 1687.
THE Presidentship of St. Mary Magdalen College, in the University of Oxon,
being void by the death of Dr. Henry Clerk, late President of the same, the
Vice President gave notice to all the Fellows present in the Chapel, on
Thursday the 31 of March, 1687; where it was unanimously agreed, to proceed to
the Election of a President, on Wednesday the 13 of April following, at Nine of
the Clock in the Morning, in the Chapel: And in order thereto, the
Vice President caused a Citation to be fixed on the Chappel-Door of the said
College, signifying the Vacancy, Time, and Place of the Election; according to
the direction of the Statutes. But before the day of Election, being credibly
informed, that his Majesty had been pleased to grant his Letters Mandatory, in
behalf of Mr. Anthony Farmer, they most humbly represented to his Sacred
Majesty, in their Petition bearing Date April 9th, That the said Mr. Farmer was
incapable, by their Statutes, of being President; and therefore did most humbly
pray his Majesty to leave them to a Free Election, or recommend such a Person
to them, as was capable by their Statutes. Monday, April 11th, his Majesty's
Letters Mandatory, were delivered by the hands of Mr. Robert Chernock, Master
of Arts, and Fellow of the said College, directed to the Vice President and
Fellows of Magdalen College, in Oxon, requiring them forthwith to Elect the
said Mr. Farmer, and admit him President: Which Letter the Vice President read
in the Chapel of the said College, between the hours of four and five of the
Clock in the same day, after Evening-Service, before the Fellows of the
College, there present, and asked them, Whether they in Obedience to his
Majesty's Letters, would forthwith Elect and Admit Mr. Farmer President? Who
all agreed, in consideration to Mr. Farmer's not being Qualified, and the
danger of Expulsion to any of the Fellows that should be absent from the
Election, and that the time of Election, according to the Citation, was so
near, to defer their Answer till Wednesday following: Whereupon the
Vice President required all the Fellows to be present in the Chapel the said
Wednesday Morning at nine of the Clock. All the Fellows being then met, the
Vice President read the Statute De Electione Presidentis; and the Statute 5
Eliz. against corrupt Elections, was read also; after which the Vice President
read the King's Letter in behalf of Mr. Farmer, and the second time demanded an
Answer of the Fellows thereto. Their Answer was to this effect: That having a
Petition now lying before his Majesty, they ought not to proceed to Election,
till they had received his Majesty's Answer to the same: And thereupon they all
agreed, (except Mr. Charnock) that the Election should be deferred: which was
accordingly done, until the next Morning nine of the Clock.

Thursday, April 14th, at nine a Clock in the Morning, all the Fellows being
met, the Vice President told them, That the Election of a President had been
deferred upon account of their Petition to his Majesty, in Answer to which,
they had not then received his Majesty's Pleasure; that the next day was the
utmost time they could defer the Election by the Statutes, and therefore it was
necessary they should come to some Resolution: he told them farther, That the
King had commanded them to Elect Mr. Farmer, and asked their Sense therein:
Which was unanimous (except Mr. Charnock) that the Election should be deferred
till the next morning eight of the Clock; and in order thereunto, the Sacrament
to be administered first; and accordingly it was Adjourned.

Friday, April 15th, at eight a Clock in the Morning the Vice President and
Fellows being met, Dr. Tho. Smith and Capt. Bagshaw, two of the Fellows,
acquainted the rest, from my Lord President of the Counsel, That in Answer to
their Petition, his Majesty having sent his Letter to the College, expected to
be Obeyed. After which, the Vice President read again the King's Letter to
them, and asked, Whether in Obedience thereunto, they would Elect and Admit Mr.
Farmer President? They answered, That they desired they might proceed to an
Election. Then the Vice President having proposed, Whether, having received his
Majesty's Pleasure in Answer to their Petition, they would make any further
Address? The Vice President, Dr. Fairfax, Dr. Pudsey, and Dr. Tho. Smith, were
for a second Address; but all the rest declared immediately for proceeding to
the Election.

Then the Vice President proposed, Whether they would go to an Election Viva
voce, or by Scrutiny? The Vice President, Mr. Thompson, and Mr. Charnock, were
for proceeding to an Election Viva voce; all the rest were for going to an
Election by Scrutiny, except Dr. Tho. Smith, who was not for going to Election,
until the King should again be Petitioned.

This therefore being their Sense, That they ought to proceed to the Election
of a President according to the Statutes, and this the last day limited for
Election: In order thereunto, the holy Sacrament was solemnly taken by all,
except Mr. Charnock. Then the Statute De Electione Praesidentis, and 5 Eliz.
against corrupt-Elections was read by the Vice President. Every one took the
Oath prescribed in the Statutes to be taken, in order to the Nomination of a
President, (except Mr. Thompson and Mr. Charnock who refused it): And the 2
Senior Fellows were sworn Scrutators in the Scrutiny of the whole Society: For
the Nomination of a President, Mr. Hough and Mr. Maymard had each of them the
major part of all the Voices; and were accordingly pronounced by the Seniour
Scrutatour, Nominati in Ordine ad Electionem Praesidentis: Then the thirteen
Seniour Fellows being met to Elect one of these two President; and every one of
them sworn according to the Statute; eleven of them Elected Mr. Hough, who was
accordingly pronounced President of St. Mary Magdalen College, in Oxon. by the
Seniour Scrutatour, in the presence of all the Fellows: and Mr. Maynard was
appointed by the thirteen Seniour Fellows, to present the said President Elect,
to the Visitour, in order to his Admission. After this, Mr. Thompson and Mr.
Charnock declared, Viva voce for Mr. Farmer; according to his Majesty's Letter.

Saturday, April 16th, Mr. Hough, President Elect, was presented to the
Visitour by Mr. Maynard, who at the same time delivered to his Lordship an
Instrument under the College Seal, containing the Proceedings of the Election;
after a sight whereof, Mr. Hough was Sworn and Admitted President by his
Lordship, according to the Statutes.

Sunday, April 17th, Mr. Hough at his return to the College, took the same
Oath again before the Society, and afterward, as President, took his Seat in
the Chapel, at four a Clock Prayers in the Afternoon.

A Copy of the King's Mandate to the Fellows of Magdalen College.
JAMES REX.

TRusty and Well-beloved, We greet you well. Whereas we are well satisfied, of
the Piety, Loyalty, and Learning of our Trusty and Well-beloved Anthony Farmer,
Master of Arts, of that your College of St. Mary Magdalen, We have thought fit
hereby effectually to recommend him to you for the place of President of our
said College, now void by the Death of Doctor Clark, late President thereof;
willing and requiring you forthwith, upon receipt hereof, to Elect and Admit
him the said Anthony Farmer, into the said place of President, with all
singular the Rights and Privileges, Emoluments and Advantages thereunto
belonging, any Statute, Custom, or Constitution to the contrary
notwithstanding; wherewith We are Graciously pleased to Dispense with in this
behalf. And so, not doubting of your Compliance herein, We bid you Farewell.

Given at Our Court at White Hall, the Fifth Day of April, 1687, in the Third
Year of Our Reign.
A Copy of Magdalen Colledge's Petition.
To the King's Most Excellent MAJESTY. The Humble Petition of the
Vice President and Fellows of St. Mary Magdalen College, in Oxon.
Most Humbly shows,
WE have been credibly Informed, That Mr. Anthony Farmer, who was not of our
Foundation, has obtained Your Most Excellent Majesty's Recommendation to be
President of Your Majesty's College, in the room of Dr. Henry Clark, Deceased.

We therefore, with all Submission, as becomes Your most Dutiful and Loyal
Subjects, most humbly Represent to Your Sacred Majesty, That the said Mr.
Farmer is a Person in several respects Incapable of that Character, according
to our Founder's Statutes: And do most earnestly beseech Your Majesty, as Your
Majesty shall judge fittest in Your most Princely Wisdom, either to leave us to
the discharge of our Duty, and Consciences, according to Your Majesty's late
most Gracious Toleration, and our Founder's Statutes; or to Recommend such a
Person who may be more Serviceable to Your Majesty, and to this Your Majesty's
College:

And Your Petitioners shall ever Pray, etc.
A Copy of the Lord Sunderland's Letter to the Fellows.
Gentlemen,
THe King being given to understand, That notwithstanding his late Mandate,
sent to you for Electing Mr. Farmer to be President of your College, you have
made choice of another person; His Majesty commands me to tell you, He is much
surprised at these Proceedings, and expects you should send me an Account of
what passed on that Occasion, and whether you did receive His Majesty's said
Letters Mandate, before you chose Dr. Hough. I am,

GENTLEMEN, Your Affectionate and Humble Servant, Sunderland.

The CASE of the Vice President and Fellows of St. Mary Magdalen College, in
Oxon. in their late Election of a President.
UPon the Notice of the Death of Dr. Henry Clark, Late President of St. Mary
Magdalen College in Oxon; the Vice President called a Meeting of the Fellows,
in order to appoint a day for the Election of a new President. The 13th of
April was the day prefixed; with power to prorogue the Election to the 15th, as
they should see cause, beyond which time it was not in their power to defer the
same. This being agreed, a Citation, or Praemonition was fixed upon the
Chappel-door of the College, signifying the same; and summoning all the absent
Fellows to repair home to the ensuing Election, as the Statute in that case
directs. After this, upon the 11th of April, they received His Majesty's Letter
in behalf of Mr. Farmer, requiring them to elect and admit him President: But
he having never been Fellow of that College, nor New-Colledge, in which are
the only Persons capable of being chosen by the Statutes; and wanting likewise
such personal Qualifications as are required in the Character of a President,
they did not imagine it was, or could be His Majesty's Pleasure, that they
should act so directly contrary to the express Words of their Statutes, to
which they are strictly and positively sworn: But did humbly conceive they were
bound in Duty to believe, that His Majesty had been misinformed in the
Character and Capacity of Mr. Farmer. And therefore on the 15th of April, the
last of those days within which they were confined to finish the Election, they
proceeded to a choice, and having first received the Blessed Eucharist, and
taken an Oath as the Founder enjoins, to choose a Person so qualified, as is
there specified; they did elect the Reverend Mr. John Hough, Batchellor in
Divinity, who is a Person every way qualified by the Satutes of the said
College: And if it shall be objected that His Majesty did in His Letter for
Mr. Farmer, graciously dispense with all the Statutes that rendered him
incapable of being elected; and that therefore they might have obeyed without
breach of their Oaths: They humbly beg leave to represent, that there is an
express Clause in that Oath, which every Man takes when he is admitted Fellow
of the College; wherein he swears not to procure, accept, or make use of any
Dispensation from his Oath, or any part thereof, by whomsoever procured, or by
what Authority soever granted. As to their former practice when they have
elected in obedience to the King's Letter heretofore; it has been always in
such cases where the persons recommended have been every way qualified for the
Office by their Statutes; in which cases they always have been; and ever will
be, ready to comply with His Majesty's pleasure; it not being without
unspeakable regret, that they disobey the least of His Commands. They know how
entirely their welfare depends upon the Countenance of their Prince; nor does
any thing more deeply affect and grieve their Souls, then when they find
themselves reduced to this unfortunate necessity, of either disobeying his
Will, or violating their Consciences by notorious Perjuries.

A Copy of a Letter to the Duke of Ormond, April 18th, 1687.
May it please your Grace,
WE the President, and of Magdalen College in Oxon, sensible of the Benefits
and Honor we enjoy under your Grace's Patronage, and how much it imports us to
have your Advice in all the Difficulties wherewith we are pressed; having, as
we fear, displeased His Majesty, in our Election of a President; do humbly beg
leave to represent to your Grace, a true state of our Case, and hope you will
please to inform the King how incapable we were to perform His Commands.

His Majesty was pleased on the Death of Dr. Henry Clark, President of St. Mary
Magdalen College, to Command us by His Letter, to elect, and admit, Mr.
Anthony Farmer in that Office, a Person utterly incapable of it by our
Statutes, as we are ready to make appear in many particulars; and since we have
taken a positive Oath of obedience to them, and that exclusive to all
Dispensations whatsoever; we humbly conceive we could not obey that Command in
favor of Mr. Farmer; unless he had brought those Qualifications with him,
which our Founder requires in the Person of the President; and being confined
as to the time of Election, we have been forced to proceed to the choice of
one, who has approved his Loyalty in the whole course of his Life, and whom we
think suitably qualified for the place. --

May it therefore please your Grace to interpose with His Most Sacred Majesty
for us, that that we may not lie under the weight of His Displeasure, for not
being in a capacity for obeying his Commands. We know him to be a Prince of
eminent Justice, and Integrity, and cannot think he will value any instance of
Duty to himself, which manifestly breaks in upon the obligation of our
Consciences. And your Grace's extraordinary unblemished Loyalty to the Crown;
and that regard which we assure our selves, our Most Honored Lord, and
Chancellor, has to the Peace and Welfare of this Place, induces us to presume
your Grace will omit no endeavors to set before His Majesty, the true Reason
and Necessity of our Proceedings. That God Almighty protect your Grace, shall
be the daily Prayers of,

May it please your Grace, etc.
A Copy of the Citation to the Vice President, and Fellows, for to appear at
White Hall, June the Sixth, 1687.
By His Majesty's Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Causes, and for the
Visitation of the Universities, and of all, and every Cathedral and Collegiate
Churches, Colleges, etc.
COmplaint having been made unto Us, that the Vice President, and Fellows of
St. Mary Magdalen College in Oxon, have refused to comply with His Majesty's
Letters Mandatory, for electing and admitting Mr. Anthony Farmer President of
the same College, in the room of Dr. Clark deceased, and that notwithstanding
his Majesty's Leters they have elected Mr. John Hough President of the said
College: You and either of you are hereby required to Cite and Summon the said
Vice President and Fellows, requiring'em, or such of the said Fellows as they
shall depute in their behalf, to appear before Us in the Council Chamger at
White Hall, upon Monday the Sixth of the next Month of June, at Four in the
Afternoon, to answer to such Matters as shall be objected against them,
concerning the Premises, and of the due execution thereof: You are to certify
Us then and there.

To Thomas Atterbury, and Robert Eldows, Or to either of them.
Given under our Seal the 28th of May, 1687.
The Answer of the Vice President, and other Fellows, of Magdalen-Colledge in
Oxon, who were deputed by the said College, to the Question propounded by the
Right Honorable, and Right Reverend, the Lords Commissioners for
Ecclesiastical Affairs, Viz.
Why they did not obey His Majesty's Letter, requiring them to Elect, and Admit
Mr. Anthony Farmer President of the said College?
THE said Vice President, and other deputed Fellows answered and said, That the
said College of St. Mary Magdalen in Oxon is a Body Corporate, governed by
Local Statutes, granted and confirmed to them by His Majesty's Royal
Predecessor, King Henry the 6th, for Him and His Heirs and Successors, under
the Great Seal of England, which are also since confirmed by several other
Letters Patents of others of His Majesty's Royal Predecessors, under the Great
Seal of England -- That by the said Statutes of the College (to the
observation of which, each Fellow is sworn) it is ordered that the Person
elected President thereof, shall be a Man of good Life and Reputation, of
approved Understanding, and good Temper, Discreet, Provident, and Circumspect,
both in Spiritual and Temporal Affairs. And at the time of Election of a
President, the said Fellows are bound by the said Statutes, to take an Oath
that they shall nominate none to that Office, but such as are, or have been
Fellows of the said College, or of New-Colledge in Oxon: or if they are not
actually Fellows at that time of Election; that they be such as have left their
Fellowships in their respective Colleges upon credible accounts. And when two
qualified persons shall be nominated at the time of Election, by the greater
number of all the Fellows, to the said Office of President; the thirteen
Seniors also swear that they will Elect one of them, whom in their Consciences
they think most proper and sufficient, most discreet, most useful, and best
qualified for the Place; without any regard to love, hatred, favor, or fear.
And every Fellow when he is first admitted into his Fellowship in the said
College, swears that he will inviolably keep and observe all the Statutes and
Ordinances of the College, and every thing therein contained, so far as does
or may concern him, according to the plain, literal, and grammatical sense and
meaning thereof, and as much as in him lies will cause the same to be kept and
observed by others; and that he will not procure any Dispensation contrary to
his aforesaid Oath, or any part thereof, nor contrary to the Statutes and
Ordinances to which it relates, or any of them; nor will he endeavor that such
Dispensation shall be procured by any other, or others, publicly or privately,
directly or indirectly. And if it shall happen that any Dispensation of this
sort, of whatsoever Authority it shall be, whether in general or particular, or
under what form of Words soever it be granted, that he will neither make use of
it, nor in any sort consent thereunto. That upon Notice of the Death of Dr.
Clark Late President of the said College, the Vice President called a Meeting
of the said Fellows, in order to the appointing a day for the Election of a new
President, and the 13th of April was the time prefixed, with power to prorogue
the same as they should see cause, till the 15th, beyond which time they could
not statutably defer their Election, and in pursuance thereof a Citation, or
Premonition, was fixed upon the Chappel-door of the said College, signifying
the same, and by which the absent Fellows were Summoned to repair home, as the
Statute in the Case requires. And the said Vice President, and other deputed
Fellows farther say, that on the 11th of April aforesaid, they received His
Majesty's Letters Mandatory, to Elect and Admit the said Mr. Anthony Farmer
President of the said College: But forasmuch as the said Vice President, and
Fellows, apprehended the right of Election to be in them, and believed His
Majesty never intended to dispossess them of their Rights: And forasmuch as the
said Mr. Farmer had never been Fellow either of Magdalen, or New-Colledge in
Oxon, and had not those Qualifications which in, and by, the said Statutes of
the College are required in the Character of a President, as they in their
Consciences did, or do verily believe; and in regard that they could not comply
with His Majesty's Letter, without the violation of their Oaths, and hazard of
their legal Interest and Property, wherewith they are by their Statutes
possessed, and which by their Oaths they are bound to maintain, they
represented the same by their humble Petition to His Majesty. And having
deferred their Election of a President to the last day limited by their
Statutes, then they proceeded to Election, and having first received the
Eucharist, and taken the said Oaths, as the Statutes enjoin, to choose a Person
so qualified as is before expressed, they did Elect the Reverend Mr. John Hough
B. D. and one of the Fellows of their College, a Person every way qualified to
be President, who has been since confirmed by the Bishop of Winton their
Visitor, as the Statutes of the said College direct.

And that they might not lie under His Majesty's Displeasure by their
Proceedings, they did on the 19th of April make an humble representation
thereof to His Majesty, by his Grace the Duke of Ormond, Chancellor of the
University of Oxon, setting forth their indispensable obligations to observe
their Founder's Statutes.

All which Matters the Vice President, and other deputed Fellows, do humbly
offer to your Lordships, and pray to be dismissed with your Lordships favor.

The Fellows Reasons why they Elected not Mr. Farmer, etc.
WHereas the Vice President, and other deputed Fellows of St. Mary Magdalen
College in Oxon, have in their Answer to your Lordships, set forth, that by
the Statutes of the said College, it is ordered, That the Person to be elected
President thereof, should be a man of good Life and Reputation, and of good
Manners and Temper; and likewise, that Mr. Anthony Farmer has not those
Qualifications which in and by the said Statutes are required in the Character
of a President, as they in their Consciences did and do verily believe. They
humbly crave leave to represent to your Lordships some of those Reasons which
induced them to such belief, viz.

That Mr. Farmer did mis-behave himself in Trinity College in Cambridge: That
he received Admonition from the Master of the College, in order to his
Expulsion; which remains in the Register of the said College, under his own
hand.

That having left Cambridge, he taught School at Chippenham in Wiltshire, under
a Nonconformist Minister, without License.

That in September 1683. the said Mr. Farmer was entered in St. Mary Magdalen
Hall in Oxon. where such frequent Complaints were brought against him to the
Principal, for his troublesome humor and unquiet temper, that to preserve the
Peace of the Society, he was desired to leave the said Hall.

That after his leaving Magdalen Hall, he was admitted into Magdalen College,
where discoursing about Religion, he declared, That there was no Protestant but
would cut the Kings Throat: notwithstanding which, at other times he declared
to some of the Fellows of the said College, That whatsoever he pretended, he
was really a Member of the Church of England; and that he made an Interest with
some Roman Catholics, only to get Preferment by their means, and for that
reason was willing to be thought of their Religion.

That at the very time when his Majesty's Letter came to the College in his
behalf, the said Mr. Farmer was at Abbington in very ill Company, where he
continued drinking to excess two or three days and nights together; and amongst
other Disorders, was one of those that then in the night time threw the
Town-Stocks into the River: and that in general the said Mr. Farmer has had
the unhappiness to lie under an ill Fame, as to his Life and Conversation, as
by several Letters and Certificates, ready to be produced, will more largely
appear.

Copies of Letters and Certificates delivered to the Lords Commissioners for
Ecclesiastical Affairs, June 27. 1687.
I. I Anthony Farmer, Batchelour of Arts, and Scholar of this College, do
confess, That I have behaved my self very unlike a Member of this College, and
even a Christian, at the Dancing-School: for which I humbly ask Pardon, and do
acknowledge before the Seniority, that I have deservedly received of the Master
my first Admonition in order to Expulsion.

Anth. Farmer.
Trinity Coll. Camb. June 11. 1678. This is a true Copy of Anth. Farmer's
Admonition, attested by us whose Names are hereunto underwritten.

Humph Babington, Vice Magist. Deput. John Hawkins, Vice Magist. Deput. Benj.
Pullsyn, Vice Magist. Deput. John Laughton, Vice Magist. Deput.




II. THese are to certify, That Mr. Anth. Farmer was Usher to Mr. Benj.
Flower, a Nonconformist Preacher in the Town of Chippenham in the County of
Wilts, for the space of half a year or upwards, the said Mr. Flower keeping
School without License from the Bishop, and the said Mr. Farmer continuing his
Usher for the time mentioned, without any License also. Witness our hands,

Will. Lak^, Vicar. Will. Loud. Will. Gale.


III. MR. Anthony Farmer was entered of St. Mary Magdalen Hall in Oxford,
Septem. 1. 1683. Where, after he had been some time, frequent Complaints were
brought to me by some of the Masters, that he raised Quarrels and Differences
amongst them; that he often occasioned Disturbances, and was of a troublesome
and unpeaceable humor. Whereupon, that Love and Friendship might be preserved
and continued in the Society, as it used to be, I advised the said Mr. Farmer
to make trial if he could live more easily and quietly in some other House.
Accordingly he did voluntarily leave the Hall July the 13th 1685. and got
himself admitted into Magdalen College.

William Levet, Principal.

IV. I Do certify, That Mr. William Bambrigg, Gentleman Commoner of Magdalen
Hall, Oxon, did say, That Mr. Anthony Farmer, Master of Arts, did entice him
from his Studies in the University to go to London, where he the said Mr.
Farmer did attempt to draw the said Mr. Bambrigg into several Debaucheries both
at Taverns and Bawdy-houses. Witness my hand,

John Ryland, Mr. of Arts of Magd. Hall.

V. I Do certify, That Mr. William Bambrigg. Gentleman Commoner of Magdalen
Hall, did say, That Mr. Anthony Farmer, Master of Arts of the said Hall, did
receive Money of him and other Gentlemen, publicly to expose unto them a Naked
Woman; which he accordingly did. Witness my hand,

Richard Clerk, Mr. of Arts of Magd. Hall.

June 9. 1687.
VI. I Am very willing to justify any thing I have formerly said, relating to
so serious a matter as this is you enquire after.

Mr. Farmer, one night in the Cloister, asked me why I did not get a
Commission: I told him truly, I had not Friends to do it for me. He then asked
me, what I would do for one: I told him, I would fight for my King, and
whatsoever he should command me. He then asked me, if I would fight for the
King's Religion: I told him, there would be no occasion for that, nor would it
ever be required of me. He as'd me of what Religion I was: I told him a
Protestant. And then he said, There was no Protestant but would cut the King's
Throat; and that he should lose Three thousand pounds, for being of that
Religion he intended to be of; which he said was a Papist. This, to the best of
my remembrance, is the full of what he said. If I have omitted any thing, it is
my care not to write more than I would honestly and justly swear to. I am,

SIR, Your most Obliged and most Humble Servant, JOHN BRABOURN.

VII. IN or about January last, 1687. Mr. Anthony Farmer declared before us,
That the Report of his being a Papist was false; but that he was willing to be
thought so, because it might do him a kindness: That the reason of his
acquaintance with Mr. Brent and Mr. Walker, was to get Preferment by their
Interest: That he had not forsaken the Protestant Religion; adding, we should
call him Rogue, if ever he did: That he would not make any public Declaration
of this, but would declare it amongst Friends, when and where he pleased.

Henry Dobson. Ja. Fayrer. Tho. Goodwin.


VIII. I Do hereby certify, That Robert Gardener, Porter of St. Mary Magdalen
College, did tell me, that Mr. Farmer did very often come into the College
late at night, so much in drink, that he could scarce go or speak. Witness my
hand, this 9th of June 1687.

George Fulham.

IX. UPon Monday, April the third, Mr. Farmer came to the Lobster in Abbington
with Mr. Clerk, Mr. Gravener, and Mr. Jenny Jar, about eight in the morning,
and staid some time in the house, and went from thence to the Tavern; returned
again about eleven at night, and sat up till one in the morning: The next day
they went to the Bush-Tavern and sent for a quarter of lamb for their Supper,
and there Mr. Farmer, Mr. Clerk, Mr. Gravener, and two Troopers and others,
continued till past eleven at night, and so returned to the foresaid place, and
sat up till past three in the morning. This I do assert, was the Company that
the said Mr. Anthony Farmer kept, and these were the unseasonable Hours. In
witness whereof, I am ready to swear, whenever a Subpaena shall be sent to me.

George Mortimer.

X. MRs. Mortimer is ready to assert, That when Mr. Anthony Farmer returned to
the Lobster about eleven at night, he came much concerned in Drink, and was for
kissing the said Mrs. Mortimer, which, he being a stranger, she permitted him
to do; but in doing of it he the said Mr. Anthony Farmer put his Tongue in her
mouth, which was such a rudeness, that she immediately went out of his company
and would not come nigh him any more.

Martha Mortimer.

XI. BEing in company with William Hopkins of Abbington, the 12th of June last
1687. I heard him declare, That himself, with one Mr. Farmer of the University
of Oxon, and some others, did in a Frolic, at an unseasonable time of night,
take away the Town-Stocks from the place where they constantly stood, and
carried them in a Cart a considerable way, and threw them into a Pool commonly
called Mad Hall's Pool. Witness my hand, the day and year above-written,

Charles Peacock.

Some Clauses of particular Statutes to which the Case relates.
IN their Statutes concerning their Election of a President, his Character is
thus described: That he must be a man of good Reputation, and good Life, and
circumspect both in Spiritual and Temporal Affairs.

In the same Statutes the Oath which every Fellow is obliged to take, before he
can give in the Nomination of a President, is this: Viz.

That he will name one or two of St. Mary Magdalen College, or of those who
have been Fellows there, or have left their places upon a legal and credible
account: Or that he will name one or two of the Fellows of St. Mary Winchester
College, commonly called New-Colledge, in Oxon, or of those who have been
formerly Fellows there, and have left their places upon a credible account.
After this, the thirteen Seniour Fellows swear, That out of the two thus
nominated, they will, with all speed, Elect one to exercise the Office of a
President, whom in their Consciences they think most proper and sufficient,
most discreet, most useful, and best qualified for it, either without any
regard to Love, Hatred, Favor, Fear, etc. as in the formentioned Statute is
more largely expressed. --

Part of the OATH which every Fellow takes when Admitted.
Item, I Do Swear that I will not procure any Dispensation contrary to my
aforesaid Oath, or to any part thereof, nor contrary to the Statutes and
Ordinances to which they relate, or any one of them; nor will I endeavor that
such Dispensations be procured by any other or others, publicly or privately,
directly or indirectly: And if it shall, that any Dispensation of this sort
shall be procured, or freely granted, or obtained, of what Authority so ever it
be, whether in general or particular, under what form of Words soever it be
granted, I will neither make use of it, nor in any sort consent thereunto.

So help me GOD.
A Copy of Dr. Hough's Deprivation, by His Majesty's Commissioners for
Ecclesiastical Affairs, etc.
WHereas it appears to us, that Mr. John Hough, B. D. has been unduly Elected
President of St. Mary Magdalen College, in the University of Oxon, we have
thought fit, upon mature consideration thereof, That the said Election be
declared void, and the said Mr. John-Hough be amoved from the said
Presidentship; and accordingly we do hereby declare and decree, That the said
Election is void; and do amove the said Mr. John-Hough from the place of
President of the said College.

Given under Our Seal this 22d Day of June, 1687.
A Copy of Dr. Aldworth's and Dr. Fairfax's Suspension.
WHereas Charles Aldworth, Doctor of Laws, Vice President of St. Mary Magdalen
College, Oxon, and the Deputys, Fellows of the same House, have been Convein'd
before Us for their Contempt in not Obeying His Majesty's Letters Mandatory,
for Electing and Admitting Mr. Anthony Farmer President of the said College;
and the said Dr. Aldworth and Deputies having been heard thereupon, We have
thought fit to declare, pronounce, and decree, That the said Dr. Aldworth shall
for the said Contempt be Suspended from being Vice President of the said
College: And that Henry Fairfax, Doctor of Divinity, one of the Fellows of the
said College, shall for the said Contempt be Suspended from his Fellowship;
and accordingly we do hereby Suspend Dr. Charles Aldworth from being
Vice President of the said College, and the said Dr. Henry Fairfax from his
Fellowship in the said College.

Given under Our Seal the 22d Day of June, 1687.
A Copy of the King's Inhibition to Magdalen College.
JAMES REX.

TRusty and Well-beloved, We Greet you well: Whereas We are informed, That a
Sentence or Decree lately made by Our Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Affairs,
touching an Election in that our College, has not been Obeyed, Our Will and
Pleasure is, No Elelection or Admission be made of any person or persons
whatsoever, into any Fellowship. Demyship, or other Place or Office in Our said
College, till We shall signify Our further Pleasure, any Statute, Custom, or
Constitution to the contrary notwithstanding. And so, expecting Obedience
herein, We bid you Farewell.

Given at Our Court at Windsor, the Eighteenth of July, 1687, in the Third Year
of Our Reign. By His MAJESTY's Command. Sunderland.

A Copy of His Majesty's Mandate for the Bishop of Oxon to be President.
JAMES REX.

TRusty and Well-boleved, We Greet you well: Whereas the place of President of
Our College of St. Mary Magdalen, is now void, Our Will and Pleasure is, That
We do hereby Authorize and Require you forthwith, upon receipt hereof, to Admit
the Right Reverend Father in God Samuel Lord Bishop of Oxon, into the said
place of President, to hold and enjoy the same, with all the Rights,
Privileges and Profits, Emoluments and Advantages thereunto belonging, any
Statute or Statutes, Custom or Constitution to the contrary, in any wise,
notwithstanding, wherewith We are Graciously pleased, and do accordingly hereby
Dispense in his behalf: And so, expecting your ready Obedience herein, We bid
you Farewell.

By His Majesty's Commmand. Sunderland.
Given at Our Court at Windsor, Aug. 14th, 1687, in the Third Year of Our
Reign.
A Copy of the Lord Sunderland's Letter to the Seniour Fellow of St. Mary
Magdalen College, in the University of Oxon, or in his absence, to the Seniour
Fellow residing there.
THe King having been pleased by His Letters Mandatory, to require the Fellows
of St. Mary Magdalen College, to Admit the Lord Bishop of Oxon, President of
that College; His Majesty Commands me to let you know, That immediately upon
the receipt hereof, he would have you Assemble the Fellows, and Communicate to
them His Majesty's said Letters: And I am further Commanded to tell you, That
His Majesty expects a ready Obedience to be paid to His Pleasure herein. I
desire you would send me an Account of your Proceedings, as soon as you can,
that I may acquaint His Majesty with it. I am

Yours Sunderland.

A Copy of the Bishop of Oxon's Letter to the Seniour Fellow of St. Mary
Magdalen College, in Oxon, or in his absence, to the Seniour Fellow residing
there.
SIR,
YOu will receive herewith His Majesty's Mandate to Admit me President of your
College of St. Mary Magdalen, in Oxon, together with a Letter of my Lord
Sunderland, pursuant to His Majesty's Commands. I am indisposed, as I have been
for some time, and not in a condition as yet to Travel; and therefore my
request to you is, That upon receipt of the King's Pleasure, you would do me
the Favor to Admit me by Proxy, (i. e.) Either the next Seniour Fellow under
your self, resident, or either of my Chaplains, Mr. William Wickins, or Mr.
Thomas Collins, whom I depute in my stead, which is as valid in Law, as if I
were present my self; and is the most usual and customary Practice. And by so
doing, you will oblige

Your very Loving Friend and Brother, Samuel Oxon.

OXON. Sept. 4 th, 1687.
The Lord Sunderland sent an Order to the Fellows of St. Mary Magdalen
College, to attend the King at Christ-Church, at three in the Afternoon. They
attended accordingly.
King What Is your name, are you Dr. Pudsey?


Dr. P. Yes, may it please your Majesty.


K. Did you receive my Letter?


Dr. P. Yes Sir we did.


K. Then you have not dealt with me like Gentlemen, you have done very
uncivilly by me and undutifully -- Here they all kneeled, and Dr. Pudsey
offered a Petition, which His Majesty refused to receive: And said,


K. Ye have been a stubborn turbulent College, I have known you to be so these
26 years: You have affronted me in this. Is this your Church of England
Loyalty? One would wonder to find so many Church of England men in such a
business. Go home and show your selves good Members of the Church of England.
Get you gone; know I am your King, I will be obeyed; and I command you to be
gone: Go and admit the Bishop of Oxon Head, Principle; What do you call it of the
College --? (One stood by said President) I mean President of the College.
Let them that refuse it look to it; they shall feel the weight of their
Sovereign's Displeasure.


The Fellows going out of the Lodgings were called back.

K. I hear you have admitted a Fellow of the College, since you received my
Inhibition; Is this true? Have you not admitted Mr. Holden Fellow?


Dr. P. I think he was admitted Fellow: But we conceive --


Mr. Cra. May it please Your Majesty, there was no new Election or Admission,
since Your Majesty's Inhibition; but only the Consummation of a former
Election. (They always Elect to one years Probation) then the Person Elected is
received, or rejected for ever.


K. The Consummation of a former Election, 'twas downright Disobedience, and
it is a fresh aggravation. Get you gone home, I say again; go, get you gone, and
immediately repair to your Chapel, and Elect the Bishop of Oxon, or else you
must expect to feel the weight of my hand. --


The Felows offered again their Petition, on their Knees.

K. Get you gone, I will receive nothing from you, till you have obeyed me, and
admitted the Bishop of Oxon.


Upon which they went immediately to their Chapel, Dr. Pudsey proposing
whether they would obey the King, and elect the Bishop of Oxon? They answered
in their turns, They were as ready to obey His Majesty in all things that lay
in their power, as any of the rest of His Subjects: But the Electing the Bishop
of Oxon, being directly contrary to their Statutes, and the positive Oaths they
had taken, they could not apprehend it in their power to obey Him in this
Matter.

A Copy of the Petition offered at Oxford, Sept. 4th, 1687.
To the King's Most Excellent Majesty, etc.
Humbly shows,
THat upon the 27th of August we received Your Majesty's Letters Mandatory,
Dated August 14th, requiring us to admit the Right Reverend Father in God
Samuel Lord Bishop of Oxon, to be our President; and dispensing with all
Statutes and Constitutions to the contrary. It is an unexpressible Affliction
to us, to find our selves reduced to such an extremity, that either we must
disobey Your Majesty's Royal Command, contrary to our own Inclinations, and
that constant course of Loyalty which we have showed in all instances hitherto
upon all occasions whatsoever; or else break our Founder's Statutes, and
deliberately perjure our selves.

For our Founder has obliged us under Oath, when we came in Fellows,
inviolably to observe his Statutes, and one Clause therein injoyns us never to
admit, or make use of Dispensation granted by any Authority whatsoever, whereby
we may be absolved from the same. In this Statute for the Election of a
President, he commands us upon Oath to Elect such a Person into the place of
President, within 15 days after the vacancy, who either is, or has been Fellow
of our own, or New-Colledge: Which we represented to Your Majesty in our humble
Petition, signed April 9th, wherein we offered our selves ready to Elect any
Person capable of the same, who Your Majesty should be pleased to recommend,
and having waited the utmost time limited by our Statutes, and received no
Answer to that effect, we did then according to the exigence of our Statutes
(having first taken the Holy Eucharist, and our several Oaths to that purpose)
nominate and Elect such a Person, as we in our Consciences did believe to be
every way qualified for that Place: By which Act of ours, we have conveyed all
that right to him, which our Founder has entrusted us with; and it does not
lie in our power to admit any other. Our Founder in another Statute obliges us
under the pain of Perjury, a dreadful Anathema, and eternal Damnation, not to
suffer any of his Statutes to be altered, infringed, or dispensed with, and
commands us under the same Sacred Obligations, not to execute any Orders or
Decree whatsoever, contrary or repugnant to the said Statutes; by which said
Statutes, and Oaths, we are utterly incapacitated to admit the said Reverend
Father in God to be our President.

May it please Your Sacred Majesty, to give us leave to lay this our Case, and
our selves, withal submission, at Your Royal Feet, most earnestly beseeching
Your Sacred Majesty, to extend to us Your humble Petitioners, that Grace and
Tenderness which Your Majesty has vouchsafed to all Your other Subjects; and
not to believe us guilty of any obstinacy or undutifulness, Crimes which our
Souls abhor; but to receive us into Your Majesty's Grace and Favor, the
greatest temporal Blessing which our Hearts can wish.

And Your humble Petitioners shall always (as in Duty bound) pray to Almighty
God, to bless Your Majesty with a long and happy Reign over us, and afterward
to receive You to an immortal Crown of Glory.

A Copy of the Address which the Fellows of St. Mary Magdalen gave to the Lord
President of the Council, Sept. 6th, 1687; and which was delivered His Majesty
at Bath.
WE Your Majesty's most humble, and most dutiful Subjects, the Fellows of St.
Mary Magdalen College in Oxon, being deeply afflicted with the late sense of
Your Majesty's heavy Displeasure; grounded, as we in all reason humbly presume,
upon a most unkind misrepresentation of our Actions, in relation to an Election
of a President, into Your Majesty's said College: Do humbly beg leave to
prostrate our selves at Your Royal Feet, offering all real Testimonies of Duty
and Loyalty. And as we have never failed to evince both our Principles and
Practices to be truly Loyal, in obedience to the Commands of Your Royal
Brother, and Your Sacred Self, in matters of the like Nature: So whatsoever way
Your Majesty shall be pleased to try our readiness to obey Your Royal Pleasure,
in any instance that does not interfere with and violate our Consciences, which
Your Majesty is studious to preserve, we shall most gladly and effectually
comply therewith: A stubborn and a groundless resistance of Your Royal Will and
Pleasure, in the present, and all other Cases, being that which our Souls
eternally abhor, as becomes

Your Majesty's most Loyal and most Obedient Subjects, etc.

A Copy of a Letter directed to Dr. Bailey Fellow of Magdalen College, Oxon.
supposed to be Writ by Mr. W -- P --
Sir,
UPon an inquiry made of your present Fellows of Magdalen College, I am
informed that you are a person eminent in that Learned Body, for your Temper,
Prudence, and good Conduct in Affairs; and therefore very fit to be addressed
to by me, who do not send you this to trapan you, and your Brethren; but out of
a passionate concern for your interest, to persuade you, either to a compliance
with His Majesty's Letters Mandatory; or to think among your selves of some
expedient to prevent the ruin of your College, and your selves: And to offer
it to His Majesty's Royal Consideration, that the Order for the Quo Warranto
against the College may be recalled, before it be too late; for you cannot be
sensible how highly His Majesty is incensed against you, neither can you give
one instance whether ever that sort of proceeding was judged against the Crown.
Your Cause most think it very hard; but you are not in Prudence to rely on the
goodness of your Cause; but to do what the present instant of Affairs will
permit, and in patience to expect a Season that will be more auspicious to
Persons of your Character. Every Mechanic knows the temper of His present
Majesty, who never will receive a baffle in any thing that he heartily
espouseth, and that he does this, your selves have had too late and manifest an
instance, to doubt of his zeal (...) the Affair.

Where there are so many Statutes to be observed, it is impossible but some must
be broken at one time or another; and I am informed by the Learned of the Law,
that a failure in any one point, forfeits your Grant, and lays your College
open to the Royal disposal.

I could give many other prudent Arguments, that might possibly incline you to
a speedy endeavor of putting an end to your Troubles, almost, at any rate; but
I shall suggest this one thing to you, that your fatal overthrow would be a
fair beginning of so much aimed at Reformation, first of the University, then
of the Church, and administer such an opportunity to the Enemy, as may not
perhaps occur in His Majesty's Reign. I am

Your affectionate Servant, etc.

The Answer to the aforementioned written Letter, Dated Oct. 3d. 1687.
THE enclosed Paper is a Copy of a Letter, which by the charitable purpose of
it, seems to be writ by you, who have been already so kind as to appear on our
behalf, and are reported by all that know you, to employ much of your time in
doing good to Mankind, and using your Credit with His Majesty, to undeceive him
in any wrong impressions given him of his conscientious Subjects, and where his
Justice and Goodness have been thereby abused, to reconcile the Persons injured
to His Majesty's Favor, and secure them by it from Oppression and Prejudice.
In this confidence, I presume to make this application to you, desiring your
excuse for not subscribing it: For if you did write the Letter, you know to
whom it was directed; and if you did not, I hope your Charity will induce you
to make such use of your light you have by it, into the Affairs of our
College, as to mediate for us with His Majesty, to be restored to his good
opinion, as the only thing which is desired by us, who are zealous, above all
earthly things, for his Felicity and Glory.

We are not conscious of ever giving His Majesty any just Offense, as it will
appear with you, when you shall have perused the enclosed Papers; and have
therefore no reason to fear the issuing out of a Quo Warranto against us. And
though you are pleased to apprehend it, no instance can be given of a Judgment
against the Crown, upon the process of that Writ: The Learned in the Law tell
me, there is nothing more common, and whereof many Cases are reported by
Kellaway, from Page 128, to Page 152, of his Book of Reports: And I think I
have heard of a Case in Coke's ninth Report of the Abbess of Prata Marcella,
which evinces the same; wherein also there is a recital of Judgment given
against Roger Mortimer for the King, upon a Quo Warranto in Court of Air,
reversed for Error in the King's Bench. We hope though we have many Statutes,
it will be found that we have not wilfully transgressed any of them, for all
our present Troubles are derived to us from our adherence to them, and our fear
to offend God, and blemish our Consciences, by departing from them.

His Majesty is intentionally righteous and just in all his Proceedings, He
will never knowingly invade any Man's Property, as He was solemnly pleased to
declare in his Excellent Speech made in Council, on the 6th of February, 1684,
at his Accession to the Government; which is again repeated in His gracious
Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, of the 4th of April last past. It is
upon His Sacred inviolable, and Royal Word and Promise, we must depend; not
doubting but when His Majesty shall be rightly informed of our Case, in
reference to both His Mandatory Letters to our College, His Anger toward us
will be totally extinguished. Our compliance to the first (which was Mr.
Farmer's Election) would have involved us in the guilt of manifest Perjury, and
the wilful violation of our Statutes: And we are confident his Majesty would
never have granted the second on the behalf of my Lord Bishop of Oxon, if he
had known we were then possessed of a President duly Elected according to our
Statutes, and confirmed by the Bishop of Winton, our Visitor (as the Statutes
require); and if he is thereby invested with a Lay-Freehold under the
protection of his Majesty's Laws, which we cannot undo or attempt to invade,
without subjecting our selves to Suits at Law, and doing an apparent injury to
the President, who does not conceive himself to be affected with the Sentence
of the Lords Commissionets, (to which he was no Party) whereby his Place is
declared void, without any Citations, Summons, or hearing of him.

I believe no instance can be given of a Quo Warranto brought against a
College or Hall in the Universities, from the first foundation of them to this
day, or any other Ecclesiastical Corporation: for the Abuses of some
Constitutions or Franchises in them, and the Misdemeanors of particular
Persons, will not destroy a College: And if the Corporation of a College
should be dissolved, the Revenues thereof will return to the Founders Heirs,
and not divolve to the Crown. And if our College must be the first Example of
that kind, we shall be better justified by the strict Observation of our
Statutes, (at least to God and our own Consciences) than we could have been by
a voluntary and deliberate Breach of them.

It was Loyalty and Conscience, that in the Reign of King Charles the First,
made thirty four of our forty Fellows, and most of the Scholars of our
Foundation, rather quit their Places, and embrace Misery and Ruin, than to
submit to the Government of the Usurpers of the Crown. And in Monmouth's
Rebellion, the same Inducements prevailed on us to raise a Company at our own
charges, under the command of one of our Fellows, to engage against him. And we
hope that these and many other the like instances, which may be given of the
Loyalty and Zeal of our Society to the Royal Family, will be received as
Evidences thereof, and that our good and gracious Sovereign will not exclude us
from that Liberty of Conscience, which he was pleased to extend to all his
Subjects.

SIR, I am Your most Affectionate Servant.

Some QUERIES sent to the Fellows of Magdalen College from Windsor, September
15. 1687.
First, WHether, waving your Election of the Bishop of Oxon, you cannot,
without violence to your Conscience, signify to his Majesty, or the above
Reverend Bishop, your willingness to admit the Lord Bishop President of your
College?

Secondly, Whether it be not more Interest to the Protestant Religion, to have
a suspected Popish President, than to have all the places of the College
refilled by the Kings sole Authority with Popish Novices and Priests?

Thirdly, Whether you are not under a mistake, in thinking you should render
your selves more acceptable to the Protestant Nobility and Gentry, by your
being turned out of your Fellowships by Injustice and Violence, as you
conceive; or rather will not they be very cautious how they receive you into
their Families, for fear of giving of Offense?

Fourthly, Whether his Majesty, as Supreme Visitor of the University, cannot
place or displace there ad libitum; or whether you have a right notion of the
Proceedings which have been practiced against you? Whether you suppose that the
Lords Commissioners proceeded against you as Lords Commissioners, or Visitors?
Which Notion, I am sure, will overthrow some bodies Plea and Exception against
their Authority.

Fifthly, Whether you acted like men skilled in business, when you refused Mr.
Pen's Mediation, who you may be sure had good Authority for what he did? You
could not but know that man, and therefore must needs be forearmed against any
Wiles that could be offered to you. Whether an unanimous Subscription for an
Expedient, (which indeed I think you ought not to refuse in good manners, since
the King was pleased to propose it) presented to his Majesty by Mr. Pen, or
another Favorite, would prevent the destruction of the best Foundation in
Europe.

Lastly, Whether you be not drawn beyond your Knowledge, by some hotheaded
Advisers, which never consider the present state of his Majesty's Court of
Justice?

An Answer to several Queries to the Vice President and Fellows of Magdalen
College in Oxon, sent from Windsor, dated the 25th of September, 1687.
To the First. WE cannot, without violence to our Consciences, and deliberate
Perjury, admit any person to be President of our College, that is not elected
thereunto, and qualified according to our Statutes; whereby the Bishop of Oxon
is in no sort capable; nor is there any Memorial in all our Register of any
admission of a President without Election, but of one Dr. Nicholas Bond, whose
case was as follows, (viz.) Upon the death of Dr. Lawrence Humphreys, about
the 30th or 32th of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, the Queen recommended Dr. Bond
(being a Fellow of our College) to be Elected President. Many of the Fellows
inclined in their judgment to Elect one Smith (another of the Fellows) and at
their meeting for Election, the Contention was so great, that they rose without
Electing, and the Obstinacy continued till the place became lapsed: And there
being no provision in our Statutes to direct us what to do in such a Case, the
Queen, by her Letters Patents, Constituted the said Dr. Bond to be President;
and therein declared, That her Majesty being informed that the Fellows had
neglected to make Election of a President in due time, (as their Statutes
required) and those Statutes having made no provision for such an Omission,
She, out of her Princely care for the place, and indulgence for those persons
who had been guilty of that neglect, did by advice of the Bishop of Winton,
their Visitor, Constitute Dr. Bond their President; with protestation
nevertheless, that She did not thereby pretend to supersede their Statutes, or
invade their Right of Election, which was thereby invested in them, but took
this course as the only means left to supply their Defect of Election.

To the Second. We must not make our selves guilty of deliberate Perjury, for
any considerations whatsoever, both in respect to our Consciences, and that we
may not by such a Breach upon our Statutes, expose our Constitution to a
Forfeiture, nor do Evil that Good may come on it.

To the Third. We conceive we shall be more acceptable to all good men, for
acting honestly according to our Consciences, than for voluntarily and unjustly
departing from our Right.

To the Fourth. We pretend not to make it a Question, whether his Majesty, by
his Authority Royal as Supreme Visitor, can grant a Commission for Visitation
of any College that has a Local Visitor by their Statutes, and are not Royal
Foundations: But we are advised, that no Commission can be granted under the
Great Seal to Visitors, to place and dis-place Members of Colleges (whose
places are Freeholds) ad libitum, or discretum; but they must proceed according
to legal discretion, that is, by the Laws and Statutes of the Land, and the
Local Statutes of the College. And places concerned for the Headships and
Fellowships of Colleges, are Temporal Possessions, and cannot be impeached by
Summary Proceedings. One Dr. Thomas Loveney President of our College, was
deprived in Queen Elizabeth's time, by the Bishop of Winton, the Legal Visitor
thereof Established by Royal Authority, and he appealed to the Queen; but by
the advice of all the Judges, it was held, that the Queen by her Authority, as
Supreme Visitor, could not meddle in it, but he must bring (...)
Westminster Hall, because Deprivation was a Cause merely temporal. The King has
a great Authority Spiritual as well as Temporal; but no Commissioners can be
authorized by the Crown to proceed in any Commission under the Great Seal or
otherwise, but according to Law; in Spiritual Causes by the Canon Law, in
Temporal by the other Laws and Statutes of the Land. And wherein the
proceedings in some Commissions are directed to be summarie and de plano, etc.
(...) those words are to be applied to shorten the Forms of Process, and not
for matter of Judgment: for Magna Charta provides for our Spiritual Liberties,
as well as our Temporal.

AN Account of the VISITATION OF St Mary Magdalen College in Oxon.
ON Oct. 19th, Mr. Atterbury the King's Messenger, fixed a Citation on the
College and Chappel-Doors, requiring the Pretended President and Fellows, and
other Members of the College to appear before the Lords Commissioners, Bishop
of Chester, Lord Chief Justice Wright, and Mr. Barron Jenner, in the Chapel,
at Nine of the Clock on Friday-morning, November 21st.

On Thursday the Lords Commissioners came to Oxon, attended with three Troops
of Horse which Quarter there.

On Friday- Morning at Nine they went into the Chapel; the President and
Fellows thinking they had designed to fit in the Quire, made no preparation of
Seats in the outward Chapel; upon which their Lordships adjourned to the Hall,
where their Commission was then read, which in general was the same with the
former: These three being added to the other Lords Commissioners, and
particularly empowered to visit Magdalen College only.

This done, the Names of the President and Fellows were called over, Dr. Hough
being first called. All in Town appeared, (except Dr. Fairfax) and excuses were
made for the absent.

Then a Speech was made by the Bishop of Chester, and in it his Lordship was
Severe against Disloyalty and Disobedience. He urged that the Church of England
taught an unconditionate and unlimited Obedience; He spoke of the Kings
Gracious Promises to Archbishops and Bishops, etc. which had deserved thanks
on bended Knees, notwithstanding the Oxon Reasons to the contrary which they
knew best who was the Author thereof. He told them that it could not be
expected, but that the King would give all encouragement to those of his own
Religion, which could be done without severity and cruelty which His Majesty
abhorred, and without injuring the Church of England, which was at present
established by Law: He told them that this Corporation as well as others were
the Creatures of the Crown; and that it was insolence in their Local Statutes
to spurn against their Maker.

That their Distempers had brought this Visitation upon them, the Consequences
of which might be ill to the Church and Universities: That however they might
escape in this World, these Sins were to be accounted for above their other
Sins in the next. He Exhorted them by the Bowels of Christ to consider these
things: He told them, that the Eyes of the World were upon them, and they ought
to take care that their Practices might not influence their deluded admirers.
In short, the whole design of the Speech seemed to be promises and threats, to
aim at the inducing them to a compliance.

The Court was then Adjourned till Two in the Afternoon.

In the Afternoon were called over the Names of the Demoys, Chaplins, Clerks,
Choristers, and College Servants. The President then interposed, desiring
leave to speak before they proceeded any further; which being granted, he told
their Lordships: That
President. THE time betwixt your Citation and Appearance was so short; that
the Society had not time to advise with the Council how to behave themselves on
this Occasion: Therefore desired of your Lordships a Copy of the Commission,
and time to consider of it.


Bishop Chapter It Is upon Record, you may have it above.


Pr. Is it the same the other Lords Commissioners had?


Bish. Chapter Yes for the most part it is.


Pr. Then my Lord, I do assure you (and will make Oath if you please) that I
have often endeavored to get a Copy of it, and could not procure it.


L. C. J. Have you not heard it Read, or will you hear it again?


Pr. I am not capable of making a Judgment of it my self, but it is possible
there may be Errors and Defects in it, such as the Society may make use of to
their own advantage, and I am confident it is neither his Majesty's intention
nor your Lordships we should be debarred from it.


A Copy was then denied.

Bish. Chapter Dr. Hough, will you submit to this Visitation?


Pr. My Lords, I do declare here in the name of my self, and the greater part
of the Fellows; that we submit to the Visitation, as far as it is consistent
with the Laws of the Land, and the Statutes of the College, and no further. I
desire your Lordships that it may be Recorded.


This was twice Repeated.

L. C. J. You cannot imagine that we Act contrary to the Laws of the Land, and
as to the Statutes the King has dispensed with them: Do you think we come here
to act against Laws.


Pr. It does not become me (my Lords) to say so, but I Will be plain with your
Lordships; I find that your Commission gives you Authority to change and alter
the Statutes, and make new ones as you think fit: Now my Lords we have an Oath,
not only to observe these Statutes (laying his hand on the Book) but to admit
of no new ones, or alterations in these; This must be my behavior here, I must
admit of no alteration from it, and by the Grace of God never will.


Bish. Chapter Do you observe all these Statutes?


Pr. Yes, my Lord, I hope we do.


Bish. Chapter You have a Statute there for Mass, why don't you read Mass?


Pr. My Lord, the matter of this Oath is unlawful; and in such a case, no man
is obliged to observe an Oath: Besides, the Statute is taken away by the Laws
of the Land.


Bish. Chapter By what Law?


Dr. Stafford. By that which obliges to say Common Prayer.


Bish. Chapter What, the Act of Uniformity? I have often considered it, and don't
remember one word of Mass in it.


Dr. Staff. But that obliges us to use the Liturgy of the Church of England, in
all Collegiate Churches and Chapels: And, I hope, my Lords, you do not imagine
that we can say Common Prayer and Mass together.


Bish. Chapter Do you allow that Act of Parliament can free you from the obligation
of a Statute.


Pr. I do not say, but that his Majesty may alter our Statutes, nor do I know
but a Parliament may do the same; I dispute not their Power: only this, my
Lord, I say, that I who already have taken an Oath to observe these Statutes as
they now stand, and am sworn not to admit of any change or alteration by any
Authority whatsoever, [ And then turning to the Oath where they were to observe
these Statutes and no other, according to the Literal and Grammatical sense,
etc. and reading it to their Lordships.] can obey none: But then those who come
after such Limitations and Restrictions are made, are not obliged to observe
'em; and that, my Lords, is our Case, as to the Statutes of the Mass.


Then the Decree of the 22d of June was read, declaring the President's
Election Null and Void.

Bish. Chapter Did you know of this Commission, etc.


Pr. Yes, my Lord, I have heard of it.


Bish. Chapter Why then did you not obey it?


Pr. I was never Cited before their Lordships, nor was either heard by them in
Person or Proxy; and I think I am the only instance that is extant, of any man
that was ever deprived of a Freehold, wherein he was legally invested, and of
which he was quietly possessed, without being Summoned or Heard.


Here mention was made of Dr. Fairfax's Suspension.

Pr. My Lord, He is absent, and if your Lordships give me leave, I have
somewhat to say on his account; your Lordships may please to observe in that
Decree, that the reason given, why Dr. Fairfax was Suspended from his
Fellowship, was, because he had not obeyed his Majesty's Command, in not
Electing Mr. Anthony Farmer President of the College: Now the Charge of
Immorality given in against Mr. Farmer by the College; Delegates was made out,
and their Lordships fully satisfied in it, on the 29th of July* notwithstanding
which, this Decree for Suspension of Dr. Fairfax, was fixed on the
Colledge-Gates, August 2d.


Bish. Chapter The King has for the most part recommended to the Presidentship of
this College.


Pr. I am the Twentieth President, and only four of that number has been
recommended by the Kings and Queens of England, whereof three were every way
qualified for that Office.


Bish. Chapter Who were those?


Pr. My Lord, there was one in the time of Edward the Sixth one in Queen
Elizabeth's, and two in the late King's Reign.


Bish. Chapter Was there never a one in King Charles the First's Reign?


Pr. Not that we know of.


Bish. Chapter What think you of Dr. Oliver?


Pr. It does not appear to us, my Lord, that he ever had a Mandate.


Bish. Chapter But it appears to us, and that I will bring you one to swear, that
he had a Mandate.


Pr. The truth is, we have lost the Register of Dr. Oliver's Election and
Admission; the Register betwixt the Year 1640, or thereabouts, and 60 being
taken away by those who were turned out of the College at that time; but I
believe, my Lord, we are able to prove that he was Elected and Admitted
according to Statute.


Bish. Chapter Was Dr. Clark a Statutable Person?


Pr. Yes, my Lord.


Bish. Chapter Do not the Statutes require that he should be in Orders? was he in
Orders?


Pr. My Lord, the Statutes only require that he should be Doctor of Divinity,
Physic, Law, or Master of Arts: There is indeed one Statute which says, The
President or Seniour Fellow should Read Prayers upon such certain Days; from
whence we conclude, that the Founder supposed we might have a President that
might not be in Orders; and in such a case he takes care that the Seniour
Fellow should do his Duty.


Mr. Char. My Lord, will you be pleased to ask Dr. Hough, whether Dr. Clark was
Married or not?


Pr. No, Sir, he was a Widdower.


Then a Petition was read from the Society to his Majesty, signed the 9th of
April, and presented the 10th to the Earl of Sunderland, by the hands of Dr.
Thomas Smith and Captain Bagshaw, wherein 'twas set forth, that having heard
that his Majesty would recommend Mr. Farmer to them a person incapable; they
did humbly beseech him either to leave them to a free Election, or to recommend
a qualified person.

Bish. Chapter Was this the Petition? Answer, Yes.


Bish. Chapter Why then did you not stay for his Majesty's Answer?


Pr. My Lord, We did till the very last day wherein we are limited to finish
the Election; and my Lord Sunderland returned, in the King's name, this Answer,
That his Majesty expected to be obeyed. Now, my Lord, we did no longer defer
the Election, because our Statutes enjoin us within such a time, and we staid
to the utmost. Nor could we choose the person his Majesty did recommend, knowing
him to be so unfit, as we afterward made him appear to be. The Society was
therefore to proceed to the Election of another person, and did agree on such
as you see.


Bish. Chapter A Mandate always implies an Inhibition.


Pr. My Lord, I cannot conceive that,


Bish. Chapter But I can; and if you question it, here is the King's Council ready
to argue it.


Pr. My Lord, Whilst the person his Majesty recommends appears duly qualified
for the place, it seems indeed to imply that we should not proceed to the
Election of another; but when he is known to be utterly incapable, it seems to
be the same as if there were no Letter at all.


Some other things and questions less material were put, and then the Court was
Adjourned to Saturday the 22d, nine in the morning, to the common Room, the
Hall being (as they said) too public and incommodious.

SATURDAY, October 22d, 1687.
As soon as their Lordships met in the common Room, and the Society before
them, the first word was Withdraw; and after a little time, the President was
called in alone.

Bish. Chapter DO you submit to the Decree of the Commissioners, whereby the
Election is declared Null?


Pr. As to that Decree of the Lords above, it is a Nullity in its self from the
beginning to the end, as it relates to me, I never having been Cited, nor
having ever appeared before them, either in Person or by Proxy: Besides, my
Cause it self was never before them; their Lordships never inquiring or asking
one queston concerning the Legality or Statutableness of my Election: for which
reasons (as I am informed) that Decree was of no Validity against me, according
to methods in the Civil Law: But if it were, I am possessed of a Freehold,
according to the Laws of England, and the Statutes of the Society, having been
Elected as Unanimously, and with as much Formality as any one of my
Predicessors Presidents of this College, and afterward Admitted by the Lord
Bishop of Winton, our Visitor, as the Statutes of the College require; and
therefore I cannot submit to that Sentence, because I think I cannot be deprived
of my Freehold, but by course of Law at Westminster Hall, or by being some
ways incapacitated by the Founder's Statutes.


Bish. Chapter Will you deliver up the Keys of the President's Office and Lodgings,
to the use of that Person whom the King has appointed your President, as the
Statutes require.


Pr. I will immediately do it, if that appear.


Bish. Chapter Turn to that part of the President's Oath where he promises to
submit quietly if he shall be Expelled, either for his on Fault vel ob aliam
Causam.


Pr. My Lord, That Statute only concerns me, if I am Expelled for any fault
committed by me.


Bish. Chapter Vel ob aliam causam?


Pr. Then, my Lord, to be short, here is no cause at all.


Bish. Chapter I ask you again, Will you deliver up the Keys to the President whom
his Majesty has appointed?


Pr. There neither is nor can be a President so long as I live, and obey the
Statutes of the College; and therefore I do not think fit to give up my Right,
the Keys and Lodgings.


Bish. Chapter We may demand them of you as Visitors.


Pr. My Lords, we never deliver up the Keys to the Bishop of Winton; and we own
no greater Visitatorial Power than his, he has the King's Authority. It Is by
Verttue of a Royal Charter that we live together, and enjoy the benefit of this
Place, that empowered our Founder to give us a Rule, and obliged us by Oath to
act suitable unto it: and the Bishop of Winton is hereby constituted to be our
Visitor; and all this we own from the King's Authority. The Bishop of Winton is
our ordinary Visitor; the King (I presume) our extraordinary. But your
Lordships know it has been controversed, Whether the King can visit a private
College or not? The Authority of the President is made by delivering up the
Statute-Book, and Keys; and therefore I look upon them as an essential Badge of
my Office.

But I humbly beg that I may ask your Lordships one Question.

Your Lordship is pleased to demand of me to give up these things: Does your
Lordship own my Right? For if not, which is it your Lordships would have me
give up?


Bish. Chapter No, we look upon you as an Intruder.


Pr. If I am an Intruder, the Bishop of Winton made me one, and I thank God for
it. My Lords, the time we have been allowed for this appearance, has been very
short, but one day betwixt it and the Citation: We are men ignorant in the
Laws, and I must confess it of my self in particular, that I have endeavored
to give your Lordships a plain and satisfactory Reply to such Questions as your
Lordships have been pleased to put to me. It is very probable that through
ignorance and inadvertency I may express my self unwarily: If so I beseech your
Lordship let no advantage be taken of it, my intention has been always to
express my self with all imaginable Duty to the King, and Respects to your
Lordships. If I have done otherwise, I beseech your Lordships Candor in a
favorable Interpretation of what I said, that nothing may be taken amiss,
where all was dutifully intended. And now my Lords, thus far have I appeared
before you as Judges; I now address to you as Men of Honor, and Gentlemen, I
beseech you to represent me as dutiful to His Majesty to the last Degree, as I
always will be, so far as my Conscience permits me, to the last moment of my
Life; and when I am dispossessed here, I hope your Lordships will interceed, that
I may no longer lie under His Majesty's Displeasure, or be frowned upon by my
Prince, which is the greatest Affliction can befall me.


Upon this the President was ordered to withdraw, and after a little time, he
and the Fellows were called in again. Then the Bishop repeated this Question.

Bish. Chapter Dr. Hough, Will you deliver up the Keys, and quiet possession of the
Lodgings, to the Person whom His Majesty has appointed President? To which no
Answer was returned. The Bishop repeated a Second time.


Pr. My Lords, I have neither seen nor heard any thing to induce me to it.


Bish. Chapter Dr. Hough, Will you deliver up the Keys and quiet possession of the
Lodgings, to the Person whom His Majesty has appointed President*

Whereupon the King's Proctor stood up and accused Dr. Hough of Countumacy;
then the Bishop of Chester admonished him in these Words; three times.


Bish. Chapter Dr. Hough, I admonish you to depart peaceably out of the Lodgings,
and to Act no longer as President, or pretended President of this College.


Which being so done, they struck his Name out of the Book, and admonished the
Fellows, and others of the Society, that they should no longer submit to his
Authority.

SATURDAY, October 22d, 1687. OXON.
Dr. Fairfax's CASE before the Commissioners.
AT the first Sessions Doctor Fairfax purposely absented himself; but Mr.
Atterbury making Affidavit he was in Town, and that he advised him to appear,
the Doctor accordingly did so the next day. The Doctor being called in alone,
and the Doors immediately shut, he begged of their Lordships some Company might
be let in; because, as all had observed the Bishop in his Speech, at the
opening their Commission, promised to transact every thing in the face of the
World. The Bishop complained of the Crowd. The Doctor then desired to fetch in
but Two or Three, at length but One, and him at the Door, viz. The College
Steward, a Public Notary.

Bar. Jen. You must not think to prescribe to the Court.


Bish. Chapter What Is the Cause of your Contempt, in not appearing at either
Sessions yesterday?


Dr. Fair. No Contempt my Lord, but for these ensuing Reasons.

First, I thought my Suspension above had eased me of that trouble. The Doctor
tendering a Copy of it, which was read by the Commissioners. The Doctor insisted
very much on the Reason^ their Lordships, at White Hall, gave for his
Suspension. ( viz) For not obeying His Majesty, in Electing Mr. Farmer, he
tendering a Copy of Articles made good against him; and yet their Lordships
ordered his Suspension to be fixed on the Colledge-Gates five days after that
famous Hearing. Second Reason for his Nonappearance, that upon the first day
of the ensuing Term, he intended to meet the Lord Chief Justice, at his Court
of King's Bench, for relief against the Sentence, his Fellowship being a
Freehold, witness Coveny's Case.


Bish. Chapter You will find but little Favor there.


Dr. Fair. My Lord, in Courts of Judicature, I only expect Justice, and turning
to the Lord Chief Justice. I have, my self, said he, been above four years in
all the Courts of Westminster Hall, and found excellent Justice, and I will see
how it is now.


L. Chapter Just. You shall have Justice.


Dr. Fair. But your Lordship may save me the labor of two Journeys, and my
Charges, by improving your Lordship's deserved Interest with my Lords
Commissioners there, and get them now to take off my Suspension: It is ill
traveling at this time of year; and besides I am not rich.


Bar. Jen. To sue in Westminster Hall requires a Purse.


Dr. Fair. My Lord, I did not say I was poor.


L. Chapter Just. You must make your Supplication, and Submission, to the King.


Dr. Fair. My Lord, they tell me that this business lies in your Lordship's
Court, and only there, (besides the trouble I am otherwise to give your
Lordship: What a noise will the cause make that Dr. Fairfax is suspended for
this very reason, ( viz.) not obeying the King in Electing Anthony Farmer, such
a Virtuoso, and under correction, your Lordships are obliged to take off my
Suspension, to take off the shame from that Body, whose number by a Common
Adjunct you your selves have lately increased.


Bar. Jen. We must not endure these Reflections on the Court.


Bish. But will you submit to this Visitation?


Then Dr. Fairfax read a Paper subscribed by him, Dated October the 22d, in
these words: My Lords, I have been Summoned, and appeared in this Cause before
the Lords Ecclesiastical at White Hall, with whom your Lordships are now joined
in Commission; and then gave in my Answer: I have nothing to add to it, and
find no reason to retract it.

Henry Fairfax.

Bish. Will you admit of the Bishop of Oxford?


Dr. Fairf. I am Suspended.


Bish. Have you done no Collegiate-Act since your Suspension?


Dr. Fairf. My Lord, I have gone into the Hall, and laid in my Chamber: I did
not think their Lordships, when they suspended me, ever intended that I should
not eat, drink, or sleep.


Bish. If your Suspension was off, would you submit to the Bishop of Oxford:


Dr. Fairf. Truly, my Lord, I cannot do it.


Then all the Fellows were called into Court.

The President being withdrawn, the Bishop put the Question to all the Fellows,
(viz.) Whether they would assist at the Admission of the Bishop of Oxford to be
installed President by virtue of the King's Mandate? To which was answered by
all the Fellows, to this effect: (except Dr. Pudsey, and Dr. Tho. Smith, who
answered doubtfully, and Chernock that he would assist) That they were under
Oaths to the contrary, and therefore could not do it.

Then all were ordered to withdraw; and Dr. Pudsey being called in alone, they
asked him concerning the Manner and Form of Installing a President; which he
instructed them in.

The Court Adjourned till Two in the Afternoon.

AS soon as they met, a Letter from the E. of Sunderland to Dr. Pudsey, was
read, dated the 2d of August, signifying* That the Society, in answer to his
Majesty's Letter commanding them to admit the Bishop of Oxford, agreed
unanimously in this Answer, That the place was full. Their Lordships were
pleased to ask the Fellows singly, Whether that was their Answer? And as many
as were there, owned that it was.

During this Examination, the President came into Court, and having waited
until it was ended, and their Lordships at a Pause, he made his Application to
them: My Lords, if your Lordships please to give me leave, I would gladly speak
a few words. They were all pleased to put off their Hats, and say he might.
Whereupon he said, My Lords, you were pleased this Morning, in pursuance to a
Decree of the Lords Commissioners at London, to deprive me of my place of
President of this College, and to strike my Name out of the Buttery-book: I do
hereby protest against all your Proceedings, and against all that you have
done, or hereafter shall do in prejudice of me and my Right, as Illegal,
Unjust, and Null: and therefore I appeal to my Sovereign Lord the King in his
Courts of Justice. Upon which the Strangers and young Scholars in the Room gave
a HVM; which so much incensed their Lordships, that notwithstanding all the
Protestations the President and Fellows could make, the President in particular
offering to purge himself by Oath, that he was no way accessory to or abetting
of it, and declared that he was heartily ashamed and troubled at it; yet the
L.C.J. was not to be pacified, but charging it upon the President, bound him in
a Bond of 1000 l. and Security to the like value, to make his Appearance at the
Kings-Bench-Bar, the 12th of Nov.

After this, was read the Answer the Fellows returned to his Majesty upon his
Command to them upon the 4th of Sept. to elect the Bishop of Oxford: the Answer
was under the hand of a public Notary, subscribed by all the Fellows then
present, except Mr. Chernock. The Bishop of Chester was pleased to charge the
Fellows of Unmannerliness, for sending such an Answer to their Prince after
such a manner.

So they Adjourned till Tuesday the 25th, at Eight in the Morning.

TUESDAY the 25th of October.
WHen the Court met, Dr. Stafford offered a Paper in answer to what was
objected on Friday, that a Mandate implied an Inhibition; which their Lordships
having perused, would not suffer to be read publicly, but asked the Fellows
whether they would sign it, bidding them to do it at their peril.

Then the Fellows had leave to withdraw into the Hall, and not being satisfied
that it was necessary to sign a Plea, which their Lordships refused to have
argued, they returned the Paper into the Court, subscribed only by Dr. Fairfax
and Dr. Stafford. The latter, after some debate, desired to withdraw, but Dr.
Fairfax stood to it.

A Copy of Dr. Stafford's and Dr. Fairfax's PLEA.
To the Right Reverend and Right Honorable his Majesty's Commissioners for the
Visiting of St. Mary Magdalen College in Oxford.
May it please your Lordships,
ON Friday last, in the afternoon, you seemed to insist very much on this,
(viz.) That his Majesty in commanding the Fellows of the said College to Elect
Mr. Farmer President, did thereby inhibit them to Elect any other Person
whatsoever; which has not yet been made appear to be Law, either out of the
Books of Civil, Canon, or Common Law. Neither is it agreeable to Reason, that a
Command to Elect a Person incapable, should include in it an Obligation not to
Elect a Person capable, that being a kind of contradiction in ternimis. Yet
this being granted, it cannot in the least affect the said Fellows, or
invalidate their Election of Dr. Hough, notwithstanding his Majesty's Mandate
in behalf of Mr. Farmer, who being incapable of the place, the Fellows cannot
be said to be guilty of any Disobedience or Disloyalty, in proceeding to the
Election of another Person who was quallified according to Statute, being
forced to make an Election. For they are obliged by the Statutes of their
College, (when called together) to Elect a President, or any Officer under
pain of perpetual Expulsion from the College, to meet and make an Election;
which punishment they incur ipso facto, who either refuse to meet when so
called, or being met, to nominate or elect a person into the Office void, as
appears by the Statutes of the said College: Titulo de numero Scholdrium and
electione Praesidentis. Now, according to the Founders direction in the said
Statute, on the 15th of April last, the Fellows were called together by the
Vice President to Elect a President in the place of Dr. Clark deceased, and the
Oath desired to be taken before the Election was administered by the
Vice President to them, whereby they are obliged to nominate and elect a person
that either is or has been Fellow of Magdalen College or New College in Oxon;
which Oath when the Fellows had taken, it was not in their power to elect Mr.
Farmer; and yet they were then obliged to make an Election under pain of
perpetual a motion from the College, as appears by the forecited Statute. And
it cannot be imagined that his most Sacred Majesty did expect that the Fellows
should be either perjured, or forfeit their Right to their Fellowships, rather
than disobey his Command; his Majesty having most graciously declared, that
Conscience ought not to be forced, and that none of his Subjects should be
molested in the enjoyment of their Rights and Privileges, etc. Now that our
Proceedings at the Election cannot lay any imputation of our Disobedience or
Disloyalty upon us, will thus be made appear: Either we had the power to Elect
a President, or we had not; if we had not, to what end or purpose did his
Majesty command us to elect one? if we had, our power was either restrained to
Persons so and so quallified, or we were at liberty to choose whom we pleased;
but we could not do the latter, as appears by our Statutes: and therefore we
could not elect Mr. Farmer, being not invested with any power to elect a Person
unquallified. And if we had so done, our Election would have been null and void
in it self, and the Person elected liable to be turned out by our Visitor.

As for the Decree of his Majesty's Commissioners (in pursuance of which your
Lordships have admonished Doctor Hough to receed from the place of President,
and quietly to resign the Keys of his Office, and have struck his Name out of
the Colledge-Book) we humbly conceive it to be null and void in it self, to all
intents and purposes, Dr. Hough being thereby deprived of Freehold for life,
(of which he was duly and legally possessed) without ever being called to defend
his Right, or any Misdemeanour objected against him. Wherefore we humbly beg
leave of your Lordships, that Dr. Hough may be permitted to defend his Right
and Title to the Presidentship at Common Law, before any other Person is put in
possession of the place.

Thomas Stafford. Hen. Fairfax.


After this Mr. Wiggins, Chaplain to the Bishop of Oxford, was called in, who
delivered a Paper impowering him as Proxy, to be Installed President for his
Lord; which being read, together with the King's Mandate for the Bishop of
Oxon; which Letters is as follows. The question was put to two or three of the
Seniours, Whether they would assist at this Instalment? which they refusing,
the Court Adjourned to the Chapel, where the Bishop of Chester put Mr. Wiggins
into the President's Stall, where he took the Oath which the Statutes enjoin
the President at his Admission, and the Oaths of Alegiance and Supremacy; the
latter of which he was ordered to take upon his Knees, which he accordingly
did. Then their Lordships conducted him to the Door of the President's
Lodgings, where knocking three times, and the Door not being opened, they
returned to the Common Room, and Commissioned Atterbury and a Tipstaff, to
fetch a Smith to force it open, which was done, their Lordships being present
all this while. None of the Fellows, except Mr. Chernock, assisting, or being
so much as present at either of these performances. Then the Commissioners
being returned to the Common Room, Dr. Fairfax desired leave, at their
leisures, to speak; which was granted.

Dr. Fairf. My Lords, your Lordships have been doing of what I can by no means
consent to.


Bish. Chapter You are big to be delivered of your own destruction. Will you submit
to the Bishop of Oxon, as now installed, President, by virtue of the King's
Mandate?


Dr. Fairf. I will not; I cannot; because we have a Statutable and legal
President already.


Then the same Question was put to the Society, which being a business of
moment, they desired time till the Afternoon to consider it.

Then the Court Adjourned till Three a Clock; at which time the Answer was
given in by the Society, (except Dr. Fairfax, who had given his in the Morning)
That whereas His Majesty has been pleased by his Royal Authority to cause the
Right Reverend Father in God, Samuel Bishop of Oxon, to be Installed President;
we whose Names are hereunto Subscribed, do submit, as far as is lawful and
agreeable to the Statutes of the College, and no way prejudicial to the Right
and Title of Dr. Hough.

This Answer was accepted, except the last Clause; which the Lord Chief
Justice, and Barron Jenner, declared, as Judges, to be insignificant, since
nothing they could do, could any way invallidate Dr. Hough's Title, but left
them still at liberty to be Witnesses for him, or any other way be serviceable
to him in the recovery of his Right. Upon this assulrance, the Society was
prevailed with to cave out the last Clause.

Then all were commanded to withdraw: And Dr. Fairfax being called in, the
Bishop asked him what he meant by his Paper abovementioned, Date October the
22d; and whether he did submit to the Authority of the Court?

Dr. Fairf. As I have denied it above, so I do here.


Then the Court was opened; and the Doctor complained before them all, that he
was twice Closseted, and being asked, Whether he would obey the Court and
Bishop of Oxon? he plainly denied both. Upon which the Buttery-Book was called
for, and the Bishop of Chester commanded his Name to bo struck out: And this
Sentance passed, Viz.

Forasmuch as you have denied the Authority of the Court, and refused to obey
the Bishop of Oxon, whom the King has made your President; and taken Commons
after your Suspension: We declare your place void, and command you quietly to
depart the College within fourteen days.

Dr. Fairf. My Lords, all the huge Calamities that have befallen me, are of the
sole account of a Religious and Conscientious Observation of our Pious
Founder's Statutes; whose Bread I have eaten almost this Thirty Years.


L. C. J. No Speeches: besides, if you have any Papers, instead of reading
them, leave them in the Court.


Then, with much ado, the Doctor prevailed with them to let him read his
Protestation, which he left in the Court. --

I Henry Fairfax, Fellow of St. Mary Magdalen College, do under my former
Answer heretofore made, and to the intent it may appear that I have not
consented, nor agreed to any thing done against me, and to my prejudice, I
protest that your Sentence given here against me, is Lex nulla, and so far as
it shall appear to be aliqua; I do say it is iniqua and injusta, and that
therefore I do from it, as iniqua and injusta, appeal to our Sovereign Lord the
King, in his Courts of Justice, as the Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances of the
Land will permit in that behalf. Subscribed

Oct. 25, 1687. Henry Fairfax.


This Protestation was overruled, and a Copy of the Sentence denied, though
most earnestly desired at the instance of Dr. Hedges, and Mr. Vice Chancellor,
two days after.

At the close of the Sessions, their Lordships declared, that they were very
well satisfied with the Answer the Soiety had given them; and though before
they had laid a Libel to their charge, yet, that Night, they declared, they had
met with nothing from them but Civility, and that they should receive the same
from them; that they had shown themselves men of excellent tempers this day and
before; and that they would represent it faithfully above to their advantage,
and that if it any way lay in their power to serve them, they should be very
ready to do it.

Then they Adjourned till Wednesday-Morning, ordering them to bring in their
Answer to the following Questions:

I. What Gifts and Provisions have you for Entertainment of Strangers? II. What
is the Value of it? III. How is it applied? IV. And where is the Place of
Entertainment?
WEDNESDAY, October. 26, 1687.
IN the Morning they made it apper to their Lordships very satisfactorily, that
they were obliged to give in Charity-money, 2 l. 3 s. 4 d. and that besides
that, they gave communibs annis, almost 100 l. as appeared by a Paper they then
delivered in. Upon this their Lordships were pleased to expatiate upon their
generous Bounty and Liberality, saying the Complement of this Account was
groundless, and that it would induce the King to a better belief of them in all
other matters.

Then a Petition of Dr. Rogers, late Organist, was given in, desiring to be
restored, which was read; but several Misdemeanors being proved against him,
it was thrown out; and he advised to rest satisfied with 30 pound per annum,
which the College had bestowed on him when they turned him out of his Place.

THURSDAY, October. 27, 1687.
THis Morning they received a List of Leases, etc. which had been renewed two
years last past: Mr. Chernock, the new Convert, asked their Lordships, Whether
those Leases stood good, which had been Sealed since Dr. Hough's Election? The
Lord Chief Justice answered, Yes; for Corporations always stick by their Seals.
Then their Lordships perused the College Registers, and finding nothing in
them to object against, they were returned, and the Court Adjourned till the
Afternoon: At which time their Lordships told them, That having received no
Express from above, as they expected, they would Adjourn till Friday at Eight
in the Morning.

FRIDAY, October. 28, 1687.
THe Commissioners being Seated, all were commanded to withdraw: then only the
Fellows were called in, and the Bishop of Chester said they had represented
them fairly to the King; but that His Majesty expected some farther
Submissiion, which they advised them to make, by acknowledging their contempt
to His Sacred Majesty in Person, and to His Letters; and that they should
promise to behave themselves Loyal for the future; and that they should some
ways own the proceedings and legality of the Court, and implore His Majesty's
Pardon, and lay themselves at His Feet.

The Fellows making a little pause, the Bishop of Chester told them, they might
Word it themselves; or if they thought fit Mr. Tucker should assist them in a
Form. Then all the Fellows withdrew into the Hall, and drew up the following
Answer:

May it please your Lordships,
WE have endeavored in all our Actions, to express our duty in all humility to
His Majesty, and being conscious to our selves, that in the whole Conduct of
the business before your Lordships, we have done nothing, but what our Oaths
and Statutes indispensably oblige us to, we cannot make any Declaration,
whereby we acknowledge that we have done any thing amiss, having acted
according to the Principles of Loyalty, and Obedience, so far as we could,
without doing violence to our Consciences, or prejudice to our Rights, (one of
which we humbly conceive the Electing a President to be) from which we are
sworn upon no account whatsoever to depart. We therefore humbly beg your
Lordships to represent this favorably, with our utmost Duty to His Majesty,
whom God grant long, and happily to Reign.


Upon their Lordships perusing of the answer, they expressed their dislike of
it, saying, it did not come up to the Address sent to his Majesty at Bath which
was read; to this it was replied, that they hoped their behavior since, had
been every way answerable to what they had therein promised. Then their
Lordships said, that it did not come up to what they delivered in on Tuesday.

Dr. Bailey. My Lords, we have acted conformable to our selves, and truly my
Lords, I cannot possibly confess any crime.


Bish. We do not expect of you to confess any Capital crime, only to make some
acknowlegment.


Mr. Fulham. My Lord, We were ordered to address our selves, as having acted in
contempt of his Majesty's Authority, which my Lord, I look upon as so great a
crime; that on no account I would be guilty of it. My Lord, we have endeavored
to obey His Majesty to the utmost of our power, and seeing your Lordships were
pleased to accept our answer on Tuesday, I humbly conceive your Lordships
Honor is engaged, that nothing further be required of us.


Bish. You are a very forward speaker, and abound in your own sense.


Mr. Fulh. My Lord, I hope Your Lordship will give me leave to speak, when our
Fortunes are so considerably at stake --


Then Dr. Bailey desired of their Lordships, to give him leave to explain, what
he meant by the word Submit in his Answer on Tuesday; because (says he) I hear
your Lordships understood more then was meant, and least your Lordships should
go away under a mistake, by the word Submit in the former Answer, I did not
intend any future Obedience to the Bishop of Oxford; but meant it in reference
to the Kings Authority, inasmuch as I did not oppose or resist the Bishop of
Oxford's instalment.

Upon this, a fresh question was put to the Fellows, whether they would obey
the Bishop of Oxford as their President in licitus and honestis; to which all
except one or two answered, they could not obey the Bishop of Oxford as their
President.

Then Mr. Fulham was particularly asked the question.

Mr. Fulham. Dr. Hough being duly Elected and admitted President does thereby
obtain a right, which I am not satisfied he has any way forfeited, and
therefore can obey no person as President.


Bish. Chapter Will you obey the Bishop of Oxford as in Possession?


Mr. Fulh. I cannot, because the Bishop has not lawful Possession.


Then he was asked wherein?

Mr. Fulh. He has not Possession in due form of Law, nor by proper Officers: I
am informed that the proper Officers to give possession of a Freehold, is the
Sheriff with a Posse Comitatus.


L. C. J. Pray, who is the best Lawyer you or I? Your Oxford Law is no better
then your Oxford Divinity: If you have a mind to a Posse Comitatus, you may
have one soon enough --


Mr. Fulh. My Lords, I intended nothing but respect to your Lordships, and have
endeavored to speak and behave my self with due reverence, and I hope your
Lordships will put a favorable construction on what I said --


Then all were commanded to withdraw, and the Buttery-Book was called for, and
after that, Mr. Fulham was sent for in; and by the Bishop of Chester suspended
as follows --

Bish. of Chapter Mr. George Fulham, We have thought fit to Suspend you from the
Proffits of your Fellowship during His Majesty's Pleasure, for your contempt
and opprobrious Language --


Then they Adjourned till Wednesday, the 16th. of November, Ordering the absent
Fellows to be sent for home against that time. So they immediately went for
London.

WEDNESDAY, November the 16th. 1687, at Nine in the Morning.
THE Lords Commissioners being sat: The first thing they did, sent for the
Buttery-Book; then called for Mr. Joyner and Mr. Allibone, and enterd them
Actual Fellows. The former in the Room of Dr. Fairfax whom they had Expelled;
The latter in place of Mr. Ludford lately deceased: All Oaths being dispensed
with besides that of a Fellow. That done the Fellows being called, and Reasons
given in for those that were absent. The Bishop of Chester spoke a Speech to
this effect.

Gentlemen, Your many Contempts, and wilful Disobedience, have occasioned this
Visitation, which will end at last in your ruin. This Society of yours has been
long exercised in the Methods of Quarrelling; has always been troubled with
Factious Spirits, and testy Mutineers, ever since the Restoration of the late
King: You have encouraged Quarrels among your selves; Quarrels between your
selves and President; Quarrels, at length, between your selves and Visitor. For
I have often heard your late Visitor complain, that this Society was ever
stocked with an unquiet and turbulent Generation. By these steps from
quarelling with the President, and Visitor, you have at last advanced to the
highest pitch of Insolence, to quarrel with your Prince, and affront His Sacred
Majesty. I endeavored before, at the opening Our Commission, to make you
sensible of the Scandal that your Disobedience will bring upon your Religion;
how much you stain and dishonor your liberal and ingenious Education, in this
Society.

You cannot but know His Majesty is your Supreme Ordinary. You cannot but have
read in Bracton, who was twenty years Lord Chief Justice under King Henry the
third: Nemo Presumat de factis ejus disquirere ne dum contra factum ejus
venire: All Disobedience imploys Pride: For no man can disobey his Governor,
but he who thinks himself wiser. The Reputation and Honor of a Prince at home,
and His Respect abroad, are chief Standards of a Government. But these Pillars
as much as in you lies, you have endeavored to shake. And unless His Majesty's
Honor and Right be vindicated by us, He can neither be feared at home, nor
observed abroad. Your Punishment must be as public as your Crime. It cannot be
conceived but His Majesty in Justice, in Honor, in Clemency, and in His Royal
Tenderness, could have proceeded otherways than he has done. On the first of
April it was published that Dr. Clark was dead: On the eleventh a Mandamus was
directed to you, for choosing Mr. Farmer. On the ninth you presented a Petition
to the Lord President: wherein you laid yourselves prostrate at His Majesty's
Feet, representing to him the Incapacitie of Mr. Farmer, desiring the benefits
of His Gracious Declaration for preserving your Rights and Properties, and
beseeching him to Nominate another person qualified according to your Statutes,
in the Election of whom you would show your ready obedience. So said and so
done, Gentlemen, had been very well.

But immediately after the delivery of the Petition, you not waiting His
Majesty's Answer, proceeded on April the 15th to an Election of Dr. Hough; So
that by this Act, which was plainly contrary to His Majesty's Authority, whose
Mandate did certainly imply an Inhibition; you directly confronted your former
promises of ready obedience, and were resolved to give the King nothing but
good words; when you had done this, as men of ill designs, are always in have,
for a confirmation of it, you immediately went and surprised your Visitor, and
by that means persuaded him to confirm Dr. Hough, that very day he received an
order from the Lord President to the contrary.

Upon this News the King was much amazed, and required an account of your
Proceedings; therefore the Lords Commissioners issued out a Citation, and after
hearing the Plea: Upon mature Consultation with the Learned of both Laws,
judged the pretended Election of Dr. Hough to be void and null, and him to be
removed, by an Instrument dated the (...) which was affixed on the Gate. After
this a Mandate was sent on the (...) to you to Elect the Bishop of Oxon; upon
which terms His Majesty was graciously pleased to dispense with your
disobedience thitherto. But this being disobeyed, His Majesty in Person on the
4th of September sent for you to Christ-Church, and required you immediately to
Elect the Bishop of Oxon President. You went strait to the Chapel, a place one
would think should have inspired more Devotion and Awe of his Sacred Majesty in
you; and there contemptuously Subscribed and Signed a Paper, directly thwarting
his Majesty's Command. The ground of your disobedience you pretend that you
could not Elect him, whereas you could not but know by a written Mandate that
lay by you, that admission would have satisfied His Majesty Conscience the
stale Topic of Rebellion was here brought to vindicate your petulant and
contumacious behavior. You pretended that you were obliged by Oaths, and I am
sorry that at the same time you forgot that of Allegiance. And indeed there is
not a greater sign of Hypocrisy, than partial obedience. Had you any respect
to the Father of your Country, and your Mother the Church, you would have
Sacrificed your pretended Scruples, as a peace offering to to the King. The
best of us I am sure, have reason to beg God and the Kings pardon. But you, as
if His Majesty Reigned by courtesy, would have a King under you, but none over
you. You urged the observance of your Statutes, of which as it has appeared,
you have not been so constant observers, when your own humor prompts you to a
dispensation, then you can readily embrace it; witness but that of being served
per Masculos, by which great Scandals have come to this Society by reason of
Bastards.

But when the King interposed, in whose power alone it is to dispense with
them, then you presently act according to such methods as these. None of these
pretenses will ease you with wise and sober men.

This was the only opposition His Majesty in his Progress received: Wherever
his Sacred Majesty came, he worked a miraculous Conversion, except in Oxford;
and so far satisfied every one with the equity of his Proceedings, that none
went away discontented from his Presence, unless it was for this reason, that
they could not enjoy it any longer.

October the 20th, We came down, and upon opening our Commission, I took care
to represent to you the heighnousness of your Offense, and to persuade you to a
serious Repentance; but all in vain.

For on Saturday-morning we required you to Admit and Instal the Bishop of
Oxon; which all, except three, refused: In the Afternoon Dr. Hough having been
deprived, and by us commanded to depart the College, came unto us without any
leave, but not without great Attendance; Circumstances, I think, much
unbesitting a man pronounced Expelled; and there entered a PROTESTATION against
all that we had done, or hereafter should do, as Illegal, Unjust, and Null;
which he delivered not in Writing, but by Word of Mouth: a thing repugnant to
the nature of all Appeals: and which was worse, without the usual Salvo to His
Majesty's Supreme Power. When he had spoken it, there followed such a
Tumultuous, Seditious, and Insolent HUM, which if you your selves had not
applauded, or at least consented to it, was impossible but that you would have
discovered some of those Mutineers. However, since his Carriage and Language
gave occasion to it, 'twas thought fit that he only should be obnoxious; and
accordingly he was bound over.

On Tuesday we our selves caused the Bishop of Oxon to be Installed by his
Proxy; after which we proposed to you, Whether, being now Installed, you would
submit to him licitis and honestis? To which you gave an Answer under your
Hands in the Affirmative. You then also desired of us to represent your Case
favorably to His Majesty, giving all assurance of your Loyalty and Obedience.
But this assurance of Submission lasted not long; for on Thursday, being
required of us to Subscribe such a Submission to His Majesty as we thought
agreeable to your Duty, you required time to consult of it; and after
deliberation, Signed such a Paper, which seemed rather to be a Protestation
against your former Submission, than an Acknowledgment of your Crime. Upon this
we might justly then have proceeded to an Expulsion: but we thought fit, in
compassion to you, to take a Journey to London, and acquaint His Majesty with
your Disobedience and ungrateful Behavior. His Majesty was extremely amazed
that His Clemency should be despised; but yet, to your comforts be it spoken,
His Patience and Goodness extends as far as your Provocations can: But if you
still persist in your Obstinacy, those that are too Tall to Stand, and too
Stuborn to Bend, deserve to be Broken. And now, I think, I have said enough to
let you know, that the Figg-leaves you have so artificially stiched together,
are not sufficient to cover your Nakedness. I wish to God you had the same
tenderness for your Concern, as His Majesty's Commissioners have for you. But
if you still persist to oppose the Royal Power of the King, we, who are come to
vindicate the Right and Honor of His Majesty, resolved to discharge our
Consciences and Duties to God and the King, without any respect of Popularity;
that is but the Paradise of Fools, and Scorn of Wise Men: and therefore, as for
us, we have no more regard to Peoples dislike, than what they dream: By reason
therefore of your late Hypocritical Submission, the Commissioners has thought
fit, upon mature consideration, to draw up an Instrument which shall be read to
you, to which, if you shall immediately subscribe, before you leave the Room,
we shall leave you to His Majesty's Pardon: And this we expect from you all,
except Mr. Tho. Smith and Mr. Charnock, with whose Behavior the King is so
well satisfied; that he expects no more from them.

Then all the Fellows being called in, their Lordships tendered a Form of
Submission to them to be Signed. Which take as follows:

To the KING's Most Excellent MAJESTY.
The Humble Petition and Submission of the Fellows of St. Mary Magdalen
College in the University of Oxon, whose Names are Subscribed.
WE Your Majesty's most humble Petitioners, have a deep sense of being justly
fallen under Your Majesty's Displeasure, for our disobedience and contempt to
Your Majesty; and to the Authority of Your Majesty's Commissioners and
Visitors; We do in all humility prostrate our selves as Your Majesty's Fear,
humbly begging Your Pardon for our said offenses, and promising that we will
for the future behave our selves more dutifully, and as a Testimony thereof, we
do acknowledge the Authority of Your Majesty's said Visitors, and the Justice
of their Proceedings; And we do declare our entire Submission to the Lord
Bishop of Oxon as our President.

To which Paperall (except Dr. Thomas Smyth, and Mr. Chernock) refused to
Subscribe.

Dr. Aldworth as Vice President was first called in to sign the Paper which had
been read to all the Fellows.

Vice President. My Lords, we desire time to consider of it, and to give our
answer in Writing.


Bish. Chapter No, You must every one Sign, or refuse as you are called.


Bar. Jennor. There is no answer to be given, but ay, or no.


They all moved again for time, but 'twas refused.

V. Pr. My Lords, this is the first time of my appearance before your Lordships
since your sitting here, and therefore I pray to be heard.

My Lords, I am as ready to comply with the King's pleasure, as any man living;
neither do I know, that we have ever in this place been disobedient to the
King, where it was in our power to obey His Commands: Our Founder in the first
clause of the Oath we take at this Election, has provided; that no one shall be
President of His College, but who was bred in it, or in the College where he
himself was bred. Now for us who have Elected Dr. Hough, a Person qualified
according to our Statutes, who has been Installed, Sworn, Confirmed, and
Approved of in all the ways and manner prescribed in the Statutes for us. My
Lords, to accept and admit of a Stranger, and a Forreigner in his place, is to
the best of my understanding, a giving up the Rights of the College to other
uses then the Founder designed it. Here he was interrupted.


Bish. Chapter Your Statutes are overruled by the King's Authority.


V. Pr. My Lords, Your Lordships sit here as the Visitors; which implies, there
are certain Laws and Statutes we are bid to observe, and by which we are to be
governed; and if it shall appear to your Lordships, that we have acted
conformably to these Statutes, I hope we shall neither incur the Kings
displeasure nor your Lordships. The whole Tenor of our Statutes run, That we
should inviolably maintain our Rights, and observe the Rules of our Founder; He
has laid his Curse upon us if we vary from them. (Here he repeated the words of
the Founder) Ordinamus sub paena Anathematis, and indignationis Omnipotentiis
Dei, etc. Item sub interminatione Divini Judicis interdicimus.


Bish. Chapter Are you not to obey the King as well as the Founders Statutes?


V. Pr. My Lord, I ever did obey the King, and ever will: Our Statutes which we
are sworn to observe, are confirmed by several Kings and Queens before and
since the Reformation, and as we keep them, are agreeable to the Kings Laws
both Ecclesiastical and Civil, and so long as we live up to them, we obey the
King.


Bish. Chapter Your Statutes were never confirmed by His Present Majesty.


Dr. John Smyth. My Lord, Neither have they been repealed by His Majesty, and
what is not repealed is confirmed.


Then their Lordships pressing to sign or refuse; the Vice President said,

V. Pr. My Lords, I Will then deal plainly, in regard to my Oath and the
Statutes, to the right of all our Successors and of Dr. Hough, whom I believe
to have been as fairly Elected, and as legally possessed as ever any since the
Foundation of the College: I cannot submit to the Bishop of Oxon as President.
So he was ordered to withdraw.


Then the same question was put to all the other Fellows singly, who all
refused to sign the submission, (except Dr. Thomas Smyth and Mr. Chernock, who
were not pressed for the Reasons above.)

Mr. Thompson being called in to sign the Paper, said

Mr. Thompson. My Lords, I have been always obedient to His Majesty's Commands,
I was not concerned in the Election of Dr. Hough; I voted for Mr. Farmer, and
am ready to submit to the Bishop of Oxon.


Bish. Chapter Did you not put your hand to this Petition? Is not this your hand --
Read the Petition -- It was Read -- In which the Fellows desired His Majesty,
to nominate any qualified Person, and to retract His Mandate granted for Mr.
Farmer.


Mr. Thompson. My Lord, I conceive the Petition not to be disobedient. We had
not yet received the Mandate, as soon as it came, I humbled my self.


Bar. Jen. Then why cannot you humble your self again; is there any hurt in it.


Mr. Thompson. This Paper requires me to own my disobedience to His Majesty; I
am not conscious of any, and therefore I cannot Subscribe.


After a short time, all who refused to sign the Submission were called in, and
by Sentence of their Lordships, expelled the College for Contempt, etc.
(except as before) -- After Sentence, all that were expelled spoke to this
Effect: -- My Lords, we prosess all Duty to the King and Respect to your
Lordships, but must beg leave to declare; That we think our selves injured in
your Lordships proceedings, and therefore protest against them, and shall use
all just and legal ways of being Relieved --

After a short time, an Instrument was fixed on the Colledge-Gates, in these
words.

By his Majesty's Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Causes, etc. particularly
Authorized and Empowered to Visit St. Mary Magdalen College in the University
of Oxon.
WHereas in our Visitation of the said College, it appears unto us, that
Doctor Charles Aldworth, Dr. Alexander Pudsey, Dr. John Smith, Dr. Tho. Bailey,
Dr. Tho. Stafford, Master Robert Almond, Mr. Manwaring Hamond, Mr. John Rogers,
Mr. Richard Strickland, Mr. Henry Dobson, Mr. James Bailey, Mr. John Davies,
Mr. Francis Bagshaw, Mr. James Fayrer, Mr. Joseph Harwar, Mr. Tho. Bateman, Mr.
George Hunt, Mr. William Cradock, Mr. John Gillman, Mr. Geo. Fulham, Mr.
Charles Pennyston, Mr. Robert Hyde, Mr. John Yerbury, Mr. Robert Holden, and
Mr. Stephen Wilks, Fellows of the same College, have been severally guilty of
Disobedience to his Majesty's Commands, and obstinately contemned his Royal
Authority, and do still persist in the same: We have thought fit, upon mature
consideration thereof, to Declare, Pronounce, and Decree, That the said Dr.
Charles Aldworth, etc. and every of them, be Deprived and Expelled from their
respective Fellowships: And we do by this our Sentence and Decree, Deprive and
Expel them and their said several and respective Fellowships.

Given under our Seal, this 16th day of November, 1687.
WHITE HALL, December. 10.
HIS Majesty's Commissioners for Ecclesiastical Causes, and for Visiting all
Cathedral and Collegiate Churches and Colleges, etc. met this day; and taking
into their consideration all that had passed in the business of St. Mary
Magdalen College in Oxford, and the contemptuous and disobedient Behavior of
Dr. John Hough, and several of the Fellows of that College, throughout the
whole Proceeding, their Lordships Declared, Decreed, and Pronounced, That Dr.
Hough, Dr. Carles Aldworth, Dr. Henry Fairfax, Dr. Alexander Pudsey, Dr. John
Smith, Dr. Thomas Bailey, Dr. Thomas Stafford, Mr. Robert Almond, Mr. Manwaring
Hamond, Mr. John Rogers, Mr. Richard Strickland, Mr. Henry Dobson, Mr. James
Bailey, Mr. John Davies, Mr. Francis Bagshaw, Mr. James Fayrer, Mr. Joseph
Harwar, Mr. Thomas Bateman, Mr. George Hunt, Mr. William Cradock, Mr. John
Gillman, Mr. George Fulham, Mr. Charles Pennyston, Mr. Robert Hyde, Mr. Edward
Yerbury, Mr. Henry Holden, and Mr. Stephen Wilks, should be incapable of
Receiving, or being Admitted to any Ecclesiastical Dignity, Benefice, or
Promotion: And such of them who are not yet in holy Orders, were adjudged
incapable of Receiving or being Admitted into the same. All Archbishops,
Bishops, and other Ecclesiastical Officers and Ministers within the Kingdom of
England, being required to take notice of the said Sentence and Decree, and to
yield Obedience thereunto.

THE 17th of January, 1687. being the day that the Thirty Demies of Magdalen
College were, by Summons from the Bishop of Oxon, the new President, commanded
to appear before him; and none appearing, Mr. Chernock, the new Vice President,
called for the Buttery-Book, and struck out the Names of Mr. Holt, Mr. Adams
Senior, Mr. Vescy, and Mr. Brabourn, Masters of Art; Mr. Hyde, Mr. Woodward,
Mr. Fulham, Mr. Watkins, Mr. Stacy, Mr. Sherwin, and Mr. Kenton, Batchelors of
Art; Mr. Cross, Mr. Bush, and Mr. Wells, Under-Graduates: Which Fourteen were
then resident in the University, and Three more, who escaped Expulsion at that
time.

FINIS.

