A SECOND LETTER FROM THE RIGHT Honorable the Lord FAIRFAX, of his late
prosperous proceedings against the Earl of New Castle, and his Popish Army in
Yorke-shire.

Presented to the Parliament, and read in both Houses, on Wensday the 4. of
January. 1642.

With an Order of the Lords and Commons, That if any of the Trained-Bands
within the City of London, Westminster, or the County of Middlesex; shall
neglect to repair to their Colors as often as they shall be required, they
shall suffer two days Impisonment or else pay five shillings for the offense.

Die Mercurii 4. Ian. 1642. ORdered by the Lords and Commons Assembled in
Parliament, That this Letter and Order shall be forthwith Printed and published.

J. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

LONDON, Printed for John Wright in the Old Bailey, Jenuary, 5 1642.

A Letter from the Lord Fairfax, of his late prosperous proceedings.
SIR,
I Have of late addressed some relations of my proceedings here, to the
Committee, appointed for the safety of the Kingdom; being assured, that they
would from time to time impart them to both Houses, that such consideration
might be had of them, as the necessity of the cause required: Now I address
this relation to you; not doubting but that it shall be timely imparted to both
Houses, and to the Committee for safety of the Kingdom, that the affairs of
the Country being known to them all, they may be provided for, as their great
wisdoms shall see convenient. I have formerly advertised, that the Earl of
Newcastles army have seized upon Leeds, where they plunder the well affected
party, and raise a very great sum of money, out of those that they can draw to
compound for their securities. And from Leeds they marched on Sunday, the 18 of
this month, with 5 Troops of Horse, 6 Companies of Dragoones, 200 Foot, and
two Drakes, of the Earl of Newcastles army, besides Sir William Savile, and
diverse other Gentlemen of Yorkshire, and their forces that joined themselves
with them, and came to Bradford, about ten a clock in the morning, intending to
surpize the Town, in time of prayer; but the Town having scours abroad, had
notice of their com^ing, and gave the alarm to the Country, who came in to
their succor from the parts adjoining, yet they had not in all above 80.
Muskets, the rest being armed with Clubs, and such rustique weapons; with which
small force, they put the cause to trial, with the great strength of the enemy,
who planted their Drakes, and discharged each of them 17 times upon the Town,
until a Townsman, with a Fouling-piece, killed one of the Canoniers, and then
they all with great courage issued from the Town upon the enemies, and killed many
of them, and took about 30 prisoners, and forced the rest to retreat, leaving
40 of their Mu^kets and barrel of their Powder, with much other provision
behind them, and this with loss of three Bradford men: The report of the
Country is, that the enemies amongst those that were killed lost Colonel Evers,
and Captain Bynnes, and an other Commander, and that Collomel Goring, (General
of the Horse, with the Earl of Newcastle) was wounded, and Sergeant Major Carr
taken prisoner; and it is generally spoken, that 150 more are run away upon the
retreat, and are not since returned to Leeds. In which victory the hand and
power of God was most evident, the Town being open on all sides, and of it
self not defensible, assaulted on every side by a malicious and bloody enemy,
and defended by a few half-naked men, there being in the Town not above 80
Muskets, before they got 40 more by the spoils of their enemies: so that
slaughter was for the most part with Clubs, and Sythes mounted no poles, when
they closed, and came to handblows; with this defeat the enemies are so
enraged, as they threaten revenge to Bradford; whereupon the Bradford-men sent
to me for succor, of men, and arms; and I have sent my son, and Sir Henry
Fowls to them, with three Troops of Horse, and 120 Dragoneers, who are safely
arived there, and received with great joy, and acclamation of the Country, who
flock to him and offer themselves most willingly, to serve against their popish
enemies, if arms could be furnished to them; he has already surprised some
Victuals sent in upon warrants to the enemy at Leeds by the overawed Country,
and he has sent Captain Mildmay, with his Troop of Horse, and some Dragoones
into Craven, to stop the raising of money, and Forces in that Country, which is
attempted by the Earl of Cumberland, who is lately retired from York to
Skipton, and I hope he will leave nothing unattempted, that may conduce to the
safety of the Country, so far as can be expected, from the few forces he has
with him. The Earl of Newcastle proceeds in raising money by all the illegal
and oppressive ways that can be devised; and both by the Commission of Array,
and by presses made in the Churches, raised all the men he can, which being
attempted in Cleveland by certain of the disaffected Gentry, their expectations
were prevented, and the resort and appearance of the people stopped, and the
Commissioners themselves forced to fly, by Sir Hugh Cholmley, to whom I sent
special order to that end; and I hear he has also been at Malton, and there
surprised both the receiver and moneys, raised out of the Country thereabouts,
by those warrants. I cannot hear certainly what moneys, or men, the Earl of
Newcastle has raised since he came into this Country; but he grants
Commissions to sundry convict Recusants, to raise Troops of Horse; as Sir John
Middleton, Sir Walter Vavasor, M. Tyndal, and others, who I hear are now
raising their men, and I hear daily complaints of horrible plunders, and
spoils done by that army, and those by special order, and in such manner, as
if they be not speedily restrained, and his popish army expelled the Country,
they will not only utterly ruin the trade and commerce of the Country, but
discourage and disable all husbandry, and so bring poverty and famine upon the
Land. Since our last estimate of our Forces, there is little alteration of
them, only 120 Dragoners of Sir Anthony Irbyes Regiment are come, which I have
sent to Bradford, with my son, and Col. Boynton with his Regiment being 500
Foot, and 40 Horse are come hither, Cap. Cromptons Dragooners, as he complains
to me are all run away, so I have given him a new Commission to raise a
Company, and for any further supplies, I cannot expect them, until the ayds
come from the South; for Sir Hugh Cholmley, as I hear, cannot bring above 130
Men, and those are so much desired, to be retained in the Northriding, to
interrupt the rising of that Country, in aid of the Earl of New Castle, as I
do not press his march this way. And for the Lincolneshire aids expected to
be sent to us, I cannot hope for any from them having this day received a
Letter by Captain Hatcher, wherein the Earl of Lincoln, and the Committee at
Lincoln write, that they are not able, to defend themselves, against 500 Foot,
and three Troops of Dragoones, and two Troops of Horse, with seven pieces of
Ordinance sent to Newarke, by the Earl of New castle and therefore desire help
from me, I have formerly represented to the Committee the extreme want of
money here, and how impossible it is to raise any, the Enemy being master of
the Field; I have sent to Sir John Hotham, Sir Edward Rhodes, Sir Hugh
Cholmley, and Captain Hotham, but they all aleadge great necessities of their
own, and helps me with none; so that I am put upon such streights, as seldom
happen, to retain an Army together, and with it serve upon a more potent
Enemy; having neither money to pay them, nor free quarter to give them; if
speedy supply of money do not come, I much fear the Soldiers will steal
away, and desert the service: I now have received your Letters signifying, that
the House have designed us 10000. l. to be presently sent, and do take further
care for all necessaries to be supplied; for which I beseech you, return my
humble thanks, and assure them that there shall want no care, nor fidelity in
me, to advance the service, so highly concerning the Religion, and Laws of the
Land: I am now about to procure billet for 14 days, of the inhabitants of the
Towns where I quarter, and to engage for the payment as soon as the money
comes to me; All which I beseech you, represent to that honorable Assembly,
whose care I doubt not, but will supply all our wants now represented,
especially hasting down the Forces of the Southern parts, with the money
intended for our supplies. It is advised by the commanders here not to fall
upon any of the Enemies quarters at this time, until we be stronger, or have
certain intelligence of their weakness; in the mean time, we ly still
waiting for opportunities, which shall not be neglected if once offered unto,

Selby 29. December. 1642. Your most affectionate friend and servant, FER. FAIRFAX.

Postscript.
The Enemy has made no attempt, upon any of our quarters, since our remove
from Tadcaster, until this morning, when six Troops of Horse, and three
Companies of Dragoones from Sherborne, fell upon our quarters at Brayton, where
two Companies of our Foot and one Troop of Horse quartered; they came in so
fas^ with our scouts, that they were in the Town before many of our Men could
be drawn out, yet the most part of our Soldiers, carried themselves with such
resolution, as they forced the Enemy to retreat in great confusion, and took
three of them prisoners, and this with the loss of one Man of our part.

Die. Mercurii, 4. Januar. 1642.
WHereas many of the Trained-Bands and others, listed under several Colonels
and Captains, inhabiting within the Cities of London and Westminster, and the
County of Middlesex, have neglected to make their appearance in Arms, to do
such service, by day or night, within the Cities and liberties aforesaid, and
in the Tower of London as of them has been required, being lawfully summoned
thereunto by the beat of Drum, or otherwise, for the defense of King and
Parliament; the safety of the Cities and Tower of London, with the adjacent
parts in the County of Middlesex: for the Reformation of so great a neglect,
and for the avoiding of so eminent evils in these dangerous times, that might
ensue thereupon; It is this day Ordered by the Lords and Commons now assembled
in Parliament, That the Colonells, Captains and Lieutenants of the
Trained-Bands or others in the Cities of London, and Westminster, and Subburbs
thereof, and the County of Middlesex, may inflict the punishent of two days
imprisonment without Bail, or Maineprise or the Mulct of five Shillings for
supply of the service, upon such Soldiers under their Commands, as shall not
repair to their Colors at the time appointed, and do their duties there,
when, and as often as they shall be thereunto required, unless they be
reasonably excused; And that made known to the Captain or other chief
Officers, or being come to their Colors, shall depart, before they be lodged;
or being to find Arms for others shall refuse to provide them, or to deliver
them, when, and as often as they shall be thereunto required.

I. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.

FINIS.

