EUTERPE Revived.

OR, Epigrams Made at several Times, In the years 1672, 1673, and 1674 On
persons of the greatest Honor and Quality, Most of them now living.

In III BOOKS.

Printed at LONDON, And are to be sold by the Booksellers of London and
Westminster. 1675.

THE Preface.
I Publish these Epigrams, as I make them, the last the first; which may excuse
me, if I rank them accordingly. They are every year a new Work, by adding the
new unto the old; and behold those of this present year. Their Subject is
chiefly Heroic, as are the persons whose praises they contain. And I writ them
chiefly to let the World know, That as we want not many praiseworthy persons,
so there want not some to praise them for it. And that you may not think me
ambitious of names, I mention none, but those I have the honor to know, and be
known unto. For the Style, you are no more to expect the force and grandeur of
Epick and Heroic Poems, in an Epigram, than the force of a Ship of War, or
grandeur of a huge Carrack in a Yaught, or Pleasure-boat. Suffice it, if it be
such as I describe in this Epigram.

What Airs in point of Music are, the same
In point of writing is your Epigram,
Short, quick, and sprightly; and both these and those
When the Ear expects it, comes unto a close.
It Is but few lines, but those like Gold well-try'd,
Out of the dross of many lines beside;
And Poetry's language of the gods, but these
In brief, the language of the Oracles.
It Is short, but in its shortness does comprize
The Point of Wit, wherein the sharpness lies.
And's nothing worth if any thing be sed,
Or tedious, dull, or vulgar-spirited.
Poets cannot write, nor Orators declame,
But all their Wit, is chiefly Epigram.
In fine, in Verse, and Prose, and every thing,
Your Epigram is writing for a King.
Some may mislike them perhaps, because they treat not of Love, nor
Love-matters; but others may like them the better; and for my part, since the
itch of lascivious love is but the scab of Poetry, I should be sorry any one
should find in my Writings, that I with my scratching had exulcerated it.

TO His Majesty.
VOuchsafe, Great Sire, on these to cast Your sight,
Made chiefly for Your MAJESTY'S delight,
By him has cast off all Ambition,
But pleasing and delighting You alone;
Counting it highest Honor can befall,
To delight Him who is the Delight of all.
The first Book of EPIGRAMS, Written An. 1673.
On the Duke of ORMOND's going along with the KING in Banishment.
WHen I but only mention Ormond's Name,
Methinks it is enough of Epigram.
Ormond, who never left the KING, but went
Always along with Him in Banishment;
Whilst many in that dark and cloudy Time,
Made too great difference 'twixt the KING and him.
So nearer Garments never quit their Master
When stormy winds do blow, but stick the faster;
While light and looser ones, like Scarfs, they find,
Are blown away with every storm of wind.
And so the KING rewards him now, we see,
With nearest Trust, for his Fidelity,
Who well discerns the difference betwixt them
Who follow His Fortune, and who follow Him:
And knows that who in adverse Times never leave Him,
Are those in prosperous Times will never deceive Him.
To the Earl of OSSORY, on his Return from SEA, An. 73.
MY LORD,
YOur Friends are glad you are safely come ashore,
And all desire you would go to Sea no more:
Nor put your Life in danger to be lost
On Foreign Seas, nor on a Foreign Coast.
What need you go? You Have hazarded enough,
And put your Valor to the extremest proof:
And as for Honor, you have by Land such store,
You need not go to Sea, to purchase more.
If It be to serve your Country that you go,
There Is none so ignorant who does not know
You, with your head may serve it more by Land,
Than ever any at Sea did with their hand.
In fine, The Brave and Noble Ossory
Is known and honored enough by Sea;
And now the Land desires to have its share
Of knowing and of honoring him there.
To the Lady MARY CANDISH.
MADAM,
IN this our Age, when thar so Critic grown,
They seek to find out spots even in the Moon
And Sun it self, I scarce should be believed
If I should tell how virtuously you have lived,
Pure as a Crystal mirror, chaste as Ice,
And full as free from stain or spot of Vice.
Nor Stars in Heaven, nor Ermins on the Snow,
In all their ways could more unblemisht go.
One who the Secret and Receipt has got
To silence Rumor, and stop Slanders Throat,
When everywhere they are so outrageous grown,
To bark and bite at Fames of every one:
The only Sanctuary where Vertu's free,
And Feminin Honor safe; and finally
The best example of a Virgins life,
And perfect pattern of a married Wife.
These are your praises, and you may contest
With any of your Sex for all the rest.
To JAMES Duke of MONMOUTH, begun at his going into France, An. 1669, and ended
at his coming from the Siege of Maestricht, An. 1673.
WE to the French as much in Court did yield,
As they to us did formerly in the Field,
Till Manmouth went, and overcame them more
In The Court, than ever we did in the Field before.
How fatal to the French is Monmouth's Name!
They should be twice thus Conquered by the same:
By Valor first in War, and now no less
A second time, by Gallantry in Peace.
Now Noble Monmouth, Was it not enough
That thou in Court shu'dst give so great a proof
How gallant and how brave thou were, but thou
In The Field shu'dst give no less a proof often too?
Since thou so early do begin to tread
The paths of Virtue which to Honor lead;
From this great Valor, and great Soul of thine,
What may the World expect of thee in time,
But for our glory thou shu'dst Conquer more
Than ever Harry Monmouth did before?
To the Duke of ALBEMARLE, going to SEA.
IN these our Warlike Times, when every one
Is going to Sea, and shames to stay at home,
Your King and Country have more care than so
Amongst the rest, my Lord, to let you go.
For the honor which your Father left you, is
Not only yours, but your Posterities,
And they, as his Trustees, concerned ar,
Till you have an Heir, you should not go to War.
Like falling Palaces which none repairs
Their Honors are, whose Houses have no Heirs*
And they but build without foundation,
Who have no Heirs to found their Houses on.
They know upon what ground you found your Right
Of being a Soldier, and of going to fight.
But if born of a General, as you ar,
You think you have so great Right to go to War,
Your Son will have a greater Right than you,
Not only born of the Race of one, but two.
These are their chiefest Arguments, and how
You Will answer them, my Lord, I do not know.
To FRANCES Duchess of RICHMOND, on her Widowhood.
YOu like a Turtle when her Mate is gone,
All sad and mourning, Madam, sit alone;
Or if there is ought more sad and mourning, yet
You, Madam, well may be compared to it.
You Are all alone, and every one does know
It best becomes a Phoenix to be so;
And you ar one, as in all states of Life
You Have well declared, both Widow, Maid and Wife:
Only in this you want of being one,
You Will leave the World no Phoenix when you are gone;
But make Arabia Desert wanting you,
Who only make it happy Arabia now.
But if of Stuarts Name, Heaven has decreed
No more to Richmond's Title should succeed;
As with the Noblest person it begun,
It never could end with a more Noble one.
To ELIZABETH, Countess of ARUNDEL and SURREY.
MADAM,
YOu always have so virtuously been bred,
And such a virtuous life have always led,
Virtue is to you as Con-natural
As life and being is unto us all.
Let others praise you then for other things,
As being descended from the Race of Kings;
I Will praise you for the virtues of your mind,
The true descendents of a Nobler kind;
Which you have so sublimed, you have raised all
The Cardinal ones to Theological;
And Virtue's virtue in others, but in you,
Not only Virtue, but Religion too.
And here I Would praise you for your Piety,
But it is of late in so great obloquy
With the vulgar sort, it is only looked upon
As Relic of the Old Religion,
Or Counterbanded Goods, which none, for fear
Of the Pragmatick, longer dares to wear;
Neither should I be safe, if I should praise
A thing that is held so dangerous now adays:
Let Angels only priase you for it then,
Since it is too bold and high a praise for men.
To the Lady GERARD of BROMLEY.
MADAM,
I Who have writ the praise of many a one,
Whom I Have had honor to have seen and known,
And always had the honor amongst the rest,
To celebrate the Noblest and the Best,
This Testimony needs must give of you,
(And all who know you, know it to be true)
Amongst all your Sex, I never yet did meet
With any, in their actions more discreet,
More prudent in their words, and in their mind
More nobly, nor more virtuously inclined.
And this not ta'n of others by Report,
But by mine own experience often. In sort
As they should rather be thought envious, who
Don't praise you for it, than Flatterers, who do;
Let none then think this Flattery in me,
For I cannot flatter, nor you flattered be.
To the Lord JOHN BELLASIS, on his quitting all his Offices.
MY LORD,
IN Camps and Courts, and all the Offices
You Have been employed in, both in War and Peace,
There Is none has been more fortunate than you;
But you were never happy until now,
When quitting all the Offices you had,
We well may say you are truly happy made.
For all along wherever you have been,
All know you have still been faithful to the King.
But in this latter Action you have showed
Your self both true to the King, and true to God:
And the King well knows there is none that can be true
To t'on, but those are so to the other too.
Mean time, my Lord, in the Age we live in now,
Both such examples, and such men as you
Were never more needful in the world, more rare,
Such men as you, and such examples are.
To the Lady, KATHARINE SEDLEY, Daughter to Sir CHARLES SEDLEY.
WHo know you, Madam, every day do find
New Beauties in your person, and your mind;
And more they know you, they discover more
Perfections in you than they did before.
Not all the numerous Train of them, nor yet
Of all the Graces in one person met,
Could make a fairer, or more beauteous show,
In any person than they do in you.
Nothing is wanting now unto the Fame
Of Noble Sedley's Family and Name,
Had all the masculine ones before, and now
Has all the Feminine Graces in it too.
So when two Sums are by Addition brought
Both into one, that which before was thought
Great in it self, does greater still become,
By adding t'on unto the other Sum.
In memory of his Noble Friend JAMES HAMILTON, who first lost his Leg at Sea,
then his Life on Land, in our last Engagement with the Dutch.
HOw like a huge Colossus thou did stand,
One Leg in the Sea, and the other on the Land?
Betwixt which two there being no standing fast,
Brave Hamilton, thou needs must fall at last.
Ah! Noble Youth! Never Innobled more,
Than when half lifeless thou were brought ashore,
And both thy King and Country, Friends and All,
Grieved and Lamented thy untimely fall.
Who would not choose, like thee, to fall and dye,
And live for it ever after gloriously;
Than for the use of a few hours breath,
To dye like others, an inglorious death?
For only War can give that happiness,
Whilst it is no glory for to dye in Peace.
To the Duke of Newcastle; On my Lady-Dutchess writing of his LIFE:
MY LORD,
WHilst with your Noble Actions you Indite
Unto your Ladies Pen what she should Write,
'T may well be said, as 'twas of Thetis son,
That you are doubly happy, both to have done
Such famous deeds, and to have had again
A Pen so famous for the writing them:
And never was Life more worthy to be writ,
Nor Pen more worthy of the writing it.
She makes you famous, and you her again
By the famous Subject you afford her Pen:
Whence it is a Question ever will remain,
Wh'er Fame makes Writers, or else Writers, Fame.
So whilst you live in the Life that she does give,
And she in writing of your Life will live;
Betwixt you both, your Fame will never die,
But to on give to other Immortality.
To DIG BY, Lord GERARD of Bromley; Recommending to him for Motto: Virtus vere
Nobilitas.
MY Lord, you now unto that Age are com,
You Are almost past Pythagoras Bivium:
And after, rarely any one forsakes
The way of Vice or Virtue which he takes.
If Virtue then be true Nobility,
There Is a necessity that you virtuous be,
Or else that Nobleman who is otherwise,
But forfeits his Nobility to Vice.
Think then whatere you love, Virtue is that;
And Vice is whatsoever you most hate.
To end then: If you love Nobility,
Love Virtue, or you will never Noble be.
If Baseness hate, hate to be one of those
Who put base Vices on, with Noble Clothes.
But I well know you bear a Noble mind,
And ar unto all virtuous things inclined.
Nature has done her part to make you so;
The rest, my Lord, depends on Heaven and you.
Love Virtue then, let it your Motto be,
Virtue is only true Nobility.
To Mr. HENRY JERMIN, On his Retirement into the Country.
SInce Nen and Manners here ar all so bad,
By their Example w'ar still worser made;
And there ar few can keep their Innocence,
Where every thing is scandal and offense.
You Are happy, Sir, who in the Country ar,
And nothing see but good Example there;
Passing your time amongst your Country-sports,
More pleasantly than we in Towns and Courts,
Who just as silly Sheep among Bushes stray,
Whilst every Bush takes part of the Fleece away:
So never com amongst others, but we find
We still lose somewhat of our better mind.
Our morning-thoughts are Gold, by noon they are Lead,
And all turned Dross before we go to bed:
Mixture with others does abase us so,
And such distractions ar where ever we go;
You Are happy Sir who in the Country ar;
And would I were so happy to be there.
On A Fair Ladies NAME.
ALthough there is none more carefully does fly
Clenches and Quibbles upon Names than I;
Counting words only the outside of Wit,
Whilst matter chiefly is the inside of it:
Yet when in the sense of the Name, and in the sound,
Somewhat of the nature of the person's found,
As is in yours, I cannot but say that you
Are Swift by name, and Swift by nature too:
Swift in your Apprehension and Wit,
And Swift in every thing belongs to it.
Only it is strange! being so in every thing,
You should be now so slow in Marrying.
But as for that, if reason often they would know;
You think in Marrying one cannot be too slow.
Of PERSECUTION.
I Never liked this Persecution
Only for Conscience and Religion;
And half suspect, that where it is not free,
It Is not Religion, but Hypocrisy.
Who seek to force Opinion, make men more
Opiniatre than they were before:
And as for Conscience, ye make it none,
Unless ye leave it free for every one.
What gentleness cannot do, it is in vain
To seek by force and violence to obtain.
And it is your Persecutors private hate,
Rather than care or love unto the State.
In fine, there is none has Jurisdiction
O'r mind and thoughts of men, but God alone;
And Princes powers their bodies may control,
But only God has power over the Soul.
To a Fair Lady, On the Peoples Reports.
MADAME,
THe People, who sometimes on Truth do light,
Although they are not always in the right,
Say you are a Duchess now; and it is well guest,
Since you deserve for to be one at least:
And it is enough of reputation,
The world believes you worthy to be one.
But be you fair and beauteous, as you ar,
You for no other Titles need to care,
Neither of Dutchesses, nor Princesses,
Nor of great Queens, nor greater Empresses:
The Title of fair and beauteous is more
Than all those Titles they so much adore:
And they are only earthly ones, in fine;
But that of Beauty, heavenly and divine.
On an Angelical Beauty.
I Must confess, before I saw your face,
I never knew what perfect Beauty was;
Nor ever saw more heavenly features, nor
Angelical air, in any one before.
We paint Angels All face, and add but wings
Unto them, and we make them Cherubins:
So add but only wings to yours, and you
Would be All Cherubin, and Angel too.
The Face now being the Index of the Mind,
By which we persons dispositions find,
We well may say, in seeing yours, that none
Had ever a sweeter disposition;
More mild, more gentle, nor more debonair;
And full as heavenly good, as heavenly fair.
All this, from Rules of Physiognomy,
Madam, which never yet deceived me.
ON A Sceptick in Religion.
THose who did wonder when they saw men go
Walking in rooms backwards and forwards so,
Would wonder more to see how thou have gone
Backwards and forwards in Religion.
Thou say we are bid try all, and choose the best:
But when there is one so far 'bove all the rest,
It Is out of the way of all Comparison;
Whoere is wise, should choose or that, or none.
But when the Soul is gone, and Body dead,
A thousand crawling worms in the Corpse are bred:
So when Religion's gone, we always find
A thousand crawling Sects are left behind.
As he is unwise, then, changes Gold for Brass,
Diamonds for Peble-stones, and Gems for Glass:
So he is more unwise, who chooses one
Of these false Sects, for the true Religion.
In Memory of her Altezze BEATRICE de Cusance, Duchess of LORAIN.
WHen this fair Soul did in her Body live,
She had some Angel been, you would believe;
Through her bright exterior there did shine
So much from her interior of divine:
And now much more you would believe her on,
When her immortal soul to Heaven is gone;
Toward which when here on earth she made such have,
Her body could not follow her so fast,
But she must leave it here below to die,
Whilst she went up to Immortality.
Mean time, who had the honor to know her here;
May, weeping, write upon her Sepulcher:
She who alive all Virtue and Beauty was,
T'on in her breast, and the other in her face;
Now she is dead, just reason w'ave to fear
All Beauty and Virtue too are dead with her.
To her (now) Incomparable Sister, The Princess of AREMBERG.
ALl the Lay thoughts, I ever had
Of your fair Sex, you have Religious made
By seeing you; and I Am become by it
Your Sexes honourer, and your Convertit.
For just as to a Temple, all do come
Unto your Chamber, and from thence go home;
The bad converted, and the good much more
Confirmed in goodness than they were before.
Besides, the world learns this from seeing you,
That noble Virtue, and Religion too,
Ar cheerful things, and far from being so sad
As they are in Melancholy Cloisters made.
But there is an artful silence, as there was
An artful vailing Agamemnon's face;
And others praises we may speak of well,
But as for hers who is wholly ineffable,
It Is praise enough to say, that she can never
Be praised enough; and say no more of her.
To the Honorable, EDWARD HOWARD, Brother to the Duke of NORFOLK.
IT is not Travel makes a man, it is true,
Unless a man could travel, Sir, like you.
In putting off themselves, and putting on
The best of every Country where they com;
Their Customs, Manners, Fashions, and their use,
Purged of the dross, and stripped of the abuse;
Till rich themselves with observation,
They come at last to enrich their Country home:
Whilst the py'd Traveller that nothing knows
Of other Countries Fashions, but their Clothes,
And speak their Language but as Parrats do,
Only perchance a broken word or two;
Goes, and returns the same he went again,
By carrying still himself along with him.
On WILLIAM, Duke of Newcastle.
BUt now behold a Nobleman indeed,
Such as w' admire in Story when we read,
And love and honor, when we do but see
As perfect Pattern of Nobility;
Who does not proudly look that you should d'off
Your Hat, and make a reverence twelvescore off;
Nor takes exceptions if at every word
You call him not Your Grace, or else My Lord:
But is all Courtesy and Civility,
As best becoms a Nobleman to be;
And does appear a hundred times more great
By his neglect of 't, than by keeping State.
Whence, through all Degrees that he has past,
Of Vicount, Earl, Marquess, and Duke at last,
H'as always gained the general esteem
Of honoring them, more than they honored him.
To The Lady BRIDGET, Vicountess KILMURRAY.
MADAME,
When I would praise you as I others do,
So many Virtues do appear in you,
As it is not in the power of Art or Wit
To count them all, they are so infinite.
What should I do then, but in brief conclude
As Painters when they paint a multitude,
Who when they have some of the chiefest heads expressed,
Under them darkly shadow all the rest?
So having said you are beauteous, virtuous, wise,
Under which heads I all the rest comprise;
I leave them darkly shadowed and hid
Under those heads, as the other Painter did.
On The Duchess of Monmouth's Happy Childbirth.
NOw thanks to Heaven! what we have hoped for long,
And long have prayed for, Monmouth has a son;
His Lady safe delivered, and with her
Thousands besides delivered of their fear.
Who hear this joyful News, and are not glad,
May they be ever deaf, and ever sad.
Now ye Physicians, you who said that she
With so great danger should delivered be;
Who Will ere believe you more, unless you say
You have no skill? and then indeed they may;
Or that each Midwife has more skill than you,
And then they safely may believe you too:
Mean time, the child, and mothers life, do show
Ye ar all great Liars, and do nothing know.
And O! to prove you greater Liars, may
Sh'have many children, and live many a day.
On The Foyl of Nobility.
SEe you yond Thing, who looks as he would cry
I am a Lord, a mile ere he comes nigh;
And thinks to show it by his being proud,
His strutting as he goes, and talking loud?
Behold him well, you will hardly find enough
In the whole man to make a Lacquey of,
And for true Honor, and Nobility,
His Groom and Coachman have as much as He.
Such empty things have nothing else of worth,
But Place and Titles, for to set them forth;
Being just like Dwarfs dressed up in Giants clothes;
Bigger he would seem, the lesser still he shows:
Or like small Statues on huge Basis set;
Their heights but only make them show less great.
The Welcoming a Friend from SEA; In Drolling.
Dear N.
Welcome from Sea, and now thou art com a shore,
If thou be wise, I prithee go no more.
Let Land-men keep a-land, and only they,
A Gods name, who are Seamen, go to Sea.
There were some comfort, if the Wars would cease
First Voyage one does make, and end in Peace.
But War's a Hydra; cut but off one head,
And straight seven others sprout up in the stead.
I know you went to learn Experience there;
And your Experience might have cost your dear;
Thank Heaven you are come off with so little harm,
And escaped without the loss of leg or arm;
Which that the art escaped, the ast but small cause to boast
'Twas but a happpie rashness at the most.
And 't had been Fortune's fault, if the first time
Thou had been killed, but second 'twill be thine.
The end of the first Book of EPIGRAMS: All newly Made, or newly Revised.
The Second Book OF EPIGRAMS.
To His ROYAL HIGHNESS, JAMES Duke of York.
THe first Book being his Majesty's, and this
By Consequence your Royal Highness is:
The World does scarcely any one afford,
After You Two, worthy to be the Third.
To Her ROYAL HIGHNESS IOSEPHA-MARIA d'Este, Duchess of York.
Madame,
IF expectation makes the Blessing dear,
Your Highness long has been expected here.
And now you are come, be pleased to know, you will find
Your Royal Lord above all Husbands kind:
The KING and Him two of the Worthiest men
The World ere saw, or ere shall see again.
The QUEEN so pious and devout, she is one
Who seems all Piety and Devotion.
The English Ladies generally fair,
Betwixt the French and your Italian air.
And the Better sort and the Nobility
Nothing but Courtesy and Civility.
For the rest, our hope of Civilizing 'um,
Next Heaven, is in Your Highness, now you are come:
Which if You do, You Will gain immortal Fame,
And make Ioseph-Maria d'Este's Name
Amongst the English full as famous as
Amongst the French, Clotilda's ever was.
Mean time, Your Highness bears along with You
Your House's Honor, and Your Nation's too.
To his Royal Highness, On his Return from our Naval VICTORY, An. 65.
GReater and Famouser than ere
Caesar or Alexander were,
Who has both done, and outdone too,
What those great Heroes could not do:
Till Empire of the Seas they get,
No Victory can be complete.
For Land and Sea make but one Ball;
They had but half, you have it all.
Great Prince! the Glory of our days,
And utmost bound of humane praise:
Increased in Style, we well may call
You now, The whole Worlds Admiral;
Whilst mighty CHARLES with Trident stands,
And like some God, the Sea commands.
Having so gloriously overcome,
What now remains, but to come home,
And fixed in our British Sphere,
Shine a bright Constellation there,
Most pow'ful ore the Watery Main,
Next unto that of Charles his Wain?
To His Highness Prince RVPERT, On the same.
GReat and Heroic Prince! surpassing far
Him who was styled The Thunderbolt of War.
The Belgic Lion stands amazed to see
A greater Lion than it self, in Thee:
And Zealand one, all trembling for fear,
Half sinks into the Waves, to hide it there.
Never since the Greeks first called the World their own,
Or Romans theirs, was greater Valor known.
And if there yet new worlds to Conquer were,
Brave Rupert were the fittest Conqueror;
Greatest Example of Heroic worth,
As ever yet this Later Age brought forth!
As formerly the Land of Britain was,
So now the Sea's too narrow for thy praise;
And 'twill in time become the work alone
Of Ecstasy and Admiration.
On the Death of His ROYAL HIGHNESS HENRY Duke of Gloucester.
Highborn and Great as any Prince on earth,
With Mind as great and high as was his Birth;
Wise 'bove his years, Valiant above a man;
And had he lived to end as he began,
The World would for Him scarce have any room,
So Mighty and so Great he had become:
Whose Life was just like the Arabian wind,
That so much fragrant sweetness leaves behind,
The World is filled with odor of his Name,
After he is gone, from whom the sweetness came.
Who Is now so dull, when this they hear but sed,
Who does not know the Duke of Gloster's dead?
The Gallantst Person Nature ever made,
And hopefulst Prince as England ever had.
Let those who trust this World then, learn by this,
What all their worldly hope and greatness is.
On the Death of Her ROYAL HIGHNESS, HENRIETTA Duchess of Orleans.
THis Life of ours is like a Garden, where
The fairest Flowers always first gathered are;
Whilst common ones are only left like Weeds,
To wither on their stalks, and fall to seeds.
And never than this was fairer Flower known,
Where the Rose and Lily both were joined in one:
In which Conjunction did together meet
All that was heavenly fair, and heavenly sweet.
Hereafter then, as it is your Florists guise
New names for rarest Flowers to devise;
And more for the perpetuating their Fames,
To call them by some Royal persons Names:
Those which are fairest sweetest ones of all,
We Henrietta's by her name may call.
To HENRY Earl of Arlington, Principal SECRETARY of State.
My Lord,
THat ours and other Nations may know
How much to such Great men as you they owe,
Who for the State perpetual Vigil keep,
And with your Watchfulness secure their Sleep.
While dull Spectators, and the common Rout
Only behold the Dyals hand without,
You are the Wheels give Motion to it within,
Next to the Primum Mobile, the KING.
You are the Intelligences of the Sphere
Of Government, and all the Weight do bear;
Whilst, like great Jove, the KING does sit above,
And under him sees all in Order move.
Mean time, it is a great happiness for a King,
To meet men fit for the Offices they are in;
And does commend their Judgments when they chose
To serve the State, such Ministers as those.
Great Offices require Great Souls, and you,
My Lord, have both the one, and the other too.
On a Nobleman Whose MOTTO is, Cavendo Tutus.
WHo as the Flint bears Fire, so bears his worth*
And is not always showing of it forth;
But for more solid and profound respects,
The needless ostentation of 't neglects:
Who Is that just man without all guile or fraud,
Who next to's first Religion unto God,
Counts what he is to Men his second one;
And for a world would harm and injure none:
Who Is wary and circumspect in all his ways,
And nothing rashly either does or says:
Nor any thing, in fine, that may offend
His Prince, his Country, Conscience, or his Friend.
If any now would know who This may be,
By his Cavendo Tutus they may see:
It is a Cavendish, and that Devonshire's He.
TO The Lord GEORGE BERKLEY.
IT is an Axiom in Morality,
That Virtue's only true Nobility;
If so, there is none gives clearer proof than you,
My Lord, that your Nobility is true.
And that 't may so continue, you provide,
By adding to it true Piety beside.
For, Piety is but Virtue died in grain,
Can never change color, nor take spot or stain.
In which pure garment whosoere are clad,
Are truly virtuous, truly noble made.
Such Courtiers Heaven desires, and such Kings should
Desire too, if they would have them great and good.
Happy the whilst, my Lord, are such as you,
Fit for both the earthly Court, and heavenly too;
Whilst those who do not join them both together,
As you have done, my Lord, are fit for neither.
To Mr. HENRY IERMIN, On their demanding why he had no higher TITLES, etc.
STill Noble, Gallant, Generous, and Brave:
What more of Titles would these people have?
Or what can they imagine more, to express
How great thou art, that would not make thee less?
He who is proud of other Titles, is
Proud of a thing that is other's, none of his.
And 'twere in thee but vain ambition
To seek by other Titles to be known;
When Henry Iermins name alone affords
As high and great a sound as any Lord's.
The title of a worthy person's more
Than all which they so obsequiously adore:
And there is no Office they can greater call,
Than doing of good offices to all.
This is thy Office, these thy Titles are;
Let who list take the rest, thou do not care.
On the Closet or Study OF MARGARET Duchess of Newcastle.
WHat place is this! 't looks like some sacred Cell
Where holy Ermits anciently did dwell.
Is this a Ladies Closet? 't cannot be;
For nothing here of vanity you see,
Nothing of Curiosity or Pride,
As most of Ladies Closets have beside.
Here she is in rapture, here in ecstasy,
With studying high and deep Philosophy.
Here those clear lights descend into her mind,
Which by reflection in her Books you find;
And those high notions and idea's too,
Which but her self, no Woman ever knew.
Whence she is the chiefest ornament and grace
Of The Age, and of her Sex: hail sacred place,
To which the world in aftertimes shall come,
As unto Homers Shrine, or Virgils Tomb;
Honoring the place wherein she made abode,
The air she breathed, and ground whereon she trod.
So Fame rewards the Arts, and so again
The Arts reward all those that honor them.
Whilst whosoe'r in other Fames does trust,
Shall after death, lie in forgotten dust.
On MELCHBOVRN, The Residence of the Earl of Bullingbrook.
MElchbourn with such perpetual quiet blessed,
As if the Halcyon there had built its nest,
Or 'twere the middle region of the air,
Where never storms nor tempests do repair.
Whether the Exorcism in the place does lie,
Or rather in the peaceful company,
Whose Lord and Lady of a dove-like kind,
Live so united, with one soul and mind:
Betwixt them never yet was other strife,
But who should kindest be, of man or wife.
All friendship, nobleness, and kindness, He;
All sweetness, gentleness, and mildness, She.
No Weathercocks of Humor, apt to change;
To day familiar, and to morrow strange:
But constant to their goodness, and their way;
The same tomorrow as they were today.
So men at ease and certainty live there;
In pain and in uncertainty elsewhere.
On the Duke of Albemarl's, AND And the Earl of Sandwich's Bringing in the KING.
THat present and all future times may know
How much to Monk and Montague they owe;
By them that great and mighty work was done,
Of The Kings most happy Restoration.
A happiness so general, we may call
It well The Restoration of us all.
Whilst the one restored him to possession
Of The Royal Fleet, the other of the Royal Throne.
One gave him full and absolute Command
Of The Sea again, as the other did of the Land.
For which, what Statues had erected been
In former times, what Titles given to them;
And with what acclamations had they said,
Whilst to these Heroes they their thanks had paid!
"If others have their Honors well deserved,
"Who nobly have their King and Country served;
"What Honors ever can be worthy You,
"Who have not only served, but saved them too!
On the Death OF The Earl of Sandwich.
NEver was greater Sacrifice than this,
Where Sea's the Temple, Fireship Altar is,
And Sandwich Victime offered up, to save
His Countries Honor by a death more brave
Than ever Hero di'd, though we should sum
All Greece ere boasted of, or ancient Rome.
O Noble Sandwich! while there is Memory,
Of The British Seas thy Fame shall never die;
Who 'twixt two different deaths, at last were found
In Water burnt, and in the Fire drowned.
As if to kill thee once did not suffice
Thy mighty mind, but they must kill thee twice:
Or else, to serve thy Country, thou did choose
More than one death, more than one life to loose.
Let then the Fabii, Decii, Curii, nor
Meltiade's be mentioned no more,
Who for to serve their Country chose to fall:
Our Noble Sandwich has outdone them all.
To the Earl of Ossory, On his going to SEA.
MOst Noble Ossory, who do possess
So much of Honor and of Nobleness,
As were all Honor, all Nobility
In others lost, they might be found in thee.
In these our Wars at Sea, where Death does stand
With twice more force and terror than at Land;
Into what danger thou thy life do bear,
The less Thou fear, the more thy friends do fear.
But when we talk of danger unto him,
Who Life than Honor does far less esteem,
This onely's all the answer he does give;
There Is need to go, but there is no need to live.
Go then, since nothing can be thoroughly done,
But where the Noble Ossory is one.
There Is nothing now that England needs to fear,
When YORK is Leader, and He Follower;
Who Is both in Peace and War, by Land and Sea,
so fit to serve his Country every way,
As for true Honor, true Nobility,
England had never a braver man than He.
To the Lord HENRY HOWARD of Norfolk* now Earl of Norwich, And Lord High
Marshal of England; On his African Voyage.
COmmanded by your Prince, you did not say
For your Excuse, A Lion's in the way;
But by Obedience and by Honor led,
Even into Africh went, where they are bred:
Teaching of Subjects, by the haste you made,
How Kings and Princes are to be obeyed;
And how they obey but slowly, and too late,
When they demur, or else capitulate.
By your Example then, whoere are sent
By Kings abroad, may learn this Document,
How they but serve themselves, and not their Kings,
Who only obey in fafe and easy things;
And how there is little Honor to obey,
When difficulty and danger is away.
Let then your talking Crowd say what they will,
The greater Danger, greater Honor still;
And that, my Lord, you went to Africa for,
Let who is lift go to fetch the Golden Oar.
To the Same: On his Voyage to CONSTANTINOPLE.
WHilst Merchants Traffic for their lucre, You
Traffic for Honor wheresoere you go:
Of which brave Merchandise you always make
A noble and rich Return at coming back.
Witness that Voyage which you lately made
To the Levant, where is the richest Trade:
Besides, now into Italy again,
Now into France, and unto farthest Spain.
How Rich the while must the Howards be often? who
Have such brave Factors for it abroad, as You:
And are so honored for it at home, as they
Without offense and vanity may say,
As God first made the Light, then made the Sun
A bright and great Reserve for it when he had done:
So Kings make Honor's, and the Howards are
The great Reserves often, still you find it there.
On WELBECK, the Duke of Newcastle's House, Where he so Royally Entertained the
last KING.
WElbeck's a Royal place, where every thing
Seems made for Entertainment of a King;
And all the World confesses that he never
Was entertained more Royally than there.
Whose Cellar and whose Larder seem to have bin
Of every foreign Land the Magazin;
Whilst every where their Rarities were sought
By Land and Sea, and unto Welbeck brought.
Let others wonder at thy Lords expense,
And at the vastness of's magnificence,
Whose feast was but Preludium to the cost
With which soon after he maintained an Host.
He who would venture's Fortunes, Life, and all,
To serve his Master when his General;
For me, I never shall wonder that he would
Not spare his Purse, that would not spare his Blood.
TO FRANCES Duchess of Albemarle.
Madame,
THe chiefest Office that the Poet has,
Is to give others their deserved praise;
And when they find a true and real worth,
TO adorn it handsomely, and set it forth.
So, there are some they praise for nothing else
But Beauty, or the outside of themselves.
Others, and more deservedly, again,
They praise for Virtue, or the inside of them;
And sometimes for Nobility of Blood,
When it is ennobled by some greater good
All which, of noble, fair, and virtuous too,
Being to perfection, Madam, found in You,
Whoever does not praise you for it, must be
No Poet, or else blind, and cannot see:
And as for me, Madam, though I were none.
The seeing You were enough to make me one.
IN MEMORY OF The Lady JANE CHEYNEE.
THe gentlest temper, and the mildest breast,
Most apt to pardon, needing pardon least;
Whose Blush was all her Reprehension,
And none ere heard her chide, or saw her frown;
Who was so liberal to the Poor, she scant
Thought any thing her own, whilst they did want;
And scarce had any Passion of her own,
But was for others All compassion.
So Innocent she was in guiltiest time,
Omission of doing good was all her Crime;
And those omissions chiefly did proceed
From the abundance too of the good she did.
In fine, a Saint she lived, and so she di'd;
And now is gone where only they abide.
Make much of her, ye Saints, for Heaven knows when
Your Quires will ever have her like again.
On MARY Duchess of Richmond.
WHether a cheerful air does rise,
And elevate her fairer Eyes,
Or a pensive heaviness
Her lovely Eyelids does depress;
Still the same becoming Grace
Accompanies her Eyes and Face:
Still you would think that habit best
In which her Countenance last was dressed.
Poor Beauties! whom a look or glance
Can sometimes make looks fair by chance;
Or curious dress, or artful care,
Can make seem fairer than they are.
Give me the Eyes, give me the Face,
To which no Art can add a Grace;
Give me the Looks no garb nor dress
Can ever make more fair, or less.
On GEORGE Duke of Buckingham her Father, To the Lord Duke her Brother.
THe Gallantst Person, and the Noblest Mind,
In all the World his Prince could ever find,
Or to participate his private cares,
Or bear the public weight of his affairs:
All which he bore as steady, and as even
As ever Atlas did the Globe of Heaven:
Like well built Arches, stronger with their weight;
And well built Minds, the steadier with their height
Such was the Composition and Frame
Of The Noble and the Gallant Buckingham.
These, whilst he lived, your Fathers praises were;
And now he is dead, are Yours, my Lord, his Heir.
The winning Carriage, and the smiling Grace
Of his exterior Person, and his Face;
The noble Virtues of's interior Breast;
And in's Example you have all the rest.
To LILLY, DRAWING The Duchess of Cleveland's Picture.
STay, daring man, and never presume to draw
Her Picture, till thou may such Colors get
As Zeuxis or Apelles never saw,
Nor ere were known by any Painter yet.
Till from all Beauties thou extracts the grace,
And from the Sun, the Beams that gild the Skies,
Never presume to draw her Beauteous face,
Nor paint the radiant brightness of her Eyes.
In vain the while thou do the labor take,
Since none can set her forth to her desert;
She who is above all Nature ere did make,
Much more's above all can be made by Art.
Yet be n't discouraged: for whoere does see it,
^t least with admiration must confess
^t has an air for charming and for sweet,
Much more than others, though than hers much less.
^o those bold Giants who would scale the Sky,
^lthough they in their high attempt did fall,
^his comfort had, They mounted yet more high
^han those who never strove to climb at all.
^omfort thee then, and think it no disgrace,
^om so great height a little to decline;
^nce all must grant, the reason of it was
^^r too great Excellence, and no want of thine.
To the Duchess of Cleveland: On her new Accession of TITLES, An. 1670.
ALthough your Graces Modesty is so great,
You will not admit of your own praises, yet
We well may praise you under Beauties name;
And You and Beauty, Madam, are the same.
To ask then, what in Beauty we can find
To honor so' is question of the blind;
Since all have any sense, or eyes, may see
It self alone is its own dignity,
And, Monarch-like, does in it self comprise
All other Titles, Styles, and Dignities.
They Are envious then, at its advancement grutch,
Or think it can be honored here too much.
That might in aneient times, if it had been,
Have chose what Constellation 'twou'd be in;
Either to have sat in Cassiopoei's Throne,
Or to be crowned with Ariadne's Crown.
There is no Honor underneath the sky,
That is for Beauty too sublime and high.
To the Earl of S. Albans, Lord Chamberlain to His Majesty.
My Lord,
THough we allow Fortune no Deity,
Yet sure there is some such fickle thing as She,
That has great power over the unwiser sort,
And, next to Virtue, can do much in Court.
For since in the Court you have stood, and honored been,
How many Revolutions have we seen?
How many strange Examples have we known,
Of Favorites sh'has raised and overthrown?
Whilst none but such as You can firmly stand,
Not raised by Fortune's, but by Virtue's hand.
Live ever honored then, ever the same,
Still more and more ennobling Iermin's Name,
And live a Great Example unto all
Who tottering stand in Court, and fear to fall;
How none but those are raised by Virtues hand,
Can either safely rise, or firmly stand.
On Mris STVART.
STVART, a Royal Name that springs
From Race of Caledonian Kings;
Whose virtuous mind, and beauteous frame,
Adds Honor to that Royal Name.
What praises can we worthy find,
To celebrate your form and mind?
The greatest power that is on Earth
Is given to Princes by their Birth;
But there is no power in Earth nor Heaven,
Greater than what is to Beauty given:
That, makes not only Men relent,
When unto rage and fury bent,
But Lions tame, and Tigers mild,
All fierceness from their breasts exiled.
Such Wonders yet could never be done
By Beauties power and force alone,
Without the force and power to boot
Of excellent goodness added to it.
For just as Jewels we behold
More brightly shine when set in Gold:
So Beauty shines far brighter yet,
In goodness and in virtue set.
Continue then but as you are,
So excellently good and fair;
Let Princes by their Birthrights sway,
You Will have a Power as great as they.
On her Dancing at White Hall, All shining with JEWELS.
SO Citharea in th'Olympick Hall,
And the rest of the Stars dance their Celestial Ball,
As Stuart with the rest of the Nymphs does here,
The brightest Beauties of the British Sphere.
Who would not think her Heaven, to see her thus
All shine with Starry Jewels as she does?
Or some what heavenlier yet, to see her Eyes
Out shine the Starry Jewels of the Skies?
Only their splendour's so exceeding bright,
The excess confounds and blindes us with the sight.
Just like the Sun, who is bright to that degree,
Nothing is more, nothing less seen than he.
Mean time the rapid motion of the Spheres
Is not more sweet nor ravishing than hers:
And it is not the harmony makes her dance, but She
With dancing it is that makes the harmony.
Next to divinest Cynthia Queen of Light,
Never was seen a Nymph more fair and bright,
Nor ever shall amongst all her Starry train,
Though those in heaven should all come down again.
On her Marriage WITH The Duke of Richmond.
THe fairest Nymph in all Diana's train,
For whom so many sighed, and sighed in vain:
She who so often had others captive made,
And who so often o'r others triumphed had,
Is Hymen's captive now her self, and led
In triumph to the Noble Richmond's Bed.
Nor is it strange to see about her fly
As many Cupids as are Stars in the sky,
As many Graces as are Sands in the Sea,
Nor yet as many Venus's as they:
But to behold so many Virtues throng
About a Nymph so beautiful and young,
Is strange indeed, and does enough declare
That she is full as virtuous as fair;
And all those lovely graces has beside,
As ere made Bridegroom happy in a Bride.
TO JAMES Earl of Northampton.
WHilst you your Father's Noble steps did trace,
And still were found where greatest danger was,
As none in the Wars more active was than you,
So none has since more suffered for it too,
By Plundring, Harassing, Imprisonment,
And all successful Rebels could invent
To punish Loyalty with, in such a time,
When being Loyal was the greatest Crime:
All which you not with patience alone,
But even with cheerfulness have undergone;
Wishing your danger, loss, and suffering,
Far greater yet, in serving of your King:
And that far from the merc'nary regard
Of those did less for Honor than Reward.
And you have the Honor often; let other men
Take the Reward, you do not envy them.
To Sir WILLIAM DVCEI, On his Three Entertainments; Of the KING, Prince of
Tuscany, and Prince of Denmark, All the same Year, An. 1669.
DVcei, who bravely knows to spend
When it is for any noble end,
And never sticks at the expense,
When it is to show magnificence;
For the Royal Entertainment that
Thou gav'st unto thy Prince of late,
The Honor only is thine own:
But what is to other Princes done,
The honor which to that is due
Is both thine own, and others too:
In that, thou art but a private man;
In this, a public person; and
Thy Country should ungrateful be,
Should it not always honor Thee,
Who know so bravely how to spend,
When it is for any noble end;
And never sticks at the expense,
When it is to show magnificence.
To Mr. BERNARD HOWARD, Brother to the Duke of Norfolk. Segnite il Pocchi, and
non li vulgar genti.
I Grant you, Sir, I have a mind unfit
For my low fortune, and too high for it:
But sure you will grant it is better have it so,
Than for high fortune to have a mind too low.
By that, a man is elevated to
An Angels pitch, attained by only few:
By this, the Noble soul is even deprest
Unto the Vulgar, almost to the Beast.
This Sentence I have ta'n for Motto then:
Follow the few, not vulgar sort of men.
Nor care I what the common people say,
For being not of their number, nor their way:
They do but talk, and cannot in judgment sit,
Nor lies it in their Verge to judge of Wit.
I put my self upon the only few;
That is, the best and Noblest, such as You.
To the truly Honorable, Mr. THOMAS HOWARD, Brother to the Earl of Carlisle.
Noble Sir,
THough never so many confidently aver
That Honor's only in the Honourer;
Yet we may well affirm of such as You,
It Is both in the Honourer ann Honored too.
Nay, You Would be Honorable, Sir, thou there were none
Extant in all the world but You alone.
As the Sun would still be luminous and bright,
Though men, like moles, were all deprived of sight.
Let others glory in the Honors then
And Titles they receive from other men;
You have no Titles by the which you are known,
Nor Honors, but what is properly Your own.
The End of the Second BOOK.
The Third Book of Miscellany Epigrams.
On our Town-LIBELLERS.
WE have a sort of Libellers in Town,
For base and villainous Rhyme put Withers down,
Men semi-Atheists, and who want not much,
In lives and manners to be wholly such.
So perfect bad, they laugh at Machiavil
For saying None can be extremely ill:
And in their Writings, as in all the rest,
Satyrs, half Men, half Goats, and wholly Beast.
These, when they write of Dildoes and such stuff,
May be allowed, though scurrilous enough:
But when they write against others, nay don't spare
Even Kings themselves, had best in time beware
Lest as wild horses, which unless they check
In their Carreer, often break their Riders neck:
So may their Wits in time break their necks too,
Unless they rule them better than they do.
Such are your Libellers, who 're but the same
Savage and wild, as Ballad-makers tame:
Hated by the nobler sort, and, to conclude,
Loved and applauded by the multitude,
For writing as they do against every one,
And counted Wits, when rather they have none;
Employ their Pens and Wits in such a way,
As none in Bedlam's half so mad as they.
And now if any take exceptions for
Writing against these, let them take Hellebor.
The Pourtrait.
SUch a stature as they call
Nor too low, nor yet too tall,
And each part, from head to foot,
With a just proportion to it;
Hair so black, and skin so white,
Never was a fairer sight:
And her fairer yet to make,
Eye and Eyebrows too, as black:
Forehead smoother than the Glass
Where she sees her lovely face:
Cheeks where naturally grows
The Lilly and the blushing Rose:
Lips all other Lips excelling,
They Are are so ruddy, and so swelling:
Voice that charms you, it is so sweet,
Made more charming by her Wit.
In fine, for symmetry and fear^ure,
Nature never made a fairer creature.
If any'd know who this may be,
Name but Bellasis, and it is she.
The Young Couple, I. D. and B. S.
THey well faign'd Cupid young: for then is the time,
As Roses in the bud, when he is in's prime.
And such an early love is this of theirs,
Who now are married in their tender years.
Now, like soft Wax, they aptest are to take
The sweet impressions which their Loves shall make.
And like young Plants, they will easily bend and bow,
Which, older grown, they would not so easily do.
Let none the whilst object their Pupillage;
For Love and Marriage none are under age.
For what does Hymen's rites to Lovers more
Than join their hands, whose hearts were joined before?
And here on earth, by sacred Pledges given,
Confirm that Marriage which was made in Heaven?
To the Temple then, and as they pass along,
Let Youths and Virgins sing their Nuptial song;
And thus conclude: For noble, good, and fair,
Hymen never coupled a more equal pair.
To M. M. Davies, On her excellent Dancing and Singing.
HOw I admire thee, Davies! the delight
Both of the ravished hearing and the sight!
Whose dancing and whose singing added to it,
Shows thee all Harmony from head to foot.
Who would not say, to see thee dance so light,
Thou were all air, or else all flame and spright?
Or who'd not think, to see thee only tread,
Thy feet were Feathers, others feet but Lead?
Athlanta well could run, and Hermes flee,
But none ever moved more gracefully than thee.
And Circes charmed with Wand and Magicklore,
But none like thee ere charmed with feet before.
Thou Miracle, whom all men must admire!
To see thee move like air, and mount like fire.
Whoe'r would follow thee, and come but nigh
To thy perfections must not dance, but fly.
But now she sings, let us peace, and say no more:
For just as when she only danced before,
We wished our selves all Eyes to see her, so
We wish our selves all Ears to hear her now.
Only we'll say, Never did mortal ear
On earth before such heavenly music hear.
And we her singing well may heavenly call,
Whose skill's divine, and voice Angelical.
On her pretty Daughter.
PRetty child, in whom appears
All the seeds, above thy years,
Of every Beauty, every Grace,
As ere was sown in mind or face.
Never by Nature yet was made
A Child who more perfections had;
Nor ever, though she would never so fain,
Can she make the like again.
Thou art the Epitome of all
We pretty, fair, and sweet do call:
And for the more Conformity,
This is the Epitome of Thee.
On a Ladies Blushing When the KING beheld her.
SO Roses blush when looked on by the Sun,
As she when by the King she is looked upon:
And so of all fair things we nothing see
More fair in nature than the Rose and She.
If things take names from their Original,
We well her Blushes Royal ones may call;
And if we have lost the Royal Purples Stain,
It in her Cheeks may well be found again.
In brief, as it is a sign the Sun draws near,
When fair Aurora blushing does appear;
To see her blushing when the King does come,
You Would say He were Aurora, she the Sun.
On a famous Running Horse.
LEt Fabulous Antiquity no more
Boast of the Running horses 't had before:
Here is a Horse, to whom they would all seem lame
Who ran in the Isthmos or Nemean Game;
Surpassing far the Horses of the Sun
So many thousand miles a day do run;
Or Gynets of the Andalusian kind,
For swiftness far outstrip their Sire, the Wind:
Whom we had praised before, but that there is none
Had time to do it till the Race was done.
Swifter than thought, or lightning from the sky,
Begins and ends in twinkling of an Eye:
Such is his speed when he begins to run,
Whose ending and beginning is all one;
And now w'ave time to praise him, then w'ad none.
Let none then talk of Pegasus, not yet
Of The the other Flying horse of Pacolet;
While we have -- here, we well may say,
We have our Flying horse as well as they.
On a Pretty Little Person.
SHe is pretty, and she knows it;
She is witty, and she shows it:
And besides that she is so witty,
And so little, and so pretty,
Sh' has a hundred other parts,
For to take and conquer Hearts.
Amongst the rest, her Air's so sprightful,
And so pleasant and delightful,
With such Charms, and such Attractions,
In her words, and in her actions,
As whoe'r does hear and see,
Say there is none do charm but she.
But who have her in their arms,
Say sh' has hundred other Charms,
And as many more Attractions
In her words and in her actions:
But for that, suffice to tell ye
It Is the little pretty Nelly.
ON Mris IEAN ROBERTS.
ROberts, whom rather we Rob-hearts may call,
Since of our hearts her Beauty robs us all;
And does it with such gentle force and slight,
As she even robs us with her very sight.
Nay, what few Beauties else could ever do,
Her sight not only robs, but kills us too.
Though none so fond of life was ever found,
Who would not gladly die of such a wound.
Nor talk of Law to her, who is above
All other Laws, but only those of Love.
Whence she is so high and absolute become,
As she gives Laws to all, but takes of none.
Such privilege Beauty has: whence we may see,
Less Thieves are punished, great ones lawless be;
And mighty Conquerors, whom no Laws can touch,
Do rob and kill, like her, but not so much.
To CLARISSA, Too curious in her Dress.
ANd why, Clarissa, all this pain and care,
To gain the Reputation of fair?
When without all this care, and all this pain,
You have already what you strive to gain.
All other Arts in you would show as poor,
As theirs would do who seek to guild Gold ore:
And you would appear as vain in it, as they
Who seek by Art to Blanch the Milkie way.
Men well this curious dressing may suspect,
Since Beauty still shows best in the neglect;
And Truth and it needs so small setting sorth,
As all you add to it, takes but from it is worth.
Leave then, Clarissa, these poor helps to those,
Who need to piece their Beauties out with Clothes.
So Politics when the Lions skin does fail
Do use to piece it out with Foxes tail:
But when the have Lions skin enough, it is poor
And beggarly to add a piece to it more.
To CAELIA, Disswasion from Marriage.
CAElia, Who now are in your Beauties prime,
Courted by all the Gallants of the time,
Who nothing else the whilst of Heaven do crave,
But tha' for Wife, they might fair Celia have:
I Will tell you what your Beauty is, and what
Y' are to expect, when come to Marriage state.
Beauty is just like Sweetmeats, which before
The have tasted of, nothing they long for more:
But after once it is tasted, and enjoyed,
Nothing with which your Men are sooner cloyed.
Your Marriage then is such a Tepid thing,
And's flames become so dull and languishing,
As losing all their force in the Marriage-Breast,
It Is Ice to them, that is Fire to all the rest.
Go Caelia then, and Marry if you will;
If not, be wise, and live a Virgin still.
TO SIR K. D.
WHilst with thy mighty Wit I but compare
Our Petty ones, methinks they Pigmies are,
And thine the Giant, with whose vast discourse
Whilst we'd be meddling fain, but want the force,
Thy Wit comes to it, and takes it up with ease,
And turns and winds which way so'er thou please.
Whence we perceive it is not for every one
To manage Hercules Club but him alone.
Mean time, how I have longed when I have been
Where I some insolent talking Sir have seen
Usurping all discourse of the company,
Whilst none must speak, none must be heard but he,
T'ave some such Tyrant-Conquerour as thou
To undertake him, only to see how
My talking Sir would presently be hushed,
And all is swollen pride just like a Bladder crushed.
So have I seen some Chattering Pie or Iay
Fright with their noise the lesser Fowl away,
Until some mighty Eagle comes in sight,
When straight themselves are hushed and put to flight.
To Mr. Ed: Waller, ON His Excellent POEMS. Poco e bono.
It Is not in Wits, as it is in horses found,
Where those who run the fastest get most ground.
Nor does't with Books, as't does with Cattle fare,
Where those are counted best that greatest are.
Yet such voluminous Authors think it brave,
When they, like those of the Alps, their swelling have;
Which other men more learned and more wise,
Do look upon but as deformities.
If Writing much did make a learned man.
Scriveners write more than Learned Authors can;
Or the Employing much Paper were the way,
A hundred Tradesmen Employ more than they.
The Italian wisely says, A little and good;
By which best way of writing's understood.
And never any Author more then you,
Did in their writings make that saying true.
On a most fair Beautiful Youth.
WHat more than fair and Beauteous Youth is this,
Seems Nature's chiefest Pride and Masterpiece?
When doubtful whether sex to make, she made
One, who of either all perfection had.
You Would think him young Apollo, or the Sun,
But that his face has two, Phoebus but one;
Or else that Cupid God of Love he were,
Did he like him, but Bow and Quiver bear.
Who e're he be, you by his Eyes and Face,
May see he is born of more-than-mortal Race,
And that there is somewhat in's Nativitie
Approaches nigh to a Divinity.
Live then, Fair Youth, and may the Fates still twine
New Treads of life, and add them unto thine,
Till thou at last Immortal may become,
As bright Latona's or fair Venus Son.
Which if the Fates and destines deny,
Thine own Immortal fame may well supply.
Of Miss's and Mistresses.
TO know the derivation of a Miss,
She the diminutive of a Mistress is,
Or little Mistress, who as yet's not come
Unto the honor of a greater one.
But you may call her by her Christen name,
Whilst to other must at least be called Ma-dame.
And she most commonly unmarried is,
Whilst Married wives commonly are Mistresses.
For the rest, 'bating but difference of the name,
To all intents and purposes they are the same;
Living the merriest and the pleasant'st lives,
With all the privileges of Married wives;
And are to their Gallants more costly far
Than Married wives unto their Husbands ar;
They giving more, how e're the Devil it comes,
For lawless pleasures, then for lawful ones.
Whence now Son of a Whore's a name more common,
Then ever was Son of an honest Woman.
Of one Sweating IN CORNELIVS's TVB.
Who Is this? that lives so like Diogenes:
For he lived in a Tub, and so does this.
Some holy Anchorite perhaps does dwell
In Tub instead of Solitary cell;
Or some Tub-preacher, who does take such pain
To Preach against Babel, as he sweats again.
Pox! now I know he is one, in the case he is in,
Who Sweats far more for's own than Adam's sin;
And's in so sweet a pickle, I suppose,
He Is glad himself that he has never a Nose.
Yet he is so far from railing against Women,
Or sorrow and repentance for his sinning,
He call's it still the sweet sin of the flesh,
Though it be rather powdered now then fresh:
And as for Women, says, however they have served him,
A Woman made him, and a Woman marred him.
To a LADY Too confident of her Innocence.
MAdam, That you are Innocent I know,
But the world wants Innocence to think you so;
And you must seek, now, slander to prevent,
As well as to be Chaste and Innocent:
When men are so unjust, they will scarce allow
That any can be fair and virtuous now.
In Saturn's days, perhaps, it might suffice,
When to be Innocent, was to be wise:
But now, without the Serpents wisdom too,
The Innocence of the Dove will hardly do.
You must provide, then, some more sure defense
Against slanderous Tongues, besides your Innocence.
For Innocence is Virtue but unarmed;
The more you trust unto't, the more you are harmed.
The Ladies name in Aenigma.
HEr first name somewhat of Elysium has;
And second is in a more mystic phrase,
That color which shows venerable age,
And does in the morning a fair day presage.
Unriddle now, and tell whose name this is,
Or forfeit a discretion if you miss.
To Mr. JOHN DRYDEN.
DRyden the Muses darling and delight,
Than whom none ever flew a Braver flight,
Nor ever any's Muse so high did soar
Above the Poets Empyreum before.
Some are so low and creeping, they appear
But as the reptils of Parnassus were;
Others but water-Poets, who have gone
No farther then to'th' Fount of Helicon:
And they but Airy ones, whose Muse soars up
No higher than to mount Parnassus top.
Whilst thou with thine does seem to have mounted higher
Than him who fetched from Heaven Celestial fire,
And do as far surpass all others, as
The fire all other Elements does surpass.
Of an Excellent Actor: OR, The praises of Richard Burbadge. To Charles Heart.
WHo did appear so gracefully of the Stage,
He was the Admired example of the Age;
And so observed all your Drammatique Laws,
He n'ere went off the Stage but with applause:
Who his Spectatours and his Auditors
Led in such silent Chains of the Eyes and Ears,
As none whilst he of the Stage his part did play,
Had power to speak or look another way:
Who a delightful Protaeus was, and could
Transform himself into what shape he would;
And of an excellent Orator had all
In voice and gesture we delightful call:
Who was the Soul of the Stage, and we may say,
'Twas only he gave Life unto a Play,
Which was but dead as 'twas by the Author writ,
Till he by's Action animated it.
And finally, he did of the Stage appear
Beauty to the Eye, and Music to the Ear.
Such even the nicest Critics must allow
Burbadge was once, And such Charles Heart is now.
In one who Slandered A Fair LADY.
THou enemy of all that is bright and Fair,
As of the light your Fowls of darkness are:
Monster of Monsters, Basilisk of spite,
That kills with Tongue, as the other does with sight.
Who takes our Purse, does but as Robbers do;
Who takes our Fames, Robs us and kills us too;
And with their venomous tongues, and poisonous breath,
Would, if they could, even kill us after death.
Beautie's a thing Divine, and he who would
Wrong that, would wrong Divinity if he could.
But I mistake; it is no infamy
To be calumniated by such as thee:
Thou rather praisest them against thy will,
Like him who our'd by chance whom he would kill.
For it is the same thing, tightly understood
To be disprais'd by'th' bad, as praised by'th' good.
A Ladies thoughts defended:
AS it is a Godlike disposition
To think, and speak the best of every one;
So it is a spirit Diabolical,
To think the worst, and to speak ill of all.
And what fau't is it others can find with you,
Of which themselves are not as guilty too?
'Less Beauty be a fault, and then who would
Not gladly be as guilty, if they could?
All have their faults, and those who have the least,
We should account the happiest and the best.
It Is the condition of humanity,
None in this world without some faults can be:
And who'd have those with none at all, must go
To the world above, there is none in this below.
This world's a Race, where some do nothing else
But find fault wi'ye, and never run themselves.
But do you well, and then let them speak ill:
The more their shame, the more your honor still.
In Execration of the Small POX.
OF all Diseases of Pandora's Box,
Was none more foul nor ugly than the Pox.
Not that for honor sake the Great we call,
But that dishonorable one the Small;
The greatest enemy that Beauty has,
And very Goth and Vandal of a face,
On which it makes as bad or worser work
Than does it is Cousin Measels upon Pork:
One of those Devils which in former time
Cast out of man, went to the herd of Swine,
And giving them the Pox, is come again
To play the Devil as it did with men.
For that which is already, all curse-proof,
What Execration then can be enough?
For, bid a plague upon it, and that curse
'T anticipates already, for it is worse;
Or great Pox on it, we should curse but ill;
For it is more great, in being the small Pox still.
Since it is so bad, nothing can worser make it,
'Twere no harm then to bid the Devil take it.
In Small-Beer.
HOw cold am I with drinking of this small-Beer,
we may well the Devils Iulip call?
Distilled from Lembeck of some Lapland-Witch,
With North-winds Bellows blowing in her britch:
Or Stale of some old Hagg of the Marshes, who
Than water never better Liquor knew.
A poenitential Drink, for none, by right,
But those in the morning, who were drunk ore night.
Sure it was the poison, as we well may think,
They gave condemned Socrates to drink;
Or that the Macedonian drank, so cold,
As nothing but an Asses-boof would hold.
We are deceived, it was not Niobe's moan,
But drinking small-Beer, turned her into stone;
And's only that which ever since has made
Our Charity so cold, and the world so bad.
If then Divines would mend it, let them Preach
Against small-Beer only, and no Doctrine Teach
But drinking Wine, and then we soon should see
All in Religion easily would agree.
This were a Doctrine worthy of their heat,
And furious beating the Pulpit till they sweat,
And would do far more good in the Pulpit too,
Than all their endless Controversies do.
The PATRON's Lives. To the Lord M.
MY Noble Lord, if you would tell
How to live, and to live well,
Please you but attention give,
I Will tell you how the Patron's live.
First of all, they neither care
Nor for Clook nor Calendar:
Next, they never desire to know
How affairs of the world do go.
Above all, they never resort
To the busy Hall or Court,
Where poor men do nothing else
But trouble others and themselves.
All the business they look after,
Only is their sport and laughter,
With a Friend and cheerful cup
Merrily to Dine and Sup,
Hear good Music, see a Play:
Thus they pass the time away
With so great an Innocence,
And so free from all offense;
When they go to bed at night
Their sleeps are never molested by it.
If you like our living thus,
Come, my Lord, and live with us.
On a Hector beaten, etc.
STill to be dragged! Still to be beaten thus!
Hector, I fear thy name is Ominous,
And thou for fighting did but ill provide,
To take thy name thus, from the beaten side:
To have the Watch, like band of Myrmidons,
Beat thee with Halberts down, and break thy bones,
And every petty Constable thou meets,
Achilles-like, to dragg thee through the streets
Poor Hector! when thou art beaten blind and lame,
I hope thou wilt learn to take another name.
On a Famous Doctor,
WHo so Famous was of late,
He was with Finger pointed at.
What cannot learning do, and single State?
Being Married, he so Famous grew,
As he was pointed at with two.
What cannot learning and a wife now do?
Posthume EPIGRAMS.
In memory of CHARLES Lord Gerard of Bromley.
WHo alive so far had been,
He almost every Land had seen;
And almost every thing did know,
A man could in this world below.
At last his knowledge to improve,
Is gone unto the World above.
Where his knowledge is so much,
And his happiness is such;
'T would envy, and not sorrow seem
In those too much should grieve for him.
Of Col. William Evers, Slain in the Battle of Marston-moor.
EVen such a person, such a mind as thine,
Brave Evers, Emperors had in Ancient time,
When choosing men for Empire only fit,
The bravest mind and person carried it,
And thou well shewd'st it by thy dying so,
No Emperor ever could bravelyer dye than thou.
Of ANNE PACKINGTON, Lady AVDLEY.
STay Reader, and if ever thou will hear
A story worthy thy attentive Ear;
Know, here lies Buried in this Sepulcher
One who had all those excellent qualities,
A Mortal creature could Immortalize,
Of Virtuous, Noble, Beautiful, and Wise,
Who after all degrees sha'd past, of Wife,
Mother, and Maid, and left them all at strife
Which state she most had honored in her life,
At last, ( too worthy of this world below)
She dyed, and to a higher World did go,
To honor there the state of Angels too.
Of Henry Petre, Son to the Lord William Petre.
THough, noble Petre, thou long since did dye,
Thou still do live yet in my Memory;
To show the knot of friendship 'twixt us two
Was tied so fast, as death could never undo.
On the BARBADOS.
HOw rich Barbados is in other things,
We well may see by'th' wealthy trade it brings:
How rich it is in men, we well may see,
By bringing forth, brave Drax, such men as thee.
A question on a Ladies letting Blood.
Q. OF this just mixture and equality Of Water and Blood, what should the
reason be?

Resp. The Reason's clear; forced to part with her, Each drop of Blood for
grief did shed a Tear.

Of Neglects.
LEt it not trouble thee, if any would
Put a Neglect upon thee if they could.
But mind it not, and thy Neglect will be
More great of them, then their's can be of thee.
In Avaros.
WHo wholly spends his life in getting Wealth,
And to increase his store, consumes himself,
We well may to that foolish sot compare,
Who sold his Horse, to buy him provender.
The Anagram.
EVery one may see by this,
How worthy Laurel, Waller is,
When look but on his Anagram,
You find it in his very Name.
On Simple.
SImple made much ado, and much offense
He took, at saying he scarce had common sense;
Till saying he had, and very common too,
Simple was plea'd, and made no more ado.
On Madam Virago.
OF Madam it may well be sed
That Madam's head has little Wit,
Since Madam's Husband is her head,
And Madam makes a fool of it.
On his praising of Many.
I Many praise; and what they are praised for
I Am sure is true: I Will answer for no more.
On Friends and Foes.
TWo Painters, Friend and Foe, once went about
To Paint Antigones, whose one Eye was out:
TO one at half-face, his Friend's defect to hide,
Set only forth to sight his better side*
TO other of the contrary, did paint him so,
He only set his blind side out to show.
So between Friends and Foes men are expressed
By halfs set forth whilst they conceal the rest.
None as their Friends and Foes depaint them would,
Being ever half so bad, or half so good.
To a Friend; Recommending a Memorial to him, Anno 52.
I Must beg of you Sir, nay! what is more,
It Is a disease so Infectious to be poor,
Must beg you would beg for me, which whilst I do,
What is it, but even to make you beggar too?
But poverty being as honorable now
As 'twas when Cincinnatus held the Plow,
Senators Sowed, and Reap't; and who had bin
In Car of Triumph, fetched the Harvest in.
Whilst mighty Peers do want, nay! what is worse,
Even greatest Princes live on others Purse;
And very Kings themselves are beggars made,
No shame for any, Sir, to be of the Trade.
To an Enemy.
WHen ere thou see me take delight
In any thing, thou bursts with spite;
And so thou do at every thing
That does me good and profit bring.
Thou bursts with spite, to see that I
Am still in noble Company;
And honor I receive from them,
Make thee to burst with spite again.
If then my honor, my delight
And profit makes thee burst with spite,
And all my good does prove thy ill,
I pray thee burst with spite of 't still.
In Pravos Aulicos.
IF, as they say, Courts are like Heaven, and Kings
Like Gods, sure Courtiers should be holy things
Like Angels: from which state when once they fall,
As Devils did, the Devil take them all.
On an Epicure.
AN Epicure is one of those
No God besides his Belly knows;
And who besides his Bill of Fare,
Does for no other Scripture care:
Who for his Palate and his Gust
Has quite forgot all other Lust;
And hugs a Bottle as he would
A Mistress, when the Wine is good:
Who lays about him like a Giant,
When a meets a morsel Fryant;
And so long has crammed his Gut,
He Is nothing else from Head to Foot.
When you such a one do meet
Or in Tavern, or in Street;
By his Bulk you may be sure
Such a one's an Epicure.
On Dame Tannakin, in Burlesque verse.
TO tell you what Dame Tannakin was
For Beauty both of person and face;
Her face was good, if with faces at least
It goes as with Bucklers, the broadest the best;
And person fair, if with fairness it goes
In Women but as in Cattle it does.
In plainer Terms, without mincing the matter,
She had a face as broad as a Platter,
And person such, to see it you would fancy
'T were some Dutch Iugg come from beyond Sea,
Which made her look like a Bawd or a Midwife,
And as unweildy as Vrsula the Pigwife.
As for the qualities of her Interior,
Which to the rest were nothing Inferior,
She cared for none, and 'twas less to be piti'd,
Since none cared for her, and so they were fitted:
And was such a Scrat at making a Bargain,
As she would wrangle and scold for a Farthing.
In fine, she was so very a Devil,
As all her delight was in doing of Evil.
From whom Good Heaven deliver Great Britany,
And so I make an end of my Lytany.
To a Lady newly Married.
YOu having wholly changed your State of life
From that of Virgin, unto that of Wife,
And, what is yet more uncouth, even your name
And family being changed with the same:
No wonder, Madam, at so great a change,
That all should seem unto you new and strange;
And even you your self do hardly know
Whether as yet you be your self or no.
So those who to the Elyzian shades do come,
At first are lost in Admiration,
Till growing more familiar by degrees,
At last they all their Admiration leese.
And Marriage is that blessed Elyzian shade,
Where those who truly love, are happy made,
As you will experience now you are thither come,
And so you are welcome to Elyzium.
To his Horse at grass in C. Park.
AFter my hearty Commendations,
Hoping thou have nor Botts nor Fassions,
But art in good health, and as pleasant
As I Am at writing of this present;
I having like a careful Master
Left thee in the Country there at Pasture,
And well considering the danger
Of one like thee who is but a stranger,
Send thee these few Instructions down
How thou art to live whilst I Am in Town,
First then, if Serving-man or Groom
To take thee up, does flattering come,
With Bridle in hand and Oats in Sieve,
Run from 'm fast as thou can drive.
For if they once but get that haunt,
Employment thou shall never want:
Gray Flecknoe here, Gray Flecknoe there,
Gray Flecknoe must go every where,
Till thou of every one does back thee
Become at last the Common Hackney.
Next, I need not bid thee fly
All such wild Rambling company
May lead thee over Hedge and Ditches,
As if they would Briars in their Britches,
Till for their Penance they be found
Half starved at last in Country-Pound.
Nor need I bid thee to be beware
Of playing Horse-tricks there with Mare,
Since being Marred by Squire Sow-guelder
For ever getting Hans in Kelder,
I imagine there is no great danger
Thou should or Stallion prove or Ranger.
As for the rest, I know my Lady
Will take all care of thee as may be,
And thou perchance at last be made
A Horse of quality and parade.
And so I leave thee to thy Pasture,
And remain
Thy Loving Master, R. F.

POSTSCRIPT. To the Lady of the place.
NOw Madam, since my Horse cannot read,
Be pleased to do it in his stead;
And so Interpret this my Letter,
As he may understand it better.
Of your Fanatics or Cross-haters.
WHo will not be Baptized, only because
In Baptism they make the sign of the Cross*
And hates all Christendom in such a manner,
Only because they bear that sign for Banner.
Who with the Cross makes as unchristian work
Where ere he comes, as Pagan, Jew, or Turk:
And on his way, does fly a Cross-stile so,
He Will rather choose a Mile about to go:
Who seeing how every one in Swimming does
Stretch forth their limbs and make the sign of the Cross
Were he to Swim, rather than make (I think)
The sign of the Cross, he would sooner choose to sink:
To show, in fine, how well the Devil and he
In hating of the sign of the Cross agree.
Of their burning the POPE.
WHat rumour's this of the burning of the Pope?
They do not take this wisp for him, I hope;
Or man of straw whom they have thus dress't up
With Triple Crown, as if he were the Pope?
He sits at Rome, and cares not what they do,
Though they should burn all the signs of the Popes head too.
Though other Princes wonder they should dare
Do this to those who Sovereign Princes are!
For shame then cease your mad Phanatick sport,
By which your selves, and not the Pope you hurt;
And do not make your selves and Nation thus
To him and all the world ridiculous:
As I have seen some mad Dog bite a stone,
To be revenged on him by whom 'twas thrown;
Whilst unconcerned, he smiling stands, and sees
How they in vain do spoil and break their teeth.
If It be to make the Papists odious by it,
That all your Squibs and Bonefires are to night,
There Is none but knows they might as well remember
Your January, as you do their November.
Of Modern EPIGRAMS.
HOw stramgely Wit's refined from what it was
When empty words for Epigrams might pass!
But now they must have substance in 'em too,
Or else the Tinckling sound will hardly do.
Then when they heard a Clench or Quible spoke,
They Would claw you for it, as if some Jest were broke.
Now when they hear but any such Toys sed,
The Wits are ready strait to break your head;
Who just as Chemists when they Spirits make
Of matter which they from gross Bodies take.
So never leave a Lembecking of Wit,
Till they extract the Elixar out of it:
So goes the world; nor must we think it strange,
The fashion of our Wits with time should change.
It Is so we see with fashion of our Clothes,
And why not of our Wits as well as those?
Of WITS.
WIts like Hawks are for their sport;
Some are long winged, some are short:
The first do fly so high a flight,
They often sour quite out of sight;
The second, far the fitter for ye,
Keep 'um close unto the Quarry
Nor too low, nor yet too high:
Of this latter sort am I.
(...) Book.
L'ENVOYE.
I Should never make an end of these Epigrams, which like a flowing River by
the continual accession of new parts, and revolution of the old, you may go
twice in two, and not twice into the same again, had I not considered that I am
now arrived to such an Age, when it Imports more to seek to make a good end of
my Life, than of my Book: Wherefore I give it over, with this Resolution, to
retire, for greater quietness, into some Solitude, where when I dye, I desire
to be only remembered by this Epitaph.

^ A vita fide vixit and mortuus est.


FINIS.

