A TREATISE OF THE SPORTS OF WIT.

Omne tulit punctam quae miscuit utile dulci. Hor. Printed for the Author, 1675.

Inquire for them at Simon Neals, at the Three Pigeons in Bedfordstreet in
Covent Garden.

The Epistle Dedicatory.
To all our Fair and Virtuous Ladies.
Ladies,
I Present you here (as most resembling them) the Sports and Recreations of
these great Ladies, who have so sublimed them by a Divine quality they have to
convert all into Virtue, as Midas did all he touched to Gold; whence their very
Sports are as virtuous as others devotions: Those melancholy Spirits then
enemies of all cheerfulness, who call such Sports as these, but idle things,
seem wholly ignorant of their first institution, and very signification of
their names. For wherefore were they called Relaxations, Divertisements, and
Recreations, but for relaxing our over bended thoughts, diverting our minds
from cares and troubles of this life, and recreating our Spirits when tired and
spent with Worldly businesses. Whence to conclude, whoever in this mortal life
can live without them, must either be a God, or else a Beast, above, or else
below Humanity.

And so much for their Sports; as for the Ladies themselves, I suppose they are
so well known to all, as I need, in this Epistle, to say no more of them; but
that they had always a high esteem for our English Ladies; and therefore, I
doubt not, but you will have the like of them. Be pleased then Ladies, for
their sakes, to accept a Dedication of this short Treatise, from him who is
naturally an enemy of all that is long and tedious, a friend to these Sports
and Recreations, an honorer and admirer of all your Nobler Sex, especially of
all Fair and Virtuous Ladies like your selves.

R. Flecknoe.

The Preface to the Reader:
Of Wit, in order to these Sports.
IT is as hard to describe Wit in particular, as it is our Taste, they so vary
with Time and Custom; the wit of our Ancestors being grosser then that we have
now: And as the Age refines, so do the Wits of Men. However, this we will say
of it in general, Wit to the subject it treats of, is, as the Soul to the Body,
animating it with Life and Spirit, which else were but dead and dull; it is the
quintescence of Conceit, extracted out of Words and Matter, as the Be extracts
Honey out of Flowers; and as out of dull Flint we strike sparks of Fire, so out
of dull Matter we strike sparks of Wit. It is not so solid as Wisdom, but the
less solid, the more Spiritual; and is so volatile, as it easily evaporates;
but fixed by Judgment, and with a lay of Discretion, it surpasses bare Wisdom,
as far as that does Folly; and is in the Brain as Nobility is in the Blood;
only one fault it has, it is more pleasant to others, then profitable to its
self; wherein it differs from Worldly Wisdom; but that wherein it differs from
Divine, is its greatest Fault; Wit now being but a new name for an Atheist and
Debauchee; but that is the fault of the Persons not of* Wit; for Wit is no ways
scurrilous and profane. But finally, we may say of it, as the corruption of the
best is the worst; so when good, nothing better; when bad, nothing worse. And
so much for Wit, as it differences these Sports, from the old homely ones of
Substantives and Adjectives, Questions and Commands, Cross Purposes, and the
like; as much out of date, as the last years Almanacks, and scarcely deserving
so much as the name of Wit.

The Occasion of Writing this TREATISE.
THe Duchess of Lorrain, with the Princess and Madamoseille De Beauvois, her
Highness Sister (now Princess of Ar^mberg) retiring themselves to B^rs^ll, near
Brussels, in the Spring time of the year fifty; where they passed their time in
all sorts of innocent and delightful Divertisements, and amongst the rest, that
of the Sports of Wit, being after Supper their ordinary entertainment: At
which, both they and the Ladies of her Highness Court, were so excellent, as it
was impossible to imagine a more Spiritual Assembly, I having the honor to be
there amongst the rest (which I shall always account, not only the most
honorable, but the most delightful moment of my life;) it pleased her Highness
to command me to write this Treatise of the Sports of Wit, which now I publish
at the desire of some Ladies, whose least desire has the force of a command.

Of the Original Of these Sports of Wit.
WE read in Boccas, and other Italian Authors (to say nothing of the more
Ancient) that these Sports began in Italy about the beginning of the Last
Century, both at Florence, Sienna, and other places, especially at Ferrara,
when those of the most Illustrious Family of d'Este, were Dukes thereof. From
Italy Queen Catherine de Medicis carried them along with her into France, a
Fertile Country; where all that is rare in Italy, transplanted, grows better
and more flourishing then in its Native Soil. From thence about the beginning
of their Civil Wars, they were transplanted into England, where, by the culture
of Sir Philip Sidney, Sir Foulk Grevill, and other the prime Wits and Gallants
of the times, and Ladies no less inclined to Gallantry, they flourished as much
as in Italy and France, not only all the time of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, but
that of following Kings, till our Civil Wars likewise beginning here, they were
not only neglected, but wholly irradicated by the Fanatic Rebels, Enemies of
all Mirth and Recreation; till they begin to be Replanted, and take Root again
under the happy Reign of His present Majesty.

Of their ordering their Sports, and how they past their time.
FOr preparation to them some one, by lot, or otherwise, was chosen, for
president, whose Office was to give out the Subject or Argument of the
following Sport, and to distribute the parts for the next Assembly; that so
betwixt premeditated and ex tempore, they might not come unto them wholly
unprepared, but have the following night, and part of the following day, for
their preparation. For the rest of the day, the time was thus distributed.

Having finished their Morning Devotions, they went to dinner, and, having
dined, each one retired to their several Cabinets, till toward Evening, when
either they rode abroad in their Coaches, to take the Air (which Promenade
never ended without some Banquet or Collation) or walked out into the Garden,
or adjoining Woo^, which seemed an Academy of Nightingales, is the Garden a
Treasury of all Flora's choicest and rarest Flowers; when gather but one, and
seven more sprang up in its place; whether it were the Nature of the Soil, or
Virtue of the Hand wh^^^ gathered it, Heaven having so disposed this pl^^sant
and delightful place, should never fall but into the fairest and vertuousest
hands of the Universe, (it being a part of the Apinage or Inheritance of
Mademoiselle de Beauvais.) From thence they went to Supper, and having supped,
retired into a large Appartement, illuminated by six fair Crystal Branches,
and bordered about with Silver Sconzaes, in which were inchac'd Concave Mirrors
of Oval Form for better reflection of the Light. When the Duchess, seated in
her Fautvil, under a Canopy, upon an half pace higher than the rest, with the
Princesses, Her Daughter and Sister, under Taborets, on either side of Her; the
sports began as follows:

The First Nights Sport
Of ORACLES.
THis sport (...), when one amongst the rest stands for Oracle, and others in
order ask Questions of it (the Duchess first, and the rest following) which
the Oracle answers briefly in the Laconick style: As for example.

Quest. How should one do to be beloved?

Answ. Love.

Quest. Who is the fairest Lady?

Answ. Every one's Mistress.

And these Questions are easily answered, but the Oracle sometimes is hard put
to it, when they ask it any captious and insiduous ones, as was his, who asked
the Oracle, whither what he had in his hand were alive, or no; to which it
answered, As you please, he grasping a little Sparrow in his hand, meaning if
the Oracle said it was dead, to produce it alive, if alive, to crush it, and
produce it dead: Which ambiguous answers and words of double sense, in such
expedience, required great wit and dexterity in the Oracle; and at this our
Oracle (Madamoiseille de Beauvais) was excellent.

The Second Nights Sport
Of DREAMS.
THe sport of this is, when every one tells their Dreams, and some one
Interprets them, who is not only to know the General Notions, (as how to dream
of Pearl, signifies Tears, and Gold, Ill luck, etc.) But perfectly to
understand the Art of Divination, and to have well read Artemedorus and
Apamasar. Such as he, to whom a Lady coming once in great anxiety for her Lord,
who was then actually in the Wars, saying, She dreamed the General was wounded
in his right hand; he answered, The ill presage of that dream nothing concerned
her Lord, who had a command of Horse; for the right hand of a General was his
Foot, and the left his Horse, and the event proved this prediction true; for
shortly after the news was brought (against the expectation of all) that Don
Francisco de Melo had lost the Battle of Rocroy, most of his Infantry
remaining, either slain or taken prisoners, whilst all the Cavalry escaped by
flight. This made the Duchess think him fittest to be president of that nights
sport, which (though far more difficult then that of the Oracle) he performed
to the general satisfaction of all; where note, they may show as much wit, who
ingenuously feign a Dream, as he who interprets it.

The third Nights Sport
Of LOTTERIES.
ALL the Wit and Art of this Sport, is so to contrive the Lots in the Urn, as
best may fit the qualities of every one. As to the Duchess all Happiness and
Felicity; to the Princess, nothing but Crowns and Scepters (then proposed as a
match for Crownedheads) and to Madamoseille De Beauvais, her choice of
Princely-Husbands, married not long after to the Marquess of Varanbon; who
dying without Heirs, left Her Inheritrix of his Marquisate, and since married
to the Noble Prince of Aremberge: Nor were the rest of the Ladies less fitted
with their Lots, the Contriver of the Lottery to please them, hazarding the
reputation of a Liar twenty times, for that of a Prophet once: But all the
Sport was to hear the inferior servants handsomely rallied for pastime of the
Ladies. For example, Two waiting Women. (amongst the rest one who would needs
lead Apes to Hell, and another, who would not go to Heaven without a Husband.)
The Duchess prohibiting all picquant Rallery, which, if any offered, she
declared a dislike of it in a blush, a greater reprehension, then could be
expressed by words, to those who understand the Language of the Face.

The Fourth Nights Sport
Of WONDERS.
THe Sport of this is, when every one tells what they most wonder at, or the
greatest wonder they have seen; not such as Lying Travelers report, or such as
they father upon our Countryman Sir John Mandevile; muchless such
foul-mouthed, slanderous ones, as his, who said, The greatest wonder he had
seen, was, a Woman honest when she was young, and handsome when she was old;
but such witty ingenuous ones, as that Ladies and Cavaliers, who saying, The
greatest wonder he had seen, was a constant Lady; she answered again, That the
greatest she had seen was a discreet Cavalier. All in the way of Gentile
Rallery without stumbling or falling foul on the Picquant, and at that Gentile
Rallery these Ladies were excellent, who went on inoffensively, without ever
making a false pace on their way; nay, they went farther yet, and converting
their Sports and Pastimes into Devotion, one said what she most wondered at,
was, That any Noble Woman could be otherways then virtuous, when Virtue was
only true Nobility; another, That she wondered their could be any Atheists in
the World, when every thing put them in mind of a Divinity; and a third more
divinely yet, That she wondered how any one could breathe or stir a foot,
without thinking on him, in whom we live, move, and have our being.

The Fifth Nights Sport of WISHES.
THis amongst Gallants is one of their chiefest Sports; when striving who
should wish somewhat most pleasing to their Mistress. One wishes himself
Somnus, or the God of Sleep, to charm her senses into a sweet repose; another
Morpheus, or the God of Dreams, to enter into her mind; and with some
delightful dream insinuate the thought of himself amongst the rest: And a third
wishing his Breast wholly transparent, that she might see through it, the
pureness of his affection; with many such like Gallantries, but all in vain:
For just as Water can be derived no higher then its Fountain head, so Earthly
minds can think of nothing, but Earthly things, whilst these Ladies were so
heavenly minded, as one wished her self a Bird of Paradise, to have no more
communication with Earth; another soared higher yet, Wishing her self in
Heaven; and the third, Wished her self an Angel there; and she only wanted
Wings, having in an Angelical Body an Angelical Spirit too. And this, with more
delight and cheerfulness then others wished for all the Treasures in the World,
well knowing this World, in comparison with the other, was less then a drop of
Water compared to the Ocean, or Grain of Dust, to the whole Globe of the Earth;
but not to be thought to undervalue this World too much, by those who have but
too magnificent a conceit of it. We will say no more, but past to the next
Nights Sport.

The Sixth Nights Sport
Of GYPSIES.
THe Sport of Gypsies was excellent well represented by Her Highness servants,
all properly habited with their Faces umbered over, supposed so many Doxies
with their Solomon, who making their Entry in a Dance, fell to telling
Fortunes, by Inspection of the Hand or Art of Chyromancy, as they pretended,
though all their Art was to give such Fortunes as they imagined best pleasing
to every one (like that Painter, when he could not make his Pictures like, made
them Fair at least.) Giving young Maids good Husbands, Batchellors, rich Wives;
and to every one long lives, and all prosperity; which the simple believed as
Gospel, although as false as the Talmud or Alchoran. But this Sport differing
only from that of Lotteries, in that, one is a dumb Fortune Tellers, and the
other speaking ones; we will say no more of it, but only as they made their
Entry, so they made their Exit in a Dance; after which, the rest made theirs
too, and every one retired to their repose; and so they concluded the sixth
Nights Sport, reserving the seventh day for their Devotions, if any thing could
be added to the Devotions of the other days.

The end of this Weeks Sports and Divertisements.
Of the Mountebank and his Farce.
WHilst they prepared for other Divertisements, that of the Mountebank and his
Farce, was this Nights sport, performed by Her Highness servants, as follows.

The Mountebank, with all formal gravity, mounting the Scaffold, made a long
Oration of the mavelous Cures he had done, and of the rare and admirable
Receipts he had; as if AEsculapius were but a Zany to him, whilst his Zany
indeed, for greater sport, turned all to ridiculous that he said: As when he
said, He had a Receipt to make them see as well by night as by day; the Zany
answered, It was but putting out their eyes. And when he said he had another,
That they should never die of old age; he answered again, It was but hanging
them while they were young; with such like vulgar Buffoonry to make the
Audience laugh. All whichended in one of the best of Scarramuchio's, and
Harlequin's acted by the Doctor and his Wife, the Zany with all his antic
tricks, and others of his followers who truckled under them.

The Eclogue or Acting of Questions.
NOthing more declares a penetrating wit, which the French call Le point de
l'esprit, then to enter into the depth of these Questions, nor a more
perspicuous Judgment, then to discern the nice and subtle Weights and Scales,
required for determinating and deciding them; of which, I will only give you an
example or two, and leave to others to furnish you with more.

Q. 1. Which of these two Lovers best deserve the Nymph, he who often obliged
her, and disobliged her as often; or, he who had done neither, but only loved
her? When after many Arguments on either side, it was finally concluded for the
first against the second, because he had done somewhat, at least, to declare
his love, but the other nothing; and love is best declared by Deeds they say,
for Probatio amoris exibitio est operis.

Q. 2. Which of those two Damsels lives the Knight should soonest save, (in
eminent danger of death) hers whom he loved, and she not him; or hers who loved
him, and he not her? And it was determined for the second against the first;
for she loved him, at least, but the other not: And for his love to the other,
that no ways went on the account of of her desert.

And now the Actors growing more numerous, a more particular Stage was
requisite, which by the Painters and Carpenters skill was easily made

The Pastoral of Love in his Infancy.
THe Birthday of the Prince of Vaudemont, celebrated at Berseel, where he was
born the year before, gave overture to the Theater, and subject to this
Pastoral, where he was introduced in his Cradle like a young Cupid, the Graces
nursing him; the Sports playing about him, and Nymphs rejoicing to have a Cupid
now, as well as Venus Urania, promising to themselves all pleasure in a love so
harmless and innocent, never imagining what pain he would cost them, when he
came to riper years: But that which most added to the solemnity of the day, was
our triumvirate of Ladies personating the three Goddesses, Venus, Juno, and
Pallas, in a solemn entry of Ballet, Dancing, and Singing about the Cradle: In
which qualities they were all so excellent, as for Dancing, the Music of the
Feet, and Singing, the Dancing of the Voice, they had few who equalled them,
none who exceeded them. And for conclusion, by bearing the Cradle in triumph
away, they gave end to the Nights Revels, and Days Solemnity.

The Play of Loves Kingdom.
IN imitation of this Pastoral, made after the same Model, and cast in the same
Mold, the Play of Loves Kingdom was made, with design to render Love so
virtuous, and Virtue so lovely, as all should be enamored of it; which with
much alteration, was after acted on the English Stage: But soon they found they
took their measures wrong, for the Times were too vicious, and it too virtuous
for them who looked on Virtue as a Reprehension, and not a Divertisement; and
Love without Lust, was like Meat without Sauce to them whose Appetites were
depraved with more vicious Food. So leaving the English Stage, it returned to
Berseel again, where Virtue was always welcome; but for love one should as soon
be drunk in a Crystal Fountain, as have the least vicious thought in so
virtuous company.

The Mask, or Opera in Music.
THis Mask or Opera in Music, represented Latona with her two Children, Apollo
and Diana, in the Floating Isle of Delos, incessantly tossed up and down, and
exposed to all the storms of Fortune, with this Motto, Diu fluctibus agitata.

The Hyades or Sea-Nymphs bewailing her sad condition; till the Scene changing,
represented the Island fixed, and her with her Children in all tranquillity,
the Word or Motto, Tandem Requiescit.

The Dryades or Land-Nymphs rejoicing at her happy condition: The first
alluding to her former state, without any certain habitation; the second by way
of Prophecy, promising their restoration to their Country again; which,
though Poets are said to be Poets and Prophets too, wants yet its wished
success, Fortune still continuing to persecute her, and the Dukes unfortunate
genius predominant still over her more fortunate one.

The Play of Laura Persecutee.
IN regard of which, Her Highness chose to act that excellent Tragy-Comedy of
Laura Persecutee which She did so naturally, and to the life, as you might well
perceive She acted Her own fortune under another name; like that excellent
Actor, who being to weep over the Urn of I know not whom, to do it the better,
brought forth with him on the Stage, the Urn of his own dearly beloved Child,
celebrating a feigned Funeral with Real Tears.

Mean time, as nothing was wanting to the excellency of the Acting, so nothing
was wanting to the completing the Theater, but only a greater Audience, for a
nobler it could not have; the Actors for the most part being Auditors and
Spectators too; though sometimes the great Ladies, and chief Nobility, would
come over from Brussels, to behold their sports, and went away unwillingly
again, envying their happiness who still remained there.

And now having mentioned the Duchess misfortune and persecution, I shall
briefly declare the beginning, progress, and would I could the end of them.

Of the Dutchesses Marriage with the Duke of Lorrain.
HEnry, Duke of Lorrain, dying without Issuemale, leaving only two Daughters,
the Princess Nichole, and Princess Claude; the Father of Charles, now Duke,
chief of the House of Vaudemont, by virtue of the Salick Law, succeeded him;
who, better to confirm his Title, forced his Son, on pain of disinheriting, to
marry the Princess Nichole (as his Brother had the Princess Claude) which he
did at last with protestation of the force, and with all signs of aversion
lived with her till his Fathers death, when by mutual consent they parted; and
not long after, he publicly married Beatrix de Cusance, the young Widow of the
Prince of Cantecroix, a Lady of incomparable Beauty, and Birth, and Fortune,
answerable every way, by whom he had issue Anne, now Princess of Lorrain, whose
Legitimation none ever doubted of. In this Marriage they lived many years with
great tranquillity, till a Storm was raised against them by the Sea of Rome,
for Marrying without Dispensation, etc. by the suscitation of the Crown of
France, who had espoused the Interest of Princess Nichole, as the Emperor had
that of the Princess Claude. Which proceeded so far, as they were forced to
separate on pain of Excommunication, till the cause might be decided by the
Court of Rome, which the Nuntio, promised should be in a year, at least. This
time expired and nothing done, the Duke following Plinies Rule, Never in what
you resolve to do, to ask Counsel of those who may hinder the doing it, went
privately to the Duchess again, and begat the now Prince of Vaudemont; for
which (when known) he was easily absolved, and so had been of all the rest, had
he not neglected, for some Reasons of State, to sue out a Divorce from the
Princess Nichole, so long as she was in state of bearing Children, not to set
her at liberty to marry some Foreign Prince, whose Issue might dispute the
Dukedom with the House of Vaudemont (the Law Salick not being so clearly
received in Lorrain, as it was in France.) This then was our Duchess
misfortune, this her persecution, and this finally that Marriage which has
caused so great rumor in the World, by those who know not how Marriages made by
force, bind no longer then the force continues; whilst those made voluntarily,
bind till death, nor by any humane force can ever be dissolved again.

And now after this serious Digression, let us return to our Sports again.

Of the Acting of Proverbs.
THe next Nights sport, and that of many Nights after, was the Acting of
Proverbs, a sport of so great variety, as you might often repeat it, and never
twice the same again; where note, That as there are diverse sorts of other
sports, some which cause laughter without any Wit, others more studious then
delightful as Ridles, Rebus's, and Anagrams; or half witted Paradoxes, as, A
Chandler can least hide his own knavery, for all his works must come to light.
And, a Shoemaker would make the best Constable, for he can put any Man in the
Stocks, and take him out at last. So there are diverse sorts of this, some
acting Proverbs in Dancing; others in dumb show and mimick gesture, and the
like; which may be sports, but not sports of Wit, or but dumb wit at most;
whereas, that of these Ladies, added words unto action: Of which, we shall give
you an example or two, not doubting, but if the Ladies be delighted with it,
there are wits enough to furnish them with more.

PROVE. It is merry when Friends meet.
THe Scene was supposed an Inn where diverse Friends met, as by chance, and
recounted their several adventures on the way; some more dangerous, others more
pleasant; every one making a several Novella, and all together a delightful
Variety. Amongst the rest two persons arrived so disguised, that they seemed
strangers both to themselves and all the rest, who recounting their adventures,
were soon known to be a pair of Noble Lovers, who on the eve of their Nuptials,
were severally made Captives by strange adventures; and by as strange,
delivered from Captivity again, to their incredible joy, and little less of all
the Company, as they declared by their Congratulations, Embracements; and all
the signs of joy and gladness, which are usually shown on such occasions.

Another, but in a more Spiritual kind, is that which follows.

PROVE. No true Pleasure in this World.
TO confirm this, they took for Argument that Moral Fable, how Jupiter, in the
first Creation, sent Pleasure down from Heaven, for the consolation of poor
Mortals here on Earth; of whom, they soon became so great Idolaters, that they
offered more Sacrifice to it, then to all the Gods besides. At which, the Gods
offended, recalled Pleasure back to Heaven again, who ascending, threw off its
Earthly Garment; which Dolon or Deceit finding, put on, and ever since has
passed for it; Men foolishly adoring as much the shadow of Pleasure now, as
they did the substance of it before. When Jove, pitying they should be so
deceived, sent Mercury down to undeceive them, and discover the Imposture and
Deceit. But soon he found his Embassy was in vain, and that all his eloquence
was lost upon them, who would not believe, though a God did tell them so, That
there was any other Pleasure, but what they had. When Jove seeing he must
create the World and Men anew, to make them better and wiser, resolved for
their punishment, to leave them to the pleasure of Beasts, who would not have
that of Angels, though they might.

The Conclusion.
ANd now I cannot better conclude this Treatise, then by giving you a short
Character of the Ladies, chiefly mentioned in it; (and to say nothing of the
Princess, who was yet so young, as she only promised to be what her Mother was,
and no doubt, but in time, she will make good her promises.) The Duchess was
one of the greatest Beauties of the times, and her Sister no less; but in a
different kind, the one Fair, the other Brown; the one clear Sunshine, the
other a Delightful-shade; and as their Beauties, so their dispositions were
alike; the Duchess with all becoming freedom of one that was married, her
Sister not so free, as one not married yet. The first all gay and cheerful, the
second not so gay, but with a cheerfulness as far above light Mirth and
Laughter, as Elemental Fire above Squibs and Crackers: For the rest, they were
both so far from Pride, as nothing could be more humble, yet so majestical, as
they appeared the higher by their Humility; and were in all so equal, as
together, you knew not which to prefer; asunder, you always preferred the
present to the absent, till she returning, set the balance even again. In
fine, not to enter so far into their praises, as never to get out again; in
their presence, you were so ravished and transported, as you would as soon be
weary of Heaven, as of their Company; and it was a species of the Beatitude, of
the other Life, only to enjoy their conversation in this.

A List of some of their Proverbs.
PRoverbs must have the stamp of Custom, to make them current with the World;
but every one for their private use may coin what ones they please, as are
these following.

Who spends all his life in getting maintenance for it, is like him who sold
his horse to get him Provender. Death and Absence differ only in this, That
Absence is but a short Death; and Death a long Absence. Who gives soon,
redoubles the benefit; and he that is long a giving, diminishes it as much.
Vice and Vanity differ only in this, that Vice lays the Egg, and Vanity hatches
the Chicken. An uncertain Nature, is like a Sea with shifting Sands, where
thereis no Sailing without a Plummet in hand; or like a Weapon loose in the
Hilt, there is no using of it with any confidence. Distracted Prayers are like
Penelopes Web, always to begin anew, and never ended. Without a little dispute,
one can never enter into discourse; and with too much, one can never get out
again. * The Rule is never to pass the third Reply.
Who takes every acquaintance for a Friend, is like him who takes every Pebble
Stone for a Diamond. A Friend is a Cabinet-piece, to be sought all the World
over, whilst we find acquaintances* in every street. The greatest Wisdom, is to
know how much Thought* we are to give to every thing, Who cheaply sells
another Fame, makes but the Market to buy his own. Noble Women are like Sacred
Relics: Beheld with reverence, but let Men come
To touch them once, their reverence is gone.
Men were never more easily Cannonised then now; When he may be counted a
Saint, who is not altogether a sinner. Who thinks to help the truth with a lie,
is like him who helping his Master on Horsback, threw him quite over on the
other side. Innocence were an excellent Jewel, if it were not so easily
counterfeited, and so hard to know the true from the false. Every one flatters
Fortunate Princes, but only hope flatters the Unfortunate. The faults of
Princes, are like sore eyes, made worse with handling. Of all Devils, bless us
from those who play the Devil for Gods sake. God help you is only an alms for
those that sneeze. To injure one, and then ask him pardon, is a Bastonado with
a Courtesy. Many cry, A merry life, and a short; who, if they knew how short
it were, would not be so merry as they are. It is a good World for the Devil,
when every one speaks ill of one another, and no body speaks ill of him. Your
Conscience-mongers have a dangerous trade of it, who go so far to keep others
from falling into Hell, as they often fall into it themselves. A generous Nature
more esteems an ounce of Honor, then a pound of Profit. Fair looks often
deceive us; as Brass guilt, looks fairer then Gold it self. He who cut off all
who were too long for his Iron Bed, and rackt out all who were too short, was a
less Tyrant then they who would force every one to their opinions. Love without
Fear is childish, and Fear without Love is slavish; both together make the best
composition. Whilst sickness is but a dying life, or living death; none truly
live, but those who are in health. Men may force our actions, and aw our words;
but none can force, or aw our thoughts. A Complementer, or, as the French say,
An accomple menteur, is the Rack of conversation, that sets every ones Joints a
stretching where he comes. Truth goes the nighest way, whilst falsehood goes
always the furthest way about. The vulgar are Judges without judgment, and
Authors without authority. In Women the first thoughts are the best, but in Men
the second. Youth invents better, but Age perfects the Invention. Wit is ripe,
when grown to Wisdom, and Wisdom rotten, when grown to Craft. The Dignity of
Obedience is lost, when we dispute what is commanded. Every one is artificer of
their own Fortune, but Fortune like Mercury is not made of every Wood. The Wise
spare their words, the witty spends them; but the Fool casts them away. Who
wears French Clothes, without French behavior, look just like Dogs in Doublets.
Jealous States hold one another like Woolfs by the Ears, and only fear keep
them from hostility. Who foolishly imitates, is like that Ass; who cutting off
his Ears, to become more like a Horse; became neither good Horse, nor Ass
neither. Honesty has almost lost its English signification, and signifies, as
with the French, only Courtly behavior. The more Danger, the more Honor; but
the less Danger, the more Prudence. When Wise wonder at nothing, the Fool at
every thing. Who counts the World an Inn, and not their Home, make no great
difficulty of leaving it. Better Religion in the lump, then Wire drawn, as it
is, and in the whole piece, then minced into so many Sects. The manner of
giving more then the gift endears the benefit; and some oblige more in denying,
then others do in granting. We are all but sucking Children of this World, and
have need of Wormwood, to wean us from it. As North and South, which differ
only by an Individual Line, may be made the whole Heavens distant, by going to
the extremity of either Pole; so Modern Controvertists, etc. Who believe well,
and live ill, or live well, and believe ill, are culpable alike. Pleasure is as
it is fancied; and a Beggar takes as much in scratching, as greatest Princes in
what they fancy most. Education is double refined Nature, and the Soul of the
Soul, as the other is but the Soul of the Body. Spiritual and Corporal
Physicians, make their Medicaments too bitter, if they would sweeten them a
little, they would have far more Patients and Proselytes. There is as small
choice in -- as in rotten Apples; none better then the other, and you know not
which is the worst. Pleasure in Excess, is like a Boor when they are drilling
him: A question, whether the pleasure or pain be more. Who have deceived you,
bid them good morrow, and good d'en; but for the rest of the day have no more
to do with them. The way of doing things now is, first, I Will warrant you, and
then who would have thought it, Repents when it is too late. Promises without
Performance, give the lie unto themselves. A little Pride well becomes great
Ladies, and begets Reverence, but too much is only for petty Persons, and makes
them but less esteemed. Though the World be foul and dirty, yet they may walk
clean enough, who but carefully pick out their way; but who runmadly, dash,
dash, seem neither to care how they bespatter others, and defile themselves. It
is easy to throw ones self into a Precipice, but not easy to get out again.
Our Bodies being but the Chariot of our Souls, wherein we run the race of this
mortal life; serves but for little when the race is run, and we arrived to
immortality, but only as a Trophy of our Victory. Wit without Discretion to
manage it, is but a wild unruly Colt, that instead of carrying us a gentle
pace, often runs away, and breaks the Riders Neck. Who never consider the end for
which they were created, live not the lives of Rational Creatures; but rather
of Sensual Animals, who only eat and drink and sleep. We being to go to the
other World, when we have passed through this, How can we hope to find the way
thither, and to be welcome when we come; when we never inquire after it, nor
after those who are there? It is a happy misfortune to be driven by storm the
sooner to their Port. Sensual persons are as unfit to judge of Spiritual
things, as the Blind of colors, or the Deaf of sounds. Pleasures are like
poisonous Baits which catch Fish sooner; but render them nothing worth when
they are caught. It is to hedge in the Cuckoo, to seek to make a Maid honest
against her will. An indiscreet person gets more enemies by telling truth, then
others do by lying. Under Officers care for no body in Court, and out of Court,
no Body cares for them. Who knows what it is to marry, would be as long in
choosing a -- as Scogan was a Tree to be hanged on. Who seeks to be more feared
then loved, shall find themselves more hated, then feared at last. Who seeks
his own interest, and nothing else, is no more a part of the Universe, then a
loose Stone in the Wall, a part of the House or Building. Detractors and
Calumniators, as Clippers and False Coyners, are punishable alike. To honor any
Man for riches only, is to worship the Golden Calf. Money is like muck, which
spread abroad, does good; but hoarded and heaped up, is like a stinking
Dunghill. While every one wants something, he is happy that can live on little,
because he can never want much. Every one has somewhat of a Fool, and he is
wisest who has least. The Itch of Lascivious Love, being the Scab of Poetry; he
is the best Poet, who scratches it the least.
These, and many more, they had, as far from Vulgar Spirited, as were those who
invented, and those who acted them; nor was it fit, persons, of their
condition, should go to the frippery for old Proverbs, when they might have new
when ever they pleased.

The EPITAPH OF Beatrix, Duchess of Lorrain, who died, An. 1662.
SHe who alive, all Virtue and Beauty was,
The One in Her Breast, and the other in Her Face.
Now that She Is dead, just reason we have to fear,
All Virtue and Beauty too, are dead with Her.
FINIS.
ADDITIONAL EPIGRAMS of the Year 1674.
Of our English Gallants lives, or the French disease.
WOnder! our Gallants never consider how
They wast their lives, with living as they do,
While just like Tapers, they at both ends light,
'Twixt Wine and Women they are consumed quite.
Amongst the rest the French disease is that
Which most consumes their Persons and Estate.
From which there is scarcely any one that is free,
Who but pretends to modern gallantry.
Nor may we wonder it is so easily gotten,
When almost all their Wenches now are rotten.
By whatsoever Name or Title known,
From those wear Vizard-Masks, to those wear none.
Mean time I cannot but pity their condition,
Who stand in need of Surgeon or Physician.
Who with their Galen and Hippocrates
But make the Cure as bad as the disease.
And this is that (thanks to their Wenches for it)
Our Gallants call a merry life and short.
While they are not only infected with the Fashions,
But the diseases too of other Nations.
To a Lady who was offended with him for praising Visdamera.
I See you envy Visdamera's praise,
For excellent parts and qualities she has.
Whilst other parts and qualities you have none,
But bare and simple honesty alone.
That Is but a Cipher, Nothing, less ye add
Some Virtue to it, by which it is Somewhat made.
Or like a single Unite at the best,
That but foundation is of all the rest.
Mean time I cannot, but wonder how it came
To Honors title, and to Virtues name.
When Honor and Virtue in it, there is none
But only in Imagination.
Cease then in vain, your Honesty to boast,
That Is but a Negative Virtue at the most.
And like the Quakers Spirit seen by none,
But we must take your word for it alone.
And know, if it make you proud, it is better be
The Publican, than the proud Pharisee;
Who whilst they think they have privilege to condemn
And judge all others who are not like to them:
Like such as you, in fine, do nothing else
(Whilst they judge others) but condemn themselves.
Good wishes to a new married Pair.
IF joy does from enjoying take it is name,
And happiness be said to be the same;
How happy are this newly married Pair,
Who now arrived unto enjoyment are?
To whom whilst every friend some present brings,
Good wishes only are my offerings.
Which though they seem but offerings of the poor,
Angels from Heaven do often bring no more.
May he and she live long and happy then
Envy of Women she, and he of Men.
The pattern of all happy Husbands he,
And of all happy Wives, the mirror she.
Enjoying all the Blessings whilst they live,
That Fortune and Felicity can give;
And like Elias when they die, so blessed,
To be translated only unto rest.
This and all other happiness beside,
I wish the Noble Bridegroom, and the Bride,
To the Countess of Shrewsbury, a pious reflection on Gods goodness.
HOw good is God! whose love of us transcends
All that of Parents, or of dearest Friends;
Nor that of Spouse to Spouse could ere express
So great a love, so dear a tenderness.
He knows our weakness and infirmities,
And when we fall, helps us again to rise.
And when h'as lost us, seeks us all about;
Nor ever rests until he finds us out.
When he is so far from chiding us, he is more
Indulgent to us, than he was before:
So as without presumption we may boast,
We had been lost, unless we had been lost.
And all this Madam, you are experienced now,
In Gods dear love, and tender care of you.
Who'd then be so ungrateful to offend,
So dear a Spouse, a Parent, and a Friend?
Rather who'd not endeavor all they could
To please so great a Lord, so good a God?
Woolsey's complaint Paraphrased.
Banished, and so well known, where ere he went,
He scarce could find a place for banishment!
As on his way he sorrowfully past,
Coming to Leister Abbey at the last:
Oppressed with weight of grief, as well as years,
Woolsey to the Abbot said with many tears.
Behold, a poor old Man (Lord Abbot) I
Am hither come in Banishment to die.
Who this may truly say, That, had I been
As careful to serve God, as serve my King.
For all my care, and all my service past,
I Would never been thus rewarded at the last.
Let all ambitious Men learn then by this,
How to serve God, highest Ambition is.
And none in serving Kings, comply so far,
As to forget how they Gods servants are;
For Kings and Princes are above Men it is true,
But God's above both Kings and Princes too.
And who serve others, are but slavish things;
But it is to Reign, to serve the King of Kings.
On the Death of an only Son, and his Mothers grief.
HEr only Son was dead, and such a Son,
As never yet was a more hopeful one.
When his sad Mother, (Mother now no more)
Did not, the common way his death deplore;
Nor would the common way be comforted,
Of other Mothers when their Sons were dead;
But does so piously his loss deplore,
She shows she loved him well, but loves Heaven more:
And, knowing 'twas the Will of Heaven, does bear
It so, she needs no other Comforter.
So th'Royal Prophet, when his Son was dead,
Like her ceased mourning, and was comforted.
And the other in as great a loss could say,
'Twas Heaven that gave, and Heaven that took away.
These of all Fathers may examples be,
But of all pious Mothers, only she.
The Adue.
NOthing but Storms and Tempests? then it is time
To seek for shelter in some Foreign Clime,
Where I may hope to find the happiness,
If not to live, at least to die in peace.
What Halcyon on such Seas would build its Nest,
Where for continual storms it never could rest?
Or Bird would choose in such a Land to sing,
Where it may never enjoy a quiet Spring?
When Winter comes, you have certain Birds which fly
To Foreign parts, one of those Birds am I.
Who joy to sing in Sunshine, but give over
When I like them can see the Sun no more.
And banished as I am the sight, of the Sun
It Is time to go, my singing days are done.
Mean while before my life be wholly past
And like the dying Swan, I ave sung my last,
Whilst others ask His Majesty, to give
'Em means sufficient handsomely to live.
All I desire is, that His Majesty
Would give me means but handsomely to die.
R. F.
The Anagram.
WALLER Anag. LAUREL
Laurel and Waller so agree,
And Individuals seem to be;
As look but on the Anagram,
You Will find it in his very name.
The end of this Quaternium.
ON HIS MAJESTY'S Military Sports at Windsor.
AS artificial Fireworks and Light;
Are best beheld in the darkness of the Night.
The Moon was set, no Stars in the Skies did shine,
But all was dark, as favoring their design.
When straight behold, in Military sport
How some assail, others defend the Fort.
Brave York and Monmouth lead their warlike Bands,
Whilst Royal Charles a glad Spectator stands,
To see'm shoot, and no Man harmed by it,
Nor any hurt or wounded in the Fight:
So, as if any, has the Charm, it is He
To render People Shot and Weapon free.
Who does not bless the while His happy Reign?
Who does us in this Peaceful State maintain,
Whilst others plundered, harras'd, ruined, are
Exposed to all calamities of War,
As we were heretofore; and but for him
Should be exposed unto the like again.
Happy, thrice happy in Him then, if we
But only our own happiness could see.
Of all the Kings that are, or ever were,
A Prince the most benign and debonair.
Of Reformation.
THis Reformation has a specious name,
But yet the World will always be the same.
And those who try, will see when all is done,
It Is easier finding faults then mending 'em.
Mean time there is no Men, who are more unfit,
Then th'people are, for the Reforming it;
Whose tamp'ring with it, has always had this curse,
Instead of mending things, to make them worse.
They see perhaps somewhat might mended be,
But hundred things they would mar by it, do not see,
Best way to mend 'em were, for every one
To mend themselves, and let the rest alone.
The World and Men are chiefly governed by,
That Golden Chain depending from on high,
Links Men to God, and Subjects unto Kings,
With like dependence of all other things.
And when their Subjects chance to break this chain,
Kings are to look to make it whole again.
Unto whose charge Heaven chiefly does commit,
The Government of the World, and care of it.
The World will never be better a this fashion,
When th'people undertake this Reformation.
Who, as by clear experience we see,
Are chiefly those who should reformed be;
And cry the Worlds not well, for nothing else,
But only 'cause they are not well themselves.
Necessity excused.
I Would not be so dull a thing as I
Should be, if 't were not for necessity.
Mother of Arts, Invention and of Wit,
Th're then injurious should speak ill of it.
We often blame necessity, when we
Are more in fault then is necessity.
Which sometimes may persuade, but near inforces
Any to take dishonorable courses,
Against her will, a Woman may be poor,
But none against her will, can be a Whore.
Nor Man a Knave, whether he will or no;
But it is his own dishonesty makes him so.
Cease then to blame and lay the fault (in fine)
Upon Necessity, which is chiefly thine.
There Is no Necessity to do that which we
Should never do for no Necessity.
Of Marriage and Mistresses.
THe Marriage Knot which use to bind so fast,
Its bonds and ties as long as life did last,
Is now become like Iuglers Knots, none knows
They re tied so slack, whether they are fast or loose,
(What Man say they) who loves his liberty,
To any Woman so much slave would be:
This to their Wives, but to their Mistresses,
They care not how they loose their Liberties.
To whom by the Scriveners help they are bound so fast,
They Are Bonds at least as long as life do last.
And the Marriage Bonds they break with ease, but they
Cannot break the Scriveners Bonds so easily.
So Dalilah held Sampson in her Bands,
Until he fell into the Philistians hands;
Where he in Prison all his life did lie:
This is the end of such Men's Liberty.
And they no better end deserve then this,
Who leave their Wives, to follow Mistresses.
A Riddling description of a Lady, who shall be nameless.
THis Lady has one of those dull handsome faces
Which never sacrificed unto the Graces.
And Person, with as little gracefulness
As has her motley face, if not with less.
A thing made up in have, all in a bundle,
Just like a Bowl as round as she can trundle.
Her Bum the bias, whence you will easily guess,
She Is naturally inclined to idleness.
And her becoming'st posture may be sed,
Or riding in a Coach, or lying a Bed.
As for her other parts, I Will say no more,
But only she is, nor scould, nor slut, nor whore.
And this in any Woman is enough
To make a Wife, though not a Mistress of.
Who this is now, for me shall never be known,
Unless she name her self, for I name none.
And of this size so many Ladies be,
None can unriddle, or till which is she.
Love and Death's exchanging Darts, or the Dying Lover.
LOve and Death of the way once meeting,
Having past a friendly greeting.
Sleep their weary eyelids closing,
Lay them down, themselves reposing.
Love, whom diverse cares molested,
Could not sleep, but while Death rested.
All in have away he posts him,
But his have full dearly costs him.
For it chanced that going to sleeping,
They had given their Darts in keeping
Unto Night, who Errors Mother,
Blindly knowing not one from the other.
Gave Love Death's, and never perceived it,
Whilst as blindly Love received it.
Since which time their Darts confounding,
Love now kills, instead of wounding.
Death our hearts with sweetness filling,
Gently wounds instead of killing.
To the Duchess of Portsmouth, on his Epigram of the Angelical Beauty. (Page
19.)
Madam,
YOu being all admirable as you are,
No wonder at first, I never could declare,
But only in silence as admirers do,
The admiration which I had for you.
Until 'twixt speech and silence without name,
I writ at last that tassid Epigrame,
Of the Angelical Beauty, meaning you,
Although I never named you until now.
When unto all the World I here declare,
You only that Angelical Beauty are.
And now if any at this offended are,
To spite 'em more, I once again declare.
The Angelical Beauty is not only you,
But the Angelical Disposition too.
The Remembrance or the Petition Renewed.
WHo in the late Duchess of Lorrains days,
To all their mirth, so instrumental was
His Majesty never danced, nor Duchess sung;
But he with his Lute or Viol still was one.
Counting it highest honor could befall
To delight them, who are the delight of all.
Now aged grown, does in some hermitage,
Desire to end the remnant of his age.
And that His Majesty for Viaticum,
Would favor his retreat with some small Sum:
Who never asked him any thing before,
Nor after this shall never ask him more.
But be His Beadsman all the rest of's days,
Who then His Poet and Musician was.
The Dilemma.
IF what I write does please, I hope (in short)
His Majesty will give me somewhat for it.
If not, I hope, (as Caesar did before)
He Will give me somewhat for to write no more.
The end of this Quaternium.
To LILY on his excellent Painting.
HOw I admire thee Lily, and thy Art,
That to dead Figures does such life impart?
Nature and thee do seem at gentle strife,
Whose Figures should be most unto the Life;
Only as in some other World they were,
They do not live such lives as we do here:
But rather such as deathless shadows do
In The blessed Elyzium fields and shades below.
So like to ours, as it may well be sed,
The dead are living, and the living dead.
As out of Chaos, all the World was made,
When first it neither Form nor Figure had:
So out of Chaos, of thy Colors thou
Do make whole Worlds of beauteous figures now.
To see and to admire the work thou have done,
Whilst all the World unto thy house do come.
Who would not think thee by so great resort,
The King of Painters, and thy House the Court.
On Peoples Talk.
A Dialogue betwixt Vizdamira, and the Author.
A. THat I defend you where soever I come,
From every slandrous and malicious tongue,
Is but an Act of Justice which I ow
Unto the Truth, as well as unto you.
What should I do?

V. Why do like me, contemn
Their base malicious talk and pity them,
Who only bark like Dogs of Villages.
And when they are contemned will hold their peace.

A. Ah never! such as they will never give ore,
But more they are contemned, do bark the more.

V. Then let 'em vent their malice as they do.
It does not trouble me, why should it you.

A. Pardon me, when I hear 'em speaking ill
Of those, I love, I must defend 'em still.

V. I thank your love, but yet my chief defense,
Against slandrous tongues, must be my innocence.
To live well, is in power of every one,
But hinder peoples talk in power of none.

Against Idleness.
To the Lady Kilmurry, sitting at work with other Ladies.
Blessed be the hands, and blessed be they who taught
This work at first, which now these hands have wrought
So Rainbow colored, as Thomantias Bow
Could never more Celestial color show.
Work is the Life, and Idleness the Death,
Of every one who lives by vital breath.
Live Ladies then, and by your work declare,
You only, of all others, living are:
Whilst others can no testimony give,
More then the dead, that ever they did live.
And live till for the work on Earth you have done,
You be rewarded when to Heaven you come,
With Crowns of Glory, and for robes may wear,
As glorious ones of your own working here.
Happy, the whilst, who live and work like you,
Both in this World, and in the other too.
To the Lady Elizabeth Gage.
Madam,
I Will not say you are so surpassing fair,
As none with you for beauty may compare.
Nor that all others, for pure flesh and blood,
Compared to you, seem only Painted Mud.
For this of every Lady may be sed,
Whose Beauty's but a little white and red.
Although of none more truly then of you,
Whose colors are no Painted ones, but true;
But I will praise you in a higher kind,
For virtue, and for beauty of your mind.
And say, the outside and the inside too,
Never agreed in any, more then you.
Continue Madam then, but as you are,
As excellently good, as you are fair.
We well may say, your beauty and virtue's such,
As none can praise, none can admire too much.
And this, when others beauty's fade and die,
Is that shall live and last eternally.
Prologue for most of our Modern Plays.
You Would have new Plays, and when you have'em you
Do by 'em as Children by their Puppets do.
Tear 'em and mangle 'em strait, then cry for more,
And use 'em just as you did those before.
And, reason of this is now, if truth were known,
You are not curious, but fastidious grown:
Nor is it Judgment in you, but disease,
That no new Plays, though never so good, can please.
And this is all, thanks and reward he has,
Gives Children Puppets, and who gives you Plays.
And now they serve you in your kind you see,
For most of the Plays are only Puppetry.
And you as unto Puppet-Plays do go,
Not for to hear the wit, but see the show:
The curious Painted Scenes, which Wit you call
With Cheapside-Pageantry, and that is all.
On the Lady Rs, Nursing her own Children.
HOw like to Charity, this Lady stands?
With one child sucking, the other in her hands.
Whilst Bounteous Nature, Mother of us all,
Of her fair Breasts, is not more liberal.
Those Ladies, but Half-mothers, are at best,
Who while they give their Wombs, deny their Breast.
And none but such true Mothers we may call,
Who give, like you, their Wombs and Breasts, and all.
Mirror of Mothers? in whom all may see,
By what you are, what others ought to be,
Ready like Pellicans for Childrens good,
To give their very lives, and vital blood:
For so do you, if Milk be Blood (though white)
Who show your self great Straffords Daughter right;
Both alike ready for the public good,
You for to give your Milk, and he his Blood.
What must the Children be the while, that come
From such a Pious Breast, and Noble Womb.
To the Duchess of Monmouth.
With his Play of the Noble, Fair, and Virtuous EMILIA.
Madam,
WHen Poets would a Heroina make,
Does all perfections of her Sex partake,
They make her Noble, Fair, and Virtuous too:
All which perfections Madam are in you.
Emilia then is but a feigned name,
And you are only really the same;
Or if their's any difference, this is all,
She Is but the Copy, you the Original.
To whom then should I dedicate my Play,
Of The Noble, Virtuous, Fair Emilia.
But to your Grace, who is without compare,
More Noble yet, more Virtuous and Fair.
Why I Write.
WHilst some do write for profit, some for praise,
And every one some end in writing has:
I only write to please my noble Friends,
And when I Have done but that, I have my ends.
For th'vulgar I so much their praises slight,
I would not have their favor, though I might;
Because, I know, none ever had it yet,
But only such who viciously have writ.
And now if any think this cowardice,
To fly their praises, as I do their vice.
I must confess, he is valianter then I,
Who dares be damned for writing viciously.
He Is vicious enough, does evil do;
But double vicious, does and writes it too.
The end of the Quaternium.

