Enigmaticall CHARACTERS, ALL Taken to the Life, from several PERSONS,
HUMORS, and DISPOSITIONS.

By Rich. Fleckno.

Anno Dom. M.D.C.LVIII.

To her Highness BEATRIX Duchess of Loreine.
Madame,
To whom should I Dedicate these Characters but only to your Highness, from
whom I Have taken all the most Noble and Excellent; besides Madam, I ow not only
to your Highness the delicious leisure I had in writing them. But if I seem to
surpass mediocrity, and approach somewhat nigh perfection, that Madame, I ow
unto you Highness too, mediocrity in perfection being never where you are; nor
can one think of any thing but excellent beholding you; owing this Work then to
your Highness by so many names; Permit me I beseech you, Madam, withal Humility
to offer it at your feet, together with my self, with the Protestation of being
all my Life,

Madame, Your Highnesses most humble most obliged and most devoted, Rich.
Fleckno.

To the Curious Reader.
It Is you will dull Reader, and preoccupated judgment; not your curious and those
have judgments of their own, whom I apprehend in publishing these characters,
made lately, with all the advantages and helps, noblest, company,
Divertisments, and accommodation could afford, to quicken the wit, heighten the
fancy, and delight the mind, whose main design is (as you will perceive) to
honor Nobility, praise Virtue, tax Vice, laugh at folly, and pity Ignorance.
And what would thou give for the Key now of these Characters? but prithie
do'nt break the lock, with tampering to pick it open. To prevent which
violence, know that for all the more noble ones, the persons I intend by them
are easily to be known (they being so extraordinary rare, they are almost
singular in their kind) but for the other, it will be harder to know, whom I
mean in particular, though easier in general, they being so numerous and
ordinary, as each one in their own knowledges, and imagination may find out a
Key for them though a hundred to one, not the same I intended in making them.
Judge freely then, so thou expose not me to the envy of it, nor obligation to
answer for it if thou judge amiss; and as thou desire to have a favorable
Character made of thee, give a favorable one, of these Characters of mine.

To his Worthy Friend Mr. Richard Fleckno upon his Characters.
FLeckno, thy Characters are so full of wit
And fancy, as each word is thronged with it,
Each line's a volume, and who reads would swear,
Whole Libraries were in each Character:
Nor Arrows in a quiver struck, nor yet
Lights in the Starry Skies are thicker set,
Nor Quils upon the Armed Porcepine,
Than wit and Fancy in this Work of thine.
W. NEWCASTLE.

To the same, On the same Characters.
FLeckno, who reads thy Characters will find,
That they not only entertain the mind,
But with the mind, even every sense has part,
Being like rich Cordials to rejoice the heart,
Or moved air that Music does excite,
With numerous sounds to give the Ear delight,
Or oderiferous Essences that gain
A gentle passage to refresh the Brain;
Whilst they with such variety are dressed,
As every Pallat finds a plenteous feast:
And the sighing Lover does refuse to look
On's Mistress Eyes, when he beholds thy Book.
W. NEWCASTLE.

Enigmaticall Characters.
CHARACTER.
Of a Lady of excellent Conversation,
YOu would not only Imagine all the Muses, but all the Graces were in her too,
whilst for matter, words, and manner she is all that is delightful in
Conversation; her matter not stale and studied, but resent and occasional; not
stiff, but ductile and pliable to the company; high not soaring, familiar not
low, profound not obscure; and the more sublime the more intelligible and
conspicuous. Her Words not too scanty, nor too wide, but just fitted to her
matter, not intricately involving, but clearly unfolding and explicating the
notions of her mind. In Manner, Majestique, not imperious, conversation that's
a Tyranny, with others being a Commonwealth with her, where every ones
discourse and opinions are free; she never contradicting, but when any speak
impertinently, only blushing for them, and saying no more: (a greater
reprehension to those, who understand blushing, than can be expressed in words,)
Having too much reason to call passion to her aid, and disdaining to use force
and violence (the ordinary Arms of falsehood) to defend the Truth, so if you
yield not, she does rather than contend, leaving you the shame of a victory,
when with more honor, you might have yielded and been overcome: Nor does she
rashly take up Argument, and abruptly lay it down again; but handsomely assume
it; delightfully continue it, and like an Air in music, just then, when the
ear expects, it comes unto a close: All in her being sweet, delightful and
harmonious, even to the very Tone and Accent of her voice, it being more music
to hear her speak than others sing. Then she is withal so easy Company, and
far from all constraint, as it is pleasure to be in it: whilst others like
uneasy garments, you cannot stir in without pain; which renders her
conversation far chearfuller then theirs who laugh more but smile less,
spending more spirits with straining for an hours mirth than they can recover
in a month again; which renders them so unequal company, whilst she is
always equal and the same. True joy being a constant serious thing; as far
different from light and gigling mirth, as Elementall fire from squibs and
Crackers; whence she Prometheus-like inspire all who converse with her, with
noble flame and spirit, none ever departing from her company but wiser and far
better than they came. It being virtue to know her, wisdom to converse with
her, Refinest breeding to observe her, joy to behold her, and a species of the
beatitude of to other life, only to enjoy her Coversation in this.

CHARACTER.
Of one that is the foil of good Conversation.
HE is to others Antipodes, and of a quite contrary Hemisphear: his matter or
some stale Common-places, like cold meat grown nauseous with often repetition;
or else some new whimsies of his own, like French quelques chooses, with no
substance at all in them: his words or low, and creeping (the very reptils of a
language) or so affectedly high and ramping, as if Eloquence stalkt and went on
stilts: his manner every ways ungrateful, in a tone harsh and untunable; with
Tempests in his mouth, and Lightning in his eyes, whilst he strains his voice
to speak loudest in the company, and heats and grows red-hot presently, by
force of Argument: impatient of contradiction, and contradicting every one; so
obstinate in his opinion, as Faith that removes mountains, can never remove him
from't: whence he frieghts all from his conversation; their words (just as in
an enemies Country, in Garrison, daring not to stir out for fear of a surprise)
It Is a Tyranny then to converse with him, none but slaves and parasites would
endure (content to swallow his words whilst they feed on him) whose enduring
it, makes him so intolerable to all besides, so as the wise avoid his company
(just as they would savage Beasts Tamed, who unless you sooth and humor them
are apt on every light occasion to start and break out to their native
savagnes) not always to be in fever of such an Accident, and sick of his
conversation; has neither wit for discourse, breeding for civility,
understanding to know it, nor patience to learn; but by Pride, Obstinancy and
Presumption is forfeited to perpetual folly and ignorance.

CHARACTER.
Of an excellent Companion.
HE is the life and spirit of the Company, that pines and droops without him,
animating all with cheerfulness, and is like sparkling liquor to your dull
companion, that's only dregs and lees; his presence chases melancholy, as the
Suns does clouds, and it is impossible to be sad in his company; He differs from
the Buffoon, as an excellent Comedy does from the Farse, being pure wit, the other
but foolery: He is never dry nor pumping, but always full and flowing; his
returns and reparties so quick, opposite and gentile, it is pleasure to observe,
how handsomely he acquits himself; mean time he is neither scurrulous nor
profane, but a good man as well as a good companion; and so far a good fellow
too, as he will take a cheerful glass or two (your fine edged knives always
needing the whet-stone most) whilst taking too many, is like whetting the edge
quite away: he is the only exorcist for the Melancholy Devil of the times;
and I imagine him just like David playing to Saul, and they just like Saul
persecuting him: He seeming to your men of business to confer but little to
the seriouser part of life; yet he whets the knife of the serious man, and is
to business as Music to devotion, apting and disposing the mind to it
afterward, tho for the present delightfully, diverting it. In fine, he ows
much of his good humor to his complexion, but much more to his company
(always the best and noblest) so he may be poor, but never want, or if he do,
it is the fault of the times, and none of his, of which when he meets with a
favorable conjunction, he is most commonly the Artisan of his own Fortune,
making himself (with a little industry) afar better than others are born unto,
being the darling of all your great ones, and nobler sort, the favorite of
Kings, and companion for any Prince.

CHARACTER.
Of one that Zanys the good Companion.
HE is a wit of an under Region, grossly imitating on the lower roap, what to
other does neatly on the higher; and is only for the laughter of the vulgar;
whilst your wiser and better sort can scarcely smile at him: He talks nothing
but kennel-raked stuff, and his discourse is rather like fruit taken up rotten
from the ground, than freshly gathered from the Tree. He is so far from a
courtly wit, as his breeding seems only to have been in the Suburbs; or at best,
he seems only graduated good companion in a Tavern (the Bedlam of wits) where
men are mad rather than merry; here one breaking a jest on the Drawer, or a
Candestick: there an other repeating the old end of a Play, or some bawdy song;
this speaking bilke, that nonsense, whilst all with loud houting and laughter
confound the Fiddlers noise, who may well be called a noise indeed, for no
Music can be heard for them; so whilst he utters nothing but old stories,
long since laughed thrid-bare, or some stale jest broken twenty times before:
His mirth compared with theirs, new and at firsthand, is just like Brokers ware
in comparison with Mercers, or Long-lane compared unto Cheap Side: his wit
being rather the Hogs-heads than his own, favourring more of Heidelberg than of
Hellicon, and he rather a drunken than a good companion.

CHARACTER.
Of one that imitates the good companion another way.
HE is on, who now the stage is down Acts the Parasites part at Table; and
since Tailors death, none can play Mosco's part so well as he: he is always
for him who has best Wine and fare (Body and Soul and all) and sooths and
humors them, even to be of the same opinion and Religion with them (right or
wrong,) mean time although he be specially devoted to the Patron; he praises
the Cook, shakes the Butler by the hand, and is familiar with all the Waiters
and Serving-men; calling one Father, adopting another son, as they are of Age,
or Office in the House; though he be as pernicious in a Family, as Moaths,
Cankers, or Poison, to Mettle, Clothes, or health; corrupting his Patrons
manners to render them more like his own, and impoisoning their ears with
calumnying other men, only to ingrosse them wholly to himself: Mean time he is
so ill natured, as to serve his end he will fawn on his deadliest enemies; and
those once served abuse his dearest friends; equally treacherous both to friend
and enemy; for the rest, although with the ignorant, he pass for a good
companion, it is no pure wit he utters, but only a mingly of clenches, quibbles,
and such half-witted stuff he (at best) being rather a pump of others jests,
Conceits, and Storys, than a Fountain of his own; so he is presently draw dry
(after a meal or two) when his mirth failing and waxing stale he is forced to
fall to plain flattery, or they grow weary of him strait, as of dead Wine,
pottage cold, or meat served up to the Table, more than once.

CHARACTER.
Of an irresolute Person.
HE hovers in his choice, like an empty Balance with no weight of Judgment to
incline him to either scale; he dodges with those he meets, nor he can ever
resolve which way to let them pass: every thing he thinks on, is matter of
deliberation, and he does nothing readily, but what he thinks not on: discourse
that helps others out of laborinths, is a laborinth to him; and he of all
creatures would be far wiser, if he had none at all: he begins nothing without
deliberation; and when he begins to deliberate, never makes an end. Has some
dull demon cries, do not, do not still, when he is on point of doing any thing,
which he obeys as a divine Revelation: He plays at shall I, shall I? so long,
till opertunity be past, and then as he did the fault, repents at leisure. He
is enemy to Resolution, or rather as Resolution were enemy to him, his heart
fails him; and like a coward he turns back presently, at sight of it: He still
misliking the present choice of things as Scoggan did his Tree to hang on: He
could never Bet at Cocking nor Hors-race yet, because the battle or race was
always done or he could delibrat which side to take, and he is only happy in
this, that his irresolution hinders him from marrying and entering into Bonds:
Nor is it (perhaps) the least part of his happiness to be as long in choosing
his Religion now, amongst so many new Sects, that sprout up every day; though
it is thought he is a Quaker; and if he be superstitious withal, he is in for
his wits, and next news you hear from him will be from Bedlam.

CHARACTER.
Of a Fantastique Lady.
HEr life is a perpetual contradiction, she would and she would not, and make
ready the Coach, yet let it alone too; drive to such a place, yet do not
neither, Is her ordinary dialect: she differs from the irresolute, in that he
is always beginning, and she never makes an end; she writes and blots out
again, whilst he deliberates what to write: t'on being a resty, the other a
restless pain: so you can tell what to make of ton's Negative, and how two
Negatives make an Affimative; but of her I and no together, you know not what
to make, but only that she knows not what to make of it her self. Her head is
just like a Mill, or Squirrels cage, and her mind the Squirrel that turns and
whirls it round, and her imagination differs from others, as your Grotesque
figures do from natural and from grotesque; In that these have some design in
them, but her imagination has none: She never looking toward the end, but
only the beginning of things; or if she does, forgets or disapproves it
strait: For she will call in all have for one, and have nothing to say to him
when he is come; and long (nay dye) for some toy or trifle, which having once,
she grows weary of presently, and throws away. In fine, who are of one mind to
day, and another tomorrow, are constant to her, and Saturns revolution compared
unto the Moons; For you know not where to have her a moment, and whosoever
would hit her thoughts must shoot flying; and fly themselves whosoever would
follow her

CHARACTER.
Of a Green-sicknesse Girl.
SHe is like a Mouse in a Holland Cheese, her house and diet all the same:
whence the more she spends in her house, the worse house she keeps, the walls
being both her Kitchen and Larder too, of which she eats so long, as she
fulfills the old proverb at last, The weakest go to the walls: For which should
they accuse her of Buglary, she has this commodity, she could never be starved
in Prison, but whilst some eat themselves into Prison, she (by the Estridge
help) might eat her self out again: She is a great benefactrix to Masons, who
where they find her are sure to find work enough, and her zeal is so great,
she has a mind to the Church-walls too, where she might sooner eat up all the
ten Commandments, by breaking her fast, than break the Commandments of the
Church: no Nunnery would hold her, but she would break enclosure presently, though
for strictness of diet, (however she eat whitmeat) she would put down any Minume
or Carthusian; for a peck of Oats would serve her a week at least, whence you
are not to wonder if in questioning her you find her somewhat mealmouthed in
answering you. By her complexion, she seems rather made of chalk or marle, than
that red earth Adam was made of; though she be so meager a soil, she grows
never the fatter by it; yet one knows not what a good Husbandman may do, for
they say, a good Husband would remedy all; but he must take her on credit then,
both for Beauty and good housewivery; few else would venture on her complexion,
and such a quality, as if she hold on as she begins, she soon would eat her
husband out of house and home: Only a Millar would take her with all faults,
she being much of his complexion, and for her diet twould be at others charge,
rather than his own; neither are the walls of his Wind-mil comprised in her
Bill of Fare.

CHARACTER.
Of a talkative Lady.
HEr tongue runs round like a wheel one spoak after another, there is no end
of it: she makes more noice and jangling than the Bells on the fifth of
November, or a Coronation day; such a wife for Moroso had far surpast all the
variety of noices invented for tormenting him; and would make a husband wish
that either she were dumb, or he were deaf: You would wonder at her matter to
hear her talk, and would admire her talk, when you heard her matter; but
considering both together, would admire: nor wonder at neither, but only
exclaim with him, who plumed the Nightingal, she is a voice and nothing else,
for it is nothing but noice she makes, and it is the labor of her tongue not
brain; whence you would only wonder how that holds out, but for that it moves
with as great facility, as leaves wag when they are shaken with the wind (give
her tongue breath, and it will never lie still) or rather indeed as Atoms move
its air, for it is quite unhung, and neither depends on nerve nor imagination;
there being as much difference betwixt a voluble tongue and hers, as betwixt an
excellent vaulter moves artfully, and one who art-lesly precipitates himself:
all the wonder is, whilst she speaks only Thrums, how she makes so many
different ends hold together (the composition of a Tailors Cushion, all of
shreds, being nothing to the wonder of it) but for that she cares not; all her
care being only for some to hear her talk (whom she must hire shortly, none
certainly else would undergo the noice and vexation) mean time an engine with
so constant a motion as her tongue would be far better than any murmuring
Fountain, or purling Brook to make one sleep, and she wants only the faculty
of talking in her sleep herself, to make the perpetual motion with her tongue.

CHARACTER.
Of a Taciturne Person.
HE is the contrary Extremity, and knows as little to speak as the other to hold
her peace. Friar Bacons brazed head was a talkative one to his; and there is
nothing so phlegmatique as his discourse; you might have patience as well to
tend a Still, that drops but once a quarter, as to attend his speech; the
counting whose words, and a Dutch clock is an Exercise much alike: The wheels
of his tongue, are like those of a rusty Jack, that ever an anon (for want of
oyling) are at a stand. He is like Pharasius picture, all Curtain, and who
think there is ought else under it, like Zeuxes are deceived; yet such veiled
shrines as he, are counted very Oracles in Cloisters now where silence is in
precept and veneration: Whose profession it is to be rather good Religious, than
good companions; and whose wisdom is the folly of the world; and be they their
wisemen, they shall be my fools still, who no more admire silence in them than
in vegitatives: Nor shall ever accoumpt impotency, perfection; rather when the
power of well speaking never proceeds to act; I shall think there wants ability
more than will; and that somewhat still in the main spring is amiss, when the
clock near strikes; only for this once (since they will needs have it so) I
will believe there is somewhat in him, cause as yet I could never perceive any
thing come out of him.

CHARACTER.
Of a Dutch Waggoner.
HE converses so much with beasts as he is become one himself, with only this
difference, that he is a Beast Paramount; and to see him mounted on his
forehorse like a dril, you would take him for a Beast two stories high, nay to his
very understanding he is one; he understanding nothing above the elevation of
his Pole; and let them talk of the Papists what they will, there is none speaks
the language of the Beast but he: they were mightily out, who feigned a Waggoner
in Heaven, when with far more reason they might have fained one in Hell: For
besides he is more churlish than Charon, his wagon is more like Hell, where
people are crowded together in perpetual pain; and he like a Fury lays about
him with his whip, only in this he is like phoebus or the charioter of the day,
that he always bring night with him to his journeyes end. For the rest;
to others Horses eats not so often as his, nor (for all his Twelve houses) has he
so many Innes to bait at, and drink at on the way: Besides he is more
inexorable then the Sun for Joshua, with calling to him once could make him
stay, which call your heart out, you can never make him do. In a word, he dos
nothing well, but whip his horses, and you can do nothing better than whip him
again; for he is saucy and malepert, and as rude as the Canvase he wears; being
a very tyrant when he gets you in his Wagon once, setting a Tax or Imposition
on passengers, called drink-gelt, which he leavies on the first four places of
his Wagon, and were ye forty, he promises to you all: Now whether this be a
Holland or Flemish Waggoner, there lies the Riddle, betwixt whom there is this
only difference, that your Hollander looks bigger and keeps more gravity, as
one that may be one of mine Heers in time, whilst the other will never be but one
of the Rascal rout.

CHARACTER.
Of a huge overvaluer of himself.
He affects a certain Corpulency in all his Actions, makes them rather appear
inflate and swollen than great and solid, with a singularity renders him more
noted than notable: His wit is rather boisterous than strong, and has more in
it of Polypheme than of the Hero. He is rather of extravagant than
extraordinary parts; and looses himself by going out of the common road;
mistaking the point of Honor so, as while it is more honorable to beat the
world at its own weapon, he is still inventing new: He makes a faction for
folly, whilst he would needs seem wiser than he is, and proves that saying
true, Nullum magnum ingenium etc. That there is no great wit without some
mixture of folly, etc. only gaining this reputation (at last) with all his
bustling, that he were a wiseman indeed, who were but all that he would seem to
be. In fine he is so unlucky in all his professions both of the Courtier,
Scholar and the Politic, to have his speculations too high, his state policy
in the air, his complements to the skies, and his schollarship above the Moon.
Princes not understand t'on, Ladies not reaching the other; nor can the
University with all its Mathmaticall Instruments take tothers height. Like too
high prized Ware then, he lies on his own hand still; nor will he ever off,
till either he be so wise to bate of it, or meet with such fools, who will over
give as much as he overvalues it: Nor availes that excuse which some would make
for him: How in great figures, falling not under one prospect of the eye; it is
hardest still observing proportion: For why does he strive then to make himself
so great, and seek rather excuse for error than not to err at all? the Lady --
then without Rival may admire him still, and he maybe Mr -- Wiseman, but none
of mine.

CHARACTER.
Of an ordinary French Laquey.
HE is as mischeivous all the year as a London Prentise on Shrovetuesday, and
is devilish valiant with his Rapier on, but is a poor devil when that is off,
and you may beat him part in hand, and part on credit, as you please, whilst
he is so rigorous an accomptant, as if you promise him, cent coups de baston:
He looks you should not bate him one* He wears mourning linen whatsoever
color his Livery's off, and he and the Dog are always Correlatives: He swears
and lies naturally, but steals nothing, only what he can lay hands on; and if
you lay not hands on him the sooner, he runs away when he has done; though for
running it is the worst quality he has, in lieu of which he vault up behind the
Coach, with as great facility as an Ape or Tumbler behind his Master: For the
rest he does nothing more willingly than pimp for you, when if he can hedge in
any common for himself, he counts it clear gain, and himself a free Commoner;
he having in that his Masters leavings, as in all things else; whilst he that
had his, would be finely sauc'd indeed. I say nothing of the Dice he has, which
however false, do break no squares with him, nor of the Cards, in his pocket
(though it be all the Prayer Book he has) only to come to his other qualities:
he Paints excellent well four fingers and a thumb, on Privy-houses, and flying
dildos upon walls, with Buts at which they are shot; no Saints mind being so
elevate in devotion to paradis as his to the Bourdell, to which he runs so
often as at last one running mars an other, when he is laid up in some
Hospital, and there is and end of him.

CHARACTER.
Of a suspicious Person.
SHe is her own Tormentor and others too, putting her mind and them to torture
of her suspicions; nor by confession nor denial is there any getting off of
them: She suspects every thing, and if you whisper, she thinks it is some harm of
her. If you speak loud, she interprets it in the worser sense; if you look on
her, she thinks it is to spy some fault in her; and if you look not on her, she
interprets it a neglect of her: Mean time, she goes on with her suspicions,
like French posthorses, who when they stumble once, near cease till they are
down: She revolving slight offenses in her mind so long, till she makes mighty
injuries of them at the last. Her surmises being always wiser than the Truth;
whilst her friends (both for their own sakes and hers) wish them but as wise
at least, and that she had either less wit, or not so great an opinion of it
as she has; she imagining she understands the full meaning of every half word,
and mystery of every look, when there is none at all: So to every thing simply
said, she affixes a double meaning strait, counting it Ironia when any praise
her, malevolence when they praise her not, flattery when you are of her
opinion, and voluntary contradiction if you hold the contrary: Explicating
others words and actions still as Heretics do scripture in the dark and
mystic sense, when the litterall is clear and manifest enough, and you may as
well convert the one as the other from their opinions: So whilst her mind is just
like the winters sun, exhaling more clouds than it can discipate again, she
both looses herself in the mist she makes, and looses her friends by mistaking
them for her enemies.

Of Raillerie.
THere is as much difference betwixt Raillerie and Satyrs, Jesting and Ieering,
etc. as betwixt gallantry and clownishnesse; or betwixt a gentle Accost and
rude Assault. And if I would habit them in their several properties, I would
cloth Satyr in hair-cloath, jeering in home spun-stuff, jesting in motley, and
Raillerie in silk. It being a gentle exercise of wit and witty harmless
calumny, speaks ill of you by contraries; and the reverse or the other side of
complement, as far beneath as that above reality. There Is nothing in it of
abusive, and only as much in it of handsome invective and reproach as may well
be owned without a blush: publishing those praises of you without shame, which
flattery would make you ashamed to hear. It differs from Gybing as gentle
smiles from scornful laughter, and from railing as Gentlemen's playing at
foyls, from Butchers and Clowns playing at Cudgels. It Is nothing bitter, but a
poignant sauce of wit, for curious pallats, not for your vulgar Tastes. And as
Barriers, Iusts and Tournment a sport only for your nobler sort; somewhat
resembling earnest, and which indeed, none should use, but those who know to
make a sport of it: your Northern Nations being most commonly unhappy in this,
that when their wits fall short, they piece it out with choler, and the
blunter their wits are, the sharper are their weapons still. In fine, it is a
plant grows more naturally in your Southern Regions, and seldom farther North
than Paris yet: Whence whilst the French would have transplanted it with their
others fashions into England, like those who first brought in Tobacco, they had
but the Curses of the common People for their pains; they understanding railing
far better than Raillerie: much of the nature of those Beasts who cannot play,
but they must fall to scratching and biting strait, wherefore till they
understand it better, 'Ile say no more of it, but leave it as a Riddle to them
still amongst the rest.

CHARACTER.
Of one who troubles her self with every thing.
HEr mind is just like their stomachs, who convert all they eat into diseases;
for every thing is matter of trouble with her, and she is perpetually haunted
with a panick fear, and Lord, Lord! what shall I do? What will become of us?
not contented with her own cares she troubles her self with those of others,
and gos more than a thousand mile to seek them out, being as much troubled for
the King of China's loss of his kingdom, as for our late Kings loosing his.
In which she shows much charity, but ill ordered, a good natural but sickly
and infirm, and a great stock of pity and compassion but ill husbanded and
managed: nay she troubles her self with conditionary thoughts of things that
near were, nor are, nor are like to be: And if others businesses so trouble
her, imagine but how she is troubled with her own, of which when she has any,
what betwixt doing and undoing it; like penelopes webb, she never makes an end;
nor can any else for her at last, she so intangles it. And all this through
ignorance of how much thought and care she is to bestow on things, whence
bestowing all she has on every thing, (as long as there is a world, and she is
in the world) her care and trouble must needs be infinite and immense: So as in
fine) her mind seems only an Hospital of sickly thoughts; being so thronged
with them, there is hardly room for any healthy one: whence through her
proposterous lodging all her care within doors, and her comfort all without,
she is so unfortunate to have the one still at hand, when she needs it least;
and the other still to seek, when she stands in most need of it.

CHARACTER.
Of one who troubles himself with nothing.
HE suffers none but gay and pleasant thoughts to enter his Imagination,
putting the rest off till to morrow still; saying, to day is too soon: and then
quite dismising them, saying; it is too Late: He is so great a Master in the
art of consolation, as he who when he casually lost his eyes, comforted
himself, that there was so much saved in candle light, was but a bungler at it,
compared to him. He accounts nothing in this world his own, whence he is never
afflicted for the loss of any thing; and for the world it self, count it but
as a pilgrimage, and himself a pilgrim, that has no other busness in it, but
only to pass through it unto the next: to which since all ways equally
conduce; he laveers not by Sea, but ever sails before the wind, and makes for
the next Port, be it where it will; and by land, knows all his easiest
passages, and all his turnings to avoid uneasy ones, whilst to beguile the
tediousness of the way, he has still choice of the best company; and at Relay:
So passes he this vale of miseries; so easily he scarcely feels its miseries;
neither contracting so much wealth, nor guiltiness, in living, as may make him
apprehend to leave tone behind him, in this world when he dies, nor find the
punishment of the other in the next. Mean time, that neither the Revolution of
things, nor inconstancy of persons, may transport, or trouble him; he has no
tie to any thing, nor person, Beauty, Riches nor honors having never yet the
power to make him quit his liberty, nor has the world chains strong enough to
make him slave; he wondering as much at Courtiers, as at Gally-slaves; and for
those who for a little profit sell their liberties, whilst they call it
fishing for a golden fish, he calls it Angling with a golden-hook: So the
spendor of a Palace* and obscurity of a Cottage equally takes his eyes, nor
sees he any thing; In the riches of the one to envy, nor in the others
poverty to pity, more than the means that tone has more than the other; to make
friends and to oblige. Thus having provided against all trouble without
himself, that nothing within himself may trouble him: (holding still the mean
betwixt idleness and too great employ) he cultivates his mind, rather like a
Garden than a Field, delightfully not laboriously; with studies may rather
render it gay and cheerful, than mellancholly and sad: shunning all by-ways
of doctrine, to avoid Error, and all highwayes of the vulgar to avoid
ignorance and viciousness; nor puts he his mind so on the rack of hope to
extend them farther than to possible and easy things; which failing his
expectation, he is no more troubled than at seeing Iuglars play fast and loose.
Lastly, not to live stranger nor enemy to himself, he first makes compact
with his genius, to lead him to no ill, and then follows it, whatsoever it leads
him too, doing just by it as by his Horse, which he is not still putting upon
new ways, but only spurs when it goes on slowly in the old: So constituting
his pleasure rather in content than voluptuousness, and in nothing fruition,
may lessen and destroy, or that may be rendered impotent by Age: He can never be
without pleasure in himself, nor can any thing out of himself ever molest and
trouble him: nor is this a happiness to be attained too, but by long
accustumance, and by doing by our Mind, just as we do with our Bodies. In time
of Pestilence, that is, by carefullv avoiding all commerce with those are sick,
else being once infected, all Council is in vain; and you may as well bid one
that is sick be well, as one that's sad and grieved be merry and comforted.

CHARACTER.
Of a Chambermaid.
A Chambermaid is as suspicious a name for a Maid, as a Grammar Scholar for a
great Scholar, or a Schoolmaster for a great Master, etc. She differs from the
Waiting Woman only as single Roses do from double ones; and is a maid of one
Coat, whilst your waiting- Gentlewoman has many; for the rest, she is the
gentler of the two, when she falls into gentle handling; marry the rude
Serving-man she cannot endure, telling him she is for his betters, etc. She is
the moresubject to towsing, less danger there is of rumpling her, (an
advantage she has of the Gentlewoman for all she is so fine) there being more
provocation too in her single Peticoat (so nigh querpo) than in all tothers
silken Gowns. Mean while her words and actions are to be understood by
contraries, and when she schreeks and cries fie away, lay by there etc. You must
understand they are interjections of encouragement, not prohibition, as when
she hids her self in the dark or fains to sleep, it is only that you should groap
her out and take her napping, etc. only there is a certain thing called
sweetheart, and a certain thing called Matrimony that spoils the sport, and
makes her shie and cautious; for any thing else there may be sport enough, and
nothing ever the worse: For she may be a Chambermaid still, though not a maid;
and if she be right and of the Game indeed, whatsoever they say unto her, and
whatsoever they do unto her too, she will be sure to be a Maid still till she be
married, when let her husband look where she be a Maid or no; for others they
have looked often enough and found her none.

CHARACTER.
Of a Noblemans Chaplain.
ALl Ministers are men of the Lord, but this is the Lords Gentleman;
distinguished by his Taffity Scarff, his fringed Gloves, bandstrings, and Linen
more a la mode; his chiefest faculty is in saying Grace: when by the elevation
of his eyes, you may easily guess at the temperature oth' clymat, or whether
his Patrons devotion be hot or cold, (and respectively the meat is the
contrary,) having said Grace, he takes Tithes of all, as belonging to the
Clergy, only the small Tithes of fruit, his Patron debars him off, (if he sit
at his Table) he and his fellow Salt together, being both taken away with the
Voider; when rising with trencher in hand (just like one playing at Buz) he
makes a Canonical leg de Cu' and Be^, and is silenst during pleasure, and
converted into a grave Cup-board or Chimny piece: If he fail of the lower end
of his Patrons board, he claims the higher end of the Stewards; where he
reprehends no vice, but too many hands in the dish at once, under the name of
gurmandizing, he being more beholding to his short commons in the University,
for a good stomach; then for his learning (which is nothing with him) or his
preaching either* (which is not worth the speaking of) whilst he hunge there
by the Beck like Barnacles in Scotland, till he flew away a Brand Goose at the
last. He takes the mentioning of Sr. Roger indudgion, with all the Apurtenances
and Apendixes of Cunny-tails, and Mrs. Abigals, though he makes love in godly
manner to the Chambermaid, or Waiting-gentlewoman (when his Lord has done with
her) by whose favor with my Lady if he gets the super intendancy of the
Family, he vexes the servants intolerably with his talking of Collegiall
Discipline, and the statutes of the University, with Orthodox nose prying into
every thing, and if he hedge in the Tutoring of my young Master in to boot, he
makes him an errant dunce, and fit only for the University.

CHARACTER.
Of an impertinent Governant.
SHe is a fit Abigail for Sr. Roger there, and makes as good a Governant for my
young Lady, as he a Governor for my young Lord: Her wits (like an old stokin
unravelling) are at an end at every turn; and had she the Governance of a whole
School, she would run mad infallibly, though she have the spirit in her of
twenty School-mistresses, looking with her Pigs-eyes so narrowly to her charge;
you cannot approach her, but like a Hen with one Chicken, she clocks and
bristles up her feathers presently, keeping such a fidel-fadle and tatling, as
you would judge her fitter to teach Parrots talk, or Apes their tricks, than
for the charge she has: for the rest of her behavior and discourse: It speaks
her of your under form of breeding right; her quips and scornful answers,
strongly favoring of the Citizen, as goodly, goodly, great ones! how say ye
by that now? etc. And but anger her, and you will see that with only one weeks
board at Billingsgate she would have scowlded curiously. In fine, she is
perpetually busied about nothing, and her whole employment is either in making,
or else finding faults; displeased with every thing, 'cause she knows not what
she would have; with which impertinency she so d^zes and bemops the poor Lady, as
she learns nothing at all of her, but only to unlearn all she did well, to do
it ill. As for her other qualities of curious handling the Bodkin and Needle
(at which every School-girle and Chambermaid is as good as she) I say nothing
'cause they are not worth the speaking off, only that by the Tree, you may know
the fruit; I Will give you the Character of the School where she was bred.

CHARACTER.
Of a School of young Gentlewomen.
TO show how many degrees they are removed from, Court breeding their Schools
most commonly are erected in some Country Village nigh the Town, where to save
charges (like that country parish that would not go to cost of true Orthography
in painting the Ten Commandments) they have the worst Masters can be got, for
love or money; learning to quaver instead of singing, hop instead of dancing,
and rake the Ghitar, rumble the Virginals, and scratch and thrumb the Lute,
instead of playing neatly and handsomely. And for their languages a Magpy in a
month would chatter more, than they learn in a year: nor are their manners and
behavior much better, both so unfashionable and rude, (or ramping and hoiting,
or mincing and bridling it, as their reverend Mistress is libertine or
precise;) as their unlearning them costs their Parents (commonly) more than
their learning did. As for their work (which they most glory in) you have
frequent examplers of it, how some one or other (ordinarily) makes such work
with them, as the stitches can never be picked out again, without the Mid-wives
help: No sweet-meat shops being ever so haunted with Wasps and Flys as these
Schools by all the wild-youth about the Town. Mean time, I Will not say their
grave Mistress is a Bawd (who thinks her self a very Debora for government)
but certainly her Simplicity is little less; first, gives admittance, then
opportunity to such vermin as these into their Bouroughs, who when they get
their heads in once, all the Body naturally follows. To conclude, they learn
nothing there befitting Gentlewomen, but only to be so gentle at last, as
commonly they run away with the first Serving-man or younger Brother makes love
unto them: when their Parents find (to their cost) that all their cost was
cast away, and their Husbands after a while find too, how to that old saying of
choosing a Horse in Smithfield, and a Serving-man in Paul's; you might well add
the choosing a wife out of one of these Schools, and you shall be fitted all
alike.

CHARACTER.
Of a Novice.
HE is just like a young Lover, and his order is his Mistress, who makes a
fool of him, whilst he Idolatrizes it more than your French Inamourists do
their Phillis's and Cloris's, and Don Quixots love to Dulcinea was nothing so
extravagant. The more doz'd and be mopt he is, the better still; it is a sign
he is right, and has a true vocation: and if he have any wit and judgment of his
own, they cry out on him for a very Reprobate: for the rest, he hates all
woman-kinde and calls a Petticoat, Leviathan; and a smock but innocently
blanching on a hedge: Afteroth or the fowl Devil of Fornication; he walks with
his eyes always fixed upon the ground, and crumples up like a Hog-lowse for
fear of effusion: he makes as many stops as an old rusty Jack, and winds up
himself, as often to rectify his intention, he says his, our Fathers as devoutly
as others their our Father, and counts all damned who are not friends of his
order, as an infallable sign of Predestination, the being devoted to it, and
the Patron thereof: he is as lively after a discipline as an Ape, newly whipped,
and is no more moved then a statua at a reprehension or reproach. Infine his
novitiat passes with him, just like an enchantment, whilst he is so stund and
astonished as he knows not what to do; only toward the end he comes to
himself again, recovering by degrees; and the charm once expired becomes like
other men.

CHARACTER.
Of a Fille devote, or a ghostly daughter.
SHe is a degree farther from the Cloister, and nigher the world than a
Beguine; to recompense which, she is more exemplar in her manners and
behavior, walking the streets like an Image carried in procession, without
stirring hand or eye, wearing her eyes just like spectacles on her nose, and
not daring to scratch though it itch never so furiously for fear of
transgressing the rules of modesty: whence a fly is as safe on her nose, as a
thief in Sanctuary, and a flea as to had pasport may travel where it please:
Returned home she is so neat, she puts all her clothes up in the press (almost
her self too) brushing her carefully for fear of a spice of Fornication ever
since she understood, man was but dust: for the world, she desies it with all
its pompts and vanities (and it is almost all the vanity she has) and for the
Devil, she knows' all his slights and tricks so well, as that Devil must rise
betimes that couzens her; as for the Flesh she mortifies not only her own, but
that of her hoch-pot too, giving it so strong allay of Carrots and Turnips,
there is no danger of it insurrection. Mean time, she holds her Confessor and
the Patron of his order for the greatest Saints, and salutes all the rest, even
to the Dog of the House with a Beati qui inhabitant, whilst of her Faith,
there is no doubt, and for her good works, you may have a pattern of them when
you please; for she is commonly the best Bone-lace-maker in all the Parish,
though her principal Trade be making scruples of every thing (if that be not
her confessarius work more than hers) to conclude, I could wish my soul with
hers, at any time, but not my Body beshrew me) especially on Lady Eves and
other days of devotion, when she Fasts, wears Hair, and Disciplines it most
intolerably.

CHARACTER.
Of an Immitable Widow.
SHe is a Tree thunder-strook, the more sacred, the more unfortunate; who had
long since been dead, when death bereaved her of her better part, but for those
living branches engrafted on her stock (for and in whom (more than for and in
her self) she lives: She has a quite different computation from other Widows,
counting from her Husbands life, in the other world, not from his death in this;
nor from his mortality, but his immortality, which every day augmenting by
consequence her memory of him, every day augments: Whence to show she mourns
not for custom, but for the dead, and eternally, not by the year; she hangs her
appertement all freshly in black at the years end, when other widows would be
unhanging theirs: Its not changing color sufficiently, declaring that it is dyed
in grain: for the rest, she on a second marriages but as a kind of Adultry.
Incontinence makes necessary and custom lawful, so far below noble woman, as
her high thoughts disdain ever to descend into it: or at best accounts it but a
kind of Theft, or robbing of the dead; and for hers should hold it a kind of
sacrilege or stealing from the Saints in Heaven: nay, she counts your Widows
marry so soon again, but a kind of Murtheresses, killing their first Husband
outright, when th're but half dead once; whilst hers long as she lives
(indespight of death) can never wholly dye, on half of him (at least) surviving
still in her.

CHARACTER.
Of a more Imitable Widow.
SHe shoots off Husbands as fast as Boys Pellets out of Pot-guns; and one
discharged, all her care is to charge again: she is as curious in her mourning
dress, as if she rather courted a new Husband than mourned for the old; and
her Glass and woman have more ado with putting on her veil and peak than
(in the days of revelling) with putting on her masking clothes; nor are these
any other in effect she only making an injurd joy under an outward grief; her
veil fitly serving her to hide her laughter in public; as her dark chamber
in private, for the rest, she hides all under her widdow-hood: before company
yet she makes sorrowful faces, and squeezes out a tear or two, but alone with
her woman she laughs at it; and all their discourse is, Who is the proper'st
man, and who would make the best husband, etc. She counts her self widdow'd not
for her bosom but her Bed (making difference still betwixt a Husband and a
Friend) and therefore procures to have that always warm, when her Husband is
scarcely cold; whom she presently forgets, never making mention of a former
Husband, but only as a spur unto the latter, with a God be with him, he would
have done thus and thus; and if they don't so too, is as ready to bid God be
with them: so as it is only a good dowry and the Itch oth' Tail that makes her
marry again, which satisfied once, she cares not how soon she is rid of you; or
unsatiat, one suffices not, but she still longs for more: Wherefore were I to
marry her, I Would be sure, one condition oth' marriage should be, she should be
no more a Widow, or (be shrew me) I Would have none of her.

CHARACTER.
Of a Fifth-Monarchy man.
HE Equivocates when he says, Thy kingdom come, meaning his own; and in the
mean time, looks upon all Magistrates as Usurpers of his right: He is a Saint,
turned inside outward, or all sanctity without and none within: his
congregation is all in querpo, though they boast the Spirit, and they care for
no cloak but Hypocrisy: It Is question whether he more hates the Church for
Ceremonies, or Ceremonies for the Church; certainly, he is more familiar with
the Lord, than to stand on Ceremonies with him any more; and he so hates a
Gentleman, as he cannot endure God should be served like one. Mean time, down
goes the Churches, and White Hall should follow too, might he but have his
will: a Barn as well as a Church or Palace, serving them, (like savages) both
for their spiritual and temporal Monarchy: He counting any place good enough
to preach in; and any place indeed is good good enough for his preaching, who
teaches nothing but sedition and infatuation, whence whilst others with their
Sermons people Heaven, he peoples Bedlam or the common Iaile; calling mirth,
prophanes; melancholy, Godliness; Obedience luke-warmnesse; and Faction, zeal:
making altogether as unchristian work with Baptizing them, as he dos with
children. In fine, other Sects run low, but he is upon the Lees, calling himself
only pure, like him who being all over defiled with dirt, bragged that he had
never a spot on him; so he thanks God with the Pharisee that he is not like
other men, and in that he says true, for he is far worse than they: As for his
Fift-Monarchy, he may expect it when all the world is mad, till when he must
give all the world leave to believe that he is so*

HE is the only persecutor of Ladies, and they may as well be quit of their
Shaddows as of him, he follows them without any regard of Time and place,
visiting them a mornings ever they are up, and scarcely gives them leave a
nights to go to bed: whence they compare him with every thing that's
troublesome, and comparisons (you know) are odious: He is their vexation in
their Chambers, their distraction in the Church, nor can they scarce be private
and at ease for him* In their Clossets, or on their close-stools, and when they
take Coach, they must have a guard of Swiz at the Boot, or else he will enter
whether they will or no. But what do I talk of a guard? when like a spright he
penetrates any place, and is as good as a Canon, or Petard to force his
entrance: whence he becomes so fearful to every one, as they fright children
with only saying he comes; and old folks who weary out others are a weary of
his company: whence he is in every ones Letanys, with deliver us good Lord: and
they pray against him as against the plague, he being far the more incurable
malady of the two; and he who knew a remedy against the Gout and him, would
soon be richer than Mayern, which makes them study it, and many remedies have
bin thought upon: Some having assayed to make him blush, but that they find is
impossisible; others have invented several excuses, but none would serve the
turn, not so much as that of business, sleeping, nor taking Physic, etc. Ill
looks, nor ill words wont do it, and for that way of diversion, some Ladies have
found out of late, of keeping handsome Gentlewomen and Chambermaids, they find
it afterward but redoubles of Access, what drives him soonest away, is their
threatening to put him him to charges of Suppers and Collations, but that he
puts off too, with his wonted impudence; only one, who has traveled many
Countries, and learned many rare Receipts, of late has found out a way, to
Quarrel him out of their Companys; and to perfect the cure, add but a good
beating to it, and it is thought, he will never dare to return again.

CHARACTER.
Of a French Dancing Master in England.
A French Dancer or Balladin, thinks himself a Palladin of France, when he
co^mences Master and ceases to be Usher once: betwixt whom and the French
Tailor there has been long contention who should be most modish and liker a
Gentleman; till the Dancing Master carried it clearly away at last, and but
for his Pochet might sometimes pass for one; for he is the only Master of the
Revels now, and makes all dance after his Fiddle. He has the Regimen of your
Ladies Legs, (nay little Montague pretended higher yet) and is the sole
pedagogue of the Feet, teaching them not only the French pace but the French
language too, as Coupez, passez, levez, etc. which they understand as perfectly
as English. He fetches you up in your Dance with a hei courage, as your Carter
does his Horses with a Whip; and is so choleric sometimes, as he is beaten for
his pains, and taught to know that he is far better at his feet than hands* he
gos a Pilgrimage to Paris every year, and distributes his new Branles Gavots
and Sarabands, like precious Relics amongst his Scholars at his return,
speaking as reverently, and with as great devotion of Monseour Provost as your
Pilgrims do of the Saints, of the Shrines they have visited: In fine, he lives
a merry life and a long; for his dancing days are never done, and he is a
brave fellow all the year, but on a Bal or Grand-Ballet night without compare:
Only, I Would council him to hide his Kit when he goes abroad, or if the Saints
spy it, it is but pretending its strings are made of the guts of the Beast, and
that they play at the wedding of Antichrist with the Whore of Babylon; to
break it like your English-Fiddles about the Fiddlers ears, against whom their
persecution is so great, as it would even extend it self to the sign of the Cat
and Fiddle too, if it durst play but so loud as to be heard by them.

CHARACTER.
Of your Town-Talkers.
YOur Town Talkers are a company in Town, who make a Trade of talking of every
thing; they work journey work, and are excellent embroiderers of lies; any
ground will serve them and it is ordinary with them to add o's and ciphers to set
it the better off. They deal more by conjecture* than Almanac makers, and are
such expert Chemists, they can extract certainty out of likelihood at any time.
They wish more for ill news, than ingrossers of Corn for dear years; and are
sorry with Caligula, when no public calamity happens in their time. They
would be glad the dearest friend they had should be hanged, only to afford them
news; and when they have any, are as pregnant with it, as Spanish gynets are
with air. They hunt with full cry, and run faster away with a rumor, than a
pack of northern Hounds do with a full scent. Their chiefest game is who, and
who? and they make more marriages, than Justices oth' Peace. As for Weddings
now the Arches are down, they are the only Bawdy court, making Adamites of all
the young people in the Town; and instead of the Star Chamber, they censure
every one: they will venture the repute of liars twenty times, for that of
prophets once, and make such have as they prevent times bringing truth to
light. In fine, it is natural to them, to speak ill of every one, amongst the
rest, making bold sometimes with us in the Country, they are not to take it
ill, if this once we make as bold with them in Town.

CHARACTER.
Of a horrible wicked and deboished person.
HE is all over Guilty, whilst others are but parcel guilt, his words,
actions, cogitations and all; his mind is a room all hung with Aritin^
Pictures, and the Contemplation of them is all his Devotion. He is so excellent
a chemist as he can extract Bawdry out of any thing: and makes Cato speak it,
nay Solomon and David too: He near sees woman, but he lusts her, strips her
naked, and enjoys her strait in imagination; when he Fathers the Children of it
upon himself, nor thinks he it dishonor to belly the honor of any one. Every
thing with him, is incentive unto Lust; and every woman Devil, enough to tempt
him to it; silk-gowns and wastcoteirs all alike, he playing at women, just as he
does at Cards, where every suit in their turns is turned up Trump; he watches
wenches just as Tumblers do Rabbets, ready still to throw himself Corpse perdu
after them; whence he has more diseases than an Hospital of which he lies in
every spring and fall, when his sweat is a curse of his own, not Adams sin:
Mean time, his word is a merry life and a short, and I know not how merry it is,
but I Am sure it is short enough; he consuming just like a Candle on both ends,
betwixt Wine and Women, without which he holds there is no pleasure in this
world, and for the other he would fain be Atheist, and believe there is none at
all; whilst his manners and ignorance supply his want of Faith: for he lives
like one, and knows no soul he has, repents more the omitting an evil action,
than any Saint would the committing it: His discourse is all oaths, and his
oaths are all his prayers (he never but in them remembering God:) he laughs at
Heaven, and imagines Hell only, a pretty winter Parlour, thinks godliness and
Religion but folly and hypocrisy; and finally for the narrow way to Paradise,
knows no other, but the common road to Maidenhead.

CHARACTER.
Of a valiant man.
HE is only a man, your Coward and Rash, being but Tame and Savage Beasts; his
courage is still the same, and drink cannot make him more valiant, nor danger
less; his valor is enough to leaven whole Armies, and he is an Army him self
worth an Army of other men: His sword is not always out like childrens
Daggers, but he is always last in beginning quarrels, though first in ending
them: He holds honor (though delicate as crystal) yet not so slight and
brittle to be broak and cracked with every touch; therefore (though most wary of
it) is not querilous nor punctilious; he is never troubled with passion, as
knowing no degree, beyond clear courage, and is always valiant but never
furious. He is the more gentle in the chamber, more feirce he is in the field;
holding boast (the cowards valor) and cruelty (the Beasts) unworthy a valiant
man: He is only coward in this, that he dares not do an unhandsome action. In
fine, he can only be overcome by discourtesie, and has but one deffect; he
cannot talk much, to recompense which he dos the more.

CHARACTER.
Of a Proud one.
SHe has as much in her of the ancient Counteship as would have served six of
Queen Elizabeth's Countesses with their Coachmen and Footmen bare, their
Cup Bearer serving them on the knee; and women waiting about their Canopy of
state; yet is she neither Countess nor Lady neither, but only of pleasure,
and at courtesy of the country. She looks high, and speaks in a Majestic
tone, like one playing the Queens part at the Bull, and is ready to say, bless
ye my good people all, as often as she passes by any company; she adding only
disobligingnes to her dishonor, whilst she would be thought more honorable by
disobligingnesse; and is but like those tradesmen, who when they have custom
enough, grow proud and to disdainful, and must be sued for their ware, whilst
those who want it, are forced to sue to you: to hide and plaster it the
better, she has two countefeit vizzards, her painting and her modesty; both
which she puts of a nights, when she lies with her own face, though not with
her own Husband; she pretending by her stately carriage (it seems) the honor
of Foundresse oth' order of undisparag'd Concubines, nor gets she any thing
else by her stateliness; but only, when soever there is a Parliament of
Curtesans, she shall be taken not for one of the Commons, but the House of
Lords.

CHARACTER.
Of an all-admirable Person.
BEauty alone is too secular a Theme for praise and virtue too Monastical an
one; together they make an excellent conjuction, so they are accompanied with
goodness and obligingness; disobliging Beauty else repelling as fast as it
attracts (and loosing all its graces by infusing them into vessels
disobligingness makes bottomless) neither is virtue ever so honored, when its
goodness is contracted in it self, as when it is diffusively good to all: To
speak separatly than of all these perfections, which she has jointly to
admiration: For her Beauty all you call sweet and ravishing is in her Face; a
cheerfulness it is joy for to behold, and a perpetual sunshine without any
clouds at all, joined with such attractive virtue, as she draws all to a
certain distance, and there detains and suspends them, with reverence and
admiration; none ever daring to approach her nigher, nor having power to go
farther off; whence that beauty, which in the days of Ethnicisme, had excited
to Idolatry; now only excites to piety and devotion; sufficient alone to fill
the place with votius tables, and even in picture to work miracles; she being
still the greater miracle herself, and so all surprising as a disease, but as
taking as her eyes, would be epidemical, and soon depopulate all the world.
Then she is so obliging, civil, and courteous, as obligingness, civility, and
courtesy seem to be born with her, and it is feared will dye and be buried
with her in the same grave when she dies; Her speech and behavior being all so
gentle, sweet and affable, as you may talk of Magic, but there is none charms
but she; nor has complacency and observance more ready at a Beck; she (to the
shame and confusion of the proud and imperious) doing more with one gentle
entreaty than they with all their loud iterated commands. Whence she alone with
her sweetness and gentleness, would tame fierce Lions, and civilize
barbarousest Savages; and if there be any fierceness and savagenesse in the
world, it is only where she is not, and because she cannot be every where:
whence Heaven seems only to have made her so beautiful, to make virtue more
lovely in her, the one serving to adorn the other; as her noble obligingness
and goodness does for the ornament of both.

CHARACTER.
Of a gallant Warrior.
HE is a Lover, and the War is his Mistress, whom he courts so nobly as not
only she, but all are enamored on him: all his thoughts are on her, and all
his Ambition is to deserve her favors, and declare himself worthy of her; he
doing that in effect, which others only talk off; hazard and expose his life
for his Mistress, as often as brave Action calls him to it: Mean time, compare
him but with your other fine Gallants of the Town, and you will see what little
pitiful things they will seem compared to him (just as Puppets in comparison
with men) he in the head of an Army, with brave fierceness in the field; they
with little meens and countenances, leading a dance at home; they slickt with
pomatum, all patcht and powdered; he all covered ore with dust and sweat, the
powder of the Canon frizling her hair, and every patch hiding or showing some
noble wound; they finally proud of the favor of some knot or ribban (their
Mistress Dog has honor to wear as well as they) he gloriously returning home
with victory, a favor only greatest, Heroes are honored with: After all
which, more to increase their shames, and his glory he beats them at their own
weapons too (to show himself every ways a Conqueror) and provs the gallanter
courtier, as far surpassing them in the gentle Arts of Peace, as in the noble
ones of War: With good reason they feigned Venus then enamoured of Mars; only
I wonder they fabled him born of immortal race, since in my conceit the fable
had been much handsomer, had they feigned (like our Mars's here) his noble
actions only Immortalizing him.

CHARACTER.
Of a miserable old Gentlewoman.
HEr word is, pity any thing should be lost, whilst others say, pity any
thing should be saved, as she saves it; for she hoards up Candles ends, and
scapes up Grease; being so rich in Kitchin-stuff, as her very clothes are
become part of it; excepting her brancht-velvet-gown, (thin as an old groat
with the figures all worn out) which she keeps more carefully for Sundays and
Holy Days; nor wonders she at the Jews wearing their cloths in the Desert
forty years, for she has a petty-coat she has worn as long; her stomacher being
a piece of venerable Antiquity, derived from the Velvet of Queen Mary's gown;
and her prayer Book was a Relic of her Grand-mothers, till falling into the
Dripping-pan (by simpathy) the Dog and Cat fell out about it, and at last
agreed to pray on it: since when for want of a Book, her ordinary prayer
(without Book) is a God help ye without Alms, for which the Beggars curse her
as fast; only your sneezers thank her, because they expect no more from her;
for her house, you enter it with the same horror as you'de do one, the witches
kept their Sabot in; she sitting purring in the Chimney-corner like a
melancholy Cat, mumping like an old Ape when she saluteth you; and when
shee'de Regale you indeed, sends for a bottle of Sack from her Closet (as
everlasting as the Widows cruch of Oil) has served this twelve months all
strangers that come to house, together with a Box of mermelate so dry, as the
flies have given 't over long since, in despair of extracting any more
sweetness out of it. In fine, to tell you all the sordid poverty of her house,
I should never make an end: wherefore to conclude, her Coffers are only rich
(whilst she is poor) where she hoard up all her old spurroials and Harry
Angels, with her deaths head and Gymal Rings, for whosoever she means to make
her Heir, which I Am sure shall not be me, I laugh at her so much.

CHARACTER.
Of a Ladies Little Dog.
HE is native of Bolonia, though of no great House (as it is imagined) yet he is
his Ladies Favorite, and the Envy of her gallants, for his lying with her a
night, whilst he innocently snugs and never thinks of his happiness, and
kisses her a days, without imagining any harm; for which they suspect him of
frigidity, and certainly he is so cold as the Chimney-corner can scarce keep
him warm; where he lies in his panier (like Diogenes in his Tub) snarling and
barking at every on comes in; whence he is imagined to be one of his Cinick
sect, yet all Caresse and make much of him, for his Ladies sake, and that
proverbs together, Love me, and love my Dog. Mean time, his chiefest bravery
consists in his chollar, which you would take for the chollar of some Order (of
which there are Carpet Knights enough, who would gladly like him be never out
of Lady's laps) but that he has no fellow for littleness, all other Dogs
seeming Giants unto him; and he would scarce pass for a Mastiff amongst the
Pigmies: though in Homers battle betwixt the Frogs and Mice, he would have
served rarely well, for mounting the Caval'ry, and have put the Infantry
terribly to Rout: but that he was spoiled in the managing; he (what betwixt
carrying in the Arms at home, and Coach abroad) having legs more for ornament
than use: Whence he has (certainly) much to answer for Idleness, but for that
he cares not, who never thinks on death (though his life may well be compared
unto a span, his body being no more) nor cares he for what becomes of Dogs in
the other world, he enjoying all his Heaven and Felicity in this; having a
Velvet Cushion for his couch; walking on Turkey Carpets like the Grand
Seignior, being fed as daintily as the Infanta or the King of Spain; nor can he
wag his Tail for any thing, but he has it strait.

CHARACTER.
Of your Ladies Coronel.
NOt to be Soldier, he was made Coronel at first, and to escape fighting, h'as
remaind so ever since; whence he is a superlative without a positive, or like a
Hovell all rouff without foundation; you may call him soldier yet in
extraordinary, as they do Courtiers who ordinarily have nothing to do at Court,
no more than he in the Field ere since he brought the name of Coronel to Town,
as some did formerly to the suburbs that of Lieutenant or Captain. Mean time, I
know not whether the Ladies made him Coronel, but I am sure they have marred
him for ever being one; he caring more for their simpring, than either for
grinning honor dead, or smiling on alive: So there is more danger of his over
complementing, than over coming an enemy; and for his sword, it can so little
boast its blood, as all its gentility lies in the Hilt and Belt; and it derives
its honor more from the scabboard than the blade, notwithstanding (though I
will not absolutely say, he is a Soldier in his heart) certainly in his words
he is a famous one, and for such he passes with my Ladies Gentlewoman, who for
the title of Coronels wife is content to marry him: When she is called Madam
and puts hard for Lady too, fathering far more children on him in Peace, than
ever he made fatherless in war.

CHARACTER.
Of a Schoolboy.
ONe may well say of him, as another did of his Son, that his mother had prayed
so long for a Boy, as he feared he would prove a Boy all his life, to which
nothing more confers than their breeding in Grammar Schools, where they study
Boys so long, they are marred for ever studying men: coming thence so rude as
in compare with those bred at home, they are like ragged Colts of the Commons,
compared with Stable-breed; he has nothing so ready, as his Hat at his fingers
ends; which he twirls about in mighty agony; when he is out and knows not what
to say, and if you question him, he looks another way, as if he sought an
Answer in the Seeling, or the Floor, and scraps you just such a leg in
answering you, as Jack oth' clock-house going (about to strike) mean while he
speaks in the same tone he recites his lesson in, as fast as a Horse running away
with his Rider, and as loud as all the company were deaf: ever and annon
putting his Nose in's cap, and sneering when he is out of countenance: for his
learning it is all capping verses, and Faggotting Poets looser lines, which fall
from him as disorderly as Faggot-sticks, when the band is broak; of his manners
I say nothing, for he has none at all; nor is there any hope he will ever
learn; his head being so doz'd with knocking, and breech hardened with whipping,
as h'as neither fear nor wit. Judge then what hope his Parents have of him, and
what comfort in his schooling, where he has learnt so many miching and sneaking
tricks, as had I a son, I loved, I Would send him to Paris-garden, as they do Apes
to learn tricks there, rather than such tricks as they commonly learn at School.

CHARACTER.
Of one that shall be namelesse.
HE is the only famous Ruffin of the Time, and is so exemplary vicious, as in
beating their children, they bid them take warning by such an on: his vices are
heavy enough to weigh down a side, whence anciently had he bin to have fought,
they would have desired him, not to pray that the gods might not have known
that he was there: He drunk formerly, when he should be fighting, and now talks
only of fighting in his drink; whence he is rather scandalous than dangerous,
and they persecute him more for his Words than Actions; he cries out on others
not suffering like himself; like the Fox, who having lost his own Tail, would
needs persuade all others out of their; nor is it zeal but envy in him, like
your Boys, who cry a whip Coachman, when they cannot get up themselves: Mean
time, he Fathers his decayed Fortune on the Wars, when it is well known, it was
rather caused by his Engagements with women, than with men: and were his
Creditors Books well examined, you should find his name there long before the
Muster master could show it you in his; which remaining uncanceld still, he
thinks to do it by wit instead of money; and to break his Creditors by breaking
jests on them; but they are too wise to be witty now a days, and he too foolish
not to remember how the times are so changed, as those who formerly for
jesting, might have begged others Estates, may now for jesting chance to loose
their own, Mean while, more prisons contend for him, than Cities anciently for
Homer, on the gates of one of them, you may well write his Epitaph, for it is
like to be his Sepulcher.

CHARACTER.
Of a pretty sweet Innocence.
HEr Innocence is the pure white garment that she wore in Baptism, which in
others looses gloss, and is quickly sullyed; but in her holds color, and
conserve its candor still, it is no witless, but guiltless Innocence, such as
was our first Parents in Paradise, of which had they been but as wary and
tenacious, they had not lost it so easiely, nor had Paradise been lost so soon:
She knows no harm, and therefore dos, nor imagines none, her ignorance being a
far better and surer guard, for her Innocence than others knowledges. She hates
Vice almost as much by Nature as by Grace; nor is there any more beholding to
both than she: She is virtue's white-paper, whilst others are only blotted,
or course blotting paper at the best; and is only fit to write Heavens
dictates on. Her Inocent stole being of the same stuff and piece, your Angels
are made off, which could she conserve like them, but unblemisht and unspotted
she might go to Heaven in it without Translation, which her noble birth and
breeding promises for her in her Infancy; nor is there any doubt, but her high
Honor and virtuous mind, will fully perform when she comes to Age all that
they have promised.

CHARACTER.
Of a scrupulous Honor.
NEver was curious Beauty more nice nor shie of sun and wind; nor frugall
Bravery of contracting spot or stain, than she of conserving her fame and
honor pure and unblemished: having such care of its integrity, she dares not
trust rumor with it, she fearfully apprehends like some fierce Mastiff,
rending and tearing every thing it fastens its teeth upon; this makes her walk
so warily for fear of awakening it, so far she is from irritating it, to bark
or bite: mean time she strictly examins all her words and actions on this nice
Interrogatory, What will the people say? Nor moves she apace without first
considering where she sets her foot; by which prudent conduct of hers, she
clearly demonstrats, that howsoever foul and dirty the world is, it is but
picking out ones way, and they may walk clean enough. And all this she dos
purely from the principals of high Honor and noble virtue, without affectation
or hypocrisy; and the care shee'as of the precious odor of her fame, never
exposed (she knows) to the subtle theft of public air without some
detrement, whence no Ermine is purer, nor Angel clothed in flesh could be more
careful of preserving its innocence; nor virtues self could it be seen with
mortal eyes, could ever gain more love nor reverence than she, who of all women
alive, has only the true receipt of stopping rumors mouth, of silencing
calumny and detraction, and purchasing the esteem and admiration of all.

CHARACTER.
Of a Fleerer.
OF all wrinckles in the Face (next to those of comely Age) give me a hearty
laughter, or a frown at least, concealing nothing of dissimulation, but for
your fleering, it is always the counterfeit vizard of the False, the Descembler,
and the Treacherous (and if it proceed from simplicity it is as bad on the other
side) to add the more to its deformity, it has somewhat in it too of the
wrinkles of an Ape, makes it look more ridiculously and scurvely; it is a screwed
face only made to insinuate into your breast, a warpt on, declaring there is no
trust to it; having as many double rinds in it, as a Bulbus root; you may
annihilate it as soon as peel it out of all of them. 'Thas nothing in it of the
physiognomy of an honest man; open and cheerful with eyes more smiling than
the mouth: in smoothnes not wrinckles, unfolding the habit of the mind,
whilst this is a Judas face, with what will you give me for motto to its
treacherous smile, or at the worst a Scotch Presbyterian face, faining
friendship and pretending zeal only to cozen you, with all its actions fawning
and language flattery; and if I would paint a Greek Sinon it should be just
with such another physiognomy, red hair, flat nose and gogle Eyes, with
crouching posture, and fleering countenance, trust them who is list for me.

CHARACTER.
Of a Makebate.
SHe is a tattling Gossip that goes a fishing or groaping for secrets, and
tickles you under the gills, till she catches hold of you; only the politic
Eele escapes her hand, and wrigles himself out again: She tells you others
secrets, only to hook yours out of you, and baits men as they do Fishes one
with another still. She is as industrious as a Be, in flying about, and
sucking every flower; only she has the Spiders quality of making poison
instead of honey of it. For she has all her species of Arithmetique,
Multiplication, Addition, and Detraction too, only at Numeration she is
always out, making every thing more or less than it is indeed; whilst they
blame Flatterers for wanting their sicut erat to their gloria; she wants both
her gloria and sicut erat too. In fine, you have diverse Serpents so venomous,
as they infect and poison with their very breaths; but none have breathes more
infectious nor poisonous than she, who would set man and wife at dissension the
first day of their marriage, and Children and Parents the last day of their
lives; nor will Innocence ever be safe, nor conversation innocent, till such as
she be banished humane society; the bane of all societies where they come; and
if I could afford them being any where with Ariosto's Discord, it should be
only amongst mine enemies: Mean time, it is my prayer, God bless my friends
from them.

CHARACTERE.
Du Tour a la mode.
C'est une Assemble ou les Dames sont pareez pour le Bal, et ou les cheuaux
dancent un Ballet. C'est un March ou l'on n' Estale que la meilleure
Marchandice, en reservant le rest dans l' arriere Boutique. C'est une Blanque
des visages ou pour un bon, on en rencontre cent mauuais. C'est une Battle
bien rengee, ou le Baggage est derrier, ou ceux sont seulement a couvert des
^^^ips d'oeillades, qui sont au fond du Carrose, e^^u les primiers ayant fait
leur discharge ilz s'en retirent pour donner place aux autres. C'est un Festin
ou ceux qui vont en Carrose sont ^^siz a Table, et ceux qui sont par terre les
regardent, et devorent des yeux. C'est l' Eglise (...) la Gallantrie ou il y a
de la Bigotterie aussi ^ien qu' aillieurs, et ou, on va plus par Curiosite que
par devotion. C'est un Ciel qui a deu^ monuemens contrairs, ou il y a des
Estoille de toutes Grandeurs, et ou les Dames fardees, et de Reputation sont
des Commettes. C'est un Ieu des Carts ou tous les valets sont escartez. C'est
un Triomphe ou les vaincus aussz bien que les vainqueurs vont en chariot. C'est
une Medaille de la vanite du monde et vicissitude des Mondains, anex ces
Inscriptions Sic transit gloria mundi, et chacun en son Tour: en fin c'est la
ou l'on roll doucement dedans le monde, and si l'on pouuoit ainsi aller en
Paradis, on seroit aussi heureux qu' Elie.

CHARACTER.
Of a Changeable disposition.
SUre the Moon had great predominancy in her Birth, there is such a perpetual
ebb and flow of humor in her; so as you may go twice into her company, and not
twice into the same company: She is a sea without North star, and so full of
shifting sands, as there is no sailing by Compass with her, nor without the
Plumet still in hand: she is all in the extremities without medium; and now
it is stormy, now sunshine with her: Now she is merry, now exceeding sad; now
fond, now froward; now infinitely obligeing, and as disobliging now again.
Whence who observe her humor are tired out and become giddy strait, and she is
only safe in it, in that flattery knows not where to find her out: Mean time,
she falls often out with you, and no wonder, for she falls out with her self as
often; and now affirms a thing, and strait gives her self the lie; now does a
thing, and presently is displeased at it; ascenting or contradicting, as she is
either in good or bad humor and disposition; and when that is, you must go to
a Cunning woman to know, for she is not cunning woman enough to know her self;
her humor being so marred by too much humouring. In fine, she is a very
Camelion or Proteus in disposition, changing fashions of mind oftener than the
French does fashions of Body; and did she change shapes as often as she does
minds, none would know her, and the Reason of all this is (perhaps) only
because she dos not know her self.

CHARACTER.
Of a Physician.
BY sin, sickness first entered into the World; and by sickness, death and the
Physician. Behold, how some derive his Pedigree; others say, that as Lawyers
engender processes and laws abuses, so physicians do Maladyes. Certain it is, he
and death are but Cozen Germains once removed, and both of the same Trade and
occupation of killing men; though the Physician escapes (by money and
corruption of the Judge) and poor Death only is condemned for it. An others
Reason why never Physician yet held up his hand at Bar for killing Patient, is,
because the Crowners quest have found it self-murder in those who take physic
of them. Certainly, they do more harm and good (for all his saying, that did
not Physicians kill men so fast, the world would be so full of them, as ther'd
be no living one by another) for with their purging they but fill the world
with ordurs; and for one stool they give a man, they give him twenty pains,
diseases, and molestations; who say that we must honor Physicians for
necessity: mean only, that they are necessary evils, against whom David
prayed (infallibly) when he desired to be delivered from his necessities; mean
time, as it is said, necessity has no law, so would it could be said, that
necessity had no Physician too. But this now, is no ways to be understood by
our English Physicians, but only those of other Nations, who with their six
penny fees, have skill accordingly, whilst ours in with their golden fees have
golden skill.

CHARACTER.
Of the Authors Idea, or of a Character.
IT gives you the hint of discourse, but discourses not; and is that in mass
and in got, you may coin and wyer-draw to infinite; it is more Senica than
Cicero, and speaks rather the language of Oracles than Orators: every line a
sentence, and every two a period. It says not all, but all it says is good,
and like an Air in Music is either full of clozes, or still driving toward a
close: it is no long-winded exercise of spirit, but a forcible one, and therefore
soonest out of breath; it is all matter, and to the matter, and has nothing of
superfluity, nothing of circumlocution; so little comporting with mediocrity,
as it or extols to Heaven, or depresses unto Hell; having no mid' place for
Purgatory left. It Is that in every sort of writing delights most, and though
the Treatise be gold, it is the Jewel still, which the Author of Characters,
like your Lapidary produces single, whilst others Goldsmith- like inchass them
in their works. It Is a Portraiture, not only oth' Body, but the soul and mind;
whence it not only delights but teaches and moves withal, and is a Sermon as
well as Picture to every one. In fine, it is a short voyage, the Writer holds out
with equal force, still coming fresh unto his journeys end, whilst in long
ones, they commonly tire and falter on their way: And to the Reader it is a
garden, not journey, or a feast, where by reason of the subjects variety, he is
never cloyed, but at each Character, as at a new service, falls too with fresh
Appetite.

CHARACTER.
Of a Dull-fellow.
HE is the mute of the company, and only plays a part in the Dumb show; or if
he say any thing like a pump, he labors for it, and presently his spirits sink
down again, and leave him dry. He sits nodding in company, like a sleepy person
overwatcht; and rouse him with a question, and he stares on you, like one newly
awaked out of sleep: he looks with his mouth, and thinks you would sell him a
bargain, and ask him any thing, and it is impossible to ask him any thing he
understands. He may thank God then for making him when he did, for they make no
more such Dunces now a days; so the species when he dies is like to be extinct
in him: when if he be saved, it must be contrary to the proceeding of our
Sessions's, and rather by his Ignorance than by his Book. And if he be Bookish
with all, he is yet the greater Dunce, being just like a narrow neckt bottle,
hastily turned down-ward, upon surprise you can get nothing out of him, and
only premeditation can save him from being begged: Whence like a dull Horse,
let him go on his pace, and he advances somewhat, but spur him and through
diffidence of his strength, his wit fails and tongue shuffles, falters, trips,
stumbles and falls flat down at last, never arriving to a period. So goes he on
plodding his Dunstable highway, till he becomes a famous scholar at the last:
Of such wood (or rather blocks) they commonly now adays making most of their
great Doctors in the University.

CHARACTER.
Of a bold abusive wit.
HE talks madly, dash, dash without any fear at all, and never cares how he
bes^^^ters others, or defiles himself; nor ceases he till he has quite run
himself out of breath; when no wonder, if to fools he seem to get the start of
those, who wisely pick out their way, and are as fearful of abusing others as
themselves: He has the Buffoons privilege of saying and doing any thing
without exceptions, and he will call a jealous man Cuckold, a child of
doubtful birth bastard, and a Lady of suspected honor Whore, and they but
laugh at it; and all scholars are pedants and Physicians, Quaks with him, when
to be angry at it is the avowing it. Then in Ladies chambers, he will tumble
Beds, and towse your Ladies dressed up unto the height, to the hazard of a
Bed-staff thrown at his head, or rap over the fingers with a Busk, and that is
all; only in this, he is far worse than the Buffoon, since they study to
delight, this only to offend; they to make merry, but this only to make you
mad, whence woe be to ye if he discovers any imperfection or fault in you, for he
never finds a breach, but he makes a hole of it, nor a hole but he tugs at it
so long till he tear it quite; giving yt for reason of his incivility, because
(forsooth) it troubles you) which would make any civil man cease troubling you.
So he wears his wit, as Bravo's do their swords, to mischief and offend others,
not as Gentlemen to defend themselves: and it is crime in him, what is ornament
in others; he being only a wit at that, at which a good wit only is a fool.
Especially, he triumphs over your modest man; and when he meets with a simple
body, passes for a wit, but a wit indeed makes a simplician of him; so goes he
persecuting others till some one or other at last, (as chollerick as he is
abusive) cudgel him for his pains, when he goes grumbling away in mighty
choler, saying, they understand not Jest, when indeed it is rather he.

CHARACTER.
Of troublesome kindness.
HIs kindness is as troublesome as others Ceremonies, and his stroakings as
painful as others strokes; he asks ye with a great deal of joy when he sees
ye, whether you be there or no? and shakes you by the hand till has shook it
out of joint, telling you twenty times, he is glad to see you well; And if he
embrace you, and get you in the hug, you had as good fall into the hands of a
Cornish Wrastler: he asks you so often how you do? as he makes you doubt
whether you be well or no, when indeed it is rather his disease than yours: He is
troublesome at Table with bidding you heartily welcome, and often drinking to
you; and being a little tippled he kisses man, woman and child, and out gos
all his secrets whispered in your ear: (the shaking by the hand still, in all
his kindnesses entering as a necessary ingredient) but above all he is most
troublesome when you are sick, with his how d'yees? and pray be well, so as you
would give as much to be rid of his visits, as you are forced to give the
Physician for his: neither are you at quiet when he is absent, but still he
writes unto you, and his Letters are filled with commendations, till they run
over the margent; and he be forced to end with my paper will give me leave to
write no more. In fine, his kindness is rather that of children than of a
friend; rather out of weakness than judgment; more luscious than sweet,
clearly demonstrating that one may far sooner be cloid with such slight junkets
than with more solid food.

CHARACTER.
Of a Iansenist.
A Iansenist is a new name for an Heretic, and the first Heretic that ever
was Catholic: Let us imagine then (to please the Mollenists) your Iansenists
condemned for Heretics at Rome, by the Pope ex Cathedra, with all his
Cardinals, and the Jesuits making Bonfires for joy. Then more to increase their
joy and Bonfires; let us imagine them again burnt for French Hugonots in Spain,
the Jesuits (of their wonted charity) assisting them to the fire, and exhorting
them to die penitent; which they refuse (like obstinate Heretics as they are)
accusing the Jesuits violent wrestling their Propositions to Heresy, which
were Catholic enough before, telling them They take their measures of
Catholic or Heretic, as they are contrary, or according to their dogmas and
principalls; and for their condemnation, say that they are rather unfortunate
then criminal, and that oftentimes the sentence may be just, and yet the person
condemned innocent. After which return we to France, and imagine the horrible
bustle that is there: The Gallicane Church, not admitting their ipse dixit, so
easily and absolutely without distinction as the rest do in Spain and Italy
etc. but there the Iansenists struggle with the Molinists still, and write
diverse pernicious Books against them, amongst the rest, one lately entitled the
Provincials, making a terrible combustion (confuted by the Hangman, who
publicly burned it.) They springing up as fast as Hydras every day, whilst
the Jesuits quell them as fast, like Hercules with his club; for which finally
they triumph, representing Father Arnoult with all the Ringleaders of the
Iansenists blown up like Crackers in a Puppet play, and all their followers at
noyce and hubbub of it, running away like frighted dogs with bottles of
excommunication at their tails, with all the Jesuits Scholars houting after
them, and all those of different Religions in other Nations, making their sport
at it, notwithstanding all which, Iansenius may be a very honest man.

CHARACTER.
Of a certain Nobleman
HIs Dignity at home, is double the same style abroad, and mind and person
answerable to his dignity: his titles become him as they were made for him, and
he shows greater the higher he is in place: He blazons his Arms by virtues not
colors, and his pedigree that's but boast with others, is but chronicle with
him: He remembers his Ancestors more to their praise than his own; and suffers
them to get the start of him in nothing but priority of time: he is great not
swollen, high not lofty, humble not stouping, raising his inferiors up to him,
without abasing himself to them, (this being an act of weakness, that of
power) In fine, he swells not with speaking big, but is courteous and affable to
all, holding courtesy so main an ornament of Nobility, as that Nobleman (he
imagines) disguises but himself, and puts on Pesants clothing, who is
discourteous; above all he holds loyalty so essential to a Nobleman, as who
proves disloyal once (he imagines) not only degrades himself, but even his
posterity of their Nobility.

CHARACTER.
Of an other.
HE is merry and facetious* dispatching more business with dallying and
tryfling, than others with all their plodding and seriousnes; and his grimaces
are worth all their supercilious gravity: he is your only universal Courtier,
beloved of all, and no wonder for he has kindred and alliance with every one,
calling one Father, an other Son; one Mother, another wife; giving the younger,
the ageder title still; and the old the younger, to be more facetious, and
endear himself the more: He has nothing in him of Saturnin and Tetricall, but
is all pleasant and joviall, wiping from old age, all the blemishes and
imputations cast upon it by time; and smoothing all the wrinkles of the mind,
which commonly accompany the wrinkles of the Face; nature being so fearful he
should ever grow wholly old: as it gives him a youthful mind in an aged Body
still; so whilst he enters singing, and goes out dancing in all companies
where he comes, he chases Melancholy so far away, as it can never return so
long as he is in place.

CHARACTER.
Of a Natural Beauty.
WHether a cheerful air does rise,
And elevate her fairer Eyes;
Or a pensive Heaviness:
Her lovely Eyelids does depresse,
Still the same becoming Grace
Accompanyes her Eyes and Face;
Still you'de think that habit best,
In which her Countenance last was dressed.
Poor Beauties! whom a blush or glance
Can sometimes make look fair by chance,
Or curious dress, or artfull care,
Can make seem fairer than they are,
Give me the Eyes, give me the Face,
To which no Art can add a Grace:
Give me the looks, no garb nor dress,
Can ever make more fair or less.
FINIS.
Apendex.
Of an Artificial beauty.
AN Artificial Beauty, lives poorly by shifting and borrowing, whilst your
natural one, is rich and lives on its own revenues: she is a living Picture of
her self, of which she is only the priming cloth, or rather a loame wall
plaistered and dawbed ore; for she imploys the Trowell rather than Pencill, and
her painting is so palpable, as if she sought not color to hide it, but rather
to publish it: She is always complaining now of a cold, now that she sleeps not
well a nights, that you may impute her ill looks unto that accident: She is
more troubled with her mouches or flies, than a gald horse in summer, now
giving this a remove, now a dab with the finger, as if she were killing that;
and ever and annon her glass gos out, to see if nothing needs reparation, it
being so fragile a tenement, as the very sun and air decays it, whence she is
so fearful of every breath, that we may well say of her, that her colluctation
is against the spirits of the air: Mean time, she is as dexterous at the Fan
as a Butcher at the Fly-flap, or Fencer on my Lord Mayors-day, at the two
handed sword: and but imagine how aprehensive she must be of the fire of the
other world, when she apprehends so much the fire of this: to which she dares
not approach, nor so much as laugh for fear of warping her complexion, so it
alters her humor, as well as her feature, and renders her so diffident of her
self, as she is still seeking out dark corners, to vent her false and
counterfeit visage, as false coyners and cousening Tradesmen to put off their
false money and counterfeit Merchandise: She having only this advantage by
it, that no shame can make her blush, nor sickness pale. If it be an advantage
to become wholly shameless, and have a face, any sick bodies may be as fair as
hers.

CHARACTER.
Of a Petty-Politick.
PEtty-Policie, is only wisdom distemperd into Craft, and who use it may well
be styled crafty, but never wise. It Is to Policy of State, as pedling to
merchanding; or rather as Mous-traps and Tinder-boxes to Archimedes Glasses of
fyring Navies, and Caesar's machins of expugning Towns; never great spirit used
it, nor great action was done by it yet, and all the advantage it has, it
rather steals than gains. It pieces not out the Lions skin with the Foxes
tail, but is all Fox skin, and even stincks again. It ever walks vizzarded,
and you can never know its true Face, but may always know that it is false:
Like the Gordian knot it amuses and puzzles you, and may be cut far sooner than
untyed: Mean time who use it, may well be styled Politiques In decimo sexto,
and are to State-politicians, as Apes to men, more full of tricks and quirks
than they, and nothing else; or like your lesser Wheels, which seem to whirle
faster about than great ones, though their progress be far less; In fine, it is
treachery in fight, perfidiousnes in Love, cousenage in gaming, deceit in
bargaining; and whosoever uses it in plain English is Knave, though the
qualifying terms be a Politician.

Of a hom-bred Country-Gentleman.
HIs Clothes are more gaudy than fashionable, and his Face more out of fashion
than his clothes: He knows not how to look in company* and is shameface'd, and
yet Impudent; either at arms end with you, or in your bosom presently: and
spaniel-like stroke him, and he leaps into your lap, if not, he snarls and
offers to bite at you. His chiefest discourse is of his Hawks and Hounds, and
he will tell Ladies what a fine Horse he has: He is never at so high a flow of
talk, as after a Horse-race, and then it ebs by degrees until the next again:
He drinks, and it is Gentleman like when he is drunk with Wine, but he is such a
clown, as he will be drunk with Beer; when he fumes and vapors it most
fearfully. For wenching it is the Innocent'st vice he has, for he is too
miserable to go the charges of silk-gowns, and wastecotiers for fear of
Trapanning he dare not venture on: Mean time, his man John and he have many a
dry dialogue about his marriage, and he waits on Ladies with fear and
trembling, at the horrible charges and expenses they may put him too, being
never willingly at more than a bottle of Ale or a pound of Cheries at a time;
and for Hide-Park, Spring-garden, and the new Exchange, he abhors the very name
of them, so unless he have a good estate; it is long enough err he get a wife
in town, and if he have, twenty to one, but some wife at last gets him, whom he
posts down as soon as may be, preaches good Housewifery unto her, has some new
religion preached unto him, with which he edifies and gets children apace, and
becomes a very Cormudgion in the Country.

CHARACTER.
Of a common Acquaintance.
HE wears out his bosom with embrasing every one, and dirties his palm with
shaking them by the hand; like a Spaniel he fawns upon every one he meets, and
will needs know you whether you will or no; he smiles on you, if you but look
on him, and smile on him, and the acquaintance strait is made: his familiarity
like engines of great swinges clasps easily, but without much violence cannot be
unclaspt again: He picks acquaintance out of every Face he has but seen once
before, and calls every one he has but seen twice a friend; after which follows
kindred and affinity (he having more Couzens than Will Summers had, and they
are much as near a kin, as Pach and he. In fine, his Plurality of acquaintance
is but a Seraglio, or wild Concubinage, whilst your friend only marries
himself to one, and the Apetite of them is a disease in him, much like that of
the Wolf, which makes him eat and ravine up every one, not knowing how of all
surfeits that of Acquaintance is the worst, and they make themselves by it so
common cheap, and contemptible, as any man that's wise, had as lieve be the
hundredth man in an Intaile, as the fiftieth man in their acquaintances.

CHARACTER.
Of a young Envoy.
IF you would deceive him tell him truth, and believe what he says If you
would deceive your self; for he thinks he has public faith enough, without
needing any particular of his own: He is as intoxicate with his instructions,
as a Scotch Presbyterian with reading the Apocalypse, and makes mists and
mysteries of state of every thing; he thinks he only understands the politic
Wheels within, whilst the rest like dull Gazers only behold the Dials hand
without, for want of experience to know, what to keep secret and what not, he
makes a secret of every thing, and not to be caught, lies still upon the catch:
so till he grow up to a greater State-engin: he is but a politic Mouse-trap
yet: at the receipt of good news, he wearies out himself and Horses with giving
advice of it; but at bad he is hushed, and he and his horses rest; only his
brain labors how to extinuate it; deny it, or turn the ill report upon the
enemy, till the shame and and novelty be over, which quaintly done, he gets
more reputation, by lying than ever any got by telling truth: So returns he at
last with reputation of a great Minister making Religion serve to State, and
State to all destructive purposes, when his salvation may well be dispaired of,
or finding his conduct of Affairs traduced at his return: In midst of the
disgraces of Fortune and the Court, he may chance be saved at last, and dye
Repentant, with this saying, of Woolsey in his mouth, That had he served God
but half as faithfully as he did his Prince, he had never come to that.

Of a degenerate Lord.
HE is a certain seely thing, who since he had no voice in Parliament, scarcely
knows what to say: He has made the name of Lord a mock name now, and almost as
ridiculous as that of Lord of misrule was in ancient times, and they shun him
as they do, Lord have mercy upon us, upon doors; and that deservedly; for he
has brought a plague upon himself, in imagining he should be any thing, whilst
they were nothing, who made him all he is. As if the Stars should conspire to
deprive the Sun of light, or streams to dry up the fountain, whence they
flowed; when who would pity them to see every farthing Candle, or Glowworm
out shine the one, and tothers swollen greatness at so low an ebb, as those
boldly stride over it now, who before even trembled at the approach of it: Mean
time he sneaks in his Title, like one in a stolen cloak, afraid to be seen in
it: and none takes notice of him now, unless some one in scorn perhaps points
at him, and says, there goes a Lord, or jostles him a purpose, who was wont in
former times like Mandarious, to make whole streets retire to give him way: All
the privilege of such Peers as these, being only to have every base fellow
without commission search their house, every Tradesman cite them before their
worships at next shire Town, and the common Sergeant drag them away to prison,
where they are honorably lodged in the Dungeon, whilst every Rug-gown and
Apron-man, has privilege to be Coacht thither, and lodged in the Rules or
Master-sides: and this fine prerogative they have got, would needs pluck down
the King, (forsooth) only to be promoted to the Kings Bench themselves.

CHARACTER.
Of a high-spirited man.
HIs mind is a thought higher than any other man's, and has influence even on
his Body, and elevates that with all; whence he walks on Terrasses, rather than
on the ground, and should more scorn to be seen in plebean company, than in
plebean clothing; nor can any look so high, but he'el borrow Galileas optique,
or he'el look as high as they; and a look, a squint is a fascination, makes him
look a squint as far the other way: he is like a glass that renders every one,
the same countenance as they give him, and except God and his Prince, can
soveraignly dispose of soul and body, he cares for offending none, who first
offends him. He is more angry with himself than you when you answer not his
salutation, and next time he meets ye be sure he will not answer yours: being as
impatient when you undervalue him, as a proud City Dame, when you underbid her
ware: and sooner stirred up to disdain by a neglect than any choleric man to
anger by offense; so it is hard putting an affront on him, but they shall seem to
have received one who offered it: yet he is more singular than proud, and though
he knows his degrees of persons, knows himself so well withal, as he will
converse with no subject but on equal terms, counts none greater that has a
lesser mind than he: Loves Nobility not for their Titles, but their persons,
and can only smile on Princes; As for the rest, he is civil and courteous,
and that is all.

CHARACTER.
Of a Proud ^^ne
SHe has as much in her of the Ancient Counteship as would have served six of
Queen Elizabeth's Countesses, with their Coach-men and Footmen bare, their
Cup Bearer, serving them on the Knee, and women waiting about their Canopy of
State: Yet is she nor Countess, nor Lady neither; but only of pleasure, and
at courtesy of the Country: She looks high and speaks in a majestique Tone,
like one playing the Queens part at the Bull, and is ready to say, Bless ye my
good people all, as often as she passes by any company; though she stirs no
more when they do her Reverence than than if she had wished, would I might
never stir, and to were a curse laid on her; she paints to hide her Age, and to
hide her painting dares not laugh, whence she has two counterfeit vizzards to
put off a nights; her painting and modesty, when she lies with her own face,
though not with her own Husband: Mean time, her froid mine or stately
demeanor, is variously censured, some saying it is for want of wit, others that
she spends so many spirits a nights, It makes her the more dull a days: some
that she is founding an Order of undisparaged Concubines, and it is the modest
habit they are to be clothed in: others again, that she is like your
tradse-women, who when they have custom enough, are proud and disdainful, and
must be sued too for their Ware: whilst those who want it are forced to sue to
you. In fine, all accord in this, that she is more coy than becomes any honest
woman, and all she is like to get, by her pride and stateliness, is that
whenever there is a Parliament of courtesans, she should not be for the
Commons, but the House of Lords.

CHARACTER.
Of a low spirited man.
HE is low born, and never seeks to raise himself higher than his birth; nor is
this content or humility in him, but sloth and baseness: his soul lives in a
cellar; and all his words and actions, even to his very apparel favors of
under breeding. The senciblest displeasure you can do him is to his Body; and
he is more troubled at loss of money, than reputation: he slinks in company,
and plays at Boe peep behind the rest, being such a friend of obscurity; as
you cannot do him a greater displeasure, than to take no notice of him in
company: Like the sensible tree he contracts and shrinks up himself at every
little touch, and looks on him; and you daunt him, and strike his eyes inward
strait; and his words congeale in his mouth through fear, and want breath still
to finish a period: his language too is as low as the rest; whilst he calls a
valiant man a kill-cow, a jest, a frump, and urge him to make have, and he will
tell ye, he is none of the Hastings'es: for the rest, he speaks of every thing
in the superlative, showing the littleness of his mind, by counting all thing
so great: so lives he, thinking, saying, and doing nothing, but mean things, in
mean company and mean condition all his life, having neither virtue nor vice
enough to raise himself above the common sort; whence where you left him at his
birth, there you find him at his death, without making any progress in the
world at all: so many years having rather past over him, than he past over so
many years, being only able to render this account, when he comes to die, that
he was just as long a dying as he did live.

CHARACTER.
Of a petty French Lutenist in England.
HE is a fellow who coms into England with an ill mien, and threadbare clothes,
and there presently sets up a Court of Judicature, arraigning both Music,
Instruments, and Musicians, for not being a la mode de France; the twelve Ranks
of strings oth' Lute, the double neck, the lessons, the method of ^laying, and
almost the hands too, for not being mangy about the wrists like his: he belies
great masters; and teaches but his own imperfections: And if his fingers be so
weak, they can scarce crawle over a Lute, then to play gently and softly is the
mode, and doucement is the word: and if so gouty and child-blaind, as he rakes
the strings worse than if they were grated on by a ragged staff: then fort and
Gallyard is the word, and strong and lusty is the mode again; and if you like
not his play, he tells ye at least, that he has the only new method of Paris,
and that he teaches a ravir and non pareille, and for his lessons (which he has
rakt out of Gualtiers dunghill, or collected from the privy-house of Defaut)
he keeps them as precious relics, giving such out for new, as were made
before the Avignon, or the Popes coming there: He is fawning where he is a
stranger, and saucy where he is familiar, having ever some vice to teach
besides his art: In fine, he is the Mountebank of himself, and though he have
nothing at all considerable to commend him, besides his own praises, and his
being French (for which reason one may commend the Pox as well) yet there is
such a charm in this word, a la mode, and the English are so besotted with it,
as the first Frenchman has their money, who proffers to teach it them; nor will
this ever be remedied, till some such zealous patriot step up, as he who
hearing them talk of the French Pox, bid them call it the English with a pox,
swearing we had as good of our own, as the French had any.

CHARACTER.
Of a Flatterer.
HE is a mid sort of Animal betwixt man and beast; with the manners of beast,
under the resemblance of a man: nay he is a compound of all base vilde beasts
together, a Dog in fawning, an Ape in imitating, a Fox in faining and
dissembling, and an Ass in suffering and bearing every thing: He is so base as
he makes not only servitude his daily food, but even the ordures of those he
serves: and is worse than those who sell themselves unto the Gally's, for they
yet perform the offices of men, and have their minds free though their Bodies
thrale: but he inslaves both mind and body too; and can neither look with the
assurance, nor speak with the confidence of a Freeborn man: making a vilder
merchandise the whilst, then he who sold Urine, or the palace smoke, for he
for slight benefits sels his own Injuries, and to live a slave sells the
dignity of an honest man; neither do they make better merchandise, who purchase
him, who whilst he sooths their humors, corrupts their manners, and flatters
them into vice: being so infectious, as even to render those he flatters
Archflatterers of themselves, with his vild arts like those who Angle with
intoxicating baits, catching them sooner (it is true) but rendering them nothing
worth when they are caught: we may conclude then the prayer of him who of all
wild beasts desired to be delivered from a Tyrant, and of all tame, from a
Flatterer, with this curse on the Flatterer, that he may never live but under
tyrants, it being but just, that they should suffer the pain and penalty of
their being such, who make them so.

CHARACTER.
Of a fair and virtuous Lady.
SHe is the honor of her sex and that to beauty, as beauty is to others all
grace and ornament, her virtue like a charm rendering her beauty invulnerable
against malicious tongues; and that which in others is fragile and of glass,
so malleable in her as it can neither be broke nor cracked, whence she only has
privilege freely to dress her self, without suspicion of harm; and enjoy all
lawful pleasures without danger of unlawful ones; whilst all is suspicious
and dangerous in others: to conclude then, as anciently your semi gods in
marrying with mortals communicated to them their divinity, so her beauty by the
marriage of sacred virtue is consecrate and rendered all celestial and divine;
those titles which others incuriously usurp, only of right appertaining unto
her, who becomes more venerable by age and imortall by death it self, her
virtue having raised her above time and mortallity.

CHARACTER.
Of a quarrelsome Coxcomb.
HE differs as much from a valiant man, as a wrangling sophister from a great
Scholar, or dull rumbling thunder in a cloud, from your quick on, that
breaks forth in storms; he is ready to give you the lie before you speak, and
then contradicts you what so ere you say, when to avoid fighting, he tells you
how often he has fought, and how many he has killed, and some believe him,
because indeed they could never see any alive, whom he had fought withal,
though others are of a contrary opinion, saying, of all men living, they would
choose to be kil'ld by him, for so they should be sure to be still alive: He
speaks all Sword, Rapier, and Poynard, and understands nothing but Cudgel and
Bastinado, which he so richly merits, as besides Canes none but would rather
want wood to burn, than for so necessary use as beating him, when he is quite
strait, for though he be his Angers slave, Fear masters it: and it is just like a
Nettle, handle it gently and it pricks you, but roughly and you break the point
of it, after which, as before he was the fools valiant man, he becomes the
valiant man's fool, and by degrees every ones, when once they find him out; yet
retains he somewhat of his former nature still, a dull grumbling and wrangling,
(that is, half quarrelling) which makes him when he is offended in any company,
go muttering away, saying, He cares no more for them than they care for him:
which if so, he is the happiest man alive, for I know none lives freer from
care than he.

CHARACTER.
Of a Complementer.
YOur Complementer is a French familly, that came not in with the Conquest, but
the corruption of England, unknown unto our honest Ancestors, who did as they
said, and spoke as they meant; he is the rack of conversation, and sets every
ones joints a stretching: And in France he derives his pedigree from an
accomply menteur or an accomplished liar: for complement is worse than
equivocation, since that has always some mental reservation or lurking hole
for truth, but this has none. It Is the language of Hyperboly, and sometimes of
Irony; it is the language of the Court, where meaning walks for pomp and show,
with a long train of words; and that the Courtier uses, to bob of suitors, or
bob for those they are suitors too: In a word, it is the language of the Idle for
to delight the vain, and but a speaking ceremony, as ceremony is but a dumb
complement; whence our new reformers hate it so much perhaps, as they have
changed the style into as much defect of Civility, as the other was in the
excess, they being fallen now upon such a vain of clownishness (or I may say)
not bluntness, but churlishness, not of plain dealing, but of plain
divillishness, as if they hold on as they begin, pray God we do not wish for
our complimenting days again, as far the better extremity of the two.

CHARACTER.
Of a young Enamourist.
He Is one who as soon as he has quited his School-boyes Toys, next Toy he gets
is a Mrs when it would make you forswear Love to see how ridiculously he makes
it, and to hear him talk of Gods and Goddesses, you would take him for some
Pagan never converted to Christianity. There is nothing so cold as to hear him
talk of Flames, nor so dull as his discoursing of Cupids darts, and to hear him
sigh like a dry Pump, or broken winded bellows; you would near wonder at
Lapland Witches affording winds so cheap. Of all servants he is the
necessariest and easiest to content and feed, for he is his Mrs. Squire,
Dispenser, Laquey or Messenger, but above all her Fool, to which he is bound,
by the proverb; It Is impossible to love and to be wise: Mean time, you may feed
him cheaper than a Chamelion, for a good look serves him a week at least, and
he is prouder of holding his Mrs. Busque or Fan, than a School Boy with a
Scepter in his hand, playing the Emperors part ith School; to keep him to
which, his Mrs. lets him know that it is with Love as it is with War, which once
declared you are to expect nothing but Hostility; and knows her self, that it is
with Lovers as it is with Anglers, who feed the Fish ere they are caught, but
caught once feed on them: Whence she bites not greedily at the bait, but
craftily tolls him on with hopes, and like Rope makers gos backwards still, the
better to advance her work, and draw him on, mean while he follows her so long,
till either he wax weary and ceases his persuit, or catches her tripping, and
then falls down on her, when fastening her in the marriage nooz, he carries her
away, and either turns kind Cuckold, and keeps open house for all, or jealous
Coxcomb and shuts his doors against every one.

Catologue.
1 OF a Lady of Excellent conversatition, 1. 2 Of one that is the foil of Good
conversation, 2. 3 Of an Excellent Companion, 6. 4 Of one that Zanys the good
Companion, 8. 5 Of one that Imitates the good Companion another way, 10. 6 Of
an Irresolute Person, 12. 7 Of a Fantastique Lady, 14. 8 Of a Green Sickness
Girl, 16. 9 Of a Talkative Lady, 16. 10 Of a Taciturn Person, 20. 11 Of a
Dutch Waggoner, 22. 12 Of a huge over-valuer of himself, 24. 13 Of an ordinary
French Laquey, 26. 14 Of a Suspicious Person, 28. 15 Of Raillerie, 30. 16 Of
one who troubles her self with every thing, 32. 17 Of one who troubles himself
with nothing, 34. 18 Of a Chambermaid, 38. 19 Of a Noblemans Chaplain, 40. 20
Of an Impertinent Governant, 42. 21 Of a School of young Gentlewomen, 44. 22 Of
a Novice, 46. 23 Of a Fille devote, 49. 29 Of an Inimitable Widow, 51. 25 Of a
more Imitable Widow, 53. 26 Of a Fifth Monarchy man, 55 28 Of an Importunate
visitant, 57. 29 Of a French dancing Master in England, 59. 30 Of your Town
talkers, 61. 31 Of a horrible wicked and deboished person, 63. 32 Of a Valiant
man, 65. 33 Of a all-admirable Person, 65. 34. Of a Gallant warrior, 68. 35 Of
a miserable old Gentlewoman, 70. 36 Of a Ladies little Dog, 72. 37 Of your
Ladies Colonel 74 38. Of a School Boy. 76 39. Of one that shall be namelesse,
78 40. Of a pretty sweet Innocence* 80 41. Of a scrupulous Honor* 82 42. Of a
Fleerer. 84 43. Of a makebate. 86 44. Du Tour a la mode 88 45. Of a changable
Disposition, 90 46. Of a Physician 92 47. Of the Authors Idea or of a character
94 48. Of a dull Fellow 96 49. Of a bold abusive wit 98 50. Of a troublesome
kindness 100 51. Of a Iansenist 103 52. Of a certain Nobleman 104 53. Of
another 106 54. Of a Natural Beauty 105 55. Of a Artificial Beauty 107 56. Of a
petty Politic 109 57. Of a hombred Country Gentleman 111 58. Of a common
Acquaintance 113 59. Of a young Envoy 115 60. Of a degenerate Lord. 117 61. Of
a high spirited man 119 62. Of a Proud one. 121 63. Of a low spirited man 123
64. Of a petty French Lutenist 125 65. Of a Flatterer 127 66. Of a fair and
virtuous Lady. 129 67. Of a quarrelsome Coxcombe 130 68. Of a Complementer. 132
69. Of a young Enamorist. 134
Finis.

