Sr William D'avenant's VOYAGE TO THE Other World: With His Adventures in the
Poets ELIZIVM.

A Poetical Fiction.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1668.

The Author to the READER.
I Write only for my self and private friends; and none prints more, and
publishes less than I: nor had I printed this, but only to let you see how
Innocent it is, which others make so Criminal. I make my self merry with the
world sometimes as one who has no business in it to make me sad; and use only
a little Poetical License, which in all times with private persons, so you
spare the public, has been allowed: And if any ask, why with this person in
particular? I answer, 'twas a subject offered me for the present; and that is
all. As superlative praises come too nigh Flattery: So superlative dispraises
come too nigh Malignity; from either of which I am equally removed. I Am sure
none are more careful than my self, to give no scandal nor offense in what I
write; and if any will needs take it before it is given, and are so dull not to
understand Wit, nor know how to distinguish betwixt Railing and Raillerie, let
them take Hellebore.

Sir William D'avenant's Voyage TO THE Other World: With his Adventures in the
Poets ELYSIUM.
SIr WILLIAM D'AVENANT being dead, not a Poet would afford him so much as an
Elegy; whether because he sought to make a Monopoly of the Art, or strove to
become Rich in spite of Minerva: It being with Poets as with Mushroms, which
grow only on barren ground, enrich the Soil once, and then degenerate: Only
one, more Humane than the rest, accompanied him to his Grave with this Elogium.

Now Davenant's dead, the Stage will mourn,
And all to Barbarism turn:
Since He it was this later Age,
Who chiefly civilized the Stage.
Great was his Wit, his Fancy great,
As e're was any Poets yet:
And more Advantage none ever made
OF the Wit and Fancy which he had.
Not only Dedalus Arts he knew,
But even Promethius's too:
And living Machins made of Men,
As well as dead ones, for the Scene.
And if the Stage or Theater be
A little World, it was chiefly he,
That Atlas-like supported it,
By force of Industry and Wit.
All this, and more, he did beside,
Which having perfected, he died:
If he may properly be said
To die, whose Fame will never be dead.
Another went further yet, and using the privilege of your Ancient Poets, who
with almost as much certainty as your Divines, can tell all that passes in the
other World: did thus Relate his Voyage thither, and all his Adventures in the
Poets Elyzium.

AS every one at the instant of their Deaths, have Passports given them for
some place or other, he had his for the Poets Elyzium; which not without much
difficulty he obtained from the Officers of Parnassus: For when he alleged, he
was an Heroic Poet, they asked him why he did not continue it* When he said he
was a Dramatick too, they asked him why he left it off, and only studied to
get Money; like him who sold his Horse to buy him provender: And finally, when
he added, He was a Poet Laureate, they laughed, and said, Bays was never more
cheap than now; and that since Petrarch's time, none had ever been legitimately
crowned.

Nor had he less difficulty with Charon, who hearing he was Rich, thought to
make a Booty of him, and asked an extraordinary price for his passage over; but
coming to payment, he found he was so poor, as he was ready to turn him back
again, he having hardly so much as his Naulum, or the price of every ordinary
Passenger.

Being arrived, they were all much amazed to see him there, they having never
heard of his being dead, neither by their Weekly Gazets, nor Cryers of Verses
and Pamphlets up and down; (as common a Trade there, almost as it is here) nor
was he less amazed than they, to find never a Poet there, Ancient nor Modern,
whom in some sort or other he had not disobliged by his discommendations, as
Homer, Virgil, Tasso, Spencer, and especially Ben. Johnson; contrary to Plinies
Rule, never to discommend any of the same profession with our selves: For
either they are Better or Worse than you, (says he) If Better, if they ben't
worthy commendations, you much less; if worse, if they be worthy commendations,
you much more: So every ways advantageous it is for us to commend others. Nay
even Shakespeare, whom he thought to have found his greatest Friend, was as much
offended with him as any of the rest, for so spoiling and mangling of his
Plays. But he who most vexed and tormented him, was his old Antagonist Jack
Donn, who mocked him with an hundred passages out of Gondibert; and after a
world of other railing and spightful language (at which the Doctor was
excellent) so exasperated the Knight, at last, as they fell together by the
ears: when but imagine

What tearing Noses had been there,
Had they but Noses for to tear.
Mean time the Comic Poets made a Ring about them, as Boys do when they hiss
Dogs together by the ears; till at last they were separated by Pluto's
Officers, as diligent to keep the peace and part the fray, as your Italian
Sbirri, or Spanish Argruzelo; and so they dragged them both away, the Doctor to
the Stocks, for raising tumults and disturbances in Hell, and the Knight to the
Tribunal, where Minos, Aeacus and Rhadamanthus were to sit in Judgment on him,
with Momus the Common Accuser of the Court.

Here being arrived, and silence commanded, they asked him his Quality and
Profession: To whom he answered, he was a Poet Laureate, who for Poetry in
general had not his fellow alive, and had left none to equal him now he was
dead: And for Eloquence,

How never any Hyperbolies
Were higher, or farther stretched than his;
Nor ever Comparisons again
Made things compared more clear and plain.
Then for his Plays or Dramatick Poetry,

How that of The Unfortunate Lovers,
The depth of Tragedy discovers;
In's Love and Honor you might see
The height of Tragecomedy;
And for his Wits, the Comic Fire
In none yet ever flamed up higher:
But coming to his Siege of Rhodes,
It outwent all the rest by odds;
And somewhat's in it that does outdo
Both the Ancients and the Moderns too.
To which Momus answered: That though they were never so good, it became not
him to commend them as he did; That there were Faults enough to be found in
them; And that he had marred more good Plays, than ever he had made; That all
his Wit lay in Hyperbolies and Comparisons, which, when Accessory, were
commendable enough, but when Principal, deserved no great commendations; That
his Muse was none of the Nine, but only a Mungril, or By-blow of Parnassus,
and her Beauty rather sophisticate than natural; That he offered at Learning
and Philosophy, but as Pullen and Stubble Geese offered to fly, who after they
had fluttered up a while, at length came fluttering down as fast again; That he
was with his high-sounding words, but like empty Hogsheads, the higher they
sounded, the emptier still they were: And that, finally, he so perplexed
himself and Readers with Parenthesis on Parenthesis, as, just as in a
wilderness or Labyrinth, all sense was lost in them.

As for his Life and Manners, they would not examine those, since 'twas
supposed they were Licentious enough: only he would say,

He was a good Companion for
The Rich, but ill one for the poor;
On whom he looked so, you would believe
He walked with a Face Negative:
Whilst he must be a Lord at least,
For whom he would smile or break a jest.
And though this, and much more was exaggerated against him by Momus; yet the
Judges were so favorable to him, because he had left the Muses for Pluto, as
they condemned him only to live in Pluto's Court, to make him and Proserpina
merry with his facetious Jeasts and Stories; with whom in short time he became
so gracious, by complying with their humors, and now and tan dressing a dish
or two of meat for them, as they joined him in Patent with Momus, and made him
Superintendent of all their Sports and Recreations: So as, only changing Place
and Persons, he is now in as good Condition as he was before; and lives the
same Life there, as he did here.

FINIS.
POSTSCRIPT. To the Actors of the Theater in Lincolns-Inn-Fields.
I Promised you a sight of what I had written of Sir William D'avenant, and now
behold it here: By it you will perceive how much they abused you, who told you
it was such an Abusive thing. If you like it not, take heed hereafter how you
disoblige Him, who can not only write for you, but against you too.

Rich. Flecknoe.

FINIS.

