THE IDEA of His Highness OLIVER,

LATE LORD PROTECTOR, etc.

With certain brief Reflections on His Life.

By RICHARD FLECKNO, Esquire.



LONDON, Printed Anno MDCLIX.

TO HIS HIGHNESS RICHARD, Lord Protector, etc.
My Lord,
THose who write Books ought to have more regard to their leisures who read
them, then to their own in writing them; this makes me so short in writing this
unto your Highness, which so declares (in passing) the life and actions of
your Highness Father (of glorious memory) as there is scarce any remarkable
passage in his life, which if it touches not, it points not at, at least; a
subject which I am so far from elevating above its height, as all my forces can
scarcely sustain its weight; nor did this deice me from undertaking it,
muchless the enemies I undertook war against in writing it.

For the war of Pens continues longer then the war of Swords, and grows
commonly more sharp and cruel after death, until time gives the deciding blow
at last, and fame always determines it for the conquering side: Mean time his
Fame has two Enemies to provide against; the Enemies of his party, and the
Enemies of his person. The first so noble, it honors virtue even in an Enemy;
the last so base, as it calumniates it in all, and against these chiefly I
undertake this war; neither is the Age, then Virtue, less concerned in it; for
whilst every one judges according to their own affections and inclinations; and
the young interpret all to Vitiousness, as the old all to Interest, Policy, and
Ambition: we shall (in time) need a Dictionary for Actions as well as Words, or
else the Language of Truth will be wholly lost, and Posterity well may doubt
whe'r there ever were any such thing as Virtue and Honesty in the Age. To
vindicate and clear it from which Aspertion, I have writ this Treatise, to let
Posterity know, that as there wanted not some in this Age to do brave and noble
things, so there wanted not others to celebrate and honor them.

And this Fame it is which is the better life of all Heroic persons; for short
is the space they live in their Bodies here, but immense that they live
hereafter in their Fames; which life, only writers can bestow; nor can Time
hang more plummets on their feet to weigh them down unto oblivion, then writers
pens add wings unto their Fames to raise them up again; to which, if mine may
add any thing amongst the rest, it will be rather my glory, then any addition
unto his:

But I forget, and destroy with one hand what I would build up with the other, in
being so long in the Epistle whilst I intend brevity in the work. I end then my
Lord, with the profession and protestation of being always

Your Highness Most humble Servant, and most obedient Subject. Rich. Fleckno.

PROEMIUM TO THE IDEA.
AN Idea is a Creature of the mind. In the Artificer it regards the future; but
in the Writer, both the present and passed time. It is not the matter, but the
form; nor the body, but the spirit and quintesence. It is more in substance
then in bulk; and gives you flowers, not simply, but Alembeck't and distilled;
and Gold, not in the Or, but purified and refined. Such an Abstract Essence I
give you of his Highness, Oliver late Lord Protector* on whose life I make no
other Reflections, then as we do on Pictures excellent well designed,
remarking only the Proportions in general, without examining each Lineament
in particular. Expect of me then no circumstances of time, place, nor persons*
that is for those who write the Annals and History of his life. I only write
his Elogiums, they show you the things he did; I, the man who did those things.

Mean time, I undertake a work (I know) displeasing and ungrateful to the
multitude, naturally envious and malicious; and more taken with one Satyr then
twenty Elogiums; pleased rather with the imperfections then perfections of men.
Like Flies, leaving sound places to light on soars; and such venomous ones, as
they even render sound places soar with their fly-blowing them. Yet this in
spite of envy and malice I Will say of him, That a Greater and more Excellent
personage has no where been produced by this latter Age; nor (perhaps) in our
Nation by any former ones. And if men anciently have been judged fit for Empire
only for the Greatness of their bodies; He certainly was most fit for it, for
the Greatness of his mind.

But Great men, like Great Saints, must die ere they are Canonized. Living, men
are busied with considering their faults: but dead, they have leisure to sum
their virtues up. As for his (for the present) I Will say no more, but only if we
may judge of Hercules force by the massiveness of his club, we may well judge
how mighty a man he was, by his wielding three Kingdoms so easily as he did.
In alteration of whose Government, this we may truly say, all that was ill and
blameable in the beginning and heat of prosecution, was done by others; all
that was good and laudible, performed and achieved by him.

But of this Strangers and Posterity best can judge. For if none can judge well
in cases whereof themselves are parties, none are competent Judges of those who
govern them. And this I Am sure will be the judgment of Posterity, that those
are rather Envious who praise him not, then Flatterers who do.

THE IDEA Of his Highness OLIVER late Lord PROTECTOR.
AS we look on the heads of great Rivers with Reverence, whilst we scarce
regard the sources of shallow Brooks; so we look on the births of Great
Persons, scarcely regarding the Origin of lesser ones.

To begin then with his OF HIS BIRTH and PARENTAGE.
Birth and Parentage. He was born of the Ancient Family of the Williams's, and
Adopted into the noble Family of the Cromwels.

But whilst others derive him from Principalities, I will derive his
Principality from him, and only say he was born a Gentleman. A name so fully
comprehending all that is great and noble, as whosoever would make him more,
should make him less.

A Gentleman, is one who takes his denomination from his Gentility and Descent,
lying level in birth to the highest degree of Nobility. And as his Descent
differences him from the vulgar; so by their Ascents he only differs from the
Nobility, who are rather higher, then better then he. Whence Princes are rather
the Fountaneers then Fountains of honor, and rather Artificers of the Channel,
then Authors of the source; since without violencing Nature, they cannot
derive*men higher then their first Origin, or Fountainhead. Nobility then ads
but little to the Gentleman, but the Gentleman much unto the man. Nor do titles
of honor, and degrees of Nobility, more advantage a worthy Gentleman, then
degrees of the University do an excellent Scholar; they rather declaring what
he is, then making of him so. Whilst he rather honors his degrees, then his
degrees honor him.

But since Birth and Parentage without Education are like land without culture,
but barren and infructuous, the force and virtue of Education being such, as
man who is a mixed creature of Angel and Beast, may be exalted by Education to
the Nobility of the one, or deprest to the ignobility of the other for want of
it. It follows, we speak of OF HIS EDUCATION.
his Education next.

He was bred a Scholar in the University, where, during his youth, he gave the
first Essay of that Admirable vivacity of spirit, profoundnesse of judgment,
and indefatigable industry, which afterward informed all the Actions of his
life.

Learning is (as 'twere) another soul, animating our minds just as our souls do
our bodies. It is a second Nobility, purifying the mind as Nobility does the
blood. It Is the only purge of vice and ignorance, without which none are wise nor
virtuous but by chance; and of all knowledges the most excellent, as teaching
us the knowledge of all other things.

But ne quid nimis is the motto of a Gentleman, whom it becomes to know every
thing, but make a Trade of nothing. Whence it is as great an error never to
apply them to Learning, as always to apply the (...) to 't. The University is
a nob^^Seminary, where young plants receive their first growth and nurriture;
but they must be transplanted ere they produce their fruit. It is an excellent
seasoning of youth: but as in vain we season vessels unless we infuse some
better and more prof^table liquors into them afterward, so 'twere an idle
action to imbue youth with Letters, unless they afterward receive the Tincture
of some better and more profitable Literature, and pass from studying books, to
study men. Letters are but like pastimes, the business of youth, but the
idleness of Age; and application to books as barren and infructuous in those
who learn only to learn: as idle Gallants application to their Mistresses, who
make Love only to make Love. This wisely considered, he made them his business,
and applied himself no longer to them then till he had attained to riper years.
When he retired home from the University just as men do from plenteous feasts,
the better to digest the nourishment they have received, before they apply them
selves to action: when he soon declared by the effect, that as there is none
more unfit for action then a crude Scholar, so there is none fitter then a
well digested one.

But fortune or better providence was long in providing that Action they
intended to employ him in. Nor is it probable they had provided it so soon, had
they not found so fit an Agent to be employed. OF HIS PRIVATE FORTUNES.


Mean time for his private Fortunes, they were but justly competent and
suitable to what the Royal Prophet prayed for when he said Divitias nec
paupertatem dederis mihi, Give me neither too great riches nor poverty; but
only a mediocritie betwixt both; most consistant with virtue; and where virtue
does most consist, too great Riches but exalting a mind too much, as too great
Poverty but too much depresses it. T'on blunting the edge of wit and industry,
the other by its hardship whetting it quite away.

But as too strait and narrow minds miserably contract themselves within their
Fortunes, as too vast and large as far dilate themselves beyond it. So his
mind was too great and high to be contained within the narrow limits of his
Estate; but it was still breaking forth, till the same Fortune or better
providence provided him with an Estate (at last) proportionable to the
greatness of his mind; when he might well glory that he had learnt that Art,
which the Apostle glories in so much, Scio abundare and penuriam pati, to know
both how to want and to abound. The wise wisely accompting those miserablest of
all, who never knew what belongd to misery.

During this Time he married OF HIS MARRIAGE.
into an honorable Family, and had hopeful and numerous issue by his Wife.

And now fortune began to dispose him for Regiment (the Government of a Family
having a certain Analogy with the Government of a Commonwealth) and now she
began to make him a member of that body of which he was afterward to be the
Head.

The unmarried are no more members of a Commonwealth, then our accidental parts
are members of our bodies: they are but Lay-worldlings, only the married take
orders in the world; and who have Wife and children, give pledges to their
Country of their fidelity, whilst it has no security of the rest. With good
reason then the Romans gave Ius trium Liberorum, or particular honors and
privileges to those who were married and had children, esteeming them only
born for the Commonwealth, whilst the others seemed only born unto themselves;
and accounting the married only Citizens, whilst those who lived in wild
Celebat were but as strangers and passengers in the world.

In all which capacities and relations of Father, good Patriot, and member of
the Commonwealth, he looked upon himself, and shortly after was looked upon by
his Country, when in one of the celebrous 't Elections of the Land, he was
chosen member of Parliament OF HIS BEING CHOSEN MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT.
(a place of highest trust and confidence) only in regard of his great
abilities of mind, whilst many of greater Fortunes, stood for the Election and
were refused.

It Is a great happiness for the Commonwealth, when men of public spirits are
employed in public businesses. Those who are of any particular faction,
interest, or opinion, endeavoring (still) to draw all to the same interest,
faction, and opinion with themselves: Whence consequently the Kingdom becomes
miserably torn and dismemberd: And you know who says, Omne Regnum in se
divisum desolabitur, Every Kingdom divided in it self shall be destroyed. So
important and necessary for the conserving a State entire, is the concord and
unity of its parts among themselves.

In this Parliament that fire at length burst forth, which had been long
secretly a kindling, and now was as impossible to be quenched, as that of Rome
was in former times, when those who should have quenched it, were the chief
Incenters of the Flame, and now they concurred on all hands to that fatal
division, which wholly separated King and Parliament, when he, as a member of
the House, took part with that body of which he was a member.

What other motives he had of siding with the Parliament, I know not. Whether
he counted it more Noble and Generous to take part with the weaker side, and
more charitable to assist those he imagined most oppressed; or 'twas purely his
piety and godliness, the public sins of the other side (in outward show at
least) appearing more great and numerous then those of theirs; and qui putant
se obsequium praestare Deo, who imagine they fight for God, never scruple to
fight against their King.

However, it had been happy for the King had he filled his Court rather with
such men as he, neither hopes could persuade to the deserting of their side,
nor fear of danger nor death it self affright, then with such as most of his
Courtiers were; men who durst hazard nothing for an honest cause, who at first
sight of danger, compounded with it, persuaded by their fears, and rather then
venture their lives, betrayed their honesties; verifying that vulgar saying,
that he who is not valiant can never be an honest man.

But it is their common Fates and Errors to employ none but such who thrust
themselves upon them, commonly the unworthiest of all (impudent forwardness
only supplying the place of worth in them) whilst the more worthy are neglected
and unimployed, only because they are modester then the rest. This the late
King dearly experien't, who, whilst he was abandoned and betrayed by those whom
he most trusted and obliged, found many standing for him in time of need, whom
he had never obliged by any Favors; but many more against him, whom he had
disobliged by his disfavouring them.

What other obligations or disobligations he had to either side, I know not:
but this I know, never any more obliged a Side, nor better served the
Parliaments then he; nor will I determine who took the better side, but I Am
sure he took the more fortunate, or made it so.

For speaking in the House, he had a strong and masculine Eloquence, more able
to persuade more he was persuaded of what he said. His Expressions hardy,
Opinions resolute, Asseverations grave and vehement, his Sentences weighty,
always intermixed with sentences of Scripture, to give them the greater weight;
with which he so governd and swayd the House, as he had always the leading
voice: compared to which, the following ones were only as ciphers, in
comparison of numbers.

Those who find no such wonders in his Speeches, may find it in the effect. I
have read speeches that have workt strange effects, and you would wonder at
their plainness, whilst others you would wonder at their eloquence, have
produced no effect at all. It Is not the spirit of the thing that's spoke, that
gives it its force and energy, but of him who speaks it; as it is not the sword
but arm gives force unto the blow. The people were enemies to book-learning,
and whosoever should endeavor with an Eloquent Oration to reconcile them, and
make them friends, should make them their enemies too. And they were great
Adorers of the Scripture phrase, which m^de him usurp it so frequently as he
did. Mean time Cicero, nor Demosthenes, with all their Tropes and Figures,
could never have so persuaded and moved the people, as he with one Text of
Scripture aptly applied to purpose of what he said.

But talking in time of Action, being but an inferior kind of maintaining a
side; he, who always aspired to the most HOW HE BETOOK HIMSELF TO THE
MILITIAE.
sublime, the Wars once declared, soon quitted the House, and betook him to the
Field, to manifest his courage as well as eloquence, and maintain by deeds what
by words he had persuaded them.

Neither showed he his courage more then wisdom in it; for though the reward of
those who guard the camp, be equal unto theirs who fight in the field, yet the
honor is not so; which usually follows the greatest danger, neither is that
followd with Envy as tothers is. Men imagining that Honor we venture for in
the field, with hazard of our lives, bought at the highest price, whilst those
who purchase it without danger at home, have it at too cheap a rate.

Besides, it is an Authority of a higher kind, the comanding in the Field, then
voting in the House; and begets far other spirits and greater thoughts. These
only imagining they command both Army and General, when in effect the General
who commands the Army, commands both it and them; and they find at last that
they give but iron to make shackles for their feet, whosoever gives weapons to
arm the soldiers hands.

This your Politicians, men wiser then the Truth, who are all Linxes, looking
into passed times, and moles looking into the future, would have him to have
foreseen from the beginning, never considering how all things in this world
being in perpetual revolution, it is impossible from the beginning to see the end
of things; besides, that which is ones end, is but another means to the
attaining his: Only there are certain periods of things, and who has the
carrying of them on when they are next that period, is always accounted most
happy and fortunate.

But to declare how he passed through all degrees of the Militiae.

Resolved to build his Fortunes on the Wars, he would not raise the building
without foundation, nor make himself Colonel without being Soldier first, as
many did (and consequently in short time their honors in the wars fell to all
ground) but the higher he intended to raise the Edifice, the deeper he diggd
for the foundation, beginning not only with simple Captain, but to perfect his
experiences descending HOW HE WAS CAPTAIN FIRST.
even to the duty and condition of common soldier, none lodging, nor faring
harder, nor going plainer nor meaner clad then he; indefatigable in labor,
exemplar in discipline, humble and obedient to command; first on all occasions
of exercising his valor, yet valiant not rash, the Army being no place for
single bravery, farther then the bravery of one might encourage all the rest.
By this means gaining the love and affections of all, whilst he yielded to none
in doing praiseworthy things, but unto all the praise of doing them, whilst he
was modest and patient, and sought not the meanest honors nor preferments, he
was esteemed by all worthy of the highest ones.

These were his Arts whilst HOW HE WAS MADE COLONEL.
under Officer, till advanced higher unto Colonel, he differd in nothing from
private Captain still, but only in his greater care and diligence, and greater
occasions he had to serve the side, which in short time conceav'd that opinion
of him, as it believd it could be servd by none better then by him. When never
any occasion there was but He and his Regiment were commanded forth, whilst
managing all those occasions to the greatest advantage of his Honor, he
always performed his Actions in the public eye of all, whence he had always
the public approbation of all he did, for want of which many brave Actions
had been lost. For painted battles in nothing more resemble real ones, then
that in either a few heads appear, the rest darkly shadowed and
undistinguished, remain undiscerned in the confused crowd.

The Fame of his Actions arriving at the House, they imagined they could not
go less in recompencing them, then first to bestow on him the Generalship of
the Horse, and afterward the Lieutenant-Generalship of all the Militiae. HOW
HE WAS MADE LIEUTENANT GENERAL OF THE ARMY.


This only encouraged him to do more bravely, not to go more bravely, as it
would have many others. Honors in this resembling Viands, that as one is the
aliment of the body, so the other is of gallant minds, rendering them still more
active and vigorous: And as t'on in sickly bodies turns only to diseases and
crudities, so the other in unworthy minds are converted only to pride and vanity,
whilst to grow healthier and humbler with either, shows the excellency of
their Tempers and Constitutions.

But now the more he endeavored to serve his Side, he hazarded his person
less, considering it thereafter more the Publiques then his own, and more
detriment to the public then himself, the loss of it.

It Is a great error in those who command in chief, to hazard their persons,
and expose their lives on every slight occasion; as if twere more glorious to
fight then to command, whereas that is only the virtue of a Common soldier,
this of the Leader, whose principal Talent lies more in direction then
execution; more in the brain, then hand. It goes ill with an Army when the
General is enforced to fight, in whose person not only the safety of the Army,
but often the safety of the State it self lies all at stake.

Mean time not only all the hopes, but even certainties of Victory (the battle
once joynd) depended on him and his Brigade; so ^^r from ever losing battle, as
he often gaind and recoverd it when it was lost. So as that might well be said
of him, what was anciently said of another, that he had done many brave things
without others, but others never any without him.

One thing that made his Brigade so invincible, was his arming them so well; as
whilst they assured themselves they could not be overcome, it assured them to
overcome the enemy.

The well Armed have the same advantage of the ill Armed in fight, as the warm
clothed have in winter of those but coldly clad; and t'on goes altogether as
disheartened to expose himself to danger, as the other to expose himself to the
bleak winter air.

But the main cause of all was his excellent Conduct. For having experienced
how others spirits, furious at first onset, dissolved in sweat, and tired and
languish't by degrees, he always kept a fresh Reserve until the last, to give
a turn to the fortune of the day, that being the precise minute on which
Victory as on hinges did depend, which depainted hovering betwixt the Armies
when first the battles join, is Amat victoria curam.
always allured unto that Generals side, who garnishes his Lure with greatest
diligence.

This made a certain modern Leader say, that Fortune did nothing in the wars,
only the Generals skill and diligence did all. But he should have rather said
that it was the providence of Almighty God.

In confidence of whose providence he never entered battle but by the port of
Prayer Prayer has this resemblance THE EFFICACY OF PRAYER:
with rain, that just as that first ascends from Earth to Heaven, and
afterward comes showring down from Heaven to Earth again; so those prayers
which by Gods grace we send up to him, he ever pours down again in blessings on
our head. It Is the great Artillery that violences Heaven, which must be rendered
exorable by prayer, ere Armies can be rendered happy by victory: And in vain the
Israelites lift up their hands in fight, if Moses first lift not up his hands
in prayer.

Thus entering battle in confidence of the God of battle, he always came off
with victory, his soldiers always imagining a certain Divinity in him, who
never did any thing without first imploring the aid of the Divinity.

It has been the policy of diverse, falsely to persuade the people that they had
a certain familiarity with Almighty God, and consequently a kind of omnipotency
in all they did; But it has been the Religion of more, really to seek a
familiarity with him by prayer, and unite all their Actions with his
omnipotence. Neither dos this their dependency on Heaven, any ways slacken
their obligations to their duties here on Earth; but rather renders the tie
more firm and strong, and themselves more active and diligent.

To do all things himself, as if he had expected nothing from God, and then
expect all from God, as if he had done nothing himself, was the way a certain
holy person took to arrive to perfection. So after the Apostle had said he
could do nothing of himself, he presently adds, Omnia possum in eo qui me
confortat, that he could do all things in God who strengthened him. In
imitation of whom, another holy person was wont to say, God and I can do all
things; and if it seem presumption in him to name himself with God, certainty a
greater presumption it is for man even to name himself without him.

This gained him a high reputation with the godly party in the House; and to
maintain a fair correspondency with all, never any place was taken, nor battle
wone, but He was first who gave intelligence of it to the House, by which he
gained at once the good opinion both of the Parliament and General; attributing
in His Letters more honor to the one then he with modesty could do unto
himself, and writing his own Actions in such modest terms to the other, as they
always imagined him more worthy honor, the less he attributed unto himself.

These were his Arts whilst Lieutenant General, by which he purchased so great a
name in war as Essex, and all those great and glorious names were swallowed up
in his; just as great Rivers are swallowed up by the Ocean.

I pass over in silence those dangerous passages of State, (about this time)
because he past them over so lightly as he scarce left the print of his
footsteps behind, whilst in all the rest none ever left more glorious marks
then he.

Whatsoever they were they go rather on the times account then his; for a wise
Statesman may often opine the best, and yet follow the worst opinion; nor is
this weakness, but judgment and necessity, there being no greater weakness
then to follow ones private opinion against the public vote; or in a
generality to be particular.

How he came afterward to HOW HE WAS MADE GENERAL.
be General, all circumstances considered, is most remarkable, there having
past a vote in the House that no member of it should bear Office or Command in the
Army, he notwithstanding by common vote of all, was presently chosen General,
so useful, or rather necessary he was esteemed for that high charge, and the
service of the Common wealth.

Useful instruments are often laid aside, but necessary we still retain in
hand, and can as little be without them as our hands themselves. Whosoever then
would be always imployd in the State, must render themselves necessary for the
service of the State; else such is their desire of change and variety as they
will often change them only for the pleasure which they take in change,
although for others no more useful them themselves.

Some will say, If no Member of the House was to command the Army, why was not
he included amongst the rest? if any, why was he excluded who commanded it, for
fortune, valor, diligence and fidelity assuredly inferior unto none?

But beside the foresaid Reason, this answer may be easily made; by this Act
they intended only to exclude the Lords, who now they were resolved to cast
aside as unnecessary utencils of State; as superstitious Relics of a Religion
they had abolished, and superfluous Pillars of a Royal Palace they had
overthrown, mean while they by conspiring against the King, did just as if the
Stars should conspire against the Sun who gives them light, or streams to dry
up the fountain whecne they flowed; whence consequently every Glowworm out
shined them now, and their swollen greatness which every one feared before, was
now at so low an ebb as all fearlesly strid over them.

This I speak not with reflection on them all, for many did what their honors
obliged them to, and many what in conscience they imagined the best; but though
all were not equally in fault, all were equally involved ith punishment; and
it is a kind of original sin in the Nobility, whose stain will never out of
their posterity.

Now General, he was not like those Images which lessen OF HIS ACTIONS WHILST
HE WAS GENERA^.
with their height, but the higher he was advanced, the greater still he
showed; and honors were to him but as fuel is to fire, the more you cast on
it you inflame it, but the more, and more vigorous and bravely active it
becomes.

Expect not from me, here the narration of all his military Actions, as his
conquering Ireland, his subduing Scotland, nor the many Battails he fought and
wone till his finishing the war in England, a field so great, as traveling it
over might well weary the longest winded History, much more so short a breathed
Pamphlet as mine. I Will only briefly touch his Military virtues, the soul that
informed all those actions of his.

Every common Sergeant can set his men in rank and file, and every Sergeant of
Battalia can order a Battalion, but every one who knows to set the men knows
not to play the Mate; to know his advantages and disadvantages in War; how to
improve his own and enervate the enemies force; how dexterously to prevail
himself of their weakness, and to elude their strengths; to know when they find
them yielding, how to press them to an overthrow, and then never permit them
to rise again, nor unite in one body, having once routed them, but scatter them
as the wind does dust before its face. These are the Arts of an expert General,
and all these he had unto perfection.

Now overcoming his enemies with celerity when there was danger in delay; and
now delaying again when there was danger in celerity.

Who have always one manner of making war, like Fencers, who have always one
ward or play, give main advantage to their enemies, and teach them as well to
offend them as defend themselves; but who intervary the manner of their conduct
still, always amuse, perplex and dismay the enemy, and put them quite beyond
their skill and prevention.

Some times again he would set upon the foe and overcome them with half the
numbers they brought to field, and at other times bring double their numbers to
overpower them.

When presumption renders an enemy negligent, he with few forces may be
overcome; but when despair makes them valiant, then greater forces are
requisite to gain the victory. Mean time this is a general rule in war, to
enterprise easy things as difficult, and difficult as easy; better to avoid
too much despair or negligence in themselves.

It is the prudent observation of a modern Writer, that the ballancing our
forces just with the enemies, has been the loss of many battails they might
have gained, only by putting more into the scale; occasions and difficulties
in war still growing like our bodies; and childrens coats will soon become too
little for them, unless we make them bigger then their measures are at first.

But let us pass from the field unto the town, and take the prospect of the
Parliament, on which the eyes and attentions of all were fixed and attent, the
war now finished.

They fancying a prescription perhaps as well against the Kingdom as the King,
thought of nothing but perpetuating their reign, and were become by this time
so imperious, as one might sadly say of them what pleasantly was said of them
in former times, that England now had four hundred Kings in lieu of one.

As there is no greater Liberty for the Subject then the OF THE DISSOLVING THE
PARLIAMENT.
moderate Government of one, so there is no greater Tyranny then the immoderate
Government of many; none knowing whom to obey where every one commands, nor who
to please when every one is displeased with what he commands not (they always
disagreeing amongst themselves) to free us from which Tyranny the Army was as
necessary now as were Parliaments to free us from the Tyranny of Kings before.

In brief, thus stood the case, that citadel and fortress of the peoples
Liberty, being in manner fortified against them now, by those whom they had
entrusted with its custody, what should he the peoples General do? but take it
in, and eject and cast them out, far from any intention to demolish it, but
only to man it with others more faithfully to the peoples trust.

When strait with joyful acclamations of all he was proclaimed their Protector
and Governor, not to leave the Commonwealth as monstrous now without a head,
as 'thad been with so many heads before.

And who indeed could better deserve that title then he, HOW HE WAS MADE
PROTECTOR.
who not only protected us from our foreign and domestic enemies, but also
from our selves, the greatest and dangeroust enemies of all; when passion rises
in rebellion against Reason, the multitude (whose liberty is madness) never
imagining that they are free so long as reason rules and governs them; in which
case even their dearest friends use constraint and force to hinder them from
mischieving others and themselves; and for this end chiefly the Army was still
kept on foot.

Though there wanted not other Reasons, the war still OF THE HOLLAND WAR.
continuing which the Parliament had engaged us in against the Hollander, which
he so happily concluded and brought to end: as it is hard to say whether the war
or peace he made was more honorable or advantageous to the English Nation; our
maritine forces rendered by it formidable unto all, we absolute and sole masters
of the Sea, and every where sovereign Arbiters of peace and war.

For the Spanish war, which OF THE SPANISH WAR.
next succeeded this, (on what motives so ever underta'n) the enterprise
certainly was great and glorious, though the event every where answered not our
expectation.

When Princes (through distance of place) are forced to hear and see with
others ears and eyes, and act with others hands and fortunes, they never can be
so truly informed of things, nor carry on the war so vigorously and
fortunately, as when they see and hear and fight themselves.

However, though in the Spanish Indies we failed of that success was hoped for,
yet if that Artificer was highly praised for the greatness of his mind, who
would have contrived mount Athos (reaching from Earth to Heaven) into one
entire Statue of Alexander the Great, to show the mightiness of his actions;
what praises does he deserve of England who intended the erecting of the whole
Indies into one entire Trophee of our victory, to show the mightiness of the
English Nation! And that this had been the success of it, had it been nigher
hand, or he had had the managing of the war, we may well conjecture by the
success our Army had in Flanders, whether he could even intend his own eyes and
hands, and by Auspice of his own Fortune carry on the war, until by taking
Dunkirk and Mardike (by our shipping as by a Bridge) he had joined our Isle
unto the continent, and Britain was no longer divided from the world, but the
world was now joynd unto Brittainy, and we to our greater honor and advantages
might make or peace or war.

Peace and War (as one wittily said) beget each other in an Incestuous in,
only peace is the Legitimate chield of war, but war oftentimes the
Illegitimate one of peace: States become rather Great then Rich by war, as they
become rather Rich then Great by peace; the best policy (then) is to intermix
them so, as neither the State fall into a plurisie by peace, nor Hectique
Fever or Consumption by war.

But wars abroad are like our natural heat, only an argument of our health and
strength, whilst Civil dissentions are like the heat of Fevers, betokening
sickness and infirmity; OF THE CONSPIRACIES AGAINST HIM.
under which notion I know not whether I should comprehend the private
conspiracies against his life and state, which he prevented and suppressed with
such temper and moderation, as whilst the punishment extended but to few, the
fear of it extended unto all: so far (the whilst) from Crueol and Sanguinair
(even when cruelty might have been accounted necessity) as he never cut off one
member but for preservation of all the rest; nor let blood in one vein, but to
hinder all the rest from corruption.

The Conspiracies of a known discontented party are easily prevented, because
they are always looked upon with jealous eyes; they are rather ulcers then
sicknesses of State; they have more of the will then ability to do harm, and
are rather troublesome then dangerous; nor are the Conspirators considerable,
but only for their inconsiderableness. Men of Estates and Fortunes always
comply with the present times and seek not (with hazard to make them worse) to
better their conditions; but men of no fortunes still wish for the future, and
having no Estates themselves, are still longing for the Estates of other men,
and still striving to better their conditions, when (whatsoever change happens)
they cannot be worse; and for such as these it is with injustice they complain of
others not observing the Articles of War, nor Act of Oblivion, whilst they on
their fides observe not their Articles of living peaceably under the present
Government, nor casting into oblivion all former enmities.

But the Conspiracies of those who have no other cause of discontent, but only
their own unquiet dispositions, are far more dangerous, like pestilentious
Fevers, hard to be seen at first, when easily prevented, and hard to be
prevented at last, when easily seen; and such were the Conspiracies OF THE
CONSPIRACIES AGAINST HIS GOVERNMENT
of some unquiet spirits in Parliament against his Government.

It ordinarily happens that when two parties join in opposition against a
third, the third removed and tan' away, the other sub-divide, but when it is to
the advantage of their common enemy, if they understand their own interest,
they remain united still, and if any for their own particular interests seek to
disunite them, they look upon them as their enemy too.

Such was the case of the Army and Parliament, and such were those men who
opposed his Government, neglecting the public safety and business, only to
attend to their private Animosities, complaining they were injured because they
were suffered to do no injury; and who had rather have no Government at all,
then not to be the men themselves to govern us: yet had these their Fautors
amongst the multitude, and were accounted Good Patriots by those, who if they
were wise would as much detest them now, for opposing one another; as they had
them in veneration for opposing Kings in former times, never considering that
'twas envy not zeal in them, that they would change the Government only to have
the Government; that they would introduce themselves in place of others far
more worthy then themselves; and (finally) that whoever should be instruments
of their Ambition, should but be instruments of their own destruction.

But see the strange fates of those who govern us! before, whilst he did
nothing for popularity, every thing was popular that he did; now (on the
contrary) nothing was popular, though he did every thing for popularity. The
same Actions are variously interpreted; the same faces diversely looked upon:
such prestigiousness there is in Government, it makes the same persons hateful
when Princes once, who THE REASON WHY PRINCES ARE NOT BELOVED.
seemed most lovely when Subjects and private men; and the reason's clear, for
none look on those above them with equal eyes, envy fascinates them, and the
people naturally Lovers of Liberty, naturally hate all who have any Dominion
over them: Whence Oderint dum metuant, let them hate so they fear me, was the
saying of a Tyrant; but Oderint dum sine causa oderint, let them hate me, so
they hate me without a cause: this both he and every good Prince might say.

But he soon prevented their machinations, and discipated their plots by
dissolving the Parliament.

It Is the best cure of malignant fevers to discipate the humors, and great
wisdom in those who contend to know their own Forces, and theirs they contend
withal; the Parliament are enough to do their business by gentleness, but
too few to do it by force violence; and in vain they imagine by number to
carry it against those who can lessen their numbers when they please. Yielding
is the best weapon of the weak against the strong, obliging them to lay aside
their force: and indeed the best weapon too of the strong against the weak,
obliging them to lay their obstinacy aside, and either to contend in friendly
courtesy: In a word, a little condescendency on both sides is the best way to
make both parts agree; as hot and cold though opposite in themselves, agree
together in Tepidity. Neither was there any other way of contending with him
but only by gentleness, resolvd rather to lose his life then reputation; as
(indeed) it is the better life of Princes, since without that, their Authority
is dead and gone, by which they only live and reign. But whether the Stars
command us, or we command the Stars, may be a Problem, as well as whether the
Suns motion or Earths occasions our daily revolutions. Certain it is, he had
such a commanding Genius as by gentle force made every one obey; nor did he
ever find difficulty or opposition, that by avoiding or incountring he did not
overcome.

In a calm every common Mariner can sit at Helm; but in a storm when the
billows swell big and high, when horror incompasses them on every side, when
they have nothing but death before their eyes, and every wave appears their
Sepulcher, then only such an expert Pilot as he can to sit at the Helm of
government, who perfectly knows his Guard and Compass, and now by a direct
course can cut through those waves, he safely may encounter, and now by an
oblique again avoid the more dangerous, till in despite of seas and winds,
conspiring against him, he safely conducts his barque to the port at last.

And without wrestling with these difficulties and oppositions, it might have
been doubted whether Fortune or Virtue had had the greatest share in all his
Actions, but now of necessity we must confess that virtute duce, comitante
Fortuna, he had virtue for guide, and fortune for companion in all he did.
'Twas Fortune that presented him the occasions of combatting, but virtue, that
he always came off with victory.

That he should find the wheel of things in so vehement commotion was Fortune
('it is true) but that (once mounted to the top) he should stop, and fix it so
suddenly as he did, appears the work of some more then human hand; so that he
should find the Body and Frame oth' State all shattered in pieces, and those
pieces all scattered about, was Fortune too, but to recollect all those
scattered pieces, and compose them all into one entire body and frame, was such
a masterpiece as none but so great a Master could ever have performed. And if
we count it so great a happiness when bones are broke and splinter'd, to light
on such an excellent Surgeon as co'd set them right again, and apt every
splinter to its proper place; how much more happiness must it needs be for
States, when all disjoynted and out of frame, to light on so excellent a
Statesman as he, who co'd without maim or scar set all things right again.

Now if we examine what had so disjoynted it, we shall find it chiefly to have
been this Reformation they talk so magnificently of, and consequently that
(though it seem a Paradox) nothing needs more OF REFORMATION.
Reformation then it.

There is nothing more spetious then the name of Reformation, and nothing less
then the thing it self; it is the itch of good times, and ulcer of ill, always
enemy to present Government; it has done great things, but undone greater;
seeing (perhaps) some one abuse 'twould take away, but not hundreds it
introduces in the place; your busy Reformers, (whether in Religion or in
State) more zealous then discreet, recurring always to the contrary
extremities; and finding things bent one ways, still bend them as far the
other, and leave them so, till some more discreet and moderate, take up where
they left them, and rectify all again.

But let us pass from discoursing of things without him, and come to what he
was within himself; so shall we be ignorant of nothing, for to know him, is to
know every thing.

It becomes the States-man's as Physicians care, to know the causes of all
distempers; the cures of all maladies, and nature and disposition of all bodies
they have in cure, and OF HIS CIVIL GOVERNMENT
all this, touching the politic body he was most perfect in.

So expert in the management of affairs, as he knew the best ways of ariving
to his ends, and the best means to faciliate those ways. In foreseeing harm
and danger so vigilant and circumspect, he was above all circumvention and
surprise; so quick and sudden in preventing them, as taking all occasion from
danger and opportunity from harm, if a day would suffice, he allowed them not
an hour; if an hour, not a moment; then of so deep inspection, he saw into the
very interior of men and businesses, and could trace design and interest to its
very den, notwithstanding all its turnings, windings, and doublings, and if he
met with a body strong and robustous, such as the Army, he knew presently how
by justly proportioning their Exercise and Regiment to preserve them in perfect
health and vigor still: If with such as the States, weak, crasie and infirm,
newly recovered from a dangerous malady, and without much care in danger of
relapse, no Physician was ever carefuller nor tenderer of his patients health
then he; now with gentle purges weakening its sickness force, and now with
cordials strengthening its health again, until he perfectly restored it unto
health, as he had done it long ere this, would it either have believed that it
was sick, or not believed a sort of Mountebanks vainly promising to make it
well.

Then for the people, none ever knew their natures and dispositions better then
he.

Men impatient of entire servitude, and as incapable OF THE COMMON PEOPLE.
of entire Liberty; frighted with sight oth' rod, but mutinous in feeling it;
none talking more of Liberty, nor understanding it less then they; more
troubling themselves, then heads, with their grievance, considering nothing,
but repining at every thing; bold talkers, and contented so you suffer them but
to talk; above all, most tenacious of their Liberty of Conscience, rather to
follow every new fangled opinion, then remain constant to the old.

This considered, he framed a Militiae, more to quiet, then molest and trouble
them; warlike in appearance, but peaceable in behavior, nowhere intrenching on
their Liberties, but where they entrenched on the priveledges of Government,
allowing them their dear liberty (or license rather) of their tongues, and for
their chiefest darling of all, the liberty to err in their opinions; he
permitted them to follow and embrace what sect they pleased, so they all
concurred in obedience to Civil Government.

This point of Policy many have wondered at, not knowing it seems, or not
remembering that Parable in the Gospel of the good Corn and Tares; and but weak
Politicians, not to understand that who intends any great Reformation, must not
amuse themselves with lesser things till that performed once; then the greater
of those, which in comparison seemed less before, becomes the object of their
Reformation, and so by degrees, till they have reformed all; for want of which
Method, the ignorant and rash bring all things to ruin and confusion, by
plucking down more then they can build up again; and vainly imagining the best
way of reforming any part, to be by the total destruction of the whole.

This was his method, mean time men's reasons could so little comprehend, as
they needed their own experience to believe, how he, Atlas-like, could support
so mighty a frame and machin, all composed of so many different and disjoynted
parts, and hinder them from slipping and falling all in pieces, which yet he
did, riveting them so fast together, and making them all so firm cohere amongst
themselves, as so many pieces of soft wax melted and molded all in one, could
not cleave faster in one Ball or Globe; and this was the great work he had to
do, and which, had not death prevented him, he was on point of finishing: when
indifatigable in body and mind, Assidual in council, perpetually in employ, all
care and diligence, all labor and industry; he died more through care and OF
HIS DEATH.
solicitude of the Common wealth, then either age or sickness; untimely for us,
but timely for himself; (in height of all his fortunes and prosperities, having
never known misfortune nor adversity) After he had refused the Crown, and
acquird more glory by it then ever any did by accepting it; in which, as in all
his other Actions, he might well be compared to Caesar, both alike fortunate
and victorious in war; both prudent alike in ordering the Civil Government; as
many prodigies devancing tons; as to theirs death, only their ends were
different, Caesar dying a violent death, he a natural; Caesar satiate with
living, he desirous only to prolong his life, until he had finished the great
work he had in hand (extending in manner beyond death it self, his care and
solicitude of the public good) Caesar finally leaving the Commonwealth all
imbroyl'd in Civil wars through multiplicity of Competitors to the Government;
he to prevent it, leaving the Government to his Son, out of the way of all
competition, for who else could he have left it to? but some ambitious or other
might strait have start up and said, And why not I as well as he? now it is
answer sufficient to say, He is his Son, so are not you; and sufficient to say
of him, that he is the worthy Son of such a Father, and more worthy the
Government the less he sought and courted it.

One capable of all the honors of peace and war, born with the seeds in him
both of civil and military Government, as time and occasion will soon produce
to light, for that only it is, and the office, which shows the man, and many had
never been thought so fit for Government had they never governed: For example,
who would ever have imagined our Henry the fifth, who seemed only to mind his
pleasures all his youth, would afterward have proved so brave a man? yet we
see how great a Soldier he became, and how occasion was rather wanting unto
him, then he unto occasion, during his Fathers life. Or that Spinola, coming
from a City that had more commence with gold then steel, should the first day
of his going to Field become an accomplished General, and ever afterward one of
the renownedst Soldiers of his Age. To say nothing of Card. Mazzarin, nor his
predecessor Card. Richelieu, both superintendants of the Arms of France; both
by their diligence gaining more victories, then their greatest Generals with
all their experience. A man of courage as easily becomes a Soldier, as a wise
man a Politic; and it is not the man, but the Country makes the war, and
rather the Treasurer then General; let them not be wanting to supply the Armies
wants, and they will nere be wanting to bring them home victories.

And this in vindication of his Fathers leaving him the Government, which yet
was rather others seeking then his own, and rather his obedience then command,
putting no natural affection in the scale, in weighing the interest of the
Commonwealth; and so far from partial for any interest of his own, as we may
well say of him, nature it self was not more natural to him then his affection
to the public good.

Neither did he this without the example of other elective States, the Polander
still continuing the Government in the house of Iagalonii, the Germans in that
of Austria, and Hollander in the Family of Nassan (though no less jealous of
their liberties then we of ours) wisely imagining a certain Omen in that name
(as we may well in that of Cromwell) to preserve that Liberty which it had
purchased them; they well foreseeing the harms and mischiefs still follow all
changes of Families, when new Officers and new Houses are introduc't, new
interests, new factions, (to the destruction of the old) new humors to comply
with, new Avarices to satisfy, so as if the people but rightly understood, how
dangerous and pernicious all change and alteration is to States, they would not
change although 'twere offered them, to be well, if they were but tolerably ill;
nor to be better, if they were well.

To conclude with his Character: he was of stature rather well HIS CHARACTER.
set then tall; strong and robustous of constitution; of visage Leonin, the
true phisiognomy all great and martial men, yet as much Lamb in the Chamber as
Lion in the Field, courteous, affable, and obliging to all; nor can any Records
show a better Child unto his Parents, Parent to his Children, nor Husband to
his Wife, and no less a Friend to all, but those who would needs make
themselves his Enemies. Bounteous of himself, but frugal for the Commonwealth;
avoiding all superfluity in a State, where superfluity is counted manificence:
living in the condition of a Prince with the moderation of a private man; and
free from all vice, even in an Age, when he is counted a good Prince who is not
altogether vicious.

These were his virtues when living, and who would find any fault with him now
he is dead, assuredly shall find no other (when they have sought all they can) but
only his leaving so many ill tongues in England, which yet he could not remedy,
leaving them the liberty (as he did) of free born English men.

Thus have we brought his life THE CONCLUSION.
(in its Idea) all under one prospect of the eye, and by brief glimpses and
reflections given light to see how great a person he was, no humain body being
scarcely capable of a greater soul; how fortune and virtue, never more concurred
to the advancement of a man; how never any past to the temple of honor by more
directer ways, through that of his own virtue and Heroic deeds; how much he
merited of England by his serving and conserving it, in its most dangerous
times; and finally how both at home and abroad he was the honor of our Nation,
wherefore our Nation should be most unworthy and ungrateful should it not
always honor him.

FINIS.

