THE PORTRAIT OF WILLIAM MARQUIS of NEW CASTLE To His LADY The LADY
MARCHIONESS.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Creake, 1660.

The Portrait of WILLIAM MARQUIS of New Castle.
To his Lady, the Lady MARCHIONESS.
LEt Painters with dull Lines, and Colors faint
Go Portrait those whose bodies they Depaint,
The Poet, more then painter's requisite,
To Portrait one, who is all Sprit and Wit.
This nature seems full well to have understood,
Framing him as nigh Spirit as she co'd,
Of Bulk not big, to show Nobility,
Dos more 'ith mind's then body's greatness lie;
Of Visage Aquiline, as best dos fit
A piercing Judgment, and a piercing Wit:
And Flaxen Hair, a color dos presage
As well an Aged Youth, as Youthful Age.
And who would see the Epitome of Wit
Let them but read the Comedies h'as Writ,
Whose Excellent VARIETIES do show
That none the world and Men, dos better know,
Nor better understands the Art, then he,
To gain them all by Noble Courtesy
Who have no greater happiness then when
He speaks, nor greater unhapinesse again,
Then when he ceases speaking, his discourse
H'as so much quickness, Energy, and force:
For Horseman-ship and Arms then, there is none
In our Age fit ^o Write, but he alone;
As none to Judge of it can be so fit
As those alone, who read what he has Writ;
Surmounts the Macedon, in Managing
The furious Beast, and that Albanian King
In Arms, whose blows so Inevitable were,
As none co'd Live, but those whom he would spare.
This partly was in cause, his Prince did call
Him, to the Honored charge of General,
When right was weak, if power were away,
And Sword then Scepter boar the greater sway.
Of which so brave account he rendered, he
(Whilst Leader) still came off with Victory.
Where 'twas his Valor, Conduct, Vigilance,
(All which, in War, do often command o'r chance)
Or's popularity (as who commands
Must have his Soldiers Hearts, as well as Hands)
Or finally, his Fortune 'bove the rest,
What er'e it was, most certain it is the best
Of other Leaders was or' come, with the same
Army, with which he always overcame.
But leaving's Warlike virtue now, to come
To's civil ones, who looked on him at home,
Imagined in his House they did not see
A man, but God of Hospitality,
Fed more at's Board, then nature at her Breast,
When she is most bountiful, amongst the rest
His Entertainment of the KING was such,
The state so Royal, and expense so much,
It ever will be questioned whe're that, or
The Entertaining's Army cost him more.
So far he went both in expense and state
Above a Cressus, or Lucullus rate.
'Bove all, he was so great a Cherisher
Of Arts and Learning, as it is doubted where
The Air (by which they vital breath receave,
The Common Aliment, of all that breath)
To the Lives o'th Learned, did confer more Good,
Then did his benefits, to their Livelihood.
From which contempt of riches 'twas, that he
'Ith Common loss, lost all so cheerfully,
Who in a Noble cause, no difference made
'Twixt giving, and 'twixt loosing all he had.
Bravely in poverty, comforting himself
That where no other way's t'arive to wealth
But by ignoble means, there is nothing more
Becom's a Nobleman then to be poor.
That petty Cottages when they ruined lie
Turn all to dust and rubbish presently;
But mighty palaces and structures, far
More Venerable by their ruins are
And in wyld Woods, Robbers and thieves molest,
Your thieves are known by going bravely dressed
In others spoils, but the honest man's best known
By being robbed, and spoiled of his own.
So stands he like some goodly Oak had stood
Long time the pride and glory of the Wood,
By storms and winter, reft of all it is Leaves,
Far more their harm, and detrement, receaves
Shadow and shelter from it then it is own,
That 's more it self, when all these leaves are gone.
And if our spring tide er'e again return
(As we are not under such a climat born
To have to perpetual winter) you shall see
All flock again unto this Noble Tree
And the Nimphs and swains of Sherwood with their lays,
Dancing about it, chanting of it is praise,
And Crowning it flowers and laurel, when
Welbeck and Bolswol shall behold again
Their Noble Lord as flourishing and more
Then er'e in better times, he was before,
So Prophesies (for Poets are Prophets too)
The humblest honourer of him and you.
MADAM, R. Flecknoe.


