THE FULFILLING OF THE SCRIPTURE, OR An Essay showing the Exact Accomplishment
of the Word of God in his Works of Providence, performed and to be performed.

For Confirming the Believers, and Convincing the Atheists of the present time.

Containing in the End a few rare Histories of the Works and Servants of God in
the Church of Scotland.

ISAI. XLVI: V. X. My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure. JOHN.
X: V. XXXV. -- And the Scripture cannot be broken. ACT. 1: V. XVI. Men and
brethren, This Scripture must needs have been fulfilled. -- Printed in the Year
1669.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
READER;
It is like you m^ expect some account anent the rise and occasion of this
discourse, that on so great, and weighty a subject so small an essay should
venture abroad, especially in a time, when it seems more safe, and prudent to
keep silence, to be swift to hear, and slow to speak, which seldom has an
after challenge; the Author will say little for his apology herein, though he
hops, he may find it more easy to satisfy others, then he did himself: this
fredome only he shall take to confess, that sometime it has been matter of
earnest, yea hat^ caused some tossing, and exercise upon his spirit, and
pressed a more serious enquiry, and search, with a respect to his own case, to
be persuaded anent the Scriptures divine authority, that Godliness is not an
empty name, or shadow, but of an undoubted truth, which indeed of all other
things is the greatest, and of most near concernment: and truly anent that,
this grave convincing argument of the Scriptures certain accomplishment, has
not only often stared him in the face, with a satisfying discovery, and
impression thereof, as a most quieting, and unanswerable demonstration of the
truth, but he must also say, that by very remarkable confirmations from the
Lord, this has been so convincingly witnessed to his experience, as leaves
him under engadgement (were such a poor testimony of weight) to put his seal to
the Word, that it falls not to the ground, neither does the promise of God
fail.

It is a dark time now with the Church of Christ, which we see every where
almost suffering and afflicted, whilst the whole earth besides seems to be
at ease, Christians also even beyond others, in their private lot, trysted with
very sharp trials, though I think suffering may be the least of our fear at
this day, while Ath-isme does now appear on so formidable a grouth, and has a
more threatening aspect then the rage, or violence of men: we see a sa^ d^cay
likewise on the Churches abroad, Religion every where under a great
consumption, and wea^ing out, that seems to have reached it in its vital
parts, men search after an unusual way of sinning, as if they scorned to be
wicked at a common and ordinary rate, prejudice easily taken up and enter^ained
against the way of God, whilst the good man does alace perish, without any
affecting observation thereof, the choice, and excellent of the earth plucked
away, and none to fill their room; Christians burials now frequent, but the
birth, and inbringing of such to the Church rare. This is indeed a sad subject
and so much the sadder that few are found whose eye affects their heart,
whose tears, and groaning seem to answer such a stroke, and ruin which now is
like to fall under our hand, but I shall leave this; prayer will be the best
cure, and is this day more fit, then complaining, to turn unto him who sees
the ways of his People that he may heal them, and can prevent these with
mercy, who seem least fit for the same; only two or three sad remarks of this
time, I cannot altogether pass, which indeed are strange symptoms of the
Churches present case, and distemper. 1. To see men own the doctrine of
sanctification, who yet can professedly disown, yea, make it their work by
reproach to beget a prejudice against the practice thereof, Oh strange! to
find such as will dip their pen in gall against a tender and strict walk in
Religion, and revile it in the power thereof, whilst they do not deny these
truths, and principles that necessarily oblidge to such a tender practice; who
in the most grave concerning duties of Christianity think it enough to charge
their brethen with Pharisaical ostentation, and hypocrisy; whilst they must
confess these duetyes to be unquestionably binding, and that they can be no
competent judges of such a challenge, which the great witness of the heart and
inward parts of men can only determine. 2. It is a sad remark also of the time
that Protestant writers, professing the Reformed Religion, shall state
themselves in opposition to the most concerning grounds thereof, such as
imputed righteousness, and justification by faith, which are well called
Articulus stantis and cadentis Ecelesi^. I cannot have that charity, that it is
from ignorance, but from a height of malice, that some of late reproach the
Protestant doctrine, in this great fundamental of justification, as if it
pressed believing and resting upon Christ without respect to works and holiness;
I confess, we put not inherent righteousness in the room of imputed, though we
assert each is necessary in their own place, the one in order to ou^ right the
other in order to the actual participation of that right, yea, that holiness is
absolutely necessary not only necessitate praecepti, sed medii, and justifying
faith does necessarily require works, sed non qua, and quatenus justificat, but
sure, if these men grant we are justified by the satisfaction of Christ, they
must needs confess it is by imputation, since if the debtour be acquit by the
cautioners payment, is it not by the imputation there of to him? O sad! to see
some put their invention upon the rack how to wound the Church (yea, a death
wound it would be if they could reach their end) in that great truth of imputed
righteousness, but it were best they denied that sixth ver. of the 4. Chap. to
the Romans to be canonick Scripture, which none can read and shift, it being so
clear, that the blessed man is there held forth, uuto whom God imputes
righteousness without works, sure that cannot be inherent righteousness, else it
were contradictio in adjecto, I profess these, what ever they pretend, I must
look on as adversaryes to the Reformed Churches, and there is nothing more
dangerous then a pirat going forth under a counterfut flag. 3. Is it not
likewise sad, yea, astonishing to see Ministers now in these times, who are the
express Ambassadors of Christ given to the Church for her edification, stand
so directly cross to the very end of their work and Ministry, many of whom may
be said that knowingly, and deliberatly they oppose piety, that such should
persecute, whose work is to feed, and wound in stead of healing, grieve the
spirit of the Godly, who should be helpers of their joy, that none are a
greater plague to corrupt the Church, and cause the sacrifice of the Lord be
abhorred, then some of these who should be the falt of the earth, yea, none
more obstruct the treaty of the Gospel, betwixt Christ and his Church, then
Ministers who are called the friends of the bridgroom, Oh, what a strange and
astonishing contradiction may this seem, but it should be no reproach to that
holy, and excellent calling of the Ministry, for of such the Scripture has
expressly warned. I confess it may be said no Atheist like an unsanctified
Minister, yea, no Atheism of so black a dye as theirs, who being still enured
with holy things have yet no sense thereof.

Now in this very dark hour, wherein the Church seems to have fallen in a
death like pang, and oh, many of her Children in a sad l^thargie, that if we
looked in an ordinary way, her wound might seem incureable, there are a great
and concerning Quaeries that I think should much take us up. The one is to know
what the Scripture speaks to the Church, what solid ground of encouragement
is there held forth, for truly if we had not that sure testimony of the Word,
we might fear Religion should quite wear out, and truth perish from the earth,
but does the Scripture speak peace? all then is well; that, O that is
sufficient security to put the Churches hope beyond further debate, though men
should threaten, though the earth were overturned, and the foundation shaken,
this is a determination above men, above all the rules of humane policy, yea,
above the stars, which frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and makes diviners
mad, even that revealed Counsel of God, taking place anent his work and People.

I knw some grave writers of these late times, do express their fear that the
horrid wickedness and apostasy of the Gentile Church may at last resolve in
the Lords departure and an universal darkness, that as the rejection of the
Jews made way for the Gentiles incoming, so their fall may as remarkably
preceede that solemn return and restoration of the Jewish Church, it is also
become the fear of many that Popery may yet once overrun the whole Reformed
Churches before Antichrist fall: but since these sad thoughts, nor any
appearances of the time, are no part of our Bible, we should learn neither to
stretch our fears nor expectations, beyond that which the Scripture warranteth,
and if the Lord be God, and this his very word, let us adhere to it and wait
for its accomplishment. A 2. Quaere which is ndeed no less concerning in such
a time, may be anent Duty, what so imminent an liazard of the Church, and this
great decay of Christianity does most pressingly call for, but this is a
subject which requires another pen, and too large, to touch with a passing
word, yea, we may say the great want of these days is not anent the discovery
of duty, but of the practice of known, and discovered duetyes, for the
Scripture gives a certain and distinct sound in the darkest time, and has not
left us to doubtful inquiries and debate in this matter, I shall therefore
leave it with a few things only to be in the general considered. 1. It is
sure, that every time has its present duty, and the wise discerners thereof
will knw thence what they ought to do, what work and service the present
circumstances of that time calls for, shall the earth have its seasons wherein
things are beautiful, shall the stork and swallow know their time, and yet
Christians not know how to bring forth fruit in their season, and discern the
special time and opportunity of duty? 2. It is also sure, that every Christian
in whatsoever capacity or condition as he has his measure and talent, so has
some work and opportunity of duty, wherein they may serve the Lord in their
generation, yea, it is not the meanest lot or condition that shuts that door
upon any, that they have no work for God, who desire to be faithful for him: Oh
that in this threatening time when darkness is like to overspread the Church, it
were more upon the heart of Christians to strive together, and contend by a
serious improvement of their several capacities to preserve Religion, and
transmit the knowledge of Jesus Christ to the posterity, that the Christian
parent, or Master of family did witness more that great resolution in a time
when many are drawing back, but as for me, I and my house will serve the Lord.
3. It is found that the most eminent and honorable service of the Church does
usually tryst her in a low and suffering condition, when there has been but
little strength, many outward disadvantages, then both their call and furniture
has been most observable, to confess the truth, to endure for the Gospel of
Christ, to overcome by the Word of his testimony, a piece of service whereto
more prosperous times do not give such an opportunity, yea, it has been in
such a case, Dan. 11: 32. that these who knew their God, were made strong to do
exploits. 4. It does much concern us to put a high value on the truth in a time
when men must either lose it, or buy it, and O what a choice purchase is that
which cannot be bought too dear, though at the rate of our liberty, estate,
credit and reputation, yea with the loss of peace when it comes in
competition with it? For it is that great depositum o^ce d^livered to the
Saints, the inheritance of our Children, that way whereby Jesus Christ keep^th
intercourse with his Bride on the earth, yea, the charter of all our mercyes,
and of our hope through eternity. 5. Though every line of di^ine truth is
inestimable, yet it is sure there is a more pressing ca^l for our adherence to
that truth which is most controverted in the time, for it is the word of his
patience and the matter of our present testimony, and it is known through all
ages what a singular bl^ssing, has followed the contending and witnessing of a
few for the truth in a spait of public defection, to keep it alive, when it
was like to be swallowed up, yea, to effects above rational belief, unus
Athanasius contratotum orbem, many such remarks have not been wanting. 6. I
shall only add that which is always necessary and binding, yet, we may say in
a time of the Churches hazard and suffering is more pressingly called for, even
the study of Christian prudence, a duty convincingly necessary, for regulating
of duetyes, according to the circumstances of the Churches case, which does so
nearly concern the interest and preservation of Religion, that I must say, a
breach in that concord betwixt zeal and Christian prudence, when there is not
some equal respect studied in the exercise of both, cannot but give the Church
a sore wound, this is indeeda large theme, but I shall only point at in 3
things. 1. In our avoiding and being tender to give offense, not only to keep a
distance from evil, but from the smallest appearance thereof, I must say they
are bad casuits, and have little respect to the Churches edification, who make
it their work, not so much to keep men from sin, as to show them, quam prope ad
peccatum sine peccato accedere liceat, O what a becoming fear is that, not to
lay a stumbling block in the way of others, to grieve the weak, or confirm
such who use to found their prejudice against the truth, and way of God, upon
the miscariage of such as profess the same. 2. This excellent study of
Christian prudence has a respect to men's taking offense as well as their
giving it, to our being sober in judging, in personal reflections, to cover and
hide the infirmities of others rather then spread them, even for the Gospels
sake, yea, to shut as it were our eyes, and cast a mantle on their nakedness,
who overtaken with the violence of some temptations may yet be serviceable to
the Church, but especially this should press us to a watchful regard of any
breach, and rent in the Church, and to study a healing spirit so far as is
possible without prejudice to truth. 3. It is also a concerning piece of
Christian prudence, how to walk vvisely toward these who are without,
when prejudice against the way of God is now in such a grouth, to study how
we may convince, gain ground, and by Christianly prudent and tender carriage
conciliat respect to the truth, and thus commend holiness, and these who
profess it to the conscience of men, to study that rule of expediency much in
things of themselves vvarrantable, what fitnes, and advantage, present
circumstances may offer, or deny for edification, and promoting that great
interest of the Gospel in our converse with men.

I shall now cease to trouble you further, only would premit some fevv
things with a respect to the subject of this follovving essay. 1. Should we
not with vvonder and astonishment look on this great record of the Scripture?
by which the glorious Majesty of God does speak to men, yea does as certainly
communicate his Counsel and mind, we may say more certainly, then if we had
an immediate audible voice from Heaven, O could we have such ordinary thoughts
of this, if we consider how near God comes therein to us? I think if there
were but one corner of the earth, though in the remotest parts, where men
might go and get a look of so wonderful, and important a thing as Gods
express will written and sent from Heaven to the earth, anent our duty
here, and blessedness for ever, should we not think it vvorth our crossing the
sea, and of the greatest expense of time or labor? it is truly a vvonder how
we can read and consider the Scripture, without wondering. 2. It is a great
concernment to know that the Scripture has such a witness as experience, and
that there is such a trade, and correspondence as this betwixt the Saints and
the Word, which lies not in the common road of the World. O what an empty
thing should Religion be if it had not this word experience in its grammar,
that secret and sure mark whereby the Christian knovveth the Scripture is of
God, how thus the Lord has often sealed their instruction in a dark plunge;
how life and power, inlivening influences, to the melting of their heart,
has often trysted them there in a very dead frame; and now they know that
verily God hears prayer, now they are persuaded, and have learned by the
cross that he is indeed a comforter, yea, many can show how by the Word
their first acquaintance with the Lord did begin, how some particular truth,
like a pickle of corn thrown in at their heart, by the blessing of the great
husbandman was made to take life, and grow. 3. It much concerns us to know
what an excellent key the Scripture is to unlock that sealed book of
providence, and that no other key can fit the same, many have tried another
way but lost themselves on the search, and the more they pressed by humane
vvisdome, they became the more dark. I truly think there is not a more
satisfying discovery within time, then this, to trace divine truth back until
we see its first breaking forth out of his eternal decree and council who is
the author thereof, how thence it takes hold of the word which is the
adequate sign, and declaration of his purpose, and then how the word takes
hold of his work and providence, where we may see the face and condition of
the Church clearly written out through all the changes of time, how
providence keeps a certain and steady course even amidst the most perplexed
motions and reelings of of the earth, yea, how all things even these which
would seem most contradictory, run within that straight channel of the word,
and cannot go without t^ese bounds, 4. It is the pri^cipal, and most
concerning Scripture-promises, that are only touched in this follovving
discourse, these which carry along with them a clear continued series of the
Churches condition through time, and shows the most remarkable changes of her
lot, for it is clear that in diverse prophecies and in a different manner the
Spirit does point at one and the same thing: and truly it should cause no
mistake, or prejudice, thar we find several of the Scripture prophecies
expressed in such dark terms, since the vvisdome of God saw it fit that for a
time these truths should be locked up, and sealed; but now light has so far
broken up with the event, as we may see how very significant and suitable to
the matter these most dark aenigmatick terms are. 5. We would upon no account
shut our ears where the Scripture is clear, and gives us ground to vvait
that the outgoings of the Lord for his people in their deliverance, and for the
destruction of his enemies now in these last times, shall be very glorious,
yea by some stately and stupendous acts of providence that he shall accomplish
his judgment on Antichrist: neither must we take a prejudice at truth,
because of the vvilde fancyes of many who would extend it beyond its bounds,
or that near res^mblance which the error of some in this time may seem to
have thereto, for that has been an old stratagem of the Devil to prejudge the
World at some of the truths of God, by setting up a counterfut thereto. I shall
add no more, only what account is given upon the close of the last argument
of some remarkable passages of providence in the late times, as herein the
author has some confidence to profess he did endeavor what could be
attained for certainty of the same, and if any circumstance of these relations
should be found a mistake, he dare say before Him who is greater then our
conscience it was not the neglect of a serious inquiry, so he must also
premit, the inserting of them was upon no further intent, then to be a witness
to that truth of the Lords eminent appearance for his Church in the last days:
it would be of great use and profit to the Church that some more fitly
qualified would study a more large collection of this kind. O that this might
go forth with a blessing from him who by the meanest things can serve himself
and promote the edi^icaaion of his Church, and that the Lord would raise some
up with much of his Spirit to make a further search and enquiry in this great
and vveiguty truth.

ERRATA.
PAge 12, Line 1, for very, read every. page 45, lin. 2, for ate, r. are. p.
77, lin. 10, for securitly, r. sccurity. p. 90, lin. 18. for were, r. where.
page 94, lin. 13, for plains, r. plainness. p. 105, liu. 26, for most, r.
must. p. 167, lin. 9, for hash, r. harsh. p. 185, len. 3, for therefore, r.
thereof. p. 108, lin. 1. for Alba, r. Alva. page 214, lin. 25. for cruches, r,
crutches. page 217, lin. 11, for III, r. 2. p. 220, lin. 1, for IV, r. III. p.
255, l. 31, for petioned, r. petitioned. p. 285, lin. 11, for observation, r.
observable.

Other such fmaller escapes as one letter for another, or wrong pointing will
not hinder an intelligent Reader.

The fulfilling of the SCRIPTURE.
THere are two means by which the blessed Majesty of God has chosen, to
reveal himself to the sons of men, his Word and his Works, which may be called
these two great Luminaries, for giving light to the Church, though the one be
greater, I mean does more clearly shine forth, yea does communicate light to
the other; these, men must not divide, which by so strait a tie the Lord has
joined, and by a mervellous correspondence has set the one over against the
other, that it may be easy to see his faithfulness, and the accomplishment of
the Scripture therein, and indeed this is a great concerning truth, that
calls for a serious study, the solid persuasion of which should afford a
svveet ground of repose, and rest for the soul, though the earth were all in a
combustion ronnd about, and give a satisfying answer to our most sollicitous
thoughts, and fears: Now this being the intended subject of the following
discourse, I shall first touch it a little in the general, and then hold forth
some more particular grounds, whence it may be clearly demonstrated.

I. That the Scripture of God has a certain accomplishment here in the World,
and what is to be understood by the same, I shall endeavor to clear in these
things, which would be considered.

1. This is the very unfolding of the Lords decree, and secret purpose, the
bringing forth of his work, now within time, to the view of Angels and Men,
which was before him in the deep of his thoughts, and counsel from eternity; it
is an opening up of the sealed book, which we must not understand to be that
secret roll of election, and the book of life, wherein the names of the elect
are writ; but Liber fatidicus, the sealed book of Gods dispensations in the
World, showing out his counsels, and designs which should be brought forth in
the after ages of time; for as the Lord did fully comprehend what he was to do,
and all that was to befall his Church, and People from the beginning to the end,
long long before there was a beginning, before the mountains were formed, so
has he copyed, and written out his heart in the Word hereanent, wherein he
has most plainly showed forth, what were his blessed purposes, and counsel of
old, and thus the thoughts of his heart, his Word and his works do sweetly
aggree, and each one wonderfully answers to another, for his work does bring
forth, and accomplish his Word, that his decree, and counsel from all eternity
may take place.

2. The Scriptures accomplishment is the transcript and writing of it over in
providence, where we may see and admire how the Word does shine upon all the
paths and footsteps of the Lord toward his Church in every age, and gives
light to the same, and what an evident reflection, his work has again upon the
Word, so that through the whole series and course of providence in the earth,
we have a most exact portraicture, and image of the Scripture, answering one to
another as face answers to face in the glass, where it may be easy to discern
the copy by the principale, and that resemblance which is betwixt the building,
and that excellent pattern, and model, which is held forth thereof in the Word.

3. The accomplishment of the Scripture is the very turning that which was the
object of our faith, and contemplation to be the object of our sense and
feeling, it is the real birth, and bringing forth these truths unto the World
in their appointed time and season concerning the Church, and particular
Christians, which were hid in that womb of the promise, and many dark
predictions of the Word; it is such a thing as gives the promises and
Prophecyes, a visible being, yea brings truth so near within the reach of our
senses, that we may even touch as it were and handle the Words of life. O what
an excellent interpreter is experience! Taste and see, for thus the serious
Christian gets a view of the Scripture, and spiritual things, which the most
subtle, and piercing eye of unsanctified Schoolmen cannot reach, yea, by the
practice of truth, nearnes to God, ahd retiring of the soul to him, has often
got more light in ane hour then others by many days, putting their judgment
and invention upon the rack.

4. This is Gods own seal, which he pntteth to the Word to confirm and ratify
the same, I do not only mean that secret seal of the Spirit within, but
something more external that solemn testimony of his works, whereby he does
every day appeal men's consciences anent his truth, for his works are very
manifest, whereon there is so clear an ingravening of his truth and
faithfulness, that as the impresse and image of the seal is upon the wax, men
may also see whose superscription and image that is, which does appear on such,
and such passages of providence.

5. This is something we are not to seek only in the extraordinary acts of
providence, or in any singular and eminent path of a christian experience, nay
it does shine forth in the smallest and most casual things that falls out, yea
in every Page of that great Volumn of providence may be clearly read.

6. The Scriptures accomplishment is such a thing as concerns every Christian
in his personal case, to which his ordinary experience does relate, whereof
these have a large register, what of the Word has been certainly proven in the
several steps, and changes of their life, whose practice does much ly betwixt
improvement of the Word, and observation how it is fulfilled, such can witness
how under a spiritual decay to be carnally minded is death, and when its well,
that great peace they have who love Gods Law, they have often found that in a
strait he is a very present help, and in the way of duty that its surely good
to draw near to him, and in the close of their life, can from many remarkable,
and convincing providence declare the truth, and faithfulness of God; and
truly whilst I speak here, of the Christians experience, I think its sad, and
a great short coming, that there is not a more serious improvement of it for
this end, which is a very concerning duty on such who have tasted that the Lord
is gracious, and O what an excellent addition would this be to their testament,
when they are to leave the World, to leave a testimony behind them to the
faithfulness of God in his Word, and promise, and thus put their seal to the
same, from what they have often proven by sure experience, for this should prove
a singular help to strengthen others, and spread abroad the fame, and good
report of religion, yea, thus one generation should declare the works of the
Lord to another, and transmit the memory of his goodness to succeding ages.

7. This is something which not only the Christians experience does witness, and
in every time take place, but has also a peculiar reference to these ages, and
periods of times, wherein such particular truths, should have their
accomplishment; for its true that the Prophets of old did not only in their
predictions, hold forth in general, the truth, and certainty of these things,
which should fall out, but they also inquired and searched diligently anent the
time to what or what manner of time the Spirit by them, did point at 1 Pet. 1:
11. For its truly clear, that a piece of the Word, was under the Law to have
its peculiar accomplishment, that part of it also, under the Messiah Kingdom,
in the days of the gospel, should be fulfilled, and we find a very concerning
part thereof belongs to their latter times; and there is betwixt such periods of
time, and revolution of the Churches case, and the bringing forth of such a
piece of the Scripture, to a performance, a very certain and undoubted
connection. Its true we do not yet well understand (which will be one of the
last manifestations, the Church shall have at the end of time, when the mystery
of God is finished) how to sort the event exactly to the Word, but it is sure
(and were worthy of our study and observation) how every age has something of
the Scripture peculiar thereto, yea carries forward the Lords work and design
a further step, may we not see how one age fulfilleth such a piece of the
Churches sufferings appointed for her, and puts some great trial and sad
persecution over her head; which she was to meet with, whilst an other age,
carries her through an other change, and gives her a time of rest and
breathing, how such a time brings Antichrist fordward to his hight, and such
a following age begins the turn of the Churches case, yea every several period
and revolution of time, still adds something, to that excellent history of
the Word, and providence, which we have since the beginning, and brings forth
something further into the world of the Lords counsel and design about his
Church.

8. The accomplishing of the Scripture is such a thing, we are to look after,
in a special way here, which concerns this militant, and traveling condition of
the Church, for if the Scriptures were once fully accomplished, and the great
mystery of God therein finished, there were then nothing more to do, his work
of providence were at an end, and time should be no more; this is something,
that is not here perfected at once, but is still gradually carrying on, and
then shall be complete at the resurrection of the just, and second coming of
the Lord, which is the last part of Canonick Scripture to be made out, when
both his work and his word, and time, shall be all finished together; but whill
the sainets are yet by the way, they have the written word and all these
precious promises therein, for present use and encouragement, for that is its
proper work to take them safe through this labyrinth of the world, and when it
has brought them to land, it has no more to do, there will be then no more
need for a Christian to go to a promise, and adventure upon it, we shall then
no more watch, with the watchmen in a dark, and stormy night, and hope for the
breaking of the day, faith then shall not be at a stand, how such a word shall
be made out, because of invincible difficulties in its way, no, then it has
done its work, and that which is written shall be swallowed up, in that which
is seen and enjoyed, all the streams of our encouragement will then lose
themselves in a greater depth. O then its finished and done what all the
promises, prophecies, and threatenings of the Word, was bringing forth, and then
no more need of something as a pledge and earnest in hand, to them who have the
full possession of the inheritance, under whose feet the God of peace has trod
Satan and all their enemies.

9. I shall add this, the accomplishment of the Scripture, is something, which
is not only demonstrat to a Christian by sensible influences, and Gods Secret
working with his Spirit, but is made out to the observation of men, in the way
of providence, and not only witnessed by that internal evidence of the Spirit,
but by an external testimony, which both rationally, holds this out to the
judgment, and sensibly to the sight and experience, and this is the strongest
and most full of all outward evidences, since the world must shut their eyes if
they do not see it, and a Christian must deny what he both sees and feels,
if he deny a witness to this.

II. We would consider the accomplishment of the Scripture, as that which is
the Lords peculiar work and design in the World, and that great bussines which
is upon the wheels of providence amidst the various changes and revolutions,
which are here within time, for bringing about whereof the blessed thoughts of
his heart, are fixed and unalterable. This is indeed a grave and serious truth
worthy to be more noticed and laid to heart by men, that the glorious
providence of God which goes throughout the earth, and does particularly reach
all things which come to pass, the smallest as well as the greatest intrests
of men, in all these, does move certainly and infallibly for the accomplishing
of the Scripture, which is that great thing God has before his eyes, for it is
no personal intrests of men how great so ever they be, that can answer this
end, it is something beyond the Setting up of Kings, or overturning Kingdoms
and nations that he does mind amidst these varions changes, which are in the
World, its some greater thing, then that which we most notice, the Lord thereby
designs, how such a party is advanced, and others brought low, for these
things come within the reach of his care and providence, in so far as the
fulfilling of the Scripture is therein concerned; the outmaking of the
promises, and threatenings one syllabe whereof he does more value then all the
crounes and Kingdoms of the earth, yea will not let it fall to the ground,
though it should be at the rate of laying cities, and countries desolate, for
its in this the Lord takes pleasure, and exercises his blessed thoughts, even
the bringing about what he has spoken in his Word.

^. Now to clear this further, I shall hold forth these following grounds,
whence it may appear.

First the fulfilling of the Scripture, and written Word is so great a thing,
and of such concernment, that the blessed Majesty of God, thought it worthy of
a place in his heart from all eternity, this was before him in his thoughts and
counsels of old; even that mervalous work which should be the after-product,
and outmaking of his Word to his Church here within time, and surely was such a
plott and contrivance that as no less then infinite love, wisdom and power,
was required to bring it about, so it was well becoming the Majesty of God, and
worthy to be the work of all the three blessed persons of the trinity; O if we
could go down a little to this deep, and see the wonders that are there, we
would find that knowledge which usually lesseneth our admiration of other
things, would highten it here, it would be new to us every day to think how
great and mervelous a thing that is which the Word is bringing forth.

2. It is upon this, even the performance of the Word that the present
encouragement, and after blessedness of the saints dothly, for the great
interest of the Church is adventured upon the Word, and embarked with it, which
should be lost yea their stock and treasure which is laid up in heaven, and all
that a Christian is worth, which is laid up in the promise, were then perished,
if the Scripture should want an accomplishment, the Godly man has then run and
labourned in vain, and these who are fallen asleep in Christ have dyed in a sad
delusion, providence would be like the work of the foolish builder, who begun
and knew not how to finish. O how heighly then is the Lord concerned in
fulfilling of his Word? That he may perfect what concerns his People, and
having surely paid the price put them also in possession.

3. There is yet more then the interests of Angels and men, yea then heaven and
earth is worth that depends upon the outmaking of the Scripture; the glory of
God and especially the praise of that great attribute his faithfulness, which he
will have no less shine forth in the performance of his Word, then his power
and wisdom in this great fabric of the universe, and these mervelous
productions of nature; for he has magnified his Word above all his works,
therefore is his heart greatly set upon this, even the bringing to pass what
he has spoken, which if in the least should faill, were no less then to make
God a liar, and falsify his Word, who is through all the Church known by this
blessed name, The God of truth.

4. We would consider this, as that great trust, which is put in his hand who
only in heaven and earth was found worthy to open the book of Gods decrees and
counsels, and loose the seals thereof, a trust which the Lord did not adventure
upon the Angels, the smallest promise, being such as requires no less then an
omnipotent power and the arm of Ithovah to bring it about; for which end, he
whom the father has anointed, is gone forth as a mighty man who rejoices to
run his race, that he may perform his Word, and through this great design in
the administration of providence, about his Church and People which he will not
cease or give over, until the mystery of God in the Scripture, and all that was
spoken by the Prophets be put to a close, when Heaven and Earth at the pouring
out of the last vial, shall give that solemn shout and exclamation, It is
finished, it is finished. O if this were once fully perfect, there would be no
more to do, then the Winter were past, and the Summer come, the song of Moses
and the lamb should be heard, because the bride has made herself ready, then
let all the trees of the wood rejoice, the hills break forth into singing, and
all that is therein be glade, because the Scripture and great design thereof is
fully finished, and the day of the perfect liberty of the Sons of God is come.

5. The accomplishment of the Scripture is of such concernment, that nothing
can be done until it be once finished, for this, time must wait, the Sun must
keep its course, and the ordinances of the Heaven continue as they are, the
World is but a scaffold until this building be perfected, for this the grave
does still retain her prisoners and the dust of the Saints must yet rest in
hope, the creation still groaneth, and the marriage supper of the lamb is
deferred, the cry of the souls under the altar get not a full return, until all
that is written in the Word be fulfilled.

6. We would consider, this is the great thing which the Lord this day is
carrying on, even the accomplishment of his Word, for this is most brought upon
debate, of any thing besides; the World challenges it, and the hearts of the
godly do often call it in question; the Atheist scoffs at it, and says where is
the promise of his coming, there are often to appearance insuperable
difficulties in the way of its performance, therefore does the Majesty of God
so much concern himself in this, for bringing about of which he is in a holy
way restles, and providence in an uucessant motion, until he has done that
which he has spoken in his Word. It was for this cause that the Scripture
might be accomplished, that the Word was made flesh, and he who counted it no
robbery to be equal unto God, did take upon himself the form of a Servant,
this is of such account in his eyes, that what time he speaks concerning a
Nation or People, ere it come not to passc, he will rather put forth
omnipotency, for the working of miracles, and change the very course of nature,
for this he will make the deep dry, make a way through the red Sea, and cause I
ordan stand as in heaps, that he may keep promise to his People; if there be
no way for bringing about his Word, but through a Sea of blood, and over the
bones and carcasses of his enemies, he will do it, and bring it to pass,
though Walled Cities, and the Sons of Anack mighty and strong should stand in
the way thereof. Abraham's old age, and Sarahs dead womb, must not frustrat
this, if the promise of the Churches restoration cannot be made out without a
wonder showed upon dry bones scattered at the graves mouth, this shall not be
wanting; when God says he will bring down the enemies of his Church, if the
dust of the ground should arise, down they must come; how many great designs of
men has this blessed design (that the counsel of the Lord may stand) crushed
and broken? so that their work and counsel has been as the Spiders web, when
it stood cross to this end, the godly need not fear, that he be not a present
help in time of trouble, for he will keep his word herein, though the Earth
should be overturned and the Mountains cast into the midst of the Sea; O who
has resisted his counsel! What are all these vicissitudes and changes here in
the World? But making way for the Scriptures accomplishment, with what desire
does he move toward this end? So that as in Zachary 6: v. 8. the instruments
by him appointed for executing his judgment and the threatenings of the Word,
its said they have quieted his Spirit, his decrees are mountains of brass,
which are unchangeable, the thoughts of his heart take place in all
generations, therefore the Word Which is gone forth out of his mouth shall not
return in vain, but the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand

III. The accomplishment of the Scripture is a truth very clear and manifest,
whereof none can pretend ignorance, if they do not shut their eyes, and force
their own light from the fear of such a discovery; for the obstruction does
not^ly in the darkness of the object or that men cannot see this, since we have
it so clearly held forth in great and legible charecters, nay, we must say the
cause is culpable, there is much of the will in it, which renders such ane
ignorance without excuse. O that this should be so little looked after, a matter
of such near and weighty concernment, when there needs not an other
demonstration, but come and see the works of the Lord through the earth, for he
has here so far condiscended to his People, to bring the truth near, that they
even feel and grip the same, yea does in a manner say to every one as to
Thomas, put in your bands, touch the Word, and truth thereof, and be no longer
faithles, taste but and see, that the Lord is good and that he is true in what
he has spoken.

We are indeed to look after a more clear, and full discovery of this truth the
nearer the Church is to the end of time; there is a labyrinth as it were of
turnings and windings, through which we may see the Word often brought, so as we
lose sight thereof, and are ready to stagger anent its performance; but its as
true that the most eminent confirmations, the saints ever had of this truth,
has been after greatest shakings thereanent, yea, the Lord has in all ages,
so visibly sealed his Word by its performance, that we may say, can he be a
Christian and a stranger to this in his experience, and a serious on-looker on
providence and the dispensations of the time, wherein he lives, and a stranger
to it, in his observation; yea, can any be so wholly brutish, not to discern a
thing so clear that oftimes these, who run, may read?

But to speak a little more to this I shall here point at some things, that may
show how manifest this truth is.

1. Is it not very clear, which we see very day, brings to light? A truth so
conspicuous, both in Gods ordinary way with his Church, and in the several
steps and passages of a Christians life: For these mercies which bring the
Word, and promise to pass, are new every morning, and cry aloud, if we could
hear, great is his faithfulnes^, this is indeed tried; and needs there more, to
convince a blind man, that his sight is restored to him, but that he certainly
sees; sure they never wanted confirmations here who do but serviously seek to
be confirmed.

2. Is it not a clear truth, which not only is found upon the exactest trial;
but is witnessed by such who ever tried it in their most pressing straits* and
extremity; for its in the darkest night this truth has most brightly shined,
and these more remarkable ventorious acts of faith, have they not still brought
forth most convincing experiments thereanent? We may say there is none can give
a better account of the performance of the Word, then these who against hope,
have believed in hope, that this never made them ashamed.

3. Is it not also clear, whereof there are such solemn extraordinary
comfirmations in all ages? For that his name is near, his wondrous works
declare, I am sure no time could ever deny its witness, how by great convincing
providence, both of judgment and mercy it has been so sealed, as has forced
Atheists to keep Silence, no time wherein the Church had not cause to erect a
pillar, and engrave thereon, We have seen with our eyes the great and wondrous
works of the Lord, by which he has witnessed the truth of his Word.

4. Is it not a manifest truth which even in the most strange, and dark
footsteps of providence, so clearly shines forth, these which at the first
look are an astonishment, and hard to be understood, yet after most clearly
verify the Scripture, that whilst the Lords way goes out of our sight, yea,
out of the ordinary road of his working, through a labyrinth of turnings, and
cross dispensations, yet at length, it does evidently clear, and dissintangle
it self, which men may often see break forth as the sun out of a dark cloud,
that shiueth the more brightly, the more it was obscured.

5. Is it not very clear which can be demonstrated by such visible effects in
these great changes of the World? For the fulfilling of the Scripture, is not a
thing hid in a corner, but often published in the house tops, that men may see
legibly written, upon Kingdoms and nations, the desolate ruins, and
deva^^ation of cities and houses great, and fair, which are made to be without
inhabitants, so as these who go by may clearly read the cause, and bear that
witness, Lothereis sin visibly punished according to the Word.

6. How clear is this, which we have so evidently drawn out, and acted over in
a Christian walk? For what else is the spiritual conversation of such, these
visible effects, and evidences of the grace of God all along a Christians way,
but a visible convincing witness to the performance of the word? Has not such a
very audible Echo, and resound to that which is the great drift, and Scope of
the Scripture; where men may see the bible turned over into a practical history,
written forth, and acted on the heart, and conversation of the saints, as on a
stage, or theater: the Word living, speaking, moving, and clearly diffusing it
self through all the veins, as it were, and conduits of a Christians life, so
that if the truth, and reality of the grace of God be a thing manifest, and
unquestionable, we must also see therein the real performance of the Scripture.

7. I shall add we may clearly see how one piece of the Scripture, is nothing
else but the punctual fulfilling, and accomplishment of the other, how that
which was shadowed out by dark types, under the Law, and held in a Prophe^y,
through the Old Testament, is written before our eyes in a plain, and real
history in the New Testament, and that the gospel is only a perfecting of the
Law, and the Prophets.

IV. Though its very manifest and by undeniable proofs can be demonstrated that
the Scripture has a real accomplishment and does certainly take place, in the
constant course of providence here in the World, that I am sure if men do not
darken themselves they can be no strangers to such a thing, yet we must say
This truth which most nearly concerns us, is to the most of men, (even such who
seem to give a large assent to the Word) a mystery and dark riddle. There are
few who do but enquire if there be such a thing, if the promises and
threatenings have indeed a certain outmaking, few do seriously ponder the
providence of God in which the truth and faithfulness of the Word shines
forth, that they may thereby be further confirmed, we see that to many, (alace
too many) the great concernments of the Law and everlasting happiness are a
trivial and an impertinent bussinesse, this is a truth the World does pass
without regarding: such as sport at Religion when they come to earnest here,
dare not stand before this discovery, it concerns them much to reconcile
their principles with their practice, their fear begets hatred, and both put
their wit and invention on the rack, how to dispute away any remander of a
conscience, to imprison their light, and under the pretext of reason, run down
godliness, and the absolute necessity thereof, yea, besides does not sensuality
wherein many wallow, and steep themselves, so dull and droun the soul, put such
ane interposition of the Earth betwixt them, and this truth, as wholly darkens
it? And, oh, how sad that many having a large profession to be Christians
scarce ever knew* what it is to put the Word to ane essay, and trial in the
concernments of their life, to have their light followed with experience,
wherein the very truth, and reality of Religion lies.

To clear this, I shall hold forth some things which may show how little this
truth of the Scriptures accomplishment is known, or studied by the most of men.

1. The abounding of so much Atheism that there are so many who not only
disclaim the practice of that Religion they seem to profess, but do state
themselves in most direct opposition to the rules, and principles thereof,
these to whom the Scripture is but as a Romance, yea, do only converse
therewith to prove their wit, and parts in impunging the same, who avowedly
mock at the judgments, and providence of God; I confess these may be reckoned
monsters, a very prodigy in the time, wherein they live, though alace, it is
not the least part of the World; and which is strange, we see the most horrid
Atheists do usually abound, were the light of the Gospel ^ath most shined, the
savage places of the Earth bring forth no such monstrous birth, as are hatched
within the visible Chutch, for thus the judgment of God puts a blacker dye
on them then others; O what a terrible sound should the fulfilling of the
Scripture, have in men's ears, if they once came to have serious thoughts
thereof, since they cannot admit this but they must certainly read their own
sentence of death, which a few days shall put in execution, and if the
Scripture be true, they are then unspeakably miserable.

2. That indifferency whieh we see amongst men about Religion, and the most
concerning truths of Scripture does show how little this is known or laid to
heart, whence there is such a generation who do not professedly deny the
Scripture, yet can turn it over in a School problem, and wonders that men
should engadge so far upon it; it is not that it is hid from them, but they
truly choice to hide themselves from it, as more suitable to that interest,
they drive, that the truth of God, should be rather a matter of opinion then of
faith, a thing which they would dispute, but not believe, but* O, what other
thoughts would a clear sight of this cause? That within so few days, the
truths, and threatenings of the Word, shall be sad earnest, the fulfilling
whereof no sharpnes of wit, nor subtle arguments, will be able to evade.

3. That there is so much barren theory of Divine truths in the World, with so
little serious Christian diligence, does it not sadly witness how small
acquaintance men have with this truth? Whence we see so great a part of these
who prefessedly acknowledge the word, and are daily conversing with it, yet can
give no other account thereof but report, so many that can satisfyingly
discourse of the Scripture, could never put their seal to it, that God is true
therein; whence are so many great School divines, and able Ministers for
parts, such visible Atheists in their way, and practice? Is it not, they really
judge Divinity, and Religion, rather a science, and matter of speculation, then
a matter of sense, and feeling, which men should more live then speak, and
cannot be known without experience the true end of knowledge; but, O. this
cannot be found in books, men will not meet with it in a throng of choicest
notions, it confounds the wife, and disputer of this World, whilst the
meanest, and most simple Christian often knows more, then these of greatest
parts.

4. The great Hypocrisy which is in the world, I mean within the visible
Church, does too clearly show that this truth is little thought on, or laid to
heart; for what is that false show, and appearance (which we may say is not a
sin, but the very sinfulness of sin) is it not the height of Atheism? And a
real contradiction in their practice to this, that the Scripture of God is
true, and will have ane unquestionable accomplishment, O could any be so
monstrously irrational, to drive this poor plott how to appear that which they
are not, to be at such pains to act the part handsomely of a serious Christian,
to personat his tears, and grief, his spiritual frame, his zeal for God, if he
did think gravely on this truth, and did believe the threatenings of the Word;
that they will surely take place, and be within a little no complement, but sad
earnest, and that he is every hour standing under that Scripture-woe against
Hypocrites? I am sure it would make his very hair stand upright, his joints
louse, and his thighs smite upon another, could he but seriously think upon
this.

5. These unwarrantable ways which in a time of trial men take for their
escape may witness this that the Word they do not judge a sure ground to
adventure on; whence is there such hesitation in suffering times? From that day
many taking there leave of Christ, who have rather choifed sin then affliction;
O is it not? They judge the testimony of the God of truth is not sufficient
security to carry them through such a strait, and are not fully persuaded that
it must come to pass what he has promised, for if this were, they should
reckon it their greatest safety to embarque their interest on so sure a ground,
and with much quietness repose their soul, and disburthen their care by putting
it over on the Word.

6. What does the frequent discouragement and unconfortable walk of the People
of God speak forth, does it not witness how little they are in earnest with this
great truth of the Scriptures accomplishment or established thereanent? What
means these distrustful fears, and perplexed complaints: if their eyes be
but open to know, they have such a well as the promise of God, at their hand;
how is it that the smallest straites are so puzling, and ready to out wit
them, that they so usually stumble at the cross? And as things from without
do appear, their eucouragement made to ebb and flow? Is not here the cause?
That they stagger at the promise whilst probabilities in some visible way, does
not go along for its performance: Its truly easy to have some sweet notions of
faith at a distance, but whilst the trial comes near, upon such a closse
approach, that there is not an other way, but to put the whole stresse of their
particular interest, on the Word, and on it alone, many are then at a stand,
because they are not thoroughly assured that though the earth, should be
overturned, there is an absolut necessity for the promise of God to take place.

Now from these things may it not appear that this grave truth of the
Scriptures accomplishment is but little known, or studied? I confess we may
think on it with astonishment, how a matter so nearly concerning is not more
our work, there are indeed many things worthy to be knopvvn, but our short
life can scarce allow time, or give leisure for the study thereof, but O this,
thongh we had only 2 days to live, I think might require the one, to be sure,
and persuaded anent the truth of that vvhereon our heaven, and eternal
blessedness lies, to which we must lay the dead grip, when we are in the
passage at that strange step betwixt time, and eternity. O what a vvonder,
how rational souls who walk on the border of the greatest hope, and fear
imaginable, can yet be so unconcerned thereanent, such serious thoughts might
force men to retire, and go sit alone; and truly these things gravely
considered may seem strange and hard to reconcile.

1. That there is such a thing as the very Word and Testimony of God, this day
upon record, vvherevvith we have so much to do, which does offer it self to
men's trial, and exactest search, and yet we put it so little to that
touchstone, that we may know it upon an other account, then report or
hearsay.

2. How in a matter of such high importance as salvation through all eternity,
and the ground of this hope me ^ should take the truth on an implicit faith, or
satis^y themselves, with a common assent thereto, as though it were enough to
witness our believing the same, because we did never doubt or call it in
question, I am sure men would not be so lax, and so easy to satisfy in the
most common interest they have here in the World.

3. How can men render to others a reason of their hope, when it is enquired,
who did never ask a reason of this at themselves, or will these seal the
truth with their blood, who never had it sealed upon their heart by
experierrce.

4. Wence is it that men can have comfort in Scripture who are not well
grounded in the faith thereof? Indeed these who are solidly persuaded anent the
truth, and its certain outmaking may have much joy and peace, whilst they know
the ground of their confidence can bear up any stresse or burden they lay upon
it, and for what end did the Lord witness the certainty of his Word by two
immutable things, wherein its impossible for him to lie but that from so sure
and strong a ground, his People might have strong consolation?

5. How can any think to adventure their immortal soul upon that whereon they
fear to venture an outward interest, or put over their dearest things in his
hand and keeping, who could never say, they know in whom they believed.

6. May it not seem strange that men can believe a certain performance of the
Word, and promises, and not be more deeply affected therewith? O is this true,
shall it surely come to pass, and not one jot thereof fall to the ground, and
should it not cause us awake in the night, and bear us more company? Ought we
not to think, our selves at a loss that day wherein, we take not a turn in the
meditation of divine truth, if we be sure that these must take place?

7. I would add, if this be indeed the Scripture of God which surely has an
accomplishment. O how are we so little Christians? Why does men's walk, so sadly
jarr with so great an hope? What manner of persons should these be, that are
persuaded within a little these heavens must pass away as a scoll, the
elements melt with ^ervent heat, and the earth be burnt up? I think if this
will not press home on men to be serious, and diligent, they must be in a very
sad lethargy.

V. The accomplishment of the Scripture is a most clear, and undeniable witness
of its Divinity, that it is his Word who is not like man to ly, or the son of
man to repent, and has this as its distinguishing character, that not one
syllable thereof falls to the ground: This is the undoubted privilege of God,
and of him alone, to forsee things contingent which are many ages after to fall
out, and has no dependence upon necessary, and natural causes; and truly,
this may be a convincing argument, yea, we may say of all external testimonies
is the greatest; but its strange to think what a generation there is who can
sport at the Scripture, and question the truth thereof, who yet did never once
seriously enquire if such a thing be true, else so clear a witne might stare
them in the face, such a party we should look on with compassion, its also sad
to think at how poor a rate far below their allowance, many of the Saints do
here live, because there is so little of that excellent and more noble Spirit,
to search the Scripture for their further comfort, and establishment thereby.

It is true this blessed record does bear witness to it self, and is known by
its own light whereon there is such a visible impresse of the glorious God,
such convincing marks of its true descent, as may thoroughly show whose it is,
and how far it exceeds all humane invention, and thus by a clear manifestation
of the truth, does commend it self to men's consciences as a safe ground whereon
they may repose their soul: It is also clear, how wonderfully the Scripture
has been preserved, and the original copyes thereof keept through all ages,
that what ever small variation there may appear as to some Apiculi, which in
some places has caused diverse readings, yet, in any necessary or saving truth
the greatest Critics will confess they do not in the least vary, and it is
known (wherein we are to adore that special providence of God) that the Jewish
Church, to whom this sacred depositum was delivered, did with such exact and
singular care look to the same, even in the least tittle, or letter thereof;
this being the great work and study of the Mazarites, from one age to another,
to see to the preserving of that great record, from being in the least vitiat,
or corrupt; and the greatest adversaries of the truth cannot possibly deny that
aggreement betwixt these many original copyes, in the whole substance, which
may be very convincing to the World. And does not men see, how mavelous the
whole frame of the Scripture is? What a correspondency betwixt all the parts
thereof, that nothing in it does in the least, vitiat the proportion, and
beauty of the work, but all along an evident tendency to advance holiness,
and conform the soul to God: With a wonderful consent and harmony in answering
to this great end, we see the simplicity, and plains of its style, yet backed
with a convincing Majesty, and authority upon the conscience; yea besides it
has been attested by miracles that were great in themselves, famous in their
time, transmitted to the Church in after ages, with unanswerable evidences of
their truth, that not only from the witness of the Word, but other pressing, and
rational grounds may let us see there could be no deceit, or imposture therein.

These are a great testimony to the truth, but I may say, on very sure ground
that, next to that great witness of the Spirit, there is no argument more
convincing to reach Atheism a stroke and thoroughly satisfy an exercised
Spirit, who may be plunged anent this great thing, the authority of the
Scripture, then a clear discovery of its performance, whilst under the assault
of such a temptation, if this be the very word of God, they may but retire
within, and then turn their eyes abroad in the World, to see what a visible
impresse, of the Word is stamped on every piece of the work, and providence of
God. Now for further clearing I would offer these few things.

1. First the accomplishment of the Scripture is a very public testimony from
Heaven to its divinity, whilst the Lord by his works through the Earth which
are done in the view of Angels and Men does solemnly avow that this is his
Word; for we must say his work within on the hearts of his People, and without
about the Church is such, whereat men, yea all the magicians of the earth, may
stand amazed, and confess that nothing less then a divine almighty power can
accomplish the same.

2. This gives in the witness of all the generation of the righteous, who from
the beginning have proven the truth thereof, yea sealed by the blood of many
excellent Christians, some of whom though they could not well disput for it,
yet, had so strong a demonstration of the power of the truth within, as made it
an easy work to die for the same.

3. This does clearly show the Scripture is an unchangeable rule of
righteousness, that alters not but takes place in all ages, whence such as are
wise to bring providence in to the Word, and compare the experience, and
remarks of one time with another, may have a great reach, and be thus led in a
sure path as to the for seeing of events.

4. This also does demonstrat that it is his Word who does rule and guide the
World, and has a sovereign dominion over the fame, whilst we may here see such
remarkable events which both in the present, and in former times have fallen
out, as may show a power, that can reach the greatest with a stroke, shake
the most established Kingdoms and even over the belly of insuperable
difficulties, accomplish the Word, yea that surely the Spirit of the wheels
which moves them is from him whose Word this is; for it is not more clear
that these courtaines of the Heavens are stretched forth over the Earrh, then
that the Scripture is stretched out over the whole work and frame of
providence, so as all the motious, and steps thereof even of the most casual
things that fall out has a visible tenden^y to accomplish these ends which
the Scripture has held forth.

5. This clearly shows it must be his Word who has forseen all things that
were to be^all the Church, and the various changes and adventures of every
Christians life through time, whilst it is so wonderfully shaped, and suited to
every new trial of the Church, as if intended only for that time, and to every
case of a godly man, as though it had been alone writ for them.

6. This also shows that he who is the author of the Scripture and has
framed that admirable piece must have some immediate correspondence with the
Spirit of Man, knows our sitting down, and riseing up, yea does search the
heart, and the reins; for experience can tell how the Word is directed to the
heart, does reach the most inward contrivances thereof, does so clearly
reveall. and open up a Christian to himself, that we may say of a truth, he is
the God of the Spirits of all flesh, and one greater then our heart whose it is.

7. I shall further add, the fulfilling of the Scripture in the experience of
the saints, does show it is not a dead letter, but has power, and life; and
there must be an enlightening quickening spirit, that surely goes along with the
same, this clearly demonstrates something above words, yea above nature in the
written. Word, that can make such a change upon the soul, give life to the
dead, open the eyes of the blind, yea, can turn a lump of earth, that formerly
tended downward, now, without any violence to move from a principle of life
toward God as the sparks flee upward.

VI. The aceomplishment of the Scripture is a most pleasant, and truly
delectable subject, worthy of our Serious thoughts, and study, for here is held
out the highest truth for the judgment to contemplat, the truth and
faithfulness of God in the Word, and here is also the greatest good for the
affections to embrace, and delight in, as that wherein our whole happiness is
certainly wrapped up; it is undeniable that it is the godly man, who knows best
what true and solid pleasure is; which he does not loss, by turning his heart
from the creature to God, but makes a blessed exchange; O, how far does the
joy, and delights of the soul exceed these of the senses, and the delight of a
Christian how far does it surpass that of a natural man, even in his best
estate; and I am sure this precious study of the daily performance of the Word,
is one of these paths of pleasure, which would bring in more solid joy to the
spirit in some few hours, then some years wallowing in the carnal delights of
the flesh, which is but as pleasure in sport, but quickly turns to grief in
earnest; it is one of the great mistakes of the World, that religion tends so
much to sadden, and disquyet the soul; nay, it is certainly the want of this,
because we are so little truly religious, when we scruffe over our duty, and
take but a passing look of the ways, and work of God in the World, then it is
indeed very affrighting, and unpleasant; but when in a more Christian way, we
do seriously look thereupon, and get our heart near God, taking the Word
along with us, O how delightful, and ravishing a sight will this be^ I truly
think though there were not a command, though it were no duty, nor such
advantage in the study of this grave truth, yet that joy, and refreshment which
the soul would find in such a diligent search, in going down into this blessed
deep, should invite us thereto.

But when I speak of this, what a sweet, and delightful subject, the
performance and outmaking of the Scripture is, it must be understood that it is
so only to the saints, and it is no wonder the World keep at such a distance
with it, for this is a truth they cannot bear, they hate it, which, as Micajah,
does Prophesy always bad things, and carries a message of death to them; a
serious look of this truth to ungodly men, is as the hand witing upon the wall
before them, which does foretell their approaching ruin, and should cause them
all tremble, the knowledge whereof must increase their sorrow, and
disquyetness, yea, cause them cry out, O, do not torment us before the time,
for they are surely undone, and ruined if the Scripture of God be true, and
has a performance; But O what pleasant, and refreshful tidings, does this
carry to a Christian! What a sweet view does he here get of the inheritance,
and blessed estate of the saints, which may cause such ane exclamation, how
great is that goodness which is laid up for these that fear thee!

To demonstrate this, I shall hold out somethings, from which we may see how
delightful a subject, the accomplishment of the Scripture is for a Christian to
study.

1. Serious converse with this grave truth, leads forward to practice, and
thus helps to bring down theory to experience, which is the most sweet, and
desirable of all other demonstrations, that we can have of the truth of the
Scripture, and makes our light clear, and pleasant to the taste, turning the
exercise of our judgment, and reason thereanent, into sense, and feeling; we
are then made to see what a difference there is, betwixt that discovery which a
spiritual man (whose religion is his practice) has of this, and the cold
winter-light of a natural understanding that has no heat or warmenes
therewith, which is as great a difference as betwixt hearing of such a thing by
report, and seeing it with our eyes.

2. This blessed study, how the Scripture has certain accomplishment, would
help to read the Word with an other kind of pleasure, O, what
representation, should then the truths and promises thereof have to the godly
man! it would be as one going in to look over his charters, and the great
things therein contained, which he does not in the least debat, or question,
since they are past the seals, and fully ratifyed, and now considers all
which is promised, as his own, which he looked in former times upon, but as a
common thing, whilst he made not earnest of the certainty thereof, and what
an intrest he had in the same, O, when he reads that promise of a new heaven
and earth, and that glorious estate which abides the Saints! He cannot turn
his eyes, and thoughts so easily off it, but is made to stand, and vvonder,
that so great a thing, that will make such a mervellous change in his
condition, is even shortly to come to pass; how svveet, and pleasant is it
for such to turn over these promises, who can set to his seal, and bear this
witness, that he has as really proven the truth thereof by sure experience, as
he knovveth he has a real being, surely the Bible is an other thing to these,
then it is to the great part of men, who only make it the subject of their
contemplation.

3. In this blessed study we should have much laid to our hand to observe, and
our observation made svveet, and pleasant to us; for there we might see, how
all the paths of the Lord toward his People, are mercy and truth, this would
give us a refreshful diary of providence, how in such a plunging strait we
found the Word sensibly sealed; what observable confirmations we have had
therevvith, at such a time, and in such a condition, the after-recounting of
which in ane hour of trial, or in the evening of our life, would exceed
these greatest pleasures, the Men of this World can have in looking over their
gold, and greatest treasures, which for many years they have been laying up.

4. In the serious study of the daily accomplishing of the Scripture, we should
have a most satisfying view, and prospect of what God is doing up and down
the Earth, what purposes and designs he has on foot, and how things here
beneath do work together for carrying on of the same, we should see what an
excellent, and curious piece of work this frame of providence is, which the
more it is considered, it will be the more a vvonder, how perfect in all its
parts, how compact, and well set in all its various colors, what an
observable concurrence there is there, how these several discords, which we
see here, do yet aggree with one consent, for the compleeting of Gods design,
which is still going on, and whilst we think there must be some disorder
amongst the vvheells, we are made after to see that this confusion, was an
excellent step of providence, confounding the vvisdome of men, every piece of
his vvav being so knit to another, as discovers to such who make this blessed
truth their serious study, a most rare contexture beyond the reach, and
uptaking of the greatest Artists that ever was. Here also we might go up to
that watchtower of Christian observation, and from thence take a grave look of
Gods way, and lay his work in the World to the Scripture, as the measuring
line, where we should see (and find the sight thereof very pleasant) how the
Word every day takes place, does ishue through all the veins, and arteries of
providence, each line whereof is so exactly drawn, as by a pincel in some
skillfull hand, to that great exemplar of the Scripture; here we might discern
these eminent examples of judgment, and mercy that in every age are set before
us, how wicked men prosper for a time, yet have a dreadful ishue, and are
suddenly cast into destruction, they spread as a green bay tree, and within a
little their place cannot be found, how the godly are often sore afflicted, yet
flowrishing as the palm tree, and the more they are depressed, the more they
grow; how the enemies of the Church are often lifted up for a sorer fall, and the
Church brought low, in order to her greater enlargement; how judgment finds
out sinners, and is often exactly proportioned in measure, and kind to the sin;
and on the other hand how integrity is sore tossed often, yet still falls upon
its feet, and overclouded that it may shine more brightly after; how the
threatenings of the Word do visibly overtake Kingdoms, and nations, bring down
great houses, causes the scarlet embrace the dunghill, and lets not the
hoary head of cruel, and wicked men go often into the grave in peace, and again
to consider how the Lord forsakes not his People, but shows respect to their
way, the good man walks in his integrity, and his seed after him is blessed
O, how sweet an exercise were this for a Christian even to loss himself in!

5. From thence we might in a great measure discern what of the night it is
with the Church; if there be any evidences that it is near day; and what such a
sinful case does threaten; we would be skilful to feell the Churches pulse, and
thereby find what symptoms there are of life or death, and perceave a dark
cloud of judgment casting up, when it is but like an handbreadth; surely this
study should make us wise to know the times, and what we ought to do therein;
for amongst these various events which fall out in every age, the Lords way is
constant with itself, and with his truth, if we be right on lookers.

6. Here we should have a most pleasant and clear view, how the Seripture of
God, comprehends the whole state of the Church, from the beginning to the end
of time; that it is a most full, and perfect register of all the vicissitudes,
and alterations, which are to go over her head whilst in a militant condition;
and does also most exactly point out these occurrences, and remarkable events,
which fall out in the ordinary way, and course of providence, that we may read
them as evidently in the Word, as we see them with our eyes fall out in the
World; for in following this study, we should clearly see how the Scripture
brings the Church to light, out of the womb of an eternal decree, and does
trace it from the first promulgation of the Gospel after the fall throvv these
dark times before the stood, whilst it was but in families, and through that
long trial in Egypt, and all its ill journey in the wilderness, until it bring
it to its se^led, and flovvrishing condition in Canaan, and carries her
sordward through all the several changes of her case, under her following
decay, and in the times of the captivity, even to the manifestation of Christ,
and dawning of the gospel; and as it thus takes in within its reach, the whole
estate, and the special events, which did befall the Church under the Law, so
we may see how the Scripture, also follows the Church, through the wholl time
of the gospel, and brings her as a grain of mustard seed from a day of small
things, until it bring her to perfection, takes her as it were by the hand
from her infancy, and goes with her through all the turnings of her condition;
through that long, and dark night of Antichrists reign, points clearly out
her condition, and various assaults that she should endure in that time, and
that blessed victory which she should after have, though not all at once, but
gradually over her enemies, and that the Word, and the Church do never part,
but one walks step for step with the other, until it bring her safe to land,
and as it were put her of its hand, and guard, at the coming of Christ.

7. This would also help us to sweet thoughts, and give us matter of a song in
the saddest night of the Churches condition, when we see how Gods great design
in the World is the accomplishing of the Scripture, and know that his ends
which he has held forth therein, cannot be frustrat, it would serve to silence
all our complaints, with wondering at Gods way, and triumphing in the works
of his hands; we should not then be affrayd of evil tidings; a stormy time
would not outvvit us; being persuaded that though the earth should be
overturned, it shall be surely well with the righteous, the Church must
flovvrish, and all her enemies be found liars, because he is faithful that has
promised, whose Word will as surely come to pass, as the sun does return
after a dark night.

VII. It does now more especially concern the godly in these latter times, to
study this great truth of the accomplishment of the Scripture, and set about a
serious inquiry, and search therein as a truth that shall yet be in a further
measure discovered, and opened up, the nearer the Church is to the end of time
which may thus appear.

1. Herein is the Word express, that one piece of the Scripture, which from
former ages was sealed up, should in the latter days be clear, and easy to
understand, Dan: lastch. 4: 9. ver. the seal is there put on; but go thy way
Daniel for these Words are closed, and sealed to the time of the end, but Rev.
last Chapter and ver. 9. We have that bar taken of, seal not the sayings of the
Prophecy of this book; for the time is at hand; because then the time did dravv
near, to which a more full discovery, and opening up of the Scripture was
reserved, and a more large manifestation of the spirit beyond former ages. Now
by the last days, we are not only to understand, the whole time of the
gospel, though it is thus termed in the Scripture, but the latter part of
these last times, which is more especially pointed at, even the close, and
evening of time, that last Epoch, and period of prophetic chronology, to
which a greate^ accomplishment of Scripture Prophecies is reserved.

2. This also is expressly promised that in the latter days, the Chnrch shall
have a more full discovery of this truth, how the Scripture is verified, Dan.
last Chapter v. 4. many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shali be increased,
which increase as it clearly points at the last times, and that bright day
the Church shall have, when Israel shall be brought in to Christ, it does also
point at, and promise some greater light, and a more full opening up of the
mysteries of the Word, and fulfilling thereof, for the former part of the
Chapter shows, that increase of knowledge does relate to these things which
were before sealed; we wait and believe the further accomplishment of this
promise to the Church beyond all we have yet seen, that many Scripture-truths
now dark, and abstruse shall be made so clear, as shall even cause us to wonder
at the gross mistakes we once had thereof, yea, that after generations, shall
have a discovery, and uptaking of some Prophecies now obscure, which shall as
far exceed us, as this time does go beyond former ages, which comparatively we
must say were very dark, O! when that promise of the incalling of the Jews
shall once take place, what a wonder will they be to themselves that their
understanding shonld have been under such a vail, when the truth shall be
clear, and evident to them in that day? Will it not be a sweet, and easy work
for the godly to sort together the predictions of the Word, and the events? And
truly there is much now wrapped up in Scripture Prophecyes, not yet fulfilled,
which we may say, in after times when the event shall unvail their meaning, will
exceed, yea, confound all these comments, many have had upon them.

3. Is it not also clear, that these Prophecies which of all the Scripture were
most obscure, and overclouded with dark figures, and allegories, concerning
which there had been such mistake, and hesitation by the Church, so many
perplexing queries, have a peculiar respect to the last times? And that then
they shall be made plain, and easy, when so notable a key as the event does
open them up; such as these of the vvitnesses taking lyse, and rising again,
Babylons fall, and ruin, Christ's Reigning with his Saints a thousand Years,
which now are in some measure already cleared, from their begun
accomplishment, beyond former times, but we vvait for a more full eommentary,
that time shall give upon the same.

4. It is in the latter times that the glory of God in his truth, and
faithfulness, shall most eminently shine forth, that is a part of the solemn
congratulation of the Church upon Babylons fall, Revelat. 15: ver. 3. not only
great and mavelous are thy works, but just and true are thy ways, for truly
in this stroke of the judgment of God, and these remarkable providence
concurring therevvith, the fulfilling of the Scripture will be so plain, and
undeniable, that we may say, it will then dazel the eyes of men, even greatest
Atheists, alarm the World, yea, very effectually contribute (we have ground so
to judge) to that promised increase, of the Church, and incoming of the Jews,
when in Antichrists fall, and ruin, they shall see so convincing a seal put to
one of the most considerable Prophecies of the Word, in the accomplishment
whereof much of the Prophetic part of the New Testament relating to the
Churches state, and her long trial under Antichrists reign, may be seen clearly
verified.

5. The Lord has reserved his greatcst Works to the latter days, wherein his
judgments shall be manifest, and the Word confirmed by such solemn convincing
providence, that men will not get them passed without a remark; we are this
day witnesses to many such, and are looking, what these times shall yet bring
forth, that the great, and remarkable acts of the Lord, must force the World to
see, a divine power, and say lo there is an undoubted accomplishment of the
Scripture.

6. The Church in these last times, has peculiar advantagcs, for understanding
this truth of the Scriptures accomplishment, which former ages had not. First a
great part thereof is now fulfilled that men may see with their eyes, if they
but know how to lay the Word, and work of God together, the Christian Church
had in former times, but dark glances at these great things; which we have this
day visibly transcribed in providence; the promises were then traveling in
birth of that which is now brought forth. 2. Are we not mounted as it were on
the shoulders of that experience and observation of former times? which has
been transmitted to us, and we must say upon that account, the Church has now
a greater seal and confirmation of the truth, then what it had in the days of
the Prophets, and the Apostles, even when Christ was in the flesh. 3. The
Temple of God and Ark of his Testament is now opened in Heaven, light more
fully abounding, and the means of knowledge; And, O! should not this be much
our study, who have a greater talent then former ages! certainly this will be a
sin of a deeper dye, then in times of ignorance, since we can be no strangers
to this truth, without shutting our eyes, blinding the conscience, doing
violence to our light, when the Lord does give his People such solemn
confirmations.

7. I shall add, is it not clearly soretold in that Dan. 12^ ver 4. that in the
last times this will be one of the special exercises of the saints to enquire,
and make a diligent search concerning the Scripturs accomplishment? For its
there said, many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased,
importing that this shall be much their study, and cause a diligent fearch,
whereunto the great works of God in these times shall invite them; and what
should be the posture of the Godly in these days (on whom the end of the World
is come,) should it not be like the watchman in the last watch of the night,
who looks often what appearance there is from the east of the day breaking? a
serious enquery what of the Scripture is fulfilled, whereby we may know on very
clear grounds, if the night be far spent, the day at hand, and that the coming
of the Lord to judgment, draws near.

VIII. This is a great, and concerning duty for Christians to study this
truth, that they may have something more then repore, how the Scripture has a
sure accomplishment, and does take place in the providence of the time wherein
we live. I must think strange that there is such a great help as this, so near,
and yet we see it not, nor do seriously ponder the same, when the command is so
express to observe the works of the Lord, which for that end are showed forth,
that men may enquire, and read the faithfulness of God therein, yea, that so
great a truth, which would bide the search of all the critics of the World, a
truth wherein our blessedness through time and eternity lies, should offer it
self to our trial, and yet, is so little known; O, who can dispense with the
neglect of this duty? by which we answer that solemn call, and invitation of
the works of God, do honor him, serve our generation, are helpers to our own
faith, and are thereby helped to strengthen others, yea, are brought to see
with our eyes, and from experience, what before was as a strange thing unto us.

Now to clear, how much this is Christians duty, to study a practical converse
with the Word, and to be serious observers of its accomplishment, let us
consider.

1. We are thus helped to declare the works of the Lord and to give him the
glory of his faithfulness; and is not that agrave duty? Which at all times in
every station, and condition of life, should engadge men to this study; thus,
every Christian may become a witness to the truth, and put his seal thereto, for
which he should think his life truly desirable, and he does in no small
measure, attain the true end thereof, though he had no other opportunity, for
his masters service, and we may say, this truth of the Scriptures
accomplishment like a great roll, has been transmitted from hand to hand, from
one age, to another, attested, and as it were subscrybed by so many witnesses,
it does thus come to our time, and to every man's door and require their
personal witnessing and sealing of the same.

2. This should make it an easy work, to trust the Word, and to adventure
thereon in the ordinary occurrences of their life, they may well trust God in
strait, who have so strong an argument to make use of, that often they have tried
him, and the truth of his Word, by many, many experiences; will not these that
know his name trust in him? Which was a notable testimony from a serious
Christian in a very sharp trial; often have I tried God, and shall I not learn
to trust him once?

3. This does lay the Christian in the way of that promise; Psalm. 107. last.
ver. a promise truly large, and comprehensive, but little considered, that
such as are wise to observe the works of God, they shall see the loving kindness
of the Lord, even in their own particular case, made out to them, yea, whilst
they are serious to observe his works abroad in the World, and his way to
others they shall be no losers, thereby at home, but find this promise meet
them and to turn their general observation unto personal experience of the
loving kindness of the Lord.

4. Thus the saints by experiencing the truth of the Word get a conyincing seal
thereby to their intrest in the promise; for begun possession, is indeed a
strong witness to this right, when they can say, they have got as certain
returns of the Word, when they have put it to an essay, in some particulars of
their life, as they are sure of any thing they did ever see, so from
unquestionable experience they set up a pillar, and write thereon Hither to
has the Lord helped us.

5. Thus should Christians, with much advantage be helped to convince
gainsayers; for its sure, Atheism could not make so bold, and public an
appearance, if men did not so much take their religion on trust, O, the serious
experienced man, can with an other confidence own the truth, whose experience,
and observation of the works of God, give him an argument that none can answer,
while not only he can assert, but conduct, and lead men to the things
themselves, that they may see if in such, and such particulars, the Scripture
be not truly fulfilled.

6. Thus the providenee of God, should have a more sweet refreshing
countenance, when from this great height, that watchtower of Christiau
observation we take a look thereof, and truly otherwise, men will stumble, at
the most ordinary dispensations, and think Gods Work is a mass of confusion,
but here we are taught to see, how the written Word, and his way, are linked in
a most sweet aggreement.

7. We may thus trace Divine truth, even by our sense, and feeling, and join
the Word, and experience in a regular correspondence; yea thus we should have a
clear transscript, of the Lords way with his Church taken out of that great
authentic original of the Scripture, and there see on what a solid basis, and
foundation that magnificent structure of providence is raised up, what a
notable key, should we thus have for opening the Scripture, by a serious humble
inquiry, after the works of God? Where not only the impression, and signals of
the power, but of the truth, and faithfulness of the Lord are so very legible.

8. This is a piece of our talent wherewith we are entrusted, of which every
Christian should study a serious improvement, knowing they must render an
account, what their observation of this great truth has gained and what further
establishment, and confirmation they have thus attained.

9. I would add, the concernment, and weight of this duty, may press it much
on us; for if the Scriptures accomplishment be an undoubted truth, O! then this
is sure the Saints have a great inheritance, they are Princes, though now under
a disguise, and though yet minors they are heirs of more then the World can
shadow forth; the Christian is then more happy on a dunghill, scraping his sore,
then such who are clothed in purple, and fare delicately every day; if this be
sure, we should look with compassion rather then envy on these, whom the World
does account happy, we need not question the gain of Godliness, then it is sure,
that such who sow in tears shall reap in joy, and the righteous though now
trampled under, in the morning shall have dominion; yea, in a word, we may
then on sure ground solace our selves with the thoughts of that great change,
which will be within a little, when the grave must render back her prisoners,
and may with as much assurance of a blessed resnrrection ly down in the dust,
as we are sure there will be a morning, when we ly down at night. O! then,
there is a Heaven, and a hell, that is certain, eternity is not a night dream,
and one moment shall shortly put an end to all our services, yea, the shutting
of our eye lids at death shall but open them in the Pardise of God.

HAving touched this truth a little in the general, I shall now, hold forth some
arguments whence the accompl^shment of the Scripture may be demonstrat; they
are these five which I intend to prosecute in the following discourse.

FIRST Argument, To prove the Scripture is certainly fulfilled, and has an
accomplishment is this; that which has been in all ages, the testimony of the
Saints, what every particular Christian does seal, from their frequent, and
sure experience, what is found, and proved by them, in there daily walk, upon
exactest trial, yea, what as many as ever were serious in Religion, do witness
must be certain, and true.

But the accomplishment of the Scripture is such, Therefore, etc.

II. Argument, That which is manifest, and legible in the whole course, and
tenor of providence about the Church and by clear convincing instances, both of
judgment, and mercy, is made out to the observation of every age, must be a
certain truth, but the Scriptures accomplishment is such,

Therefore.

III. Argnment, Thar which has not only the Christians testimony, from
experienee, and of the Church from constant observation, but is obvious even to
the view of the World, which from the conscience of the worst of men, does
force a testimony that they can neither shift, nor deny, which also may be
demonstrat to the conviction of ordinary observers, and has a public
acknowledgement, from greatest Atheists, and mockers of Religion in every age,
must surely be a clear truth.

But, etc, Therefore,

IV. Argument, That which was to take place in such and such periods of time,
and has accordingly come to pass, the event exactly answering to the
prediction, yea, that whereof the great part is now fulfilled, and but a little,
at this day, remains to be made out, must be a certain truth.

But the great part of the Scripture is thus already fulfilled, and but a little
thereof now remains. Therefore,

V. Argument. That which not only is for the most part already accomplished,
but is a thing whereof we have such sure confirmations, yea, so great a pledge
in our hand from the Lord, that what yet remains, shall be certainly
fulfilled, must it not be an undoubted truth? But the Scripture as to these
special predictions, that are not yet made out, is such as concerning which the
Lord has given his People, a very larg^ pledge, and strong confirmations, now
in these latter times, to believe their certain accomplishment. Therefore.

ARGUMENT FIRST.
THat the Scripture of God contained in the Old and New Testament, wherein our
great hope, and comfort does ly, is certainly true, and has, a real
accomplishment, may be thus demonstrat, That it is tried, and Proved in the
godly man's experience, to which in all ages, yea, from innumerable proofs the
saints have put to their seal, that this is a sure, and faithful testimory.

Experience is indeed a strong demonstration, and it is such a witness as
leaves no room for debate, for here the truth is felt, proven, and acted on
the heart, which the Christian knows well, and is as sure of as he is
persuaded that he lives or that the sun when it shines has light, and
warmnes therewith, it is true the World lives at a great distance with this,
they only converse with the sound of such a thing, and we know the naked theory
of Scripture truth has but a short reach and that it differs as far, from
that which a serious practical Christian has as the sight of a country in a
map is from a real discovery of the same; where the difference is not in the
degree, but in the kind: yet though this grave testimony of experience is a
thing whereto many (alace, too many) are strangers yet we must say, so much
thereof is obvious, as may force its authority on men's consciences, and show
that there can be no fallacy, or delusion in this witness, if they but allow the
use, and exercise of reason, seeing it is not the record of a few, at one time,
or in one corner of the earth, but a solemn witness, from the saints, and
followers of God, whose judgment, and integrity, their adversaries must often
confess, yea, of all the saints in every age through the whole universal
Church in parts of the earth most remote from other, and this, by most frequent
renewed prooffs, has found, and experienced the truth, and real accomplishment
of the Word: and now if this be not sufficiently convincing, I would but add,
O ^ will you then, come and see, be but Christians indeed, and then ye will no
more debate that testimony; and truly it is a very poor shift, for men, who
have the Scripture before them, which of it self does witness its authority, and
this backed with so solemn a seal from the Lord, by his works, and providence,
to debate the Christians witness, from their experience, because they do not see
this themselves; what is the cause thereof? their choice, that they do not
follovv on to know the same, the truth of God seeks credit from no man upon
trust, yea, craveth no more but that by a practical converse they would put it
to a trial, and then it shall not decline their judgment.

Now to prosecute this argument a little, I shall point at some special
Scripture-truths, with which Christians have most usual trade, and converse in
their own case; and give in therewith, their testimony, how these are clearly
proved and verifyed by most sure experieuce: it is not to be here understood
the giving a particular account with respect to persons, time, or other
circumstances, how the Word does thus take place. I think it may be
sufficiently convincing to instance in the general, such clear uncontroverted
experiences, which are well known to the godly, and have by them been often
proved amidst the various changes of their life (though not by all in the same
measure but in some suitable proportion to their different syzes, trials, and
wrestlings) which can witness that real correspondence which the Word has with
the experience of the saints; and truly concerning these I may with some
confidence assert, they are not naked, or airy notions, but such as can witness
their truth to the serious experienced Christian, whom on this account I dare
attest.

I shall here instance 5. special truths of the Word, which are much tried, and
proved in Christians experience. 1. That there is such a contrariety betwixt
the flesh, and the spirit, as the Scripture holds forth. 2. The deceitfulnes
of man's heart. 3. That there is a spiritual, and invisible adversary, with whom
we have war. 4. That the promises of the Word have undoubted accomplishment. 5.
The truth also of the threatenings, I mean such under whose reach the godly may
fall.

I. That there is a contrariety betwixt the flesh, and the spirit, a Law in our
members rebelling against the Law of our mind, is a truth, very clearly proved
to the Christian, whose experience though sad does undenyably verify, and
confirm the Scripture, Gal. 5: v. 17. Romans 7: v. 19, 21, 23. this is a piece of
the Word which holds forth man's nature in its true shape and form, whither
their byasse, and inclination most easily turns, yea, so marvellously
answers their experience, that to question the same were to put it far beyond
question that they know nothing of a new nature or a principle of grace within.
For who ever made earnest of Religion but their first acquaintance with the
peace of God, was the beginning of this war; it is then that the house
divides, and corruption sets up a standard, yea, no sooner can any begin to
be a Christian, but he must be a soldier also; and ^e may say none ever
attained such a measure of mortification, or was so old in the grace of God, as
could privilege them from the stirrings of the old man, and necessity of that
complaint, who shall deliver us from a body of death, but what ever advantage,
some of the saints have above others, yet in this their experience can witness.

1. They now know two different parties within themselves that until once grace
came they could not understand, which at the same time in the same action do
act oppositly one to the other, yea, that there is no spiritual duty, wherein
the flesh (though not always in such a prevalent degree,) does not show some
active resistance.

2. That all the stirrings, and motions of the flesh have still a tendency,
congruous to their own nature, to turn the heart carnal and to alienat it from
God, so as it is easy to discern how in these, the rise and the end do
thoroughly correspond.

3. That this is a cruel taskmaster if once it bear sway; imperious in its
command, and violent in its pursuit, so that their experience may herein tell,
its a sore, and an intolerable thing for a servant to bear rule.

4. That to things most forbidden the flesh moves most impetuously, so, as it
will even break through the hedge, though sure there by to be scratcht wirh
thorns, yea, it is often so eager in its pursuit, that it will follow the bait,
while the hook is most discernable.

5. That when once this does swell, and wax fat, they may upon another interest
cry, woe's us, our leannes, for like the scales of the balance, they find a
proportionable abatement and depressing of their spiritual life, as the flesh
goes up, yea, they have cause to know how every step of their hearts going
forth to the World is a step that does put them further off from God.

6 That the more closely the Law is pressed in its spiritual extent, yea, the
more spiritual a duty is, the more fully opposite they find their carnal heart,
and though the flesh may bear up a little with the form of Religion, and has
more complacency with that way, which lies most in externals, yet it cannot
endure the power thereof, it can suffer men to be Hypocrites, but not truly
Christians.

7. To restrain, and bring this under bondage they find that it does put the
Spirit so much at liberty, which getting loose rains for a little will leave the
soul work for many days and with sad after groans pay back an hours pleasure
yea, they also know, when the outward man is low, and upon a sensible decay, it
has not then hindered but rather effectually helped their inward joy, and
strength.

8 That indulgence to the flesh causes a sensible thick interposition between
Heaven, and the soul, whence they are so clogged, and hamperd in their flight,
and motion toward God, yea, thus have often, their choised duties been made a
sore, and grievous task.

9. That this is the true rise of their usual perturbations, and does still put
some jar betwixt them, and their lot, and does hinder a satisfied enjoying of
that which they have, through murmuring at that they want, yea, they know, that
to please the flesh has been often the cause of their greatest grief, and
displeasure.

10 They also find how the defilement of their Spirit, does help to darken it,
which overgrown with the flesh, can have no clear discovery of spiritual
things, but the more separat from the body, and purged from these gross dregs,
they find themselves at a further advantage to converse with divine truths.
which thus they get discovered, beyond all that nature can reach.

11. That the heart of man is deceitful, and desperately evil, Jer. 17: ver. 9.
Jer. 4: ver. 14. Prove. 4: ver. 23. is a Scripture truth, where to the
Christians experience does answer, as the face answers to its self in the
glass, yea we may say it is so clearly demonstrat to these who were ever
serious, about their inward case, that while they thus read the Word in
themselves and are made to read themselves in the Word they may with wonder
acknowledge, that he, which can sound this great deep of the heart, and draw
so vive a portraicture thereof, is surely one before whom all things are
manifest; who does search, and try the reins, and know what is our mould, and
fashion; this is one of the very first lessons which practical Religion does
teach, and the more nearnes with God, and further measure and grace, that is
attaind, the more clear discovery there will be of this; O! what sad hours,
what bitter complaints, has it caused? This often does mar the Christians
feast, and mingle their Wine with Gall, and wormwood; I am sure if that
excellent company of the Saints, who have been from the beginning to this day
could be brought together, to give in their suffrage, and witness concerning the
deceitfulnes of the heart, there would be one joint testimony to this truth, we
should find that Enoch who walked with God, Moses with whom he spoke face to
face, that beloved servant, who leand in Christ's bosom, and he who was
caught up to the third Heavens were no strangers thereto, but could witness
thus.

1. That it is within, which aileth them most, and their greatest adversaries
are men of their own house, yea, that in the vvorst of times, there is still
more cause to complain of an evil heart, then of an evil, and corrupt World,
there being no worse company, then they are often to themselves.

2. That no time of their life, but might give them, some further proof, that
they are fools who trust their own heart, which often will escape and
overreach, their quickest reflection, even when both their eyes are on it;
yea, that there is no time that allows the putting off their armor, or to
dismiss their guard, not the best case of the greatest establishment in grace,
nor the evening of the day, though they were within some minutes of the
crown, and complete victory does privilege them from the experience of a
deceitful heart.

3. That under the best frame they find there will often lurk that which
after-time, does discover that for the present though it had been told, they
could not have believed until frequent experience makes them see that the
Word knowed their heart better then themselves.

4. That to bring home their heart when once it goes abroad, or recall the
liberty they have given it is not easy, which does no sooner parley with a
temptation at a distance, adventure to sport therewith, but it quickly turns
to earnest, and is ready to yield.

5. They know the constant need to have a watch upon their senses, and to make
a Covenant with their eyes, which do so quickly betray their heart; so easy it
is to be deceived, yea, to grow warm, and to take need-fire upon the smallest
touch.

6. How quickly also their spirit does slacken, and lose its bensil even in the
greatest advantage of their case their experience can tell, that when in some
measure they have been raised up in any spiritual enjoyment, they were then in
hazard to be lift up to the wind, and to have their substance dissolved in the
more solid part of Christianity.

7. What a sight have they sometime of themselves, such as would be a terror,
to them if the heart, and motions thereof could be writ out to the view of
others, or that any were vvitnesses to that which in one room will dwell
beside the grace of God as its door-neighbor.

8. In a word their experience does witness, how soon the strongest resolutions
will evanish, that they are not often in the evening, what they were in the
morning, nor for many hours do they keep the ground they had attaind, but
Reubens Character unstable as water, may be still their complaint, yea, I am
sure as many as ever obtaind mercy, to know themselves, can tell that its past
all reckoning, how often their heart has deceived them, when they trusted it
most: This every day may cause them sit down, and admire the grace of God,
which can mend, what they so often mar, and is stronger to save, and preserve,
then they are to destroy.

III. That as there is a body of death within, they also know there is, An
adversary without, Ephesians. 6: v. 12. 1 Pet. 5: ver. 8. Ioh. 8: v. 44. whose way,
and devices, and method of tempting does most exactly answer the discovery of
the Word, this is indeed a truth, which Christian experience in all ages does
witness, that no sooner they had a serious look after God, but found themselves,
pursued by an invisible party whose approaches though spiritual, are yet
certain, and most sensibly demonstrated, beside that which the Word does
clearly teach, yea, it is sure none of the saints were ever privileged from
such experiences, for herein does the Christans warfare ly, but O how sweet may
the evening be while they sit down, can sing that song, Our soull has escaped
as a bird from the fowller. I shall here give in something of the godly man's
experience, which can bear witness to this.

1. That there is surely an other party then the World, or themselves, with
which they have to do, an invisible adversary without, whom they perceive by
that sensible correspondence he keeps with their heart within, by these
violent inroads, importunat solistations, these impetuous motions, wherewith
they are so strangely hurried, and often driven over light, and judgment, yea,
over their strongest resolutions, so as he may be as discernable to them, and
that there is something therein beside themselves, as if they conversed with
him in an outward visible shape.

2. That since the time when they begun to look after God, and to know any
thing of his work upon their spirits they have been acquainted with most
affrighting, dreadful temptations, and does now preceive his rage, and violent
pursuit to bring them back, which they knew not before, when at peace with
their idols, and sin^ul way.

3. That the mark he levelleth at, to which his usual temptations have a
tendency, is their soul, and inward man to hinder communion with God, and to
turn their heart off from him, to break the Law, and lay a side commanded
duties.

4. That his ordinary approaches to the heart are often by a very small thing, he
needs no more but an open door, or a sinful look for the dispatch of a
temptation, and knows by a wound in the eye, how to carry death in, to the
soul.

5. That he is such a party as knows his time and opportunity, can change his
weapous, and busk the book with diverse baits and yet he is always at hand,
when the heart is lifted up, when they a^e out of their duty, and in a
carnal frame, to put in then with some temptation, and fish in such a drumly
water.

6. That his way does truly answer his name, Spiritual wickedness in high
places, this being so discerned, by daily experience that he has the advantage
of the ground, is a most subtle observing adversary, who lies in the dark to
us, while we are in the light to him, and knopweth how to correspond with our
corruption, and to suit his temptation to our natural temper (wherewith he is
well acquainted) and to our calling, and our company, to the present strait, to
our predominant inclination and to our retirement, and solitude, yea that he is
one who knows how to follow in, and ply with such a gale, when we are in hot
blood, or in any distemper, and discomposure of spirit.

7. That he can transform himself into an Angel of light, and suit his
temptations to the spiritual exercises, and enjoyments of the saints, that
there are temptations on the right hand as well as the left, which are so
refined, and so like a Christian exercise, that they can scarcely discern the
weed from the flower, and most dreadful errors from the choicest truths, to
which they often have a great resomblance, though at last it does appear that the
native tendency even of the most specious errors in the judgment is to
loosnes in practice, and to make men religiously irreligious.

8. That he is also a roaring lion, which they have often proved by the dreadful
blasphemous injections, these fiery darts which are thrown in with violence,
wherewith there is no concurrence of the inclination or consent, but a
discernable force put upon them, assaulting them with most horrid Atheistical
thoughts, even while their heart does rise with abhorrence, and enter their
dissent against the same.

9. That he is a most restless adversary, who is going still about and gives
uo cessation, but with purpose to return at some greater advantage; and is no
less terrible in his flight then in his assault and that he can speak out of a
friend as well as out of a foe, yea, and does then most dangerously tempt, when
the temptation is lest seen, or discovered.

10. That his temptations do not only drive at engadging of the heart to bring
sin to the thought, but also the bringing it forth to the act, for putting some
blot upon their walk, and conversation.

11. That he is one who is overcome by resistance, and does flee before these
that withstand him, which they have often proved, that they have returned from
prayer with the spoil of their adversary, and at such a time have been made to
wonder, how that which has often foiled them, should have been their temptation.

13. They also find by frequent observation that though he is most subtle,
being indeed one who through long experience, and continued practice has
attained a great deal of dexterity in tempting, yet, that he has one usual
method, and devices which the serious Christian, by daily experience, and
watchfulnes may easily discern and perceive his temptations in their rise, and
at a distance while they are as it were, creeping up the wall; yea, thus in
some measure he may find out the depths of Satan, and know how to avo^d the net
spread by that great fouler.

IV. That the promises of the Word which are held forth to the Godly for their
use, and encouragement while they are in the way, have a certain
accomplishment, and are a safe ground to adventure upon, and worthy to be
credited, is a truth tried in all ages whereto experience of the saints can give
a large testimony.

Now in speaking to this grave subject, it is not needful to speak any thing of
the nature, and diverse kinds of promises nor whence it is that we live at so
poor a rate, and so unconfortably while such a well as this, is at our hand,
for its easy to read the cause within our selves, we sow sparingly, and venture
little out, therefore we have so small an increase; their is a price for
wisdom, but it is in the hands of fools who have no heart thereto, but this
not concerning us here I only aim to hold out this, that the promises which
God has given his People in the Scripture, are of unquestionable verity, and
have as real, and sure performance in the saints experience, as they are sure
of that which comes most necessarly to pass, by the work and concurrence of
natural causes as that the fire does burn, when combustible matter is added, or
the sun rise after its going down; for indeed this truth is so manifest, proved
by such innumerable experiments, amidst the various changes of a Christians
condition, that we might sommond as many witnesses as have been followers of
God in the World, which are not a few, who in all ages have put the promises to
an essay, and put their seal thereto that God is true; yea, to ask at such, if
they know whither there be a truth in Scripture promises, that comes not to
pass, I think were to enquire at a living man, whither he sees, and feels,
or if there be such a thing as motion, since they have as sure, and sensible a
demonstration of the one, as he has of the other.

But ere I speak any thing particularly to this, I would first premit some
things to clear what we understand here, by the saints experience of the truth
of the promises, in these following considerations.

1. We would consider, though the Scripture has here it is accomplishment, and
is intended for the use of the Church, and every particular Christian, while on
the way in his militant condition yet there are some promises of the Word yea,
the greatest, which belong to the saints, that will not be fulfilled, until
they have cast off their armor, and are called to divide the spoil, their
experience of which, will be the high prize of the calling of God in Christ,
whereof all which they now enjoy is but an earnest.

2. We would consider that the great intent of the Scripture, and promises
thereof, is not for contemplation, but that we may know them by experience, and
drive a blessed trade, and commerce therewith, the merchandise of which is
better nor that of gold, for herelyeth the Christians life in the World, yea,
it is a great part of their talent, the promises, which are not to be laid up
in their heart, and memory, as in a napki^, but they must give an account, what
experience they have gained thereby, and thus the diligent hand should make
rich.

3. What ever be the different syzes, and degrees of experience among the
saints, according to their grouth, and age in Christ, yet it is certain that
the meanest who have intrest in the promises, and did ever grip them in earnest
and put them to trial must know something of the performance of the samein
their own case; for the Lord does not suffer his work in his People to want a
seal.

4. The godlyes experience hereof, is then much made out, when they are much in
observation, and we know little of the truth, and performance of the promises,
because we are not more habitually in a frame to observe; thus he goes by, and
we perceive not; but they never wanted confirmations, who were seriously
seeking to be confirmed in the truth of the Word.

5. The special mercyes, and providence of a Christian life, are a certain
return of the promise, and in that way do meet them, as the proper channel of
their conveyance; for they are the sure mercies of the Covenant, and how
refreshful is it that all the several cases of the Saints, and their outgate
theteof, their meanest as well as their greatest necessities, are comprehended
in the Word. and under some promise, and were all forseen in his everlasting
view, who has so marvellously suited the same to all that his People stand in
need of, as if it had been directed to such, and such a Christian only.

6. This helps to make the mercies of the godly man to have a peculiar, and
sweet relish, and to be someway twice his mercy, when he gets them in so
immediate a way reached to him as it were out of the hand of the promise, and as
an observable return from Heaven, when thus the Lord seals his Word to him by
his work, and the way of the Word, he finds has been the way of his
comfortable outgate; that when he has had no other escape, but to tu^n in to
the promise, and to cast himself upon it, he gained this experience; he trusted
in God, and was helped, and can give in this testimony of him, that he has
both spoken it, and himself also has done it, according to his Word.

7 It is not any extraordinary thing, we here understand, by the Christian man's
experience of the truth of the promises, it is not a rapture or revelation, or
such as some of the Saints have upon some singular, and special account had;
for we have not any promise for these things, but it is something, well
grounded upon the Word which constantly holds in the Lords ordinary way of
procedure with his People, according to the tenor of the Covenant, for his Word
does good to them that walk uprightly, and does certainly take place in the
experience of every serious, and diligent Christian.

8. This is not the testimony of a few, but the record of all the Saints since
the beginning, whose experience does all most harmoniously agree, and bear one
witness that he is faithful who has promised, and it is not that which a
Christian has found once, or twice in his life, but the daily food of such as
live by faith.

9. This does put a strong obligation on the godly man to the Word, for the
time to come, for these who have tried it often, may with much confidence trust
it, in the day of their strait.

10. The experience which the godly has of the real performance of the
promises is a most convincing evidence of his state in Christ, it is the
earnest, and pledge of the inheritance, and full accomplishment of that which
remains that the Lord will make perfect what concerns him, who has been
his help hitherto, and will be his exceeding great reward in the end who has
made him find so much of the gain of godliness, here by the way.

Now having premitted these things, I shall here instance some particular
promises, where in the Christ^^^s most usual trade; and commerce dothly, and to
which they give in their seal and witness; I confess if all these proofs which
the Saints have had, of the fulfilling of the promises could be gathered
together, we might make use of that Divine hyperbole, The World could not
contain the books that should be written thereof. O, what an admirable
volume, what an excellent commentary, and copy should this be of the Scripture,
to see it thus turned over into the experience of every Christian; it would be
some way as easy to number the drops of rain, and dew since the creation, as to
reckon, all these precious drops, and emanations of love, these sensible
returns, and outmakings of the promise, which they have had in their
experience; I truly think it could hardly be believed, though it were told,
what some of the godly, here, have found in the way of the Word; but it is
sufficient, to answer the design of this work, to show that there is a sensible
demonstration, and performance of Scripture promises, concerning which the
experience of the Saints in all ages does aggree; that by many confirmations
the Lord has often sealed the truth thereof to their souls.

There are 10. special promises, held forth to the godly in the Word, which I
shall here instance, and therewith hold forth, what a clear testimony their
experience can give, of the undoubted truth, and aecomplishment of the same.

FIRST. Instance, is that promise given to believing, to such who credit the
naked word, when there is no probable appearance of its outmaking, and thus
give God the glory of his faithfulness, which we have expressly held out. 1 Chronicles. 20: 20. Ps. 112. 7, 8. Ich. 1: 50.

To clear the accomplishment of this promise, I shall; but appeal to that
testimony the saints in all ages have le^^ thereof, yea to the present
experience of the godly at this day, if they have not certainly found it so.

1. That when in a particular they have trusted God therewith and got their
spirit quiet in a recumbency on him if he has not dealt with them according to
his word, yea if then from clear convincing returns of the promise they have
not been made to say it did never repent them, that they gave more credit to
the testimony of God, then of their own hearts.

2. That they have found a more sweet, and observable issue, then, when their
help lay most immediately on the word alone; never a more sensible outgate then
when least of sense, and most of faith was in carrying them through, when
little of the creature, and much of God appeared in their mercy, and where they
were at the lowest, no way of escape but to throw themselves on the promise;
they have then had the best retreat, yea, their supply as sensibly felt, as
their need, and burden had formerly been felt.

5. That their greatest difficulties, and shakings anent the promise have
helped to their further confirming, and establishment, and so as they can say,
the Lords way, by brangling them first, yea, to their sense loosing their grip,
has helped to fasten it better, and that which for the time, did speak their
case most helpelesse, has made way for his more eminent appearance, and
manifesting of him self.

4. That their greatest venture, and giving most out has usually had the
richest income, the most eminent experiences of their life, have followed the
most adventurous acts of their faith, yea, upon an after reckoning they have
often found, that their adventuring of life, estate, and credit on the promise of
God, even in these things, has very observably been their upmaking.

5. That where they have most been a friend to their faith, there has faith
also been most a friend to them, in their standing to the credit of the
promise, over the belly of greatest objections, and false reports raised
thereof, they have found a very evident mark of Gods respect to the same,
causing them to see, that he will honor such who thus honor him. And it is
indeed worthy of a remark, what we have of Caleb upon record, that he took part
with the promise of God against that discouraging report which then was raised
of the Anakims, and their walled cities, and therefore the inheritance of the
Children of Anak was given to Caleb, and his sons, in their lot, from the
Lord.

6. That believing, does always make way for sense, and in their closing with
the naked Word of promise, they have not wanted the seal of the spirit of
promise, but have found a sweet calm, their burden sensibly eased, when once
they got it laid over on the word, which they can say has been their first
resting place, like the very fixing of the motion of the needle, toward its
right point, when their spirit had been restless, and in greatest agitation.

7. That these greatest disappointments, which their hope in the Word, seemed
to have, they have found afterward most to their advantage, when their returns
have not only been according to their faith, but have often exceeded their
adventure, and been far beyond what they believed, yea, that from frequent
experience they may say, the issue of trusting the Word, how long so ever they
thought it deferred, yet, came always in season, was never too late and out of
time.

8. That this did never occasion bitter reflections, or was their upcast before
the World, that they trusted God in a day of strait and were not helped; but
this testimony have all such left, who have most credited it in a dismal
hour, that none should scarr, after them to hazard upon such a hand, and
venture on the promise, for, their faith has often taken them well, and
comfortably through, where both sense, and reason have been ready to sink.

SECOND. Instance, Whereby we may see the performance of the promise in
Christian experience is this that God truly hears prayer, is near unto his
People in what they call upon him, aggreable to his Word, and will answer their
desires, we have this promise most express, Phil. 4: ver. 6. Ps. 32: 6. Ps.
65: 2. Ps. 91: 15.

Now the accomplishing of this piece of Scripture is so very clear, that I can
attest the experience of all the generation of the righteous, since the
beginning, what frequent and unanswerable comfirmations, they have got of this
truth in their Christian walk, fo that I am sure, no man ever was in earnest in
the matter of Religion, and a stranger to this; yea. that he was never more
certainly persuaded of any thing, then of this that God does hear prayer. O if
men's souls were but in their souls stead whose evening wrestlings, and tears,
the Lord has often turned into a morning song, they should know this is no
delusion, I shall here touch something of that experience which by many proofs
the saints can give as a witness to this promise.

1. That when they have often with Hanna gone in before the Lord in the bitterness
of their spirit, they have been made to return with a sensible, and mavelous
change in their case; yea, when in going about prayer, they have been put to
wrestle with much distemper, and deadnes, they have often seen the wind
discernably change, and therewith their spirits lightened from under that
burden, an observable calm, and serenity after much inward perturbation, yea
they can say that they have found their hearts thavved, and put in a flush of
tenderness, upon the back of a most sensible restraint.

2. That access, and liberty to pour forth their souls to God when he has
filled their mouth with arguments, and enabled them both to wrestle, and
wiat, they have found a favorable Crisis and begun outgate, yea, the very
turn of a sad case, which they have got from the Lord, as the pledge of a
further answer, and that when he thus prepares the heart, he does cause his
ear to hear.

5. That when they have been under a most dark cloud, they have found their
sky clear, have got a very sensible taste of Gods acceptance in prayer and of
his taking their suit off their hand, even while the matter was still in
dependence before him, yea that they have often had such a satisfying impression
impression of Gods mind, and persvvasion of his answering their desire, as
has helped them cheerfully to vvait, yea sometimes to sing the triumph before
the victory.

4. That when they had been much in prayer, they must also say, it has been
the time wherein the spirit has flovvrished, was most lively, yea that then
they had their best days that then, the candle of the Lord shined upon their
paths, and his dew lay all night upon their branches and that they have found
there is an evident, and proportionable abatement of their spiritual life, and
encouragement in God, according to their vvearing out in the exercise of this
duty.

5. They have many times found, that when there was nothing left them, but to
turn in to God, and they knevv of no other way to come through but to pray,
and look up, they. never found a more svveet, and seasonable outgate; so that
most observable times of prayer, have been also the most observable times of
their experience, and they can say from many proofs. it is no hopeless
bussines, which is put over upon God by prayer, though there be small outvvard
appearance.

6. That it is not in vain to follow out a suit before the throne, and that
access and moyen in Heaven, is as sure a way to come speed (which they know
well) as greatest moyen upon earth; having so evidently found, while many seek
the rulers favor, that the determination of every thing is from the Lord.

7. That prayer with quiet onwaiting in the use of means wi^neth comfortably
through, where over caring, and carnal policy, in the use of all other shifts
has been forced to stick.

8. They know by experience that as there are judicial times, wherein, an
inhibition as it were is laid on them from the Lord, in their wrestling, yea
and a sore restraint on their spirits, which has been very sensible, so also
they have found times of more easy access, and abundant liberty, a spirit of
prayer, let forth, before some special mercy, and deliverance to the Church,
whereby they could in some measure discern its near approach.

9. That on the back of some solemn address, and application to God by prayer,
and fasting in a day of strait, they have often seen cause even from that day,
and up ward to date a remarkable return, and outgate, in which even common
observers, might discern what an evident answer, the Churches intercession with
God in times of extremity has had.

10. I may add the saints know this so well by experience that surely God
hears prayer, even in such, and such a particular, that they can with much
confidence adventure, and make an earant of the meanest, as well as their
greatest concernments to him, having so often tried, and found that seriousnes,
and sincerity in address to God, was never in vain, but what ever be the times
wherein this promise takes place, their heart shall live that seek God.

THIRD. Instance Is the promise of the Spirit, and pouring out of the same,
which we have clear in the Word, Is. 59: v. 21. Ioh. 14: 16, Luke 24: v. 49.
Romans 8: 16, 16.

The accomplishment of which is so manifest, such a sensible demonstration
thereof, in the experience of the saints that I am sure this can no more be
denied, then these who are warmed with the heat of the sun can deny their
sense, and feeling, that the sun has such an influence: and does not the
Christans spiritual walk, bear as convincing a witness to the fulfilling of this
promise, as any living man, by walking in the way shows that he has a soul,
and principle of life within him. Now to demonstrat this a little I would but
touch some of the ordinary experiences of the saints therein, which they do
testify and by clear undeniable evidences know to be no delusion.

1. That which causes so real a change upon them, which makes them alive to
God, who once were dead, creating them as it were of new, that which
brings a clod of earth so near Heaven, raises them so far above themselves
to a delightful converse with things not seen, that while their place and
abode is here, their company, and fellovviship is above; that which makes all
things new to them and does so ^ar change their nature, and inclination as
causes them find more sweetness in a spiritual life then in the pleasures of
sin yea, reconcileth them with the Law, and exercises of a Ch^stian, where
once there was such contrariety, O! is not this a real effect of the spirit,
and no ^^aginary thing.

2. That whereof they were altogether ignorant, when they were strangers to
God, and knevv not if there was a Holy Ghost, but by report, now, since their
being born again, they find themselves entered in another World, brought out of
darkness unto a mavelous ligh^, and of this are sure, that once they were
blind, but now they see, is not this a proof of the truth of this promise?

3 That which makes them see more of God in his Word, and Works, at one time
then at another; whence is this difference and inequality, the Scriptures are
at one time, the great things of the Law, which are at an other time, but
common things to them; the object is the same, but O! what different
manifestation thereof, whence is it that such a light springs up in the Word,
that opene^h up this deep, and makes them see the wonders of his Law, and
within a little nothing but dark night, do not the saints knopw this well, and
that it is no delusion?

4. That which makes such sensible liberty in their soull, and confidence in
their approach to God, after sore bondage, and fear, which raises them often
so far above their ordinary frame as they are not only quickened. and refreshed
themselves. but do observably warm others, O how piercing, and savory are their
words, which show what difference there is often, betwixt a Christian, and
himself, betwixt a dead exercise of a gift which reaches the ear* and that
which melts the heart, and does even reach by standers, with a pleasant
perfume.

5. That which makes such a sudden change in their ^ase under ordinances, that
their heart that died within them as a stone, ere ever they were aware has
taken life, and need ^re with a Word, yea, has been powered out within them so
as their beloveds voice, has had an other sound; O then they think not the
time long, the Word is as the ^oney from the comb, so as they have often wi^ht a
p^^pe^ual arrest upon their spirit, in such a condition that none may stir up
their beloved until he please; can that be any delusion?

6 That which brings in promises seasonably, into their mind in the day o^
their strait, and causes the Word tryst so suitably to heir present case with
such a satisfying impression of the same, as does give most sensible, and
present ease.

6. That which so clearly by the Word discoverth to men then own heart, and
does search them out in their most closse and retired thoughts, that they have
been often made to wonder, how the Word is upon all their secrets; is not this
the candle of the Lord?

8 That which does demonstrat their state and being in Christ, by an argument
which is beyond all words, and does by power in an irresistible way answer all
objectious, and turn the most f^oward case into a blessed calm, and has made
a simple word more effectual in a moment, then most persuasive a^guments could
be.

9 That which makes such abundant joy spring up in the heart, when there is no
visible grounds for the same, like the dry* bone gushing out water, must surely
be some supernatural* and excellent power, that can not only bring it out of
nothing, but out of contraries.

10. That which gives them so sensible a taste of the powers of the World to
come, such a ravishing glance of the inheritance that they could hardly
sometime sorbear to rise at midnight, and sing for joy in the hope thereof, and
has given them such a discovery of God at some special times, as has made
them judge that all they ever knew of him before, was but by the hearing of the
ear

11. That which is so discernable, and sensibly felt in the present time, that
Christ's return to the soul, and the outletting of the spirit, has been as
evident often to the saints, as to that Martyr who was forced to cry out at the
stake, He is come, he is come; and has been so sweet when enjoyed, that the
remembrance of some of these times has been very pleasant, and refreshing, yea
this is such a thing as most observably trysts the godly man in the way of his
duty, according to the Word.

12. That is no delusion, the withdrawing whereof is so sensible to them, as it
makes their duty* wherein they have had delight, become their burden, when
they are put to row with oars, the wind being gone, and makes it like night
to the soul, when the sun is gone down, and sad experience has often showed
them, how the overclouding of their soul, the with drawiug of the spirit, and
comforter, does observably follow a sitting up of their duty, and yiedling to
any known sin, by which it is grieved.

FOVRTH. Instance, is that Promise for direstion which God has given his
People in the Word, that he will guide them with his Counsel, will order, and
direct their steps, who do commit their way to him, and teach them the way
that they shall choofe, Ps. 37: 5: Ps. 25: 9, 14. Ps. 73: ver. 24.

The fulfilling of which has been so manifest to these who ever made earnest
of acknowledging God in their ways, and committing the conduct thereof to him,
that I shall but attest their experience, if they have not this testimony to
give.

1. That to trust God with their case, and give him the guiding of their way,
has taken them much more easily through a plunging case, them overcareing
anxiety, yea, the Lords directing their steps, and making things successful,
when they have committed the same to him, has been often as sensible to them,
as their strait, and difficulty was.

2. That the way of the word has been the best expedient for taking them safe,
and comfortably through, and that they never repented that they did more
consult their duty, then inclination, when they were at a stand about a
particular, and did not debate the command, even while there seemed a lion in
the way.

3. That they were never left without counsel, and direction, when their eye
was single, and serious about it, and it was not so much want of light as of an
heart to close therewith, that made their way often so dark, but when they
subjected themselves to Gods mind, they found, that such who follow him, shall
not walk in darkness.

4. That light, and counsel does tryst men in following the command, and the
practice of known duty, has helped them to know more the^ duty, and that
light did most abound when it was their serious study to follow the same.

5. They found it was never in vain to enquire after Gods mind by prayer, and
also in the temple to make a reference of a particular to him, when it was too
hard for them, but have often seen the Word evidently directed to such, and
such a case, as if they had gotten a return from Heaven by an audible voice.

6. They also know, that Gods following in light, with a powerful impression,
his teaching the reins, and instructing with a strong hand, is no delusion,
but the sure, and well grounded experience of most solid Christians in all
ages, yea, most discernable from any false impulse, and that some special piece
of work and service, which God has laid in their way, wants not usually some
special call, backed wi^^ such light, and authority, as in an irresistible way,
can answer all objections, to make them go bound in the spirit* about such a
duty.

7. How Gods special directing hand, has been often very observable, not only in
preventing, and crossing their way, to withdraw them by some sharp
dispensation, from their purpose, but sensibly overpowering them, so that they
have been plucked as it were back, from unavoidable hazard, that they could not
find their paths.

8. I shall add, they have often observably found, how easy their way was made
to them when the Lord does countenance, and prosper the same; what sweet
concurrence of providence, how then difficulties have most sensibly been taken
out of the way, yea, wind, and tide going along with them, in such a manner,
that they have been forced to see, and confess a divine hand therein.

FIFH. Instance, is the promise of Pardon, and forgivenes which God has given
his People in the Word, that for his names sake he will blot out their
iniquity, and remember their sin no more, yea, is ready to pardon, which is
expressly held forth, to these who are truly humbled, Mic. 7: 18. Ier. 31: 34.
Is. 43: 25.

Now that there is a real accomplishment of this, I am sure the experience of
the saints can in all ages clearly witness: what joy and peace this has
occasioned, what a sensible demonstration, and solemn confirmations they have
had of this promise, so as their very bones might sing, Who is like unto the, o
Lord! It is true real pardon of sin, does not always infer the sensible
feeling thereof, and when it is remitted in Heaven, there is not always a
declaration of it in the conscience, but it is also sure, that this is sensibly
felt and that it is tried by all even all the generation of the righteous to
have had as powerful an operation on a disquiet, troubled soul, as ever wine,
or the choicest cordial could have on the sick, or faint; O! if these who
question this, were in their case, to whom God speaks peace after a storm,
they should know how real, and certain that is, I would offer the Christians
witness to this promise, from many, many experiments, by which the Lord has
sealed it to their soul, whereby they know assuredly it is no fancy, or
delusion.

1. How this has as sensible a connection with the serious exercise of
contrition, and repentance in their experience, as it certainly has in the
word, and promise; while they find, that in silence, and keeping up their case
from God, their bones have been troubled, their spirit in a restles, and
disquiet condition; until once they made an address, and got their soul
vented by confessing to ^he Lord which was then like a kindly turn, and cool of
a fever.

2. They know it is no delusion that is found so certain a cure to a wounded
spirit, under the sense of sin, a wound which the world and all its diversions
could never heal, whose pain, and grief no music can allay (a drop of divine
displeasure being enough to turn all their pleasures in wormwood, and gall)
but, O! a taste of this unspeakable cordial, one warming look of a reconciled
God, they know by experience, can give present ease.

3. It is no delusion which they can command no more, then the sun to shine
when overclouded, or the wind to blow, but when it lists, which the most
persuading moral arguments, can no ways effectuat nor all their former
experience, yea, the letter of most refreshing promises, which sometimes are to
them, but as the white of an egg, without taste, until once the spirit breath,
which not only, discovers the ground of their joy in the word, but does also
cause them to rejoice therein, when it shines upon the same.

4. It must be no delusion which causes so mavelous a change that after
greatest disquieting fears, they have found most sensible manifestations of
love, the greatest flood on the back of the lowest ebb in their spiritual
condition, which often has forced them to retreat, what their fears, and
jealousies did utter; yea, have made them enquire with wonder, whence they are
so cheerful to day, who yesternight were so broken, and crushed; whence their
spirit, should be in so sweet a calm, that so lately was like the raging, and
troubled sea.

5. That this has often met them, as a blessed surprizal, and unexpected welcome,
when they have in a backsliding case come in to God, they certainly know, that
when they knew not how to adventure, and at what end of their raveled condition
to begin, counts having run long over, yet, on their very first address, have
got a sweet disappointment to their fears, been helped to their feet, yea,
some times have had as it were the fatted calfe killed to make merry with their
friends.

6. That which has an audible voice within, so strong an Impression upon the
soul, which carries with it such a clear satisfying discovery of Gods heart,
and love, is surely no delusion, while the intimation of that one truth, Your
sins are forgiven, or any other word of promise for that end, they have found
to be an argument beyond words, which they could not resist, but for the time,
have been as sure, they see, and feel this, as that they live, yea, can no more
now call it in question, then formerly they could get it believed.

7. That is no delusion which causes them with another kind of freedom,
approach to God, makes them know there is a Spirit of adoption which sets the
soul at liberty, from the sore bondage, and thraldom under which their former
backsliding had put them, yea, a thing not only sensibly felt by themselves,
but may be discerned by others, while they cannot smoother the joy of their
heart or hide in their couutenance such a change of their condition, that
truly God has dealt comfortably with them.

8. Has not this the Saints in all ages witnessed even a joy unspeakable, and
full of glory, which though but of short continuance yet for the present so
strong, as has ravished their soul with the hope of the inheritance above, and
clear view of their interest in it, yea, sometimes, made them sing for joy, in
expectation of that blessed day but, O! this is better felt then expressed.

9. And in a word can that be a delusion that has often turned the poor man's
hell into a Heaven, which trysts the Christian in the way of his duty, and the
work does so exactly answer the promise, most sensibly felt after greatest
shakings of the conscience by the law, and can make a sad outward lot, so very
sweet, and pleasant, cause them triumph over the wrath of men, to sing in a
dungeon, to abound, and have all things under greatest wants, look grim death
cheerfully in the face in its most dreadful aspect, yea, does make so great,
and visible a difference betwixt the Christian, and himself.

SIXTH Instance, Is that promise of encouragement, and support under the
cross, which is expressly held forth in the Word, that the Lord will own his
People, bear their charges, and be with them in trouble in the day of their
suffering for his truth; yea, will bind up the broken in heart, and heal their
wounds. Psalm. 91: ver. 15. Isai. 43: ver. 2. Cap. 41: ver. 17. and Cap. 49:
ver. 14. Psalm. 9: ver. 9. Isai. 51: ver. 12.

Now that this promise is a truth, and has a certain accomplishment, the
experience of the Saints in all ages will witness, and we know their testimony
is true, what at solemn times of Gods presence they have had in a barren
wilderness, how great a cloud of witness, does seal this, and give their
testimony to the cross of Christ, of which we may say, the fame, and sweet
savor has gone forth, and spread abroad through the Church, the Fathers have
told it to the Children, and one generation to another, but how little a part
thereof can be expressed! I think it would be a mavelous record, if the
suffering, and prison experiments of the Saints were particularly set down,
what they have sound under the cross, but it is well, we know this
promise, has been, and this day is evidently sealed, concerning which I dare
attest the experience of as many as did ever drink of this blessed cup, and
were counted worthy to suffer for the testimony of Christ, if this be not a
faithful, and true witness.

First that they have often tasted what communion with God is, in the secret
duties of a Christian, also in the public ordinances, and in a special
measure, at some more solemn times, but, O! never knew his presence and
communion with him, more sensibly then under the cross, yea, have found that
the work, and service of a suffering time, as is it not the ordinary service of
every day, has also a peculiar, and more then ordinary allowance.

2 That they never knew divine strength more sensibly, then when they have been
most pressed above their own strength, that in the day they were cast on Gods
immediate care, and ordinary means of their help most withdrawn, they had
never less cause to complain, but might often say this as their experience;
they thirsted not when he led them through the wilderness, yea, that they have
no time of their life, found their mercyes more observably tryst them, more
sweet, and satisfying then when by prayer, and believing, they were put to digg
the well, and wait for the rain coming down to fill it

3. That they never found more true liberty, then in the house of bondage, more
refreshing company, then amidst their greatest solitude, while they found him
near, whom gates, and bars cannot shut out, in the day when all things else
seemed to frown upon them, that their midnight songs have been sweeter, then
all the prosperity they sometimes enjoyed, and that they have often proved, that
the deeper any are in affliction for Christ, and his truth, they are also the
deeper in consolation.

4. They must say the most satisfying, and clear discoveries of the word are
under searching, and sharpest trials, that a sanctified exercising affliction,
they have found one of the best interpreters of the bible, and the vvo^d then
to be an other thing, then it is at other times, yea, even to have been that to
them, which they could desire it to be so as they are sure it has been shaped
out, and directed for that present plunge their soul was in.

5 That there is a very easy passage and dispatch, betwixt Heaven, and an
oppressed afflicted soul, an observable vent by prayer, and more sensible
access to God face, when other things have most frovvned. yea, they can
vvitness from experience, he stays his rough vvind in the day of his East
vvind. While he shuts one door he has set an other open that when the
storm without has been very sharp, they have found a sweet calm, and
sunshine within to make it easy, and when he lays on one sore trial, he will
take an other off.

6. They can tell what a sweet comfortable parting, they have often had, with
some sharp trial, that which at the first was bitter as death, has in the
close, after sanctified exercise under the same, they have found cause to leave
it their blessing; and they confess that the time of greatest jealousy, and
fear upon their part, they have found on Gods part has been a time of greatest
kindness, and love, the sharpest wounds from such an hand, and heart as his,
has tended to a cure, yea, that circumstance, and ingredient in the same which
of all was most bitter, and grievous, even there they have found their outgate
and encouragement most remarkable.

7. That the peculiar advantage of a sanctified trial, is not so well seen in
the present time, as afterward, when the case has altered, then they found a
long, and rough storm recompensed at their landing, with a rich loadning of
experience, an other kind of discovery of God, his way, and the certainty of
his word then they formerly had won to; so as now they can speak of him, and
the good of the cross, and adventuring any thing for Christ, with some greater
esteem, on some other ground, then report, or an hearing thereof by the ear.

8. I shall add what has been the frequent testimony of these who ever
endured tribulation for the gospel, that their remembrance, and after
reckoning, upon this account has not been sad, or bitter, when they sat down,
and compared their gain with their loss, their upmaking with these days of
trial, that have gone over their head, that they would not then exchange their
experience, or want what they have found by the cross, no not for many more
days of trouble, and affliction.

SEVENTH Instance, is that promise of the word which integrity, in an evil time
has, that it shall preserve their steps, and be the best mean to help these
through that keep Gods way, yea, even in this life shall not want some witness
of Gods respect. Ps. 18: 25. Ps. 112: 4. Rev. 3: 10.

Now to hold forth the accomplishment of this, I may with confidence appeal to
the observation of the saints in all ages, who ever made it their serious study
to keep their conscrence, and their garments clean in a time of trial, if their
experience, has not this testimony to give.

First that though at present, honesty in evil times has brought them in
hazard, and with Joseph to a prison, yet, it has brought them out also, with
observable advantage, yea, how ever the Lord did order their outgate they have
found; this did land them well, and always bring them to a comfortable
harboury.

2. That honesty, and faithfulness has an authority even on the conscience of
their enemies, and leaves usually a conviction upon them: Yea, has forced a
testimony, and approbation, from such men, and has often found better
entertainment, then these have who in a sinful way have sought to please them.

3. They have found this always the choicest expedient, and best policy in a
dangerous time, which has observably met them, when they had most to do; A
thing whereof they have reaped the fruits in the day of their strait, and times
of judgment, yea, though it has occasioned sometime their sufferings, yet it
has been also their safety, and protection from sadder sufferings.

4. That though integrity is often under a dark cloud of reproach, yet it wins
still well out from under the same, and has shined usuallyt more bright
afterward. So as they might have had cause to observe, what unexpected means
the Lord has made use off, for their clearing.

5. That while their enemies might have (were it not for the preventing
goodness of God) quarrelled upon some other ground, they have been observably
led, to pursue, and make them the but of their malice, for their honesty and
that wherein they have peace before God, and have been kept from hitting on
the right cause.

6. They find how unspeakably sweet this is upon an after reckoning, and in
the evening of their life, that then they reap a comfortable harvest, of that
they have sown with much suffering, and tears; O! then it does not repent them
that integrity was their choice.

7. They have sometime found a hundred fold even in this life, and an
observable upmaking in that, which they have been willing to loss, and hazard
most.

8. They must also say, integrity was never their ruin, but an outgate was often
brought about in a way they could not have expected, yea the Lords shutting all
other doors upon them, has been that he might open one himself, like Hagars
well springing up in the wilderness.

9. That in making this their aim, when they had a large heart for God, they
have not then wanted an opportunity for evidencing the same, their
encouragement has abounded with their duty, and they have got much in, in
giving much out for Christ, that there was no such feast in the world, as they
have sensibly found in the testimony of a good conscience.

EIGHT. Instance is that promise which is held forth to the Christian in the
word, of strength, and assistance to go about duties. Is. 40: 29, 30, 31. Ps.
18: 6, 14. Ps. 84: 5. Ps. 68: 28.

To clear this, that it has an unquestionable performance, I attest the
experience of the generation of the righteous; who ever knew what it was to
serve the Lord in the spirit, who by many sensible confirmations, have not
proven the certainty of these things?

First that when they have gone about duty under much deadnes, and straitnes of
spirit, they have found a very sensible enlargement, and got their bonds
loused, which surely they could no more command, without the concurrence of
divine help, and something above nature, then these who spread out the ^ail,
can command a fair wind, when it is cross.

2. That Gods help, and concurrence, was never more discernable carrying them
through, and making them strong, then in the day, that, to their own sense,
they were most weak, when they have gone about duty under greatest fears, and
fainting in spirit.

3. That when they had most confidence in themselves, and judged they were at
greatest advantage in their going about some duty, they have usually had the
saddest retreat, and found that a sure truth, the race is not to the swift, nor
the battle to the strong.

4. They knew well what an influence divine concurrenc^ has, not only upon
their inward frame, but also upon the exercise of their gifts, yea, upon the
commonest abilites of judgment, and memory, and that there is a most
remarkable difference, betwixt themselves at one time, and an other, according
to the blowing of this wind.

5. They must also witness this as their experience, they found duty never more
easy to them, then when they have had most to do, and were kept throngest
therein; yea, when much work was laid to their hand, they then wanted not an
enlarged allowance for the same.

6. That their fpirits have been fitted for duty, and carried through
difficulties, where at some other time, and in an other frame they would have
fainted, and thereby seen, that none needs to scarr at piece of duty, when God
calls them to it, for while difficulties have appeared greatest at first, the
less they have found them afterward, yea, the hardest piece of service often
made most easy.

7. They find God does raise the spirit of his followers with a suitable
elevation for their work, and can fit them for the service of that time, and
other trials thereof, even beyond their ordinary reach.

8. That there is an open door, and sensible assistance, when there has been
work for the Gospel in such a place, while on the other hand they have found,
an inhibition sensibly served on them, the door as it were shut when the tide
was going back, and the work of the Gospel at a stand in such a part.

9. That it is not greatest abilities which make undertakings succesful, it
being in vain to rise up early without the Lord.

10. It has often been their experience, that in following the way of God, his
candle did then shine upon their paths, the Spirit of the Lord was with them,
and sensibly let out, the withdrawing wheteof has been no less discernable,
while they turned aside from him, that they have then been put to bear the
burden alone, and found difficulty, and despondency of spirit at once growing
upon their hand.

11. I may add what these who are serious in Religion have often tried, that
there is no such help, and furniture, for going about duties as a spiritual
frame, and nearnes with God, for then light, and counsel, inward freedom, and
sweet composure of spirit have brought most sensible advantage to them, in
their greatest, yea and in their most common undertakings, this has been very
evident.

NINTH Instance, Is that great promise, we have Romans 8: ver. 28. that all
things shall work together for good to them who love God, and Psalm. 25: ver.
10. all the paths of the Lord are mercy. and truth to such as keep his
Covenant. I confess it is not easy sometimes, to reconcile Gods way and this
piece of his Word together, these who take only an ordinary passing look of
providence, cannot well judge, how such things, wherewith often the godly in
their life are trysted, should contribute to their good, and advantage; while
nothing would seem more directly cross to the same; But the Christian, and
wise observer can give another account, they know what a sure truth this is,
that there is no real jarr betwixt the promise and providence of God in this
matter; and what ever be the present thoughts, patient on waiting has had
cause to say this.

1. When his way and their thoughts have most differed, in the accomplishment
of his Word, and bringing about their mercy, they have found it was to their
advantage, that his choice was always better then theirs, yea they have been often
made to confess, that their saddest disappointments therein have tended to
their further upmaking.

2. That the Lords denying them, some outward thing which they have most
desired, they have found (as afterward has appeared) was to grant them more
then their desire; he has refused them as it were in an Ishmael, that he might
give them ane Isaac.

3. They can often say they had been undone if they had not been undone; that it
was their mercy, the Lord took such a way to cast them in a fever, to prevent a
lethargy, and by some sharp cross, gave them a wound in the flesh, to cure and
let out some gross impostume in their soul, which should have made their case
worse.

4. How greatest shakings, have helped their further establishment, so as they
were never more confirmed then in that about which they have been most
brangled; yea, they have also found this the Lords way to cure their
frowardnes, and misbeleef by some further addition to their cross; that when
they would not believe, he has caused them come in upon a greater
disadvantage, whileas a small affliction, has made them impatient, a more
heavy, and pressing trouble has been their cure, and helped them to keep
silence under Gods hand.

5. That the growing of difficulties in their way, and some further pressure in
the trial, they have found, it was from the Lord, in order to its removal, and
to the bringing forth of some greater good, and that all visible grounds of
confidence, have been often broken, but with this upmaking, that their mercy,
they had it more immediately out of Gods own hand, yea that the less moderation
was whilst their trial has come to an extremity, they have found it then upon
the turn, and their hope, and encouragemtn often made to spring up therewith.

6. How the Lords deferring their mercy which they had often sought has been
indeed their mercy, and advantage, which did always tryst them in the season,
yea they must say his way is always nearest, and waiting on God without making
haste, dorh truly make the quickest dispatch.

7. Their experience can also witness, how men's reproach and outing their malice
that way to ruin their reputation, has often been the very mean, ordered by the
Lord, to bring forth their further clearing, and vindication, even by that very
mean.

8. How by some sad cross, he does often prevent a sadder, which though strange
at first, they have been forced upon after discovery to confess: The man who
riding in have to the sea port, to have passage over seas with a ship going
then off, fell, and broke his leg by the way, which was the say^ng of his life,
for the ship, and all its passengers perished in that voyage, yet, this was a
bitter astonishing providence to him for the present.

9. How their loss even by some sad slip, and failing in their spiritual
condition, has really tended to their further humbling and advantage, yea,
that which brought them under some visible decay, as to the wonted luster of
their Christian profession, has freely helped them to grow more under ground,
to the root, and substantialls of Christianity.

10. They can tell how these steps of the providence of God, which seemed most
cross to that design he was carrying on, yea, looked like the very crushing of
their hope, have often been the very mean, which has wrought most effectually to
bring about their mercy.

11. I shall add but this, as the Christians witness to the truth of this
promise, that sharpest reproofs they have seemed the wounds of a friend; most
pressing straits, made the mean for their further enlargement, how the Lord
has brought them into some dark, and plunging trial, which then looked like a
fearful pit, that he might bring them out with advantage, set their feet on a
rock, and establish their goings, yea, that in the hottest furnace, they lost
nothing, but what they might well spaire, even some of their dross.

TENTH. Instance, I shall here set down, is that general promise made to
Godliness, and these who make it t^eir serious study, that it shall be great
gain that verily it shall be well with the righteous, for they shall eat the
fruit of their labor; and in keeping of the command there is a great reward, 1 Timothy 6: 6. 1 Pet. 3: v. 12, 13. Psalm. 19: 11.

This is indeed a great, concerning truth, but a truth which I am sure none who
did ever make earnest of religion will call in qnestion; many sure convincing
experiments has the Christian had thereof through his life, such wants not
some diary and record, wherein they can cast up the advantage, they have reaped
in closse following of God, and their duty, yea from most remarkable
providence, they may often say, This I had because I kept thy precepts, now
that this promise has a large witness, I shall here touch somethings which I
may with some confidence say, both in the present, and in former times, has
been proved, and sealed by the saints in their experience.

1. That they never more effectually consulted their good, and advantage, then
when they did with greatest singlenes consult their duty, and least with flesh,
and blood; they did never more truly seek themselves, then in the practice of
self denial, yea, in that they intended God most, and least their private
interest, they have therein found a very sensible upmaking.

2. That a serious endeavor to walk before God acceptably they have found
still the best policy, even in the worst of time, and have found his way then
very satisfying, while it was most their study how to please him, yea they have
been oblidged to confess, that when the Lords way was their choice, they have
found it also their reward.

3. They have found more real joy and peace, in withstanding temptations, then
in any thing the temptation offered, and in laying their interest at Gods feet,
and their will underneath his, more then in all their carnal enjoyments; O the
trust, and testimony of God appobation: how sweet a smyle is his, in whose
countenance Heaven lies.

4. That inward peace, and tranquillity of mind, a sweet calm, and composure of
spirit, does as really attend a spiritual frame, and walk, as the shadow the
body, and their best, and most comfortable days, wherein they have truly
walked at liberty, have been when their heart was most subject to the Law, with
a single respect to the same.

5. That religion, and a spiritual walk, is the best friend even as to a
contented, and comfortable life here in the World, and that they have then most
access to enjoy themselves, and their lot with satisfaction, when they enjoy
God, yea, that neernes, and communion with him, tends to the sublimating, and
refineing of their natural spirit, and has been an observable help to their
very common abilities and parts.

6. That there is truly a reality in the blessing, which makes a small thing
signify much, and yield more, then greater abundance.

7. That when they give God their heart, it is then sweet, and matter of
satisfaction to observe his ways, and their observation thereof is very
refreshing, how far the Lord condiscends to their desires when they sum them
all up in himself, and make him their delight.

8. That the pleasure of religion is in the practice thereof, and the way to
have religion easy, is to be thoroughly religious, that duty is then sweet when
men do act from an inward principle; and holiness should be a more pleasant
work, yea, a reward to its self, if there were less mixture of Hypocrify.

9. That real humility, and walking low in their own eyes, and before God, did
never lose to them respect, and credit from men; but self abasement does
observably go before lifting up, and true honor follows such, who least hunt
after vain applause from the world.

10. That when they were most faithful to observe, and improve a little for
their enconragement, more has been added, and they never wanted matter to be
thankful, when opportunities laid to their hand were improved and taken hold of
for that end, yea, they have found there is a mercy within a mercy, and some
peculiar mercy in every cross, which is only found and brought forth, by the
exercised serious improver of the same,

11. That much sincerity has also much sense following the same, secret
honesty before God, has met them openly before men, and faithfulness in
Christian freedom purchased them more favor, and respect even from the worst,
then when they studied most to please them in a sinful way.

12. That they never savv more clearly the gain, and real advantage of
Godliness, and what a difference there is betwixt these that serve God, and
these that serve him not, as in a time of trouble, and strait, how then
tenderness in their former walk, and that which they entertained in the
morning, does now meet them at night, and pay them home with advantage in ane
hour of temptation.

13. They were forced to observe that there was an invisible guard about his
People in their duty, that the ministry of the Angels toward such is no
delusion, and thar they have often been made to vvonder ho^ hazard within an
hairbreadth, has been prevented; relief, and help come as betwixt the bridge,
and the water, how they have been sensibly preserved amidst greatest dangers,
while as it were an inhibition has been served upon these, that they should
come near, but not hurt, and only met with them, that they might read their
preservation from them.

14. That an enlarged heart does meet with an enlarged allowance, and bearing
burden with others of the People of God, has helped to make their own private
burden the lighter.

15. That real godliness, and religion, has as much in hand, as it may be a
reward to its self; which beautifieth the soul, and makes the face, and
conversation to shine with an observable luster; that guardeth and preserves
the heart from many vexing crosses; preventeth sad strokes, and sorrows that
others are pierced with, who will follow their idols, and the ways of sin,
which are bitter in the close.

In a word, this is surely found, that God is the best friend, and when there
is peace with him, things without do not offend, but they shall then
understand what it is to be in league with the beasts of the field and stones
of the ground, having a sweet aggreement, with all the providence and
dispensations that come in their way.

V. That the scripture threatenings have also a certain aceomplishment, are
found to be sad earnest, and do not fall to the ground, the Christian can also
seal from his experience.

It is not here to be understood the threatenings of wrath (from which believers
are freed in Christ,) but of a fatherly displeasure, which because of sin, may
draw deep, yea, bring forth very dreadful effects, to witness rhat it is an
evil, and bitter thing to depart from God, and that their own doings shall
chastise them; and these threatenings of the Covenant, if thy children for sake
my law, I will punish their transgressions with rods, etc. Ps. 89: ver. 30. are
sure truths which want not in every time a performance.

To clear this (ere I speak any thing particularly) I would premit somethings
to be considered.

1. That the word is a perpetual rule, which in every time must take place, and
though affliction is a piece of the common misery of man, yet, does it not
arise out of the dust, neither fall out at an adventure, but does often visibly
follow the tract of sin, as a slouth-hound, pointing at such evils as the
cause, by the stroke, and at the truth and fulfilling of the threatenings,
written upon both.

2. We should adore his sovereignty whose way both in the measure, and manner
of his peoples chastisement is so various, as that none can infallibly
conclude, what he is to do in such a case, I mean we are not to limit the Lord,
to such a way, and method in his working; yet, this we may assert, and firmly
conclude, that not only the threatenings of the word have a performance, but men
may also have, even before hand some more then probable conjecture, yea, a
clear discovery, what such a case does threaten, and what will be the issue of
a sinful course, by considering the Lords ordinary procedure, both with
themselves and others, how sin, has very ^^d effects, and his way in all ages,
is still uniforme agreeing with its self, and with the word.

3. Though a gracious state does surely privilege from wrath, and
condemnation, yet not from affliction, and sad strokes of divine anger because
of sin; for he takes vengeance on men's inventions, even when he will spare the
inventors.

4. The Lord does often contend with his people for their folly, and
miscarriages, more severely then with others, and will not let pass in them
that which he passes by in the world, without being a reprover; but when
light, and love and the law, ^^ll not hedge in their way, he will set briars,
and thorns, before them, yea, speak by chastisement upon their bones, to
withdraw men from their purpose.

5. It is known, how very deep the holy anger of God, may draw against his
children, even sometimes, to pursue them out of the land of the living, and
follow them to the grave, with some remarkable stroke, yea it has made them
dreadful examples of judgment in this life, for whom, he has accepted an
eternal sacrifice in Christ.

6. I shall add, this is the Lords blessed end in making out his threatenings,
against his people, that they should not perish with the wor^^. O, what a blessed
exchange is it, that the flaming sword which once stood to guard the tree of
life, does now stand, as it were in the way of the saints, to keep them from
running into the paths of death.

Having premitted these things, I shall now instance, some particular evils,
wherewith the godly are ready to be overtaken, which the word, does expressly
threaten, and hold forth the hazard of, both as to outward, and spiritual
strokes, and give in here the Christians witness from their experience in all
ages of the truth of these threatenings.

FIRST. Securitly, and carnal confidence, which we find the word does threaten
is an evil wherewith Christians are ready to be overtaken; but they do also
know by sad experience, what bitter fruit this does bring forth, and that
therein the word falls not to the ground, whilst from frequent trial, they
find.

First that a secure condition is the usual forerunner of some sad change, that
when they are most at ease in a dull, and dead temper of spirit, some sharp
rousing dispensation is upon the back of it, either a gross sin, or a
searching cross, as a thorn in the bed of their security to put them to their
fee^. Hos. 7: 9, 12. Hos. 2: 8, 9.

2, That seldom reckoning with the conscience, the running on of counts for
sometime upon their hand, does ravel their case, unto a sad confusion and
makes it a bitter, and heartlesse work to retire alone, or within themselves,
ye^, has a most direct tendency to a further hardening, and real upgiving with
their dnty.

3. That when security, and deadnes grows within, it qnickly makes them dry
up, and wither without, in the external performance of duty, and in that
vigorous, lively appearance which did formetly luster their walk, and carriage
before others, so as very by standers may read the languishing of grace, in the
dead exercise of their gifts.

4 That going about duty with most confidence in themselves does usually give
them the most clear discovery of their weakness, yea, when they have least
looked for any cross, they have then been sure to meet with it with that sad
addition, of being a surprizal in a secure condition, where as on the other
hand they may tell, what refreshing disappointments they have got where some
trials have been most feared and looked for.

5. That secure sporting with a temptation, may soon turn to sad earnest and
they have found it very hard to dance about the fire, and not be burnt, and the
temptation, which at a distance seemed small upon a nearer approach, they have
found had more bands on their heart, and was another thing then they could have
believed.

6. That the means whereon they have laid most weight, they have also found,
have given them the saddest disappointment, the putting of them in Gods room,
and out of their own place, has been the way to cause them miscarry, yea, to
turn their cross, whereas they have often seen something unexpected, made the
mean of their help, that they might know means are ordered of the Lord, and
are useful, because he makes them so.

7. Their experience can also witness that carnal confidence despising the
trial at a distance, usually punished with carnal diffidence, and despondency
of spirit under the same, the one extremity made the punishment of the other,
like the hot, and cold fits of an ague, which do mutually make one the other
more intense, yea, that their immoderat confidence, and expectation of a thing,
has after resolved in as immoderat discouragement, as their stroke.

SECOND. The Christians unwatchfulnes, and intermitting in the exercise of that
so necessary and commanded duty, we find the Word threateneth, and holds
forth the hazard thereof; Lest ye enter into temptation, the outmaking whereof
their experience can also witness, Luke 21: v. 34, 36. Math: 26: ver. 41.

1. That it is not easy to guide their walk, and conversation when their guard
over the heart does slacken, but the giving loose rains for a little, may make
such a sad, and large breach, that many many days will not easily make up, yea
they do also know, how a sensible withdrawing of the Spirit, and drying up of
their life, and liberty, is the usual fruit which unwatchfulnes brings forth.

9 That this helps to make their sun-blincks short, causes a low ebb after
the greatest enlargement, whilst they do not guard against their peculiar
evils and that usually there does haunt such a condition, the swelling of the
flesh, when the spirit is most enlarged, which will soon put them as far
behind, as they formerly thought themselves at an advantage.

3. That when once the heart lies open, it is quickly seized on, and made a
prey, with what a bitter sting does it return, after it has taken liberty to
wander? yea, does find there is a swift progress that sin has from the
thoughts to the rolling of it to the imagination, and thence to the affection,
wherewith it is more easy to engadge, then to shake this off.

4. That unwatchfulnes has often turned the most special times, and
opportunities for advantage to the greatest loss, which through their neglect
of these, has put them further behind then they were, it has turned their
retirement, and solitude, to be their snare, made the desert worse, and more
dangerous then the city, and made them find that vain thoughts the following
whereof seems pleasant to the mouth, will prove gall, and vvormvvood in the
belly, there being no sadder company then a man's spirit let loose upon it
self, whilst they cannot stop that current, whereto they had given a vent.

5. Their experience of this can witness that unvvatchfulnes, has an undoubted
tendency to cast of prayer, how hard is it in the evening to retire to God,
vvhilest the heart is abroad all the day? To be Religions in Worship, when men
are not so in their walk? Yea they do find that this will bring their
distemper within, out at doors to some disorder, impertinency, or passion in
their words, or outward communication, a thing which experience may tell does
wound the soul, make a sad breach in their peace, and does quickly overcloud
the Spirit, and unfit them for communion with God, and going about of spiritual
duties.

THIRD. To restrain prayer, and neglect calling on God is ane evil also which
the Word does threaten, and hold forth the same hazard thereof, as of
unwatchfulnes, lest ye enter into temptation, yea, that this is even a step to
the casting off fear, the Christians experience, from frequent trial can
witness, that this Scripture threatening is true, Math. cap. 26: vor. 41. Heb.
15: ver. 4.

1. That they have found this the rise, which gives life, and increase to
their prevailing evils, and that corruption then is upon a sensible grouth, as
the lively exercise of prayer begins to be intermitted.

2. That this wears out their spiritual life, and brings a consumption upon
the vital spirits of Christianity, so that these who sometime flowrished, and
kept green, as by the sent of water, that correspondence which they had with
the fountain of their life, while his dew did ly all night on their branches,
has through neglect of prayer, been brought to a poor shadow, so although
sometimes, the greatness of their lose and distemper, has been hid from
themselves, yet, might be easyly discerned by onlookers.

3. That wearing out of prayer, and of delight therein, will quickly make them
disrelish any other piece of Religion, put them out of frame, to meditat; or to
give thanks, or entertain fellowship with the Saints, yea, the more lively,
and spiritual these are, it makes them the more a burden, and torm^nt to them.

4. That vvearing out of this, is a strong temptation to a further forbearance,
and will sensibly vvear them out of any sense of their need hereof; and make
them strangers to themselves and to their own case, so that they shall sinde,
the less they are in this exercise, the further they shall be indisposed and
the fewer errands they have, the less felt necessity of the same.

5. Their experience can also witness that little prayer makes a heavy burden,
does multiply their straits, and cause their care grow as this is abaited; they
must then bear their burden alone, and with heavines take counsel within
themselves, while they ply not this blessed tried remedy to make their requests,
in all things known to God.

FOVRTH. We find the Word does threaten defection from the truth, and turning
from the way of God in a time of trial, as an evil into which, these that are
kept by grace from final apostasy, may yet through the violence of a
temptation, fall, Ierem. 9: ver. 13: 15. Psalm. 89: ver. 30, 32. Ios. 8: v. 11.
and their sad experience can witness, the truth of the Scripture threatenings
concerning this also, while they have found.

1. That in one day they mayt adventure on that, which through most of their
life they have not win above, but has made them go with their back bowed down
to the grave; that their giving the Lords work, a wrong touch, is one of these
things which does scarcely leave them all their time, but, beyond other sins
they have found this still come up with a bitter, and heavy reflection, yea, in
the evening of their life they have found this so sore on their spirit, that it
could not ly hid or silent but they were forced to witness their sense of it
before the World, ere they could win to any ease.

2. That this the Lord does usually meet, with some sharp and public reproof
even before men that though he pardon his People, yea, give some sensible
intimation thereof to their souls, yet, he has not past them, as to some
visible mark of his displeasure, because of such a thing.

3. They see that a crooked, and uncleanly way proves not the mean of
extricating them out of trouble, but their straits have been made to grow
therewith, yea they have found that which they eshewed in Gods way, has more
sadly trysted them in another rod, and that there is a thick dreg in the bottom
of the cup, which makes it worse to drink thereof at the close, then at the
beginning.

4. That it is not easy to make a stand in turning aside from the way of God,
when once they are engadged, and that a retrograd motion is very violent, and
yielding in a little will bring with it some necessity of going further, as a
judicial stroke.

5. That sitting of some clear opportunity, to give a testimony for the truth,
when called thereto, has turned to be their judgment, that they should not
have further access, or be made useful that way; a thing truly obvious to
such, as are wise to observe the judgments of God in their time; yea,
likewise that public backsliding, does often visibly vvear men out of personal
tenderness.

FIFTH. Unsubduednesse of spirit, and want of mortification to outward things,
the Word does clearly threaten, and hold out its hazard, the accomplishment
whereof, Christians experience can vvitness, Romans 8: ver. 6, 7.

1. That God has often turned their idol to be their cross, put a mark of his
jealousy on their dearest things, when once they put them in his room, yea,
frequent observation of the Lords way both with themselves, and others does
show, if they would be quite of a thing, they may set their heart immoderatly
on it, such eagernes, and exorbitancy of affection, being a sure presage, it
shall either be their judgment, or sorrow, or cease to be.

2. That outward things did never yield less then whilst they pressed them
most, that when they are eager in pursuit of the World, and satisfaction there,
spirits are sensibly hurried with many perturbations, so that they must say,
that which keeps them from enjoying of God, does also hinder the comfortable
enjoying of themselves.

3. They have founded that slow advance in the work of mortification, has at
last doubled their smart, and been the procuring cause of some very sharp cure,
when the discase did come to that height that a small, and ordinary potion
could not do the turn.

4. That immoderat desire, and pressing after an outward thing, they have
sometime got answered, but therevvith a sharp reproof from the Lord, yea,
usually have found small satisfaction in their enjoying that, about which they
were so unsober in their enjoying that, about which they were so unsober in
their pursuit, give children, or else I dye, said Rachel, she got children and
she dyed, in bringing one of them forth.

5. Their experience can also witness how overcaring anxiety has often caused
things thrive worse under their hand, vvhilest they found never a more
satisfying issue in a particular, then by a quiet, submissive dependence on the
Lord for the same.

SIXTH. The doing violence to light, and sinning with a witness against the
conscience, as it is clearly threatened in the Word, so likevvayes the sad
effects thereof, has been clearly witnessed, in all ages.

1. What a direct tendency this has to the further darkning of their light,
and to a judicial hardening, and that reproofs not entertained do usually become
less frequent, yea, less pungent, and searching; their heart then does not so
easily smite them, and put the tear in their eye, as sometimes a word, or
secret rebuke of the conscience would have done, so as they can now digest
greater things, who would sometiumes, have stood at that, which comparatively
was very small.

2. That when they would not read their bosom distemper, which both by the
word, adn conscience was pointed out, others have got leave to read the same
written on their fore head, and the shifting of discovered guilt, and of all
serious endeavor to get the quarrel taken up in secret betwixt God, and them,
has brought the matter at last, to some public hearing, even before the
generation.

3. That their darkening of their light upon some private interest, while they
would again, and again enquire if such a thing be warrantable, concerning which
the Lord had once cleared their mind, is a most perilous thing, yea, has got
an answer according to the idol of their heart, and their choice made to be
their judgment.

I shall but add what bitter, and sad experience can tell, how dreadful it is
to give the conscieuce a wramp which is more easily hurt then healed, that
deliberat adventuring on the occasion of a temptation, when they would go to
the high priests hall without warrant, or a calling, has cost them dear; and
they have found that bold sinning does afterward make faint believing.

SECOND ARGUMENT.
SECOND Argument to demonstrat the accomplishment of the scripture is this,
that not only Christian experience, but the observation of the Church and
people of God, does in all ages bear witness thereto, how the Lords way in these
providence both of mercy, and judgment, about the Church, amidst the various
changes of her condition, yea, in the most strange things which fall out in the
world, does convincingly answer the word, and verify the same.

It is indeed undeniable that the scripture of God, as it is written to the
personal case of his people, and does in their experience take place, so is
there a part of it in a peculiar way directed to the Church, the fulfilling
whereof in the providence, and events of the time should be the subject of our
observation, and would singularly help to confirm our faith of the truth
thereof.

For prosecuting this argument I would touch it a little in these three branches.

1. How these General promises which belong to the chureh universal, and
concern her in all ages, have an accomplishment.

2. How these threatenings also of the word which do not only concern the
church, but have a respect to her adversaryes are certainly fulfilled, and take
place in men's observation, who do observe the judgments of their time.

3. How the Scripture of God does clearly shine upon the darkest footsteps of
providence, even these which would seem most strange, and hard to understand,
so that it may be demonstrat nothing falls out in the world, or befalls the
saints, but what is most consonant to the scripture.

FIRST BRANCH As to the first branch of this argument, I shall but instance
five general promises, which we find held forth in the word concerning the
church, and endeavor to show how very clear, and obvious the accomplishment of
them is, if men do not willingly shut their own eyes.

FIRST Promise wherein we find the Scripture express, is the preservation of
the Church that he will be with her to the end of the world, and though he make
an end of other nations, yet, will he not make an utter end of her; but while
the ordinances of the sun, and the moon do last, and as the days of heaven,
so shall her days be prolonged, against her the gates of hell shall not
prevail. Ps. 49: ver. 16. Math. 16: 18. Now that God has truly verifyed this
his promise and is as good as his word, is a truth though mavelous, yet, so
very clear, and manifest, that I am sure no Atheist can deny, it may be so
easily demonstrat.

First, that the Church does continue, and is kept alive to this day, it does
certainly prove the truth of his promise, for it can be said of her, and none
can say it is a lie, she has outlived all her opposers, the greatest of whom
have found their grave in the quarrel, over whose tomb that last confession, of
a great adversary Julian may be written vicisti tandem Galilaee, has not this
deadly, and irreconciliable feed been perpetuat, from fathers to children, but
who has prospered in that enterprise, the archers have often shot, and wounded
her sore, but her bow does abide in strength, as at this day, this is her
motto, persecuted but not forsaken, cast down, but not discouraged, she who
has brought forth many children, yet, cease not to bear whose age has not
marred her beauty, her eyes are not dimm, hor her strength failed, a sight
which may cause us no less stand, and consider this great wonder, theu Moses
did at that; which was but the shadow, and emblem thereof, a bush, burning,
and not consumed, for behold a church keptalive, yet, still in the flames, and
when to appearance consumed it does arise more glorious out of her own ashes,
this is indeed the only Phanix, and we know no other, of whom that can be said,
has she not born out these universal deluges, which did like an inundation go
over her head, of idolatry, and paganism in the first times, and
Antichristianism with Arrianism in the after ages, yet not swallowed up, which
may be no less mavelous then when she was keept above the waters in the ark,
and though her enemies, have often sung her funeral song, and rejoiced over the
dead, the dead bodies of her witnesses, yet, they have risen again, her dry
bones have taken life, and come together, and behold she is alive at this day.

2. Not only the Churches preservation, but the continued series, and
succession thereof unto this time, does witness the fulfilling of this promise,
that in the darkest times, of her condition, she has not altogether
disappeared, even, when she was so long hid in the wilderness, but still in
every age, had some witnesses, and though the Church has often cried out for the
want of Children, and been heard weeping, bemoaning her self because they were
not; yet, we may say she never wanted an offspring, to this day, she did never
dye without an heir, and seed of her own, to raise up her name, even since the
Covenant was first made with her, in Adams family, and though particular
Churches have their set times which like the sun, have these usual periods,
their first rise, their height, and flowrishing, and afterward a gradual
decay, making way to the departure of the light, yet, this made never void the
promise of God to the Church universal, whose lamp was never put out, nay,
shall not while the days of Heaven do last.

3. We must also say that the continuance, and preservation of the Church, is
peculiar to her alone, and can be said of no other interest and party beneath
the sun, for it is clear that there was no Kingdom, or empire so firmly
rooted, no society so well governed by Laws, backed with power, which has had
the best title, and claim, but time at last did prevail over it, and made the
same a trophee of her conquest; yea, the greatest Monarchies, and flowrishing
cities, have at last yielded, so as of them it may be said, nunc seges est ubi
Troia fuit, but time cannot to this day, boast of a triumph over the Church of
God, though no nation, no family, in the earth could ever plead antiquity with
her: This is that interest, which has born out all these great revolutions
that so often changed the very face of the world, yea, has outlived so many
Kingdoms, and successions thereof.

4. It does convincingly demonstrat the truth of this promise of the Churches
preservation, that the World, yea, greatest Athiests may see, this has not
come to pass, at an adventure, nay, not in an ordinary way of providence, but,
by a divine power, most discernable therein; while it is so clear. 1. That no
interest, or party had ever such adversaries, as the Church, against whom the
powers of the World, and the powers of darkness have always been on foot. 2.
That outward advantages have usually been on her adversaries side, not only
(...) great men of the earth, but these of greatest parts, an^ ^^ilities. 3.
That there will was never wanting to their power, and their design no less
then to raze her to the foundation. 4. That this enimity has been rooted, and
irreconciliable, which time to this day could never take up. 5. That no
interest did ever endure, such violent assaults, so many sharp batteries, for
it is observable that most of the wars, and commotions of every age, have been
some way stated on the Churches account, and what ever private quarrels men have
had among themselves, yet it has not hindered the pursuit of their malice,
against the woman, and her seed. 6. That such who have come out of her bowels,
even the men of her own house, have often been her greatest enemies; and lain in
wait to take her at an advantage in the day of her halting. 7. That her real
friends have often fainted in a time of her strait, and stood afar off, yea,
almost none of the Children, which she had brought forth, have been then found
to take her by the hand; 8. That the depths of Satan, in her enemies, as an
angel of light, have sometimes given her a sore assault, so that if it had been
possible, and ordinary midses could have reached their end, they should have
deceived the very elect. 9. I must add this further witness to the mavelous
preservation of the Church, which in an ordinary way could not come to pass,
that we find no other party was ever brought so low and near death, to be yet
alive, the knife was once at the Churches throat in Isaac. she did seek to
adopt a bound-womans son in stead of a lawful heir, when Abraham agreed to
Sara's overture for the outmaking of the promise; how near exspiring do we
find her in Egypt, when a sentence to destroy all her male issue was gone
forth? Yea, what but a miracle could have preserved her, when she was betwixt
Pharaoh, and the red sea? How low was the Church in the wilderness, and after in
the days of the captivity, even broken to pieces with small appearance of
life, when her face was all blurred with weeping, and her enemies made sport
over her ruins at the rivers of Babylon, when the Children of Edom cried out
let us raze her even to the foundation? Yea, could the Church be nearer the
grave, then when her bones were scattered, at the graves mouth, bnt above all
in that dark night when her head, and shepherd was smitten, and her hope
seemed to be buried in the grave with a stone put upon it, when she could get
no entertainment among the Jews, was wounded in the house of her friends, and
the Gentiles in wrath rose up against her, that for some hundred Years the
great Empire which had trod down all the nations about, put forth the outmost
of power, and malice for her undoing. O who could have thought the Church
should outlive this? Yea, after all we find her tossed, and hurried by
Antichrist into the wilderness, an adversary more cruel then any that had gone
before, where the Dragon watched to get her destroyed, but how in all these, and
through that long dark night she has continued and marvellously flowrished, as
the palm tree, under her greatest weights; so that we cannot, but see that
which her enemies being judges will not deny, that this promise to the Church
of her preservation is this day fulfilled, yea, that it has not in an ordinary
way been brought about; surely there is no enchantment against Jacob, nor
divination against Israel, all her enemies have been found liars, happy art
thou above other People, for the eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are
everlasting arms, else long since she should have been swallowed up; may we
not still say with astonishement. O what has God wrought in her behalf.

SECOND Promise, Which I shall here instance, that God had made to his Church,
in the Word; Of her increase and enlargement, that the Earth should be covered
with the knowledge of God, as the sea of water, and her seed be as the stars of
Heaven, that her bounds should be from the sea to the utmost rivers, which was
promised to Christ in the behalf of his Church and that she should possess
the gates of her enemies. Psalm. 89: v. 25. Psalm. 2: v. 8: Ifa. 42: v. 4. Isa.
54: v.

As this prom^^^ is express in the Scripture, we must say it is no less
clear, and evident in its accomplishment, that surely the Lord has keept his
Word, whereto the event does most exactly answer, and though yet it be not to
the full made out, I am sure there is so much at this day manifest, considering
the former condition of the Church, as undenyably proves the fulfilling of the
formentioned promise which even to the conviction of greatest Atheists may be
demonstrat from these grounds.

1. That vast extent which the Kingdom of Christ has had in the World, for
this cannot be denied, that the greatest Empire, or Monarchy could never so fa^
extend their conquest, as the Church has done, since the wall of partition was
taken down; short are the limits of the Grecian, and Roman Empire considered
with this, whose bounds have been the ends, and uttermost parts of the Earth,
where neither Greece or Rome did ever set up their Trophies; has not the
Gospel as the sun made its circuit from the East to the West? Yea crossed the
seas, to the dark northern nations, thus fulfilling its course, in order to its
return again, to the place of its first rising, that it may, as we are sure it
shall once visit the Jews again, and the eastern places of the World that now
are buried in a night of darkness, which I think will be as sure a presage of
the break of day, and second coming of the Lord, as the morning Star is to the
World of the Suns accomplishing its course, and that it is returning again to
the East were it should rise; has not the Gospel now, been through Asia where
it did not tarry for a night, for many flowri^hing Churches were there, and the
going back of the tide from thence was its flowing to another part of the
World, which is indeed observable of the Church, as it is of the sea, that what
it has losed in one part, it has gained in another; did the vast distance of
Africa, its great barren deserts, or scorching heat hinder the Gospels making a
visit thither, so as it was once, a fertile soil, and brought forth many famous
lights, yea, something yet does both there, and in the East parts of the World
remain, to show the Gospel was ^ruely in these places; and has Europe though
last, been least on this account? Yea, what do mean the late discoveries of
unknown parts of the Earth, but to make way for a more full performance of this
promise, that the Gospel might stretch its conquest over the line, which surely
was the gold and treasure Christ designd from thence that even America might
have her day also, and the voice of the turtle be heard in these lands,

2. Not only the large extent of the Church as to its bounds does witness this,
but also the great, and numerous offspring of Sons and Daughters which in these
parts where the Gospel has been were brought forth to Christ, for we may say,
what John saw in vision has been very manifest to after ages an innumerable
company of all Tongues, Nations and Languages, of whom it could be said these
are born in Zion, O how great a harvest of the Nations, is even already
gathered? What a fleece has every particular Church cast? What a mavelous
increase, has been in some places after special tides of the Gospel? May we
not say that truth is now beyond debate, that out of one, and him not only as
good as dead, but truly dead, there has come forth as the sand of the sea,
and Stars of Heaven in number, the Church has inherited Joseph's blessing of
the womb, and the breasts, in a fruitful offspring, the dew of Christ's youth
has been as the womb of the morning. O what a mavelous and goodly company
will this once be, when gathered together? Then will the performance of these
precious promises be fully manifested.

3. This truth may be demonstrat not only from the real conquest of the
Gospel, and these excellent trophies of her victory over many noted enemies,
who have after been vessels of honor, but also from the feigned subjection
that so many have been made to render, is it not strange, what a multitude does
in these times profess the truth, and yet, hate it, and were never drawn with
the cords of love? How very many have courted the name of a Christian, and
wooed the shadow of religion, who never knew the truth thereof, which certainly
is a convincing evidence of the Gospels conquest, that so many knees should bow
to the name of Jesus, whose hearts were never bowed, or really subdued to him.

4. It is an unanswerable proof of this truth that we see the churches
increase, and enlargement has come to pass most punctually after that manner,
yea, with all the circumstances as was fortold and promised, so that the event
does in every thing answer the word, for, First it is there held out, that from
a day of small things which men would be ready to despise, it should grow up
as a tender plant, and spread forth its branches over the nations, that the
children of the desolat should be more then of the married Wife, and the glory
of the second temple, exceed that of the first, and O! has it not accordingly
come to pass? 2. This great increase, and enlargement of the church was to
fall out in the days of the new testament, when Christ should be lifted up,
that then he should draw all men after him; for these promises we have thereof
in the old testament, do clearly point at the times of the gospel, and does
not the event here accordingly answer? 3. The scripture holds out that the
falling away of the Jews, should be the riches of the gentiles, and that their
rejection should make way for the fulfilling of this promise even the
ingathering of the nations, and do not men see the event with this very
circumstance?

4. We find the isles, and outmost parts of the earth are given to Christ, for
his inheritance, and foretold as a special part of the Churches increase, and
do we not clearly see there is no place of the world, where Christ's Kingdom
is more visible, where more children have been begot to him by the gospel, we
may say, then in these northern places, even in these Isles of Britain, and
Ireland, which are almost the uttermost parts of the earth, there being but
little from that airth, and nearer the pole which is inhabited, yea, we may
judge has been that Thule whereof the Ancients did so much speak. 5. Was it
not also foretold that the church should possess the gates of her enemies, at
whose great increase the world should wonder, the princes thereof see, and be
troubled while God is known in her palaces for a refuge, and does not the event
witness this, that over all these counsels, and essays which the world, has
had to hinder the churches grouth, her rising has always been upon the ruins
of her greatest enemies, yea, these who have been a terror in the land of the
living did often fall, and break themselves in that attempt, can men deny the
mavelous progress of the church how from a small beginning she at last
possessed the gates, of both the east, and western empire her old enemies, and
do we not this day see her conquest advancing on the ruins of Antichrist, her
last, and greatest adversary.

5. As the fulfilling of this promise anent the churches increase is
undeniable, since men cannot contradict their sense therein, we must also say
this is a thing great, and mavelous, which no less then some divine, and
extraordinary power could bring about, if we consider these things; first, that
quick dispatch which the churches grouth, under the days of the new Testament
has made. O might not the pagan world wonder how in the space of two or three
hundred years, it was almost become wholly christian; O strange! a Dioclesian,
and Maximus so grievously persecuting, and trampling on the very name of
christianity and yet near that same age, this great Roman empire, and Emperor
submitting to the gospel which was fulfilled in the days of Constantine. 2.
How astonishing was it for the churches rise, and increase to be brought about
upon the ruin, and dounfal of the idols of the nations, who had their temples,
and were worshipped as God, that the world should be made to renounce its
Bible, and that religion which for so many ages was deeply rooted by tradition
from their fathers; these altars which were had in such reverence, demolished,
and their temples made a ruinous heap, yea, the very name of their Gods should
be thus obliterat, was not this indeed very wonderful? But Dagon has no
strength to stand before the ark of the God of Israel. 3. That it should be
thus advanced by such a mean as the preaching of the word, even of that which
to the Jews was a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishnes, how this
voice, should put to perpetual silence these Oracles that for so many ages, had
given a response to the world, might be indeed astonishing, yea, that the
churches increase should thus be brought about, at no less rate, then the
overturning of greatest Kingdoms, the conversion of so many nations, should
tame, and civilize the most savage, and barbarous, cause the lion to ly down
with the lamb, and even make so great and universal a change in the face of the
universe. 4. Does it not speak forth some divine power the carrying on of the
churches grouth, and increase not only over the violence of men, but over all
these dreadful errors, and inventions, these thick mists which both in former,
and late times, have ascended out of the pit to choke her, that we may say, the
church has not only been helped to tread upon the lion, and dragon, but ou the
adder, and cockatrice also, and does carry the trophies of her conquest over
all these at this day. 5. I would add is it not mavelous how the churches
increase, has been advanced in a way most contrare to all the rules of
ordinary policy, by which states, and empires have risen, not by dissimulation,
but greatest plains, and free dealing for Christ, and his Ministers did never
flatter the world to embrace the truth; not by open violence, but a more
excellent spirit. and power before which men could not stand, where foolishnes
was made to confound, and outwit humane wisdom, and weakness to overcome
strength that we may say, O how little of man, and much of God was to be seen
therein.

THIRD Promise which the Lord has given to his church in the word, is the
giving of the Spirit and pouring out of the same, which is there expressly held
forth, and promised, Zach. 12: 10. Ioh. 14: 17. Ps. 59: 21. And does concern
all the times of the church, though in a more full measure, to be let out in
the days of the Gospel,

It is true the Christians inward experience can best witness this, for these
have an argument from within; they know, and they are sure they have received
the spirit by the word, whereby they understand, these things which are
spiritually discerned; but that which here is intended, it is to show, that the
spirit is truly let forth to the church according to the promise, that it does
accompany the truth, and doctrine of Christ, and purity of the ordinances, as a
thing which from clear undeniable evidences, may be demonstrat to the
conviction of the greatest Atheist: for I must think even bystanders, such who
never knew any saving work of the spirit, but live in these parts where the
ordinances are dispensed with purity, and power, if they shut not their eyes,
may often clearly see something going forth with the word, that is beyond words,
a divine spirit, and power which sends forth its savor in the daily
administration of the gospel, yea, by its effects, and some convincing
discovery thereof, does force this truth in upon men's consciences, who are
otherwise strangers thereto.

Now to hold forth the accomplishment of so great a promise that God is
faithful, and true therein, I would give in these clear, and convinceing
witnesses to the same.

1. These excellent gifts, and enduments given to the Church, are they not a
visible proof of this truth? For it is undeniable, where once the gospel comes
that instruments are raised with another spirit, reapers sent forth, while
there is a harvest to be gathered, and shaped for their work, yea, these who
were of mean, and ordinary parts, when called forth to the service of the
Church, will have another luster, that it may be often seen with astonishment,
how far not only they exceed themselves but these who were of more eminent
natural enduments, I would but seriously ask men who never laid this truth to
heart whence is that variety of Gifts, so sutably dispensed to the various
employments, and different pieces of service, the Church does call for; how are
they thus suited to the several times, yea, to the very genius, and temper of
such a time? Whence is it, that every gift, and qualification is so fitted, and
disposed for its proper use, some most peculiarly shaped out to awake, and
threaten, these Boanerges, while others are set forth with a spirit eminently
fitted to comfort; some mighty in persuasion, yet not so fit to expound; others
most dexterous to instruct, yet, not so powerful to apply; some the gift of
tongues, and others the tongue of the learned to speak a word in season to the
weary; to some the face of a lion is given, when a heroic spirit of courage,
and resolution is called for, to others the face of a calf for patient enduring
in sufferings times, surely it were a choice meditation to think how with as
great wonder, we may say of this excellent body of the Church, as of the
natural body of man, how curious, yea, marvellously is it framed, where every
part does answer another, and to the use of the whole, each has its peculiar
excellency, and something proper to every ones gift may be then seen, as well
as in the face of man, by which in somethings they differ from all other.

2. These more eminent extraordinary outlettings of the spirit do also witness
this truth, which at some special times when the churches necessity requires
it has been most discernable, when the Lord sends forth his servants, about
a more then ordinary piece of work, either to do, or suffer; when he is to
plant the church in some place, where the gospel will meet with much
opposition, is it not then manifest how some more then ordinary power, and
irresistible efficacy does accompany the truth, before which there is no
standing; the disputer is then in his reasoning confounded by something above
reason, the untoward, and rude are forced to stoop before the word, and to
confess they have to do with power, and not with words; yea, these whom the
Lord makes use of, who were feeble, and weak as others, in that day are made
as a brazen wall, and defenced city.

3. Is it not also undeniable that now under the New Testament there are
Ministers of the spirit, and not of a dead letter and empty sound? That with
the word, there go along a ministration of power, and life, whence a Majesty,
and authority attending the public ordinances is often so discernable, that even
these who know not what the Spirit is are made to see something therein which
does dazzle them with astonishment; whence is it that at sometimes such a
beauty, and power shines forth with ordinances like a glance of the glory of
God, even going before men's eyes, which for the present has made a wonderful
change upon some very gross men and put them in an other temper, yea, forced
them with fear to acknovvledge that surely God is near in the assemblyes of
his people^ and I would ask whence is it, the word gives law to men's
consciences? should speak with such an authority, as makes them all to shiver,
that even the worst of men are sometime made to stand before the ministry of
the word, like men standing at the bar upon life, and death, before a judge
whose authority they durst not decline.

4. It is very discernable what a great difference and an other appearance,
there is both on Ministers, and Christians at one time, from what they are at
an other, in the discharge of duty, as if these were not the same persons;
which appears not only in the enlargement. and streatning of their gift,
but also in power, and life; is it not seen, with what liberty these do
sometimes pray, are as a ship with a full gale before the vvind, that it is
then easy to preach, when at other times there is like a shut door, that even
onlookers may perceive a sensible languishing and them hampered in their very
expressions, yea, as men rovving against a contrary wind, the word vvanting
that savor and relish it has had at other times, and this not through a
natural indisposition, or want of preparation, but that which all who ever
served God in the spirit must confess, has most sensibly trysted them when
they have thought themselves at the greatest advantage, for going about duty:
O who can deny this evidence of the spirit, a thing in all ages so sensibly
felt, yea, even obvious to the vvorst of men.

5. It is also clear that where ever the Lord has had a church at some
special turns of her condition there have usually been, some more solemn times
of the spirit and high spring-tydes of the gospel, there was indeed mavelous
flowing forth of the spirit of God after Christ's ascension, which like a
mighty current did carry all before it, at which time more success did follow
one sermon, then has been by the ministry of many others in an age; this made
the world vvonder, as if some universal enchantment had fallen on men, what
that could be, which the more they sought to bear down, the more it
increased, that made the rich choose poverty, and these who dwelt in palaces,
take themselves with chearfulnes to the dens. and caves of the earth; but
besides this, it is very manifest that in a large measure the spirit has been
let forth to the church in after ages, yea, there is no particular church
where the light has shined but has had it is special times, some solemn day
of the pouring out of the spirit, before the sun went down; which may be
observed either at the first breaking up of the gospel, or at some other
remarkable time, and change of her condition; whence a great tack of souls to
Christ has follovved, in a day wherein an effectual door was opened,
besides the reaching of the conscience, and stirring the affection of many
others, under a common work of the spirit, which usually goes along with
such solemn times.

6 The going back of the tide, and visible withdravving of the spirit from
particular churches, where it has sometime, in a large measure, been let
forth, is a very convincing witness to the truth of this promise; for it is
clearly seen at what a stand the gospel is in these places where it most
eminently shined; that the land which blossomed and was like a watered
garden, has been made as the heath in the wilderness, and the ground from
whence rain is vvithdravven, and then that the ministers of Christ, whose lot
has fallen in such a time are put to very sore work, to work, as it were,
with oars for want of vvind to cast out the net all night, and catch
nothing; a shut door is upon them in the exercise of their Ministry, duty is
made Lurthensome because the Lord is against them, there is an evident
restraint upon the word, and its intercourse is more with the ear, then with
the consciences of men, yea, any liberty they find is to execut a commission of
judgment, and to denounce the woe of the Gospel. O, does not so manifest
withdrawing of the spirit witness the outletting thereof, and that it is a
certain, and real thing.

7. Do not the stirrings, and strange convictions which even the worst of men
have sometimes under the word, witness a divine spirit, and power going along
therewith, that which forces an assent from their conscience to the truth,
which otherwise they hate, yea, makes them for the time, wonder they should
not have been more serious in the ways of God, yea it does often put a thorn
in the bed of their security; for indeed the word, and the light thereof does
torment these who dwell in the earth: And truly this is a mavelous thing,
which wins in uponm men's secret designs, and councels, does reveal to them
the most closs thoughts of their heart, which they are sure men's eye could not
reach, takes them down through themselves, and yet, that the world knows not
whence it is, yea, are they not forced to confess, what a great difference
they find betwixt the word from the mouth of some, who are holy, and serious
though held out in greatest simplicity, then from others even of greater gifts,
and accompanied with more show of eloquence, that surely the one, has an other
sound, and relish, speaks more feelingly home to their heart, then the most
polished discourse of greatest orators.

8. One witness more I shall here give to the truth of this promise, even these
eminent examples of the grace of God, which in every age have shined, in the
firmament of the Church, some in love, and zeal, some in patience, and
humility, some in the strong acts of faith, and ^elf-denyal; which do
certainly demonstrat a more excellent spirit then that which is in the world,
whence they appear with another luster in their walk, and carriage, and have a
sweet, and fragant savor of the spirit to the very discerning of bystanders,
which truly shows that his wind does blow on his garden, when the spices
send forth so pleasant a sent.

FOVRTH. We find an express Promise in the word of Deliverance to the Church
^n a low, and oppressed condition, that surely the Lord will plead her cause,
will deliver his People when he sees their strenght is gone, and save them
from the hands of their enemies, Ps. 18: 47, 48, 50. Ps. 22: 4, 5. Is. 54: 17.
Is. 51: 23.

It is true, this promise has its bounds, limits, and provisions which should
be taken along in the application thereof, we know the Covenant of God with
particular Churches is conditional only, he promises that he will be with them
while they are with him, yea, it is often seen, (and there is no jarr here with
this promise) that a People professing the Gospel confederat with God,
following duty, have even turned their back before the enemy, and in the holy
providence of God, have for a time been given up to their fierce rage and
violence; but it is also sure that this promise, has an accomplishment, and in
the day of the Churches strait the Lord has often appeared, by a strong
outstretched hand for her help, his own arm brought salvation to his People,
when they sought to him; for God is known in her palaces for a refuge, yea,
surely the Church might often sing that song on such clear grounds as though with
Israel she had been standing at the red sea thy right hand, O Lord, is full of
power, thy right hand has dashed in pieces thy enemies; for what nation, or
People is like this to whom he has showed such mavelous things.

Now to show forth the faithfulness of God in this his promise, I would offer
some few things that are a most clear and undeniable witness thereto.

1. There are fevv ages, but, we have some record of the churches condition,
which hold forth such signal convincing providence of God, in behalf of his
oppressed church, and people, as may be a manifest seal to this truth; it is
true some times have been more remarkable for suffering, times of judgment and
of a growing trial wherein this truth has not so clearly shined forth, yea
that long night which the church had under Antichrist, might seem to call it
in question; but never the less, if men take a serious look of the Lords way,
and series of providence in ages past, comparing one time with another, what
the straits, and most extreme case of the church has at last resolved in, they
will find cause to cry with astonishment, great deliverances gives he to his
people, yea, the Lord has done gteat things for them. I am sure, were a full
record with that true account which might be given, of these more remarkable
delivrances, that particular churches have met with, since the first planting
of the Gospel among them, wherein Gods very immediate hand for their help has
been discernable, it should nonplus the World, and greatest Atheists anent the
real outmaking of this promise.

2. The confession even of the Churches enemies has often witnessed this truth
that in pursuing their malice to trouble and undo her, they have but undone
themselves; how tormenting disappointments have caused their very flesh to pine
away, and the close and issue of their rage, forced this conviction from them
at last, that the Church is a burdensome stone, to be lifted up, a party with
whom it is full of hazard to meddle; have not such, been made to discern
something of a divine hand, so clearly against them, blasting their counsels,
and most promising attempts, as if their eyes with Balaam had been opened to
see the Angel in their way, yea in all ages it is known how the conscience,
even of the worst has often bewrayed something of a presaging fear they have had
of these whom they pursued with greatest malice, and a dreadful impression they
had of a praying people, and their prayers.

3. This truth has had the clearest witness in times of the Churches greatest
strait, and extremity, when difficulties have appeared insuperable and an
outgate in an ordinary way of providence most hopeless, when visible means
have been withdrawn, all refuge failed, and none to help, that in such a day
the Lord has been seen upon the mount and unexpectedly by very strange midses
brought deliveranee, to a broken almost ruined Church, even as it were betwixt
the bridge, and the water; so that these who would have a clear view of the
accomplishment of this promise, may but turn back, on these more remarkable
extreme exigences of the Churches condition, aod there have it, how often a sweet
sunshine has followed the most dark, and cloudy times a raging storm has
resolved into a refreshing calm, yea, that with a further grouth of the
Churches trial, and doubling of her burden, her enlargement, and outgate has
broken up with so great and obvious remarkes therein that it was a convincing
return of prayer, and wrestling, having further addition of some new and
singular mercy therewith, yea, some eminent act of judgment upon her
adversaries.

4. The greatest advantage, and victories which men have got over the Churches,
and people of God can also bear witness to this, that when the wicked have
sprung up like the grass, and the workers of iniquity seemed to flowrish, this
very way has the Lord taken to bring about a more full deliverance? Yea, on
the other hand, has it not been very obvious how the Churches gain has been
brought forth out of greatest lose, that these wounds which seemed most deadly,
by the infinitely wise providence of God, have turned to her most effectual, and
through cure; and men's unreasonable violence, and rage against the Church has
often had an evident tendency to bring about even that whereto it seemed most
directly contrary, some further mercy, and deliverance, then could have been
expected; as the Amorites refusing Israel but^ passage through their land did
prove the very mean to give them more then they sought, the possession of that
land for an inheritance.

5. This witness the observation of the Church in all ages can bear to this
promise, that deliverance has often sprung up, and been brought to her hand from
an airth, and by such means, as none would have expected, by such, as none but
God could do; a sudden report and rumor; 1 Samuel 23: ver. 27. means, that
have been not only small, and improbable but that looked directly contrary, as
in bringing the Church out of Egypt, yea, sometime by the wicked ensnared in
the work of their own hands, is it not obvious, how the Lord has trysted men's
private interests to put them on, for befriending his Church and has caused the
earth to help the woman and raised up one oppressor to punish another, yea,
often has prepared carpenters, whence it was least thought, to cut the horns
of these who had scattered his people.

6. There is this convincing witness to the truth of such a promise, that sudden
remarkable change, which may be often discerned both on men's inward frame, and
the outward face of the Church, when a time of mercy, and enlargement is come;
instruments raised of the Lord with a discernable elevation of their spirits to
act, and do exploits, the feeble then made strong, and these who sometime
would have fainted, at an ordinary piece of service dare with such a gale of
divine assistance run, as it were, through a troup, and overleap a wall' for
indeed this may in all ages be obvious, how easy it is to move, in the day when
the Lord moves for his people, and strengthens the girdle of their loins,
that it was not their bow, or sword, which got them the victory, but the very
finger of God, something above the counsels of men, or ordinary means, which
has sometimes been made clear as the noonday, so that even, at some distance,
these who are wise to disc^^n the times, did see when there was a breaking up
of a d^y of a Churches hope, how a previous motion, and stir anongst the dry
bones, the sound of the Lord as in the top of the mulberry trees has been then
discernable and some p^^mising appearance from the present disposition, and
tenper of the Godly in that time (though we must grant m^rcy and sovereign
grace, has often trysted the Church when little of this has appeared) which,
like the breaking up of that cloud in the of mount Carmel to the Prophet,
though at first but as an handbreath has showed that liv^rance to the Church
was not far of.

^. I would add this witness also; these convinceing pr^vidences which in all
ages have been showed against the enenyes of the Church, such as men could not
pass without some remark, what an issue these have had, who have sometimes
been a sore rod, on the People of God, yea, a terour in the land of the living?
How they have become a most abject and contemptible party, like bees who have
lost their sting; their countenance has been changed, and they ceased to be
any more a fear, when once their work was done, and the date of their
commission for the humbling, and trying of the Church exspired; yea a judicial
stroke from the Lord, has been often seen upon their very judgment, and
resolutions, which could not then serve them to trouble, and afflict the
Church, the day being turned, and the time of her deliverance come.

FIFTH. There is this Promise also which concerns the Church in general, as
well as Christians in their personal case, that all things work together for
the go^d of these who live God, Romans 8: 28. the accomplishment whereof as it is
written out in providence to the observation of men, I would here touch.

This is indeed a great comprehensive promise, which in the constant course,
and tenor of providence about the Church we may see, it does take place; how
these turrings, and changes of the World, the most strange emergents of the
time, the various motions, and interests of men, do cooperat together, and
have an undoubted ^e^dency to bring forth the Churches good as though they ^d
intentionally act for the same, there will indeed, one day, be a more clear,
and mavelous discovery of this, when the Lord has perfected his work, and
the mystery of God is finished, the Church brought safe to the harbor, then
shall it be fully manifest, to what end all these storm^s, and cross winds in
the counsels, and designs of men we, these things which in the time could not
be understood, but seemed perplexed and strange, did really work fo^the
Churches good, for then men will see with their eyes afull performance of the
word; yet we must say, even here in every age, amidst the various changes of
the Churches case, this has so clear an outmaking, that there is no serious
observer of providence, but may bear winess to it.

1. That not only the Churches good, but ever her greatest good, has most
clearly had its rise, and been brought forth out of the greatest mischiefs, and
hurts intended against her; that if we search the Scripture, and will turn over
these after records of the Churches condition, we shall there find the most
remarkable attempts, and plots such as Pharaohs last essay to destroy the
Isiaelites, Hamans great design to root out the seed of the Jews, that great
Masterplot Satan once had on ^oot, to crush the Gospel, and the Christian
Church by crucifying her head, yea, in these last times Antichrists killing the
witnesses have all, as if really intended by the instruments as well as the
first mover, brought forth the Churches greatest good; so as the after-mercy,
and outgate, has carried some visible proportion to her trial, and to the
greatness, of her adversaryes design.

2. It may be also clear, if we but trace back these memorable changes^, which
have been up and down the earth, how direct a tendency they have had to this
end; did not the bringing down, that great image of the Monarchies witness
this? We find Nebuchadnezar raised up as a rod to the Church, and Cyrus for a
deliverer; we may see the Persian, and Grecian Monarchies brought down, to make
way for the setting up of the Messiah his Kingdom. Antiochus must stand up a
little for a sharp trial, and his downfall give the Church a new breathing, and
hold forth to after ages, a remarkable monument of the judgment of God against
his enemies. Peaceable Augustus most tryst with his time in whose days shall
be abundance of peace; we find a Titus, set up to execute the judgment of
God on the Jews, to make way for a further enlargement to the ^gentil Church,
an Nero, and Domitian to help forward the Churches suffering, and a Constantine
to give her some rest, after so long, and sore an assault, and at last, the
Roman empire mouldred down for Antichrists upsetting, to accomplish what did
remain of the sufferings of Christ, in his Church by that adversary.

3. We may often see a very strange tryst, and concurrence of things, how
instruments act to bring about the Lords end and advance his Churches interest,
even while each one, does most vigorously drive their own proper end, and
design, which shows there is surely a living spirit in the wheels, that
orders these motions, a supreme and first mover that can thus determine them,
whither they will, or not, to serve his end and the Churches good, when they
most directly intend the contrary.

4. We have seen how in men's plotting the ruin of the Church there is often an
unseen hand determining their judgment, and inclination to fall upon that very
way, then which we would think nothing could have been more direct for her good
and their own ruin, how an Hushai, has been sent in or some have been stirred
up amongst themselves (upon their own interest) to break the pernicious
counsels, and designs of others.

5. We have also seen the personal quarrels of the Churches enemies among
themselves, brought to such an height, and to tryst so seasonably, that
onlookers might clearly perceive that it has been from the Lord, a judgment
for their rage, and violence against his poor oppressed People.

6. We have seen the Churches enemies raised to a strange height, all
advantages favoring them, until their plot and mine has been ripe for
springing, and lo, at that very choke, something unexpected has fallen out,
which did turn their former success to their further ruin, yea, disappoint
all; this the World is ready to call some fata, and malevolent conjunction,
which cannot be resisted, and what is this in effect, but the witness of men's
conscience to a divine hand?

7. Have we not seen some sore dash, and overthrow in the Church bring forth
her good, and a more full victory when visible help and means have been taken
out of the way, that something above means might be seen in her condition,
even in that day, when all has been given for lost, yea, truths loseing the
day upon the field, bring forth her triumph on the scaffold, and at the stake.

8. We have seen most despicable, and ordinary things, made subservient for
some great piece of the Lords work, a very small thing made the first rise of
strange revolutions, that remarkable changes, have been often lying in the bosom
of common providence; yea, truly we find both Scripture, and the observation
of after ages witness that the Churches deliverance, and outgate, did almost
never come that way, by such a method, and means, as she had most expected
the same, and that Gods time of working, may be often very contrary to our time
of expecting?

I shall only add, is it not often seen (which I am sure all ages can witness,)
how men's endeavors to darken the truth by error, has been an effectual
means for its further clearing? That the growing of a trial, a violent, and
sore exacting upon the Church, has kindly wrought toward her outgate, and
enlargement, her meat has been often brought even out of the eater, by midses
most destructive thereto, and a svvord must pierce the Churches heart, that the
thoughts of many may be discovered, a time of persecution must help to cure the
divisions amongst the godly, and bring them together in the furnace, which
prosperity could not do; yea, it is often seen, which former ages can also
vvitness that the very undoing of the Church, has been Gods blessed way, to
keep her from being undone.

THE SECOND BRANCH
Does concern these Scripture threatenings which are held forth in the word,
with a respect to the visible Church, and against a people professing the
Gospel, that no privileges they have above others shall exeem them from
judgment, yea and from very sad strokes, he has known them above the rest of
the World, he will contend with them most severely because of sin; and such
particular evils as we find the Word threatens.

I touched a little some Scripture-threatnings, in the preceding argument as
concerned Christians in their private experience; what I here intend is to point
at this truth, as it is written in the providence, and judgments of every time
to men's observation, how judgments from the Lord, which point, as with the
finger, at the abounding sins of that time, do reach a land, and particular
Churches, according to the threatenings of the word; this is indeed manifest,
that the greatest promises made to a people, we find backed with saddest
threatenings, and accordingly we find, the greatest monuments of wrath have
usually been set up, where sometimes the largest offers of the Gospel were,
yea, that the anger of the Lord may draw so deep against a people professing
his name, as to make their land desolate, and the high ways thereof mourn; for
in this precinct of the Church does both judgment and mercy most eminently
shine forth, and the Lords way there, does differ from that he has with any
other people.

Now to clear this grave truth a little, how these threatenings of the word,
against a nation, and people because of sin are also verifyed, in their
judgments, I shall touch a few instances, that are most known, and obvious,
where we may lay the word, and observation of the Church together, and see how
they answer one the other.

First we find the Threatenings of the word do point at the time of a peoples
judgment, 1 These. 2, ver. 16. Rev. 14: ver. 15, 18. That when they fill up the
measure of their sin, and their cup is full, the Lord will not then defer the
execution; until the cup of the Amorites was full he did let them alone; and we
find an answer deferred to the cry of the souls under the altar, for avenging
their blood on Antichrist, because that accursed party had yet more to do
against the Church, and the Saints more to suffer under their hand.

Now to witness the accomplishment of this; let us but consider what in all
times may be observed. First that there is an ordinary grouth, and height of
sin, which a land comes to before destruction, some national, and universal
spreading thereof, prodigious outbreakings, the utter rejecting of reproof,
which show that a peoples case, must then be on some turn, yea, that strange,
and unusual sinning, uses to go before, some strange stroke. 2. Before
judgment come, is it not seen, how the sin of a people has become so daring,
that it has had a loud cry; yea, their case has been such as did justify the
Lords procedure against them, even in the conscience of all lookers, that he
did it not without much cause? 3. Is it not easy for such as are wise to know
the times, to see night coming on a land, when sin is at some dreadful height,
by considering the word, and the Lords usual way with a people in such a case?
Yea, has there not then been some special forwarnings, a more then ordinary
impression of judgment upon the spirits of the godly? the hiding of many of
them in the grave, which, as threatening presages, has showed the near
approache of a stroke. 4. There does not usually want even some Noah, or Jonas,
the Ministers of God sent forth to threaten, who as watchmen upon the wall are
discerning hazard at distance, yea, with an observable pressure then upon their
spirit; and a more then ordinary aggreement amongst themselves to cry out, and
give the people warning, when the time of judgment has been drawing near.

2. It is clear, there are some special evils, and sins of a time, which we
find the word most dreadfully does threaten, yea in a peculiar way it does put
a mark upon them that though the Lord should pass by many infirmities in a
Church, and people professing his name; yet, for such, and such sins as we
find, in Amos 1: ver. 2. he will not turn away the punishment thereof, but has
solemnly declared, by his truth and faithfulness, that these shall not pass
without some visible mark, even before the world, of his anger, now in this the
Scripture is clear, and lets us see there are some sins more particularly
threatened, some land destroying sins that have as it were the mark set on
them, which do especially provoke the holy indignation, and jealousy of God;
such as idolatry, corrupting the Worship of God; Perjury, and
Covenant Breaking, shall they break my Covenant, and escape says the Lord,
Ezekiel. 17: ver. 15. also departing from God, and his way, for this the land
shall be desolat as in Ierem. 9: ver. 12, 13. yea blood guiltines which the
earth shall not cover, and for which the sword shall not depart, even from the
house and family of David, 2 Samuel 12: 10.

Now to evidence the accomplishment hereof I shall point at somethings most
obvious to the observation of every time, how terribly the Lord uses to plead
for such things, and by some exemplary stroke, and judgment point them out, as
we find them particularly set by themselves in the word, and threatenings
thereof.

First how in these sins, thus marked, men may see how their judgments use not
wholly to be deferred to another world, but though much is often passed here, and
laid over to that last, and great judgment, yet, upon such sins the Lord has
put some mark of his displeasure, even in this life. 2. That for these he uses
to contend, before the sun, and in the view of men: his judgments are indeed
often secret, and do consume as a moth, but upon such sins we may frequently
see, some public, and visible stroke is made to follow that the world cannot
pass without a remark. 3. That the Lord also uses to be a very swift witness
against such evils, for as we find the oppression of the Church has a loud
cry, and the blood of the saints a how long? it is also seen these
forementioned sins, do much hasten judgment, so as seldom that generation
passes away without some witness thereto; it is rarely found that some great
revolt of a people from God, and breaking Covenant with him, does ly long over
unpunished, nor does the hoary head of the violent. and bloody man go often to
the grave in peace. 4. That these sins use to be followed with some very
dreadful, and eminent stroke, they have made the land desolat, their cities
sometime wast, and a ruinous heap, yea, houses great, and fair to be without
inhabitans; so as men have with astonishment enquired, why is all this comed to
pass; and it was easy to answer, even for such, and such evils has the Lord
done this, according to his word. 5. That a divine hand uses to be most
discernable in the punishments of such sins because of a very clear resemblance
betwixt them, and the stroke, which has forced their own conscience, as well
as of onlookers to confess the Righteousness of God therein. 6. That the Lord
will put some mark of his anger on the choicest of his servants for any
accession to such sins, these to whom he has given their soul for a prey, have
yet got a sore outward stroke, upon such an account, which has followed them
to the grave; for this the sword shall not depart from David's house: Idolatry
rent the Kingdom from the posterity of Solomon. Jonas shall not escape for his
rebellion, yea, God was wroth with Moses, and no entreaty shall hinder his
dying in the wilderness. I may add, has not the Lords controversy on this
ground even reached their posterity. which may show that these threatenings are
sad earnest, and such sins are not more particularly pointed at in the word,
then they have been in after ages made exemplary in judgment.

3. A peoples lukwarmenesse their slighting of the gospel, and not receiving
the love of the truth, we find sadly threatened in the word, Rev. 3: ver. 15,
16. 2 Thessalonians. 2: ver. 10, 11. and truly we must say, they have not fallen to
the ground in any age without an accomplishment, as frequent observation can
witness. First how a peoples entering upon a Religious way, their pursuing a
form of reformation, and not through for God therein, but on carnal grounds,
has thus put them in a worse condition then before, for truly men's hypocrisy,
in going about a good work does threaten more, then the performance thereof
does promise. Jehu got a temporal reward but his posterity must at length
reckon for all the blood of Jezreel. 2. That no people use to be further from
getting good of the gospel then such who have been under most clear, and
greatest convictions, so as it is found, there is often more access to gain
amongst the savages, then these who have sit their day while the tide did flow,
yea, ministers have found most discouragement to labor in these parts where
the word has been long preached with power. 3. It is seen, how light not
improved will turn a People more gross, and is usually followed with some
remarkable grouth in sin, that the more the word does put a restraint on men's
corruption, the more it rages; so as it may be observed what a very black die,
and color, the powerful preaching of the Gospel has put upon a People, as a
visible mark of judgment on such who profit not thereby. 4. Is it notseen how
men's formality in the matters of God has been often punished even with the
taking away of the form? Yea, that seldom error, and delusion does want a
harvest amongst a People who receive not the truth in love. 5. Has not
slighting of the Gospel been at last followed with some visible restraint, and
inhibition, both upon the ordinances, and dispensers thereof, a judicial
withdrawing of the Spirit, as to the work of conversion, and conviction,
whereby the Lord does plainly cease to be a reprover to such, yea, even says,
bind up the Law, and seal the Testimony.

4. The Word does also threaten carnal Security (a disease whereof the Church
is often in great hazard) yea, we find it holds forth a certain connection betwixt
spiritual judgments upon a People, and some outward strokes to follow thereon
that these who are under that first woe, and plague upon their spirits, are
then near, to some judgment upon their persons, and may expect a sharp
wakening; in hearing they shall not understand, etc. but the close is, until
the cities be consumd without inhabitants, and there be an utter desolation,
yea, we find judgment does begin as a moth in that 5. of Hos. but in the 14.
ver. it does turn at last to be a lion. We may truly say the fulfilling of
this has in all ages of the Church been obvious. 1. That as the first part of
the Churches deliverance is usually spiritual, so it is found the first step of
judgment, and the execution thereof against a People, has been upon their
spirits; that serious discerners of the time might know that the night was fast
coming on, and some sad outward stroke on a land, by the abounding of spiritual
judgments. 2. It is clear themost dreadful strokes that ever come on a
particular Church, do usually find it in such a case, judicially hardened, and
under many warnings plagued with security; thus did the flood find the old
World, and before that desolating stroke on Jerusalem by the Romans, were not
the Jews in such a case. Salvain can tell how it was with the African
Churches, before that dreadful inundation of the Goths, and Vandals, yea, the
Churches records in all ages do witness that before any sad stroke or
persecution came upon a People, a deep sleep, and lethargy, has been previous
thereto; gray hairs might have been seen upon them, and the Word, does even
show that this will be the last disease whereof the Church shall be sick before
the great day of the Lord. 3. It is also seen how spiritual judgments when
they grow upon a people, make great dispatch, and do quickly ripen, for some
further stroke, that when men have run down their conscience and are past
reproof of the word, going on from evil to worse, the case comes then to be
clear, and ready for the final discussion of the process.

5. The word does denounce woe against the troublers of the Church, and these
who are her persecutors, that the Lord shall recompense tribulation to such,
and plead with her oppressors, the accomplishment whereof has been truly
manifest, yea to the observation even of the world. Is. 10: 5. 2 Thessalonians: 1: ver.
6. 1. That eminent oppressors of the Church have seldom gone out of the
World, without some remark of divine anger upon them; surely if there were a
record of such instances that in every age has been conspicuous, men should be
forced to see and say that the most noted enemies, and persecutors of the
saints have been also the most convincing and noted examples of judgment in
the time. 2. That the Churches suffering uses to go before a day of vengeance
on the instruments thereof; we find Jehu got an outward reward for execut^ng
the judgment of God on his enemies; but as for these men who have been the rod
of the Church it has been seen that they have not long wanted some scourge as
sore upon themselves, as they have been to his People, and that at last these
have paid dear-for their service. 3. We may see how this also does help to
finish the contraversy of God, with men: and their houses, that for this he
has taken many away in the midst of their days, and made them cease to be,
who would not cease to trouble the Church, while they had a being; yea that He
has taken them in his own hand, whom men could not reach, and made their
downcasting in the midst of themselves.

6. Does not the Scripture threaten carnal confidence, in a People, the putting
of their trust in man or in any outward instruments, Ier. 17: ver. 5, 6. Is.
30: ver. 16, 17. to clear the accomplishment whereof, let us but compare the
word, and the Churches observation together, and we will find* 1. That outward
means have never more miscarried then when most promising, and when there was
greatest expectation from the same, yea, that very eminent instruments when
much leaned to, have been observably blasted, and made to shrink under such a
burden. 2. That these whom the Lord had made much use of, yea, honored greatly
to be instruments in the service of the Church, have often had some discernable
blot, to reprove men's overlading of instruments with their esteem; a
Tertullian, an Origin in ancient times, yea, even a Luther in these latter
ages must go with some halt to the grave. 3. That many who have been useful
in the Church for a time, the Lord does often lay by, yea, makes not use of them
to the end, but, the last may be made first; and truly that excess in men's
esteem, putting a further weight on some means, then they could bear, has
often helped to render many useless. 4. Is it not also seen, how one extremity,
is thus plagued with an other? None more ready to shrink in a day of trouble,
then such who at a distance seemed most daring, yea. none more ready to fall
in that ex^^sse of undervaluing instruments, then these who have most exceeded
upon the other hand.

7. Do we not find the word threaten, and in a special way point at corrupt
ministers, unfaithful watchmen who give not warning to the Church, these
shepherds that feed themselves, but not the flock, the leaders of a people
that cause them to err, and by their practice to stumble at the law Mal. 2:
ver. 3, ver. 9.

The accomplishment whereof has in all ages been very discernable. First how
such have usually been most noted as the greatest and most violent enemies
which the Church has, at any time, had, yea that no course has been so evil
and gross that has wanted some of these to help it on, whose hatred, and
persecution of the Godly has been found to exceed the most openly profane and
profligat in that time. 2. That as they are particularly threatened above others
in the word so they get also some remarkable cast above others in their
judgment, and having once lost their savor, become vile, and loathsome even to
the worst of men, are contemptible in the eyes of such whom they seek in a
sinful way to please, yea have a worse savor, then the prophanest wretches,
that being verified in them, Corruption optimi, pessima. 3. that these do
seldom make a good retreat from an evil way; so as it is an usual observation,
it is rare for Churchmen to repent, or a fallen starr to shine again. 4. Are
not such often smitten even in their gifts, which we may see wither, and dry up
upon them while not faithfully improved, yea, to the very conviction of their
hearers, to have lost that edge which once they had in their ministry. 5. I
must add another remark (thoug I desire to deal with fear, and much
tenderness, in such an application of the judgment of God) how the Lord does
often put some note of his wrath on the Children, and offspring of unfaithful
Ministers, that it has been seen none more wretched, and gross; whereto as
their evil practice, and example, has been a special help, so likewise are
they thus punished of the Lord, who did not seek to beget Children to him, by
the Word, but through their way did rather cause many to err and fall.

THE THIRD BRANCH.
HAving spoke something how the Scripture both as to the promises, and
threatenings thereof is evidently fulfilled in the Lords ordinary way of
procedure with his Church I would a little further follow this Argument, how
this also has a manifold accomplishment, even in these most strange and dark
passages of providence, whereas men are ready to stumble and challenge the
spotless righteousness of God, and his faithfulness therein; but if we lay them
to that measure, and line of the word which is stretched over the whole work
of providence, we will see how well these do aggree, and answer one to
the other, yea that all the paths wherein God walks toward his Church,
and people, are surely mercy, and truth.

To clear this I shall point at some footsteps of the providence of God in the
world, and about the Church which would seem most dark, yea a contradiction
to his word, and promise, but are plain and manifest, if weighed in the
balance of the sanctuary, where we may have a satisfying look, and
resolution of these things which other vvayes would be too hard for us to
understand, and may see, how straight these paths are which we thought
crooked; yea, how easy, and passable, the greatest deeps of providence would
be, both as to Gods way with his Church, and in our own particular case, when
once they are set over against the word. I shall but touch this a little in
these following instances.

1. It may seem strange how the Chnrcbes trouble and strait is often seen to
increase, with the first stirrings of her deliverance; yea, when some
remarkable mercy, and outgate is in the bringing forth the first step thereof,
would seem to put her further aback, and in a worse condition then before. This
is indeed a piece of the Lords way with his Church which in many instances
may be witnessed, but let us take the word along therevvith, and we will
find. 1. How the Church is often at the brink of the grave even when her case
is upon a turn, and how it is congruous to his way (whose paths are in the
deep waters, who cloatheth himself with darkness, that men should not find
any thing after him or lay down absolute conclusions, concerning his dealing)
that the motions of providence should be often so perplexed, and various. 2. Did
not the case of the Church in Egypt, seem much worse, their burdens doubled
upon them, even when their deliverance was breaking up? 3. Joseph to be sold as
a slave, and in Egypt turned in to a dungeon would seem steps of providence,
very unlike the thing which God was driving at thereby, and yet we see how
kindly these did work toward the same. 4. The Church in Micah. 4: ver. 10.
When she was even at the door next to a deliverance, her trial was at the
greatest height, be in pain, and labor to bring forth, for ye shall go to
babylen and there be delivered, but sorest pangs in the birth, do usually
promse the best issue. 5, It was the step of the providence of God which of all
seemd most dreadful to the Church in Ester, the sealing of the decree, and
sending it forth to the out the whole seed of the Jews, while Haman still
flowrished, but lo this was the very step that wrought most thoroughly for her
deliverance; a wet mourning seed time, is indeed one Scripture presage of a
good harvest.

2. The sore interruptions which a peoples endeavors for Reformation, and to
promote the Kingdom of Christ, have met with, even when set about with a clear
call, yea, solemn, and serious engadgements to God, would seem strange, and a
shaking piece of providence; and truly this is often seen, as an usual attendant
on reformation, how unsuperable like difficultyes, and unexpected lets do grow
up in the way thereof; thus ^hen Luther and other instruments were raised up
in Germany, to pursue the Churches Reformation, what cruel edicts were then set
forth to give it a dash; division among themselves, the rising up of the Boors,
and Anabaptists what a pure, and through reformation was on foot under Edward
the sixth in England, and what a dreadful storm did quickly break it up, for
that time; and I vvouldadde, what the present case of the Church in Britain,
and Ireland may at this day vvitness, where once the Lord so eminently
appeared in a begun Reformation, which now is at so great a stand, but let us
go in to the scripture with this and we will find. 1. There is a vive
portraicture of providence in the affairs of the Church held forth in that
vision which Ezekiel had of the wheels at the river Chebar, whose misterious
motions, and turnings so cross one to the other, without any discord therein,
as to the end, to which they were directed, does witness the rational, and wise
conduct of providence: the Lords work about his Church, is a most shadowed, and
elaborat piece, which men cannotsee, before their eye, as they see behind upon
a review, while ordinary causes do often vary in their operation, yea, go out of
the common road, yet the Scripture will make this very plain. 2. Was not
Nehemiah, Ezra, and Zerobabel at their work, and duty, and had an express
call, for building of the temple, yet, how great, and frequent interruptious
did they find, sometimes environed with difficulties, Zach. 4: ver. 7. Who are
thou great mountain before Zerobahel? Yea, they were put to hold the sword, and
build, to watch, and work at once, because, of their enemies. 3. What a very
sore backset, was the Church at. Hab. 3. Revive they work o Lord in the midst
of the years, this was both a great, and long interruption, yea, do we not
find her almost at a non plus with a queree which no visible appearance could
answer, by whom shall Jacob arise for he is smell? 4. We find a special
reformation set on foot, by Hezekiah with a solemn Covenant, by the Princes,
Priests, and body of the People, with a setting up of the pure Worship, and
ordinances of God, but lo a sharp storm is soon after, by Sennacherib, yea^
Hezekiah scarcely is in his grave, when his Son does bring in corruption, and
persecution both at once; yea, when the Christian Church in the times of the
Apostles, begun to flowrish, success following the Gospel, did not a sad
interruption, and scattering follow, Act, 8. 5. This is promised that Zions
walls shall even in troublsome times be built, and her being brought to a heap
of rubbish was but making way for a further advance, that in the building of
her again the Lord might appear in his glory; and is it not clear, that Christ's
coming in the Gospel, and power thereof to purge his Church, and to carry on a
reformation. Mal. 3. ver. 2. proves a searching, and trying time which men
cannot endure, for the power of the Word, and clear discovery of sin, and other
shaking dispensations which do usually attend such times and torment them who
dwell on the earth, yea, and put the Devil, and corruption of men aloft, with
all rage to oppose the same.

3. That a sad overclouding, and darkness should come on a land after most
special manifestation of the power and glory of God therein, and that a time of
the Gospel with much light should be so near a forerunner of wrath, and
judgment, would seem a strange piece of providence, and cause a serious
enquiry how such eminent appearances of God for a people, such great
confirmations, observable success for a time, with many signal encouragements,
should all seem to resolve in a desolating stroke, and ruin? This may be
instanced in that protestant war in France where instruments were remarkably
raised, fitted of the Lord for the service of that time, had much of his
presence, and countenance, yet, to resolve thus in a bloody massacre;
likevvayes these confederat German Princes, Saxony, and Landgrave of Hesse, Men
eminent for piety, carried forth with much zeal for God, for defense of the
truth, yea, in the beginning of that war having many promising encouragements,
yet, remarkably deserted of the Lord with very sad-like consequences
follovving the same. Let us consider also the late Bohemian war, stated upon
necessary defense of religion and liberty, and at first attended with some
smiling providence, should resolve into so great a desolation, and ruin: yea,
the Church of Ireland, O, what a dreadful massacre of the protestants there,
did quickly follow one of the most solemn times of the power of God and
outpowring of the spirit that we ever heard of, since the days of the
Apostles. I confess this may have a strange aspect, and is a part of the
mavelous ways of the Lord, but when we take it in to the word, we will find
there is no jar, or discord here, for. 1. It might seem as strange, and
astonishing what Baruch got from the Lord in answer to his compliant, Ierem.
45. that he would pluck up what he had planted, and cast down that which he had
built, for a work to be thus thrown down, where the Lord had once so eminently
appeared, and given his People many confirmations might then occasion great
thoughts of heart, yet the unspotted righteousness of God, and his truth was
apparent therein; yea, after that discourse, and all these large promise, which
Christ gave his disciples in that sixteenth of John, we find all is shut up
with that, the hour is coming; and now is, that ye shall be scattered. 2.
What strange providence did tryst the Church in the wilderness, sometime
brought back to the red sea, tried with hunger, and nakedness, consumed with
various strokes, and many years wandering until most of that generation, who
came out of Egypt filled their graves in the journey, and yet this was after
most eminent confirmations, and as clear singes of Gods presence as ever a
People had. 3. We find a public reformation most zealously prosecute by
Josias, which looked like the renewed espousales of that land with God, by a
solemn Covenant, yet, quickly after night came on that land with a long
captivity, and Josias did fall by the sword. 4. Was there nor a bright
sun-blink, and flowrishing plantation of the Gospel in Judea a little before
the desolation of that land by the Romans, yea, we will find it clear from the
word that times of much light, and reformation do much sooner ripen for a
stroke then any other times. 5 It is very manifest that particular Churches
have their day where the Gospel has its appointed work, and their stroke at
last may reach the length of removing the candlestick, I truly think that sad
instance of Bohemia's case, may have this observable in it, that it had longer
day, and enjoyment of the light even from the times of John Hus, and Ierom of
Pragus which was near an 100 years before there was any day break on other
parts, so that we would consider if their night did come soon on, that their
day was also much longer, yea the stroke might tryst with the ebb of the
tide, when their harvest was much gathered in, under so long a continuance of
the Gospel, though I dare not think, the Lords work is utterly extinct there,
but that Bohemias dead, and withered root has life yet in it, and shall once
again bud forth.

4. Is it not usually seen when judgment comes on a land, that the Godly get
the first stroke? but let us also consider this in the word, where it is clear,
1. That judgment must begin at the house of God, and the green tree; and that
the Churches trouble, and persecution is a forerunner of vengeance on her
adversaries, do we not find, there is a cup of trial which uses to go before,
that cup of the judgment of God? And O the last is of a strong composition,
for the wine is red and mixed, and the dreg very thick which is reserved for
the troublers of the Church, and for such who are at ease in a day of her
grief, and truly they have the advantage that drink first, Blessed are they whom
thou chastenest, etc. That they may rest in the day of their adversity, until
the pit be dug for the wicked, yea, Rev. 3: 10. we find keeping of the word
of patience, which does import suffering to the Church, goes before some more
universal stroke; and in that day proves the safety, and protection of the
People of God. 2. It is also clear that men may be raised up of the Lord, and
followed with success, when he has them for a rod to his Church, but that at
last, A shur the rod of my wrath will I cast in the fire, says the Lord, it is
truly an evidence of great wrath, upon a party to be made the rod, and
executioners of judgment upon the People of God; for they shall pay for it, by
some sadder stroke then any trouble or suffering whereof they have been
instruments.

5. That prosperity, and success should follow sometimes the worst of men in
an evil course, and cause, yea, such a concurrence, and series of providence,
as seems to smile on them even to the bringing of their sinful devices to
pass, while the People of God, have been made to fall in a just quarrel,
before their adversary, would seem an astonishing providence, but let us lay it
foreagainst the Word, and there we will see. 1. That there is a proserity which
tends to destruction, Prove. 1: ver. 32. the tabernacles of the robbers
prosper, Job 12: ver. 6. and they that provoke God are secure, into whose hands
he brings abundantly, but they do not see that wickedness is its own
punishment, and how it is a dreadful stroke to thrive in an ill course. Was not
the Church shaken with such a providence, Mal. 3: ver. 15. yea, tempted to call
the proud happy, but in the ver. 18. they were taught from further observation
to discern, and to put a difference between the righteous, and the wicked. 2.
Do we not find that even the signs, and predictions of false Prophets in
favors of a sinful way may come to pass, Deuteronomy. 13: ver. 1, 2. whereof the
Church is there warned, and Gods intent in the same cleared, that it is for the
trial of his People, whither they will love, and fear the Lord, and cleave to
his way, when providence would seem to shine on a crooked path. 3. Did not
success for a time attend Absalom? Israel as one man went after him, yea, the
friends and counselors of David; a fair wind did also favor Haman in his
essay to ruin the Church. Jeremy is almost shaken with this, yea they have
taken root, yea, they grow, and bring forth fruit, but is not this at last
usually found an ominous weather-gall before a storm? though the brutish man
knows not, nor fools lay it to heart for what the wicked does often spring,
and flowrish; I would add Isreal's falling before Benjamin, it was an
astonishing like providence; and Habacuck was put to a stand with such a thing,
why the Lord looked on, while the wicked devoured the righteous; Yea, Joshua,
was to cry out in an amazement. O Lord what shall I say, when Israel turns
their back before their enemies? but we have also the Lords intent therein
witnessed by his word, that this is to humble, and prove his People, that he
may do them good in the latter end, and thus he beats them off from all
carnal grounds of confidence, he wounds them to a cure, that by bringiug them
low, he may raise, and fit them for a further mercy.

6. What great disappointments has the Church met with, when outward grounds
of confidence, and ordinary means have been most promising, as it is a thing
most true, so it may seem strange at the first look, but let us bring it to the
word and the case will be there answered. Deuteronomy. 32. Why should one chase a
thousand, but because their rock has sold them, and therefore their strength
is gone with the Lords departing from them, for, when a time of judgment is
come, even the mighty then find not their hands, counsel fails to the
ancient, ordinary means bring not forth their wonted effects, which Solomon
shows and after ages have often seen, the race not ever to the swift nor the
battle to the strong, it is also clear from the word, how threatening a
condition that is, for the People of God to be much carried out after means, or
lifted up therewith, Is. 30. they will ride on horses, and this shall be their
punishment, but on the other hand the Lords way, in bringing forth his greatest
works has not been by might, and power, but often by means most improbable,
and unexpected.

7. The long continuance of a heavy afflisting rod on the Church, without the
appearance of an outgate, or any return to much wrestling, and prayer on that
account, may seem a strange step in Gods way, with his People. But the word
will answer us in such a case where it is clear. 1. That there are no bounds
in the Scripture set to the continuance of a trial, it does not tell how long a
sharp storm may ly on, either as to the Church, or any particular Christian;
for it is a piece of the Lords secret counsel, but not of that which is
revealed, it is enough that we know from it that men cannot make the Churches
suffering longer, then Gods time. 2. It was a long term that of Isreal's trial
in Egypt and after under the captivity, three hundred and ninty days must the
Church ly on her left side. O how many a sad day, and wearisome night was there
in that word, 70 weeks are determined upon thy people, and city Jerusalem. 3.
Have not the Saints under a long trouble been almost the length of blasphemy,
in their complaints, Isa. 40: ver. 27. My way is had from the Lord, and my
judgment past over from my God. Daniel, how pressing with the Lord was he that
he would hearken, and do, and not defer, and yet the return comes not until
the first year of Cyrus; yea, that cry of the fouls under the Altar, How long,
does it not even get a dilatory answer? for thus the Lord, does often interpose
his long suffering for some time, betwixt his hearing of his people, and
avenging of them. 4. It is also clear that there are many prayers before the
throne, the return whereof is suspended, and an answer to Christians, in their
particular, until that time when God shall build up Zion, and then the prayer
of the destitute shall be remembered even as to Christians private enlargement,
when the Church shall be raised up. 5. We know the Churches enemies must have
time to ripen, and it is not a storm of a few days, that will purge away the
filth of the Daughter of Zion, too soon letting out of a sore, may cause it
undercot, and gather new matter, and truly the word can resolve us in this,
that one minut sooner, then Gods time would not be his peoples mercy.

8. It is often seen when there is some remarkable work of God on foott in a
land, and some great outpowring of the spirit, how Satan sets up some usual
counterfeit thereof, and brings forth something of his work in such a time
with a very strange resemblance of the same; thus, with the preaching of the
freedom of grace, and a clear discovery of that truth, did Libertinisme under
a very specious pretext, spring up. Thus we find the Anabaptist, and Antinomian
party, set up in Germany, to run down a Church-reformation under the show of a
more pure, and spiritual way; and of late did not Familisme in England, and new
England under pretext of a more spiritual dispensation cast off the very letter
of the Scripture, turning it over in an Allegory, and in behalf of the liberty
of prophesying, cry down a standing ministry; but though this may seem strange,
yet, the Scripture is very clear concerning it. 1. That even Satan himself is
transformed into an Angel of light, and in no shape proves more dangerous to
the Church. 2. That the most dreadful errors, and a false way will often come
near to the choicest exercises of the saints, and have such a resemblance to
the same, that if it were possible the very elect should be deceived. 3. Was
there not a Simon Magus with false miracles set up over against the Apostles,
and when the time of the Messiah drew near, did not then a Theudas, and Judas
of Galilee, break forth to amuse the people? We find also an altar from
Damascus, set up beside that which was showed to Moses the Servant of the Lord
in the mount, yea, when Moses, and Aaron was giving Pharaoh a sign, and did
show forth the mavelous power of God then did the Magicians cast down their
rod also to counterfeit the same, by which the heart of Pharaoh was hardened.

9. The abounding so much of error, and heresy, now in the times of the
gospel, with that swift grouth thereof, which is often seen where the light most
clearly shines, would seem strange, yea, is a thing whereat many are ready to
stumble, and thus to challenge the way of God. But is not the Scripture in this
clearly verifyed so that this piece of providence, which is so shaking to many,
if we take the word along with it might be a very convincing confirmation to us
of the same, for. 1. We find the Apostles, yea, Christ himself has given
express warning thereof, that this should be one of the special, and greatest
trials of the Christian Church, whereof the Old Testament we find does little
mention, that trial not concerning the Church then so much, as these
aftertimes under the Messiah Kingdom: wherein the event, may be clearly seen,
to answer these predictions, which are so frequent thereof in the New
Testament. 2. Does not the event also answer the word as to that particular
way, and method, how error should be propagated, which is there clearly
foretold, by subtle undermining, under the pretext of liberty with plausible
insinuations, so that we must say not only the matter, but with all these
discernable tokens, even upon the manner, the word is made out. 3. Do we not
find this should be judgment on men who receive not the love of the truth, and
that after flourishing times of the Church, when he who rides on the white
horse is gone forth, the black horse, and his rider does quickly follow, and
truly it is seen that in the time of hottest persecution, the Church has not
been so much troubled with this adversary, as when she did begin to get rest,
and most of outward liberty, nor yet so at the first breaking up of the Gospel,
as after some time of its continuance. 4. Does not the event likewise thus
answer the word, that in the breaking out of heresy in the Church, a spirit of
error, the dephts and mighty working of Satan should be seen, which I am sure
is undeniable, how manifest the interposing of these powers of darkness is
therein, if we consider, 1. Its mavelous dispatch, and grouth like a plague,
and the arrow that flies by day. 2. With what a discernable fury, and violence
men are thus driven, as with an impetuous current, yea, often a change on their
very natural temper is seen most evidently. 3. These monstrous, and horrid
things, which are often brought forth, may show whose hand is in such a birth. 4.
That usual tendency that at last error has to looseness in practice, which as
it poisoneth the spring, and corrupts the leading faculty the judgment, so
we see, it moves toward the vital spirits and does influence the
conversation; and thus the leprosy in the head, breaks forth in blaines
through the whole body. 5. And do we not see how many gross, and profane have
been carried with this spate, how few get leave to stand, but are still carried
from one step to another, and it is clear the world did never put out its rage
so much against that way, as it has done against the truth, except when some
outward interest, makes it a quarrel.

10. These great shakings, and commotions that use to attend the Gospel when it
comes in power to a land, may also seem strange, yea, is ready to make many
stumble. But is not the word verified herein, what great stirs, and trouble did
tryst the the Church after great light in pouring out of the spirit, Ioell 2:
ver. 29. we may there likewayes see, how this gives the World an Alarm,
makes the Kings, and great men of the earth run together, to hinder the rising
of Christ's Kingdom, Psalm. 2: ver. 3. let us break his bonds, etc. for truly
in all ages Christ's rising in the Gospel, has cast a terror, to its enemies,
that this should be their fall and ruin, when the Apostle has an effectual
door opened in his ministry, he has also much opposition thereto, but on the
other hand all is still, and quiet while the strong man does keep the house,
yea, it is clear from the word, that where the gospel comes there is a red
flag hung forth, that if men will not receive the same and subject to him who
rides on the white horse, one shall come after whose work is to take peace
from the earth, to put the world in a flame, and to accomplish the judgment of
a despised gospel, who shall devide betwixt the husband, and wife, the parents,
and children, wherein our blessed Lord Jesus is express, Math. 10: ver. 34. I
come not to send peace on the earth, but rather a sword, which might seem
strange from him, but it is to tell men if they will not embrace the offer of
his peace they shall not have peace among themselves, for the message of the
gospel must either be the best, or the worst sight that ever a land had.

11. This may seem strange how in all ages men of greatest parts, and learning,
are such usual opposers of the truth, yea, how the most sober, and calm will
even appear violent in their way, the more the gospel is followed with power;
but, O! how well does this answer the scripture, for the wisdom of this world
is enmity to God, 1 Cor. 3: ver. 19. not many wise according to the flesh
comparatively, with these who hate the truth; of all the beasts of the field
was not the serpent Satan's choice? and if there be an Achitophel in the time,
at him he will have a special pull, to such the simplicity of the gospel is
foolishnes, whereat they stumble; to such Christ is a rock of offense, we find
the light does torment them that dwell in the earth, will cause men blaspheme
and discover that, which would not appear, whilst they got leave to enjoy
their sinful peace, without disturbance.

12. These strange judgments which may sometimes befall the Saints in their
outward lot, yea, sometimes attended with some very astonishing circumstances
would at the first look, put men to a stand and to challenge the holy way of
God. But let us weight it in that balance of the Scripture, and we will find.
1. That such has been the complaint of the Saints, the Lords wounding them
with the vvound of a cruel one; what a strange query is that in Lament. 2:
ver. 20. Behold, and consider, to whom thou have done this shall the women eat
the fruit of their womb, shall the Priest and Prophet be slain the Sanctuary of
the Lord, yea, did it not even to Solomon seem strange, Eccles. 8: ver. 14.
that there are just men to whom it happens according to the work of the
wicked. 2. It looked like some strange stroke, which forced David to this
complaint, my enemies cast iniquity on me, and say an evil disease, or as the
original reads it, a thing of Belial cleaves to him; we find losias fell by
the svvord; Eli, with one stroke has his sons killed, his Daughter in law
dying, and himself falling from his seat, and breaking his neck; yea, Aaron
has both his sons killed before his eyes, by an immediate stroke from the Lord.
3. The word does also show, there is no jar betwixt this, and the tenor of
the Covenant which God has made with his people, to punish their
transgression with rods, yea, sometimes by a strange rod, while he takes not
his loving kindness from them, and do we not find that a cleanly trial, may
tryst the saints which the world would think a dreadful judgment, for,
great sufferings may be ordered of the Lord, to give some great examples
thereby, we have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the
Lord.

13. The gross falling of these who have sometimes shined with much luster in
the Church may be astonishing, but here also, we may see the scripture made
out, for it is clear. First that fevv instances of the most eminent of the
Saints, we have on Scripture record, but there is some particular spot, and
blemish also noted, a Noah, Lot, Moses and David, yea, under the New Testament
that great Apostle, whose denial of his master is set forth, to show how far
some may fall whom grace will again restore, and make up. 2. It is there clear,
that some of understanding do fall for a judgment to others, that such who
will stumble, whose prejudice at the way of God is their choice, may thus
further fall, and be broken. 3. The blessed meaning, and intent hereof we may
there also read to Alarm men to watchfulnes, that such who stand may take heed
lest they ^all, to warrant also their adventuring on the grace of God, that
none should scar to come in after such eminent examples.

14. I would add this, The contingency of events, that we see many things in
such a casual way fall out in the world, as if by chance only without the
rational conduct of a providence (which does infallably direct things to a
certain end,) this might at the first look, put men to a stand, yea, would seem
to give Atheists some shadow to say, how does God see or does the God of Jacob
regard* But upon a more serious enquiry, setting the word over against it, O
what a sweet exercise should it be to consider. 1. That though the providence
of God in things here beneath moves sutably to the nature of inferior causes,
whither necessary, free, or contingent, not violenting them, or otherwise
making use of them, but according to their nature, so that though the event be
necessary, and infallible, wit^ a respect to the first cause, the determined
counsel of God, it is never the less contingent in respect of its nearest
cause; yet, this also on the other hand is clear, how the smallest, and most
casual motions do certainly fall under that comprehensive reach of providence,
that even a sparrow falls not to the ground by guess. Rebeccah comes not
with her pitcher to the well nor Ruth to glean in Boaz field at an adventure,
but in these the providence of God must reach its end, and cannot miscary. 2.
That these things which to us would seem most casual we often see in their
tendency, and product, have been intended by the Lord, as a special mean for
the promoting of his glory wherein such a wonderful tryst, and uniting of
things in themselves most remote for that end may be truly discerned, that if
prejudice do not shut men's eyes, they must confess this can be no blind
chance, but some higher counsel, and conduct of the same; what would look more
contingent then that Ahasuerus was indisposed to sleep and could have no rest
in the night, or that a reflection of the sun upon the waters should make them
appear as blood to the Children of Moab? But we see what great things the Lord,
is thus bringing about. 3. Is it not often manifest, how not the smallest
casuality, or circumstance providence does loss, without some improvement
thereof? yea, that it guides the stroke of man's sword in the battle, and
directs the bullet to its appointed mark, and it does evidently check the
stars and control that fatal necessity, which we are ready to fear may or
will follow their aspect, and it does even determine these which in themselves
are most free, and absolute, the heart, and will of man; must not the crowing of
the cock, the foldiers dividing of Christ's garments fall out for an
accomplishment of the Scripture, and though it was at a venture that that man
drew the bow which sent Ahab to his grave, yet, it was no chance did direct the
arrow between the very joints of his armor. 4. Amidst the various emergents,
and hazards of men's life, may not experience tell that surely things contingent
are not abandoned to fortune, but there is a providence which does number our
hairs, without which they cannot fall to the ground. O how astonishing may it
be to think how surprising hazards have been often obviated? by what unexpected
means men have been delivered from violent assaults, how help unlooked for
has even trysted at a choke, and an extremity, yea, while their foot was
slipping even betwixt their falling, and fall, they have been trysted with
some remarkable cast of mercy. 5. Is it not easy to discern, how many
accidents which seem most casual, yet by no humane prudence or industry can be
prevented, but are observably brought about, and guided to fulfill the
threatenings of the word on ungodly men, how was Sisera led in to the house
of Iael, by other places, how should Hamans suit for Mordecais death, tryst
with that very morning, when the Kings thoughts were favorable to him, for
it might seem had Haman been one day sooner he would have got his will.

THE THIRD ARGUMENT
FOr the Scriptures accomplishment is this, that not only the Christians
experience, and observation of the Cnnrch bears witness thereto, but it is
also a truth which even to the view, and conviction of the World, may be
demonstrat, from whom it does often force a testimony, yea, in every age the
worst of men have been forced to acknowledge, and so it must be a thing very
evident. But the accomplishment of the Scripture can be thus witnessed,
therefore, etc.

It is true these sweet, and sensible enjoyments which the Saints have of this
truth, the World cannot reach; but it is also sure, that in every age, the
works of the Lord, and some more notour convincing providence, both of
judgment and mercy do solemnly invite men, to observe the accomplishment of
the word therein; yea, no time has wanted something of a public witness,
from ungodly men even greatest mockers of Religion, who under that
constraining power of conscience at death, or in some day of their strait,
have been forced to seal the truth by a very open confession of the
righteousness of God toward them, and this is indeed the Lords blessed design
in making his works sometime so conspicuous, that they may not only confirm
the faith of his people, but render Atheism inexcusable, that the glory of his
faithfulness, as well as of his power, and vvisdome, may shine forth before
the sons of men. I confess we may vvonder, why the World looks so little
upon this, and how the conviction of so great a truth, which they cannot
shun, does not more press them; but the Holy Ghost does fully resolve this,
the brutish man knovveth not, neither do fools lay to heart, how the
Scripture takes place; and that the flovvrishing of wicked men, is but in
judgment for their further ruin.

To prosecut this argument a little, there are some special truths I would
instance, wherein the faithfulness of God in fulfilling his word may be seen,
by the World, yea, is obvious to the most ordinary observers; and though they
be but a fevv, which I shall here touch, yet I must say, they are such
concerning truths, and have so near a reference to the foundation of our faith,
that men cannot acknovvledge the same, but must also confess the Scriptures
Divinity, and that there is a truth, and reality in godliness, and in Christian
Religion; truly I may here with some confidence challenge the greatest
Atheists, yea, appeal them to their conscience, and serious thoughts, if in
these following instances, (though but a little of what might be said on such a
subject,) the truth, and accomplishment of the Scripture be not very manifest.

FIRST. I shall first hold forth this truth that man is surely fallen from that
excellent estate wherein once he was formed, Romans 5: ver. 18. 19. and now is
not that which he was at the beginning; a truth so clear, that we may say even
without the discovery of the word might be easy for any serious onlooker, to
discern the same, did not even heathens have some glance at this? The evidence
whereof they could not altogether shun.

It is true the cause, and original of this dreadful contagion, how sin entered
into the World, how it is derived to the whole race of man, by imputation, as
well as inhesion, how that poison is carried from the fountain to the cistern,
the Scriptnre does only discover; but this I am sure may be obvious to all,
that poor man is thus sick, and diseased, and now bears the marks of such a
fall, and ruin, as we read of in the word. I confess it is strange, that when
this is so very convincing, and manifest, it should not force men to some more
serious enquiry, whence such a thing is, or if there can be a recovery of so
sad, and desperate like case, but to clear this a little, I would offer these
three things to be considered.

1. That there is some remainder of that excellent fabric, which may yet
appear among its ruins, some print, and appearance (though dark) of that
primitive lustte and beauty, some draughts which sin has not wholly worn out,
that may clearly tell what man once was, and point out his former excellency,
that he has been an other wight, of whom Absaloms character might be truly
said, without all blemish from the head to the foot. For we see the deep
impressions of a Deity still rooted in men, even among the most wild, and
savage which no invention can utterly raze, we see some common principles of
reason that are imprinted in the most rude, and ignorant, some innate notions,
and Ideas which the soul has of good, and evil, among all, and in every place
of the earth; likewise these natural truths (...) which we may see are no ways
impressed on the soul from any objects of sense, but such whereto men by an
unavoidable necessity are forced to assent, and besides, what means the
witness of the conscience, and authority thereof in every man, which they
cannot possibly decline? O do not these vvitness that from some great height
poor man has fallen.

2. Does not the present appearance of man's nature, clearly show he his fallen
into some dreadful disease, that it is surely overspread, with some horrid
leprosy, and contagion, the symptoms whereof now are most discernable. O what
an exorbitancy does appear in his desires, with what contrary tides, is he
hurried? still at jar with his present lot; his reason and will, once in a
sweet league are now at war, betwixt which he is often rent in pieces, as one
betwixt wild horses; how is he now restless in an unreasonable pursuit, he
labors in the fire, and for a shadow; yea, what do these tumults, and
commotions of the earth mean, men upon the smallest account sheathing their
swords in others bowels, homo homini Lupus; ruptures in familyes, unsatiable in
revenge, and the earth so often in an uproar as a raging sea. O do not these too
visibly witness what a dreadful disorder, and perturbation there must be
within, impetuous boiling of man's lusts* so that here we may see a very
manifest rupture, and breath of building once well knitt, and framed

3. I would ask wherein man's true advantage and excellency, above others of the
creatures can be seen, if not with some respect to that he once was, and that
blessed restoration by grace; for his knowledge does often serve but to increase
his sorrow, to show the good he wants, and the evil he is subject to; is
there any of the creatures subject to such outward misery, and pain? to so many
diseases, as poor man now is? Yea, as to a sensual life* may we not say the
beasts have even some preference? or are these so unruely? do they so much go
out of their bounds, and station? which the many laws made for man in the
world with the convincing necessity thereof can wittness; we see also that fore
travel is appointed to man; at how much toil he is for an outvvard
subsistence, how he does often sovv, and not reap; the beasts withdraw from
the yoke, these over whom he had dominion ready to assault him how women
bring forth their children in sorrovv, the men are attended with fear, their
life often made bitter with care and labor, yea, as men increase in the world,
their care and discontent increasing therevvith, but besides all, is he not in
the greatest slavery of all the creatures through the violence of his lusts?
that make him pursue the bait, though he knovveth it will undo him, while
his corruption does often like a strong man bind him in fetters, and his flesh
imperiously drag him at its heels; O may we not say, was poor man thus formed
at the beginning? or raised so far above the rest of the creatures only, to
make him the more miserable for truly if a vive portraicture could be drawn
of sinful depraved nature, there is none so gross but should-abhorr, yea be
affrighted, to see that in the third person, with which alace, they so
friendly comply in themselves.

SECOND. That so great a change is truly wrought upon men in conversion, as
the scripture does promise, and hold forth, Ioh. 3: ver. 3, 6. Ephesians. 2: ver. 1,
5. Coloss. 3: ver. 1, 2. wherein some thing above nature, even the mavelous
power of the grace of God may be seen, is a trnth Iam sure, known, and
undeniable to the world, yea, the greatest mockers at religion must confess,
can be no delusion, but is indeed real, and certain; upon these follovving
grounds.

1. That the most gross, who in their practice have been notourly profane, in
the place wherein they lived, it has been seen that grace has reached them
and thus the Leopard has been made to change his spots, and such who were
accustomed to do evil have learned to do well. O! Do not many famous
instances witness this, in every age? 2. That also men most principled in their
judgment against the way of God, who were wont to deride holiness as fancy,
even on such so great a change has been wrought as has made the world to
wonder; but then they were forced to lay down their prejudice, yea to wonder at
themselves, how they could stand before the truth so long, whereof they have
got such an impression; sure Atheists must grant there have been as professed
Atheists as themselves, who have been made eminent examples of grace. 3. That
such even in the height of their wickedness (like Paul breathing out cruelty,
and of late Vergerius while he was writing against the truth) grace has
sometimes reached them, it has been found that of Christ's greatest enemies
some have thus fallen upon their high places before the power of the word; some
such trophies of the gospels conquest have been conspicuous in every age; yea
it is often seen that some remarkable height in sin, has proved an evident
Crisis, and turn in men's condition either to judgment, or mercy. 4. That some
of the most eminent adversaries of the truth have, through grace, been made
eminently useful instruments in the Church the world cannot deny; that there
have not been choiser vessels of honor, more zealous for the Lord in their
time then such, who were once most violent in their opposition. 5. That such
whom the world did reckon most wise, and discerning, yea that did want no
judgment to know the value of outward things, as well as others, grace has
reached, can the Atheists object, do any of the rulers, or Rabbis believe in
Christ, or follow that way when it is so clear that not more wise, learned, and
judicious (even themselves being judges) have been in their time then some who
are most serious in the matter of Religion. 6. Has not this change been made
discernable, upon the simple; the most stupid, and dull, yea, upon some such,
as a natural incapacity might have obstructed the work if something above
nature had not carried it on, which may be also manifest by some change even
on their understanding, to show that this can make the simple wise; and in the
way of holiness, the wayfaring man though fool shall not err. 7. That by a very
improbable mean, the word, and that sometimes by weakest instruments, we see
this great change has been wrought, and it is remarkable, how little of the
work of conversion did follow the putting forth of miracles in the primitive
times, but by the simplicity of the preached gospel much more, for indeed the
conversion of a soul, and such a change is it self some way a miracle. 8. That
they are not a few on whom this, change has been wrought is undeniable; and
truly besides these ordinary proofs I think it is a great want there should
not be some more special record by the Church, of these illustrious, and
eminent instances of the grace of God, which have been in such an age, as well
as remarkable instances of judgment. 9. Men must see this falls not out at an
adventure which is wrought upon one, and not an other while both are a like
discerning, yea, some who seem furthest from the grace of God, very gross, and
rude, have been taken when the more civil, and refined, and of a more promising
natural disposition have been past by. O does not this witness the grace of
God, and soveraignity thereof. 10. Is not this change often discernable upon men
in a time while no advantage from without does appear? even times of
persecution, and hazard from which many have dated their first acquaintance
with God, when they could expect nothing but a suffering lot, sure there must
be something above nature in it. 11. It is also known how great a cloud of
witnesses have sealed this truth, O! can there be such an universal
enchantment, that in every age, in several yea in most remote places of the
earth, has fallen upon so many, who have witnessed the power of the Gospel;
or can all these be void of understanding? What gain, or outward advantage
could they design in that which is so usually attended with outward hazard,
and loss, or what credit from men, while it makes them the very butt of the
worlds hatred, and reproach? Yea, can it be thought that all these could have
combined to conspire into so great a cheat? I must appeal Atheists to their
serious thoughts of this matter. 12. The mavelous effect of this change, does
it not witness this is no fancy, or delusion, when men are reached with such a
stroke, and by one word, as has made the stout hearted and most daring to
tremble, and to show, by their very countenance that there is an other tribunal
then man's, before which they are arraigned? Must it not be sad earnest and a
mavelous power, that can make so willing a divorce betwixt men, and their
idols, which were once as their right eye to them, and beat them off that
ground of self-righteousnes, which they had been so long establishing to
themselves, that should cause them also choose the reproach of Christ, and his
cross before any outvvard advantage, and abandon that society without which
sometimes they could not live? Must not this speak forth something above
nature, and natural reason. O! may not the world often wonder what is become of
their old friends, though I confess this should rather put them with wonder,
and astonishment, to some serious enquiry, whence so great a change can be.

THIRD. Thus communion, and fellowship with God, whereto the Saints are in this
life admitted, and brought near to him in the spirit, is a most real thing, and
no delusion is a truth which may be very convincingly demonstrat, even to the
view of the world, and to such who are but onlookers on the same, 1 Job. 1:
ver. 3. Phil 3: ver. 20. I confess this is a truth that must be spiritually
discerned, and therefore the world cannot know it or reach that unspeakable
joy, and delight which is found by the Saints in that sweet path; yet we must
say there are somethings, and some such and so convincing evidences, as may
witness to men, and rationally demonstrat the same; the conviction whereof they
cannot possibly shun, if they but come near, and in their serious thoughts
consider.

1. How great, and excellent a company do bear this testimony, even as many
as in every time did ever serve God in the Spirit; is not this transmitted by
the fathers to the children as their experience? And as certainly tried by
succeeding ages, a truth which is not once, or twice proved in the Christians
life, for the proofs thereof are innumerable, and past reckoning, which they
have had, yea, amongst all the Saints since the days of Abel, to this present
time, there was never one contradictory witness could be produced.

2. Are not these who do thus testify, what they have often found in secret
retirements to God, such whose testimony in any other matter, the worst of men
could not refuse or deny to be famous, I am sure the World is convinced, that
the followers of Christ dare not, yea, use not to deal falsely in other things
with these they have to do with how ever their malice carry them to reproach
them, yea, that they are more to be credited then such, who make a scorn of
Religion.

3. Have they not had as great an interest, and share of the World as others,
and been of as discerning spirits to know the true value of things, who from
their experience do not only declare, there is an undoubted reality in
converse with God, but that the joy and delight herein which they have found,
is above all the pl^^sures of the flesh. O! what must that be which could make
such who wanted no outward allurements, who had not lost their taste, and were
flesh, and blood as well as others to turn their back on all for Christ, and by
their walk testify they have found some more satisfying enjoyment in fellowship
with God?

4. Must not this be very obvious, and convincing that when men once become
serious in the way of God they have got some new acquaintance, that sure is
another world, and some other society then that of men with which they have
intercouse? Whence are their frequent retirements, from which they have been
seen so often to come forth with greatest satisfaction, and with some remarkable
change in their case, does it not thus appear They are not alone, when they are
alone, yea, in such a solitude must find something very desirable?

5. Is not this also testified in such times, when men could not well
dissemble, or be suspected of deceit, in times of great outward affliction,
when the World also has been most tempting, with its offers, yea, at death
when they are stepping over that threshold; a time, wherein the words of dying
men are of greatest weight, and credit, the spirits of such being then more
unbyassed, and free of these ordinary temptations wherewith others are swayed.
How often have they at such times declared that surely God is familiar with men,
which they have found, and though they were going to change their place, yet
were not to change their company.

6. Can that be a delusion which is so sensible in the present time, whereof
the Saints are not more sure that they live then they are sure of this truth,
what near approaches, what refreshing viewes they have got while God has come
near to their soul, what a discernable elevation of their spirits does go along
with this? yea, on the other hand, as the withdrawing hereof is very sensible
to themselves, so is there not something of this obvious to bystanders, how
great a change, and difference this will make in their case, from other times,
which they cannot get hid?

7. Does not something of this truth appear on the very countenance, and
outward carriage of Christians, with what a luster, and resemblance of Heaven a
holy stayednes, and composure of spirit, when they have been brought near God,
in secret converse with him, and taken up to that mountain; in a word, does not
the walk of a serious mortified Christian convincingly witness this, yea,
cannot but be some way astonishing to the World, what should make them look so
well, and with such satisfaction, when no visible cause for it, when shut up in
prison from converse with friends, and acquaintance? Sure men will not think
any rational spirit so demented to quite their former pleasures, and chose the
cross that they may only deceive the World, with a conterfeit joy and
satisfaction, if they did not really find the same, and while it is too too
evident, what a dreadful society and commerce many have with the Devil, should
any question, or debate, whither the Saints have truly communion and
fellowship with God the Father of Spirits, whom they serve, and worship.

FOVRTH. That the righteous is more excellent then his neighbor, Prove. 12:
ver. 26. And has an other spirit which is greater, and more choice, then that
which is in the World, is a truth which, I am sure, men notvvithstanding all
their prejudice must needs confess, and that therein the Scripture is truly
verifyed when such clear and convincing evidences, do stare them in the face.
I confess the Saints are much under a dark cloud here, through the prevalency
of corruption, yea, are often accounted as the filth of the World, but when grace
in any greater measure, and in its vigorous exercise does show it self, then
there appears so much as will darken all the grandour of this earth, and
force men to see an excellency upon the saints, beyond any others, they cannot
altogether shun such a conviction. First, what an evident difference is betwixt
their way, who walk with God, and that of the most polished moralist, something
is in the one which does witness a more excellent sp^^^, a higher elevation, a
sweet harmony, and equability in their way, that they move in some higher
sphere, act from other principles, with a respect to some greater interest then
any thing here, have more of a large heart to serve their generation, then
these whose self-interest is seen to be the first, and last in all their
motions.

2. May it not also appear to onlookers that tender serious Christians who live
near God, do truly witness their resemblance, and likeness to him to whom
they move, as to their great, and last end, yea, do evidence, a more true
excellency of spirit, what a sweet calm, and serenity they have within, while
going through things that are most cross, and vexing; with what discernable
quietness these can look upon most affrighting revolutions in the world, as
such, whose treasure, and great interest is beyond hazard, though the earth
were all turned to ashes.

3. Is there not so much in the way, and carriage of the saints, yea, such a
majesty, and authority, that attends holiness, as does force respect, and
fear, even from these, who do most hate them, yea, and does force men to
justify such, in their conscience, whom they openly reproach, and persecut;
whence is it that a serious tender Christian, is often a scarr crovv, and terror
to the profane, when there is no outvvard cause for it, but that they are
struck with the conviction of a more excellent spirit, in these, carrying such
a resemblance to the image of God as sorceth fear, and subjection from that
spirit which is in the world.

4. Does not a Christian, and holy walk cause men shine, as a light in the
midst of a crooked and perverse generation, yea darken all their neighbors,
and in the darkest night, is it not seen how grace shines with the greatest
luster, what a svveet, and odoriferous sent, does this even send through the
country where they live, that may show to all what a difference there is,
betwixt such, and these who are vvallovving in this puddle of the earth.

5. Is ^^^ot obvious what a luster and beauty, yea, something more becoming
our immortal soul that is seen in the self-denial of Christians, their bearing
injuries, forgiving such as injure them, without reviling, then in that proud
vindictive spirit which is in the world, that sure such walk by a more
excellent rule, and move from a higher principle.

6. It may be also evident to the world what an other spirit is in these,
who do not bovv with the speate of every time* nor yield to men because of
their outvvard power, then in that spirit which is in the world, that while
the one does press men to save themselves on any terms, the other does cause
the Christian take up his cross, yea* lay down his life, to save his
Conscience; and whence is that patience, and resolution by which the godly in
times of suffering have overcome their persecutors; their bold avovving of the
truth before men, when hazards are most obvious, and that advantage
vvherevvith they appear above others in such a time. O! does it not clearly
witness, they are of an other metal, who do thus abide the fire, yea, become
more bright by that wherewith others are consumed?

I would add that which the world cannot deny how this spirit which is in the
Saints, has prevailed over the greatest entisements of carnal gain, and
pleasure, which to many may seem a wonder, as the popish party did once say of
Luther, Bestia haet non cur at aurum, that which they did speak in contempt,
that it did prove him a beast, did in effect show him therein* to be something
above men; for that is a thing before which the spirit of the world could never
stand.

FIFTH. That the promised encouragement which is held forth to the People of
God under trouble and suffering for his name is a truth, and the Scripture
herein verifyed, I am sure, not only Christian experience, can witness, but may
even to the observation of others, be demonstrat from very convincing grounds,
that it is no fancy or delusion, (...) 9: ver. 9. Is. 51: ver. 12.

1. The very countenance and outward appearance of the godly, in a suffering
time, does often declare the peace, and tranquillity of their soul, so as surely
they must have joy, and satisfaction from whence the world does not know, and
have some other correspondence, then with things visible, for it may be often
said, as of Daniel, and his fellows that under greatest pressures, and a very
mean condition they look as well, yea, with as much chearfulnes as these who
live on the Kings allowance.

2. It can be no counterfeit, which should thus reconcile the christian with a
suffering lot, for it is known how very searching affliction and trouble
proves, which often does broach the vessel, and bring forth what has formerly
most closely lurked: And O! does not that holy confidence, and freedom which
the saints have evidenced in confessing the truth, before the princes of this
world and their most cruel adversaries, yea, that chearfulnes which in most
extreme pieces of suffering they often do wittness, even when they are resisting
to the blood, does not this, speak forth something beyond the gallantry of a
natural spirit, that far exceeds the ordinary way of men, and is a thing the
world cannot reach yet cannot but wonder, and whither they will, or not see
Gods very immediate help, and hand in the same, according to his word?

3. Is it not seen how the cheerful way of the Godly under suffering, while
there is no outward ground for the same, does not only astonish, but is an
exceeding torment to adversaries? when they are forced to see, how all their
endeavors (when their wrath and malice has been to the outmost put forth)
have yet been in vain, either to turn them aside, or to ruin their
encouragement* but that the most sharp snfferings of the Godly* do still give
them the sorest dash* help to strengthen others, and justify Gods way, and that
tender respect he has to his suffering people, even before all onlookers.

4. Is i^ ^^t also manifest, that such whose natural disposition was known to
be very fainting and timorous, yet when called to suffer for the truth have
without the least appearance of discouragement, showed an invincible
resolution, and not only their own fears, but the exspectation of others has
a mavelous disappointment. O is there not there a visible fulfilling of the
Scripture, that shaking reeds should be made to stand, where strongest cedars
have bowed, yea, some of very mean, and ordinary parts have been so discernably
raised above themselves, as they were made to confound the wise, and learned.

5. Must it not be confessed that the zeal and resolution of the saints did
never more appear then in times of greatest opposition? that at no time they
have looked more like Christians with more advantage, and with some peculiar
beauty, and luster of the grace of God, then under suffering, a thing which as
it eminently does commend the gospel, has also so far convinced their enemies,
as in some measure it has blunted their edge, and taken off their prejudice
against the way of God, and followers thereof.

6. I may appeal the greatest Atheists to their conscience, if any moral
arguments (what ever influence they may have upon men's patient enduring) could
ever produce such effects as rejoicing in triumph over chooling affliction
before sin, and all its pleasures, to triumph over persecutors, and to go with
such a calm, and chearfulnes to a scaffold, to sing amidst a dark prison, yea,
and to abound, and have all things under greatest wants? O! whence is this?
sure something above nature must be here, that is stronger then moral reasons,
by which the Saints have thus overcome the world, yea, is it not obvious to all
who look on, how great a difference there is betwixt the pretended resolution
of a natural spirit in death and suffering, and that joy, and confidence of a
Christian, which has then showed in the composure and tranquillity of their
soul within? The one being but a dark shadow, and the other drawn to the life.

SIXTH. That there is a conscience within men, whose power both as a judge, and
witness does answer that clear discovery, the Scripture gives thereof, Rom, 2:
ver. 15. Ioh. 8: ver. 9. is a thing obvious even to the world which they must
needs confess both from its visible effects on others, and the working thereof
within themselves; that herein the Word is verifyed these things make it clear,
and undeniable.

1. That sure there is something within which thus makes men affrayed to be
alone with themselves, yea, will cause them go abroad, and frame diversions to
be out of its noise, must it not be sad earnest, which has so dreadful a sound
in their ear, does haunt the wicked man whither he will, or not? Wherewith he
would gladly be at peace, but amidst his greatest mirth, and prosperity, this
does mingle his wine with gall, and wormwood.

2. Is it not also sure that men have often an accuser within their breast, while
they seem to brave it out before orhers, whose judgment, and sentence they can
by no means decline, but after the committing of sin, yea, on the back of
their sinful pleasures does follow the same with a bitter sting, and ring this
dreadful knell in their ear, that in the end their way will be bitterness. O!
is not this an accusing conscience, which does begin the torment of some before
the time?

3. What is it that should make men's guilt so legible often in their countenance,
even when they studle most to conceal it, and thus cause them give their
tongue the lie, yea, bewray to bystanders whither they will, or not some secret
trouble, and sore they have whithin, does it not clearly show the power of the
conscience, which has such authority on men, that without violence, or
constraint from others, does even force them to confess the truth, and supply
the room of witnesses?

4. Whence is it some are so much disquieted for secret sins, which the eyes of
others could not reach, yea tha^ some gross sins even the most profligat
amongst men have an horror at them without respect to outward hazard, does it
not show the power of a natural conscience, that holds forth a greater party
then the world with which they have to do, to whom all things are manifest, and
some greater witness then that of man?

5. How is it that even greatest men whom the world could not reach, and in the
midst of all probable advantages have yet often most affrighting thoughts, much
terror, and disquieting reflections? must it not be from within which does
cause them fear an other power then that of the world, and a judgment greater
then of men?

6. What must it be which does force men to justify God when his hand does
pursue them, and makes them so easily find out sin in a time of their strait?
why is the sense of guilt, so every affrighting at death, is it not the
conscience which does presage a future judgment, and extend its power to
matters of an everlasting concernment, and duration?

7. What should make men tremble at the word and so much hate a searching
ministry, is it not because the Light does torment them, though the word does
particularly name none, but that there is something within, which makes
application of the truth, and does plainly say, thou art the man?

8. How do the worst of men often justify these in secret, whom they openly have
condemned, that while they are even persecuting the saints for truth and
holiness, yet, for these they give them, and their way a favorable testimony,
over the belly of all their prejudices, yea what is it that does cause a secret
fear, and awful regard, of such whom they hate, does it not show something
within, whose judgment they are not able to resist?

9. I must further ask whence is that horror, and these dreadful cries, and
groans which wicked men often have in their sickness, even such who were
wont to sport at sin, with a daring countenance? can the world get this past
without some remark, how intolerable a thing an evil conscience is, when
once let loose, when in all ages such terrifying examples of this kind have
been set up for all that past by to look on, such as Spira, Latomus, Olivarius,
etc and truly, I think it is a great want there should not be a more particular
record of such, which would give Atheism so great a dash, yea, force men to
confess the truth of a Deity, and of the written word.

SEVENTH That there is a reward for the righteous and unquestionable gain in
Godliness, in a piece of the Scripture, not only well known, and witnessed to
the observing Christian, in his experience, but is also held forth in every
age, as in great letters to the view of the world Ps. 58: ver 11. Ps. 97: ver
11. Is^. 3: ver 10. It is true that the Christians lot is often followed with
much trouble, and sometimes with los of his life, which may seem to have a very
dismal aspect: for that great goodness which the man who fears God has
ensured to him, is much laid up in another world; but it is also sure that
there are such notour convincing proofs of this truth held forth even to the
observation of men, by which the Lord has, in every age, confirmed the same,
that I am sure the greatest Atheist cannot answer even these things.

1. That this is the very dictate of a natural conscience not only that God is,
bnt that he is a revvarde^ of such as serve him, yea, none amongst men are so
gross, or bruttish, which are not in some measure principled to difference
betwixt good, and evil, with some fear of a punishment to the one, and some
hope of recompense to the other, and are also forced to notice some more signal
and convincing examples, which have been of that kind in their time.

2. Must we not say, yea, does not the World ^ee, in every age, that history of
Joseph in some part acted over again? Sure there have not been wanting many
such remarkable instances, wherein it might be easy to trace an upright, and
straight walk, through a very maze and la^^in^h of changes, and to shovv how
that has been their condition, and at last integrity has brought them to land
in to a comfortable harbor, yea how often they have had a mavelous, unlooked
for outgate, contrary to all humane appearance, this indeed is no Romance, but
a most true history which through all times, and many examples, might be
written of the Word and providence, which should surpass, the richest fancy
that any fiction, or romance did ever contain.

3. Must it not be convincing, even to the worst of men, what a visible
blessing does often follow the mean lot of some of the Saints, which can make
their little reach far, and cause them abound more in their poverty then others
amidst their abundance; which I think the world, cannot shun to observe and
gather that there is, sure, something else then men's own care, which does
their business; and how that ordinary proverb falls not to the ground, that
it is better to be happy then wise, when they see a secret judgment blovv
upon some men's estate that no means can prevent, and a secret blessing which
makes things prosper, and take effect, and does accompany the Christians
little, so as it may be easy for such who look abroad to see where real
contentement with chearfulnes, and giving of thanks, uses to dwell.

4. May not the world, se^ there is a feast in a good conscience how little
soever they ^artake of the World, that well doing, and the practice of
godliness has some present revvard in its hand; whereas so remakable a
difference, may be discerned betwixt the countenance, and carriage of such,
and of them who trust in falsehood, that surely in a time of strait, these
have another kind of security, and confidence, when greatest natural spirits
fail, yea, that these alone, can enjoy themselves, have the most calm and
composed spirits, amidst the several changes of their life, that according to
outward things, their peace does not ebb, nor flow, but they are at a seen
advantage above others in the day, when men are sore outwitted with their
straites, so as it will be most easy then, to see the good and advantage of
religion, when the vanity of other advantages, is most discernable.

5. Is it not also seen that true honor does truly vvait on humility, and
follovveth such, but it flees from them who do most pursue it, yea, that
faithfulness and an upright walk will gain credit even amongst her enemies,
and respect before the World.

6. That these who are faithful in their little, and diligent improvers of a
small talent, have usually more added, with some discernable grouth,
follovving the same, and as the drying up of the parts of some, as a judgment
on unfaithfulnes, is often obvious, so also such a blessing upon serious
diligence, as has made the last first, and even outrun such who were once
before them; yea, it is truly seen how grace helps men's gifts, does raise,
and sublimat their spirits, above that which once they were.

7. Does not the Lord put some visible difference often, betwixt the righteous,
and the wicked in a time of common calamity^ that a strange outgate with the
concurrence of very mavelous providence, does sometime tryst such even to
the convictions of onlookers which may tell the World, such have had an
invisible hedge of preservation about them, and have been under some better
care, then their own.

8. What a clear vvitness do ungodly men often bear to this truth, at their
death, or at some other strait, so that their conscience has forced them to
justify the godly men's choice, and to say that the lot of such is only most
desirable, yea, with much bitterness to lament their folly that made not
religion more their business, the good and advantage whereof, is now no
matter of debate; sure the World will confess how often the confession, and
testimony of such men, to this truth, has reached their ear.

9. I shall but add, that which is so very manifest, how faithfulness, and
integrity does transmit men's name with more honor, yea, makes it have a
sweeter savor in their generations, then either riches, or outvvard
preferment; yea, that there is a great difference betwixt the memorial of the
righteous, and the wicked even to the conviction of the world.

EIGHT. That verily there is a God who judges in the earth, Ps. 58: ver. 11.
who does render unto men vengeance, and does pursue the transgressour because
of sin, is a truth which the world has in every age by many convincing
instances held forth to them where they may see the Scripture clearly verifyed.

I have a little touched this in the second Argument how the accomplishing of
Scripture threatenings is witnessed to the observation of the Church, and to
these who are wise to discern the times wherein they live; I shall here point
at this truth as it is in the providence of God, written in such great letters
as are obvious to the view of the World, so as most common onlookers cannot
pass this without a remark; it is true much may be laid over to that great
general a^fize of the last judgment, that day of retribution; yea, sometimes
we see the most wicked and vile, go in peace to the grave, the soveraignity of
God, does also appear very observably, in the different measure, and kind of
punishment, and it is too evident how prone men are to look more to the
interest that second causes have, in such a thing, then to a divine hand, but
this is also sure that the Lord is known on the earth, by the judgment which
he executes, and in every age does set up such convincing examples before men,
that the greatest Atheist may see, yea, often their conscience must break the
jayle, restrain it as they will, and force this acknowledgement, that such
judgments, can be no casual thing; while something of a power higher then man,
and a clear verifying of the word is so discernable therein.

Now to demonstrat this truth I would offer somethings which may show how very
near this comes to the observation of men, so as none can be a stranger
thereto, or want conviction of this piece of the truth of God, except they
willingly shut their eyes, while it is clear.

1. That the very Heathens who never knew the Scripture, nor a written Law,
have (...) so much of a natural conscience that not only they can put some
difference between virtue, and vice, but even in some measure can discern Gods
putting some difference betwixt the same; how flagitious crimes use to be
punished by a divine hand, we may say, time could never yet wear out the
observation of this truth, through the World, and though many things may be
received, and credited, which not having a sure ground do quickly evanish, it
being truths privilege, still to outlive falsehood, yet, it is sure, how in
the darkest parts of the earth, this has been still noticed with a remark, and
transmitted from one age, to another, yea, the records of the nations even by
heathen writers, show what remarkable punishment, has followed cruel
oppression, Covenant Breaking, and bloodshed, and such other gross sins
against the second table, yea, how these have been the usual forerunners of
great strokes on Kingdoms and familyes.

2 Does not the World see, that in these remarkable judgments which have come
on a nation, and People, there is something higher then instruments, or second
causes, which may be very evident in bringing the same about, so that all who
go by, must confess, such is no casual tryst, nor does arise out of the dust,
but that surely a divine hand is there, and truly though some desolating
strokes, are very terrible in themselves, and blood, and ruins should be no
matter of pleasure, yet, whereas thereby that stately sound is heard, even his
voice who makes the earth to tremble, and God is made known to the sons of
men, we should not only with fear, but even some holy congratulation, consider
his work; now to clear what a convincing witness these are to this truth, I
shall point at some very obvious remarkes, which I am sure the World cannot
contradict of the Lords own immediate hand in such judgments. 1. That strange
concurrence and tryst of providence which uses to appear when God is against a
People, how all things will then conspire, as in a fatal conjunction to ^^^k
the woe, and ruin, that men may see, surely this (...) from the Lord, who is
wonderful in counsel, from a hand against which there is no striving. 2. How
such remarkable strokes are seen to tryst with some great, and remarkable
height of sin in such a nation, and People, so that it is easy then for all
onlookers to confess the righteousness of God therein. 3. That when judgment
is coming on a land it may be seen how instruments are raised, and in a more
then ordinary way acted with all advantages for such a piece of service. 4. A
visible blasting then both of counsel, and strength, and these means which
otherways looked most probable, how remarkably such are confounded even in
the use of their ordinary abilities their heart and usual courage taken from
them while the Lord is on a work of judgment. 5. That astonishing success
which is usually seen to follovv these whom the Lord sends forth to execut
his judgment, how then they move svviftly, and with vigor, they do not
stumble, or weary, it is neither rivers, nor walled cities can stand in their
way; mountains are made valleys to show it is the Lord whose hand in that day
is strong upon them, to strengthen their loins, and make the sword, and axe
sharp for his service. 6. Amidst these various strokes which come on a land,
can men pass that of the Pestilence without some special note, where Gods
immediate hand, something supernatural above ordinary, or natural causes may be
clearly seen, both in its strange progress in spreading, which like a
lightning does often go throvv cities and countries in a small time; do not these
tell aloud to the World that they come not unsent, and without some special
commission; and that there is no stryving against them, nor are ordinary means
effectual in some such extraordinary plagues until he who brought it on, do
also by his own hand take it off.

3. It is very obvious even to the world that clear resemblance which is often
betwixt sin, and the stroke, how holy justice does keep a proportion, and does
shape out the judgment so exactly both in measure, and kind, that it may be
easy to see, the stroke pointing, as with an hand to the cause, by its
discernable likeness, and both at the righteous judgment of God which thus
measures out to men, as they have dealt with others: we see how the Lord
trysted Agag, and Adonibezek, how Sodoms burning lust was punished with fire
from heaven, yea what even David had measured out for his murder, and
adultery; the svvord shall not depart from his house, and for the other his
wives by his own son abused, and truly every ages observation can witness this
truth from many convincing examples, that there is a God who judges in the
earth, it being often seen if men would seriously observe. 1. How an universal
overspreading of sin in a land, has usually some national, and universal
stroke following.

2. That blood waits on bloody men, and suffers them not often to live out
half their days; one oppressor punished by another, the unmerciful man, paid
home in his own coin, by such as shall show as little mercy to him, or his. 3.
How the proud, and insolent who do most hunt after outward glory, are usually
trysted with some humbling abasing stroke, he povvreth contempt on princes,
and such who will not honor God, shall not brook that honor they seek from
man. 4. That such who have been most given up to uncleannes are often seen not
to increase as to their posterity, but their issue observeably made to fail,
yea, by a divine hand rooted out, sure many such signal examples might be
instanced. 5. How such who have choosed sin to shun trouble, and suffering,
have in their sinful way got as large a measure thereof, as that man who in
Queen Maryes time said, he could not burn for the truth, and therefore forsook
it, by an unseen hand had both himself, and his house in one night burnt. 6.
That the treacherous, and deceitful men are thus dealt with by others, yea,
children who have been unduetiful to their parents, have from theirs met with
the same recompense. 7. That whilst men to make a purchase have even denied
themselves the necessary use of outward things, are often seen to leave their
estate to such, who do quickly wast and scatter the same, and thus the sinful
parsimony of parents punished with the prodigality of such who succeed them. 8.
That the frequent use of some dreadful imprecations are often punished by the
Lord with a suitable stroke to the conviction both of themselves, and onlookers,
9. How such as have joined together, and united themselves against the truth
have been visibly broken as to their own private interest, and truly we must
say there is often such a tryst of very convincing circumstances, in some acts of
the judgment of God, with such a resemblance to the sin, yea, judgment
sometime pursueing men in the very place, where the sin has been acted that it
may be easy for all who go by to say, there is indeed a God who judges in the
earth.

4. Does it not appear, how very convincing and obvious this truth is even to
the world, from these ordinary remarkes, and proverbial sayings which we find
in all ages, and in every part of the earth, even the most rude, and ignorant
have had, of the judgment of God; for truly what else are these but an
express witness, how universally this truth is known, and received by men, how
much the world is convinced thereof, through a long tract of observation from
the fathers to the children, yea, thence they have had a divinity of their own,
drawn out thereof, how such sins do not use to pass without some notour
punishment. Now I would but name some few of these remarkes, that have been
most usual in all times. 1. How some familyes have not thriven, but a secret
judgment has been discernable thereon since, they had hand in some gross
acts of wickedness; such as bloodshed, their former prosperity from such a day
visibly declining. 2. How that an evil purchase uses not to be of long
continuance, but their estate often in a very strange, and unsensible way made to
evanish, which their children though frugal can by no means keep up, and the
cause hereof, men do easily point at, it was purchased by fraud transmitted
with a curse cleaving thereto, and so there was no warding of the judgment of
God. 3. Such who do not much consider Gods contraversy, yet are often forced to
remark that since some have meddled, or matched with such an house, they have
sadly smarted thereby, something of a curse even following the race, and
posterity of some. 4. How sacrilegious meddling with that which has been for a
pious, and public use has caused a visible wast and consumption in their own
estate. 5. That men's asking counsel from the Devil, and turning to that airth
for their help, does usually resolve in a sad, and tragic close, and truly
this many in the shutting up of their life have been forced to confess. 6.
That falsehood does not use to keep its feet, nor a wicked way long prosper,
what ever it seem to the first view, yea, I may add as one of the Worlds
remarks which they cannot well shun, that which seems was an ordinary saying
in the time of Ester, that it is not safe troubling the Church, or for men to
state themselves in opposition to that party, and I dare not question, but this
shall be yet as convincing, and obvious to the World as it has been in any
former ages.

5. Is not the appearance of a divine hand often very obvious to the World in the
discovery of sin, and bringing to light some gross acts of wickedness, even in
extraordinary way, while it is seen. 1. By what strange unexpected means,
these have been brought forth, such an astonishing tryst, and concurrence of
things therein as has forced not only onlookers, to some special remark, but
has even struck the guilty party through the heart with wonder, and conviction
of the same. 2. How the hand of Justice persuing men for some notour, and known
crime, does often bring to light some that have been most secret, which they
thought the World could never reach, yea, it may be frequently seen while men
have been in one sin found out, it has also brought forth the discovery of
some other, and forced them to confess, that is was a righteous judgment
persuing them for the same. It is a thing also known, yea, by many undeniable
instances witnessed that mavelous discovery of concealed murder, by the
bleeding of the body upon the touch of the murderer. I confess it should be
hard to assert the lawful, and warrantable practice of such an appeal to so
extraordinary, and stupendous a sign from the Lord, where the Scripture goes
not clearly before us, but on the other hand, such a thing so surely tried for
such an end, and in the case where all ordinary means of discovery have been
wanting, I think calls us to a serious remark thereof, while it so visiby
seems to witness his hand, who does make inquifition for blood.

6. Is not the dreadful consternation, these tormenting fears which men after
some gross acts of wickedness do bewray, a very obvious witness to this
truth, that there is a God who judges on the earth, in whose hands it is a
terrible thing to fall, and shows how great a punishment wickedness is to its
self, truly if Atheists turn not brutish, and stupid, they must notice this,
and confess a thing which does so often reach their ears, what have been the
horrid cries of many dying men who have most sported with sin in their life;
that may tell bystanders there is a judge who can stretch forth his hand on the
soul, and conscience, whereto no rack, or outward torments is any way
comparable.

7. I would further add these extraordinary signs, and prodigies which do
usually go before some stroke and judgment on a land, do they not clearly
point at a divine hand in the same? For as these are a solemn forewarning from
Heaven to give men an alarm, before remakable changes the truth whereof the
World cannot deny, so we must say they are a convincing testimony, that these
judgments are no casual things, which the Atheist cannot answer, it being so
clear. 1. That such signs, and prodigies, have been in every age visible to
the World, experience, and the gravest histories both of ancient, and later
times, do fully witness. 2. That such things should also be previous to great
revolutions in the World, we know the Scripture is most express, Joel 2: ver.
30. Luke 21: ver. 11. And as we should guard against any sinperstitious
respect, we would also bevvare of stupid Atheistical inadvertency at these
strange works of the Lord, which call both for fear, and observation. 3. That
such have been usually previous to great calamities, and judgments on a
People, is a thing that all ages must witness, even these, who have been most
cautious, and discerning in their time, who could not shun this as a remark,
Herodotus does set that down as a think most sure, in his sixth Boek, Cum Deus
puniturus est gentem, and urbem, prodigiis id solet ^ignificare, and Lucan
could tell, what went before the Romans civil wares, -- Superique minaces
Prodigiis terras implerunt, yea, it can hardly be instanced any great change,
or revolution in the earth, which has not had some such extraordinary Herald
going before. 4. Can the World deny how sometimes these prodigious signs have
been shaped out to point at the very nature of the stroke then imminent, by a
strange resemblance, to the same, such as a flaming sword in the air, the
appearance of armies fighting even sometimes upon the earth, to the view of
many, most sober, and judicious onlookers, also showers of blood, the noise of
Drums, and such like, which are known usually to go before war, and
commotions.

NINTH That there are evil spirits, Ephesians. 6: 12. Rev. 20: ver. 2, 3. and a
Diabolical power such as the Scripture has held forth whose constant work is
the ruin, and undoing of man, is a truth not only witnessed, from that
experience Christians have of their assaults, but is undeniable by the world,
and greatest Athiests, except they deny the discovery of sense as well as
reason.

I confess it may cause fear, and astonishment to think on this, that spirits
so knowing, and once originally excellent, have fallen thus into such an height
of indignation, against infinite goodness, that it is now their only aim, and
pleasure to dishonor God, and destroy his image in man. It should indeed cause
us fear him that spared not the Angels who sinned. But the truth it self is
sure, that such a party is at this day, encompassing the earth, and trafficking
up, and down there, to prove which by arguments were to light a candle to let
men see that it is day, while it is known, what ordinary familiar converse many
have therewith, and alace too easy to discern that power which the prince of
this world has upon the children of disobedience, how obvious are the marks of
his conquest almost every where? Thousands lying in his chains, how far do we
see many transformed even to the very image of the Devil, which in these
desperate prodigious acts of wickedness that are often in the world may appear,
such whereat we should think humane nature, though corrupt could not but
tremble, yea, look on with horror, how many in all ages have even been in an
express covenant with them, and is not there a great part of the earth where
the Devil is visibly, and audibly known where he has a kind of neighborhood
with men? But there being no need for such a demonstra^ion, I only here aim to
hold forth what a concerning truth this is, and of great consequence if
seriously considered, yea, how both the Scripture, and Christian Religion, is
hereby evidently confirmed since these things must necessarly follow.

1. That in this the Scripture is truly fulfilled which does witness what these
Spirits are, adversaries to man, in their nature, and inclination desperately
evil, whose actings in the earth, have a visible tendency to men's hurt, and
ruin, yea, their pretended favors, always directed to that end, whence we
see, such a natural inbred horror which is in man against them.

2. That it is no common thing which they so much pursue, something more
precious then the body for which so great, and cruel an adversary is in
continual labor, for their actings have no such tendency to ruin men's estate
in the World; no, it is most evident this is the soul the immortal soul, to
undo them in that great interest, which is the mark wherea^ they level, that
poor man might be sharer of that misery under which they are concluded.

3. Is it not an undeniable consequence of this truth that there must be an
invisible World that has inhabitants of another kind then such as are here,
that sure there is some being above man, yea a real correspondence betwixt men,
and Spirits, and should not man thus placed in a middle estate betwixt the
Angels and the beasts here below partaking in his body with the one, but in his
reasonable soul with the other thence raise himself to thoughts of some more
excellent condition for which he is framed, then a sensual life, and that
surely the soul has an interest in an other world, which he should most look
after?

4. Must not this also be sure that there is an invisible guard, and these
desperate Spirits are under restraint by a power stronger then they which can
bound their malice, for, this may be certain that these who have so great
enmity to man, are so near, and have such advantages over us, could not keep at
such a distance, but that they are keept in chains by a higher power.

5. How is it that now by the Gospel and within this precinct of the Church,
Satan's power is so much restrained in respect of former times while it is
known what a familiar converse they had with men, did even haunt their houses
and were so public in their appearance under such names of Fairies, and
Brounies which since the breaking up of the light of the Gospel has not been,
yea has not the Devil to this day an open throne and dominion in these parts
of the earth where Christ is not worshipped, it is also known, how the oracles
of old did cease, and that public worship which the world for many ages had
given them, with the very time of Christ's apearance, and breaking up of the
Gospel these night beasts getting to their dens, when once the day was broke
up. Plutarch, and other heathen writers are a witness to this.

6. Whence is it that within the Church where Satan is most restrained, yet
there he does more stur then in all the world besides? Does it not show that
that is the party with which he is at war, hence does he more rage, the more
clear the light shines, yea, is there not seen something, besides men's natural
enemity at the truth, even a fury, and violence wherewith some are visibly
driven in their actings with such an unsatiable cruelry against the followers
of Christ, without the least shadow of provocation as holds forth a vive
resemblance of the Devil, and some violent pressure, and incitement from that
airth.

7. Is it not sure that there is such a party, by this, that he is an adversary
to God, and holiness, for which he does so impetuously tempt, and press men to
the outward acts of sin, yea, that there is a Spirit of blasphemy which so
visibly rages in the world, and acts men to war against Heaven with their
tongues by cursing, and blasphemous oaths which has no carnal pleasure or
gain, but yet, cannot forbear, from a violent incitement which may be seen
swaying them to the same.

8. Whence is it which is so very known and notour that these horrid wretches
who give themselves to the Divill cannot enter in any formal engadgement
without renouncing Christ, and their baptism, does it not show that direct
opposition he stands in to Christ, yea to the very name and shadow of
Christianity?

9. Whence is it that even the grossest Atheists upon any appearance of the
Devil, or apprehension from that airth will not then make scorn of prayer, but
turns in earnest to that, which at other times they mocked. O does it not show
men's Atheism is their choice, but not their judgment, that not only there is
a dreadful horror, and fear which by nature men have of these evil Spirits,
but some inbred sense also, and impression of a Deity, which does bewray it
self whither they will, or not, in a pressing strait, and extremity.

TENTH. That there is such an enmity betwixt the seed of the woman, and the
Serpent as the Scripture has held forth is very manifest, a truth wherein the
world may see the Scripture clearly verifyed. Gal. 4: ver. 29.

It is truly strange that this puts not men to more serious thoughts, to
pursue such a thing to its true rise, what should cause such a violent, and
unreasonable contrariety against the way, and followers of God; for here upon
grave reflections they must needs see what a convincing witness their way is to
the truth of the Scripture, which might put them in some other humor, yea, help
to turn this poison into an antidot against it self, but, this is sure, and
undeniable, the discovery where of cannot but stair the greatest Atheist in the
face, from these convincing evidences.

1. That it is seen no private quarrel which ever was among men has been with
such vigor, and malice persued, as this upon the account of religion, which
has still put the World more in a flame, then any private interest, yea, it is
very manifest how men are carried with the spaite of their own natural
inclination, to oppose the Church, and People of God.

2. That this feed, and enmity could never be taken up through all the
successions of time, a strife which is not late begun, or to be seen only in
one age, betwixt the children of the bond woman, and of the free, no, the most
sage, and wise amongst men the greatest Peacemakers, could yet never fall on a
way to reconcile these two parties, but, the children have still served
themselves heirs to the quarrel, and hatred of their fathers against the
Church.

3. Is it not seen that these who are more civil, and can hold a little up with
the form of religion, yet, will break forth in greatest rage against the power
thereof when once it begins to appear? it is indeed here, that imbred
contrariety which is in men against holiness, does bewray it self, even, in
these who are other ways noted for a calm, and peaceable disposition, while
once they begin to be scorcht with its heat.

4. What a strong natural antipathy is this which causes men pnrsue with so
much bitterness these from whom they never had any personal injury? sure their
conscience must often tell that they have no reason, or any other provocation
then what is from the appearance of the image of God in such, but this is their
nature, and indisposition, an enmity which they can no more help, then they can
change their nature, or the Leopard can change its spots.

5. From what a strong inclination, and inward principle does the World thus
act in its opposition to the Church and followers of God? whilst it is clear,
that though these were never so quiet and peaceable, yet their enemies are
still restless, and cannot sleep beside them.

6. It is seen how this does separat betwixt nearest friends, and relations,
and alienat such who have sometimes been most dear to other, no bond in nature
so strait which it will not break, it does often set the husband against the wife
and the parents against the children, yea, when religion once breaks up in a
corner of a land, or a family, does it not then make a visible jarr, and put
all in a flame?

7. It is clear that when once grace appears in men they are as a sign, and
wonder to a profane generation, the World does then sensibly change her
countenance, and looks like a stepmother, while on the other hand it is
clear that professors turning loose, and running to that excess of riot with
others, will cause their old adversaries warm toward them, and alace, proves
the surest way to gain men's frienship while the World thinks, they are their
own, when once they turn profane.

ELEVENTH. That the Creature is made subject to vanity because of sin, which
not only the wisest of men, but the Spirit of God, does witness that things here
beneath the sun, are indeed vanity, and vexation of spirit, Romans 8: vor. 20.
Eccles. 2: ver. 11. is a piece of the Scripture in such great letters written
forth to the view of men, that none can be strangers thereto.

It is true the cause, and solid remedy of this so general a complaint, is only
reached by the Godly man, who knows how to read the vanity of the creature,
as a piece of the fulfilling of the word, and does seriously consider things as
they are and not as they appear, but it is also sure, that in every age through
the various changes of man's life this is so cleirly witnessed, that the most
gross, and brutish, cannot shift the conviction thereof, but in one of these
two times have been forced to a public acknowledging of the same, at death,
when they are leaving the World, or in a day of strait when the World is
leaving them, now to demonstrat this I shall here but offer these few queries.

1. Have not the greatest instances of the glory of the World, been usually the
greatest examples of its vanity, and change? how few has ambition raised, but
it has also ruined, yea, given the sorest fall to these it had lifted most
high? What sudden changes do attend great men, and high places, which these who
sit l^^ do escape, sure if the tragedies of Princes, and such who in their
condition have been raised above others were put by themselves in record it
should make a great volumn, and show how their glory, and prosperous estate did
only make their fall the more observable.

2. Is it not obvious what a frail dying disposition is in all worldly things?
that even the greatest Kingdoms, and politic bodies, to maintain which neither
policy, nor strength was wanting, yet like the natural bodies of men had their
inevitable periods, their youth, and flowrishing times, their declining, and
old age, and at last even brought to their grave, has not the glory of
greatest Empires, and Monarchies sunk in the dust? yea, scarce* heap of stones
left this day to tell us where once famous cities have stood, Nunc Seges est
ubi Troja fui^, the ruins whereof, and such excellent pieces of the World does
cleirly show that certain dissolution of the whole fabric at last.

3. What a small distance we may see betwixt extremityes in outward things,
even greatest plenty, and poverty, the highest place, and a low condition, so
that the morning has seen some happy, and flowrishing in the World whom the
evening has seen miserable, and in a most short time, such who have been
objects of envy, and admiration, made the object of men's contempt, and pity,
yea, has so suddenly disappeared, has sunk into so little bounds, that men
have been put narrowly to consider them, and with admiration ask, are these
they who were once a terror in the land of the living, and their place has
not been found who a few days before seemed to place themselves alone in the
midst of the earth?

4. What else is it but the very present moment of time that makes such a
difference betwixt the rich and poor, since as to what is past, and the bygon
time men's happiness, and misery may be reckoned as though it had never been, Nam
quicquid retro est mors tenet, and who but a fool would boast of that which is
to come, a thing so uncertain? this only is sure that a f^^ days will make
all conditions equal, when the bones of the rich, and the dust of greatest
Princes will not be discernable from these of the poor man.

5. Is there any thing so pleasant which has not a worm at the root thereof, a
moth which naturally breeds in the most satisfying enjoyments that quickly eats
out the heart thereof, and blasts their hope before the harvest? how often is
greatest longing in the pursuit of things turned to loathing, and wearines when
obtained, because it is not the nature of the thing so much as an humor, and
the novelty thereof that makes them pleasant, hence many sensual men have
turned Monastic, and greatest Monarchs become melancholy, yea, how usual is
it for many to survive their pleasures, and bury their joy, and delights in the
World, even before themselves, while nothing remains of all their former
enjoyments but some sad sighs, and groans with a heavy fairwell.

6. Is it not found that riches, and abundance of the earth does load more
then it fills, and men's wealth only further heighten their wants? How very poor
are some amidst their fulness, more then these who earn their bread with sore
labor, whom the world does wholly possess, while they do not at all possess
it, neither is it in their power to make use of that they have, yea, are they
not sick and die in Princes courts, as well as in the meanest cottage, and the
complaints of the great, and rich usually more then these of the poor? Sure it
is known that the great man does oftener want a stomach, and rest, then the poor
want meat and a bed to ly in.

7. In what an endless circle do voluptuous men move, from one thing to
another in a perpetual search after other enjoyments to satisfy their spirits?
which shows what a great want is there, which still calls for variety of
things, and some fresh supply, to take off the weariness of one pleasure by
another, else the delight they have therein, would quickly languish, and wear
out, yea, is it not still found that the best of outward things are not on a
near approach what they seemed to be at a distance, the eye not satisfied with
seeing, nor the ear with hearing, but the more they are pressed the less the
yield, neither do they enjoy such things with most satisfaction who take a full
draught, who wallow, and steep themselves in their enjoyments, being more in
expectation then in possession, so that sometime men's attaining their desire
has caused their delight, and pleasure in these things cease.

8. It is also clear that outward things are incident to the worst without
making them the better, and separable from the best without making them the
worse, and what can silver, or gold suite an immortal soul, or answer such a
capacity, more then virtue, and godliness could answer to fill an empty chest,
or glass botle?

9. How rare is it for men to get their lot in the World brought up to their
desire? But are still at some jar with their present condition, so that often
there needs no more to turn men discontent, but the thought of some other lot,
which they apprehend more satisfying then their own, the want whereof turns
them more disquiet then all their enjoyments are pleasing, yea, it is also
evident many men's labor, and disquiet does increase with their wealth, and
turns the flame more violent, and that even in the condition of the poor there
is something the great man is made to envy, while the poor may find cause
oftimes to pity, and compassionat some great men in the midst of their
prosperous estate.

10. What is the enjoying of the best of the earth, but its very passing away,
while it perishes in the present use? And what? Are not men going through the
World and leaving it behind them in the midst of their most satisfying
enjoyments? is not the excellency of most outward things only according to
opinion, of the institution of men, while they have but small intrinsic worth
from their own quality? in some parts of the earth, witness is reckoned
deformity, and the blackest color the greatest beauty, and therefore they
paint the Devil white, what a poor smoke is swelling titles of honor if
soberly weighed? while the proud man's happiness, does someway hang upon the
poor who go by, which they must beg from others with the greatest artifice;
and would the choicest jewels, or a bag of gold laid upon the heart of a dying
man, any way quiet his spirit, or ease his pain? Surely this is vanity.

11. Is it not often seen amidst the various changes of the earth, Princes, and
great men walking on foot, and servants riding on horsback, the Children often
put to ask an alms from such who have served their fathers? Fools loaded with
wealth, and great styles, while men of the choicest spirit, are buried under
contempt, and poverty, yea, do we not see how quickly men are cried up, and
down in the World? That which in one age is raised, is often rased in an other,
yea, many at much labor to undo that, which others have done with greatest
care, and expense, what a sore vanity is this?

12. Will not the want of a very small thing often embitter the pleasantest lot,
and turn into w^^mwood, and gall? the smallest touch of pain, the gravel, or
tooth-ake, yea, even some melancholy thought will make men disrelish all their
present enjoyments, what a torment does a small ruffle, and affront often prove
to the proud man even in the midst of his glory? is it not also found, how
carnal mirth, and joy, men wallowing in the delights of the World has still in
the close a bitter sting and hasth waygate, which as the shadow attends the
body, is the native, and unseparable consequent thereof, and surely that may be
easy to discern there is no condition, which can want a cross or some mixture
of discontent, even where there is least seen cause.

I would add which cannot want a remark in every time that while men seem to
be at the top, and furdest period of their thoughts, and projects, have things
according to their desire brought to some happy close, they are often then upon
some turn, and change in their condition, either by death or some very sad
cross, and even in that day their thoughts have perished, truly such as are
wise observers of the World, and of the course of things therein may often see,
how usual a tryst this is that when there is too bright a sun-blink in outward
prosperity, if great sobriety and moderation do not accompany the same it is an
ominous, and fatal presage of a storm, and ad summum quicquid venit, ad
exitium prope est.

TWELFTH. I would further add this truth which has in all ages been clearly
witnessed, even to the conviction of the World, that the end of the upright man
is peace, and integrity what ever rub it may seem to have by the way, yet, has
a sweet and comfortable close, Ps. 37: 37.

This is an undeniable truth not only because the Saints are then entering into
perfect peace, but it is also clear that how ever the godly man may have very
sharp assaults in the close of his days, and some who have shined very bright
do set in a dark cloud, their evening full of sorrow, and bitterness, yea, their
reflection on some sad stip which they have made by the way, bearing them
company even to the grave, yet, this truth is still verifyed, yea, may be
discernable to the conviction of bystanders, that integrity, and an upright
walk has much peace in the end, and does land men upon a comfortable harbor,
anent which I can appeal the World, and the most ordinary onlookers if this
has not been often very convincing, and discernable to them, from many instances
from the Lords usual way with these who have been faithful in their generation
at their death, from that testimony which they have then given to this, yea,
from most visible signs and evidences hereof even upon their countenance, and
carriage vvhilest it is seen.

1. How great an advantage such use to have above others, when Death
approaches, so that it has not been Balaams wish alone to die the death of the
righteous and to have his latter end like theirs, but the worst of men are
still forced to witness their respect to the lot of a dying Christian, and
would wish a share thereof when it coms to their turn, anent which I may ask
the greatest mockers at religion, and at the life of a Godly man, if they can
possibly shun this conviction, that surely such are of the best estare, and at
the greatest advantage, in their end.

2. This I am sure cannot be hid from the World what abundant peace, the
Saints do then testify in their choice, what a present unspeakable complacency
they have with this that they valued Christ above all other advantages, did
choose aff^iction rather then sin, and now while they are turning their face to
the wall, finds the witness of a good conscience, and of Gods approbation so
sweet a feast, that their joy, and peace on this account, they can not smother
or keep in but declare to all who stand by what they find, and truly it has
been often seen, how the inward joy which some of these have had has exceeded
their outward pain, been more sensible to them then their sickness, yea, have
been in leaving the World much more cheerful then these whom they left behind.

3. It is also known, and may be very obvious to bystanders how with a sweet
composure, and recumbency of foul such have laid themselves upon the promise,
in that hour, while they were grapling with the king of terrors, their spirit
then quiet, and calm, having taken the truth, and testimony of God for their
shield, and buckler, which may tell the World what an other kind of security,
and confidence these have beyond others, yea, that surely the ground on which
this confidence is ^ounded, must be a thing that is able to bear out the
greatest storm, and assault, and is something above nature.

4. Is it not clear that even an untimely, and violent death, could not let, or
frustrat that peace which integrity causes in the close? For innumerable
instances can witness what mavelous joy, and satisfaction the Saints have
showed at a stake, and upon a scaffold, and thence has had a more cheerful
going out of time, then the rich man stretched upon his soft bed, or the
greatest Monarch, amidst all outward advantages, sure we must say, that sweet
refreshing close of the upright man, has never been more visible, and writ in
greater letters, then in such a case.

5. What very sad conflicts have some of the Saints had in their life, yea,
even upon the setting of the sun has been put to cry out through sore
perplexing fears, and doubts wherewith they have been assaulted, who have at
last had this turned into a song, and such a mavelous change in their case,
as has not been more sensible to themselves, then discernable to all
onlookers, like a sudden calm, and sunshin, after some dark storm. I must here
ask the Atheist, and such as reckon Godliness but a fancy whence should so
strange, so sudden, and great alteration proceed, that these who a little
before were under such horror, could have no rest, no arguments could do their
tnrn, do thus witness the abundant peace of their souls, yea, which is often
seen that fervent desire wherewith some of the Saints are taken away, the very
luster of heaven being upon their countenance, how mavelous and piercing are
their words, which may clearly tell that now they feel, they see, and have got
some glance of that, which onlookers cannot reach, though they cannot deny an
acknowledgement of this.

6. Must not the World grant, yea, the greatest enemies to godliness allow this
charity that sure this peace, and joy which such have witnessed at death cannot
be dissimulation, that there is no temptation could thus bias them to deceive
others, and themselves in a matter of such high concernment, and at a time when
it is expected grossest of men would speak truth, yea, that this does appear,
while men cannot in the least charge the dying Christian with any distemper in
his judgment, but while they have been most composed, stayed, and present in
mind, and as to other things, of their concernment, most deliberat, and sober,
even then they have born this witness.

THE FOURTH ARGUMENT
I shall here offer to prove the Scriptures accomplishment is this, That
whereof the most part, as to these special predictions, and promises that
concern the Church, is fulfilled, and has now taken place in their appointed
times, which we may at this day clearly tead in the event, and but a little part
thereof now remains to be made out, must be a sure truth. But the Scripture
is thus fulfilled, and the prophecyes. thereof now made legible in the history
of providence, and in the works of God about his Church. Therefore, etc.

I would premit here some few things ere I speak particularly to this argument.

1. Though the Scripture is thus wonderfully suited by the Lord, and takes
place in every generation as if it were alone directed to that time, yet, it is
also clear that a special part thereof has its proper accomplishment in these
ages, and periods of time, to which it does in a peculiar way relate, some part
of it, which did concern the times of the Old Testament, some that does also
answer to the times of the Gospel, and a part of it which has a peculiar
respect to these latter days, which the Lord is now bringing forth, and we
wait for a more full accomplishment, that it is on a near approach.

2. It is also sure that the whole work of God, and his providence about his
Church here in the World which was perfect from the beginning, and before him
from eternity, is comprehended under the written word, where the Lord has
fully revealed his mind, and counsel anent every event, and concernment of the
Church; though we often be in the dark in finding out the same, but the event
will in due time speak for it self, which should cause us until then, with
much sobriety pass our judgment on some of these truths that are not yet
fulfilled.

3. It is clear that the Prophets of old did not only foretell such great
changes, and revolutions, as were to go over the Churches head, and declare the
certainty thereof, but we find these prophecyes often point at the times, and
periods of time whereto they did relate, and though sometimes in dark terms,
yet did clearly show that there was a certain prefixed time, and not at every
time they could have their performance.

4. We would consider how the full accomplishing of the Scripture, and the
perfecting the Lords work about his Church. will be at once, and does keep foot
together, and then shall a full, and satisfying discovery of Gods way, and
providence, and all that he has been doing in the World clearly break up, when
the great mystery of God in his written word is finished, and the Church so
near to land.

That I may speak a little to so grave a subject, I would lay down these two
things to be considered. 1. How much of the Scripture, and predictions thereof
may be now seen clearly verifyed in the event. 2. What does yet remain to have
an accomplishment in these last times by which we may certainly judge, how
near the Lords work about his Church is to a close; anent the first I shall
point at some of these most concerning events, and changes which the Church
has met with, wherein we may see what of the Scripture may at this day be
read in the history of providence, and is certainly fulfilled.

I. WHAT IS ALREADY ACCOMPLISHED.
I. Let us go back to these first times after the fall, and see that dreadful
stroke which came upon the old World by the flood after an universal defection
from God, and we shall there find the fulfilling of that which Noah that great
preacher of righteousness had often foretold, and of these threatenings which by
Moses were there recorded, wherein it may be very manifest. 1. That this truth
besides Divine authority, no records of ancient times no antiquity could ever
contradict, yea, some of the eldest writers do clearly witness something of an
universal deluge over the earth with the strange preservation of some from it,
however they were in the dark as to many circumstances thereanent. Josephus
does cite Berosus the Ci^aldean about this, who without doubt had the^ some of
these oldest records true, and incorrupt. Eusebius also does mention some
fragments of Abidenus, and Appollidorus, which in his time were extant, clearly
pointing at the flood, and at Noah under the name of Zisuthrus with his sending
out of birds to see if the waters were assuaged. 2. There is nothing here does
contradict reason, how this might be brought about, even in the way of ordinary
natural causes, which the Lord did make use of for that end; for we find the
windows of Heaven were opened the air being condensed into clouds, and their
retentive power loused, these great floodgates were thus set louse; which
falling not in drops, but all in a full body like the spouts and cataracts of
the West Indies might soon overwhelm the earth with abundance of water, while
these fountains also of the great deep beneath were broken up, which was not
only the Ocean let forth to go over its banks, but an universal vent to all the
veins of the earth, and that great mass of waters which is in the bowels
thereof, which from beneath meeting these that were from above, may give men a
clear, and rational account how such a thing might be. 3. This piece of the
Scripture, is most congruous, and aggreable to the whole, and the great scope,
and drift of the same, for it points out an height of sin, and of wrath, an
universal defection, and an universal stroke meeting together, it leads us
forward to Christ, of whom the ark was an excellent shadow, and of that
salvation which in, and by him the Church has from eternal wrath, and is a
very manifest pledge, and sign of that last destruction of the World, which
though not in that manner, yet, shall once surely be, and find men in such a
condition, as this flood found them into in the days of Noah.

II. What we have expressly promised in the word of the Churches delivery from
Egypt, and was foretold by Joseph at his death, that God should surely bring
back his People out of that land, for which he left his bones to ly unburied
as a pledge thereof, has now many ages past been fulfilled. It is long since
that remarkable day when God made a way for his People through the red sea,
and his power known upon Pharaoh, and the Egyptians, since Moses with the
Church did sing that triumphant song, the horse, and his rider he has cast in
the sea, wherein these things are most clear.

1. That this was a deed known, and public in the time, which was not done
in a corner, but in the view of the World, and before all the Children of
Israel, and by them attested, and with greatest carefulnes transmitted to
their Children, and by these to the follovving generations, as a thing never to
be forgotten.

2. Was testified by Moses so great a person, and eyevvitnes thereof, one whom
even the most ancient of heathen vvriters, do mention with much respect, and
in this did never challenge his testimony, though a matter of fact, and of that
moment. which all the nations about could not but know, and both in the
present and after ages have the remembrance thereof kept up; so that they
might easily refute such a thing if false, and we may judge the Egyptians, and
many others, could want no goodvvill to put disgrace on a People they so much
hated, nor be ignorant of that which Moses published in his own time, to
whose works some of the auncientest heathen vvriters, do show they have been
no strangers.

3. A truth which by Moses was put in record, and delivered to the Jews to be
keept by them, and their Children in all succeeding ages, a record which they
did so narrowly look to, and had in that reverence, and esteem, that all the
syllabs, and letters thereof were by them numbered, lest in the smallest point
it should be wronged, yea, were more careful to preserve it then any nation can
be of their most concerning rights, and charters.

4. A thing whereof the remembrance was yearly from that time celebrat by the
Jewish Church, whence the institution of the passover had its rise, that
deliverance being as a sign, and sacramental pledge of that great salvation,
by him who is our true passover.

III. What is held forth in the Scripture concerning the more full grouth of
the Jewish Church that Judah should enjoy a Scepter, which was foretold by
dying Jacob, and promised once and again to Abraham by the Lord that his seed
should be as the sand of the sea, and enjoy Canaan for an inheritance has it
not long since been fulfilled? Wherein these things are clear.

1. That for many ages Israel did enjoy that land in a most flowrishing
condition which does in part appear from these very ruins, and desolation,
over which they have so long lamented, the glory of Jerusalem, and the temple
once so famous, which causes such reverence amongst them to the very rubbish
thereof at this day.

2. That they were once a People by themselves who were not mingled with the
Nations, but keept at a distance by their Religion, and Laws, from the rest of
the World as a peculiar People to the Lord is a thing undeniable.

3. That whilst they enjoyed it there was a singular blessing of fruitfulnes
thereon above other places, so as that small piece of ground, was eneugh for an
innumerable multitude of inhabitants, but is now at this day a barren sand, an
extraordinary curse no less seen thereon then the blessing was in former times.

4. It is also evident that something in the way, and carriage of this people,
even in their low, wandering condition does discover they have not forgot what
once they were, nor their former grandour, and flovvrishing, but still keep by
themselves with some respect to their own land, which their fathers did
enjoy.

IV. That piece of the Scripture which did concern the declining times of the
Church under the Old Testament, what Jeremy foretold of the Babylouish
captivity has now many ages since been fulfilled, a truth which we have
attested by sacred history, an history which does clearly justify it self, and
its authority by such convincing marks thereof, that we may say, these who do
seriously converse with the word, cannot take up Atheism without the laying
down of reason, and putting a force upon their own light.

Now as to this particular prophecy we would but seriously consider.

1. That which Jeremy did foretell anent the captivity, was not its
accomplishment put on record in a book of the Churches lamentations? where
this truth may be read in her tears, and truly such as ever knevv grief in a
high measure, may easily know what is there expressed to be sad earnest, and
read the lively motions of an afflicted case therein, and besides has not this
been witnessed to after ages by a visible monument, even the destruction of the
temple, that great, and excellent work which though after rebuilt did never
attain its former splendor.

2. This was a matter of fact of great note, and famous in the time, done in
the view of all the nations, a considerable piece of the Babylonish conquest,
yea that testimony the Scripture bears to the same, was it not a few ages
after made public to other parts of the world by the Septuagint translation,
so that it had been easy for Ptolemy or any in that time to have discovered the
falsehood of a thing so lately done, yet, these times nor the most professed
enemies to the Church therein, could not in the least contradict the same.

3. Though much of humane history, and these records of ancient times that we
now have, are both corrupt and defective, yet, there wants not some consent,
from the surest of these, to many of the most observable things that we have of
the history of the old testament, and as to the certanity of this truth besides
its own authority, we will find some of these oldest writers Berosus, Herodot,
and Xenophon, give some light to the same, whose witness the Atheist cannot
challenge, yea, is it not clear that Josephus not only from sacred history but
from these old records, and fragments of former times which were then extant
(though since have been much lost) compose his Jewish antiquityes, which give
so particular a relatiou of this truth.

V. What was foretold by Daniel concerning the rise, and fall of the
Monarchies, and change of these great Empires, who had been so sore a rod upon
the Church, has it not many ages past had a most punctual performance? It is
now long since that great image showed to the prophet in a vision, has been
brought down, and broken, so that scarce the toes thereof do now remain, which
besides the witness of the Scripture, may be clearly demonstrat upon other
rational grounds.

1. It being granted that the prophecy of Daniel was translated in Greek, and
laid up in that great library of Alexandria, long before much of it was
fulfilled, before Antiochus Epiphanes, and the rising of the Roman empire which
Porphyrius could not be ignorant of though all he could answer to that evident
agreement betwixt his prophecy, and the event, was that it must have been
writ, after these things were accomplished, whilst it is clear, that a part of
the prophecy of Daniel which concerned the fourth Monarchy, was not even in
his times fully made out, yea, we must say something thereof does reach to the
last end of time.

2. It is also undeniable that in these great revolutions of the Monarchies
there is a discernable consent and harmony betwixt the Scripture, and these
ancient records which we yet have of these times, so that not only the things
themselves, but some of the most observable circumstances thereof which are
particularly mentioned by Daniel, we may read in Xenophon, Herodot, and
Diodorus Siculus.

3. It must also be granted that somethings which in Daniels prophecy would
seem most strange, and improbable, such as Belshazars death in that very night
the hand writing was showed to him, may be particularly understood in Xenophons
history how Cyrus took the advantage of the Babylonian security whilst they
were in the midst of a solemn feast, and by diverting the channel of Euphrates
did enter the city without opposition; also how that great horn of the high
goat was so suddenly broken and the coming up of four in his room, which by
Daniel are expounded of the Grecian Monarchy, and the deviding of that Empire
after Alexanders death, is it not punctuallie held forth by all the historyes
of that time.

4. Was there not a very convincing appearance of a divine hand, both in the
rise, and fall of these Monarchies and an extraordinary providence which we
cannot but see when we read these histories, that surely something above
ordinary means, and second causes was both in Cyrus conquest against the
Babylonians, and the mavelous swift progress, and success of Alexander
against the Persians.

VI. That which was the great scope of all Prophesies under the Old Testament.
The coming of the Messiah is surely verifyed, and now many ages past has had
an accomplishment, the Lord is come unto his temple even he whose day Abraham,
and the Saints under the law did long after; this was the most happy, and
notable crisis that ever the Church was under, the great Epoch, and period of
time from which she does now reckon, which we know is no fable, or cunning
device of man, that God was manifested in the flesh, did make his abode, for
some time in the earth, suffered at Jerusalem in the view of the World, before
many witnesses, did arise from death on the third day, was seen, and known by
his disciples thereafter, and having finished the work for which he came was
received up again into glory.

This is indeed a great truth which concerns us no less to know, and be
sure of, then our soul is vvorth, and interest through eternity, the fulfilling
whereof besides the authority of sacred writ, the witness, and records of the
Evangelists, and Apostles of Jesus Christ who testify what they certainly
knew, is a truth which from such convincing rational grounds, may be
demonstrated that the greatest height of Atheism knows not how to state it
self in direct opposition to the same; and truly in this the Lord has so
tendered the strengthening of his peoples faith and their encouragement; that as
it is the most concerning promise of the Scripture, on which our whole hope,
and blessedness depends, so is it also most clear, and conspicuous in the event:
I shall but only touch this, whereof so much has been said by others.

1. It is undeniable the Messiah was to come, to whom all the Sacrifices under
the Law these ancient, types, and shadows did clearly point, to whom the
Prophets bear witness, and was the faith of the ancient Jewish Church, of which
promise, they were persuaded even whilst they saw it but a far, yea did
embrace it, and repose themselves thereon, yea, is there not a most clear, and
exact portraicture drawn forth under the Old Testament, of the Messiah, what an
one he should be, and by what peculiar characters he should be known, who was
to be revealed to Israel.

2. The special season, and period of time wherein Christ should come, we find
prefixed, and showed to the ancient Church, which though under some figurative
expressions, seemed then dark, yet, was so far revealed that upon a diligent
search, and enquiry, and particular collation of the times, it might be easy to
discern the Messiah coming, and near approach, of which salvation the Prophets
did enquire, 1. Pet. 1: ver. 10. and truly the fall of the Monarchies, and
right uptaking of Daniels weeks, were sure, and solid grounds, for a clear
computation thereanent; thence was it that so general an expectation of the
Messiah was among the Jews, at that very time when he came, so as diverse
impostoures did arise whom the People was ready to follow, and we see with what
amazement the Pharisees did enquire at John the Baptist if he were the Christ,
or not, yea, Josephus shows how the persuasion of this did most excite that
People to war with the Romans from the prophecies they had in holy writ, that
from Judea should about that time come who was to be Emperor of the World.

3. It is also sure there was such an one who in the days of Tiberius, and
under the reign of Herod was made manifest to Israel, and came with no outward
show, and observation, but did great, and mavelous things before all the
People, was crucified at Jerusalem, under Pontius Pilate, and notwithstanding
the ignominy of his death was after adored, and followed, both by many of the
Jews and the gentiles, whose doctrine did also in a short time spread through
the World, a truth which the greatest adversaries of the Gospel have ever
confessed, and do attest the history thereof de facto, to be a faithful
relation, not only Jews, but the heathen writers Suetonius, Tacitus, and
Plinius the younger that lived near and some of them contemp^rary with the
times of the Apostles, do witness that this Jesus whom the Christians worship,
did truly suffer in the time of Pilats jurisdiction over the Jews.

4. Is it not clear how this appearance of Christ to the World, did exactly
tryst with the very time, foretold by the Prophets thereanent? Was not Jacobs
prophecy, thus accomplished? for until that time it is clear the royal line of
David's house, did not cease, until Herod a stranger came to reign, by whom it
was utterly cut off, and it is manifest these 70 weeks mentioned by Daniel,
must be understood of years else they could admit no other sense, which
reckoning from the decree, given out by Cyrus, to rebuild the temple, are 490
Years, and does answer to the very time of Christ's being in the World, and his
death, which necessarly falls in the last of these weeks, a thing so manifest,
that Porphyrius an avowed enemy to the Christian Religion could have no answer,
but that this prophecy had been devised after the event, which I am sure the
Jews, though as direct adversaryes, would be loath to admit.

5. It is most clear that in him who at that time was revealed to Israel,
whom the Christian Church does this day worship, was exactly accomplished
whatever was by the Prophets to^d concerning the Messiah, and it is no small
advantage for the Christian cause, that it needs but appeal to these records,
which have been keept, in the hands of her adversaries, where there is so
clear a portraicure of him held forth, both as to his person, his way of
coming, the place whence, the entertainment he should get, and his death, that
I must think it a contradiction to reason, how men should acknovvledge the Old
Testament, and not grant the New; since, it is clear the Jews look for no
other Messiah, then such an one as is held out by the Prophets, and they
acknowledge also the divine authority of Esaias, Daniel, Micah, Malachi, etc.
who do, by such clear marks point him forth, and show the Church how they
should know him when he comes, for truly it may thence appear, that it is not
more certain the Messiah should come, then that Jesus Christ is he: I would but
seriously ask what do the jews this day miss in our blessed Lord Jesus,
which the Old Testament allows them to expect in the Messiah, is it that he
came with no outvvard show, and glory, sure according to the Scripture, such
an one we ought not to acknovvledge; no, should he not be of the seed of the
woman, 2. Genesis who should be born of a virgin as Esaias shows, his voice not
heard in the streets, despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrovves; such an
one, as was shadowed out under the Law, who should be made a sacrifice for
sin, yea, come with no outvvard pomp, but meek, and lowly, and riding upon an
ass, was to be betrayed, and sold, and his price shevved by Zach for 30
pieces; a crucified dying Christ that should be wounded in the house of his
friends, and cut off from amongst the children of his People, O! can men
possibly deny so clear an accomplihment of these in our blessed Lord?

6 Is it not undeniable that the Jews now in their present case cannot
possibly expect the accomplishment of this promise? that the Messiah cannot
this day come, according to the Scriptrue, except they could be put in such a
condition, as they were then in at Christ's coming; certainly it is impossible,
that the Old Testament be ever fulfilled anent this, if it be not already, can
he come forth out of Bethlehem whilst now no such place is known by that name?
can he come into his Temple that is utterly destroyed, is there not now a
subversion of the tribes, and the family of David not known, at this day? yea,
are not the gentiles brought in, whom Isai shows, should be gathered under the
standard of the Messiah? does not the daily sacrifice cease? which the Jews
will confess has been for many ages, and this was to be after his coming, and
I would ask how was that ever fulfilled, that the glory of the second Temple
should exceed the glory of the first? for this cannot be on the account of its
structure, or outward magnificence, sure there is nothing, wherein this glory
could appear, but as it points at Christ, and the breaking up of that glorious
light, which was before its destruction.

7. There is an innumerable company who have embraced the Gospel, and received
the spirit by the ministry thereof since the times of the Apostles who have put
this seal thereto in all ages that it is the power, and wisdom of God* and
truly without partial respect (which the conscience of the worst of men have
been forced to justify) it may be said, these were the excellent of the earth
in their time, many of greatest outward parts, and abilities, whose moral
integrity, and candor was beyond question even with their adversaries, and
these both of Jews, and gentiles of all rancks of men, of all nations, and
languages, who not only by a naked profession, but by their walk, and
sufferings did show forth the power, and virtue of a crucified Christ, yea,
shine as lights whilst they were in the World to the conviction of onlookers,
and is not this a convinceing witness to the truth of the Gospel which its
enemies cannot possibly deny.

8. That excellent doctrine delivered to the Church in the New Testament by
Christ, and his Apostles does it not clearly show whence it is, and witness its
own authority? for here we may see a manifest agreement, betwixt this, and the
doctrine of the ancient Jewish Church, that as the five Books of Moses hold
forth the sum of the Gospel, the Covenant of grace, and that mystery of
Salvation by Christ, so the Prophets do carry it on with further clearnes, and
the Evangelists brings forvvard like an excellent edifice that is founded, and
advanced in the one, but perfected in the other, all breathing the same spirit
with a convincing tendency to the same end, so that we may say the old Jews
under the Law, were in effect Christians, and the followers of Christ now under
the Gospel in some respect are Jews, being one in the substantials of their
religion; for it is clear, that poor Apostat people, now in the Jewish nation,
has wholly departed from their own doctriue, and will not come to the light
that they may be judged according to the Old Testament; now in this I would
seriously attest the adversaries of the Gospel, if paganism, the Turks
Alcoran, or Jewish Talmud hold forth any such doctrine, or rule, as that which
the Christian Religion does, such pure, and excellent precepts to restrain the
inordinacy of corrupt affection backed with arguments becoming an immortal
soul, a doctrine so sincere, solid, and rational so consistent with it self,
and agreeable to the true scope, and drift thereof, which holds forth, the most
exquisite rule of perfection, for men to press after, yea, where every page,
and line breaths forth holiness toward God, and righteousness, and humanity
toward man.

9. I shall add, these clear convincing evidences of the truth of the Gospel,
which did attend the first publishing thereof, were so evident, and undeniable
a seal from the Lord as may force the greatest Atheist to silence, for. 1. They
were Jews as much concerned in the Religion of their Fathers as any, who did
first publish the Gospel, none more zealous according to the Law then Paul was
before his conversion, none also could challenge their driving any outward
interest hereby, since persecution, and bonds, yea, greatest hazard was that
which they could expect. 2. It is clear they walked by no rules of human
policy, nor these ordinary ways of insinuation, which the World does use, to
engadge men, and make a party to themselves, but did deliver the truth, truth
most repugnant to the flesh, and that interest, with greatest candor, and
simplicity, though likewise with a convincing authority, and confidence, yea,
came with a message to the World, which had no other convoy, or persuading
argument, but the evidence of its own truth, but withal, such a power
accompanying the same, before which men could not stand. 3. What is published
concerning Christ by the Evangelists, the great works he did, his dying at
Jerusalem with all the stupendous circumstances thereof, and signs from Heaven
was not a thing done in a corner, but in the public view of men, which in
these days was most notour, and famous, but yet there cannot be produced, one
contradictory testimony to the truth of these relations, by any adversary of
the Gospel, either at that time, or since; sure the World wanted no malice, and
these great things were airly published, by the Evangelists, and Apostles,
whilst much of that generation was alive, yet, it is clear, though in a matter
of that concernment, which made then so great a noise, and was at that time
putting the earth all in a flame, none was found, either among Jews or
gentiles, who could, or durst put forth a manifesto to discover the least cheat,
or falsehood, in these things attested in the History of the Gospel. 4. What
ever different parties, and sects, did break up with the first time of the
Church, to opppse the truth in other things, yet, in this they had all one
consent, that he who was crucified at Jerusalem, was the Messiah, and Christ,
which truly, did witness the clear irresistible manifestation of this truth in
these times, since if there could have been the least ground to challenge any
imposture, or deceit, in this great foundation of the Christian faith, it is
more then probable, these bitter contentions followed with such animosity, and
heat, and irritation of these whom the Apostles, and Church in that time, did
with much zeall, and sharpest censures pursue, would have engadged them to put
all the disgrace upon the truth which they could, if they might have had where
to fasten their teeth; I would further add, that even the arguments and
objections, which the adversaryes of the Gospel could ever bring, to oppose the
same, are indeed a convincing witness, and confirmation, and show how little
they could any way say, in giving their malice a vent, we find that absurd
alledgeance of the Jews that the great works Christ did in the days of his
flesh were by stealing the name Jehovah out of the temple, which they allege
he sewed up in his thigh, which truly needs no further refutation but the
reciting therefore, and, here they are even forced to witness the truth of these
relations held forth by the Evangelists as to the matter of fact, which we find
also these later Atheists such as Vanninus, Cardan, etc. dare not challenge, or
debate, only they would ascrive these great works which Christ then wrought,
to the influence of the stars, a challenge so absurd, that needs no other
answer but to relate it.

VII. We have that remarkable prophecy of the incoming of the Gentiles, a truth
indeed great, and mavelous, which as it is expressly held forth in the Old
Testament, yea, is there mentioned, Is. 54: ver. 1, 2. Is. 60: ver. 3, 9. is a
thing so clearly now written forth in the event, that I am sure, the greatest
Atheists can have no shift here, that in this strange work of God about his
Church, the Scripture has an undeniable accomplishment. Now to clear this let
us but consider.

1. That for many ages this truth anent the incalling of the gentiles was sealed
up in a prophecy, a thing so great, and astonishing to the ancient Jewish
Church that they could not well comprehend the same, until once the event
brought it forth, for this was indeed a mystery hid from ages, how the Gentiles
should be fellow heirs, of the same body, and partakers of the promise in
Christ, then the bounds, and extent of the Church did not exceed Judea that
small enclosure, whilst the whole World beside did ly buried like an out field
in dark paganism, it is well known that the most pleasant places of Africa,
Asia, and Europe, where afterward many famous Churches were, within these 1600
years was but a savage wilderness, Britain, Germany, and France, did then
worship the sun, and stars, they sacrificed to the Gods of the heathens,
yea, these eastern parts, on which the sun did first rise, did not then know
the God of Israel, a truth which not only the Roman, and Grecian Historyes, but
the records of particular Nations can clearly attest.

2. It is clear that this prophecy was not held forth in a general; but we find
the time also prefixed (with other special circumstances) when it should have
its accomplishment at the appearing of the Messiah, when he should be revealed
to Israel, before which time a bar was drawn in the way of the Nations, and a
wall of partition betwixt them, and the Church, until he stand up who should
hold forth an ensign to the People, and gather the gentiles under his standard,
which Esaias does clearly show, Es. 11: v. 10. and 34: ver. 1, 2. and 60: ver. 1,
etc. and then must the mountains flow down at his presence, Nations be born at
once, yea, the light break forth to the East, and the West, then should the
Children of the desolate be more then of the married wife, when this time, even
the set time for the gentiles is once come, and it may be very convincing, which
is indeed observable, that notwithstanding of a more flowrishing condition, of
the Jewish Church in former ages, when her grandour, and prosperity was more
tempting, and the neighborhood, and commerce which the Nations about had with
that People, yea, though by the captivity they were scattered, among the
Persians, and Babylonians, yet was there no stir, or change of the World, until
the appointed time once came.

3. It may be easy to prove the event of this prophecy, and its manifest
accomplishment, even at the time thereof, for this men can not deny, that the
Lord did visit the Gentiles with the knowledge of his truth, which then caused
such a change in the earth, as a great part of it has been brought from
heathnish idolatry to worship the God of Israel, and such who once were
strangers, and aliens, now made to profess the same faith (as to the substance
thereof) of the ancient Jewish Church, sure this truth needs not want a
witness, vvhilest Nations, and much of the known World has been for so long a
time, and, yet to this day are a visible proof thereof, a truth of such
concernment that in former ages made a great and stupendous change upon the
face of the earth, so that not only an innumerable company out of all Nations,
and languages, but the generality, the very complex body of Kingdoms, and
Nations can bear witness thereto, now the Gospel has been preached through
much of the World, yea, we may say, fevv parts thereof, where there has not
been some face of a Church, though the promise has not yet had its full
accomplishment, but we wait for (according to the Scripture) a more
flowrishing time, and great harvest among the Nations, when Israel shall be
gathered, how ever it is sure the Lord has in a great part fulfilled this his
promise, so that the Church might then with astonishment cry out, who has
begotten all these Children, who are these that flee as a cloud, like the doves
to their windows? O blessed day, in which the light did first break up on the
poor offspring of Iaphet who then dwelt in the shadow, and region of death. O
blessed day that brought salvation with it to the gentiles, wherein the Lord did
visit these dark places of the earth, which were full of the habitations of
cruelty, I think the sense of so great a mercy, should never let us want an
errant for giving thanks, yea, put much to silence our other complaints.

4. Is it not also clear that not only as to the time, but these very places of
the earth which Esai, and other of the Prophets did particularly point at, this
promise had an exact accomplishment? for it is this day manifest the isles
which we find so frequently mentioned, that these should wait for his law, and
the uttermost parts of the earth, whence he should bring the Daughter of his
dispersed, may have a clear commentar upon the same, from what the Lord has
done to Britain, and Ireland with other remote parts of the earth, yea, has
not the Aethiopians been made to stretch out their hands, even in these
sunburned places of Africa, has not Christ also had a conquest, where many a
black moore was through grace made as the snow of Salmon, and the feathers of a
dove, so that it is clear how these particular places, which were so often
pointed at by the Prophets have been visited by the Gospel, and fallen to the
share of the Church.

5. This change which by the incoming of the gentiles to the Church was wrought
upon the Earth, is a thing so great, and astonishing, that were it still in the
promise, and this not yet fulfilled, it would truly stagger our faith, how
such a thing should ever come to pass, and is there not here a miracle, that
the World cannot possibly deny? even this great work of God in bringing of the
gentiles, which without an extraordinary power, could not be effectuat, if men
will consider. First. That swift progress which then the Gospel had, how it
did run, and was glorified through the furthest parts of the earth, and like a
ligtning break forth from one place to another, so that in the Apostles time,
the Scripture does show, how most of the conspicuous Provinces of Asia, had
received the Gospel, and Tertullian who lived in the second Century, in his
Book contra Iudaos does there witness how many nations, and these most remote
from other, Parthians, Medes, Armenia, Phrygia, Cappadocia, Pontus, and
Pamphilia, with much of Egypt, and diverse parts of Africa, besides Rome,
Spain, and other places of Europe, were in his time almost wholly Christian;
for it is indeed clear that the bounds of the Church was then of a larger
extent then it is now at this day. 2. It is also undeniable that in this solemn
day of the Gospels spreading amongst the nations, suffering, and persecution
did all that time attend the Church, yea, in such a measure that as the writers
of these times do witness neither famine pestilence, nor the sword, did destroy
so many of the World, as then were of Christians in the two first centuries put
to death for adhering to the truth, and it is clear, that this great work of
God in such a swift spreading of the Church, was most discernable in these
times of hottest persecution, yea then was her most effectual grouth, and
increase, which upon her getting some rest, and beginning to flowrish with
external peace, was at a visible stand. 3 How mavelous a thing was this, to
be brought about (if we consider the many different languages, that did then
stop correspondence between the Church and the rest of the earth, for how could
the truth thus spread among the nations, yea, in such remote places of the
World Churches be planted by the Apostles, and have the Scripture translated,
and made legible to them without that extraordinary gift of tongues, which for
that end was then given from the Lord? sure beside sacred authority anent this,
reason may convincingly witness to the World the truth of such a miracle. 4. How
strange, and wonderful a change was this, that in so short a time the Gospel
should thus enlighten, and put such a luster on the most rude, and savage
places of the earth, where scarce humanity had been, and bring them from the
condition of beasts to men, should thus tame, and civilize the greatest
Barbarians, and cause the lion to ly down with the lamb, yea, by the preaching
of that Gospel, and of a crucified Christ, which as it was to the Jews a
stumbling block, so to the Greeks foolishnes.

And in a word was not this indeed a miracle how in a mattet of such high
concernment as that wherein men's soul, and everlasting interest lay they
should be turned off their old way, and Religion, in which they, and their
Fathers had been so long rooted, and that a little spark which did break up in
Judea, should bring down the idols of the nations, and burn up their temples.

Alace that there is so little of a large heart, of that primitive zeal, and
fervor this day among Christians for the enlargement of the Church, that such
merchants are now rare who would venture out to trade with other parts, for
this excellent ware, the merchandise whereof is better then of gold. O that in
these parts where the truth is known and professed, the Lord would raise up
men of such a spirit, and such a Magistrate, who would make it their work,
and lay down solid grounds how to advance the Kingdom of Christ in the dark
places of the earth, and reckon their interest in a foreign plantation upon the
account of the Gospel, no less then on the account of trade, we would pray,
and yet hope for this.

VIII. What we find foretold by Daniel, yea, by Christ himself anent the
destruction of Jerusalem, and ceasing of the Jewish daily sacrifice with the
rejection of that people, Dan. 12. ver. 11. Matthew. 24: ver. 2. has many ages
past come to pass, wherein the World may see how clearly the event does answer
this Prophecy, for it is manifest.

1. That this is a truth which does need no other witness, then the scattered
remnant, and desolate ruins of that once flowrishing Church, and nation of the
Jews which we see with our eyes at this day, whose present state is so
great a monument of divine judgment, so clear a witness to the Scripture that
I think men cannot look thereon, if they be in any measure serious, but must
have such a conviction.

2. What has befallen this people may it not be an astonishment to the World
in all succeeding ages? a stroke that has put them in a more sad condition,
then any nation, or people we ever yet heard of, that has cast them out of
their own land, scattered them as vagabonds through the earth, so that these
many ages they have had no scepter nor Lawgiver, no piece of the earth they
can call their own, but at the mercy, and arbitrary disposal of every place
they reside in, no privilege, or liberties but a naked permission to brook
their lives, and estates during the pleasure of these under whom they get
shelter, a people put by themselves with a visible mark of divine wrath upon
them, like a beacon set up for all the nations to look on, even these who were
once eminently owned of the Lord, who was known in their palaces for a refuge,
yea, it is very manifest that no stir or essay that ever they made for their
releef, but was still to their further ruin, and found Gods hand visibly cross
to them therein; sure Ammianus Marcellinus, a heathen writer did intend no
testimony to the Christian cause in relating that strange passage which near
his time fell out, how the Jews by Iulians warrant, and permission did attempt
to build the temple again, but a fire breaking up from the foundation thereof,
which destroyed many of the workmen, forced them with much terror to desist.

3. Must it not be some strange, and dreadful provocation, beyond the sin of
their forefathers, whereat so strange, and unusual a stroke does point? whilst
it is clear that notwithstanding frequent Idolatry, and departing from God when
they were at that height in wickedness to offer up their children to Molech, and
set up altars in the groves, to reject the message of the prophets, and thrust
some of them in a dungeon, yet, were only punished with 70 years captivity,
and after by Gods very immediate hand brought again, these who had taken them
captive concurring with them to rebuild the temple: but now how long and dark
has their night been since this judgment came on them, and though they could
not these many ages charge themselves with Idolatry, yet no savior or
deliverer has been raised up, no Prophet sent forth, no sign or appearance at
this day of releef, now for these 1600 years, yea amidst these frequent
changes and revolutions that have been in the World no change in their
condition, sure if that people were in speaking terms with their
consciences, this might put them to a strange demurr, what should be the cause
if they be not guilty of killing the Messiah, and that blood pursuing them;
what attrocious provocation beyond others they can condescend on, for which the
Lord does so long and so sore by such an unusual, and unheard of strok thus
contend.

4. What a mavelous concurrence of providence, and convincing appearance of a
divine hand was in this judgment, the besieging of Jerusalem by the Romans
trysted with the very time of the passover whilst so great a confluence of
people from all parts of the land were there on that account, that both sword,
and famine might contribute their help to destroy, what unreasonable and
astonishing obstinacy against all offers of peace, and the most pressing
insinuations thereof which Titus Vespasian made, even whilst, their ruin was
otherwise unevitable, an unheard of strife where the enemy did contend to save,
but they to undo themselves, how judicially hardened, under most remarkable
prodigies, and warnings which they had of that approaching desolation, divided
wholly amongst themselves, yea, so cruel one upon another within, that their
adversary without could not but look thereon with compassion. O what a stroke
was this wherein greatest Atheists would grant a fatality, for indeed men
cannot consider the same without acknowledging a divine hand and something
above ordinary means, and causes where all did thus meet together in a solemn
tryst to accomplish that Peoples ruin.

5. But it is here we may see a singular providence of God for his Church, that
these who of all the World are most violent enemies to the Christian truth, are
also a most convincing witness to the same, vvhilest, first, these do clearly
attest the Scripture (which is our alone charter) the divine authority of
Moses, and the Prophets, the true copyes whereof, they did most tenderly
preserve what ever absurd glosses some of their Rabbis have thereon. Yea,
durst never offer in the least to vitiat the original, but has had the same
transmitted, still from one age to an other, to which records that are this
day in their hand, the Christian Church can with much confidence appeal, and
demonstrat from the Old Testament the ^undoubted truth of the New. Yea, in this
we may appeal the Atheist to his conscience that the Scripture is no imposture,
or any cunning device of Christians which is so far witnessed even by the
greatest adversary, and maligners of the Christian Religion. 2. That strange
induration of the Jews, their unreasonable rejecting of the truth, who after
so long a time cannot see the cause which is most discernable in their stroke.
O is not this also a most convincing seal to the Scripture, and clear
fulfilling thereof that there is a vail over their mind as the Apostle shows,
whilst they read the Law, judicially smitten by the Lord with blindness, that
they cannot see until once this vail be taken off, and truly we may say there
is nothing in their judgment more strange and astonishing then such a
continued obstinacy against the truth, how they should be thus dark in the noon
day. But that herein the Scripture is fulfilled; so that we may even turn a
poison unto an antidot.

IX. That which is so expressly foretold in the New Testament, yea, is the great
drift of the Prophecyes thereof, The coming of Antichrist, and revealing of the
man of sin to the World, 2 Thiss. 2: ver. 3, 4, 7, 8, 9. has long since been
accomplished, wherein we may, say the wonderful corresponding of the event with
the prophecy is so clear, that this truth is now as plain, and obvious as once
it was dark to the Church, these things being undeniable.

1. How the Spirit of God in the Scripture has been in a more then ordinary
way particular, to point Antichrist forth by such notour marks, and characters,
that after ages may known him, if they will not shut their eyes, I confess it
is not strange the popish party should seal-up the Scripture, and forbid the
ordinary reading of it; since the breaking forth of that light would soon make
their Kingdom dark, for if men would but set the history of the Church since
the times of the Apostles, over against the Scripture, and make use of that
notable key for opening up the prophecyes of the New Testament it should be
then easy to know, the Antichrist is surely come, and who this is, and herein
does the Lords tender respect to his Church appear, that he does not only in a
very solemn manner, forevvarn men, anent this great trya^, and as it were by
the sound of a trumpet give an alarm, that such an adversary was coming, yea
of the time thereof, who would do more hurt, then all who had gone before,
but does also make so clear a discovery of the whole fabric, rise, and progres
of that party, with such particular circumstances and differencing characters
from any other enemy of the Church, as may render the World most inexcusable,
if they will needs dash on that rock, whereon the Scripture, has set so
conspicuous a beacon.

2. That this Prophecy should now want an accomplishment or Antichrist be yet
to come is a thing most repugnant to sacred truth, since it is sure, that
mystery of iniquity even in the times of the Apostles did begin to work, and he
who then for a time withheld his coming, the heathen Empire of Rome, has long
since been taken out of the way, which caused some Christians in these days
wish the standing, and continuance of that Empire, from the terror they had of
that adversary who according to the word they knew was to fill his room, yea,
do we not find the Churches trial from Antichrist should be the most sore, and
lasting trial of the Church under the New Testament, which after her begun
breathing from heathnish persecution, was to continue for many ages wherein the
word is most express, and cleir, that the rise, and fall of this enemy should
be gradual, and not at once, whose beginning, and first appearance might be
traced to the first times of the Church, and his close, and final run near the
second coming of Christ, by the brightness whereof he shall be destroyed, and
therefore, this is so much the subject of the Prophecyes of the New Testament,
the great intent, and scope of the Revelation of John, in which, the true state
of the Christian Church, with the various changes of her condition, even from
the opening up of the first seal to the blowing of the last trumpet, is
particularly held forth, and there may we all along trace the steps of the
rise, and fall of that man of sin.

3. That such an one as the Scripture points forth, who does most fully answer
to all these marks which are there given of Antichrist, has come, and been
revealed to the World, is a thing so very manifest that except men will needs
force their light, and conscience it cannot but be beyond question, and debate,
even such an one whose coming should be after the working of Satan with all
power, signs, and lying wonders, forbidding to marry, and to abstain from
meats which God had appointed, who sits in the temple of God, having a name
full of blasphemy, and does exalt himself above all that is called God, who
bewitcheth the Kings, and great men of the earth with his enchantements, yea,
even by his livery may he be known that he most usually has scarlet, and
purple, which I think truly mavelous how particularly these are mentioned in
the Scripture; and in a word, such an one whose traffic, and merchandise, is
not only gold, and silver but the souls of men, who should be drunk with the
blood of the Saints, and martyrs of Jesus Christ, under whose reign the Church
must flee to the wilderness, and there be latent for a long time, and his seat,
that city which is situat upon 7 hills, even that great city which does rule
over the Kings of the earth. O strange how men can acknowledge this for the
Scripture of God, and yet not see it fulfilled before their eyes, that there is
so vive an image, and portraicture of Antichrist there held forth, such
peculiar characters which do convincingly point at the Pope, and popish
hierarchy, yea could answer to no other adversary which Christ ever had under
the New Testament, either pagan, or Mahumetan, and yet so much of the World
does not know him when he is before their eyes.

4. It is clear that no age since Antichrist was revealed, did altogether want
some witness, to point him forth, even in the darkest times, many of whom loved
not their lives unto the death that they might seal this truth, and it may be a
question if more of the blood of the Saints, was shed under heathens then in
after times under Antichrist, yea, though we had not such express marks to
disover him from the word, it may be easy for men to judge, who that is, who is
this day so directly opposire to Jesus Christ, and the great design of the
Gospel, that assumes to himself what is alone due to God, to forgive sin, and
be worshipped with Religious adoration, does challenge a Magisterial power, and
supremacy, over the whole Church as its head, a style too great for any of the
Angels, who makes void the merit of Christ, and lays down a way of life, and
salvation, on the same terms that it stood in the Covenant of works, does
destroy the great intent of the Gospel, and in effect denies Jesus Christ to
have come in the flesh, who sets Heaven upon sale for money, and permits
none to perish and go to hell, but the poor, does dispense with the grossest
acts of sin and the expres commands of the Lawgiver, makes moral prohibitions
void by his authority, yea, halloweth the very stews, and most horrid acts of
uncleannes, takes on him to change the condition of the dead, and ensure to
their friends, the happy state of their souls, if they will make large
offerings on that account, O! who is this, is not that Antichrist, whose way
does state him in such direct terms of opposition to Christ?

5. Have we not cause to wonder no less at the strange induration, and
blindness, of the popish party, then of the Jews, that whilst the one does
confess the Old Testament; and yet knows not Christ, the other should grant
the truth of the New Testament, and not know Antichrist, that he is come, even
he after whom a great piece of the World, for these many ages has been
wondering, sure so clear an agreement betwixt this prophecy and the event may
not only put this beyond debate, but leave a conviction, upon the greatest
Atheists, of the truth, and divinity of the Scripture, for what ever former
times might pretend ignorance whilst this mystery was but working, now when
the man of sin has comed to his full height, and stature, and so clearly
revealed by the light of the Gospel, it takes away all excuse, and I profess
in these latter times, I cannot see how one can be a knowing Papist, and not an
Atheist also.

X, What was prophesied anent the killing of the witnesses under Antichrist,
Rev. 11: v. 3, 7, 8. we may say has clearly comed to pass, and at this day
may read the same, in the event, for it is manifest.

1. That dureing Antichrists reign even in the darkest times, there wanted not
some to seal the truth, and bear witness thereto, both by open confession, and
suffering on that account, which the Church Histories can abundantly make out.

2. That dureiug that dark night these who did give a testimony, and any way
appeared, against the grievous encroachments of Antichrists in behalf of
down-born truth, were put to prophecy in sackcloth, when there was nothing
left, but to weep, over the Churches ruins, and witness their detestation, and
grief, for the growing Apostasy of such times.

3. It is clear, that as the prophecy does point at some more remarkable
suffering, and persecution, which the Church was to meet with from Antichrist,
beyond all it had endured from that adversary in former ages, yea, a special
permission from the Lord to that party, to vent their rage and cruelty against
the Saints, which should fall out after the witnesses finishing their
testimony, who had so long in an abject, low condition, as in sackcloth
prophesied yea, when Antichrist should be at his height, and his Kingdom upon
the turn, that then must this remarkable killing of the witnesses be
accomplished; so, likewise did the event convincingly verify the same, for it
is known that upon the close of Antichrists reign, whilst the truth began to
break up, this sorest storm of persecution beyond all that had been before,
did then break upon the Church, even in its budding forth, that we may say,
that adversary did not only put forth the outmost of his power, and rage
against the Saints, but seemed in some measure to bring his cruel designs to
pass, which, the dreadful massacres in France, Province, and the Valleys of
Piemont, the sore and violent persecution of the Church through the
Netherlands, under the Duke of Alba, and in England by Queen Mary, in Germany
after the defeat of the Duke of Saxony, and Landgrave of Hesse can clearly
witness.

4. Is it not also clear, how this remarkable storm, and cutting down of the
Saints, over whose dead bodies their adversaryes did rejoice, was according to
this prophecy to be previous to some eminent enlargement, and reviving of the
Church, which did accordingly fall out in the event like a resurrection of the
witnesses from the dead, to the astonishment of the World, that immediately
followed upon the back thereof, so that when their enemies thought they had
gained their end, as they did conclude by such persecutions, particularly that
French massacre that the Protestant interest, should be quite ruined, they were
forced to see their labor in vain, and the Church more eminently flowrishing
after the same.

I shall but further add that Antichrist has not only been revealed, and his
Kingdom come to its height, but it is clear this day that it is on the falling
hand, and his ruin is now begun, upon which account we may say, yea, have
cause to sing that the winter is past, the fig tree puts forth her leaves
that shows the summers approach, yea, the singing of birds is heard in our
land let us go forth, and meet him who is now gone out as a mighty man, for the
salvation of his Church, and taken the fields against this great adversary of
his truth and people, on whose side victory does surely wait.

II. WHAT IS YET TO BE ACCOMPLISHED.
HAving touched a little some of the most concerning prophecyes of the
Scripture, both under the New and Old Testament, which are already fulfilled,
and the truth thereof so clearly written forth in the history of providence,
that we may say the most ordinary observers if they will not shut their eyes,
cannot want a conviction thereof, I shall now in the next place point at that
which yet remains of the prophetical part of the Scripture, to be
accomplished, these prophecyes which concern the Church in these last times,
whereby we may have a sure demonstration, how far the night is spent, and of
the near approach of that blessed day, of the liberty of the sons of God, for
this does finish the mystery of God, and fully perfecteth his work, if once
that which remains of the prophecyes of the word were fulfilled.

There are these truths the accomplishment whereof we have a sure warrant to
expect before the end; First, the full ruin, and downfall of Babylon. 2. The
conversion, and incalling of the Jews to Jesus Christ. 3. A solemn day of the
Churches flowrishing, both Jews, and Gentiles, which shall follow the
outmaking of the former promise. 4. The fall, and destruction of the Turkish
Empire, that cruel party who has been raised up, and established for
judgment, with whom the Lord shall yet reckon, for all that Christian blood by
them, so unjustly shed, seems clearly held forth, Rev. 16: ver. 12. 5. We are
also to expect after all these, that full, and last stroke upon Gog, and Magog,
and then the Lord is at hand, and that great mystery of the prophecyes, and
promises of the Scripture, shall then be finished, and at a blessed close.

I. We have the full ruin and destruction of Antichrist, and his Kingdom,
clearly prophesied, and in very express terms promised to the Church, 2 Thessalonians 2: ver. 2 8. Rev. 16: ver. 10, and 17. the accomplishment whereof we do
yet according to the Scripture wait for, that the God of truth who cannot lie
or repent, shall in due time assuredly bring about, and that this day
approaches when that solemn cry shall be heard, Babylon is fallen, anent which
we would consider.

1. That this judgment is already begun and the first step thereof visible, is
now clear, wherein men may see the event most exactly answer the prophecy, for
the Lord has begun to consume Antichrist by the breath of his mouth, and since
the first breaking up of the light, his Kingdom has been mouldering down
before the Word, has not Nations fallen off at the voice of the preached
Gospel? It is true the Church wants not sore con^licts, even under the Vials,
and it is the Lords way to try his People with such various uncertainties, that
when things have been most promising, another providence comes like a cross
wave, which seems to drive them as far back as once they seemed to be
forward, yet, it is sure, and should be beyond debate, that Antichrists
overthrow is upon a present advance, and that work of the Lord for his Churches
deliverance, is going fordward, for if we believe salvation by Christ upon the
warrant of the word, should we not also with much assurance believe that
Antichrists wound is deadly, and incurable, which he has got by the preaching
of the Gospel, which all the Physicians of the earth shall never help.

2. This is one of the greatest, and signal acts of the judgment of God, on
his Churches enemies, one of the most eminent manifestations of his glory which
he has reserved for the last times, wherein, the appearance of his hand, and
great power shall be very manifest, and we are to expect by this remarkable
stroke, that way shall be made for that glorious house, which Christ is to have
for himself in the latter days, which shall be built upon Antichrists ruins,
when that new bride both of Jews, and Gentiles, shall be prepared for the
marriage supper of the Lamb.

3. Though we are to expect on clear ground from the word, the Lords eminent
appearing by his immediate hand in this great work which shall be so convincing
in that day, and witness an extraordinary providence, that all onlookers must
with fear and astonishment confess that this is Gods own work, yet, it is also
clear, that he will therein make use of instruments fitted, and chosen for that
end, who shall be raised, and acted forth with a more then ordinary Spirit, to
execute the vengeance of the Lord, even the judgment written, amongst whom the
feeble shall then be strong, yea, we have ground to expect, that of the Kings
of rh^^arth, and the race, and successors of these, who in former times had
given their power to the Beast, shall the Lord raise up to hate the whore, and
make her desolate; O blessed are they who shall have a hand in so noble a work
to sack, and destroy that accursed City, built up with the blood of the Saints,
and martyrs of Jesus Christ.

4. We are not to bound the Lord, as to any particular time for accomplishing
this piece of his word, yet, we have clear ground to believe that Babylons ruin
makes have, and the day of the Lord upon her is near, whose sword is bathed in
Heaven, and that the instruments of his vengeance are making ready, one stroke
upon that party is already past, Antichrist has begun to fall before the word,
and must fall further until that great ^^roke, which shall destroy his seat,
and lay wast that land be accomplished; some promising evidences of its near
approach I would here point at. 1. The many prayers of the saints, which are
now before the throne, and cannot want a return, many who wrestled often with
the Lord on this account, though they are away, yet, are their prayers to the
fore, and waits for this solemn manifestation of the judgment of God, and the
blood of the Saints does not cease to cry, yea, has as loud a cry as ever. 2.
It is clear that the preached Gospel now since the light began to break forth
does ripen, and help to make the harvest more white then many ages formerly,
and truly if we consider how long the word has been sounding a retreat to
that party to come out of Babylon, and that for these 150 Years they have been
still acting in opposition to so clear a light, to such a solemn call, so many
warnings, yea, to such convincing discovery of the Lords being against them in
very remarkable providence, does it not show, at what an height their sin this
day is, and an obstinat rejecting of cure? 3. We cannot but see, how that
judgment which should be poured forth on Antichrist under the vials, is in a
great measure now verifyed in the event. 4. It is clear, and consonant to the
Scripture, that the Lords work is now hastening in the latter days, providence
in a^^ist motion and makes great advance, more quick changes in the case of
the Church both as to storms, and calmes, and her trials now must not be so
long as in former times, Romans 9: ver. 28. he will cut short his work in
righteousness, for a short work will the Lord make in the earth. 5. That
Antichrist and his followers, do this day seem to be at such an advantage, the
Lords work, as it were at a stand, yea, rather going back, this late reviving
of Antichristian Prelacy in Britain, and Ireland, with so visible a grouth of
popery there, and so dark an hour upon the reformed Churches abroad, I think,
on very solid grounds is a promising evidence, of the near approach of a further
stroke on that party; for it is clear both from the word, and Gods ordinary way
of ^^ocedure how a sharp storm is usually previous to some remarkable
enlargement of the Church, a very low ebb, before the turning of the tide, yea,
that every step of her advance, whereby she has gained ground on Antichrist,
has still had some conflict, and wrestling going before, and thus the Lord by
suffering does ripen his People for such times of mercy, for which time, O let
us pray, and wait, when the smoke of that accursed City shall ascend up to
Heaven, and his People be made to triumph in his praise, and sing that song,
Halelujah, salvation, glory, and honor to the Lord God, who has judged the
great whore, rejoice over her thou Heaven, and ye holy Apostles, and Prophets,
for God has avenged you upon her.

II. We have a clear ptophecy anent, the incalling of the Jews, and their
conversion to Christ in the latter days, held forth by the Prophets, and in
the New Testament very expressly mentioned, for the fulfilling whereof the
Church must yet wait, and long after, when God shall being again the capt^vity
of his ancient People, and say to that valley of dry bones live, anent which
we would consider, Isas. 11: ver. 15. Romans 11: ver. 24. Rev. 16: ver. 12.

1. That this promise does not only concern particular persons, or a few, but
the body, and generality of that people, is most clear from the Scripture, if
men would compare Isai. 11: ver. 11. Zach. 12: ver. 10. with Romans 11: ver. 25.
where it is undeniable, that their gathering must be as full, and remarkable as
their scattering, and as there is no nation so remote whither some of them are
not this day, that shall not hinder the fulfilling of the promise, but as Esai
shows, the Lord shall then assemble the dispersed, and outcasts, and bring
them back from the four corners of the earth, and furdest places thereof, yea,
does not the Apostle expressly show that it is all Israel, whereat this promise
points, for though they are enemies concerning the Gospel, yet, are they
beloved for the fathers sakes, because of the Covenant which was made with
Abraham, and his seed, and truly we have in this ground also to expect
something further then their conversion, that in this day, the Lord shall raise
the tabernacle of David, which is fallen, and plant them upon their own land,
Amos 9: ver. 11, 15. not only bring them to a visible Church state, but even
therewith some temporal restitution, and recollection of them as a Nation, yea,
may expect a return of the old blessing of that lands fruitfulnes which I think
is clearly held forth in that of Ames 9: ver. 13. that the plewman shall
overtake the reaper, the very hills drop down sweet wine, and melt as it were
in outvvard blessings on them.

2. That this promise has not yet had an accomplishment, is also clear from
the Word, for it must follovv the rejection of that People, and should not take
place until the fulness of the gentiles be brought in; which harvest for many
ages after was not to be reaped, yea, did not the Apostle hold this forth as a
mystery, a piece of the Scripture, which the ancient Jewish Church could not
well comprehend, when it was pointed at by the Prophets, and even at that
time was not understood, which surely could have been no mystery if their
conversion had reached no further then the Apostles time; and it is known, how
small a number since, of that People has yet been brought in to Christ.

3. We have much ground from the Scripture, that this day, this great day of
Iezreel shall be a very remarkable, and solemn time, which will even cause
astonishment to the Nations about and make a wonderful change on the face of
the earth, a time of Gods eminent appearance for that People, when his singular
respect shall be as manifest as formerly his great displeasure and anger was, a
time on which many of the choicest mercyes of the Church do certainly wait, the
return of many prayers, a large pouring forth of the Spirit, even on the body
of that People and all ranks, not only the familyes of David, Nathan, and Levi,
but also the families of Shimei, with a large outletting of gifts, yea, such a
time wherein the converted of Israel shall then see, and understand, how far
the glory of the second Temple does exceed that of the first, and shall be a
very conspicuous part of Christ's universal Kingdom, eminent for the power, and
purity of the ordinances, to which others shall look as to a most choice and
excellent pattern of a purely reformed, and glorious Church.

4. Besides the promise of him who is not like man, to lie, or the son of man to
repent, there wants not some very convincing providence to confirm our faith
anent this, if we consider how this People are still kept by themselves, amidst
all their scatterings not mixed or incorporat with other Nations, which is most
usual through long converse that People of several parts of the earth will
unite and join in one, is not their great increase also remarkable? What great
multitudes of them are in the eastern parts, yea, through most of Asia, in
Africa, and in these places of Europe where the Christian Church is, and all
this time their land not possessed but by a rabble of the Turks under whose
yoke they groan, and though the genealogies of particular families are at this
day much lost, yet there is still so much sure, and evident, as to the series,
and genealogy of the Nation that does difference them from any other People.

5. It is true the authority of the word should silence all our thoughts, how
so great a thing shall be brought about, yet, we may judge, that as a mean this
shall eminently contribute to the same, such a convincing stroke upon
Antichrist which must go before their conversion, wherein so manifest an
appearance of God, and the fulfilling of one of the greatest promises of the
New Testament, cannot but then stare them in the face, and with this the taking
away of that stumbling block of idolatry which has so long helped to harden
them against the profession of the Gospel.

I must shut up this with a sad regrate that whilst we have so clear a
promise, there is no more tender respect, and further essay to promot the good
of that People, who knows what a blessing might attend the use of ordinary
means, since this is an unquestionable duty, and men know not when they sow
the seed, whither this, or that shall prosper, alace that the usual deportment
of Christians with whom they converse, does often further help to highten their
prejudice against Christianity, let us long, and pray more for this day, a day
which shall bring so great a blessing with it to the gentiles.

III. There are many prophecyes both in the Old and New Testament which do
clearly point at a great flowrishing and prosperity in the days of the Gospel
which I humbly conceive are not yet fully made out, but shall have a more
remarkable accomplishment before the close of time, Isai. 60. ver. 13. Isai 65:
ver. 25. Isai. 66: ver. 12. Mich. 4: ver. 1, 2.

I confess the event will be the surest commentar, and until this appear men
should be sober, and cautious, that they darken not the counsel of God, and his
truth, with any wild fancy and aim to be wise above that which is written,
yet, I must think that with sobriery, and on solid grounds it may be safe to
judge that there are great things laid up in these promises for the Church,
that we cannot now well reach, yea, would scarce get believed until the
appointed time unvaile their meaning, I shall here but only touch ^ow it may
appear these promises are not yet fully accomplished, and what with a safe
warrant we may expe^^ in their accomplishment, as to the first we would
consider these things.

1. That these great promises which hold forth so eminent an enlargement, and
flowrishing of the Church, do also point at some particular limited time, some
period, and revolution of the Churches condition, which is not agreeable, and
common to other times, until which these promises do not take place.

2. This promised flowrishing concerns both Jews, and Gentiles, and the word
does clearly point at some further increase of the g^ntil Church by the calling
of the Jews, which must have a peculiar respect to that solemn time of Isreal's
restoration, and Antichrists ruin, a time on which the return of many prayers,
and the fulfilling of many promises in the behalf of the Church does surely
wait, so that as Esaias, and other of the Prophets do put over this great
flowrishing of the Church to the days of the Gospel, the Apostle Romans 11. does
point at a more precise time, wherein this in a larger measure shall be made
out.

3. We cannot find the Christian Church did ever enjoy so great an enlargement,
and flowrishing state as these promises seem to import, for persecution and
suffering has most been her lot, first from the Jews, next from her heathen
adversaries, and last from Antichrist, whose fall, and ruin we have ground to
expect shall make room for so great an increase of the Church, for how much
power Antichrist has, in so far is the Church keep under, yea, it is clear
how very short all her breathings have been.

4. It would appear so solemn a time of the Churches flowrishing whereat the
Prophets did so often point, as it has an undoubted respect to the days of the
Gospel, so in its full accomplishment must answer to that remarkable day of
Satan's binding, and the Saints Reign with Christ, when the Kingdoms of the
Earth become the Lords, which we find does immediately preceede Satan's last
lousing, and his going forth to gather his broken forces, for that great battle
which is to be very near the end.

I shall but add we have ground to judge the Lord will usher in that glorious,
everlasting state of the Church, even by some preparative degrees here, the
latter times are therefore to be reckoned the more blessed, the more near they
approach to the dawning of glory.

Now in the second place I shall but point at somethings which with a safe
warrant, we may understand, and look after, in the accomplishment of these
promises.

It is very clear they hold forth a great enlargement to the universal Church
both of Jews, and Gentiles, particular Churches may be in a sad withering
condition whilst other parts do flowrish, but these promises seem to point at
a day, which will concern the Saints in all corners of the earth, who shall not
want their share with the rest of that blessed time, it may be also clear, some
more bright, and hot sunshine of the Gospel is held forth, some such
remarkable springtide of the Spirit that shall be as discernable, as the
Churches low ebb sometime was, a day of the great power of God, his presence
very manifest among his people, and with the ordinances, beyond former times so
that Ezekiel. 48: ver. 35. the name of that place shall be called Jehovah Shammah,
the Lord is there, yea, that in this day Christ's visible Kingdom in a settled
Church state shall more eminently flowrish, and the flowing in of people and
nations with much fervor, who shall join themselves to the Lord, pure
ordinances, a more universal oneness amongst the worshippers of God, the walk
of Christians with a discernable luster of holiness, made to commend the Gospel,
Christ's goings full of Majesty, and the shout of a King which then shall be
heard among his People, the noise of such sad complaints, and bitter exercises
from the spirit of bondage, not so much among the Saints as in former times,
and though we see no sure ground from the word to expect such a favorable time
wherein the Church militant shall not have trouble and persecution from the
World, yet, there seems so much clearly imported in some of these great
promises, as point at a greater calm, and more favorable gale of outward
prosperity, which the Church shall then have, yea, this in some longer
continuance then in former ages, a day wherein the haters of the Lord shall
even be made to feign subjection with much of the countenance, and concurrence
of Magistrates, and the civil authority in behalf of the Church, yea, a time
of much holy fear amongst the people of God, and of much terror, and aw upon
his enemies, to which the great works of the Lord in that time shall then
effectually contribute and cause them fear the Lord, and his goodness in the
latter days.

IV. We have a prophecy held forth, Rev. 16: ver. 12. which comparing with Rev.
9: ver. 13. seems clearly to point at the fall, and destruction of the
Turkish Empire who have been these many ages so great a scourge to the
Christian World, for it is manifest that this drying up of the river of
Euphrates must relate to that very party which we find in that 9 Chap, raised
up from about that river where the Turk has so considerable a part of his
dominions, it is true the event will more clearly make this known, yet these
are undeniable.

1. That such a party was foretold by John in ^^at 9 Chap. and a solemn warning
given to the Church of so dreadful a storm, the time also there pointed forth
when Antichrist should be at a great height, yea, the portraicture of such an
adversary most evidently held forth, such as indeed they were found to be, a
terrible cruel destroying party, and therefore are said to have breastplates
of fire, their number also there held out to be a very great multitude, which
these huge armies usually brought by the Turk to the field, can witness.

2. The cause why the Lord should raise up so dreadful an enemy, and thus let
them louse, is also expressly declared in that 9 Cha. 20 ver. that it was in
judgment, and for a plague on men for Antichristian idolatry, which then had
so much overspread the earth, and it was no wonder, that when so much of the
visible Church was turned almost brutish in their Religion, and from the pure
worship of God, was carried after idols of gold, and silver, the work of men's
hands that so brutish, and barbarous an adversary should be let out for a
scourge; I truly think that as Antichrist, and the abominations of that party
has been hitherto the let of success against the Turk; so we are not to
expect the prospering of any such design, and his fall, and ruin, until the
cause be removed, for which the Lord did make use of this dreadful rod.

3. That such a party was raised up according to the prophecy, yea, at the
appointed time thereof, is very clear, who like a mighty deluge did overflow a
great piece of the earth, and with strange prodigious success, did overrun
much of Asia, some parts of Africa, and brake in on Europe to give work to
these kings, and great men, and be a scourge to them who had given their power
to uphold the throne of the Beast.

4. There is also clear ground from the Scripture that the Lord shall as
eminently appear in the fall, and destruction of this adversary as in the
raising of them up, and that by their fall, he is to make way for the
accomplishing of his promise, anent the Churches further increase, his
perfecting the fulness of the Gentiles, and bringing in his ancient people,
whereto this prophecy seems to have a particular respect, this we are to look
after as one of the great works of the Lord that is reserved for the latter
days which shall no less show forth his power and glory, even the drying up
of that great Euphrates, then in the day that he divided the sea, and made
Jordan a dry channel for his people to go through, we are not to be further
positive anent means, and instruments how such a thing shall be brought about,
it is eneugh what the Lord has spoken, and the word that is gone out of his
mouth shall not return in vain.

V. Now to close this, there is yet one great assault which we find the Church
shall have before the end, and then her warfare will be near finished, anent
which the Scripture is clear, that Satan for a little must be let louse, and
that solemn and perfect victory, which the Church in the close of time will get
over all her adversaries, shall be ushered in with a very sharp trial, and once
again this ungodly World will show its rage, ralley its broken scattered
forces, in a general muster Rev. 20: 8. with as much fury as ever, and there
shall the Lord eminently appear, that by one full stroke he may for ever decide
that long continued war, and feed betwixt the Church, and her enemies, a
deliverance which as it will be the last, so one of the greatest, that ever the
Church had, the Lord thus finishing his work of providence by so stately, and
magnificent a close; and truly after this we know no more of Canonick
Scripture to be fulfilled but the coming of the Lord, when the poor, tossed,
afflicted Church, shall enter unto a triumphant estate above all the violence,
and oppression of men. O blessed, and long looked for day, of Christ's return to
judgment, when the dust of the Saints that for some thousand years past have
been resting in hope, shall awake, and this earth, and all the glory thereof
like a poor vain show disappear? O blessed, and comfortable time in which the
saints shall then fully know what Heaven is, which they have so often admired at
a distance, to behold his face in whose presence is fulness of joy, and shall
need no further confirmations of the truth of the word, when once this great
promise of the Lords return is verifyed, a promise, wherein all these precious
truths which concerned the Church in her journey as so many streams, shall
empty themselves in this great deep, then there is no more to do, the work of
the Gospel is finished, the redeemed all brought in, and the Bride made ready
to go forth and meet him, who shall fully satisfy, and comfort his People,
according to the days of their former affliction, and be for ever their
exceeding great reward.

THE FIFTH ARGUMENT.
THat which not only is for the most part already accomplished, but is a thing
whereof we have so sure confirmations, yea, so great a pledge in our hand from
the Lord, that what yet remains shall be certainly fulfilled, must is not be
an undoubted truth? But the Scripture as to these special predictions, that are
not yet made out, is such, anent which the Lord has given his People, a very
large pledge, and strong confirmations now in these latter times, to believe
their certain accomplishment, Therefore, etc.

It is sure that a part of the Scripture some special prophecyes, which do
concern the state of the Church in these last times, has not yet had an
accomplishment, which are already touched in the former argument, and are
indeed so great concerning truths, that may cause us sit down, and wonder, when
we think these shall shortly come to pass; yet such, whereof we may be fully
persuaded, if we consider that they are held forth, and promised, by him who is
the God of truth, and the begun performance thereof, now so manifest, yea what
has been the Lords way, and the eminent providence of these last times which
may fully satisfy our spirits that Gods work is near to a close, and the
accomplishing of the whole Scripture now at hand.

I shall here point at 3 special grounds whence the godly in these times may be
thoroughly confirmed anent the truth, and certain out making of the Scripture,
and these prophecyes thereof, that yet are not fulfilled, which we should look
on, as a very convincing pledge in our hand of the same.

I. Ground whence we may be thus confirmed in our faith is this; that not only
the most part of the Scripture is already proved, and verifyed in the event,
but also, These truths which of the whole Scripture, are most strange, and
mavelous, yea, should have much staggered our faith if they were yet still in
a promise are this day certainly accomplished, I shall but only instance the
coming of the Messiah, which the Prophets of old foretold, that God should be
manifest in the flesh, and a virgin bring forth a son, whose name should be
Emmanuel, that was to dye, and be cut off out of the land of the living, not
for himself but for the transgression of his People, is not this now surely
accomplished^ Which we may say is the greatest wonder, the most astonishing
thing that ever was, or shall be, and should fully silence our thoughts, anent
any other Scripture truth, that is yet to be made out, for we now know that the
great bussines of redemption is put to a close, the ransom and price thereof
fully told down, now is the doctrine of the Gospel sealed, and attested by
blood even the blood of the Testator, it is now sure the promised Messiah has
come, and this is he, who in the days of Pilat suffered at Jerusalem, in whom
all things which were written by the Prophets, were truly accomplished. And is
not this a great pledge, to assure us of the real outmaking of every other
promise? It is sure he did dye, his blessed side was pierced with a spear, and
upon the cross he cried with a loud voice and gave up the ghost. O Here lies
the greatest cause of wonder, not what does yet remain of the Scripture but
that which is already fulfilled, not that Christ should come again to judge the
World, but that once he did come to the World, and become man; for God to be
found in the form of a servant and dye, that is beyond expression wonderful,
for the other must necessarly as a consequent follow, that he who has redeemed
the Church, and did pay her ransom should see the travel of his soul, and be
satisfied, that having made such a purchase, he should also have possession and
finish the building the foundation whereof was his own blood; I confess what
we do yet expect according to the promise, are great, and astonishing truths,
the full overthrow of Antichrist, and his Kingdom, that the dead bones of the
Jewish Church should again live, but especially Christ's return to judgment,
who shall be revealed from Heaven with flaming fire, the sound of the trumpet,
and voice of the Archangel, yet, how great so ever they are, and may seem hard
for us to believe, O how small comparatively are they, with that which is
already done and accomplished, the incarnation of the Son of God, a mystery hid
from ages, wherein the Angels with wonder do look, which we may say, is
unspeakably more great, then to creat this World, and turn it again to nothing,
it may be truly strange, whilst we read these prophecyes anent Christ, and
his Kingdom, in so plain an history, and profess that we believe he did dye,
and rise again, we should have such hesitation, anent the performance of any
other Scripture promise; is it not this day much more easy, to believe the
Scripture and fulfilling thereof, then it was of old for the Jewish Church
before Christ's coming? And how may we not with as much assurance, wait for the
second coming of the Lord, and a full perfecting of his word even from that
which is already verifyed thereof, as we are sure of the return of the sun
after it is gone down, and of the breaking of the day when once the night is
past.

II. Ground whence the godly in these times should be confirmed, anent the full
performance of that which is yet remaining of the Scripture, that it is sure,
yea, now near at hand, is this, that Jesus Christ is come to action against the
enemies of his Church, and has taken the fields, that surely he is now gone
forth in the greatness of his strength conquering, and to ^onquer.

This is a grave truth which might give us very sweet refreshing thoughts in
so shaking a time that whilst we have seen the Lords appearing by a great, and
outstretched hand for his people, these terrible stirrs, and concussions of the
nations, have seen him strike through Kings in the day of his wrath, and fill
the place with the dead body of his adversaryes, we may also on clear
Scripture grounds conclude, that the Lord is now awaked as a mighty man, and
upon the fields, yea, that the war is surely begun against Antichrist, and all
the adversaryes of his Church, which shall not cease until the full victory be
obtained, for indeed these providence which in these last times, should be
very affrighting, and terrible, when we go in to the word, we shall find they
have a comfortable aspect on the Church, and do presage her greater
enlargement, which as the tender buds, and leaves of the fig tree, are put
forth to show the summers approach, Luc. 21: ver. 28. it is true the Church is
now low, and the work of God meets with very sad interruptions which are
needful, both for trial, and rebuke, but this also is sure which none can deny,
that the Lord has eminently appeared, and done great things for his Church,
yea, we must say, he has, by a confluence of very remarkable providence, thus
condescended to strengthen his peoples hands, to confirm such who are ready to
stagger, even as it were by cruches, anent the greatness of these things which
are yet promised.

Now to clear this truth a little we would consider. First, How it is very
consonant to the Scripture and expressly held forth in the same, that in the
last times, and turn of the Churches case from Antichrist, the Lord will thus
appear, in his great strength, and set up his standard against his adversaryes,
yea, will then in a special way call forth his people, to glorify him by an
active testimony. 2. That the Lord has thus begun to appear according to his
word is a truth that is also undeniable, and should much help to confirm our
faith, anent the performance of that which further remains of the Scripture.

1. That this is manifest from the word may be thus clear. First, Though the
Church militant must not want an adversary, and some persecution from the
World, even in her best estate, yet, we have a safe warrant to expect that the
Lord will glorify himself in a peculiar way in his people now in these latter
days, by doing, and acting for the truth, as in former ages his glory did most
appear, dnreing Antichrists Reign, in his Churches suffering; for then the
faith, and patience of his Saints was to be witnessed in its season, Rev. 13:
ver. 10. and thus he would serve himself of his people, and bring forth his
glory, until that time of retribution, when these who had killed with the
sword, should be killed by the sword, and these who led unto captivity, be so
dealt with, which does also clearly promise some special outletting of the
Spirit for acting with these gifts of courage, and resolution suitable to the
service of the Church in the latter days, and truly I think it is a great
want we study not more the accomplishing of the promises, and how to improve
the same for gifts, as well as grace in order to the several times, and
necessities of the Church.

2. It is very clear from the Scripture that in the last days, when Christ is
to raise his Church from under the power, and tyranny of Antichrist he shall
then appear in a warlike posture, which John had showed to him, Rev. 19: v. 13,
14. as one upon the head of his forces, with his vesture dipped in blood, to
show that when once the war is begun, against his adversary, and this Lion of
the tribe of Juda begins to rouse himself up, what a terrible appearance he
vvil have in that undertaking, and it is clear, that the Lord has declared in
this his counsel, and will, that his Son Christ should in the latter times,
take unto himself his great power, and reign, Rev. 11: ver. 17. yea, cause
the World know him to be Head of principalityes, and powers, as well as of
the Church, for his glory in this truth as a King, which former ages seemed in
so great a measure to darken, must then clearly shine forth. I truly think
men's appearing with such violence, and rage against so concerning a truth, now
in these days does promise some eminent appearance of the Lord therein, and
that he shall yet more solemnly assert the same before the World.

3. Does not the Scripture point at the last times, as that special time of
recompense for the controversy of Sion to which the Lord has reserved a solemn
triumph of his justice, over all his Churches enemies, when he shall enquire
for the blood of his Saints, shed upon the earth since the days of Abel, at
Babylons hand, Revelat. 18: ver. 24. that great adversary, who stands in law
guilty, and has served her self heir to all the violence and cruelty done in
former ages, for in her hand must that cup be found full which the enemies of
the Church, from the beginning has been filling up, and as so many rivers, and
fountains has run unto this great sea.

4. It is also clear that in the last times, when the Lord shall bind up the
breach of his people, and heal the stroke of their wound, who, for so long a
time, had been trampled under by Antichrist, he shall by some signal
providence roll away this reproach, and scandal of meannes, contempt, and
persecution, shall put some glory on his Church proportionable to its former
abasement, yea, thus comfort her, according to the days, wherein he had
afflicted her, and cause his peoples uprising, in measure, and kind to answer
their low, and suffering state from Antichrist, even in the last times, when
the Lord shall make them appear with the face of a Lion, when the feeble shall
be as David, and as the Angel of the Lord, Zach. 12: ver. 8. which promise does
clearly point at the Churches raising, and delivery from Antichrist; upon the
back whereof we find the Prophet does foretell the last conversion, and
incomming of Israel.

5. I shall only add what the Scripture does most expressly show, that the Lord
shall so gloriously appear in bringing his Church out of Babylon, and executing
his judgment on that adversary, as in the day when he brought his people out
of Egypt, and therefore shall they sing, the song of Moses, and the lamb, Rev.
15: ver. 3. his great power, and outstretched hand, being no less discernable
therein, then if they had been standing with Israel at the red Sea, when they
saw their enemies lying dead upon the shore, yea, have we not ground to
believe, that the Lord shall make himself very evidently known in raising
instruments, and acting them forth, which has been already seen, and I am sure
the World must confess what great things have been done by these of whom
little was expected.

III. That the Lord has thus begun to appear, and make himself known to the
World in these last ages according to his word is a thing very easy to
demonstrat, for.

1. Is it not clear how in these last times, he has met his enemies upon their
high places, and in their greatest strength, that by a strong hand he did make
room for his truth, when both Law, and force did withstand the same, and put
the marks of his wrath, on such who would oppose the spreading of his Kingdom,
that they have been as visible, as sometimes their rage, and violence against
the Church was, yea, since the Lord begun to lift up a standard for the truth,
and call forth his People to act, has it not been seen they have losed their
ground more by underhand treaties, and turning aside to carnal politic shifts
then by open force, and violence, which the French Massacre, with other sad
instances can witness; for indeed the Church has still lost least, by greatest
opposition.

2. Have we not seen by what dreadful shakings, and alterations of the earth,
this late glorious reformation of the Church from Antichristianisme has been
ushered in, which has been more strange, and frequent, then in many ages
before; has not the Lord caused the Nations shake, and the earth to reel like
a drunken man, to show men that though he suffered long in former times of the
Worlds ignorance, he will not so now bear with opposing his truth.

3. Have we not also seen the Lords raising up men fit for action, in these
last times, men of a great heroic spirit, with some more then ordinary
elevation of the same, to appear for his intrest; such we may say that many
former ages could not instance, in which the Lords helping his People to do
great things, his suiting them with enduments for the service, and work of
the time, has been most discernable? Was not that excellent man the Admiral of
France, with many others in that place, eminently raised up, for the necessity
of that time, and do we not find, these Princes of Orange William, and
Maurice, and Mauritius of Saxony, whom the Lord raised against Charles the V.
and caused him flee over the Alps, yea, what mavelous resolution, and
courage, did attend the actings of the confederates of the Low Countries, and
in latter times do we not find Gustavus King of Sweden, Bernard Duke of
Weymar, Lantsgrave of Hesse, with many others eminently raised to avenge the
Lords quarrel against that bloody house of Austria, have we not also seen very
great instrumemts raised up in Britain, and Ireland, (who were followed with
wonderful success,) to act for the truth against Antichristian Prelacy, and
truly we must say the withdrawing in such a measure of that spirit of courage,
and resolution, which once was so visibly let forth in the first dawning of the
Reformation, may sadly point at a great decay of zeal, self confidence,
unfaithfulnes as to the improving of opportunities, for the Lord was with his
People, whilst they were with him, and did singly follow him, in his way, but
alace, with their departing, it may be said their strength has departed from
them, however, the quarrel is clear for an oppressed Peoples acting, upon so
just, so necessary an account as the interest of Religion against the cruelty
and violent encroachments of Antichrist, wherein as the Lord has eminently
owned his People, so, I dare not question he will yet appear, and silence the
adversaryes of this truth, by such an argument, against which they shall not
debate.

4. That unusual deludge of blood which for the 100 years past has overflowed
much of Europe can be a witness to this; that the Lord has taken peace from men
who would not embrace the peace of the Gospel offered in these last times, and
given his enemies who had shed the blood of the saints, blood to drink in great
measure. I am sure poor Germany can prove this, which for 20 years together,
was a field of dead men, and France from the days of Henry the II. to the
establishment of Henry the IV. how long was the Low Countries made a stage of
war, where many a cruel Spanjard did fall under the svvord of an avenging
God, besides the late bloody vvarres in Britain, and Ireland, and what does
this declare, but that Jesus Christ has taken the fields, and it vvil not be
now with the Kings of the earth, to oppress his Church, and withstand the
truth as in former times.

I shall but add, how wonderfully has the Lord appeared in delivering his
Church at the greatest extremity, has turned his enemies counsels and designs
upon themselves, brought about the great works of these last times by means
so unexpected, and improbable, that we may say, as to what of his judgment
is already execute against Antichrist, has been no less mavelous then that
Jerichoes walls should fall at the sound of a trumpet of ramhorn, or a cake of
barley bread tumbling into the host of Midian should smite, and overthrow the
same, surely when we consider, what the Lord has done, and how exactly that
does answer the Scripture we may have much to confirm us, anent the further
accomplishment of his word, and be assured that the term of his long suffering
toward Babylon is at an end, war is denounced, and the execution already
begun, which must not have a close until judgment be accomplished into
victory.

IV. Ground which may confirm the faith of the saints, and be as a pledge in
their hand of the full accomplishing of the Scripture, yea, that this is near
is this, that the day is now turned and that prophesied victory which the
Church should have over Antichrist before the end, is not only begun, but in a
great measure advanced.

This is indeed a great confirmation when we see so mavelous a crisis in the
Churches case, her recovery from so desperate, and hopeless a disease, already
begun, that it shall be further perfected, we are made to wonder at the greatness
of these things yet promised, but why should we not also wonder at that which
God has already done for his Church in our days, the Scripture does show that
Antichrists ruin must begin by the word, that this stroke shall be gradual, and
however, that great work of God meet with much opposition, yet, it shall no
more go back in the whole, and must we not say in all this the word is
fulfilled, it has not hitherto failed the Church, but the event in every
circumstance made to answer to the same.

Now to clear this we would consider these two. First, that the Churches
victory over Antichrist is this day so far advanced. 2. How the Lords very
immediate hand has been most discernable therein.

I. The first I need but name whilst it is so manifest, what the Lord has
wrought for his Church, for we have seen Kingdoms, and Nations, subject
themselves to the truth, the kingdom of Antichrist grow dark, with the
breaking up of the light, and many of his followers made to gnash their teeth,
being scorched with the heat and power of the gospel, in how great a measure is
that interest now shaken, if we consider, what the Lord has wrough, what a
great reformation has been in Britain and Jreland, through much of France,
Germany, Sueden, the Low Countries, Pole, Denemark, yea, even in Hungary, and
Transylvania, sure this was a great work, which should be mavelous inour
eyes, how that Antichristian Empire contrived with such wisdom underpropt with
so great strength, whose commands not long since were received as Oracles, with
an avv, and respect only due to God has in such a measure begun to fall
before the power of the word. O the righteous judgment of the Lord. which he
has showed forth upon that adversary, and should be a pledge to us of the
further manifestation thereof, an adversary we may say the greatest that ever
the Church had, whose little finger has been sorer, then the loins of all who
went before, if we consider his cruelty over men's bodies, tyranny over their
conscience, with so long a continuance of that trial; in respect of whom it may
be said Pharaoh was an easy taskmaster, Antiochus, and the Roman Emperors
mild, who for near 1200 year did carry on a despeart, and bloody war against
the Church.

II. The Second which I would at some more length follow forth is this, how the
Lords hand and something of an extraordinary providence has been no less
discernable in this late raising of the Church, and her begun victory over
Antichrist then in the First planting of Christianity by the Apostles, this is
a truth which to many may seem strange, but when seriously considered, if
prejudice do not darken men's judgment, will appear from sure and solid
grounds; now to demonstrat this I would here offer some very convincing
witnesses, which may help to strengthen the faith of the Godly, and give
Atheism some dash.

FIRST Witness to this truth is that wonderful success which the Gospel in
these last times has had, wherein men must see, the great power of God, and
efficacy of the Spirit, in some measure as manifest, as in the first rise of
the Christian Church, if we consider.

1. From what a small spark, so great a fire did break up which in a short time
put Europe in a flame, and made so great a change therein, even Luthers
appearing against Texelius upon the account of his indulgencies. O but Gods
time of working may be often contraire to our time of expecting.

2. What a swift progress did the gospel have? may we not say with wonder can
a nation be born at once, yet, this we have seen how many Nations and Cities in
one, and the same age yea, in less then 40. years, was brought in subjection
to the truth, and these instruments whom scarce any durst own at first, made to
see great Princes with armies on the fields for the interests of Christ.

3. Have we not seen Religion propagated by martyrdom, no less then in the
primitive times, and men's essaies to ruin the Church helped it further to grow.
O what but a divine power could thus bring gold out of iron, and clay, bring a
flowrishing Church out of their ashes, and turn her poison to a preservative,
but alace it is sad that whilst men were burned for the truth, and reading the
Scripture, their affection did also burn in reading the same, but now with our
liberty there is so great a decay.

4. Must not the wise, and politicians of the World, confess this late
increase of the Church is a thing above their reach, most cross to all their
rules, which they cannot see how in an ordinary way it could be brought about.

5. Were not instruments most unlikely for so great a work if we would judge as
men, that such a poor handful, as Luther, Zuinglius, Melanchton, Bucere, etc.
should go forth to confront that power which then made the earth to tremble,
might it not seem as improbable as the sending forth of some fisher men to
subdue the Nations?

6. It is known they were none of the Rabbis of the time. whose repute and
fame might have purchased easy access to their message, nay they were loaded
with all the reproach which their adversaryes could devise, with novelty of
doctrine, deceit and falsehood in their dealing, represented to the World as
Monsters, Luther was forced to answer himself a printed relation of his death,
how he was carried away soul and body by the Devil.

7. Was not the message they carried most opposite to men's carnal inclinations,
to these principles they had sucked in from their infancy, to the religion of
their Fathers, yea, in a word, had no outward encouragements, the whole World
seemed to combine against them; Luther, at his first appearance excommunicated
by the Pope, proscribed by the Emperor, and good Melanchton was often made to
faint, when he thought on so great a speat of opposition, so that without the
convoy of an extraordinary power, nothing could have looked more improbable.

SECOND. Witness that may let the World see a wonderful providence in this late
raising of the Church is this, these sharp assaults which the Church met with
from a party, no less cruel, and powerful then any adversary which the Church
had in the primitive times, for I am sure the World must confess that no
ordinary mean had wanted for an essay to crush the gospel in its first budding
forth, that both counsel, and force, the authority of law, backed with
greatest rage and violence in its execution, yea, the power of the Princes of
the earth was put forth to the utmost, to withstand this great work of God in
these last ages, to clear this I shall only point at some remarkable assaults
which did tryst the dauning of the gospel that may show something above nature
going along with it.

1. We find a Spanish Emperor devoted to the popish interest, more powerful
then any who went before, brought in on Germany with the very first breaking up
of the light, which might seem a dreadful let to the Gospels spreading.

2. The rise of the Boores, and Anabaptist party, whose way being so gross,
destructive to civil order, to the interests, and proprieties of men, did look
like a sad tryst, and a probable mean to beget much prejudice against the truth.

3. That sad overthrow of the Duke of Saxony, and Landgrave of Hesse, who were
such great patriots to the Church, did then threaten the very ruin of the
Protestant interest in Germany.

4. The Council of Trent where the Popish party had all their politics on foot
in a strong combination, how to ruin the Church.

5. The Interim of Germany a most subtle contrivance to divide, and thus break
the strength of the Protestants, was also a sore assault, a snare to some, and
cause of persecution to others.

6. That Spanish Inquisition established through Spain, Italy, and the Low
Countries, a horrid cruel engine which did reach to prevent the smallest
glancings of the truth:

7. The French Massacre where not only the Admiral, but most of the
considerable Protestants were through all France in a few days cut off, O
would not this seem an irrecoverable stroke together with that Catholic
league, which did quickly follovv upon the back thereof, a very strong and
formidable combination to root out the Protestant interest.

8. The taking away of Edward the sixth of England, and establishing of a cruel
persecutor Queen Mary did indeed look like a stroke that should root out the
Church in that part, and destroy that famous plantation of the Gospel, in its
tender grouth.

9. I must add that which was as sore an assault to the Church as any, so
grievous a difference which with the first breaking up of the work of
Reformation, did begin betwixt Luther, and Zvvinglius about Christ's presence
in the Sacrament, yea, came to such an height, and with so great heat, and
animosity was follovved, as in appearance would have wholy frustrat the
work they were about.

THIRD. Witness to this truth is that wonderful patience, and resolution of the
Saints, yea, with much chearfulnes in their greatest sufferings, which in these
late times did appear. Wherein the World must confess that same immediate
support from Heaven, yea, the Lords owning his People in a very extraordinary
way, was no less manifest, then in these primitive sufferings of the Church
from heathens. Sure no by past times, even in these bloody days of Nero,
Domitian, etc. can show more horrid, more strange engines of torment, and
cruelty then what in these last ages the Church did endure, from the Popish
party, whose savage, and barbarous usage of the poor flock of Christ, where
ever they had access, may witness a cruelty more then humane, and as to the
number, are they not almost without reckoning, who in France, Germany,
Britain, and the Low Countries, beside other parts, were slain within this
150. Years, for the word of God, and the testimony of his truth. Now as this
is most manifest it is also known what a divine, and an invincible spirit with
an astonishing courage, and resolution, did appear in the carriage of the
People of God, under this sore persecution, how they triumphed over their
oppressors, and did cheerfully meet death in its most terrible shape, a thing
which the Schools of Socrates, and Plato, with all their rules could never
reach, yea, should be reckoned, amongst the miracles of these later days,
anent which we would consider these things.

1. That something more then nature, a spirit, and resolution above the
ordinary rate of men, yea, something much above themselves, their natural
temper, and disposition did in their most extreme sufferings often appear, and
this without the least shadow of affectation, and deceit, I am sure the World
in these last ages, yea, the conscience of their persecutors, and of the
greatest Atheists must witness this.

2. That many of the most soft, tender disposition, many women whose complexion
would declare more weakness, yet in this late Antichristian persecution, did en
dure greatest torments, and by suffering triumphed over the fury, and rage of
their adversaryes, whereof we have many instances in record.

3. The World has been also a witness how serious, and deliberat the Saints
were in this, that they made suffering their choice, which they could easily
have shunned, at the rate of yielding something in the truth, but ere they
would do this, or give the adversary such a bribe, they choised to embrace
death, and go to a stake for Christ, even when they wanted not most persuading
offers to turn them aside: for instance I would here mention that excellent man
in Queen Maryes time Julius Palmer who not only had life, but preferment
offered if he would recant, to which his answer was, that he had quit his
living in two places for Christ, and now was ready to yield his life also on
that account: likewise one William Hunter, whom Bishop Bonar did urge with many
offers to recant, told him it must be Scripture arguments, and not perfwasions
of that kind, for he reckoned all earthly things, but dross, and dung in
respect of Christ, and at the stake when a pardon by the Sheriff was offered
upon such an account, did peremptorly reject the same. Antonius Riceto a
Venetian when condemned for the truth had a large offer to have his patrimony
restored, which was much morgadged with debt, and made free, beside his life,
if he would but a little yield, and likewise had his son weeping on him for
that cause gave this answer he was resolved to lose both Children, and estate
for Christ. I shall add what we have related of one Hervvin, who suffered
in the lovv countries, to whom the Magistrates made great entreaties with
large promises to recant, which he wholy slighted, many more instances of
this kind here might be set down.

4. It is known, that such who were of great repute in the World, and had a
large share of outward things to tempt them, did in these last times most
cheerfully part with the same, and choice rather suffering for the truth: we
may instance these 2. great witnesses John Frederick of Saxony, and the
Lantsgrave of Hesse, who under that long imprisonment by Charles the 5. bare
out many sharp assaults both by threatenings and offers, without yielding in the
least to the prejudice of the truth, yea, on this account did the Duke of
Sanony forgo with his estate, and dignity. Annas Du Burg counselor of the
Parliament at Paris of great parts, and repute, who before Henry the II. had an
excellent speech in Parliament, for the Protestant party, for which by him
being imprisoned, did forgo all his honors, and interests in the World, which
otherwise he might have brooked, and embraced death for Christ. The Prince of
Condee at the massacre of Paris, when the King expressly showed him he should
within 3 days dye, if he did not renounce his Religion, told him, his estate,
and life were in his hand, but ere he renounced the truth he would quite both.
Charles de Zeroton a Moravian Barron of great interest, and authority in that
country in the late Bohemian persecution did quite all his estate, and
possessions for the Gospel, not withstanding of many large offers, and
persuasions, we find also in England the Duchess of Suffolk, a lady who lived
in the fulness of the World, and pleasures thereof, yet in Queen Mary's time,
did quite both estate, and country for the truth, and on that account did
choice a very hard lot in other parts.

5. Is it not also known how these who had been ready to faint, and be
overcharged with discouragement, yet, at death in the extremity of their
suffering, did show a mavelous resolution, and chearfulnes, a thing which no
Atheist can possibly answer, and shows Gods very immediate support. Mr Glover
how sore was he cast down, and could feel no joy, or comfort after much
wrestling, but no sooner did come in sight of the stake, but his soul was
filled with the joy of the Lord, and with his strength, which forced him to
clap his hands, and cry forth to a friend who knew his former damp, and
discouragement. Oh Ausline he is come, he is come, and thus cheerfully went to
death. Thomas Hudson a choice Christian who suffered in Queen Maryes time,
when at the stake, did slip suddenly from under the chain, to the astonishment
of the People, but not from fear of death, but from the want of feeling of
Christ, which made him full of heavines, but after his turning aside, that he
had got his soul poured out to God, he returned as one raised from death to
life, crying out, Now I am strong, and do not care what man can do, and thus
with much joy, did yield up his spirit. Likewise Annas Du Burg whom we before
mentioned being through fear, and discouragement drawn to recant, had no rest
in his spirit, until he retracted the same, and after did cheerfully undergo
death; with what mavelous resolution did that excellent man Doctor Cranmer
put his right hand to the fire when he came to the stake, and suffered to burn
without shrinking, which as he said he would punish, for subscribing a
recantation which was so much thereafter his grief.

Last I must add, that mavelous joy, and resolution which the Saints in
these late times, did in their greatest sufferings show, is very notoure, and
known to the World, for their sufferinge was not in a corner, and we may
say, has not come short of the primitive martyrs but did witness the same
spirit, and power accompanying them. I cannot pass this in a general without
giving some touch, amidst such a multitude of convincing instances, let us hear
blessed Bradfoord at the stake, thus speak to his fellovv sufferer, be of good
comfort, for we shall have this night a merry supper with the Lord. Latimer to
Ridley ^^ shall this day light such a candle in England, as I trust shall never
be put out. Mr Sanders, I was in pris^n until I got ^^^ prison; and at the
stake embracing cries welcome the (...) of Christ, welcome everlasting life.
Doctor Ferrer to a gentleman who bemoaned his death, and the painfulnes of it,
if ^ow see me once stir in the fire, believe not my doctrine, as did after
appear, for he stood without moving in the midst of the flame. John Ardley, if
every ha^r of my head ^ere a man, it should suffer death in the faith I ^^
stand ^^ Elisabeth Folks embraceing the stake cried fare well World, fare well
faith, and hope, and welcome love. Robert aguires son when at Lile in the Lovv
countries he suffered with his father for the truth, in the year 1556. did cry
forth at the stake, behold millions of Angels about us, and the heaven opened
to receive us after he had sometime fixed his eyes on heaven, and when the
fire was kindled, says to his father yet a very little, and we shall enter
into the heavenly mansion. Mr. Tims an English minister in Queen Maryes days
thus writs to his friends, I am going to the Bishops colehouse but shall not
be long there, before I be carried up to my brethren, who are gone to heaven
before me in a fiery chariot; follovv you after me, where you shall find
me singing merrily at my jurneyes end, holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath.
Algerius an Italian martyr thus writs from his prison a little before his
death, who would believe that in this dungeon I should find a paradise so
pleasant; in a place of sorrow and death, tranquillity, and hope of life;
where others vveep I rejoice. O how easy and svveet is his yoke, and this he
subscribs from that delectable orchard of the Leonine prison. Guy de Bres the
ringing of my chain has been sweet ^^sick in my ears, all my former
discourses were but as a blind wans of colors, in respect of my present
feeling. O what a ^^ious comforter is a good conscience. The Lord Henry Otto a
Bohemian, who suffered in the late persecution, said to the minister, I was
troubled but now I feel a vvonfull refreshment. O now I fear death no longer I
will dye with joy and on the scaffold cried out, behold I see the heavens
opened, pointing with his hands at the place where others observed a certain
brightness that did dazel their eyes, and thus dyed with great chearfulnes. I
shall but add the last words of that holy, and great Mr Wishart, who thus
spoke amidst the fire, this flame does torment my body, but no whit abate my
spirits.

FOVRTH. Witness is these great, and remarkable judgments of God, which in
these last times have befallon the adversaryes, and persecutus of the Church
who have been most notour for their opposition to the truth, wherein we must
say a divine hand has been so discernable that ordinary observers could not
pass the same without a remark, but must acknowledge the righteous judgment
of God, that it comes not by guess and at an adventure, but does convincingly
seal the word.

This is indeed a grave subject wherein we should be very serious, and sober,
for the judgments of God are a great depth, nor can we determine from events,
but in so far as they answer to the word, it may sometime happen to wicked men
according to the work of the righteous, but on the other hand it is a sure
truth that God is known by the judgment he executs, and in every age does
point out sin to the World by remarkable strokes, some great examples of
judgment, which as a beacon are set forth for men to observe, and truly we
may say these remarkable instances of the judgment of God, since he begun to
sound a retreat to his Church from Babylon are fan beyond other preceding
ages. I would be spareing to repeat what of this kind is published by others,
b^t that in speaking to this truth, I cannot pass it in a general^ whilst
there are so many instances wherein the Lord has made himself known, and
these such a convincing seal, and confimation of the truth, and Protestant
cause in these last times, anent which, and the following relations, I dare
with confidence say, there is not any passage, or matter of fact, here set down
without some clear, and satisfying grounds as to the certainty thereof.

I shall first instance Charles the V. whose undertakings, for many years were
followed with success, until once he set himself to persecute and oppress
the Church, and bathed his sword in the blood of the Protestants, with his
cruel, and unjust usage of the Duke of Saxony, from which time, his affairs
begun visibly to decline, he is forced to fly before Mauritius, and seek a
retreat in the furthest confines of the Empire, and after broken with
melancholy, and discontent, like another Dioclesian, does resign his empire,
and turn to a private life.

Philip the II. of Spain, one of the greatest persecutors of the Church in
these last ages, whose work was to root out the Protestant Religion in his
dominions, and therefore set on foot that horrid engine of the Inquisition,
yet, at last finds all his essays frustrat, and after the loss of many
millions of treasures, and of some 100000 Lives by war, yea, of a considerable
part of the Netherlands, and after the breaking his great Armade at sea against
the English by every remarkable stroke from Heaven, is at last smitten of the
Lord in his body by a strange disease, or rather a con^uence of diseases, which
his physicians could neither understand, nor cure, his body falling out in
grievous boyss, whence (besides putride matter) there did issue such abundance
of Vermin that bystanders could hardly cleanse, or endure the horrid smell
thereof, that he who had put so many of the Saints to cruel torments by the
Inquisition, was himself tormented, for 2 years together with unexpressible
pain and anguish.

Henry the II. of France a most violent enemy to the Church whilst he had
caused sentence Annas Du Burg to death, having solemnly protested in such
words, these eyes of mine shall see thee burnt; a little before the appointed
time of his execution, running in the lists with a spear against Count
Montgumry, is pierced through the eye, with such a wound, that in a short time
sent him to his grave, and frustrat his expectation of seeing the death of that
excellent man. His son Charles the IX. that bloody persecutor, I shall mention
elsewhere how remarkably the judgment of God did pursue him.

Henry the III. who (whilst he was Duke of Anjou) did assist at that horrid
Council keept at St. Cloud, near Paris where the Massacre was concluded is some
years after stobbed to death by a Jacobin friar in that very chamber, a thing
which Du Serres does twice mention with a remark, as a ma^vellous instance of
the judgment of God,

The Duke of Guise, the great executioner of that Massacre, with his brother
the Cardinal, a special contriver of the same, are not long after killed by
Henry the III. at Blois, with whom they had often joined in Council, to root out
the Protestants, and which is very observable, by a specious show of friendship
were circumvented, and with solemn oaths, and promises as treacherously
reached as the Admiral, and Protestants by Charles the IX. was at Paris, and
these 2 who were his great Counselors, thus are they dealt with, blood
measured out to them for blood, and treachery as they had dealt treacherously
with the Saints.

We find also the Duke of Aumale who was a joint actor with the Duke of Guise
in that massacre does a little after fall by a shot off the walls at the siege
of Rochel, which not only Du Serres, but also Davilla, who was very popish does
particularly relate, where we may see, what a bloody end the great contrivers,
and actors of that horrid massacre had.

Henry the IIII. a Prince of excellent parts and great natural accomplishments,
was followed with mavelous success whilst he owned the truth, yet, after
many victoryes, and the breaking of the Catholic League, turns popish, and
ab^ures the protestant Religion, but lo within a little, he is stobbed in the
mouth by a Jesuit, on which a protestant Gentleman used this freedom with him,
Sir, you have denied God, and his truth with your mouth, and he has given you
there a stroke, take heed you, deny him not also with your heart; lest the next
stroke be there, which as the French History shows, did accordingly fall out,
when he was stobbed by Ravilack, Du Serres his own Historiographer does show it
was through the very heart, and it was too evident, that sometime before his
death, he had turned too cordial; and zealous for the popish interest.

Ferdinand the II. a great persecutor of the Church in Germany, who after his
victory over Frederick and the Bohemian States, made it his work to root out
the Church and Protestant Religion there, and turned that country unto a
bloody shambles, not sparing any rank, who would not abjure the truth, but a
short time after we find the avenger of blood (in whose sight that of his
Saints is precious) persueth him, raises up the Svveds for an adversary under
whose svvord most of these cruel vvretches, that were the Bohemian scourge
does fall, turns Germany, and the Emperors countries in a field of blood,
breaks that great army which for many years had given Law to Germany, so
that as some historians mention, an army of 24000 Captains, because all old
expert soldiers was broken in the plain fields with a hudge slaughter, yea,
the violence, and cruelty of the popish party, thus measured out to them, as
they had measured to the poor Church of Bohemia, and the Palatinat, and
Ferdinand the Emperor broken with breach upon breach, that men may see, the
judgment of God persuing a bloody persecutor.

These barbarous cruel Irish who of late carried on that horrid Massacre there,
sparing no Protestans what ever was their age, or rank without compassion to
women, or children. O how visibly did the judgment of the Lord reach them, and
for that savage blood shed give them blood to drink in great measure, their
chief leader Marguier, Machune, and after Philomy Oneale taken, publicly
execute, most of them consumed by the sword, their spirits so debased, that a
few English, or Scots Soldiers would have chased multitudes of them, so that
the World might see divine vengeance eminently persueing them, which in a few
years did root out most of that cruel generation.

We have an observable instance also recorded of Sir James Hamiltone natural
Brother to the Earl of Arran who in King James the V. time was by the Popish
Clergy promoted against such as was then suspected of favoring the Protestant
Religion, in which place he was most terrible, and cruel against all he could
reach, yea, so violent that some of his near kinsmen, were by him brought under
the lash of his power, but lo, when at his greatest height, whilst, he is
making it his work to cru^h the Gospel in its budding forth, this is made the
mean of his ruin, and by one of his friends whom he persued on the account of
Religion, he is accused of treason, and notwithstanding of the solistation of
the Popish clergy for him as their great Patriot, he is presently arraigned,
beheaded, and quartered in the public street of Edinburg.

It is also known what violent persecutors Cardinal Beaton, and his successor
Bishop Hamilton were, who were no less conspicuous instances of the judgments
of the Lord in that time, also what befell one friar Cambel, who did bitterly
rail on that excellent man Mr Patrick Hamiltonne when he was burnt at St
Audrews, to whom Mr Hamiltonne at the stake in great vehemence said, wicked man
thou know the contrare, and have sometime professed the same, I appeal the
to answer before the judgment seat of Christ, and within a few days after,
(which in that time was very notoure) this friar fell sick, and in great
horror of conscience as one mad died.

There are indeed many such remarkable instances, it is known how the judgment
of God did pursue these 2 great Apostates from the truth, Olivares Chancellor
of France, Latomus, and Francis Spira, who after they had quit their
profession, and over their light denied the truth dyed with great horror of
conscience, crying out to bystanders what a hell they found within them, Du
Serres does show, how that Chancellor of France through the torment, and
anguish of his mind, caused the very bed to shake under him, but since there
are many examples of this kind, already upon record, I do the more briefly
touch it; and shall only add, some few, which are worthy of a remark in our
own land, how visibly the Lord did pursue by his judgment, some who had
deserted the truth, and turned opposers, and persecutors thereof in their
promoting Antichristian Prelacy contrare to their former profession, and
engadgements.

1. I shall instance Mr Patrick Adamsone, a Preacher once of great repute in
this land, but one whom ambition, and private interest swayed more, then the
interest of Christ, who insinuating himself in the Kings favor made it his
work to overturn the established government and discipline of the Church until
he got himself settled Archbishop of St Andrews, and Prelacy by his means
advanced, which the Church from her first Reformation from Popery had
disclaimed, yea, in this height of his power, and grandour, turned an avowed
persecutor of his brethren; at which time he used to boast of 3. things that he
said could not fail him, his riches, learning, and the Kings favor, but a
little after, as was then most known, he was by the righteous judgment of God
brought to this pass that his parts did so far wither, and dry up, that in
seeking a blessing on his meat he could scarce speak a few words to sense,
though once admired for his eloquence, as for his riches, he was forced to get
charity from these Ministers whom he before persecuted, and for the Kings
favor he was so abhorred by him that as he himself professed when the stroke
of God brought him to some sense of his condition, he was sure the King did
care more for the worst of his dogs then for him, and thus in great misery
dyed, cast off by the World whose favor he had only sought, his public
acknowledgement of his guilt, and apostasy, and of the Lords hand pursuing the
same, was by himself subscribed, before diverse eminent, and worthy Ministers
of the Church, who did also by their subscription attest the same, and was
afterward printed.

It is also manifest how the Lord in his judgment did pursue that vvretched
man his successor Bishop Spotswood who in a more subtle way did endeavor
the overturning the discipline, and liberties of the Church, for setting up of
Prelacy, and by underhand dealing got himself first thrust in Glasgow, and
after to be Archbishop of St Andrews, yea, at last, was Chancellor of
Scotland, his eldest Son a Barron in Fife, and his second Son President of the
Session, his Daughter also married to Rostine then a considerable Barron, but
let us see vvhither this ends, what an eminent example in all these respects of
the judgment of God he was, and therein the prophecy of that great man Mr
Welsh accomplished, who did foretell in a letter whilst he was prisoner at
Blackness, that he should be as a stone cast out of a sting by the hand of
God, his name should rot, and a malediction on his posterity, and truly this
is known what become of himself in the year 1638. how he was excommunicated by
the Church, did flee into England where in great misery he dyed, his eldest
Son Sir John Spotswood was sometime brought to beg his bread which is known
to many yet alive, his second Son who was President of the Session, being
taken at the battle of Philips hauch, was beheaded at St Andrews, and his Oy
young Darzie beheaded at Edinburgh, and for his daughter who was married to
Roslin, it is known how quickly after that estate was rooted out, and turned
from that race.

Mr James Nicolsonne one very eminent in his time for parts, and judgment in
the effaires of the Church, yea, once very zealous for the truth, and a great
opposer of Prelacy, when it first begun to assault the Church, but at last was
turned aside, by Court insinuations, gets the Bishopric of Dunkel, yea, turns
most fordward to promote that interest, but lo in a short time he is stricken
by the Lord with sickness, and great horror of conscience within, can get no
rest, his friends in vain endeavoring to comfort him, and when they would have
brought physicians, he told them his disease was of another kind, for which
they could give no physic, which pressed him more then his sickness, that
against so much light, and over the belly of his conscience he had opposed the
truth, and yielded up the liberties of the Kingdom of Christ to please an
earthly King, and he charged his Children that nothing which he had acquired
since he was Prelate, should go amongst the rest of his estate, and thus in
great bitterness, and grief died, whereupon his brother in Law Mr David Lindsey
then a witness made some Verses is Latin.

Solatur frustra conjunx, solantur amici,
Et medicum accersi, sedulo quisque jubet.
Sed dare solamen nemo, dare nemo salutem,
Te praeier poterit, Rex Iacobe, mihi.
Quae corpus gravat, atque animam, tantum exime mitra
Huic caput, hujus onus me premit, and perimit.
Mr William Couper, sometime minister of Perth one who witnessed much zeal
against Prelacy, both by preaching, and writting, in a letter to Mr Greorge
Grhame, who had writ to him entreating his charity toward his own conforming,
he has these words. Sir, for your self I never hated you, but the course you
are in I never loved, how dangerous is their estate who cannot rise but with
the fall of many, who in Christ have entered the right way to the ministry,
closing these fountains which God has opened; doing in a matter of conscience
with doubting, turns men's light to darkness, whence follows induration,
therefore I cannot stand with you except to witness to God in my heart against
you, and thus shuts up his letter, oonsider your self where you was, and where
you now are, and quantulum sit illud propter quod nos reliquisti, this I set
down to show what sometimes he was, yet shortly after this man turns to a
Bishopric, was loathed by the Godly in that time, some of his old friends
brought his own sermons to him, and desired him to reconcile them with his
after actings, which did visibly affright and disquiet him, and one day being
at pastime near to Leith, he was suddenly terrified with apprehension that he
saw armed men, coming upon him; these who were which him told him, there was
no such thing, it was only a dream, vvhereupon he became silent, and fell a
trembling, but after he went home, took bed, and dyed in much anguish, and
trouble of spirit, being observed to point often with his finger to the earth
crying out these words, a fallen Starr, a fallen Starr. It was also known
how for diverse years, he had been seized upon with an Hypochondriack
distemper apprehending he was all glass, vvhereupon worthy Mr Simson of
Sterling who had sometimes been his familiar, hearing of his Court-advancement
had this line. Aureus, hen, fragilem confregit malleus urnam.

A very convincing instance of the judgment of God in that time, was one Mr
Andrew Foster, Minister at Dumfermling who being sent Commissioner to the
Assembly at Glasgovv 1610, and solemnly adjured as he should answer to Jesus
Christ by his brethren, not to consent to any alteration of the government of
the Church, yet notvvithstanding, voted for Prelacy having got 50 Merks from
the Earl of Dumbar, who made use of that argument to break some of these
wretches, a small sum indeed to sell the cause of Christ, and by him very dear
bought, for after his return, he falls in sickness, and upon his recovery from
that was seized with horror of conscience, so that he run out of the pulpit
whilst he was going to preach, confessing he had sold Christ at that Assembly
for money, that being poor, and having a numerous family, he chused rather to
make have, then believe, and thus laid aside his ministry requesting Mr John
Murrey, who then was silenced by the Bishop that for Christ's sake he would take
the charge of that place, after which he fell in a great distraction, and
became in some measure mad, and though he did something recover, yet, dyed in
great infamy, poor, and drouned in debt, a very convincing example of the
judgment of God. This old Mr Row of Carnock being then a minister in the same
Presbitery sets down under his hand which he most certainly knew.

I shall only add 2 remarkable instances of the Lords judgment, within these
few years that should not be past without a remark.

The first, relats to a considerable family in this country, who made it their
work to trouble, and persecute the Minister of that Parish, an eminently holy,
and faithful man, yea, upon the account of his faithfulness; the old Lord of
that house, out of malice does pursue him with a false libel before the Sinod
using all means he could to reproach his name, having it as his design, either
to get him broken, and put out of the Parish, or at least to crush his spirit,
and weaken him in the exercise of the ministry; but does there meet with a
disappointment, the Lord cleiring the innocence of his servant, and the malice
of the other, so that even such who otherwise wanted not a prejudice at him,
were forced to acknowledge this, at which time that Gentleman, whilst he went
to the stable where his horses were, being then at the Sinod upon that account,
is in the place stricken with sickness, forced to haste home and take bed and
there seized with such horror of conscience, which made him often cry,
entreating most earnestly for his Minister whom he had thus persecuted, and often
had these words, O to see his face, yea told his friends that if he would not
come to him, they would cause carry him to his house, but his Lady out of
malice did in a most rude, and violent way hinder the Ministers access to him,
and thus that poor Gentleman in great horror, and anguish dies: after his
death his Lady does still pursue the quarrel with no less malice until she
also falls sick, and therewith had much terror upon her conscience, yea, did
no less cry out for the Minister, then her husband, who then was
providentially absent, so that she was put to cry, and in that denied, which
she did hinder to her poor husband, though at last, he came to her before her
death, to whom she with much bitterness confessed her vvrong. After this a
young man their chaplain, who had been engadged by them to appear as a witness
against that godly man was so terrified in his conscience that he could get no
rest until he went to the next Sinod, to acknovvledge that horrid sin, in
bearing false witness against his Minister, but being there keept by some from
a public appearance, he went to another part of the country, where it is
certainly reported he dyed distracted. Now last of all the young Lord who
did succed in that estate, would needs pursue the quarrel, and finding more
access through the change of the time, did so endeavor with some who were
in power, that an order was past for banishing him out of that Parish, and
though he was then otherways staged, upon the account of the public cause,
yet, it was known the violent pursuit of that Gentleman was the main cause
of this sentence, which these who had hand in passing it did themselves
confess, for he had solemnly svvorn, that if he lived in that place, that man
should not be Minister there, but lo a fevv days after, having returned to his
house, and boasting, how he had keept his word, and now got his Minister
cast out of the parish, he was suddenly struck by the Lord with an high
fever, which plucked him away in the very strength of his years. This I had
related as it is here set down, from a grave Christian, the party himself
being present, which he did humbly decline to relate, though he could not but
assent thereto.

Second is one David Mackbryar who was a member of the late Parliament being
one of the commissioners of the Burrowes, a man most notour in the country
where he lived for a lewd, and gross practice, but most remarkable and known
beyond others, for his violence, and rage against the Godly, as he showed by
his carriage, both in the Parliament, and afterward where he could have
access did set himself to trouble, and persecute such under that reproachful
name of fanatics, but within some time thereafter whilst he was forced to
retire by reason of debt, for fear of caption, he was found one day walking
alone by one who was then comed out of the North to that country, and had
riden forth, to see if he could catch any of that party whom he judged was then
lurking, and supposing upon his rencounter that he was surely one of these,
would needs apprehend him, but he upon his resistance, and struggling against
him was by him run through with a sword, and immediately killed on the place,
upon that very account, and persuasion, that he was a phanatick, and rebel as
he then termed him, thus he who had declared himself an enemy to the people of
God whom he was wont in reproach to call phanaticks, was himself under that
very notion, and upon that ground cutted down by one of his own stamp, and
principles. O was not this the finger of God, and a convincing proof of his
righteous judgment.

FIFTH Witness which holds forth the Lords eminent appearing, and something of
an extraordinary power, in the late raising, and reformation of the Church from
Antichristianisme, is this that large measure of the Spirit, and outletting
thereof which did convincingly follow the Gospel and ministry of the word in
these last times a truth which we must say, has been manifest and by many
solemn proofs thereof demonstrat, no less then in the first planting of the
christian Church.

It is undeniable how great a witness to the truth, the Spirit, and down-powring
thereof is, for this is Gods own seal, which is not put to a lie, or falsehood,
thus he bears witness to his work in the hearts of his people, and by this also
the Lord does seal, and attest the doctrine of the Church, and commission of
his servants who publishes the same, yea, at some special seasons, when the
truth has least countenance, or encouragement from without, times of
contradiction, when men will not receive its testimony, and a great speate of
opposition is to the Gospel, then has this in a more full and large measure
been discernable, thus did the Lord eminently own, and confirm the Christian
Religion in the days of the Apostles, and for some following ages, by so great
a downpowring of the Spirit, such visible, and extraordinary effects thereof,
as did then astonish the World, and force men to confess something above
nature, that this was surely the great work, and power of God; and have we not
also cause to say, that thus the Lord has born a very solemn testimony to his
truth, the work of reformation, and doctrine of the reformed Churches in these
late times; anent which I dare appeal by standers, yea, the adversaryes to
their conscience, if without shutting their eyes, they could shift the
conviction of a convincing appearance of God in the power, and efficacy of the
Spirit, even in a more then ordinary way, accompanying the word, and
ordinances, a power which carried kingdoms, and cities before it, yea in a
very short time over the belly of greatest violence, and opposition: to clear
this a little I shall point at some few remarkable evidences, which might stare
the grossest of men in the face, and in some measure convince them of this
truth.

1. It is evident that mavelous conquest which the Gospel had in Germany, by
the ministry of Luther, Melanchton, Bucer, Martyr, Musculus, and a few others
of these excellent instruments whom the Lord then sent forth, O was not this a
day of the Spirit, and pouring forth thereof in a large measure, a day of the
gospels triumph, not by might, or by power, yet such as before it the World
could not stand, cities and countries might then be said to be born at once the
arm of the Lord revealed with the same, that men were either scorched, or
truly warmed and gained thereby. Did not that mavelous power, and efficacy
of the spirit also attend the ministry of Zuinglius, and Oecolampadius, in
Zurick, and Basile, when so through a reformation followed, to the throwing
down of Images, abolishing of the Mass by public authority notwitstanding of
its long continuance; and this in a short time; the spirit, and power of God
did very eminently appear also, in these famons plantations of the Gospel by
the Ministry of Calvine, Farel, and Vires in Geneva, Lausanna, and other
adjacent Provinces. It is written in the life of Vires, that at Lions which was
a great populous city, he preached in an open place, where diverse thousands
were converted to the truth, yea, some who came by with no purpose to hear,
only out of curiosity stepped in, were so wrought on, and overcome with the
power of the word, as for that time made them neglect their other business.

2. That great success which did attend the ministry of Mr Wishart in Scotland
can also witness this truth, whence so mavelous a change did quickly follow,
in these places where he preached through Angus, Lothian, and the western
parts, yea, how much the spirits of the people, were then raised and affected
with the word, but this being a thing so known from the historyes of that time,
I only name.

3. Besides these which are more known, and upon public record, I must here
instance a very solemn, and extraordinary outletting of the spirit, which about
the year 1625. and thereafter was in the West of Scotland, whilst the
persecution of the Church there was not from the prelatick party; this by the
profane rabble of that time was called the Stewarton Sickness, for in that
parish first, but after through much of that country particularly at Irwine
under the ministry of famous Mr Dickson it was most remarkable, where it can be
said (which diverse Ministers, and Christians yet alive can witness) that for
considerable time, few Sabbaths did pass without some evidently converted, and
some convincing proofs of the power of God accompanying his word, yea that
many were so choked and taken by the heart, that through terror, the spirit
in such a measure convincing them of sin, in hearing of the word, they have
been made to fall over, and thus carried out of the Church who after proved
most solid, and lively Christians, and as it was known some (...) the most
gross who used to mock at religion, being engadged upon the same that went
abroad of such things, ^o go to some of these parts where the Gospel was then
most lively* have been effectually reached before their return; with a visible
change following the same, and truly, this great spring tide which I may so
call of the Gospel, was not of a short time, but for some years continuanc^*
yea thus like a spreading moor -- burn, the power of Godliness did advance from
one place to another* which put a mavelous luster on these parts of the
country, the savor whereof brought many from other parts of the land to see
the truth of the same.

4. I must also mention that solemn Communion at the Kirk of the Shots 20 June
1630. at which time there was so convincing an appearance of God, and
downpowring of the Spirit, even in an extraordinary way, that did follow the
ordinances especially that sermon on the Monday 21 June, with a strange unusual
motion on the hearers, who in a great multitude were there conveened of diverse
ranks, that it was known, which I can speak on sure ground, near 500, had at
that time a discernable change wrought on them, of whom most proved lively
Christians afterward, it was the sowing of a seed through Clidesdeal, so as
many of most eminent Christians in that country, could date either their
conversion, or some remarkable confirmation in their case from that day, and
truly this was the more remarkable that one after much reluctance by a
special, and unexpected providence was called to preach that sermon on the
Monday, which then was not usually practiced, and that ^ight before by most of
the Christians there was spent in prayer, so that the Mundays work, as a
convincing return of prayer might be discerned.

5. I shall he^^ ^lso instance that solemn, and great work of God, which was in
the Church of Ireland some years before the fall of Prelacy about the year
1628. and some years thereafter, which as many grave, and solid Christians yet
alive can witness, who were there present, was a bright, and hot sun-blink of
the Gospel, yea, may with sobriety be said, to have been one of the largest
manifestations of the Spirit and of the most solemn times of the downpowring
thereof that almost since the days of the Apostles has been seen, where the
power of God did sensibly accompany the word with an unusual motion upon the
hearers, and a very great tack as to the conversion of souls to Christ, the
goings of the Lord then full of Majesty, and the shout of a King was heard in
the solemn meetings of his people, that as a judicious old Christian, who was
there present, did express it, he thought it was like a dazeling beam, and ray
of the glory of God, with such an unusual brightness, as even forced by standers
to an astonishment, a very ^ffectual door opened, with more then ordinary
enlargement, which the Ministers of Christ there did find in preaching the
word, whilst the people might be seen hearing the same in a melting frame with
much tenderness of spirit; surely this was the very power of God a convincing
seal to the truth, and ministry of his Servants, who were then persecuted by
the Prelates, yea, ^ thing which as it was known, had an awful impression, and
was a terror to their adve^saryes. I remember amongst other passages what a
worthy Christian told me, how sometimes in hearing the word, such a power, and
evidence of the Lords presence was with it, that he has been forced to rise,
and look through the Church, and see what the people were doing, thinking from
what he felt on his own spirit it was a wonder how any could go away without
some change upon them. And then* it was sweet, and easy for Christians to come
30* 40 miles to these solemn Communions which they had, and there continue from
the time they came* until they returned, without wearying, or making use of
steep* yea, but little of either meat, or drink, and as some of them professed
did not feel the need thereof, but went away most fresh, and vigorous, their
souls so filled with the sense of God.

6. That was also a remarkable time wherein the Lord did let forth much of the
Spirit on his people in the year 1638, when this Nation did solemnly enter in
Convenant* which many yet alive at this day do know, how the spirits of men
were raised, and wrought on by the word, the ordinances lively, and longed
after, for then did the Nation own the Lord, and was visibly owned by him,
much zeal, and an enlarged heart did appear for the public cause, personal
reformation seriously set about, and then also was there a remarkable gale of
providence that did attend the actings of his people, which did astonish their
adversaryes, and forced many of them to feign subjection. Alace how is our
night comed on, for the Lord has in anger covered the face of the Daughter of
Zion with a dark cloud.

7. Must not we also say, since the land was engadged by Covenant to the Lord
in these late times, what a solemn outletting of the spirit has been seen, a
large harvest with much of the fruit of the Gospel discernable, which we may
say with a warrant, has been proven in the inbringing of thousands to Christ,
a part whereof now are in glory and many yet live who are a visible seal to
this truth* of whom I am sure some will not lose the remembrance of these sweet
refreshing times, which the land for several years did enjoy of the Gospel and
of many solemn Communions, where a large blessing with much of the Spirit, and
power of God was felt ac^ompanying the ordinances; if it were expedient to set
down circumstances, I could here point at many such remarkable times, and
places, which should clearly demonstrat this.

Now besides these more public, and obvious proofs, it is known what a great
testimony, the experience of the godly in these late times could give to this
truth, what they have in a large measure felt of the power, and refreshing
outlettings of the spirit within their ^oul, yea, how often after sorest
downcasting have been wonderfully raised above themselves* and filled with the
consolation of God, and joy unspeakable; this would indeed make a great volum,
to reckon over all these instances, even these whose experience in these last
ages could in a large measure witness this truth, only to s^ut this up I shall
name these two.

1. Mr Welsh, and Mr Forhes two great witnesses of Christ in this land, when
they were prisoners, give this account of their case in a letter to Mr James
Melvin, and his Uncle, then at London, which under the said Mr Melvins hand is
set down in a manuscript of his, their wotds are these. Dear Brethren, we dare
say by experience, and our God is witness we lie not, that unspeaka^le is the
joy, that is in a free, and full testimony of Christ's royal authority,
unspeakable is the joy of suffering for his Kingdome^ (for on that truth was
their suffering stated.) we had never such joy, and peace in preaching of it,
as we have found in suffering for the same, we spoke before in knowledge, we
now speak by experience that the Kingdom of God consists in peace and joy, and
in an other letter, thus they say, our joy has greatly abounded, since the
last day (which was after passing sentence of death on them by an assize at
Linlithgow) so that we cannot enough wonder* at the riches of his free grace,
that should have vouchafed such a gift upon us to suffer for his Kingdom in
which there is joy unspeakable, and glorious, and we are rather in fear, that
they (to wit the sufferings) be not con^^n^^ed, and so we be robbed of further
consolation, then that they should increase, surely there is great consolation
in suffering for Christ, we dow not express unto you the joy which our God
has caused abound in ^^.

2. I shall also mention that great Servant of Christ Mr Rutherfoard whose
Letters now published can witness what solemn days of the Spirit and sensible
outlettings thereof; he often had in his experience. Though books can tell but
little what he really felt, and enjoyed. I shall only set down some of his
last, and dying expressions, which I had from these who were then present, and
caused write down the same from his mouth, that may show, how lovely he also
was in his death, and how well that did correspond with his former life, some
of his words are these, I shall shine, I shall see him as he is, and all the
fair company with him, and shall have my large share, it is no easy thing to be
a Christian, but as for me I have got the victory, and Christ is holding forth
his arms to embrace me. I have had my fears, and faintings as an other
sinful man to be carried through creditably, but as sure as ever he spoke to me
in his word, his spirit witnessed to my heart, saying fear not, he had accepted
my suffering, and the outgate should not be matter of prayer, but of praise, he
said also, thy word was found, and I did eat it, and it was to me the joy, and
rejoicing of my heart, and a little before his death after some fainting, he
says now I feell, I believe, I enjoy, I rejoice, and turning to Mr Blair then
present he said; I feed on Manna I have Angels food, my eyes shall see my
Redeemer, I know that he shall stand at the latter day on the earth, and I
shall be caught up in the clouds to meet him in the air, and afterward has
these words, I sleep in Christ, and when I awake, I shall be satisfied with his
likeness. O for arms to embrace him; and to one speaking anent his painfulnes
in the ministry; he cries out I^disclaim all, the port I would be in at, is
redemption and forgivenes if sins through his blood. And thus full of the
spirit, yea, as it were overcome with sensible enjoyment, he breaths out his
soul. His last words being Glory, Glory, dwells in Em^^nuels land.

SIXTH Witness is that convincing appearance of an extraordinary, and Apostolic
spirit on some of these instruments whom the Lord raised up in these last
times, and these great enduements wherewith they were sent for the fervice of
the Church, and overthrow of the Kingdom of Antichrist, a truth which we must
say if not in such a measure, yet, has been no less evident then in these
primitive times, when the Christian Church was planted.

It is clear that extraordinary gifts, and enduements have been let forrh to
the Church under the New Testament, for with the first dawning of the Gospel
there was both Apostles, and Prophets raised up, it cannot be also denied that
since the Cannon of the Scripture was closed, yea, in these late ages there
has been very extraordinary men given to the Church, who had special
revelations from the Lord of his mind anent things to come, which though we
should not now look after, yet herein did the Lord remarkably condescend, when
some great piece of service, and necessity of the Church did more call for it,
and truly these were led in no other path then that of the word, though they
had a more special discovery, and immediate inbreathing of Gods mind as to the
application thereof in particular cases, neither did they press upon men's
conscience to credit the same, but were most cautious, witnessing much humble
sobriety on that account.

It is known what extraordinary instruments, how wonderfully called, and
qualified, Luther, Zuingliu^, Calvine, Mr Wishart, and Mr Knox were, whom God
sent in these latter days to grapple with Antichrist, and sound a retreat to
his Church from Babylon, likewise (...), Beza, Bacere, and Martyr, with diverse
in England such as Latimer, Ridley, Bradfoord; etc. Who indeed were burning,
and shining lights in their time, mighty in the Scripture fervent in spirit,
were clothed with the power, and authority of God, before which the World
could not stand. But besides these famous witnesses, of whose life we have
something this day on public record, I must here craveliberty to set down a
fevv more, more late instances of our own Church in Scotland to confirm this
truth, such as are but little known to the World, nor any thing of their lives
published, which I think a great loss to after generations, whom we may say
(and this with a vvarrant, and in sobriety) were men truly extraordinary,
eminently serviceable in the work of the Lord; yea, of a Prophetic, and
Apostolic Spirit, and such who through grace, did not even come short of the
first three. I mean not only these before mentioned but also some of these
great lights who were in the first age of the Church after the ascension of
Christ.

1. I shall instance Mr John Welsh whom the Lord called forth to the ministry
at Kirck cubright in Galloway, and afterward was transported to the Church of
An, whom Mr Rutherfoord in one of his books calls that heavenly Prophetical
and Apostolic Man of God, and shows that from the witnesses of his life, he
had this account that of every 24 hours, he gave usually eight to prayer, if
other necessary, and urgent duties did not hinder, yea, spent many days, and
nights which he set apart in fasting, and prayer, for the condition of the
Church, and the sufferings of the reformed Churches abroad. I can also add
this, from very sure information (and truly anent any of those particulars, I
seriously study to have satisfying grounds anent the certainty thereof) that
it was his use even in the coldest winter nights, to rise for prayer, and often
times his wife who was an excellent woman, has risen to seek after him, where
he has been found lying on the ground weeping, and wrestling with the Lord,
yea; sometimes would have been much of the night alone, in the Church of Air
on that account. One time especially his wife finding him overcharged with
grief he told her he had that to press him which she had not, the souls of
3000 to answer for, whilst he knew not how it was with many of them, And an
other time whilst she found him alone; his spirit almost overcharged with
anguish, and grier, upon her serious enquiry, said, that the times which were
to come on Scotland, were heavy, and sad though she should not see them, and
this for the contempt of the Gospel.

Whilst he was prisoner in the Blackness in a letter to a Christian lady, he
gives this account what large joy he had to suffer for such a truth, that
Jesus Christ was a King, and had a visible Kingdom in the World, even his
Church, which was as free to keep its Courts, and exerce discipline by virtue
of an intrinsic power from Christ, as any Kingdom on the earth, for which he
was ready to lay down his life, yea, would rejoice to be offered up a sacrifice
on so glorious a truth, in the close of that letter, he does also forewarn that
judgment was coming to Scotland which should be blood, first by an intestine
sword, and then by the sword of a stranger, and that a great sacrifice should
be there, both of great men, and mean, the fulfilling whereof has since been
very sensible and is known by many alive, who had that letter long before the
late troubles begun; whilst he was thus prisoner, two of ^^mankable passages I
have had confirmed by diverse worthy of credit, some of whom showed me they had
them from these who were most familiar with the persons themselves, they are
indeed strange, but we must also consider he was an extraordinary man.

The first was this, that one night whilst he did expound the Scripture after
his supper, in the prison (at his custom was,) whilst he, with much power;
and authority was pressing home the truth, one of the company who had some
charge in the Castle, fell a jearing, which Mr Welsh observing, and looking
earnestly to him, did presently close the Bible, and cease, and a little after
having a drink in his hand, he says to a friend at the table before all that
were present, there is one so profane and gross as to contemn and mock at the
word of the Lord, but ere a little God shall smite him, with a remarkable
stroke of his judgment, which accordingly fell out to the astonishment of the
company, for that man did presently drop down to the ground, and dyed. A lady
that was then Popish being present by reason of a friend of hers that was
prisoner in the castle, was so moved therewith that it proved an help to her
after-conversion.

The other passage is this, one John Steward, an eminent Christian who lived at
Air having conted to visit Mr Welsh in prison, found him in a more then
ordinary way troubled, and sad, and upon his enquiry there anent he says,
John, ye should not be here, go home to Air, for the plague of God is broken
up in that place, and cause Hew Kennedy provest of that town (who was also a
very singular Christian) conveeh the people to the streets, and pray together,
and the Lord shall hear How Kennedy, and remove that stroke; this at the first
did something astonish the said John, and put him to question its truth, having
so lately comed out of that place, but at his return found it so, and
accordingly in every thing it fell out as the man of God had showed.

After his banishment to which the King did change the sentence of death past
upon him at Linlithgo, he in a very short time acquired the French tongue, with
such a facility therein, as was thought strange by these who knew it; Trochrig
in his Commentar on the Ephesians, sets down this passage how being called to
preach at Salmur a famous University, yea, one of the most learned auditors in
France, he did with such boldness, and authority preach, as though he had been
before the meanest congregation, whereat Trochrig being astonished, could not
but on his acquaintance with him question him thereanent, whence he had such
confidence, and was so little moved, whilst he preached before strangers, so
grave, and judicious an auditory, and in a strange tongue, to whom in a humble
way as one more dejected, then lifted up, he gave that answer, when he
considered his being before the Lord, and that he was delivering his message,
he could not regard, either great, or small, but all flesh did then go out of
his mind.

Whilst he was Minister at S. Jane de Angeli a protestant town in France,
where his Ministry was much blessed with success, the civil wars did break
up, where that city was twice besieged on the Protestant interest, during which
time these passages fell out most remarkable, One was, the town being fore
straited, and ready to be taken, the enemies having raised a battery, and by a
close approach had made a great breach in the wall, Mr Welsh hearing thereof
(who had much encouraged the People, that their adversaries should not then
prevail) went himself with the Cannonier up the walls, and desired he would
charge such a piece of cannon, and shoot, for God should direct that shot, and
cause it prosper, which accordingly did to the astonishment of onlookers
dismount that battery, and the Lord so ordered things after, that the King did
parley on favorable terms with the city, and did only himself with his court
come in without doing any violence. An other mavelous passage was this, the
following Sabbath some of the godly in that place, fearing Mr Welsh his hazard,
did seriously deal with him that he would forbear to go forth, and preach, the
Court being there, from which he by no entreaty would be hindered, but showed
them he would adventure to preach the word to his People, and trust the Lord
with what concerned himself, being more grieved at their fear, and
despondence, and that day had a very great auditory both of friends, and
others, who come upon the fame of such a man, but in time of sermon, a great
man of the Court, with some of the Kings own guard was sent to bring him
forthwith before the King, and whilst he was entering the Church which had some
difficulty by reason of the multitude, Mr Welsh did turn himself toward that
entry, and desired the People to give way to one of the great Piers of France
that was coming in, but after whilst he was coming near the pulpit, to execut
his commission, by putting force on the servant of Christ, for his desisting,
he did with great authority speak to him, before all the People, and in the
name of his Master Jesus Christ charged him that he would not disturb the
Worship of God; wherewith that man was so affrighted that he fell a shaking,
yea was forced to crutch down, and make no further trouble. A third passage no
less remarkable was upon the close of sermon, whilst Mr Welsh with much
submission, went to the King who was then greatly incensed, and with a
threatening countenance asked, what he was, and how he durst preach haeresy so
near his person, and with such contumacy carry himself, to which with due
reverence howing himself he did answer, I am Sir, the Servant, and Minister of
Jesus Christ, whose truth I preached this day, which if your Majesty rightly
knew, ye would have judged it your duty to have comed your self, and heard,
and for my doctrine I did this day preach these 3 truths to your People. 1.
That man is fallen, and by nature in a lost condition, yea, by his own power,
and abilityes is not able to help himself from that estate. 2. That there is
no salvation, or deliverance from wrath by our own merits, but by Jesus Christ
and his merit alone. 3. I did also preach this day the just liberties of the
Kingdom of France, that your Majesty owes obedience to Christ only, who is
Head of the Church, and that the Pope, as he is an enemy to Christ, and his
truth, so also to the Kings of the earth, whom he keeps under slavery to his
usurped power. Where at the King for a time keeping silence with great
astonishment turned to some about him, and said surely this is a man of God.
Yea, after did commun with him, and with great respect dismissed him. The
year follovving vvhilest the differences betwixt the King, and Protestant
party did grow, that city was again besieged, taken, and in part sacked as Mr
Welsh did publicly foretell, at which time, it is known, how the King past a
solemn order, that none should in the least vvrong Mr Welsh, or any thing that
belonged to him under highest pains, and did after give a safe conduct to him,
for transporting himself to England where he died, King James refusing his
return to his own country, though earnestly petioned by his wife for her
husbands health.

During his sickness he was so filled, and overcome with the sensible
enjoyment of God, that he was sometime overheard in prayer, to have these
words, Lord, hold thy hand, it is eneugh thy servant is a clay vessel, and can
hold no more.

II. I shall also here instance Mr Robert Bruce who in a very extraordinary
way was called to the Ministry, having for a long time follovved the study or
the Law, both in this country, and in France, yea, had some ground to expect
a place amongst the Lords of the Session, his father being then a considerable
Barron, who had many friends, but a more pressing, and irresistible call from
God did otherwise determine.

Whilst he was in the Ministry at Edinburgh he shined as a great light
through the whole land, the power and efficacy of the spirit most sensibly
accompanying the word he preached, he was a terror to evil doers, and the
authority of God did so appear upon him, and his carriage, with such a Majesty
in his countenance, as forced fear, and respect from the greatest in the land,
even these who were most avovved haters of Godliness, yea, it was known
what an avvful impression King James had of him, and did once give him that
testimony before many, that he judged Mr Bruce was worthy of the half of his
Kingdom.

He was a man that had much inward exercise about his own personal case, had
been often assaulted anent that great foundation of truth, if there was a God,
which cost him many days, and nights wrestling, and when he has comed up to
the pulpit, after being sometime silent, which was his usual way, he would
have said I think it is a great matter to believe there is a God, telling the
People, it was an other thing to believe that then they judged. But it was
also known, by his friends with whom he was familiar, what extraordinary
confirmations he had from the Lord therein, what near familiarity he did
attain in his secret converse with God, yea, truly somethings I have had from
persons worthy of credit thereanent, would seem so strange, and mavelous,
that I forbear to set them down.

The great success of his Ministry at Edinburgh, Innernesse, and other places
whither providence called him is abundantly known, whilst he was confined at
Innernesse that poor dark country was marvellously enlightened, many brought in
to Christ by his Ministry, and a seed sown in these places, which even to this
day is not wholly worn out. I shall here set down one passage of famous Mr
Henderson who at his first entry to the Ministry at Leuchars, was very
prelatick and by the Bishop of St Andrews brought in against the parishes
consent; so that the day of his admission, the Church doors being shut by the
People, they were forced to break in by a window to get him entrance, but a
little after this, upon the report of a Communion where Mr Bruce was to help,
he would needs from a longing he had to hear and see such a man, go secretly
there, and placed himself in a dark part of the Church where he might not be
known, when Mr Bruce was come to the pulpit he did for a considerable time keep
silence as his manner was, which did some way astonish Mr Henderson, but much
more when he heard the first words wherewith he begun, which were these, He
that comes not in by the door, but climbeth up another way, the same is a
thief, and a robber; Which did by the Lords blessing at the very present take
him by the heart, and had so great an impression on him, that it was the first
mean of his conversion.

He was one that had the spirit of discerning in a great measure, did
prophetically speak of many things which afterward came to pass, yea, which I
had attested by sober, and grave Christians, who were familiar with him, that
diverse persons distracted, and of these who were passed all hope of recovery in
the falling sickness, were brought to Mr Bruce and after prayer by him in their
behalf were fully recovered: this indeed may seem strange, but it is also
true, Mr Bruce was a great wrestler who had more then ordinary familiarity with
his Master.

A little before his death when he was at Edenbrugh and through weakness keept
his chamber, there was a meeting of diverse godly Ministers at that time there,
on some special ground of the Churches concernment, who hearing he was in the
town came together, and gave him an account of the actings of these times, the
Prelates then designing the service book, after which Mr Bruce prayed, and did
therein tell over again to the Lord the very substance of their discourse,
which was a sad representation of the case of the Church, at which time
there was such an extraordinary motion on all present, so sensible a
dovvnpovvring of the Spirit, that they could hardly contain themselves, yea,
which was most strange, even some unusual motion on these who were in other
parts of the house, not knovving the cause at that very instant, one Mr Weemes
of Lothaker being then occasionally present, when he went away, said, O how
strange a man is this, for he knocked down the Spirit of God on us all, this
he said because Mr Bruce did diverse times knock with his fingers on the table;
I had this from a worthy Christian Gentleman in whose mothers house this was.

He was deeply affected with the naughtines and prophanity of many Ministers
then in the Church, and the unsuitable carriage of others to so great a
calling, and did express much his fear that the ministry of Scotland would
prove the greatest persecutors of the Gospel that it had. If there were a full
collection of these remarkable passages, which have been known to others in
his life, it would further witness what an extraordinary man that was. I
shall only shut this up with learned Didoclavius his testimony in his preface
to his Altera Damascus, Robertus Brusius ver genere and virtute nobilis,
majestate vultus venerabilis, qui plura animarum millia Christo lucrifecit,
cujus anima, si ullius mortalium, absit verbo invidia, sedet in coelestibus,
anima mea, cum anima tua, Brusi, si ex aliena fide esset pendendum.

III. Mr Davidsone Minister of the Gospel at Salt-Prestoun, may be truly here
instanced as one of an extraordinary prophetic Spirit, who was likewise
eminently zealous, and faithful for his Master in a time of the Churches
defection, as Didoclavius in that forementioned preface terms him; Cato, and
Constani Cato sui temporis. He did then foresee Prelacyes breaking in upon the
Church, when King James was pressing the setting up of superintendents under
a very specious pretext, and was for that end himself present at the assembly
in Dundee, having engadged many, alace too many to consent thereto, but Mr
Davidsone with great boldness rose up, and warned the assembly of the hazard,
and told them he savv the knave Bishop, with his mitre coming in under that
mask, yea, did solemnly in his own name, and name of the Church of Scotland
enter a protestation against that step of defection, and their yielding up in
so far the liberties of the Church to please men.

Whilst he was Minister at Salt-Prestoun the building of a Church was by him
much endeavored which then was vvanting, for which he did advance so much
out of his own private interest, my Lord Nevvbatle who then had a great
interest in the Parish engadging to help it fordvvard, from which he after
refiled, and thereby frustrated the work, Whereupon Mr Davidsone told him,
these vvalls that were then begun to be builded, should stand as a witness
against him* and that ere long God should root out him, and his estate out of
that Parish, and should not have a piece of land in the same, which shorthy
after had a visible accomplishment. It was very clear from many passages of
his life that the secret of the Lord was in an extraordinary way with him.
Some of these which have been transmitted from these who particularly knevv
the same are indeed most worthy of a remark.

At a certain assembly of the Church Mr John Spotswood, and Mr James Law who
were then entered into the ministry, were processed for some gross acts of
prophanity, where Mr Davidson finding the assembly too easy to pass the same
in regard of their parts, and gifts, only with a rebuke, he did with much
ve^emency press their deposition, and after being crossed therein, said, you
will needs spare these 2 men, vvhereat I am grieved, but the time is coming
when they shall trample upon your necks* and upon the Church of Scotland. And
it is well known what an accomplishment this prediction had.

Being with Mr Bruce one time at dinner who was then in great favor with the
King, he had these words in giving thanks after meat. Lord, they servant here
is now a great favorite of the Court, and in much respect, but he shall be
within a little as much persecuted as he is now in favor, and go down the
streets, when many who have him this day in esteem will not give him a
salutation, which was very manifest afterward. And at an other time whilst
Mr Robert Bruce, and he were dyning together in the house of one of the
Magistrates of the town, who was then a cordial friend to godly Ministers, he
did also in his plain, and free way break forth with these words, whilst he
was giving thanks, Lord, this good man has respect for thy sake to thy
servants, but he little knows that in a short time he must carry us both who
are here to prison, which words did much trouble that honest man, though
afterward it came most exactly to pass.

There is one more remarkable passage which I should fear to set, down it is so
strange, but that I had the same confirmed by some worthy of credit, who showed
me, that from these that were present, and familiar with Mr Davidsone they had
it related. A Gentleman nearly related to a great family of that Parish, bnt a
most violent hater of piety, did upon that account beat a poor honest man who
lived there, having not the feast shadow of a provocation, and amongst other
sore strokes gave one upon the back with these words, take this for* Mr
Davidsons sake, after which the honest man was for a time forced to keep his
bed, and complained most of that stroke which he gave him on the back, as that
which he felt more then all the rest; but the Sabbath following, Mr Davidson
speaking in the close of his Sermon anent the oppression of the godly, and
enmity which wicked men had to such, did very particularly touch that late
instance, saying, it was a sad time, whilst a profane man would thus openly
adventure to vent his rage against these who were seekers of God in the place,
whilst he could have no cause but the very appearance of his image, and with
great authority said, he who has done this, were he the Lord, or the Lairds
brother, ere a few days pass, God shall give him a stroke that all the
Monarchs of the earth dare not challenge, which was then publicly known how
in the close of that very week, standing before his door, he was struck dead
with a thunder bolt and all his bones crushed.

A little before the death of this great Servant of Christ having an occasional
rencounter with Mr John (...) a young Gentleman who was lately come from
Fr^^^^* and had then no though^s of the ministry* but (...) in a very cou^^ly
dress* Mr. Davidson did in a (...) lemn way charge him to cast off his scarlet
cloak, and lay aside his gilded rapper, and take him to his book* for you are
the man, says he, who is to succeed me i^ the ministry at this place, which so
very astonishing ^^ that Gentleman for the present, yet accordingly fell out,
he did immediately succeed him there, where he was for many* years an holy, and
faithful Minister of the Gospel. This last passage many yet alive who had the
same from the said Mr John Ker can witness.

IV. Mr Patrik Simson who was once Minister of ^ramond, and after transported
to Stirling may be here also instanced* as a very extraordinary man in the
Church, in his youth he attained to great knowledge in the languages, did much
study Greek and L^ti^e A^thors, and gave this reason to such who vvondred ^^
should spend so much time in reading these who vver^ but pagans, that he
purposed to dedicat all these ^evvels which he borrowed from the Egyptians,
to the building of the house of the Lord, it is known with what zeal he did
oppose himself to the corruptions of that time, in the year 1584, whilst
there was an express^ charge from the King, for acknowledging Mr Pat^ic^
Adamson Archbishop of S. Andrews, or else lose th^^ maintenance, he did with
great vehemence appear against the same, though that man was his uncle upon the
mothe^* side, and some who seemed willing to subscribe there* to with such a
condition, according to the Word of God, he did gravely rebuke, showing them it
could be no salve to their conscience, since it was repugnantia in adjecto, to
subscribe to any institution according to the word, when the word did expressly
condemn the same. It was also known, he refused the offer of a Bishopric, and
af^^^wards of a yearly pension from the King, which he looked on as a design
only to bribe his conscience, which was more dear to him then all the World;
and when that assembly at Aberdeen was condemned by the State, he did openly
own, and avow the same, and in a very solemn manner denounced the wrath, and
^^dgement of God against these accusers, and convicters of these excellent men,
at Linlithgow, who stood for the liberty of that assembly; that notable paper,
and protestation given in to the Parliament 1606 (where Prelacy was further
established) was by him penned, and out of his own hand given to the Earl of
Dumbar, subscribed by many Ministers of the Church who were then there on that
account.

His life was most examplary for piety, and faithfulness in serving his Master,
which did preach no less to that part of the country wherein he lived then
his doctrine, one very remarkable passage of his life I do here adventure to
set down, having very satisfying grounds as to the certainty of it, from these
who knew the same, and had a particular relation, of all its circumstances from
a grave Christian who had it out of his own mouth, and likewise has it written
under old Mr Row of Car^ocks hand, who was his familiar intimat friend; it is
this. His Wife Martha Barron a gracious woman, the wife of his youth with whom
he had lived in great love, fell sick, which proved her last sickness, where she
was first sore assaulted by the Devil, who pressed in upon her that she should
be given over to his hand, and after it did resolve in a visible distraction
which for a time grew upon her, so that most unlike to her former way, she
would have broke forth with dreadful, and horrid expressions, it did most
appear on a Sabbath morning whilst Mr Simps^n was going to preach, and wh^^gst
for a time he was forced with a heavy countenance to stand silent, he at last
kneeled down, and prayed, which she did no ways regard, but a little after he
turning to the company that were present, told them he was sure that these who
now were witnesses of that sad hour, should yet see a gracious work of God on
this his Servant, and that the Devils malice against that poor woman, should
have a shameful ^oil; her distraction did still continue until the Tuesday
which was the 9 of August, which morning at the very dawning of it, he gooth to
his garden, and shut the door behind him, where for many hours he was alone;
but a godly woman who that night was with his wise, Hel^^ Garner wi^e to one of
the Bailyes of Stirling, being apprehensive of his hazard, through his grief,
and fasting, could have no rest till she knew his cafe, and by some help
climbed up, and wan in to the garden, but on a near approach to that place,
where Mr S^mps^^ then was, she was terrified with an extraordinary noise which
through fear made her fall to the ground, it seemed, as she related after to
others, it was like the noise of a great rushing of multitudes together, and
therewith such a melodious sound, as did make her know it was something more
then humane, and turned to player entreating the Lord would pardon her rashness,
which affection to his Servant who had been the instrument of her good, had
carried her to; and after going forward finds him lying upon the ground, it was
with much entreaty that he did then reveal himself in that particular, until
she promised clossenes; not to speak it to others so long as he lived, but had
his allowance if she should ^urvive him, which promise she keept, but after his
death, did relate it to these from whom I have had this, he said, O what am I
being dust and ashes that the holy Ministering spirits should be sent by the
Lord to deliver a message to me, and showed he had a vilion of Angels, who did
with an audible voice give him an answer from the Lord of his wifes condition,
and coming over to his house, he said to all who were present, be of good
comfort for ere 10 hours of this day I am sure that brand shall be plucked out
of the fire, after which he went to prayer at his wifes bedside, where for a
time she la^ quiet, but whilst he mentioned Jacobs wrestling in prayer, she
^its straight up in the bed, casting aside the courtain, and says, Thou art
this day Jacob, who have wrestled, and also prevailed, and nou God has made
good his words, which he spoke this morning to you, for I am plucked out of the
hands of Satan, and he shall have no power over me. Which interruption made him
for a space silent, but after with great melting of heart proceeded in prayer,
and magnified the riches of Gods love toward him; and after prayer there was
sweet, and Christian embracements betwixt them, yea, from that hour she did
speak most Christianly, and comfortably even to her death, which was on the
Friday following August 13. 1601, whose last words in the moment of her
departure was with a loud voice, Come Lord, in thy hands I commend my spirit.

After this Mr S^mpson lived several years fervent, and faithful in the work
of the Lord, and one who in private walk witnessed such mortification, that all
who knew him might clearly see, his converse was little in the World, in March
1618. he said now shall this month put an end to all these things, and
accordingly toward the close of it was removed by death, at which time he
expressed much joy, blessing the Lord for his kindness, that he had not been
perverted by the sinful courses of these times, and might say as the Lord fed
Elijah in the wilderness, so in some respect he had dealt with him all his life
time, and having these words, upon some of his books written, Rememmember O my
soul, and never forget the 9 of August, what consolation the Lord gave thee,
and how he performed that ^^ spoke, according to Za^h. 3: ver. 2. it not th^^ a
brand plu^k^^ out of the fire, upon which some of his friends speaking ^^ him
anent the same, his answer was, Absit miht (...) ^^ aliquo, nisi in Domino Deo
meo.

Now besides these great men, many others who at that time did shine as lights
in the Church may be here also mentioned, who were indeed stars of the first
magnitude, eminently zealous, and faithful, and their Ministry followed with
much of the power; and authority of God, such as Mr Andrew Mel^^ne, of whom it
might be said, he had the face of a lion in his masters cause, and feared not
to speak before Princes and great men, when the truth called for it; likewise
his nevoy Mr James Melvine that holy grave, and prudent Servant of Christ, Mr.
Andrew Dunkan, Mr John Scringer, Mr Chartes Fere^^^ Mr. James Balfure, etc. One
passage I shall here ^et down worthy of a remark of Mr Andrew Melvine who being
prisoner in the Tower, a Gentleman of his acquaintance, got access to visit
him, but found him in a sad, and deep muse, anent the defection of many
Ministers in Scotland, and did deplore the state of the Church there, having
lately got an account of their way at that assembly at Glasgow 1610. where the
Earl of Dumbar had been active to corrupt diverse with money: this Gentleman,
desiring to know what word he had for his own country got no answer, but upon
a second enquiry, he said, I have no word to send, but am heavily grieved, that
the glorious government of the Church of Scotland should be so defaced, and a
Popish tyrannical government set up, and thou Manderston (for out of that house
Dumbar was come, and he thus styled him) Have thou no other thing to do but
carry down to Scotland such commissions, whereby the poor Church there is
wracked; the Lord shall be avenged upon thee, and thou shall never again go
down for all thy grandour; which words took such impression on that Gentleman
that when he went forth he desired some friends, who then waited to get a
bussinesse at court ^^ped by Dumbars moyen, that they would in time, ^^^ their
affairs to a close, for he was persuaded, the words of that servant of Christ
should nor fall to the ground; and truly this did very quickly take place,
that Earl being suddenly struck by death, within a few months after, and thus
thrown down from the top of his grandour, whilst he was bussie, perfecting
that great house of his at Berwick, and had appointed a sumptuous feast for his
daughters marriage, even then did his thoughts perish.

I shall here but add one instance more of one whom we before named, though
not a Minister, yet a great instrument for promoting the work of the Gospel in
the place he lived, and one we may say, of an extraordinary spirit, Hew Kennedy
provest of Air, of whom I would mention these two passages from sure
knowledge, One was whilst the Merchant Ships of that town were at ^e^ amongst
whom his son John, who was also a choice Christian, was at that time, he did
one night rise before the breaking of day, and came to the house of his
familiar friend John Steward desiring he would rise, and go along with him to
some room; whereat the said John being exceedingly astonished, he says to
him; it is no time to linger, let us go pray, for my son with the rest of our
friends now at sea are at this hour on the very nick of perishing, and after
they had spent some time in prayer, he arose cheerfully, and said now they are
safe. Within a little after John Steward who had writ this down, with the day,
and hour, at the return of the Ships, did most particularly enquire, and found
how it did answer in all the circumstances, and in that very hour of that
night, they were to appearance past hope of safety upon a very dangerous place,
and by an extraordinary unexpected providence then delivered.

The other is this, one day being for many hours alone in prayer, whilst some
of his Christian friends did, wait long for him, at last, with an unusual
chearfulnes, he came forth, and upon their enquiry anent his stay, he told
them; it was no wonder, for he had that day got mercy to him, and all his, and
truly it was very evident, that not one of his Children, but there was large
ground of charity that they were truly godly.

Whilst he was dying Mr Ferguson a godly Minister, says to him, you have
cause, Sir, to be assured that the Angels of God are now waiting at the
stoups of this bed to convoy your soul into Abraham's bosom, to whom his
answer was; I am sure thereof, and if the walls of this house could speak,
they could tell h^^ many sweet days I have had in secret fellowship with God,
and how, familiar he has been with my soul. I shall only add Mr. Welshes
testimony in a letter from France to this great man, his words were these,
Happy is that city, yea, happy is that Nation that has a Hew Kenneay in it, I
have my self certainly found the answers of his prayers from the Lord in my
behalf.

SEVENTH Witness to this truth, that the Lord has in so solemn, and
extraordinary a way appeared for his Church in these last times, is this, these
great, and mavelous providence (which we may call magnalia Der) by which he
has witnessed his truth, and confirmed the same since the breaking up of the
Gospel, in this late raising of the Church from Antichrist; For we may truly
say there has not wanted a visible attestation from Heaven, and a convincing
testimony, by some great works of the Lord, to his truth, as well as in the
primitive times of the Church.

We do here understand by such providence, these wherein man cannot but see
something above nature and natural causes, yea, above the ordinary way of the
Lords working, which does evidently witness his great, and immediate hand, some
whereof have been so wonderful, which can be instanced in these late times, as
might truly be called miracles; it is true this is not the Lords usual way,
neither makes he use of such a solemn testimony, but on special, and weighty
grounds when the necessity of the Church called for it, vvhilest he is about
some extraordinary piece of work, or when the Gospel comes first to a land
that has been long overspread with darkness, when ordinary means of
conviction are vvanting, or in times of great opposition, when the commission
of his servants needs some extraordinary seal; in such a time as that of
Achabs, when the People are made to halt betwixt truth, and a false way, and
thus we find the Lord did confirm the first breaking up of the Gospel, and
make use of such a mean to spread the Christian Church through the World, and
should this seem strange that in so great a change of the Churches case now in
these latter days, when he was to raise her up, after so long a ruin, and
desolation, vvhilest Antichristianisme so many ages had overspread the face of
the World, that he should thus appear, and give some signal demonstration of
his power in behalf of his People, such as we have seen with our eyes, and
our fathers did tell us.

It is not miracles, or any extraordinary providence on which men should
resolve their faith, nor do we here mention these, for laying stresse thereon
in believing the truth, no, the Protestant doctrine, and cause does lean on a
stronger gtound, it can with confidence appeal the adversary to the Scripture
these divine records which they do not pretend to deny, this, even this is the
reason of our hope, which we offer to all that ask for the same; and there
let the God of truth who has revealed his will, and answers men by the
written word be judge, and we shall demand no greater advantage, nor justice at
the hand of our enemies; we know miracles cannot authorize a lie, or be a seal
to any thing repugnant to the Scripture; and truly these lying wonders which
have been so frequent in the World, which the Apostle does foretell that such an
engine the Devil will make use of, to turn men aside from the truth, besides
other marks of their falsehood, they have this one most discernable, that they
are the support and warrant of that which cannot stand alone by the Word; and
thence are the popish miracles made use of to confirm such tenets which of all
their doctrine do most directly contradict the Scripture, as the merit of
works, purgatory, praying for the dead, etc. Bus as we will not boast of such
as the authority, or proof of our doctrine, so we judge it a grave, and a
concerning duty to observe the wondrous work of the Lord in our times, yea, to
make a diligent search thereanent, that we may tell posterity some of these
great acts of our God, for his Church in bringing her again from Babell.

I would desire to be very tender, and cautious upon such a subject, for I
judge it horrid divinity to make a lie for God; it is not the truth, but a
false way which requires such a help, and truly anent these following
instances, which are but a few of many that might be brought if there were more
serious enquiry, I dare attest the Lord, the great witness that I have not
knowingly set down here any thing false, yea, not without some diligent search,
and satisfying grounds anent the certainty thereof. I judge it not necessary to
repeat these which are so known already to the World from public records, and
therefore shall but briefly point at some of these, and add a few more
particular instances of this kind, which I may with some confidence bring to
the light, from clear evidences of the truth thereof.

I shall first mention that solemn testimony of Mr Baynam in Queen Maryes time
who in the midst of the fire, whilst his body was all in a flame, his arms,
and legs half burnt, cried out to bystanders, O Papists, ye look after
miracles, lo here is one, I am now burning in this fire, but feels no more pain
then if I were in a bed of roses, O must not this be called a miracle, and an
extraordinary seal from the Lord, to his ttuth, wherein the World would
consider, this was the testimony of one, who was upon the borders of eternity,
which he did declare before a great multitude, attested by Mr Fox that holy
servant of Christ who in things of that kind so extraordinary was most
cautious, and did much search out the truth, and certainty of what he sets
down, and by him was published whilst many of that time, who might have been
present were alive, yea, it is the more remarkable, the sharp combat that this
Martyr had through the terror of the fire a little before his death, fearing
he should never be able to endure the same.

What a remarkable providence was that at a town in the Low Countries, whilst
some of the Saints were put to death, by the Popish party, and among these one
Michael Bomboutius a Deacon of the reformed Church, whilst they were going to
suffer about midday the Heavens being most clear, there came suddenly so great
a darkness, and so horrible, and unusual a tempest which was only in that place
and above that city discerned, that men were generally shaken with fear,
thinking there should be a present dissolution of the World, this famous
Voetius in that piece de signis, does witness that from diverse there present
even some of them popish he had this related to himself; and as he says
such^^ thing Papists would have with greatest observation published, as the
very finger of God, if they had the same occasion.

At a town Alsa in Westslanders whilst a godly man whom the Inquisition there
had pursued, was leading to the stake, and was by the way singing Psalms, the
Captain of these who guarded him was so enraged, that he caused presently his
tongue be plucked out by the roots, but lo^ a few months after, this wretched
man has a Child born with his tongue hanging out a great way, which by no
means could be keep^ within his mouth, this Doctor Hall being himsel^^
afterward in that town had showed him from some who were most considerable
there, as he sets down in his Epistles.

Charles the IX. of France who was author of that horrid Massacre where the
blood of many thousand Protestants at Paris, and other parts was shed, did a
very little after dye in the strength of his years, by an extraordinary
effusion of blood from all passages of his body that as Du Serres, and other
french vvriters of that time do show he was made to vvallow in his own blood
before his death. O was not this the very finger of God, a most convincing
stupendous piece of his judgment?

What an extraordinary providence was that which is attested by diverse
vvitnesses thereto, in the late bloody Massacre of Ireland; a young woman who
by the Irishes was stripped almost naked, and after by one of, them threatened
that except she would give him her money, he would forthwith run her
through, to which she gravely ansvvered; I know you cannot kill me: except
God give you leave whereupon he did three (...) with his sword run at her naked
body, but could not once pierce her skin, which did so confound this wretched
man, that with a kind of horror he went away, and ceased to trouble her
further.

Did not God wonderfully appear in the raising of the late King of Sweden, with
that astonishing success, which did attend him in breaking the power of the
house of Austria, whilst they were at so great an height, and had their hands
hot reeking in the blood of the Protestants through Bohemia, and other places
of Germany, O but the Lords hand might be clearly seen in acting forth, and
fitting that party of the Swedes, for such a piece of his service, even in a
more then ordinary way, who like that he goat mentioned in Damel did come so
swiftly that they touched not the ground, as it were, but like a mighty speate
bare down all before them.

The breaking of that great Spanish Armado in the Year 88. which had been 3
Years in contriving, did convincingly witness a divine hand opposing the same,
and how remarkable was that issue of all the Counsels, expense, and cruelty,
which Philip the second, had made use of to bear down the rising of the Gospel
in the Netherlands, for it is notour that after many essays, the loss of an
100 Millions of gold, with near 400000 Lives, the reckoning of all his gain,
and purchase was only the loss of considerable part of these countries, and
helping fordward the establishment of the united Provinces, and truly we must
say the Lord did by his great, and outstretched hand wonderfully appear in
raising that Common wealth, so that they may date their flowrishing in outward
interests from their owning of the interests of God. Religion did raise them
and no People this day has more cause, and are under greater engadgements to
be zealous for the truth, and defense of the Protestant Cause.

The breaking of that formidable league of the Catholics in France for rooting
out the Protestant Religion there was very wonderful, how all their Counsels,
and designs should resolve in their own ruin, so that the most ordinary
onlookers, could not but see, a divine hand counteracting the same: Davila
though an adversary, in setting down that history, gives a large account of
this.

What a great appearance of the Lords hand, yea, of an extraordinary
providence, was there in the throvving down of the Popish images, and altar^
almost in one night throvv much of the Netherlands, which for so many 100
Years had been made use of for idolatry. O did not Satan thus fall as
lightning from Heaven, it being very evident how strange an impulse did carry
out the People in this, over all difficulties, or fear of hazard, what a
wonderful consent and agreement amongst places so remote about one thing, and
almost at one time; how quickly also was it executed through these Provinces
almost in an instant, the authors did never appear, nor any noise of their
boasting thereanent, and which was strange the Magistrates of the cities,
having both power and will to hinder, yet were so over ruled, and struck
with astonishment, that they could not resist; and as Famianus Strada a great
enemy to the truth does show what fell out in Antwerp, and other places,
considering the greatness of the work, the multitude, and height of these
idolatrous monuments it might have been eneugh for many days, what was done
in one night, and yet not any in the least prejudged or hurt thereby, which
made him cry ^ut, that sure this was the work of the Devil, and his help
eminently therein: but I do not vvonder, to hear these in such a manner
blaspheme, vvhilest they are tormented with so clear a discovery of Gods hand
against them.

Must we not here mention that great deliverance of the town of Leyden from
the Spanjard with a special remark, vvhilest it was then manifest, if the
enemy had made use of Cannon in battering the walls, they could not have come
short of their design: in what an extraordinary way also were the winds
trysted to raise the waters in order to the touns relief, when they were at
the utmost extremity, yea for driving the waters back again, when the town
was once delivered, and which was very mavelous, that the same night,
wherein the Spanjards were forced to retire, a part of the walls fell down,
which if it had fallen out a little before, that city had been utterly lost. O
was not this a divine hand, which even the greatest Atheists, and such who
judge things to fall out by chance, must confess?

What wonderful providence did attend the actings of that poor handful of
protestants in the Valleys of Piemont, for their necessary selfe-defence; Fox
with other vvriters give a clear account in setting down that horrid
persecution which they endured in the Year 1555. I shall here only touch some
passages mentioned by Mr Morland in his History, who upon the account of that
bloody Massacte, which was there within these fevv Years, was then near
that place, and from sure knowledge, and information does very gravely hold
forth the same; and truly they are providence so mavelous, and astonishing,
that men cannot but see the Lord in an extraordinary way helping that poor
People, his acting forth a fevv to do such exploits, beyond any thing that can
be mentioned of these great Heroes, whom the World in former Years did admire;
so that we must say, as this was a convincing proof of the great power of God,
put forth for his People, when help in an ordinary way failed, it was also a
solemn testimony to their cause, and of the Lords approbation of his Peoples
standing for their own defense against the cruelty, and violence of a
persecuting Magistrate. We have there held forth, how after that bloody
persecution by an order from the Duke of Savoy, a small number was in a
remarkable way raised up, and upon their first essay 7 or 8 under the conduct
of that worthy Gentleman Joshua Gianavell (whom God made use of as a choice
instrument, to help that poor scattered remnant) was made to fight 300
soldiers who were sent to excerce further cruelty in that place, killing many
of them and pursueing the rest for a considerable time. After, a party of 500
being sent by the Marquess of Fianem who then commanded the Duke of Savoyes
forces, were opposed by 11 of the Protestants, and other 6 with slings, and
after a short conflict were forced to flee with considerable slaughter, the
terror of the Lord upon the one, and a Spirit of courage and resolution in the
other being very manifest. After these, there was another party sent forth of
700 soldiers to sease on all the passages, upon which about 17 Masters of
familyes, whose hearts God had in signal manner strengthened to the battle, for
their poor brethrens preservation, resolved to cast themselves upon the Lord
for the success of their undertakings, and with such mavelous boldness faced
their adversaries as put them in amazement and made them draw off, resolving to
take another way, but were still pursued by this little handful, who killed
many without the loss of one man. At an other time the Protestants there
joining in a greater number, being 300 under the conduct of the forementioned
Captain Gianavel were assaulted by 2500 of the adversaries, but the Lord so
ordered that this little party getting the advantage of the place, after some
conflict did force them to retire pursueing them into the vvoods, and steep
rocks with great slaughter, and thus with a mavelous courage in a continued
fight for 8 hours together, did drive the enemy before them. Diverse other
remarkable passages of this kind, are at more length mentioned in that History
which the Author after most exact search, and enquiry thereanent, does
solemnly attest, and truly it might be much cause for vvonder as it is there
observed that through the Lords ominent appearance, and his blessing on his
poor Peoples endeavors, for the interest of Religion, and their own
preservation they did in a short time dispute the matter with such a
prosperous success, against all the forces, which the Duke of Savoy sent,
that their enemies at last began to fear what effect it might produce, and
therefore having no better game to play, were glad by a treaty of peace, to get
the sword out of their ^^nds, how ever they pretended it as a complement, put
on neighboring Princes, who did interceed for the same.

Have we not also to reckon among the great works of the Lord in these last
times, Henry the VIII. of England most violent in opposition to the truth, who
by the Pope was styled Defender of the faith upon that account, and for his
writing against Luther, and yet the same man shall be the instrument made use of
by the Lord, to throw down the Pope, and his power in his Dominions and give
some beginning to a great reformation of the Church there.

Vergerius the popes Nuncio, for many years in Germany, whilst he is writing
against the truth, is even then converted, and forced to yield to the power of
the same, turn Protestant, and a zealous preacher of the Gospel to his death.

Galeacaeus Garracceolus an Italian Marquess of great place, and estate in the
World; was so taken by the hear^ with one word in hearing Peter Martyr as made
him quite not only all his hopes of preferment, a most pleasant place as was in
the earth, and a great inheritance, but to go over the belly of the most
pressing entreaties, and insinuations of his friends, the weeping cries of his
Lady, and Children, and go to a strange place quiting all, that he might
preserve his conscience, and enjoy fellowship with the Church. O what a solemn
witness was this to the truth, and of the conquering power of Christ.

And in a word what a mavelous thing was it that poor Luther, against whom so
much of the World was aloft, with greatest rage and violence, should yet live
to an old age, and go to the grave in peace. And truly the Spirit and
appearance of this great, and f^^st witness to the truth might be a convincing
evidence, that the Lord was then to raise up a People to himself in whom he
would be glorified, by an active testimony, as well as by suffering.

Besides these instances I would here mention some remarkable providence
worthy indeed to be observed, though they are little known to the World, which
we may say does not only witness the power of God; but are a convincing seal to
his truth, and the Churches Reformation in these last times.

It is a remarkable passage which worthy Mr Forbes sets down under his hand,
whilst he was banished for the truth; whose words are these. In the year 1607.
being at Ruan in France, and meeting with Monsieur (...) that ancient, and
famous divine, and then Pastor of the Reformed Church in that city, he had from
him this following relation: After the close of the Council of Trent in the
time of Pius the V. there was a consultation in Italy by the Pope, and
Cardinals, for an utter extirpation of the Reformed Churches in Europe; and to
this end every Prince of the Romish Religion had a certain part designed where
this great project should be put in practice; The death of Pius the V. hindered
a present prosecuting of this design. And his successor Gregorius XIII. did
suffer it to ly dead having no heart that way, and so until that time of
Clemens VIII. it was not revived, but then this bloody resolution was of new
ratified by him, and his Cardinals under their hands, and seals; the only
difficulty was in this, to find a fit, and trusty person whom they should make
use of to the Princes of the Romish Religion, for engadgeing them to subscrive
the said ordinance, and set about the execution thereof: At length a Gentleman
of good parts, near in blood to the Cardinal Baronius is choised; which to him
was a matter of much grief, and sorrow, for unknown to them he was of the
Reformed Religion, but this grief in his countenance, and carriage, put his
friends who observed the same to strange thoughts, and so much the more, that
he did expressly declare to some of these who asked thereanent, that what to
them seemed a cause of rejoicing, was to him a just occasion of grief, yet at
last finding his ha^ard, upon a bitter challenge from the foresaid Cardinal who
had heard thereof, he judged it his wisdom to dissemble, showing him his
unsuitablenes to so great an employment could not but be ground of trouble, and
fear; and so was someway forced to engadge, getting his commissions, the decree
of the Conclave, with letters to the foresaid Princes, sealed, and subscribed.
But lo whilst this poor Gentleman is on his journey, having found ways to
free himself of his servants, and other company, his spirit was in great
perplexity betwixt these two grievous temptations, either to be instrument of
utter ruin to the truth, and Churches of Christ, or forsake his country,
inheritance and all he had in the World, upon which he resolved to retire
himself out of the high way to an obscure village, where for three days he
gave himself to fasting and prayer for direction, and resolution from the Lord,
and after this had his heart so strengthened against the care of his wordly
estate, that he resolved to forsake all, and to reveal this bloody conspiracy
to the Churches of Christ, and cast himself on Gods hand for his future estate,
so that he turned his face from Spain, and took journey to France, and to
Paris, where at that time remained the sister of Henry the IIII. a Religions
Princess, afterward Duchess of Lorraine to whom the foresaid Monsieur
Figureus was her preacher, and unto him made his address (though after diverse
refusals of admission upon suspicion) showing him the whole bussines, and
delivered the sealed decree with his letters of co^^mission for that effect,
and did likewise show him (who was then astonished at such a wonderful
providence of God, in fostering some of his own Children in the midst of
Babylon, and that to so comfortable an use for his Churches safety) that there
were many others in Italy, yea, in Rome it self of the Reformed Religion, who
had their secret meetings, and even Gregory the XIII. before his advancement to
the Papacy, was thoroughly clear thereanent in his judgment, whereof he gave
him diverse evidences: This foresaid relation did so affect Mr Forbes that he
showed his mavelous desire to see that man who had done so worthy, and
gracious a work for the glory of God and good of his Church, and by a
recommendation from Mousieur. Figureus, he did afterward go of set ^^^pose to
that place, taking the first opportunity for He^delberg, where this Gentleman
was then retired for his further security, and honorably entertaind by that
Prince, where he shows that he saw him, and from his own mouth received the
assurance of this former narration to his great satisfaction, and comfort: This
is the very su^me which I have here set down and truly ^^^scribed off the
principale, which I had beside me, both written, and subscribed by Mr Forbes
his own hand.

A remarkable providence I shall also here set down, which did tryst with some
very convincing circumstances, at the Parliament 1621. at their bringing in of
Popish Geremonies upon the Church, which was then a sad step of the lands
defection from the truth, contraire to their engadgements; whilst the faithful
Ministers of Jesus Christ at that time did with greatest seriousnes and
freedom obtest, and warn these who were in power (alace, that now there is
little of such a Spirit appearing) that they would not, to please men corrupt
the Worship of God, but the speat being violent, it did at last resolve in a
Law; at which very time, whilst the Kings Commissioner did rise from the
throne to ratify this woeful act, by the touch of the Scepter, was even in this
moment of that ratification trysted by the God of Heaven, with an extraordinary
lightning, and very unusual great claps of thunder, and these followed with a
most strange, and extraordinary darkness, which both for the suddennes, and
greatness of the same did astonish, and affright all who were present, and after
all, so violent a downpowring of rain, as made the streets to run like a river,
imprisoning the Lords within that house for an hour and an half; and truly as
we are not hereon to lay stresse, or be peremptory in the application of
particular providence, yet, this was so very convincing as should not be
passed without a special remark, considering first how at that time many of the
choice Ministers of the Land, were together near the town, at fasting, and
prayer, bewailing before the Lord such an avowed defection from the truth. 2.
That likewise this horrid tempest, and darkness appeared to these who were at
some distances to be most directly above the town, the darkness overshadowing
that part ^onely, and was not so in other places. 3. That they had by the
instigation of the Prelates; guarded the entry to the Parliament that day, lest
any Ministers should have entered a protestation in behalf of the Church against
these Articles, ^^^ thus thought themselves seoure from any opposition of that
kind; but whilst they least suspected, they are met with a more public, and
visible witness from Heaven against the same. 4. Which was also most strange
upon the monday following, whilst these acts were proclained, the Heavens did
in the same manner, put on darkness with a most fearful tempest, of th^^der
lightning and rain, which continued all the time of their reading at the
Cross. And truly when the Lord thus doubled his warnings it might cry aloud
formens observation thereof.

The breaking of that journey to New England which about the year 1636, was
seriously intended by some of the choice Ministers and Christians in Ireland,
who were then much persecuted by the Prelates, though not from any fear of
their own sufferings, but with a respect to a further liberty to serve the Lord
in the work of the Gospel, when that door was ^hut upon them in their own
country: This was truly a strange, and remarkable providence, and their
preservation in some kind miraculous, anent which these circumstances are
worthy to be observed. 1. That whilst their vessel amidst a tempestrous sea,
and far from any land, was like a riddle with so many lakes, yea, the rudder of
the Ship breaking, so that the Pilots were turned wholly hopeless, and could
not see any ground of safety in an ordinary way, a poor sea man by a remarkable
providence, whose company they had much shunned was made the instrument of
preserving the whole vessel, with a mavelous dexterity fastening the rudder,
which others had given over, as one visibly sent by the Lord for that end. 2.
The strong persuasion that some of these worthy Ministers had of their safety,
which with great confidence they declared before the passengers, whilst the
Pilot, and others were giving it over as a hopeless bussinesse, and seeing a
convincing necessity for a return though it was very astonishing, and bitter at
the first look, yet was: afterward followed with a clear discovery from the
Lord, as one of them with much freedom did express his assurance to the rest
of his brethren, that since the Lord would not accept their service in America,
they should not want work, and service, whither he was sending them back by so
remarkable a providence, as within a short time was evident, the downfall of the
Prelates in Scotland and after in Ireland trysting shortly upon the back
thereof, so that it may be said this was a convincing presage thereof, the Lord
by a strong hand bringing back such choice, and useful instruments for that
great harvest which did after follovv, so that they could not but say, the
Lord did in a very mavelous, and immediate way appear in that cross vvind,
and storm, and thereby as if with an audible voice did witness his mind in
such a disappointment. 3. It was also most observable that none of these who
on the account of their consciences, that they might enjoy the purity of the
ordinances, went in that journey was the worse, but had a safe return, only
some persons who upon another account, expecting a fat soil, and outward
advantage in that place, and had unexpectedly slipped in the vessel, did all dye
upon the sea save one being 5 in number, and it was also wonderful upon their
return how the Lord as he had stayed the rage of the sea, did also still the
tumults of People, which they found by experience, so that it did evidently
give a dash, and became a terror to their adversaries.

I must here also set down a very singular, and strange instance, we may say
both of judgment and mercy which was in this land, not many years ago, a
Gentleman whose style was Wastraw a most bloodyman, and otherwise notour for
profanity, but most in this, that it was his great work, and pleasure to put
difference betwixt men, and as it was at that time very easy to engadge them
in blood, vvhilest he had thus stirred up a neighbor Gentleman to kill an
other in that place, finding him after sore troubled in mind thereanent, he
told him more of that practice would be the best cure, for he himself had
killed 6, and at the first time was much disquieted, but the longer he did
continue, it became the more easy. But one day vvhilest he was on such an
account riding to a place where 2 had trysted to decide a private quarrel by
fighting, his horse stumbles on the side of a steep rock, and he falls a great
way down, his svvord falling out before him, yet without any hurt; and here
by such a strange piece of providence did the Lord tryst and break in upon his
conscience, so that he quits his journey turns home with great trouble and
remorse, a most kindly change follovving thereon, and for some years after
witnessed much tenderness and repentance by his after walk, spent much time
alone mourning before his death, and that day he dyed having no visible
appearance thereof to these who looked on, he was heard in his chamber much
wrestling in prayer, and after long continuance, these of the house were
forced to break up the door getting no answer after their long knocking, and
finds him dead in the room, but upon his knees in a prayer posture, and the
whole blood of his body, which from every passages thereof had issued out,
svveeming about him in the floor, it being visible how all these passages
were opened for that effect, a most astonishing instance, declaring this to
the World, though He pardon the inquity of his People, yet some sins he will
not let pass without a visible mark of his anger, but will take vengeance on
their inventions.

What an observation passage is that also, known to many yet alive, anent a
notorious robber in the south parts of this land, called John of the Score who
for many years having driven that woeful trade did one day rencounter a poor
man traveling with 2 horses which he according to his custom takes away, the
poor countryman falling down on his knees, did earnestly beg, that for Jesus
Christ's sake, he would give the one again, for he had no more to maintain his
poor family, but what he could gain by them, but it was in vain, he carries
them home with him, leaving the poor man in that desolate condition, but a
little after, he turns dumpish, and melancholy, could get no rest, or quiet not
knowing the cause, but as he professed, that these words the poor man had spoke
to him, (though he was so great an Atheist, that he understood not what he
meant when he spoke of Christ) were lying like a heavy weight upon his spirit,
and whilst he was sought after for his robberies he desired his sons to
shift for themselves, for he could not go out of the way, there being a
restraint upon him, and something within him that in a kind bound him from
going out of the way, and thus stayed at his house until he was apprehended,
brought in to Edinburgh and there put up in prison, upon which a godly Minister
Mr Henry Blyth, with a Christian Gentleman William Cunir ghame Tutor of
Bonitoun who had sometimes known him, make a visit, holding forth to him his
miserable estate, and the he^^^rd of his soul, (for he was judged by the Law
to dye) and amongst other words showing him the necessity to flee to Jesus
Christ, he does suddenly break out with a cry, O what word is that, for it
has been my death, that is the word that has lain upon my heart since the
poor man spoke it to me; so that I had no power from that time to go out of the
way, and after being told what an one Christ was without whom he could not be
saved, he cries. O will he ever look to me, and show mercy, that for his sake
would not show mercy to that poor man, and give him back his horse, but after
further instruction, a most real, and gracious change did appear upon him, he
gave most convincing evidences of the reality thereof, attained to great
assurance before his death, and upon the scaffold in the public streets where
he was executed did speak so wonderfully of the Lords dealing with him, and
with such knowledge, and judgment, as left a conviction on all present, and
forced them to see a truth, and reality in the grace of God.

An other notable instance of grace, with a very remarkable passage in his
condition, I shall here mention, one Patrick Mackelwrath who lived in the
west parts of Scotland whose heart the Lord in a remarkable way touched, and
after his conversion, as he shevved to many of his Christian friends was in
such a frame so affected with that new World wherein he was entered, the
discoveries of God, and of a life to come, that for some months together he
did scarce ever sleep but was still taken up in wondering, his life was very
remarkable for tenderness, and near converse with God in his walk, and
which was worthy to be noticed, one day after a sharp trial, having his only
son suddenly taken away by death he retired alone for several hours, and
when he came forth did look so cheerfully that to those who asked him the
reason thereof, and wondered at the same in such a time, he told them he had
got that in his retirement with the Lord, that to have it afterward renewed
he would be content to loss a son every day. This one remarkable passage I
would set down, it had been long his burden the want of memory that he could
retain almost nothing of what he heard from the word, and bitterly complaining
thereof to worthy Master James English Minister of Daly, his counsel to him was
when he heard any truth which he desired to remember, to hold it up to the
Lord, and desire him to keep it for him, and give him it back according to his
need, which accordingly this blessed man did with much seriousnes practice, and
on his death bed, to his Minister, and diverse Christians that were present, he
did solemnly declare how wonderfully the Lord had ansvvered, and condescended
to him in that particular, for as they knew how much formerly it had been his
burden, the want of memory, now the Lord had given him back all these truths
that he had put in his keeping, so that what for many years before he had
heard, was now most clearly brought to his remembrance, which he witnessed by
repeating many particular truths, and notes of Sermons which at such, and such
times he had heard.

Now to shut up this, we have truly cause to say even from late experience
since this dark night came upon the Church in these Nations, with so sharp a
storm of persecution, there has not wanted some very signal, and convincing
providence witnessing the Lords appearance for his People, and against their
enemies; which are worthy of a remark, and may let men see that there is one
higher then the highest, who rules in the Kingdoms of the Children of men,
for it is manifest.

1. How eminently the Lord did appear in breaking that party who had been the
great instruments both in Counsel, and Action to break the government of the
Church of Christ in this land, and lay so much of his vineyard waste, and
desolate, and this, in the height of their power, and greatness, vvhilest they
seemed most firmly rooted. O how evident was a divine hand there, that this
Cabbal who made it their great work to raise up Prelacy, and oppress the poor
Church, and like a violent tempest did carry all before them, in a moment,
when they could have least expected, should be made to fall, yea, in so short
a time be turned out of their places, and offices, who but a little before had
turned out so many of the faithful Ministers of Christ, and that great man,
who put forth his power and authority so much to turn many of the godly of the
Land both Ministers and others, out of their houses and familyes, tossing them
from place to place, should thus be dealt with from the Lord, and recompensed
with that measure, being forced to quite his lodging once, and again, yea,
even to banish himself out of the country, who had been the chief instrument
to banish some of the most choice servants of Christ, and this stroke also made
to tryst them from that hand whence they could have least exepected, whose
interest they studied to promote in opposition to Gods; truly I should desire
to study sobriety, and fear in application of the judgments of God, but when
the Lord does so clearly reveal himself and show forth such an evident
resemblance, betwixt men's sins, and their stroke, it cries aloud for a
serious observing thereof.

2. Should we pass without a remark so solemn 2 witness from the Lord of his
respect to his Peoples sufferings in this late time? for it is known, with
what mavelous resolution, and chearfulnes, these have been carried through,
who were called forth to resist unto the blood in their adherence to the truth,
witnessing to the conviction of onlookers even their greatest enemies,
something above Roman Gallantry, yea, something above nature in that stayednes
and elevation of their Spirits, and as some of all rancks in the land the Lord
would have brought forth to seal, and witness his truth, and the work of
Reformation, so it has been also clear, that none wanted a large measure of
support, and strength for the trial, their suffering still giving a further
dash to their adversaries.

3. It is also manifest, and may be truly matter of wonder, by what a
mavelous providence so many suffering and desolat familyes have been carried
through without any obvious noise of their straites, now for these diverse
years, with such convincing chearfulnes, yea, the experience of many made to
witness that they never less knew a strait, then since they were put from the
ordinary means of their support, and others who have been more sharply tried,
could not reckon any such plunging strait and difficulty, but have also found
outgate by some remarkable providence trysted, I am very sure amongst other
advantages yet of these times, this shall be one, a large Register of
Experience, and remarkable confirmations of the truth of the word, and promise,
which the godly have had under this sharp trial, that will be sweet matter for
an after reckoning and a greater gain then any loss their former sufferance
did occasion, Yea, have not seen, what in an ordinary way looked as
irrecoverable, a stroke which a generation could not have made up, has been a
mean the Lord has choised to promote his glory, and thereby declare himself
to be God, has he not made us see, how easy it is for him to turn the sharpest
storm to the great advantage of his Church, that he can act in desperate cases,
above the skill both of Angels, and men, and truly though we should be brought
yet more low, even to the place of Dragons, this may uphold the shaking hearts
of his People, and be solid ground of confidence, that Christ's power and
faithfulness is this day engadged for his Church, and truth, he must increase,
his Kingdom is upon the rising hand, and shall yet have a more glorious
appearance in the World, what ever become of instruments, the reviving of his
work is not in the reverence of men, and since we know the Lord has solemnly
declared war against Antichrist, and all who will oppose the spreading of the
Gospel in these last times, yea, has past his word to the Church, for the fall
and ruin of that adversary, fall he must though the dust of the earth should
arise for that end, and it is sure Prelacy must also wither, that has its
life, and sap from that accursed root; they have this day a desperate cause in
hand, who do engadge their power to support the throne of the Beast, for they
run in the way of the wrath, and vengeance of the Lord, and shall surely
involve themselves in that ruin; though they were the greatest Princes of the
earth. I shall only add, we have much ground in these times to believe that
the Lord shall yet appear, and make himself known in the earth, by as great,
and convincing providence both of judgment and mercy, as in any former ages,
and thus vindicat his glory, and refute the Atheism of this generation, by
such an argument, as shall force iniquity to stop its mouth.

Now since this is sure, which none can get denied if they will but allow some
serious thoughts thereanent, that the Scripture falls not to the ground, for
Gods way is perfect and his word is tried, Ps. 18: ver. 30. O is it not also
sure, and a conclusion well grounded that He is a buckler to those who trust in
him, none needs fear to venture his interests through time on the word, yea, if
there could be any thing greater then a Heaven, or eternal salvation, the
testimony of the God of truth might be sufficient security for the same, it is
a small matter how this World does reel, and stagger, or what be the changes of
outward things, that is eneugh, the promises of the Word shall certainly take
place and the expectation of the Saints shall not make them ashamed.

FINIS,
For filling up some vacant pages a few Scriptures are set down, pointing at
the present condition, or what may be apprehended to be coming, concerning
either sin or judgment, doctrine or duty, wherein each Reader is desired not
so much to apply to others as to himself, and not to himself but what he may be
sure is his due: and because there was not room for setting down the whole
Texts, these may be consulted and considered in the Bible, only for memories
cause a little hint is given of each passage.
Ezekiel. 3: 17. etc. 21. A Watchman to warn righteous and wicked. Ierem. 1: 17,
18, 19. Speak what I command thee iron pillar, etc. Amos 3: 7. Secret revealed
to servants the Prophets. Galat. 4: 16. Am I your enemy, telling the truth?
Luke 12: 42. etc. 48. Faithful wise steward to give portion in season. Ierem.
7: 27, 28. Speak, but they will not hearken. Ezekiel. 2: 5. Whither they will hear
or forebear. Ezr. 7: 23. Whatsoever is commanded by the God of Heaven, etc.
Deuteronomy. 12. 32. Add not, diminish not. Galat. 1: 8. Who preaches another Gospel
is accursed. Galat. 2: 5. We gave place not for an hour. Hebr. 8: 5. According
to pattern showed in mount. Hebr. 3: 1, 2. Consider Christ faithful in his
house. Matthew. 17: 5. This is my beloved Son, hear him. Luke 20: 25. Give to
Caesar Cesars, and to God Gods. Psalm. 2: 6. I have set my King on Zion. Math.
15: 13, 14. Every plant not planted by my Father, rooted up. Math. 16: 12.
Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees. 2 King. 11: 17. Jehoiadah made a
Covenant, etc. Gal. 3: 15. Though a man's Covenant, no man annuls. Isai 24: 5.
Broken the everlasting Covenant. Exodus 32: 8. They have turned aside quickly.
Deuteronomy. 32: 5, 6. Do ye thus requite the Lord? Jerem 34: 18. etc. 21. I will give
the men that have transgressed my Covenant, etc. Ezekiel. 17: 15. etc. 19. Shall
he break the Covenant and Prosper? Prove. 20: 25. It is a snare after vows to
make enquiry. Levit 26: 25. A sword to avenge quarrel of Covenant. 2 Chronicles. 24:
17. etc. 24 loash and Princes left the house of God. 2 King. 16: 10. etc. 18.
Ahaz, altar of Damascus / Vrijah. 2 Chronicles 13: 9. Ye have cast out the Lords
Priests. 1 King. 12: 26. etc. 33. Jeroboams devised worship and Priests. Hos.
7: 3, 4, 5. Made glad with lies / adulterers / bottles of wine. Hos. 10: 3, 4
Feared not the Lord / swearing falsely. Zechar. 5: 4. Curse in house of false
swearer. Malach. 3: 5. Swift witness against false swearers. Ezekiel. 8: 6. Thou
shall see greater abominations. Jer. 5: 25, etc. 31. Overpass the deeds of the
wicked, etc. Psalm. 58: 1. etc. 5. Deaf adder hears not charming. Psalm. 94: 20
etc 23. That frames mischief by a Law. Psalm. 2: 1, 2, 3. Rage against the Lord
and his anointed. Ezekiel. 22: 25. etc. 31. Conspiracy of Prophets, Priests,
Princes. Hos. 5: 1. A snare on Mizpah. Jerem. 5: 1 etc, 14. Seek if ye can
find a man, etc. Isai 22: 12, 13, 14. Let us eat and drink, and tomorrow die.
Isai. 26: 10, 11. They will not see but shall see. Psalm. 28: 5 They regard not
the works of the Lord. Hos. 5: 10, 11. Willingly walked after the Command.
John. 19: 15. We have no King bur Caesar. Eccles. 5: 8. Marvel not at
oppression. Prove. 28: 15, 16, 17. A wicked ruler over poor People. Prove. 21:
13. He shall cry himself and not be heard. Hos. 4: 1. etc. 6. The Lord has a
controversy, etc. Jerem. 6: 13, 14, 15. They were not at all ashamed. Psalm. 21:
8. etc. 13. Thine hand shall find not thine enemies. Luke 19: 29. Those mine
enemies, stay before me. Isai. 8: 11. etc. 22. Say not a confederacy, etc.
Micah. 2: 1, 2, 3. Work evil upon their beds, etc. Psalm. 35: 20. Devise against
the quiet in the land. Prove. 14: 31, Who oppresses poor, reprocheth his maker.
Prove. 28: 3, 4. Sweeping rain that leaves no food. Isai. 10: 1, 2, 3. Decree
unrighteous decrees. Prove. 17: 15. Who justify wicked and condemn the just.
Psalm. 11: 2, 3. If foundations be destroyed, etc. Jerem. 11: 9, 10, 11. A
conspiracy / broken my Covenant. Amos 6: 1. etc. 6. Put far away the evil day,
etc. Jerem. 9: 1. etc. 9. Oh that my head were waters, etc. Psalm. 5: 9. No
faithfulness in their mouth. Prove. 26: 25. If he speak fair, believe him not.
Psalm. 12: 8. Wicked walk on every side when vilest, etc. Jerem. 8: 6, 7. No man
said, what have I done? Dan 11: 31. etc. 35. That do wickedly against Covenant,
etc. Dan. 12: 10. The wicked shall do wickedly. Isai. 28: 14. etc. 22. Made a
Covenant with death, etc. Isai. 29: 13. etc, 16. Fear taught by precept of men.
Math. 15: 9. In vain they worship me. Mark. 7: 9. Ye reject the commandment of
God. Jerem. 2: 11, 12, 13. Has a Nation changed their Gods. Jerem 2: 21. etc.
24. Turned to a degenerate plant. Malach. 3: 14, 15. It is vain to serve God.
Act, 7: 51, 52. Ye always resist the Goly Ghost. Isai. 5: 8, 9. Woe to them
that join house to house. Isai. 5: 20, etc. 23. Woe to them that call evil good.
Isai. 9: 12. etc. 17. For all this, anger is not turned away. Zeph. 3: 1. etc.
5. Woe to the filthy and polluted city. Zeph. 1: 8, 12. I will search Jerusalem
with candles. Isai. 65: 11. etc. 16. My servants shall eat but ye, etc. Math.
6: 12 13. I will make thee sick in smitting thee. Isai. 3: 9. etc, 15. They
declare their sin as Sodom. Eccles. 8: 11, 12, 13. Because sentence not execute
speedily. Isai. 1: 21. etc. 24. How is faithful city become an harlot? 1 King.
22: 8. Ahab hated Micaiah. Prove. 15: 12. A scorner loves not reprover. Isai.
30: 8. etc. 14. They say to seers, See not. 2 Timothy 4; 3. They shall heap
teachers, having itching ears. Isai. 56: 9. etc. 12. Watchmen are blind /
dumb, greedy dogs. Jerem. 14: 13. etc. 16. Prophets prophesy Lies. Jerem. 23:
9. etc. 22. Both Prophet and Priests profane. Math. 23: 13. They nather go in,
nor suffer others. Romans 16: 17, 18. They serve not Christ, but their belly. 2
Cor. 11: 13, 14, 15. Are transformed into Apostles of Christ Ezekiel. 13: 22, 23.
They strengthen hands of wicked. Malach. 2: 8, 9. I have made you base before
the People. Galat. 2: 11, 12, 13. Peter and Barnabas dissembled. Galat. 2. 18.
If I build what I destroyed. 1 King. 13: 18. The old Prophet deceived the
young. Nehem. 6: 12, 13, 14, 17, 18, 19. Some Jews favor the Enemy. Ezekiel 44:
5. etc. 10. Strangers brought in Levits gone astray. Isai. 61: 8. I hate
robbery for burnt offering. Ezr. 10: 2. Hope in Israel concerning this thing. 2 Timothy 2: 24, 25, 26. In meekness instructing opposers. 1 Cor. 2: 7 8. Had they
known, they would not have ctucified 2 Chronicles. 7: 14. If they pray, I will hear
and forgive. Jerem. 3: 1, 13. Only acknowledge thine iniquity. Jerem 4: 1, etc.
4. If thou will return, return to me: Dan. 4: 17. Break off thy sins by
righteousness. Jerem. 3: 3. etc. 7. Amend your ways, and doings. Jerem, 26:
12. etc. 15. If ye amend, the Lord will repent. 2 Chronicles, 12: 5. etc. 8. Princes
and King humbled themselves. 2 Chronicles. 33: 12, 13. Manasse humbled himself.
Ezekiel. 18: 31, 32. Why will ye die O house of Israel? Hos. 14: 1, 2. Take with
you words. Zechar. 1: 3. etc. 6. Turn to me, and I will turn to you. Zephan. 3:
1, 2, 3. Before the decree bring forth. Jerem. 13: 15. etc. 18. Say to King and
Queen, Humble, etc. Jonah. 3: 5, etc. 10. Niniveh repented. Act. 3: 19. Repent,
that sins may be blotted out. Act. 8: 22, 23. If Perhaps it may be forgiven
thee. Jam. 4: 8, 9, 10. Cleanse your hands ye sinners. Levit. 26: 40, 41, 42.
If they confess, and accept punishment of iniquity, I will remember my
Covenant. Ezekiel. 16: 59. etc. 63. Thou despised the oath in breaking Covenant,
yet I will remember my Covenant, 1 King. 19: 18. Yet I have left me 7000. Math.
28: 5. Fear not ye, ye seek Jesus. Ezekiel. 9: 4. A mark set on mourners. Galat.
5: 1. Stand fast in the liberty. Ephesians. 5: 11, 12. Works of darkness, rather
reprove them. Psalm. 26: 5. I hate the congregation of evil doers, Phil. 1: 27.
etc. 30. Conversation as becomes the Gospel. Dan. 6: 5, 13. Daniel regards
not thee O King. Act. 5: 29. We ought to obey God rather then men. 1 Pet. 4,
17, 18, 19. Judgment begins at the house of God. Rev. 2: 10. Fear not what
thou shall suffer. Rev. 3: 10, 11, 12. Behold I come quickly. Math. 5: 11, 12.
Blessed are ye when persecuted. Math. 10: 16. etc. 42. As Sheep in midst of
Wolves, etc. Math. 24: 9. etc. 13. They shall deliver you up, etc. Isai. 52. 5,
6. What have I here? my People taken away, etc. Mark. 10: 28. etc. 31. He shall
receive an 100 fold. 1 Pet. 2: 20, 21. Christ suffered leaving us an example. 1
Pet. 3: 14. etc. 17. Be not afraid of their terror. John. 15: 18. etc. 21. If
World hate you, it hated me before. John. 16: 1, 2, 3. Who kills you will
think it Gods service. Romans 8: 18. sufferings not worthy to be compared, etc.
Heb. 10: 36. etc. 39. He that shall come, will come. 2 Cor. 12: 9. My grace is
sufficient for thee. Zechar. 13: 9. Bring third part through the fire. 1 Cor,
10: 13. With temptation a way to escape. 2 Cor. 4: 8. etc. 18. troubled on
every side, etc. 2 These. 1: 5. etc. 12. To you troubled, rest with us. Psalm.
12: 5. Now will I arise says the Lord. Luke 18: 7, 8. Shall not God avenge
his elect? Jerem. 30: 8. etc. 11. I will break his yoke. 2 King. 19: 30, 31.
Remnant shall take root, and bear fruit. Zechar. 4: 6, 7. Not by might, but by
my Spirit. Isai. 66: 5. etc. 14. Shall a Nation be born at once? Micah. 7: 8,
9, 10. Rejoice not against me O mine enemy. Zechar. 12: 3. Jerusalem made a
burdensome stone. Isai. 49: 24, 25, 26. Shall prey be taken from the mighty?
Isai. 51: 21, 22, 23. Cup put in hand of afflicters. Ezekiel. 37: 11, 12. I will
open your graves. Zechar. 1: 12. etc. 21. Returned to Jerusalem with mercies.
Zechar. 9: 15: 16, 17. The Lord shall defend them, etc. FINIS.

