THE DIARIUM, OR JOURNALL:

Divided into 12. Iornadas IN Burlesque Rhyme, OR Drolling Verse, With diverse
other pieces of the same Author.

HOR. Risum undique, and undique quaerit. LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman
at the sign of the Anchor in the lower walk of the New-Exchange. 1656.

To all true lovers of Mirth and Wit.
TO you, as to the only few, I dedicate this Book, for there are not many so
wise and happy now adays. You neither thinking harm, nor doing any, and so
have the less done to you, whilst those who always trouble others and
themselves, never want others to trouble them again, and so live wretchedly and
miserably all their lives.

Let us do then in these times as I have seen the wiser sort of passengers do
in Holland ships, when the weather has been a little foul, get under hatches,
and make our selves as merry as we can, whilst for those busy bodies, who will
needs be talking and meddling above decks, I have seen the skipper with a good
ropes end sometimes, courteously entreat them to go down and not trouble them.

Mean time thou may entertain thy self with this, which I desire thou
would be so charitable to believe, is no part of my Study, but my Recreation,
written chiefly to divert the grief and melancholy of a certain illustrious
personage, too much pressing and oppressing her noble mind, and that in as few
days (almost) as it is divided into Jornadas, with only the allowance of some
small time for the polishing it, which I have not done so accurately; but thou
may well perceive, I affect not these, difficiles nugae, or studied toys:
however, if you like it, I care not, for your dull melancholy people, who never
laughed since the Kings death; and relish Jests as Horses do Italian Sallets,
and French Ragouts. If they like it not, let them take Helebore.

Farewell, and laugh, and be merry.
To the Reader.
BEtwixt Poetry and Painting there is near relation, Poetry being but a
speaking Picture, as Painting a silent Poem. So have you Poets and Painters
excellent in their several kinds. For your Virgil, or Heroique Poet, a
Raphael, and Titian. For your Horace, or Lyrique, a Holbeen, and Vandick,
representing particular persons to the life; as for your Burlesque, or Drolling
Poem, a Brughel, and (in his kind) Callot, representing Grotesque and
fantastic figures. In which way there has been fewer excellent than in any
other, as being the most witty and ingenious, your other putting you too much
on the gravity, to be always witty, and having somewhat else to sustain the
dignity of the person when that fails; but here wit is all, which failing
once, the work presently falls flat, and the Author has nothing left for his
support, whose part it is to sustain the matter, and not the matter him.

Of this kind is the Poem I present thee here, which when its figures are
lively, and representations natural, is one of the delightfullest of all;
where note, that as nations grow more polite and witty, they fall upon this
strain, it being the luxuriant branches of a flourishing language, and the very
interior of it, beyond the access of vulgar wits, whither (as in China) no
stranger can arrive. So your Dutch, and more Northern nations, could never get
past Jack puddings, or Pickle-herrings, stale jests yet, which none but Beer
brewers can laugh at, whilst your severest Statesmen, and refinedst Wits can
laugh at these.

That I use some broad words sometimes, it is but conform to the pattern I
imitate: Brughel representing, without any dishonesty, here a Boor shiting,
there a Boorinne pissing, to render the vulgar more ridiculous ^are properly
the subject of ridiculousness) and whose follies, abuses, and vices, are
properly the subject of Satyr: for the rest never was Indian contriving
feathers intopicture, more careful of their shadows, than I not to give umbrage
unto any, who reverence Authority, honor all noble Persons, and especially am
a devoted servant unto Ladies; yet to think to satisfy all objections, were to
think to peel a Bulbus root to its last rind, or sweep an Earthen floor to its
last grain of dust, especially here, where they understand railing, far
better than Raillery. Now if you ask me why I prefix not my name to this, as
well as to my other works: besides, that I count it the slightest of them all,
it is because those I printed only to communicate to my private friends, but
intending to make this more public, and hating to have my name lie glaring on
Booksellers stalls, I have purposely suppressed it here; yet so, as I care not
(for satisfying thy curiosity) to take thee aside from the Title Page, and tell
thee my name is Richard Fleckno.

Postscript.
To go currently and smoothly on, be pleased to correct the errors of the
Press, by the Errata at the end.

Entrance into Style.
BEing Diarium to write,
Whose Genius shall I invite?
Or of whose Muse invoke the favor
To assist me in my Labor?
Greek Aristophanes, or Plautus
In Latin, where not many a fault is,
Or in Spanish of Cervantes,
Excellent in's way I grant is,
Or of Scarron For so he calls himself the Queens Sickman.
le Malade,
Best yet France has ever had;
Or Secchia Rapita's Author,
In Italian has no fault there,
Or our English Doctor Smith,
Whose muse so bonny is, and blithe,
Or, in fine, of Sir John Mennis,
For excellence yeildeth not to any's:
Faith, once I Will trust unto my own,
For trifling yeildeth unto none.
I. IORNADA.
THE ARGUMENT.
1. The humor of Gravesend Watermen. 2. The spirit of the Fish wives of
Billingsgate. 3. The Towns complain, and Cripples. 4. The nature of your
ordinary town-visits. 5. And abuse of the Beggars.

1. FRiday the twentieth of September,
(if day of the month I well remember)
(I know not well what time of the day)*
I toward Gravesend took my way,
Being for London to take boat,
Where Water-man in Livery coat,
Does in boat, as pig in stye,
Invite ye in fresh straw to lie;
Where you all sorts of passengers,
Shall encounter on the stairs;
And where of Company there is none fails,
To meet with Tag, and Rag, and Long-taile.
Mean time, good sport it was to hear,
How watermen would jibe and jeer:
Has gotten now new way of jeering,
Not ungrateful to the hearing;
And Rogue and Rascal is no more
Their Dialect as 'twas before.
Here none of them but had the art
To call his Father Knave by craft;
And all of them for the nonce were made,
If imperfection ought you had,
To make it more ridiculous,
By their jesting at it thus:
They Would tell an ill-lookt fellow, he has
Robbed Jack-an-apes, and stolen his face,
And wry-neck they would ask with laughter,
What news 'twas he was harkening after?
Long nose, they would say, was good to make
Handle for Jaques; and for Crook-back,
If all trades failed (quoth they) he would
At least for Ape-carrier be good.
In fine, nothing from head to foot,
But somewhat they had to say unto't,
So witty, as (would you should know it)
'T might well beseem their Water-poet:
But principally he does glory
In telling of you bawdy story,
Which if any woman's there
He addresses still to her,
And you must laugh at, or you spoil
His story, and himself the while.
2. To Billingsgate now as we came,
We soon perceived Water-man
To Fish-wife was for railing fool,
And well might go to her to school;
Each one being so learned there,
She might be Doctresse of the Chair,
Or Ducking-stoole; and though of the Tribe,
But few were well knew how to jibe,
Yet all knew well to scold outright
'Alarum to the ensuing fight,
Where each one did on each one fall,
And all were enemies to all.
Now on aboard the ships, like Edgar,
Triumphs there, and off goes head geer,
While she with Elf-locks 'bout her ears,
Just like Medusa's head appears.
Instead of turning you to stone,
Throwing stones at every one;
The Other with save-guard off, as troubled,
As ere was dancing Dog in doublet;
In torn smock, with small compliance,
Denounces unto all defiance*
There over and over one does come,
Lighting by chance upon her bumm;
Others more expert, just like Cats
Always light upon their pats;
Amongst whom there was such stink
Of fish, but more of them you would think,
Who talk of stink of Paris garden,
For wronging it should ask its pardon.
Whence, whosover thither goes,
Thanks God for all, but Ears and Nose,
And above all, thanks him for feet,
As we did to get out of it.
Hence we by Water passing London,
Found poor new Town almost undone,
With banishment of Cavalier,
Crying out, pity 'twas to hear.
"O Proclamation! Proclamation!
"That thou would use us in this fashion,
"To take away from's all, our guest!
"Thou might have left us some at least;
"And houses not have left so poor,
"They Are forced to wear bill on door.
"Just as old Armenian there,
"Bill upon his breast does wear.
"But thou no more pitiest poor people,
"Than Anabaptist does Paul's steeple,
"Or Scotch Presbyterian does
"Fall of Cheap, or Charing-crosse,
"Yet glad we are thou do begin,
"Tattered to grow on door of Inn;
"Whilst with thee here one lights his pipes,
"Another backside with thee wipes:
"Sign (as it is every ones desiring)
"Thy date is very nigh expiring;
"Unless unto our mickle pain
"Thou chance to be renewed again,
"With the States and Councils hand for it,
"When goodnight Lodgers, goodnight Landlord.
Among the rest; the Captain Beggar
Of Train-band has never a leg there.
In Lincoln fields, and Covent garden,
Scorning for to take a farthing,
Or ask Alms for Gods sake either,
Clubbing wooden legs together.
Often drinks a health (in Tears
Of Kan) unto the Cavaliers.
Here strait as we arrived be,
Visits I made me two or three,
With reverence not very comely,
And complements indeed as homely;
As for example; "How do you do?
"Well I thank ye, How do you?
"Better for to see you well;
"What a clock is it? can you tell?
"The Sun these three days has not shone*
"I pray now how does such a one?
"I hope it is for your ease, you put
"Not on your hat? O Lord it is but
"My duty: as of such like stuff,
Town-visits do afford enought:
And well if they are so innocent,
Are now adays for most part spent
In detraction, and in lies,
In slanders and in calumnies,
Reciprocally by their tongues,
Doing one another wrongs;
So the subtle net of Envy's wrought,
In which so many souls are caught,
And brand of hatred's tossed about
Uncessantly, that never goes out;
Which being now the common style,
Where Is Christian charity the while?
Then taking of collation light,
To lodging I returned at night;
Link boy lighting of me home,
That beggars trade is now become
As switches upon highway is,
And Brooms in street where durty it is;
None giv^ng Alms for Gods sake now,
Nor none indeed e're asking't you,
Excepting Gentleman or twain,
Ready for to starve again:
But all have trades, and who have none,
For need can offer at Buffoon;
Talk madly, tell you bawdy story,
Or in some vice, or other glory:
Whence, being none are truly poor,
Charity we see no more.
And after good works Faith being gone,
Hope, with Presumption, left alone,
Is even gone too, so as (in fine)
Such is the misery of the Time.
Of Virtues now we have left no more
But Patience, virtue of the Poor.
II. IORNADA.
THE ARGUMENT.
1. The strange Company in Towns. 2. The ill breeding of their Children. 3. And
nature of the Men. 4. The Hollanders neatness, with other Occurrences, and a
politic Discourse on the French Peace.

1. NExt morn, new Suit I on did say,
No matter who does Tailor pay,
For who would charge their memories
With dribbling Reck'nings, such as these?
When they are sure (when least they mind them)
They in written Books shall find them;
Then Shoemaker being come with shoes,
Abroad I went to hear what news;
When, as I walked in the street,
I not a face I knew did meet,
But such strange visiognomies
As they were dropped from the skies:
(And that may be, as we see plain,
By Paddocks after-shower of Rain)
As Sailors wives in Coaches, and
Prentices along the strand,
Whilst their plodding Master's walking
In Spatterdashes, or dark Stocking,
And shining Shoo, he sees his face
As well in, as in Looking-glass,
With scarce a Gentleman the while,
Appearing within twenty mile.
2. Only the durty children there,
Same things are still they ever were,
Calling Rogue, and Whore, and Bastard,
Then cuffing (or they are counted Dastard)
Till one or other always goes
With blew eye thence or bloody nose;
While Parent by does stand and smile,
Encouraging them in it the while.
Mean time what would the Italian say?
Bring up their children soon as they
Are born, to make their legs, and kiss
Their hands, with their your Seignories,
At every word, to show their buon'
Greanza by it to every one:
Should they behold their breeding here,
(Good enough, if worse it were.)
3. But much more would they amazed be,
Frequently in street to see
Men shoulder and justle one another,
As they had father killed, or mother,
Ravished sister, or had been
Destruction of all their kin:
And look as stern and furious on'um,
As they had ruined and undone them;
With as much glory and delight:
Doing them mischief and despite
Whom before they would never seen,
As deadly Enemies they would been.
These needs must gain fine Reputation,
Of Civility to the Nation;
And Fame over all the world again,
O'th Courtesy of English men.
From thence I went to Barkshire house,
Was wont to be as still as Mouse,
And wondered much, such noice to hear,
And find your Hoghen Moghens there;
When what was it? but not long before,
'Twas hyr'd by Dutch Ambassador.
Neither I think will house or garden
Much repent them of his bargain
4. For I was told that Dutch were neat,
And into back side still would get.
To do that business which the French,
In house would do (matter for stench)
While Portugees were such foul slovens,
They Would do it in Chymnyes and in Ovens.
For as of Hounds are several breeds,
Some in Chambers do their needs:
Orher some again do scummer
In Hall, or else in Parler somewhere;
And others out of doors do go
Into Yard, or Backside; so
You among Nations have likewise,
Men of several faculties
In shiting, amongst whom we may call,
Dutch neatest shiter of them all.
As witnesses his Mussel shells
You find in Holland, where he dwells;
Pil'd up as Pewter is in kitchen,
In house of office that he shits in.
Which more is to be wondered at,
Since Hans is corpulent and fat;
Laxative Turnep great devourers,
And every way the greater scourers.
Whence, I dare swear, with any two
Nations, eat Roots but as they do,
They Will shite not only, upon even
Hand, but shall give them two in seven.
O Neatness, neatness! for thy sake,
This discourse so long I make;
Rose of houses, and of street,
And as that of garden, sweet.
With fragrancy the nose delighting,
Even of Hollander in shiting.
Blessing on that breech of thine,
Makes such good meat for swine;
And blessing on the swine again,
Makes such good meat for men!
Here having talked and laughed, and so forth,
I'bout eleven from thence did go forth
Toward Chelsey, to a noble friend,
Lives there (nigh hither end.)
For I know 'twould cause your laughter,
To say 'twas to woo Mayern's daughter,
Though by it I might chance dismount
Your French Lord, and your German Count.
There I having dined, forthwith,
By water went to Hammersmith,
Where I found them yet at board,
All varieties did afford,
Served in with such elegance,
As they had been Italy or France,
And with such Frontineak met there,
Old King James did never drink better,
Worth the whisper in the ear,
If Toby Mathews had been there,
Specially the Ragouts and Sallets,
Excellent for curious palats;
Which your honest country Knight,
Does compared to Mutton slight;
Your dull Squire, that nothing knows,
But Beef and Bacon, calls Kick-shaws;
And Farmer swears with Country-clown,
Pudding for meat quite puts it down,
While nothing that had but the name
Of wine, amiss unto them came,
The very name often being enough
To make them count it excellent stuff;
Though with Matheglin Sack were made,
And French wine dash of Cider had,
Or't had but Aqua vitae's heat,
It excellent was unto their meat;
So't seemed that wine was only doomed
For their palats to be stum'd:
Brownbread spirits, whose dull flat palate,
Not a thought is elevated,
Nor heightened 'bove the pitch it was
At, in their old forefathers days,
Happy if the same tenacity,
They Had had of the faith and honesty,
As of their fathers clownishness,
Which yet to this day they profess;
And here first I heard the news,
(Did me not so much amuse)
That peace with us and France was made,
I was nor sorry for, nor glad,
Who for my part do not care
With whom we have or Peace or War;
Farther than dangerous consequence
Of wanting wine, may follow thence.
For if we'ave peace with France, we Claret
Shall have (I hope none will debar it)
And whensoe're we have peace with Spain,
I hope we shall have Sack again.
However yet I should be loath,
At same time to have war with both;
For fear of the dangerous consequence,
Indeed, might chance to follow thence.
When we in making war with either,
Shauld have nor Sack nor Claret neither:
Both which that night I drank at Kew,
Where bras dessous, and bras dessus,
I welcomed was, and lodged in Chamber,
With Curtains yellow as any Amber.
III. IORNADA.
THE ARGUMENT.
The description of a ridiculous Congregatio^^ 1. The Place. 2. The Auditors.
3. And t^^ Teacher.

SUnday nevt morning being come,
Those who would, might stay at home,
And those who would, to Church might go,
For none force here does ever know,
Only when dinnertime was come,
As well those who staid at home,
As those who to Church did go,
Must dine then where they would or no.
That done, to Thistleworth I went,
Service straitwaies to present
To noble company was there,
Where near highway I might hear
A Dipper of the newest cut,
Who had Congregation got,
So ridiculous, as I
Cannot but describe it to ye.
At Thistleworth, if I don't miss,
Weekly Congregation is,
Where Architecture is not wholly
Of Vitruvius nor Vignoli,
Nor Michael Angelo at all,
Had hand in structure of the wall;
You Would think it the Rotunda were,
But that was round, and this was square,
Being in form (you might discern)
Betwixt a Chamber and a Barn,
So narrow, one does thrash a Cock,
Has not room to strike a stroke,
They sitting (as in Oven heat)
In summer stewing all with sweat,
And chimney't had to keep them hot
In winter, when their zeals would not;
Above it had no Cupillo,
Though wind from thence through tiles did blow,
Nor Musaick pavement more
Than father Adam's earthen floor;
Window it had for to give light
To any that had eyes to see it.
And at the higher end a Pulpit
That would not dung if it were full shit;
Garden for Cowcumbers in pickle,
For half the holy Conventicle,
2. For Auditors you by their features,
Would imagine them Gods creatures;
But by physiognomies, they had
The sillyest ones as ere he made,
Each one there looking so demurely,
As they had got the Colique surely,
Or some such symptom had did make
Men look as they had the belly-ake.
For men in clothes, some old, some new,
Not many beards you there should view,
For fear (perhaps) lest some should twit
Them, that they had more hair than wit.
Ierkins wear some, but Cloaks not many,
And for socks and cuffs not any,
Mary for stockins, two at least
They had a piece, but all were piec't;
And for the rest it was no news,
To say they all wore cobbled shoes.
Now of young Maidens were good store
But of good Wives were many more;
Amongst the rest a bouncing Hostiss,
Whose leg as big as any post is,
And flank and buttock just as Hogshead,
Living there hard by a Dogs head
And porridge*pot. And as for her,
She well could lie, but could not swear,
And of neighbors talk but odly;
If they were not of the godly;
Sip she would too, somewhat deep,
When they Gossipping did keep,
And all good qualities had beside,
Of Holy Sister cannot abide
'T have ought to do with man of sin,
Whilst godly might do any thing,
And talk o'th Spirit what you will,
Flesh she would have enough of still,
She somewhat strait lac't now good heart
Grievously sighing let a -- --
When one in curtsying bid God bless her
As she had sneez'd, nor was there lesser
Stink, and Devotion amongst the rest,
Their breath all smelling strong at least,
But seeing (more's the pity) all,
Under prospect cannot fall:
As in pictures where the chief
Persons appear, in bas relieve,
Whilst your less important are,
Shadowed to be seen afar,
It Is fit at least that I describe,
Who was chief* Rabbi of the Tribe.
A tiny Kniperdalling Teacher;
And withal as pretty a Preacher;
For declining he, ha, hum,
As any again in Christendom,
In Brainford dwells of good fashion,
And Man of high Ce'st un determine.
determinarion,
Resolved to eat his bread and butter
In open streets, let who is will mutter.
More lively to describe the Urchin,
On legs like twigs of Besum burchin;
He limps and doubles as he goes
Like tumbler who does kiss his toes,
Yet he is a man held as upright,
For one like him that haults downright,
As any he again in Brainford,
The good wives there count him a Saint for it.
I Will tell ye too (now I Am in the vain)
He every year gets children twain,
As if they still, his wife and he,
Got children under Gemini:
And to behold how walk they did,
You Would think he got them with his head;
For whilst in streets he limpeth by her,
She than he by the middle higher;
It Is lechery to see him go,
He butts against her belly so.
Then you must know how that Baboon
Kisses in the streets, even at high noon,
Though she being higher than he three foot,
He Is forct to stand on stool to do it.
This man was he in the Pulpit stood
To day, for soul and bodies good,
Sending them edified each one,
And mightily comforted home:
All Saints, and pure, though (to be short)
Never a one the better for it;
One only excepted, that is I
Make this relation often unt'ye.
IV. IORNADA.
THE ARGUMENT.
1. A few particular Occurrences. 2. With the adventure of the Rat:

NExt day afforded little matter
Of novelty, by land nor water,
For betwixt lying too long abed,
And dining late too, as we did,
Before you, What is this? could say,
Morning and noon were past away;
Whence it was late e're I could go
abroad as I was wont to do:
Go, did I say? nay, there I ly'd,
For I, to tell you true, did ride
Though without boots, the way being short,
And clean, not worth pains taking for it;
First to Richmond, then to Twicknam
(Wheresoever it got that nickname)
Where I a Lady went to see,
Of noble and of high degree,
Whilst at Richmond I saw none
That I knew, but only one,
Who they say (Gods blessing on her)
Was the Lady of the Manor,
Has made the town now (with the Court gone)
Little better then Hogs-norton;
From whence I went again to Kew,
I ever make my Randevous,
(Since Asturly has quitted clear
The noble Company was there)
Nor know I no where company,
And place that better do agree;
For faire's the place, the company fair,
Pure good they, pure good the air.
When going to bed, adventures that,
By day were wanting, were by Rat
Supplied by night, from sleep did wake
Me with the rattling noise 't did make,
In gnawing candles end (plague choke him)
While first I gently thus bespoke him:
"Prithee Rat when I Am a bed,
"Do not trot it over my head,
"And find out some other place,
"For thy gallop and thy pace,
"Nor with trampling thou do keep,
"Offer to disturb my sleep,
"And if thou wilt have me for friend,
"Let alone the candles-end,
"Needs must be too fat and greazy
"For a stomach weak and queasie,
"Rather go a little farther
"To the Dairy and the Larder,
"To the Cellar, or the loft,
"Places thou frequentest often,
"Where thou choice of food may find
"Far more pleasing to thy mind.
"There thou may thy body feast
"With Lard and Bacon of the best,
"Dainty Pears and Apples mellow,
"For their favor have no fellow;
"With a hundred other cates,
"Junkets for the King of Rats.
"There like Anchoret ere the art dead,
"Thou may delve thy Grave in bread,
"Or like Hermit, if thou please,
"Make thy Cell in hollow cheese;
"There in gnawing pulse or seeds,
"Thou may nibble over thy beads,
"And get thee reputation by it,
"Of holy Rat reformed quite.
"So may meet with no mishap
"Of subtle engine, snare, nor trap.
"Nor presidious bridge over water,
"For to make thee drop in after:
"So may none with poisonous bait
"For thy ruin lie in wait,
"Nor Ratcatcher of's wonted manner
"Fright thee with his hideous banner;
"So may thou avoid the Cat,
"Deadly enemy of Rat:
"Nor ever any mischief have
"To bring thee to untimely grave,
"But may thou live till thou art old,
"And a numerous race behold,
"For thy solace often may
"Dance about thee when thou art gray;
"For thy music squeeking loud,
"Making thee both glad and proud:
"And last when life for death thou change,
"May thou in some barn or grange,
"Buried in fresh straw remain,
"And lie there till thou stink again.
But afterward he growing more
Bold and insolent than before;
Fit it was in severer strain,
Thus to threaten him again,
That if Rat had any grace,
'T might make him better then he was;
If not, and was no hope of that,
'We might conclude him reprobate.
"Then farewell patience, since I see
"Thou but abusest it and me,
"And my goodness makes thee worse,
"It Is time to take another course.
"Then as in Ireland they do,
"Rhyme Rats to death with verse or two,
"So'll I thee, if Art don't fail,
"And send thee hence with straw in tail,
"Born of that race of Vermin on's,
"That Egypt was so plagued with once,
"Or of those eat, the Prince at Mentz,
"And lineally descended thence.
"So, thou do of race proceed,
"Not only of Thief but Homicide.
"Can nothing but whole candles now
"Serve thy turn, thou Rascal, thou?
"Reproach I should be loath to put
"On any of thy grave black coat,
"But thou forgetting manners, I
"May well forget civility.
"Light! we shall not shortly dare to sleep
"Without Halbert-watch to keep,
"To defend our ears and nose,
"And thou wilt be nibbling at our toes,
"And fingers ends, let thee alone,
"But with a plague I Will set thee gone,
"If Ratsbane, or the Cat can do it,
" Traps or Ratcatcher to boot,
"Or any virtue's in a charm,
"To wave thy farther doing harm,
"Then by the formidable Pat,
"Of thine enemy, the Cat.
"By her fierce and cruel gripes,
"Piercing to thy guts and tripes;
"By her sucking of thy blood,
"Which she finds so sweet and good,
"By the pain that is in thy belly,
"When with Ratsbane they do swell ye,
"Or Trap* door does on thee fall,
"Squeezing out thy life and all.
Get thee gone ere I do arm
Me against thee with a second charm;
And upon this, and greater pain,
Presume not to return again.
V. IORNADA.
THE ARGUMENT.
1. The Horses devotion at Brainford. 2. The Maids petticoats there somewhat of
the shortest. 3. The Citizens fishing. 4. The Bargemens rudeness. 5. And
manner of drinking healths.

FOr Tuesday, which was next day after,
Having ferried over the water
To Brainford, where 'twas market day,
Coaches some I met on way.
Lecture going for to here
Every market day preached there,
Horses who to Church went foremost,
Seeming in their zeales the warmest:
For they two are Auditors,
By th'peoples answers plain appears,
Who asked what Lecturer sed, do say,
The Horse does know as well as they:
Nor ought it to appear so strange.
If times but one point more do change
To Have Horses go to Churches now,
As well as Men, since you will allow
Bodies of Horses were in Paul's,
Though builded 'twas for Christian souls;
And such was their profaneness! some
To Horses have given Christendom.
2. Now Coaches past it was good sport,
Wenches in petticoats so short,
And shorter Lockrum smocks the while,
To see tumbling over the style,
As thanks unto their scanty clothing,
You half their breech might see for nothing,
And the other half I do not know
Whether't worth seeing was or no.
At which if any be offended,
This geer may shortly be amended,
When new Reformers are at leisure,
For petticoats to appoint a measure,
That your young men with their peering,
Nor your old for all their leering,
May Not see so far in maidens carriage,
As may chance to mar their marriage.
From Brainford then, for mornings walk,
I o^re to Thist le worth did stalk,
Just as Crane or Hernshaw does,
When over Bog or Marsh it goes,
To take leave of every one,
Being on next day to be gone,
3. Where Fisherman I saw in brook
Angling, who just nothing took,
Yet thither was he come from London,
Complaining trading was quite undone,
And if he hoped for to mend it,
By his fish when God should send it: The Citizens fishing fair, and catching
a Frog.

Faith, even fair he fished has,
And caught a frog, as proverb says.
So by water home I went,
And thus was all the morning spent.
4. Only (on way) we met with Western barge, with whom there is no jest,
Their wits being heavy as barge, whilst merry
Waterman was light as Wherry;
But railing, was in earnest all,
As soon you would find, and do but call
Them Pugs, and see what coil they would keep,
Ask Who was hanged for stealing sheep?
Rude Rogues have naught but shit and turd,
And kiss mine arse at every word,
And without mannerly preface
Of Sir reverence, name their Arse;
Whom you would say, do just appear
In white shirts, and their hempen geer:
Whilst one does lead, another follows,
Like Morris dancers to the gallows;
But hands I washed, and fingers from them,
And nothing have to say unto them,
For fear of Proverbs two, that say,
Ill meddling it is with such as they.
And first is (if I ben't beguiled)
Who touches pitch shall be defiled;
And for second, it is (I think)
The more they stir, the more they stink.
After dinner horse I took,
And again ferrying over brook,
My horse starting at windmills sight,
Ran me away with all his might;
I could not till I came to Twiford,
Get him stop if I should die for it.
From thence we gallopt over to Acton,
Where ale, and beer, and wine, we lackt none:
Though for my part in country town,
Rarely with palate wine goes down,
Has had far better bringing up,
Such trash in belly e're to put,
As mungrel balderdash Mine Here,
Dutchman has stummed for us there,
Who loves so well our beer to brew,
Our very wine he will brew us too.
Mean time we two might over-hear,
Drinking deep in next room were;
Helter, skelter healths, quoth one,
Here Is to the best in Christendom;
Let't come, said the other, I Am content,
And here is to the Sun in the firmament;
A health which none, I think, that is wise,
Doos well know what it signifies;
In Tavern cipher, used of late,
By those make drinking matter of State,
Who, to every wise man's thinking,
Matters of State have marred by drinking:
More to hear I was afeard,
Had against good manners erred,
TO have heard so much, but that I could
Not choose, the Cockseombs talked so loud,
Who wish, who ere does stretch an ear,
Others discourse to over-heare,
May have them stretched on pillory
For it next market day, for me.
Thus with their sun in the firmament,
Drinking of healths so long they went,
And we tarried so long, the sun
Out of the firmament was gone:
When we galloping thence in the dark,
Whilst dogs behind at horse-heels bark,
Children had eat their bread and butter,
And Clowns and Laborers were at supper
The Owl with its to whit, to whoo,
Hooting all the way we go:
I came to Kew with weary crupper
Just as they sat down to supper.
For as natural Philosophy,
Tells you somethings, nigher they lie
To the fire, warmer grow,
And that is strange you will say now so;
My crupper, I Will assure you, more
I ride, more still it waxes sore,
So after supper having sed
Good night to all, I went to bed,
Where snugging I did sleep, lik top,
Till next morn mine eyes were open.
This manner I concluded Tuesday,
You will say was no great news day.
VI. IORNADA.
THE ARGUMENT.
1. His weary journey to Kensington, and choler at it. 2. The Hollanders
devotion to Turnips. 3. A survey of Hyde-park. 4. The Poets folly.

1. ANd now Aurora blushing red,
Came stealing out of Titans bed,
Whilst the hours that swiftly run,
Harnass'd the horses of the Sun.
Now Chantecleer with stretcht-out wings,
The glad approach of Phoebus sings,
While Bats and Owls, and birds of night
Were all confounded, put to flight.
All which is only for to say
In Poets language, that 'twas day,
Might have been sed in word or two
As well, without all this ado,
But that 't does please Master of Schools
To render all their Scholars fools,
By canting language signifies
Nothing at all unto the wise.
Now with the Sun I rising too,
Kind leave took of all at Kew,
And going to Thames side (having got
Breakfast in belly) called for boat,
With London hey, or London ho,
Whether of the two I do not know,
With intention that day
To hedge in Kensington in the way,
Where much noble company
And friends good store I had to see*
Now on the way in boat I took
Footman or boy of Colonel C --
Who told me Fulham, nighest place
To Kensington, for landing was,
And had the impudence the while
T'assure me it was but a mile,
When I had full three miles to go,
Plague on him did not tell me so:
Kibes on his heels, Corns on his toes,
Still may he have where ere he goes:
And be his pumps when he does travel
Always full of sand and gravel.
Pardon me that I disimbogue
With choler thus against the Rogue;
Had plot infallibly to make me
Footman too as well as he;
While this h'as only gotten by it,
To mar of me a Footman quite.
2. Now whilst over fields I walked along,
My comfort was 'twas all among
Turnips, sweet Turnips, which the Dutch
Honor and esteem so much;
They count by them their Origin,
How many Turnip eaters have been
Of The family, whence swine and they
Are somewhat near akin they say.
Calling't their Manna sent from Heaven,
Such as to Israelites was given;
Nay, as their Leeks Egyptians dud,
Turnips they even account their God,
Singing Hymns unto its praise,
As Ethnicks did in ancient days.
"O Divine Turnep, thou and Butter,
"How often have you made us squtter?
"Dunging our Land with what comes from us,
"Till't even becomes a Land of promise,
"Thou art our Apple, raw we eat,
"And roasted, thou art all our meat;
"Thou art our sweetmeats which we strait
"Convert into swines marmalet,
"Whence thou art (to end) our Indies too,
"As Goldfinders full well do know.
Here I did see our noble friend, [ Cor. J. S.

Whom well again I pray God send,
To hear news was much comforted,
How 'twas reported he was dead,
And God grant when of us they do
Report so, we may hear so too.
3. From thence over Hyde-park way I took,
To see how all things there did look,
And trees I found as many there
As on bald crown you shall bush hair,
Tail on Ape, or as you will have
Beard on Evnuchs face to shave,
Which in plain English, is just none,
So you should see where Coach had gone;
Ground look just like gald horse back,
That here and there does plaster lack,
All broken out in boyles and blotches,
Where had gone, or horse, or coaches,
They even hiring't out to you,
As Hackney men their horses do,
Which for your money you may ride
In spur-galling both flank and side.
4. Here now are two comparisons,
In conscience worth at least two crowns,
Though you, I warrant, would be loath
To give your half a crown for both:
So are Poets often deceived,
Imagining they have conceived
Fancies more precious then gold,
Till all abashed they behold,
Going to maket with their wit,
Nothing's to be bought with it;
But all with ready money, they
Seldom, or never, have to pay:
But let that pass, and so let us
To journeys end, which ended thus
'Bout Cock* shut time I came to town,
So weary, I was forced to lie down,
And weary limbs to rest in bed,
Just like dog that is surbated,
Or horse that is foundred, choose you whether,
Being as tired as both together,
As much the while, in rest rejoicing,
As Youngster after long deboyshing;
All durty, just as one had been in
Tavern three days, and never changed linen:
And thus this day of Mercury
Did go but very hard with me.
VII. IORNADA.
THE ARGUMENT.
1. How he rested next day. 2. A fray betwixt a Drayman and Carman. 3. The
Citizens cousening and equivocating.

THursday I rested, not as Jew,
Nor Christian, on their Sabbaths do,
Abstaining from all sorts of work,
Nor as on Friday, Moore, and Turk;
Nor as more ridiculous,
Reformed Pharisean does,
Abstaining even from being merry:
But only indeed 'cause I was weary,
Finding just my pettitoes
Like Teags, or Irishman, that goes
Hundred mile on Masters errant,
Without resting, ache I warrant;
Or just like Dog that limping goes,
Having in embers singed his toes,
Licking tenderly his vamp,
Or like man that had the cramp:
With my journey day before,
Having walked five mile and more,
Perceiving then my feet so sore,
I Would of the Infantry be no more;
But mounting me for Cavelry,
Out I went me, horse to buy,
With all Requisits beside,
Out of town next day to ride.
When in passing on my way,
I chanced to see a doughty fray
'Twixt a Drayman and a Carman,
(Hap what would, could home no harm an;)
Such a fight they did present there
As was 'twixt Lapithe and Centaur,
Or 'twixt Grecian and Trojan,
All in earnest without dodging:
But not to hold you in suspense
With Poets wonted eloquence,
Writing one blow with their pen
Longer then they are fighting ten.
First Carman lightly skirmished,
With whip in hand, but small hurt did
Whilst sturdy Drayman, just like Ox,
With Leaver down my Carman knocks,
(And unto wrong use it did put,
To strike down, made for lifting up)
With blow infallibly had been dead,
But that it light upon his head;
Gramarcy, gentle nature gave him
Head only from blows to save him:
When Drayman straitwaies went away,
Marching in triumph with his Dray,
Leaving the people loudly bawling,
And Carman in the kennel sprawling,
Till we saw, a little after,
To some's pity, others laughter,
Carman scrabbling up, and rubbing
Head full gently, and tail scrubbing,
Away go, wiping hands on shirt,
As he never had any hurt;
Threatening Drayman that was parted,
He would see him to Tyburn carted.
But now in buying I Will tell ye how
Your Citizen will cousen you,
Which 'twould never anger one
So it were but kindly done;
But whilst French, Italian, and
All nations sell with hat in hand,
Nay Jew even with bended knee,
Only your English tradesman, he
Scorns forsooth to put off hat
(He keeps such gravity and state)
Nay, the whilst you buy his ware,
H' expects, I think, you should stand bare,
Cousning you so squemishly,
So grumly and so surlily;
As for my part I Will besworn
I Would rather he should let't alone,
Above all of your yea and nay
Man, take especial heed I pray;
As of him sticks not to swear,
It Is true as is that light shines there,
When be assured he cousens ye,
For it is all false light you see:
Nor more are ye to trust that other
Tells ye, he uses ye as his Brother,
Although in that he tells ye true,
For he will both cosen him and you.
So I well cousned, went to lodging,
Where paying house went without dodging,
And taking leave of Landlady,
She, tender soul, began to cry,
Being one of the Good-wives of the City,
Cries out at every thing, it is pity,
With woe, alas, and well-aday;
At ever thing that comes in way;
So she would go see young Kitlings drowned,
And stra^t would fall into a sound:
At Tiburn so, men hanged she would see,
And then cry out most pitiously,
Lord! What a proper man he was?
What pity 'twas h'ad no more grace!
With hundred of such exclamations
Would make a hanging man lose patience,
And then would weep a fortnight after,
So as it would move your laughter.
Then seeing ye bleed, she would swown again,
And sigh when any were in pain;
And if you finger chanced to cut,
She strait would Cob-web on it put,
And Mouse-skin on your heel, when you
Chilblane or Kibe had, and then too,
If your Toe but chanced to ache,
She Would Posset strait, or Cawdle make;
And binding Kercheif 'bout your head,
Lay you carefully in bed:
Nor would she forget ye than,
Irish rug and warming-pan,
Nor close-stoole, nor chamber pot,
You might be sure should be forgot.
Such was my honest Landlady,
Tenderly wept to part with me.
VIII. IORNADA.
THE ARGUMENT.
1. The terrible adventure of the Dog and the Hog. 2. With his unfortunate
voyage in Surrey.

NOw Friday came, your old wives say,
Of all the week's the unluckiest day,
Journey to take, or work to do,
And I for my part found it true;
Being day, on which't might well be sed
No buttered stick upon my bread,
1. First adventure then I had,
(Like mighty Hub-bub to have made)
In Southwark was, where finding fray
'Twixt Hog and Dog upon the way;
To part them I gave Hog a lash,
Who headlong ran me at first dash
Upon Apple-womans stawle,
And down went Basket, fruit and all;
Mean while Dog all afrighted, ran
To Potters shop, and down fell pan,
Pots and Pipkins a whole dozen,
Potter standing with hands in bosom.
This seeing, starts up, Dog to scare,
And broke as many for his share;
When he exclaiming loud against Dog,
And she as loud again against Hog:
Neighbors hearing of their voice
(Are naturally friends to noise)
Came running to see what was matter,
When one laments a broken platter,
The Other again does even shed tears
For black pot that had lost his ears,
Nor others wanted, who were sad
For pipkin, and mischance it had,
Whilst every one concerned were,
In loss of somewhat that was there;
Disanimated and dejected,
As every one stood most affected.
Now for the Apple-woman, she
Had friends too, among the Infantry:
(The boys I mean) came running there
To help her gather up her ware;
But as in fires there is more do run
For plunder, than for quenching them;
So did these Rogues with Apples do,
For one they gathered, eat up two;
Mean time one of the busiest spied
Me, how I fast away did ride,
Running as Country-woman does
When the Bears are broken loose,
Or like Dog with squib at tail,
Wondering what he does aile,
Or what a devil is the matter,
Hearing behind him such a chatter,
And loudly cried after me,
Work I Would done I should come see;
When I my self of the trouble freeing,
Said I Would believe it without seeing:
And more they cried to me to stay,
More I spurred and rid away,
Till past Sir Georges Church being got
Then let them come, I feared them not.
2. Then riding down to Mestam, where
I had not been this many a year;
Quite over Croydon race (God save it)
Journey a dog would not have it;
For my comfort there being come,
I found just no body at home.
After sixteen long miles riding,
In such ways was no abiding;
Stumbling most often in the dark,
Hand the while I could not mark,
VVandring every foot from road,
As Robin Goodfellow were abroad;
Puck, the fairies with their hobblings,
With all the crew of those Hobgoblins,
With which babes so frighted be,
Devil take Mestam for it for me.
Next to be forced to take up Inn,
Where none but Carrier ere had been;
And where I nothing found for supper
But only course brown bread and butter
Upon table, cloth had been in
Scotland, mourning with their linen,
With mare mortuum of beer,
Dead is, even any where,
Full of hundred drowned flies,
For me to write their Elegies;
Judge how delicious this must be,
Devil take Mestam for it for me.
Then in going to bed to have
Course winding sheet as 'twere in grave,
To wrap me in, and Coverture,
Which whosoever could endure
Whilst he lived, I Would gi'm this blessing,
He should never die by pressing;
A huge Irish rug would smother
Any one whom it did cover,
And greasy Tapestry to boot,
Loading you from head to foot.
Then wench with hands all hatched with dirt,
Safe for any's doing her hurt,
With grease and soot did so besmutch her,
But with tongs there is none would touch her,
Ugly as the Devils Damm,
Or as Hagg of's lineage came:
Beelzebub to have her soul,
D'not lie with her she was so foul.
And lastly, for my greater ease,
A whole warren of starved fleas
Grazing on me, that did keep
Such frisking, as I could not sleep,
Once to make end of Littanie,
Devil take Mestam for it for me.
IX. IORNADA.
THE ARGUMENT.
1. The bashfulnesse of the Gentlewomen. 2. And want of breeding of Country
Gentlemen. 3 The description of a monstrous Belly. 4. And the several passages
of a Country Fair.

NExt morning having saddled Cut,
Spurs unto his sides I put,
And 'way toward Ashsted strait did ride
Some seven miles off on the other side
Of Baensted downs nigh Epsum wells,
Where noble company there dwells;
With whom in coach I after dinner
(Though before I nere had been there)
Though Leatherhead went to Buckham town,
Where Fair was kept of great renown,
And where at Knights house (God be thanked)
We entertained were with banquet.
Good sport it was, mean time to see
How Country Gentlewomen would be
Quite out of countenance at sight
Of noble stranger, and so quite
Stunned and bemoped with it, they would stand,
Not knowing to move eye nor hand;
And in that pudder and dismay,
Would mumping sit, or slink away,
Looking like the veriest Meacocks
As ere came from making Hay-cocks.
2. Then would your Country-Gentlemen
Be out of mood as much again,
And as surly, and as grum
As they new from plough did come;
This puffs and swells like Turkey-cock,
Until he ready was to choke,
That with choler, heats and glows,
Making a looking-glass of's nose,
Maundring in mind, and saying, "That he
"No more cared for their company,
"Than they for his, and he to them
"Would speak as little as they to him;
Right nature, disposition and
Humor of homebred English man:
From thence we going to the fair,
Found hundred things to laugh at there,
(As God forgiv's, we are but too prone
(Indeed) to laugh at every one.)
First sight we saw (yet) was a Monster,
Amazed us when we saw it once stir;
For first we saw a belly, and than
By degrees we saw a man,
But such a man, as I must tell ye,
Like dutch Iugg was even all belly,
Moving feet with pace as slow
As Snaile does creep, or Tortise go,
Yet with that pace he would go they say
For a need, six yards a day.
Oh how'd a Ballad maker now
Triumph, should I but tell him how
He used to wish when he was young,
Would I might never stir so long.
Till's monstrous belly grew so fast,
He could not stir indeed at last,
With " Oh good people be warned by this
" How any harm to your selves you wish,
" For you one time or another shall see,
" Sure as a club 'twill happen to ye.
This man but ill advised had been,
Amongst other monsters he was not seen;
For pence a piece there in the fair
Had put down all the Monsters there,
Who Sir John Falstaff made an ass on,
And of Goodman Puff of Bars^n;
And, were his legs but answerable
To his belly, he would be right able,
Without stilts on legs alone,
Over Paul's steeple to have gone;
Whence we great damage may account it,
His belly was no better mounted.
Now if any angry grow,
For staying so long I Would have them know
His belly stood so in our way,
Spite of our teeths he made us stay,
And 'twas an hour, not to belly him,
Ere there was any passing by him,
Just as in Bridewell-dock we see,
If any Lighter chance to be,
What do a little VVherry has
Along by that huge bulk to pass;
Or as where Mountain nigh we are,
All farther prospect does debar,
We nothing see but it, until
We over* passed have the hill;
So passing him, and gotten clear,
Strait other objects began appear,
And w'ad full prospect of the Fair,
And all the persons that were there.
Here one to market brings his Bullock,
Praying God to send him good luck;
There one sells Cow, and having money,
Kisses her, saying, farewell dear honey:
Then does with trickling tears protest
In Surrey's not a better beast.
Having enough of Beasts, we went
Where Israelites did pitch their tent,
The Jews I mean, of the fripperie,
Where your Clowns does old suits buy;
And from thence, where Country women
Household* stuff do buy, and linen;
But the cream of all the Fair
Was where the tippling houses were,
Where good sport 'twas to see the Clow'n,
Some swearing ' snailes, and others ' snowns,
Kindly salute with thump of the back,
At meeting, and at parting, thwack
Over shoulders (dog 'd not be banged)
With Farewell sirrah and be hanged:
Each one with crab-tree stick in hand,
With new shoostrings and clean band,
Ribbon red, or blew, in hat,
How broad! matter it is for that;
All as courteous as Bears,
Falling together by the ears
Upon every light occasion,
And upon as light persuasion:
With double Jugge made friends again,
(God knows how long they will so remain.)
Then for the Country wenches, they,
You may be sure, were spruce and gay;
One simpering, and another tit
Bridling, and nicely pacing it;
And from head to foot but take them
Fine, as fine white gloves could make them,
Tawdry lace, fringed petticoat,
With linen, had not on it a spot,
Murrey stockins, and blew shooe-ties,
Whilst the Clowns, as was their duties,
Chiefly those who sweethearts wear,
Gave them the courtesy of the Fair,
With green Gowns, and Cakes and Ale,
Where there best were, and most stale.
Then Country children over head
And ears in Flawnes and Gingerbread.
Here the little ones are squawling,
There the great ones crying and bawling;
Here one whistling, there one drumming,
As one went, another coming,
Making such a din and noise,
One could not hear another voice.
But of this, and such like stuff,
This a conscience is enough.
X. IORNADA.
THE ARGUMENT.
1. The parallel of the Blacksmiths and the Parsons. 2. The Clowns joviality
spoiled. 3. With the famous History of Tony.

TWo Bells next morn with mighty din,
Parishones did all ring in
To Church, which was the house so near,
We Sermon out of bed might hear,
Where honest Vicar, as fame says,
Had been a Blacksmith in his days,
And had as much ado, no doubt,
To hammer now his Sermons out,
As ever he had hereto -- fore
Iron bar, or nail of door;
Nay, he was still by Metaphor
Of The same trade he was before,
With hammer of the word of God,
On their ears still laying load,
Puffing and blowing to set fire on,
Their stubborn heart as hard as Iron,
Which he makes Hob-naile, or Plough-share,
As they Hynds or Carters were,
Though for the most part, not to wrong them,
He could make but Hobnailes on them;
So the Blacksmith, as the Parson
Ale bench often does set his arse on;
So honest Smug, as honest Vicar
Can always tell ye where is best liquor,
So for old knockers both were couzens,
Both getting children by the dozens.
But let that pass, and proceed we,
Who after Prayer-time went to see
House (if you ancient Records look)
Belonged once to Sir Robert Cook,
For Garden, Wood, and Bowling-green,
A prettier place you have not seen,
Where supping in good time, we took
Coach, and went home by nine of the clock.
2. Now I observed on the way,
How clownes were nothing nigh so gay,
And merry as the were wont to be
In days of mirth and jollity,
When piper striking up, would make them
Every one to legs betake them,
And all the harm to them sunk down,
Which settling now in head of Clown,
Hatches coffeehouse there,
Which we all have cause to fear,
And to wish again those days,
When in harmless sports and plays,
They Feast-dayes spent, and Sundays even,
Never the farther by it from heaven,
They being then as godly too,
And more perhaps than they are now.
To which purpose story I Will tell,
If you will list and mark it well.
An English Merchant-man by hap
From India, doubling the Cape,
Light upon a Cafre there,
Of all Moors most barbarous are,
With whom to eat raw flesh was small matter,
They playing The Devil in plain English.
their Diable a quarter.
This he into England brought,
And Christian Religion taught,
And, howsoere about it came,
He honest Tony had to name,
Speaking English well withal,
As ere a Tony of them all.
Then having learnt to wear his clothes
Neatly, unto school he goes,
Where having been well whipped, he did
Like any Christian body read,
And went to Church diligently,
Following Master, dog and he;
When he of Sermon the whole sum,
Could repeat at coming home;
For he chiefly loved Sundays,
'Cause he worked not as on Mondayes,
And would well, as't did appear,
It would a lasted all the year;
For over a Bible he would soam
The whole day long, let him alone,
Who strait in reading Holy writ
Became a mighty Proselite,
And a notable do he kept there,
With interpreting of Scripture:
Of The Pocalyps he knew each letter,
And could expound it no man better;
Had still in mouth Phares and Techel,
And could guess shrewdly at Ezekiel;
He read whole Genealogies,
And counted ancient Patriarchs wise,
That they so many wives did keep,
And so many flocks of sheep:
Story of David and Bersheba,
He knew, and how with her he lay,
And was therewith much edifi'd,
Then he would eite ye text beside
Out of Matthew, Luke and Paul,
As if they had been hail fellows all.
For turning up then white of the eye,
He could do it excellently;
And through the nose too, speak for need,
When he thanks gave, or did read,
Having in every thing right twang,
Of the pure and holy Gang.
This his Master seeing, who
Was very zealous, you must know;
He thought should Ton^ but return
To the land where he was born;
He would not leave woman nor child
Unbaptiz'd, nor unreconcil'd;
Nor should there be a man or beast,
That was not civilized at least,
So furnished with his instructions,
And a few other deductions;
Tony a shore was left, and he
Voyage went on prosperously,
Hoping at his return to see
Wonders wrought by Anthony:
When going a shore, whom should he find
But Tony he had left behind,
All naked as ever he was born,
(His fellows having at's return
(It seemed) as fellows did of Iay,
Peckt all his borrowed plumes away)
About whose neck hung guts of beast,
Which he was nibbling with the rest,
And with the foremost cutting it,
Like Tumbler upon hands and feet.
Which Merchant seeing to his grief,
So contradicting his belief,
And finding all his labor and cost
Upon Tony wholly lost:
In this sort he him bespoke,
"Fie Tony, fie, is this the hope
"I had of you? this all the fruit
"Of Scripture, and the Church to boot?
"And is it Tony a this fashion,
"You converted have your Nation?
"To return like dog to vomit,
"And such abominations commit,
"A Heathen would not do ye, nor a
"Jew in Sodom and Gomorrah:
"Well well, I do perceive now by it
"'It Is hard to wash a Black-moore white.
And much more to this purpose sed
(Which very stones had molified)
All which no sooner Tony heard,
But standing warily on guard,
In English (running somewhat low,
Like small beer on tilt does go)
He this wise sentence out did drivel,
"In Ingeland mush God, mush Devil;
"But here now it much better is
"Where neither God nor Devil is,
So whip ran Tony from the shore,
No setting eye upon him more.
By which story's plainly shown,
Not reading Scripture it is alone
Brings us to heaven, but doing it,
And well observing what is writ.
XI. IORNADA.
THE ARGUMENT.
1. The Clownes misdirections on the way. 2. The description of a monstrous
one. 3. And of a Country school.

NExt morning I by break of day
Sadled Cut and rid away
To Albury, nine miles off, to see
Ladies who lived there, two or three;
Yet thither, as I am a sinner,
Arrived not until after dinner,
Though horse was never in lesser dumps,
Nor ever more bestirred his stumps,
Such admirable faculty
I have in missing way, as I
Am sure, if there but two ways be,
To take the wrong one presently:
Whatever Adamantine force,
In wrong way is, draws me and horse,
Or howsoere it comes about,
Right way and I should still fall out;
By hook or crook certain it is,
My way I Am always sure to miss.
Which coming home was more apparent,
Going ten miles about I warrant;
Thanks to direction of guide
I met sometimes by highway side.
4. Such sure guide now is in clown,
Nere goes but to next market town,
Nor ere other direction knows,
Than by his neighbor Hobson's close,
Or Iobson's barn, he does suppose.
Well as he your traveller knows;
Yet still the way he will understand,
Only he will mistake the hand,
And left hand tell you often for right,
As on the hard names he chance to light.
So when a hundred by-waies is,
He Will tell you way you cannot miss,
Be only sure to keep on right,
And put you in such lab'rinth by it,
Dedalus skill, and Hercules pain
Can never lead you out again,
2. Amongst the rest I met with one
Clown (or never there was none)
Or Monster rather you would a swore,
For tusks he had like any boar,
Flat nosed, beetle-brow'd, blear-eyed,
Crump shouldered, and wry-legg'd beside,
You could not tell where Nature, or
Fortune had disgraced him more,
Resolved at least to disgrace them,
As much, or more, than they did him.
This sweet youth set me three miles right
Out of my way for very spite,
As plainly did appear to me,
'Cause I had better face than he.
3. Mean time on way I chanct to hear,
As Country village I drew near;
A humming noise first, just as Bees,
That swarm 'bout hive, or hollow trees;
And then the more confused noyses
Of a hundred several voices,
Just like Dawes and Pies that chatter,
When wondering what should be the matter,
At last drawn nearer, I heard strait
A certain voice articulate,
In screaming accent hic haec hoc,
As if some Perroquit had spoke;
And then another taking's qu,
Began to spell me be ba bu:
When what was it but a country school,
Or young Bedlam, if you wull,
Where the whip is always walking,
And they nonsense always talking.
For first incitement there is none
To learning but the whip alone;
Incitement more for beasts than men,
And for manners they again,
Ill nature only learn, and naught
But ill behavior there is taught;
For whilst lesson they repeat
Hat on fingers end they get,
(Not lesson) which they twirle about
For pure fear of being out,
And leg make turning round just like
Jack of the Clock house 'bout to strike.
Then for that same fool and ass there,
In vulgar language called schoolmaster,
With cloak of some old Herse-cloath made,
Lining nor yet outside had,
So threadbare, thrice seven years 't had been
Ere any wool upon it had seen:
Poor fellow he knew nothing else,
But whipping boys and ringing bells,
With a little of the Psalter,
Which children in the school are taught there,
'Cause he understands that better
Far, than any other letter,
Which strait the boys to dogs ears tear,
Such deadly enemies to it they are;
And as often as any's whipped there,
He falls (in anger) on the Scripture:
For Solomon's saying* words are mild,
Spare the Rod, and spill the Child.
But dunces they are, dunces they will die,
So I went and left them, I:
And at last came home, though late,
Where whilst adventures I relate;
I by 't only this did gain,
To be well laughed at for my pain.
XII. IORNADA.
THE ARGUMENT.
1. The ridiculous adventure of a Miller. 2. A story and fable well applied to
the present time.

NExt day returning toward Kent,
Leave I took, and way I went,
Where whip! in less than pissing while,
I out of way was gone two mile;
Whilst verses I was thinking on,
And wits a wool-gathering were gone.
But good luck was, on Bansted downs
I met my ancient friends the Clowns,
(At dead lift as sure as Sexton)
Who set me on my way to next town,
Saying, I to London thence might go,
Which what fool is it that does not know?
1. But bawking London way I went,
Jogging onward toward Kent;
When I chanced to see at Dartford,
(I Would like to have laughed out my heart for it.)
Out of Alehouse came a Miller,
To maid of the house was a well-willer,
Who nimblenesse to show and force
He had in getting up on horse,
Yerks out legs, and so far stretches,
As point broke, and down fell breeches,
When shirt to nock that hardly came,
Owing him, it seems, a shame,
His buttocks all discovered bare,
For frost-biting exposed to air,
As I Have Gentlewomen seen with face,
Not much well-favourder than's arse,
He lying over packsaddle all stripped,
Just like schoole-boy to be whipped;
For's credit showing her one trick more
Than ever she had seen before.
2. A little farther I overtook
One, who did like Doctor look;
By his grave deportment, marry
He talked more like Apothecary:
For being sess'd some fifteen shilling,
More than he to pay was willing,
He, as loins and back were broke,
Murmured most fearfully, and spoke
Treason, as much as might amount
To whipping, upon good account,
When I for danger on it might come,
Wished I were deaf, or he were dumb,
Who should be loath that any stranger
Should decoy me into danger,
Wehre (in fine) to let him see,
He Ovum tondere.
eg-shel had to slave of me,
To stop his mouth did tell him story,
To hear perhaps you will not be sorry,
How a certain novice Friar
Of his friend did once desire
To know how he might live content
In the Cloister where he went:
When friend complying with his desire,
First bid him speak well of the Prior. Loqui been de priore.

Next, that by all means forbears
To intermeddle with affairs:
And lastly, that he let things go
As the were wont to do, so, so,
And never trouble himself again,
With thinking of reforming them;
Observe but these three rules, said he,
I warrant you will contented be.
Then fable told him for the nonce,
Story to confirm, how once
Land and sea-fowl being together
(Though not birds of the same feather)
Land fowl gravely said to the other,
What difference there is betwixt us brother!
When storms do rage, and winds do blow,
As Earths foundations they would orethrow,
Hoisting the billows up so high,
They seem to lave the sea in the sky,
Without suffering any harm
From the wind, or from the storm.
In some tod of Ivy I,
Or some hollow tree, do lie.
Whilst you on boystrous seas are tossed,
And lastly in the wild deeps lost.
With this bare Epitaph on grave,
Storms they loved, and storms they have.
So whosoever was not fool,
Follow should the Friars rule,
And never over head and ears
Plunge, and ingulph them in affairs,
Else if they chance to get a lash,
As Horses headstrong, wild and rash,
The Rider's not in fault, but they
No better riders will obey,
Are for obedience only born,
Nor ought they mean time think it scorn
Compared to be to the noble beast.
In whom they much should find (at least)
To liken and assimulate
To every popular estate.
In The Centaur so when man and horse
Join equally their wills and force,
How easy is the government,
And every one how well content?
Which disagreeing strait ye view,
Naught but confusion does ensue;
Whilst Rider Horse does spur and check,
Or Horse does break the Riders neck.
So much I, which having said,
Doctor seemed full well apaid;
And with this counsel way went he
Without ere paying me my fee.
As I at last did homewards wend,
So my Diarium did end,
Or Iournall rather, choose you whether,
For the are indeed but hard words either.
FINIS.
OTHER PIECES OF THE SAME AUTHOR.
To the Noble Company at Lodge.
The success of his Journey from thence.
I AM sure you all remember well,
Amongst the rest at Lodge befell,
What wonders strange George Stroud did tell.
How Alder stick in pocket carried,
By Horsemtn who on highway feared
His breech should nere be galled nor wearied,
Although he rid on trotting Horse,
Or Cow, or Cowl-staff, which was worse,
It had, he said, such virtuous force,
Where virtue often from Judas came,
Who hanged himself upon the same
(For which in sooth he was too blame.)
Or 't had some other Magic force,
To harden breech, or soften horse,
I leave 't to the learned to discourse.
This solemnly he did protest,
H'ad tried it twenty times at least,
And well could write Probatum est.
But Pox, say I, of his probatum,
Has cost me full ounce of Pomatum,
A dram of it I will not bate um.
For I had hardly rid a mile
But backside was as sore as byle,
Devil take Alder-stick the while.
And Devil take all clownish bummes,
As hard and stiff as braced drums,
No harm unto them ever comes,
Whether they ride over down or heath,
Trotting of dagger out of sheath,
All Is one to them, they are sound beneath.
Whilst I have such a tender breech,
Leather I lost in thongs would stretch*
From Quinborough to Clements reach.
Out-vying Madam Tenderlet,
Who crupper burst with fart she let,
All France they say does ring on it yet.
No Snake its slough had lately slipped,
No Ele that of its skin was stripped,
No Schoolboy that was newly whipped,
Nor Lady fair with Mercury,
Skinning of new face, in does lie,
Was ere so raw and sore as I.
Whence first I did most heartily
Commend me to Saint Barthalmy,
With putting it in Litany.
From horse that trots as he would flee,
From faith in stick of Alder-tree,
And from galled breech deliver me.
This not doing, I changed style,
And fell to curse another while,
But breech still was as sore as boil.
Then for another fit I Would try
The Mathematics, and whether I
Could find out by Philosophy,
Whe'r Atoms were round or square,
If in my breech there any were
(Now I had worn it to the bare)
Or else (in counting one by one)
How many trots, if horse held on,
Would reach from hence unto the moon.
But these being questions too high,
(My horse does know as well as I)
At last I fell to Poetry;
Which (though breech still was sore) at least
In turning of it all to jest,
I of all shifts did find the best,
Excepting when my breech I shift,
In giving it the gentle lift,
(For to save Leather was but thrift.)
When seeing of what seats I did choice make,
You would have said I shift did worse make*
Than ere did Iack-an-Apes a horseback.
But now to journeys end being come,
Commending me to all, and some,
You Will see I Will better look to bum,
And better look too (without jest)
How I believe of man or beast,
Again, George Stroud's probatum est.
On Doctor Cuckold.
Who so famous was of late,
He was with finger pointed at.
What cannot learning do, and single state?
Being married, he so famous grew,
As he was pointed at with two:
What cannot learning and a wife now do?
One busy in Office.
Who to o'resee others, makes too busy have,
Most commonly oversees himself at last.
To his Horse running in C. Park.
AFter my hearty commendations,
Hoping thou have nor bots nor fashions,
Nor any other such disease,
But art, as I am writing these,
In perfect health; these are to let
Thee understand I cannot yet
Come into country, and to tell
Thee all thy friends in town are well.
As also for to give thee some
Instructions how, until I come,
Thou Art to behave thy self at pasture,
For the credit of thy Master.
First then, for company of Mare
I need not bid thee to beware;
For the man that sounds horn
Already has done thee that good turn:
But of Colt that flings and kicks
Be sure thou learn no coltish tricks,
For fear thou put me to the pain
To bang them out of thee again:
So in the Park thou with the Dear
May freely feast, and never fear;
But however the world goes with thee,
Do not feast the dogs I prithee.
Then thou art to shun all company,
By whom thou may deboished be,
To run wandering about,
Till Baily seeking of thee out,
Thou to thy disgrace be'st found
Laid by the heels in country-pound.
But 'bove all, be sure if Groom
With oats in peck do flattering come
To take thee up, thou keep aloof,
And trotting fast away on hoof,
Neighing loud with head in wind,
Show him fair pair of heels behind:
For if once they get that haunt,
Employment thou shall never want,
But must trot for every one,
Has any business to be done:
Gray Fleckno here, Gray Fleckno there,
Gray Fleckno must go every where.
And now to Rochester they will send
Thee, now again unto Gravesend,
Although't be but for new-laid eggs,
Until they have ride thee off thy legs:
To those would take thee up, then say
Thou have no shoes (as well thou may)
And till thou Masters pleasure know
Thou dare as well be whipped as go:
If that suffice not, gi'um, a kick,
I will bear thee out in it.
To end, ply thy business, that
Is, to eat, and to grow fat,
And to choose thee out best pasture
For to feed on, that thy Master
Finding thee in flesh and force,
May say indeed, Gramercy horse;
So farewell, from town, where news
Is none, in Smithfild, nor at Mewes,
Which the Exchange is, and the Court
Where horse of business resort;
But Cavalier for raising forces,
Having no more wit than horses,
Are condemned, for ought we hear,
To keep all the horse in the shiere,
Whilst themselves have left them none
But Hackney horse to ride upon.
And this fine reward now they
Have got, for playing of horse-play,
None pitying them for ought I know,
So the innocent don't suffer too;
And those who from the fault are free,
In The punishment involved be;
For the rest of news in town,
That their Religion quite goes down.
That concerns thee nothing, who
No more have then a Horse I know.
Besides, thou never wilt grow fat,
Trouble thy head but once with that,
As we experience had in Pouls,
Where horse (than thee, had bigger nowles)
Quartered, but did leaner grow,
Experience that does plainly show:
Cathedral Churches may make men
Fat, but make the horses lean.
But what do I talk? this is discourse
Too high for Master and for Horse.
Io's Metamorphose into a Cow.
FAir maidens all draw nigh and hear,
A wondrous story I Will tell you now,
How Inachus lost his daughter,
Poor wench was turned into a Cow.
The Damsels name was Io, hight,
(As Clark and Parish-book do say)
A maid as beautiful, fair, and bright,
As one should see in a summers day.
Her father was one of the River- Gods,
And water of's urn did only look after,
Though better for him 't had been by ods
This once to have looked to's daughters water.
Who being the offspring of a River
(As all your ancient Records tell)
None but this commendations give her,
That she could make water excellent well.
At which as Jupiter one day found her,
A whoreson mightily given to the vice,
He laid her down as flat as flounder,
And whipped off her maidenhead in a trice.
When for to hide it from Juno his wife,
As arrant a scold as ever was born;
What did he for a quiet life?
But poor Io into a Cow transform.
When but imagine how troubled she was,
When looking in the River, by which she fed,
And in the water beholding her face,
She found sh'ad a great pair of horns on her head.
And think withal how it would puzzle
As fair a maid as went on the ground,
To see she had got so ugly a muzzle,
You would not have kissed her for twenty pound.
Next thing she wondered at was her palate,
So strangely changed she did not know how,
As nothing would down with her now but sallet,
And she could eat grass as well as a Cow.
Then hearing with what a current she pist,
Full quarter of hour and never falter'd,
Alack and well aday, she wist,
Her case must needs be mightily altered.
Then having a rumbling in her belly,
And letting a fart as loud as a gun,
Her trouble impossible it is for to tell ye,
Concluding (alas) she was quite undone.
For oh (thought she) poor maid beguild,
And more than ever was any by half,
A my conscience, indeed, to have got me with child
This rascally rogue has got me with calf.
And that which increased her suspicion the more,
Was her dropping of somewhat, when turning to see it,
It was not indeed the calf she looked for,
But as ffat a cowturd as ever was shit.
Yet see the force of imagination,
The thought of a calf so run inher head,
She thought they had all been calv'd a that fashion,
And served up in green-sawce alive and dead.
When just her father came her in sight,
Who had been seeking her many a day,
And was for her loss so woeful a wight,
He even be pist him, the story does say:
Who how he came to knowledge of*s daughter,
As soon it is said he knew her full well,
And also what became of her after,
Too long a story 'twere for to tell.
In a word, let maids be warned then,
Be they of City, Country, or Court,
To make best of their time as they can,
And look that they never be cowed at the sport.
And for your married wife, she wull,
I hope of this counsel well allow,
Rather to make her husband a Bull,
Than suffer her husband to make her a Cow.
The Dispute.
POrtia beloved by every one,
Into foreign Regions gone:
One day Bellaria the fair,
And brave Villasis did compare
Affections, questioning whose loss*
And sorrow for it, greatest was;
While Peg from tail did never budge,
Betwixt them gravely sat as Judge,
Just as Paris once 'twixt Goddess,
Though the comparison but odd is.
First then there was great contest
Whether sex could love the best;
When Peg being shrewdly put unto't,
Was at first a little mute,
Till after she, like Ape, did chatter
Awhile, she said ' it was no great matter.
Next was, who loved Portia most,
When Peg again, who ruled the roast,
Still gravely sitting on her bum,
Spitting thrice, and thrice crying hum,
Without moving off her arse,
Said She could tell no more than horse.
Another Quere then was moved
By Portia, who was most beloved?
Which question mightily did puzzle
Our reverend Judge with fair black muzzle,
Until at last, point blank she swore,
She was as wise as she was before.
Another doubt they pitched upon,
Was, where two equally could love one,
Or one equally could love two?
When Peg with her te whit te whoo,
So busy was in cracking nuts,
She could not answer for her guts;
Who often as any did perplex her,
Cried, For Gods sake they should not vex her.
In fine, when none of this would do it,
Villasis put Bellaria to it;
Saying, men's hearts being far more spacious,
Must needs of love be more capacious;
But fair Bellaria, whose wit
Yet never wanted Repartit;
And who in powerful reasoning could
Dispute and conquer when she would,
Did women's hearts more tender prove,
And so more capable of love.
At this they called away to supper,
When Peg arising strait from crupper,
Waddling before cried fiddle faddle,
They Had talked, so they had, till head waa sddle,
And that 'twas, so 'twas very fit
She should go drink to settle it.
Here I could tell what she said after,
To excite them unto laughter;
And what a feast she made of wit,
Though devil a bit I saw in it,
Now serving in, in lieu of sallet,
The stale ends of some old Ballet;
And for baked meats, then a story,
That all musty was, and hoary:
Then she for second course would offer ye,
Of gibberish a Gallemawfrie;
And then for Music would so humme,
You Would wish you deaf, or she were dumb;
And when as none of all these took,
Tell ye how woodenly she would look.
But her drinking being that,
She ever was most excellent at,
I Will only tell ye how a glass
She took, that more than half pint was,
And drinking't to them, on their peril,
Bid them not forget her Squirril.
Song.
The Mock-marriage.
You Are to be marred, or married, as they say,
To day or to morrow, to morrow or to day;
But be it as they say,
To morrow, or to day,
For your comfort yet I pray
Take this by the way;
Your women are but fickle,
Your Marriage-ware is brittle,
And 'twixt merry age
And marriage
Is difference not a little.
On the Justice of Peace's making Marriages, and the crying them in the Market.
SONG.
NOw just as 'twas in Saturns reign,
The Golden age is returned again;
And Astrea again from heaven is come,
When all on earth by Justice is done.
Amongst the rest we have cause to be glad,
Now Marriages are in markets made,
Since Justice we hope will take order there,
We may not be cousened no more in our ware.
So husbands shall have this commodity by it,
TO have wives by the weight, who are often too light,
And wives (to contentment of every one)
Shall have husbands too (they hope) by the stone.
Nay perhaps in time they may think it fit
That Justice first night by bedside should sit,
And carefully look (as in market they did)
That Justice too be done in the bed.
So all incommodities would be prevented,
And every one would hold them contented,
And all debates in Marriage would cease
When things were done by a Justice of Peace.
Besides, each thing would fall out right,
And that old Proverb be verified by it,
That Marriage and Hanging both together
When Justice shall have disposing of either.
Now as for Ladies who may be so proud,
They will not go to market where things are allowed
They may in their chambers (for ought I do know)
Have Weddings, and let the Marriages go.
And as for Ione of the Dairy, it may be,
Who counts her self as good as my Lady,
Who knows, whilst no body too does mark,
But she may have a touch in the dark.
Let Parson and Vicar then say what they will,
The custom is good (God continue it still)
For Marriage being a now Trafique and Trade,
Pray where but in Markets should it be made?
'Twas well ordained they should be no more
In Churches nor Chapels, then as before;
Since for it in Scripture we have example,
How buyers and sellers were drov'n out o'th* Temple.
Mean time God bless the Parliament,
In making this Act so honestly meant;
Of these new Marriages God bless the breed,
And God bless us all, for was never more need.
Of great Names.
I Who in former times observed have been,
Never to talk under a King and Queen,
Nor ever in discourse to have mention made,
But of what such a Duke or Duchess said;
With whom my Lord and Lady, such an one,
As common was as now are Jack and Ione.
Now all those names are almost taken away,
Am at a stand, and know not what to say,
And well could wish for such an art as his,
Who wire-draw'd Simon to Simonides,
Or with the full-mouthd Spaniard add an O
TO our names, to make them more resounding so.
But yet it needs not, for considered right,
Your great names no ways are advantaged by it,
It Is not the sound (next blast of air devoures)
That fills the mouth of fame, though it does ours;
But it is brave action only dignifies,
And raises names of men unto the skies.
So Caesar only signified one,
Was cut untimely out his mothers womb,
Until by's glorious actions he became
The honor and the glory of his name;
And Cicero's was a scorned name, till th'Gown,
And civil pleadings, gave it such renown.
So mighty names of Kings and Emperors,
Signifies nothing but the Sovereign powers.
This has in War, as the other has in peace,
Duke leader of an Army, Princess's
Principal persons, or in peace or war*
More still esteemed, more absolute they are;
Which being so, this be the conclusion then,
Great Actions make great Names, great Names great Me^.
As once the^ did you noble Heroes, so
Let Us do great Deeds, and let the great names go,
Or rather, as those Worthyes did of Rome,
Let Us do great Deeds, and the great Names will come.
To the Lady M. S. departing in the beginning of May, under the name of Cloris.
SONG.
CLoris if ere May be done,
You but offer to be gone,
Flowers will wither, green will fade,
Nothing fresh nor gay be had;
Farewell pleasure, farewell spring,
Farewell every sweeter thing;
The year will pine away, and mourn,
And winter instantly return.
But if you vouchsafe to stay,
Only till the end of May,
Take it upon Flora's word,
Never sweeter spring was to'ard,
Never was Favonian wind
More propitiously inclined;
Never was in heaven nor earth
Promised more profuser mirth.
Such sweet force your presence has,
To bring a joy to every place;
Such a virtue has your sight,
All are cheered and gladded by it,
Such a freshness, as does bring
Along with it perpetual spring,
Such a gaiety the while,
As makes both heaven and earth to smile.
On a fair Ladies singing, under the name of Celia.
PRetty mouth, which but to see,
Is alone such Harmony,
That so hightned is the while,
Only but behold it smile:
And but hear it speak, is more
Music than it was before;
How much more must 't be to boot,
Add, at last, but singing to 't?
If Birds the ears can so delight,
Have no attraction of the sight;
And instruments deformed can do it,
The ill-fac'd Viol, and crook-back'd Lute,
Think to what a vast account
Of rapture it must needs amount,
When so many numbers meet
All in one, of fair and sweet.
When beauty, music, every grace,
That ere adorned a mind or face,
Every line, resulting air,
In one uniting sweet and fair;
To ravish us do all concur,
With so much excellency in her;
And whatsoever we hear and see
In Celia, is all Harmony.
Doctor FOR and AND: A Dialogue betwixt Nobody, the Doctors Admirer, and
Somebody, that laughed at him.
Nobody. LIsten, I pray, what says the Doctor there?
I warrant some brave stuff, if one could hear,
But loath I am to stretch mine ears so far,
As if they wire-drawn, or tenter'd were;
If Doctor but hold on as he begins,
He Will drive, I imagine, all the deadly sins
In mouse-holes strait, nor Peccadillio
Shall ere hereafter dare its head to show,
For Doctors zealous and Canonical,
And in's fervor I know will damn them all.

Some. Hang me if any thing I understand
Of all he says, but only for and and,
And that he paies, banging the pulpit there,
So most tyrannically, as you would swear
(To hear how he does rage, take on, and bawl)
That down went Dagon, Antichrist, and all,
That he had quite overcome both Bell and Dragon,
And Whore of Babel left with never a rag on.

Nob. How! For and And! alas, what have those words done?
I wonder! Doctor should so thunder them,
They are no foreign words I Am sure, and so
Has (on that score) no spite against them I know,
And in conscience, I dare swear, this is first time
That For and And were counted any crime,
Or any part of our Religion.

Some. I think so too, wherefore hundred to one,
Our Doctor here with these same words did meet
Amongst the learned Rabble in the street,
Whilst Robin Hood (there) for and Little John,
With Friar Tuck, for and Maid-marrian,
Were troul'd in Ballad, and since like that wise
^verdo
Justice does note them for enormities.

Nob. Ye jest, but strange that he should look so big,
Squeeking like Ghost of a departing pig,
With so devoutly turning up the eyes,
Pronouncing words that nothing signifies;
Whilst but to put the accent in wrong place,
Is for an Orator as much disgrace,
And shows him (as you know) as ignorant just,
As Fencer knows not when to give a thrust.

Some. But what if these words have deep mystery,
And For should stand now for Episcopy,
And And for Prebends, hope you then will grant
That For and And at least are Protestant.

Nob. Now heaven forbid, for then both For and And.
With them should likewise banished be the land,
And we without them should as puzzled be,
As freshman without If and And you see.
No, rather h' inveighs against them a this fashion,
'Cause For and And did word the Proclamation
Was made against them, so the Doctor, he
Does look on them, as Protestant enemy.

Some. I knew some harm was signified by it,
Or Doctor against bare words would never fight,
Just like Knight Errant, who Romance will tell ye,
Makes Giants first in the air, and then does quell ye.

Nob. Nay, we are bid against spirits of the air,
To fight, you know, so it is no idle war:
Now, of all spirits, you must understand,
Dangeroust of all is this same For and And.
For first, This for reason of things does give,
That Is dangerous now in things we are to believe:
Besides this, For has with its reasoning
Caused all disputes in the world have ever been;
For And now he inveighs against it so,
'Cause it is a Conjunction copulative you know;
And against it too does just exceptions take,
Since and with c does an et caetera make,
Which (in the sense of the Doctor understood)
'S most wicked, abominable, and not good,
Point Blank 'against one of the commandments ten.

Some. Nay an't be so, it is well fought Doctor then:
Io triumph, you the day have won,
Your enemy's vanquished quite, and overthrown,
For and And's paid, and as in Greece it was,
Custom t'errect a Tropheee on the place;
So on the pulpit We'll erect you on,
With this magnificent Inscription.
If For and And Grammar had never seen,
Our Doctor here had never so famous been:
Then reason it is, as formerly in Rome,
They w're named from enemies they had overcome;
W'our verbal Conqueror (no words can withstand)
Do call hereafter Doctor For and And.

On Madam Imperiale.
OF Madam it may well be sed,
That Madam's head has little wit,
When Madam's husband is her head,
And Madam makes a fool of it.
On the Play of the life and death of Pyrocles, Prince of Tire.
ARs longa, vita brevis, as they say,
But who inverts that saying, made this Play.
On his Censurer.
SPending thy judgment as thou do so fast,
Thou needs must have no jugement left at last.
The -- 's humor, and resolute way of wooing, when he is in King Cambyses
vain, expressed by way of Letter to his Mistress in his own words.
Lady,
THough peradventure there is in nature
No such rare and perfect creature
As your self; and that you are
Lyndae, muy, Lyndae Lyndissimae.
Both fair, and more fair, and most fair,
Although your health too drink I can, thus
With hey Abrusso, multos, annos,
Nay, though too, peradventure, I
So far may be in love with ye,
As by this hand't must needs be granted,
I Am little better than enchanted,
Whilst in my self I do discover
All the symtomes of a Lover,
As you shall find my dainty Duckling,
In reading but of Sir John Suckling;
Besides of Agues (I don't jest)
TO have twenty fits a day at least;
TO have heats and colds, and such a shivering,
In my life as I was never in;
And so many qualmes to boot,
Sir Roger's love was nothing to it.
Yet being in King Cambyses vain,
All this I do recant again.
And tell you, as I Have told you often,
You all are things below my thought;
Nay confidently tell you too,
That I your Gypsy tricks do know.
And peradventure there is in Nature
No such admirable Creature,
As I my self am now, in King
Cambyses vain that I am in.
All language so I do disdain,
That Is not of King Cambyses vain,
And count all Letters low and vile,
That are not written in his style.
If then you please to have me, so,
(There are enough that will, I know)
If not, so too, I care not I,
You Will be worse offered ere you die.
This benefit he does obtain,
Who is in King Cambyses vain;
From bonds, and folly of Love he is free,
Whose fool or slave soever he be.
This day and month that many are pensive,
'Bout Arms offensive and defensive,
And all your Protestant Ministers
May even go and shake their ears,
Every one of them at least,
Having their quietus est.
From this Antichristian town,
Where good White nor Claret's none;
But such heathenish, gotish liquor,
Would hardly serve for Country Vicar;
For Wassel bowl, for making Union
'Twixt Porters, nor for Welsh Communion,
Makes me as heavy and as dull,
As Botcher you by nose may pull,
As Alderman on bench, for sloth
Does sleep, far gone in Capon broth,
Or Lover, who for being denied
Last Saturday, went home and died.
From which sad fate good Lord deliver
Your faithful servant now and ever.
Amen.
On the Author of that base infamous Libel, lately writ against some Ladies of
the town.
I Wonder where the Devil thou
Found'st language for to write so low?
Ballad-maker compared to thee
Might Waller, best of Poets, be.
Had never a waterman for friend,
That might thee handsome railing lend,
Nor Oyster wench, nor Fish-wife might
Assist thy Muse whilst thou did write,
Nor Blew-coat-servingman (at least)
Might furnish thee with some stale jest,
But thou must write such wicked stuff,
None can condemn nor damn enough,
Where there is nor Prose nor Meetre neither,
But dregs and lees of both together.
We see in viands which we eat,
The Sauce sometimes commends the Meat;
But thou for seasoning what thou have writ,
Have not a dram of sense nor wit,
Nor ought we may as much as call
Insipid, but mere stinking all.
For Bawdry then thou offer'st at,
It is so impotent and flat,
It shows thy Muse a Prostitute
That would ('it is true) but cannot do it.
This of thee's my opinion now,
If what the Ladies is thou't know,
They say the end a Poet has,
Being commonly to write for praise,
They never knew any one but thee
Did write before, for infamy;
Those then are sorry and ashamed,
Only whom thou have not named,
Should count it high indignity,
Even to be praised by such as thee:
Nor is this (I Would have thee know)
Impudence, but judgment now;
Thy Rhimes are all so lewd and base,
Write to thine own, not their disgrace.
None then thy name inquireth after,
Nor in anger, nor in laughter,
Nor does think thee worth a banging,
Nor a whipping, nor a hanging;
Whence whatsoever is thy abuse,
It in thy baseness finds excuse:
So if thou't have thy name forgot,
Thou may write still, and spare them not:
If not, the more severer sort
Do wish thee fairly hanged for it,
And after sung in Ballad-rhime,
Almost as villainous as thine:
Mean while, if thou but hold on
Thy railing style as thou have begun,
I Will give thee this encouragement,
England no longer shall lament
Its scarcity of wood and tree,
For other cause but beating thee.
This I'ad in indignation
Writ, when discourteously one
Of The Ladies disobliging me,
For taxing her, I pardon thee.
A Lover (such an one, as Simple in love with Mrs. Anne (...)) having bewrayed
himself, writes (...) in this manner.
Cupid,
THis is to let thee understand
I Am deeply in love with Mrs. Anne,
And would for more than only meeter,
That I could say the deeper the sweeter;
For I Am in love in such a fashion,
It Is even as good as a purgation.
And now I thus much have expressed,
You easily may smell the rest.
Here perchance now some may say,
That I by this may Love bewray;
But they are deceived, of the contrary,
It Is my Love bewrays me.
Pardon me Cupid, I Would not sed it,
But I knew 'twas for thy credit,
As it is for Doctors more repute,
To make their Patients go to it;
So it is for credit of the Patient,
To be bewrayed a this fashion;
For first by it he does discover,
That he is no Costive Lover;
And next by pickle he is in again,
That he is no raw one, makes it plain;
Make all then so themselves beshite,
And thou't become so famous by it,
Thou by the College wilt be had away,
And straitwaies made Doctor of Padua;
And thence returned, each one will make thee his
Doctor, when thou come to practice,
And Physic only take of thee,
Have woman for Apothecary:
And that none may have sinister
Surmise, of what thou do minister,
Thy bitter pill first, Mistrisses
Denial and refusal is,
And thy Alloes, her frown
With Lovers bitterly goes down,
Thy simples (I would have them know)
Are men, when they in love do grow,
And when with mistress he is found,
Then they are thy Mixtures and Compound.
ERRATA.
PAge 17. line 21. read the Baboon, p. 20. l. 23. r. insidious, p. 21. l. 15.
r. fit 'twas, p. 23. l. 14. r. by their answer, p. 25. l. 14. r. waterman's, l.
28. and nothing'd have, p. 34. l. 12. r. could come no harm an, p. 36. l. 10.
r. house rent, p. 40 l. 4 r. such a clatter, p. 41. l. 8. r. dead if ever any
were, p. 56. l. 7. r. is your clown, p. 61. l. 1. r. who (in fine) p. 65. l. 5.
r. by Horseman, l. 2: r. to shave, p. 75. l. 3. r. daughter dear, p. 77. l. 7.
r. instead, p. 78. l. 12. r. as flat, p. 80. l. 26. r. was addle, p. 8^^. 19.
r. being now a.

FINIS.

