A Farrago Of several PIECES.

Newly written by RICHARD FLECKNOE.

Being a SUPPLEMENT TO HIS Poems, Characters, Heroic Pourtraits, Letters, and
other DISCOURSES formerly Published by him.

Quicquid Agunt homines --
-- Nostri est Farrago Libelli.
LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1666.

To Her Grace MARGARET Duchess of Newcastle.
MADAM,
THE Stork (they say) in sign of Gratitude, leaves always some of its young to
the house where it builds its Nest. This Gratitude I strive to imitate in these
Pieces of mine, made (most of them) under your Graces Roof at Welbeck: And if I
appear too presumptuous to Dedicate so little and worthless a Work as this, to
your Grace, who writes so Great and Worthy Ones, I hope in your Goodness,
Madam, you will pardon me; for to whom should the Little fly for Protection,
but to the Great? And the worthless, but to the Worthy, to dignifie and honor
them? Accept then, Madam, I beseech you, this small Acknowledgement of his
Infinite Obligation unto your Grace, who shall rather dye; than not live

Your Graces most humbly devoted Servant, Richard Flecknoe.

PREFACE.
To his Noble Friends.
THE Mortality of the last Year, has given Life to most of these Pieces, which
I made in the Country, whilst I fled that in Town; nor is it strange that the
Corruption of one, should be the Generation of another.

I make them short, because I would have them read; and easy, because I Would have
them understood; and writ them only for mine own, and my Friends Recreation;
not for the Critics nor Vulgar; for those who are too wise, or who are not
wise enough: And as I writ them, so I publish them only for my Friends, and
should be sorry they should come into the hands of any other.

I pretend no place for them in Bodle^s Library, (that is for greater Vol^mes)
for mine, all I can hope for, is to ^ave them have some place in a Friends
Closet, or Ladies Cabinet; and as others writ to live when they are dead, I
writ only that they may not think me dead, whilst I am alive. When I am dead,
let Posterity dispose of my memory as it pleases. Alive, I desire to live with
this Reputation, of conserving an inviolable Faith unto my Friends, a Loyal
heart to my Prince, and a Good Conscience to Almighty God.

ON THE QVEENS Being with Child.
OUR vows are heard O Heaven! our vow^ are heard,
Though for our greater faith a while differed.
The Queen's with Child; and in her fruitful womb
Are all our wishes past, and hopes to come.
It was the greatness of the benefit
Made Heaven, it seems, so slow in granting it:
Who Is l^ng in making of great Princes, though
In making lesser people it is not so;
And does consult no less about it, than
When the world begun, 'bout making the first man*
So though with us, our Potters every day
Make Vrns and Pitchers of more common clay:
^et vesse^s of more precious mold we see
^n China must whole age^ making be;
and by the cur^ous Art^st must be had
^ thousand cautions too before the ar' made.
^ut now it is done, and Carolus has an Heyr,
^hiefly obtained by Catharinas prayer.
So pious Hanna once for Children prayed,
Until at last a child from Heaven she had:
When she ^^nverted all her prayers to praise,
As now our no-less-pious Hanna has.
What may we imagine, must this Infant be,
Who is the Child of so much piety?
As the Conception did, so may the Birth.
Hold more immediately of Heaven then Earth.
So Princes should b^ born, whose lives should be
Nighest aproaching to div^nity:
As those to whom (being Gods on earth) is given
To be most like unto the Gods in heaven.
They say Heaven suffers violence, and from whence
But force of prayer proceeds this violence?
O mighty Prayer! that can such wonders do,
To force both Heaven and the Almighty too.
Fools were those Giants then since if instead
Of heaping Hills on Hills, as once they did,
They had but heapt up prayers on prayers as fast,
They might have easily conquered Heaven at last.
There Is nothing now that England may despair
TO obtain of Heaven by Catharinas prayer:
Let us have faith in her, but to confide,
And she has faith enough for all beside.
On Her Miscarrying.
NOT yet! but must she iterate her prayer
Before heaven grants, and Carolus has an Heyr?
And has it only impregnated her womb,
To give assurance that an Heyr will come?
If so, we are satisfied, O Gracious Heaven!
And thank thee, for the assurance thou have given.
This was a pattern only (it seems) to show
What men were to expect, and God could do.
As Statuaries little models make,
From which for greater works they patterns take.
Let all who grieve, that she is miscarried, then
Take comfort, that she will soon conceive again:
Which since it is caused by her fruitfulness,
Does make our Hopes the more, though Joys the less:
So when trees once have born, it is a sign
That they will bear again another time.
What, though their first fruit by untimely frost
Or Hayl, or wind, or some mischance be lost;
Why should we grieve? since we are assured they will bear
Us other fruit again, another year.
TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS THE Duke of YORK, Returning from our Naval Victory, over
the Hollanders, June 3. Ann. 1665. Under His Royal Highnesses happy conduct.
GReater and famouser then ere
Caesar or Alexander were,
Renowned by land as well as they,
And now far more Renowned by sea.
What those great Hero's could not do,
He has both done, and outdone too;
Far more beloved of Heaven then they
To whom both Waves and Winds obey,
Till Empire of the Seas we get,
No victory can be complete:
For Land and Sea make but one Ball,
They had but half, he has it all.
No more let vain Batavians boast,
The Watery Empire they have lost,
Rebbels by Sea, as once by Land,
If now they obey not his command:
Nor think themselves and State undone,
Because by him they are overcome,
It is a kind of Victory
To be o'rcome by such as he.
Increast in style, we well may call
Him (now) the whole worlds Admiral,
Whilst mighty Charles with Trident stands,
And like some God the Sea commands.
Great Prince! the honor of our days
And utmost bound of humane praise,
Having by Land and Seas o'rcome;
What now remains but to come home:
And fixed in our British Sphere,
Shine a bright Constellation there,
Greater and famouser then e're
Caesar or Alexander were,
TO HIS HIGHNESS PRINCE RUPERT.
On the same.
GReat and Magnanimous Prince, surpassing far
Him who was styled the Thunderbolt of war.
The Belgic- Lion trembles for to see,
A mighti^r Lion then it self in thee.
And quite abandoning the Seas command,
Roaring for fear, does hide it self on land,
And Zeland one no more dares to appear
But sinks into the waves, and hides it there:
Lions no more but rather Wolves of pray,
(...) all men hate, and all men chase away.
(...) Navy shattered, and their courage lost,
What Is now become of all their glorious boast
Of (...) us? themselves n^w conquered,
(...) more for shame to show their head:
(...) be to add,
A (...) to the first we had.
M^an tim^ the ^ritons hissing them to scorn,
(...)
And Sea-Nymphs ri^^ng from their watery bed,
Make wreaths for crowning thy victorious head.
So should the Conquerors be ^rown'd, and so
The Conquered hist, and scorned, where ever they go.
Greatest Example of Heroic worth,
As ever yet our latter age brought forth.
As formerly the Land of Britain was,
So now the Sea's too narrow for thy praise.
Which will in time so immense become, as we
Must seek new Worlds and tongues for praising thee,
And 'twill at last become the work alone
Of Ecstasy, and Admiration.
Great and Magnanimous Prince surpassing far,
Him who was styled the Thunderbolt of War.
TO IANVS.
Recomending Welbeck to him, etc. On Newyears-day, An. 1666.
THOU that art always old and new,
That yearly do thy youth renew,
And yearly too, more aged grow,
Ianus, if ever thou wilt bestow
A well deserved gift, and grace,
On any persons, any place:
Bestow it now, this present year
Upon this place, and persons here;
Preserve them long in safety, and
With them, preserve the King and Land:
For they would not be safe, I know,
Unless the King and Land were so.
First, drive this year from England far,
All other wars, but foreign war;
And let our Enemies only prove
The harm of Mars, who harm do love.
Next, let no storms our Seas molest
Where the peaceful Halcyon builds her nest.
But to those Coasts and Climates go,
That Halcyon-daies did never know*
Lastly, that plague which where it comes,
Unpeoples Towns, and peoples Tombs;
Drive hence; and what is worse then that,
All Traitors to the King and State.
That so delivering of our I Will
From all its fears, we may the while
Abroad, Sea Monsters overcome,
And its Land-monsters too, at home.
Another gift thou have in store,
Which if thou grant, we ask no more;
That this year, to our Royal King
And Queen, may happy Issue bring.
This Ianus grant and thou shall see
Each year, on this solemnity:
More vows unto thee, we shall pay,
And offerings, on thy Altars lay,
Then ever was, or shall be paid,
Or ever on thy Altars laid:
Since out of Chaos, all was born,
Till unto Chaos, all return.
On Welbeck.
WElbeck a place of much Renown, betwixt
Your best of ancient, and of modern mixed.
As if one age alone could not suffice,
For building such a noble Edifice.
No petty Garnishments that look so spruce,
As they were more for ornament then use;
Nor Towers nor Turrets in the air again,
As they were rather built for birds then men:
But all large, and capicious you find
Justly proportioned to the Owners mind;
All great and solid, as in ancient times
Before our modern buildings were our crimes.
Entered, at first, you would think you entered some
Huge Piazza made for all the world to come.
So great men's Houses should be builded great,
And not so much for prospect, as receipt.
Amongst the rest the Stables all appear,
As if each one, some Princely Palace were:
And 'twas but fit they should be so, where all
The Horses, you of princely race might call.
For the Riding-House it is of so vast extent,
It does some m^ghty Temple represent.
Where seeing them ride, Admiring Indians would
Adore each Horse there as a Semi-God:
And if this to the Horse, what would they do
To him who rides, and animates them too?
From hence beholding of the Park, you would say
For pleasantness 'twere some Arcadia,
And think you saw the jolly Nymphs and Swains
Feeding their flocks upon the lawns and plains,
And heard them in the pleasant woods and groves,
Inchant your ears, with chanting of their loves.
Among trees so thick and fair they seem the aboads
Not only of Rural birds, but rural gods:
But least we loose our selves and stray too far,
It Is time to the house it self, for to repair:
Where though the Rooms be vast, and every thing
Seems made for entertainment of a King:
Yet that is the least you look on, but the Lord,
Himself the noblest prospect does afford.
In whom your late Nobility may see
What the ancient were, and modern ought to be.
And amongst the * other Arts, he does profess,
May learn of him the Art of Nobleness.
He looks not (as some do) that you should d' off
Your Hat, and make a reverence twelve-score off:
Nor takes Exceptions if at every word
You don't repeat your Grace, or else my Lord;
But as they would seem great men by Pride, so he,
Is one indeed by noble courtesy:
And dos appear a hundred times more great,
By leaving it, then they by keeping state:
Whence h'as so high a reputation got,
Amongst all that know, and all that know him not;
Through all degrees of honor he has past,
Of Viscount, Earl, Marquess, and Duke at last.
H'as ever had the general esteem,
Of honoring them, more then they honored him.
ON THE Duchess of Newcastles Closet.
WHat place is this! looks like some sacred Cell*
Where Holy Hermits anciently did dwell,
And never ceast importunating Heaven,
Till some great Blessing unto Earth was given!
Is this a Lady-Closet! 't cannot be,
For nothing here of vanity you see;
Nothing of curiosity, nor pride,
As all your Ladys Closets have beside.
Scarcely a Glass, or Mirror in it you find,
Excepting Books, the Mirrours of the mind.
Nor is it a Library, but only as she,
Makes each place where she comes a Library,
Carrying a living Library in her brain
More worth then Bodleys or the Vatican.
Here she is in Rapture, here in Ecstasy,
With studying high and deep Philosophy.
Here those clear Lights descend into her Mind,
Which by Reflection in her Books you find;
And those high Notions and Ideas too,
Which none before, but she, did ever know:
Whence she is her Sexes Ornament and Grace
And Glory of the Times, hail sacred Place!
To which the world in aftertimes shall come,
As unto Homers shrine, or Virgils Tomb,
Honoring the walls wherein she made abode,
The Air she breathed, and ground on which she tro'd*
So Fame rewards the Arts, and so again,
The Arts shall honor her who honored them,
Whilst others, who in other hopes did trust,
Shall after death, lie in forgotten dust.
TO LILLY, Drawing the Countess of Castlemains PICTVRE.
STay daring man! and never presume to draw
Her Picture, till thou may such colors get,
As Zeuxes and Apelles never saw,
Nor e,re were known by any Painter yet.
Till from all Beauties thou extracts the Grace,
And from the Sun, the beams that gild the Skies;
Never presume to draw her Beauteous face,
Nor the bright Beams, and Sunshine of her Eyes*
In vain the whilst thou do the labor take,
Since none can set her forth to her desert;
She who is above all Nature e're did make,
Much more's above all can be made by Art.
Yet been't discouraged, since who e're does se't,
At least with admiration must confess,
It has an air for charming, and for sweet,
Much more then others, though, then Hers much less.
So the bold Giants who would scale the sky,
Although they in their high attempt did fall;
This comfort had, they mounted yet more high
Then those who never strove to climb at all.
Comfort thee then, and think it no disgrace,
From that great height a little to decline,
Since all must grant, the reason of it was
Her too great Excellence, and no want of thine.
ON Mrs. STVART.
Formerly printed, but after an imperfect Copy.
STUART a Royal Name that springs
From the Race of Caledonian Kings*
Whose virtuous parts and beauteous frame
Adds honor to that Royal Name.
What praises can I worthy find
To celebrate thy form and mind?
The greatest power that is on earth
Is given to Princes by their Birth;
But there is no power in earth, nor heaven,
More great then what is to Beauty given:
That makes not only men relent
When unto Rage and Fury bent,
But Lions tame, and Tigers mild,
All fierceness from their breasts exiled:
Such wonders yet could never be done
By Beauties force and power alone,
Without the power and force to boot,
Of excellent Goodness added to it;
For just as Diamonds we behold
More brightly shine when set in Gold:
So Beauty shines far brighter yet,
In virtue and noble goodness set.
Continue then but what you are
So excellently good and fair.
Let Princes by their Birthrights sway,
You Will have a power as great as They*
ON A Lady's Embracing a Religious life.
A Gentle shepherdess as e're did tread
Upon the plains, whereon her flocks were fed;
Inspired by him, who all good thoughts inspires,
Felt in her breast, till then unfelt desires:
To taste Heavens pleasures, seeing earth had none,
A soul in longing, long could feed upon:
But changing one, a weary of the first,
She found the latter pleasure still the worst;
And so went still deluded in her mind,
Seeking for that which she could never find.
This Infant thought, with pious care she fed,
And with Religious education bred;
Giving it now an Aspiration,
Or wish for that blessed life to feed upon,
And now a sigh, and now a tear again,
Never to have known true happiness till then.
Avoiding carefully those rocks and shelves,
On which so many fouls had wrackt themselves.
Those two extremes on which so many fall,
To undertake too much, or naught at all:
For it is with new born children of desire,
As it is with sparks you kindle unto fire.
Starved with too little fuel, 'twill not light,
Oppressed with too much, it is extinguished quite.
And now she is all afire! happiness be
Fair Virgin to thy best desires, and (...)
So full, so high, so great a happiness,
As nothing can be more, that is not less;
Nothing beyond, but down the hill again,
And all adition rather loss then gain.
By glad experience, may thou find all store
Of hearts contentmert, thou expects, and more:
And learn that magic of Religion there,
Make every thing quite contrary appear;
To you, then unto us, rich poverty
Triumphant sufferance, brave humility;
Soft hardness, hardest difficulties slight,
Sweet bitterness, and heaviest burdens light;
Ease in your labor, pleasure in your pain,
A heaven on earth, and all things else but vain.
To the Lady Rockingham. On her nursing her Children.
HOW like to Charity this Lady stands
With one child sucking, the other in her ha^d^,
Whilst bounteous Nature parent of us all,
Of her fair breasts is not more liberal.
Mirour of Mothers! in whom all may see
Both what you are, and what they ought to be:
Ready like Pelicians for your childrens good,
To give your very life, and vital blood.
Those mothers, but half mothers, or, at best
Who whilst they give their wombs, deny-their breast.
And bringing children forth, they nothing do,
Unless when they are born, they nurse them too.
How far much better then the mothers blood
Is mothers milk, may hence be understood;
By milk original piety's taken in,
But by the blood only original sin.
Happy thrice, happy then those children are
Of whom their Parents take such p^ous care!
Whilst those as often unhappy are again,
Whose Parents take so little care of them.
Such mothers little different are from those
who anciently their children did expose:
Who soon as they are born do leave them to
The care and nursing of they know not who.
How many harms the whilst to children come
By other nurses, endless were to sum:
Besides diseases which they suck from them
And more malignant qualities again.
Whence it is to change their kind, and nature mock
To graft their offsprings on another stock,
And hence it is, that often times we find
So many children of a mungril kind.
Nurse still your children then, as now you do,
By which your self, you a true mother show;
And if it be true that milk's but blood turned white,
You Will show your self great Straffords daughter right.
Both alike, ready for the public good,
You for to give you milk, and he his blood.
The ANT.
LIttle thinks thou poor Ant who there
With so great pains, in so long time
A grain or two to the Cell do bear,
There Is greater work in the world then thine.
In The small Republic too at home,
Where thou'st perhaps some Magistrate,
Little thinks thou when thou do come,
There Is greater in the world then that.
Nor is it such wonder now in thee
No more in the world, nor things do know,
That all thy thoughts oth' ground should be,
And mind on things so poor, and low.
But that man so base mind should bear
To fix it on a clot of ground,
As if no greater world there were;
Nor greater business to be found.
He so much of the man does want
As metamorphosd quite again,
While you are but man turned grouling Ant,
Such groulers seem but Ants turned men.
The Birthday.
A General silence was in Heaven, and expectation on Earth, with a busy
whispering in either, as if some great and extrordinary business was to be
done. When Mercury in the name of Jupiter, summond a council of all the Gods:
which being assembled, Jupiter commanded the destinies to spin out one of their
finest and most lasting Threads of life, to which Mars was to give a warlike
spirit, Pallas wisdom, Mercury eloquence, and finally the Graces whatsoever was
wanting else, to render it every ways accomplished, when Lucina presently was
dispatched to earth, to assist at the nativitie of this illustrious Child, whom
Jupiter was pleased particularly to honor, by breathing into it a spirit of
his divinest air, (For though all, he inspires be celestial and divine, yet
there is some grosser then others, as there is here on earth, he reserving
still the most rarefied and refined, for your most noblest Bodies,) and those
whom he favors most, mean time on earth (as at lanching of some great
Ship-Royal.) There was a great and joyful Assembly, in longing expectation of
the Infants coming into the world; when behold the mother having invocated Juno
thrice, and Lucina as often, was at last happily delivered of a Son, who had all
the aforesaid endowments of Heaven, and all the applaudisments that possibly
could be on Earth; for celebration of his Nativitie: And as there are never
wanting some on Earth, who undertake to know all that is done in Heaven. Your
Astrologers undertook by inspection of his stars, and calculating his nativity,
to foretell that in the management of Arms and perfect knowledge of the
Equestrian Art, he should be the compleatest Cavalier of his time, and every
ways the most accomplished. But it was not their predictions that made him so,
but his being so, that verified their predictions.

How he past his youth, is not necessary to declare, (for youth most commonly
are but the same in little, as afterward they are in great when they are men,)
And how great he was, would require a Chronicle to tell, as how he surpassed
Lucullus rate in peace, (who held that none who could not spend a private
patrimony at an entertainment, should be accounted splendid and magnificent)
and Crassus rate in war, (that none should be counted rich, that could not
maintain an Army at their own proper cost.) To tell his name only is Chronicle
enough;) It Is William Duke of Newcastle* who as if his fate and the Crowns were
inseparably conjoynd, supported the Crown whilst he stood; and when (by the
iniquity of the times) he fell, the Crown fell too; till they were both at last
restored again, and raised to greater height then ever they were before. The
Crown by Heavens favor, and He, by favor of the Crown.

The Pourtrait Of MARGARET Duchess of NEWCASTLE.
IT will be most hard and difficult for me to make this Pourtrait well, since
other Ladies (for the most part) are all outside, and nothing else, and when
you have seen but that you have seen them all, but that which you see in her,
is the least part of her, she being all soul and mind, nor could an Angel in a
mortal body, be more spiritual then she, nor have more interior graces and
perfections.

For her exterior then I will only say that Heaven and Nature, never agreed
better, 'ith composition of any one, giving her a beauteous mind in a beauteous
body, and you would easily imagine her as good, as fair, to see (when she sees
any one in misery,) how tender and compassionate she is, even like that noble
Tree ready to wound her self to afford balm and cure for others wounds.

Nor has Fortune been wanting to make her as great, as fair, and good; none
ever better deserving it, by the greatness of her mind, nor comporting better
with all states and conditions, whilst none ever carried it higher in adversity
nor lower, and more humbly in prosperity, so counterpoising either, within her
self, when others are all without themselves, or too much deprest with the one,
or elated with the other. To which supreme height of wisdom, since she could
not attain, without as supreme and high Philosophy; It ocurs in the next place,
to speak of that.

For which, I need only remit you to her works, in which she of all others has
most reason to glory; they being only Nurses and Fosterers of others opinions:
but she the true parent of hers, using that liberty which heaven has bestowed
on every one, and humane custtom allows, to have their opinions free, which
though in point of Faith and Manners of good Raeson it be restraind, to avoid
error and confusion in Church and Comonwealth, yet in Philosophy it has been
always free; Every one having liberty to hunt in common, nor was it ever
enclosed by any unless by some few Schools of so inconsiderable Authority, as
when you are once out of their walls, you are out of their jurisdiction, to
whom she has been so little beholding, as never any with less help of them,
addressed themselves to writing, nor ever performed it more happily then she; of
whom one may well say, that whilst oothers only traslate many Books to make
one; she without help of translation, has writ so many: As it is the Admiration
of every one, which being so rare and extrordinary in her sex, does as little
derogate from others, as miracles do from the ordinary works of God.

Let all then cease to envy what she has writ, or think that flattery which we
write of her, whose virtues and perfections are so great, and many, as they
ought rather to think those envious, who praise her not, then flatterrs who do.

To the Lady GERRARD Baroness of BROMLEY.
Of Education.
MADAM.
ALmighty God, having blessed you with such a son, as a more hopeful in Nature
can hardly be: you do wisesly, and like a pious mother indeed, to take care
betimes of his Education, without which Parents do but half their duty, and
leave with all the better half undone; for Education is not only a second
Nature, but also a perfectioning of the first, and that which whilst their
birth makes them only children, does make them men. You are to consider then
how that mother does nothing, who only brings children into the world, unless
she takes care they should live well, whilst they are there, by which she makes
both her self and children happy, for a good child is the happiness of the
mother, and a good life the happiness of the child.

This being so, if you but examine well, what it is that makes that almost all
our youth now adays, have so little sense of Virtue and Religion; you will
find that it is only because they are not traind up enough in the principles of
either, whilst they are young.

For the Age proper for their Educacation, being chiefly their first fifteen
years, or their Infancy, Childhood, and Adolescence, or Youth; in which the
main business ought to be, the removing of Vice, Error and Ignorance, from
their souls and minds. You shall find that whilst their Parents take care only
of the two last; the first which ought to be the principle is wholly neglected
by them and left undone: They never considering that man is like a Garden,
where it is not enough, to ^ow good seeds, but you must be daily plucking up
ill weeds too, or else they will soon be over grown with them.

During their Infancy then, leaving the care of the first year unto their
N^rses who give them suck, As soon as they arive unto the second year, their
Parents should provide them of some discreet Governant, who may carefully
observe their natural inclinations, either to good or evil, and cherish the
one, and correct the other, as they shall see occasion.

Some may say now; this is too soon to begin with them, and that children can
apprehend nothing yet: But they who say so, rather want apprehension; For when
is the time (I pray) to bow and bend a Tree, to rectify it and make it st^ait?
Or make a Garment take a good fold or pleyt, but when it is first put on? And
for their apprehensions of things we see, they can be afraid of Bug-bears;
rejoice when you tell them they shall have somewhat they are delighted with,
and love those who give it them: Which being so, why may they not at those
years be taught to fear vice, to delight in virtue, and to love God? if they
were but prudently represented to their imaginations.

Let them be taught then to fear no other Bugbear but vice, (especially that
which they shall see them most inclined unto*) and when they see them delighted
with any thing, either of fair or sweet etc. Let them tell them it is God who
gives and sends it them, and presently cry out, Oh how Good! How fair, how
sweet is God! etc. By which means they shall imprint in their tender minds, a
dear and affectionate love of him; after which it would be easy to to make them
do whatsoever they shall understand to be most pleasing to him, and abstain
from doing whatsoever may be displeasing to him on the contrary, under which
notions they may represent both virtues and vices to them as they shall see
occasion. This if their first Tutors or Governants would but do; Their second
Tutors or preceptors would more easily do the rest: of whom I will only say
that you are to choose him more for prudence then for learning; more a Gentleman
then a Pedant, and one that has more studied men then Books. Mean time let him
so season what he teaches him with sweetness, (the common bait of children) as
so he may be delighted with learning it.

Above all, let him be a Religious honest man for he is to inform his manners
as well as his understanding; and more souls for want of good Tutors, then
Bodies for want of good Midwives, in these latter Times have perished and been
cast away.

For the ordering his studies in particular, I say nothing more, But let his
Rule be ne quid nimis to study nothing too much, for learning consisting either
in words or matter, of which the first has no depth, and the last no bottom* to
study the one too much, were trifling, and the other labor lost, besides too much
study, but condenses the thought which is only for your melancholy Schoolmen; a
Gentleman's thoughts should be more rarifyed and refined.

As for Travail none can give him better directions then my noble Lord his
Father, who has made right use of them, by bringing home all that was good
mother Nations; and leaving all the bad behind.

And thus much con^erning Education may suffice, and I have insisted more upon
the pious then learned part, because as it is the most neglected, so it is the
most necessary, for none can be either a good child to his Parents, or subject
to his Prince, who is not first a good servant to Almighty God: And the reason
is clear, for how can it be expected, that they should be grateful or obedient
unto either, for their being and conversation; if they be not so to God, in
whom (as the Scripture says) They both live, and move, and have their being.

Neither let any imagine that this sort of Education should make children sad
and melancholy, on the contrary I see not how any can be truly merry and
cheerful, who cannot think on God or Death without fear and horor, whilst every
thing puts them in mind thereof, and this is the case of all those who in their
youth are not Educated in Virtue and Piety.

Which Education MADAM, if you give your Son, it may well be said of you, as it
was of another most resembling you, that she not only brought forth children,
but virtuous ones, her Virtue being as fruitful as her Self.

TO Sir C. B.
Of the choice of a Wife.
OF all worldly things, the choice of a wife is that which requires the longest
deliberation: for diu deliberandum est quod statuendum est semel. We are long
to deliberate of that which we can only choose but once: and and when all is
done, Fortune will have a main hand in it: or to speak more Religiously,
Almighty-God. Whence it is said, that Marriages are made in Heaven. It Is the
part of a Wise man then, to leave as little in it to Fortune as he can; and of
a Religious, as much as he can unto Almighty God.

Amongst all the requisits of Marriage, Beauty is the most fragile, and
deceives the expectation most, both because the one expects to find the same
Adoration when a Wife, as when she was a Mrs and the other finds not their Wives
such Goddesses when married, as they immagined before they married them.

To marry for Beauty only, is to buy a House only for the outside, without
considering the Conveniences within; and Age or a little sickness takes that
away and them, and there is an end of all the delight you had. Whence it is no
ill distinction, that a woman exceeding fair, is better for a Mrs. then a Wife,
If she be but moderately handsome it is enough, so the rest be supplied by the
Beauty of the mind; the one being only the pleasure of the first day, the other of
all your life.

Of all things, Complacency is the best Cyment of affection, and similitude of
humor and disposition; for similis simili gaudet, All Likes do love their
Like, and hate the contrary; unless perhaps some humors in them, may be too
predominant; and then a little of the contrary would be a good Allay, as Mirth
to Melancholy, or a placid or Patient humor, to a Harsh or Chollerick
disposition.

With handsomness of Body, and good disposition of mind, the Goods of Fortune
make no ill composition, so they be not the principal ingredient, for so Love,
would wholly degenerate into interest, and men would look on their wives no
otherwise then Farmers, on their Cattle, only considering how much they are
worth in the Market and nothing else.

I need not give you a Caveat not to marry with any of condition much below
your self, for you are too wise I know to be fooled by any such fond affection,
nor is there any danger of your marrying much above your self, since we have
few nobility so high, into which a Gentleman of your birth and fortune may not
aspire to match without ambition.

This is all Sir that ocurs to write unto you for this present upon this
subject, who wish you all happiness in a wife, and know you so well, as I am
sure your wife will have all happiness in you.

TO THE LADY N. N.
Of Benefits.
GOod will is that well ordered charity, which the Holy Scripture commends unto
us so much, and which it obliges us to have, even for our Enemies; it is that,
which humanity binds us to, and which makes one man a man unto another, who
otherwise would be a God, or else a Beast, according as he benefited or
injurr'd them. But in friendship Good Will, is like the power that never
proceeds to Act, promises to performance, or flowers unto fruit, unless it
proceeds to benefits withal, for a benefit is the Aliment of Friendship, as
Oil is of the flame, but as too much poured into the Lamp at once, rather
extinguishes it, than nourishes it, so it is with benefits. Wherefore Madam I
only desire of you small benefits at once and humbly thank you for satisfying
my desire.

Else 'twere to smother me with Roses, and to Oppress me, rather then Relieve
me; for it is with pain, when we are obliged too much, and great benefits, are
but great debts and heavy burdens to a Grateful man: Whilst little ones are
light burdens, which every one can bear; and small debts, which every one can
pay. Nor did they ever make Banquerout yet, or Modesty blush, or Generosity
ashamed. Besides Madam, loving my Liberty as I do, and to be too much obliged
being a kind of servitude; I thank you for leaving me in possession of that I
love so well, and in possibility of that which you love so well, Gratitude; In
which noble virtue you so excel, as none yet could ever oblige you so much,
but you would find some way or other to disoblige your self again and turn
those Bonds on them which they had bound you withal: But Madam, you have
obliged me so far already, as now there is no farther danger of my Liberty, nor
should I more willingly give it to any one, then to her to whom already I have
given my heart, and for whom I am ready for to give my life.

CHARACTERS.
Of One Who changes Day into Night.
HE is the Antipodes to the Country where he lives, and it is Day with him when
it is Night; and Night with him when it is Day with them, and he is worse then
those who call light darkness, and darkness light; for he makes it so: he
contradicts that old proverb, that the day was made for man to labor in, and
the night to rest, and says 'twas meant only by Day Laborers; and he thinks
that saying of Solomon, nothing concerning him, that all is vanity underneath
the Sun, for all his is underneath the Moon; for the Rising- Sun, it serves him
only to go to bed by, and as formerly they measured the Time by Water, so now
he does by Fire, and the burning of so much Light. He says his Paternoster by
contrarys, and as others pray for their Daily, so he prays for his Nightly
Bread. He fears neither Death nor Judgment, for Death is said to come like a
Thief in the Night, and then he sits up and watches; and Judgment by Day, and
then he is a Bed and sleeps, and if the Angels awake him with their loud
trumpeting, he hopes they can charge him with nothing concerning Time, for he
only changes it, and change is no Robbery, and h'as this comfort that amongst
all his other sins, though they may say the Sun did rise sometimes, they can
never say that it Set upon his wrath.

OF A FRENCH TAILOR.
HE is the King of Fashions, and Emperor of the Mode, and commands more
absolutely then the King of France himself: for his Edicts pass, where the
others will not go; and in England and other Nations, they obey his Authority;
where they care not a rush for that of the King of France. Nay they not only
submit their bodies to him, but their minds, obeying him with such Implicit
faith, as though their Fashions be never so unbecoming, yet they believe them
becoming, only because they come from him. Such a Charm there is in this word
Alamode de France, As it is able to transform men Circes-like, into Apes,
Babboons, or what Antic shapes they please. But to make up the Dance or
Masquerad complete, you must have a French Violin and Dancing Master too, and
then you shall see how the Englishman will lead the Dance and other Nations
follow him, amongst the rest, the Hollander in the French Fashion, is the
veriest Antic of them all, looking in it just like a dog in a doublet, mean
time, the Spanish and Italian, are the only wise Nations; who whilst all
others in Europe make themselves ridiculous, with following the French Fashion,
laugh at them, and keep their own.

OF AN Old Batchellor
WHen he was young, he loved his Liberty too well to marry; and now he is old,
his ease and quietness; nor does he love every night to be put in mind how old
he is. He was as long in choosing a Wife, as Scoggen was in choosing a Tree to be
hanged on; and at last resolved to choose none at all, for the same Reason as
the Fox refu'd to go to the Lions Den, because he saw the footsteps of many
going thither, but of none returning back. Above all, that which chiefly
detered him, was the very name of Wedlock the yoke of Marriage and and bonds of
M^trimouy etc. All sounding nothing but locks yoaks and bonds; or imprisonment,
slavery and captivity. For the rest, they can say nothing for the profit or
pleasure of Marriage, but he can say as much or more against it, and they have
long since given him over for a Heretic, too obstinate in his opinions to be
disputed with. In fine, he imagines all who are married, to be sick of it,
though they complain not; because they hold their disease incurable: but if
there were a Physician who could cure it, he thinks he would soon be Richer
then Mayern.

For your Maids now, he hopes they will not be offended at this Character, but
be of his opinion: since in point of Marriage they have always the worst
bargain of the two, (as we shall presently declare) and if the name of Old Maid
sounds ill, that of Nun sounds well, at least. and for Married Wives, we shall
make them honorable amends, in the Character of an Excellent Wife.

OF A Wife in General.
THough in it self, and the institution of the Church, Marriage be holy and
honorable; yet, there is no more miserable Creature in the world, then a
Married Wife: when Maids, sold by their Parents to slavery; and when Widows,
selling themselves, (so inured to servitude) as it is become natural to them as
their beings, and necessary as their food.

Some aptly compare their Marriages, to Aviaries or Bird-cages in Gardens,
where the Birds which are without, long to get in; and the Birds which are
within, long to get out. Others to the Horn of surtiship, where they
desperately throw themselves without any consideration at all, into the larger
end, and come squeezed out of the B^tall.

It were a blessed life, f the wheels of desire could continue still wound up,
and not run down with enjoying; but as it is, they are only happy for a day,
and miserable all their lives after; and their Gallants come fawning and
fiattering to them at first, as the Hedghogg did to the Hare in a frosty night,
desireing to shelter himself in her Muset against the cold; pretending his
prickles should never do her harm; but being entered once, and a little warm,
he began to bristle them up; at which the poor Hare cried out, but had only
this answer for all her courtesy, that those who found themselves not well,
might go out.

Yet this I will say, for the comfort of the English Wives, that the English
Men make the best Husbands in the World, if their Natures have not been too
much corrupted and depraved with the licentiousness and Vices of the Time.
Notwithstanding they should answer them if they be wise, when they come a wooing
to them, as the Athenians did Demetrius, who pretending Dominion over them;
told them, that he would be a good Lord unto them; to whom they wisely
answered, that they no ways doubted it; but for their parts, they desired to
have no Lord at all.

OF AN Excellent Wife.
SHe is like an Excellent Watch, Rich and Fair, but above all, True; only in
this they differ, in that her Goodness depends on nothing but her self, (for
those who are only good because they are looked unto, it follows, if they were
not looked unto, they would be bad.) She is never in ill humor; and never in
better, then in her Husbands company, with whom alone she is familiar, but
civil and courteous unto all; she has all the handsomness of a Mrs. the
Goodness of a Wife, and delightsomness of pleasant Company; united in her
alone; and whatsoever she does is becoming her, not so much because it is so, as
because she makes it so. She is sparing in superfluous things, that she may be
more bountiful in those more necessary; and spends with such discretion in her
House, as her expenses are more profitable then others savings are. Her Virtue
and Beauty makes it always a Temperate Zone with her, where her Husband lives
as in a PARADISE; Her HONOR like a flaming Cherubin, conserving and rendering
her inaccessible to all beside: Whence in this Critical Age, where they find
out blemishes in the Moon, and spots even in the Sun it self, they could never
find out any spot or blemish in her, she only having found out the way to stop
Rumors Mouth, and silence Calumny, whilst they bark and bite at every one
besides. In fine, she has all the perfections of a Wife; and all that can make
a Husband happy.

This, if her husband knows not, it is an unpardonable fault, and ignorance in
him; if he does, 'twere no compliment, nor fondness in him, but a Just esteem
of his own Happiness, to say as often as he sees her, O my dearest! you are all
mine, and I am all yours; and when I cease for to be so, may I be the
miserablest man alive, as now I am the most happy.

OF Your New Irreligious ORDER.
THey are, amongst you Irreligious, as your reformed Orders, (or Capucins and
Carthusians) are amongst your Religious, professing a more perfect state of
life, and higher degree of perfection then the rest. They keep quire, and for
Psalmody, have a sort of Bawdy songs, composed by certain Authors of their own,
far surpassing your Ancient Heathens; for their Legend of Saints, they have
Apitious's and Heliogabulu's Lives, and Aretins pictures for heightning their
devotion. They meditate most devoutly on a Peticoat, and are rapt into ecstasy
with contemplation of the Mystery therein; they observe their Rules of Modesty
in Ladies company most exactly, standing with their hands in their Codpieces,
and minding Bawdry whatsoever they say unto them. As others have done by
Philosophy, they have wholly subverted all Morality, neither deal they more
favorably with Divinity, doubting whether there be any God or no; and holding
all Scripture Apochrypha, Excepting only the Canticles of Solomon, which with
their gloss passes for Canonical Bawdry; they count Heaven but a Melancholy
place, and care not for coming there; so as those who would have them saved,
must make a new Heaven a purpose for them. Marry the old Hell (with a little
Addition) will serve them well enough. In fine, they are incapable to conceive
how any Man can be honest, or Woman chaste, and make a fool of Macchiavel, who
held that Men could not be extremely vicious, so as by help of their Example,
your after Ages will learn of the present; that too many Religions incline men
to Atheism, as well as none at all. And such as these, whilst they call
themselves Wits, have brought the name of Wit into such obloquy, as you will
shortly see the Church sensure it; the Laws condemn it, Casuists invent new
Cases for it; And finally, all Good Christians put it in their Litanies, to be
delivered from such wits as these.

OF WIT.
WIT, like Beauty, has somewhat in it of Divine, and they profane either, who
use them to vicious ends; it is rather a slight then force of the spirit, and
is chiefly expressed in quick expedients and reparties. The French call it le
point de l'esprit, because it is sharp, and easily penetrates things; whence
clenches and quibbles are not wit, because they go no farther then the outward
word: It is that, in pleasant and factious discourse, as eloquence is, in grave
and serious; and well comports with jest and raillerie, but no ways with
profaneness and scurrilitie; it is the spirit and quintessence of speech,
extracted out of the substance of things; and a spiritual fire that rarefies
and renders every thing spiritual like it self; it is a soaring quality, that
just as Dedalus wings, elevates those who have it above other men; and is the
same in the brain, as Nobility is in the blood. In fine, it is somewhat above
expression; and easier to admire, then tell you what it is: not acquired by Art
and Study, but Nature and Conversation; and is so volatile a thing, as it is
altogether as volatile to describe: Rendering those who have it, good and
virtuous, as well as witty men; and whosoever is otherwise, we may well
conclude, wants as much of wit, as they do of being such.

ESSAYS OF HISTORY, And how it is to be written.
HISTORY may well be called the Book of Princes, since it chiefly becomes
Princes to read and study it. It is a Mirror, representing passed Times or
Persons, and is twofold; either of affairs in General, or Heroic Persons in
particular; in either, It is to represent nothing that is false, nor conceal
any thing that is true; but since all truths are not indifferently to be
uttered; it is enough to pass over lightly, and touch gently, what is dangerous
to handle, or insist upon. It Is long since that (not without some reason,) the
wiser sort, have suspected the Faith of all Historians, whilst they writ all in
extr^ams, either through hate or favor; and leaving the Truth in the midst,
think they do nothing, unless they ^^ther depress to Hell, or exalt to Heaven,
those which they treat of, with their Invectives or E^comiums.

To write a History well, of all your four dimensions, it is rather to have
height and depth, then longitude and latitude; that is, it is rather to have
height and depth of expression, then too diffuse circumstances, or long
narrations; and for heighthning your style, similitudes much confer; as for
depth of the matter, grave sentences, and politic notes and observations.

It is not like Philosophy, to be delivered too plainly and briefly, (for so it
nothing differs from an Epitome;) nor like Poetry, nor Rhetoric, all garnished
with Flowers and Figures, like their Poems and Orations; (the one being a
clothing too plain and simple, the other too light and flaunting, for the
dignity and gravity of History:) But it is rather to be represented like a
Grave Matron, rich, not gaudy; fashionable, not fantastical; and more set out
for reverence, then ostentation; beside, as in contriving a Building, so in
writing a History, a main regard is to be had to the apt coherence of the
whole; and passing handsomely from one part unto another, consisting either in
Time, Place or Persons; in all which they may easily introduce on any other, by
way of comparison, either for similitude or dissimilitude.

To write of Actions only, differs nothing from a Gazette; unless you declare
the reason why they were done; and it is but looking ignorantly upon the
outside of a Dyal, without considering the wheels that give it motion within.
And in declaring these Reasons, you are not to be wiser then the truth, by
imagining those which are not; nor less wise by ignoring those which are; but
you are to collect them out of the private Cabinets of Princes or public
Registers of affairs and negotiations; neither are they to be crudly delivered,
^ut digested into the corpse of History; unless^ you may judge it more
covenient, to insert the Originals Entire, for the greater Authority of what
you write.

By which we may clearly perceive, that there is no sort of writing that
requires greater sufficiency, nor more judgment then that of History; nor of
which we may more truly say, that when well done, none better; when ill, none
worse then it; and conclude for the method, that when your Historian enters
into matter with promise of what he is to write, and clearly deduces it all
along (to avoid confusion) till he end at last with performance of what he has
promised; both He and his History will be every ways complete.

OF MUSIC AND POETRY.
ALL Poets anciently were Musicians, and Music and Poetry were conjoined
together; when their chiefest employment was to sing the praises of the Gods;
which begat them so much reverence with men, as they imagined a certain Divinty
in them. Poets were counted Prophets; and as Poetry was the Language of the
Gods, so Music was the Accent in which they spoke.

Music was then but simple, and had no more variety in Singing, then had the
Voice in speaking; it being only an Harmonious speaking, as Poetry was but a
speaking Harmony.

Whilst they remained thus united, all those miracles were effected by them, as
are recorded of Orpheus, Amphion and Arion, etc. Neither did they ever such
miracles and wonders since they were separated, as when they were conjoined.

That which first separated them, was, (I imagine) the Extravagancy and
Fantasticalness of some instrumental Musicians, introducing into the Art, so
much division, with their crocheting and quavering, as Music could afterward
no more express a word entire, then a River divided into too many branches,
support that weighty Burden it did before: Besides, whereas formerly when they
sung in Chorus, they sang altogether the same words; now their counterpoint has
rendered our vocal Music so disjointed and confused, as we can no longer
understand the words they sing. To reduce them to their former unity and
simplicity, diverse have labored in the Psalmody of the Church (in our
Forefathers days) as in these of ours, in their R^^i^ative Music for the
Stage; but they could never do such wonders with it, as formerly they did; nor
ever will, till People and the world return again to their former simplicity:
Besides, it is Novelty that chief^y begets Admiration; and for that, in point of
Music and Poetry, Ancient Times will always have the advantage and start of
ours.

Yet certainly our Music is much more Artificial than theirs, with whom a
discord was an unheard of thing, and going out of the Air, an unpardonable
fault. Besides, our Musical Instruments are much more improved. But the more
(...) Advance in Art (perhaps) the farther we recede from Nature; and it is that
which chiefly moves the passions and affections of men.

What their Ancient Music was, there are ^^areely left any footsteps or
memorials to inform us, excepting only the Nam^s of Dorick, Phrygian, Ionick,
Lydian or AE^lick; to which if we only compare our Pipes, or Wind Instruments,
as our Organs, Flutes, or Recorders, to their grave and solemn Dorick; our
Cornets or Trumpets, to their Warlike Phrygian; our W^i^s (...) Hautboies, to
their Enthusiatick Ionick or Eolian; and our Scotch or Bag-pipes, to their
Bacchick Lydian: The magnificent opinion we may have conceived of them, would
as soon vanish (perhaps), as Mountains did of Architecture, when he found all
their Terms of Art, which he Admired so much before, of Freez, Coronish,
Plinthe and Archetrave, etc. in an old Chimney of his, which no body took
notice of. Or, I could liken the Italian to their Pathetick or Enthusiack
Music; the French to their sweet and melting Airs; the Spanish to their loud
and hawty Tones; and the English Iiggs, or Scottish Lyds, to their light and
Frantic Bacchick Tunes, but that I study Brevity, as much as Music, or Poetry.

I will conclude then, That there is nothing found in the one, that is not in
the other, of Elegance, Grace and Ornament, both so little comporting with
Mediocrity, as unless either arrive to Excellence, they are counted no better
then Minstrelry, or Ballating.

A Discourse of LANGUAGE: And particularly, of the ENGLISH TONGUE.
IT IS Fabled, that Mercury god of Eloquence, distributing to every Nation their
several Lan^uages; out of certain Vases or Phiols, (in which, by Reason of
their f^uidness they were contained) flying over England, and having exhausted
all his store, was forced to compose them a Language out of the Remains of all
the rest; of which (say they) the English Tongue is only the Dregs and Lees;
but abusively; for certainly, we having our choice of all, and being our own
Mercurys, were Fools s^u'd we not choose the best of every one.

It Is certain, that our Language is but a mixture of other Languages: and as
certain that all our Neighbour-^n^s are the ^ike; your French, Spanish and
Italian having a deep mixture of the Latin^ most of your Northern Nations of
the Dutch, as the Oriental of the Arabic, or Sclavonian, there being but few
Original Languages in the world.

For ours, the best notion I can give you of it, is, That it is French
Embrothered upon Dutch, with some few Additions of other Languages, (all our
monosillables being Dutch, and our compounds, French and Latin,) the Dutch, or
Saxon, first expelling the British-Tongue, then the French or Norman, usurping
upon that; till at last, it became neither Dutch nor French, but somewhat of
both, or a ^ungril of either.

Certainly for wit and facetiousness, we yield unto no other Nation, n^i^her
for figurative speaking by Allusions and metaphor; they speaking but simply,
whose words infold not some do^ble meaning, or somewhat beyond the bare words
which they pronounce

Neither is it a dull sluggish Language, like the Dutch or Turkish, in which
you shall never hear a witty j^st, or good conceit, but is capable of as much
quickness, wit, fancy, and conceit, as any other Language, and the Nation is as
well fitted for it too; only it is defective in superlatives and diminitives,
and has not so many complements as the French, nor so vast Hyperbolies, as the
Italian, to say, schavo di vestre seignorie; nor wish them dieci milli anni,
whom they wish health unto; which is rather a commendation of the Nation, and a
mark of their well-meaning and sincerity, that they cannot dissemble, nor
enlarge themselves so far beyond the Truth.

In fine, for copiousness and variety of expressions, it yields to none No
Comedy being too light* nor Tragedy too grave for it; though by Reason of our
situation, it has not that esteem nor vouge as the French, (for Example) who
being situated in the midst of Europe, and the concourse of all Nations, your
Travelers are necessitated to learn their Language, under pain of being
Tongue-tyed whilst they pass along.

Another Reason that makes our Language the less esteemed, is it is many
monosillables (derived from the Dutch) which makes it nothing so resounding as
other Languages; (And strangers judge of the goodness of a Language, as they do
of Bells* or Mu^^cal-Instruments only by the so^nd) (...) the principal grace
of words, b^ing (...) the Cadence or Ending, where (...) word for strength is
able to sustain (...) ours comes so faintly and weakly (...) the one is forced to
fall on the other (...) support.

Notwithstanding, if we (...) take a little pains to smooth and (...) our
Language, as the Fren^h (...) an does, by liquifying all (...) pronounciation^,
(as we (...) pronouncing our harsh Dutch (...)) and would not stick so close to
(...) ^^thography, but write as we sp^ak, and speak more clearly and distin^^^y
(...) we do; we need not envy others L^^guages, nor speak (as some do) (...)
co^temptibly of our own.

POSTSCRIPT OF THE STYLE OR PHRASE.
FOR the Style or Phrase, which is only the habit a Language is clothed in;
Ours follows much the Italian fashion; (Those learned men that had the ordering
of our Language in former times, being most conversant with that Nation it
seems) where note, that as there are two s^rts of Languages, your dead ones, or
those which are past farther growth, (as the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin) and
your living ones, or such who grow every day, as all our European ones so in
every growing Language, there are two sorts of styles, the Eru^ite, and the
style of the Time, or ^f the Mode; of which the first never changes, because
(e. g.) it is cast in the Latin mould, which always remains the same; whilst
that of the Time changes perpetually, as the fashion of our Habit does; whence,
whosoever would write for Lastingness, should write in the Erudite styles; as
Pictures we see drawn in Ancient Attire, remain always fashionable and
becoming; whilst those drawn in modern-habit (which changes every day) soon
become obsolete and ridiculous. Besides, the Phrase or Style (being as we have
said) the habit of a Language, as the Apparel is of the Body, there is a
certain becomingness, and natural propriety in either; which in the Excess or
Defect, is equally vicious; a certain mean betwixt the Switzers Puffs, or
Bumbast, and Irish Trouse, neither too strait, nor too wide for the expression
of our minds which whosoever has, is abundantly Eloquent.

OF NOBLE WOMEN.
I Know not under what Constellation I was born, that it has always been my
Fortune to live amongst the best and noblest of womankind; but I am sure,
she'as been a happy and fortunate one for me; for there I have seen nothing but
honorable and virtuous; there as in a Sanctuary I have lived, protected from
the Vices of the Time; and there (if any where) I have found that saying true,
That if virtue could be seen with mortal eyes 'twould ravish all with
Admiration and Reverence.

I deny not, but virtue may likewise be found amongst men, but it is an Austere
and Rigid one, not much different from that which you shall find in Cells, and
Cloisters, rather deterring with its rigor and austerity, then any ways
attracting with sweetness and gentleness; besides, it is a quarrellous and
contentious one, that would force every one to its opinion, and for my part,
like him in the Fable, if the Sun by its sweetness and Gentleness cannot do it,
the wind certainly by Rufling and blustering, never shall.

Now amongst them, (on the contrary) you find nothing but sweetness and
gentleness, accompanied with such awful Majesty and Gravity, as whilst they
attract to a certain distance, they there suspend you with Reverence and
Admiration; nor needs there any frowning looks to do it, since as one said
well, Beauty is Regnum sine satellitio, a Kingdom that needs no force to guard
it: if it guard not it self, all other force is vain; and frowning and ill
looks will never do it. With good Reason then, they make all vertus of the
Feminine Sex, since virtue in a fair Body, as Virgil says, is always most
grateful and becoming; and it implies a certain Congruity, that the richest
Jewels should be conserved in the fairest Cabinets; besides, there is a kind of
necessity, as well for nobility of Form, as blood; To be Good and Virtuous, not
to degenerate from the stock and origin from whence they came.

This Testimony then, I will give of the Truth and Them, That I never saw
greater Innocence, higher Honor, more Virtue, nor truer Cheerfulness then
amongst them: and above all, none better disposed for piety and devotion;
without which, all the rest would easily fall to ruin, and decay, like
buildings, wanting their foundation. Mean time, I deny not, but there are many
to be found who are not so; but then they are no longer to be counted noble nor
beautiful; there being a certain baseness and deformity in vice, that deprives
them both of Beauty and Nobleness, and like Traitors to their Sovereign Prince,
degrades them of all the honor and dignity they had before.

OF THOSE Who Glory in their VICES.
WHen any hide their Vices, I shall never seek to discover them; and a
well-palliated Vice, shall pass for virtue with me at any time: but when they
glory in them, and discover them themselves, they must pardon me, if I take
notice of them, and tell them they glory in that, which they ought rather to be
ashamed of; and seek Fame from that, which would be another Infamy.

There are few so mad, to Glory in their Corporal infirmities; and if they do,
their Cures may well be dispaired of; yet that these do in their spiritual
ones, and never perceive how miserable they are, nor know they the whilst, what
harm they do to others: for to do ill (most commonl^y) goes no farther then
ones self; but to speak of it, is a spreading sin, and one knows not how far it
goes: it is like oil, which easily insinuates self into others minds, and
afterward so spreads and dilates it self, as the stain of it can never be
wholly taken out again.

As the Weapon-salve cures at distance, so do those discourses wound, and they
raise up more Spirits with them, like ignorant Conjurers, then they can lay
again.

Amongst the rest, lascivious speeches are the most dangerous of all, for such
is man's proneness to lust and the Lubriety of his mind; as it is well compared
to Ice about the brink of some precipice, which of it self is so slippery, as
they can hardly abstain from falling in; but when you add the Impulse of
others, it is in a manner impossible.

Such then I shall avoid, as public Impoysoners, or as those infected with the
Plague, who long to communicate their contagion to others; and there is nothing
more infectious, then such men's company.

Above all, I can least suffer them, when they talk profanely of God and of
Religion; and it is but the duty of every Christian to reprehend them for it;
for as he should be counted no good subject, who could hear the King and State
ill spoken of; so should he be no good christian, who could hear the like of God
and of Religion; and this is that which renders the state of such as these more
desperate and deplorable, and wholly exempts them from the General pardon of
other sinners; for if he who excuses his fault, redoubles it, he certainly who
Glories in it, renders it a hundred times more inexcusable then before; for by
the first, he only offends God; but by this he Braves him too; and the first
may be repented of, and so forgiven; but in this they are so far from repenting
it, and consequently of being forgiven, as they declare a will of committing it
again.

OF RELIGION AND GOOD LIFE.
To Theotima.
I Knew a Noble man, who was wont to say, when he saw any one bravely vicious
indeed, That they were valianter then he, who durst be damned: And though we
are not lightly to judge so of any one; yet when we see any professedly wicked
and Irreligious, it is much to be feared, that they are in a damnable state; for
there are two things conducing to ^alvation, a Good Life, and Good Religion;
and the one without the other, nothing avails us, (as the Apostle says)
toward the attaining of Eternal Life.

For the first, our Rule is the Commandments of Almighty God, which whosoever
transgresses, is in danger of damnation. For the second, the Evangil of our
Savior Christ, tells us, that out of his Church, there is no Salvation.

Of the first there is no doubt; since even the very Heathens themselves by the
only light of Nature, held absolutely necessary for a Good Life, the observance
of all that God has commanded us: for the second, there is much doubt even
amongst Christians themselves: Some holding they may be saved in all Religions,
as well Christian, as Jewish or Pagan, etc. And if so, what needed our Savior
to have come into the world to teach us a new Religion, since there were old
Religions enough in the world before?

Others again are of opinion, That in all Christian Religions they may be
saved, at least; and if so, what needed the Holy Scripture so nicely to
distinguish betwixt the True Church of Christ, and Herisies, pronouncing all
Heretics infallibly damned, or such as adhered to their private opinions,
against the Generally received ones of the Church? which being so, Theotima,
all who have any care of their salvation, besides living well, are to endeavor
to follow the Religion anciently instituted by our Savior Christ, and to
insist on the footsteps of the ancient Christians to find it out; which
however obscured by length of time, may yet by those who diligently seek, be
easily discovered.

Since then our Savior has said, that Seducers should come, but that his
Church should never fail; Let us not hearken to these new start-up Teachers,
crying out, here is Christ, and there is Christ, so long, till they make many
doubt whether there be any Christ or no; which is all the fruit of their new
Doctrines, to make people doubt of the old, and be certain of nothing; nor will
there ever be an end of them, till they return into the old again: For if it be
lawful for any man to begin a new Religion, another will presently start up,
and cry, Why not I, as well as he? and so they will at last increase to
Infinite. As we tender then our salvation, Theotima, let us hold firm unto the
old, which our Savior himself has instituted and taught us, who says of
himself, That he is the Way, the Truth, and the Life; the Way, in which we
cannot err; the Truth, by which we cannot be deceived; and the Life, in which,
and by which, we are to live Eternally.

To the same: Counselling him to write OF SPIRITUAL MATTERS.
YOu are the first, Theotima, who encouraged me to write of spiritual matters;
from which, I confess, I was but too much discouraged before, by the Libertines
of the Time, who make no more of God, ^or Godly things, then they did of the
King and his Regalities, in the days of Rebellion. But where should I find
Readers when I have done? when besides your self, and some few others
resembling you, it is a Language none now adays understand more then old ^sk,
or the Punick and Carthagenian Tongue? when I shall find opportunity, I shall
not be wanting to it; but for importunity, this is not a Time nor Place. There
are spiritual Books enough already, unless they were better followed; and enough of
Religion, unless they were better understood. Mean time, I thank you for the
good opinion you have of me, to think me capable of so good a work; whilst some
are so scrupulous, as they should think themselves damned, if they should but
laugh; and have so little scruple on the other side, as to think me little
better, because I am not as melancholy as themselves.

I thank God, I have always been a professed Enemy to Vice; and although this be
but a negative kind of Virtue, yet it is somewhat, as the world goes now, where
those may be counted Saints, who are not altogether Sinners; as those who are
not altogether knaves, may be counted honest men; and I thank God, I am still
constant to my first principles, as you will see by these pieces which I send
you here; which though they are not so spiritual as you desire, tend toward
it, yet at least, in a moral way; and credit me, Theotima, We have as much need
now of Morality as Divinity; and it is but a preposterous way, to persuade the
the one without the other, or seek to plant virtue and piety in their hearts,
without clearing them first of vice and impiety. This then is the way,
Theotima, which I have ta'n, which if I find but approved by you, I shall with
the more cheerfulness pursue it, and glory in the Title of being

Your devoted Servant and Convertit.

FINIS.

