ARIADNE Deserted by THESEUS, And Found and Courted by BACCHUS. A Dramatick
Piece Apted for Recitative Music. Written and Composed by RICHARD FLECKNO.

LONDON, Printed Anno Dom. MDCLIV.

DEDICATED To the Duchess of Richmond and Lenox, her Grace.
Madam,
ACcording to my Accustomances of making my Addresses always to the Noblest and
Worthiest wheresoere I ^ome; permit me, I beseech your Grace, in the most
humblest and respectiv*st man^er, to present this model of my Recitative Music
to your fair Hands, as I shall shortly my Music it self, to your admirable
faculty of judging and understanding it, as also to subscribe my self,

Madam, Your Graces most Humble, most Obedient, and most Devoted Servant,
Richard Fleckno,

The PREFACE.
Declaring the Excellency of Recitative Music,

It Is many years since I proposed unto a Sovereign Prince the cong^uity, that as
their ^ersons, so their Music should be elevated above the Vulgar, and made
not only to delight the ea^ but also their understandings; not patcht up with
Songs of different subjects, but all of one piece, with design and plot,
accommodated to their several dispositions, and ocasions; which they then
graciously pleased to be inclined to hearken to, when the intervening of
certain unexpected accidents, diverted their ears from it, and me from farther
thought thereof, till traveling into Italy I found that Music I intended to
introduce, exceedingly in vogue, and far advanced toward its perfection, which
made me also more study the perfectioning my self therein, I mean Recitative
Music, being a compound of Music and Poetry together, affecting the mind and
sense with redoubled delight, since if a thing but barely pronounced has such
force to move the Soul, how much more forcible must it be, when the Harmony of
Music is added to the pronuntiation?

And this Music it is, (and no other) that has wrought all those miracles
recorded in ancient Story; this it is that preserv^d Penelope chaste, and
Alexander valorous, that expels evil spirits, and appeases troubled minds; and
that finally has caused all those admirable effects of Music (whether real,
or figurative) performed by Amphion, Arton, and Orpheus, etc.

All your ancient Musicians having been Poets too, as your Poets Musicians,
(having by it a main advantage of best expressing their own fancies and
conceptions) and so they were called Lyricks, and the Muses and Music,
perhaps, were but reciproque denominations: Nay, not only almost all the
Erudition of those Times, but even the Religion too was delivered in Music*
witness the Canticles of Mo^ses, the Psalms of David, the Hymns of Orpheus, and
finally the Druads Songs, and the Ballads of the British Bards, etc.

Which Ballads (such was the Barbarism of ensuing times) was in manner the sole
relict of this divine Science, until Claudio Montanendo (in our Fathers days)
principally, revived, it shall I say? or renewed it again by his admirable
Skill (like another Prometheus) conjoyning in one body again the scattered
limbs of Orpheus (Music and Poetry) which the ignorance of Poets and Musicians
had separated, and disseered: The Italian of all other Languages being most
happy in it, in having their Tongue and Genius apted to it; the Spanish Genius
not lying that way, though there Tongue be fit enough; nor our Tongue fit for
it, though the Genius be not wanting. Now the advantage the Italian tongue has
of ours in it, is chiefly, as I conceive, in the strength of their words, they
being composed more of the A, and O, (the sinewousness of a Tongue) as also the
length of them, whereby each one is able to sustain it self; whereas our
Language is so debile and weak, as our words die in a manner as soon as born,
not being able scarcely to brook the air; Ending also so faintly and feebly for
want of length, as they are forced to fall upon the next following for their
support, whence comes the difficulty of pronouncing our words distinctly, or
understanding our Language when it is sung; which Inconvenience to Remedy, I
concluded first, That your long discourses, and periods, were carefully to be
avoided by us, in Recitative Music, that so the often coming to a close, might
make up in the full stop, our words want of length, and by several reprises
more strengthen them. Next, your curious recerched words out of the way of
common understanding, were carefully to be avoided, since the main Reason, why
commonly we understand not so well when one sings, as when they write, is,
because the delightsomness of the Harmony, takes part of the Attention away
from the understandin^ of the words; whence the words consequently are to be
made as facile as may be, the better to be understood.

Where I cannot but note their want of judgment, who have endeavored to imitate
at all parts in our language the Italian Recitative Music, not considering,
that the Music of all Nations is cast in the mould of their language, whence
there being great difference betwixt their verbosity, and our concised speech,
it consequently follows, that that difference should also be betwixt their
Music and Poetry, and ours.

To conclude then, you may observe in this composition of mine, a particular
way of Recitative, different from the Italian, as our language is different;
insomuch, as though others, both in Italian and English, have composed upon
this subject, I am confident yet, whosoever peruses them will absolve me of
theft from either, so have I endevour'd short periods, and frequent rithmes,
with words smooth and facile, such as most easily might enter into the mind,
and be digested by the understanding; studying nothing so much, as that my
words should not at all appear studious, your difficiles nugae, or difficil
toys, being in nothing more ridiculous than in this; with finally a
pathetickness in lieu of all other Rhetoric, having observed, that your
Italian Orators, with an Oh or a Misericordia, do more move their Auditors to
tears and compunction, than with all their curious Rhetoric besides.

Of the composition of the Music, I shall defer to speak, until the
publishing of it, as shortly I intend to do* with a Treatise of the Air of
Music, and of this in particular, to show, that as no composition seems more
easy to the ignorant than it, so none is more hard to those who understand it.

Hoping that I shall not appear to have ill merited of my Country, in studying
Music and Concord, whilst others study only discord and dissension; and in
striving to delight rather than contristat it, in the sad and sorrowful
condition wherein it is.

ARIADNE.
^he Landscapt, or Prospect of a Desert Isle discovered, with a Ship afar off
sailing from thence; when Ariadne, awaked out of sleep, by sad (but delicate)
Music, (supposed the harmony of the celestial minds) and finding her self
deserted by Theseus, thus expresses first, in recitative Music, The Confusion
of her Thoughts, and her distracted passions. Ariadne. AY me! and is he gone!
And I left here alone!
Ah Theseus stay --
But see he sails away,
And never minds my moan --
Yet sure he does not fly me,
But only dos 't to try me;
And he will return again --
Oh no! that hope is vain,
He Is gone, he is gone,
And I left here alone,
Poor wretch! the most forlorn,
As ever yet was born,
With killing dolors more than Tongue can speak,
O heart, why dos't not break?

Here the Winds and Seas seeming moved with her Sighs and Tears, (the supposed
Companions of her Solitude and Affliction) the first represented by the
Aeolides, or winged heads, puffing out of bigg-swoln clouds, and the second by
the Nereides, or Sea-Nimphs, Syren-like, Sing this in Chorus. It Is still the
Heavens peculiar care,
Of all that is nobly Good, and Fair,
That when they suffer, every one
Claims right to soft compassion;
So the liquid Waves do weep, and moan,
The gentle Winds do sigh, and groan,
While the Rocks with Echoes measure keep
To the Music of the Air, and of the Deep;
Only Theseus, more hard, more cruel far than they,
Never minds her grievous plaints, but sails away.
Here she starts up, and first expresses her Rage and Anger, next her pitiful
Lamentations and Grief. Ariadne. BUt why thus weep I, for that perfidious, who
Abandons, and leaves me so?
Let him weep rather, so perfidiously
Leaves and Abandons me.
" Only for proper Guilt,
" Tears should be spilt.
And so they shall, if there be any Powers
Beyond this Sphere of ours,
In Heaven, or the Abyss,
To punish crimes like this.
As it is your Interest, O ye Powers divine!
As well as mine:
For let him pass unpunished, and who shall
Hereafter think there is any Gods at all?
But you 'r too pitiful, and are not bent
Cruelly enough; -- I Will be his punishment;
If there be any Magic in a Curse,
Dire Imprecations, horrid Vows, or worse,
I Will thunder Tempests on his catif head,
That now is fled,
I Will storm, and whirlwinds of my breath,
Mixed with the angry lightning of mine Eyes,
More violent by far
Than those that darted are
From the enraged Skies,
Shall hurry him to death,
My Angers sacrifice:
When thou pale trembling Theseus then,
Wretchedst of Men,
Shall find, when it is too late,
" Nothing 's more cruel than a Lovers hate.

Chorus. Shall we the whilst contribute nothing to
Her rage, as well as to her woe?

Winds. Yes, first we'll murmur, and hiss him unto scorn,
Then rage, and crowd our selves into a Storm.

Sea. And up we'll bear him, till he touch the Skies,
Then down, till buried in the Deep he lies.

Winds. Away, away, then let 's about it strait.

Sea. Stay, yet her farther pleasure let us await.

Ariadne. BUt alas! what can I do?
But only wish and wish, and scarcely too,
For I recall them, would to Heaven, withal,
I Theseus but as easily could recall;
I repent me of them too, would thou could tell,
O Theseus, to repent thee but as well;
Then should poor Ariadne not complain,
As now, alas! she does, nor burst again
With thronging sobbs and sighs, more than she ever can vent,
For thy grieved loss, more than she can lament.

Here, after sad Music, she falls into a passion of sighing, weeping, and
lamenting. Ariadne. BLow, blow, my Sighs,
Flow, flow, my Tears then, till you overflow,
And drown me so;
And then congeal, till Ariadne be
A colder Stone than Niobe;
And so become
Her own sad Tomb:
Or let my pining Grief consume me so,
Hereafter none may ever know,
Unto her foul disgrace,
Ariadne ever was:
Or chaage me to a thin unbodied Ghost,
Some aerie spirit, or substance, or at most
An Animated groan,
And an Eternal moan.

Here lively, and sprightly Music is heard afar off, by degrees approaching
the Place, and at last the Bacchanti, or Forerunners of Bacchus, appear, in
Ovant Triumph, with their Timbrels, Systrums, Thyrseses, and other Ensigns of
Bacchus Orgyes. When suddenly they fall into this drinking Catch, COme Children
of the Bottle, and let us have a round
As long as but liquor in the Bottles is sound,
Drink, merrily drink,
Whilst the Flaggons do clink,
And glasses do tink,
And each one does think
That the world turns round a, round a,
And no body sober be found a.
Fill the Cups full,
Fill the Cups full Boys,
And say what they wull,
Say what they wull Boys,
There is no life but in Liquor.
For Aesculape
's but Phoebus's Ape,
And Phoebus but Bacchus's Vicar.
Here Bacchus appears, habited like a Conqueror, with his Lynxes or Leopards
Skin fastened on one shoulder, and hanging down under the other Arm, crowned
with Ivy, and his Thyrses intwin'd and wreathed with Vine leaves in his hand,
followed by the Satyrs and Sileni, etc. whilst the Chorus sings. Chorus. IO,
Lyaeus, Evan, Bacchus,
Nysaeus, Bromius, and Iacchus,
Twice-born, to show, Divinity
Was redoubled in thee;
Whilst all the Inhabitants of the Skies
Besides, are simple Deities.
Io, Lyaeus, Evan, Bacchus,
Nysaeus, Bromius, and Iacchus,

Here Bacchus spies Ariadne weeping, and stands amazed. Bacchus. O All ye
Heavenly Deities!
What lovely grief and sorrow 's this,
At once mine eyes, and admiration draw?
Surpassing far
All ravishing joys that are,
Or yet I ever saw!
And can those sighs be breathed into air,
From lips so fair, and sweet,
But we must straightway see 't:
Ambrosique sweet, as Rosy fair?
And can those Tears, let fall
From her bright eyes, not strait congeal withal
To Pearls, we more than Oriental call? --
Divine beauty, compared to whom,
Divinity does less become,
Who have un-godded Bacchus, and
Made him here thy Suppliant stand,
Doubtful whe'r any thing he be,
Till 't be determined of by thee.
Neither would he be divine,
Farther than he may be thine --
Behold a God falls down before thee,
Lowly prostrat to adore thee.

He kneels, whilst the Chorus sings. Chorus. Sovereign Beauty, have the power,
To conquer that great Conqueror
Of all the Indies far and wide,
And all the adjacent world beside;
Sing we of all the Gods above,
The mightiest of all is Love,
In Heaven and Earth, when e'^ he please,
Can do such mighty things as these.

Bacchus. SOrrow does so heavy sit
Upon her, as she moves not yet:
Sing then again, and with a merrier lay,
Chase her importunater grief away.

Chorus. THen let us sing to make her merry,
And laugh til our cheeks be as red as a cherry
And make all laugh as well as we*
With ho, ho, ho, and he, he, he.

1.
Laughter every one does love,
From him below, to him above,
Appearing still with countenance gay,
Chasing care and grief away,
Chearing with her cheerful face;
Whilst your melancholy Ass,
Who smiles just as his Lips were starcht,
Or his mouth burnt up and parcht,
Nor does ever laugh outright,
But when Dogs, perchance, do fight,
Or some other mischief 's done,
Is hated for it by every one.
Chorus. LEt those then care and sorrow love,
Weeping- Heraclites approve,
Laughing- Democritus for me,
With ho, ho, ho, and he, he, he.

2.
He who laughs not at a Jest,
's like him who eats not at a Feast,
Either of them, you must grant,
Does both wit, and stomach want;
I Would not give a pin for him,
Cannot laugh at every thing,
At the wagging of a Feather,
Or Straw's motion (choose ye whether)
And but fall, and there is laughter
For a week or fortnight after.
Who say Fools only laugh, do lie,
I say the are only Fools who cry.
Chorus. LEt those then care and sorrow love,
Weeping- Heraclites approve,
Laughing- Democritus for me,
With ho, ho, ho, and he, he, he.

Here she looks up, appearing a little com^ted, when Bacchus thus makes his
Addres^ to her. Bacchus. (...) Airer than fairest, if your eyes,
(...) Cleerer than the cleerer skies,
^ign to look upon a Lover,
^^o this bold Truth dares discover
^^at he loves, and loves most true,
(...) withal loves only you,
^old none of the ignoblest I,
and here, could boast a Deity,
(...) that I hold it greater boast,
^vaunt that I love you the most --
In pledge of which love, deign O fairest,
Sweetest, dearest, and the rarest,
TO accept of this poor Crown you see,
And with 't of Immortality;
Since after once it is dignifyed
By you, 't shall strait be stellifyed,
And in the clearest Skies appear,
Exalted to the highest Sphere,
The brightest Constellation there
What says my dearest?

Ariadne. What should I say?
But where the Gods command, there Mortals mus^ obey*

Bacchus. LEad on in Triumph then, and let the Fame
Of brightest Ariadne's name,
Whilst with glory she is crowned,
From Earth to highest Heaven resound,
From t'on to the other Pole be known,
From the Suns rise, to his going down.

Here, whilst they go off in Triumph, the Chorus sings this Triumphant Song.
Chorus. Never was conjunction more sweet,
Than where Divine and Fair do meet.
Nor ever were this happy pair,
Happier than now they are,
In his blessed Consortship she,
And in her Emoraces he.
Let Bacchus and Ariadne's name,
Be ever (then) i'^h' mouth of fame,
And ever fill the worlds large ear,
And in Accents loud and cl^er,
From t'on to the other Pole be known,
From the Suns rise, to his going down.

FINIS

