Love's Kingdom.

A Pastoral Trage-Comedy.

Not as it was Acted at the Theater near Lincoln's Inn, but as it was written,
and since corrected

BY Richard Flecknoe.

With a short Treatise of the English Stage, etc, by the same Author.

LONDON, Printed by R. Wood for the Author, 1664.

Licensed,

April 22, 1664. Roger L' Estrange.

To his Excellence, William, Lord Marquess of Newcastle.
My Noble Lord,
THe People, who (as one says well) are Judges without Judgment, and Authors
without Authority, had condemned this Play on the Stage, for want of being
rightly represented unto them; at which, many noble Persons were so much
offended, as I could not in any one Act do it more right, or give them more
satisfaction, then by Printing it, to show its Innocence. As it is, it has had
the honor to have been approved by most of the better and wiser Sort; and if
your Excellence but add unto it your Approbation, I desire no more. It wants
much of the Ornament of the Stage, but that by a lively imagination may easily
be supplied: For my part, unless it may be presented as I writ it, and as I
intended it, I had rather it should be read then acted, and have the World for
Theater, rather then the Stage.

Having said thus much by way of Prologue, I leave you to the Play, remaining
always,

Your Excellencies Most humble, and most devoted Servant, Richard Flecknoe.

To the noble Readers.
TO think to write without faults, is to think to peel a Bulbus Root to the
last Rind, or sweep an earthen Floor to the last grain of dust; and it is here,
as in the Mint, where if the Dross exceed not the pure Or, it passes for
current Coin. The greatest fault in this kind of writing, is to err against
Art and Decorum, of which I hope this Play is free; who finds fault with the
mirth in it, never consider how here with us, mirth in Plays of this kind is
like Alloy in Coin, which though it abases it, yet makes it more passible. For
the Rhyme, it is more excusable in Pastorals, then in other Plays; and where I
leave the Rhyme or numbers, I imagined, that as a good Actor was like a good
Singer, so a good Play was like a good Song; where it is not necessary all notes
should be of an equal length. For the Plot it is neat and handsome, and the
Language soft and gentle, suitable to the persons who speak, neither on the
Ground, nor in the Clouds; but just like the Stage, somewhat elevated above the
common. In neither, no stifness, and (I hope) no impertinence nor extravagance;
into which, your young writers are apt to run; who whilst they know not well
what to do, and are anxious to do enough, most commonly overdo. Those who think
it so easy now to make a good Play, will tell me some twenty years hence how
hard it is; when they will find that it is not a good Humor or two in a Comedy
will do it, (which are good supports it is true; but to think they will make a
Play, is to think a Pillar or two sufficient to make a House) nor the writing a
fine Copy of Verses or two, sufficient to make a Tragedy, or Trage-Comedy; but
there must go a Genius as well as Ingenium to it, with long exercise and
experience. But to leave their Plays, and return to ours; if you like it for
whom I writ it, I have my end, which was only in an innocent and harmless way,
to divert my self and you.

The Persons represented.
THe Prologue spoken by Venus from the Clouds Theotimus, Loves Arch-Flamin, and
Governor of Cyprus. Polydor, Loves Inquisitor. Diophantes, one of the
Advocates of Loves Court. Palemon, A noble Cypriot in Love with Bellinda, and
loved by Filena. Evander, A stranger come to Loves Kingdom on devotion.
Pamphilus. A vicious young fellow, stranger to Love's Kingdom, and imagining
all as vicious as himself. Philander, a noble Cretian, and Bellinda's betrothed
Bellinda, a noble Cretian Nymph, stranger in Love's Kingdom. Filena, a noble
Cyprian Nymph. Amaranthe, Governess of the Nymphs. Cloria, Mellissa, Lydia,
with others. Nymphs of Cyprus. Chorus -- of Musicians, and young Virgins. 2
Aruspices. Love's Sacrificators. The Popa, or sacred Executioner. Guards, etc.
The Scene, Cyprus, with all the Rules of Time and Place so exactly observed, as
whilst for Time it is all comprised in as few hours as there are Acts; for
Place, it never goes out of the view or prospect of Loves Temple.
The Prologue.
Spoken by Venus from the Clouds. IF ever you have heard of Venus name,
Goddess of Beauty, I that Venus am;
Who have to day descended from my sphere,
To welcome you unto Love's Kingdom here;
Or rather to my Sphere am come, since I
Am present no where more, nor in the Sky;
Nor any Island in the world, then this,
That wholly from the world divided is:
For Cupid, you behold him here in me,
(For there where Beauty is, Love needs must be)
Or you may yet more easily descry
Him among the Ladies in each beauteous eye;
And amongst the Gallants, may as easily trace
Him to their bosoms, from each beauteous face.
May then fair Ladies you,
Find all your Servants true;
And Gallants, may you find
The Ladies all as kind,
As by your noble favors you declare
How much you friends unto Love's Kingdom are;
Of which your selves compose so great a part
In your fair Eyes, and in your loving heart.
Love's Kingdom.
Actus primus.
Enter Evander and Pamphilus. The Scene, a delightful Landscape or Paisage.
Evander. Is It not a pleasant place?


Pamph. As e're I saw;
but I can see no Wenches yet, and that
I long for.

Ev. Why?


Pam. What a question's that? why do
the hungry long for meat I pray?

Ev. Then I
perceive you are an Epicure in Love,
and only would feed your body.

Pam. I am no Platonic Philosopher,
who while they feed their minds,
do starve themselves; give me a Love that has
some substance in it.

Ev. Well, this is no time
for to convert you; behold some coming here.

Enter a Troop of Nymphs and Shepherds, singing and dancing hand in hand. The
Song.
Come, and in this pleasant Grove,
Sacred to the Queen of Love,
Let our Voices and our Feet
In harmonious number meet;
Thus we sing the year throughout,
And merrily, merrily dance about.
^xeunt. Ev. O happy Land! of all the sun surveys,
where thus perpetually they pass their days;
and if only a living death it be,
or dying life to live in misery;
seeing their joyful lives, we well may say,
in all the world there are none live but they.

Pa. They Are dainty wenches I Will say that for them,
and I must needs follow them.

Ev. Nay prithee.


Pam. Never talk of it, I can hold no more
then a good Greyhound when he sees the Hare,
or Hawk the Quarry; it is all my sport
and inclination, and by their mirth and jollity
I know they are right, and of the Game.

Ev. There Is your
error and ignorance now, who do not know,
how true virtue is a cheerful thing,
rendering its favorites and followers far
more cheerful too, more virtuous they are.

Pam. Hang Virtue! I know no cheerfulness
but laughing, and I Am sure all the Nymphs here
are as supple and pliant as Kids-leather gloves,
a gentle pluck or two will easily draw them on.

Ev. How know you that? who came
but yesternight a stranger hither.

Pam. And how know you the contrary? who came
but hither yesternight along with me? let it suffice
I know all women by instinct; and
is not this Love's Kingdom? answer me to that.

Ev. Well, what then?


Pam. Why then I am in mine,
for I Am the loving'st creature
(thou do not know me yet)
I tell thee I was such a forward Child,
I fell in Love with my Nurse in the very Cradle;
and they were forced to wean me,
for fear of spoiling her milk.

Ev. A great deflowrer of nurses it seems you are
but had you not better tarry till Diophantes comes,
who has promised to be our guide, and instruct us
in their manners and customs here?

Pam. Tarry you for him if
you please, my business can best be dispatched alone,
and I need no tutors nor conductors for it.
I thank you.

Ev. Well, thank your self if any harm
come of it.

Pam. No harm I Will warrant you,
but rather good, the good of posterity,
whose business I am going about; and methinks
I hear the Children yet unborn, crying out
unto me to make haste, and so I will
my little pretty sweet Babes.

Exit. Ev. what a wild fellow's this? I Am sorry and ashamed
(now I know him better)
that I came along with him to Cyprus here;
who knows no more of Love then beasts do* and's
so bravely impudent and vicious,
he puts vice and impudence to the extremest proof
and shames not to be impudent enough:
but here comes Diophantes.

Enter Diophantes. Dio. Noble Evander, I must demand your pardon
if I instead of waiting on you, have made
you wait for me; but I am Advocate in
Love's Court you know, where so many petty
quarrels of Lovers are daily to be reconciled.
W*ave scarcely any vacancy at all,
nor had we dispatched so soon to day, but for
the grand Solemnity in the Temple.

Ev. What Is that I pray?


Dio. Why, it is the anniversary Feast of Venus,
our Sea-born Goddesses first arrival here
upon the Cyprian shore.

Ev. And with good reason
you Celebrate that with all Solemnity,
that renders you so famous through all the world.

Di. And to add to the general Solemnity oth' day
there is a particular Ceremony too
renders it more solemn.

Ev. What?


Dio. Why, you must know
that all strangers by the Laws of Cyprus here
are after three months residence to swear
they love some one in the Isle, or else be banished;
now Sir, three months to day are just expired,
since there arrived a Nymph the most admired,
and most deserving admiration,
as ever in Love's Kingdom yet was known;
and whether she will take the solemn Oath or no,
only her self and the Deity do know;
for to all else it is doubtful.

Ev. Can it be doubted that any here should love,
where they are all born and bred Lovers; the very
air inspires it, and it is as natural
for them to love, as it is to live and breath.

Dio. True Sir, but for our admiration
the gods work miracles sometimes, and she is one;
but where is your friend Pamphilus?

Ev. Rambled somewhere abroad,
I know not whither.

Dio. Of what humor, I pray,
and disposition is he?

Ev. Why, harmless and merry, only a little wild


Dio. He thinks perhaps our Nymphs are wanton here;
but Sir, I can assure you they are all
so chaste and pure, as Crystal you would say
is not more pure, nor Ice more clear then they;
And for the Land, know Sir, in all the spacious
world there is not a more religious place,
where Love with greater purity is professed,
nor served and honored with more pious breast.

Ev. I Have understood so much, and therefore come
expressly hither on devotion,
to render my vows and offerings at his sacred shrine

Dio. I applaud you for it, and may the powers divine
for every prayer that you send up to them,
send you as many blessings down again.

Ev. Soft! who are those come here?


Dio. Oh now you will see
A noble Ceremony and Solemnity.

Enter Theotimus with Assistants of Loves Sacrifi^ators, with Asperges and
Thuribles besprinkling and incensing the place. The. Far hence be all profane,
whilst here
With Solemn Rites thus every year,
To render all our Lovers true,
We element Love's Kingdom new;
That no heart may too strongly beat,
We give its fires a temperate heat;
We give its waters virtuous force,
To swage them (taken in their Source)
Fogs of perjured vows and oaths,
Which spotless truth and candor loathes,
We purge the Air from, and the Earth
From every strange and monstrous birth:
For as some Lands their monsters fear,
Lust only is our monster here;
As others poisonous beasts molest,
So avarice is our poisonous beast:
From which when once a Land is freed,
Then, then Love's Kingdom it is indeed.

Exeunt Manent Evander and Diophontes. Ev. A Ceremony as religious as great!


Di. Y'admire too soon, and have seen nothing yet,
if but compared to what you will see anon,
worthy your sight and admiration.

Exeunt. Enter Palemon in desperate action, withheld by Polydor. Pol. You will not
be mad?


Pal. I will be nothing but for Love,
and for Love I will be any thing; --
pray unhand me: -- Shall Bellinda, the
divine Bellinda be banished hence to day,
and shall Palemon see it, and shall he live?

Pol. And shall the gallant and the brave
Palemon dye only for fear of death?
how low -- and poorly would it show!
and that is the worst; but I hope better still:
Venus the Goddess of this Isle
has often done greater miracles then this,
to make one young and fair to love.

Pal. O Polydor! who has
miracles for hopes, has hopes too nigh despair.

Pol. I grant you,
but yours are far
from that; -- for has she not promised,
if any in the Isle she loves, it shall be you:
And is this no hope? no comfort?

Pal. Just as much
as among the numerous and unhappy throng
of her excluded Lovers to stand next the door,
first exposed to the affront, and nighest concerned
in the disgrace.

Pol. Nay, if you give your self despair,
it is in vain to give you hope; suppose the worst:
If you love fair Bellinda, as you say,
and she perchance be banished hence today,
what hinders you from following her? vainly and
ridiculously does he complain of Winter,
who by following the sun might still enjoy the Spring*

Pal. I, -- but following an ecclipsed Sun,
what should he gain by it, but only by
that fatal light to have every thing appear
more sad and dismal then if it absent were?

Pol. Well, though it seem more to be wished then hoped,
that she should love you; yet take this from me,
your Nymphs are bashful, and so cautious too,
they will not seem to love, although they do:
and 'twod appear a miracle to me,
she should not feel love who makes so many feel it;
or that her heart should resist that alone,
was never yet resisted by any one: --
But there is I fear some farther misery
in it, and the gods are highly offended w'ye,
or they would never inflict on you as they do
so heavy a punishment to love one, who
neglects you; and the while, to neglect one
so dearly loves ye, and see where she does come.

Enter Filena. Fi. Where should this Nymph be? she is not at home,
nor in the sacred Grove; and it is too soon
to go to the Temple yet.

Pol. Well, I Will leave you.


Pal. What, will you go
and leave me alone then?

Pol. How can I leave you better accompanied?


Pal. In company of one I hate!


Pol. In company of one
who dearly loves you, and for your hate to her
in these pretty skirmishes, there is no fear
of danger; for now you are foes, and then
the peace is made, and you are friends again,
and so I leave you.

Exit. Pal. What shall I do? she has
spied me, and there is no avoiding her; I Would best
dissemble then, and by one importunity
avoid another: -- Gentle Filena, well met.

Fi. Kind looks aside.
that guild the sunshine, as that guilds the day:
Kind words,
whose ravishing sweetness melts into my heart
at sunshine of those looks of his; how I Am
o'rejoyed with them!

Pal. I have a suit unto you.


Fi. And I another to you.


Pal. To me! fie, fie,
Nymphs sue to men!

Fi. Why, not Palemon here,
where Love's not only Love, but Virtue too;
it no ways misbeseems a Nymph to woo: --
But what is your suit? you may be sure that I am too much yours ( Palemon) to
deny
you any thing.

Pal. You know Filena, how much
I love Bellinda, and how much I long to know
if she loves me, which you can tell me best,
are confident of all the secrets of her breast.

Fi. Some secrets she confides to me it is true,
but of her Love I know no more then you;
for that is a warfare where each one's a spy,
and every rival is an enemy:
She Would never trust me with it then, whom she does know
am both a Lover, and her Rival too.

Pal. However Filena, you do know at least
those softer minutes, when Nymphs minds are best
disposed for the impressions of Love;
in one of those then prithee do but move
my Suit unto her, especially before she goes
to the Temple, when she must needs be more
disposed then ever, and thou shu'dst infinitely
oblige me by so dear a courtesy.
Do You hear?

Fi. I do, and will you hear me now?


Pal. If you have any new thing to say I will,
but of old businesses I pray no more.

Fi. That cannot be old that is every day renewed.


Pal. And how can that be new I pray,
that needs renovation every day?
But of this enough: -- prithee Filena go,
and if you love me as you say you do;
know now is best time to shew't, for Love's best shown,
by doing their wills we love before our own.

Fi. Well then, to show
how much, how dearly I love you, I will go;
and though Love a burden be,
which two hearts equally
should bear, and then it is sweet and light:
But when once all the weight
lies upon one alone,
a grievous and intolerable one:
my heart shall bear it yet, and never repine,
or else I Will not acknowledge it to be mine.

Pal. That Is bravely and nobly resolved.


Fi. But is there no hope, no pity for Filena?


Pal. To deal ingeniously w'ye,
and not abuse you with civility,
There Is pity, but no hope; for Bellinda has all
my stock of Love, and consequently
for loving any other has rendered me so poor,
as I can dye, but I can love no more.

Fi. Since you are so resolved, Palemon know,
Filena too can dye as well as you;
and be assured that the same messenger
brings news Palemon does Bellinda wed,
shall carry back the news, Filena's dead.

Pal. Soft, soft Filena, for I Would have you know,
to the thing called dying there goes more then so;
and every Coward is valiant enough
to talk of death, but when it comes to the proof,
their hearts do fail, as yours no doubt will too,
wherefore dear Filena I Will be gone,
and shall not fear to leave you here alone.

spoken scornfully. ^xit. Fi. Cruel Palemon! is it not enough, that thou
refusest me, but thou must scorn me too?
This is not to be endured! one nobly born
can better suffer injury then scorn;
but what do I say wretch as I am, or how
com these high thoughts in one that is fallen so low:
I Am now engaged, what ever does befall, --
and those who are slaves to Love must suffer all.

Exit. Enter Pamphilus, looking after her. Pam. Hey! whurr! there boults
another wench,
the Warren's all full of them,
and I, like a good Tumbler,
am ready to throw my self after every one: --
and see here coms another! and alone too? Enter Amarantha.
this opportunity is the shell that Love
is hatched of, and the Nymphs here just like
young Lapwings run away with it on their heads;
you shall see how I Will accoast her now. --
Fair Nymph, might I be so bold I pray,
to request the time of the day of you?

Am. Oh Sir, with all my heart,
it shall be any time oth' day you please for me,
I Will not stick w'ye for half an hour or so.

Pa. Lo ye there now! there is never a sextons wife
in all Cyprus co'd answer ye more courteously:
a kind Wench I Will warrant her; --
Let Us see what is next now?
Pox on it, I better know what to do with wenches
then what to say to them; and we Complementers
of the first head, when we are past our legs and faces
are past the greatest part of our discourse: --
It shall be so, and how have you done I faith,
since I saw you last?

Am. Right and methodical!
how do you? and what is a clock? I Will wager now
next is, what news? or somewhat about the weather
the ordinary discourse of those who can
discourse of nothing, -- and when was it I pray
you saw me last?

Pam. Why, in Plato's great year,
don't you remember it? I do as perfectly
as if 'twere but to day; by the same token,
meeting you just as I do now, I took you by
the hand, and kissing it, led you just
into such another Grove as this.

Am. Just no such matter:
pray stay a little, sure you don't remember well.

Pam. Most perfectly, by the same token I
saluted you too.

She puts him by. Am. I knew you were quite wide,
not me I Will assure you.

Pam. You cannot deny't I Am sure.


Am. Indeed Sir but I can.


Pam. And thereupon
I told you, that having so fair opportunity;
but lose it, you would never have the like again.

Am. Opportunity for what?


Pam. Nay, if you know not that,
we shall never have done; -- com leave dissembling
I know you Nymphs here are all so learned, as
your husbands can teach you nothing on the
marriage-night, but what you knew before.

Am. Bless me! I never heard
man talk thus wildely!

Pam. And how first time you went abroad
after fifteen, when you returned again,
you found y'ad left your gloves, handkercher,
and maidenhead, with some such odd toys
behind you.

Am. Wilder and wilder still! I begin to be,
afraid of him, pray let me go; is this
discourse for Maids?

Pam. I, as good a Milkmaid as my Nurse I Will
warrant you; -- but stay, she may be one perhaps,
and that it is makes her so shie and timorous,
for maids apprehend the loss of a maidenhead
as fearfully, as the loss of an arm or leg,
and imagine they shall be maimed forever after. --
Come, come, never fear, I persuade you to nothing
but what I will do w'ye my self for company.

Am. I Am more and more afeard of him, I would
some body would come to rid me of him, and see
in happy time here is some, and yonder is more:
now I may be Some pass over the Stage.
as merry with him,
as he has been with me: -- Cry mercy Sir,
now I remember this Plato's great year you talk of
as perfectly

Pam. Oh do you so! I knew
you could not forget it.

Am. By the same token
Theotimus chief Governor of the Isle
past by with a numerous train just as we were
alone together.

Pam. Yonder I think he comes indeed.


Am. When I made bold to ask you one question Sir,


Pam. What was that?


Am. Why, whether you loved dancing or no?


Ham. Oh exceedingly.


Am. Right, so you told me; and thereupon I said
he would help you then to a certain spritely instrument
to dance after called a whip, a whip;
do you hear Sir, worth a hundred of
your Kits and Violins, to make such gallants as
your self to frisk and caper.

Pam. Umh! I remember nothing of all this now,
but be shrew me next Plato's great year I fear*
I shall indeed, 'less I get me gone the sooner.

Am. Nay, hark ye, hark ye Sir,
Pray don't go yet; now I remember me
I can tell ye what time of the day it is too.

Pam. As for that,
I know it now I thank you, it is time
for me to get me gone, as I take it.

Exit. Am. Why then farewell my Platonic Philosopher,
and Anteplatonick Lover.

Enter Theotimus, Chorus of Musicians, and young Virgins, Polydor, Evander,
Diophantes, Palemon, etc. The Song sung by a Bass, Tenor, and Treble. Chorus
sings. Praised be the Deities above!


Ten. We love.


Bass. We loved.


Treb. And we shall love.


Cho. O ye blessed immortal Powers!
Grant this happy Land of ours
1. Pure fires, 2. Pure fuel,



Cho. All things pure,
And that our flames may ever dure.

The. Now Children, in a word to tell,
what noble Love is, (mark me well)
it is the counterpoise that minds
to fair and virtuous things inclines;
it is the gust we have, and sense,
of every noble excellence;
it is the pulse, by which we know
whether our souls have life or no;
and such a soft and gentle fire,
as kindles and inflames desire,
until it all like Incense burns,
and unto melting sweetness turns.

Ev. Whose heart
melts not within his breast at hearing this?

The. Who Is that?


Dio. A noble stranger come hither on
devotion unto Love's sacred Shrine.

The. He Is welcome.


Evan. kisses his hands. Pal. Somewhat more then this to boo't,
by experience I can add unto't;
Love is a union of all
we happy and unhappy call;
a mixture where together meet
both pleasing pain, and bitter sweet;
the greatest joy and greatest woe
a mortal breast can ever know,
to show its great disparity
in fair Bellinda and in me;
in her face it is a paradise,
where all delicious pleasure lies,
and in my heart it is a hell,
where all your worst of torments dwell.

Th. Once more you are welcome -- now set forwards
and with all the pomp and ceremony you may
proceed to Celebration of the day.

Exeunt. Manent Theotimus and Polydor. The. Polydor, stay you, you're Loves
Inquisitor;
look well unto your charge, we hear there are
(besides Atheists, who impious deny
Love's sacred Power and Authority;
and Libertines, whose vicious lives are such,
as they profane the Deity as much)
new Heresies in Love sprung up of late,
Platonicks, Scepticks, dangerous to the State;
e're they take deeper root, and farther spread,
be it your care to see 'um extirpated.

Pol. It shall, most reverend Sir.


The. Other abuses there are beside,
against which we must most carefully provide;
as talking of Cupid so familiarly,
as if he were some vulgar Deity;
and making Love the business and employ
of every idle Girl, and wanton Boy;
taking of every fond desire for it,
whilst difference 'twixt them is as infinite,
as 'twixt folly and wisdom, virtue and vice,
or deep abyss, and highest Paradise. --
This must be looked unto.

Pol. As it is most fit.


The. Is the Nymph summoned to the temple yet?


Pol. It Is not time yet till the sixth hour be past


The. When it is,
be it your care to summon her, and see
that all be ready for the Solemnity: --
This day peculiarly Love is thine,
work miracles, and show thy self divine.

Finis Actus primi.
ACTUS 2.
Bellinda sola. The Scene, a Wood or Boscage. Bellinda. YE aged Oaks, the
semi-gods abodes,
and who your selves in ancient times were Gods*
and solitary Woods, whose walks and shade
Lovers so often their confidents have made,
whilst never did your walks nor shades disclose
either a Lovers joys, or Lovers woes:
You I dare trust with secrets, which I never
durst trust with any since my coming here:
I love, -- but Oh! if any listening ear
should have o'reheard me now, as it is my fear!
And see where this inquisitive Nymph does come?
Would she were deaf, or else that I Would been dumb.

Enter Filena. Fi. I faith, I faith.
I Am glad I Have found you.

Bell. Why?


Fi. For now it is clear you love.


Bell. How so? -- it is as I feared,
she has o'reheard me.

Aside. Fi. These very trees and woods declare it.


aside. Bell. Ay me! this it is to trust ones mind
with trees, whose leaves whisper with every wind;
with woods, whose very walks and shades have ears,
and babbling Echo that tells all it hears.

Fi. She fears, it is a good sign, I Will urge her further --
your solitude and retirement too confirms it;
for no Nymph here
retired from company ever walks alone;
but Love is still gentle companion of
her solitary thoughts.

Bell. If that be all, it is well.


Aside. Fi. And why should you with so much caution now
conceal this from me? as I did not know
how Love did all things out of chaos make,
and all to chaos would again turn back:
If all things did not love, from Gods and men
to senseless and inanimate things again;
and what a monster should Bellinda prove,
if only she of all things did not love?

Bell. Of all the Nymphs that ever spoke with tongue,
this Nymph has Magic I must bless me from!

Fi. Where is the friendship y've so long professed
to make me such a stranger to your breast?

Bell. Trust me dear friend, if what you say be true,
I am more stranger to my breast then you.

Fi. See how you blush now when you tell me so!


Bell. Ay me! mine own blushes betray me too!
What is it can be secret in a Lover,
when even their blushes do their Loves discover?

Fi. What and sigh too! nay then you love, it is clear;
for, but for Love, none ever sighed here.

Bell. my sighs betray me too! how many traitors
have Lovers about them?

Aside. Fi. But why should you sigh! you live happily;
and sighs are for the miserable, such as I: --
Palemon loves you, and so loves you too,
as he even pines away for Love of you;
consumes with grief, languishes with despair,
melts into tears, and sighs himself to air;
faith, give him some comfort e're you go
unto the Temple, sweet Bellinda do;
poor Youth, he is in so desperate estate,
I fear, lest after it may come too late.

Bell. What greater comfort can he expect of me,
then that, if any in the Isle I love, it is he?

Fi. Poor comfort, that it shall be him alone,
if any in the Isle you love, if you love none;
this is to mock his hopes; and they deny
rather then grant, who promise doubtfully.

Bell. More ( Filena) I neither will nor can
give him, until I go to the Temple anon,
and there consult the Gods what I should do.

Fi. Consult your own thoughts rather,
and your mind.

Bell. It Is not easy as you think to find
the source and origin of our thoughts and mind;
of which the one is so deep, the other so high,
as there are Optics made to pierce the sky,
plummets to sound the bottom of the ocean;
but for to pierce and sound a heart there is none.

Within. Bellinda, Bellinda. Enter Polydor. Bell. Here! who calls?


Pol. It Is I.


Fi. Gentle Polydor,
what news from the Temple w'ye?

Pol. Nothing, but only all is prepared there
for the grand solemnity, and only fair
Bellinda's presence expected.

Bell. If It be so,
let us away.

Pol. Soft, it is not time to go this hour yet.


Bell. And that a day will seem to be
a month, a year, a very age to me.

Exit joyfully. Pol. Do You think she knows?


Fi. I know not, let us divine,
and join your observations to mine: --
Do You mark with how great joy away she went?
none goes so cheerfully to banishment.

Pol. But if her body's here, and mind elsewhere,
it is she does banish us, and not we her.

Fi. Well, if she love, I wonder at her art
can carry fire so smothered in her heart,
as none nor by the flame nor smoke can know
whether sh'ave any in her breast or no.

Pol. And if she do not love again, then she
of all the Nymphs I yet did ever see,
the most my admiration does move,
to have so much beauty, and so little love.

Fi. I Will follow and observe her better.


Pol. Do,
and I Will but stay awhile and follow you.

Exit Filena. Enter Pamphilus. Pam. That Wench!
that wench would I give a limb for now,
though I halted to an Hospital for it, (and there
are many have ventured as far for wenches as that
comes to) I must needs have her, and he here
shall be my Agent in the business. --
Do You hear, do you hear Sir, a word with you I pray.

Pol. With me! your pleasure Sir?


Pam. Do You know that Nymph there?


Pol. Very well, what then?


Pam. Why then I should desire
your better acquaintance;
for look ye, suppose a man
should have a mind unto her.

Pol. A mind, what mind?


Pam. Why, a months mind or so.


Pol. Why then, after a month you may be rid often


Pam. I hope Sir you do not mock me?


Pol. Indeed Sir, but I do, --
you must pardon me.

Pam. It Is well you confess it, and ask my pardon,
I should be very angry else, I can tell you

Pol. This is some simple stranger, ignorant of
our manners and customs, rather meriting
pity then anger.

Aside. aside. Pam. He understands nothing but plain
downright language I see, that calls every thing
by its right name: -- Well Sir, since I perceive
you are a little dull, in plainer terms
I Would fain -- -- you understood me.

Whispers. Pol. How Sir!


Pam. Even so Sir,


Pol. Do You know where you are?


Pam. Why, in Love's Kingdom, where should I be?


Pol. But not
in Lusts -- remember that.

Pam. Pox a these nice
distinctions! that only serve to break
Dunces heads, and keep Maidenheads so long,
till they are quite marred: -- Come, come, I know
no other love but what I Have told you.

Pol. Then you must be taught,
and learn other language too, or else this Isle
(I can tell you) will prove too hot for you.

Pam. Would the Nymphs were not so cold,
and let the Isle be what it will.

Aside. Pol. And now to instruct you a little better, know
that for all lewd and lascivious speeches we
have a gentle punishment here, called whipping.

Pam. Gentle do you call it?


Pol. And for fowl libidinousness,
an other excellent remedy called castrating
that takes it clear away.

Pam. Clear with a witness,
bless me and all mine from it:
why this is cruel sir --
have you no regard then to peoples infirmities?

Pol. O yes, a special one, for your wild and unruly
heats of youth, w'ave an admirable way
of cooling 'um, by marrying 'um unto
old women of fourscore, there is a cooler for you.

Pam. A cooler with a vengeance! ah ha!
it makes my teeth chatter in my head to think of it
but sure sir you are not in earnest all this while?

Pol. It seems sir you love to jest, but look to it, and
say y'ad fair warning; -- and so farewell.

Exit. Pa^. Farewell quoth ye?
marry it is time to bid farewell indeed
if this be so, whipping, castrating, and
marrying to old women of fourscore!
a great consolation for a man that loves
a wench; but he said all this sure
only to fright me;
yet let him say what he will,
wooed I had that wench say I.
Enter Amaranthe, Cloria, Lydia, Melissa, etc. Whow? here comes a whole ocean
of them!
now am I in my element, and I shall wallow
like a Porposs amongst them.

Am. What my Platonic Philosopher,
and Anteplatonick Lover again?

Pam. 'Slid is she there? I Would best be gone then, I Am
as feared of her as a dog is of a whip.

Am. What is he going? I must needs have
some sport with him before he goes. --
Hark ye, hark ye sir, pray stay a little.

Pam. Now will she trappan me
into a whipping, I Am sure;
yet I am such a fool I must needs tarry.

Am. These nymphs here would be glad
of your better acquaintance:

Pam. With all my heart.


Lyd. What means Amarinthe?


Am. Come nearer, nearer yet; now nymphs
look on him (I pray) and mark him well.

Pam. This goes well hitherto --
I must prepare my self to court um now.

Am. And now be it known unto you all,
he is one whom you are to bless your selves from, as
from some ghost or goblin. --

Pam. How Is this?


Am. For he will haunt you,
haunt you worse then they,
and stick to ye faster then burrs, or rather pitch
that defiles all it touches: there is no
purifying your selves a month after h'as once been
in your company.

Mel. Bless us from him!


Pam. The devil's in her:
in what a fair way of courtship was I, and how
she has put me out of it?

Am. Yet (would ye think it?)
he imagins all the nymphs are in love with him,
nay will swear it, if they look but on him once,
and then talk so lewdly, as shows him all
groom and footboy within,
however without he appears a Gentleman.

Pam. She Will make me all groom
and footboy presently, she'as half
transformed me already.

Am. Nay, hold up your head sir,
and ben't ashamed of your commendations.

Pam. Commendations do you call it? I wonder what
are your reproaches, if these be your commendations.

Aside. Lyd. Sure Amaranthe you wrong him.


Pam. I indeed,
does she sweet heart,

Lyd. Forbear, and know your distance Sir.


Am. Nay he is like
a Spannel, hold him at arms end, or he will
be in your bosom presently.

Mel. Nay, now you are too cruel.


Am. If he would either spare
his own or others modesty, I would be
content to spare him yet?

Pam. I must suffer I see.


Am. But see Theotimus coming, -- cultivating
our youth, and sowing in their tender minds
the seeds of all our future happiness, for
it is not the culter of the Land, but of the mind
makes people happy;
and as that is done well or ill,
so they are happy or unhappy still.

Enter Theotimus, Chorus of Musicians, and young Virgins, Diophantes, Evander,
etc. The. Now tender Virgins all draw near,
And Loves diviner doctrine hear;
First, Nymphs be modest as you go,
For just as by the pulse we know
The bodies state, so we as well
By the eyes, the state of the mind may tell;
And rolling eyes do but betray
A heart that rowls as well as they.

Chor. sings. O fly then far
Glances that are
But outward signs, by which we find
The inward temper of the mind;
And rolling eyes do but betray
A heart that rowls as well as they.

Pam. Hei day, now will these wenches wear
their eyes like spectacles on their noses, and
look as demurely as Cows in bon-graces.

The. Then for your kisses, oh, be sure
No Virgins ever those endure;
For you are flowers and blooming Trees,
And men are such deflowring Bees:
Let once their kisses light upon ye,
They soon will suck all sweetness from ye,
And women's lips with kissing used
Will look but just like Cherries bruised.

Chor. sings. O fly then far
Kisses that are
Like Bees that suck all sweetness from ye;
Let 'um once but light upon you:
And women's lips with kissing used,
Will look but just like Cherries bruised.

Pam. Now will these wenches lips grow
as cold as dogs noses, if they leave off kissing once.

The. But above all take heed again
You fly and shun the touch of men;
For there is no canker more devours,
Nor mildew more blasts tender flowers,
Then men will you, whose lightest touch
Will soon your fresher beauties smutch;
And once but tainted in your hue,
You well may bid the world adieu.

Chor. sings. O fly then far
Touches that are
So blasting, as the lightest touch
Will soon your fresher beauties smutch;
And once but tainted in your hue,
You well may bid the world adieu.

Pam. It Is time to bid the world adieu indeed,
if there be no touching 'um.

Th. Now that we ben't expected there,
it is time to the Temple to repair: --
set forwards there before.

Exeunt. Manent Diophantes, Evander, Pamphilus, Amaranthe, Cloria, Lydia,
Melissa. Ev. Oh! Pamphilus well met;
and how do you find the nymphs here, ha?

Pam. As I co'd wish, the kindest lovingst souls
as e're I met withal.

Am. How Is this! let us stand close,
and over hear him.

Pam. You need not multiply the Phoenix to sum up
the number of all the maidenheads I shall leave
in Cyprus here, before I Have done with'um.

Am. Do You hear?


Ev. Is It possible!


Pam. No, no, I knew not the humor
and disposition of the nymps here, I.

Em. Troth, and so I think still.


Aside. Pam. I hope now you will believe me another time?


Ev. It may be so, but now I swear I do not.


Aside. Dio. Yet let us sooth and humor him to have
some sport with him; --
you know all the Nimphs here then?

Pam. O most intimately.


Diop. Amaranthe, Cloria, Lydia, Melissa?


Pam. All, all --
and have had favors from every one of them,
this Ring from one, this Ribband from a second,
this Jewel from a third.

Mel. What a lying fellow's this!


Dio. And what think you of Cloria?


Pam. She kisses well,
I Have gone no farther with her yet, but there
is hope I may in time.

Clo. Shall I endure this?


Am. Nay prithee,


Dio. And Lydia?


Pam. With her I must confess
I Have had a little more samiliarity.

Lyd. There Is no enduring this!


Am. Yet this was he
you thought I wronged.

Lyd. Hang him, none can, but only
by reporting too well of him.

Pam. For Amarinthe she is the coyest of 'um all*


Am. I thank you.


Pam. And was so angry with me for
a kiss I stole from her, but I soon pacified her:

Dio. As how?


Pam. Why, I told her that rather
then that should make a war betwixt us,
which was wont to be the sign of peace with others,
I Would make her double satisfaction;
and for one kiss I took from her, would give
her two.

Ev. So then (as you imagined 'um) you find
all the Nymphs here as supple and plyant as
kids leather Gloves, a gentle pluck or two
will easily draw 'um om.

Pam. Draw 'um on! would some body would draw 'um off for me:
I fear I shall be ravished by 'um.

Am. Out upon him, I Will hear no more,
let us go, and as we pass, show him all
the neglect and scorn we can possible.

They pass by him frowningly and Exeunt. Dio. Do You mark how they frown upon him?


Pam. Favors, mere favors, believe it Gentlemen,
and only invitations to follow 'um;
you see how I am courted, and must pardon me.

Exit. Dio. The man's as impudent as vain I see,
and though this hitherto be but in jest
you whom he counts his friend may tell him best,
If he imagines with injurious lies
To get him honor by their injuries:
Our Nymphs are all of such unquestioned Fame,
He Will sooner punishment, then credit gain.

Exeunt. Enter Palemon. Pal. This way the fair Bellinda is to pass
Unto the Temple, and although she has
Forbid me speaking to her on pain of her
Displeasure, I may see her howsoever;
And as she goes to the Temple, feast mine eyes,
Which happiness she to my tongue denies. --
Enter Bellinda, Filena, Polydor. See where she comes, and now it fares with me
As with those sick, who whilst they long to see
The cup they may not taste, become but more
Thirsty with sight often then they were before.

Fi. Behold Palemon, as I Have appointed him
ith way, can we invent no stratagem
to make her now with favorable eye
regard him? think, I Will second you.

Pol. I Will try:
whose that Palemon?

Fi. Think it be,
but let us go on and think not on him.

Exeunt Bellinda and Polyder. Pal. She my enemy!


Pol. Ben't deceived Palemon, for
'twas said to make her think of you the more*
For just as wind or fanning does the fire
So prohibition more inflames desire.

Exit. Pal. I fain would follow her, but I know that she
Would be offended with it; and for me
To offend her now, were to undo my self,
And in the Haven shipwreck all my wealth.

Exit. Finis Actus Secundi.
ACTUS 3.
Enter Diophantes and Evander. The Scene, Loves Temple surrounded with Pillars
of the Dorick Order, with a Dome or Cupilo of the top, and the Statues or
Simulachrums of Venus and Cupid on an Altar in the midst of the Temple, all
transparent. Diophantes. THis is Loves Temple, here who e're repairs,
Finds Love propitious to their vows and Prayers:
Regard not then the proud materials,
Or outward structure of the Vaults and Walls;
But mark the Altar, and the sacred Shrine,
Then which the world has nothing more divine.

Ev. Methinks there is somewhat more then humane here
Fills me with reverence and holy fear!

Dio. Peace, the Ceremony begins.


Ev. And do
the Nymphs begin it?

Enter all the Nymphs in solemn manner, addressing themselves unto the Altar.
Dio. Yes,
For of that Sex, Virtues and Graces are
Of that, all that is beautiful and fair;
And as the care of Cupids is to men,
So that of Venus's rites is due to them.

Ev. I understand, and every thing I see
Is ordered here with rare economy.

Fi. Thou fairest, brightest Star in heaven,
And most benign of all the seven;
If on this day (when every year
We celebrate thy coming here:)
Thou do not hear our prayers; it is we
Are rather wanting unto thee
Then thou to us; for thou wod'st grant
(We know) what ever we do want,
If we (on our parts) did but crave
What e're is fit for us to have;
Grant then to celebrate thy feast
A holy and religious Breast,
Virtue, high honor, beauty, health,
And mind above all other wealth;
Let others ask what boon they please,
All that we crave of thee are these:

All. Oh hear our vows and prayers as we
do purely love and honor thee.

Soft Music. Fi. Thou do confirm us by this Harmony,
O Love our Vows are pleasing unto thee.

Ev. Now I perceive it is our faults, not theirs,
If when we pray, the gods don't hear our prayers.

Dio. Peace now, the other Ceremony begins.


Fi. Let us retire then, and give place to them.


Enter Theotimus, Chorus of Musicians one way, Bellinda the other, brought in
by Polydor, Pamphilus, etc. Chorus sings. Divinest Love does all command,
In fire and water, air and land;
And all with his commands inspire
In land and water, air and fire.

The. Where is the Nymph?


Pol. Great Sir, behold her here; --
bear back, bear back, room for the Nymph there.

Pam. Now will he break my head,
only to show his authority, (you will see)
'less I get me out of the way the sooner.

The. Then fair and gentle Nymph draw near,
And all our Ceremonies hear,
Which to Religion do dispense
Both Mystery and Reverence:
We first must charm you silent, then
Must vail and blind your eyes again;
That you may see and speak with none,
Until the Ceremony's done:
Then you are to go to the sacred Cell,
Where a full hour you are to dwell,
Before you are produced to swear,
You love some one in Cyprus here;
Or else (refusing it) be sent
Into perpetual banishment. --
If then you have any thing to say,
Now speak it freely whilst you may.

Bell. Prudence assist me, thou that best can tell, Aside.
What I should say, and what I should conceal; --
Knowing great sir, how w'ar the gods chief care,
More dear to them, then to our selves we are:
Behold Bellinda here resigned stands
To obey your Laws, and their divine commands.

The. A wise and pious Resignation!
Most pleasing unto Heaven, and such an one
As even necessitates the Gods to grant
All that we mortals crave, and all we want. --
Reach us the sacred Wand
to charm her silent then.
The Charm.
Still-born Silence, thou that art
Flood-gate of the deeper heart,
Offspring of a heavenly kind,
Frost of the mouth, and thaw oth' mind;
Admirations chiefest tongue,
Leave thy desert Shades, among
Ancient Hermits hallowed Cells,
Where retired Devotion dwells,
With thy Enthusiasmes come
Ceize this Maid, and strike her dumb.

Pam. If every man that is troubled with
a shrewd wife had but this Charm,
how happy should he be?

The. Now, reach us the sacred veil --
Where such a cloud of mysteries lies,
As whilst we with it blind your eyes,
If only you convert your sight,
From the outward to the inward light,
Illuminates your soul and mind
Sent from above, you soon will find
The Sun here in its brightest Sphere,
Will darker then a shade appear.

he vails her. Pam. Now were she and I
to play at blinde-man-buff together, ah!
what dainty sport should we two make? she should
catch me, or I Would catch her, 'tshu'd cost
one of us a fall else.

The. Now to the sacred Cell set on,
Where w're to leave her all alone,
Until the hour's expired, and then
To the Temple all repair again.

Exeunt. Manet Pamphilus. Pam. Would I were in the sacred Cell
with her now,
what holy work should she and I make together?
if these holy whorsons did not hinder us;
as most commonly they hinder all good sport. --
Well, here will I spread my nets to catch
some of the Nymphs in their return;
it is hard if they all 'scape me: Enter 1 Nymph.
And see here is one already. -- Fair Nymph,
might I desire the honor to wait upon you home?

1 No indeed Sir.


Pam. And why so?


1 Because it is not the custom
for Nimphs in this Country to go alone with men

Pam. But it is the custom for men in our Country
when they are alone with women, to offer them
the courtesy of -- you know what.

1 I know not what you mean!


Pam. The more's the pity
you should live to these years, and be so ignorant;
the Nymphs in our Country
would have understood me presently:

1 They better understand
what belongs to men perhaps; but we Sir, better
what belongs to women.

Exit. Pam. Goodly, goodly! how say ye by that?
I was deceived in her; but here comes another,
if I understand any thing in women,
will be more kind. -- Fair Nymph,

Enter 2 Nymph. 2 Pray keep your way Sir, and trouble me not.


Pam. This is worse then to'ther!
Did you but know how much I love you,
you would never refuse my courtesy.

2 And did you but know how little I care for it,
you would never offer it.

Ham. Hei ho! have ye the heart to hear me
sigh thus, and never pity me?

2 Yes indeed, and to laugh at you for it too,
to hear you sigh thus
like a broken-winded bellows,
or a dry pump and spend so much breath in vain,
as we shall never wonder hereafter
at Lapland Witches selling wind so cheap.

Pam. But I shall always wonder,
that here in Venus School the Nymphs should learn
no more compassion.

2 Now ye talk of Schools,
I must to the Graces Grove,
where all the Nymphs are gone
to learn their lessons.

Exit. Pam. And I will follow them;
strange that all should be honest!
I have heard of one or two in a Country, or so,
but all, all, was never heard of before!
I don't despair yet.
Well.

Exit. Enter Amaranthe, Filena, Cloria, Lydia, Melissa. The Scene, the Graces
Grove, the Statues of the three Graces in the midst, all hand in hand embraced.
Am. Now Nymphs, here in the Graces Grove,
A place which Beauty most does love,
And gentle Love most highly prize,
Let Us fall unto our exercise
Of studying all those gracious parts,
Which most do take and conquer hearts.

Enter Pamphilus. Pam. Now will I stand here concealed,
and observe them; they say, all women when
they are alone, put off their modesties;
I should be glad to see it.

Am. First Nymphs, in honor of the Graces
Let us compose our looks and faces
To gentle smiles, for no frowns here
In any face should e're appear.

Pam. If I thought they would not frown,
I should soon be amongst them.

Am. And next, as we our faces do,
We must compose our garments too
With such a decency, as best
Becomes the modest to be dressed.

Pam. Would they would put off their garments once,
that is it I look for.

Am. But since the graces of the mind
Are those which most adorn our kind,
It ought to be our chiefest care
To render our interiours fair;
Counting the exterior nothing else,
But outward garments of our selves.

Pam. Give me the outside,
and take the inside who is list.

Am. Other Graces there are beside,
Which Nymphs should carefully provide,
As dancing, singing, and such arts,
Which through the Senses strike their hearts;
And give (where ever they are found)
That dangerous yet gentle wound,
Which never can be cured again,
Till Hymen ease their amorous pain.

Pam. I co'd ease and cure it a great deal better,
if they would but let me alone with them.

Am. Then let us sing, that Echo may
The sound unto the Woods conveigh;
And after raising it more high,
The Woods conveigh it to the Sky;
That heaven and earth may both partake
The Harmony your Voices make.

Here the Nymphs sing. Pam. I co'd make othergess music with them,
if I were but master of the Quire amongst them.

Am. Now let us have a dance, to show,
How that which does enchant men so,
Is not the Magic of the face,
The red and white, nor bodies grace;
But it is the Magic of the feet,
Where all harmonious numbers meet.

Here the Nymphs dance. Pam. I think there is witchcraft in it indeed,
for I can as well be hanged as hold now,
but I must have a frisk amongst them;
Hei for our Town!

He comes out dancing. Fi. A man amongst us!
what insolence is this?

Exit. Pam. Nay, never look so strange on it, --
there are those can dance too, you
shall see else.

he dances 'em about one after another. Mel. Was ever seen the like?


Pam. Yes twenty times, -- How say you?


Lyd. Away, are you not ashamed?


Pa. No indeed, I was never ashamed in my life --
nay, you must have your turn too.

Clo. Let me go, -- or I Will cry out else.


Pam. It Is yet too soon,
I Will give you more cause presently.

Lyd. Away Melissa.


Exit. Mel. Away Cloria.


Exit. Clo. Away Lydia.


Exit. Am. Away all of you,
this is a rudeness must be complained of.

Exeunt omnes, manet Pamphilus. Pam. Look ye! is not this a lamentable case?
that all the Nymphs should fly me as chickens do
a Kite, or birds some strange Owl; yet I protest,
I mean them no more harm, then their fathers did
their mothers, as they should soon perceive, if they
would but try me once; I fear I shall never do
any good on them, yet I must follow them still:
For the devil's in it, when once we begin
to follow wenches, we can never give over.

Exit Enter Philander solus. The Scene, the Cyprian Shore, a waving Sea afar
off discovered, etc. Phi. Hail happy Island! Natures chiefest care,
Where all things love, and all things fruitful are;
Where Springtide makes perpetual Residence,
And rigid Winter's ever banished hence;
In you, (O blessed and happy Land) in you
I shall find her, (if the Oracle be true)
Through all the Islands of the Egean Main,
These three months I have sought, and sought in vain;
Till here arriving now at last, I see
So vaste a solitude, as amazes me!
Nor on the barren Mauritanean Shore,
Or Lybian Desert, scarcely co'd be more!

Enter Palemon. Pal. I Will hide me no longer from my fears, nor fly
The danger, it is childish and cowardly,
And (well considered) rather does increase
Our dangers and our fears, then make them less;
For looking through that false optic fear,
Danger does still more terrible appear,
And terrors in the dark far more afright
(The imagination often) then in the light:
I Will then to the Temple, and whatever befall
By help of this, I am prepared for all.

Pointing to his Sword. Phi. Sir, might a stranger here desire to know
Why all your houses are deserted so,
As if some plague had swept 'um; and the Land
Depopulated, as if some enemies hand
Had mowed it with the sword! to me it does
Appear to wonder strange, that love should thus
Leave his own Land unpeopled, whilst he
Peoples all others so abundantly!

Pal. Know Sir, it is not for want of people here,
Loves Kingdom does so desolate appear,
But just as we perceive from every part,
The blood does all retire unto the heart,
In any great commotion or dismay;
So all the people, in no less, to day
Are gone to the Temple, in expectancy
Of The issue of our great solemnity.

Phi. What Is that?


Pal. Why, by the Laws of Cyprus, here
All strangers after three months are to swear
They love some one in the Island, or be sent
Away into perpetual banishment:
Now Sir, this oath a Nymph to day must take,

Phi. And why should that
so great commotion make?

Pal. 'Cause she is the joy or grief of every one;
Joy if she stay, and grief if she be gone.

Phi. What is this Nymph so much exacts your care,


Pal. One who some three months since arrived here,
Wrack't on the Coast, (the rest all drowned but she)
In whom appeared so great divinity;
It was another Venus you would have swore,
Born of the Sea, and landing on the shore.

Phi. Just so long it is since she was stolen away
from Crete, to barbarous pirates made a prey;
and her name, Sir,

Pal. Bellinda, Sir, they call
this admirable Nymph:

Phi. Her name and all?
and where is she?

Pal. In The sacred Cell enclosed,
ready to take the oath.

Phi. And is it supposed
she will take it?

Pal. That as yet, there is none can tell
But this (unto my grief) I can full well,
That less she does, you here behold in me
The wretchedst Lover ever eye did see,
Or ever lived in memory of men;

Phi. Heavens! what do I hear? -- are you her Lover then?


Pal. Should I deny it, these Trees would tell you I am,
Upon whose Barks so often I Have carved her name;
This shore so often my lamentations hears --
And Sea that I Have augmented with my tears;
As with my sighs the air; these Sir, all these
Will tell you I am, though I should hold my peace.

Phi. O Heaven! in vain why did you valor give,
If I can hear this now, and let him live?
But stay, if seeing and loving her be a crime,
I must kill all mankind as well as him;
For all would guilty be, and you should find
None innocent, but the senseless, and the blind:
I Will then suspend my anger, till I know
Whether Bellinda does love him or no;
For there, there only the offense does lie,
Else he is the person offended, and not I;
For never Tyrant invented greater pain,
Then it is to love, and not be loved again. --
It shall be so -- and pray Sir, may not one see
This Nymph you speak of?

Pal. Please you go with me
Unto the Temple Sir, there you may both
See her, and hear her take the sacred Oath.

Phi. So confident!


Pal. I Have a promise Sir from her
makes me hope so.

Phi. Then I may well despair -- Aside.
yet will I not be jealous, for that,
Though it begins in love, does end in hate,
And I her love to mine so far prefer,
As I may hate my self, but never her --
Yet it is strange, if what he says be true!

Pal. But has she any relation unto you,
you seem so much concerned for her, Sir?

Phi. No other
But what a Sister has unto a Brother;
If she be the same as I imagine her:

Pal. Then I beseech you Sir,
till some more near
relation and bond may bind me to ye,
you would be pleased for to accept of me
for your most humble Servant.

Phi. That Sir, I
may not; but please you do me the courtesy
to show me the way unto the Temple, and you
should much oblige me.

Pal. That Sir I shall do
to show my obedience, or any thing I may.

Exit. Pal. Phi. I Will follow you then,
please you to lead the way. --
Now dearest Love, in this thy kingdom be
As kind and as propitious unto me.
As through thy grace and favor I hope to find
Ease for my wearied limbs and troubled mind;
And a calm port and sure retreat at last
After so many storms and dangers past.

Ex. Phil. Finis Actus tertii.
ACTUS 4.
Enter Palemon and Philander. The Scene, Loves Temple, as before, two Aruspiece
with burning Censors, etc. Palemon. NOw here Love at thy sacred shine
I offer up these vows of mine, --
Father of dear and tender thoughts,
Thou who the hardest bosom softs;
Soften Bellinda's heart, and make
Her but thy dear impressions take;
So shall I burn Arabian Gums,
And offer up whole Hecatombs
Upon thy Altar, whilst thy fires
Shall shine as bright as my desires.

1. Arus. Whilst he the Deity does invoke
The flame ascends in troubled smoke:

Phi. What sort of offering mine shall be,
Divinest Love's best known to thee;
Nor spices, nor Arabian Gums,
Nor yet of beasts whole Hecatombs:
These are too low and earthly, mine
Are far more heavenly and divine;
An Adamantine faith, and such
As jealousy can never touch:
A constant heart, and loyal breast,
These are the offerings thou love best.

2. Arus. Loves fires never brighter yet appeared,
Who e're thou art, thy vows are heard.

Enter Theotimus, Chorus of Musicians one way, Bellinda 'tother, with all the
Nymphs, Polydor, Evander, Diophantes, Pamphilus, etc. Pal. Now see here where
she comes.


Phi. Her noble frame,
habit, and stature tells me it is the same?

The. Why comes she not away?


Pol. What ails she there?


Am. Help, help, she swounds:


Lyd. Give her, give her more air?


The. Hold, hold, I charge you, and let none
presume to touch the consecrated veil.

Pol. Behold she is come
to her self again;

The. Let the Solemnity
go on then.

Phi. Now I clearly see it is she.


The. Now on this Book here lay your hands,
Covered with skins of Doves and Swans;
And Love so help you as you swear,
Unfeignedly you love one here.

Phi. Now Philander thou shall know
whether she be true or no:

Pal; And I know my destiny,
Whether I Am to live or dye.

The. Thus I uncharm your tongue, now speak
And to our joys your silence break.

Bell. Then by Loves sacred deity I swear,
I love one in the Isle.

Phi. What do I hear!


The. Enough, -- the charm again, I thus apply.


Pal. O me, most happy!


Phi. And most unhappy I!


The. Now bear her to the Cell again,
Where yet an hour she is to remain;
Suffered to see nor speak with none
Until the hour be past and gone.

Chor. sings. Praised be Love does all command
In fire and water, air, and land,
And all with his commands inspire
In land and water, air and fire.

Exeunt. Manet Filena. Fi. Bellinda Love! nay then my fears I see
Were not in vain, and nothing's left for me,
But only death; when nothing else prevails,
That Is the last remedy, and never fails.
Enter Palemon, and seeing her, returns. Stay, stay Palemon;
This is the last time we shall ever meet;
Stay then and hear me, it is nobler yet
To kill me like the basilisk with your sight,
Then like the Parthians, kill me with your flight --
But he is gone (alas) and does deny
Me the last office of humanity
Of closing of my dying eyes in death,
And when I expire, receive my latest breath. --
The many ways that lead to death do make
Me yet irresolute which way to take;
But some way I must take, and speedily
Resolve upon it too, what e're it be.

Exit. Enter Pamphilus. The Scene, The precints of the Temple. Pam. Strange!
that I can find no way
to fasten on these Nymphs?
here comes one now, Enter first Nymph.
and I Will try a way with her
that seldom fails they say. -- Fair Nymph
please you to accept these Jewels here?

1, Nym. Wherefore Sir?


Pam. Only to buy your love, nothing else


1. Nym. Bless me! Throws them away and exit.
Simony in love!

Pam. This is the first wench
as ever I met withal,
that refused presents when they were offered her,
and I think will be the last. --
This is a strange Country,
where a man cannot get a wench
neither for love nor money? well, I perceive
this handling 'um with so much ceremony
is that which spoils 'um,
and makes 'um so nice and ticklish
there is no touching 'um:
women should be handled like nettles,
but press them hard
and you may do any thing with them,
and I Will try that way with the next I meet.

Enter Filena. Fill. I have bethought me of a way to dye
and must go seek out Amaranthe's help.

Pam. Stay Lady, a word with you I pray
before you go.

Lays hold on her. Fill. Was ever such a rudeness? unhand me sir,
and know that Virgins are like sacred Relics
beheld with reverence; but let men come
to touch 'um once, their reverence is gone, --
what would you with me?

Pam. What a question's that?
when a man's alone with a woman, you
may easily guess what he would have with her.

Fill. Hence and avoid my sight, for now I see,
How all that we call vicious is in thee;
Foul corrupter of honor, as cankers of fairest flowers,
Shame of thy Sex, dishonourer of ours*

Pam. Whow, whow! is the woman mad?


Fi. Avoid my sight I say, thy glowing eyes
like Basilisks will kill me else; go and repent
thee of thy crying sins.

Exit. Pam. What are those?
I know no crying sins I have,
but mine own Bastards: -- Well, go thy ways,
if e're thou marriest, I Will give thy husband this
com^fort, he shall have no other issue of thee
but nails and teeth, if thou be'st such a Vixen.

Enter Evander and Diophantes. Ev. Now Pamphilus, what is the matter,
that the Nymph is gone in such a rage away?

Pam. Nothing, nothing, only I offered her
the courtesy oth' Country, and she refused it,
that is all.

Ev. Why then, I see you need not multiply
the Phoenix, to sum up all the Maidenheads
you will leave in Cyprus,
before you have done with them.

Pam. Well, well, you do not know yet.


Ev. Yes, but we do Sir, more then you imagine --
of a certain Nymph, you met in Plato's great year,
and how she entertained you.

Pam. 'Slid! how comes he to know of that?


Ev. And of diverse other encounters
with them since, when you could not desire to be
better mocked and laughed at then you were.

Dio. And now Sir, pray
as you find our Nymphs here, so report of them;
and know it is not the way
for men to gain them reputation here,
to make themselves more vicious then they are.

Pam. Nay, if he chide once I Am gone.


Ev. You Are deceived, he chides you not,
but rather gives you good counsel.

Pam. That is as it is taken, -- it is good council
to those who mean to follow it; --
but to me it is flat chiding,
and I Will hear no more of it.

Ev. Nay pray.


Pam. Not I I swear, --
Chide me! who have lived like a Saint here, and
not touched a Wench to day!

Exit. Ev. But tarry a little.


Dio. No, let him go, I see
he is forfeited to vice and debauchery
beyond redemption; and such as he,
when vice is once turned nature, never repent,
till they find their shame, or feel their punishment

Exeunt. Enter Filena and Amaranthe meeting. The Scene, a Landscape or Paisage.
Fi. Amaranthe, -- well met,
I Have sought you all about,
And co'd not rest until I Would found you out;
You know, whilst you and I the other day
In yonder Mead, beheld our young Lambs play,
One of them straggling from the rest) we spied
Fell down, stretched forth its tender limbs, and died
In as short time as I Have been telling to ye,
And wondering what the reason often should be,
You said 'twas with eating
a venomous herb grew there.

Am. It Is true, -- what then?


Fi. You know besides how here,
where Love is even the vital air we breath,
and its privation consequently death;
deprived once of our Love, it is lawful for us to
despair and dye.

Am. Whither tends this discourse I wonder?


Fi. Now Amaranthe,
I must entreat of thee one courtesy.

Am. What need you with so many circumstances
entreat her whom you may command?
What is it?

Fi. It Is, that thou would show me this same slye
And subtle Thief, that so insensibly
Does steal us from our selves, the lookers on
Do scarce perceive we are going, till we are gone.

Am. And why
would you know this?

Fi. Only for curiosity.


Am. Take heed, take heed Filena, it is no
Good curiosity to desire to know
Such dangerous secrets, as we well may say,
Their ignorance does no harm, their knowledge may.

Fi. See Amaranthe how unkind thou art grown!
Wo'dst all my secrets know, but tell me none:
But now to satisfy your curiosity,
In plainer terms, know I Am resolved to dye;
And having heard how death's a bitter cup,
To tell thee true, before I drink it up,
I Would sweeten it so, as though the Fates do please,
That I should live in pain, I Would dye with ease.

Am. How, you dye! now the Gods forbid!


Fi. No, no,
Thou art deceived; for Amaranthe know,
They are so good, as when it is misery
For us to live, I Am sure they would have us dye.

Am. But think, think what death is.


Fi. What is it more,
then going to rest when we are weary, or
sleep when we'd rest.

Am. I grant you, when we are dead
Death is like rest, and the grave but like our bed;
But if we chance to find unrest there, then
As we lie down, can we rise up again?

Fi. What is in the other life, I cannot tell;
But what there is in this, I know so well,
As I Am resolved to dye; spare then your pain
To seek to hinder me, for it is in vain: --
There Is but one way to live, but nature has
Provided us to dye a thousand ways;
And hinder us from living every one
Can do, but hinder us from dying none.

Am. I must take some other way to hinder her, Aside*
For this but makes her long for death the more.
And for the way that she has chose to dye,
Unknown to her, I know a remedy: --
Well then, since you are so resolved, I Will show
You this venomous herb, upon condition you
Let me ha'th' tempering it, to make it so sweet,
You even shall be enamored with taste of it.

Fi. On any condition Amaranthe I Will dye,
But on no condition live in misery;
Life is not worth it, and
For noble spirits it is brave necessity,
When they cannot honorably live, to dye;
Whilst to ignoble ones the Gods do give
For punishment, dishonourably to live.

Exeunt. Enter Philander. Phi. Since no where we a constant woman find,
But all light and wavering as the wind;
And there is no woman in all this wide
Circumference true, but she was never tried!
Why should I grieve as 'twere my fate alone,
What Is common I perceive to every one?
But these are thoughts unworthy her and me,
For it is not hers, but my inconstancy;
If I can think her false, when I do know
Falsehood would even be truth, if she were so:
And nature of things quite change, rather then she
What she has been, should ever cease to be.

Enter Palemon. Pal. Oh fortunate Palemon! and the more,
The more unfortunate thou were before!
And happy pains, happy affliction!
From which such pleasure and such joys do come!
Now I perceive there is none can better tell
What heaven is, then who first have past through hell. --
Methinks great conquerors who in triumph come
charged with the spoils of conquered nations home
Are but the Types of me, who in triumph go
To the Temple to enjoy Bellinda now.

Exiturus Phi. Death! If I can suffer this,
I shall deserve it: -- Pray stay Sir,
for you have another victory to gain,
and enemy (I Would have you know)
to overcome, before you triumph so!

Pal. What victory do you mean, what enemy?


Phi. Why, I my self and the victory over me;
for know, Bellinda's mine, and I her Lover.

Pal. You! did you not say you were her brother?


Phi. I, but that was only a disguise put on,
to hide what then was fit should not be known.

Pal. Why this does take all faith away from you;
For eith'r 'twas true or false you said before;
If true, why then it is false you tell me now;
If false, there is no believing of you more.

Phi. This fine Dilemma would serve prettily
In The School, but not in the Field; where it must be
Somewhat of finer temper then your words
Must make Bellinda yours, I mean our Swords.

Lays hand on's Sword. Pal. I pray Sir hold, and e're you go so far,
consider but a little where we are,
here in Love's Kingdom, in a peaceful place,
where never any strife or quarrel was,
but only loving ones.

Phi. And is not ours for Love too?


Pal. If it be, let Love decide it, are you content
to put it to his Tribunal and Arbitrament?

Phi. That Is a way poor, and low spirits finds,
This is the Tribunal and Arbitrament of mighty minds; Draws.
'Twere folly in me to refer my Cause
Unto my enemies Tribunal and Laws.

Pal. Fortune as well as Love's your enemy,
Of her as well as Love you feared should be.

Phi. For Love already he is declared my foe,
What Fortune yet may do, I do not know;
I Will try at least, my comfort is I can
Not be in worse condition then I am;
Cast down so low, it is not in the power
Of Love, or Fortune, e're to cast me lower.

Enter Polydor. Pol. What Is here? -- a quarrel toward!
Our peace disturbed, and their offensive Swords
The uncivil Arbitrers of civil strife,
Already drawn, threatening each others life:
Our guards, -- where are they there?

Exit hastily. Phi. We are discry'd,
Before they come, our quarrel let us decide.

Pal. Do, and you will see how they but bluntly fight,
Who first consider not their Causes right;
Whilst those who well consider it before,
Have but their courages whetted by it the more,

Phi. And unto me considering is but like
The weak opposing of some bank or dike
Unto some torrents rage, which more y'oppose,
more raging and impetuous it grows.

They fight Enter Polydor with Guards, and parts them. Pol. Hold, hold, I
charge you in Loves name, or else
We are to seize your weapons and your selves.

Phi. What violence is this?


Pol. Your self's the cause,
who first have violate Loves peaceful Laws.

Phi. Then in Loves Kingdom here shall Lovers be
Deprived both of their Loves and Liberty?

Pol. What Love do you mean?


Phi. Bellinda, who is my betroathed.


Pol. How! she your betroathed!


Phi. I, all Crete can witness it.


Pol. If this be so,
you have too much witness here already, and you
've discovered a secret, which now it is known,
May prove Bellinda's ruin and your own.

Pal. O heavens! -- now I remember me
by another Law; who e're does falsify
the sacred Oath; are instantly to dye,
sacrificed to the offended Deity:
But e're it comes to that, my life shall pay
the forfeiture of hers.

Pol. Come let us away,
Palemon, you have your cliamber for prison;
you Sir, must along with me unto
Theotimus to be examined.

Pal. I obey you.


Phi. And I obey necessity.


Exeunt. Manet Palemon: Pal. Well Fortune, thou giddy Goddess,
if Bellinda be to dye,
And thou have only raised me up so high,
To cast me down with greater force, I Will fall
So gallantly and bravely, yet as all
Shall say at least, how e're unfortunate
Palemon yet deserved a better fate.

Enter Amaranthe in haste with other Nymphs* Am. Run, -- run, and seek her all
about,
or she is but dead; and when you have found her out,
bring me word presently, as you love her life. --
Was never a more unfortunate maid and wife?

Exeunt Nymphs several ways. Pal. What busy haste is this.


Am. What are you there?
fly, fly Palemon, or the Nymphs will tear
you in pieces.

Pal. Why?


Am. For killing the gentlest maid
eye ever saw, or Cyprus ever had;

Pal. What maid do you mean?


Am. Filena.


Pal. Why! is she dead?


Am. Dead, dead, killed by your cruelty
And see poor soul what she does write to me,
She reads. Filena's Letter.
Pardon me Amaranthe,
for having taken the poison unknown unto you,
and deceived you once in my life,
rather then you should deceive me in my death.
Commend me to Palemon, and tell him,
that as I lived in hope of his love,
so now I dye for despair of it:
and let him aster I am dead but wish me rest,
and I shall rest in peace. --
FILENA.



Am. And so I hope thou do
fair gentle maid, or the Gods should else be most
unkind and cruel, should they not to thee grant
that rest in death, which thou in life did want. --
Now you who for cruelty surpass
The cruel'st savage Beast that ever was;
Some Tiger bore thee sure, or thou were bred
With Tigers milk at least, and nourished:
If thou who art the cause of all can hear
This, and not vent a sigh, nor shed a tear.

Pal. As for my sighing and my weeping, that
Is an expression too effeminate;
Only for single losses: such as mine
Requires expressions far more masculine:
Where grief and sorrows are redoubled,
For dying Bellinda, and Filena dead.

Exit. Am. What Is that? Bellinda dying does he say?
Sure Love and death have changed their darts to day,
and there is some Planet reigns will kill us all,
but I forget Filena.
Enter a Nymph. Oh now I shall
hear news of her -- well have you found her?

Mel. No,
but Lydia says sh'ave trac't her footsteps to
the sacred Grove.

Am. Take a cruise presently
Of purest water then, and follow me;
Yet there is hope I may retard her fate,
And save her life, which Love does make her hate.

Finis Actus quarti.
ACTUS 5.
Filena Sola. The Scene, a Wood or Boscage. Filena. THe poison now is arrived
unto my heart,
The place assigned where life and I must part;
And where I must resign my latest breath,
Then farewell life, and welcome sweetest death;
To prisoners freedom, to the weary rest,
Comfort to the sad, and ease to the oppressed:
Who'd then endure such worlds of miseries,
When life's but pain, and death no more but this!
Now, now I dye, yet Love lives in me still, Falls:
As if what Love does wound, Death durst not kill.
Who doubt then whether thou immortal art,
(O mighty Love) could they but see my heart,
And bosom here, where thou can never dye,
It would assert thy immortality.

Enter Pamphilus. Pam. Bless me!
amongst what a generation of Nymphs
am I fallen here, who are all so precise and pure;
as when they come but where men are, they take
the wind of 'um, for fear of being got with child;
as Spanish Ginnets are, and when they go away
brush themselves carefully from the dust, for fear
of a spice of fornication, ever since
they understood that man's but made of dust.
Ha! what have we here? a Nymph a sleep:
ah pretty rogue, have I caught you napping?
she sleeps as snug and soundly
as a young sucking pig,
you can scarce perceive her breath;
what a great blessing is a sleeping woman?
for they will lie quietly yet --
methinks I should know her.

Enter Lydia. Lyd. No news of her yet? it is strange?
but who is here? my goblin again?
what is that he looks so wistly at
I wonder? a Nymph asleep?
for modesties sake I Will wake her -- out alas
it is she? and dead? help, help the glory of
Our Hamlets here, the pride of all our plains,
Grace of the Nymphs, delight of, all the Swains,
Our Isles chief ornament; Filena's dead!
The gentlest Nymph as Cyprus ever bread.

Exit. Pam. How, is she dead? what a beast was I then
to let her go, for I Am sure she was alive.

Enter Lydia again with Polydor and Guards. Pol. A Nymph dead in our wood! it
cannot be,
here are no Savage Beasts, and much less men
so barbarous and savage to kill and murder 'um --
where is she?

Lyd. There.


Pol. Alas, it is she indeed,
how came she dead, do you know?

Lyd. Not I, only in this
posture I found her, and that stranger by her there.

Pol. Oh, I know him,
and have cause to suspect,
considering his former misdemeanors here;
that he is the likeliest man to have murdered her,
seize on him, and let him be examined.

Pam. So, now am I finely served
for hunting after wenches, to be caught
my self, instead of catching them, and like
to be hanged for it, for ought I see:
well, if I be, my comfort is
I Am not the first man that wenching has brought
unto the Gallows, nor am like to be the last.

Enter Amaranthe, with the other Nymphs. Am, Where is she? where is she?
stand from about her there. --

Pam. So would I with all my heart,
if I cu'd get away.

Am. She is not dead, but only intranc't. --


Pam. Marry and I Am but little better.


Am. You Will see
with this cool water she will strait revive again.

Pam. And hot water will scarce
bring me to my self again.

Mel. Take my tears too if water can only do it,


Lyd. And mine,


Clo. And mine,


Mel. And all of ours to boot.


Enter Palemon. Pol. O Palemon welcome, I sent for you
by order of Theotimus, to let you know
strange news of Bellinda.

Pal. I fear I am but too
familiar with it already.

they whisper. Am. See, she begins to stir,
And opens her eyes; I told you their fair light
Was but ecclipst and not extinguished quite.

Pol. Then you may let him go;


Pam. Marry,
and I Will be gone then as fast as I can,
and fly the land too, before I Will be put in such
a fright again.

Exit: Fill. Where am I? in what Region of the dead!
not in hell sure, for there
are far more horrid visions then are here;
nor yet in heaven, for there again
are far more glorious ones; where am I then?

An. She thinks she is dead still.


Fill. Ha, Palemon here! nay then I see
Love takes delight still in tormenting me,
And there is some middle place 'twixt Heaven and Hell,
Where wretched Lovers, such as I, do dwell;
Where sh'ud I go to fly the sight of men,
And where to fly Loves fires and arrows, when
Where e're I go, just like the wounded Dear,
I fly in vain, that which I carry here.

Exit. Am. Go follow her,
and look carefully unto her,
Her wandering mind you will see will come anon
unto its self, when her amazement's gone.

Pal. Whatever it be, methinks there is somewhat here
Whispers remorse, and chides me (as it were)
For my unkindness, and stern cruelty
Unto this Nymph, who thus would dye for me;
But as loud winds will not let us hear the soft
And gentle voice of others; so the thought
Of dying for Bellinda, will not let
Me hear its voice nor hearken to it yet.

Enter Diophantes. Dio. O noble youth! whose famous memory
Shall never be forgot, or ever be
remembered without praise.

Pal. What news brings Diophantes,
he is so transported with it?

Dio. That, which had I a thousand tongues to tell,
Or you a thousand ears to hear, would well
Deserve them all. -- Soon as 'twas rumored,
Bellinda must dye for having falsified
The sacred Oath: but this stranger instantly
Offered himself with such alacrity
to dye for her; as Love
never gained so glorious a victory, nor
ever so triumphed over death before.

Pal. Oh me! if this be so, I shall become
the derision and the scorn of every one;
and was his offer accepted?

Dio. That you know
by the Laws here co'd not be refused him.

Pal. How!
Has he prevented me? but do I stand
Senseless and stupid, as I were dead here, -- and
Had not a life to lose as well as he?
No generous stranger whosoever thou be,
Since thou were born my Rival, thou shall prove
I Will rival thee in Death as well as Love.

Exit. Pol. I fear the event of this!


Am. And so do I;
But wherefore is Bellinda doomed to dye?

Pol. For perjury and falsehood, whilst she swore,
She loved one here, being betroath'd before
unto that stranger there.

Am. All that may be
Without forswearing yet and perjury;
For what if he she swore she loved be he
she was betroath'd unto?

Pol. That cannot be,
For she was in the sacred Cell it is clear,
Long time before he e're arrived here;
In Sequestration, separated from
Society of all, mean time her tongue
Charmed silent, and eyes blinded as they were,
How co'd she see or know that he was here?

Dio. Are you convinced yet?


Am. No, not always they
Convinced are, who know not what to say;
For my part until farther proof shall show
Her guilty, I shall never believe her so:
For just as Images in Tapestry
Do all appear distorted and awry,
Until they are fully explicate, and then
We see they appear all right and straight again;
So she we now think guilty, we may find
Innocent perhaps, when she explains her mind.

Pol. Pray heaven she may! mean time let us go see
This stranger, who shall ever honored be
Alive and dead; and be all Lovers boast,
and honor to Love's Kingdom.

Am. And that most
deservedly, for never any yet
For truly loving did more honor get;
Nor ever any whilst the world lasts, or
There Is Lovers in the world shall e're get more.

Exeunt. Enter Theotimus, Chorus of Musicians, Philander led to Sacrifice
crowned Victim-wise, Youths and Virgins with baskets of flowers strewing the
way, etc. Evander. The. Go noble youth, who does in dying prove
Death, who has power over all, has none over Love
And shows to the world, that who refuse to give
Their lives for honor never deserved to live*
Go take with thee this consolation,
You lose a life that easily would be gone;
But gain one by it, when thousand years are past,
And thousand other lives, shall always last;
And though you might have longer lived, yet know,
You never could dye more gloriously then now;
To have all our Youths and Virgins strew
With flowers all the way you go,
With Roses and with Myrtle Boughs
Adorning your victorious brows;
And singing with triumphant Song
Your praises as you go along.

Chorus sings. Thus shall he ever honored be,
Who dies for Love and Constancy;
And thus be ever praised, who dies
Love's Martyr, and his Sacrifice.

The. And if alive you thus are honored,
Much more you shall be after you are dead;
If such as you can e're be said to dye,
By whose noble example and memory,
A thousand Lovers when you are dead and gone,
Shall spring up in the world instead of one;
Who every year on pilgrimage shall come
To honor your dead ashes in their tomb;
Seeing whose votive gifts and offerings,
The greatest and the mightiest of Kings,
In envying you, and wishing them their own,
Shall for your tomb gladly exchange their throne

Chorus sings. Thus shall he ever honored be,
Who dies for Love and Constancy;
And thus be ever praised, who dies
Love's Martyr, and his Sacrifice.

Enter Palemon, Diophantes, Polydor, Amaranthe, etc. following. Pal. Justice,
Justice, Sir.


The. For what? or against whom?


Pal. Against that stranger there,
who'd rob me of the honor and happiness
of dying for Bellinda.

Phi. He Is more unjust then I,
who 'as robbed me of the honor and happiness
of living for her, and now will not let me dye.

Pal. As if no rocks nor seas, nor flames there were
Nor other ways of dying, but for her?
Choose any of them you please, your choice is free,
Only dying for her belongs to me.

Phi. You may live for her, what would you more? were I
So happy as you, who is list for me should dye.

Pal. You talk as if there were no life to come,
No blessed Shades nor no Elysium;
Where those who have been Lovers here possess
Eternity of joys and happiness.

Phi. Heaven is my witness I never think upon
The joys and pleasures of Elysium,
Nor any joys or pleasures whatsoever
But that of dying and suffering for her.

Ev. How like two towering Hawks they mount and soar,
Love never flew so high a flight before!

Dio. There'l be no end of this.


Pol. Peace, let them alone,
Greater example of Love was never shown!

The. Then let Bellinda come, and sentence give
Whether of them should dye, and whether live;
Are you content?

Pal. I am.


Phi. And so am I
ready for her either to live or dye.

The. Bring her forth then, with all the ceremonies
requisite in so dire a Sacrifice,
All the Nymphs in mourning accompaning her,
The fatal Axe and Executioner
Before her, and (the whilst they go along)
The Chorus singing of her Funeral Song.

The Song, sung whilst the Nymphs put on their mourning Veils. Oh! Oh! Oh! Oh!
Never was there greater woe,
Let us all the habits borrow,
And the face of grief and sorrow;
Who'd not spare a sigh nor tear
From all mishaps to spend it here!
Enter Bellinda veiled, brought in by Polydor, the Popa, or sacred Executioner
before her, all the Nymphs weeping, etc. Ev. Wherefore this ceremony, since
she is not to dye?


Di. Only for terror and formality.


Th. Come, -- thus I unveil thy eyes, that thou may see
Unto what misery and calamity
T'hast brought thy self and us, and thus uncharm
Thy tongue, the fatal cause of all this harm.

Bell. What means these sable weeds and mourning cheer?
Whilst not a face but wears death's Livery here!

Th. It Is all for thee, (unhappy Nymph) put on,
That thou shud'st dye so untimely, and so young.

Bell. I understand you not, nor can I fear
Death, whilst my dearest life, Philander's here.

Pal. How Is this?


She goes to embrace Philander, and he turns away Ev. This is more strange then
the other!


Bell. Ha!
Philander prove unkind! nay, then away
With the fatal Axe and Executioner,
And all these deadly preparations here,
They need not now; one unkind look or two
Of his, can kill me sooner then they can do.

The. It is thy falsehood and perfidity,
(Unfortunate Nymph) that kills thee, and not he;
Whilst falsely and perfidiously you swore,
You loved one here, being betroath'd before
unto another.

Bell. How! I never did swear,
That I loved any but Philander here!

Pal. Oh killing declaration!


The. That cant't be.
For as for him, all Cyprus knows that he
Arrived not here, till after you were enclosed
In The facred Cell, and separated from
All conversation; in the mean time your tongue
Charmed silent, and Eyes blinded as they were,
How could you see or know that he was here?

Bell. Love is a fire, and there needs no eye,
But only heat to tell when fire is nigh;
And Lovers by their glowing bosoms know
When those are near they love: but lest this now
Might seem too mystical, to make it more clear,
As in the Temple I came forth to swear,
I heard his voice, and swounding instantly
For joy to hear it, whilst officiously
They lifted up my Veil to give me air,
I glanced my eyes aside, and saw him there,

The. Can any thing be more clear?


Pol. Or any more
Deceived in judgment, then we were before?

Am. Did I not tell you she was innocent, I?


Bell. Yet can you doubt my faith and constancy?


Phi. No, but I doubt whet'r yet I wake or dream,
My ecstasy and joy is so extreme.

They embrace. Ev. See how they stand so ravished with delight,
And so transported each in to others sight,
'T can scarcely be conceived by humane breast,
Much less by humane tongue can be expressed.

Th. Disturb them not, -- and now a word with you
Palemon.

Fi. Now Love grant my hopes be true.


Bell. Co'd you be jealous of me?


Phi. Dearest know,
I should not love so dearly as I do,
Were I not jealous; for jealousy
'S but scorching of Loves fire, and he should be
But a cold Lover, who sometimes at least
Felt not a little of it in his breast.

The. Come, come, I here command you to restore
That heart unto her, you took from her before;
For all the Isle knows 'twas Filena, who
Enkindled the first sparks of Love in you;
Till (haplesly for both) Bellinda came,
And after raised those sparks unto a flame,
And holy Vestals never with greater care
Preserve their fires, then we Loves fire's air,
Enkindling one straight in another room.

Pal. In tepid hearths fires kindle not so soon.


The. Call not that tepid, where late such a fire
Did burn, never any in Cyprus flamed higher.

Pal. But Loves fires once extinguished, leave hearts more
Tepid, and cold then e're they were before.

The. Come, don't dispute, for I Am to be obeyed,
And now but look upon this gentle maid,
And tell me truly, did you ever see
A fairer, or a sweeter Nymph then she!
One for whose love there is not a gentle Swain
In all the Land, but sighs, and sighs in vain;
And she to love you, and to love you so,
She willingly would dye for love of you:
What cleansing water, or what purging flame
Can expiate your not loving her again?

Fi. Fall all the fault on this devoted head,
Rather then blame him for it, would I were dead;
It Is my unworthiness, and no fault of his,
He does not love, if any fault there is.

The. Yet (obstinate as you are) are you not moved
To love again where you are so dearly loved?

Pal. These vaults and walls built for eternity,
Love's Temple shall be sooner moved then I:

The. Nay then it is needful we apply I see
Our utmost and extremest remedy,
Lest the contagion of the example should
Nourish bad humors, and corrupt the good:)
Let him to the desert Island straight be led
Whither all Loves Rebels are banished.

Pal. Unto what place so e're I am confined,
I may change place, but cannot change my mind:
But stay! what sudden earthquakes this I feel,
Makes the walls totter, and foundations reel
of the Temple here!

The. It Is well, it is a good sign,
Love who moves stones will move that heart of thine,
More hard then they -- and see O wondrous sight!
The Temples filled with unaccustomed light;
And love with flaming brand amidst it flies,
Illuminating with it all the skies:
Now (rebel as thou art) thou soon shall know
Whether Love's God have any power or no.

Pal. Just as some gentle gale does fan the fire,
There Is somewhat here within that does inspire
My breast, and now't increases more and more,
Till that which only was a spark before
Does by degrees so mighty a flame become,
As I am all but one incendium!
O Love, to whom all bosoms must submit,
I feel thy mighty hand, and reverence it!

The. Just so Phoebus, the Delphick God inspires,
The Pythonesses breast with sacred fires,
Only the God of Love more mildly burns,
And 'stead of raging unto sweetness turns.

Chorus sings. So gentle Love does all command
In fire and water, air and land,
And all with his commands inspire
In Land and water, air and fire.

Pal. And can you pardon me?


Fi. I can pardon any thing
in my Palemon, but only his doubting
whether I can or no. And for the rest,
Account my self by Love most highly blessed,
(Who pays debts best the longer he forbears)
To Have all my morning sighs and evening tears,
My daily griefs and nightly sorrows past,
Rewarded thus abundantly at last.

They embrace. Pal. My dear Filena.


Fi. My dearest, dearest Palemon.


The. Enough, enough, leave your embraces till
At fitter season you may take your fill
Of such delicious pleasures and contents,
Such sweet delights, such joys and ravishments,
No heart can e're conceive, no tongue express
The thousandth part of their deliciousness. --
To Phi. and Bell. Now see and wonder, these are Lovers too,
This is the least of miracles Love can do.

Phi. Noble Palemon, I congratulate
Your and the fair Filena's happy fate:

Pal. And I, noble Philander, rejoice no less
At your and fair Bellinda's happiness.

The. Never was more abundant joy, and now
To the paradise of happy Lovers go,
Where with redoubled flames Love's God does prove
Whose hearts are most capacious of love:
And then with all becoming rites and state,
When once your marriages are celebrate;
Philander you, and fair Bellinda may
At your best pleasure either go or stay.

Exeunt. Manet Evander, to whom Pamphilus enters: Pam. And what shall we do?


Evan. I for my part, since
there is so much joy and happiness
in marriage, resolve first to go home
and dispose of all I have, and after come
and marry here.

Pam. Promise you so will not I,
if there be no wenches
nor wenching businesses here,
it is no place for me; wherefore my word is,
Come here no more.

Ev. And mine is, Come again.


Pam. I Am sure I shall have the greatest part
of my opinion.

Ev. And I all the nobler and the better --
And now let us see which number is the greater.

FINIS.
Filena's Song, of the commutation of Love's and Death's Darts.
In the narrative Style.
LOve and Death of the way once meeting,
Having past a friendly greeting:
Sleep their weary Eyelids closing,
Lay them down themselves reposing.
Love whom diverse cares molested,
Could not sleep, but while Death rested,
All in haste away he posts him,
But his haste full dearly costs him:
For it chanced that going to sleeping
Both did give their darts in keeping
Unto Night, who Errors mother,
Blindly knowing not one from the other,
Gave Love Death's, and never perceived it,
Whilst as blindely Love received it;
Since which time their Darts confounding,
Love now kills instead of wounding:
Death our hearts with sweetness filling,
Gently wounds instead of killing.
Another Song.
CElia weeps, and those fair eyes
Which sparkling Diamonds were before,
Whose precious brightness none could prize,
Dissolves into a pearly shower.
Celia smiles, and straight does render
Her fair Eyes Diamonds again,
Which after shine with greater splendour,
As the Sun does after rain.
Now if the reason you would know,
Why Pearls and Diamonds fall and rise;
Their prices just go high or low,
As they are worn in Celia's Eyes.
FINIS.
A Short DISCOURSE OF THE English Stage.

A SHORT DISCOURSE OF THE English Stage.
To his Excellency, the Lord Marquess of NEW CASTLE.
My Noble Lord,
I Send your Excellency here a short Discourse of the English Stage, (which if
you pleased you could far better treat of then my self) but before I begin it,
I will speak a word or two of those of other Countries.

About the midst of the last Century, Plays, after a long discontinuance, and
civil death in a manner, began to be revived again, first in Italy by Guarino,
Tasso, de Porta, and others; and afterward in Spain by Lopes de Vega; the
French beginning later by reason of their Civil Wars, Cardinal Richlieu being
the first that brought them into that Vouge and Esteem as now they are; well
knowing how much the Acting noble and heroic Plays, conferred to the
instilling a noble and heroic Spirit into the Nation. For us, we began before
them, and if since they seem to have out-stript us, it is because our Stage has
stood at a stand this many years; nor may we doubt, but now we shall soon
outstrip them again, if we hold on but as we begin. Of the Dutch I speak
nothing, because they are but slow, and follow other Nations only afar off:
But to return unto our present subject.

Plays (which so flourisht amongst the Greeks, and afterward amongst the
Romans) were almost wholly abolished when their Empire was first converted to
Christianity, and their Theaters, together with their Temples, for the most
part, demolished as Relics of Paganism, some few only reserved and dedicate
to the service of the True God, as they had been to their false gods before;
from which time to the last Age, they Acted nothing here, but Plays of the
holy Scripture, or Saints Lives; and that without any certain Theaters or set
Companies, till about the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, they began here
to assemble into Companies, and set up Theaters, first in the City, (as in the
Innyards of the Cross-Keyes, and Bull in Grace and Bishops-Gate Street at this
day is to be seen) till that Fanatic Spirit which then began with the Stage,
and after ended with the Throne, banished them thence into the Suburbs, as after
they did the Kingdom, in the beginning of our Civil Wars. In which time, Plays
were so little incompatible with Religion, and the Theater with the Church, as
on Week-dayes after Vespers, both the Children of the Chapel and St. Paul's,
Acted Plays, the one in White-Friers, the other behind the Convocation-house
in Paul's, till people growing more precise, and Plays more licentious, the
Theater of Paul's was quite suppressed, and that of the Children of the Chapel,
converted to the use of the Children of the Revels.

In this time were Poets and Actors in their greatest flourish, Johnson,
Shakespeare, with Beaumont and Fletcher their Poets, and Field and Burbidge
their Actors.

For Plays, Shakespeare was one of the first, who inverted the Dramatick Style,
from dull History to quick Comedy, upon whom Johnson refined; as Beaumont and
Fletcher first writ in the Heroic way, upon whom Suckling and others
endeavored to refine again* one saying wittily of his Aglaura, that 'twas full
of fine flowers, but they seemed rather stuck, then growing there; as another
of Shakespeare's writings, that 'twas a fine Garden, but it wanted weeding.

There are few of our English Plays (excepting only some few of Iohnsons)
without some faults or other; and if the French have fewer then our English,
it is because they confine themselves to narrower limits, and consequently have
less liberty to err.

The chief faults of ours, are our huddling too much matter together, and
making them too long and intricate; we imagining we never have intrigue enough,
till we lose our selves and Auditors, who should be led in a Maze, but not a
Mist; and through turning and winding ways, but so still, as they may find
their way at last.

A good Play should be like a good stuff, closely and evenly wrought, without
any breaks, thrums, or loose ends in 'um, or like a good Picture well painted
and designed; the Plot or Contrivement, the Design, the Writing, the Coloris,
and Counterplot, the Shaddowings, with other Embellishments: or finally, it
should be like a well contrived Garden, cast into its Walks and Counterwalks,
betwixt an Alley and a Wilderness, neither too plain, nor too confused. Of all
Arts, that of the Dramatick Poet is the most difficult and most subject to
censure; for in all others, they write only of some particular subject, as the
Mathematician of Mathematics, or Philosopher of Philosophy; but in that, the
Poet must write of every thing, and every one undertakes to judge of it.

A Dramatick Poet is to the Stage as a Pilot to the Ship; and to the Actors, as
an Architect to the Builders, or Master to his Scholars: he is to be a good
moral Philosopher, but yet more learned in Men then Books. He is to be a wise,
as well as a witty Man, and a good man, as well as a good Poet; and I Would allow
him to be so far a good fellow too, to take a cheerful cup to whet his wits, so
he take not so much to dull 'um, and whet 'um quite away.

To compare our English Dramatick Poets together (without taxing them)
Shakespeare excelled in a natural Vein, Fletcher in Wit, and Johnson in Gravity
and ponderousness of Style; whose only fault was, he was too elaborate; and
had he mixed less erudition with his Plays, they had been more pleasant and
delightful then they are. Comparing him with Shakespeare, you shall see the
difference betwixt Nature and Art; and with Fletcher, the difference betwixt
Wit and Judgment: Wit being an exuberant thing, like Nilus, never more
commendable then when it overflowes; but Judgment a stayed and reposed thing,
always containing it self within its bounds and limits.

Beaumont and Fletcher were excellent in their kind, but they often erred
against Decorum, seldom representing a valiant man without somewhat of the
Braggadoccio, nor an honorable woman without somewhat of Dol Common in her: to
say nothing of their irreverent representing Kings persons on the Stage, who
should never be represented, but with Reverence: Besides, Fletcher was the first
who introduc't that witty obscenity in his Plays, which like poison infused in
pleasant liquor, is always the more dangerous the more delightful. And here to
speak a word or two of Wit, it is the spirit and quintessence of speech,
extracted out of the substance of the thing we speak of, having nothing of the
superfice, or dross of words (as clenches, quibbles, gingles, and such like
trifles have) it is that, in pleasant and facetious discourse, as Eloquence is
in grave and serious; not learnt by Art and Precept, but Nature and Company.
It Is in vain to say any more of it; for if I could tell you what it were, it
would not be what it is; being somewhat above expression, and such a volatile
thing, as it is altogether as volatile to describe.

It was the happiness of the Actors of those Times to have such Poets as these
to instruct them, and write for them; and no less of those Poets to have such
docile and excellent Actors to Act their Plays, as a Field and Burbidge; of
whom we may say, that he was a delightful Proteus, so wholly transforming
himself into his Part, and putting off himself with his Clothes, as he never
(not so much as in the Tyring-house) assumed himself again until the Play was
done: there being as much difference betwixt him and one of our common Actors,
as between a Balladsinger who only mouths it, and an excellent singer, who
knows all his Graces, and can artfully vary and modulate his Voice, even to
know how much breath he is to give to every syllable. He had all the parts of
an excellent Orator, (animating his words with speaking, and Speech with
Action) his Auditors being never more delighted then when he spoke, nor more
sorry then when he held his peace; yet even then, he was an excellent Actor
still, never falling in his Part when he had done speaking; but with his looks
and gesture, maintaining it still unto the height, he imagining Age quod agis,
only spoke to him: so as those who call him a Player do him wrong, no man
being less idle then he, whose whole life is nothing else but action; with only
this difference from other men's, that as what is but a Play to them, is his
Business; so their business is but a play to him.

Now, for the difference betwixt our Theaters and those of former times, they
were but plain and simple, with no other Scenes, nor Decorations of the Stage,
but only old Tapestry, and the Stage strewn with Rushes, (with their Habits
accordingly) whereas ours now for cost and ornament are arrived to the height
of Magnificence; but that which makes our Stage the better, makes our Plays
the worse perhaps, they striving now to make them more for sight, then hearing;
whence that solid joy of the interior is lost, and that benefit which men
formerly received from Plays, from which they seldom or never went away, but
far better and wiser then they came.

The Stage being a harmless and innocent Recreation; where the mind is
recreated and delighted, and that Ludus Literarum, or School of good Language
and Behavior, that makes Youth soonest Man, and man soonest good and virtuous,
by joining example to precept, and the pleasure of seeing to that of hearing.
Its chiefest end is, to render Folly ridiculous, Vice odious, and Virtue and
Nobleness so amiable and lovely, as, every one should be delighted and
enamoured with it; from which when it deflects; as, corruption optimi pessima:
of the best it becomes the worst of Recreations. And this his Majesty well
understood, when after his happy Restoration, he took such care to purge it
from all vice and obscenity; and would to God he had found all bodies and
humors as apt and easy to be purged and reformed as that.

For Scenes and Machines they are no new invention, our Masks and some of our
Plays in former times (though not so ordinary) having had as good or rather
better then any we have now.

They are excellent helps of imagination, most grateful deceptions of the
sight, and graceful and becoming Ornaments of the Stage, transporting you
easily without lassitude from one place to another; or rather by a kind of
delightful Magic, whilst you sit still, does bring the place to you. Of this
curious Art the Italians (this latter age) are the greatest masters, the French
good proficients, and we in England only Scholars and Learners yet, having
proceeded no further then to bare painting, and not arrived to the stupendous
wonders of your great Ingeniers, especially not knowing yet how to place our
Lights, for the more advantage and illuminating of the Scenes.

And thus much suffices it briefly to have said of all that concerns our Modern
Stage, only to give others occasion to say more.

FINIS.

