THE Life and Death OF THE B. VIRGIN: Giving an Account of the MIRACLES
Ascribed to Her by Romish Writers.

WITH THE Grounds of the Worship paid to Her.

By a Lay Hand.

Imprimatur.

H. MAVRICE.

June 7. 1687.

LONDON: Printed and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall,
1688.

AN ACCOUNT OF THE Life and Death OF THE Blessed Virgin.
ALL the Service that is paid to the Blessed Virgin, is founded (as they love
to speak) upon the greatnesses of Mary, i. e. upon the glorious Privileges she
received from God in her Conception, Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection, and
pretended Assumption. Of these her Greatnesses we find no mention at all in
Holy Scripture, and I am persuaded there is some mystery and secret reason of
Divine Providence in the silence of the Evangelists, who tell us nothing of the
Birth, the Life or death of the Mother of Jesus Christ, she appears but in four
or five passages of the Gospel, from the birth of our Savior; and even some of
them are such, as make not much for her greatness. Such, for example, is that
which happened at the Marriage in Cana of Galilee, where undertaking to inform
our Lord there was no more Wine left to entertain the Guests, she received an
Answer, to our thinking, very hard: Woman, what have I to do with thee? mine
hour is not yet come. And like to this is that other passage of the Gospel,
where she stood without with his Brethren, with purpose he should come and
speak with her. But to those who brought the Message, he returned this Answer,
Who is my Mother, and who are my Brethren? and went not, that we know of. This
does not very well agree with that profound Respect, and reverend manner of
Deportment, with which (they say) he treats her now in Heaven. This silence of
the Evangelists, proceeds, unquestionably, from the same reason, for which it
pleased God to conceal the Body of Moses heretofore; to wit, that the
Israelites might not find it out, and make an Idol of it. So God was pleased
the Evangelists should say no more of her, than was necessary to teach us the
Mystery of the Incarnation; that Men might not (with any show of reason) Father
on his word, those horrible Superstitions which he foresaw and knew Papism and
false Devotion, would one day introduce into the World.

But the Evangelists have got nothing by this their Silence of the Birth, the
Life and Death of Mary. We know them very well without their help. We have
divined and discovered all. God knows how, indeed, but so it is, we have a
complete History of the whole. It Is true, it is so fabulous, and in some places
so shameless, that even the Legends of Latona, Mother of Apollo and Diana, or
of Rhea, called the Mother of the Gods, cannot possibly be more. In the design
of making her a Goddess, and allotting her a Worship, very near to that we pay
to Jesus Christ, there is nothing great and considerable in the Birth and Death
of our Lord, the Son, that Papism has forgot to imitate and attribute to the
Mother, excepting that they have not dared, as yet, to say, She was conceived
of the Holy Ghost. Let us therefore see a short Abridgment of this Legend,
which the Greeks (who were always notable Men at Invention) first began, and to
which the Latins (scorning to stay behind) put the finishing hand.

First then, we have happily learned, (but you must not ask me how, or from
whom,) that the Father of the Blessed Virgin's Name was Joachim, who was of the
Royal Line, her Mothers, Ann. Which Ann had two Baronius in apparatu Annal.
Sisters, the one called Mary, and the other Soba, all three Daughters of Matan
the Priest; for it was necessary that the Royal and the Priestly Line should
concenter and meet in her, who was to bring forth him, who is our Priest and
King. From Epiphanius's time, Joachim Haeres. 78. 79.
and Ann, have gone for the Father and Mother of the Blessed Virgin: But
Revelation (like a Snow-ball) still goes on increasing, and we have found,
since John Damascene's J. Damascen. l. 14. de Orthod. fide. cap. 15.
time, who lived in the Eighth Century, that this Joachim was the Son of one
Barpanther, who was the Son of Panther. It Is true, these Names are not usually
found among the Jewish Genealogies, nor are of Hebrew extract; but what was
that to John Damascene, who neither understood a word of Hebrew, nor thought
himself obliged to such exactness? We are also told, to Niceph. lib. 2. cap. 3.
whom the Sisters of this Ann were married, and also what Children they had.
Mary, the Eldest, was married in the Town of Bethlehem, and was the Mother of
Salone the Midwife. Soba, that was the second Sister was the Mother of
Elizabeth the Mother of John Baptist, and Cousin German to the Virgin Mary.

Aun, the Wife of Joachim, that was to be the Mother of the Mother of the
Savior of the World (the Mother, I say, of her that was to be called our
Goddess, our Redeemeress, our Comfortress, (for strange things, you know, must
have strange Names) our Advocate, our Refuge, the Salvation of Christians, the
Perfection of the Divinity and Trinity) received all manner of Tokens of the
future Greatness of the Child she was to bring into the World. She was Barren
many years after her Marriage, and because they could not find in whom the
fault lay, they were both of them cruelly ashamed; and the High Priest Isachar
rejected the Offerings of Joachim, as of a dry and cursed Tree, saying to him
with Indignation, Cursed is every one that begets not a Male Child in
Israel. Baronius (that understood these things too well, not to know
Pseudo-Hieronym. ad Heliod. and Chromat.
that no such Man as. Isachar was at that time High Priest, and that they did
not use to reject the Offerings of such Men as had barren Wives,) durst not
adopt this passage of the story, although he does the rest. But till his time,
none ever dared to call this History into question, but it went for certain an
undoubted truth, upon the pretended Authority of St. Jerome. They add
farthermore, that Joachim, covered with confusion for the affront the High
Priest had offered him, resolved never to go home again; and that Ann, deprived
of the comfort of her Husband, betook herself to her Prayers, that God would
please to send him back, and to take away this her reproach. And hereupon it
was, that Bernardin de Mariate Part 2. Ser. 3. Pelbart. de Temeswar. in
Stellario l. 1. part. 1. c. 11.
Bustis made that pious and ingenious Application of the words of Moses, to
Joachim, and Ann. In the beginning God made Heaven and Earth: By Heaven (says
he) we must understand the Virgin Mary, the Lady of the World. And God said,
Let there be Light: That is (says he) Let Mary be begotten, and be born. Poor
Joachim, overwhelmed with grief, went and hid himself in the Wilderness, where
continuing forty days in Prayer and Fasting, an Angel at last appeared to him,
and promised him the Birth of Mary, giving him this for a Token, that in going
home, he should meet his Wife at a certain Gate of Jerusalem, called the Gilded
Gato. Ann at the same time pouring forth her Prayers and Tears, was got into
the Holy of Holies, to get as near as she could to the Throne of God. Indeed,
no Woman yet had entered into that Sacred Place, and even among Men, it was the
privilege of the High Priest alone to do it, and that but once a Year, on the
great Feast of Propitiations. But what might not she do, who was to be the
Mother of the Virgin? And who should have dared to shat the door against her?
Hither then the Angel came, and declared to her the Birth of Mary, and ordered
her to go and meet her Husband in such a place: It was the Angel Gabriel that
performed this Office, as Bernardin de Bustis, and Batholomew of Pisa, Authors
of sovereign and unquestionable Authority, both assure us: Who add moreover,
That he received this Commission of God with Joy incredible; and that returning
into Heaven, the whole Quire of Angels set themselves to Dance and Sing for
Joy, having learned of him the approaching Birth of Mary, who was to be their
Queen.

Hitherto the Virgin, and our Lord, are on the square, each of their Births
annunciated by an Angel. Her Conception, in the next place, was alike
Miraculous; for, (besides that Joachim and Ann, were both of them past the age
of having Children) it was Immaculate, i. e. Mary also, as well as Jesus, was
Conceived without Original Sin. The Church knew nothing of this Mystery, for
Eleven or Twelve hundred Years, when certain lazy Canons of Lions set
themselves to invent this Fancy, whom St. Bernard labored to Confound, Ep.
174. ad Can. Lugd.
but without any great success. The devotion to the Virgin daily increasing, it
was found very convenient She should be exempted from the Law, common to all
the Children of Adam. It Is true indeed, that all the Fathers, St. Augustine,
Ambrose, Chrysostom, Remigius, and the rest, were of another opinion, as
Melchior Canus, the Learned Bishop of the Canaries, proves, from their
Citations: But we are to appeal, it seems, from them, as incompetent Judges in
this Case, though their Authority be very good in any other. The Jesuit
Salmeron, In Eq. ad Roman. cap. 5. ^ Disput. 51.
does all he can, to Invalidate their Testimony and Authority. He says, That
Proofs drawn from Authority, are not altogether sure: That the greatest part of
Fathers, cited against the Immaculate Conception, deserve not to be heard; and
that, at last however, God had not revealed all things to all Men: That the
Fathers were Ignorant of this great truth, the revelation of which was reserved
for these latter Ages of the World.

This is no place to give you an account of the terrible Bickerings there have
been, upon this score, for many Ages, and even in this of ours, between the
Jacobins, and Cordeliers, i. e. Dominicans, and Franciscans. The former
maintaining, with Thomas Aquinas, that the Virgin was conceived in Original
Sin: The latter, with Scotus, that She was conceived without. And although the
Popes have never formally and in express words, decreed it to be an Article of
Faith, yet they have defined it as a Truth, which no Man can oppose without
great Rashness. And it had been forbid to the Dominicans, to Preach, deliver
their Opinion, or Teach in public or private, directly or indirectly, any
thing against the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin, since which the worship
of Her has exceedingly increased; every Body almost has chosen Her for their
Patroness, and whole Kingdoms have put themselves into Her Protection.

Nor is this a place to refute this Extravagance in, although it very well
deserves to be refuted, since it smells strongly of Profaneness, in that it
deprives our Savior of the Honor and Advantage of having been the only One
that was Conceived without Sin; and of being the Redeemer of the World without
Exception. For if the Blessed Virgin was without both Actual, and Original Sin,
I do not see how She stood in need of either Remission, or Redemption, and She
contributed nothing to Her self, or to Her own Salvation, by bring ing Jesus
Christ into the World.

We must not here forget, that Papism, agreeable to the spirit of Error by which
it stands, has not failed to heap Fable upon Fable, and to establish this
Immaculate Conception, by many a lying Miracle, and many a false Vision. Saint
Briget has defined this Controversy many a time and often, and the Virgin Mother
has revealed it to her frequently, that She was Conceived without Original Sin,
and many Miracles have been wrought to that purpose. But that which is as
pretty, is, that the Dominicans have also had their Saint and 5 Book. Rev. the
13. and Book 6. cap. 49. Tom. 2. O. pus^. Tract. 31. c. 5.
Prophetess, to maintain She was conceived in Original Sin, and that was
Catharine of Siena, whose Revelation is upheld by Cardinal Cajetan, as much
more Creditable than that of Briget; for that Catharine had been Canonized in
due and formal manner, when there was a lawful Pope, and so acknowledged over
all the World, whereas Briget was Canonized by Benet the IX. Plus the II.
in a time of Schism, when no body knew who was the true Pope, or whether there
was any such at all.

The Dominicans not contented with St. Catharine's Revelation, would also have
some Miracles to establish their Opinion on; and I believe there are few in the
1507.
World, that have not heard of the famous History of the Dominicans of Bearn,
(and here in England, by the name of the History of Jetser) who took upon them
to prove by Miracles, the Conception of the Virgin, to have been in Sin,
against the Cordeliers. Four of these Men, undertook to deceive and cheat a
wretched simp^e Novice of their Convent; and one of them appeared to him like a
Spirit, telling him, that the Order of Dominicans was most unjustly hated,
because i^ taught after St. Thomas, that the Virgin Mary was Conceived in
Original Sin: but that their Enemies the Franciscans, were sufficiently
tormented in Purgatory, and especially among the rest, Alexand^r of Hales, and
John Duns Scotus, for teaching the contrary: The Virgin Mary her self in like
manner appeared to him, (that is to say, a ^ryar in her Habit) and Imprinted on
his Right Hand (by way of Vision) one of the Wounds of our Lord, her Son, which
the Monk (without a Vision) did really and indeed feel, to his very great pain;
and very well he might, for the Virgin-Monk had pierced his Hand through with a
great Nail. But in wounding him She gave him some Lint, and Rags made of our
Saviors Swadling-bands whilst they abode in Egypt, and assured him from her
own self, that She was Born in Original Sin. But the Monks, not satisfied with
this, gave to our young Novice, (who was indeed a very stupid Block-head) a
mighty strong sleeping Potion, which deprived him of all manner of Sense, and
Understanding, and in this Fit, imprinted other four Wounds upon his Feet, his
Hand and Side, with Aqua Fortis, to imitate the Wounds of our Savior, and the
Marks of St. Francis. Being come to himself, they made him believe, he had been
in an Ecstasy, during which the Blessed Spirit had imprinted on him these four
new Wounds. They gave him also very frequently strange Drinks to make him Foam,
and struggle against Death, as Jesus Christ had done before him. Hitherto the
poor Wretch had never doubted of the truth of all this, but believed in good
earnest, that he had had true Visions from Heaven, and Apparitions of the
Virgin. But now at last, began to suspect there must be some Enchantments,
Witchcraft, and Illusion in the case; and therefore (after he had been thus
Martyred several Months) makes his escape from the Convent, to the Magistrates,
where he discovered all the Mystery. Langius a Monk, in his Chronicle, in the
Year 1509. adds, That they made an Image of the Virgin, and filled the Head of
it with some red Liquor, which distilling from the Eyes, She was reputed
thereby to weep Blood. They colored also an Host with Vermilion, and
Flesh-colors, as though it had been turned into Flesh; and all this to persuade
the World, their Doctrine of the Conception, was true. Four of the Dominicans
were hereupon seized, Francis Vulchi, that counterfeited the Spirit; Stephen
Boltzhorst Preacher, whose Office was to vent these Visions in the Pulpit, with
J. Vetter, Prior of the House, and H. Stenieker, Receiver; who were all Burnt
over against the Convent, in the Year aforesaid. This Story did not serve a
little, toward the disabusing of the Switzers, some time after, when they
reformed themselves, in matters of Religion.

The Monks, to whom Heaven, in these latter days, revealed the notable
Circumstance of the Immaculate Conception, have also, by the same Spirit of
Revelation, learnt the very day when it was. It was on the eighth of December,
and She was brought forth the Her Birth.
eighth of September following; this we know, because we know what Age the
Virgin was of when She lay Inn of our Savior: And knowing precisely the Year
of our Lord, we know also the Year of his Mothers Birth. Not that the Gospel
says a letter of her Age, but that is all one. We have found it in Nicephorus
Lib. 2. c. 2. ex Enodo Antiochedo.
Callistus, an Author that may compare with any Legendary in the World, and
who, by consequence, shall have as much Credit as a true Evangelist. We have
found, I say, in this Historian, that the Virgin was just Fifteen, when She
brought forth Jesus Christ. She was Born at Jerusalem, in Joachims own House,
that stood pretty near to the Pool of Bethesda, of which St. John, in the 5th.
of his Gospel makes mention. For so says our old Friend, J. Damascen, who was
Sainted L. 4. c. 5. de Orth. fide and Orat. 1. de Not. Virg.
for having been a Martyr for the Worship of the Virgins Images. Others (and
Tostatus for one, on Mat. 2.) say, She was Born at Nazareth, or Seppharo, Three
Leagues from thence; but where ever it was, it is certain, that the whole
Universe was moved at it: The Angels (as they did some time after for the Son)
Descended in Troops from Heaven, chanting out Hymns, and most Melodious Songs,
in honor of the Spouse of their Eternal King. The little holy Maid her self,
(having the use of her Reason as soon as She was Born) found also mighty
Consolation, and exceeding great Pleasure in it. And, which is a greater Wonder
yet, Pelbart^ Stellarium lib. 5. part. 1. art. 3.
this Heavenly Melody is every Year repeated, on the same day. And by this
Music, the day of her Birth, which had long been undiscovered, came to be
revealed, to a very Contemplative Saint, who had heard this Music every 8th.
of September, and wondered what the matter was; (as a Wiser Man than he, might
very well do) and therefore on a time, in one of his Rapture Fits, begged of
God, that he would reveal this matter to him; and was answered, that on this
day, the Glorious Virgin was Born; and thus has the Mother gotten the start of
her Son. She was even with him, in having Armies of Celestial Spirits to
celebrate the day of her Birth; but this yearly Repetition of the Angels
Harmony, has given Her the advantage: For I don't know any Book that says, they
do as much for Jesus Christ.

It may be, some Devoto of the Virgin, jealous of the glory of his Queen, may
find something less in the Birth of Mary, than in that of Jesus Christ, because
he hears of no new Star, that accompanied her Birth, as one did his. But this
only serves to betray his want of reading; for had he seen but one Theophilus,
a certain Historian (of whose Age and Authority, it would be to no purpose to
inquire, for no body can give you an account, but however of very good Credit
in this Case); he could have told him, that on the Birthday of the Virgin, the
Light of the Sun was doubled; that the Moon received such an augmentation of
Light, that she seemed almost to equalize the Sun, so that the little Cloud
that is wont to obscure her, disappeared on the night of this Nativity; and
round her Globe shone (as it were) a great Star, of an extraordinary Fire, and
Luster.

I think, this was another kind of Star, than that which appeared to the Wise
Men in the East, which seemed to be but a pitiful flying Meteor in the Air, in
comparison with this. An Angel gave the Name of Jesus before the Child was
born, and an Angel did as much for Her, and the name of Mary was of Heavens
choice; and it was also Mystical as well as that of Jesus, for Mary, or Miriam,
in the Hebrew, signifies the Star of the Sea. Not that any Jew, or Rabbi, how
profound soever, ever understood this Etymology, but that it was revealed to
our Legendaries so to signify; that by virtue of it, she might succeed to
Venus, who was the Morning Star before, and President of the Sea, having a kind
of right thereto, by Her extraction from the Froth of it: For, as Salmeron the
Jesuit says, as Tome 3. Tract. 4.
the Star that is called Hesperus, and Lucifer, directs and conducts the
Sailers to the Port, so the Mother of Messiah succors us in all our Dangers,
that we may arrive at the Port of the Grace of God, and Life Eternal. Common
Seamen have another kind of opinion of her Power, in respect of Ports and
Havens, in this World too.

After the Birth, next comes her Education in her Niceph. l. 1. cap. 7. Damasc.
ubi supra. Cermanes Constable. in Encomio B. Virginis.
tenderest years, the Scriptures say nothing of this neither, but we have lost
nothing by that, for we learn elsewhere. That Ann, to obtain her of God, had,
as Hannah heretofore had done for Saemuel, vowed her to his Service: And that
when she was weaned and three Years old, she was presented to the High Priest,
who received her as a precious Jewel, and Lodged her in the Sanctum Sanctorum,
where before stood the Ark of the Covenant, and where he himself alone had
right to enter, once a Year. Zachary, the Father of St. John Baptist, was (it
seems) High Priest, and made no such unnecessary Scruple as these, How should I
introduce a little Girl, into a place where I my self can enter in but once a
year? How can I, in the most sacred and august Partition of the Temple, bring
in a Bed, a Nurse, and little Child, with all that is necessary in such a case?
And what shall become of all the Impurities inseparable from the Infant Age?
But being a Prophet, and knowing the Mystery of all, he received her without
any stickling. Thither she was brought accompanied with troops of Virgins with
slaming Torches in their hands, and there was brought up for eleven years, the
Angels all the while supplying her with nourishment. After eleven years, the
Priests assembled to consult what they should do with this divine Virgin, and
at last concluded, to commit her to the Guardianship of St. Joseph, of whose
virtue and continence they were very well assured. 11 and 3 make 14, and at 14
she was affianc'd to Joseph; 3 months after, the Angel came with the
Salutation, she conceived of the Holy Ghost, and was brought to bed at 15.

An unbelieving Jew, would make a great many odd exceptions to this History, he
would say it was a thing unheard of in the Mystery of Religion, to introduce,
to feed and bring up a Girl in the Holy of Holies, where ordinary Priests
themselves durst never enter. He would tell us that Women, were they never so
pure, were never admitted into the Temple beyond the place called the Women's
Court. He would say, it was very strange the Rabbis and ancient Doctors should
mention no such thing as this, either to recount or refute it. He would add
moreover, that in the Catalogue of High Priests, he could find no such Man as
Zachary, the Father of John Baptist. Indeed, these difficulties have put our
Catholic Costerus Medit. 3. de praesent. Virg.
Doctors to no small trouble; and now they rather choose to say, that round the
Sanctuary there were little Chambers, where Recluses and Religious Maids were
bred up, and worked for the Temple, to whose care the Education of little Mary
was entrusted: But our old devout Gentlemen heretofore, never concerned
themselves with any Scruples or Objections of Unbelievers, but in great
simplicity swallowed all for truth, upon the word and authority of Saints, such
as J. Damasc^n Canonized, and consequently made Infallible, at least by the
tacit consent of the Church. And who can forbear believing a History that has
gotten some twelve hundred years upon his head? For Gregory Nyssen reports
this: And In Natalib. Chr. tom. 3.
though he reports it only as an Apocryphal History, yet the Church has since
made it as good as Canonical, by an universal Belief of it.

The Blessed Virgin consented to live with Joseph, in show of Marriage, but in
effect, in pure Virginity, for she told him secretly, that she had made a Vow
of Chastity, and withal advised him to do so too. But notwithstanding her Vow,
which seemed to determine her never to become a Mother, she quickly after
became so, by the operation of the Holy Ghost. And here, the Doctors are in
great trouble to know, of what it was, that the Virgin conceived, and formed
the Savior of the World. Some believe the Holy Ghost took three drops of her
Heart-blood, and disposed them in their place, to make the Body of our Lord.
Salmeron, though Tome 3. tract. 9.
he reject this Opinion, yet allows it to be a devout religious Contemplation.
But he himself is of another mind, which I cannot give you in his terms, no
more than I can the Opinions of other Authors upon this Occasion, because they
search into the Mysteries of Generation so profoundly and exactly, and examine
them in such a gross and naked manner, that even the chastest and most delicate
Translation of their Latin into English, would not fail to wound (or at least
disorder) our Imagination. It would be worse yet, if I should recite any thing
out of a Book, that was current in the last Age, (and it may be, is in being
now) entitled Proto Evangelium, sive de Natalibus Christi, and ipsius Matris
V. Mariae, and Fathered on St. James. Here we may find enough to make the most
shameless Prostitutes to blush; upon occasion of one Salome a Midwife, who
would not believe a Virgin had brought forth, but would needs be as curious in
her way, as St. Thomas, doubting of the Resurrection, was afterward, in his.
One William P^stell, in the preceding Age, made the discovery of this Horrible
Gospel, God knows whence. But is it not a pretty ready way, to bring the True
and Sacred Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ into contempt?

I will pass (...) all the impertinent tales with which they cha^^ (...) Life
of the Blessed Virgin. The care she took (...) keep the Foreskin of our Lord,
at his Circumcision. The pains she was at to gather all the Blood and Water
that fell from his hands, and feet, and side, upon the Cross; and in
particular, the care she had to keep the Nails that sastened him thereto. I
will pass over all this (I say) and a hundred such like things, to come to the
last and greatest action of all, her Assumption into Heaven, because it is one
of the principal Stories on whcih the Worship of the Blessed Virgin is
established. Thus then the Gentlemen report the matter.

The Blessed Virgin lived upon the Earth after her Pelbart, who lived in the
Year 1471. and dedicated his Book to Pope Sixth. IV.
Son, till she was Fifty Eight years old, as some say; Sixty Three, as others;
and others, more by a great deal. At last she Prayed very earnestly to her Son,
that she might depart from this place of Pilgrimage on Earth, and be gathered
unto him; who thereupon sent an Angel to her, promising that within three days
he would take her to himself. Together with this News, the Angel delivered her
a branch of Palm that he brought from Paradise, and told her, she must have it
carried before her Bier to her Interment; he gave her also a Suit of Mourning
which her Son had sent her. Of this Angel she demanded two things; first, that
she might be buried by all the Apostles. Secondly, that when her Soul departed
from her Body, it might meet with none of the Devils, or Malign Spirits. Upon
which last demand, the Angel said unto her, Madam, why are you afraid to meet
the Devil, whose Head it is that you have bruised? However what you ask, you
shall have: You shall meet with no Devils, and the Noble Apostles shall Inter
you. Upon this the Angel re-ascended into Heaven, environed with a great Light.
And suddenly the branch of Palm that he had brought, and left in the Virgins
hand, became exceeding bright, of a lively shining Green, and every leaf
thereof as glorious as the Morning Star.

To free you from all manner of doubt in this matter, St. Cosmus Vestitor (from
whom honest Pelbert says he took this History,) tells us, he saw himself a
little piece of this Branch, which retained to his days, a luster, equal to a
very bright Star.

The Virgin, full of Joy at this good news, assembled all the Virgins and
Saints together, and gave them to understand her Death was now at hand,
comforting them thereupon. At the same time was St. John the Apostle Preaching
at Ephesus, and in the middle of his Sermon, comes me a clap of Thunder, and a
white Cloud, that whisk'd him through the Air, and set him down at the Door of
the Virgin Mary's House; where being entered, he and the Virgin embraced each
other, with abundance of Tears, and Mary recommended to his care, her Burial.
At which words, the good Apostle threw himself down upon the Earth, and with a
great deal of passion cried out and said, Alas! My God, My God, Why do thou
lay this sore affliction upon us, to take away this Holy Mistress of our
Religion, the Mirror of Sanctity, and our only Consolation? As he was thus
lamenting, the Blessed Virgin showed him the shining Palm, and the Mourning
Suit her Son had sent her, and ordered him to take great care this Branch were
carried before her Bier. St. John desired with all his heart, that all the
Apostles might accompany him at this Solemn Action, and immediately the
Apostles, that were scattered in all the corners of the Earth, were carried
through the Air on white Clouds, and set down before the House, where entering
in, and meeting with St. John, they were marvellously astonished, but after
Salutations, he explained the whole Mystery to them, upon hearing of which,
they were overwhelmed with grief, and entering into Mary's room, adored her, in
the Angels Salutation, saying Ave Maria, gratia plana, etc. to whom the Virgin
replied saying, God preserve you, the chosen Disciples of my only Son. After a
great deal of homage and adoration paid unto her by the Apostles, she received
the Communion, recommended her Spirit to her Son, kneeled down upon the ground,
lift up her Soul to God, and disposed herself to give up the ghost. About the
third hour of the Night, Jesus himself, with the nine Orders of Angels, the
Assembly of Patriarchs, Prophets, Martyrs, Confessors and Virgins, came down
from Heaven, and stood about her Bed, the whole Celestial Army singing Songs
and admirable Hymns to the honor of Mary, Jesus himself beginning, and saying,
Come my chosen, come, and I will place Thee on my Throne. To whom the Virgin
answered, Lo, I come, as it is written in the Volume of the Book, that I should
do thy will, O my God; and the reupon rendered up her Soul into the hands of
her Son, who bore it away with him to Heaven. When the Soul was gone, the Body
made shift of itself to say, I I give thee thanks, O Lord, for that I am thy
glory; remem-Me, because I am the work of thy hands, and have kept what you
committed to my charge; upon which the Body became so luminous, that the Maids
who were preparing it for Burial, and could touch it very well before, could
not so much as look upon it. Now when all things were ready, and the body to be
taken up, the Apostles made abundance of Complements and Ceremonies, offering
the Places of Honor to one another round, with great civility; but at last it
was agreed, that Peter and Paul should carry the Corpse, John should go before
with the Palm, and the rest of the Apostles should folin couples. As they were
going forward, Jesus Christ marched over them, with all his Angels, covered in
a Cloud, and joining Voices with the College of Apostles, they made an
admirable Consort; and at the same time, a most sweet and fragrant Odor was
spread through all the Region of the Air, on all hands.

The Jews at this sight, being filled with rage and malice, thought this a very
fair opportunity to rid their hands at once, of all the Apostles of Jesus
Christ, there met together; and gathering together, the High Priest himself
advances first, and most profanely lays his two hands upon the Bier, to stop
them; when lo! immediately they both withered, and were torn of at the elbows,
and there hung on each side of the Corpse, whilst the rest that followed him,
were struck with blindness. The miserable High Priest made a lamentable howling
for the loss of his hands, and for extreme anguish that he felt. But Peter told
him honestly, there was no way to save himself, but by kissing the Bier where
the Body of Mary lay, and making Profession of the Christian Faith, which he
quickly did, and both his hands were immediately fastened on again. A little
after, Peter gave him one of the Dates that grew on the Branch of Palm, to rubb
his Followers eyes with, who thereupon recovered their sight. And now, without
any further molestation, they were come to the Vale of Jehosophat, where they
found a Sepulcher hewn out of a Rock, and altogether like that of Jesus Christ;
there they laid the Body of the Virgin, and continued three days in their
Devotions at her Tomb. At the end of which, a bright Cloud shone all about the
Sepulcher, the Voices of Angels ecchoed out from every quarter, a sweet
smelling Savor was spread throughout the Air, and all the World was seized
with ravishing astonishment. Jesus descended with his Angels, and having
saluted his Apostles, said unto them, What Glory, and what Honor, think you,
ought I to bestow upon my Mother? To which, with one consent, they answered, It
seems just unto thy Servants, O Lord, that as Thou have vanquished Death, and
reignest from Generation to Generation, so also Thou should raise the Body of
thy Mother, and set her at thy right hand for evermore. The Soul of Mary
presently appeared, and our Lord said to it, Arise my well beloved, the
Tabernacle of Glory, thou art fair, my dear beloved, and there is no blemish in
thee; as thou have no spot, so shall thy Body never see corruption.

And thus were things carried, according to the report of Pelbart of Temeswar,
a grave Author, whom Father Crasset, a Jesuit, has very lately cited abundance
of 1 Part. tr. 1. quaest. 13. page 103.
times, (in his Book of True Devotion to the Virgin, Printed in 1679.) as
worthy thoroughly to be believed; and Pelbart himself tells us, he had them from
the Writings of St. Cosmus Vestitor Othersreport these matters a little
otherwise, in the business of the Virgins Tomb, which (they say) stood open
three days, by reason St. Thomas was absent, who earnestly desired (it would
not be very fair to ask of whom he desired this, or how he came to know she was
dead, but desire he did,) the Consolation of seeing the Body of Mary, which yet
was not granted him, for he came, and found the Sepulcher was empty, and in the
midst of it, a Spring of Manna boiling up.

O God! what face is this, to forge so silly a Romance, for which there is not
in good History, the least foundation? For in a word, in all this Rapsody,
there is not a syllable of Truth: And yet this is the bottom of the Worship and
Adoration paid to the Blessed Virgin, and of the Feast of her Assumption.

It Is not my business to confute this Story of the Assumption, here; let it
suffice, at present, that I advertise you, it was unknown to all the Ancients
for the first four Centuries. That passage in the Chronicle of Eusebius, is
acknowledged by Men of Understanding, to be false and spurious; as likewise are
the Pieces attributed to St. Austin and St. Jerome; together with the false
Dionysius, who wrote between Four and Five Hundred, at the soonest. In a word,
the Men of sense and honesty, even among the Romanists, do at this day look
upon the Assumption, as an idle business, but I must not tell the People so.
The Church of Paris seems to have declared openly against it; for by an
Ordinance of the Cathedral Chapter of Nostre Dame, the First of August 1668, it
was decreed, that such a certain long Sermon, or Homily, that had been read in
the Quire the first Canonical hour, for many years last past, on the Fifteenth
of August, the Feast of the Assumption, every year, should be read no more.
(This Sermon, you must know, established the Assumption both of Body and Soul,
and was added by I cannot tell who, from the Year 1549. or 1550.) and that
henceforwards should be read, what was usually read out of the Martyrology,
taken from Vswardus.

Now the passage in Vswardus, which the Chapter Who lived in the 9th. Cent.
and Bishop of Paris, ordered to be restored to its place, has these words: The
Sleep or Death of Mary, the holy Mother of God. Although her Sacred Body is not
found on Earth, yet the Church, who is a pious Mother, celebrates her blessed
Memory, not doubting in the least, but that She died according to the condition
of all Mankind. But the Church being deliberate in her Judgments, has rather
chosen to own she knows not where this Sacred Temple of the Holy Ghost is
hidden by the Providence of God, than teach any thing herein either Vain or
Apocryphal. These were the words, that were taken from the Service of the Feast
of the Assumption, to thrust in a certain Sermon that taught just contrary;
saying, the Church looked upon the Assumption of the Blessed Virgins body and
soul into Heaven, as a thing very sure and certain. Claudius Joly, Canon of the
Church, and one of the C. Joly ^^verbis Usuardi disse^tatio J. Launoii de
controversia super excribendo Martyrologio.
Commissaries, deputed to Examine this Affair, has made a Dissertation
thereupon. And the Learned Monsieur de Launoy, has given his Judgment on the
same Subject, in whose works one may find enough to confound this Story of the
Assumption, and answer Baronius and the rest, who look upon it as a point of
Faith, or at least a Sacred History, that no body must touch, or offer once to
disbelieve.

What we have hitherto seen of the History of the Blessed Virgin, and on which
the Worship that is paid to Her is founded, is but a little part of the
Chronicle of the Mother of God. She has done more Miracles since her Death,
than Jesus Christ and all his Apostles did in all their Lives, in all the
World; and we have huge great Volumes of them, some of which I cannot forbear
giving you for a taste, because the Worship of the Blessed Virgin is
exceedingly Built, and Established on them, and because they are at this day
thought the efficacious and powerful Arguments to defend their Superstition.
And F. Crasset, a Jesuit of repute, thought^ so to be sure, when in Answer to
the Author of Sober advice to the Indiscreet Devotos of the Virgin -- He makes
this Use of them.

In the number of these Fables, I put the establishment of Places of Devotion,
where the Virgin is particularly Worshipped, where She works great Miracles,
and whither Her Devotos go on Pilgrimage; the reputation I say of these Places,
and their Holiness, is founded on such Fables, as I verily believe Pagans would
blush to own. Such, for Example, is that on which is founded the famous Worship
of our Lady of Mount Serrat. We are told, the first Count of Barcelona had an
exceeding handsome Daughter, but possessed with a Devil, whom the Count one day
carried to a holy Man in the Neighborhood, called Friar John Guerin, to the
end he should exorcise the Devil, and deliver his Daughter: He did so, and for
fear the Devil should return again into her, he advised the Count to leave her
there some little time in his keeping; to which the Count consented, and
accordingly left her. Friar John being alone with this handsome young Lady,
(and not being able to quell his own Devil) became enamoured of her; and in
short, Ravished her first, and afterward Killed her, at the instigation of a
Devil disguised like a Hermit. After this, being guilty of these detestable
Crimes, away he goes to Rome, there confesses himself to the Pope, who ordered
him for Penance, to return to Mount Serrat upon all four, like a Beast as he
was; and not to speak a word, nor offer to get up upon his Legs, till a Child
about three Months old should bid him rise, and tell him God had pardoned his
offense. Seven years after this, the Count of Barcelona was a Hunting, when
some of his Men found out this Friar in a Den, all over hairy like a Bear, whom
they took and Chained, and brought away with them to the Castle of Barcelona,
where he was tied up in a Stable like a Monster. The Count a little after made
a great Feast, and to divert his Company, ordered the Monster to be brought
forth; whom as soon as the Earl's Child saw, that was there in its Nurses Arms,
it said distinctly these words: Rise up upon thy Feet, Friar John Guerin, for
God has pardoned thy Offense. And immediately the Friar came to himself, began
to speak, and tell the whole Story. Upon which the Count told him, that since
God had pardoned him, he could do no less. But however, he desired to know
where he had buried his Daughter, that he might take up her Bones, and bury
them in his Fathers Sepulcher. The good Friar conducted the Count's Servants to
the place where he had Interred the Lady, and opening the Ground, they found
her (Would you think it?) alive and well, as fresh, and as handsome as ever,
excepting a little kind of streak like a Scarlet Thread, about her Neck, in the
place where he had cut. The Maid spoke, and told them she owed her Life to the
Blessed Virgin, to whom she had been Consecrated, and who preserved her (and
indeed it was so) Miraculously. There they built a Convent, of which this young
Lady was the Abbess, and Friar J. Guerin, the Confessor. Near to this place, in
a certain Grotto, was found an Ferreolus Locrius lib. 4. c. 25. Mariae Augustae.
Image of the Blessed Virgin, exceeding bright and luminous, and perfumed with
excellent Sweets, which was discovered by Angels Melody, that were worship ping
it in the Cave; this Image, they that found it, were for carrying away, but
when they came as far as the place where the Lady had been buried, it grew so
heavy on their Hands, that they were glad to leave it there with all their
Hearts. There they built a Chapel over it, although it was a very desert
place, and mighty inconvenient for the Pilgrims resorting thither; and this is
the rise of that famous Chapel, where so many Miracies and famous Things have
been done.

The Devotion of our Lady of Liesse, is founded on a Tale, no less ridiculous
than the former, though it be something less horrible. We are told, that a
certain Princess, Daughter to the Sultan of Egypt, in the time of the Holy
Wars, (the Original of all Romances) came to visit three Gentlemen of Picardy,
that were Prisoners at Grand Cairo, and demanded of them the Picture of the
Blessed Virgin. Not a Man of them understood a bit of Painting, but however one
of them promised her Highness what she required; but being put very hard to
fulfill it, the Virgin delivered them from their Concern, by giving them her
Picture from Heaven her self. The Princess upon this, found means to break
their Prison, and escape with them, and passing an arm of the Sea, they laid
them down to sleep in a Wood, and waking in the Morning, found themselves in
Picardy by a Fountain, where they built the Church of our Lady of Liesse.

But of this kind, there is nothing in the World more Renowned, and at the same
time more Absurd, than the History of the famous Chamber of our Lady of
Loretto. This is the very Chamber of the House of Joachim and Ann, in the City
of Nazareth in Galilee, in which the Virgin Mary was Born. (Our Legendaries
should consult with one another, sometimes, for before we heard She was Born in
Jerusalem, with a great deal of Punctuality.) In this Chamber She received the
Salutation of the Angel, in this Conceived the Savior of the World, and in
this bred Him up till He was Twelve Years of Age. The Apostles, after the Death
of Jesus Christ, observing carefully what a world of Miracles were wrought in
this Chamber, judged it very convenient to build a Chapel there, and Celebrate
the Mysteries in it, that is to say, to sing Mass in it; and Saint Luke the
Evangelist, who was as good a Painter as Physician, drew with his own hand the
Picture of the Virgin, which is there to be seen to this day. This Chapel was
frequented with a great deal of Devotion, whilst the Christians staid in
Galilee, and especially in the time of the Croisades, or holy Wars, but the
Christians being chased away, and the Devotion at this Chamber beginning to
cool apace, the Angels took it on the 9th. of May, in the year, 1291. (says
Turselin, very exactly) and brought it through the Air into Dalmatia, distant
from Galilee about Six thousand Miles; as those who have cast it up tell us,
upon whom let it rest. There the Angels set the Chamber or Chapel down upon a
Hill, in view of the Adriatic Sea, between two Towns, the one called
Tersactum, and the other Flumen. At the first, there was a mighty concourse of
devout People, that came upon the fame of this great Miracle, but their Zeal
continued not; and the Virgin not finding there, the honor she expected,
ordered the Angels a second time to take the Room, and passing the Adriatic
Sea, to Transport it into Italy, and set it down in the Territory of Recanati,
in the midst of a Wood, belonging to a certain Lad^^^ (for without a Woman in
the case, there can be no great Miracle) called Loretta, that owed the Diocese,
or Territory of Recanati; which accordingly they did. This new Miracle of the
second Transportation of the Chamber, rekindled Men's devotion for the Virgin,
and there was old flocking to it from all Quarters, but the Situation of the
Chapel was an occasion of a great many Robberies and Villainies committed on
the poor Pilgrims, by reason that the Woods afforded shelter to the Rogues, who
upon all occasions Sallied out upon them, and retired into the same securely.
The Angels therefore thought it fit, it should be taken from amidst this Wood,
and removed a little farther, to a Mountain that belonged to two Brothers;
which Brothers in a short time, made a very profitable business of it, by the
great resort of Pilgrims, and the rich Presents that were made, but not being
able to agree in the division of the Spoil, the Virgin was very angry, and
thought they were unworthy of the honor She had done them, and therefore
ordered the Angels to transfer it to another place; up then they took it the
fourth time, and set it in the Highway, where now it stands and works such
Miracles. The People of Recanati came to see this Miraculous Room, and finding
it set upon the Ground without any manner of Foundation, were greatly afraid it
would fall down, and therefore built about it a huge and mighty thick Wall,
which stands at this present to be seen. But no body could tell from whence
this House came, till a long time after, when the Blessed Virgin appeared in a
Dream to a certain Man, an intimate Friend and Servant of Hers, and revealed
the whole matter to him, as I have been relating it. This Man declared the same
to a certain Wise and ^nderstanding Person of that Country, who thought it
convenient, to depute sixteen Grave and Creditable Men, to go to Nazareth in
Galilee, and take Cognizance of the matter of Fact. Away they went, taking the
Measure of the House at Loretto with them, and came safe to Nazareth, where
they found an empty space, where the Virgins House had stood, and nothing left
but the Foundations, of which these Sixteen took the Length and Breadth, and
finding them to agree most exactly with the Dimensions of Loretto House, they
were sufficiently convinced; but besides, they found an Inscription on the Wall
hard by, attesting that such a Church had stood there heretofore, and was
Miraculously carried away. And thus this truth was laid open as manifest as the
Light, by the Testimony of almost a Jury and half of able Ambassadors, and this
we find written in the Registers of that House, and hung up in a Table in the
Chapel, to be seen by all Comers. This is in effect, an Epitome of Tursellin's
great Tursellin's Historiae Lauretanae, lib. 1.
History of this House, who amplisies the Matter very curiously. This Jesuit's
Book was Printed with Privilege from Pope Clement the VIII, with the general
Approbation of the greatest Doctors at Rome, such as Raynaud, Bzovius,
Spondanus, and others, who refer us to this Book as a Piece, that is able to
ease us of all manner of Doubts, that may rise on this occasion.

And will the time then never come, when Men will reassume that Shame they have
so long renounced? How is it possible they can in Earnest, propagate such
Impertinences as this? Cui bono, To what end and purpose is it, that a House
must jump from place to place thus through the Air? Who does not see that this
is an Invention of one who is not the Father of Truth, to uphold those
lamentable Superstitions, of which that Blessed Maid is made the Object?

It may be convenient here to observe, that this pretended Transportation is
said to have been made, at the end of the Thirteenth Century, when the Saracens
had entirely chased the Christians out of Palestin: And yet St. Antonine, A. B.
of Florence, one of the hardiest Relators, and greatest Admirers of Fabulous
Miracles, and strange things, that perhaps the World ever had, says not one
word of this Matter; and yet he should have known, being an Italian, and living
within 150. years of the time assigned for this great Wonder, and one that
would have believed it, if he had but once heard on it. Another Saint also of
the same Order, (a Dominican) and same Country, to wit, Vincent Ferrier, that
lived according to Bellarmin's Account, 1410. or as others say, in 1440. in a
Sermon (amongst his Works) on the Feast of the Assumption, says expressly, that
our Ladies Chamber is still at Nazareth, and yet according to the History, it
had been then in Italy, above 100. years; And was it not possible that great
Saint should not know as much? But thus it is, The Fable was at first invented
without any Conscience, without any Shame, or indeed, without any Discretion;
God so permitting it, for the farther evidencing this great Truth, that we
might more easily see on what grounds all this kind of Worship is founded. But
now for a Sample or two of Miracles.

We are not to doubt, but as She is the most Glorious, She is also the most
Holy, and by consequence, the humblest of all Women. But Papism has made Her a
very pattern of Pride and Ambition, always aiming at Divine Honors; angry with
all that pay them not, severely Punishing those that offend Her, and
Recompensing amply all that are peculiarly devoted to Her, and working Miracles
perpetually, for nothing but to acquire Adoration, and Honor to Her self. To
establish this Adoration, they have made such a Romance of the Blessed Virgin,
that no good sober Heathen would have done the like to his Minerva or Diana,
Goddesses of Chastity.

For Example. What more could any Servant of Venus or of Flora, Goddesses of
Prostitution, say of their Deities, than has been said of Mary, when they make
her marry St. Dominick. This Saint was in a Cavern, where he was doing
Penances, alas! for the Albigenses of Toulouse, covered with gore and wounds of
his own inflicting. To him the Virgin appeared, accompanied with three Women,
each of them being attended with fifty other Women; these were (Oh horror to
relate!) this three Persons of the Holy Trinity, that made up Alanus redivivus
p. 2. c. 3.
the Nuptial Equipage and Pomp, when the Virgin was to marry Dominick; and
coming to him, Dominick (said she) my Son, my dear Husband, because thou have
valiantly fought against the Enemies of the Faith, lo I am come to succor
thee, I, (I say) whom thou so often has called upon. Then the three Queens that
accompanied her, lift up St. Dominick from the ground, where he lay half dead,
and the Virgin received him into her embraces, kissing him lovingly and
tenderly, and withal opened her breasts and let him suck, till he was perfectly
recovered. In what a hot and furious imagination was the impudent Monk, think
you, when he wrote these horrible things? Came he not reeking from his damned
debauches, to commit these foul impurities to paper? I appeal to all Persons in
the Roman Communion, of pious Minds and chaste Thoughts, nay, to all the Adorers
of the Blessed Virgin, that have any sense of Virtue, any touch of shame, to
all such I appeal for my just indignation against this. Alanus de Rupibus, (for
he it is that reports these things, and that writes of the like abominable
intercourse betwixt the Virgin and himself says, he was usually tempted of the
Devil, once in every seven years, and in one of these fits, he had like to have
cut his own Throat for Idem ibid. part 2. e. 4.
despair; but at Midnight the Virgin came into his Cell, and after a great
deal of discourse, drew out her Breasts, and milk'd them on the wounds the
Devil had made, and cured them perfectly. Afterward she married her Servant in
the presence of Jesus Christ, and a great many Saints there present, giving him
her Virgin Ring, made of her Virgin-hair. After this, she put about his neck a
Chain or String, made likewise of her hair, with a hundred and fifty
Precious-stones, according to the number of Beads in the Virgins Psalter or
Chaplet. After, she gave him a sweet Kiss, and let him suck her Virgin-Breasts,
which he doing very greedily, seemed to have all his Body bedewed with a sweet
Liquor; and this favor, he says, she afforded him frequently. Another Story
tells us, that one Eustochium a Religious Nun, having begged of the Virgin to
see the Child Jesus, she found him laid upon the straw, where she fell to
kissing and embracing him so ardently, that she thought she should have died
for pleasure, on the place. Another young Maid, about Fourteen, a devout
Servant of the Virgins, having asked the same thing, Mary gave him into her
arms, who embraced, caressed and kissed him with such violent transports of
love, that her very heart was cleft asunder. Fair warning, one would think, to
young Maids!

Has either Alcoran, or Jewish Talmud, Stories so lewd and so abominable as
these? Yet these are the Authors, whose Authority F. Crasset has within these
six last years, renewed and re-established in his Book! But what is the design
of these tales? Why, it is to establish the Worship of the Blessed Virgin; for
St. Dominick had never been her Husband, but that he invented the Rosary,
otherwise called the Virgins Psalter, composed of a hundred and fifty Beads, of
which there are fifteen Pater Nosters for God, (and well they can spare them
too,) and and one hundred thirty five Ave Maria's for the Virgin. And for the
same reason was our Friend Alan favored, because the Rosary-way of Worship
beginning to decay, he did what in him lay to revive it. And for the two
Virgins obtaining the favor to Kiss Jesus Christ in the Flesh, even to
Swooning away, why was it, but because they were devoted to the Service of the
Virgin in a more peculiar manner? Now, that you may not think these fearful
Examples are but few in number, you must know there are abundance of them in
all the Authors that F. Crasset quotes and admires. Hautin, a Jesuit like
himself, reports a History from Surius, of the Marriage of the Virgin Mary with
one Herman, surnamed Joseph, (because they were both of them married to the
Virgin,) to whom the Virgin came, accompanied with two Angels, one of which
began to speak and say, To whom shall we marry this Young Man? To Mary, replied
the other, at which they commanded Herman to draw near: Poor Herman knew not
what in the earth to do; Love pricked him on, and Shame-fac'dness pulled him
back; for though before times he had had particular intimacy with the Hautin
Angelus Custos c. 4. numb. 3.
Blessed Virgin, yet he could never hope to see himself advanced to such a
degree, as to be married to Her. Caesarius also, whom F. Crasset quotes as a
very sincere Caesarius l. 7. c. 13, 18, 32, 52.
Author, relates the Story of a Soldier that fell in love with his Captain's
Wife, and following the advice of a good Hermit, saluted the Virgin a hundred
times a day, who to recompense this civility, offered herself to him like an
exceeding handsome Woman, saying, I will be thy Wife, come kiss me, and forced
him to it. In the same Author, we find the Virgin Mary kissing and embracing
Monks very liberally: Some she watches over whilst they sleep; others she wipes
the face of, whilst they sleep, with her Handkerchief. And had I not reason to
say the Chronicles of Diana and Minerva were more chastely delivered down, than
those of the ever Blessed Mother of our Lord?

After these favors, it would be vain to produce any more, or others; but you
may be assured there is no sort or kind, with which the Devoto's to the Virgin
have not some time or other been graced. She has kept them in their Sicknesses;
She has given them their Sight; She has delivered them from extreme dangers
both by Sea and Land, from Thieves, from Fire, from the Gibbet, from Prisons,
and from Death itself; for many have been raised from the dead, only because
they or their Parents have been religious Worshippers of the Blessed Virgin.
Read but Chroni^on S. V. Deiparae, where you shall find a thousand Instances.
If one should collect together all the deliverances God h^th wrought from the
beginning of the World, to this day, they would not make a History to compare
with those wrought by our Lady of Loretto, Mont Serrat, Liesse, Hall,
Moyenpont, Aspremont, Ardiliers, and a hundred more, and all to persuade Us,
that the Virgin is mightily pleased to see Herself adored, and that she is at a
stand sometimes to find out what Favors to bestow on her peculiar Servants.

But that which is most abominable, is, that these Fables would persuade Us,
that the Service of the Virgin is of greater benefit to Us, than that of God;
and that, provided a Man dedicate himself to Her Service, let him be otherwise
never so wicked a Villain, yet he need not despair of his Salvation. It was one
of these profane Visions St. Brigit pretended to have had, and which F. Crasset
has mustered up afresh, to the intent you should not think those Opinions were
at all altered since those days, 1370. Sinners (says he) being her Subjects,
Part 1. tr. 1. qu. 10. p. 77.
make up her Crown and Glory, and it is for that she loves them, with the
tenderness and sweet compassion of a Mother, let them be never so wicked, as a
Mother pittieth her Children, though they have lost their senses, and are
become mad; and this is what she has revealed to St. Brigit. Brig. Revel. book
6. c. 10.
Know Thou (quoth the Mother to the Daughter) my dearest Child, that there is
no Man in the World so lewd and cursed of God, that is entirely forsaken of him
whilst he lives; no Sinner so desperate, but may return, and find mercy with
him, provided he have recourse to Me. St. Bonaventure is of the same mind, and
expresses himself in these comfortable words: O Mary, be a Man never so
miserable a Sinner, you have the soft compassions of a Mother for him; you
embrace him, and hug him close in your bosom, and never will forsake him, till
you have reconciled him to his formidable Judge.

It Is with design of persuading us to believe these comfortable Truths, that F.
Crasset musters up a whole Chapter of Examples of the wickedest Men that
possibly can be, that yet have been saved, by preserving their Ubi supra. page
86.
devotion for the Blessed Virgin, amidst all their impieties, entire. Such a
one is that of Theophilus of Adanus, a City of Cilicia, who having been deposed
of his Archdeaconry, for no great good, gave himself over to the Devil, for
spite and anger, by the help and means of a Jewish Magician whom he served. He
renounced Mary and her Son, and gave the Devil a Scroll signed with his own
Hand; after which he became intolerably desperate and mad for what he had done:
But in these Agonies of Mind and Soul, a glimpse or ray of hope appeared to
him, that Blessed Mary could deliver him from this evil, and straightways
thereupon he goes to her Church, and prostrates himself before her Image: Which
failed him not at this time of need, but reconciled him to God, and forced the
Devil to give him back his Bonds again.

To this, F. Crasset thinks sit to add such another, Page 90. part 1.
taken from Caesarius; of a young Gascoign Soldier, who after he had wasted all
he had in the World, gave himself up to Satan, and renounced Jesus Christ; but
do whatever the Devil could, he could not be brought to renounce his Mother,
and this obtained his Pardon for that horrible Crime; down he threw himself
before the Image of the Virgin Mary, which had the Image of Jesus in her arms,
and heard this Dialogue between them. The Virgins Image said, O my sweet Son,
have mercy on this Man: The Son's Image answered, Why Mother, what would you
have me do with this Wretch, that has renounced Me? After this, the young Man
saw the Blessed Virgin (that is to say, her Image) prostrate herself to little
Jesus, and demand again his Pardon, whom Jesus lovingly took up, (and 'twas
very much for a Child of his bigness,) and said to her, I never yet refused my
Mother any thing she asked; I grant it for your sake, and yours alone. Would
one believe, that a Jesuit should have the confidence to furbish up such
ridiculous things as these, at this time of day, in such an Age as ours? I had
often heard this Story told by Protestants, to shame the Papists; but I never
thought it would have been produced at this time, by a Renowned Jesuit, in
honor of their Religion, and that too in Paris, the most frequented City in
the whole World. But to put you past all doubting of this Truth, F. Crasset
tells us, that Caesarius says, that this very Gascoign was alive in his time,
1222. and that nothing was more sure, nor better attested, than this famous
Story. And for the credit of Caesarius, the same good Father tells us, he was
of the Order of Cistercians, and lived above four hundred years ago, and was,
as Trithemius the Abbot tells us, a very Learned, and a very Page 105.
Honest Man, and one that stuck to his rule very close. You may judge (says he)
of the sincerity and credit of this Man, by what he says in his Preface to his
own Works, God is my Witness (cries he) that I am not the Inventer of any thing
I have reported in my Dialogues. And who alive can help believing him, after
this Protestation? Therefore take, in short, another Story of Caesarius's
telling, of one Beatrix a Servant in a Convent, who being debauched by a
Priest, got out of the Convent, and lived in a Bawdy House fifteen years,
during all which time, the Virgin Mary took her shape, and constantly supplied
her place; so that no body perceived her absence, and her Reputation suffered
nothing all the while; and all this, because she had, as she was going out,
prayed to the Virgin, and (giving her the Keys of the Convent into her hand)
had said, Madam, I have served you as devoutly Caesarius l. 7. c. 35.
as I possibly could; I give you here your Keys again, and am able no longer to
withstand the temptations of the Flesh. This tends to the same end with all the
rest, namely, to let you understand, that, break God's Commands, or do Crass.
p. 9^.
whatever you please, serve but the Blessed Virgin, and all is well.

Pelbart of Temeswar, another of F. Crasset's great Authors, Stell. Coronae. l.
12. ^. ^.
tells us, there was a certain Woman that played the Whore with a Neighbor's
Husband of hers, whose Wife finding his roguery out, prayed to the Virgin to
confound that wicked Creature that had debauched her Husband from her Bed; but
it was ^ound, that this impudent Harlot had still the grace, every day, to say
seven Ave Maria's, and therefore the Virgins Image answered the complaining
Wife, and said, She of whom thou speak, offers me Praises that are very
agreeable to me, and whilst she does so, I assure you Mistress I can never hurt
her, but on the contrary, will preserve her from disgrace; however I promise
you, I Will see and convert her. And this is the way to Proselyte to the Virgin,
those who trample God's Commandments under foot.

If you would have any more Stories, to prove that the Worship of the Virgin
separate from that of God, is a sure way to Salvation, you may find them, in
great Crasset. p. 94.
plenty, in Father Crasset. There you may see the Virgin keeping them, that
keep not God's Commands; and how a Bird having learned to cry Ave Maria, and
being seized on by a Hawk, scream'd out but Ave Maria, and the ravenous Hawk
immediately left her. And likewise, how the Devil, being in the Air, and spying
a Christian that was not upon his guard, came swooping down upon him, like a
Bird of Prey; but as soon as he heard him pronounce, and devoutly call upon the
Name of Mary, he was fain to pull in his horns (I meant his talons) and be
gone. There you shall see her taking a great deal of pains to raise from the
dead, Rogues that had lived in nothing else but wickedness, and died without
repentance; only to give them leisure to Confess, and do some trifling
Penances, and then again depart in peace. It is the same Father Crasset, that
tells from Surius, the History of a Citizen of Rome, called Andrew, so
insufferably debauched, that he bore no token or mark of Christianity upon him,
but that he was an Admirer of St. Caesarion Martyr: As Andrew lived, so he died
like a Reprobate, without any tokens of Repentance; but at the Intercession of
Mary and Caesarion, he arose from the dead to Confess, and do Penance, and
returned from whence he came

Pelbart of Temeswar (that never sticks at any thing) tells us of a Robber on
the Highway, (that used nevertheless to Fast every Saturday in Honor to the
Virgin) who at last being caught in the Fact, was Beheaded on the spot; his
Head in falling from his Body, cried out thrice, Confession, Confession,
Confession, upon which they fetched a Priest, who came and set his Head again
upon his Shoulders, to whom the Thief reported, that as soon as his Head was
^ut off, the Devils had seized on his Soul to drag it into Hell, but that the
Virgin hindered them, not permitting the Soul and Body quite to separate, till
he was Confessed; and that he had obtained this Grace, for Fasting every
Saturday to her Honor: And this serves to support two Articles of Popery, the
Invocation of the Virgin, and the necessity of Confession. But if we will not
believe Pelbart, nor Father Crasset, neither will we Heretics be persuaded,
that a Rogue rose from the dead.

In the same place, you read how that the Soul of a Soldier killed in Fight, in
the Service of the Emperor Sigismond, continued in his Body many years after
the Flesh was rotten and worn off. The Blessed Virgin not permitting the Soul
to part before Confession, because he had been all his Life time Her peculiar
Servant. Another Miracle there is, of which Pelbart himself was an Eyewitness.
A certain wicked Villain fell into the Danube, and was under water three days,
where he heard a Voice say to him, Thou deservest well, O Wretch, to lose thy
Life, and be Condemned for ever for thy Sin but because thou art a Servant to
the Virgin Mary, thou shall be delivered from this danger, that thou may go
and be Confessed; and up he came, though he could not Swim a stroke, and came
and Confessed to Pelbart himself, who tells you this Story. 'Twas from the Man
his own self (says Father Crasset) that this Religious Pelbart heard this
History; and you must either believe this Penitent was an Impostor and Cheat,
(and I pray take heed of wronging such a Pickled Youth) or else that Pelbart
was a wicked Man, and took delight to Page 135.
impose upon the belief of the sovereign High Priest of Rome, (to whom he
dedicated his Works) and all the Faithful. Or else you must believe this Story
for a certain truth, and consequently that the Virgin does preserve sometimes
her Servants from everlasting Damnation, after Death. And in the same Page,
this worthy Jesuit says, That Caesarius the Cistercian, that lived about 400.
years since, and made 12. Books of Dialogues upon Miracles and Apparitions in
his time, sets down many Examples of this nature; how Dead men were saved from
Damnation by the Virgins means, obtaining Grace for them, to return to Life
again to do some Penance.

If I would drain those Springs (as Father Crasset does) of Pelbart, Caesarius,
Bernardin de Bustis, Vincentius Bellovicensis, St. Antonine of Florence, and
the rest, I could make a monstrous great Volume of these Fables, that tend to
the establishing the necessity of Worshipping the Blessed Virgin, but this
small number drawn from Father Crasset, is as good as if I had heaped up all
together, with a great deal of Pains and Trouble.

For by this, we Protestants may see, how far we are to trust those Catholic
Doctors, who would have us believe, their Service and Religion has for many
years last past, been cleansed and purified from all these vain and idle
Popular Superstitions. When Father Crasset, a famous Jesuit, (though Monsieur
Arnaud call him the Wretched Jesuit Crasset). A Jesuit, I say, in the City of
Paris, where Popery is most refined; in the Face of Monsieur, the Bishop of
Meaux, and other Catholics, averse from the vulgar Superstitions. When he, I
say again, renews and revives these Silly and Impertinent Fables, with the
approbation of his Society, his Archbishop, and his King. And if the great Man
at Rome, Of Louis le Grand.
should in a good Humor, think fit to say, this Book of Father Crasset, is
composed with so much Learning, in such a Method, and with such a Discretion,
as is proper to instruct the Readers clearly in few words, and to extort even
from the unwilling (such as Monsieur de Meaux, and Monsieur Arnaud) a
confession of the Catholic Faith. (In this point) If he, I say, should but say
thus much, I would fain know-why it would not be as Authentic a Book, as the
Catholic Exposition of Monsieur de Condom. And are we (in good earnest)
secure, it never will be so? Will a better Friend to the Jesuits, never possess
that Chair? And if there do, may he not do as much for such a Book as this of
Father Crassets, as the present Pope has done for Monsieur de Meaux's? And must
the Faith of Christ be at such uncertainties? This surely is not building on a
Rock, but on the Sand, that every Wave can wash away at pleasure. For if every
Pope can make an Exposition of the Catholic Faith, Authentical, (And if every
one cannot, how can any one?) I do not see but we may have as many several
Faiths, as there are Casualties and Diseases in the Weekly Bill.

THE END.
Books Printed for Tho. Newborough, at the Star in St. Paul' s Churchyard.
THE Travels of Monsieur de Thevenot into the Levant, in Three Parts, viz. Into
I. Turkey. II. Persia. III. The East Indies. Fol.

R. Manlii, Commentaria de Rebellione Anglicana ab Anno 1640. usque ad Annum
1685. Pars Prima. Octa.

A Paraphrase with Notes, and a Preface on the Sixth Chapter of St. John,
showing that there is neither good Rerson nor sufficient Authority, to suppose
that the Eucharist is discoursed of in that Chapter, much less to infer the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation from it. Quarto.

Wholesome Advices from the Blessed Virgin to her Indiscreet Worshippers.
Written by one of the Roman Communion.

Humanity and Charity of Christians. A Sermon Preached at the Suffolk Feast,
November, 30. 1686. by W. Claget. D. D.

The Present State of the Controversy between the Church of England, and the
Church of Rome.


