EPIGRAMS OF All Sorts.

I. BOOK.

Written by RICHARD FLECKNOE.

LONDON, Printed for the Author. 1669.

TO HIS NOBLE FRIENDS, The Readers.
EPigrams; In Verse are the same, as Characters in Prose; a short and easy kind
of writing; and therefore most fit for me, who Love not long discourses, and
cannot take pains in any thing; and if the Reader be of my disposition, I Am
glad of it; for we shall well agree. I writ them to avoid Idleness and publish
them to avoid the Impute of it; And as others write to live, after they are
dead: I do it, not to be thought dead, whilst I am alive; for as to conceal
what one does, little differs from Idleness; so so to be Idle, little differs
from being dead.

They are most of them newly writ, or newly published; And if any of them have
been published before, there is somewhat added to them that makes them in
manner new. To Dedicate them in particular to any one, were to do Injury to the
rest; by appropriateing that, which should be in common amongst you all. Take
them amongst you then, since they were chiefly writ for you; and if you like
them, they are the First Book; if not, the Last, of

Your humble Servant, RICHARD FLECKNOE.

EPIGRAMME In Praise of Epigrams.
WIth Epigrams, just as with Music it is,
Their chiefest Grace is in their Cadences,
And point of the close; just like some Gentle Dart
Does strike our Ears, as Love does strike our Heart.
In every kind, be th'writing what it will,
It Is Epigram does most delight us still.
And in it is Wit consists the Harmony,
And Beauty of 't, what e're the subject be.
Poets cannot write, nor Orators declame,
But all their wit is chiefly Epigramme:
Nor any well discourse, but it is that which
Does chiefly charm, and chiefly does bewitch
To End, in Verse and Prose and every thing,
Your Epigramme is writing for a King.
EPIGRAMS Of all Sorts.
To a fair Lady, too confident of her Innocence.
POor Innocent Beauty how it pitties me!
To see thee thus exposed to Calumny.
Whilst men so vicious are, they will not allow
That any can be fair and Virtuous now.
In Saturn's reign perhaps it might suffice,
When to be Innocent was to be wise,
But now without the Serpent's wisdom too,
The Innocence of the Dove will hardly do.
Trust then no more to harmless Innocence,
For you and Virtue, but a poor defense,
For Innocence, but Virtue is unarmed,
The more you trust unto't, the more you are harmed.
To his Honorable Friend H. H.
I Grant you, Sir, I have a mind unfit
For my low Fortune, and too high for it,
But sure you will grant it is better, have it so
Than for high Fortune, to have a mind too low.
I Am none of these same Cringing things that stoops
Just like a Tumbler when he vaults through hoops,
Or Daw, or Magpie, when at fruit it pecks,
Alternately their Tayls above their becks.
If wealth ith vulgar way does only lie
For me, let low minds stoop for it min's too high
Who never thought any thing was truly wealth,
That was below, or else without my self.
Nor care I what the talking vulgar say
For being not of their number, nor their way,
They do but talk, and cannot in judgment sit,
Nor lies it in their verge to judge of it.
I put my self upon the only few
That is the best and worthiest, such as you.
Who is the Richest and happiest man.
WHo cares for nothing that he cannot have
And nothing others can deprive him of,
With no disquiet of a guilty Breast
To break his sleep, or to disturb his rest;
In state and fortune neither Rich nor poor,
But has enough and does desire no more,
And lives a life no Prince's smile nor frown
Can either raise him up, nor throw him down,
And neither hopes to rise, or fears to fall
Is richest and the happiest man of all.
On an Avaritious person.
WHo wholly spends his Life in getting wealth,
And to increase his store, consumes himself,
Does no less Fool, than those to me appear,
Who sell their Horse, to buy him Provender.
On certain Ladies, who said, they liked not our old Wits.
LAdies you like not our old wits, you say,
And what new ones are those, you like, I pray?
As Squibs and Crackers are to solid fire,
So to the old, as th'new ones you admire.
But it is the Nature of Green Sickness wits,
As it is of your Green Sickness appetits,
That in the Soul's, this in the Body's food,
To like the bad, and to mislike the Good.
And just as Heresy at first begun,
With crying down the old Religion,
So it is a kind of Heresy in you,
To cry down old wits, and cry up the new.
If so with your good leave, say what you will
Of your new wits, I Am for the old ones still.
On the death of Charles Lord Gerard of Bromley.
WHo alive so far had been,
He almost every Land had seen,
And almost every thing did know,
As man could in this World below.
At last his knowledge to improve,
Is gone unto the World above.
Where his knowledge is so much;
And his Happiness is such,
It Would Envy and not sorrow seem,
In those too much should grieve for him.
On Pen careless.
SLighted by all, Pen said; she did not care
For others more, than others did for her,
If so she is happy, for I do not see
Any one lives more free from Care, than she.
On married Ministers.
IF both in the Spiritual and Temporal war,
Your Wives but Baggages oth' Armies are,
We well may say, your Ministers who marry,
Whilst others fight, do with the Baggage tarry.
The Author of a Good Play not Acted, to the Author of an Ill one Acted.
THeir wit and Judgment's small, we well may say,
By the acting or not acting, judge the Play,
For it is not the act(...)ightly understood
But writing makes the Play or bad or Good;
If Good, like mine, it is the Actors fault,
And not the Writers, if they act it not,
But if it be bad, like thine, then if they do,
It Is both the Actors and the Writers too.
To Mis: Davies, on her Excellent dancing.
DEar Mis: delight of all the nobler sort;
Pride of the Stage and darling of the Court,
Who would not think to see thee dance so light,
Thou were all air? or else all soul and spirit?
Or who'd not say to see thee only tread,
Thy feet were feathers! others feet but lead?
Athlanta well could run, and Hermes flee,
But none er'e moved more Gracefully, than thee;
And Circes charmed with wand and Magic lore,
But none, like thee, er'e charmed with Feet before.
Thou Miracle! whom all men must admire
To see thee move like air, and mount like fire.
Who er'e would follow thee or come but nigh
To thy perfection, must not dance but fly.
AEnigma. On the Name of a fair Lady.
HEr first name somewhat of Elysium has,
Her second is (in a more mistick phrase)
That color which shows venerable Age,
And does in the morning a fair day presage;
Unriddle now and tell whose name this is,
Or forfeit a discretion, if you miss.
On Mrs. A. C. blushing when the King looked on her.
SO Roses blush when looked on by the Sun,
As Cicilanna when the King looks on,
And so of all fair Things, we nothing see
More fair in Nature, than the Rose and she.
If things take name from their Original,
We well her blushes Royal ones may call;
And if tha've lost the Royal purples stain,
It in her cheeks may well be found again,
Mean Time as Excellent matter best does fit
An excellent Artisan to work on it,
The King could never have found a fitter place
To look upon, than Cicilanna's face.
The dedication of his Book of Characters to his Majesty.
VOuchsafe Great Sire on these to cast your sight,
Made chiefly for your Majesty's delight,
By one has cast off all Ambition
But pleasing and delighting you alone.
Counting it, highest honor can befall
To delight him, who is the delight of all.
On Madam Master.
OF Madam it may well be sed,
That Madam has but little wit,
Since Madam's Husband is her head,
And Madam makes a Fool of it.
On Doctor Cornuto.
WHo so famous was of late,
He was with finger pointed at,
What cannot learning do and single state?
Being married, he so famous grew
As he was pointed at with two,
What cannot learning and a wife now do?
To Clarissa.
ANd why Clarissa so much pains and care
To gain repute of beautiful and fair?
When without all this Care and all this pain,
You have already what you strive to gain:
Beauty and Truth need so small setting forth
As all you add to it, takes but from its worth,
And the Sun and you need far more Art to hide
Your Glittering beams, than make them more espied.
All other Arts in you would show as poor
As his should seek to gil'd Gold Ingots over,
And you would appear, as vain in it, as they
Should go about to Blanch the milky way.
No, no, you are fair enough, leave unto those
These petty Arts, whose Beauty's chiefly clothes,
So Politics when the Lyon's skin does fail,
Do use to piece it with the Foxes Tail,
But when they have Lions skin enough, it is poor
And beggarly, to add a piece to it mote
On those who sell their Liberty for a little Gain.
WHilst those for wealth do sell their Liberty,
Cal't Angling for the Golden Fish, for me,
Loving my Liberty as I do, I look
Upon It, as fishing with a Goldenhook.
To the truly Noble Lord.
EVen such a person, such a mind, as thine
Brave Hero, Emperors had in ancient time,
When choosing men for Empire only fit,
The bravest mind and person carried it.
And now, although the Times be changed, we see,
They make their Favorites still of such, as thee,
Whom for their noble persons and their mind,
They best and fittest for Employment find.
So howsoever the World goes, thou at least
Shall always be the best, or nigh the best.
The Lives of the Patrons.
FIrst of all they never care
Nor for Clock nor Calendar,
Next they never desire to know
How affairs ot'h World do go.
Above all, they never resort
To the busy Hall nor Court,
Where poor men do nothing else
But trouble others and themselves.
All the business they look after,
Only is their sport and Laughter,
With a friend, and cheerful cup
Merrily to dine and sup,
Hear good Music, see a Play,
Thus they pass the Time away.
Of an Epicure.
He Is one, of nothing else does think,
But only of Good cheer and drink,
And never is in better mood
Than when you talk of drink and food.
Who for his palate and his gust
Has quite forgot all other lust,
And huggs a bottle, as he would
a Mistress, when the Wine is good.
Who lays about him like a Giant
When he meets a morsel fryand.
And so long does cram his Gut
He Is nothing else from head to foot*
When you such an one do see
For many a year never saw his knee,
And now scarce sees at all, be sure
That such an one's an Epicure.
On the Play, of she would, if she could, To the Duke of N.
TO tell you what I think of Etridg Play
Since you command this, I will only say,
Th'as sparks of wit, as much as you would desire,
But sparks alone, as far from solid fire.
In former days none ever went away
But with a glowing bosom from a Play,
With somewhat they had heard or seen, so fired
You Would think they were Celestially inspired.
^ow you have only a few light conceits
^ike squibs and crackers, neither warms nor heats,
But cause at best a little gigling laughter
Which quickly past, makes you but colder after.
^o hard it is now for any one to write
With Iohnson's fire, or Fletcher's flame and spirit.
Much less Inimitable Shakspear's way
Promethean-like to animate a Play.
On our late Prolouge and Epilouge.
AS Horse-coursers their Horses set to sale
With Ribands on their foreheads and their tail,
So most ot'h Poets wit lies now a days
In The Prolouge and the Epilouge of their Plays.
On the Poetess.
It Was wonder knowing the Poet they should press,
And run so far to see his Poetess,
But 'twas no wonder seeing it, at last
They pressed and ran away from it, as fast.
Epitaph on the same.
UNder this Stage together with Queen Bess,
Deeply entombed here lies the Poetess,
It Is fit such Plays for obsequies should have
Actors for Mourners, and the Stage for Grave.
Question On a Lady's letting Blood.
OF this just mixture and equality
Of water and blood what should the Reason be?
The Reasons clear, forced to part with her
Each drop of blood for grief did shed a Tear.
On the Lady Rockingham's Nursing her Children her self.
HOw like to Charity this Lady stands
With one Child sucking, the other in her hands
Whilst bounteous Nature Mother of us all,
Of her fair Breasts is not more Liberal.
Those Parents, but half Mothers are at best
Who whilst they give their wombs, deny their breast
And none true Mothers are, but such as you
Who when they have brought them forth, do Nurse them too.
Mirror of Mothers! In whom all may see
By what you are, what they themselves should be,
Ready, like Pelicans for Childrens good,
To give their very lives and vital blood.
And if that milk be only blood turned white
You show your self great Strafford's daughter right,
Both alike ready for the Kingdom's good,
You for to give your milk, as he his blood.
On Simple.
SImple kept much ado, and much offense
He took for saying, he scarce had common sense,
Till saying, he had, and very Common too,
He was well pleased, and made no more ado.
In Execration of small Beer.
NOw pox and plague to boot on this same small-
Beer, we may well the Devils Julip call,
distilled in the Limbeck of some Lap-land witch
With North winds bellows blowing in her breech,
Or stale of some old Hagg ot'h Marshes, who
Than water never better Liquor knew.
A penitential drink for none by right
But those it'h' morning who were drunk over night.
Sure 'twas the poison, (as we well may think)
They gave Condemned Socrates to drink,
Or that the Macedonian drunk, so cold
As nothing but an Asses hoof could hold.
They were deceived it was not Niobe's moan,
But drinking small-beer turned her unto stone.
And that which since Infallibly has made
Our Charity so cold, and the world so bad.
If then Divines would mend it, let them preach
Against small-beer only, and no Doctrine teach
But drinking wine, and then we soon should see
All in Religion easily would agree.
This were a study worthy of the pains
Of breaking both their own and others brains,
This were a Doctrine worthy of their heat,
And furious beating the pulpit, till they sweat.
In the Small pox.
THou greatest Enemy that Beauty has,
The very Goth and Vandal of a face,
On which thou make as bad or worser work
Than does thy fellow Meazels upon Pork,
What Execration can be enough
For one like thee is long since all curse-proof?
For should we bid the Plague on thee, that curse
Thou Anticipas't already, for tha'rt worse,
Or great Pox on thee, we should Curse, but ill,
Since you are more great in being the small Pox sti^^
Be still thy self then, but for ever be
Banished all fair and gentle Company
To live with Beasts, as Horses, Dogs and Swin^
Or Divel's, old Companions of thine.
To Sir K. D. Recommending a Memorial to him in Italy, during our Troubles here.
I Must beg of you, Sir, nay, what is more,
It Is a Disease so Infectious to be poor,
Must beg, you would beg for me, which whilst I do,
What is it but even to make you beggar too?
But povety being as honorable now
As 'twas when Cincinnatus held the plough,
Senators sowed and reapt, and who had been
In Car of Triumph, fetched the Harvest in.
Whilst mightiest Peers do want, nay, what is worse
Even greatest Princes live on others purse,
And very Kings themselves are Beggars made
No shame for any, Sir, to be ot'h' Trade.
On the Riches of the Barbados to Col. Henry Drax.
HOw rich Barbados is, and how much worth,
We well may see by Sugars, it brings forth,
Of all the rest, the Richest Merchandise.
And if by the pattern, we may judge ot'h' piece,
How Rich it is in men, we well may see
By bringing forth brave Drax such men as thee.
Of the difference of Travelers.
AS Bees and Spiders by their different power
Suck Honey and poison from the self-same flowe^
So there no less a difference does appear
Betwixt the wise and foolish Traveller,
Whilst the one makes wise Election of the best
Of every thing he sees, and leaves the rest:
The Other as foolishly does only choose
The worst of things, and better still refuse,
The One brings their Virtues home, the other again
Their Vices, only brings along with him.
On a Hector, beaten and dragged through the Streets by the Watch and Constable.
STill to be dragged! still to be beaten thus!
Hector, thy name (I fear) is ominous,
And thou for fighting did but ill provide,
To take thy name thus from the beaten side.
To have every watch like Band of Mirmidons,
Beat thee with Halberts down, and break thy bone^
And every petty Constable thou meets
Achylles-like to drag thee through the streets.
Poor Hector, when you are beaten blind and lam^
I hope thou wilt learn to take another name.
Somewhat to Mr. I. A. On his Excellent Poem of Nothing.
OF nothing, nothing's made they say, but show
By what tha'st writ, disprov'st that saying now,
And prov'st thy self maker of Poems right,
Can out of Nothing bring such ones to light,
Which I (as Creatures, him who does create)
Only on somewhat dully imitate.
Mean time at least say all they can agin it,
I hope they needs must say there is somewhat in it.
Or granting it, as good as Nothing be
The greater honor still, for it and me.
A Rural Dialogue.
Cho. ONce a Nymph and Shepherd meeting,
Never past there such a Greeting,
Nor was heard 'twixt such a pair
Plainer dealing, than was there.
He scorns Women, and she men,
He slights her, she him again.
Words with words wer'e overthwarted
Thus they meet, and greet, and parted.

Shep. He who never takes a Wife,
Lives a most Contented Life.

Nim. She, her whole Contentment looses
Who a Husband ever chooses.

Shep. I of Women know too much,
Er'e to care for any such.

Nim. I of men too much do know
To care where er'e you do or no.

Shep. Since you are so resolved, farewell,
Look, you lead not Apes in Hell.

Nim. Better lead Apes thither, than
Thither to be led by men.

Shep. Be ruled, and do, but as they bid you.
They to Paradise would lead you,

Nim. To Fools Paradise; it is true,
Would they, but be ruled by you.

Cho. Thus they parted as they met,
Hard to say, who best did get,
Or of Love was least afraid,
When being parted, either said

Ambo. Love, what Fools, thou make of men,
When they are in thy power! but when
From thy power they once are free,
Love, what a Fool men make of thee!

To story, of the meeting of Love and Death.
LOve and Death ot'h' way once meeting,
Having past a friendly greeting,
Sleep their weary Eyelids closing,
Lay them down themselves reposing.
Love whom diverse cares molested,
Could not sleep, but whilst Death rested,
All in have away he posts him,
But his haste full dearly costs him.
For it chanced that going to sleeping,
They had given their Darts in keeping,
Unto Night, who Error's Mother
Blindly knowing, not the one from the other.
Gave Love, Death's and never perceived it,
Whilst as blindly Love received it.
Since which Time their Darts confounding:
Love now kills instead of wounding.
Death our hearts with sweetness filling,
Gently wounds instead of killing.
Epithalamium, Or a Nuptial Song for the marriage of the Lord Brackley with the
Lady Elizabeth Cranfield.
THe fairest Flower of Cranfield's race,
And noblest branch of Egerton,
Accompanied with every Grace,
By Hymen now are joined in one.
Go happy youth, and taste a bed
The pleasures fair Eliza. yields,
By far surpassing all that is sed
Ot'h pleasures of the Elizian fields.
And fair Eliza. be'nt afraid
Of The bug-bears of a married life,
Those Fears which haunt you now a Maid,
Will vanish soon, when you are a Wife.
And when you are once a Mother grown,
Such Joy they in their place shall leave,
Can never be exprost by human Tongue,
Nor human heart can e're conceive!
To George Duke of Albermarle.
IF others have their honors well deserved,
Who nobly have their King and Country served*
None ever yet deserved them more, than you,
Who have not only served, but saved them too.
In Recommending the Acting of a Play out of the French, unto his Majesty.
Most Royal Sir,
THis Play will not Court the Actors, and much less
To any others humbly make address.
'Twas made for you, and has the Ambition
To owe its Acting unto you alone.
All other Courtship and address is poor,
It Is pure Moliere, I need to say no more.
Prologue. For the Revival of his Damoiselles, a-la-mode.
THis Play of ours just like some Vest or Jupe,
Worn twice or thrice, was carefully laid up,
And after a little while it so had lain,
Is now brought forth, as good as new again.
For having the Honor of our Master's sight,
And happiness of giving him delight.
Our Author thought his business was done,
But great part of our business is to come.
He only looks after the pleasure of it,
But we must look as well, unto our profit.
He cared but for an Audience or two,
But if we could, we would every day have new.
And to conclude, he had his end again,
In pleasing those, who only saw it then,
But we must please you now, or we would be sorry,
Since only for that end w'ave kept it for ye.
On Sir Critic.
WHilst thou on every one so fast do spend
Thy Judgment as it would never have an end,
Prithee take heed thou spend it not so fast,
To leave thy self no Judgment at the last.
On the same.
It Is but a Cruel sport for men to go
To the Theater, as to Bear-bayting they do,
And Bandog-like to fall upon the Play,
Worry the Poet, and then go away,
As they some great and mighty Act had done,
When every day, Dogs do as great an one.
On the Play of Periocles Prince of Tire.
ARs longa, vita brevis, as they say,
But who Inverst that saying, made this Play.
On the Duchess of Newcastles Closet.
What place is this! looks like some sacred Cell,
Where holy Hermits anciently did dwell.
And never left Importunating Heaven,
Till some great Blessing unto Earth was given?
Is this a Lady's Closet, it cannot be?
For nothing here of vanity we see,
Nothing of Curiosity, or pride
As most of Lady's Closets have beside.
Scarcely a Glass or Mirror in it you find,
Excepting Books, the Mirrours of the mind.
Nor is it a Library, but only as she
Makes each place where she comes, a Library.
Here she is in Rapture, here in Ecstasy,
With studying high and deep Philosophy.
Here those clear lights descend into her mind,
Which by reflection in her Books we find.
And those high Notions and Idea's too,
Which, but her self, no Woman ever knew.
Whence she is her Sex's Ornament, and Grace,
And Glory of her Time, hail Sacred place!
To which the World in Aftertimes shall come,
As unto Homer's shrine, or Virgil's Tomb,
Honoring the Walls, in which she made abode,
The air she breathed, and ground on which she trod.
So Fame rewards the Arts, and so again
The Arts reward all those who honor them,
Whilst who in any other hopes do trust,
Shall after Death lie in forgotten dust.
To Mr. Henry Jermin on occasion of some demanding, why he had no higher Titles.
STill Noble, Gallant, Generous and brave!
What more of Titles would these people have?
Or what can they imagine more to express
How great thou art, that would not make thee less?
He, who is proud of other Titles, is
Proud of a thing, that is Fortun's, none of his,
A thing, that is but the Title Page ot'h Book,
On which your Ignorant Vulgar only look,
Or garnishment of dishes, not to eat,
But only*better to set off the meat.
Thou envy'st none their honors, but would be
Sorry they should deserve them more, than thee.
And 'twere in thee, but vain Ambition,
To seek by other Titles to be known.
When Harry Iermin's name alone affords
As great and loud a sound as any Lords.
Be still Thy self then, and let others be
High as they list in place, what is that to thee?
Their worth's without, but Thine is all within,
And man it is fills the place, but worth fills him.
The Title of a worthy person's more
Than all the rest the World does so adore.
And there is no Office we may greater call,
Than doing of Good offices to all.
This is Thy Office, these Thy Titles are,
Let who'se will take the rest, thou do not care.
In one who standered a fair and virtuous Lady.
THou Enemy of all that is fair and bright,
As fowls of darkness are unto the Light.
Monster of Monsters! Basilick of spite,
Who kill'st with Tongue, as the other does with sight.
Slanderer of Ladies, and of them the best,
Thou Have done an Art which all men must detest.
Beauty's a thing Divine, and he that would
Wrong that, would wrong Divinity, if he could.
Whence thou art not only highly injurious,
But impious too, in slandring of her thus.
Who takes our wealth, does but as Robbers do,
Who takes our Farms, robbs us and kills us too.
And's worse, than he who does another slay,
He takes but Life, thou life of life away.
The Soul of honor, and with poisnous breath,
Would if thou coud'st, even kill them after death.
But I mistake, it is no infamy
To be calumniated by such as thee.
Thou rather praisest her against thy will,
As he who cured by chance, whom he would kill.
For it is the same thing, rightly understood,
To be disprais'd by the bad, as praised by the good.
On Mistress Stuart.
STuart, a Royal name that springs
From Race of Calidonian Kings.
Whose Virtuous mind and Beauteous Frame,
Adds honor to that Royal name.
What praises can I worthy find,
To celebtate thy Form and mind?
The greatest power that is on earth,
Is given to Princes by their Birth.
But there is no power in Earth nor Heaven,
More great, than what is to Beauty given.
That makes not only men relent,
When unto Rage and Fury bent,
But Lions tame, and Tigers mild,
All fierceness from their breasts exiled.
Such wonders yet could never be done
By beauties force and power alone,
Without the power and force to boot,
O^ excellent goodness added to it.
For just, as Jewels we behold,
More brightly shine, when set in Gold,
So Beauty shines far brighter yet
In Goodness, and in Virtue set.
Continue then but what you are,
So Excellently Good, and Fair,
Let Princes by their birthrights sway,
You Will have a power, as great as they.
On Mistress Stuarts dancing in Whitehall, all shining with Jewels.
SO Citherea in the Olympic Hall,
And rest oth' Stars dance their Celestial Ball,
As Stuart with the rest ot'h Nimphs does here,
The brightest Glories of the British sphere.
Who would not think her Heaven, to see her, thus
All shine with Starry Jewels as she does?
Or somewhat more than Heaven, to see her Eyes
Outshine the Starry Jewels of the Skies?
Only their splendor's so exceeding bright,
The Excess confounds and blinds us with the sight,
Just as the Sun, who is bright to that degree,
Nothing is more, nothing less seen, than he.
Mean time the rapid motion of the Spears,
Is not so sweet and ravishing, as hers,
Nor is it the Harmony makes her dance, but she
In dancing, it is that makes the Harmony.
Next to divinest Cinthia, Queen of Light,
Never was seen a Nymph more fair and bright.
Nor ever shall among all her Starry Train
Though those in Heaven should all come down again.
On Mistress Stuarts Marriage with the Duke of Richmond.
THe brightest Nymph of all Diana's Train,
For whom so many sighed, and sighed in vain,
She who so often had others Captive made
And who so often over others triumphed had.
Is Venus Captive now her self, and led
In Triumph to the Noble Richmond's bed.
Nor is it strange to see about her fly
As many Cupids as are Stars in the Sky,
As many Graces as are Sands in the Sea,
Nor yet as many Venus's as they;
But to behold so many Virtues throng
About a Nymph so Beautiful and young,
Is strange indeed to admiration!
And Joy and Gladness too of every one.
But now whilst so much Joy and Gladness is,
To see how mighty Jove does frown at this,
Is stranger yet! and does too clearly prove,
They Are near to-Thunder, who are near to Jove.
Oh may he think amongst his milder thoughts,
How God-like *it is to pardon Mortals faults,
And how of all the rest, the faults of Love
Least move the Anger of the Gods above.
Of Friends and Foes.
JUst as a Friend and Foe should go about
To paint Antigonus, whose one Eye was out.
Which at half Face, either to show or hide,
The One turns his blind, the other his better side.
So betwixt Friends and Foes men are expressed,
By halfs set forth, whilst they conceal the rest.
No man's so bad, as Foes depaint him would,
No man, as Friends would make him, half so good.
To Lilly drawing the Countess of Castlemains Picture.
STay daring man, and never presume to draw
Her Picture, till thou may such colors get,
As Xerxes and Apelles never saw,
Nor er'e were known by any Painter yet.
Till from all Beauties thou extract'st the Grace.
And from the Sun, the Beams, that gil'd the Skies,
Never presume to draw her beauteous face,
Nor paint the Radiant brightness of her Eyes.
In vain the whilst thou do the labor take,
Since none can set her forth to her desert;
She who is above all, nature er'e did make,
much more's above all, can be made by Art.
Yet been't discouraged, since who er'e does see it,
At least with Admiration must confess
It has an air for charming and for sweet,
Much more, than others though than here is much less.
So those bold Giants, who would scale the Sky,
Although they in their high attempt did fall,
This comfort had they, mounted yet more high
Than those who never strove to climb at all.
Comfort thee then, and think it no disgrace,
From that great height a little to decline,
Since all must grant the Reason of it was
Her too great Excellence, and no want of Thine.
On a fair and virtuous Lady's embracing a Religious Life.
A Gentle Shepherdess as er'e did tread
Upon the Plains, whereon her flocks were fed,
Inspired by him who all good thoughts inspires,
Felt in her breast, till then unfelt desires,
To taste Heavens pleasures, since the Earth had none,
A Soul in longing, long could feed upon.
But changing one, aweary of the first,
She found the latter pleasure still, the worst.
And so went still deluded in her mind,
Seeking for that which she could never find.
This Infant thought with pious care she fed,
And with Religious Education bred.
Giving it now an aspiration,
Or wish for that blessed Life to feed upon,
And now a sigh, and now a Tear again,
Never to have known that blessedness, till then.
Avoiding carefully those Rocks and Shelves,
On which so many Souls had wrackt themselves,
Those two extremes on which so many fall,
To undertake too much, or naught at all,
For it is with newborn Children of desire,
As it is with sparks you kindle unto fire,
Starved with too little fuel 'twill not light,
Oppressed with too much, it is extinguished quite,
And now she is all a fire, happiness be
Fair Virgin to thy blessed desires, and thee,
So full, so high, so great a happiness,
As nothing can be more that is not less,
Nothing beyond, but down the Hill again,
And all Addition rather loss than gain.
By glad Experience may thou find all store
Of hearts contentment thou expect'st, and more,
And learn that Magic of Religion there,
Makes every thing quite contrary appear,
To you than unto us, Rich poverty
Triumphant sufferance, brave Humility.
Soft hardness, hardness difficulties slight,
Sweet bitterness, and heaviest burdens light.
Ease in your labor, pleasure in your pain,
A Heaven on Earth, and all things else but vain.
Pious EPIGRAMS To her MAJESTY.
Of the Force and Efficacy of Prayer.
HEaven is God's Throne, and Earth his Footstool is,
To that on wings of Prayer, Souls fly from this,
Where they almost Omnipotent become
By being joined to the Almighty's Throne,
To this height ( Madam) from your Infancy
Your Majesty by Prayer was taught to fly,
In Company of those, to whom it is given
To have their Conversation in Heaven,
Where those stupendous Miracles are wrought
Surpass all human force and human thought,
And if Heaven suffer violence, from whence
But only Prayer, proceeds this violence?
There Is nothing then that England may despair
To obtain of Heaven by Katherina's Prayer,
Let us have faith in her, but to confide,
And she has faith enough for all beside.
Of Easter and Christmas.
OF Easter a great word was said
This is the Day the Lord has made:
Of Christmas now a greater word,
This is the Day that made the Lord.
On the Magii's following the Starr.
YOur other Magii knew that every Starr
In Heaven, was greater than this world by far
But now so well professed what they had known
As these, who left the World to follow one.
On these words of our B. S. be ye perfect.
YOu bid us to be perfect, Lord, and we
Continue still imperfect, as you see,
What should we say, O Lord, but only this,
Give what you bid, and bid us what you please.
On these other words, O Woman great is thy Faith!
O Lord when shall our Faiths be praised thus
And we deserve to have thus much said of us
Others count all things possible to thee,
We nothing possible but what we see,
They more to Faith, than Senses credit give,
We more our Senses, than our Faith believe,
They believe all, we but believe by halfs,
Their Faiths are Giants, our Faiths only dwarfs
FINIS.
On these Words of our B. S. I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life.
O LORD,
THou art the Way, the Truth, and Life, thou say;
As well thou may.
What Fool is he then, would forsake the Way,
To go astray?
What Fool is he, who would the Truth refuse,
And Falsehood choose?
But oh! 'bove all, what Fool and mad-man's he
Would forsake thee?
The only Eternal Life, and choose to die
Eternally!
The saying of a certain Holy-man.
MY God, and I, can all things do said one
And if it seem too great presumption
To name on's self with God, it is without doubt
A greater yet, to name on's self without.
On Adam's Fall.
THose who deny Free Will to man, I would
When Adam fell, they could have made it good.
The pleasure of doing Good.
DO Good with pain, this pleasure in it you find,
The pain's soon past, the Good remains behind.
Do Ill with pleasure, this you have for your pains,
The pleasure passes, and the Ill remains.
In Contemplation of our B. S. Crucified.
O God! And would thou die for me!
And shall I nothing do for thee?
But still continne to offend,
So good a Lord, so dear a Friend.
Had any Prince done this for thee,
What wondering at it would there be!
But since it is God that does it, thou
Do never wonder at it now.
Strange! that one should more esteem
A Grace or Gift, that is given to him
By Earthly Kings, then what is given
Unto him by the King of Heaven!
On Man's Audaciousness, who dares offend Almighty God.
Whilst some admire young Cato in story so,
Durst offend those who threatened for to throw
Him down to the ground; I more admire them who
Dare offend God, not only threatens to*
Throw them to the ground; but what more fearful is,
Even to th'pit of the bottomless Abiss.
On our Passions.
PAssions like Fire and Water are, and they
Good Servants, but ill Masters are, they say;
Govern them then, if thou would Master be;
If rather Servant, let them govern thee.
On the Death of Beatrix Duchess of Lorain.
SHe who alive, all Virtue and Beauty was,
The One, in her Heart, and the other in her Face;
Now she is dead, just reason w'ave to fear,
Least Virtue and Beauty all be dead with her.
To the Right Honorable the Lord Henry Howard of Norfolk.
IT is not Travel makes the man, it is true
Unless a man Traveled (my Lord) like you;
In putting off himself, and putting on
The best of every Country where they come,
Their language, fashions, manners, and their use,
Purged of the dross, and stripped of the abuse.
Whilst y'ur pied Traveler, who nothing knows
Of other Nations fashions but their Clothes,
And learns their Language but as Parrots do,
Only perchance a broken word or two;
Goes, and returns just as he went again,
By carrying still himself along with him.
Mean time your own, and other Countries too,
In this agree, That chiefly such as you
Are honored by their Country when at home;
And honor of it, when abroad they come.
Of the Choice of Friends.
WE ought to shame, each common Carver should
More choice and careful be in chosing wood
To make their Statua's of, than we of men
To make our friends of, try, and prove them then,
And know each one is not for friendship good,
No more than Mercury's made of every wood;
A friend is rarely found, and just as one
Who is of every Trade is good for none:
So he who every one a friend does call,
Shall find in time of need, no friend at all.
To his Royal Highness the Duke of York, Returning from our Naval Victory, An.
1665.
MOre famous and more great than e're
Caesar or Alexander were!
What those great Heroes could not do,
Thou have both done, and outdone too.
Till Empire of the Seas we get,
No Victory can be complete;
For Land and Seas make but one Ball,
They had but half, thou have it all:
Great Prince the Honor of our days,
And utmost bound of human praise!
Increased in style, we well may call
You now the whole World's Admiral:
Whilst mighty Charles with Trident stands,
And like some God, the Seas commands.
Having so gloriously overcome,
What now remains but to come home;
More famous and more great then e're
Caesar, or Alexander were!
To his Highness Prince Rupert on the same.
GReat and Heroic Prince, surpassing far
Him, who was styled the Thunderbolt of War!
Whilst with thy mighty courage we compare
But others petty ones; methinks they are
Like Dwarfs compared to Giants; or at Sea
Like little Schiffs to some huge Argosey
Well for the World the whilst, thou do not find
Employment equal to thy mighty mind;
With the Macedon else it would as little seem
Unto thee now, as then it did to him.
Greatest Example of Heroic worth,
As ever yet this latter Age brought forth!
As formerly the Land of Britain was,
So now the Sea's too narrow for thy praise:
And 'twill in time become the work alone,
Of Ecstasy and Admiration!
Great and Heroic Prince surpassing far,
Him who was styled the Thunderbolt of War!
Of an unworthy Nobleman.
SEe you yond thing, that looks as he would cry
I am a Lord, a mile e're you come nigh.
Look on him well, and you would scarce find enough
In the whole man, to make a Lacquey of.
As when a Dwarf's dressed up in Giant's cloths,
Greater he would seem, the lesser still he shows;
Or petty Statua's on tall Bases set,
Their heighths but only make them seem less great
So when they in themselves have real worth,
Titles show handsomely, and set them forth,
When they have none, their Titles makes them show
But less, and more contemptible and low.
The Mock-Lover.
SONG.
OF all your Fools, your Lover
Does greatest Folly discover;
Who Is alway's crying and weeping,
Like Schoolboys after a whipping.
So long as they are merry,
One's never a weary:
But still to be whyning and puling,
And still to be sad,
As if they were mad,
Is neither good Loving nor Fooling.
Your Natural Fools we pity;
And delight in those that are vvitty;
But those who are Fools for Love,
Nor delight, nor pity do move.
These only are Toys
For Girls and for Boys.
And never move to compassion,
When Lovers are wise,
And Cupid has Eyes,
They Will love in another fashion.
The Excuse.
TO excuse thy Vice thou callst it natural,
A poor excuse the whilst, if that be all,
For so we call a Fool a Natural too,
But to excuse his Folly that will not do.
The Revenge.
GOD says, Revenge only to him belongs,
The Laws, to them the righting others wrongs,
For us to seek it then, what is it else,
But to wrong them, whilst we would right our selves
Exhortation to Friendship.
ENough, enough, let us be Friends again,
And still remember we are not beasts but men;
This bayting one another is but just
Like Bear-bayting, where those who seem the most
Delighted with it, nor love the Dog, nor Bear,
But only th'sport to see them tugg and tear
Each other; and what fools are they, would hurt
And harm themselves, for to make others sport?
You know we are commanded not to let
The Sun upon our Angers rise nor set.
It is enough then, let us be Friends again,
And still remember w'ar not Beasts, but Men.
On Mary Duchess of Richmond.
Whether a cheerful air does rise
And Elevate her fairer Eyes,
Or a pensive heaviness
Her lovely Eyelids does depress;
Still the same becoming Grace,
Accompanies her Eyes and Face.
Still you would think that Habit best
In which her Countenance last was dressed:
Poor Beauties! whom a look or glance
Can sometimes make look fair by chance,
Or curious dress, ore Artful care,
Can make seem fairer than they are:
Give me the Eyes, give me the Face
To which no Art can add a Grace:
Give me the Looks, no Garb nor dress
Can ever make more fair, or less.
The Liberty.
FRee as I was born I Will live,
So should every wise man do:
Only Fools they are who give
Their Freedoms to I know not who.
If my weakness cannot save it,
But 't must go, what e're it cost:
Some more strong than I shall have it,
Who can keep what I have lost.
Still some Excellency should be
More in the Master than the slave;
Which in others till I see
None my Liberty shall have.
Nor is it Excellency enough,
Time or Chance can mar or make;
But 't must be more lasting stuff
Shall from me my Freeedom take.
Those to whom I Will give away
That which none too dear can buy,
Shall be made of better clay:
And have better Souls then I.
Of several sorts of Wits.
Wits like Hawks are for the Sport,
Some are long vving'd some are short:
The first do fly so high a flight,
They often soar quite out of sight.
The second, far the fitter for ye,
Keep them close unto the quarry;
Nor too lovv; nor yet too high,
Of this latter sort am I.
Why I write not of Love.
I Know not what is Love, but what is more,
I know to honor, reverence and adore
A Mistress, so vvrapt up from outvvard sense,
In all that is Excellent, as one by one
Unfolding her out every Excellence:
You never shall to only women come.
Whilst all my thoughts then are so far above,
Let none admire I never write of Love.
l' Envoye.
AUthors use to make the Feasts,
Books their Viands, Readers Guests;
Judgment Caterer, and Wit
The Cook to dress and season it;
Which lastly on the Table set,
The Author who provides them meat,
Comes and prays his Guests to fall
Unto't, and says, they are welcome all.
FINIS.
Emendations or Amendments, page 2. to H. H.
I Grant you Sir I have a mind unfit
For my low Fortune, and too high for it;
But sure you will grant it is better have it so,
Than for high Fortune to have a mind too low:
For by the first w'ar almost raised to
An Angels height attained by only few;
Whilst by the second we are even deprest
Unto the Vulgar, almost to the beast, etc.
Page 3. On an Avaritious person, better thus.
Who wholly spends his life in getting wealth,
And to increase his store, consumes himself;
Does unto me, more Fool than him appear,
Who sold his Horse to buy him Provender.
Page 15. On the Riches of the Barbados
HOw Rich Barbados is of other things,
We well may see by Sugars that it brings;
How Rich it is of Men, we well may see
By bringing forth brave Drax such men as thee.
Page 24. l. 78, read
THe Title of a worthy Person's more
Than all the Titles which your Fools adore:
ERRATA.
FOr the Faults of the Printer as p. 1. l. the last but 3 harmless for
^elpless: p. 11. l. the 6. from the end far for fast. p. 24. l. the last but
two farms for fames: and diverse other lesser ones, the Reader may please to
mend.


