RELAT^ Of ten Years TRAVEL IN Europe, Asia, Affrique* and America.

All by way of Letters occasionally written to diverse noble Personages, from
place to place; And continued to this present year*

By RICHARD FLECKNO.

WITH Diverse other Historical, Moral, and Poetical pieces of the same Author.

Haec olim meminisse juvabit.

LONDON, Print^d for the Author, and are to be sold by (...)

The Epistle Dedicatory. To all those Noble Personages mentioned in these
following Letters.
TO you, with good Reason I dedicate these Letters, to whom they were writ, and
to whom I have Dedicated my self: For whilst others were desirous of pleasures,
Ambitious of Honors, or Covetous of wealth, you were all in all to me, all my
pleasure, all my honor, all my wealth; nor had I other desire nor Ambition,
but of you; so became I more dese^ving, similitude of disposition best gaining
and conserving Friends, knowing you were not to be purchased bu^ by worth, nor
conserved but by merit. Never any man then gained more by his Friends than I,
not without some Acknowledgment to mine Enemies, (of whom I should have fewer,
if they would be content to stand Neuters) Of which sort though I make no
mention, yet had I ever some who added sharp spurs unto me of doing well, not
to afford them the pleasure of my doing Ill: as Soldiers in battle, ar most
commonly as much encouraged to fight, to deprive their Enemies of the Victory,
as to gain it for their Friends. Accept then of this Dedication, and be still to
me as you have ever been, so shall I study still to be always to you as I have
been,

Your, etc*

To the Reader.
Gentle Reader,
It Is for no vaunt nor boast that I write my Travails (I esteeming my self (I
can assure thee) a far less Travailer now (having sailed of seeing the
East Indies, and consequently all the Eastern Monarchies) than I did when I
past over Seas to Zeland first) but to satisfy the curiosity of some noble
friends, and make honorable mention of others, to whom I am infinitely
obliged, (so thou will find whilst I make but slight mention of those, I am
most acurate in mentioning these) nor is it vani^y in me, that I make mention
of so many, and noble ones, all that know me, knowing I never willingly
converse but with the noblest in every place, finding them still in every
respect the best; besides, since Fortune maimed me, and brought me to my
Crutches, whom should I rely upon but the best able to support me? which they
the more willingly do (perhaps) because I lean so lightly on them, and always
strive to afford them some pleasure for the profit I receive of them. And thus
much for that, for the following Letters, I must advertise thee, that most of
those writ abroad are but translated out of the several Languages I writ them
in originally, nor art thou to imagine them less English for that, there being
as much difference betwixt the Authors translating his own conceptions, and
those of an others, as betwixt a Pre^tises copying, and a Painters drawing the
same piece again, the one having a dead Copy for imitation, the others pieces
being all drawn upon the life. For the rest, some faults thou must allow the
Printer, and some me, neither having bee^ so acurate as they might have been,
and for all testimony of friends, give me leave to prefix only this following
one before my Book, Qui mihi mill testes erit.

To the Lord Marquis of NEWCASTLE.
Who in Answer to a Copy of Verses of his sent him these following,
FLeckno thy verses are too high for me,
Though they but justly fit thy Muse and thee,
Caesar's should be thy Theme on them to write,
Though thou would express them more than they could ^ight,
Those Worthies rank them in thy wits pure fil^,
Though Homers blush, and Virgils lofty style:
For thy Poetique Flame is so much higher,
Where it should warm, 't consumes us with thy fire.
Thy vaster fancy does embrace all things,
And for thy Subject ought to have greatest Kings.
My Lord,
I Received the Verses you honored me withal, which impose on me a necessity
of deserving them, although I do not yet; to which end I know you writ them
(for 'twere ^oo great presumption in me to imagine you flattered me) it being
one of the Gentlest Arts of Friendship, laudando praecipere, to praise one for
somewhat they are not, to incite them to what they are praised for; yet must I
glory in it, and publish it every where; Since, if as Cicero says, laus est
laudari a laudabili viro, it is only true praise to be praised by a
praiseworthy man, how glorious must it be to me to be praised by the most
praise worthy-man alive? by one who has the most of the noble man in him, the
most of true greatness, and who is of so equal a mind in all Fortuns, as
prosperous could never elate, nor adverse ever depresse; no more My Lord but the
assurances that I shall always be

Your Lordships most etc.


I. To Col. Will. Euers from Gant, Anno 40.
The Reasons of his Going over Seas.
Noble Sir,
THere are diverse Birds that fly away, when Storms and Winter comes, one of
those Birds am I: for all prognostics Mariners observe of ensuing Storms, I
have observed in England, the billows beginning to swell high, and those
Porpoic^s which, were the Times fa^r and serene, should be in the Bottom,
dancing on the Top. Mean time, let your vast and strong built Carracks ride
out the storm for me, I Am too weak and slight-built a Vessel for Tempestuous
Seas; Besides educated as I am, in the Arts of Peace, (Music and Poetry) and
your Music of Base, Superious, and Rect^r chori, o^ King, Peers and Commons
being all di^consorted, the Base neither admitting of Master of the Quire to
moderate it, nor Superious to consort with 't, without which, it is rather a Loud
Tumultuous noise, than Music and Harmony: England is no place for me, and for
Poets, they are well feigned to delight in Hills and Mountains, where there are
always some Eminences above Lycurgus valleys, or fields of standing Corn,
where all heads are equal, England begins to be a place too much overgrown with
Shrubs and Underwoods for me. And thus much for my leaving it. Now for my
Retreat hither, 'twas altogether without design; I, like one who flies an
Incendium, wholly indifferent whither I went, so I saved my self; and if any
thing turned the scale for Flandres, 'twas its near Vicinitie to England; and
for Gant, because it is the chief Town here, (whosoever would know any thing, or
be known in any place, being ever to reside in the principalst City of ^^e
Country where he is) yet did Fortune, (the best director of indifferent Things)
dispose it better for me, than Council or D^liberation could (the Directors of
things where there is choice and difference) I lighting hear on a neat Town,
Good Air, and excellent Company, of the Count Salazar Governor o^ the Citadel,
his Lady, the Baron Re^^urt her noble Brother, the Blangelvals, the M^rquiss of
Libourg^, with diverse others of the Nobility, extremely courteous and obliging,
(as most commonly they are all, when out of Court and Competency with others)
amongst these I am daily Conversant, there is no Feast nor party without me. In
all their sports and Exercises I must make one, for their Games, they teach
them me, and make me win, or if I chance to lose, they are as much concerned as
for their own losses, and more than I am for mine. It were too great a vanity
to tell you this, if it were not a greater Ingratitude to conceal it, and you
know (Sir) I can so little conceal the honor my Friends do me, as I publish
every where the honor you do me, in being one of them, as that I have in being,

Sir, Your, etc.

II. To the Lord -- from Gant, An. 41.
With the Character and Epitaph of the Earl of STRAFFORD.
My Lo^d,
YOu would not believe me, when I told you which way things tended, and see
what comes of it. One of you is brought unto the block already, for whom I have
made this following Epitaph, To see such Heads off, on the Scaffold lie,
Only to keep on the Head of Majesty,
What is it, but Admonition to his Peers,
Such Heads once off, it is time to look to theirs.
As for this following Character, because I know my Lord amongst your many
other commendable qualities, you have this, not to Envy others commendations, I
send it you withal.

The Character of the Earl of Strafford.
He was the fullest Man of all the Eminent parts and qualities of a Great
Minister of State, as England ever bred, and both in Cabinet, and abroad,
expressed it as fully too; his unhappiness 'twas, (or rather ours) that he lived
not in happier Times (might have rather Admired, than Envyed those parts of
his) so as that Epitaph of Adrian the 6th, might well be applied to him, Proh!
dolor quantum refert in que Tempora vel optimi cujusque virtus incidat. Many
Envyed him, because few understood him, and it is almost to be wished that his
Prince had not don't so well, since 'twas his overthrow (so much more it
imports the People than the Prince be Good, they being many, and he but one.)
He was a Jewel sit for the Crown of any Prince to wear, and that his Prince
well knew, and therefore wore him him there; but being matched, and overmatcht
too with counterfeit ones, they fearing his splendour should dim and offuscat
them, snacht him thence* and cast him into the obscurity of a Prison, from
whence he might have escaped, had he preferred his Life before his Fame; but he
had higher Thoughts, and looked only after Eternity, and the perpetuating his
Memory; so while 'twas irreparable loss unto the Crown, 'twas his gain to die
with the glorious title, and high reputation of his Princes Martyr. Nor wanted
there as great prodigies at his death, as ever fore-run any Heroes yet, all the
Laws of the Land being first subverted, the King losing his Authority, and
Kingdom changed into Democra^ie, Er' he could die: so as his noble House was
more honored and illustrated by his fall, than ever't could have been, even in
his greatest rise.

And now (my Lord) comfort your self, if you chance to be the next, that you
shall not want one to make your Epitaph, and Cha^acter at least; but I rather
wish and hope 't may be your Elogium, in celebration of your Glorious Actions.
For if things look toward a War, (as I Am afraid they do) 'twill be as well
the Glory of your Judgment to choose the better side, as of your Valor to
defend it bravely; for Valor is either Virtue or Vice, as it is well or ill
employed; and it is hard to determine which is the greater Crime, to defend an
Ill Cause well, or a good one ill: You then being of Brutus disposition,
(Quicquid vult, valde vult) that is, vehement in all you undertake, I cannot
end this Letter with a better Prayer, than God bless a good Cause from having
you for Enemy, and God bless you from being Friend unto an Ill; which is the
prayer of

My Lord, Your, etc.

III. To Mr. Henry Petre from Gant, Anno 42.
Of his Resolution ^o leave GANT.
Noble Sir,
I Have lived to see the day, when having lost all (...) sinc^, I may thank God
for having nothin^ now, nor did I ever know how great a happiness 'twa^, till
I saw their unhappines^e, w^^ are bemir'd and hog^'d in their own L^^^, and
bound to the^r Countries by the ^ie^ of ^^fe and Children: For what avails it
such to ^^ve their Bodies free abroad, whilst their Souls are imprisoned at
home? or to fly the miseries of the^r Country, whilst they have lef^ Pledges
with Fortune there to be miserabl^ still? I speak this in regard of many
Engli^^ here, retired (as they imagine) from the Noise and Tumult in England,
whil^^ their ea^ are as much beaten with it here, and their minds as much
solicited and perplexed, as they were present there. They receiving wee^ly
Intelligence from their Wives, Friends and Servants there? This, that his house
is plundered; that, that his Tenants refuse to pay their Rent; a third, that
his Estate is sequestered, etc. when I must make sad faces with them ^or
company, or they cry out, I care not how things go. I answer, If my care could
remedy it, I should; And for their Losses, I protest they touch me as nearly,
and ^'m as sorry for them, as I should be for my own, and if that suffice not,
I am sorry Nature made me not of another Temper and Disposition for their
sakes; Neither was this any Sto^cal Indolency in me, who could suffer, nay die
for a Friend, but yet without trouble and vexation. In ^ine, I Am so wearied out
with this sad sport, as (not to be made miserable at second hand) I Am resolved
to quit this place, and retire me to Antwerp or Bruxelles (for I Am indifferent
for either) you laugh now at my Indifferency, but may I die, or lose your
Friendship, which is more, if I find it not an Immense happi^esse to say with
Bias, Omnia mea mecum porto, and while others by heaping up wealth on wealth,
make themselves at last so cumbersom a load of it, they cannot stir for it; I
by reducing all to the narrow compass of one Portmanteau, travel lightly up
and down, enjoying that Liberty, Fortune has bestowed on me, and Nature
inclines me to, wanting nor wishing for nothing more (Sir) than your Company,
being as I am,

Sir, Your, etc.

IV. To the Lady Audley, from Bruxelles, Anno 42.
Of his Arival there.
Madam,
I Am at last arived at Bruxelles, where for some Time I intend to stay, having
by rolling up and down like a Snow-ball contracted so many Acquaintances, as I
am now incompast with them, and in the Center of them all. The Town is
exceeding pleasant, the Nobility numerous, and Ladies generally handsome, more
sprightly than the English, and of graver Temper than the French; (in a word,
Madam, just like your sel^) to tell you of their Generous Actions, (For I know
you love Generosity, and they but imitate you in it) the Marchioness of
Bergues, Mother of those two incomparable Ladies, the Duchess of L^rein, and
Mad^moiselle d^ Beauvais, after my first visit, singling me from the Company,
told me, that since she kn^w those of my Country and Condition (as the Times
went) could not be so well accommodated, she should take it ill of me, if in my
wants I had recourse to any but her self. To whom I answered, (after my most
humble remerciments for so high a favor) That as I yet wanted nothing: so
'twas now impossible I ever should, having the honor of her good Graces, which
I beseech'd her to continue only, and I should be Rich enough. After this,
visiting Madam Berlamont, (whose very Name is story) she freely and nobly
offered me the honor of her Table during my abode in Bruxelles, where only Eat
her self, her two Neices, Daughters to the Duke of Arschot, and the young
Prince of Arembergh his Son, whence you may conjecture how great an honor
'twas, but much more by that which follows.

She having the great Spirit of the Nobility here, not only Hereditary, but
almost all contracted in her self, not brooking the Spanish domination (besides
some P^cque with the Infanta) was banished the Court to her House at Audenard,
where for some years she lived retired, like a Great Princess as she was, till
at last (the Infanta dead) her Banishment was exchanged, for Confinement to her
House at Br^xelles, which she carried so wisely, and so cunningly dissembled at
her Return, as making virtue of necessity, she reclus'd her self in her own
House, as in a Monastery, together with her Neices, every one the whilst
envying her felicity, accompting ^t a point of solemn greatness in her, to be
visited by all, without obligation of re^v^siting any, and of great happiness
to live so in the world, as she were ou^ of it* and so out of it, as she
enjoyed it more than those who were in it, living at vast expense, keeping a
Noble Train and Tabl^, wanting no pleasures nor delights a plenteous Fortune
could procure, or honorable mind could wish, having Woods, Gardens, Fishponds,
Banqueting-houses, all within the incinct and enclosure of the Walls, with
cooling Fountains, where under the shadow of fresh Arbors, she eats all the
Summer Time. And in that state she was, when she offered me the honor of her
Table, and Freedom of her House; which her Nobleness not suffering my Modesty
to re^use, imagine Madam, what a delicious life I lead, in so noble Company, so
splendious Entertainment, and so Magnificent Equipage; which that you may not
think too voluptuous a life, it is requisite you know, that the Mornings we
employ in our Devotions in the Chap^ll of her Monastery, into which she has a
Door opening out of her House, where on Sundays and Holidays is frequent
concourse of all the Nobler sort, to hear the N^ns Music, absolutely the best
in Bruxelles, for Voice and Instrument. You Will pardon Madam, my Tediousness in
relating these particulars, and consider how hard it is to moderate ones self
in so great Felicity, which yet I can assure you, without Complement, I would
exchange, were it far greater than it is, for one day at Holicroft, or
whersoever you are. Mean time be pleased to believe, that wheresoever I am,
nothing can change me from being

Madam, Your, etc.

V. To Mr. Edward Lewis at the Spa, from Bruxelles, Anno 43.
Of Conve^sation with Ladies.
Noble Sir,
YOurs from the Spa I received by the last, for your News I thank you, that of
the Prince of Gaure was welcome to Mademoiselle d' Arschot, and more to Madam
Bar^amont, who both command me to present their best respects and remembrances
unto you. But now touching our Quarrel.

You wonder I am always amongst the Ladies, and I wonder, you and all men are
not so; for amongst them, one learns nothing but Virtue, high honor and
Nobleness, whilst amongst Men (such is the corruption of the Times) one learns
nothing but Libertinage, Vice and Deboisherie; Mistake me not yet I mean not
all Women, but only such you left me with, and Madamois^lle de Beauvais, whom I
look not upon as Woman, but Vertu's self; of whom you remember I said upon
another occasion, that She was so wrapped up from our mortal since,
In all that is Exc^llent, as one by one
Unfolding her out every Excellence,
You never should unto bare Woman come.
Nor mean I all Men neither, but only your young Gallants of the Time, who have
little of the Court, less of the School, and all of the Bourdel in them; who,
whilst they learn only to manage the Sword, lea^e the Ladys in possession of
their Books at home: and at best, talk of nothing but Rampards and Parapats,
Mosquetad^, Estramacons, and Canonads: so as you have nothing but the noise of
Drums and Trumpet in your head, whilst they are present, and the ringing of it
in your ears a month after they are gone. I know too there are bad Women in the
world, such who have put off Woman, and put on Impudence; but I thank God I
know them not, nor ever mean to do: So are there many learned and pious men;
but still me thinks they are but Men, and have their Imperfections. If they be
learned, they are most commonly too positive and Magisterial, and so opiniatre,
as none's opinion must be heard, but th^irs. It Is a Tyranny to converse with
them, and Conversation, you know, should be a Republique, where every ones
discourse and opinions should be Free: So your Pious men have somewhat in them
(commonly) of the supercilius, rather deterring than inviting to their
conversation; They would have all Grave like themselves, without distinction of
Age nor persons; every thing is Vanity with them, every thing Levity: which
quality till they sweeten, they are too Austere for me. Now for your Ladies,
without noise and quarrel you converse with them, there is no contention with
them, but in court^sie; they gentlely give you their opinions, and let you
retain your own; they pursue not contention, but Truth, and have no Author to
maintain beyond it; their Virtue is charming, and Honor without boast; and
finally, it is pleasure, not pain, to converse with them. I grant you, they have
their Imperfections too, but they are noble ones, and their Birth, their
Education, and the modesty of their Sex, makes them nothing, in comparison with
those of men; For example, an Oath, an Obs^ene word with them is horror and
blasphemy, that is but sport and gallantry with Men. But what do I talk of
Imperfections, having so newly mentioned Mad. de B. with whom Imperfections the
same day are not to be named, and of whom I must make more have to speak,
whilst she is effable, she advancing so fast toward perfection, as she will be
ineffable ever long, and here I must end, since having but named her, I have no
more to say, but to admire, and abruptly to tell you that I am,

Sir, Your, etc.

VI. To the Lord -- from Bruxelles, Anno 44.
Of his Resolution to tra^el into ITALY.
My Lord,
YOu will wonder, living so deliciously as I do, so as it is the general voice
of Brussels, None lives but I, every day with Mademoiselle de Arschot and the
Princess d'H^ghzolern in the Park, singing, and making M^sick at foot of
every Tree, and head of every Fountain, every day in Feasts at home, or
Collations abroad, I can resolve so soon to quit Brusselles, having scarcely
yet resided here a year; And you will lay perhaps, (as others do) that I am
unconstant, fickle, and even aweary of mine own ^^licitie. But I will tell you
now, in confidence, my Reason for it. It Is no Inconstancy, but rather a constancy
to my first Resolution of ^lying war and trouble, makes me now resolve to leave
this Country, and travel into Italy; Nor could I excuse it to mine own Country,
should I longer stay here, where the French and Hollander betwixt them, wast
and consume this Country; just like a Taper lighted at both Ends; nor is there
any retreat here from the noise of War and Tumult, every place being Frontire
to some Enemy or other; nay the very Walls of some Towns (so narrowly they are
pressed) frontire unto both. Mean time, imagine with what heart I can behold so
many noble creatures (so nobly obliging me) suffering under so many heavy
Calamities, one's Territory spoiled, an others Castles razed unto the ground,
and all reduced by it to such want and poverty, as I heard a Great Princess
say not long since, after she had reformed her House and Family almost to a
fourth part, That she feared she should be forced to Spinn to maintain the
rest. Yet do they venture Lives and Fortunes here to maintain their King in
possession of his own, whilst better cheap they might be subject to an other
Prince, and change hands, only by crossing of their Arms, and sitting still (a
rare Example of Loyalty in Subjects now adays.) Italy then, being the only
Country now free from Wars, and the miseries it brings in train of it, thither
I resolve to go, in search of that Peace all Countries have lost but it. And if
you ask me, with what heart I can leave this Noble Company, I am so much
obliged unto? Truly, just with such an one as I should depart with Life, or
whatever were dearer unto me then it; Nor could I ever resolve to do it,
without hope of returning soon again, and some sudden change of Fortune. Mean
time, part of my Grief, and resentment of my departure, I have endeavored to
express in this following copy of Verses, which, cause they are but short, I
send you here. Absence, that in each soft and gentle mind,
With parting friends do leave a sting behind;
Just like the Be, but with far different Fate,
Thou wounding where thou love, they where they hate:
Since Destiny of things would have it so,
What most we love, with pain we should for go;
And that the smart of all loved things be such,
Nothing hereafter may I love too much:
So, though I prove less happy by it, ('it is true)
I shall, withal, be less unhappy too.
This, my Lord, if you shall read with some reflection to your self, you shall
do but Justice to

Your Lordships, etc.

VII. To Mademoiselle de Beauvais, from Paris, Anno 44.
Of his Arival at PARIS.
Mademoiselle,
IN compliance with my Duty, and your Commands, I shall have the honor to let
you understand that I am arrived at Paris, (thanks to Count Grancy, who
arrested all my Company (except my self) for coming to Gravelling out of the
Enemies Country, without Pasport. For Paris, what should I say of it, but that
it is one of the greatest Cities in the World? and where there is the greatest
disorder; it is all Hurry, and one spends more spirits with noises here in a
week, than he can recover in a years Solitude. They account their Kingdom
greater than any three of the King of Spains, and so they may this City, then
any three of his Cities, Madril, S^vil, and Salama^ca, for Court Ville
Marchante, and Universitie, not being altogether to be comp^r'd with it. For
the rest, leaving every one to admire somewhat or other here, eve^ to that
Italian Prelat, who admired the Great Abundance of Cooks shops, and Alloys of
Bief. I admire nothing in it; for he ariving at admiration, who go^s but a step
beyond that he Knows already, I ( Mademoiselle) am gone a step beyond Admiration
it self, in knowing you. I dare make no stay here, for fear of being tempted to
longer stay; nor visit any, for fear of Engaging my self in too many Visits,
the abstinence from things being sar easier than the Temperance of them;
wherefore tomorrow I depart for Lions, and so forwards on my Journey toward
Italy. Of the progress of my Voyage I shall not fail to advertise you from
place to place, since you do me the honor to permit me, and esteem me for.

Your, etc.
Postscript:
My most humble Baisemains I beseech you to the Lady Marquess your noble
Mother, to Mademoiselle d' Arschot when you see her, and all the rest.



VIII. To the same from Marseilles, Anno 44.
The Description of the place.
Mademoiselle,
BY my last from Paris I had the honor to write unto you, Now this is (if you
please) to let you understand, that the next day I departed thence with the
Messenger for Lions, from thence down the Rhosne by water to Avignon, and from
thence by Horse to Marseilles all my journey through France being only a bon
voyage, or pleasant journey in excellent company, with Wines that would tempt a
Nazareth, and Flesh and foul that would deboish a Minime. For Marseilles, it is
one of the delightfullst places as yet I ever saw, situated in a corner of the
Mediterranean sea, at equal distance betwixt Spain and Italy, enjoying in a
more temperate climat than either, all the commodities of both. The Sea tamed
and broken by the force of the opposite Hands before it arives unto the walls,
flows thither, (leaving all its rag^ngnes behind) as gently as any River, when
by an Inlet entering the Port it becomes as calm and smooth as any Lake. The
Town on the left hand of it Theater-wise, (with one house elevated above an
other) seeming situated on purpose to behold the pleasant spectacle of the Port
(some two miles about in Oval form) where ride all the French Galleys, so
evenly ranked, as whilst their Becks like a stand of Pikes seem to charge the
Water, their Prows seem to assault the Land, and brave the Cawsway surrounding
all the Port, where toward the Town-side the Ladies accompanied with their
Gallants walk every Evening some ten or twelve a breast, sollacing themselves
with Music and Conversation til Midnight; Nor shall you easily find any where
in France bandsomer Women, better behaved, nor richlier clad, so accostable and
free of Company and Entertainment, as none (no not strangers themselves) are
strangers there to any: ^o as comparing them with the Maritime Women of other
Seas, (for the most part fowl, ugly, and weather-beaten) you would easily
conclude, 'twas only on those Seas Venus was born. For the Town, it is rather
well compact, than great, and more commodious than magnificent, containing
about some seventeen thousand Houses within the walls, and without (on the
adjacent Hills and Valleys) some two and twenty thousand more: so as you would
imagine them an Army of Houses in disrout, or the greatest part of the Town
broke out the walls, their incinct not being capacious enough to contain them
all. To these Bastids or Houses of Pleasure, in Spring and Summer time, (which
is with them almost all the year) they retire themselves, and pass their Time
in nothing but Sports and Jollity, where for more than this fortnight I have
past my Time amongst the rest, in expecting the commodity of Embarquement for
Genoa. Mean time, Mademoiselle, be you who are Patroness of my Voyage, but as
propitious to me by Sea as you by Land have been, and I shall soon be at my
journies end, of which I can no ways doubt, being as I am,

Mademoiselle, Your, etc.

IX. To the same from Genoa, Anno 45.
Of his Arival there.
Mademoiselle,
With good Reason I imagined my Voyage by Sea would prove as fortunate as my
journie by Land, having you for Patroness of either; We having past with
favorable Wind, and prosperous Navigation from Marseilles hither, frighted
only a little with Pirates on our way, which necessitated us to put in at
Monaco, where for some four or five days during my Residence there, the
Prince did me the honor to lodge me in his Palace, being a great Vertuoso,
and not only a great Lover of Music, but an excellent Musician. He is really a
Prince very noble and generous, deserving a far greater Principality, it being
only a Rock or Promontory into the Sea, some mile about, o'^ looked by Horrid
Cliffs, hanging like Clouds or Tempests in the air, threatening each moment to
fall upon their heads. It has a pretty Port, capable of some twenty Ships and
Galleys, which is his chiefest Revenue, every Ship paying some 3 Crowns for
Anchorage; yet is his Palace magnificently built, a^' Italian, and richly and
nobly furnished. And so much for Monaco. From whence I imbarqu'd for Genoa in
the Princes own Faluque, all the strand of Genoa for more than ^ hundred mile
seeming but one continued Town, allowing the interjacent Mountains and Valleys
for Gardinage, planted with all sorts of delicious fruit, Oranges and Limmons
amongst the rest, in so great abundance, as their flowers perfume the Sea all
the way you pass along. Ariv'd at last at St. Pietro d' (...), the Suburbs of
Genoa, you would imagine that Architecture had installed there all the ra^ities
of its Art, and given the last proof o^ i^s excellency, it being a Seminary of
Palla^es; no one plot in the world, for its bigness, being able to show so
many and so stately, (...). From thence passing by the (...) po^t into the
Town, first thing you admire f^r it is Admirable all) is its Mole or Wall,
forced all along into the Sea to secure the Haven, rampir'd with whole Rocks
thrown in at foot thereof, to break the fury of the waves, in beholding which,
you would imagine, that as the Giants formerly pil'd Mountains on Mountains to
scale the Heavens: so* these threw one upon another to penetrate the Abyss.
Next prospect that takes your eyes, is that of the Palace of the Duke ^'or^^,
fronting the Haven with its Gardens, and Collosean Statuas, making a glorious
show. Whence you pass onward toward the City, situated on rising ground, all
built of white Stone, making a fairer show without, than it does within, by
reason of the narrowness of the streets. Here I no sooner ariv'd, and had ta'n
up mine Inn, but the Marquis Philippo Palavicino fetched me straight away from
thence, and lodged me in his Palace, I easily imagining upon whose account it
was, when that Night at Supper the Marquess his Mother drank a health to all
the Flandres Ladies, as he himself did afterward, in a solemn Entertainment he
made for me aboard one of the States ships in the Harbor, together with diverse
other noble Gen^ueses, where whilst he drank your health, Ecco reported to Land
and Sea, the Fame of the Flandres Ladies, and the Canon unto the skies; 'twere
infinite to tell you all my Entertainments here, all (Ladies) to express his
Gratitude unto you, as I in Gratitude to him am obliged to let you know. One
thing I observed here, that whilst they glory in being a free Estate, even to
have Libertas written on the Arms of the Commonwealth, the Nobility
notwithstanding abuse the Common people at pleasure, they having only the
Liberty to hang themselves, if they please, for other Liberty they have none.
Whence I see it is but a mere cheat this Popular Liberty, the Enchantment of the
vulgar, and G^ugaw they promise Children, to make them good Boys; yet 't has
been, and ever will be the madness of the Common people to go in quest of it,
as Don Quixote did of his Dulcinea, or Sancho Pansa of his imaginary Island or
Government, which, just like your floating Islands, slips away from you, when
you think to set foot on it, and so eludes your imaginary possession, which
those who govern them well understanding, they always delude them with that
specious name, when in reality there is no such thing at all, the true liberty
of the people only consisting in being well commanded, and the Magistrates in
being well obeyed: From whence results the perfect Harmony of Kingdoms and
Commonwealths, which then is disaccorded, when the one deflects to Tyranny, and
the other to Riot and Licentiousness, the one abusively called Absolute
Domination, and the other Liberty: From whence finally results those two
Extreme mischiefs of all Estates, by Fronto wisely observed to be equally
dangerous, where all things are lawful, or where nothing is. But enough of
this discourse: and to conclude with Genoa, their Churches here are most of
them richly guilt, Marble being their vildest material, their Music very good,
but that of their Comedys excellent. I ariving here just at the overture of
their Theater. By my next, Mademoiselle, I shall have the honor to write unto
you from Rome; toward which to morrow is going,

Mademoiselle, Your, etc.

X To the same from Rome, Anno 45.
Of his A^ival t^ere, and ^^e Overture of some A^^ai^s.
Mademoiselle,
BY my last from Genoa you understood of my Arival there. Now this (if you
please) is to let you understand, how from thence by Lucca, Pisa, Florence,
S^ena, etc. finally I am arived here at Rome, admiring nothing so much in all
my voyage, than that from Bruxelles hit^er, having made the Tour of C^l^s, 't
has cost me only two and twenty Pist^lles. Next day after my Arival here, I
visited the Duke and Duchess of Boullon, who live here very privately since
the last Popes death, with the fall of the Barbarins, they f^lling l^^ewise in
Credit and Authority: so they being no friends of her Highness, (as you know)
no matter how great Enemies they are. One pretty mistake I ran into at
unawares, treating him with Excellence, (as formerly I was wont to do) when ^e
pretends (as since I have understood) to be treated with Altezze, which I am
glad of (who otherwise should be sorry to err in so main a point of Civility,
in giving an Ace too little, rather than an Ace too much) since he treats her
Altezze with nothing but Excellence. I have been also to visit the Marquis Rene
Bentivolg^o, who retains still a grateful memory of the Curtesy he received in
Flandres of particulars, though as to the general he is so little Friend, as I Am
informed he is taking conditions under France. The Marquis Matthei I saw too,
there being a solemn Justing or Running at Ring and Sarazen this week at the
Cardinal d' Estes (where all the great Ladies of Rome were present) consisting
of three Bolonez, three Ferrarians, and three Roman Knights; of which the
Marquis Ma^thei was chief of the Romans, and Bentivolgio of the Bolonez, both
doing excellent well, adding somewhat of the air of Flandres to that of Italy,
that made them excel the rest. His Highness Agent in this Court I have not
visited yet; thinking it high time, after I have prepared my materials, to
assemble my Workmen for finishing the Edifice, toward which one main Help I
hope to have of Cardinal Carasfa, newly promoted to the Cardinalat. More
Mademoiselle by the next: Now give me leave (if you please) to conclude this
with my must humble baise mains to her Highness your Sister, my Lady Marque
your Mother, and with the Assurance that I am ever,

Mademoiselle, Your, etc.

XI. To the same, from Rome, Anno 45.
Containing an Historical Narration of the Marriage of the Duchess of Lorain.
Mademoiselle,
SInce those who are to Inform others ought first to be well informed
themselves, you will please to correct me, if any where I have erred in this
following Narration of her Highness Marriage, wherein, as it is my duty, I have
endeavored to vindicate the Justice of her Cause, and declare her Innocence.

Henry Duke of Lorain dying without issue Male, leaving only two Daughters,
Nicole and Claude. The Count of Vandemort (Father of the present Duke) assumed
the Duchy, as next Heir unto the House (by right of the Law Salique, as he
pretended) in deffalance of the Masculin Line (the Daughters of the last Duke
but weakly reclaiming) when more to strengthen the title of his House (by
connecting the branches of either Stock together) he proposed the Marriage of
Charles his eldest Son, with the Princess Nicole, eldest Daughter of the
deceased Duke, with Protestation in case of his refusal (well perceiving his
unwillingness) to marry her to the Prince of Faulxburgh, and disinherit him,
when he knowing there was no dallying with his Father, of stern nature, rendered
more violent by opposition, seemingly assented, and so was forced to marry her,
yet would he no ways bed her, such an Aversion he had from her, til his Father
perceiving it, (and knowing he had don nothing, until he had don also that) he
forced him to bed her in his presence, taking witness of it, as his son did
presently after of the force thereof; who though a Religious Prince, was not
Religious yet, to that point, to lose a Dukedom for want of bedding a Lady,
shortly after his Father dying, he continued still his cohabitation with her,
til having assured, as he thought, the possession of the Duchy, they severed
at last, like Bodies never well joined, having no other Issue of their Marriage,
but nails and teeth (as one said anciently) when he accounting himself free
from all Bonds of Matrimony, (being assured so, by many grave Divines, not only
of his own, but of others Dominions) after some years suit, and all the
precedent formalities of the Church, Married publicly the Lady Beatrix de
Cus^nce, Princess of Cantacro^x, one of the consider^ble^t Marriages then for
noble, rich, and fair (under the degree of absolute Sovereigns) in the
Christian world, her House having often allied with that of Loraine, and her
Dem^ins when he married her (as I have often heard) amounting nigh to Thirty
thousand pounds a year: In which Marriage [Celebrated by a Bishop in the face of
the Public Church] they lived some 7 years happily together (he having fair
Issue by her) when a storm was raised against them at Rome, by the suscitation
(as was imagined) of his Brother Prince Francis, and the Princess Nicole, he
(having espoused the second Daughter of Duke Henry, by whom he had numerous
Issue) for the Intrest of his Children, and she for emulation, and Revenge on
her fair Rival; which proceeded so far at last, as Excommunication was
denoun^'t against them, not to be revok't, till they mutually separating,
should submit their cause to the decission of the Court of Rome.

This occasioned many Rumors in the world, some allowing no Divorce at all,
but only by Death, (as if the tie of Marriage were like that of the Gordian
knot,) others inferring from their long Cohabitation, their validating the
Marriage, when all Casuists agree, that no length of Time can render that
Marriage or Contract lawful, which was unlawful at the first, and that force
or metus cadens in constantem virum, (as they term it) was one of the
principal Anullers of Marriage, nothing being more essential to it than the free
consent of the parties. Their long cohabitation then was still but the same
force drawn out in length: And for their main objection of all, the Censure of
the Church* What should I say? But many a Verity may be doubtful, for want of
being well explicated and understood, that Truth has no greater Enemy than
verisimilitude and likelihood; and that the condemnation may oftentimes be
just, and the person condemned innocent. This enclosed I beseech you to her
Highness, with the most humble baise mains of

Mademoiselle, Your, etc.

XII. To the Duchess of Loraine, from Rome, Anno 45.
Touching the state of her Affairs.
Madam,
AFter long poring in the dark, I begin at last to perceive some light in your
Highness affairs here, and to find how his Highness Agents negotiation here,
is more to take off the Excommunication, than to procure a Divorce from the
first Marriage, or Ratification of the last; and this I came to light of by this
occasion: I recommending your Affairs the other day to the Duchess Matthei,
one who can do all here, his Holiness Governing Rome, Donna Olympia him, and
she Donna Olympia. She most readily undertook it, first, for your Highness
sake, next for her Brothers, and lastly perhaps for mine, (I having the honor
to wait often upon her) commanding me to bring my Man, and his business should
be dispatched. Whereupon I joyfully ran to inform his Highness Agent of what
had past, imagining he would have run as joyfully to embrace the occasion, when
contrary to my expectation, I found him nothing moved with it all, rather
surpised, confused and Interdict, and so cold (in fine) as conecting delays
unto delays, at last he absolutely refused to go, less he had his Highness
warrant first, which excuse appeared to me frivolous; for if he had order to do
the thing, (as now I suspected he had none) what need he further order to do it
well? This suspicion shortly after grew up to certitude, when discoursing with
Cardinal Caraffa about your Highness affairs, and recommending to him the
Justice of your cause, and expedition of the Rhota, He answered me, with the
prudence of an Italian, and franchize of a Germain, (with whom he was Nuntius,
when I had the honor to know him first) that I urged the expedition of an
affair, wherein they should disoblige both the Emperor and the Crown of
France, without so much as gratifying the Duke himself, who being the main
party, solicited it not at all; Whereupon I wondered at mine own blindness all
this while, not to have perceived, how whilst the Emperor embraced Prince
Francis Intrest, (who had put himself under his Protection) and the Crown of
^rance (for the same Reasons) that of the Princess Nicole's; his Alt^zze of
Lorain had his Interest too, not to set the Princess Nicole at Liberty to
marry with any other, till she were past estate of bearing children, lest some
foreign Prince having issue by her, might claim the Duchy in their right, to
the Exclusion of his own House, if not of his own Body. This, Madam, I could
not but represent to your Highness consideration, that you might perceive how
all the World (not only there but here) is governed by Interest and Reason o^
State, in spite of Justice and Innocence. Mean time, for my part I can only
assure your Highness, that I have none, nor ever had other Ambition, than only
(Madam) to declare upon all occasions how much I am

Your Highness most humble, etc.

XII. To Sir J. S. from Rome, Anno 4^.
In answer to h^s Ne^s of the Scots comi^g into England.
Noble Sir,
I Give you humble thanks for your News, and if it were not an homely
complement, could wish it better for your sake: since if I be n't deceived, (as
I shall never be, in thinking too well of a Scotch Pre^byterian) they come but
into England with their Arms, as Butlers do at Christmas with their Cards, to
set you a playing, that all the Gains may come to their Box at last; for if you
remember, they have much to retaliate with the English, both for injuries and
benefits; of the first sort are our often Inrodes into their Country, and the
deadly fewd of the Nations; of the second are our assisting them to change
Religion, and Rebel against their lawful Prince; Now, if they should have a
mind to be quit with us, I know not whether twere not better have them Enemies
than Friends. And thus much for your News. Now for ours, I Will tell you a
pleasant passage happened here about the Book you sent, in front or title thereof
was a Dove, with an Olive branch in the mou^h, and the word or motto, Holy
Innocence be blessed, (which if intended by the Scots, might better have been a
Vulture, with its prey in the mouth, and this motto, Cursed be their Rapine)
which coming in conjuncture with his Holiness Innocent the Tenth's assumption
to the Papacy, whose Arms are a Dove, with an Olive branch in the mouth, 'twas
interpreted as a prophecy of him, so ridiculous they are, wherefore prethy come
up to Rome, that we may laugh at them, I being in mighty want of one, as Cicero
says, Cum quo docte rideam, that may laugh learnedly with me; for these
Italians here are such wise men at home, and such Fools abroad, as they know
nothing out of Italy, though they pretend to know every thing: And for the
place, it is a common saying, that to like Rome, one must be either very
virtuous or very vicious: if so, I am neither, for I swear I like it not. Good
meat there is, delicious wine, and excellent fruit; but that is the Climats
virtue, and none of theirs. Give me good Company, good Natures, and good Mirth,
and the Devil of any such thing they have here, all being for their Interest,
and conserving their Individuums, I never hearing a hearty Laughter since I
came, nor seeing a smile but from one end of the mouth to the other. In a word,
when you have seen their Ruins, you have seen all here; for all their ancient
Virtues, like their ancient Structures, are fa^n to ruin: and for Generositie
and Magnificence, it seems to have dyed with the last Pope, for now there is
none left alive; Yet do your Cardinals (I Will say that for them) live like great
Princes as to the Exterior, with great trains of Coaches, Staffi^res and other
dependancies; but examine their Interior, and you will find, while their Bodies
inhabit whole Acres of Palaces, their souls in their straight narrow bo^oms
are stifled for want of Room. And ^hus much for the better sort; for the other,
I must confess they are the civillest, and farthest from Quarrel in the world,
(thanks to their cowardice) so as saying but con licenza, you may pluck them by
the Noses, tread upon their Toes, or do any thing but touch their money or
their Wives, and they will tell ye, Vostre Signiorie e patrono. In fine, with the
old you shall hear nothing but quattri^^ in their mouths, and with the young
Putana, yet with all these Vices, if you will believe them, there a^ no where in
the world more Virtuoso's than here; for if an Ape do but his tricks well, or
an Ass leap thorough a Hoop, they call him a Virtuoso strait. But you will say
this is an odd way to invite you hither; wherefore I Will take an other way, and
tell you there is no Town nor Country in the World better Governed than this,
nor where there is more variety to satisfy the Curious, where one of your
Religion lives more free, nor one of your knowledge better improves himself,
(their very streets being as learned and full of Erudition, as others
Histories) Every wall is a Monument, and the stones of more than a thousand
years standing, stand up in testimony of their Religion, of the Truth of which,
though there were no other Argument, yet twere enough to convince any Rational
man, that it must needs be that Church and Religion our blessed Savior
promised perpetuity unto, since in so great corruption of manners it stands
still, and falls not to the ground, while so many others who pretend to more
virtue and morality of life, are wholly perished and decayed.

Farewell, and prithy come up (I say again) that we may laugh, for I have great
need of it,

Your, etc.

XIV. To the Lord Marquis Camillo Bagni, from Rome, Anno 45.
Declaring unto him the nobleness of N.
My Lord,
SInce you did me the honor to make me of your Confidence at Bruxelles, it is
but Justice I make you my Confident from hence, and discover to ye a noble
piece of bravery of the Admirable person we both Admire so much, ye can never
Admire enough.

Know then, that I lately received from Mad. B. a Letter of Exchange, in so
obliging terms as none but her own words can express them, and therefore
verbatim I send them here.

Sir, I esteem more this occasion than to have found a Treasure, as in effect
it is one for to oblige ones Friends. You may give this enclosed to Monsieur d'
Armencourt, who will make no difficulty to deliver you the sum therein expressed,
neither does he know wherefore it is, but may imagine I owe it you. I let you
understand this, because I know every one is not willing to have these things
known. In fine, I deal with you, as I would another should do by me, if I were
in your place.

Words so nobly obliging, and so worthy of Eternal memory, as if ever any thing
I write may last, 'twill be for having inserted them in my Writings, every word
that proceeds from her, being a certain charm against forgetfulness; But I
forget in the mean time to tell you how I have seen the Marquese your Sister
here, who complains of your forgetfulness of her; whence it seems that charm
has rather a particular than a general influence. Pray oblige me to let you
hear from you by the next, and esteem me ever, as really I am, for

Your Lordships most humble, etc.

XV. To Count Salazar, from Rome Anno 46.
On the taking Pi^mbino and Porta Longona.
My Lord,
I Congratulate (with all my heart) your new Accession of honors, and wish
that Goulden Key you have lately received in mercede from his Catholic
Majesty, may but serve to open you the door to many and greater, etc. The
taking of Piombino and Porta Longona has occasioned many rumors here amongst
the Italians, to the dis^dvantage of his Majesty of Spain, to stop the mouths
of whom, in imitation of Boccalino (a way much taking here) I have made and
published this following.

Lusus Hisp^niae, and Gal^iae.
A Spaniard and Frenchman playing in Italy, the Spaniard played negligently, as
one who had much to lose, and was too confident perhaps he could never lose it
all; whilst the Frenchman like a cunning Gamester, knowing all the slights and
advantages of play ha^ ^uddenly won of the Spaniard Piombino, and ^^^ta
Longona, he esteeming the one no mo^e th^n a leaden token, and the other but
^nl^ a a n^st o^ Rocks, for a few ships to harbor in: But the Italian standing
by, who had learnt (o^ the Jews perhaps) to estimate things on another manner
(In detaille, not in g^osse as did the Sp^n^ard) thought it a mighty matter,
and wondered at the others negligence, as you might perceive by the often,
casting up his eyes, lif^ing up his hands, shrugging his Shoulders, and crying
out Capito ever and anon, inclining toward the French party by degrees, in
wishing him good luck, (as your Rooks do always to those who win) and seeming
much to rejoice in his good fortune; but seeing no Baratta coming in, as when
the Spaniard won, his joy began to cool, and he was a little out of
countenance, when tha^ which put him quite out, was this Reproach made to him
by the Spaniard.

Thou silly penurious Italian, that beginning with Quatrius, counts a Iuli^ thy
blood, a Teston thy Livelihood, and a Crown thy soul, with a heart and Breast
narrow as thy country, that accounts Massa and Mo^aco two mighty
principalities, and them Sovereign Princes, the one for being Lord and Master
of some mile of Rock, wi^h a Port no bigger than a ducking Pond, and the other for
having dominion of a Plain twenty Farmers in Flandres have bigger fields to
feed their Oxen on; and for his marble of Carrara, it only shows how hard a
Country Italy is, and how hardly you live in it, when stones are the chiefest
revenue of a sovereign Prince. Thou think me now quit undon (I warrant thee)
for losing two petty places, they afford no Place in the mapp of the world too,
allowing no more to your Italy it self than a Flys wing c^n cover, whilst I am
Lord of Territorys wearies the Sun to travel over, nor can he sooner end his
journey on them in the West, but he begins it on them in the East again. Get the
a greater Book for shame, and leave thy Hornbook of Italy, if thou would not
be always esteemed a Baby in the world, when thou will know this is nothing,
and know thou know nothing too. Mean time, I would thou had felt the
heaviness of the French yoke thou would so fain bring on thy neck, that thou
might find by Experience how light that of the Spaniard is, which tho'w'dst
so fain shake off; so he, when the Italian left off his insulting, and the
Spaniard continued playing till he had won all again.

As it is the wish and prophecy of

My Lord, Your, etc.

XVI. To the Princess of Hoghzollern, from Rome, Anno 47.
Of his Irksom lise at ROME, and hope he had to revisit FLANDRES.
Madam,
MAy I not live, if I breath the Air of Rome but only to sigh after that of
Flandres, I living here me thinks (wanting that Company I had there) just like
Adam out of Paradise, among Beasts, having lost the blessed conversation of
Angels; for what comfort's in a Heaven, where one never sees the Stars? I mean
those living Stars I saw in the Heaven of Bruxelles, without whom me thinks
the Sun at Noonday is but Cimmerian darkness, for it is not the Eyes, but the
Mind is cheared with light. Whence it is that I converse more with the dead than
living here, (their ancient Statua's and Pictures I mean,) and find them ^ far
the better company of the two. And if for those few months of your Excellencies
absence in Holland I lived so melancholy a life, my Lute being silenc't, and I
never appearing in Park but like a walking ghost, or a body without a soul;
Imagine Madam now how melancholy a Creature I am, and how I pine away, so far
from you, and so long absent. One thing comforts me, that by all Prognostickes
both there and here, I conjecture my Absen^e now cannot be long from thence:
When but conserve for me (Madam) your good Graces, and I shall be more happy
than before, the more of unhapinesse I have experienced since; None knowing
better the benefit of health, than those who have been sick; nor rellishing
prosperity better than those who have tasted adversity before, as has in being
deprived of your sight,

Madam, Your, etc.

XVII. To the Count Salazar, from Genoa, Anno 48.
Of the Reduction of NAPLES, and some passages concerning it.
My Lord,
OF the Reduction of Naples, I gave you advertisement by my last from Rome,
from whence I departed just upon the advice there, Embarquing in the Popes
Galleys at Civita Vecchia, together with the Marquisses Iean Baptista, and
Felice Mario, with the Marquess Spinelli, recommended particularly to them by
the Marquess de Buffalo, and treated by them with all noble courtesy: Our
Navigation being so speedy, and prosperous, as in less than three days we
arrived at Genoa; on the way we met with the Duke of Tursi coming from Naples,
who confirmed all I writ unto you, as did likewise your Ambassador Signior
Roncilio at Genoa, we conferring Letters together, and he making solemn
bonfires for the news; yet do the French report the contrary, the best
Architectures in the world of false rumors, when it makes for their advantage,
as does this, they knowing how it is only the first reports of ill news, that
dismays, astonishes, and disanimates, which if you can divert and damp a while,
people are nothing near so struck and startled with it afterward; which false
rumors I tracted from the very Fountain, finding them on the Friday after, the
day before the General Postday; impoysoning with it all the public places of
Rome, from whence news is derived, and flows abroad in the World.

The Copy of that Letter Count de Ogniato thought fit to make use of, to
injealouse the Neapolitans, upon the arrival of the Duke Guise, as written from
France intercepted and interpreted, is thus.

Behold the best sport in the world for us, our Enemies fighting against our
Enemies; to prevail our selves of this occasion, you must be sure to keep the
parties so equally balanced, one may not destroy to there, but with its own
destruction; wherefore if you find the Neapolitan too weak, you may strengthen
them with small succors; if too strong, you may weaken them, with drawing them
out in small factions, ever keeping your main design secret, till they be both
so weakened, you may easily make an absolute conquest of either; Let the Duke of
Guise then be precautioned by the Duke of Alansons ill success at Antwerp, In
discovering his designs too soon, and allaruming them by it, to unite forces as
against a common Enemy; whence I wonder why he proclaims so loud his
descendency from the house of Anjou; enough to waken their jealousies, that he
intends to set on foot the Title of that house again; pray let him be advised
of it. More Instructions you need not; all being comprised in this only, that
you look upon the Neapolitans as wild beasts, that may be subdued, but never
tamed.

This published amongst them work't such effect, as out of this Letter they
sinisterly interpreted all the Duke of Guizes Actions, every thing he did,
stumbling them afterward, just like French Posthorses, who stumbling once,
never leave running headlong till they be down. Thus you see (My Lord) how
little things sometimes (which History never mentious) confer mainly to the
performance of greater ones; and the smallest occasions as hinges sometimes
serve to turn the world; No more; but my most humble service, and best respects
to your self, your Noble Lady, and Monsieur Recourt, etc. being

Your Lordships most, etc.

XVIII To the Lord Thomas Somerset from Marseilles, Anno 47.
Of his voyage and return out of ASIA.
My Lord,
I Have travailed farther than ever Ulysses did, since I left Italy, and had
the honor to see you last; yet write Odysses of my travails he that list, for
I have nothing of rare or particular to write, but what has been heard of a
hundred times before: For that little then I have seen of Asia, the Isles of
the Archipelago, the Dardanelles, Pontus Euxine, and the Helespont, etc.
consult Sands, and others travails (if you please) where you shall find them
acurately and at large set down; for me, He only say of Constantinople, that
for an Imperial seat, it is one of the noblest Cities I ever saw, situated on
two Seas with its two feet Collossean like, treading on Asia and Europe, nor
did I ever see truer bravery, or greater gallantry than there, every one
wearing such various colored silks, with swelling Turbans, and flowing
garments, as their streets appear just like Tulipp Gardens, whilst ours (with
so many's wearing black) appear just like mortuary houses, all mourning for the
dead: Here finding no commodity of voyaging farther Levant, the Seas being all
obstructed by reason of the Venetian wars, after some two or three weeks
residence, I returned again in a French Bottom, and am at last arrived at
Marseilles, where I am now on point of Embarquing for Spain on an English
Vessel having only Time from my necessary preparatives, to assure you my Lord,
that as there is none I am more obliged to than your self, so there is none who
can with greater verity say that he is,

My Lord your, etc.

XIX To the Lord Charles Dudley, Prince of the Empire, etc. from Lisbon, Anno 48.
Of his Sea voyage from PROV^NCE to PORTUGAL.
My Lord,
IF he that is at charges of setting forth the ship has right to the voyage it
makes, Certainly your Lordship has right to the relation of all the passages of
my voyage, who was at charges of setting forth the Passenger. You may please to
understand then, that the same day I parted from you at Marseilles, I met at
Toulon with the Captain of our Ship, with whom I went to Eres, where our Ship
lay at Anchor; Nor am I so great a contemner of Vanity, but I confess I took
a little, to find Fame, like a Harbinger flown thither before me to take up my
Lodgings; whilst all the Town was taken up for Lodgements of Soldiers, the
Dean of the chief Church meeting me, and knowing me by the same he had heard of
me at Marseilles, courteously offering me Lodging in his house; The next day
the wind turning fair, we imbarqu'd, and merrily sailed along the Coast of
Provence, finding the Gulf of Lions, so furious to others, as gentle as a Lamb
to us; yet had we so fresh a gale of wind, as in 4 or 5 days say^ we had left
the coast of France, Catalonia, and Valentia behind, and were now where the
Mediterranean (like a wide Vessel with a narrow neck) began to streighten a
little, betwixt Minorca and Murcia, when one Evening tacking once or twice
about to hale up the beck or spur of a Galley, driving on the waves (the
relicts of some wrack perhaps) we might perceive two great ships chasing us,
when we needing no more spurs, clapped on all the Canvas we could make, and fled
away so fast before them, as our chasers perceiving they followed us in vain,
gave o'r their chase about the shutting in of the Evening, and fell to Seaward
of us; when full glad and joyful were we, but 'twas but a short Joy and
Gladness, for the next morning by break of day two Turkish Galleys from a nest
of Rocks (where they ordinarily sculk, called the Collybre on the Spanish
coast) made toward us amain, neither could our best defense of flight avail us
now, the Sea all becalmed, and winds breathless (as we were our selves for
fear, our ship though called the Hercules being of small defense, since ne
Hercules contra duos, what is Hercules against two?) whilst those Catterpillars
the Galleys on their Oars, as on so many feet, made toward us a main; at
which we looking about us, (as People in danger do, who would be glad to run
away) might espy a far off those two ships had given us the chase o'r night,
which comforting us not a little, we gave them a warning-piece (at all
adventures) to advertise them of our danger, when presently we might behold
them tack about, and make up toward us, which the Turks and we jointly
perceiving, we suddenly changed minds ( Fear departing from us to them, and
Courage from them to us) and they of chasers, now become our chase, whilst we
incompassing them with our three Ships, as Hunters with their Toils do wild
Beasts, or so many Greyhounds would a Hare, gave them a turn or two, now from
the Spanish shore toward Barbary, and now back again, till at last they escaped
away before us, on the strength of their Oars, whilst our flagging sayls seemed
to chide and murmur at the winds deserting them This danger past, we has'd out
our Boat, and went aboard the other ships, to thank them for their timely Aid,
whom we found to be two Holland men of war (the Tergo^se, and the Lewarder)
part of a Squadron whose Admiral was in Portugal, sent out with express
Commission to scour the Seas of Turks and Pirates, with the Vice Admiral of whom
I presently making Acquaintance, he easily invited me along with him to Lisbon,
(^ being not secure in the other Ship where I was,) so altering my course from
Spain to Portugal, and changing ships, I began a new Voyage on Sea, without
ever going to Land. Thence we sailed along the Spanish coast from Cap^ to Cape,
escaping a little danger nigh Cape de Pales of driving on Land) our Cable
sheering whilst we lay at Anchor there, to make provision of fiering in a
Juniper wood nigh Carthagene) the King of Spain being not more absolute Lord on
Land, than we were on his Seas, hasing all ships in keen of us, every one
contributing somewhat to us of Sea provisions, til at last drawing nigh the
Str^ights, the shore now on both sides affording us a delightful prospect,
betwixt the steep Rocks of Gibraltar on the Spanish coast, and the Embattaild
walls of Zent^, situated on the high Mountains on the Barbary shore, in less
than 5 or 6 hours we passed all the streits, and out of the Mediterranean Sea
past into the Grand Ocean, when steering our course directly toward Portugal,
within some two days after we arived at Cascais in the mouth of Lisbon Road,
where I landed some 5 or 6 weeks after my depart from Provence, and took leave
of my Hollander, who had treated me most courteously and nobly all the way;
neither did I ever meet with any of that Nation more a Gentleman than he.

Of his Arival to LISBON.
And now behold me (my Lord) safely arived in Portugal at Cascais, some twelve
English miles from Lisbon, where the Governor (besides the ordinary vice of
that Nation, the foolisher the wiser they pretend to be) would needs play the
Statesmen, and be wiser than the Truth, in suspecting me for some Spi^, or
else come thither upon some great design, and so presently he sent me to Lisbon
with a Soldier along with me, with express order not to leave me till he had
deliverd me to the Secretary of State, who being altogether as great a
Politician as my Governor, made great difficulty of my stay in the Country,
till spying my Lute, the suspicion I was a Musician, as clavis clavem pellit,
soon drove out of his head the suspicion that I was a Spy: so lodging me by way
of Caution in an English Gentleman's house, a great Confident of the Kings, till
he might inform his Majesty of me (who being an excellent Musician, was
covetous of knowing all Strangers of that profession) He no sooner understood
of my arival, but he sent for me to Court, and was so well satisfied with me,
as continuing my Lodging in Mr. John Muley's the same English Gentleman's house,
than which the whole Town afforded not more noble accommodation, The next day
he sent for me again, where after some two or three hours trial of my skill,
(especially in the composative part of Music, in which his Majesty chiefly
exceeded) I past Court Doctor; though Don Emanuel Sa, Grand Chamberlain to the
King, swore 'twas rather a trial for a Doctor in an Universitie, than a
Gentleman in the Court. After this, his Majesty was pleased to assign me a
certain Cavallier of the Order, to whom I was to address my self for Audience
and access to his person as often as I pleased. Mean time, Regis ad exemplum,
I was looked upon with particular regard by all, passing most of my time in Mr.
Muley's Kinta, or Garden house some three or four English mile from Lisbon,
whose Amenity I cannot better set before your Eyes, than in this following Copy
of Verses.

Where in a Vale near Tagus Golden side,
Through all the world renowned far and wide,
Though now for Silver waters famed more
Than ever it was for Golden sands before,
Circled with fruitful Olives, Vines, and Corn,
A! Pallas, Ceres, Bacchus, there were born,
A Kinta stands so situated t'has
Resort unto 'r of every Rural Grace,
(And Rural Graces are in Summer far
Iollier than those of Towns in Winter ar)
Whose fairest Garden's planted round withal
Those Trees we fruitful and delicious call,
As Orange, Lymon, Apricock and Peach,
(Whose rudier sides do Nimphs their blushing teach)
Silk animating Mulberies, spreading wide,
Pomegranads, Figs, and hundred more beside,
Under whose leaves the Sunshine all the day
Delights with dancing beams to sport and play,
Whilst to its Walks each cooling wind dos come,
T'asswage the Calenture of the burning Sun.
Here, whilst I often used to make resort,
To quicken the dull pleasures of the Court,
One day my Muse (that never in any place
More present to me, nor propitious was,)
Appeared to me in all her best array,
And th^s to the Kinta's Glory bid me say,
How all the Gardens of the Hesperides,
Semiram's pensil' ones, Alcinous'es,
Lucullus's nor Seneca's to boot,
Compared but unto this, were nothing to it.
XX. To Doctor Heart at Rome, from Lisbon, Anno 48.
Concerning some rep^rts of him at ROME.
Deer Doctor,
THere are some places, as some persons, better agreeing with our Genius and
disposition than others; and if ever there were any that agreed not with mine,
'twas Rome, where one cannot stand without supplanting, speak without Caution,
nor live without extreme Industry, all is Insidiousness, all shoving and
shouldring, and all soliciting, making business of every thing, and then
following close that business; which considered, it is no wonder I never agreed
with it, nor it with me: Nor need I go so far as the stars with the Astronomer
to find the cause of it; for when good fortune falls, I cannot crowd and shove
to catch it: I had rather be silent than be solicitous what to say, nor am I
busy body enough to have a head fit for business, and for Industry it is not
in my Nature, nor I can no more change my disposition of mind, than my
lineaments of body. This I say, to let you know, that as I lived, so I came a
discontented person from Rome, which I declare on every occasion, so it is true
(what is reported of me) that discoursing o^e day here with his Majesty of
Portugal, and he demanding of me how Atts flourisht at Rome, I (betwixt
malicious and merry) answered, that as those Arts his Majesty favored Regis ad
exemplum, were the study of the Portugal Courtier, so all at Rome studied the
Popes Arts, which was Hording up of money, and nothing else. And though I
wonder how his Holiness came to understand this, there being scarce four
persons in the Cabinet beside the King and I when 'twas spoke, yet I am glad he
did, it being necessary Princes should know, that their better lives live by
the breath of Strangers, and their Fames can no more fly out of their own
Territories and Dominions without obliging them, then they can voyage by Sea,
or travail by Land, without some Vehicule to transport them, their own Subjects
being but as their own legs, whilst strangers as those ships and montures
which easiliest and best can do it. And thus much for that, for the rest dear
Doctor hold me always

Your, etc.

XXI To the Countess of Berlamont, Anno 48.
Where he merrily describes his life at LISBON.
Madam, etc.
I Am not yet so heavenly minded, to count all the world a Prison, but I no
longer admire those that do, since really, I count my self as absolutely in
Prison here, in not being able to go out of this Kingdom, for Flanders, as
ever any did in a common Gaol; for it is not the bigness of the place, but the
restraint that makes the prison, so they are as much Prisoners who are in the
Bois de Vincent, as those who are in the Dungeon. To describe unto you my
prison, and my company in it (that you may pity me) I am here in Lisbon, a City
of but 9 or 10 mile about, all built upon Hills and Dales, rising just like the
great Billows of the Ocean (when you are in the bottom, and wonder at the
vastness of one, passing that, you find another as vast to wonder at) there I
have a Garden no bigger than your Park at Brussels (to walk in, and take the
air) where there is all sorts of fruit the East or West Indias can afford, or the
Northern or Southern climate of the world produces, Figs that make beccoficos
of men, and Meloons both red and green, beyond their Marmal^ds for
meltingn^sse; but alas, what are these unto your Pompions? Now for my Company
I have none but such, one would be ashamed to keep company withal; The King
here a m^n of no estate, but only besides the Kingdom of ^o^tu^^l and the
Algarves in Europe, Lord of two or three Kingdoms in Affrique, of the Western
Islands, the Maderas, the Isles of Capo Verte, St. Thoma, the Empire of Goa in
the East Indies, and of Brasilia in the West, alone bigger than all Europe
together, poor things God worcester, that with good Husbanding might only yield about
9 or 10 millions every year.

Now to describe unto you his person, and the Queens: the King is an honest
plain man, changing nothing of the Duke of Braganza by being King of Portugal;
faring as homely as any Farmer, and going as meanly clad as any Citizen,
neither did he ever make use of any of the Crown Wardrope, since he came unto
the Crown; his ordinary Exercise is Hunting, and Music, never omitting the
first every Mond^y, not the second every day after dinner, for any business.
But for the Queen, she has more of the Majestic in her, and if she be not
King, her Ambition 'twas that made the King; She has a goodly presence, a
stately Gate, and uses the Trowel in painting, with better reason than other
Ladies do the Pencil, having an Epilipse makes one side of her face reder than
the other (like the sunny side of fruit) did not her painting make both sides
red alike. For Prince Theodosio her eldest Son, he is a Pr. of great
expectation, learned, and of great wit and courage, of person tall and slender,
about some 18 years of age. And this is all Madam I can say of their Persons,
as all I desire should be said of mine, is, that I am

Madam Your etc.

XXII To Mademoiselle de Beauvais, from Lisbon, Anno 45.
Mademoiselle,
YOu will wonder, that having seen the Court of the world, in Paris, Rome, and
Constantinople; the City of it, in Venice, Genoa, and Lisbon; the Garden, in
Provence, Andaluzia, and Italy; and the Paradise of it where you are, that I
should now go see the Desert and Wilderness of it in Affrique and America, the
one (all the Coast along) nothing but barren sand, and the other where I am
going (the Brasils) all overgrown with woods and Trees; And that too in midst
of so great desire to return for Flanders, as never any thing was more ardently
desired; but when you hear my reasons for it, you will absolve me,
Mademoiselle, I Am sure of Legerity or change of resolution.

B^ pleased to know then, that just upon point of my Embarquement for Flanders,
understanding of the loss of the Battle of Lens, I thought it no ways fit to
render the joy I hoped to conceive at sight of my friends in Flanders abortive
by their general sadness there; Wherefore casting about for some diversion for
a year or so, till your losses might be recovered or forgot, there opportunely
offered it self unto me, the voyage of Brasil, which having proposed unto the
King (without whose permission no stranger can undertake that Voyage) his
Majesty not only gave me permission, but 200 Crowns aiut a de costa for my
voyage, when a hundred other considerations began to encourage me to the
undertaking it (besides the ardent thirst I had of voyaging, which nothing but
the whole ocean could quench) first having seen so many rarities of the Brasils
in Portugal; I thought it worthy my voyage thither to fetch you some of them.
^ly. According to the ancient expiation of fire and and water, I thought it fit
to pass whole Oceans, and the Torrid zone, before I approacht unto your
presence. 3ly. Having somewhat in me of the Philosopher and Astrologer, I
imagined it richly worth my journey, to see the stars of the other pole, and
nature of the other Hemiphere. And lastly my desire of seeing all the world is
so insatiate (whether the more one sees of it, the less he is satisfied, or
that it satisfies so much, as one has still a desire of seeing more) as just
like another Alexander, not thinking one world sufficient, I am seeking another
forth; Mean time (Mademoiselle) your goodness will pardon this presumption of
mine (who ought not to stir out of one Room into another without your
permission) that I dare presume to go out of one world into another without
your License, being as I am

Mademoiselle, Your, etc.

XXIII. To the same. Anno 48.
Of his Sea Voyage from Lisbon to the BRASILS.
SOme week after we set sail at Lisbon, we ariv'd at the Madera's (one of the
Affrique Islands) where landing at Funchal (the chief City, or Bishops seat) we
were kindly entertained by the Merchants there, contending in Hospitality who
should first lodge and entertain us, (as the manner is, where provisions are
plenty, and Strangers rare) here we staid some 4 or 5 days feasted and regaled
every day, and presented at our departure with the rarities of the Isle, they
making the best confectures in the world, both for dry and wet, Sugar growing
there in great abundance, and their Wines surpassing for Generous all that ever
I tasted yet: when prosecuting our voyage, after a few days sail we had a
sight of the Canaries or Fortunate Islands, where under the pick of Teneriff we
lay some days becalmed, it being one of the highest mountains in the world,
all green unto the Top, and of so equal an Ascent, that those of Babel might
have innocently built their Tow^r there, secure from Deluge, and did it extend
itself a little higher, one could not imagine a more pleasant nor easier
passage unto Heaven. From thence we say^'d along the coast of Affrique, toward
the Islands of Capo verte, which we past without touching at them, the Air
being generally held unwholsom, but at that Season Infectious; after which,
steering our course Westward toward the Brasils, and once past all comerce the
land has with the Sea, of common air, and repercussion of waves, etc. we had
the pleasantest Voyage as could be imagined, no storms, the Winds (which surely
on those Seas blow all from Land) hardly having breath enough (for the long
Voyage they had made) to fill our sayls, and the air so pure, as in comparison
with the pleasure of it there, it seems a^ pain to breath on Land, where the
air is stuffing, suffocating, and noisome, tainted as it passes with Ordures and
Filth, (there being few Countries like Arabia, affording more sweets than
stenches) whereas that of the Sea comes purely (as it were) drayn'd and
purified by the Sunbeams, as it passes to the sense. Then for other pleasures,
you have none on Land, but we had some at Sea to equal it; and to begin with
the most incredible, Hawking and Hunting. (besides Fishing) we had perpetually
for more than a month together. Our ship being all incompast with Dorado's or
shining Fishes (somewhat like Dolphins) hunting the Flying Fishes, which you
might see on Top of the water, fluttering to escape, and the Dorado's bounding
to overtake them, till being hard pursued, and so near pressed, as they were in
danger to be ta'n, the poor flying Fish would get on wing, and flying one
danger, incur another; for a slight of Sea fowl (called Booby's by the
English) followed us all the way hovering in the air, in expectance of their
prey, seeing the flying fish on wing, would stoo^ at them, and each one
singling out one, fly them to a mark. Then for Fishing, our Mariners had but
only to choose out their Dorads (as a good Woodman would a Dear) and strike him
straight with his Fisgigg (or Dart with many barbed heads) never failing of
their Cast, and this furnished us with fresh Fish all the time, it being
excellent meat, short and crisp like our Salmons, and much like them in
bigness; which being ta'n, strange it was to behold the curious colors of its
scales, fading by degrees, as death won on life, (just as the skies color does
when night comes on) till quite dead it became all black, with good reason, it
putting on mourning for its death, whose life had clothed it in such rich and
glittering color. An other sort of Fish we took called the Shark or Tuberon,
black and great as a Porpoise, with terrible long Teeth, huge wide jaws, and so
ravenous, as at a bit 'twould snatch a Leg or Arm away of any it found
swimming in the Sea; these have certain little Fishes called the Pilot Fish,
cleaving to them so fast by a Fynn of the top of the head, you can hardly
separate them by any force: they have great heads, some spann long of body, and
are excellent meat. Nor wanted we the pleasure of Gardens too at Sea, the Ocean
(for many hundred miles from Land, and many miles together) being all covered
over with a certain Green, so thick as the Ship could hardly make way thorough
it, with many Gridiline Flowers besides like our Crocus's, rendering it a most
delightful spectacle. Then for other prospect, do but behold the rising and
setting Sun, and you should see a hundred several forms and figures, like your
scenes in Masks and plays, with lights behind them, reflecting them to the
Eye, and betwixt light and shadow, setting them off more resplendently to the
view. For other commodities and delicacies you have on Land, we wanted none,
Our great Cabines being large as your Chambers, our Beds as commodious, our
Decks spacious as your Galleries to walk in, our Kitchen our Sellars as well
furnished, herds of Swine, flocks of Sheep, and Pullen of all sorts aboard,
perpetually feasting, nor wanted we Music to our Feast, (besides an excellent
set of Trumpets) the Mariners having some Fiddles amongst them, to which they
often danced to delight the Passengers. And thus sleeping, eating, drinking,
and recreating our selves, we made our voyage secure from storms, secure from
Pirates and Enemies, till making Land about Capo St. Augustine, we might de^cry
some 3 or 4 sail which knowing to be Hollanders of Fernambucca, and not willing
to encounter them, we steered to Seaward again, being that night overtaken by
one of them, who allarumn'd us as if their whole Fleet had made after us,
appearing on every side of us with fires on his main Mast, and about the wast
of his ship perpetually burning (as a call it seems for his Companions, if any
were in sight) sailing away in the morning to find them out, and returning
toward Evening, (ever endeavoring like a Kite to snatch away our Carvel and
Pattachio, which lay like Chickens close under our Wings) till at last, about
the height of Baia, it left us, despairing to meet any of their Fleet higher
up, when holding on our course for the Rio, and sounding all the way, we found
it a bold Coast, some 35 Fathom all the way, with neither Flats nor Rocks, so
passing by Capo Frio (so called from the excessive cold there, though under the
Torrid Zone, and the climate on either side be exceeding hot) at last we
arrived before the mouth of St. Sebastians Haven, where under a little Isle we
cast Anchor, having in less than three months, deducting our stay in
Assrique, made the voyage almost to the Antipodes, of 4 ships (as we were) and
more than 4 hundred men, losing only one man in all the voyage; and here let me
cast Anchor too, er' I prosecute my voyage.

Of our arrival to St. Sebastians, or the Rio de Ianaro in Brasil.
Whilst we lay h^re at Anchor, our Mariners Angling, took certain F^shes about
the highness of Roc^ats or Gurnet, which they call Cunny Fishes from their
resemblance of our Cunnies in face (but only they wanted Ears) with bellies all
white and chequered, which swelled just like blown bladders, when they had lain
a while panting on the Hatch^^, these were rank poison, as the Portuguez
assured us, the Sea being full of diverse other venomous Fishes, which renders
the water unwholsom, as I experimented my self, when bathing me in it, I came
out all faintish and ill-dispos'd, accustomed to come out of other Seas more
strong and vigorous. Mean time advertisement being given from the Fort unto the
Town of our arival, they (perceiving us to be friends) sent diverse Boats and
Canoes forth to welcome us, and bring us aboard all sorts of fresh provision and
fruits of the Country. Their Midsummer being our Mid-winter here. Amongst the
rest, having Pilots sent us to conduct us in, we weighed Anchor toward
Evening, and with a gentle Brize or gale from Seaward, blowing constantly every
Night from Sea, as every Morning it does from Land. We entered the Bay betwixt
two mighty Rocks some mile assunder (the one (from its form) called the Sugar
loaf) when having past the Fort some mile or so, beyond the Entran^e of the
Bay, we discovered the pleasantst prospect in the world for natural Landschap,
of the Rio or Lake some twenty mile or more about, all tu^ted with Green
Islands, some a mile about, some more, some less, the Town situated on the
left hand, some 2 or three mile beyond the Fort, where was safe harbor for
many hundred ships. Here ariving, and going on shore, I found a Lodging
prepared for me, by the Fathers of the Company, with two Molato's or Mungril
Negro's to serve me, with my diet from their Kitchen, just against my Lodging,
whether by order from the King, the recommendations of the Governor (who came
along with us) or the charity of the good Father I know not, but certainly
'twas so extraordinary an accommodation, as no money could have purchased the
like, there being no Innes nor Pensions to lodge or eat at, as with us; all who
frequent those parts being either Merchants, who lodge with their
Correspondents, or Seafaring men, who lodge aboard, never any man like me
before making that voyage merely on Curiosity.

Of Brasil in general.
Brasil, as it is confined by the Ocean on the one side, and the Rivers of
Amazones and de Plato on the other, is a vast Continent, and far bigger than all
Europe, the Climat is hot and moist, by reason of the abundance of Rain that
falls there continually; yet are there no Rivers at all in the Country (but
only those it is surrounded with) from whence any watery vapors should exhale.
It has only some 4 or 5 Ports by which you may enter into the Country, all the
rest of the shore being impenetrable, by reason of Rocks, and inextricable
woods, for many hundred miles together, the Country seeming rather reserved
for the habitation of men hereafter, than ever to have been Inhabited
heretofore; and one of these Ports was that we now entered.

Of the Town.
The Town of St. Sebastians is situate in a Plain some mile in length, bounded
at either end with rising Hills, the inmost toward the Lake inhabited and
enclosed by the Benedictins, and the outmost toward the Sea by the Fathers of
the Company; upon which hill was formerly situated the Ancient Town (as the
Ruins of houses, and the great Church, yet remaining, testify) till for the
commodity of Traffic, and portation of Merchandise, 'twas by degrees reduced
unto the Plain, their buildings being but low, and streets not above 3 or 4,
the principal regarding the Haven. Behind the Town is a great plain some two
mile over, part of it bushy, part woody, and part meadow ground, beyond which
you find a Country so wholly different from ours, as there is not a Tree nor
Plant, Bird, Beast, nor any thing you ever saw in Europe to be found, and to
speak somewhat of each one in particular.

Of the Country.
The Country is for the most part^all o'rgrown with wood, which the soil,
unforced since the Creation of the world had produced without culture, amongst
which are some trees of such vast bigness, as they are above 7 or 8 fathom in
Diameter, and 70 or 80 high, of which they make Canoes, or Trees hollowed into
Boats of 2 or 300 tun. As for the Brasile wood, by excellency taking its
denomination from thence it is but a shrub in comparison with the other Trees,
much like our bigger sort of Hawthorn Trees. The Country i^ naturally hot and
moist, by reason of frequent rains; whence in many places, where the moisture
settles in the bottoms, you have meadow grounds, some 20 or 30 mile over,
(seeming abandoned by those Trees, for not being firm enough to sustain the
weight of their huge vast bulks.

Of the Fruit Trees, and Plants*
For Fruit Trees, besides wild Limons, which grow every where in great
abundance, the Bonano deservedly claims the first place, it being a Tree that
from the root grows yearly up to the height of an ordinary Pium or
Cherry-tree, and much about that bulk; it is all green, the body being nothing
but a collection of the leaves, which spread out toward the Top, and fall like
plumes of Feathers, each leaf being some 6 foot in length, and 2 in breadth, on
top of which, the fruit grows some 40 together in a bunch, in husks like Beans,
all yellow when they are ripe, the fruit of color and taste much like our
Apricock, but much more firm and more delicious. For their Caijus, it is a sort
of Tree of the bigness of our ordinary Apple Trees, the leaves like chestnut
leaves, and fruit much like the bigger sort of green Figs, fastened to the Tree
in lieu of stalk, by certain Chestnuts, which roasted are excellent meat, the
fruit eaten whole, melts all away to juice, exceeding cooling and refreshing,
excepting certain strings which hang in your teeth, so tough, you cannot
swallow them. The Guaver is a certain Tree about the same height and bigness,
the Fruit is round and green, like to our Nectarins, but crushed, you find a
round red pulp within, about the bigness of a Bilyard ball, eating like so
many Strawberries molded into a past. Another sort of Fruit they have called
Mamons, growing like great green pears, some 20 or more in cluster on the top
of the Tree, never ariving to the maturity of being eaten raw, but they make a
good conserve. Limons, Oranges and Citrons they have in great excellence and
abundance (which I suspect to have been transplanted thither at first) and
Limas of a mixed sp^cies, betwixt the Orange and Limon, all round, with a bunch
on the top, of a drier taste, and mor eager douce than either. Another Tree they
have, of whose root dried, and the moisture pressed out o^ it (which is rank
poison) they make their f^ri^a de pan, as they call it, which they use instead
of bread, when fresh and recent, it is like the Crumbs of wheaten bread, and when
stale, like pownded Oatmeal; by every ones Tr^ncher they lay heaps of this, and
though Bread (made of Corn, brought from Portugal and the Western Isl^nds) be
neither scarce nor dear, yet most of the Inhabitants r^ther eat of that. But
above all, the Ananaz is one of the deliciousest Plants the Earth did ever
produce, it growing like an Ar^^c^oke, the leaves thick and sharply Indented,
like those of Sempervive, thistly on the top, with a rind all scaly like the
pineapple, which paring off, you find the fruit of the bigness of an ordinary
M^loon, of a Golden color, and distinguished in^o Cells, like Oranges, which
slicing and eating in wine (as 'twas affirmed of M^nna) every one finds* that
gust and taste in it, he is the most delighted with. Meloons they have too, both
yellow and green, far better than those of Europe (though transplanted from
thence perhaps at first) and Boratos in as great abundance as Turnips and
Carots are with us. To conclude, another Tree it has called the P^nto, which
though no fruit Tree, yields them more profit than all the rest; growing most
commonly in moist places like our Willow, the body growing Cane-wise,
distinguished by several knots, out of whose poory sides, the branches issue
forth in round, with their several falls rendering it so many stories high; of a
delightful green, body and all, whose le^ves being thick and filmy, they use
to sleave and spin to what finesse they please; the grosser serving for H^mp,
the middle sort for Flax, and the finer for Silk.

Of their Beasts.
For their beasts they are all strangely different from ours: The Coty has some
resemblance to our Hare, but bigger, without Ears, and its back parts ending
more bluntly toward the Scut, and of a redder color than all the rest o'th
body: The Tatoo is, not much unlike our lesser sort of Swine, but 'thas a more
swag belly, and longer snout. Pigritas they have, so called from the slownesse
of their pace, so monstrous, as no Devil can be painted more horrible and ugly,
all scally like the Rhinoceros, but more Serpent like, going so slowly, as it
scarcely advances a pace a day: Ounces, Tigers, and Leopards they have too for
wild beasts, and for ^^me, Sheep, Swine, Goats and Oxen (al^ imported) and
breeding there in so great abundance, especially the latter sort (which they
nourish both for food and service, to turn their sugar-mills) as the fathers of
the Company have for their share (not far from the Rio) more than twenty
thousand all grazing in one pasture. Bu^iis or Apes, they have in great
abundance, most commonly all black with white faces, their tails in spire,
turning inward, they smell sweet, and when they have done any mischief, will so
hugg you, whistling lamentably with their mouths, as you cannot but pardon
them; but above all, the prettyest Animal Nature ever made is the Saguin, about
the bigness of a little Squirrel, with long shag mains, and bushy tails, of
golden color (most commonly) faced and handed like a Black-more, with small
singers and smi^king countenances; peeping or squeeking like a Cricket when it
craves, so as could it be but transported (as it is so tender and delicate, it
commonly dies on change of air) all your Island Sho^ks, and Bollonian dogs
would be banished Ladies Laps and Chambers, and these be their sole Minions and
Favorites.

Of their Fowl.
For their Fowl, they are all so beautiful in comparison with ours, as we may
well say, Nature learnt her colouris there, when she painted them; and that for
Birds, whilst those of Arabia are called birds of Paradise, Brasil may well be
called the Paradise of Birds. Amongst the rest the Arara is a certain Bird
about the bigness of a Goshawk, seeming a whole Garden of Tulips, every
Feather being of a several color, which beheld in Sunshine, even dazzle your
Eyes, they are so bright and glittering; of these I had one I taught to speak
like a Parrot, but in so gross and big a tone, as you could not abstain from
laughing to hear it; an other Bird they have called a Canada, differing from
the Arara only in color; its back and wings without being all Azurine, and
breast and wings within of golden yellow: Others all jet black they have, with
a stomacher of Aurora color, borthered with Crimsen, others again all scarlet.
In fine the ordinarest Bird they have, is the Parrot, of which they have
hundred sorts; The Parrachitos about May coming thither in flocks, just like
Stars in other Countries, and are sold as cheap, and eaten as ordinarily as
they. With the rarer sorts of all which beasts and fowl I had my Chamber
furnished, during my stay in the Country, as Sanguins one or two, which I
always carried along with me, calling them my Pocket Lions, out of which at
meals they would come, and on either shoulder one, take meat from my hands and
mouth, of my kindness to which, I had an Arara was so jealous, as it never
left importuning me with its caresses, now looking me in the face, and talking
to me, now climbing up my back, it being a good-natured Bird, having only this
ill quality, to be always pecking and tearing with its Bill what ever was next
it, which makes your frugal Portuguez, or wholly banish them their houses, or
provide them Iron Perches to exercise their Beacks on. Many other sorts of
Animals I had, which all perished by Sea, my Sanguins by change of air, my
Arara's drowned, on which I made this following Epigram.

Since thou so like unto the Phoenix were,
In shape, in color, and in every part,
That so unlike should be your destiny,
That should by fire, thou should by water die.
Of their Insects, or lesser sort of Animals.
For their Insects, a certain little crab or crevish they have, no bigger than
Beetles, earththed in banks of sand, as Cunnies are in Buroughs, with one claw
far bigger than the other, which makes them turn whirling about, as other Crabs
motions are retrogred: another strange Insect they have the Portuguez call
Lobedio, or Praise God, as for some admirable thing, as indeed this is; It
being a certain animated stick, like the end of some small twig, some fingers
length, out of the joints of which there grow out legs by pairs, on which it
crawls, like walking Tressles, nor can you perceive any other life it has, nor
any other part of living Creature; as Eyes, Mouth, etc. I finding one of them
crawling on me as I walked forth into the Woods, which tied with a Third, and
fastened to a bough, I kept long time in my Chamber, not perceiving any
sustenance it took, often peircing it, to find if it had any sense; it always
crawling in the the same manner about, until at last it vanished, I know not
how; but that which molested me most of all, was a certain kind of anima^ed
dust, which insensibly ingenders to worms in your feet as big as Magots in a
cheese, which unless they be carefully extracted, leave each one the seeds
behind of a hundred more; these was I grievously tormented with for a month
together, so as I could not slir, but as I was carried in a Hamatta; nor did I
ever know before, how near confining pain and pleasure was; ^, at their first
ingendring in my feet, being assaulted with so fierce an itch, as 'twas the
greatest pleasure in the world to scratch it, which presently was succeeded by
so intolerable a pain, as I never remember to have felt the like.

Of the Salvages, or Natives of Brasil.
Of the Natives or Inhabitants what shall I say, but if, as John Baptista de
porta says, every Nation has resemblance to some certain beast or Animal,
certainly these Brasilians are most like Asses, dull and phlegmatic, in
servitutem nati, and only fit for to^l and druggery, which is the reason Nature
perhaps provided that Country with neither Horse nor Ass, nor any beast of
carriage or burden besides themselves, yet are they rather squat than robust,
with broad Bodies, and little Legs, small Eyes, of sallow, sickly complexion,
ill featured, with black and greezy hair, nor curled nor dangling, but flagging
Ill-favouredly about their Ears, going for the most part all naked both Men and
Women, with only some rag to hide their privy parts, which you would never
desire to see, you ar so disgusted with the rest, they being all Christians,
but such, as put me in mind of that sentence of Holy Scripture, Homines et
Iumenta salvabis Domine, that the Lord will save both Man and Beast; for surely
they are both, having not wit enough to commit ingenious Vices, nor Temperance
enough to abstain from brutal ones; and thus much for those who live among the
Portugals, betwixt which and the other Savag's I imagine there is as much
difference as between wild Beast and tame; neither can I believe what is
reported of their fierceness, though all that is reported of their ferity I
do, as their eating one the other, and having not so much as a word in their
language, signifying nor God, nor King, nor Law, for were they so fierce as
it is reported, certainly they would never have yielded their Country up so
tamely to the Portugal, nor suffer them to enjoy it so quietly as they do; But
to return to my tame Salvages, I hired 4 of them for a journey I made by Land,
to carrry my Hamatta, whilst the other two ran Lacqueying by, which was on this
manner. Your Hamatta is a certain cotton Net about the bigness of a Blancket,
drawn together at each end, and fastened by a strong Line to a Cane as big and
long as a Colstaff, carried on their Shoulders, where you sit or lie in what
posture you please on a Boulster or Pillow, far more easily than in any Licter
(the Portuguez men having a Negro carrying a Parasol or Umbrella to shadow them
from the Sun, whilst the Women are shadowed and defended from public sight,
by some rich coverture thrown over the Hamatta, with two Negro Maids going by
their sides, to help them up, and put on their ^hoppinas when the Net's laid
down, and they rise to go out of it to any place. In one of these was I carried
some twenty miles a day, more or less, ^ according as the way was more plain
or mountainous, covenanting with my Savages for a small matter in money,
besides my finding them diet, which was only a little farina de pan (or bread
made of the root of a certain Tree, as we have said before) for the rest they
rather finding me, for to our Farina we had ordinarily no other meat but Fish,
of which at every plash of water where they came (but casting in their hooks)
they took enough for twenty men, when we presently made fires upon the place,
and broyl'd them, eating them aftewards with the juice of wild Lymons, growing
every where in the woods; and this, with water for our drink* was all our
sustenance, and for our lodging at night, we hung up our Hamattas betwixt two
Trees, and there slept till morning, only along the Coast, in that tract which
the Portug^ls have made to travel by Land from place to place, you sail not
every second day at most to find some R^ss or Country Farm of the Portuguez
where for your money you are well accommodated with all sorts of pullen and
fruit. One pleasure I had in passing through the woods, was to see the Trees
full of Apes and Parats, (as if they had born no other fruit) one chasing
another with such noise and chattering, you could not hear one another speak,
and you should see those Apes which had young, with 2 or 3 claspt about their
neck, or hanging on their back, which they went thus luggering, till they waxed
big, to catch which, the Natives would shoot the old ones with their Arrows
(with which they are the best mark men in the world, considering what clouterly
Bows and Arrows they shoot withal) when the old one tumbling down, the young
for want of exercizing their Legs, had not the address to run away.

Of the Commodities of the Country.
From my Voyage, I will return to speak of the Riches of the Country, chiefly
consisting in their Sugar, which when I have named, I have named all; not that
it wants others, but that it can want no others, having that, since that
country which abounds with that commodity which all others have need of, can
never want any commodity which others abound withal. For the rest, it produces
neither Corn, nor Wine, nor Salt, which I attribute not so much to the
difference of the Climate, as some politic reason to keep them with that
necessary dependency on Portugal, to vent their commodities, and prevent
revolt. Now for their Sugar thus it grows, and thus it is made; Their Sugar
canes are pruned to the height of standing corn: nor need they other culture,
but every second year to cut them close by the roots, as we do Osiers, when
against the next year they never fail to spring up again, the flaggs of which
Canes are of a pleasant green, and show a far off just like a Field of Corn,
which being ripe about the month of June, they joint them in pieces some
footlong, and carry them to the Mill, turned by Oxen, or Water, consisting of
two round Cylinders, about the bigness of Mil-posts, plated with Iron, which
turning inwards, and joining as close together as they can meet, so squeez the
canes in passing through them, as they come out on the other side all bruzed,
and dry as keques, which were all liquid before; which Liquor is conveyed by
Troughs to certain Caldrons, where it is boiled, still retaining its amber
color, till powered out at last into their forms or coolers, with a certain Lee
it is rendered white; And in these Mills (during the season of making Sugar) they
work both day and night, the work of immediately applying the canes into the
Mill being so perilous as if through drowsiness or heedlessnesse a fingers
end be but engaged betwixt the Posts, their whole body inevitably follows, to
prevent which, the next Negro has always a Hatchet ready to chop off his Arm,
if any such Misfortune should arive.

Of the Stars, and Heavens of the other Hemisphere.
I will conclude this Treatise of Brasil with a word or two of the Stars of
the other Hemisphere, garnisht with many constellations wholly unknown to us,
of which the Cruciero or Cross is the principalst, consisting of 5 or 6 Stars
of the first magnitude, as bright as any in our Hemisphere; whose brightness,
as with a foil, is set off the more by a great black cloud that is continually
under it, as is the witness of the Milky way rendered more perspicuous, by a
streak of black in the midst of it, tending toward the same constellation;
both which, as also another great black cloud on the other side the Milkie way,
I observed at my being there, for more than six months continually: whence I
concluded, 'twas the natural complexion of that sky (as ours is blew) to have
much part of it black, which perhaps renders the people of that Climat far more
melancholy than ours, which black clouds I much wonder none (as I know of) has
observed besides my self, especially since there are 2 white clouds not far from
the Cruciero appearing always in the same posture and figure, so generally
observed and known, as they are called Nubes Magellanicae, from Magellan, who
first discovered them. And thus much for Brasilia may suffice; In which, if I
have been too long, you will perceive at least, I have made al have I could
away. There being nothing in the Country, besides the satisfying my curiosity,
that could invite me to longer stay than whilst the Fleet was preparing, which
in the beginning of August, the 8th month after our Arival there, was ready to
depart, I being to Imbark on the Adm^^al Don Rhoderigo d' Alancastro, who nobly
invited me to diet and lodge with him in his own Cabin.

XXIV. To the Reverend Father John Pererio of the Society of J. in Brasil, Anno
50.
Reverend Father,
T'Il I can do it in deeds, you will please to accept of my thanks in words for all your noble favors in Brasil, by whose courtesy it was that I not only lived
there, but that my life in all my voyage has been prer^^gued ever since; for
Non vivere, sed been vale^^ vita est, you know: and I can assure you I never
fared better than I did on shipboard with the General Drn Roderigo d'
Alancastro, to whom you particularly recommended me, who lodged me in his own
Cabin, placed me at his table next himself, and not only made me companion
alive with him, but would have don't in death ^oo, ^f there had been occasion,
(as we imagined, on sight of another Fleet, which afterward proved friends) when
putting a Rapier in my hand, and arming me with a Rondache or Shield, he bid me
(if we chanced to fight) keep always close to him, that we might live or die
together. So as (my dear F.) whilst others oblige as 'twere by chance, you only
have the Art to do it, by linking benefit thus to benefit, till you make such a
chain of it, as he must be most ungrateful should not always remain your
Thrall; but that which your Modesty will not hear from me, I hope shortly you
shall hear from the King himself, whom I have informed since my Arival of the
many favors I received from you in Brasil, chiefly for his sake, next to God;
nor have I limited my Gratitude only to this place, but I have written also to
Rome, that I might repay your courtesies the sooner, the more I should call into
contribution to the debt, of which Letter behold the Copy.

Ad Eminentissimum Card. Fra. Barba. Anno 50.
Post suum ex Brasilia reditum:
Eminentissime Domine,
EX quo soed a illa Tempestas nuper in Anglia exorta me quasi Naufragum in
alienas orbis terrarum oras ejecisset, ego, ac si omnis terra mihi patria
suisset, vel polius nulla, magna p^r^e Europae peragrata, atque nonnulla Asiae,
Affricaeque Brasiliam tandem in America cogitavi, quo a nobis remotior ^o
propius ^^men notitiae admoturus.

After which Exordium I proceed, and say, that though it abound in many things;
and that a Gold mine has lately been discovered there in the Territory of St.
Paul's, and a veyn of Emeralds nigh Sancto Spiritu, yet I esteem more than any
Gold or Precious Stones, the planting of the Christian Faith, (I having no
w^ere seen Learning and Piety more flourishing than there) chiefly by the
Industry of the Fathers of the Society, who converting those Barbarous people
daily, whilst they exercise their Bodies in cultivating the Land, do cultivate
their Souls for Heaven.

I will conclude, by telling you how our voyage was so prosperous all the way,
as for more than 3 months none of our 22 sail ever lost sight of one another,
til nigh the Western Islands; or Ti^rcieros (where I only with our Purser went
ashore, the General suffering none else to stir) our Fleet was so distipated
by fowl weather, as only 7 of us entered Lisbon road together, the rest coming
afterward dropping one by one, excepting 2 or 3 caught up by the Hollanders,
and one or two lost: And this is all I can tell you of our Voyage hither:
besides which, I have no more to say, but only again and again to Iterate my many
thanks unto you, R. F. Rector, F. Vas^o^cells, and all the rest, with the
assurances that I shall always be

Your R. etc.

XXV. To the Lord -- from Lisbon, Anno 50.
Of some Discourses in PORTUGAL.
My Lord,
BEing returned from my Brasil voyage, my next is for ^land^rs, whither I
tended in my thoughts, even whilst I tended farthest from it; they like
Compasses having one foot fixed in that, whilst the other compast the whole
world about, for which whilst I expect an Embarquement, I cannot better
entertain my sel^, than by en^er^aining you with some passages here; be pleased
to know then, that discoursing the other day with one of the greatest in this
Kingdom about our affairs of England, (which have so changed face since I left
'em, as I should hardly know them. I having been so remote from them, as the
blow of that fatal Axe which took the Kings life away, was not heard there till
six months a^t^r) they thereupon vilifying the Supreme Authority, imagining
none great enough, that is not monstrous, and that to Reign courteously, is
only to reign at courtesy of others, and not rightly understanding that of our
Parliament; I to rectify their understandings in either, told them first, That
the right Institution of the Parliament of England was so far diminishing the
Royal Authority, as on the contrary it rendered it, but the more absolute,
whence they were deceived, who imagined the Parliament there an imperious
Master, as it is in some Countries, or an abject Vassal, as it is in others; it
being rather in nature of an humble friend, to advise and counsel as often as
was requisite for the Kingdoms good; That there are some things which like the
wheels of Chariots, or wings of Birds, look like burthensom; when indeed they
are but helps to support and lighten the burden, and one of those things was
the Parliament of England; not so much an Embarasment to the Royal power, as an
expediating and faciliating it, not so much to Limit the Regal Authority, as
not to leave it altogether Limitlesse, that its bounds was like that of the
Ocean, boundles, but for its own conservation, that the King could do all
things, but ruin and destroy himself and his Kingdoms, an Impuissance so far
from Imperfection, as is that of Almighty God not being able to sin, which is
on the contrary one of his most God-like Attributes. In fine, that the King of
England was one of the potentest Kings in the Christan world, but with his
Parliament omnipotent, and that without that he was but one it is true; but that
without him nothing. For the rest of our affairs, his Religion had rendered him
more intelligent; and he could say, That as it is not then when the House falls,
that the ruin begins, but when some main pillar or foundation is neglected, the
want of maintaining which, draws on the Ruin of all the rest: So 'twas not now
the Ruin of the Royal Authority began in England, but then when the Schism
began; when that foundation of Monarchy, P^r me Reges regnant, was so shaken
and weakened, as it has stood wavering and tottering ever since. That the
Spiritual and Temporal Monarchy are that Murale and Antemurale, fortifying one
another; neither could the one more subsist without the other, than the Walls
of a Town without its Bulwarks and Outworks can defend it self. That so the
King, in taking the Ecclesiastical Authority upon himself, did but like him who
foolishly took his Horse on his own shoulders, and fell to the ground with it,
whilst he vainly endeavored to carry that, whith should carry him; and so we
see all had fayl'd in their Ends they proposed to themselves in that
preposterous change; the King in establishing a greater Authority, the Bishops,
or Spiritual Lords, in imagining they should grow more absolute by the ejection
of Abbots; and the Lords Temporal by the ejection of Bishops afterward, all
but making way for their own ruin; nor were the Commons to imagine they had
much mended their Market by it; since whosoever cheaply fells another authority
makes but the Market to buy his own: So we see since the first change of that
Religion, wherein England had continued flourish^ng more than a Thousand years,
how 't has been hurryed from one to an^t^er ever since; it being as impossible
things div^rted from their pristine Institution, (...) which by long tract of
Time they h^^ been Accustomed, should afterward stand firm and stable; as for
the needle of the Compass, diverted from its North, to cease its restless
motion, till it return unto't again. Thus he, which how truly, the Event o^
things will show: for my part prep^^'d ^or ^ll Ev^nts, when I am in Flandres,
if there be any S^ttlement in England, and subsistence for an honest man, who
loves to be quie^, and let others be so, I may see it ag^n: i^ not, I have
learnt how wide the wo^ld is, an^ to esteem every place for my Country, w^^re I
may live quietly, and without molest^tion; which humor and disposition (my
Lord) I know you will not dislike, in

Your Lordships most, etc.

XXVI. To Mr. John Mulys, An. 50.
Worthy Sir.
THe courtesy I have received in all my voyages from those of your noble
prosession, especially from your self, obliges me in gratitude to the
publishing every where of this following

CHARACTER Of an English Mercha^^ reside^^ in sor^in pa^^s.
He is one, who goes abroad with a stock of honor, as we will as money to Traffic
with, and manages either bravely, being a Master, and not a slave to wealth,
and such a Master as honors it by his commands, making it only serve to noble
ends. He neither sticks at Trivial exp^nce nor gain, nor Anticipates poverty
for fear of being poor (like those who kill them^^lves for fear of death) nor
accelerates it by vain glory of appearing rich (like those who guild over
ruinous Palaces) but look in his Accomp^s and Warehouse, and you find him a
wealthy Merchant, but look in all the rest of his House and Family, and you
find him a noble and gallant minded Gentleman. In brief, he neither starves the
Chanel with penuriousnesse, nor exhausts the Spring with prodigality, but has a
particular Art to keep a full stream still running, and the Fount still full,
so as we may well say of him in these dead Times, that there is none lives but
he; who whilst greatest Landed men are outed of all they have, as long as the
Sea is open, is sure of his coming in: To conclude, he is the honor of his
Nation abroad, and therefore his Nation should be very dishonorable and
unworthy, should it not always honor him.

For the rest (Sir) you will please to know, that about a month after my
departurture from Lisbon, and Embarquement at Set^val I arrived in Holland, the
travailing through which by Land, from the Texel to Amsterdam, from thence to
Utrecht, Dort, and so to Antwerp, etc. cost me more than all the Sea Voyages I
made in all the four parts of the world beside, and Land too, since I left
Italy. They will imagine this a Paradox, who know not that all my other voyages
cost me nothing (which by computation in four years only, had cost me more than
2 or 3 thousand Crowns) If the accommodation I had with Princes by Land, and
Admirals by Sea, could have been purchased with money, to say nothing of the
Entertainment I found by Merchants every where; Of which now I say no more, but
only that I can never say enough. In fine ((...) having completed my ten years
Voyage, I am now arrived at Bruxelles, as Stones to their Center, and Elements
in their Sphere, wanting nothing of that requiescence which every thing enjoys
in that which it most desires, where I remain

Sir, Your, etc.

XXVII. To the Duchess of Lorain at Berseel nigh Brussels, Anno 50.
The Description of the Countess of BERLAMONTS Funeral.
Madam,
YEsterday were the obsequies of Madam Berlamont celebrated with all
magnificence in her own Chapel, hung all with black Velvet, bordered with
Cloth of Gold, the Hearse in like manner with a Coronet and Canopy, The
Holland Bishop officiated, all the Privy Council, and Magistrates in Crops
assisting, together with all the Nobility, her two Nephews, the Duke of
Arschot, and Prince of Gau^e the chief Mourners; but the Prince the more
officious of the two, as most concerned in her Testament, Father Mallyard made
the Funeral Oration, indiscreetly enough, who whilst he excused her for not
intermedling with State Affairs, accused her the more, there being some
incurable wounds of Fame, which like soar Eyes are but made worse with
handling, nor wanted there positive virtues enough to praise in her, that he
should need to seek out negative ones; but it is the vice of your petty Orators,
to o'rpasse familiar and obvious things, and seek out uncouth and abstruse,
thinking they are never eloquent enough, till they are extravagant. The
Ceremonies of the Chapel performed, the Prince of Ga^re and I in manner soly
accompanied the Corpse into the Vault (perhaps the only true and real mourners
there) where I complemented him, in telling him I wished with all my heart all
his misfortunes buried in the same Grave with her, and he answered that he
never had, nor could have a more sensible one than the loss of her. In fine
(Madam) it were no ill complement to your Highness (I imagine) to wish all your
Enemies buried in the same Grave too; she having nothing I ever dislike in her,
but her Enmity to your Highness; for which Sin God forgive her and I doubt not
but he will forgive her all the rest; I having been always of opinion, that somes
obliging vices ar better than others sour and austere virtues, learning of that
Friar in Comines, to pray always for those who do me good, and for me, your
Highness knows the many obligations I had unto her, so great really, as all
the joy I had of living in Flanders had been buried in the same Grave with her,
had she not left your Highness Executrix of it before she died; so Madame
having rather gained than lost by the Exchange of the Hand, I may the more
truly say now, that I am solely and absolutely

Your Highness most etc.

XXVIII. To the same.
Apprehending danger from the Inflammation and rediness of the Princesses Eyes.
Madam,
I Am so concerned and sorry for the Princess malady, as did I apprehend the
least danger of it, I should not be now alive to tell your Highness so; but I
am so far from it, as whilst Doctor Forges is busy with the rest, consulting
the remedys, with half the consultation, I Will tell your Highness the cause of
it, (when the malady is half cured they say.) First then, The redness of her
Eyes is nothing else but as the blushing of the Morn is to the day; and no
wonder that Aurora should precede, the fair Sunshine her Eyes promise; Next
it is but Justice, that those Eyes which are to inflame so many, should first
experience what it is to be inflamed themselves; that she may say with Dido, She
has learnt to pity others by her own harms, etc. besides by her drawing Green
Taffaty Curtains over them, I suspect some design of keeping them for relics
(as the manner is) if so, I desire she should understand, that there are some
things ('it is true) are more esteemed and reverenced the less they are beheld;
but such as her Eyes are, the more they are beheld, are ever reverenced and
esteemed the more. How ever, to morrow I shall not fail to come and pay my
Devotions at her shrine, when if she look well upon me, I shall esteem my self
highly blessed; Mean Time, I desire she would esteem me for the humblest of her
Votaries, and that your Highness would hold me for,

Madam, The humblest of you Honourers and Admirers.

XXIX To the same.
Merrily describing his journey on foot from BERSEEL to BRVXELLES.
Madam,
YEsternight ever I reached Bruxelles I was sufficiently punished for my
unmannerly (or rather too mannerly) refusing your Highness Coach, the sudden
rain having rendered the ways so slabbery, and me so dirty, as I can assure your
Highness it put me more in mind of Adam's clay than a hundred As^wednesdays
with its memento homo's could have done; I having more on my shoes than went
to making the first man, and one might have planted more Salads on them than
would serve Mademoiselle de -- s little household a year at least, so as my
feet were like Nebuccadonozors Image all of clay, and they had like to have
cost me twenty quarrels in coming hom. The Master of the Brick-kills had like
to have quarreled me for carrying away all the Clay upon my shoes he had been
preparing and making provision a whole week of to make in Bricks; and a
Spaniard looked grim and furly on me at the Gate, for carrying away so much of
the Kings Highway on my Shoes; at my Entrance into Town, I might have had two
pence for it of an Ale-wise for stopping Bung holes, and a moulder of Images
bargained for it to make his moulds of. But he who made most profit of it,
(next to the Shomaker) was your good Friar Terminarius of Berseel, who
meditating on his way, how Adam in State of perfection, of clay was made made
man, at sight of me fell on another conceit, how man in state of Imperfection
was made clay. In fine, Madam, all the profit I can make of it, is to learn how
I go on foot again when I may have commodity of a Coach, and not to refuse any
thing that is offered me.

XXX. To the Lord Duke of Buckingham.
In praise of Berseel a Castle of Ma^am^iselle de Beauvais nigh Bruxelles.
My Lord,
THere are certain moments and ravishing Minutes like the divine Ecstasies of
Saints, we should desire might always last; and if our lives were all of the
same piece with them, how happy should we be? one of these in my opinion (and I
doubt not but I have your Graces suffrage) was that we had the other day at
Berseel, when May had put on its best attire, the day its sereuest Countenance;
Madam the Duchess was never more pleasant, your Grace in better humor, nor my
Late in better Tune. For Berseel it self, I could not at my return but give it
this Character: That 'twas the only remains of the Terrestrial Paradise, the
world being still there in its first Innocence, the Tree of (...) only wanting
to make them live perpetually, The air being so pure, as heal^h has made there
its constant residence: and sickness dares not come within the sphere of
Zeph^rus breath, who has taken possession of the territory thereabouts, and
suffers no wind to blow there besides its self, whilst the Liquid Crystal of
its silver Moat serves both for Mirour to its lofty buildings, and the Wood
Nymphs too, who with little Sports and Cupids on every Tree, in fresh revelry
every day, pass all the year. The Genius of the place is always sprightly, and
the spirit of May is always there. In fine, it is an Academy of Nightingals;
and the Bees, those little Huntfeasts of Flowers, sind no where better, nor
more abundant store, than there, where flowers grow every where, and crop but
one, and strait seven more spring up in place of it, whether 't be the
goodness and fertility of the soil, or the virtue and fairness of the hand
that gathers them; Heaven having priviledg'd this place, with that happiness
above all others, that it should never fall, but into the fairest hands of the
Universe. Thus I; but this I know (my Lord) comes short of your Idea of it,
whose quick Imagination goes far beyond all others Expressions, wherefore I Will
leave this Theme, and come to that other of the Reason why after Madmoiselle de
B's letting blood there was found so equal a mixture of blood and water, as
the nicest sense could not distinguish it; for which, whilst we were
soliciting our Muses till after Midnight, and could not obtain any Reason of
them, behold that mine gave me next morning. Of this so just and equal mingly
Of water and blood, what should the Reason be?
But only this, being forced to part from her,
Each drop of Blood for Grief did shed a Tear.
And now (my Lord) your Grace is obliged to admit of this Reason, or afford a
better; which I know is as easy and natural to you, as it is to me to be always

Your Graces most, etc.

XXXI. To Madamoselle de B. Anno 50.
The Reason of his leaving BRUXELLES to wait upon the Duchess of LOREIN into
the Country.
Mademoiselle,
THe Roman Stories make mention of a certain Lady so nobly constant to the
Afflicted, as when her Husband had cast her Father into banishment, she left
her Husband, and followed him; and when her Fathers Faction (afterward
prevailing) did the like by her H^sband, she followed him again, and lef^ her
Father; and I should more praise this disposition, if it were not mine own, I
having followed the Queen Mother so, as now I do her Highness, that they might
see, I followed not their Fortunes but themselves; nor is it virtue, but
Interest in me, who love the good Graces of those I am with, above all the
benefits they can bestow on me; of which your Princes are then most liberal,
when they have nothing to bestow on you besides; so there is somewhat methinks
in great Princes, as in the Sun, that makes them the more regardable the more
they are Eclipsed, and somewhat more venerable in ruined Palaces, than when they
are entire. I speak not this (Mademoiselle) with any reflection on her Highness
Fortune, but on mine own disposition, who was pleased to say publicly, when I
had resolved to wait on her into the Country; That none ever running at the
Ring was more sollicitous to carry away the prize, than she was to carry me
away from you. In revanche of which I can assure her Highness, that none ever
having gained in prize some precious Jewel, was more careful to conserve it,
than I shall be the honor of her good Graces. Mean while think not, (
Mademoiselle) that I leave you for her; but only hope to serve you the more in
serving her; You being so good a Sister, as I know you prefer her contentment
to your own, or rather have no contentment but only hers; to which if I shall
confer any thing, it is all the Ambition, as it is but the duty of

Mademoiselle, Your, etc.

XXXII. To Monsieur Laurins, Lieutenant Civil at Gant, Anno 50.
Noble Sir,
I Have finished my little Circle of the world (incompassing only the Borders
of Asia, Affrique, and America) and am returned to Bruxelles, the point where I
first begun, remaining much unsatisfied (the while) that I took no greater
compass; yet was I rather wanting to the opportunity, than the opportunity to
me: The Count d' Averos (newly made Viceroy of the East Indies at my return
from the West offering me the like accommodation with him thither, as I had
with Don Roderigo d' Alancastro (who had married his Daughter) in returning from
Brasil (that is, my diet and lodging with himself) (to which the King would
have willingly assented, and munificently contributed) which, with many humble
thanks I refused then, and if I repent me now, it is because I weigh it without
the same Circumstances which then turned the Scales, (the extreme l^ssitude of
one Voyage, and danger of the other) not one Portugal ship of three returning
safe from that voyage, whilst not one in ten of the Hollanders ever miscarries,
the doubling the Cape of Bona Esperanza being only dangerous at some seasons
in the years, which season they never avoid, (by their own confession) so
unwise men, or so ill Mariners they are, not better to know to Time their
Voyage, or Trim their Ship; But enough of Voyaging: and now it is time for me,
like a ship safe returned to Harbor, to Carine and rest awhile, and tempt
Fortune no longer, since Quem saepe transit ^^sus aliquando invenit, not one in
a hundred ever having been so fortunate as I, nor (perhaps) did I live ^
hundred years, should I ever be so fortunate again, I never knowing what danger
was by L^nd, nor storms by Sea, in 8 years traveling by one, and two years
Voyage by the other (so rare a felicity as (perhaps) none could ever boast
besides my self) so are there certain conjunctions which never but at certain
periods (like Ecclipses) encounter, as was this to be defrayed and entertained,
where ever I went (in manner) at the public cost, like some public
Ambassador; one chief reason of which I imagine to have been my indifferency
of traveling to any place where I had not been before (those who bind
themselves to a^y one course ^n particular, renouncing to For^unes concurrency
to all the rest) yet let none ever hope the like advantages, that are not
signalized by some remarkable qualities (as I was by Music, etc.) There being
somewhat in Art (whilst exercised in no Mechanique way) above Fortune, that
makes Princes more favor those that excel in the one than the other, they looking
on the one, as their Subjects, but on the other, as their Companions (there being
no superiority in Art as there is in Fortune, but the best, not the greatest
carries it) This you should see now Sir if you were at Brussels, where whilst
others far richer than my self are kept at distance, I am admitted to such a
familiarity with those Grandees, as some Admire, some Envy, and all Emulate,
all which honor I should not glory in, if it were not accompanied with that of
being

Sir Your, etc.

XXXIII. To Mademoiselle de B. Anno. 50.
Of Language.
Mademoiselle,
SInce you honor me so much to permit me to entertain you weekly (or oftener)
with our occurrences, and my meditations here, and please to give me the hint
sometimes of the Subject I am to treat of, as now you do; be also pleased to
understand that for Languages, it is to Embarque without Bisquet, or travel
without viaticum for any to travel, or undertake a voyage without the Language
of the Count^y, where he goes; for a shift (it is true) one may have recourse to
their Country men in foreign parts, but that is but a kind of begging to be
understood, and traveling in forma Pauperis; and as you must seek them out in
Corners, so must you confine your self to Corners while you converse with them;
for my part I account it altogether as necessary for those who travel to make
provision of Language^ as of money, and therefore I never travail any wh^^^,
but (...) provide me with furniture (...) of ^anguages for so vast a Room, as
those (...) ^ries ^ travail through: and if you demand of^^^e which Language I
found the most l^rge an^ ^preading, and of greatest latitude and extension, the
best way to answer you, is to give you first the plane of the Room, and next to
let you see the several pieces of Languages to furnish it. First then for
French it serves you thorough all Fland^rs, Spain, Savoy up to Italy
(exclusively) as through the Neitherland up to Sweadland, Denmark and Poland,
the other way) where almost all the people of quality speak French. Then for
Italian it serves you not only through all Italy, but Sicily, Malt^, and almost
all the Isles of the Ar^hipelag^ and Medditerranean Sea, up to Constantinople,
where your Language begins to change, and fails you in travel^^ng further
Levant* wherefore to return back again, It serves thorough all Dalmatia, and
b^yond the Venetians Territory up to Austria, where it is spoke commonly in the
Emperors Court, as almost in all the Princes Courts of G^^many. Now for
Spanish it not only serves you thorough all Spain and Portugal* but along all
the Coast, and the Isles of A^frique to the Brasils, and either Indies. For
Dutch next, It not only serves you in Germany, Switzerland, the Low Countries,
Denmark, Sweadland, but every where by Sea, which is as properly the Hollanders
Country, as any Land they or any other Nation Inhabit and possess; and lastly
for Latin and English (to tell you true) they only served me to stop holes
with; the English Language out of our Dominions being like our English money
current with much ado in neighboring Countries who traffic with us; but
farther off you must go to Banqu^ers of your own Nation, or none will take it
of your hands. And for Latin, it being no where a vulgar Language, but the
Sacred and Erudite Tongue, take even the Clergy and Schoolmen themselves (whose
proper Language it ought to be) out of the Church or Schools, and you cannot
do them a greater displeasure, than speak Latin to them, so as it rather
serves to interlard other Languages, than to make an entire meal of discourse,
and but upon great necessity is never to be used. And now I Will tell you an
observation or two concerning Languages, ever I end this Letter; and the first
is, that (almost) all the Languages of Europe, are originally derived from the
two main Fount^^ns of the Almain or Latin Tongue, the Italian, French and
Spanish branching from the last, as the Low Dutch, D^nish, English, etc. from
the first. The next is the influence they have, according as their Countries,
Border and Con^^ne one upon another, or by flux and reflux of Trade; The
Italian for example being more Current in Turkey than the French, for the first
reason: As the French (for the second) is more current than the Spanish there.
The last is concerning your subordinate Languages, as the Walloon and Liegois
to the French, the Portuguez to the Spanish, and Scotch to English, etc. all
which understand you in speaking the chief or Master Language, but not o'th
contrary, and all these your Master Language says use but their old absolet
words, as Servants wear their Masters old Garments, but they (too proud to
acknowledge this) say rather, that as old men keep constant to their old
fashions, whilst their Sons refine daily upon them in bravery, and change for
new, so the plainness of their Language, is but an Argument of the antiquity
thereof. To conclude ( Mademoiselle) 'twould be difficult for me to tell you
which of these Languages served me most in traveling about the world, were not
the French that I have the happiness to converse with you in, whom I esteem
above all the world besides, to that therefore I must give the preeminence, and
subscribe as I do this Letter, with the Assurances that I am

Mademoiselle, Your, etc.

XXXIV To the same.
Of the pronunciation o^ several Languages.
Mademoiselle,
IN my last I discoursed to ye of several Languages; now if you please I Will
treat of their several pronunciation, and withal make a lazy Apology for my
pronouncing them so ill: First then for French, you know the Queen Mother would
never suffer them to correct me when I erred, saying, that If they taught me to
speak well, she should want the sport of hearing me speak so ill; and betwixt
the Latin, Span^sh and Italian there is so little difference in most words, as
what betwixt negligence and unadvertance, assured to be understood, though they
pronounce them ill, sew are careful and curious enough to pronounce them well;
besides their similitude is so great, as (like Twins of the same Parent) one
hardly distinguishes them, which, similitude as it facilitates the
understanding of them in general, so it renders the pronunciation of them in
particular more difficult, so as I (for my part) count it as hard to speak pure
and without mixture, as it is for your Water drinker there to spurt several
Liquors out of his Mouth, without confounding the taste of Bear with Vinager, or
Aquavitae with Wine, etc. Besides to one (like me) who regards more the matter
then the words, and the words then the pronunciation; and are of opinion that
there is no supreme excellency in the world (besides only in your self) I count
it as great trifling in him should seek to rid and weed his mouth of all
Impropriety of some words* and mispronouncing of other (in speaking other
languages) as it is in him should go about to sweep an earthen floor too every
g^ain of Dust, or rid a Garden from all its weeds, quod ere nascitur, vix
evitatur, that which i^ c^^^atural to a thing being impossible to be av^yded.
Suffice it then, that speak as well as one can other languages besides his own,
unless from his Childhood he has been trained up in them, In which case they
are as natural to him as his own, and he sha^^ speak with the allowance of a
stranger still (It matters not much, whe'r'^ be a grain or two more or less)
let me then understand a stranger Language, so as to make all I hear or read in
it mine own, and speak it so as I may be understood, and let whose will take
the bootl^sse pains to pronounce it well, and have the reputation of an
affected Traveller for me: To conclude ( Mademoiselle) I shall never envy him
who tells you in finer language than my self, that he is your most Humble
Servant, etc. but 'twould inflict me much that any one should be indeed more
than I am

Mademoiselle Your, etc.

XXXV. To Mademoiselle de B.
Of Fame.
Mademoiselle,
COnsidering the mighty Elogiums and magnificent praises that has ever been
given to Fame by all Kingdoms and Republiques on the one side, the airinesse
and the Fabulousnesse of it on the other side, it makes me half suspect that
there is more of Policy than Reality in the thing; for who would do great and
noble Actions? who would expose their lives for their Countries? if somewhat
beyond their Lives did not excite them to it? If the memory of what they did
were terminated with themselves, or that memory nothing appertained to them
when they were gone, Hence it is, that this is used as a spur to incite men unto
Virtue; It Is Fames Trumpet, that encourages men, and edges them to valor, and
the sound of this like that of Meltiades Trophies to Themistocles, is still
resounding in our Ears, and animating us to great and noble Actions; But if (as
I say) we examine on the other side, the frivolousnesse of the Thing, we shall
find our selves imposed by Antiquity, and conclude with that Greek, who taken
with the voice of the Nightingal, and imagining it some mighty thing, pluming
it (for curiosity) and seeing what it was, cried out, Vox est, and praeterea
nihil, that 'twas a Voice, and nothing else. For first, if we consider the Fame
of Writers, (in which the Fames of all others are included) both in its
duration and Immensitie, (for these two, forsooth, they promise you, shall
never be terminate, and always permanent) if we consider, I say, unto how
small a part and portion of the world their Fames can penetrate, how few
understand their Language, and how few of those who do, can read it, and lastly
how few of those who can are curious; surely instead of painting it with wings,
we might more properly paint it with Plumets at the heels, and in lieu of
imagining it flying about the world, we may imagine it rather pent up, and
fluttering about some narrow Bird-cage or volary: So as it is as great a folly
and vanity to imagine what we write in our Language, or any other crudite
Tongue whatsoever, can make any ^ar progress in other Countries, as to imagine
the sound of a Cymbal, or little Tinckling B^ll could be heard over all the
Universe. Then for the duration or perpetuating of it when I am dead, what
avails that me, or how can it more rejoice and delight me, than Music played at
my Tomb or Monument? When I am named, who remembers what I was? or when those
are dead that knew me, who reflects upon my person hearing me mentioned; give
me then Fame alive, and take whose list my Fame when I am dead, which at most,
is but as the Echo of dying voices, or the perfume of expiring Odours, rather
shaddows than substances, and not so much as pictures, which terminate at least
the imagination to certain species and Resemblances. And if any one object, By
this opinion all Incitement to Virtue and to noble and Heroic Actions is ta'n
away; I absolutely deny it, and affirm that the Fame we enjoy alive, and our
Countries and Families after our death, is sufficient incitement, and
encouragement enough: so as to conclude, I must answer you, Mademoiselle,
demanding what Fame is, as that Ancient did him, who desired to know of him
what God was, That he would tell him on the morrow; when summoned of his
promise, he demanded two days respite more: and so went multiplying Time and
delays, till being pressed at last, he answered ingenuously, That before he
thought of it he imagined he know it, but the more he thought of it, the less
he knew of it; and here ( Mademoiselle,) before I conclude, that the
worshippers of this Fame may not think me Atheist, I have made this following
Hymn, here to its honor, to acquit me of Impiety.

Fame that from great and noble Actions coms,
As precious Odours from Arabian Gums,
The shadow that from brighter virtue flows,
And follows it along where ere it goes,
The Echo of great names, the walking spright,
And Ghost of mighty men, the Tripartite
Division of us, when we are dead and gone,
And nothing left of's here, but thee alone.
When Heaven our Soul has (where it never dies)
The Earth our Bodies, Fame our Memories;
Since only thou it is make our memories last,
Nor can oblivion ever draw so fast
Her Curtain or't, as thou't undraw't again,
To show the fairer Portrait of 't to men.
To whom, fair daughter of Eternity,
Should we commend our selves and works, but thee,
Through whose sole benefit it is, if we survive,
Long as there is worlds, or men be left alive.
XXXVI. To Mademoiselle de Clerque at Gant, Anno 50.
Wherein he declares the Life they led in the Country.
Mademoiselle,
MY Endeavors have not been wanting, nor ever shall, to maintain that good
Intelligence betwixt her Altezze of Loreine and you, who often mentions you
with much honor and tenderness, and the ofter perhaps for my giving her the
occasion, She always honoring me with that complacency, to prosecute willingly
that discourse which I begin, we often wish you here, and to incite you to
visit us the sooner, I Will tell you how we pass our time. The mornings, having
finished our Devotions, About an hour before dinner we have a little consort of
Viols, Lutes, and Ghittars, which we often vary, together with our pieces for
more variety; neither the Duchess, Princess, nor I, but play our parts on
all, and if Mademoiselle de Beauvais be with us, as oftentimes she is, they
sing 3 parts, to which I play the Base, nor shall you any where hear more
excellent voices, nor airs more excellently sung; having dined, and some one or
two hours past in pleasant conversation; If the day be fair, we go abroad in
Coach to take the Air, a second Coach following, and some Horse, besides the
Princess in Side-Saddle, who takes much delight in her little Pal^rey, and
rides excellent well, though not above 12 year old: From our journey, which
never ends without some Banquet or Collation, we return about Sun set, and
dance Court and Country Dances, some hour or two before Supper, our company of
Women Dancers, or Ladies of the Court being strong, but of men weak, unless
some noblemen of Brussels or Englis^ Gentlemen come over to us, as ordinarily
they do: After Supper we either play at Cards, or at the sports of wit and
laughter, and all sorts of Petits Ieus, which ended, the Duchess and
Princess retire to their several Appartements, and each one to theirs, we
having one main advantage here, to be free from the tyranny of Clocks, which
tells you peremptorily what hours you must rise, eat, and go to bed at, whom
you must punctually obey forsooth (as Sheep go to Pasture, or Hens to roost)
whether you have mind or appetite to it or no, or you are disorderly and irregular;
An Order and Regularity fitter for Monks and Friars than Seculars, for Slaves
than Freemen* and for Knitting women than Ladies, If you like this life
(Mademoiselle) do but come over to us, and you shall have your part of it, and
find the Duchess ready to welcome you, and me most ready to wait upon you,
who am

Mademoiselle Your, etc.

XXXVII. To Mademoiselle de Beauvais.
The Vices of evil Tongues Arraigned.
Mad^moiselle,
I Know not how you got the secret (but I Am sure you have it) to charm ill
Tongues, and so stop the mouth of Mesdi sance, as whilst every one (almost)
speaks ill of others, every one speaks well of you; Is it because you speak ill
of none? and give none occasion to speak ill of you? but they can do it
without occasion, and when you give them none, can take it of themselves; or is
your high Virtue above the reach of evil Tongues? but nothing in this Age is
above their reach, who are so curious of finding fault, as where their eyes
fail them, they invent new Prospectives, to find spots our even in the Sun it
self; or is it lastly, a certain Majesty in your person, that daunts and aws
them to Reverence? What ever it be, I must admire and congratulate your
felicity, and profess my self as glad often, (being to speak against the Vices
of Evil Tongues) as one would be in a strange Country to find out one that
understood his own Language. Purposing then to arraign those Vices, I have
chosen you for judge, the only Impartial one I know of, that is not complice
with the Criminel. First Vice then I intend to call unto the bar, shall be
Mocking, Ieering, and Derision, rather Abuses than Crimes, and next the more
Criminous ones of Calumny, and Detraction.

Of Mocking, Ieering, and Derision.
Mocking, Ieering and Derision, may be defined a malicious publishing of others
Imperfections, with intent to render them ridiculous, (for if it be their
Vices, it is Reproach and Contumely, and done on purpose to render them odious,)
and it is lawful in no case, but only when Imperfections are affected, to laugh
them out of them; whence it is good when used for Physic, but when only for
poison, it is detestable. However, it becomes none but Buffoons, and under pain
of becoming Ridiculous ones self, none is to endeavor to make others so. It
tends to Enmity, if it proceeds not thence; (for the faults of those we love,
we seek to hide, and never seek to find fault with any, but those we care not
for:) Mean time, whilst they imagine they show their wits, they but show their
folly by it, and want of wit, none more foolishly purchasing Enemies, than they;
it being as great a folly for a Jest to lose a Friend, as to sell ones Horse to
buy him Provender. It Is a dangerous Vice too, being commonly the occasion of
quarrel, (whilst it touches men where they are most sensible) and therefore none
but Women may safely use it; which is the cause (perhaps) why now adays more
women ar tainted with this vice than men. And if you mark it, their Mocking and
Jeering at others, is principally for not being fine Gentlemen, and a la mode
(forsooth) they learning by looking on their Glasses, to look on nothing but
superficial things; (having more regard to the discomposure of ones Garments,
than of their manners, and the disorder of their hair, than of their mind) and
for such as these, your blunt man marrs their mirth, his not being put out of
Countenance by it, putting them out of countenance themselves: Such an one was
our Countrymen Sir Roger Williams, an excellent Soldier, but a blunt Courtier,
who coming to Court after the loss of Sluice in Flandres, and being jeered for
it by the Ladies, with Is this he that delivered up Sluice? Pray let us see him,
a doughty soldier no doubt he is. Answered them brusquely, Yes Ladies, I am
he; and on so good conditions, there is none of you* but would have delivered
up your Sluices too. Nor did he spare Queen Elizabeth her self, when waiting
long at Court to deliver a certain Petition for arrears of pay, and the Queen
not willing to see him, he one day Encountering her where was no avoiding him,
she, to put him out of countenance, feigned to smell some evil savor in the
Room, crying nicely out, Fogh, What a stink's here? Williams, I think it be
your Boots (said she) that smell so. No by -- said he, it is my Petition (
Madam) I have kept it so long, ever I could get it delivered. But to return to
our subject. There are diverse sorts of Derisions and Mockery; Some by whisper,
others more openly; some before ones face; others behind ones back; some finaly
by laughing outright, and others Ironically, and by dissembled scorn: Of
which, that of whisper is commonly the most offensive, which, whilst it takes
away all place from Reply, leaves place to imagine the Injury greater than it
is; whence, whilst the Affront perhaps regards but one, the Offense of it
extends it self to all. Your public way of Jeering is most dangerous, and
your secret more base and cowardly; above all your Ironicall one does the least
harm to those they mock, and the most to those who use it; it marring their
Natures quite, and teaching them falsehood and dissembling. And generally those
who are so diligent in marking others faults and Imperfections, must needs be
full of Faults and Imperfections themselves; Since, whilst their minds are
still abroad to observe others faults, they can never be at home to mark and
amend their own. In fine, however light they make of it, they are to know, that
no Generous spirit but can easilier brook Injury than Scorn, and the reparation
of it too, is easier made: and that they but render themselves by it odious
unto all, it being natural for men to love those who esteem them, as it is to
hate all those who disesteem them, (as those who mock and jeer them manifestly
declare they do.) To conclude, I could with them only to observe this rule,
Never to say any thing of others, but what they would say before their faces,
or what they would others should say of them behind their backs.

Of Slander, Calumny, and Detraction.
But Mocking, Ieering, and Derision, are nothing to Slander, Calumny, and
Detraction. Those but point with the finger, but these brand in the forehead;
those but strike, but these wound; let those say no more, and there is an end,
but these must unsay what they have said, and like venomous Beasts, resorp
their own poison, and like Witches and Sorcerers undo their own spells and
charms, or the poison and the mischief remains still. To distinguish them,
Detraction seeks to take away my Good name, and Calumny to purchase me an Ill.
For Example, Detraction comes and says of one that is esteemed an honorable
and virtuous Lady, that she is not so honorable and virtuous as is imagined;
when having laid the Egg, Calumny comes and hatches it, saying that she has
her G^llants too, as well as others; after which* comes Slander, and for
conclusion, names persons, and charges her with certain Crimes; whence you see,
the first has more of the Envy, and the second two more of the Malice; the
first Slights, the second Reproaches, and third Defames; These (is those who
have the Plague seek to to infect others with their sores,) you shall always
find sowing of their malice in others minds; when take it for a General Rule,
what ever they report to you of others, is ^^ther wholly false, or never wholly
true; for they doing it to mischief others, do it with ^ll the malice they can
devise, and owing a (...) to those they calumniate, do it, you (...) be sure,
as spightfully as they can. But let t^^m take heed, for where the Scripture
s^^s (...) shall answer for every idle word, (such as (...) Mocking and
Jeering) On the contrary, we shall never be able to answer for our spightfull
and malicious ones, (such as are Detract^on, Slander, and Calumny) whence it
distinguishes* and says (in effect) that whosoever concristats and offends his
brother, shall be liable to Judgment; but whosoever injures and desames him,
shall be liable to Condemnation: but as there would be no Thiev^s, if there
were no Receivers; so there would be no Calumniators, if none would give ear
unto their Calumnies, wherefore it is rather our faults then, than theirs, who
whilst we vainly imagine the depressing others a kind of exalting our selves,
and that we are magnified, whilst others are lessened, if we truly consider it,
we shall find we but depress and lessen our selves by it, and declare our own
indigence and want of worth the whilst, as Ladies who use painting or choppins
do their want of beauty, and their own littleness: For me then, when any goes
about to make me Enemy of any, I conclude he is their Enemy, and no friend of
mine, with this distick.

*Who'd have me doubt another is my Foe,
First makes me doubt wh'er he is my friend or no.
XXXVIII. To the Lady, -- An. 51
Of Secrets.
BEtwixt making a secret of every thing and nothing, there is a difference and
mean, and great judgment is requisite to know what is to be kept secret, and
what not: you shall have some of so Laxative Tongue, they are in pain to be
delivered of all they know, and these are never to be entrusted with any
reports above the Region of Bake-house or Barbers news: Others again are so
Costive and ha^d-bound, as they will not tell you how they do without caution,
and will whisper you the Weather and Time of the day as a great secret. When
you hear one say, I know more than I will or dare speak of, etc. know it is but
a call for the Curious and Inquisitive, and he longs to tell it you; so when
you see any Inquisitive, you may conclude them talkers too, and but factors and
Ingrosers of news only to divulge it afterward. These are those who with their
reports Embroyl themselves and others, so sophisticating what they hear (as
Hucksters do their ware) as ever it pass their mouths, you may be sure it is
either wholly false, or never wholly true, they corrupt and fly-blow it so with
their reporting it; and such should be banished all civil company, where they
only sow the seed of lies, mistake and quarrel: For my part, I observe this
rule in all companies where I come, never to speak any thing of others that may
do harm; but on the contrary all the good I can; ^or example, when I say this
or this such an one said of you, etc. It shall be so advantageous to either, as
to beget a good opinion and intelligence in both; But what if they did not
speak well or them, will you say? why in that case Ill tell the speaker of it,
not those are spoken ill of; for this may mend matters, the other but make them
worse, and exasperate them the more, for the rest, what every one may know,
I Will make no dainty to tell every one; for he to no purpose gets the reputation
of close and shy, who is continually reserved; and who on ordinary occasions is
so cautious, for extraordinary reserves no caution for himself. Above all, I Will
willingly participate no secret which others may know besides my self, not to
be responsible for their blabbing it, neither are they more secrets insus'd
into many conscious breasts, than waters are Rivers when cut into many branches
and Rivolets. In fine, Mademoiselle, as that Princes Favorite was wise who
when his Pr. demanded of him what he should impart unto him of all he had?
answered any thing, but his secrets, and so say I: Wherefore chide me and spare
not, if ever you perceive me inquisitive of others secrets, or injurious in my
reports of them, and this Madam I give you under my hand, that when I
transgress herein, this Letter may be witness against me of that want of
Temper and discretion that is requisite in one that has the honor to be

Madam, Your, etc.

XXXIX To the Lady, --
How we are to contemn the Calumnies of the World.
I Never knew any one nobly eminent in any kind but they were envyed and
calumniated; It being the nature of base and low spirits, despairing to arrive
to that height, to which others by their merits and excellencies are attained,
to seek by detraction to pluck them down as low as they; nor will it be ever so
happy with the world, to have more Emulators than Envious: Emulation making men
strive to be as good as others, but Envy to make others as bad as it, whence
this vice is only found amongst the worser sort, to whom every one that's better
than they seems to exprobate their being so ill; so as it is either some
particular hate or self love that blinds them from seeing their own faults as
well as those of other men's, else they would never calumniate others as they
do, if they but considered, that one ought to be most clear themselves of those
faults they reproach to others, and he who cheaply sells others fame (upon the
account) makes but the Market to buy his own. Mean while it being as impossible
all should speak well, as that all should do well, and it is not what we are,
but what they are that make them speak ill of us: we are to endeavor so to
live, as our lives may give the lie to their reports, and that they may never
say true any harm of us, and let them say false what they please, twill be more
their own harm than ours.

To this purpose (Madam) I Will tell you a pleasant story, which I use often to
recount, when I would laugh at these busy Censurers of others Actions. An Old
man and his Son (a young stripling) traveling on the way, the Boy mounted on
an Ass, the Father trudging it on foot; The first Company they met began to
revile the Boy, calling him ungracious Rascal, was he not ashamed to ride, and
let his Father walk on foot (nor must you imagine the charitable presage of
hanging was forgot amongst them.) At this the Boy desired his Father to get up,
and let him walk on foot; which being done, the next Company reviled the Father
as much as formerly the other had done the Son, calling him hard-hearted and cruel
(strong and robustous as he was) to ride, and let the Tender Infant walk on
foot; when the Father to content them took up his Son behind him, and so they
jogged on a while, till the next Company raild on them afresh, for
over-burthening the poor Ass, calling them more Beasts than he (nor did the
Ass ever know before how many friends he had amongst the multitude) when to
content these at last the Father and Son both light and led the Ass, which
when the next Company espied, they laughed at them more than the others had
railed at them before, calling them a hundred fools, to tire and weary
themselves, having an Ass to ride on: When the Good man perceiving the
impossibility of contenting the world, and avoiding its censure, wisely
resolved thereafter to content himself, and let them judge and censure him as
they pleased.

And 'twas a wise resolution, I having found by experience, that one sooner
stops ^he mouth of Calumny by a resolute going on their way, than a too nice
fear of irritating it, it being of the nature of Cowards, the more you fear it,
the more outrageous it becomes, and the vulgar like Apelles Coblar, but care
for its censure once, and they will never leave censuring you; Mean time I
know, as the Apostle says, that I am debtor in point of Fame both to the
foolish and the wise, but if they will not accept the payment, when it is lawfully
tendered them, but find fault and cavil still; let them still remain
unsatisfyed for me, and for that vae scandal^, that woe to scandal, it is to be
understood where scandal is given, not where it is taken before it is given.

To conclude this point, never brave spirit yet, cared what the Vulgar said,
nor ever was brave nor noble Action performed by those that did. Insomuch as
Alcibiades would administer them matter himself to censure him. Alexander
gloried in it affirming nothing was more great, nor Kingly, than to do well,
and hear ill for it; and Aristides was so offended at the peoples speaking well
of him, as he asked his Friends, not without Indignation, What ill he had done
that he should deserve it at their hands.

But what should we go so far for Examples, when we have others nearer home, I
remembering to have heard of the late Earl of Exceter, how (amongst his many
other Excellent Apothegms) he demanded one day of his Lady, Whether none spoke
ill of him? and she assuring him they were so far from it, as (on the contrary)
every one spoke well of him; Mary, and I am sorry for it, said he, for it is a
sign I have nothing of extraordinary, they being most commonly your ordinariest
persons of whom the world speaks well, with the slight commendations of Oh he
is a good man! An honest man! etc. But God be thanked there is no great danger
of that in the Age wherein we live, Calumny being so universal a a Trade now,
as every one is of it; Neither need you take care to afford them ^ matter, for
they can make it of themselves, and out of themselves (as the Spider does) So
whilst 'twas the Custom in ancient Times (when there was more Charity in the
world) to excuse the Act by the Intention, we are now arrived to such a height
of uncharity to condemn the Intentision, when we cannot the Act, at least,
calling Devotion, Hypocrisy; Honest Liberty, Dissoluteness; Complacency,
Flattery; nor is there any Action so Good, they cannot sind a bad name for; nor
intail upon it an ill intention, insomuch as one was so injurious to his Mistress
Beauty not long since to say, "Cease jealous Thoughts, and thus resolve at last,
"She has more Beauty than becomes the Chaste,
Worthy of no Mistress, but such an ugly one as none should Love but he, who
would entitle Deformity, rather then Beauty to virtue, against the intention of
Nature, with whom it implies a certain fitness to conserve choicest Jewels in
the fairest Cabinets, and to lodge the noblest persons in the stateliest
Palaces; Yet such is the Iniquity of the Times, as Beauty only, because it is
Beautiful, is calumniated now, as Virtue, because it is out of fashion: And this
Madam is just your case, whose excessive Beauty makes you not only the mark
of Envious Eyes, but also of malicious Tongues, to spit their venom at, whilst
defended by your Innocence, their poison, like the Cockatrices, but returns
upon themselves. Mean time thank your beauty ( Madam) or rather he who gave it
you, for delivering you by it from the many vices of your detractors, you
having too many perfections to envy the praise of them in others, or to
calumniate that in them, which is so praise worthy in your self, whilst you
need not vex Nature nor your self, as they do, to become fairer than you are.
To whom (or rather to the Truth indeed) I must give this Testimony, that having
as a Spy of all that is fair and good, travailed almost o'r all the world, I
never met with greater Beauty accompanied with greater Innocence, nor one who
thought less harm, because she did none, nor judged less ill of others,
because she knew none in her self, and of this your cheerfulness and freedom
of behavior is to me sufficient Argument; Those who dissemble most commonly
over-doing, whilst they are over-anxious to do enough; whilst who are secretly
immodest, cloth it in an outward demureness, and feigned modesty, which most
commonly, like Gold gilt, shows fairer than Gold ^ itself.

If any fault then there be, it is in the Time itself, which though it can never
warrant bad Actions, can render Indifferent warrantable at least, and so I see
no reason but our behavior, as our fashons, may alter with the times, and
become more large or strait, as the fashons are. To conclude this point, what
is affected is deformed. as what is natural is ever becoming as it is (Madam)
in you to be cheerfully free, and in a word, your self* In which I wish none to
imitate you, if they be not of your disposition, nor you to alter, unless you
be of theirs.

Be still then your self (Madam) in spite of your Detractors; that is, one of
the fairest and beautifullest creatures in the world, and let none make you
less Good, by calumniating your Goodness as they do; And in conlusion assure
your self, that as you shall never want Detractors of the baser sort: (as are
all such who detract from you) So of the better and nobler you shall never want
Admirers and Honors: amongst the rest (Madam) I hope more than one Age, as
more than one Nation shall testify how much I am your Faithful Honourer and
Admirer.

XL. To Mademoiselle de B.
Of Affectation.
Mademoiselle,
YOu know the Sun with his beams chears not, nor is more diffusively good, tha^
her Highness with her presence. who Yesterday was pleased to graoe a Country
Wedding here with her Company, where the Country people (you may imagine) put
on their best Mine to entertain her, and the Dauncers set the best foot
forwards to show their Agilities: Amongst the rest a Country Fellow laid about
him with Arms and Legs, so as I looked still when they would fly off from him,
and feared ever and anon as he approached me, lest he would throw them at my
head, at Boys do Cudgels at Plum-trees. Verily, Mademoiselle, never any Wheel
so whirled about, nor spoaks ever turned so fast, so as you could not perceive
which part of him was upwards, or which was undermost; yet did he imagine he
daunc't excellent well, and was the more confirmed in it, the more we laughed at
him: such Fools self-opinion makes of men, whilst it hood-winks them so, they
cannot see their own Imperfections, and so besots them, as they imagine none
else does; Nay, makes them mistake Vices and Faults for Imperfections;
Whereupon I considered the deformity of Affectation, which makes people so
anxious to do enough, as most commonly they over-do, and all Excess you know
is Vicious, as all that is vicious is ugly and deformed. In fine, after the poor
fellow had taken pains a great while to make himself Ridiculous, he gave over
for pure weariness, and all panting, looked about to see who commended him,
when frustrated of his expectation, he was as much dejected with the want of
it, as he was elated with the expectation of it before: so it exposes us not
only to the Derision of others, but to dejection also in our selves. You see
the use I make of my time in every place, and how I Philosophy on every thing,
with only this difference, that where you are, my meditations are delightful
and serious, where you are not, every thing ^eems to me Irksom, and ridiculous;
no more but ^he tres-humble baisemains of all the Ladies of our Court, and of
Mademoiselle.

Your, etc.

XLI. To Madamoselle de B. Anno 51.
Inviting her into the Country, the Plague being hot at BRUXELLES.
Mademoiselle,
IT being absolutely necessary in these dangerous Times, that you quit
Bruxelles; it is concluded in a Council of War, to use all means of persuasion,
force and stratagem, to make you abandon it. First we send you Master John
here, to make you an eloquent Oration with all his Tropes and Figure, and his
Topics de bono utili, and del^ctabili, to persuade you into the Country;
neither wants he his flowers of Rhetoric out of Cicero, and the Muses Garden,
far beyond all the Gardens you have at Bruxelles. If that will not do (...) we are
resolved to try force an other while; to which end we'^l implore the assistance
of our Ladies of Succor by our Ambassador Sir Toby Matthews (powerful wi^h
Ladies as you know) and old Monsieur Hurdlestone with his Baston of Marishal de
camp shall lead the succors up. If that fail, we'll employ stratagem, and Gros
Iean shall be workt to undermine you in the Sellar he has in keeping under your
Appartement, or if he cannot be corrupted, we'll employ some Holland ingenier to
derive all the Spa water from Bruxelles hither, that you may be enforced to
come and take it here. In fine we are resolved to use all possible means to
make you leave the Town, when having got you here, we will erect a Trophy of
Bottles on the place, and drinking you health in pure Mosella wine, so triumph
for it here, as you shall not need to envy them the recreations of the Spa,
we'll walk in the mornings, and ride abroad to take the Air every afternoon, and
instead oth' Meadow, we'll dance here on the green a Chanson, and our six and
Thirty English dances every night; After which, Mademoiselle, twill be ^ime, I
think, to bid you Good night

Your, etc.

XLII To Mademoiselle --
Taking Exceptions at somew^at he had writ.
Mademoiselle,
I Lay me down most humbly at your feet, demanding your pardon --

Mademoiselle,

WHat should I say, or what should I not say in my excuse? --

Mademoiselle,

TO say your Exceptions were not just, were to accuse you, and to say they
were, were to accuse my self --

Mademoiselle,

THat Friend that suspects me without cause, must attend less satisfaction
from me than an Enemy --

Mademoiselle,

NEver was man so Embaras'd and perplexed as I; not knowing betwixt the too
humble, and the too brave, what to write or say. There Is none than your self,
I Am sure better understands Railery, nor better knows to distinguish betwixt
the Gentle and Piqua^t, yet do you interpret to evil sense and intention my but
naming the Duke of -- and deducing a parallel betwixt the shynes of Damsels in
this age, and those in the days of Knights Errantry, who were not afraid to
encounter Cavaliers alone in Wildernesses; whilst those now a days are afraid
to meet them in a Park or Garden, and that in Company. I pray Mademoiselle
hereafter have more bounty for me, and declare your self at least so much my
friend, as not to look on me as an Enemy; for if you did not, you could not
interpret my words so sinisterly as you do.

There are some Pictures so contrived, as look on them on the one side, and they
appear Angels, on the other Devils, and in the middle Men. Just such things are
words (the Pictures of our mind) a Friend interprets them to good, an Enemy to
evil, and one indifferent to neither. How, Madamo^selle, I should esteem of
you, declare I beseech you by your more favorable interpretation of all I
write and do, whilst how you should esteem of me all I write and do shall
testify, which is, that I am

Madamois^lle, Your, etc.

XLII. Per speculum in Enigmate. Or a Mirour in Enigma presented to the
Princess of LOREIN.
Spoken by the Mirour.
Madam,
AS it is the fashion of all those who present their services to any one, to
declare their Countries, Birth, and Quality, your Highness may please to know
that I am Venetian by Nation, of as Illustrious Extraction as any Magnifico of
them all, and of a Family as unble misht and untainted; for my Qualities, I am
sincere, and tell others there faults without fl^ttery, and that so far from
humor of finding fault, as I tell them as well their virtues and perfections
too. I am strangely fantastique (I must confess) wearing my clothes within, as
others do without, and ^o awkward, as where others use their right hand, I use
my left; For the rest, (to confess my weakness) I am most frail, and subject
to fall, if I be'nt looked well unto, and am so weak of constitution, as it is a
hundred to one afterward, if ever I recover it. In fine, I am somewhat of the
nature of a Cameleon, changing color often by reflection; nay, what is yet more
strange, I often change Complexion and Sexes too, being now fair, now fowl, now
a Woman, now a Man, though I Am obliged out of Gratitude to love more the
Feminine Sex, and can assure your Highness on my faith, I am never fairer than
when you look on me.

XLIV. To Mademoiselle de Beauvais, in Raillerie,
On his being King on Twelf-ni^ht. Anno 51.
Mademoiselle,
PYthagoras (or I imagine) would never have been such an Enemy to Beans, had he
received such favors from them as I have done, who by the Suffrage of one am
chosen King to night; Think me not now one of those who change their natural
Condition, with the condition of Fortune, and wax proud with their honors. No,
more I am in capacity of doing good, more good I mean to do; and I promise you
on my Royal word* my Subjects here shall all^ have cause to rejoice whilst I
reign over them, my reign shall be nothing but one continued Feast, which they
shall celebrate with joyful acclamation, nothing shall be consumed but in the
Kitchen; and nothing be exhausted but the Cellar, I will do Grace to all, and
no Justice shall be done, but in drinking healths, amongst the rest
Mademoiselle, yours shall not be forgot, and think but what Grace I may do you,
and account it done.

Il Rey.


The Answer. A sa Majeste Flecknotique.
SA Majeste scaura que je me rejouie Insin^ment de son heureux avenement a sa
coronne, et je le cr^is d'autant plus facilement, pour^^ que l' on a tousieurs
este d' opinion du temps pass, que le ^ Royaumes seroient heureux quand les
Rois ^eront philosophes ou les philosophes Royes. Pesper e que vostre Regne en
sera extremement, et que vostre grandeur n' empeschera pas, qu' elle ne se
souviene de mapetittesse.

The same in English. To his Flecknotique Majesty.
YOur Majesty may please to know that I rejoice exceedingly for his happy
accession to the Crown, which I easily believe will be the more happy, since
Antiquity has always been of opinion, that then Kingdoms would be happiest,
when Philosophers were Kings, or Kings Philosophers; according to this, I
esteem your Kingdom very happy, and hope your Greatness will not hinder you
from remembering one so little as I,

Your, etc.

To Mademoiselle de Beauvais, An. 51.
On his leaving BREEN.
Mademoiselle,
I Am looked on here as an Ingrosser of her Highness favors, which (having no
Intrest) I have no Arts at all to conserve, but only my sincere honoring her;
for the rest, I have so little complacency (I profess) as I imagine 'twere too
much spending on the main stock, to be complacent to all, and every one
thinking they deserve it, imagine they are injured if they have it not: this
makes those Enemies, whom I care not to make my Friends. Since then those who
live in Court, are like those who Embarque on Sea. The Prince is the Sea, your
open Enemies, the Winds, and secret ones, the Rocks and Shelves; Yon, who are
not only my Cynosura, or Pole Star by whom I direct my course, but my Pilot,
who are also to direct me, knowing better than I the nature of those Seas, will
be careful I hope to preserve me from these rocks and shelves, and for greater
storms I will take care my self, who am of the nature of your Holland Yauges or
Barks of pleasure, which when any storm arise, put to land presently and secure
themselves; and just as in those Boats, when the Sea is calm, and the Sky fair
and serene, you shall hear nothing but laughing and meriment, but when storms
arise, and the clouds gather together once^, they are all hushed, and there is an
End of their Joviality; so I lose my good humor straight, when I perceive any
clowdy countenances, as I imagine I do here now. You Will say perhaps, it is but
my Imagination. It may be so, however I Will retire a while, so shann't I break
with my Friends, but avoid breaking with them, it being not my manner, who love
not to be treated with Indifference, much less neglect, to importune any with
my Company, longer then they may take delight in it: so shall they return to it
with appetite again, which else, as meats they are once cloyd with, they
always look afterward on with loathing and nautious^es. Besides, I find it no
ways conducing to my health, to remain longer here this Winter, which (as a
hole in the wall, is no part of the building) is so deep sunk in a bottom, as
it seems no part of the world, there being a hole in Ireland they call
Purgatory, and another in the Isle of Lipary they call Hell, but if ever there
were any place that deserves the name of both, in my conceit it is this. You see
how Satirical discontent makes a man; and in the humor I am in, will excuse
I Am sure my leaving Breen, only with intension, when they and I am am in better
humor, to return again; Mean time (Mademoiselle) I beseech you conserve me,
not only in your good graces, but also in theirs, to whom I am, and ever shall
be as I am to you

Mademoiselle, Your etc.

XLVII To the Lady Tenham. An. 54:
In sending her a Song or Ballad.
Madam,
I Send you here a Song made upon this occasion: The other night almost all the
Ladies of the Time were in the Garden, with none to wait on them but my self,
when if a Handkerchief but fell, I must strait reach it up, and with a couple
of reverences, and kissing my hand, deliver it them again. If a Fan dropped, I
was to do the like, and if a Glove were lost, like a good Water Spaniel I must
go hunt it out* and fetch it them again. In fine 'twas impossible Sir Toby
Matthews himself amongst so many Ladies could have been busier than I was, nor
more officious; with which notwithstanding I was so wearyed at last, as
returning to my Chamber I made this following Song, In revenge of those who
left me all alone under so great (yet honorable) a burden.

SONG.
I
NOw into what Times
Are we fallen for our Crimes,
Or what ever the matter often may be;
It does not afford
So much as a Lord
To wait upon a Lady:
But now all alone
A walking they come,
With none to wait upon them;
Your Gallants are grown
Such tarriers at home,
A Murren and Shame light on them.
2
Is It boldness they lack,
They are grown so slack,
Or each turned Woman hater,
Or money they want,
Of which store God grant,
Or what the Devil's the matter;
But yet we behold
Them daily more bold,
And their Lands to Coin they distill ye,
And then with the Money
You see how they run ye,
To lose it at Pickadilly.
3
Your Country Squire
I far more admire,
(Whose Father that is dead God pardon)
He knows it is the fashion
To give them Colla^ion,
Who go to the Park and the Garden;
Whilst he of the Town
Is grown such a Clown,
Yo wait on them he is unwilling;
But away he does run,
When the Ladies do come,
And all for to save his Ten shilling.
4
But Ladies you will see,
Be ruled by me,
And this geer will soon be amended;
Upon them but frown,
When you have them at some,
And all this quarrel is ended;
Sharp Hawks we are sure
Will come to the Lure,
Then of Favors in private but starve them
And strait you will see
In public they will be
More ready and glad to deserve them.
XLVIII To Cloris, Anno 54*
On her going out of Town.
SEE fair Cloris how you deal with us, you left us in the Spring to deprive us
of Flowers, and you leave us now in Summer to deprive us of the fruit of them;
but you know what you do; two Suns at a Time would be too much now in the
Town, and therefore to prevent plagues and Calentures, you go out of it; but
now our better Sun is gone into the Country, what should we do here; where that
we have, only serves to scorch and burn, not to comfort us: It being more safe
and comfortable then to follow you into the Country, than longer to remain in
Town here; If now we suffer by your absence, we may thank our selves, and none
would pity our complaining of it, when we might enjoy your presence with but
only going after you. Expect me then next week with you (fairest Cloris) and if
you find not yet in my Heart the Reasons for it; look but in your Glass at
least, and you will find it in your Face, the Sun never attracting more flowers,
than that does hearts to follow it, and amongst the rest (if not above the
rest) that ( Aimablest Cloris) of

Your, etc.

XLIX
To the Lord Rich.
My Lord,
I Have considered since I saw you last, wha^ vain boast 'twas in those who
threatened (on I know not what particular picque and quarrel of their own) to
deprive me of all my friends; for besides few are so indigent of Enemies now a
day, as they need to take them up on others scores; If another can deprive me
of them, they are no friends of mine, and to imagine others should be angry
with them when they are angry, is as great a folly, as to imagine others should
be sick with them when they are sick; besides I should be very greedy of the
store, should I not content my self with those for friends, (should they
deprive me of all the rest) whom they have for Enemies; but all this proceeds
from their not considering the differences between Acquaintances and Friends,
which are so hard indeed to distinguish (but on such occasions) as pray tell
them when you see them) they shall much pleasure me to do it for me, when with
all their blustering they shall do me no more harm by it, than the wind does to
the Trees, by blowing off their old withered eaves, to make place for new
flourishing ones; Mean time I assure my self, My Lord, you are none of those
who think those that cry loudest have the greatest wrong, when it is rather
their weakness than any just provocation of mine, unless they take it for an
injury and affront, that I Would receive none from them. For me, though I should
not be so good a friend, unless I knew how to be as bad an Enemy; yet I
profess I had rather contend with them in any quarrel, than in such an one;
where it is a greater shame to overcome, than to be overcome, so tell them, if
you please My Lord, assure your self from him who knows not to dissemble, nor
to be other than

Your Lordships most etc.

L. To the Lady --
Of the Temple of Friendship, a Tragi-comedy he was writing, with the character
of the Persons.
Friendship being our second Religion, and so main a part of our first, I have
designed to present it so beautiful to the Eye, as all should be ravished wi^h
its Love and Admiration. To this end I have ^personated it in the loveliest
sex, and that betwixt persons of the same sex too, for avoiding all suspect;
Friendship being nothing but Love stripped of suspicion of Harm. For representing
it by Ladies, after the like example of the Queen and her Ladies here formerly,
and of the greatest Ladies and P^incesses in Spain, France Flandres, and else
where, I thought none reasonably could take exceptions, nor think me too
ambitious in'^, especially I having been long Time trained up and conversant in
the Courts of the greatest Queens and Princesses in Europe, and consequently
not altogether ignorant of personating and presenting them according to their
dignity and quality.

First then for Blondinia and Lindiana, I make them vindicating to their Fair
Sex, all the Nobleness and Generosity as ever was in man, and to their
Friendship all the dearnesse and tenderness as ever was in Love.

For the two Princesses ^artiana and Philothea, I make them of equal
perfection, though of different disposition (like Pamela and Philoclea in the
Arcadia) high minded, magnanimous, excelling in all the Virtues of great
Princes, and not to make them more than Princes, subject too to their noble
Vices of Anger, Ambition, etc, To show in fine that they are not virtuous by
chance, but by choice and Election, since they may be otherwise.

For Bellara, she is a person whose divine Conversation would even make you
doubt whe'r she were humain or no. Her wisdom is so great as there is no
Labyrinth in this world she would not help you out of, by conecting a Third of
first and second causes together. She has charge both of the Altar and Oracle,
yet is her breast the purest Altar, and mouth the truest Oracle: so as in
following her opinion, you are sure of Truth for guide, and in following her
Example you are sure of Heaven for Friend.

For Euphemia, so young yet as she is but a Neophi^e, and under Bellaras
tuition, she is of so pure a breast, as like white paper she is apted for
receiving all the others divine Precepts and Impressions: so as you may well
guess at what she will be hereafter, by what the other is at present.

For Compase lastly, and the rest, we may well say of them, that as those who
play the Fools part in the Play, are most commonly the wisest men: so those are
most commonly the best Actors, who play those Treacherous parts, and though
they be not looked on with such gracious Eyes for the persons they represent;
yet certainly they are most Admired, when they represent them well, as Painters
when they paint some ugly Body to the life.

For the Plot, to give you some light of it, I feign a Commonwealth of Amazon^,
and (to render it more propable than the other) of peaceful ones, sent there in
Colony, though for the greater variety distempered into War; In which (
Heroina's as they are) you are not to wonder, to see them do Actions of
greatest Heroes, and capable of all the Heroical Exploits you admire of men in
Story. I having found in your noble Sex a capacity of all the Excellency I ever
yet found in man.

LI. To Lilly
Dra^ing CLORIS picture.
STay daring man, and till perchance thou sinds,
Colors so rare, and of such orient worth,
To paint bright Angels, or Celestial minds,
Never presume to paint bright Cloris forth.
Till from all Beauties thou extracts the Grace,
And from the Sun beams gets the dazzling thread,
Never presume to draw that Heavenly face,
Nor those bright radient Tresses on her head.
Ve^ not thy Art, the while, to express th'eclate
That from her Beauty and her Eyes do shine,
All earthly things thy Art can imitate,
But Cloris Eyes and Beauty are devine.
What needs thou then the bootless labor take,
When none can paint her out to her desert,
She that is above all Nature ever did make.
Much more's above all can be made by Art.
But yet go on too, since who ere does see it,
At least wi^h admiration must confess,
It has an Air so most divinely sweet,
It Is more than others, though than her^ much less.
So they who shoot at Heaven, though they propose
T'emselves a Butt, to hit they never may hope,
Level and shoot far higher yet than those,
who aim but at some Tree, or Houses top.
Comfort thee then, and think it no disgrace,
TO have failed where none could hit and know (In fine)
(Unto thy higher praise) the cause of 't was,
Her too great Ex'lence, and no want of thine.
LII. To the Lady Biron.
On the black hair of a fair Lady.
RArest of all that nature ever and do,
Light in the dark, and Sunshine in the Shade.
Tresses so black, and Eyes so fair and bright
As it a mixture seems of day and night
Wonder! whence this so strange conjunction
Of meeting oposits and extreems should come!
Did Nature fear, when those fair Eyes she made.
They Would not have shone so bright unless they had;
Foil of black hair, to set them off, or did
She with those shadowy Curtains keep them hid
Left their so radient and resplendent light,
Should dazzle our weaker sight, and blind us quite.
Or to defend us from their scorching Rays,
This needful shelter she invented has;
As in the torrid Lybian desert, where
Th parching Sun shrinks up the Traveller,
To 's nontide shade, black clouds she does provide.
Poor fainting wretches from its beams to hide,
Or cause it is controverted which does make,
the perfects Beauty, or the fair or black,
Did she together curiously place
The choice of eithers Exellence in in her face.
Or is it the Harmony she'as within does make,
Her outward form, o'th Harmony partake;
Discord in concord so has reconciled,
She Is sweetly rigid, and severely mild.
She Is simply wise, modestly confident,
Gravely pleasant, and wittily innocent:
What ever it is our wonders all will ^ase,
When we shall hear it is Biron is all this;
Or rather ( Madam) we shall wonder more,
Hearing you mentioned, than we did before,
Since all must needs confess, beholding you,
Your Beauty's Beauty and Admiration too.
LIII. To Briget Countess of Desmond.
In Excuse of his no sooner celebrating her praises.
Madam,
YOu being all Admirable as you are,
No wonder yet I never did declare,
But in an Aspiration or two,
The Admiration which I have for you,
For Silence (Admirations tongue) can best
Speak that, by words can never be expressed;
For it is not with me, as with one that has
Some slight and easy subject for his praise;
For plain and obvious Texts all at first view
Can understand, but one must study you:
So the superficial Beauty of a face
Each superficial brain knows how to praise,
And the shallower bosom every shallow wit
Can dive into, and sound the depth of it.
But your fair soul, so deep, and so profound,
Fews wits have fathom-line enough to sound;
And for each several Grace one might again
Number as well the Stars as number them;
Besides, what most perplexes, is to see
You equally possessed to Excellency
Of all the per^ections of your fairer sex,
And equal, not unequal, does perplex --
So as whilst others the subjects penury
Deters, it is the store only deterreth me,
When, seeing so much to praise in you, I Am lost,
Not knowing what in you to praise the most.
Thus you have the Reason of my praising you
No sooner now, but (silly) what do I do,
He Is a mere Trifler and nothing does,
In general terms, praises a subject thus,
And should I to particulars descend,
'Twere easier to begin than ever to end.
^IV.
To CLORIS.
CLoris never think that I should whyne and cry
At Women's humors and Inconstancy,
Or, like the Amorous Knight In the Romance,
Look pale for it, sound, and fall into a Trance.
I know you love to change, and would that you
Should know, that I can change as easily too,
When sum of all the harm can come of it,
Is, you leave me, I you, and so w' are quit.
Mean time yours, and not mine shall be the loss,
When Cloris forth in all her bravery goes.
Contending whe'r the gaudy Spring or She,
To eyes end hearts more ravishing should be,
TO have none with praise usher her forth, and say,
This is the Spring, the other but only May,
This, this is she, so glads these hearts of ours,
Whilst that glads only Trees and senseless flowers,
And more to heighten the glory of the Spring,
Birds do but chirp, Cloris does only sing.
Be then my Goddess, as you were before,
Or never expect such offerings from me more,
And as propitious as you are wont to be,
Or you have lost a worshiper of me,
Who never yet a Reverence did bear
To Deities, would be only served for fear:
So your young Novice in Religion,
Is's Goddess frown, thinks he is quite undon,
And fondly superstitious seeks in vain,
By Prayers and Tears her favor to obtain,
Whilst the old Egyptian Idolater
His Idol fire to Nylus bank does bear,
And 'lesse he finds it in a better mood,
Does threate^ straight to quench it in the sloud.
LV. To the Lady Elizabeth Darcey.
The Farewell.
Madam,
TO my departing Grief it is some allay,
That all my better Thoughts with you do stay
Whilst only thought of you I bear away.
So whersoever Absence us confines,
'T can never separate resolved minds,
Whom mutual bonds of thought so fast combines
What need I care then whilst from you I part,
So long as you are present to my heart,
Whe'r Eyes or no ^'th' joy have any part.
Eyes are dull Instruments, that only hew
Out forms in the mind, with often repeated view,
Or being decayed those forms again renew.
Whence, as it were folly in Painters more to stare
O'th person, when their Pictures finished are
So it were in me, for Eyes now more to care.
Howe'r since Friendship and Suspicion
Trade both in the same mind, I Have but this one
Boon (Madam) to crave of ye, and I have don.
And it is t'assure ye, I am none does take
The last Impression still his Eyes does make,
But what his heart once has, does never forsake.
To end then, after this assurance, know,
That you who are my last thought now I go,
Shall be when I am gone, my lastingst too.
LVI. To the Lady Isabella Thinn.
MAdam, in the worlds great Liberary, when
I Have studied Men far more than Books, and there
Have learnt to know their differences too:
Some are my Classique Authors, such as you,
From whose fair Lectures I have learnt alone,
What Is profitable, and fit ^or to be known.
Others light Pamphlets, which when once w've read,
W're straightways cloyed with them and satiated.
Others mere outside ^hore for Ornaments
Of studies, than for inside or contense,
(For Libraries are like the Stationers stall,
Defective, if not furnished with all)
And fin'lly some too hard and Tetrical
For the Muses to be conversant withal:
Having at last perused every one,
I must conclude of all I Have ever known
Or read, both for contense and outside too.
The fairest, best, I ever read, is you.
LVII. The fair Mourner.
To the Lady HOWARD.
IN fable weeds now all the Graces mourn,
Till she to brighter Colors does return,
And just like sad Camelions appear,
Taking their dark reflections all from her,
From her, whose Beauty cannot go more nor less,
For any additionary wear or dress.
Who gives her Robes, their chiefest ornamesit,
Whilst others chiefly from their Robes are lent;
And does herself within herself contain;
All that is by others sought and, sought in vain;
Not France does on the Neighboring world impose,
(As it had Pattent for it) its garb and clothes,
Nor Ladies teach with more becomingnesse,
What Habits they should wear, what tire, what dress
Then she on all that is excellent, sweet, and fair,
Happy to take examples all from her.
Mean time was never sweeter sorrow seen,
Since for her Favorites loss the Idalian Queen,
Taught loveliness [could only smile before]
The Gentle Art to weep and to deplore,
Which she Improving makes her Tears the while
More precious sweet, than ever was any's smile,
Enhancing of their value by it so high,
'Twould beggar either India to buy;
Ah Gentle Nymph then shed them not so fast,
Of precious baum make not such lavish wast;
One drops enough to satisfy for all
Misfortunes in this world co'd ever befall,
And then the living make (by odds) the dead
Happyer, for whom those precious Tears are shed,
Who would, you would spare them yet, their care is such,
(Though most concer'nd) lest you should weep too much;
Happy the whilst are both the joy and care,
Of all that is dead, of all that living are,
LVIII. To Misa.
Angry because she was old.
NOw what a Devil Misa makes
Thee with such eyes behold me still.
Cause from thee time thy good looks takes,
Must I therefore have thy ill?
I prithee Misa don't behold
Me thus, as if I were thy Foe,
For howsoever thou art old,
I am not Time that make thee so.
And rather than to quarrel with me,
As if I had done thee wrong,
Go quarrel with thy Age I prithee,
Whose fault it is that thou' ast lived too long.
How ever (for me) thou well may spare,
Thy anger, and thy frowns may cease,
who for thy good looks little care,
For thy bad ones care much less*
LIX To the same.
On her striving to appear still fair and young.
LEt Autumn paint her withered leaves,
And Winter dye his snowy hair,
Yet he is a fool that not perceives
Both aged and decayed are.
So while thou't needs look well again,
And still seem fair unto our sight,
Misa, thy labors all in vain,
Like his who'ud wash the Ethiope white.
Nature by Art is better made,
Whilst Art has ground for what it does,
But when that Nature's once decayed,
All Art but more deformed shows.
Who looked well in King James's reign,
And in King Charl^'s old appeared,
Will hardly now look young again,
When the Commonwealth has got a beard.
Then Misa follow my advice,
And leaving off thy bootlesse care,
Strive rather to win hearts than eyes,
And to appear more good than fair.
LX. To Phillis.
Reporting he loved her, because he praised her.
PHillis, how you your Ignorance discover,
Whilst you mistake a Poet for a Lover,
Who when he verses writes, makes Love it is true,
But it is unto his Muse, and not to you,
And oftentimes does Mistresses invent,
To exercise his wit, and complement;
Just as I Have Gallants seen (disposed to mock)
Make legs and faces to a courting stock.
When then I praised you with Hyperbolies,
Naught but impossible, excused from lies,
Planting the Rose and Lillys in your cheeks,
(Where one more truly might have planted Leeks,)
And talked of your divinity of mind,
(When I human'ty ^here co'd scarcely ^ind)
And much more when ^ flattering ye did bring
Sweets from Arabia, Flowers from the Spring,
From Beauty all was excellent and fair,
And from the Graces all was choice and rare.
Were you so simple, to believe that I,
Could ever commit to gross Idolatry?
Or that I had so little sense and wit,
To mean all this by you? or you by it?
Pray be more wise hereafter, left you make
Me blush (not for mine own) but for your sake,
And understand against another Time,
There Is no small difference 'twixt Prose and Rhyme,
While t'on for what you are commends ye,
The Other for what indeed you ought to be,
Your Poets end being only to make men
Better than they are by their commending them;
Make you like use often then, and so I may
Perhaps admire ye, as you think and say;
Mean time all (Phillis) I admire in you,
Is (saying I admired ye) you could think it true.
LXI. To the Vice Roy of Norway, Anno 55.
Insending him some Verses which he desired.
My Lord,
BEhold your desire has a greater force with me, than any others commands could
have, I obeying it even when I was not in estate of obedience, being in the
heat of a Fever, and consequently unapt either to write or compose any thing.
If your Lordship find any heat then in these Lines, I will not say it is of the
Fever, nor that of Poetry; but of the desire I have to serve you: and if you
like it not, you will think it worth burning at least: so shall it but die a
natural death, and but return to its first being, being begot in flames. I will
detain your Lordship no longer from reading it, being able to write no more,
but only that I am

Your Lordships most, etc.


On his choosing Valentines.
HOw great a Freedom he injoyes
Who loves not without Counterpoise,
Since be the attraction what it will,
He stands upon firm basis still:
So the other day my chance it was,
Choosing Valentines in a place,
TO have one draw me, and I an other,
Who so counterballanc't the other,
Neithers Captive I was made,
Both such equal Beauty had,
Eithers Captive else had been,
Had I both assunder seen,
So true it is when two such as those,
We to our equal choice propose,
We should dye ever we could choose
Which to take, or which refuse.
No danger's then of eithers harms,
Whilst the one undoes the others charms:
But when these Circes are alone,
Then all the loving harm is done;
So she who made Alcides spin,
His Club laid by, and Lions skin,
Should soon have seen with what disdain
He would have snatched them up again,
And thrown his servile work aside,
Soon as some Dame he had espied
In The room with Omphale appear,
At all parts equalizing her;
So great a freedom he enjoys,
Who loves not without counterpoise,
Since be th'attraction what it will,
He stands upon firm basis still.
LXII. To the Countess of Desmond.
On the Death of the Lady Theophyla Carey, Daughter to Henry Earl of Monmouth,
Anno 55.
Madam,
I Saw so many Graces and Perfect^ons in the Lady Theophyla Carey (for she was
all transparent, and her very Soul did shine thorough her Body) as I must wish
(with her noble Family, and the rest of her Honourers and Admirers) that
either I had never known her, or that we had never been deprived of her. But
being fair as an Angel, having an Angels mind, and singing too Angelically as
she did, we might well imagine her one of those Celestial Quires, and cease
wondering, being all Angel as she was, that we had only a Glympse of her on
Earth, and that she should straight vanish like some Heavenly Apparition into
Heaven; It dealing so ordinarily with us in this manner, to show us such as she
only, and straight to snatch them away again, as I begin to suspect it is but a
bait to make us desire to follow them, knowing us so Earthly minded, as there is
no other way to entice us unto Heaven. For my part, (at least) upon her death
I Have left the Town (so much I am displeased with it, could no better conserve
the choicest Rarity it had) and that after Times might know what a loss they
had in her, as well as the present, have made this Epitaph on her before I went
into the Country.

REader, if the art courteous slay,
And understand before thou go,
Here lies the admired Theophila;
More of her if thou will know,
For Beauteous features, lovely Grace,
For candid breast, and purest mind;
She Glory was of Careys race,
And excellentest of Woman kind.
LXIII. To Mr. Thomas Higgins
With his Ode in praise of the Country life.
Noble Sir,
IF those on whose soil the Tree grows have most right to the fruit, none has
more right than your self to this following Ode in praise of the Country life,
since 'twas made at Grewel with you in the Country. After which I know not what
excuse to allege for my living in the Town, but that self-accusing one of
Phedra, Video meliora, p^j rasequor, or this, that when I would live to my
friends and self, I go into the Country, when to others, I go to Town;
However, I being of that Amphibean Gender, with those who are now in one, now
in the other, do receive this benefit (at least) by it, that the one but begets an
appetite to the other; all pleasures in this life consisting in a certain change,
and vicissitude, which indeed is but a pause and respite of pain, or relaxation
from misery (none taking pleasure in rest, but the weary, nor in eating but the
hungry, etc.) which you will easily perceive, when continue them but too long,
and you make a pain of that pleasure, and begin to long for the pleasure of the
pain you had before; such is our humane infirmity, as like sick men in their
beds, we lie tossing and tumbling up and down, and restlesly change place, only
to find rest, which we can never find, because we carry unrest along with us,
quod e re nascitur vix evitatur; the purest company which I find without
lassitude is the company and conversation of a friend, which is the more pure
the more spiritual they are; and that, Sir, I never enjoy in greater
perfection, than when I am with your company.

ODE In praise of the Country life.
O Happiness of Country life,
Which ^own nor Palace never could boast,
Where men are even with Gods at strife
Whose happiness should be the most.
Whilst innocently all live there,
Lords of themselves, as well as Land,
Out of the Road of Hopes and Fear,
And out of Fortunes proud command.
Where to deprive men of their own,
Is crime which yet they never saw,
Nor more injustice ever was known
Than not to give Beasts hunted, Law.
Where but for fish there is none lays baits,
Nor traps, but for some ravenous Beast,
And but for Foul there is no deceipts,
So harmless they are in all the rest.
Where of false dealings none's afraid,
And soothing flattery none allows,
But only in the Dairy Maid,
Who whilst she milks them, strokes her Cows.
Where only in Sheep-sheering Time
The Rich the Poor do seem to Fleece,
And of oppression all their crime
Is only whilst they make their Cheese.
Then for the pleasant, do but think,
Th'vast difference there is twixt both,
Whilst men in Towns live in a sink,
A life, even very beasts would loath.
Where nothing on the Earth does grow,
To speak the seasons; but (in Sum,)
By Dirt they only Winter know,
And only dust shows Summers come.
Then for serenating the mind,
Without which no contentment is,
Where in loud Cities shall you find
A recollection like to this?
Where on some Object whilst X stay,
And hidden cause of it would find,
No noice does fright my thoughts away,
Nor sudden sight distract my mind.
Or if that any noise there be,
it is such as makes me not af^ard,
Of Waters fall, Birds Melody,
Of The bleating flock, or lowing heard.
Mean time how highly are they blessed,
Whose conversations all with them,
Who only but for the name of Beast,
Are (in effect) less beasts than Men.
For no ambition makes them fight,
Nor unto mutual slaughter run,
Invading one another right,
Till the one or both be quite undone.
None others acts calumniate,
Nor mis-interpret every word;
For others lives none lies in wait,
Nor kills with poison, nor with sword.
Then to conclude the Country life,
Has happiness Towns could never boast,
Where men are even with Gods at strife,
Whose happiness should be the most,
And since life somewhere must be spent,
Give me but Amorets Company,
Without which life has no content,
And here I could both live and die.
LXIV A condoling Epistle To the Duchess of Richmond. Anno. 55.
O^ the death of my Lord Duke her H^^band.
Madam,
AMidst the greatest discomfort I ever had, This comfort my Lady Kingsmel gave
me at my arrival to Town, that a more becoming sorrow, nor more natural than
that of your Graces, as yet she never saw, which made me (Madam) instead of
condoling (in some sort) congratulate with your Grace, that as y'av formerly
performed all the parts of a most illustrious wife, so now you do of a most
ex^mplar Widow, one of which is not to mourn ambitiously as others do, and
with such a studied sorrow, as if they courted new Husbands in mourning for the
old, but with such a Grief, as shows them rather dying than living, since those
are dead whom they most loved alive. Mean Time (Madam) since virtue always
consists in the mean, and all extr^mities are vicious, Give me leave (I beseech
your Grace) only to put you in mind that you grieve not too much (like those
who are over anxious to grieve enough) but imagine (amongst your other
imaginations of the dead) that you hear your noble Lord and Husband
expostulating with you thus; Why ( dearest heart) having left thee three main
businesses to do, to have care of my Children, to have care of my estate, and
to bewail me dead, why would thou frustrate and irritate my will in all these
three, by making my Children complete Orphans by thy death? by ruining my
estate if thou dyest? and lamenting me so dead, as 'twould kill me a second
time were I alive? Modera^ thy sorrow then, and k^ll me not wholly by it, who am
not wholly dead, as long as you are alive, but live, as (if 'twere in thy
power) thou would have me live again, so shall thou comfort me by comforting thy
self, so shall I more perceive thy love, than if thou dyedst for me.

Those (Madam) I beseech your Grace to believe are rather his words than mine,
after which I'^ say no more but only weep, whilst I write this following Elegy,
and subscribe my my self (as really I was, and shall ever be) his and

Your Graces most etc.

On the death of the Lord Duke of Richmond and Lenox:
ELEGY.
AS when some mighty blow is given,
By which our Walls and Towers ar shook,
Some all aghast look up to Heaven,
Some wildly on each other look.
Nay sometimes too (we are made of such
Frail brittle stuff) it may so fall,
The violence often may be so much,
To shatter in pieces life and all.
So, at Report that Richmonds dead,
Whilst some Astonished stand at Gaze,
Some toward Heaven lift up their head,
In witness of their sad amaze.
We whom the blow does strike more near
At the report even dead do fall,
Whilst sad and doleful news we hear,
Of such a Death that kills us all.
How would that Tyrant (then) be glad,
To Mankind was so great a Foe,
He wished that all but one neck had,
To take them all off at a blow?
When he sh^'d see, now Lenox' gone,
How dead and sprightlesse each one is,
As if to kill us all in one,
Did need no other Death but his.
Mean time soft rest In The sacred Vrn,
Unto his Noble Ashes be,
Where lies entombed, not to return,
All Virtue, all Nobility.
Until the Heir h'as left behind,
In whom his House's hopes remain,
True Offspring of the Phoenix kind,
Revive them from his dust again.
Then shall his Mother tears refrain,
Then shall she cease to sigh and moan,
Seeing her Husband live again,
With all his Glories in her Son.
LXV. A Consolatory Epistle, To the Queen Mother of France, Mary of Medices;
written about the year, 41.
Omi^ted in its place, and inserted here.
Madam,
YOur Majesty knows (whose chief study these many years has been Divinity) how
our B. Savior in one place of Holy Writ, says, Without him we can do nothing;
and the Apostle in another, That he could do all things in him who conforted
him: which two passages conferred together, (as two contrary Medicaments in
mixture) are a Sovereign cure for those two extreme maladies of our soul, a too
great Presumption, and too great diffidence of our selves. For who will ever
despair hereafter, when he considers the second saying? Or, who will presume
too much of himself, who considers ^ut the first? In consideration of which, a
^ertain Holy man was wont to say, God, and I can do all things; and if it seem
too great a presumption in him, to name himself with God, certainly a greater
presumption it is for any to name themselves without him. This receipt ( Madam)
your Majesty has got, and this consideration it is, that makes you bear all your
Afflictions with so great patience, as Job will no more be mentioned for it,
when your Majesty is named, nor David for mansuetude and forgiveness of his
Enemies; I having heard (with Admiration of your Majesty's virtue) whilst one
inveighing against your Enemies, your Majesty interrupted them, with entreating
them to desist, and affirming that they were persons you daily and nightly
prayed for. Oh generous and noble example of Christian Patience and Charity!
worthy perpetual Remembrance, which ( Madam) I set before your Majesty's eyes,
knowing that nothing comforts more for the present, then the recordation of our
good Deeds past, as nothing incourages us more, to those that are to come. And
this I desire to set before the eyes of all the world, that the joint
concurrency of the Greatness of the person and example might nore move them to
Imitation. Be pleased to go on then (Madam) in being a pattern, as you a^e, not
only to these, but also to future Times, ^f Longanimitie, Patience, and
Sufferance, G^^ ever from time to time renewing in his ^hurc^ such examples as
these, that beholding them near at hand, we might believe them possible, which
else beheld a far off, might be imagined Fabulous, and but the illusions of
Fancy and Imagination: so shall you receive ( Madam) of our B. Savior, who has
said he is the way, the truth, and the life, for your following his way, and
his Example, Truth for your Guide, and Eternal life for your reward; which is
the wish M^dam, of

Your Majesti^^ most, etc.

FINIS.

