EPIGRAMS OF ALL SORTS, Made at DIVERSE TIMES On SEVERAL OCCASIONS.

By Richard Flecknoe.

A nostris procul est omnis vesica libellis.

Mart. LONDON: Printed for the Author, and Will. Crook, at the Green-dragon
without Temple Bar. 1670.

THE Epistle Dedicatory, To all his NOBLE FRIENDS.
THere is none Prints more, nor publishes less than I; for I Print only for my
self and private Friends (and had I not thought these more passible than the
rest, I had never made them so public as I do.)

I write chiefly to avoid Idleness, and print to avoid the Imputation: and as
others do it to live after they are dead; I do it only not to be thought dead
whilst I am a live: (for as the concealing what one does, little differs from
Idleness, so the being Idle, little differs from being dead.)

Epigram in general, is a quick and short kind of Writing, rather a slight,
than any great force of the Spirit; and therefore the more fit for me, who
(...) not to take pains in any thing, and rather affect a little negligence,
than too great curiosity (which I desire may serve for excuse of my negligence
in some of these.)

Epigrams at their first institution served only for Inscriptions of Ports,
and Entries of Temples, and public places, and consisted only in a Distick,
or line or two; till at length, by degrees, they became so much enlarged, both
for matter and quaintity, as there was nothing that was not matter of Epigram,
and no length it would not admit of, so it kept but close unto the matter, with
that l^se and quickness which was Requisite and essential to it; and especially
a^oided long discourses, which is (...) improper for it, as a long Robe for one
who is to run a Race.

For these here, they are chiefly in praise of worthy persons, of which none
had ever a more plentiful subject than I, having been always conversant with
the best and worthiest in all places where I came; and amongst the rest with
Ladies, in whose conversation, as in an Academy of Virtue, I learnt nothing but
Goodness, saw nothing but nobleness; and one might as well be drunk in a
Christial Fountain, as have any evil thoughts whilst they were in their
Company. Which I shall gladly always remember, as the happiest and innocentest
part of all my life; and that they are mixed with the dispraise of others, it is
only as sauce unto the rest, which should always have somewhat of sharp piquant
in it.

I was long deliberating before I published them, whether I should range them in
order, or let them pass promisculously, till at last (to save the Heralds
labor) I resolved on this latter way, only I have separated the more Light
and Theatical ones, and the more Grave and Pious ones from the rest, as being
particularly subjects of themselves.

Of which Pious ones, this I will only say, that Piety and Devtion, Consisting
chiefly in moving the Affection, Verse seems the fittest language for it, and
of all Verse, that of Epigrams: it being a short Jaculatory, kind of writing,
and therefore the aptest to penetrate the breast, it is that which strews the
way of Virtue and Piety with Roses instead of Thorns: and one reason why no
more are delighted with it, is because it is no more delightfully persuaded;
and then it was when Verse was wholly employed in Devotion, that Poetry was
called the Language of the Gods, your Poets, Prophets, and such as Moses and
David were Poets: nor will it ever be well with the World, till things return
to their first institution, and Poets take as much pains to render Piety and
Virtue delightful, as now they do Vice and Impiety. Whatsoever they are, they
are yours, for I have made them for you, and to dedicate them to any one in
particular, were to do injury to the rest, take them amongst you then, for it is
but just, that I should Dedicate all I have to you, to whom I have dedicated my
self.

R. F.

Emendatioms
Recomended to the Reader.
TO distinguish my faults from the Printers, first the Reader may please to
amend these few faults escaped in the printing, and pardon the rest. Page 11.
Line 8. read your for the. P. 14. l. 10. r. then for as, and l. 14. 45 for 55.
P. 33. l. ult. r. makes them seem less great. P. 38. l. 13. r. fruit for first.
P. 86. l. 2. r. 54 for 34. P. 87. l. 2. r. ordering for making.

For mine own faults p. 9. read the first Stanzza thus:

CYrus a mighty Conqueror was,
And great Example of other Princes:
But you his Conquests far surpass,
Who win more hearts than he Provinces.
You will find many other rubs besides, to hinder the Verses running smooth,
which none but a Friend can excuse; and I should be sorry they should light into
any other hands.

EPIGRAMS Of all sorts, Made at diverse times, On several occasions.
Of EPIGRMS in general.
WHat Airs in point of Music are, the same,
In point of writing is your Epigram,
Short, quick and sprightly; and both these and those
When the Ear expects it, comes unto a close.
It Is but few lines, but those like Gold well tried
Out of the dross of many lines beside;
And says not much, but all it says is good,
And plain and easy to be understood.
In every kind, be the Writing what it will,
It Is that most takes, and most delights you still;
And does to the rest, no less Adornment bring
Then does the Stone or Jewel to the Ring.
Poets cannot write, nor Orators declame,
But all their wit is chiefly Epigram:
And both in Verse and Prose, and every thing
Your Epigram is writing for a King.
Of the difficulty of making them nowadays.
NOr is it so easy making of them, as
It was of old, in our Forefathers days:
When even the very sound of words alone,
Or outside of them used to pass for one.
And when they heard a Clench, or Quibble spoak,
They Would claw you for it, as if some Jest were broak.
But now they are grown more curious and nice,
And what was Virtue then, is counted Vice.
Clenches and Quibbles now are out of date,
Which they no less then Bilke and Nonsense hate:
And when they hear but any of them sed,
The Wits are ready strait to break your head.
So goes the World, nor must we think it strange
The Mode together with the Times should change.
It Is so, we see, in fashion of our Clothes,
And why not of our Wits as well as those?
Of several sorts of Wits.
WIts like Hawks ar for the sport;
Some ar long-wing'd, some ar short:
The first do fly so high a flight,
They often soar quite out of sight.
The second far the fitter for you,
Keep them close unto the Quarry:
Nor too low, nor yet too high,
Of this latter sort am I.
To the Duke of MONMOUTH, On his going into France, Anno 68.
WE to the French as much in Court did yield,
As they to us did formerly in the Field,
Till Monmouth went, and overcame them more
In The Court than ere we did in the Field before.
How fatal to the French is Monmouths name!
They should be twice thus Conquered by the same:
By Valor first in War, and now no less
A second Time, by Gallantry in Peace!
To the Duchess of MONMOUTH.
Madam,
YOu being all Admirable as you are,
No wonder yet I never could declare,
But by an Aspiration or two,
The admiration which I had for you!
Nor is 't a thing I 've rane up of report,
But traveling your whole Sex over for it,
I must conclude, where ever I have been,
You are the worthiest yet I 've ever seen:
Else 'twere my Ignorance, not your praise, had I
Not first of all made full discovery:
" For who know nothing, admire all they view;
Who all things know, nothing admire but you.
Nor can there any so injurious be
Unto your worth, to think this Flattery:
" It Is flattry to praise vice, but when we praise
" Virtue, it is obligation each one has;
And they should rather be thought envious, who
Don't praise you for it, then flatterers who do.
To a certain Great Lady, Who commanded him to wait on her; And when he came,
he was made to wait for her.
Madam,
YOu did command that I should wait on you,
And that there is none more willingly should do:
But to wait for you in your outward Rooms,
Among your Tradesmen, Servingmen and Grooms.
That is a thing I never yet could do,
Nor ever was accustomed unto.
Bid me to go, I 'll run; to run, I 'll flee;
But stand and wait's impossible for me.
All that is possible to be done, I 'll do;
I can wait on you, but cannot wait for you.
On the death of the Duke of GLOUCESTER.
HIgh- born and Great, as any Prince on earth,
With Mind more Great and High then was his Birth:
Wise 'bove his years, Valiant above a man,
Whence you perceive how early he began;
Whose life was only an Epitome,
Where you in brief all gallantry might see;
And active fire, like lightning did appear,
That even is gone ere you can say it is here.
One who had all those brave and noble parts,
Which most gain love, and most do conquer hearts:
Whence no Prince yet had ever more that grieved
When he was dead, or loved him when he lived.
Who Is now so dull, when this they hear but sed,
That does not know the Duke of Glocester's dead?
The gallantst person Nature ever made,
And hopefulst Prince as ever England had.
Let all admire this world now, learn by this,
What all their worldly hopes and Greatness is.
On the death of the Lady Jean Cheynee.
THe softest Temper, and the mildest Breast
Most apt to pardon, needing pardon least;
Whose blush was all her Reprehension,
Whilst none ere heard her chide, nor saw her frown:
All sweetness, gentleness, and dovlike all,
Without least anger, bitterness or gall;
Who scarce had any passion of her own,
But was for others all compassion:
A Saint she lived, and like a Saint she died,
And now is gone where only Saints abide.
What will she be when she is with Angels, when
She even was one whilst here she was with men?
What will she be in heaven when she comes there,
Whose life and manners were so heavenly here?
Make much of her you Saints, for God knows when
Your Quires will ever have her like again.
The Pourtract.
SUch a Stature as they call
Nor too Low, nor yet too Tall;
With each part from head to foot
Justly answerable to 't:
Such a Beauty, such a Face
Adds to all the rest a Grace;
In whose Circle does appear
Thousand Cupids sporting there.
Hair so black, and Skin so white,
Never was a fairer sight.
And her fairer yet to make,
Eyes and Eyebrows too as black.
Forehead smoother then the Glass
In the which she sees her Face.
Cheeks, where naturally grows
The Lillies and the blushing Rose.
Nose 'bove all so gently rises,
Nothing more the sight surprises.
Lips, all other Lips excelling,
The ar so ruddy and so swelling.
Mouth and pretty dimpled Chin,
With such pearly Teeth within,
No Indian Shell did ere enclose
More Oriental ones than those.
Voice that charms you it is so sweet,
Made more charming by her Wit:
And you would think in every smile
All the Graces dwelt the while.
If any'd know who this may be,
Name but Bellasis, it is she.
STANCES Envoyez par le Sieur de Scudery A l' Altezze de Madame la Duchess de
Lorrein Avec son Grand Cyrus.
.
CYrus passa tous les vainqueurs
Ilfut l' Example des Grands Princes;
Mais vous surmontez plus des Coeurs
Qu'il ne surmonta des provinces.
.
O mervileuse nouveaute
O rare pouvoir de vos Charms
De fair plus par la Beauty
Qu'un Heroes ne fit par ses Arms.
.
Vous voyant vaincre en un moment
Le Brave qui vainquit l' Asie
Chacun a de l' estonement
Mandane a de la Ialousie.
.
En fin le plus grand des Guerriers
Va mettre a vos pieds sa Couronne
Heureux si parmy ses Lauriers
Vous prennez son Coeur qu'il vous done.
STANCES Sent to her Highness the Duchess of Lorrein, By the Sieur de Scudery,
Together with his Grand Cyrus.
.
CYrus a mighty Conqueror was,
To whom for valor none but yields:
But yours, his Conquests far surpass,
Who win more hearts then he did fields.
.
O strange to admiration!
O wondrous power of your Charms!
Your Beauty should do more alon,
Then coud a Hero by his Arms.
.
To see you overcome so soon
Him, who all Asia overcame;
Gives wonder unto every one!
And jelousie unto Mandane.
.
In fine, the best of Warriers lays
His Crown down at your feet, and shall
Count it his happiness, if with his bays
You but accept his heart and all.
On her Death.
WHen this fair soul in mortal flesh did live,
It had some Angel been you would believe;
Thorough her bright Exterior there did shine
So much from her Interior of Divine.
And if her Virtuous Actions you had seen,
You would have thought she Vertu's self had been:
Which could it but be seen by mortal Eyes,
All hearts with admiration would surprise.
And now all that could dye of her is dead,
And that that is living unto Heaven is fled,
As when some Lamp untimely does expire,
The flame mounts up to the Element of Fire.
This Epitaph in memory of her,
Let Us only write upon her Sepulcher.
She who alive all Virtue and Beauty was,
TO on in her Breast, and the other in her Face,
Now she is dead, just Reason w'ave to fear
All Virtue and Beauty too ar dead with her:
Whilst all the joy we had, or ere shall have,
Now she is dead, lies buried in her Grave.
To her Noble Sister, Mademoiselle de BEAUVAIS, Now Princess of Aremberg.
ALl the Lay thoughts, Madam, I ever had
Of your fair Sex, ar now Religious made,
Admiring you, and I Am become by it,
Your Sexes Votary, and your Convertit.
For just unto the Chamber all do come
As to some Temple, and from thence go home;
The bad converted, and the good far more
Confirmed in Goodness, then they were before:
Whilst with your sight, not only you restrain
All vicious speech, but even all light and vain:
And none to utter there, permission has,
Or words of double sense, or doubtful phrase.
Yet Virtue that is in others so severe,
It from their conversation does deter,
In you is so attractive and so gay,
None from your presence ere went sad away.
But stay my Muse, for if thou forwards tend,
Thou may begin, but never make an end,
Of such as hers, whose praise is infinite,
The more you say, the less you say of it.
There is an Artful silence, as there was
An Artful vailing Great Atrides face:
It Is praise enough to say that she can never
Be praised enough, and say no more of her.
Of VVelbeck, The Duke of Newcastles House, Where he entertained The last King
so magnificently, Anno 33.
WElbeck, a Royal place where every thing
Seems made for entertainment of a King,
And every one confesses that he never
Was entertained more royally then there.
Let others wonder at thy Lords expense,
And at the vastness of 's Magnificence.
He who would hazard Fortune, Life and all,
To serve his Master when his General;
For me I never shall wonder that he would
Not spare his purse, who would not spare his blood.
To Sir WILLIAM DEWCY On his three entertainments of The King, the Prince of
Denmarck, And the Prince of Tuscany, All the last Summer, Anno 69.
DEwcy that bravely know to spend
When it is for any noble End;
And never stickst at the Expense,
When it is to show Magnificence.
For the Royal entertainment, that
Thou Have given unto thy Prince of late*
The honor only is thine own
But what is to other Princes done,
The honor thou to them do do,
Is both thine own and Countries too;
In that thou art but a private man,
In this a public person, and
Thy Country should ungrateful be,
Should it not always honor thee,
Who know so bravely how to spend
When it is for any noble End;
And never stickst at the expense,
When it is to show Magnificence.
On his House at Charlton nigh Greenwich. Where these entertainments were made.
WHilst Greenwich for its seat's commended so,
Thou shall not Charlton uncommended go*
Although thou wantst a Barklays pen to raise
Thee to the height of Fame which to other has.
Did Thames but at thy feet its Tribute pay,
As 't does to theirs, thoudst be as famed as they.
But yet it needs not, for thou have by Land,
As that by Water, full as great command;
And have as many Naiades as they
Their Hyades have, who thy commands obey.
Thy Champions ar as pleasant and as green,
Thou see as much, though not so much art seen;
And in thy safe retirement from the Shore,
Thy Fame's the less, but happiness the more.
In brief, thy Gardens, Orchards, and thy Fields
Yield not to to others Park, whilst Greenwich yields
As much, or more (although a Royal Seat)*
To thee for height, as thou to it for Great.
On his Accession to the Poetical Academy in Italy, Anno 55. under the
precedence of the Duke of Buckingham.
It Is so indeed! here is a free Mart or Fair,
I now perceive, of all Poetic Ware;
No Tax, Gabel, nor Imposition none
On any Merchandise, but every one
Brings what he please, and from the Lord of the place
Free pasport, and safe conduct for it has:
Mean time all store of rich Commodities
Ar here installed, to take the curious Eyes.
Pictures of the mind, so drawn to the life and like,
They put down Titian, Holbeen and Vandike.
Damasks and Tissu's of Pernassus work
Surpass the Chinean, Persian, and the Turk.
T'ons richer vein, and sparkling Wit contends
With Gold and Jewels, either India sends;
The Other for soft and silken Phrase puts down
The smoothest Satin and the softest down.
Only as I have heard objected, there is
Amongst the rest great want of some small wares;
Things which your simple people so admire,
They scarce without them think a Fair entire:
And for such Bagatels that none may lack,
I Am come to fit them with my Pedlers-pack.
To Sir K. D. made Anno 45.
WHilst with thy mighty Wit I but compare
Our petty ones, methinks they Pigmies are;
And thine the Hercules, with whose vast discourse
Whilst we'd be meddling fain, but want the force,
Thy Wit comes to it, and presently with ease
Takes't up as light, and weylds it as thou please.
Oh how I Have sometimes longed, when I have been
Where I some insolent prating Sir have seen,
With Tyrant talk a wing the Company,
Whilst none must speak, and none be heard but he;
T'ave some such Tyrant-Conquerer as thou
Enter the room, but only to see how
My mighty Talker presently would sneak
At sight of thee, nor dare to look nor speak.
So have I seen some chattering Pie or Iay,
Fright with their noise the lesser Fowl away;
Until by chance some Eagle comes in sight,
When strait themselves are hushed and put to flight.
To the Lady Gerard of Brunley, of the Education of my Lord her Son.
IF Education second Nature be,
(Madam) you doubly oblige Posterity,
By giving (as you do) my Lord your Son,
Such brave and noble Education,
As gives him double Title to the Fame
Of noble Gerard, and brave Digbies name:
Which you bestow, and he receives so well;
Which merits greater praise, there is none can tell:
But all agree, there is none can better do,
A Sons than he, a Mothers part than you.
EPITAPH In memory of that ever-memorable Lady Anne Packington Lady Audley.
STay Reader, and if ever thou wo'dst hear
A story worthy thy intentive ear,
Know here lies buried in this Sepulcher
One who had all those excellent qualities
Of noble, virtuous, beautiful, and wise,
A mortal creature, could immortalize.
Who after all degrees of Mother, Wife
And Maid sh'ad past, and left them all at strife,
Which state she most had honored in her life;
At last (a weary of this life below)
She died, and unto highest heaven did go,
To honor there the State of Angels too.
To the Lord Henry Howard of Norfolk, Returning from his Asiatick voyage.
My Lord,
AS Merchants trade for other Riches, so
You trade for Honor, wheresoe'er you go;
And richly fraughted with it, always make
A noble and brave return at coming back.
What store then must the Howards have often? who
Have such brave Factors for it abroad, as you?
And are so honored for it at home, as they,
Without offense of any, well may say,
As God first made the Light, then made the Sun
A great Reserve (as 'twere) for it, when h'ad don:
So Kings make Honor, and the Howards are
The great Reserves often, you still find it there.
To his Highness, COSMO Prince of Tuscany On his Travels.
COsmo a name that is all Cosmography,
And Cart or Map where all the world you see
Seeing what you do, and being what you ar,
You are the only great Cosmographer.
And if others like rolling Balls of Snow,
Traveling about the world still greater grow:
How great must you be, who were great before;
And now by traveling still grow more and more?
To the same, On his coming into England.
COsmo whose thirst of seeing the world's so great,
Should the Creator more new worlds creat;
Till there were Globes enough for every Ball
In The Mediceian Arms, you would see them all.
Amongst the rest at last you are come to see
This other world of ours, Great Brittany;
And Princes like your self where ere they come,
This privilege have, they are every where at home.
Others are Citizens of the world, but you
Not only Citizen, but Prince often too;
Nearly by Birth and Parentage allied,
To most of the Princes of the world beside.
To the Lady M. N. Or the fair Daughter of as fair a Mother.
WHat you will be in Time we know
By the Stock on which you grow,
As by Roses we may see
What in time the Buds will be:
So in Flowers, and so in Trees,
So in every thing that is;
Like its like does still produce,
As it is Natures constant use;
Grow still then till you discover
All the Beauties of your Mother:
Nothing but fair and sweet can be
From so sweet and fair a Tree.
EPIGRAMS.
The second BOOK.
To his Royal Highness, The Duke of York, Returning from our Naval Victory,
Anno 65.
MOre famous and more great then ere
Caesar or Alexander were!
Who has both done and outdone too,
What those great Heroes coud not do.
Till Empire of the Seas we get,
No Victory can be complete:
For Land and Sea makes but one Ball;
They had but half, thou have it all.
Great Prince, the glory of our days,
And utmost bound of humane praise!
Increast in style, we well may call
Thee now the whole worlds Admiral,
Whilst might Charles with Trident stands,
And like some God the Sea commands.
Having so gloriously overcome,
What now remains but to come home,
And fixed in our British Spher,
Shine a bright Constellation there?
More famous and more great than ere
Caesar or Alexander were.
To his Highness Prince Rupert, on the same.
GReat and Heroic Prince, surpassing far
Him who was styled the Thunderbolt of War:
The Belgic Lion stands amazed to see
A greater Lion than it self in thee;
And Zealand on, all trembling for fear,
Half sinks into the Waves, and hides it there.
Never since the Grecians called the world their own,
Or Romans theirs, was greater valor known:
And if there yet new worlds to conquer were,
Brave Rupert were the fittest Conqueror.
Greatest Example of Heroic worth,
As ever yet this latter Age brought forth;
As formerly the Land of Britain was,
So now the Sea's too narrow for thy praise,
And 'twill in time become the work alon
Of ecstasy and admiration!
Great and Heroic Prince, surpassing far!
Him, who was styled the Thunder-boult of War!
To Sir K. D. in Italy, Anno 46. Recommending to him a certain Memorial.
I Must beg of you, Sir, nay what is more,
('It Is a disease so infectious to be poor)
Must beg you would beg for me; which whilst I do,
What is it but even to make you beggar too?
But poverty being as honorable now,
As 'twas when Cincinnatus held the plough;
Senators Sowed and Reaped, and who had been
In Car of triumph fetched the Harvest in:
Whilst mightiest Peers do want, nay what is worse,
Even greatest Princes live on others purse;
And very Kings themselves are beggars made,
No shame for any Sir, to be of the Trade.
To Sir Peter Collaton, On the discovery and Plantation of Carolina in America.
BOrn for the Countries good, and adding to it
New Countries and Plantations to boot,
(Whilst others for themselves seem only born
Like Rats and Mice, and but to eat up Corn:)
If others so much praised and honored are
For bringing home some foreign Countries ware;
Their praise compared to thine must needs be small,
Bringst home the ware, the Country too, and all.
On Mary Duchess of Richmond.
WHether a cheerful air does rise
And eleuate her fairer Eyes;
Or a pensive heaviness
Her lovely Eyelids does depress;
Still the same becoming Grace
Accompanies her Eyes and Face;
Still you would think that habit best,
In which her countenance last was dressed.
Poor Beauties! whom a look or glance,
Can sometimes make look fair by chance;
Or curious dress, or artful care
Can make seem fairer then they are:
Give me the Eyes, give me the Face,
To which no Art can add a Grace:
Give me the looks, no garb, nor dress
Can ever make more fair, or less.
On the Death Of Charles Lord Gerard of Bromley.
WHo alive so far had been,
He almost every land had seen;
And almost every thing did know
A man could in this World below:
At last his knowledge to improve,
Is gone unto the World above,
Where his knowledge is so much,
And his happiness is such,
'Twould envy, and not sorrow seem
In those too much should grieve for him.
On George Duke of Albemarle.
IF others have their honors well deserved
Who nobly have their King and Country served:
What Honor ever can be worthy you,
Who have not only served, but saved them too?
To a Lady Too curious of her Dress,
ANd why Clarissa so much pains and care,
To gain the reputation of fair!
When without all this care, and all this pain
You have already what you strive to gain?
Beauty and Truth need so small setting forth,
As all you add to it, take but from its worth;
And the Sun and you, need far more art to hide
Your brighter beams, then make them more espied.
All other Arts in you would show as poor
As his should go about to guild Gold over;
And you would appear as vain in it, as they
Should seek by Art to Blanch the Milkie-way.
You're fair enough Clarissa, leave to those
These petty arts, whose Beautie's only Clothes;
And who need powdering, patching, painting too,
Or else they know their beauty'll hardly do.
So politics when Lions skin does fail,
Do use to pie^e it out with Foxes tail.
But when they have Lions skin enough, it is poor
And beggarly to add a piece to it more.
To Mr. Edward Howard, Brother to the Duke of Norfolk.
IT is not Travel makes the man, it is true,
Unless a man could Travel Sir like you;
In putting off themselves, and putting on
The best of every Country where they come:
Their Language, Fashions, Manners and their use,
Purged of the dross, and stripped of the abuse:
Whilst you pyed Traveller, who nothing knows
Of other Countries fashions, but their clothes;
And learns their Language but as Parrots do,
Only perhaps a broken word or two;
Goes and returns the same he went again,
By carrying still himself along with him.
On the Duchess of Newcastles Closset.
WHat place is this? looks like some sacred Cell
Where ancient Hermits formerly did dwell!
And never ceast importunating Heaven,
Till some great blessing unto Earth was given?
Is this a Ladies Closset? 't cannot be,
For nothing here of vanity we see,
Nothing of curiosity, nor pride,
As most of Ladies Clossets have beside.
Scarcely a Glass, or Mirror in it you find,
Excepting Books the Mirrors of the mind.
Nor is it a Library, but only as she
Makes each place where she comes a Library.
Here she is in rapture, herein ecstasy,
With studying high, and deep Philosophy:
Here those clear lights descend into her mind,
Which by reflection in her Books you find:
And those high Notions, and Idea's too,
Which but her self, no Ladies ever knew.
Whence she is the chiefest Ornament and Grace
Of The times, and of her Sex. Hayle sacred place,
To which the world in aftertimes shall come
As unto Homers Shrine, or Virgils Tomb;
Honoring the Walls wherein she made abode,
The air she breathed, and ground whereon she trod.
So Fame rewards the Arts, and so again
The Arts reward all those who honor them;
Whilst those in any other things do trust,
Shall after death lie in forgotten dust.
To Mrs. STUART.
STuart a Royal name that springs
From Race of Caledonian Kings;
Whose virtuous mind, and beauteous fame
Adds honor to that Royal Name,
What praises can I worthy find,
To celebrate thy form, and mind?
The greatest power that is on Earth,
Is given to Princes by their Birth,
But there is no power in Earth nor Heaven,
More great then what is to Beauty given,
That makes not only men relent,
When unto rage and fury bent,
But Lions tame, and Tigers mild,
All fierceness from their breasts exiled.
Such wonders yet coud never be done
By Beauties force and power alone,
Without the power and force to boot
Of excellent goodness added to it.
For just as Jewels we behold,
More brightly shine when set in Gold:
So Beauty shines far brighter yet,
In virtue and in goodness set.
Continue then but what you ar,
So excellently good and fair;
Let Princes by their birthrights sway,
You Will have a power as great as they.
On her dancing in White Hall, All shining with Jewels.
SO Citharea in the Olympic Hall,
And the rest of the Stars dance their Celestial Ball,
As Stuart with the rest of the Nymphs does here,
The brightest Glories of the British Sphere;
Who would not think her heaven, to see her thus
All shine with Starry sewels as she does?
Or somewhat more then Heaven, to see her Eyes
Out shine the starry Jewels of the Skies?
Only her splendor's so exceeding bright,
Th'excess confounds and blinds us with the sight;
Just as the Sun that is bright to that degree,
Nothing is more, nothing less seen then he.
Mean time the rapid motion of the Sphers
Is not so sweet and Ravishing as hers:
Nor is it the harmony makes her dance, but she
In dancing it is that makes the harmony.
Next to divinest Cynthia Queen of light,
Never was seen a Nymph so fair and bright!
Nor ever shall, among all her starry train,
Though those in Heaven should all come down again.
On her Marriage, With the Duke of Richmond.
THe fairest Nymph of all Diana's train,
For whom so many sighed, and sighed in vain.
She who so often had others Captive made,
And who so often over others triumphed had,
Is Venus Captive now her self, and led
In triumph to the noble Richmonds bed.
Nor is it strange to see about her fly
As many Cupids as are Stars in the sky,
As many Graces as are sands in the Sea,
Nor yet as many Venus's as they:
But to behold so many Virtues throng
About a Nymph so beautiful and young.
Is strange indeed, and clearly shows she had
Called all in counsel when the match was made;
And Venus Urania only 'twas who came
Her self from Heaven to celebrate the same.
To LILLY, Drawing the Countess of Castlemains Picture.
STay daring man, and never presume to draw
Her Picture, till thou may such colors get
As Zeuxis and Appelles never saw,
Nor ere were known by any Painter yet:
Till from all Beauties thou extracts the Grace,
And from the Sun the beams that guild the Skies,
Never presume to draw her beauteous face,
Nor paint the radiant brightness of her Eyes.
In vain the whilst thou do the labor take,
Since none can set her forth to her desert:
She who is above all Nature ere did make,
Much more's above all can be made by Art.
Yet bee'nt discouraged, since whoever do see it,
At least with admiration must confess,
It has an air so admirably sweet,
Much more then others, though then hers much less.
So those bold Giants who would scale the Sky,
Although they in their high attempt did fall,
This comfort had, they mounted yet more high
Then those who never strove to clime at all.
Comfort thee then, and think it no disgrace
From that great height a little to decline,
Since all must grant the Reason of it was
Her too great Excellence, and no want of thine.
Somewhat to Mr. J. A. On his excellent Poem of Nothing.
OF Nothing, nothing's made, they say, but thou
By what thou have made disprov'st that saying now,
And prov'st thy self maker of Poems right,
Coudst out of nothing bring such ones to light,
Which I, (as Creatures him who does creat)
Only on Somewhat dully imitat:
Mean time at least, say all they can agin it,
I hope they needs must say there is somewhat in it:
Or granting it as good as nothing be,
The greater honor still, for it, and me.
To Mr. Henry Jermin, On their demanding why he had no higher Titles, etc.
STill noble, gallant, generous and brave,
What more of Titles would these people have?
Or what can they imagine, more to express
How great thou art, that would not make thee less?
He who is proud of other Titles, is
Proud of a thing that is Fortunes, none of his;
A thing that is but the Title Page of the Book,
On which your Fools and Children only look:
Or garnishment of dishes, not to eat,
But empty nothings to set off the meat.
Thou enviest none their honors, but woudst be
Sorry they should deserve them more than thee:
And 'twere in thee but vain ambition
To seek by other Titles to be known,
When Harry Iermins name alone, affords
As great and loud a sound as any Lords.
Be still thy self then, and let others be
High as they will in place, what is that to thee?
Their worth is all without, but thine within,
And man it is fills the place, but worth fills him.
The Title of a worthy person's more
Then all the Titles which your Clowns adore;
And there is no Office we may greater call,
Then doing of good offices to all:
This is thy Office, these thy Titles are,
The rest take those that list, thou do not care.
Of an unworthy Nobleman.
SEe you yond' thing, that looks as if he would cry
I am a Lord, a mile ere he comes nigh?
And thinks to carry it, by being proud,
Or looking high and big, and talking loud.
But mark him well, you will hardly find enough,
In the whole man, to make a Laquey of;
And for his words, you will scarcely pick from thence
So much of man, as comes to common sense.
Such things as he, have nothing else of worth,
But place and title for to set them forth.
Just like a Dwarf dressed up in Giants clothes,
Bigger he would seem, the lesser still he shows;
Or like small Statuas on huge Basis set,
Their highth's but only makes them less great.
Of a Worthy Noble man: Or, William Duke of Newcastle.
BUt now behold a Nobleman indeed,
Such as w'admire in story when we read;
Who does not proudly look that you should doff
Your hat, and make a reverence twelvescore of:
Nor takes exceptions, if at every word
You call him not his Grace, or else my Lord?
But does appear a hundred times more great
By his neglect often, than by keeping state.
He knows Civility and Courtesy,
Are chiefest signs of true Nobility;
And that which gains them truest honourers,
Is their own Virtues, not their Ancesters.
By which through all degrees that he has past,
Of Vicount, Earl, Marquess, and Duke at last,
H'as always gained the general esteem
Of honoring those, more than they honored him.
On the Lady Rockingham's Nursing her Children her self.
HOw like to Charity this Lady stands,
With one Child sucking, the other in her hands:
Whilst bounteous Nature, Mother of us all,
Of her fair Breasts is not more Liberal!
Those Ladies but half-Mothers are at best,
Who give their Womb, whilst they deny their Breast;
And none deserve that name, but such as you,
Who bring their Children forth, and nurse them too.
Mirror of Mothers! in whom all may see
By what you are, what others ought to be,
Ready like Pelicans for their young ones good,
To give their very lives and vital blood.
For so, if milk be blood, but clothed in white,
You show your self great Straffords daughter right
Equally ready both forth' public good,
You for to give your milk, and he his blood
To her Noble Sister, The Lady Arabella Wentworth.
TO your fair Sex, you are best Example still,
Of following good, and of declining ill:
Who full as pure, and as umblemish go
In this foul Worlk, as Ermins on the Snow;
By never stirring foot upon the way,
Without first asking what will people say?
Teaching the unwary, if they walk not clean,
The fault's not in the World so much as them:
By which besides, that rare receipt you have got,
To silence Rumor, and stop Slanders Throat.
Whence you, and your Illustrious Sister are
Each in their several kinds without compare;
You for a matchless Virgin, she a Wife;
The great examples of a virtuous life.
In one who slandred a fair and virtuous Lady.
THou enemy of all that is fair and bright,
As Fowls of darkness are unto the light.
Monster of Monsters! Basilisk of spite!
That killst with Tongue, as the other does with sight.
Slanderer of Ladies, and of them the best,
Thou Have done an act, which all men must detest!
Beauty's a thing Divine, and he that would
Wrong that, would wrong Divinity if he coud:
Who takes my purse, does but as Robbers do;
Who takes my Fame, robs me, and kills me too:
And with his venumous Tongue, and poisonous breath,
Would if he coud, even kill us after death.
But I mistake, it is no infamy,
To be calumniated by such as thee:
Thou rather praisest us against thy will,
Like him who cured by chance, whom he would kill.
" For it is the same thing (rightly understood)
" To be disprais'd by the bad, as praised by the good.
To a Lady Too confident of her Innocence.
MAdam, that you are Innocent I know,
But the world wants innocence to think you so;
That Is all so vicious grown, it will not allow,
That any can be fair and virtuous now.
In Saturns days, perhaps it might fuffice,
When to be innocent, was to be wise:
But now without the Serpents wisdom too,
The Innocence of the Dove will hardly do:
Go get you some more powerful defense,
For Virtue then, besides your Innocence:
" For Innocence, but Virtue is unarmed,
" The more you trust unto't, the more you are harmed.
The Ladies name in Enigma.
HEr first name somewhat of Elysium ha^,
Her second is in a more mistick phrase;
That color which shows venerable age,
And does in the morning a fair day presage:
Unriddle now, and tell whose name this is,
O^ forfeit a discretion if you miss.
To Mr. Bernard Howard, Brother to the Duke of Norfolk.
I Grant you Sir, I have a mind unfit
For my low fortune, much too high for it:
But sure you will grant it is better have it so,
Than for high fortune, to have a mind too low;
By that, a man is elevated to
An Angels height, attained by only few:
By this the Noble Soul is even deprest
Unto the Vulgar, almost to the Beast.
I Am none of these same cringing things that stoops,
Just like a Tumbler when he vaults through hoops,
Or Daw or Magpy, when at first it pecks,
Alternately their tails above their becks.
I care not for high place, nor can I raise
My self unto^t by base unworthy ways;
And if wealth in as base unworthy lie,
For me, let low minds stoop for it, mine is too high.
Nor care I what the ignorant vulgar say,
For being not of their number, nor their way:
They do but talk, and cannot in judgment sit,
Nor lies it in their verge to judge of it.
I put my self upon the only few,
That is, the best and worthiest, such as you.
Of a happy life.
WHo ever would live a happy life indeed,
And wholly be from care and trouble freed,
Must first stand well with God, and then with Man,
Must have as little buceness as he can;
Must care for nothing, that he cannot have,
And nothing others can deprive him of.
And above all must fly ambition,
To be to great Men, or to Princes known.
For who lives so, no Princes smile nor frown,
Can either raise him up, or cast him down;
And neither hopes to rise, nor fears to fall,
Does live the best and happiest life of all.
Of Clorinda's Excellence.
AS when the Sun appears, the Birds of night
Make haste away, and all are put to flight:
So when the bright Clorinda does appear,
All wanton Lovers fly the sight of her:
To whom, to talk of Love were high offense,
Who Is so wrapped up in every Excellence,
As in the unfoulding of them one by one,
You never should to only Women come.
Love is for meaner Beauties, such as theirs,
In whom there nothing else but Sex appears:
But as for her, who ever dares aspire
Farther, then for to reverence and admire,
Ixions fate to such should be allowed,
Who steed of Juno, but embraced a cloud;
And thy in Justice, only should invent,
To punish them, Ixions punishment.
On the equal mixture of blood and water, After letting blood of Mademoiselle
de Beauvais.
Qust.OF this just mixture and equality,
Of water and blood, what should the reason be?
Ans. The Reason's clear, forced to part with her,
Each drop of blood for grief did shed a tear.
On Cicilannas blushing When the King beheld her.
SO Roses blush, when looked on by the Sun,
As she, when by the King she is looked upon;
And so of all fair things we nothing see,
More fair in Nature, than the Sun and She.
If things take name from their Original,
We well her blushes, Royal ones may call;
And if w'ave lost the Royal purple's stain,
It in her Cheeks may well be found again.
So, as it is sign the Sun is drawing near,
When fair Aurora blushing does appear:
To see her blushing when she sees him come,
You Would say she were Aurora, he the Sun.
In small-Beer.
NOw pox and plague to boot on this same small-
Beer, we may well the Devils Iulip call:
Distilled from Lembeck of some Lapland witch,
With Northwinds- bellows blowing in her breech;
Or stale of some cold Hag of the Marshes, who
Than water never better Liquor knew:
A penitential drink for none by right,
But those in the morning, who were drunk over night:
Sure 'twas the poison (as the Learned think)
They gave condemned Socrates to drink:
Or that, the Macedonian drank, so cold,
As nothing but an Asses houff coud hold.
They were deceived, it was not Niobes moan,
But drinking small-Beer, turned her unto stone.
And it is that infallibly which now has made
All Charity so cold, and the World so bad.
If then Divines would mend it, let them preach
Against small-Beer only, and no Doctrine teach;
But drinking wine, and then you soon should see,
All in Religion easily would agree.
This were a Doctrine worthy of their heat
And furious beating the Pulpit till they swear.
In the Smallpox.
THou greatest enemy that Beauty has!
The very Goth and Vandal of a face;
On which thou make as foul or fouler work,
Than does thy cosen Meezles upon Pork.
One of those Devils, which by power Divine,
Cast out of man once, went to th'heard of Swine,
And giving them the Pox, art come again
To play the Devil, as thou did with men?
To bid a Plague upon thee now, that curse
Thou anticipates already, for thou art worse,
Or great Pox on thee, we should curse but ill,
For you are more great, in being the small- Pox still.
But get thee gone, and soon too, or I know
A way I Am sure will quickly make thee go;
But send for Doctor -- and you will see
We with a vengeance shall be rid of thee.
To Mis Davies, On her excellent dancing.
Dear Mis,
WHo would not think to see thee dance so light,
Thou were all air, or else all soul and spirit?
Or who'd not say, to see thee only tred,
Thy feet were Feathers, others feet but lead?
Athlanta well coud run, and Hermes flee,
But none ere moved more gracefully than thee:
And Cicres charmed with wand, and Magic Lore,
But none like thee ere charmed with feet before.
Thou Miracle! whom all men must admire
To see thee move like air, and mount like fire!
Those who would follow thee, or come but nigh
To thy perfection, must not dance, but fly.
The Patrons Lives, To the Lord of, etc.
MY Lord, if you will attention give,
I Will tell you how the Patrons live:
First of all, they neither care,
Nor for Clock, nor Calender.
Next they never desire to know,
How affairs of the world do go.
Above all they never resort
To the busy Hall nor Court:
Where most men do nothing else
But trouble others, and themselves.
All the business they look after,
Only is their sport and laughter,
With a friend, and cheerful cup,
Merrily to dine and sup
Hear good Music, see a Play;
Thus they pass the time away:
And if you like our living thus,
Come my Lord and live with us.
On a Hector, Beaten and draged away by the Constable.
STill to be dragged! still to beaten thus!
Hector I fear thy name is ominous;
And thou for fighting did but ill provide,
To take thy name thus from the beaten side:
To have Watchmen still like band of Mirmidons,
Beat thee with Halbards down, and break thy boans?
And every petty Constable thou meets,
Achillis-like to drag thee through the Streets?
Poor Hector! when the art beaten blind and lame,
I hope thou wilt learn to take another name.
Of an Epicure.
AN Epicure is one of those,
No God besides his belly knows;
And that Religion best does think,
Where a he finds best meat and drink.
Who for his Palate and his Gust,
Has quite forgot all other Lust,
And hugs a bottle, as he would
A Mris, when the Wine is good.
Who lays about him like a Giant,
When he finds a morsel friand;
And so long has crammed his gut,
He Is nothing else from head to foot.
When you such an one do meet,
Or in Tavern, or in Street;
By his bulk you may be sure,
Such an one's an Epicure.
To Misa, made Anno 52.
NOw what a Devil Misa makes,
Thee with such eyes behold me still?
'Cause from thee Time thy good looks takes,
Must I therefore have thy ill?
I prethy Misa don't behold
Me thus, as if I were thy foe;
For howsoever thou art old,
I am not Time that made thee so.
So rather then to quarrel with me,
As if 'twere I had done thee wrong:
Go quarrel with thy age, I prithy,
Whose fault it is thou have lived so long.
However for me, thou well may spare
Thy Anger, and thy frowns may cease:
Who for thy good looks little care,
Does for thy bad ones care much less.
To the same, Whilst she would needs look fair and young.
LEt Autumns paint her withered leaves,
And Winter dye his Snowy hair;
Yet he is a Fool that not perceives
They either dyed, and painted ar.
So while thou wilt needs look young again,
And still seem fair unto the sight;
Misa thy labor's all in vain,
Like his would wash the Ethiope white.
Who looked well in King James's reign,
And in King Charles's, old appeard,
Will hardly now look young again,
When the Commonwealth has got a beard.
Then Misa follow my advise,
And leaving off thy bootless care;
Strive rather to gain hearts than eyes,
And to appear more good than fair.
Good counsel to an Enemy,
NO more for shame! but let us be friends again,
And let us remember w'ar not beasts but men.
Beasts out of natural instinct fight, but we
Should out of natural instinct now agree:
This baiting one another, is but just
Like Bear-baiting, where those who seem the most
Delighted with it, nor love the Dog nor Bear,
But only the sport to see them rend and tear
Each other, and themselves who'd harm and hurt
As beasts do, only to make others sport?
No more for shame then, let us be friends again,
And still remember we are not ^^asts, but men.
The Liberty.
FRee as I was born I Will live,
So should every wiseman do;
Only Fools they are who give,
Their freedoms to I know not who*
If my weakness cannot save it,
But 't must go, what ere it cost;
Some more strong than I shall have it,
Who can keep what I have lost?
Still some excellency should be,
More in the Mr. than the Slave,
Which in others till I see,
None my liberty shall have.
Nor is it excellency enough,
Time or chance can mar or make;
But't shall be more lasting stuff
Shall from me my f^e^dom take.
Those to whom I Will give away,
That which none too dear can buy,
Shall be made of better clay,
And have better souls than I.
To the Lord John Bellasis.
It Is not to honor, but be honored by it,
I mention you, my Lord, in what I write.
Since to my Book can be no greater Fame,
No^ greater honor unto me again:
Then to have him, who has the Fame to be
His Countries honor, thus to honor me.
To the Lady Elizabeth Gage, On her Marriage and Conversation to the C. Religon.
NEver was greater Test^mony given
(Madam) how Marriages are made in Heaven
Then is by yours that both Religion had,
For mak^ng it, and has religion made:
So as if Marriges be holy all,
We this of yours may doubly holy call,
In which you have doubly offered up your vows,
Both to your heavenly, and your earthly Spouse:
Whence it is a joyful one indeed, has made
Not only Men, but even the Angels glad;
To whom it does more properly belong,
Than unto us to sing your Nuptial Song.
Which whilst above in the higher world they do,
We here below congratulate them and you.
To the Lord George Barkley.
SInce as by clear experience we see,
Virtue is only true Nobility.
There Is none gives greater proof of it than you
(My Lord) that your Nobility is true:
And that 't may so continue, you provide,
By adding to it true Piety beside.
" For Piety is but Virtue dyed in grain,
Can never change color, nor take spot or stain.
Such Courtiers Heaven desires, and such Kings should
Desire too, if they would have them great and good*
Happy the whilst (my Lord) are such as you,
Fit both for the heavenly Court, and earthly too.
Of Friends and Foes.
TWo Painters (friend and foe) once went about
To paint Antigones whose one eye was out,
which t'on to show, and the other for to hide;
That turned his blind, and this his better side.
Just so 'twixt Friends and Foes men are expressed,
By halfs set forth, whilst they conceal the rest:
None, as their Friends or Foes, depaint them would,
Being ever half so bad, or half so good.
On the Riches of the Barbados, to Mr. H. D. Esquire
HOw Rich Barbados is of other things,
We well may see by the wealthy Trade it brings:
How rich it is in men, we well may see,
By binging fourth brave Drax such men as thee.
On the Marriage of the Lord Brakley, With the Lady Elizabeth Cranfield, made
An. 65.
THe fairest Flower of Cranfields Race,
And noblest branch of Edgerton,
Accompanied with every Grace,
By Hymen now are joined in one.
And now the Nuptial rites are past;
In passing over the rest was done:
Let Us to the Bridal Chamber haste,
Where the Bridgroom longs I Am sure to come,
Go happy Youth, and taste abed,
The pleasures far Eliza yields;
By far surpassing all that is sed,
Of The pleasures of the Elizian Fields.
And fair Eliza bee'nt afraid
Of The Bug-bears of a Married life;
Those fears which haunt you now a Maid,
Will vanish soon when you are a Wife.
And in their place such joys shall leave,
When once you are a Mother grown:
No humane thought can ere conceive,
Or ere b' expressed by humane Tongue!
On his Arara. Drowned in his return from Brasil.
THou how so like unto the Phaenix were
In shape and plumes, and almost every par*
That so unlike should be your destiny,
That should by Fire, and thou by Water dye!
Consolation To Poor Porters.
TAke courage Porter, every one must bear
Somewhat or other whilst they tarry here;
And every one (if that be good) are free,
As well as thou, of the Porters Company.
Nor is it so base a Trade perhaps as thou
Imaginst it, since if that saying be true:
Great honors, are great burdens we may call
The Porters Trade, the honourablest of all.
Out of Ronsard, Of a happy life.
CEluy n'est pas heureux, qu' on monstre par larue,
Que le peuple cognoit, que le peuple sal^e;
Mais heureux est celuy, que la Glo^re n'es point,
Que ne cognoit person, and qu' on ne cognoit point.
The same in English.
HE is not happy, they point at in the Streets,
Whom the people does know, and salutes as it meets:
But happy is he who ambition has none,
Nor others to know, nor by others be known.
To certain Ladys, Who said they like not your old Wits.
LAdies, you like not your old Wits, you say,
And what new ones are those you like I pray?
Perhaps you have squeemish stomachs just like those*
Loath wonted fare, and'd have some new quelque chose.
And it is the nature of Green Sickness Wits,
As it is of your Green Sickness Appetits:
To^ in the souls, the other the bodies food,
To l^ke the bad, and to mislike the good:
O^ just as Heresy at first begun,
With crying down the old Religion,
So it is a kind of Heresy in you,
To cry down old Wits, and cry up the new*
If so, Ladies, of the new say what you will,
With your good leave, I Am for the old ones still.
Of Friends and Acquaintance.
WHo 'twixt Acquaintances and Friends does make*
No difference, is just like him does take
Each peeble-sto^, of which enough are found
In each Highway, for some Rich Diamond.
A Friend's a Cabinet-piece, and to be sought
All the World over, nor can too dear be bought,
Whilst t'other's a cheap trivial thing, you meet,
And take up when you please in every street.
Believe not all who friendship then protest,
But prove them first, and after choose the best:
For he who every one a friend does call,
In time of need shall find no friend at all.
The Ant.
LIttle think thou poor Ant who there
With so much pains in so short time*
A grain or two to the Cell do bear,
There Is greater work in the world than thine*
In The small Republic too at home,
Where you are perhaps some Majestrate;
Little think thou, when thou do come,
There Is greater in the world than that.
Nor is it such wonder now in thee,
No more of the world, nor things do know,
That all thy mind of the ground should be,
And thoughts on things so poor and low.
But that man so base mind should bear
To fix it on a clot of Ground;
As there no other business were,
Nor greater world for to be found.
He so much of the man does want,
As metamorphoz'd quite again,
Whilst you are but man turned grovelling ant,
Such grovelers seem but ants turned men.
How to bear neglects.
LEt it not trouble thee, when any would,
Put a neglect upon thee, if they coud:
But mind it not, and thy neglect will be
More great of them, then theirs can be of thee.
On Madam Master.
OF Madam it may well be sed,
that Madam's head has little Wit,
When Madam's Husband is head,
And Madam makes a Fool of it.
On Doctor Cornuto.
WHo so famous was of late,
He was with Finger pointed at;
What cannot learning do, and single state?
Being married, he so famous grew,
As he was pointed at with two,
What cannot learning and a Wife now do?
On Simple.
SImple made much ado, and much offense
He ^ook, for saying he scarce had common sense;
Till saying he had, and very common too,
Simple was pleased, and made no more ado.
On Married Ministers.
IF both in the Spiritual and Temporal War,
Their Wives but Baggage of the Armies are;
We well may say, your Ministers who Marry,
Whilst others fight, do with the Baggage tarry.
In pravos Aulicos.
IF* as they say Courts are like Heaven, and Kings
Like Gods, sure Cour^iers should be holy things;
Like Angels, from which state when once they fall,
As Devils did, the Devil take them all.
In Invidum.
WHen ere thou see me take delight,
In any thing thou bursts with spite.
And so thou do at every thing,
That does me good, or profit bring.
Thou bursts with spite, to see that I
Am still in noble Company;
And honor I receive from them,
Does make thee burst with spite again.
And if my honor, my delight,
And profit, makes thee burst with spite;
And all my good, does prove thy ill,
I prethy burst with spite often still.
Of an Evil Tongued person.
THou have so many Tongues as Cerberus, nor
Seaven-headed Hydra, scarcely coud have more:
The lying, cogging, and dissembling Tongue;
The spightful, railing, and malicious one;
The foul and beastly, the Satirical;
The lewd, and slanderous one, and above all,
The scurrilous and profane. Strange! that one should
Amongst so many Tongues have never a good!
In eundem.
WHilst I repay with handsome* Railerie,
Thy base and ugly railing against me:
Thou call'st me foul-mouthed for it, thy self thou means,
As those in Lewkners-lane, call Ladies Queans.
In eundum.
THe same advantage, thou have over those,
Who have some Fame, whilst thou have none ^o loose;
As Gamsters have, who play of the Tick with one,
Who has some money, whilst themselves have none.
In Inimicum.
SInce all some Enemies needs must have, I Am glad
That such as thou mine Enemies are made;
For as In The field, the worthiest are best,
So out of the field, still the unworthiest.
In eundem.
I See thou art resolved in spite,
To cry down every thing I write;
And I Am resolved in spite of thee,
To write so, thou ashamed shall be,
Both of thy Envy, and thy Spite,
To cry down every thing I Write.
On M. Asoto, An apocryphal Captain.
IF with the Cynick we away should fling
Every unuseful, and superfluous thing,
I nothing know, thou better coudst afford
To fling away Asoto, than thy sword.
Of the Application Of these Epigrams.
WHilst I (on purpose not to have them known)
Present in Mask and Vizard any one,
And they themselves, or any else (in fine)
Shall pluck it off, the fault is theirs, not mine.
On Sir Querilous Coxcomb.
There are two sorts, with which he cannot agree,
All that are better, and all are worse than he:
Do you secure him for the better sort,
And for the worser I Will secure him for it.
On a Rich vainglorious Miser.
THou boasts thy money, and if that be all,
Thy praise, and commendations is but small;
For every Cobbler may with industry
And pains, (in Time) boast that as well as thee:
Mony's like muck, that is profitable while
'T serves for manuring of some fruitful Soil;
But on a barren one (like thee) methinks
It Is like a Dunghill, that lies still and stinks.
To one Who desired him not to name him.
I Wonder why thou shudst be so ashamed,
Amongst such noble persons to be named!
Unless thou think's thee unworthy of it? if so,
Thou Have reason for it, and I Am of thy mind too.
To one Who desired him to name her.
You Would have me name you, and I wo^d not name
Any, but only those of better Fame:
I prethy then, that we two may agree,
Go bring a better Fame along with thee.
Against Covetousness.
WHilst those for wealth do sell their liberty,
Called Angling for the golden-Fish, for me;
Loving my liberty as I do, I look
Upon It as fishing with a Golden-hook.
And he who spends his life in getting wealth,
And to increase his Store consumes himself;
Does just to me as very a Fool appear,
As he, sold's horse, to buy him provinder.
To one that shall be nameless*
TO those from whom, I for reward cannot look
So much as comes to the binding of my Book;
Much less the printing, why should I present
It to 'um, unless 't be out of complement?
And I don't like such complement^ as those,
Where one gets nothing, and is sure to loose.
To the same.
I AM in great straits! for first I do believe,
Should I ask any thing, you would nothing give;
Then if I should not, you would never think of me,
What should I do in this extremity?
Why I write not of Love.
YOu fain would have me writ of Love, and say,
It may be chaste and virtuous, so it may:
But howsoe'er virtuous and chaste it be,
It yet does come so nigh unchast^^^^
And is so stiep and slippery a precipiece,
One easily thence does slide and ^all to vice.
Wherefore let who is list write of it for me,
I Will keep me, if I can, from the danger free.
L'Envoye To the Readers.
AUthors use to make you feasts,
Books the fare, and Readers guests;
Judgment, Caterer and Wit,
The Cook for the a seasoning it:
All which when on the Table set,
The Author who provides you meat,
Does pray you heartily to fall
Unto't, and says, you are welcome all.
THEATRICAL EPIGRAMS.
The Third BOOK.
Of Plays and Actors.
YOu rail at Plays, they are idle things you say,
Faith so's the world, for all is but a Play;
And difference 'twixt them, there is none at all,
But t'on's the Copy, the other the Original:
And as the World is but a Theater, so
All that are in it are but Actors too;
Let none despise then the dramatick Art,
Since none that is in the world, but Acts their part.
This of the Stage, then let us at last conclude,
For satisfying the ignorant multitude;
That of all Recreations, when well used
It is the best, as worst when it is abused.
Of Poets.
OUr lives we trust to the Physicians care,
For manners, Poets our Physicians are;
Their way to profit and delight, their End
To commend Virtue, Vice to discommend,
Of which unless they take especial care,
They rather Poys'ners then Physicians are:
And just like Poys'ners too, should have their hire,
To be themselves and poison cast in the fire.
On Sir Common Critic.
WHilst thou on every thing so fast do spend
Thy judgment, as twoud never have an end.
Prethy take heed thou spendst it not so fast,
To leave thy self no judgment at the last.
To the judicious Censurer.
BUt unto thee who know the Rules of Art,
And judgst not out of ignorance, but desert;
Whose head like empty balances is not swayed,
But all things there judiciously are weighed.
There Is none that is wise, but willingly would submit
All that he writes, to judge and censure it;
And should far more prefer thy judgment then,
That of whole Theaters full of other men;
Who think perhaps that difference, there is none
'Twixt judging and condemning every one;
While the wise do only know to judge like you,
For to condemn, that every Fool can do.
On the Cinical Censurer.
It Is but a cruel sport thou have to go
To Theaters, as to Bear-baitings they do,
And Bandog-like to fall upon the Play,
Woory the Poet, and then go their way:
As some great Anter, thou forsooth have done,
When every day dogs do as great an one.
On the death Of Sir William Davenant.
NOw Davenant's dead, the Stage will mourn,
And all to Barbarism turn;
Since he it was this latter age,
Who chiefly civilized the Stage.
He knew's decorum, and the Art,
To fit his properties to's part,
His part unto the Actors, and
All to the dramma h'ad in hand.
And if the Stage or Theater be
A little world, 'twas only he,
Who Atlas-like supported it,
By force of Industry and Wit.
Not only Dedalus arts he knew,
But even Promethius's too;
And living Machines made of men,
As well as dead ones for the Scene.
All^ this, and more he did beside;
Which having finished he died;
If he may properly be sed
To dye, whose Fame will never be dead.
Of his Plays.
AS for his Plays, the Unfortuats Lovers,
The depth of Tragedy discovers;
In's Love and Honor you may see,
The height of Trage-comedy.
And for his Wits, the Comic fire
In none yet ever flamed up higher.
But coming to his Siege of Rhodes,
It out goes all the rest by odds,
And somewhat's in it that does out do
Both Ancients and the Moderns too.
And thus you see h'as left behind,
In's Plays, the best of every kind.
On Mr. Abraham Cowly.
COwley's not dead, immortal is his Muse,
Or if he be, a Phaenix he is become;
Who unique in his kind, his life renues
By animating's Ashes in his Tomb.
The same in French.
NOn, Cowley n'est pas mort, sa Muse est Immortelle
Ou biensi Cowley est mort, e'est un Phoenix nouveau,
Qui n'ayant son pareil, soy mesme ronovelle
Et suruit asa cendre animant son Tomb a^.
To Mr. John Dreyden.
DReyden the Muses darling and delight,
Than whom none ever flew so high a flight.
Some have their vains so drosie, as from earth,
Their Muses only seem to have taken their birth.
Others but water-Poets are, have gone
No farther than to the Fount of Helicon:
And they are but aerie ones, whose Muse soars up
No higher than to mount Pernassus top;
Whilst thou, with thine, do seem to have mounted higher,
Then he who fetched from Heaven Celestial fire:
And do as far surpass all others, as
Fire does all other Elements surpass.
On a bungling dramatick Poet.
SInce thou must needs write Plays, it is thy fate,
And ours to be so plagued with them of late;
We are as feared as of the plague, and more,
When we but see thy Bills upon the Door;
It seems that every one their madness has,
Actors to Act them, we to see thy Plays;
And thou to write them, question which of all,
We may the most and greatest madness call;
For curing which, Apollo must be fain,
To let thee blood in the Poetique vain;
And give to us, and the Actors Hel^bor,
If ere they act, or ere we ^ee them more
The Author of a good Play not Acted, To the Author of an ill one Acted.
THeir Wit and Iudgement's small, we well may say
By the Acting, or not Acting, judge the Play;
For it is ^ot the Acting (rightly understood)
But writing makes the Play, or had, or good;
If good (like mine) then it is the Actors fault,
And not the Writers, if they act it not.
But if it be bad (like thine) then if they do
It Is both the Actors fault, and Writers too.
Of the difference Betwixt the Ancient and Modern Plays.
IF any one the difference would know,
Betwixt the Ancient Plays and Modern now;
In Ancient Times none ever went away,
But with a glowing bosom from a Play,
With somewhat they had heard, or seen, so fierd,
They seem to be Celestially inspired*
Now you have only some few light conceits,
Like Squibs and Crackers, neither warms nor heats;
And sparks of Wit as much as you would desire,
But nothing of a true and solid fire:
So hard it is now for any one to write
With Iohnson's fire, or Fletcher's (...) and spright:
Much less inimitable shakspears way,
Promethian-like to animate a play.
Valediction To the Stage and Dramatick Poetry.
I Who so much have loved thee heretofore,
When thou were chaste, do love thee now no more,
But like some common Mrs. give thee over.
By which all those who blamed me for it, may see
I only loved thee for thy chastity,
Which now thou have lost, thou have lost a friend of me.
And as for those who have deboisht thee so,
I publicly declare my self their foe,
As by this following piece the world shall know.
In your scurrilous and obscene Dramatick Poets.
SHame and disgrace of the Actors and the Age,
Poet more fit for the Brothel than the Stage!
Who makes thy Muse a Strumpet, and she thee
Bawd to her lust, and so you well agree:
Bawdry however washed is foul enough,
But thou do writ such foul unwashed stuff,
Thou only seems to have taken all the pain,
To write for White stones-parke, or Lewknors-lane:
And Water-poets we have had good store,
But never Kennel ones till thee before.
What Devil made the write? for sure there is none
Coud write so bad, without the help of one,
Which till't be exercised, and quite cast out,
Thou Art only fit to write for the common rout;
And with thy impudent lines, and scurrilous style,
To make Fools laugh, and wisemen blush the while.
On the spoiling and mangling of one of his Plays.
ALas poor Play! for never Orphens
By frantic hands was torn and mangled thus!
Better I Would barren been, for this is worse,
Then to have the Fairys steal ones child from nurse,
And make a Changling of 't. But it is in vain,
For things are past prevention to complain.
It Is the common fate of Poets nowadays,
TO have such as these mangle and spoil their Plays;
And there is scarcely any one that scapes,
The unskilful tampering of these Poet-Apes;
For which, all th'harm that I coud wish to them,
May, never Poet write for them again:
But they be forced to Act old Plays like those
For want of new, are forced to wear old Clothes;
And come of the Stage all tattered and poor,
In old cast suits, which Field and Burbadge woar.
On our late Prologues and Epologues.
AS Horse-coursers their Horses set to sale,
With Ribonds on their Forheads and their Tail:
So all our Poets gallantry nowadays
Is in the Prologues, and Epilogues of their Plays.
On the Play of the life of Pyrocles, Prince of Tire.
ARs longa, vita brevis as they say,
But who inverts that saying made this Play.
PROLOGUE, For the revival of his Damoiselles a la mode, Acted by his Majesty's
Servants.
THis Play of ours, just like some Vest or Iup,
Worn twice or thriee, was carefully laid up:
And after for sometime it so had lain,
Is now brought forth, as good as new again;
For having the honor of our Masters sight,
And happiness of giving him delight,
Our Author thought his business was done,
But great part of our business is to come:
He only looked after the pleasure of it,
But we must look as well into our profit;
He cared but for an Audience or two,
But that on our account will hardly do.
And to conclude, he had his end again,
In pleasing those who only saw it then:
But we must please you now, or we'd be sorry,
Since only for that end w'ave kept it for ye.
The Epologue.
ANd now what think ye of the Damoiselles a la mode?
We hope none grutches money they have bestowed,
In seeing them, or if that any here
Does think for seeing them, they have paid too dear,
We wish that for the mode and Damoiselles too,
They never may dearer pay, than now they do.
PROLOGUE, Intended for his Physician against his will, In a Fools Coat.
I AM sure to see me thus for Prologue stand,
You Will think some fooling business is in hand;
A thing so common now, as if you mind it
In every Coat as well as mine you find it.
And now since fooling is so much in fashion,
This we'll say forth' Stages commendation;
That of all sorts of Fooling nowadays,
The best and innocentst is that of Plays:
For this our Play (as in the Bill you will see)
It Is called a Farce, and not a Comedy,
'Cause it is an Antic, Drolling-piece affords,
You mimick gesture, to your comic words:
And just as Iigs to otheir Airs, so this
Is unto other Plays and Comedies:
It Is merryer then a Comedy by halph,
And does not only make you smile but laugh:
T'on stirs up mirth in you, the other comes after,
And spite of your teeth makes you burst forth in laughter.
Those who love mirth and laughter then may stay,
And have their fills often ere they go away,
And those who would have serious Plays in Rhyme
May go their ways, and come another time.
Songs in Plays. Chorus. In his Play of Loves Kingdom, Incensing and
Lustrating the place.
FAr hence be all profane, whilst here
With solemn Rites thus every year,
To render every Lover true,
We Element Loves Kingdom new.
That no breast too strongly beat,
We give his Fires a temperate heat;
We give its Waters virtuous force
To slack them, taken in their source;
Fogg of perjured vows and oaths,
Which fair Truth and Candor loathes:
We purge the Air from, and the Earth
From every foul and monstrous birth:
For as some Lands their Monsters fear,
Unruly Lust's our Monster here.
As others poisonous beasts molest,
So Avarice is our poisonous beast.
From which when once a land is freed,
Then Loves Kingdom it is indeed.
Invocation of silence in the same Play.
SAcred silence thou that art
Floud-gate of the dieper heart;
Off spring of a heavenly kind,
Frost of the mouth, and thaw of the mind.
Admirations readyest Tongue,
Leave thy Desert shades among,
Reverend Hermits hallowed Cells,
Where retired devotion dwells,
With thy Enthusiasmes come,
Ceaze this Nymph, and strike her dumb.
Yhe Commutation Of Love and Death's Darts.
LOve and Death of the way once meeting,
Having past a friendly greeting,
Sleep their weary eyelids closing,
Lay them down themselves reposing.
Love whom diverse cares molested,
Coud not sleep, but whilst death rested:
All in haste away he posts him,
But his haste too dearly costs him.
For it chanced that going to sleeping,
Both had given their Darts in keeping
Unto night, who Errors Mother,
Blindly knowing not t'on from the other;
Gave Love, Deaths, and never perceived it,
Whilst as blindly Love received it.
Since which time their Darts confounding,
Love now kills instead of wounding:
Death our hearts with sweetness filling,
Gently wounds instead of killing.
The description of noble Love.
NOw Lovers, in a word to tell
What Noble Love is, mark me well.
It is the Counterpoise that minds
To fair and virtuous things inclines,
It is the gust we have and sense
Of every noble excellence.
It is the pulse by which we know,
Whether our souls have life or no;
And such a soft and gentle fire,
As kindles and inflames desire;
Until it all like Incence burns,
And unto melting sweetness turns.
Song.
CElia weeps, and those fair Eyes,
Which were diamonds before;
Whose precious value none coud surprise,
Desolves into a pearly shower.
Celia smiles, and strait does reader
Her Eyes diamonds again;
Which after shine with greater splendour,
As the Sun does after Rain.
And if the Reason now you would know,
Why Pearls and Diamonds fall and rise;
Their prices just go high and low,
As they are worn in Celia's Eyes.
Song. The mock Lover.
OF all your Fools the Lover
Does greatest folly discover,
Who's always crying and weeping,
Like School-boyes after a whipping,
To see a great Lubber
To whine and to blubber
And hear them cry out upon Cupid,
With gesture so antic,
You Would think he were frantic,
There Is nothing in Nature so stupid.
2.
Your natural Fools we pity,
And delight in those that are witty:
But he who is a Fool for love,
Nor delight nor pity does move;
These only are Toys
For Girls and for Boys,
And never move to compassion;
When Cupid has Eyes,
And Lovers are wise,
They Will love in another fashion.
The mock Marriage, A drolling Song.
YOu're to be mard or married, as they say,
To day or to morrow, to morrow or to day:
But be it, as they say,
To morrow or to day,
For your comfort yet I pray,
Take this by the way,
Your married folk are fickle,
Your marirage ware is brittle,
And 'twixt Merryage,
And Marriage,
Is difference not a little.
A Rural Dialogue.
Cho. ONce a Nymph and Sheepherd meeting,
Never past there such a greeting;
Nor was heard 'twixt such a pair,
Plainer dealing than was there:
He paid women, and she men,
He slights her, she him again.
Words with words were over thwarted,
Thus they meet, and greet, and parted.

Sh. He who never takes a wife.
Lives a most contented life.

Ni. She her whole contentment looses,
Who a Husband ever chooses.

Si. I, of women know too much,
Ere to care for any such

Ni. I of men too much do know,
To care where ere you do no.

Sh. Since you are resolved farewell,
Look you lead not Apes in Hell.

Ni. Better lead Apes thither then,
Thither to be led by men.

Sh. They to Paradise would lead you,
Be but ruled, by what they bid ye.

Ni. To Fools Paradise it is true,
Would they but be ruled by you.

Cho. Thus they parted as they met,
Hard to say who best did get;
Or of Love was least afraid,
When being parted either said.

Ambo Love, what Fools thou makst of men
When they are in thy power, but when
From thy power they once are free?
Love, what a Fool men make of thee?

Facetious and drolling EPIGRAMS.
The Exchange Maid.
MAid, if Gallants you would invite
By whole dossens to your sight,
Get you to the Exchange, and there,
Of all Trades tu^n Linniner:
For your Gallants most love Linnin,
Since it is that they must do sin in;
And is ever next the skin,
Where does chiefly lie the sin.
Then still keep your Tongue a walking,
(For they much delight in talking)
And with Reparties so quick,
Give them word for word so thick;
None that plays at Shuttlecock,
May sooner give them stroke for stroke;
Still provided that your main
Design, be only for your gain;
And 'twixt buying and bestowing,
Keep their purses still agoing:
But to their Chambers never go home,
If to your Shop you would have them come:
Since, if once they get you there,
Farewell to all your other ware:
Then put them off with pish and fie,
When they chance to come too nigh,
And tell them money buys ('it is true)
Linnin, but matrimony you.
And of these Rules you need take care,
But only till you married are,
And then by privilege of his Crest
Your Husband cares for all the rest.
On the Fanatics. Or Cross-haters.
WHo will not be baptized, only because
In Baptism they make the sign of the Cross,
Showing the whilst how well the Devil and he,
In loving of the sign of the Cross agree.
Seeing how every one in swiming does,
Streth forth their arms, and make the sign of the Cross:
Were he to swim, rather then make (I think)
The sign of the Cross, he would sooner choose to sink.
On an ill-favored malicious person, In Burlesques Rhyme.
TO tell you what -- was
For Beauty both of person and face;
Her face was good, if with faces at least
It goes as with Bucklers, the broadest the best;
And person fair, if for fairness it goes,
With women at least, as * with Bullocks it does:
In plainer terms, without mincing the matter,
She had a face as broad as a platter;
And person such, as to see her you would fancy,
'Twere some Dutch Iugg were come from beyond Sea.
As for the qualitys of her interior,
Which to her outside were nothing inferour.
She loved not the world, and 'twas less to be pittyed,
Since the world loved not her, and so they were fitted,
And was so malicious in words and in action,
As she would set at division and faction;
First day of their mar^iage, your husband and wives,
And children and parents, last day of their lives;
The biggest the fairest.
Wherefore I Will end with this Littany on her,
Lord bless all those who love quietness from her.
To a Lady who reported he was in love with her, Because he made Verses on her.
Made Anno 54.
CLoris how you your ignorance discover,
Whilst you mistake a Poet for a Lover?
Who when he Verses writes, makes love, it is true,
But it is unto his Muse, and not to you.
Know then there is nothing can be more absurd,
then for to take a Poet at his word;
Who when he praises, with Hyperbolyes,
Nothing but Poetry can excuse from lies:
It Is the Idea of his Wit and Brain,
He praises, and not you, then bee'nt so vain,
To think that you the subject are of it,
When it is the Idea of his Brain and Wit.
To the same grown proud and disdainful for it.
CLoris, never think that I should whine and cry,
Since you will needs change, for your inconstancy:
Or like the Amorous Knight in the Romance,
Sinks down for grief, and fall into a Trance;
But if you needs will change, I Would have you know
That I can change as easily as you,
When all the harm that is like to come of it,
Is, you leave me, I you, and so we are quite:
I Am like your Glass, or Mirror, that the same
Face you show it, still shows to you again;
Smiles when you smile, frowns when you frown, and so
Does every thing just as it sees you do:
Then be the same to me you were before,
Or I will be the same to you no more;
Who easily for it my pardon can obtain,
By finding my excuse, in your disdain;
But how you will find excuse and pardon now,
For your disdain the whilst, I do not know.
On the Justice of Peace's making of Marriages, Anno 54.
NOw just as 'twas in Saturn's Reign;
The golden Age is returned again;
And again Astrea from heaven is come,
When every thing by Justice is done.
Who now, not only in Temporal matters,
But also in Spiritual looks to our waters;
And Parson and Vicar have nothing to do,
When Justice has making of Marriager too:
The name of Justice was dreadful before,
But now 'twill be a hundred times more;
When we must expect no manner of favor,
But all stand bound to our good behavior:
Our Mittimus now by Justice is made,
And we in sail of Wedlock are laid,
When instead of bonds, we are bound in a halter,
And sure to be hanged if ever we falter.
So every thing does fall out right,
And that old proverb is verified by it;
That Marriage and Hanging both go together,
When Justice shall have the ordering of either.
On the occasion Of his being left alone in the Mulbery-Garden, To wait on all
the Ladies of the times. Anno 56.
1.
NOw into what times
Are we fallen for our crimes?
Or whatever the matter of 't may be,
It does not afford
So much as a Lord,
To wait upon a Lady?
But now all alone,
A walking they come,
With no man to wait upon them:
Your Gallants are grown
Such Taryers at home,
A murren and shame light on them.
2.
Is It boldness they lack,
They are grown so slack,
Or each turned Woman hater?
Or money they want?
That Is grown very scant;
Or what the Devil's the matter?
But yet we behold
Them daily more bold,
And their Lands to Coin they distill ye;
And then with the money,
You see how they run ye
To loose it at Piccardily.
3.
Your Country Squire
I far more admire,
(If's want of breeding you will pardon)
He knows it is the fashion
To give them Collation,
Who go to the Park and the Garden;
Whilst he of the Town,
Is grown such a Clown,
To wait on them he is unwilling:
But away he does run,
When the Ladies do come,
And all to save his ten shilling.
4.
But Ladies you will see,
Be ruled by me,
This geer will soon be amended;
Upon them but frown,
When you have them at home,
And all this quarrel is ended.
Sharp Hawks you are sure,
Will come to the lure,
So for favors in private starve them,
And strait you will see,
In public they will be
More ready and glad to deserve them.
The Conclusion To his MAJESTY.
VOuchsafe great Sir, on these to cast your sight,
Made chiefly for your Majesty's delight,
By him, has cast off all ambicion,
But only the delighting you alone;
Counting it highest honor can befall,
To delight him, who is the delight of all.
EPIGRAMS DIVINE AND MORAL, DEDICATED To Her Majesty.

Nunc -- cetera ludicra pono.

Hor. Printed in the Year 1670.

TO Her MAJESTY CATHERINE of PORTVGAL, Queen of Great Britain, etc.
MADAM,
AS never any Stranger was more obliged than I, unto the King your Father, of
glorious Memory; so never any had greater desire than I, to make
acknowledgement of it to your Majesty: but living in obscurity, retired from
the light of Court; and making no Figure there, I imagined it would have no
Grace for such a shadow and Cipher as I, to present my self unto your Majesty;
and other presents I had none, but only this, which by its littleness, shows
the greatness of my desire to declare my self,

MADAM, Your Majesty's In all Humility and Devotion, Richard Flecknoe.

Divine and Moral EPIGRAMS.
The Fourth BOOK.
To her MAJESTY, Of the dignity and efficacy of prayer.
AS by the Sun we set our Dyals, so
(Madam) we set our Pietys by you;
Without whose light, we should in darkness be,
And nothing truly good nor virtuous see.
You in the Temple so assidual are,
Your whole Life seems but one continued Prayer;
And every place an Oratory you make,
When from the Temple you are returned back:
Like vapors prayers ascend, and heaven in rain
Of blessings, showers them down on us again;
And if Heaven suffers violence, from whence
But only prayer proceeds this violence?
Fools were those Giants then, since if instead,
Of heaping hills on hills, as once they did,
They had but heapt up prayers on prayers as fast,
they might have easily conquered heaven at last.
O mighty prayer, that can such wonders do,
To force both Heaven, and the Almighty too!
On these words of our B. S. O woman great is thy Faith!
O Lord! when shall our Faith be praised thus?
And we deserve to have thus much said of us?
Others count all things possible to thee,
We nothing possible but what we see:
They more to faith, than senses credit give,
We more our senses, than our faith believe
They believe all, we but believe by halfs,
Their Faiths are Giants, ours but only dwarfs.
Why I write these pious Epigrams so short.
SInce long discources thou wilt not harken to,
I make these short, to see what that will do.
On the Nativity of our B. S.
AFter the Glory which to God on high,
Was given to day, at his Nativity:
If piously -- curious you would know
What Peace it was, was given to men below.
That peace of God infallibly it was,
All humane understanding does surpass;
Which whilst the high and proud do seek in vain^
The low and humble only do obtain.
Seek then to know no farther, but be wise,
This is the Mystery of Mysteries;
After which none that any Reason has,
Can doubt of any mystery of Faith,
That God's a Man, and 's Mother a Virgin is,
What can there be more wonderful than this?
Of the Circumcision of our B. S.
HOw soon, O Lord, to day did thou begin
To shed thy blood for us, when first was seen?
Spring forth the Fountain of thy precious blood,
Which at thy passion, ended in a flood.
On the death and passion of our B. S.
O Blessed God! and would thou dye.
For such a wretched thing as I?
This of thy Love's so great a proof
Angels can never admire enough;
And all the Love by far transcends,
Of Parents, and of dearest friends:
To Have such a benefit bestowed,
Would undo any but a God:
And Love it self make Bankrout too,
By leaving't nothing more to do.
Had King or Prince done this for me,
What wondering at it would there be?
And wondering at it now there is none,
When by a God himself it is done!
Strange blindness! man should more esteem
Of any thing that is given to him,
By earthly Kings, than what is given
Unto him by the King of heaven!
Of Judgment.
DEath terriblest of terriblest they call,
But here behold the terriblest of all;
For none fear death, but those who judgment fear
For some offenses they have committed here.
Life's but a prison, we the prisoners are,
Death, Iaylor, or the Turnkey as it were:
Who but delivers us when Sessions come,
To the Tribunal, to receive our doom:
When as we well or ill have lived here,
We shall be punished or rewarded there:
And this now is the most that death can do,
The rest let each ones Conscience look unto.
Happy are those who in that dreadful day,
With good Hylarion confidently may say,
" Go forth my soul, this many and many a year
Thou have served God, and now why shudst thou fear?
Leave that to those, who whilst they made abode
In this world here, did serve it, more than God:
" The good and virtuous wish for death, the bad
And vicious only are of death afraid.
Death is the shadow of life, and as in vain
A beast should look for the shadow of a man;
So those who have not lived the life, should trust
In vain, at last to dye the death o'th'just.
Of Easter and Christmas.
OF Easter, a great word was said,
This is the day the Lord has made;
Of Christmas yet, a greater word,
This is the day that made the Lord.
On these words of our B. S. I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life. Paraphrase.
THou art the Way, the Truth, and Life thou say,
As well thou may,
What Fool is he, then would forsake the way,
And go astray?
What Fool is he, who would the Truth refuse,
And falsehood choose?
But above all, what fool and mad man's he
Would forsake thee,
Who art Eternal Life, and choose to dye Eternally?
On Gods beholding all we do.
THou fearst the sight of men, when thou do ill,
Why not the sight of God, who sees thee still?
On our dependancy on the hands of Almighty God.
HAve you not marked how little puppets move,
By their dependanee from some hand above?
Just such is man in the hands of God, if he
But well considered his dependancy;
And who if this he well consider would,
Should ever dare to offend Almighty God?
Who gently leads those, who his will obey,
And those who will not, he hales and drags away.
Rebel and fool then, struggle not in vain,
To flee the hand of God, and break thy chain;
Which thou can never do, nor ever flee,
But from God pleased, to God displeased with thee.
Struggle no longer with him then, for woe
Unto thee, if he once but let thee go.
On these words of B. S. Be ye perfect.
YOu bid us to be perfect, Lord and we
Continue still imperfect as you see;
What should we say, O Lord, but only this?
Give what you bid, and bid us what you please.
On these words of the Apostle Nihil ex me possum facere. And again: Omnia
possum in eo qui me Confortat.
HAppy are those who doubly armed are,
Against presumption, and against despair;
By these words of the Apostle: first, that man
(Without Gods help) of himself nothing can;
and next that he can all things do again,
By Grace of God, who helps and comforts him.
On the saying of a certain holy man.
MY God and I can all things do, said one,
And if it seems too great presumption
To name himself with God, it is without doubt
A greater yet, to name one's self without.
On these words. Deo service Regnare est.
HArk all, who just like Tantalus's starve,
Whilst you in vain for worldly greatness serve;
And know that all this world is but a cheat,
And how there is nothing in it that is truly gyeat:
But if indeed true greatness thou do love.
It Is only to be sought in the world above.
And to serve God whilst in this World we are here
Is the only way to arrive unto it there.
Know then, the only true Ambition,
Is for to serve Almighty God alone.
For who serve others are but slavish things,
But it is to Reign to serve the King of kings,
On the Picture of a weeping Magdalen.
ARt as well as Nature coud,
Have made a speaking, if it would,
As well as weeping Magdalen:
But that it is the nobler way,
In those who grieve for love they say,
to grieve and never to complain.
On the Magjis following the Star.
OTher Astrologers of opinion were,
That all the World was lesser than a Star;
But these it seems, believed it alone,
Who would leave all the world to follow on.
Of the rooting out vices.
VIce is in man, as weeds in Gardens are,
And lest we daily take especial care,
To weed and root them out, they grow so fast,
We should be quit over grown with them at last.
More shame for us, each silly Gardner then
Should take more care to keep his Garden clean
Than we our selves, and with a hand more nice,
purge it from weeds, than we our selves from vice.
Of the pleasure of doing good, etc.
DO good with pain, this pleasure in it you find,
The pain's soon past, the good remains behind:
Do ill with pleasure, this you have for your pains.
The pleasure passes soon, the ill remains.
On a Ladies Beauty suddenly decayed.
O Heavens! is this that so admired face,
Where yesterday such world of Beauty was?
And now to day, it is all so wholly gone,
No shadow coud be vanished half so soon!
If this the end of mortal Beauty be,
O thou imortal; rather unto thee
Let me my vows, and my devotions pay,
That ever lasts, and never can decay:
Then such frail Idols, which whilst we adore,
To day are here, to morrow are no more.
Of Sin.
WHo would but think, when they are about to sin
Of The pains which sinners for it in Hell are in;
They Would sooner throw themselves in the fire here,
Than hazard ^eing thrown in the fire that is there.
This if thou do believe, I see not how
Thou can a sinner be, and if that thou
Do not believe it, then I do not see,
How thou again a Christian can be.
O cursed sin! nor heaven nor earth can bear,
Cast Angels out of heaven, created there,
man out of Paradise, who there did dwell,
And all the rest for sinning into Hell.
The Harms of procrastination
You say Repentance never comes too late,
But let not sinners be deceived with that;
It may too late be to Repent, if they
Defer it yet until an other day.
How many sinners have unto their sorrow,
Lost Heaven by putting't off until to morrow?
And Hell is full of those, who sinning cried,
To morrow still, till unawars they died.
Then let us not croaking Ravens imitate,
By crying cras, cras still, till't be too late:
But leaving of this damned cry, let us say,
To morrow is too late, begin to day.
Of hearing the Word of God.
IF those (as Holy Scripture makes it clear)
Who have the Spirit of God, God's Word will hear,
We well may fear what spirit makes abood,
In those, who will not hear the Word of God.
On our B. S. curing the Leaper, And our own infirmity.
O Lord thou know how most infirm I am,
Blind unto Truth, and virtuous actions lame.
O therefore thou that makst the blind to see,
And lame to walk, help my infirmity.
I know, O Lord, thou needst but only say
Be cured, as thou to the Leaper did to day:
And thou know Lord, so great's my misery,
That I am far more Leaporous than he;
For mine is not only in the outward skin,
But in the very heart, and mind within;
And does not only make the body soul,
But even infects and taints the very soul.
O therefore thou that know my infirmity,
Make haste, O Lord, to help and succor me.
Of Revenge,
GOd says Revenge only to him belongs,
The Laws to them, the righting others wrongs:
For us to seek Revenge then, what is's else
But to wrong them, whilst we would right our selves.
Of Heaven.
WHat God is, he might undertake as well,
As what Heaven is, should go about to tell:
For God makes Heaven, as Kings make Courts, and he
No more by man can comprehended be;
Then can the Ocean that is infinite,
Be comprehended in some narrow pit.
Just then, as less the Oceans bottom's found
More dieply those ingulpht in it are drowned;
And as the more's our ravishment, the less
We can the joys which ravish us express,
We well may say it never can be expressed,
What joys are there prepared for the blessed:
And 'twere not Heaven, if we knew what it were,
But more a Heaven the whilst, to those are there.
Of the thought of death.
I Cannot conceive how any can be said,
Happy to live, who are of death afraid;
Since daily we in every thing do see it,
And every where we are put in mind of it:
Happy was he then every night did go
To bed, as 'twere unto his grave, and so
Got such a habit often at last, he did
Go to his grave, but as he went to bed.
" Since every where death waits for us, it is fit,
" We likewise every where shut wait for it.
Of a Noble Ladies embracing a Religious Life, Eglouge:
A gentle Sheepherdess, as ere did tread
Upon the Plains whereon her Flock were fed,
Inspired by him, who all good thoughts inspires,
Felt in her breast, till then unfelt desires
To taste Heavens pleasures, seeing Earth had none,
A Soul in longing, long coud feed upon.
But changing one, a weary of the first,
She found the latter pleasure still the worst:
And so went still deluded in her mind,
Seeking for that which she coud never find.
This Infant thought, with pious care she fed,
And with Religious Education bred;
Giving it now an Aspiration,
Or vote of that blessed life to feed upon;
And now a sigh, and now a tear again,
For never knowing that happiness till then:
Avoiding carefully those Rocks and Shelves,
On which so many souls had wrackt themselves,
Those two extremes on which so many fall,
To undertake too much, or naught at all.
For it is with new-born-children of desire,
As it is with sparks you kindle unto fire:
Starved with too little fuel 'twill not lighs,
Oppressed with too much, it is extinguished quite.
And now she is all a fire, happiness be
Fair Virgin to thy best desires and thee:
So full, so high, so great a happiness,
As nothing can be more, that is not less;
Nothing beyond, but down the Hill again,
And all addition rather loss then gain.
By glad experience may thou find all store
Of hearts contentment thou expects and more;
And learn that Magic of Religion there,
Makes every thing quite contrary appear
To you, than unto us. Rich poverty,
Triumphant sufferance, brave humility,
Soft hardness, greatest difficulties slight,
Sweet bitterness, and heaviest burdens light:
Ease in your labor, pleasure in your pain,
A Heaven on Earth, and all things else but vain.
FINIS.

