THE CHANCES, A COMEDY: As it was Acted AT THE THEATER ROYAL.

Corrected and Altered by a PERSON of HONOR.

LONDON, Printed for A. B. and S. M. and Sold by Langley Curtis on Ludgate
Hill, 1682.

PROLOGUE.
OF all men those have reason least to care
For being laughed at, who can laugh their share:
And that is a thing our Author's Apt to use
Upon occasion, when no man can choose.
Suppose now at this instant one of you
Were tickled by a Fool, what would you do?
It Is ten to one you would laugh, here is just the case,
For there are Fools that tickle with their Face.
Your gay Fool tickles with his Dress, and Motions,
But your grave Fool of Fools, with silly Notions.
Is it not then unjust that Fops should still
Force one to laugh, and then take laughing ill?
Yet since perhaps to some it gives offense,
That men are tickled at the want of Sense;
Our Author thinks he takes the readiest way
To show all he has laughed at here fair play.
For if ill writing be a folly thought,
Correcting ill is sure a greater fault.
Then Gallants laugh, but choose the right place first,
For judging ill is of all faults the worst.
The Chances.
ACT I.
Scene I.
Enter Peter and Anthony; two Servingmen. Peter. WOuld we were removed from
this Town ( Anthony)
That we might taste some quiet: for mine own part,
I Am almost melted with continual trotting
After Enquiries, Dreams, and Revelations,
Of who knows whom or where? serve wenching Soldiers,
I Will serve a Priest in Lent first, and eat Bell-ropes.

Anth. Thou art the froward'st Fool --

Pet. Why good tame Anthony?
Tell me but this; to what end came we hither?

Anth. To wait upon our Masters.

Pet. But how Anthony?
Answer me that; resolve me there good Anthony?

Anth. To serve their Uses.

Pet. Show your Uses Anthony.

Anth. To be employed in any thing.

Pet. No Anthony,
Not any thing I take it; nor that thing
We travel to discover, like new Islands;
A salt Itch serve such uses; in things of moment,
Concerning things I grant ye, not things errant,
Sweet Lady's things, and things to thank the Surgeon:
In no such things sweet Anthony; put case --

Anth. Come, come, all will be mended: this invisible Woman
Of infinite report for Shape and Beauty,
that bred us all this trouble to no purpose,
They are determined now no more to think on.

Pet. Were there ever
Men known to run mad with Report before?
Or wander after that they know not where
To find? or if found, how to enjoy? are men's brains
Made now adays of malt, that their affections
Are never sober? but like drunken people
Founder at every new fame? I do believe
That men in love are ever drunk, as drunken men
Are ever loving.

Anth. Prithee be thou sober,
And know that they are none of those, not guilty
Of the least vanity of love, only a doubt
Fame might too far report, or rather flatter
The Graces of this Woman, made them curious
To find the truth, which since they find so
Locked up from their Searches, they are now resolved
To give the wonder over.

Pet. Would they were resolved
To give me some new shoes too: for I Will be sworn
These are e'n worn out to the reasonable souls
In their good Worships business^ and some Sleep
Would not do much amiss, unless they mean
To make a Bell-man of me: here they come. Exeunt.

Enter Don John and Frederick. Ioh. I would we could have seen her tho: for sure
She must be some rare Creature, or Report lies,
All men's reports too.

Fred. I could well wish I had seen Constantia;
But since she is so concealed, placed where
No knowledge can come near her; so guarded
As 'twere impossible, tho known, to reach her,
I have made up my belief.

Ioh. Hang me from this hour,
If I more think upon her,
But as she came a strange Report unto me,
So the next Fame shall lose her.

Fred. It Is the next way:
But whither are you walking^

Ioh. My old round
After my meat and then to bed.

Fred. It Is healthful.

Ioh. Will not you stir?

Fred. I have a little business.

Ioh. I Would lay my life this Lady still --

Fred. Then you would lose it.

Ioh. Pray let us walk together.

Fred. Now I cannot.

Ioh. I have something to impart.

Fred. An hour hence
I will not miss to meet ye.

Ioh. Where?

Fred. In The high street;
For not to lie, I have a few devotions
To do first, then I am yours.

Ioh. Remember. Exeunt.

SCENE II.
Enter Petruchio, Antonio, and two Gentlemen. Ant. Cut his windpipe, I say.

1. Gent. Fie Antonio.

Ant. Or knock his brains out first, and then forgive him.
If you do thrust, be sure it be to the hilts,
A Surgeon may see throw him.

1. Gent. You are too violent.

2. Gent. To open, undiscreet.

Petr. Am I not ruined?
The Honor of my House cracked? my Blood poisoned?
My Credit and my Name?

2. Gent. Be sure it be so,
Before ye use this violence. Let not Doubt
And a suspecting Anger so much sway ye,
Your wisdom may be questioned.

Ant. I say kill him,
And then dispute the cause; cut off what may be,
And what is, shall be safe^

2. Gent. Hang up a true man,
Because it is possible he may be thievish:
Alas, is this good Justice?

Pet. I know as certain
As Day must come again; as clear as Truth,
And open as Belief can lay it to me,
That I am basely wronged, wronged above recompense,
Maliciously abused, blasted for ever
In Name and Honor, lost to all remembrance,
But what is smeared and shameful; I must kill him,
Necessity compells me.

1. Gent. But think better.

Pet. There is no other Cure left: yet witness with me
All that is fair in man, all that is noble,
I am not greedy of this life I seek for,
Nor thirst to shed man's blood; and would 'twere possible,
I wish it with my soul, so much I tremble
To offend the sacred Image of my Maker,
My Sword could only kill his Crimes; no it is
Honor, Honor my noble Friends, that Idol Honor,
That all the World now worships, not Petruchio,
Must do this Justice.

Ant. Let it once be done,
And it is no matter, whether you or Honor,
Or both be accessory.

2. Gent. Do you weigh, Petruchio,
The value of the Person, power, and greatness,
And what this spark may kindle?

Pet. To perform it,
So much I am tied to Reputation^
And credit of my House, let it raise wild fires,
And storms that toss me into everlasting ruin,
Yet I must through; if ye dare side me.

Ant. Dare?

Pet. You Are friends indeed, if not.

2. Gent. Here Is none flies from you,
Do it in what design you please, we will back ye.

1. Gent. Is the cause so mortal, nothing but his life?

Pet. Believe me,
A loss Offense has been the Desolation
Of a whole Nam^.

1. Gent. No other way to purge it?

Pet. There is, but never to be hoped for.

2. Gent. Think an Hour more,
And if then ye find no safer road to guide ye,
We Will set up our Rests too.

Ant. Mine Is up already,
And hang him for my part, goes less than life.

2. Gent. If we see noble Cause, it is like our Swords
May be as free and forward as your Words. Exeunt.

SCENE III.
Enter Don John. Ioh. The civil order of this City Naples
Makes it beloved, and honored of all Travelers,
As a most safe Retirement in all Troubles;
Beside the wholesome Seat and noble temper
Of those Minds that inhabit it, safely wise
And to all Strangers courteous: but I see
My Admiration has drawn night upon me,
And longer to expect my friend may pull me
Into suspicion of too late a stirrer,
Which all good Governments are jealous of.
I Will home, and think at liberty: yet certain,
It Is not so far night, as I thought; for see,
A fair House yet stands open, yet all about it
Are close; and no lights stirring: there may be foul play
I Will venture to look in: If there be Knaves,
I may do a good Office. Woman within.

Within. Signior?

John. What? how is this?

Within. Signior Fabritio?

John. I Will go nearer.

Within. Fabritio?

John. This is a Woman's tongue, here may be good done.

Within. Who Is there? Fabritio?

John. I.

Within. Where are you?

John. Here.

Within. O come for Heavens sake!

John. I must see what this means.

Enter Woman with a Child. Within. I have stayed this long hour for you, make
no noise,
For things are in strange trouble here, be secret,
It Is worth your care; be gone now, more eyes watch us,
Than may be for our safeties.

John. Hark ye?

Within. Peace: goodnight. Exit.

John. She Is gone, and I am laden; fortune for me;
It weigh's well, and it feel's well; it may chance
To be some pack of worth: by the Mass it is heavy;
If it be Coin or Jewels, It is worth welcome:
I Will never refuse a Fortune: I am confident
It Is of no common price: now to my Lodging:
If it be right, I Will bless this night. Exit.

SCENE IV.
Enter Don Fredrick. Fred. It Is strange,
I cannot meet him; sure he has encountered
Some light of love or other, and there means
To play at in and in for this night. Well Don John,
If you do spring a leak, or get an itch,
Till you claw off your curled pate, thank your night walks:
You must be still a boot-haleing: one round more,
Tho it be late, I Will venture to discover ye,
I do not like your out-leaps. Exit.

SCENE V.
Enter Duke and three Gentlemen. Duke. Welcome to Town, are ye all fit?

1. Gent. To point Sir.

Duke. Where are the Horses?

2. Gent. Where they were appointed.

Duke. Be private, and whatsoever Fortune
Offer it self, let us stand sure.

3. Gent. Fear us not.
E're you shall be endangered or deluded,
We Will make a black night on it.

Duke. No more, I know it,
You know your Quarters?

1. Gent. Will you go alone Sir?

Duke. Ye shall not be far from me, the least Noise
Shall bring ye to my Rescue.

2. Gent. We are counseled. Exeunt.

SCENE. VI.
Enter Don John. John. Was ever man so paid for being curious?
Ever so bob'd for searching out Adventures,
As I am? did the Devil lead me? must I needs be peeping
Into men's Houses where I had no business,
And make my self a mischief? it is well carried;
I must take other men's occasions on me,
And be I know not whom: most finely handled:
What have I got by this now? what is the purchase?
A piece of evening Arras work, a Child,
Indeed an Infidel: this comes of peeping:
A lump got out of laziness; good white bread,
Let Us have no bawling with ye: 's death, have I
Known Wenches thus long, all the ways of Wenches,
Their Snares and Subtilties? have I read over
All their School-learning, dived into their Quiddits
And am I now bumfidled with a Bastard?
Fetched over with a card of five, and in my old days,
After the dire Massacre of a Million
Of maidenheads? caught the common way, in the night too
Under another name, to make the matter
Carry more weight about it? well Don John,
You will be wiser one day, when ye've purchased
A Beavy of those Butter-prints together,
With searching out concealed Iniquities,
Without commission: why, it would never grieve me,
If I had got this Ginger-bread: never stirred me,
So I had a stroke for it: 't had been justice,
Then to have kept it; but to raise a Dayry
For other men's Adulteries, consume my self in Candles,
And scouring work, in Nurses, Bells, and Babies,
Only for Charity, ^or Mere I thank you,
A little troubles me: the least Touch for it,
Had but my Breeches got it, had contented me.
Whose ever it is, sure 't had a wealthy Mother
For it is well clothed, and if I be not cozened,
Well lined within: to leave it here were barbarous,
And ten to one would kill it: a worse sin
Than his that got it: well, I will dispose on it,
And keep it, as they keep deaths Heads in rings,
To cry Memento to me; no more Peeping:
Now all the danger is, to qualify
The good old Gentlewoman, at whose House we live,
For she will fall upon me with a Catechism
Of four hours long: I must endure all;
For I will know this mother: come good wonder,
Let you and I be jogging: your starved trebble
Will waken the rude Watch else: all that be
Curious night walkers, may they find my fee. Exit.

SCENE VII.
Enter Frederick. Fred. Sure he is gone home:
I have beaten all the Purlews,
But cannot bolt him: if he be a bobbing
It Is not my care can cure him to morrow morning
I shall have further knowledge from a Surgeon --
Where he lies moored to mend his Laks.

Enter 1 Constantia. C^n. I am ready,
And through a world of dangers am flown to ye,
Be full of have and care, we are undone else:
Where are your people: which way must we travel?
For Heavens sake stay not here Sir.

Fred. What may this prove?

Con. Alas, I am mistaken, lost, undone,
For ever perished, Sir for Heavens sake tell me,
Are ye a Gentleman?

Fred. I am.

Con. Of this place?

Fred. No, born in Spain.

Con. As ever you loved honor,
As ever your desires may gain their ends,
Do a poor wretched Woman but this Benefit,
For I am forced to trust ye.

Fre. You Have charmed me,
Humanity and Honor bids me help ye;
And if I fail your trust --

Con. The time's too dangerous
To stay your protestations: I believe ye,
Alas, I must believe ye: From this place,
Good noble Sir, remove me instantly.
And for a time, where nothing but your self,
And honest Conversation may come near me,
In some secure place settle me. What I am,
And why thus boldly I commit my credit
unto a Stranger's hand, the fears and dangers,
That force me to this wild course, at more leisure
I shall reveal unto you.

Fre. Come be hearty,
He must strike through my life that takes
You from me. Exeun^.

SCENE VIII.
Enter Petruchio, Antonio, and two Gentlemen. Pet. He will sure come. Are ye
all well armed?

An. Never fear us.
Here Is that will make 'em dance without a fiddle.

Pet: We are to look for no weak Foes, my Friends,
Nor unadvised ones.

An. Best Gamesters make the best Play,
We shall fight close and home then.

1. Gent. Antonio,
You are a thought too bloody.

An. Why? all Physicians
And penny Almanacks allow the opening
Of Veins this Month: Why do ye talk of bloody?
What come we for, to fall to cuffs for apples?
What would you make the Cause a Cudgel-Quarrel?

Pet. Speak softly, gentle Cousin.

An. I will speak truly^
What should men do allied to these Disgraces,
Lick over his Enemy, sit down, and dance him?

2. Gent. You are as far of the Bow Hand now.

An. And try,
That Is my fine Boy, thou will do so no more Child.

Pet. Here are no such cold pities.

An. By St. Jacques,
They shall not find me one: Here Is old tough Andrew,
A special Friend of mine, and he but hold,
I Will strike 'em such a Horn-pipe: knocks I come for,
And the best blood I light on; I profess it,
Not to scare Costermongers; if I lose my own,
My audit's lost, and farewell five and fifty.

Pet. Let Us talk no longer, place your selves with silence,
As I directed ye; and when time calls us,
As ye are Friends, so show your selves.

An. So be it. Exeunt.

SCENE IX.
Enter Don John and his Land-Lady. Land. Nay Son if this be your regard.

Io. Good Mother.

Land. Good me no goods, your Cousin and your self
Are welcome to me, whilst you bear your selves
Like honest and true Gentlemen: Bring hither
To my House, that have ever been reputed
A Gentlewoman of a decent and a fair Carriage,
And so behaved my self?

Io. I know you have.

Land. Bring hither, as I say, to make my Name
Stink in my Neighbors Nostrils? Your devices,
Your Brats got out of Alligant and broken Oaths?
Your Linsey-wolsey work, your Hasty-Puddings?
I foster up your filtch'd Iniquities?
Y' are deceived in me, Sir, I am none
Of those receivers.

Io. Have I not sworn unto you,
It Is none of mine, and showed you how I found it?

Land. Ye found an easy fool that let you get it.

Io. Will you hear me?

Land. Oaths? What care you for Oaths to gain your ends.
When ye are high and pampered? What Saint know ye?
Or what Religion, but your purposed lewdness,
Is to be looked for of ye? nay, I will tell ye,
You will then swear like accused Cut-purses,
As far off truth too; and lie beyond all Falconers:
I Am sick to see this dealing.

Io. Heaven forbid, Mother.

Land. Nay, I am very sick.

Io. Who waits there?

Pet. Sir? (Within.)

Io. Bring down the Bottle of Canary Wine.

Land. Exceeding sick, Heaven help me.

Io. Haste ye sirrah,
I must even make her drunk; nay gentle Mother.

Land. Now ^ie upon ye, was it for this purpose
You fetched your Evening walks for your Devotions,
For this pretended holiness? no weather
Not before day could hold ye from the Mattins.
Were these your bo-peep Prayers? you have prayed well,
And with a learned Zeal watched well too; your Saint
It seems was pleased as well: Still sicker, sicker.

Enter Peter with a Bottle of Wine. Io. There is no talking to her till I have
drenched her.
Give me: Here Mother, take a good round draught,
'Twill purge Spleen from your Spirits: deeper Mother.

Land. I, I, Son; you imagine this will mend all.

Io. All, I faith Mother.

Land. I confess the Wine
Will do his part.

Io. I Will pledge ye.

Land. But Son John.

Io. I know your meaning Mother; touch it once more.
Alas you look not well, take a round draught,
It warms the blood well, and restores the color,
And then we'll talk at large.

Land. A civil Gentleman?
A stranger? one the Town holds a good regard of?

Io. Nay I will silence thee there.

Land. One that should weigh his fair name? oh a Stitch!

Io. There Is nothing better for a stitch, good Mother,
Make no spare of it as you love your health;
Mince not the matter.

Land. As I said a Gentleman,
Lodge in my House? now Heaven's my comfort Signior!

Io. I looked for this.

Land. I did not think you would have used me thus^
A woman of my credit: one, heaven knows,
That loves you but too tenderly.

Io. Dear Mother,
I ever found your kindness and acknowledge it.

Land. No, no, I am a fool to counsel ye. Where Is the Infant?
Come, let us see your workmanship.

Io. None of mine Mother;
But there it is, and a lusty one.

Land. Heaven bless thee,
Thou had a hasty making; but the best is,
It Is many a good man's fortune; as I live,
Your own eyes Signior; and the nether Lip
As like ye, as ye had spit it.

Io. I am glad on it.

Land. Bless me, what things are these?

Io. I thought my labor
Was not all lost, it is Gold, and these are Jewels,
Both rich, and right I hope.

Land. Well, well, Son John,
I see y^'re a Wood man, and can choose
Yoar Deer, though it be in the dark, all your discretion
Is not yet lost; this was well clapped aboard:
Here I am with ye now, when as they say
Your pleasure comes with pro^it; when you must needs do,
Do where you may be done to, it is a wisdom
Becomes a young man well: be sure of one thing,
Lose not your Labor and your time together,
It seasons of a Fool, Son, time is precious,
Work wary whilst you have it: since you must traffic
Sometimes this slippery way, take sure hold Signior,
Trade with no broken Merchants, make your Lading,
As you would make your rest, adventurously,
But with advantage ever.

Io. All this time, Mother,
The Child wants looking to, wants meat and Nurses

Land. Now blessing of thy heart; it shall have all,
And instantly; I Will seek a Nurse my self, Son,
It Is a sweet Child: ah my young Spaniard,
Take you no further care Sir.

Io. Yes of these Jewels,
I must by your good leave Mother: these are yours,
To make your care the stronger: for the rest
I Will find a Master; the gold for bringing up on it
I freely render to your charge.

Land. No more words,
Nor no more Children, (good Son) as you love me.
This may do well.

Io. I shall observe your Morals,
But where is Don Fredrick (Mother?)

Land. Ten to o^e
About the like adventure: he told me
He was to find you out. Exit.

Io. Why should he stay thus?
There may be some ill chance in it: Sleep I will not,
Before I have found him: now this Woman's pleased,
I Will seek my Friend out, and my care is eased. Exit

SCENE. X.
Enter Duke and three Gentlemen. 1. Genesis Believe Sir, it is as possible to do it,
As to remove the City; the main Faction,
Swarm through the Streets like Hornets, and with angers
Able to ruin States, no safety left us,
Nor means to die like men, if instantly
You draw not back again.

Du. May he be drawn,
And quartered too, that turn^ now, were I surer
Of death than thou art of thy fears, and with deaths
More than those fears are too!

1 Genesis Sir, I fear not.

Du. I would not break my vow, start from my honor,
Because I may find danger; wound my Soul,
To keep my body safe.

1 Genesis I speak not Sir^
Out of a baseness to ye.

Du. No, nor do not
Out of a baseness leave me: what is danger
More than the weakness of our apprehensions?
A poor cold part of the Blood? who takes it hold of?
Cowards and wicked livers: valiant minds
Were made the Masters of it, and as hearty Seamen
In desperate storms, stem with a little Rudder
The tumbling ruins of the Ocean.
So with their cause and Swords do they do dangers.
Say we were sure to die all in this venture,
As I am confident against it: is there any
Amongst us of so fat a sense, so pampered
Would chose luxuriously to ly abed,
And purge away his Spirit, send his Soul out
In Sugar-sops, and Syrops? give me dying,
As dying ought to be, upon mine enemy,
Parting with mankind, by a man that is manly:
Let 'em be all the world; and bring along
Cain's Envy with 'em, I will on.

2 Genesis You may Sir,
But with what safety?

1 Genesis Since it is come to dying,
You shall perceive, Sir, that here be those amongst us
Can die as decently as other men,
And with as little Ceremony: On brave Sir.

Du. That Is spoken heartily.

1 Genesis And he that flinches
May he die louzy in a ditch.

Du. No more dying,
There Is no such danger in it:
What Is a clock?

3 Genesis Somewhat above your hour.

Du. Away then quickly,
Make no noise, and no trouble w^ll attend us. Exeunt.

SCENE XI.
Enter Frederick and Anthony with a Candle. Fre. Give me the Candle: So, go you
out that way.

An. What have we now to do?

Fre. And of your life sirrah,
Let none come near the door without my knowledge,
No not my Landlady nor my Friend.

An. It Is done Sir.

Fre. Nor any serious business that concerns me.

An. Is the wind there again?

Fre. Be gone.

An. I am Sir: Exit

Fre. Now enter without fear --
Enter 1. Constantia with a Jewel. And noble Lady
That safety and civility ye wished for
Shall truly here attend you: no rude tongue
Nor rough behavior knows this place, no wishes
Beyond the moderation of a man,
Dare enter here: your own desires and innocence,
Joined to my vowed obedience, shall protect ye.

Con. Ye are truly noble,
And worth a woman's trust: let it become me,
(I do beseech you Sir) for all your kindness,
To render with my thanks this worthless trifle;
I may be longer troublesome.

Fre. Fair Offices
Are still their own rewards: Heaven bless me Lady
From selling civil courtesies: may it please ye
If ye will force a favor to oblige me,
Draw but that Cloud aside, to satisfy me
For what good Angel I am engaged.

Con. It shall be.
For I am truly confident ye are honest:
The piece is scarce worth looking on.

Fre. Trust me,
The abstract of all beauty, soul of sweetness,
Defend me honest thoughts, I shall grow wild else.
What eyes are there, rather what little Heavens,
To stir men's contemplations? what a Paradise
Runs through each part she has? Good Blood be temperate:
I must look off: too excellent an object
Confounds the Sense that sees it. Noble Lady,
If there be any further service to cast on me,
Let it be worth my life, so much I honor ye,
Or the engagement of whole Families.

Con. Your service is too liberal, worthy Sir,
Thus far I shall entreat.

Fre. Command me Lady.
You make your power too poor.

Con. That presently
With all convenient have you would retire
Unto the Street you found me in.

Fre. It Is done.

Con. There if you find a Gentleman oppressed
With force and violence, do a man's office,
And draw your Sword to rescue him.

Fre. He Is safe.
Be what he will, and let his Foes be Devils,
Armed with your beauty, I shall conjure 'em.
Retire, this Key will guide ye: all things necessary
Are there before ye.

Con. All my prayers go with ye, Exit.

Fre. Ye clap on proof upon me: men say Gold
Does all, engages all, works through all dangers:
Now I say beauty can do more: The King's Exchequer,
Nor all his wealthy Indies, could not draw me
Through half those miseries this piece of pleasure
Might make me leap into: we are all like Sea-Cards,
All our endeavors and our motions,
(As they do to the North) still point at beauty,
Still at the fairest: for a handsome Woman,
(Setting my soul aside) it should go hard,
But I would strain my body: yet to her,
Unless it be her own free gratitude,
Hopes ye shall dye, and thou tongue rot within me,
E're I infringe my faith: now to my rescue. Exit.

ACT II.
SCENE I.
Enter Duke pursued by Petruchio, Antonio, and that Faction. Duke. YOu will not
all oppress me?

An. Kill him in the wanton eye: Let me come to him.

Duke. Then you shall buy me dearly.

Petr. Say you so Sir?

An. I say cut his Wezand, spoil his peeping:
Have at your lovesick heart Sir.

Enter Don John. Io. Sure it is fighting.
My Friend may be engaged: Fie Gentlemen,
This is unmanly odds. Duke falls: Don Joh^ bestrides him.

An. I Will stop your mouth Sir.

Io. Nay then have at thee freely:
There Is a Plumb Sir to satisfy your longing.

Petr. Away: I hope I have sped him: here comes rescue^
We shall be endangered: where is Antonio?

An. I must have one thrust more Sir.

Io. Come up to me.

An. A mischief confound your fingers.

Petr. How is it?

An. Well:
'Has given me my Quietus est; I felt him
In my small guts, I Am sure 'has feez'd me:
This comes of siding with you.

2 Gent. Can you go Sir?

An. I should go man, and my head were off,
Never talk of going.

Petr. Come, all shall be well then, Trampling within.
I hear more rescue coming.

Enter the Duke 's Faction. An. Let Us turn back then;
My scull's uncloven yet, let me but kill.

Peter. Away for heaven's sake with him.

Io. How is it?

Duke. Well, Sir,
Only a little staggered.

Du. Fact. Let Us pursue 'em.

Duke. No not a man I charge ye: thank's good Coat,
Thou have saved me a shrewd welcome: 'twas put home too,
With a good mind I Am sure on it.

Io. Are you safe then?

Duke. My thanks to you brave Sir, whose timely valor,
And manly courtesy came to my rescue.

Io. Ye had foul play offered ye, and shame befall him
That can pass by oppression.

Duke. May I crave Sir,
But thus much honor more, to know your name?
And him I am so bound to?

Io. For the Bond Sir,
It Is every good man's tie: to know me further
Will little profit ye; I am a stranger,
My Country Spain, my name Don John, a Gentleman
That came abroad to travel.

Duke. I have heard Sir,
Much worthy mention of ye, yet I find
Fame short of what ye are.

Io. You are pleased Sir,
To express your Courtesy: may I demand
As ^reely what you are, and what mischance
Cast you into this danger?

Duke. For this present
I must desire your pardon: you shall know me
E^re it be long Sir, and a nobler thanks,
Than now my Will can render.

Io. Your Wil^'s your own Sir.

Duke. What is it you look for Sir, have you lost any things

Io. Only my hat in the Scuffle; sure these fellows
Were night-snaps.

Duke. No, believe, Sir: pray use mine,
For 'twill be hard to find your own now.

Io. No Sir.

Duke. Indeed ye shall, I can command another:
I do beseech you honor me.

Io. Well Sir then I will,
And so I Will take my leave.

Duke. Within these few days
I hope I shall be happy in your knowledge.
Till when I love your memory. Exit cum suis.

Io. I yours.
Enter Frederick. This is some noble fellow.

Fre. It Is his Tongue sure.
Don John?

Io. Don Frederick?

Fre. You Are fairly met Sir?
I thought ye had been a Bat-fowling: prithee tell me,
What Revelations have thou had to night,
That home was never thought of?

Io. Revelations?
I Will tell thee Frederick. But before I tell thee,
Settle thy understanding.

Fre. It Is prepared Sir.

Io. Why then mark what shall follow. This night Frederick,
This bawdy night.

Fre. I thought no less.

Io. This blind night,
What do thou think I have got?

Fre. The Pox it may be.

Io. Would 'twere no worse: ye talk of Revelations,
I have got a Revelation will reveal me
An errant Coxcomb whilst I live.

Fre. What is it?
Thou have lost nothing?

Io. No, I have got I tell thee.

Fre. What have thou got?

Io. One of the Infantry, a Child.

Fre. How?

Io. A chopping Child, man.

Fre. Give you joy Sir.

Io. A lump of lewdness Frederick that is the truth on it:
This Town's abominable.

Fre. I still told ye John
Your whoring must come home; I counseled ye:
But where no grace is --

Io. It Is none of mine, man.

Fre. Answer the Parish so.

Io. Cheated in troth.
Peeping into a house, by whom I know not,
Nor where to find the place again: no Frederick
It Is no poor one,
That Is my best comfort, for 't has brought about it
Enough to make it man.

Fre. Where is it?

Io. At home.

Fre. A saving Voyage: But what will you say Signior,
To him that searching out your serious worship,
Has met a stranger fortune?

Io. How good Frederick?
A militant Girl to this Boy would hit it.

Fre. No mine is a nobler venture: what do you think Sir
Of a distressed Lady, one whose beauty
Would over-sell all Italy?

Io. Where is she --

Fre. A Woman of that rare behavior,
So qualified, as Admiration
Dwells round about her: of that perfect Spirit --

Io. I marry Sir.

Fre. That admirable Carriage,
That sweetness in discourse; young as the Morning,
Her blushes staining his.

Io. But where is this Creature?
Show me but that.

Fre. That Is all one she is forthcoming,
I have her sure Boy.

Io. Hark ye Frederick,
What truck betwixt my infant?

Fre. It Is too light Sir,
Stick to your charge good Don John, I am well.

Io. But is there such a Wench?

Fre. First tell me this,
Did you not lately as you walked along,
Discover People that were armed and likely
To do offense?

Io. Yes marry, and they urged it
As far as they had spirit.

Fre. Pray go forward.

Io. A Gentleman I found engaged amongst 'em,
It seems of noble breeding, I Am sure brave metal,
As I returned to look you I set in to him,
And without hurt (I thank Heaven) rescued him,

Fre. My work's done then:
And now to satisfy you there is a Woman,
Oh John, there is a Woman --

Io. Oh where is she?

Fre. And one of no less worth than I told ye;
And which is more, fallen under my protection.

Io. I am glad of that; forward sweet Frederick.

Fre. And which is more than that, by this nights wandering,
And which is most of all, she is at home too Sir.

Io. Come let us be gone then.

Fre. Yes, but it is most certain,
You cannot see her John.

Io. Why?

Fre. She has sworn me,
That none else shall come near her: not my Mother
Till some doubts are cleared.

Io. Not look upon her? what Chamber is she in?

Fre. In ours.

Io. Let Us go I say^
A Woman's Oaths are wafers, break with making,
They must for modesty a little: we all know it.

Fre. No I Will assure ye Sir.

Io. Not see her?
I smell an old dog trick of yours, well Frederick,
Ye talked to me of whoring, let us have fair play,
Square dealing I would wish ye.

Fre. When it is come
(Which I know never will be) to that issue,
Your Spoon shall be as deep as mine Sir.

Io. Tell me,
And tell me true, is the cause honorable?
Or for your ease?

Fre. By all our friendship, John,
It Is honest and of great end.
I am answered:
But let me see her though: leave the door open
As you go in.

Fre. I dare not.

Io. Not wide open,
But just so, as a jealous Husband
Would level at his wanton Wife through.

Free. That courtesy,
If ye desire no more, and keep it strictly,
I dare afford ye: come, it is now near Morning. Exeunt.

SCENE. II.
Enter Peter and Anthony. Peter. Nay, the old Woman's gone too.

Anth. She Is a Catterwauling
Amongst the Gutters; but conceive me, Peter,
Where our good Masters should be?

Peter. Where they should be,
I do conceive, but where they are, good Anthony --

Anth. I, there it goes: my Master's bo-peep with me,
With his sly popping in and out again,
Argued a Cause. Lute sounds.
Hark.

Peter. What?

Anth. Do not hear a Lute?
Again?

Peter. Where is it?

Anth. Above, in my Master's Chamber.

Peter. There Is no Creature: he has the key himself man.

Anth. This is his Lute: let him have it. Sing within a little.

Peter. I grant ye; but who strikes it?

Anth. An admirable Voice too, hark ye.

Peter. Anthony,
Art sure we are at home?

Anth. Without all doubt Peter.

Peter. Then this must be the Devil.

Anth. Let it be.
Good Devil sing again: O dainty Devil,
Peter, believe it, a most delicate Devil,
The sweetest Devil --

^nter Frederick and Don John. Fred. If you would leave peeping.

Io. I cannot by no means.

Fred. Then come in softly,
And as you love your Faith, presume no further
Than ye have promised.

Io. Basco.

Fred. What make you up so early Sir?

Io. You Sir, in your Contemplations.

Peter. O pray ye peace Sir.

Fred. Why peace Sir?

Peter. Do ye hear?

Io. It Is your Lute. She Is playing on it.

Anth. The House is haunted Sir,
For this we have heard this half year.

Fred. Ye saw nothing?

Anth. Not I.

Peter. Nor I Sir.

Fred. Get you our Breakfast then,
And make no words on it; we'll undertake this Spirit,
If it be one.

Anth. This is no Devil Peter.
Mum, there be Bats abroad. Exit ambo.

Fred. Stay, now she sings.

Io. An Angels Voice I Will swear.

Pred. Why did thou sh^^g so?
Either allay this heat; or as I live
I will not tr^st ye.

Io. Pass: I warrant ye. Ex^unt.

Enter 1. Constantia. Constable. To curse those Stars that men say govern us,
To rail at Fortune, to fall out with my Fate,
And tax the general World, will help me nothing:
Alas, I am the same still, neither are they
Subject to helps, or hurts; our own desires
Are our own Fates, and our own Stars, all our Fortunes,
Which as we sway 'em, so abuse or bless us.

Enter Frederick, and Don John Peeping. Fred. Peace to your Meditations

Io. Pox upon ye.
Stand out of the Light.

Constable. I crave your mercy Sir;
My mind o'r charged with care made me unmannerly.

Fred. Pray ye set that mind at rest, all shall be perfect.

Io. I like the Body rare; a handsome Body,
A wondrous handsome Body; would she would turn:
See, and that spightful puppy be not got
Between me and my light again.

Fred. It Is done,
As all that you command shall be: the Gentleman
Is safely off all danger.

Io. Rare Creature!

Constable. How shall I thank ye Sir? how satisfy?

Fred. Speak softly gentle Lady, all is rewarded,
Now does he melt like Marmalad.

Io. Nay, it is certain,
Thou art the sweetest Woman that eyes ever looked on.

Fred. None disturbed ye?

Constable. Not any Sir, nor any sound came near me,
I thank your care.

Fred. It Is well.

Io. I would fain pray now,
But the Devil, and that Flesh there, of the World,
What are we made to suffer?

Fred. He Will enter;
Pull in your head and be hanged.

Io. Hark ye Frederick,
I have brought you home your Pack-Saddle.

Fred. Pox upon ye.

Constable. Nay, let him enter: fie my Lord the Duke,
Stand peeping at your Friends.

Fred. Ye are cozened Lady,
Here is no Duke.

Constable. I know him full well Signior.

Io. Hold thee there Wench.

Fred. This mad-brain'd fool will spoil all.

Constable. I do beseech your Grace come in.

Io. My Grace,
There was a Word of Comfort.

Fred. Shall he enter,
Who ever he be?

Io. Well followed Frederick.

Constable. With all my heart.

Enter Don John. Fred. Come in then.

Io. Bless ye Lady.

Fred. Nay, start not, though he be a Stranger to ye.
He Is of a Noble strain, my Kinsman, Lady,
My Country man, and Fellow-Traveller,
One bed contains us ever, one purse feeds us,
And one Faith free between us; do not fear him,
He Is truly honest.

Io. That Is a lie.

Fred. And trusty:
Beyond your wishes: valiant to defend,
And modest to converse with, as your blushes.

Io. Now may I hang my self; this commendation
Has broke the neck of all my Hopes; for now
Must I cry, no forsooth, and I forsooth, and surely,
And truly as I live, and as I am honest
'Has done these things for nonce too; for he knows,
Like a most envious Rascal as he is,
I am not honest,
This way: h'as watched his time,
But I shall quit him.

Constable. Sir, I credit ye.

Fred. Go, salute her John.

Io. Plague of your Commendations.

Constable. Sir, I shall now desire to be a trouble.

Io. Never to me, sweet Lady; thus I seal
My Faith, and all my Service.

Constable. One word Signior.

Io. Now it is impossible I should be honest.
What points she at? my Leg I warrant, or
My well-knit Body: sit fast Don Frederick.

Fred. 'Twas given him by that Gentleman
You took such care of; his own being lost in the Scuffle.

Constable. With much joy may he wear it: it is a right one
I can assure ye Gentlemen; and right happy
May he be in all fights for that Noble Service.

Fred. Why do ye blush?

Constable. 'T had almost cozened me,
For not to lie, when I saw that, I looked for
Another owner of it; but it is well.

Fred. Who Is there? Knock within.
Stand ye a little close: come in Sir.
Enter Anthony. Now what is the News with you?

Anth. There is a Gentleman without,
Would speak with Don John.

Io. Who Sir?

Anth. I do not know Sir, but he shows a man
Of no mean reckoning.

Fred. Let him show his Name,
And then return a little wiser. Exit Anthony.

Fred. How do you like her John?

Io. As well as you Frederick,
For all I am honest; you shall find it too.

Fred. Art thou not honest?

Io. Art thou an Ass?
And modest as her blushes? What a blockhead
Would ever have popp'd out such a dry Apology,
For his dear Friend? and to a Gentlewoman,
A Woman of her Youth, and Delicacy,
They are Arguments to draw them to abhor us.
An honest moral man; it is for a Constable:
A handsome man, a wholesome man, a tough man,
A liberal man, a likely man, a man
Made up like Hercules, unslack'd with Service:
The same to night, to morrow night, the next night,
And so to perpetuity of pleasures,
These had been things to hearken to, things catching;
But you have such a spiced consideration,
Such Qualmes upon your Worship's Conscience,
Such Chil^lains in your blood, that all things prick ye,
Which Nature, and the liberal World makes Custom,
And nothing but fair Honor, O sweet Honor,
Hang up your Eunuch Honor: That I was trusty,
And valiant, were things well put in; but modest!
A modest Gentleman! O wit where wast thou?

Fred. I am sorry John.

Io. My Lady's Gentlewoman
Would laugh me to a Schoolboy, make me blush
With playing with my Cod-piece-point: ^ie on thee,
A man of thy discretion.

Fred. It shall be mended;
And henceforth ye shall have your due.

Enter Anthony. Io. I look for it: how now, who is it?

Anth. A Gentleman of this City,
And calls himself Petruchio.

Io. I Will attend him.

Enter Constantia. Constable. How did he call himself?

Fred. Petruchio,
Does it concern ye ought?

Constable. O Gentlemen,
The hour of my destruction is come on me,
I am discovered, lost, left to my ruin:
As ever ye hay pity --

Io. Do not fear,
Let the great Devil come, he shall come through me: first
Lost here, and we about ye?

Fred. Fall before us?

Constable. O my unfortunate estate, all angers
Compared to his, to his --

Fred. Let his, and all men's,
Whilst we have power and life, stand up for Heavens s^ke^

Constable. I have offended Heaven too; yet Heaven knows --

Io. We are all evil:
Yet Heaven forbid we should have our deserts.
What is a?

Constable. Too too near to my offense Sir:
O he will cut me piece-meal^

Fred. It Is no Treason?

Io. Let it be what it will: if a cut here,
I Will find him cut-work.

Fred. He must buy you dear,
With more than common lives.

Io. Fear nor, not weep not:
By Heaven I Will fire the Town before ye perish,
And then the more the merrier, we'll jog with ye.

Fred. Come in, and dry your eyes.

Io. Pray no more weeping:
Spoil a sweet Face for nothing? my return
Shall end all this I warrant ye.

Constable. Heaven grant it may. Exeunt.

SCENE. III.
Enter Petruchio with a Letter. Petr. This man should be of Quality and worth
By Don Alvaras Letter, for he gives
No slight recommendations of him:
I Will even make use of him.

Enter Don John. Io. Save ye Sir: I am sorry
My business was so unmannerly, to make ye
Wait thus long here.

Petr. Occasions must be served Sir:
But is your name Don John?

Io. It is Sir:

Petr. Then,
First for your own brave sake I must embrace ye:
Next, for the credit of your noble Friend
Hernanda de Alvara, make ye mine:
Who lays his charge upon me in this Letter
To look ye out, and
Whilst your occasions make you resident
In this place, to supply ye, love and honor ye;
Which had I known sooner --

Io. Noble Sir,
You Will make my thanks too poor: I wear a Sword Sir,
And have a Service to be still disposed of
As you shall please command it.

Petr. That manly courtesy is half my business: Sir,
And to be short, to make ye know I honor ye,
And in all points believe your worth like Oracle,
This day Petruchio,
A man that may command the strength of this place,
Hazard the boldest Spirits, has made choice
Only of you, and in a noble Office.

Io. Forward, I am free to entertain it.

Petr. Thus then:
I do beseech ye mark me.

Io. I shall Sir.

Petr. Ferrara's Duke, would I might call him worthy,
But that he has razed out from his Family,
As he has mine with Infamy, This man,
Rather this powerful Monster, we being left
But two of all our House, to stock our Memoires,
My Sister Constantia and my self; with Arts and Witchcrafts,
Vows, and such Oaths Heaven has no mercy for,
Drew to dishonor this weak Maid, by stealth,
And secret passages I knew not of,
Often he obtained his wishes, often abused her,
I am ashamed to say the rest: This purchased,
And his hot blood allayed, he left her,
And all our Name to ruin.

Io. This was foul play,
And ought to be rewarded so.

Petr. I hope so;
He escaped me yesternight:
Which if he dare again adventure for --

Io. Pray Sir what Commands have you to lay on me?

Petr. Only thus; by word of mouth to carry him
A Challenge from me^ that so (if he have honor in him)
We may decide all difference between us.

Io. Fair, and noble,
And I will do it home: when shall I visit ^e?

Petr. Please you this afternoon. I will ^^de with ye;
For at a Castle six mile hence, we are sure
To find him.

Io. I Will be ready.

Petr. My man shall
Wait here, to conduct ye to my House.

Io. I shall not fail ye Sir. Exit Petruchio.

Enter Frederick. Fred. How now?


Io. All Is well, and better than thou could expect, for this Wench here is
certainly no Maid; and I have hopes she is the same that our two curious
Coxcombs have been so long a hunting after.


Fred. Why do ye hope so?


Io. Why? because first she is no Maid, and next because she is handsome; there
are two Reasons for you: now do you find out a third, a better if you can: For
take this Frederick, for a certain Rule, since she loves the sport, she will
never give it over. And therefore (if we have good luck) in time may fall to
our shares.


Fred. Very pretty Reasons indeed. But I thought you had known some particular
that made you conclude this to be the Woman.


Io. Yes, I know her name is Constantia.


Fred. That now is something; but I cannot believe her dishonest for all this:
she has not one loose thought about her.


Io. It Is no matter, she is loose in the hilts by Heaven. There has been
stirring, fumbling with Linen, Frederick.


Fred. There may be such a ^lip


Io. And will be Frederick, whilst the old Game's afoot. I fear the Boy too
will prove hers I took up.


Fred. Good circumstance may cure all this yet.


Io. There thou hit'st it Frederick, come let us walk in, and comfort her; that
she is here is nothing yet suspected. Anon I shall tell thee why her Brother
came, (who by this light is a noble Fellow) and what honor he has done to me, a
Stranger, in calling me to serve him. There be ^rons heating for some on my
word Frederick. Exeunt.


ACT III.
SCENE I.
Enter Landlady and Anthony. Land. COme Sir, who is it keeps your Master
Company?

Anth. I say to you, Don John.

Land. I say what woman?

Anth. I say so too.

Land. I say again I will know.

Anth. I say it is fit you should.

Land. And I tell thee he has a Woman here.

Anth. I tell thee it is then the better for him.

Land. Was ever Gentlewoman
So frumpt off with a Fool? well saucy Sirrah,
I will know who it is, and to what purpose;
I pay the Rent, and I will know how my House
Comes by these inflammations: if this geer hold,
Best hang a sign-post up, to tell the Signior's,
Here ye may have lewdness at livery.

Enter Frederick. Anth. 'T would be a great ease to your age.

Fred. How Now?
Why what is the matter Landlady?

Land. What Is the matter?
Ye use me decently among ye, Gentlemen.

Fred. Who has abused her, you Sir?

Land. Od's my witness
I will not be thus treated, that I will not.

Anth. I gave her no ill Language.

Land. Thou lie lewdly.
Thou took'st me up at every word I spoke,
As I had been a Mawkin, a ^^irt Gillian;
And thou think, because thou can write and read,
Our Noses must be under thee.

Fred. Dare you Sirrah?

Anth. Let but the Truth be known Sir, I beseech ye,
She ra^es of Wenches, and I know not what Sir.

Land. Go to, thou know too well, thou wicked Varlet,
Thou Instrument of evil.

Anth. As I live Sir, she is ever thus till Dinner.

Fred. Get ye in, I Will answer you anon Sir. Exit Anthony.
Now your grief, what is it? For I can guess --

Land. Ye may, with shame enough,
If there were shame amongst ye; nothing thought on,
But how ye may abuse my house: not satisfied
With bringing home your Bastards to undo me,
But you must drill your Whores here too; my patience
Because I bear, and bear, and carry all,
And as they say (am willing to groan under)
Must be your make-sport now.

Fred. No more of these words,
Nor no more murmurings Lady; for you know
That I know something. I did suspect your anger,
But turn it presently and handsomely,
And bear your self discreetly to this Woman,
For such a one there is indeed.

Land. It Is well Son.

Fred. Leave off your Devil's Matins, and your Melancholies,
Or we shall leave our Lodgings.

Land. You have much need
To use these vagrant ways, and to much profit:
Ye had that might content
(At home within your selves too) right good Gentlemen,
Wholesome, and ye said handsome. But you Gallants,
Beast that I was to believe ye --

Fred. Leave your suspicion:
For as I live there is no such thing.

Land. Mine honor;
And 'tw^re not for mine honor.

Fred. Come, your honor,
Your house, and you too, if you dare believe me,
Are well enough: Sleek up your self, leave crying,
For I must have ye entertain this Lady
With all civility, she well deserves it
Together with all service: I dare trust ye,
For I have found ye faithful: when you know her
You will find your own fault; no more words, but do it.

Land. You know you may command me.

Enter Don John. Io. Worshipful Lady,
How does thy Velvet Scabbard? by this hand
Thou look most amiably: now could I willingly
(And 'twere not for abusing thy Geneva print there,)
Venture my Body with thee. --

Land. You Will leave this ropery^
When ye come to my years.

Io. By this light,
Thou art not above fifteen yet, a mere Girl,
Thou have not half thy teeth --

Fre. Prithee John
Let her alone, she has been vexed already:
She Will grow stark mad, man.

Io. I would fain see her mad,
An old mad Woman --

Fre. Prithee be patient.

Io. Is like a Millers Mare troubled wi'th' Tooth ache.
She makes the rarest faces.

Fre. Go, and do it,
And do not mind this fellow.

Exit Landlady and comes back again presently. Io. What, again!
Nay, then it is decreed: though hills were set on hills,
And Seas met Seas, to guard thee, I would through.

Land. Od's my witness, if ye ruffle me, I Will spoil your sweet face for you,
that I will. Go, go to the door there is a Gentleman there would speak with ye.


Io. Upon my life Petruchio; good dear Landlady carry him into the Dining Room,
and I Will wait upon him presently.


Land. Well Don John, the time will come that
I shall be even with you. Exit

Io. I must be gone: yet if my project hold,
You shall not stay behind: I Will rather trust
A Cat with sweet milk Frederick; by her face.
Enter Constantia. I feel her fears are working.

Con. Is there no way,
I do beseech ye think yet, to divert
This certain danger.

Fre. It Is impossible:
Their Honors are engaged.

Con. Then there must be murder,
Which Gentlemen, I shall no sooner hear of,
Then make one in it: you may, if you please Sir,
Make all go less.

Io. Lady, were mine own cause,
I could dispense: but laden with my Friends trust,
I must go on though general Massacrees
As much I fear --

Con. Do ye hear Sir; for Heavens sake
Let me request one favor of you.

Fre. Yes any thing.

Con. This Gentleman I find is too resolute,
Too hot, and fiery for the cause, as ever
You did a virtuous deed, for honor's sake
Go with him and allay him, your fair temper
And noble disposition, like wished showers,
May quench those eating fires, that would spoil all else^
I see in him destruction.
I will do it.

Fre. And it is a wise consideration,
To me a bounteous favor: Hark ye John,
I will go with ye.

Io. No.

Fre. Indeed I will,
Ye go upon a hazard; no denial;
For as I live I Will go:

Io. Then make ye ready,
For I am strait a Horseback.

Fre. My Sword on, and
I am as ready as you^ what my blessed Labor,
With all the art I have can work upon 'em,
Be sure of, and expect fair end: the old Gentlewoman
Shall wait upon ye, she is discreet and secret,
Ye may trust her in all points.

Con. Ye are noble;
And so I take my leave.

Io. I hope Lady, a happy issue for all this^

Constable. All Heavens care upon ye, and my prayers.

Io. So,
Now my mind's at rest.

Fred. Away, it is late John. Exeun^.

SCENE II.
Enter Antonio, Surgeon, and a Gentleman. Gent. What Symptoms do ye find in him?


Sur. None, Sir, dangerous, if he would be ruled.


Gent. Why! what does he do?


Sur. Nothing that he should. First, he will let no Liquor down but Wine, and
then he has a fancy that he must be dressed always to the Tune of John Dory.


Gent. How? to the Tune of John Dory?


Sur. Why? he will have Fiddlers, and make them play and sing it to him all the
while.


Gent. An odd fancy indeed.


Ant. Give me some Wine.


S^r. I told you so. -- It Is Death Sir.


Ant. It Is a Horse Sir. Do think I shall recover with the help o^ Barley
water only?


Gent. Fie, Antonio, you must be governed.


Ant. Why Sir? he feeds me with nothing but rotten Roots, and drowned Chickens,
stewed Pericraniums and Pi^-maters, and when I go to bed, (by Heaven it is true
Sir) he rowls me up in lints with Labels at 'em, that I am just the man in the
Almanac, my head and face is Aries place.


Sur. Will It please ye to let your Friends see you opened?


Ant. Will It please you, Sir, to give me a brimmer? I feel my body open enough
for that. Give it me, or I Will die upon thy hand, and spoil thy custom.


Sur. How, a brimmer?


Ant. Why look ye Sir, thus I am used still^ I can get nothing that I want. In
how long time can thou cure me?


Sur. In forty days.


Ant. I Will have a Dog shall lick me whole in twenty.
In how long can thou kill me?

Sur. Presently.


Ant. Do It that is the shorter, and there is more delight in it.


Gent. You must have patience.


Ant. Man I must have business; this foolish Fellow hinders himself; I have a
dozen Rascals to hurt within these five days. Good Man-mender stop me up with
Parsley like stuffed Beef, and let me walk abroad.


Sur. Ye shall walk shortly.


Ant. I will walk presently Sir, and leave your Salads there, your green Salves
and your Oils, I Will to my old diet again, strong Food, and rich Wine, and try
what that will do.


Sur. Well, go thy ways, thou art the maddest old fellow I ever yet met with.
Exeunt.


SCENE III.
Enter Constantia and Landlady. Constable. I have told ye all I can, and more than
yet
Those Gentlemen know of me; but are they
Such strange Creatures say you?

Land. There Is the younger,
Don John, the errant'st Jack in all this City:
The other, time has blasted, yet he will stoop,
If not o'rflown, and freely on the Quarry;
H'as been a Dragon in his days But Tarmont,
Don Ienkin is the Devil himself, the dog days,
The most incomprehensible Whoremaster,
Twenty a night is nothing; the truth is,
Whose chastity he chops upon, he cares not.
He flies at all; Bastards upon my conscience,
He has now in making multitudes: The last night
He brought home one; I pity her that bore it,
But we are all weak Vessels, some rich Woman
(For wise I dare not call her) was the Mother,
For it was hung with Jewels; the bearing cloth
No less than Crimson Velvet.

Constable. How?

Land. It Is true Lady.

Constable. Was it a Boy too?

Land. A brave Boy; deliberation
And judgment showed in's getting, as I Will say for him,
He Is as well paced for that sport --

Constable. May I see it?
For there is a Neighbor of mine, a Gentlewoman,
Has had a late mischance, which willingly
I would know further of; now if you please
To be so courteous to me.

Land. Ye shall see it:
But what do ye think of these men now ye know 'em?
Be wise,
Ye may repent too late else; I but tell ye
For your own good, and as you will find it Lady.

Constable. I am advised.

Land. No more words then; do that,
And instantly, I told ye of, be ready.
Don John, I ll fit ye for your frumps.

Constable. I shall be:
But shall I see this Child?

Land. Within this half hour,
Let Us in, and there think better. Exeunt

SCENE IV.
Enter Petruchio, Don John, Frederick. Io. Sir, he is worth your knowledge, and
a Gentleman
(If I that so much love him, may commend him)
That Is full of honor; and one, if foul play
Should fall upon us, (for which fear I brought him)
Will not fly back for phillips.

Petr. Ye much honor me,
And once more I pronounce ye both mine.

Fred. Stay, what Troop
Is that below in the Valley there?

Io. Hawking I take it.

Petr. They are so; it is the Duke, it is even he Gentlemen,
Sirrah, draw back the Horses till we call ye,
I know him by his Company.

Fred. I think too
He bends up this way.

Petr. So he does.

Io. Stand you still,
Within that covert, till I call: he comes
Forward; here will I wait him: to your places.

Petr. I need no more instruct ye?

Io. Fear me not. Exit Petruchio and Frederick.

Enter Duke and his Faction. Duke. Feed the Hawks up,
We'll fly no more to day: O my blessed Fortune!
Have I so fairly met the man?

Io. Ye have Sir,
And him ye know by this.

Duke. Sir, all the honor,
And love --

Io. I do beseech your Grace stay there, and
Dismiss your Train a little.

Duke. Walk aside,
And out of hearing I command ye: now Sir
Be plain.

Io. I will, and short;
Ye have wronged a Gentleman, beyond all Justice,
Beyond the Mediation of all Friends.

Duke. The man, and manner of wrong?

Io. Petruchio;
The wrong, ye have dishonored his Sister.

Duke. Now stay you Sir,
And hear me a little: This Gentleman's
Sister that you named, it is true I have long loved,
As true I have enjoyed her: no less truth
I have a Child by her. But that she, or he,
Or any of that Family are tainted,
Suffer disgrace, or ruin, by my pleasures,
I wear a Sword to satisfy the World no,
And him in this Cause when he pleases; for know Sir,
She is my Wife, contracted before Heaven,
(Witness I owe more tie to, than her Brother)
Nor will I fly from that Name, which long since
Had had the Churches approbation,
But for his Jealous Nature.

Io. Your pardon Sir; I am fully satisfied.

Duke. Dear Sir, I knew I should convert ye; had we
But that rough man here now too --

Io. And ye shall Sir.
What hoa, hoo.

Duke. I hope ye ^ave laid no Ambush?

Enter Petruchio. Io. Only Friends.

Duke. My noble Brother welcome:
Come put your anger off, we'll have no fighting,
Unless you will maintain I am unworthy
To bear that Name.

Petr. Do you speak this heartily?

Duke. Upon my Soul, and truly; the first Priest
Shall put you out of these doubts.

Petr. Now I love ye;
And I beseech ye pardon my suspicions,
You are now more than a Brother, a brave Friend too.

Io. The good man's overjoyed.

Enter Frederick. Fred. How now, how goes it?

Io. Why, the man has his Mare again, and all is well:
The Duke professes freely he is her Husband.

Fred. It Is a good hearing.

Io. Yes, for modest Gentlemen. I must present ye:
May it please your Grace
To number this brave Gentleman, my Friend,
And noble Kinsman, amongst the rest of your Servants.

Duke. O my brave Friend! you shower your Bounties on me:
Amongst my best thoughts Signior, in which number
You being worthily disposed already^
May freely place your Friend.

Fred. Your Grace does me a great deal of honor.

Petr. Why, this is wondrous happy: But now Brother,
Now comes the bitter to our sweet: Constantia.

Duke. Why, what of her?

Petr. Nor what^ nor where do I know:
Winged with her fears, last night, beyond my knowledge,
She quit my house, but whither --

Fred. Let not that --

Duke. No more good Sir, I have heard too much.

Petr. Nay sink not,
She cannot be so lost.

Io. Nor shall not Gentlemen;
Be free again, the Lady's found; that smile, Sir,
Shows you distrust your Servant.

Duke. I do beseech ye.

Io. Ye shall believe me, by my Soul she is safe.

Duke. Heaven knows I would believe Sir.

Fred. Ye may safely.

Io. And under noble usage: this Gentleman,
M^t her in all her Doubts last night, and to his Guard
(Her fears being strong upon her) she gave her Person,
Who waited on her, to our Lodging; where all respect,
Civil, and honest Service now attend her.

Petr. Ye may believe now.

Duke. Yes I do, and strongly;
Well, my good Friends, or rather my good Angels,
For ye have both preserved me; when these virtues
Die in your Friends remembrance --

Io. Good your Grace
Lose no more time in Complements, it is too precious,
I know it by my self, there can be no Hell
To his that hangs upon his hopes.

Petr. He has hit it.

Fred. To Horse again then, for this night I Will crown
With all the Joys ye wish for.

Pe^r. Happy Gentlem^n.

Enter Francisco, and a Man. Fran. This is the maddest mischief, never Fool was
so ^ub'd off as I am, made ridiculous, and to my self, to my own Ass; trust a
Woman, I Will trust the Devil first, for he dares be better than his word
sometimes. Pray tell me, in what observance have I ever failed her?


Man. Nay, you can tell that best your self.


Fran. Let me consider.


Enter Don Frederick and Don John. Fred. Let them talk, we'll go on before.


Fran. Where did thou meet Constantia, and this Woman?


Fred. Constantia! what are these Fellows? Stay by all means.


Man. Why Sir, I met her in the great Street that comes from the Marketplace,
just at the turning by a Gold-smith's Shop.


Fred. Stand still John.


Fran. Well, Constantia has spun her self a fair thread now: what will her best
Friend think of this?


Fred. John, I smell some juggling, John.


Io. Yes, Frederick, I fear it will be proved so.


Fran. But what should the reason be do think of this so sudden change in
her?


Fred. It Is she.


Man. Why, truly I suspect she has been enti^'d to it by a Stranger.


Io. Did you mark that Frederick?


Fran. Stranger? who?


Man. A young Gentl^man that is newly come to Town.


Fred. Mark that too.


Io. Yes Sir.


Fran. Why do you think so?


Man. I heard her grave Conductress twattle something as they went along that
makes me guess it.


Io. It Is she Frederick.


Fred. But who that he is John.


Fran. I do not doubt to bolt 'em out, for they must certainly be about the
Town. Ha! no more words; come, let us be gone. Exeun^ Fran. and Man.


Fred. Well.


Io. Very well.


Fred. Discreetly.


Io. Finely carried.


Fred. Ye have no more of these Tricks?


Io. Ten to one Sir, I shall meet with 'em if ye have.


Fred. Is this fair?


Io. Was it in you a Friends part to deal double? I am no Ass Don Frederick.


Fred. And, Don John, It shall appear I am no Fool: Disgrace me to make your
self thus every Woman's courtesy; it is boyish, it is base.


Io. It Is false: I privy to this Dog-trick? Clear your self, for I know well
enough where the wind sits, or as I have a life -- Trample within.


Fred. No more, they are coming, show no discontent, let us quietly away; If she
be at home our Jealousies are over, if not, you and I must have a farther parley
John.


Io. Yes, Don Frederick, ye may be sure we shall: but where are these Fellows?
Pox on it, we have lost them too in our Spleens, like Fools.


Enter Duke and Petruchio. Duke. Come Gentlemen, Let Us go a little faster;
Suppose you have all Mistresses, and mend
Your pace accordingly.

Io. Sir, I should be as glad of a Mistress as an other man.


Fred. Yes, of my Conscience would thou, and of any other man's Mistress
too; that I Will answer for. Exeunt.


SCENE. V.
Enter Antonio and his Man. Ant. With all my Gold?


Man. The Trunk broke open, and all gone.


Ant. And the Mother in the Plot?


Man. And the mother and all.


Ant. And the Devil and all: the mighty Pox go with 'em: belike they thought I
was no more of this World, and those trifles would but disturb my Conscience.


Man. Sure they thought, Sir, you would not live to disturb them.


Ant. Well, my sweet Mistress, I Will try how handsomely your Ladyship can hang
upon a pair of Gallows, there is your Masterpiece. No imagination where they
should be?


Man. None Sir: yet we have searched all places we suspected; I believe they
have taken toward the Port.


Ant. Get me then a Water-Conjurer, one that can raise Water-Devils, I Will port
'em, play at Duck and Drake with my money? Get me a Conjurer I say, enquire out
a man that lets out Devils.


Man. I don't know where.


Ant. In every Street Tom Fool, any blear-eyed people with red heads, and flat
noses can perform it. Thou shall know 'em by their half gowns, and no breeches.
Find me out a Conjurer^ I say, and learn his price, how he will let his Divils
out by the day. I Will have 'em again if they be above Ground. Exeunt.


SCENE VI.
Enter Duke, Petruchio, Frederick, and John. Petr. Your Grace is welcome now to
Naples; so ye are all, Gentlem^n.


Io. Don Frederick, will you step in, and give the Lady notice who comes to
visit her?


Petr. Bid her make haste, we come to see no curious Wench, a nightgown will
serve turn. Here Is one that knows her nearer.


Fred. I Will tell her what you say Sir. Exit.


Petr. Now will the sport be to observe her alterations, how betwixt fear and
joy she will behave her self.


Duke. Dear Brother, I must entreat you --


Petr. I conceive your mind Sir, I will not chide her.


Enter Frederick and Peter. Io. How now?


Fred. You may Sir: not to abuse your patience longer, nor hold ye o^f with
tedious circumstance; for ye must know --


Petr. What?


Duke. Where is she?


Fred. Gone Sir.


Duke. How?


Petr. What did you say Sir?


Fred. Gone: by Heaven removed. The Woman of the house too.


Petr. What, that reverend old Woman that tired me with Complements?


Fred. The very same.


Io. Well, Don Frederick.


Fred. Don John, it is not well. But --


Petr. Gone?


Fred. This Fellow can satisfy I lie not.


Peter. A little after my Master was departed, Sir, with this Gentleman, my
Fellow and my self being sent on business, as we must think on purpose.


Petr. Hang these Circumstances, they always serve to usher in ill ends.


Io. Now could I eat that Rogue, I am so angry. Gone?


Petr. Gone?


Fred. Directly gone, fled, shifted, what would you have me say?


Duke. Well, Gentlemen, wrong not my good opinion.


Fred. For your Dukedom, Sir, I would not be a Knave.


Io. He that is, a Rot run in his blood.


Petr. But hark ye Gentlemen, are ye sure ye had her here? Did ye not dream
this?


Io. Have you your nose Sir?


Petr. Yes Sir.


Io. Then we had her.


Petr. Since ye are so short, believe your having her shall suffer more
construction.


Io. Well Sir, let it suffer.


Fred. How to convince ye Sir, I cannot imagine, but my life shall justify my
innocence, or fall with it.


Duke. Thus then -- for we may be all abused.


Petr. It Is possible.


Duke. Here let us part until to morrow this time; we to our way, to clear this
doubt, and you to yours. Pawning our honors then to meet again? when if she be
not found --


Fred. We stand engaged to answer any worthy way we are called to.


Duke. We ask no more.


Petr. To morrow certain.


Io. If we outlive this night Sir. Exit Duke and Petru.


Fred. Come, Don John, we have somewhat now to do.


Io. I am sure I would have.


Fred. If she be not found, we must fight.


Io. I am glad on it, I have not fought a great while.


Fred. If we die --


Io. There Is so much money saved in Lechery. Exeunt.


ACT IV.
SCENE I.
Enter 2. Constantia and her Mother. Mo. HOld Cons, hold, for goodness hold, I
am in that desertion of Spirit for want of breath, that I am almost reduced to
the necessity of not being able to defend my self against the inconvenience of
a fall.


2. Constable. Dear Mother let us go a little faster to secure our selves from
Antonio; for my part I am in that terrible fright, that I can neither think,
speak, nor stand still, till we are safe a Shipboard, and out of sight of the
Shore.


Mo. Out o^ sight of the Shore? why, do ye think I Will depatriate?


2. Constable. Depatriate? what is that?


Mo. Why, ye Fool you, leave my Country: what will you never Iearn to speak out
of the vulgar road?


2. Constable. O Lord, this hard word will undo us.


Mo. As I am a Christian, if it were to save my honor (which is ten thousand
times dearer to me than my life) I would not be guilty of so odious a thought.


2 Con. Pray Mother, since your honor is so dear to ye, consider that if we
are taken, both it and we are lost for ever.


Mo. Ay Girl, but what will the world say, if they should hear so odious a
thing of us, as that we should depatriate?


2 Con. Ay, there is it, the world; why, Mother, the world does not care a pin
if both you and I were hanged; and that we shall be certainly, if Antonio takes
us, for running away with his Gold.


Mo. Protest I care not, I Will never depart from the demarches of a person of
Quality; and let come what will, I shall rather choose to submit my self to my
fate, then strive to prevent it by any deportment that is not congruous in
every degree to the steps and measures of a strict practitioner of honor.


2 Con. Would not this make one stark mad? Her style is not more out of the
way, then her manner of reasoning; the first sells me to an ugly old fellow,
then she runs away with me and all his gold, and now like a strict practitioner
of honor, resolves to be taken, rather then depatriate, as she calls it.


Mo. As I am a Christian, Cons, a Tavern, and a very decent Sign; I Will in I am
resolved, though by it I should run a Risco of never so stupendous a Nature.


2 Con. There Is no stopping her: what shall I do?


Mo. I Will send for my Kins-Woman and some Music, to revive me a little; for
really, Cons, I am reduced to that sad imbecility by the injury I have done my
poor feet, that I Am in a great incertitude whether they will have liveliness
sufficient to support me up to the top of the stairs or no. Exit.


2 Con. This sinning without pleas^re I cannot endure; to have always a
remorse, and never do any thing that should cause it, is intolerable. If I loved
money too, which (I think) I don't, my Mother she has all that; I have nothing
to comfort my self with but Antonio's stiff Beard, and that alone, for a Woman
of my years, is but a sorry kind of entertainment. I wonder why these old
fumbling fellows should trouble themselves so much, only to trouble us more.
They can do nothing, but put us in mind of our graves. Well, I Will no more on it;
for to be frighted with Death and Damnation both at once is a little too hard.
I do here vow I Will live for ever chaste, or find out some handsome young fellow I
can love; I think that is the better; Mother looks ou^ at the Window^


Mo. Come up, Cons, the Fiddles are here.


2 Con. I come. -- Mother goes from the Window, I must be gone, though whither
I cannot tell; these Fiddles, and her discreet Companions will quickly make an
end of all she has stolen, and then 500 New Pieces sells me to another old
fellow. She has taken care not to leave me a farthing; yet I am so, better than
under her conduct: 'twill be at worst but begging for my life;

And starving were to me an easier Fate Goes up to her Mother.
Than to be forced to live with one I hate.

SCENE II.
Enter Don John. Io. It will not out of my head but that Don Frederick has sent
away this Wench, for all-he carries it so gravely: yet methinks he should be
honester than so; but these grave men are never touched upon such occasions:
mark it when ye will, and you will find a grave man, especially if he pretend to
be a pre^^^e man, will do ye forty things without remorse, that would startle
one of us mad Fellows to think of. Because they are familiar with Heaven in
their prayers, they think they may be bold with it in any thing: now we that
are not so well acquainted, bear greater Reverence. Music plays above. What Is
here, Music and Women? would I had one of `em. One of `em looks out at the
Window. That Is a Whore; I know it by her smile. OF my conscience take a Woman
masked and hooded, nay covered all over so that ye cannot see one bit of her,
and at 12 score distance, if she be a whore as ten to one she is, I shall know
it certainly; I have an instinct within me never fails. Another looks out. Ah
Rogue! she is right too I Am sure on it.


Mo. above. Come, come let us dance in the other room, it is a great deal better.


Io. Say you so? what now if I should go up and dance too? It is a Tavern. Pox
of this business: I Will in I am resolved, and try my own fortune; it is hard luck
if I don't get one of 'em. As he goes to the door 2 Constantia enters^ See,
here is one bolted already: fair Lady whither so fast?


2. Con. I don't know Sir.


Io. May I have the honor to wait upon you?


2 Con. Yes, if you please Sir.


Io. Whither?


2 Con. I tell ye I don't know.


Io. She Is very quick. Would I might be so happy as to know you Lady


2. Constable. I dare not let you see my face Sir.


Io. Why?


2. Constable. For fear you should not like it, and then leave me, for to tell you
true, I have at this present very great need of you.


Io. If thou have half so much need of me, as I have of thee Lady, I Will be
content to be hanged though.


2. Constable. It Is a proper handsome Fellow this; if he would but love me now, I would
never seek out further. Sir, I am young, and unexperienced in the World.


Io. Nay, if thou art young, it is no great matter what thy face is.


2. Constable. Perhaps this freedom in me may seem strange; but Sir, in short, I Am
forced to fly from one I hate, if I should meet him, will you here promise he
shall not take me from you?


Io. Yes, that I will, before I see your face, your shape has charmed me enough
for that already; if any one takes ye from me, Lady, I Will give him leave to
take from me too -- (I was a going to name 'em) certain things of mine, that I
would not lose, now I have you in my arms, for all the Gems in Christendom.


2. Constable. For Heaven's sake then conduct me to some place where I may be
secured a while from the sight of any one whatsoever.


Io. By all the hopes I have to find thy face as lovely as thy shape, I will.


2. Constable. Well Sir, I believe ye, for you have an honest look.


Io. 'Slid I am afraid Don Frederick has been giving her a character of me too.
Come, pray unmasque.


2. Constable. Then turn away your face; for I Am resolved you shall not see a bit
of mine till I have set it in order, and then --


Io. What?


2. Constable. I Will strike you dead.


Io. A mettled Whore, I warrant her; come if she be now but young, and have but
a nose on her face, she will be as good as her word: I Am even panting for breath
already.


2. Constable. Now stand your ground if you dare.


Io. By this light a rare creature! ten thousand times handsomer than her we
seek for! this can be sure no common one: pray Heaven she be a Whore.


2. Constable. Well Sir, what say ye now?


Io. Nothing; I Am so amazed I am not able to speak. I Would best fall to presently,
though it be in the Street, for fear of losing time. Prithee my dear sweet
Creature go with me into that corner, that thou and I may talk a little in
private.


2. Constable. No Sir, no private dealing I beseech you.


Io. 'S Heart, what shall I do? I Am out of my wits for her. Hark ye, my dear
Soul, can thou love me?


2. Constable. If I could, what then?


Io. Why, you know what then, and then should I be the happiest man alive.


2. Constable. I, so you all say till you have your desires, and then you leave us.


Io. But, my dear Heart, I am not made like other men; I never can love
heartily till I have --


2. Constable. Got their Maidenheads; but suppose now I should be no Maid.


Io. Prithee suppose me nothing, but let me try.


2. Constable. Nay, good Sir hold.


Io. No Maid? why, so much the better, thou art then the more experienced; for
my part I hate a bungler at any thing.


2. Constable. O dear, I like this Fellow strangely: hark ye Sir, I am not worth a
groat, but though you should not be so neither, if you will but love me, I Will
follow ye all the World over; I Will work for ye, beg for you, do any thing for
ye, so you will promise to do nothing with any body else.


Io. O Heavens, I Am in another World, this Wench sure was made a purpose for
me, she is so just of my humor. My dear, it is impossible for me to say how
much I will do for thee, or with thee, thou sweet bewitching woman; but let us
make haste home, or I shall never be able to hold out till I come thither.
Exeunt.


SCENE III.
Enter Frederick and Francisco. Fred. And art thou sure it was Constantia,
say thou that he was leading?


Fran. Am I sure I live Sir? why, I dwelt in the house with her; how can I
choose but know her?


Fred. But did thou see her face?


Fran. Lord Sir, I saw her face as plainly as I see yours just now, not two
Streets off.


Fred. Yes, it is even so: I suspected it at first, but then he forswore it with
that confidence -- Well, Don John, if these be your practices, you shall have
no more a Friend of me, Sir, I assure you. Perhaps though he met her by chance,
and intends to carry her to her Brother and the Duke.

Enter Don John, and Second Constantia. A little time will show. -- Gods so,
here he is;
I Will step behind this Shop, and observe what he says.

Io. Here, now go in, and make me for ever happy.


Fred. Dear Don John.


Io. A pox of your kindness, how the Devil comes he here just at t^^s time? Now
will he ask me forty foolish Questions, and I have such a mind to this Wench,
that I cannot think of one excuse for my life.


Fred. Your Servant Sir: pray who is that you locked in just now at that door?


Io. Why, a Friend of mine that is gone up to read a Book.


Fred. A Book? that is a queint one in faith: prithee Don John what Library have
thou been buying this Afternoon? for in the Morning to my knowledge thou had
never a Book there, except it were an Almanac, and that was none of thy own
neither.


Io. No, no, it is a Book of his own he brought along with him. A Scholar that
is given to reading.


Fred. And do Scholars (Don John) wear Petticoats now adays?


Io. Plague on him, he has seen her. -- Well Don Frederick, thou know I am
not good at lying, it is a Woman I confess it, make your best on it, what then?


Fred. Why then, Don John, I desire you will be pleased to let me see her.


Io. Why, faith Frederick, I should not be against the thing, but ye know a man
must keep his word, and she has a mind to be private.


Fred. But John you may remember when I met a Lady so before, this very self
same Lady too, that I got leave for you to see her John.


Io. Why, do ye think then that this here is Constantia?


Fred. I cannot properly say I think it John, because I know it; this Fellow
here saw her as you led her in the Streets.


Io. Well, and what then? who does he say it is?


Fred. Ask him Sir, and he will tell ye.


Io. Sweet heart, do thou know this Lady?


Fran. I think I should Sir, I have lived long enough in the House with her to
know her sure.


Io. And how do they call her prithee?


Fran. Constantia.


Io. How! Constantia?


Fran. Yes Sir, the Woman's name is Constantia; that is flat.


Io. Is it so Sir? and so is this too. Strikes him.


Fran. Oh, Oh. Runs out.


Io. Now Sirrah, you may safely say you have not born false witness for nothing.


Fred. Fie, Don John why do you beat the poor Fellow for doing his Duty, and
telling truth?


Io. Telling truth? thou talk as if thou had been hired to bear false
witness too: ye are a very fine Gentleman.


Fred. What a strange confidence he has? But is there no shame in thee? nor no
consideration of what is just or honest, to keep a Woman thus against her will,
that thou know is in love with another man too; do think a Judgment will
not follow this?


Io. Good dear Frederick, do thou keep thy Sentences and thy Morals for some
better opportunity, this here is not a fit Subject for 'em: I tell thee she is
no more Constantia than thou art.


Fred. Why will not you let me see her then?


Io. Because I cannot: besides she is not for thy turn.


Fred. How so?


Io. Why, thy Genius lies another way; thou art for flames, and darts, and
those fine things: now I am for the old plain downright way; I am not so
curious Frederick as thou art.


Fred. Very well Sir; but is this worthy in you to endeavor to debauch --


Io. But it there no shame? but is this worthy? what a many buts are here? If I
should tell thee now solemnly thou have but one eye, and give thee reasons for
it, would thou believe me?


Fred. I think hardly Sir, against my own knowledge.


Io. Then why do thou, with that grave face, go about to persuade me against
mine? You should do as you would be done by Frederick.


Fred. And so I will Sir, in this very particular, since there is no other
remedy; I shall do that for the Duke and Petruchio, which I should expect from
them upon the like occasion: in short, to let you see I am as sensible of my
honor, as you can be careless of yours; I must tell ye Sir, that I Am resolved
to wait upon this Lady to them.


Io. Are ye so Sir? Why I must then, sweet Sir, tell you again, I am resolved
you shall not. Never stare, nor wonder, I have promised to preserve ner from the
sight of any one whatsoever, and with the hazard of my life will make it good;
but that you may not think I mean an injury to Pe^ruchio, or the Duke, know Don
Frederick, that though I love a Wench perhaps a little better, I hate to do a
thing that is base, as much as you do. Once more upon my honor this is not
Constantia; let that satisfy you.


Fred. All that will not do. -- Goes to the Door.


Io. No? why then this shall. ( Draws) Come not one step nearer, ^or if thou
do, by Heaven it is thy last.


Fred. This is an insolence beyond the temper of a man to suffer; -- thus I
throw off thy friendship, and since thy folly has provoked my patience beyond
its natural bounds, know it is not in thy power now to save thy self.


Io. That Is to be tried Sir, though by your favor. Looks up to the window.
Mistress what you call 'em, -- prithee look out now a little, and see how I Will
fight for thee.


Fred. Come, Sir, are you ready?


Io. O Lord, Sir, your Servant. Fight.


SCENE IV.
Enter Duke, and Petruchio. Petr. What Is here fighting? let us part 'em. How?
Don Frederick against Don John? how came you to fall out, Gentlemen? What Is the
Cause?


Fred. Why Sir, it is your quarrel, and not mine, that drew this on me^ I saw
him lock Constantia up into that house, and I desired to wait upon her to you;
that is the Cause.


Duke. O, it may be he designed to lay the obligation upon us himself. Sir, we
are beholden to you for this favor, beyond all possibility of --


Io. Pray, Sir, do not throw away your thanks before you know whether I have
deserved 'em or no. O, is that your design? Sir you must not go in there.
Petruchio 's going to the Door.


Petr. How, Sir, not go in?


Io. No Sir, most certainly not go in.


Petr. She Is my Sister, and I will speak with her.


Io. If she were your Mother Sir, you should not, though it were but to ask her
blessing.


Petr. Since you are so positive, I Will try.


Io. You Shall find me a man of my word Sir. Fight.


Duke. Nay pray Gentlemen hold, let me compose this matter. ^hy do you make a
scruple of letting us see Constantia?


Io. Why, Sir, 'twould turn a man's head round to hear these Fellows talk so;
there is not one word true of all that he has said.


Duke. Then you do not know where Constantia is?


Io. Not I, by Heavens.


Fred. O monstrous Impudence! upon my life Sir, I saw him shut her up into that
house, and know his temper so, that if I had not stopped him, I dare swear hy
this time he would have ravished her.


Io. Now that is two Lies: for first he did not see her, and next the Lady I
led in is not to be ravished, she is so willing.


Duke. But look ye Sir, this doubt may easily be cleared; let either Petruchio
or I but see her, and if she be not Constantia, we engage our Honors (though we
should know her) never to discover who she is.


Io. I, but there is the point now, that I can never consent to.


Duke. Why?


Io. Because I gave her my word to the contrary.


Duke. And did you never break your word with a Woman?


Io. Never before I lay wi^h her; and that is the case now.


Petr. Pish, I will not be kept off thus any longer: Sir, either let me enter, or
I Will force my way.


Fred. No pray Sir, let that be my Office, I will be revenged on him for having
betrayed me to his friendship.


Petruchio and Frederick offer to fight with John. Duke. Nay ye shall not offer
him foul play neither.
Hold Brother, pray a word; and with you too Sir.

Io. Pox on it, would they would make an end of this business, that I might be
with her again. Hark ye Gentlemen, I Will make ye a fair Proposition, leave off
this Ceremony among your selves, and those dismal threats against me, phillip
up cross or pile who shall begin first, and I Will do the best I can to entertain
ye all one after another.


Enter Antonio. Ant. Now do my fingers itch to be about some bodies ears for
the lo^s of my Gold. Ha! what is here to do, Swords drawn? I must make one,
though it cost me the singing of ten John Doryes more. Courage brave Boy, I Will
stand by thee as long as this Tool here lasts; and it was once a good one.


Petr. Who Is this? Antonio? O Sir, you are welcome, you shall be even Judge
between us.


Ant. No, no, no, not I Sir, I thank ye; I Will make work for others to judge of,
I Am resolved to fight.


P^tr. But we wo'n't fight with you.


Ant. Then put up your Swords, or by this hand I Will lay about me.


Io. Well said old Bilbo in faith. They put up their Sword^.


Petr. Pray hear us though: this Gentleman saw him lock up my Sister into that
house, and he refuses to let us see her.


Ant. How Friend? Is this true?


Io. Nay good Sir, let not our friendship be broken before it is well made.
Look ye Gentlemen, to show ye that you are all mistaken, and that my formal
Friend there is an Ass.


Fred. I thank you Sir.


Io. I Will give my consent that this Gentleman here shall see her, if his
information can satisfy you.


Duke. Yes, yes; he knows her very well.


Io. Then Sir. go in here if you please; I dare trust him with her, for he is
too old to do her either good or harm.


Fred. I wonder how my Gentleman will get off from all this.


Io. I shall be even with you Sir another time for all your grinning.

Enter a Servant. How now? where is he?


Ser. He Is run out of the back door Sir.


Io. How so?


Ser. Why Sir, he is ran after the Gentlewoman you brought in.


Io. 'S death, how durst you let her out?


Ser. Why Sir, I knew nothing.


Io. No thou ignorant Rascal, and therefore I Will beat something into thee.
Beats him.


Fred. What, you will not kill him?


Io. Nay come not near me, for if thou do^t by Heavens I Will give thee as much;
and would do so however, but that I will not lose time from looking after my dear
Sweet -- a pox confound you all. Goes in and shuts the Door after him.


Duke. What? he has shut the Door.


Fred. It Is no matter, I Will lead you to a private backway by that corner, where
we shall meet him. Ex^unt.


ACT V.
SCENE I.
Enter Antonio 's Servant, Constables and Officers. Ser. A Young Woman say
thou and her Mother?


Man. Yes, just now come to the house. Not an hour ago.


Ser. It must be they, here Friend, here is money for you; be sure you take 'em,
and I Will reward you better when you have done.


Constable. But Neighbor how -- hup -- shall I now -- hup -- know these these
Parties? for I would -- hup -- execute my Office -- hup -- like -- hup -- a
sober Person.


Man. That Is hard; but you may easily know the Mother, for she is hup -- drunk.


Constable. Nay -- hup -- if she be drunk, let -- hup -- me alone to maul her, for
-- hup -- I abhor a Drunkard -- hup -- let it be man -- Woman, or -- hup --
Child.


Man. Ay Neighbor, one may see you hate drinking indeed.


Constable. Why Neighbor -- hup -- did you ever see me drunk? answer me that
Question: did you ever -- hup -- see me drunk?


Man. No, never, never: come away, here is the house. Exeunt.


SCENE II.
Enter 1. Constantia. 1. Constable. Oh, whither shall I run to hide my self! The
Constable has seized the Landlady, and I Am afraid the poor Child too. How to
return to Don Frederick's house, I know not; and if I knew, I durst not, after
those things the Landlady has told me of him. If I get not from this drunken
Rabble, I expose my honor; and if I fall into my Brother's hands, I lose my
life: you Powers above, look down and help me, I am faulty I confess, but
greater faults have often met with lighter punishments: Then let not heavier
yet on me be laid,
Be what I will, I am still what you have made.



Enter Don John. Io. I Am almost dead with running, and will be so quite, but I
will overtake her.


1. Constable. Hold Don John, hold.


Io. Who Is that? Ha? is it you my Dear?


1. Constable. For Heaven's sake Sir, carry me from hence, or I Am utterly undone.


Io. Phoo pox^, this is the other: now could I almost beat her, for but making
me the Proposition: Madam, there are some a coming that will do it a great deal
better; but I am in such haste, that I vow to Gad Madam --


1. Constable. Nay pray Sir stay, you are concerned in this as well as I; for your
Woman is taken.


Io. Ha! my Woman? Goes back to her.

I vow to Gad Madam, I do so highly honor your Ladyshp, that I would venture my
life a thousand times to do you Service. But pray where is she?


1. Constable. Why Sir, she is taken by the Constable.


Io. Constable! which way went he? Rashly.


1. Constable. I cannot tell, for I run out into the Streets just as he had seized
upon your Landlady.


Io. Plague of my Landlady, I meant the other Woman.


1. Constable. Other Woman Sir! I have seen no other Woman never since I left your
house.


Io. 'S heart, what have I been doing here then all this while? Madam, your
most humble --


1. Constable. Good Sir, be not so cruel, as to leave me in this distress.


Io. No, no, no; I Am only going a little way, and will be back again presently.


1. Constable. But pray Sir hear me; I Am in that danger --


Io. No, no, no, I vow to Gad Madam, no danger in the World; let me alone, I
warrant you. Exit.


1. Constable. He Is gone, and I a lost wretched, miserable Creature, lost for ever.


Enter Antonio. Ant. O, there she is.


1. Constable. Who Is this, Antonio? the fiercest Enemy I have. Runs out.


Ant. Are ye so nimble-footed Gentlewoman? If I don't overtake you for all
this, it shall go hard --

She Will break my wind with a pox to her.
A plague confound all Whores. Exit.

SCENE III.
Enter Mother to the second Constantia, and Kinswoman. Kins. But, Madam, be not
so angry, perhaps s^e'll come again.


Mot. O Kinswo^an, never speak of her more, for she s an odious Creature, to
leave me thus in the lurch. I that have given her all her breeding, and
instructed her with my own Principl^s of Education.


Kins. Protest, Madam, I think she is a Person that knows as much of all that as
--


Mot. Knows, Kinswoman? There Is never a Woman in Italy of thrice her years knows
so much the procedures of a true gallantry, and the inf^llible Principles of an
honorable friendship as she does.


Kins. And therefore, Madam, you ought to love her.


Mot. No, fie upon her, nothing at all, as I am a Christian: when once a Person
fails in Fundamentals, she is at a period with me. Besides, with all her wit,
Constantia is but a Fool, and calls all the Meniarderies of a bonne mine,
affectation.


Kins. Indeed I must confess, she is given a little too much to the careless way^


Mot. Ay, there you have hit it Kinswoman, the careless way has quite undone
her. Will ye believe me Kinswoman? as I am a Christian, I never could make her
do this, nor carry her body thus, but just when my eye was upon her; as soon as
ever my back was turned, whip, her elbows were quite out again: would not you
strange now at this?


Kins. Bless me sweet goodness! But, pray Madam, how came Constantia to fall
out with your Ladyship? Did she take any thing ill of you?


Mot. As I Am a Christian I cannot resolve you, unless it were that I led the
dance first; but for that she must excuse me, I know she dances well, but there
are others who perhaps understand the right swim of it as well as she; Enter
Don Frederick. And though I love Constantia --


Fred. How Is this? Constantia?


Mot. I know no reason why I should be debarred the privilege of showing my
own parts too sometimes.


Fred. If I am not mistaken that other Woman is she Don John and I were
directed to, when we came first to Town, to bring us acquainted with
Constantia. I Will try to get some Intelligence from her. Pray Lady, have I never
seen you before?


Kins. Yes Sir, I think you have, with another Stranger, a Friend of yours, one
day as I was coming out of the Church.


Fred. I Am right then. And pray who were you talking of?


Mot. Why Sir, of an inconsiderate inconsiderable Person, that has at once both
forfeited the honor of my concern, and the concern of her own honor.


Fred. Very fine indeed. And is all this intended for the beautiful Constantia?


Mot. O fie upon her Sir, an odious Creature as I Am a Christian, no Beauty at
all.


Fred. Why, does not your Ladyship think her handsome?


Mot. Seriously, Sir, I don't think she is ugly, but as I Am a Christian, my
Position is; That no true Beauty can be lodged in that Creature, who is not in
some measure buoyed up with a just sense of what is incumbent to the devoir of
a Person of Quality.


Fred. That Position, Madam, is a little severe, but however she has been
incumbent formerly, as your Ladyship is pleased to say; now that she is married,
and her Husband owns the Child, she is sufficiently justified for all she has
done.


Mot. Sir, I must blushingly beg leave to say you are there in an error. I know
there has been passages of love between 'em, but with a temperament so
innocent, and so refined, as it did impose a negative upon the very possibility
of her being with Child.


Fred. Sure she is not well acquainted with her. Pray Madam, how long have you
known Constantia?


Mot. Long enough I think Sir; for I had the good fortune, or rather the ill
one, to help her first to the light of the World.


Fred. Now cannot I discover by the fineness of this Dialect, whether she be
the Mother or the Midwife: I had best ask the other Woman.


Mot. No Sir, I assure you, my Daughter Constantia has never had a Child: a
Child! ha, ha, ha; O goodness save us, a Child!


Fred. O then she is the Mother, and it seems is not informed of the matter.
Well Madam, I shall not dispute this with you any further; but give me leave to
wait upon you to your Daughter; for her Friend I assure ye is in great
impatience to see her.


Mot. Friend Sir? I know none she has; I Am sure she loathes the very sight of
him.


Fred. Of whom?


Mot. Why, of Antonio Sir, he that you were pleased to say had got my Daughter
with Child. Sir -- ha -- ha -- ha --


Fred. Still worse and worse; 'Slife cannot she be content with not letting me
understand her, but must also resolve obstinately not to understand me because
I speak plain? Why, Madam^ I cannot express my self your way, therefore be not
offended at me for it; I tell you I do not know Antonio, nor never named him to
you: I told you that the Duke has owned Constantia for his Wife, that her
Brother and he are Friends, and are both now in search after her.


Mot. Then as I Am a Christian, I suspect we have both been equally involved in
the misfortune of a mistake. Sir I am in the derniere confusion to avow that
though my Daughter Constantia has been liable to several addresses, yet she
never has had the honor to be produced to his Grace.


Fred. So then you put her to bed to --


Mo. Antonio Sir, one whom my ebb of fortune forced me to enter into a
negotiation with, in reference to my Daughter's Person; but as I Am a Christian
with that candor in the action, as I was in no kind denied to be a witness of
the thing.


Fred. So, now the thing is out. This is a damned Bawd, and I as damned a Rogue
for what I did to Don John: for of my conscience, this is that Constantia the
Fellow told me of. I Will make him amends what ever it cost me. Lady, you must
give me leave not to part with you, till you meet with your Daughter, for some
reasons I shall tell you hereafter.


Mot. Sir, I am so highly your Obligee for the manner of your Enquiries, and
you have grounded your Determinations upon so just a Basis, that I shall not be
ashamed to own my self a Votary to all your Commands. Exeunt.


SCENE IV.
Enter second Constantia. 2. Constable. So, I Am once more freed from Antonio; but
whither to go now, there is the question; nothing troubles me, but that he was
sent up by that young Fellow, for I liked him with my Soul, would he had liked
me so too.


Enter Don John, and a Shopkeeper. Io. Which way went she?


Shop. Who?


Io. The Woman?


Shop. What Woman?


Io. Why, a young Woman, a handsome Woman, the handsomest Woman thou ever
saw in thy life: speak quickly Sirrah, or thou shall speak no more.


Shop. Why, yonder is a Woman: what a Devil ayls this Fellow? Exit.


Io. O my dear Soul, take pity of me, and give me comfort, for I Am even dead
for want of thee^


2. Constable. O you 're a fine Gentleman indeed, to shut me up in your house, and
send another man to me.


Io. Pray hear me.


2. Constable. No, I will never hear you more after such an Injury, what would ye
have done if I had been kind to ye, that could use me thus before?


Io. By my tro^h that is shrewdly urged.


2. Constable. Besides, you basely broke your word.


Io. But will ye hear nothing? nor did you hear nothing? I had three men upon
me at once, and had I not consented to let that old Fellow up, who came to my
rescue, they had all broken in whether I would or no.


2. Constable. Faith it may be it was so, for I remember I heard a noise^ but
suppose it was not so, what then? why then I Will love him however. Hark ye Sir,
I ought now to use you very scurvily, but I cannot find in my heart to do it.


Io. Then God's blessing on thy heart for it.


2. Constable. But a --


Io. What?


2. Constable. I would fain --


Io. I, so would I: come let us go.


2. Constable. I would fain know whether you can be kind to me.


Io. That thou shall presently; come away.


2. Constable. And will you always?


Io. Always? I cannot say so; but I will as often as I can.


2. Constable. Phoo! I mean love me.


Io. Well, I mean that too.


2. Constable. Swear then.


Io. That I will upon my knees: what shall I say?


2. Constable. Nay, use what words you please, so they be but hearty, and not those
are spoken by the Priest, for that charm seldom proves fortunate.


Io. I swear then by thy fair self, that look so like a Deity, and art the
only thing I now can think of, that I Will adore thee to my dying day.


2. Constable. And here I vow, the minute thou do leave me, I Will leave the
World, that is kill my self.


Io. O my dear heavenly Creature! -- Kisses her. That kiss now has almost put
me into a swoon, for Heaven's sake let us quickly out of the Streets for fear of
another s^uffle. I durst encounter a whole Army for thy sake; but yet methinks
I had better try my courage another way; what think thou?


2. Constable. Well, well; why don't you go then? As they are going out,


Enter 1. Constantia, and just then Antonio seizes upon her. Io. Who Is this, my
old new Friend has got there?


Ant. O have I caught you Gentlewoman at last? Come, give me my Gold.


1. Constable. I hope he takes me for another, I will not answer, for I had rather he
should take me for any one than who I am.


Io. Pray Sir, who is that you have there by the hand?


Ant. A Person of Honor Sir, that has broke open my Trunks, and run away with
all my Gold; yet I Will hold ten pound I Will have it whipped out of her again.


2. Constable. Done, I Will hold you ten pounds of that now.


Ant. Ha! by my troth you have reason; and Lady I ask you pardon; but I Will have
it whipped out of you then Gossip.


Io. Hold Sir, you must not meddle with my Goods.


Ant. Your Goods? how came she to be yours? I Am sure I bought her of her
Mother, for five hundred good pieces in Gold, and she was abed with me all
night too; deny that if you dare.


2. Constable. Well, and what did you do when I was abed with you all night?
confess that if you dare.


Ant. Umh, say you so?


1. Constable. I Will try if this Lady will help me, for I know not whither else to
go.


Ant. I shall be shamed I see utterly except I make her hold her peace. Pray
Sir by your leave; I hope you will allow me the Speech of one word with your
Goods here, as you call her; it is but a small request.


Io. I Sir, with all my heart. How, Constantia! Madam, now you have seen that
Lady, I hope you will pardon the haste you met me in a little while ago; if I
committed a fault, you must thank her for it.


1. Constable. Sir, if you will for her sake, be persuaded to protect me from the
violence of my Brother, I shall have reason to thank you both.


Io. Nay Madam, now that I am in my wits again, and my heart's at ease, it
shall go very hard but I will see yours so too; I was before distracted, and
it is not strange the love of her should hinder me from remembering what was due
to you, since it made me forget my self.


1. Constable. Sir, I do know too well the power of Love, by my own experience, not
to pardon all the effects of it in another.


Ant. Well then, I promise you, if you will but help me to my Gold again, (I
mean that which you and your Mother stole out of my Trunk) that I Will never
trouble you more.


2 Constable. A match; and it is the best that you and I could ever make.


Io. Pray Madam fear nothing; by my love I Will stand by you, and see that your
Brother shall do you no harm.


2. Constable. Hark ye Sir, a word; how dare you talk of love, or standing by any
Lady, but me Sir?


Io. By my troth that was a fault; but I did not mean it your way, I meant it
only civilly.


2. Constable. I, but if you are so very civil a Gentleman we shall not be long
friends: I scorn to share your love with any one whatsoever; and for my part,
I Am resolved either to have all or nothing.


Io. Well my dear little Rogue, thou shall have it all presently, as soon as we
can but get rid of this Company.


2. Constable. Phoo, y' are always abusing me.


Enter Frederick and Mother. Fred. Come, now Madam, let not us speak one word
more, but go quietly about our business; not but that I think it the greatest
pleasure in the World to hear you talk, but --


Mot. Do you indeed Sir? I swear then good wits jump Sir; for I have thought so
my self a very great while.


Fred. Yo've all the reason imaginable. O, Don John, I ask thy pardon; but I
hope I shall make thee amends, for I have found out the Mother, and she has
promised me to help thee to thy Mistress again.


Io. Sir, you may save your labor, the business is done, and I am fully
satisfied.


Fred. And do thou know who she is?


Io. No faith, I never asked her name.


Fred. Why, then, I Will make thee yet more satisfied; this Lady here is that
very Constantia --


Io. Ha! thou have not a mind to be knocked o^^ the pate too, have thou?


Fred. No Sir, nor dare you do it neither; but for certain this is that very
self same Constantia that thou and I so long looked after.


Io. I thought she was something more than ordinary; but shall I t^ll thee now
a stranger thing than all this?


Fred. What Is that?


Io. Why, I will never more touch any other Woman for her sake.


Fred. Well, I submit; that indeed is stranger.


2. Constable. Come Mother, deliver your Purse; I have delivered my self up to this
young Fellow, and the bargain's made with that old Fellow, so he may have his
Gold again, that all shall be well.


Mot. As I Am a Christian Sir, I took it away only to have the honor of
restoring it again; for my hard fate having not bestowed upon me a Fund which
might capacitate me to make you Presents of my own, I had no way left ^or the
exercise of my generosity, but by putting my self into a condition of giving
back what was yours.


Ant. A very generous design indeed. So, now I Will even turn a sober Person, and
leave off this wen^hing, and this fighting, ^or I begin to find it does not
agree with me.


Fred. Madam, I Am heartily glad to meet your Ladyship here; we have been in a
very great disorder since we saw you -- What Is here, our Landlady and the Child
again?


Enter Duke, Petruchio, and Landlady with the Child. Petr. Yes, we met her
going to be whipped, in a drunken Constables hands that took her for another.


Io. Why, then, pray let her even be taken and whipped for her self, for on my
word she deserves it.


Land. Yes, I Am sure of your good word at any time.


1. Constable. Hark ye dear Landlady.


Land. O sweet Goodness! is it you? I have been in such a peck of troubles
since I saw you; they took me, and they tumbled me, and they hall'd me, and
they pulled me, and they called me painted Iezebel, and the poor little Babe
here did so take on. Come hither my Lord, come hither; here is Constantia.


1. Constable. For Heaven's sake peace, yonder is my Brother, and if he discovers me
I Am certainly ruined.


Duke. No, Madam, there is no danger.


1. Constable. Were there a thousand dangers, in those Arms, I would run thus to
meet them.


Duke. O my Dear, it were not safe that any should be here at present, for now
my heart is so o'erpress'd with joy, that I should scarce be able to defend
thee.


Petr. Sister, I Am so ashamed of all the faults, which my mistake has made me
guilty of, that I know not how to ask your pardon for them.


1. Constable. No, Brother, the fault was mine, in mistaking you so much, as not to
impart the whole truth to you at first; but having begun my love without your
consent, I never durst acquaint you with the progress of it.


Duke. Come, let the Consummation of our present joys, blot out the memory of
all these past mistakes.


Io. And when shall we consummate our Joys?


2. Constable. Never; We'll find out ways shall make 'em last for ever.


Io. Now see the odds 'twixt married Folks and Friends: Our Love begins just
where their Passion ends.


FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
PErhaps you Gentlemen, expect to day
The Author of this fag end of a Play
According to the Modern way of Wit
Should strive to be beforehand with the Pit,
Begin to rail at you, and subtly to
Prevent the affront by giving the first blow.
He wants not Presidents, which often sway
In matters far more weighty than a Play:
But he no grave admirer of a Rule,
Will Not by Example learn to play the fool.
The end of Plays should be to entertain,
And not to keep the Auditors in pain.
Giving our price, and for what trash we please,
He thinks the Play being done, you should have ease.
No Wit, no Sense, no Freedom, and a Box,
Is much like paying money for the Stocks.
Besides the Author dreads the strut and mien
Of new praised Poets, having often seen
Some of his Fellows, who have writ before,
When Nel has danced her Iig, steal to the Door,
Hear the Pit clap, and with conceit of that
Swell, and believe themselves the Lord knows what.
Most Writers now ad^ys are grown so vain,
That once approved, they write, and write again,
Till they have writ away the Fame they got;
Our Friend this way of writing fancies not,
And hopes you will not tempt him with your Praise,
To rank himself with some that write new Plays:
For he knows ways enough to be undone
Without tbe help of Poetry ^or one.
FINIS.

