R. Rich. Flecknoe's AENIGMATICAL Characters. BEING Rather a new Work, then new
Impression of the old.

LONDON, Printed by R. Wood, for the Author, in the Year 1665.

Aenigmaticall CHARACTERS.
The Character of a Character*
IT gives you the hint of Discourse, but discourses not; and is that in mass,
which you may wire-draw to infinite. It Is more Seneca then Cicero, and speaks
rather the Language of Oracles then Orators; every line a sentence, and every
two a period. It says not all, but all that it says is good, and like an Air
in Music, is full of closes, or still driving to'rds a close. It Is all matter
and to the matter, and has nothing of superfluous or circumlocution. It Is that
in all writings which delights most, and the shame of voluminous Authors,
that when men have read whole Volumns over, they should think that only worthy
to be born away. It Is a journey where yo^ see the end from the beginning, and
pass it over without weariness. It Is a market where you have fruit and flowers
ready gathered, without climbing or going amongst thorns for them. In fine,
it is the quintessence of speech, and that which the French call the Point o^
Spirit, because it penetrateth most: and in point of praise or dispraise that
may be said of it, which was said of Brutus, Quicquid vult valde vult:
Whatsoever it does it does thoroughly.

Character 2. Of an excellent Actor.
HE is a delightful Proteus, changing and transforming himself into what shapes
he please. He puts off himself with his clothes, and never assumes himself again
(not so much as in the Tyring-house) till the Play be done. There is as much
difference betwixt him and a common Actor, as betwixt a Ballad-singer and an
excellent Musician; the one only mouthing it, whilst the other artfully varies and
modulates his voice; knowing all his graces even to how much breath he is to
give to every syllable. He has all the parts of an excellent Orator, (animating
his words with speaking, and speech with action) his Auditors being never more
delighted then when he speaks* nor more sorry then when he holds his peace. Yet
even then he is an excellent Actor still, not falling in his part when he has
done his speech, but with his looks and gesture maintaining it still unto the
height: imagining age quod agis only spoke to him; so as whosoever calls him
a Player does him wrong, no man being less idle, nor more employed then he; his
whole life being nothing else but Action, with only this difference from other
men; that as what is a play to them is his business, so what is their business
is but a play to him.

Character 3. Of an Importunate Visitant.
HE is the only persecuter of Ladies, and after the Ten, they hold him the
greatest Persecution. He visits them in their Chambers a nights (when they are
going to bed) and a mornings e're they are up: nor can they be quiet in their
Clossets for him. No excuse of business, sleep, nor taking physic, nor that ye
are gone abroad (though you your self should tell him so) can keep him out; no
nor a Guard of Switz at door can do it, for he will enter like a Witch by the
chimney, or like a Spirit, the doo^s and windows shut; and it were a miracle
beyond the Irish Friars skill, to Exorcise, and cast him out. And if he be thus
troublesome at home, much more does he trouble them abroad, (where he thinks he
has more liberty) for wheresoever you go, he follows you like your shadow, and
crowds himself into your Coach whether you will or no. At Church he is your
distraction, at Feasts and Recreations he mars your mirth, and every where he
is your sickness and disease; so as a Physician who could find out a Remedy
against the Gout and him, wod be richer then Mayern. Many have been invented
but none wod serve. Ill usage nor ill words will not do it, and the keeping handsome
Gentlewomen and Chamber-maids but redoubles the access. Only one Remedy has
been lately found out at Bruxelles, and practiced on Marigny, which if well
applied, it is thought will rid you of him.

Character 4. Of an Eager Disputant.
HE has Scollarship enough (like an ignorant Conjurer) to raise Doubts, but not
to lay them; and comes from breaking Priscians head to breaking your^. He
thinks it is brave to have his speech (like Dametus Armor) composed of several
pieces of Greek and Latin, when indeed it is only clothing Eloquence in
Motley. He seeks Contention more then Truth, and you cannot do him a greater
displeasure then to be of his opinion. He has too much Passion to have any
Reason for what he says, and heats and grows red hot presently, with thunder
in his voice and lightning in his eyes: impatient of contradiction, and
contradicting every one; so as Faith that remove^ mountains, can never remove
him from his opinion. From question of things he comes to question of names,
and from thence to misnaming them, so as by degrees at last he quite loses
himself, and the state of the question too. And such as these they are who have
so rent the Church with their hot Disputations, and made the breach so wide, as
that which at first like North and South, was only divided by an individual
Line, becomes at last the whole Heavens distant, by their indiscreet going to
the extremity of either Pole.

Character 5. Of a Dutch Waggoner.
HE converses so much with beasts as he is become one himself, with only this
difference, that he is a beast Paramount; and to see him mounted on his fore
Horse like a Drill, you would take him for a Cart-Centaure, or beast two stories
high. Nay, to his very understanding he is one; he understanding nothing above
the Elevation of his Pole: And let them talk of the Papists what they will,
there is none speaks the Language of the Beast but he. They were much out of
their way, who feigned a Waggoner in Heaven, when with far more reason they
might have feigned one in Hell: for he is more churlish then Charon, and more
exacting money for his fare. Besides, his Wagon is just like Hell, where
people are crowded together in perp^tual Torment, whilst he lays about him
like a Fury with his whip. Only in this he is like Phoebus, or the Charioter of
Heaven, in that he always brings night with him to his journeys end. Nor has
the other (for all his twelve Houses) so many Inns as he, to bait at on the way.
Besides, he is more inexorable then the Sun; for Joshua with calling to him
once, could make him stay, which you can never do him, though you should call
your heart out for it. In fine, he is a very tyrant when he gets you in his
Wagon once, and sets as many Impositions on his passengers; amongst the rest
he has one Tax called Drink-guelt, which he levies on the first four places in
his Wagon; and were you forty he promises unto you all.

Now whether this be a Flemish or Holland Waggoner, there lies the Riddle;
only this looks bigger and keeps more state, as one who may be one of mine
Heers in time, whilst the other will never be but one of the Rascal rout.

Character 6. Of an ordinary French Laquey.
HE is as mischievous all the year, as a London Prentice on Shrove-Tuseday; and
is devilish valiant with his Rapier on, but a poor devil when it is off: and
you may beat him (especially his Master) as far as Cent corpse de baston comes
to at any time. What color soever his Livery is of, he wears mourning Linen
still, and he and the Dog lie together, and are Correlatives. He swears and
lies naturally, but steals nothing, only all that he can lay hands on, and (if
you lay not hands on him the sooner) runs away with it when he has done. Though
for running it is the worst quality he has, in lieu of which he vaults up
behind the Coach as nimbly, and with as great facility, as an Ape or Tumbler
behind his master. For his Soul he has so little care of it, as he is always
giving it to the Devil; and has so little care of his Body too, as he is
always running to the Burdello, till at last one running mars another, and
he is laid up in an Hospital, and there is an end of him.

Character 7. Of a Gamestress. Made at Bruxelles.
SOme say she was born with Cards in her hands, others that she will dye so;
but certainly it is all her life, and whether she sleeps or wakes, she thinks of
nothing else. She speaks the language of the Game she plays at, better then*
the language of the Country where she was born, and can less endure a
Solecisme in that, then this. She knows no Judge but the Groom Porter, nor Law,
but only the Law of the Game; in which she is so expert as they appeal to her,
as from subordinate Judges to the supremer ones. She loves Winter more then
Summer, because it affords more Gamesters; and Christmas more then any other
time, because there is more Gaming then. She gives more willingly to the
Butlers, then poor Folks box; and is never more Religious, then when she prays
that she may win. She imagines she is at play even when she is at Church, and
takes her Beads for Counters, her Prayer Book for Cards, and thinks she is
shuffling when she turns over the leaves. And she would play like Nero with the
Town on fire; or like Archimaedes when it were a sacking, rather then interrupt
her Game. In fine, it is all her life, and as she lives so she will dye; when
she hopes to go to the Gamesters Paradise, and there play per omnia saecula
saeculorum.

Character 8. Of a Fine Nice City Dame.
SHe is one your Cockneys call a Beauty, because like a sick Turkey she looks a
little bluish about the gills, and has a faint white Complexion of the color
of fletten milk. She has no advantage of a brown Country Lass, but only that
her complexion is the unwholesomer of the two, and her skin apter to break
forth in scabs. She is so dough-bake't, and her complexion so raw, as those who
have any mind to her, must have the Green sickness, or be half Cannibals at
least. Her Blood is all whey, which she clarifies with physic still, whence
instead of Children she brings forth nothing but Curds and green Cheeses. She
is always complaining she knows not wherefore, and would fain be sick if she
knew of what; giving that Physician more who finds her out a Disease, then
others would do those who cured them of one. She longs still whether she be
with Child or no, and her chiefest longing is after every new Fashion; which
she must have presently, or there starts up a new Disease; and her Husband
gives it her, finding by dear experience, the Mercers Book far less chargeable
then the Pothecaries or Physicians: so betwixt her being sick and well, he is
never quiet with her, nor will she ever be so until she be in her grave.

Character 9. Of a Curious Glutton.
THe total sum of his life is in his Bill of Fare, and he thinks all Solomon's
wisdom consisted in nothing else, (he knew the nature of all Fish, Beasts and
Fowl, and Herbs, Trees and Plants so well.) He counts the Italian the only
wise Nation for faring so deliciously as they do, and calling a Wise man huom
de buon gusto, or one that has a good taste of things. He undertakes to tell
you not only what you should eat and drink, but also how you should eat and
drink it too; and is ready to snatch his Ruffs and Goodwits out of your mouth,
when he sees you swallow them greedily and ravenously; and is mad if you drink
not his Verdea or Frontinack as chickens do their water, with often lifting up
your eyes to Heaven. For the rest he is of a good nature and quiet disposition,
hating all disputes, since there is no Dispute of Tastes; and for disputes of
Religion, so they allow but of eating and drinking, he is indifferent for any
one. His chiefest Religion consists in keeping a Calendar of the Months and
Days when several Meats come in season, which he observes as devoutly as the
Roman Catholics do their Calendar of Saints. In fine, he thinks of nothing
else as long as he lives, and when he dies, only regrets that Funeral Feasts
are quite left off, else he should have the pleasure of one Feast more (in
imagination at least) even after death; which he cannot endure to hear of, only
because they say, there is no eating nor drinking in the other world.

Character 10. Of a Gallant French Monsieur. Made at Paris.
BEhold this gallant Hermophrodite, in the Chamber more effeminate then Woman,
and in the Field more masculine then Man. It is he who has so improved
Gallantry, as it signifies not only bravery in Clothes, but in Language,
Manners, and Behavior too. He rises a morning, and having spent some two or
three hours in dressing himself, goes afterward to the Church of Gallantry,
where instead of his Prayer Book, out goes his Tortoise Comb, whilst the
little whisper to his Mistress supplies the place of Jaculatory prayers; and for
one Pater noster he says to God, he says ten Miserere's to her. Mass done, he
waits upon her to her Coach, then home where he dines; so as he makes his Body
serve his Spirits, and not his Spirits his Body. After dinner he dresses
himself again for the Tour a la mode, where he falutes with good grace, and has
the jolly rencounters on the way: Then to the Ball, where he utters such
Douceurs and delicate Conceits, as it is a very Banquet for Ladies ears. Thus
having his Diarium, you have the whole course of his life, till he be old, if
some Duel or Disease do not interrupt it whilst he is young.

Character 11. Of a Dairy. Made in Bedfordshire, Anno 1664.
THou that of Milk the name do bear,
And Bourn's of water flowing there;
And do me with thy Name invite,
Of low and humble things to write:
Thy Dairy and thy Pastures fat,
I Will only choose to celebrate;
Let others celebrate the while
Thy Parks, and Woods, and stately Pile:
Such high things ask a higher strain,
More low befits my lowly vain.
In thy so rich and fertile Ground,
There so much plenty does abound,
You Would think fair Amalthea's horn
From fruitful Archileos torn,
Some God did from next River tear,
And with like Bounty placed it here.
From t^is Rich source, that Milk does come,
Which when the Cow does bring it home,
As Bees do Honey to the hive,
In Cheese and Butter they contrive:
And should (as anciently) some Fairy
Nightly come and haunt the Dairy,
And but see how neat it is kept,
The Shelves so clean, the Floor so swept,
Money should in their shoes be laid,
Instead of pinching of the Maid.
How happy should we mortals be?
Did all example take from Thee:
Where all the oppression that there is,
Is only in their making Cheese;
And where there is no p^rcussion,
But only to make Butter come.
Idolat'ry that in ancient time
Was their Religion, as their crime,
With some excuse we might allow,
Had they alone Adored the Cow,
(From which such plenteous good does come)
And let their other Beasts alone.
From that comes Butter, Milk and Cheese,
And Whey, and Curds so white from these*
As t'wod the Milkie Way appear,
Should God^ look down and see us here,
As we behold the Galaxy,
In looking upwards to the Sky.
And now if any curious are,
To know why they are more white and fair,
Then ever Milk or Curds were yet,
That from their Ladies hands they get;
So fair and white, we well may say,
Nothing's more white and pure then they.
Character 12. Of Absence. To the Lady -- Written at Bruxelles in French.
ABsence is the Abscinthe or bitterness o^ Love, that weans us from the
delightful pres^nce of those we love; it is the night and winter of Amity: When
our Sun being set, or retired into another Hemisphere, we are sad, and
restlesly long for its return; and if Death be nothing else, but only a
separation of Soul and Body* Absence certainly would be worse and more grievous
then Death it self; since it separates the Soul even from the Soul, but that
fortior quam mors dilectio; A^ Love has power over Death, so Time and Place
has no power over Love. It Is the touchstone and trial of our Loves; and when
in presence of those we love, we are all eyes to look on them; and in absence,
all thought to think on them* it is a sign our Love is perfect and true indeed,
(as when ^he Painter has no more need to look on the Original, it is a sign the
Picture is fully finished) Yet Love is such (...) ^ne, as without retouching it
often on the original, the species and colors of it are apt to fade and
vanish; and though sometimes it is necessary to be absent from those we love,
(that they may imagine they cannot live without us) yet we are never to be so
long away, a^ to let them know they can indeed.

However Madam* I should be loath to put it to the trial, or to be put to the
nece^^ity.

Character 13. Of the same Lady.
NEver was curious Beauty more wary of sun or wind, nor frugal Bravery of
contracting spot or stain, then she of the least breath of rumor, and
preserving her fame and hono^r untainted and unblemished* never doing any
thing, without first examining, what will the people say? nor s^irring a foot*
without first carefully looking where she tr^ads; by which wise care and
cir^umspection of hers, she clearly shows, that however Rumor be apt enough to
spea^ ill, yet it is but living well, and we need not care what it says* and
however foul and dirty the World i^* yet we may walk clean enough, and but
carefully pick out our way. This makes her so ad^ir'd and reveren^'d, as
Virtue's self (cu'd it be seen by mortal eyes) cu'd not be more reverenc't nor
admi^'d* and this makes them propose her as a noble pattern for all her fairer
Sex to imitate; who lives so, as no Ermin can be purer, nor Angel in mortal
flesh live more spiritually then she, who of all Women living has only found
out the way of stopping Rumour's mouth, and silencing Calumny and Detraction.

Character 14. Du Tour a la mode.
C'Est une Assemble ou les dam^^ sont Pa^^e^ ^our le Bal, and ou le^ (...)
dan^^nt un Ballet. Cest un (...) ou (...) Esta^e que la meil^i^e Marthandiz^,
en reservant l^ rest (...) ^arriere Bou^ique^* Cest un Ieu de^ Carte^ ou ^ou^
(...) Valets sont os^a^te^; ^est une (...) ^ien Beng^^, ou l^un ne ti^e que des
coups ^ O^^^lades, and ou les promiers a^ant fait leui desc^arge ilz s'en vont
pour donner place au^ autres. C'est un Ciel qui a deux monue^^ens contrairs, ou
il y a d^s Esto^ll^s de routes grandeurs, and ou il y a des Commettes enter le
rest* Cest un Triumph ou les Vaincus aussi bien que les Vainqueurs vont en
chariot. Cest une Medaille de la vanite du monde, and vicissitude des mondains,
avec cet Inscription, sic transit gloria mundi* and sur ^e ^envers, chaque un
en son tour. En fin c'est la ou l'on roll doucement dans le monde* and (...)
on pouroit ^insi alle^ en Paradis, on ser^it aussi heureux qu' Elie.

The same in English*
THe To^^r a la ^^ode is an Assembly, where the Ladies are dressed for the Ball,
and the Hor^es dance the Ballet; it is a Fair or Market* where they install all
their best commodities, and keep the rest behind in the Warehouse: It Is a
Game at Cards, where all the Valets are discarded. It Is a well ordered Battle,
where they shoot nothing but Glances; and where the first rank discharging,
give place to those who follow. It Is a Heaven or Firmament* with two contrary
motions, where there are Stars of several magnitudes, and where there are some
Commets too: It Is a Triumph, where the Conquered as well as the Conquerours
ride in Chariot: It Is a Meddal of the Vanity of the World, and Vicissitude of
worldly things; with this Inscription on the one side, sic trans^t gloria mundi,
and every one in his turn on the other. In fine, it is there where people ride
pleasantly and easily in the world; and if they could go to Heaven so, they
would be as happy as Elias.

Character 15. Of a Ladies little Dog.
HE is Native of Bolonia, though of no great House there, and is his Ladies
Favorite, and the envy of all her Gallants, for his lying with her anights,
and kissing her by day; and they suspect him of frigidity, that he is no more
moved with it; certainly he is so cold, the Chimney-corner can scarce keep him
warm, where he lies in his Pannier, like Diogenes in his Tub; and you would
take him for a Cynick, by his barking at every one. By his Collar you would
think him of some Military Order, (as there are Carpet Knights enough, who wod
willingly like him, be never out of Ladies Laps) but that he has no fellow for
littleness, all other Dogs seeming Mastives compared to him; and he would scarce
pass for one amongst the Pignies, though in Homers Battle betwixt the Frogs and
Mice, he might have served for mounting the Cavalry, if he had not been marred
in the mannaging, he (what betwix^ carrying in the Arms at home, and Coach
abroad) having Legs more for ornament then use: Whence he has much to answer
for idleness, but for that he cares as little as others do, and others as
little as he, so they may have like him, their Heaven in this world; and have a
Velvet Cushion for Couch, walk on Turkey Carpets like the Grand Signior, and be
fed as daintily a^ the Infant^ or King of Spain, whilst he cannot wag his tail
for any thing* but he has it presently.

Character 16. Of a bold abusive Wit.
HE talks madly, dash, dash^, without any fear at all, and cares not how he
bespatters others or defiles himself; nor ceases he till h'as run himself
quite out of breath; when no wonder if to Fools he seems to get start of those
who carefully pick out their way* and are as fearful of abusing others as
themselves: He has the Buffoon's privilege, to say or do any thing without
exceptions; and (...) call a Jealous man, Cuckold; a Child of doubtful Birth,
Bastard* and a Lady of suspected honor, Whore; whilst they only laugh at it;
and all Scholars are Pedants with him, and Physicians Quacks; when the being
angry at it, were the avowing it. In Ladies Chambers he is rude, and tumbles
the bed, and towzes t^e^, dressed up unto the height, to the hazard of a
Bed-staff thrown at his head, or rap o'^e the fingers with the Busk, (and that
is all.) Only he is worse then the Buffoon in this, that they study to
delight, he only to offend; they to make you merry, he only to make you mad;
giving that for reason of his incivility, because it troubles you (forsooth)
which wod make any civil man cease troubling you: So he wear^ his wit as
Bravo's do their Swords* only to mischief and offend others, not as Gentlemen,
to defend themselves; and it is crime in him, what is ornament in them; he being
only a Wit at that, at which a good Wit is only a Fool. And thus he
continues, till he meets with some or other as cho^serick as he is abusive,
when afeard of a beating, he goes away and says, they understand not Jest,
when indeed it is rather he.

Character 17. Of a modern Casuist.
HE is your only Conscience-monger, and frames it wide or strait, as he lists
himself* he leaves no Usury, whilst he makes all Vsur^rs; and takes away the
sins of the world, but makes more sinners then there were before. He has his
several wards for several sins, as Equivocation against lying, and secret
recompensation against theft, so rectifying the Conscience, as he can set it
right again at any time: He can make any thing good with a distinction, and
mar it again with another; especially, he has particular cases for Princes,
in confidence of which should they offer to go to Heaven, St. Peter it is thought
wod hardly allow of them, (as Scholastical Querks invented since his time.)
Amongst the rest, he is so partial to his own Country Vices, as Drunkenness
with the Dutch is almost no vice at all, nor Fornication with the Spaniard;
mean time the ignorance of what he writes makes people more virtuous then the
reading it; his Writings being nothing else but a Rapsody of all Vices in
general, whence, consequently by reading them particular person^ must needs
know more vices then they did before; and for him himself, for all his nice
distinctions, woe be to him, if when he comes to dye, he meets with some such
ignorant Devil as that Lawyer did, who c'ud not make him understand him for his
heart, but he wod needs carry him away to Hell whether he would or no.

Character 18. Of an Anabaptist, or Fifth-Monarchy man.
WHen in the Lords Prayer he says, Thy Kingdom come, he equivocates and means
his own, looking upon Magistrates bu^ as Usurpers of his Right, he is a Saint
turned inside outward, or all Sanctity without, and non^ within; his
Congregation, however they boast the Spirit, are all in Querpo* and they use no
other Cloak but only Hypocrisy* it is question whether he more hates the
Church for Ceremoni^s, or Ceremonies for the Church; but for him he is more
familiar with the Lord, then to stand on Ceremonies with him; he Tho^i^g him at
every word* and speaking with less reverence to him, then any Clown does to hi^
Landlord* he so hates a Gentleman, as he cannot endure God should b^ served like
one: Mean time down go the Churches, and Whitehall should follow too, might they
but have their wills; a Barn (like Savages) serving them instead both of Church
and Palace, they counting any place good enough to preach in; and any place
indeed is good enough for their preaching, who teach nothing but Sedition and
Infatuation; and whilst others with their Sermons people Heaven, they with
theirs only people Bedlam and the common Goal. He calls Mirth Profaneness,
Melancholy Godliness, Obedience Luke-warmness, and Faction Zeal, making as
unchristian work with that, a^ with Baptizing their Children; and calls himself
pure, lik^ him, who over head and ears in dirt, boasted that he had never a
spot on him* so he thank^ God with the Pharisee, that he is not like other men,
and in that he says true, for he is fa^ worse then they.

Character 19. Of a Dutch Frow* Made in Holland.
SHe is nea^ and cleanly in her House, but not in he^self, and so frugal in the
Kitchen, that if there be any Grease, Kitchi^-stuff, or Candles ends, it is sure
to go to pot; there is no entering any of her other Rooms, without first putting
off your Shoes, as if 'twere holy Ground; and y'ad better spit in her face
then spit in it, whilst you are there; her Tongs and Fire-shovel, with all the
res^ of her Chimney-implements, serve more for ornament then use; and you may
as soon ge^ her to set fire on the house, as make a fire in any Chimney besides
the Kitchen one; for her own Chimney, it is under her Coats in her Lul^pot, with
which she so bemackerels he^ Thighs, as you would take her for a Maremaid, half
fish, half flesh, by which unnatural heat she brings forth nothing but
Zooterkins: She never travels without her basket full of Provan^, or half
Stivers worth of Shrimps or Nuts, with cracking and nibbling of which (besides
her tatling) she entertains her self upon the way, and when she comes home,
puts up every thing in a Press, her Band, and Huke, and self too when she goes
to bed. She housewives every thing so well, as not a se^m of her Gloves, but
she has dern'd over twenty times at least; and she is so great an enemy to
Superfluity; as he^ Handkerchief wod scarce make a Plaster for her Nose. There
goes always some branch^-velvet, or tuff-taffity to the Stomacher of he^
Holiday Gown, and the silver Chain, with all its appendi^es, muft on on
Sundays, or she will go to the Lumbard for it. In fine, she keeps the House or
Shop all day, and at night her Husband and she drink lovingly together, till
they are Maudlin-drunk, and then they go to bed together, and s^eep like pigs.

Character 20. Of a strange Disposition.
HE is rather made of Oak then Willow, and will sooner break, then bow. He
counts stooping baseness, and except that civil respect which is due unto their
place and titles, he cannot flatter or fawn on any man; but like their Mirours,
the same countenance they show him, he shew^ them again* and excepting hi^
Prince, who can Sovereignly dispose of his Body; and God, who can dispose of
his Soul and Body both, he cares for offending no body, who shall first have
offended him; and none ever looked so high on him, but he would get a Persp^ctive,
or he would look as high as they: This gets him many enemies, and hinders him from
getting many friends; for every one wod be complied with all, and he has not
complacency for every one; nor can he help it, for it is his nature, and we can
as easily change our outward form and features, as our inward ^ind and
disposition, (after by long accustoming it is past into nature once) and his
friends like it well enough in him, as knowing, that of such wood your best
Friends are made; nor was there ever Flatterer of that disposition.

Character 21. Of a Stage-Critick.
He goes to Plays only to find fault there, and if he finds none, he makes
them, (like your Flesh-flyes, who not only leave sound places, to light on
sores, but are such venomous ones, as they even make sound places, ^ore, with
their flye-blowing them.) In the Coffee-house he is of the Peace and Quorum,
and gravely sitting on the Bench there, (like Justice Clack) condemns first and
examines afterward; but every where else, he i^ out of Commission, and as
ridiculous as the other is on the Stage, (they holding him for a Judge without
Judgment, and Author without Authority.) He is an Heretic in Poetry, (or
Fanatic, which is worse) and is quite fallen from the Faith of his
Forefathers, who believed in the Poets Infallibility; and so Fletcher made the
Play, it was enough with them: But if Fletcher were alive now, or any man
living writ like him, he is resolved to condemn him whosoever he be, who praifes
the dead only to dispraise the living. Mean time, he spends his judgment so
fast on others, as he leaves none for himself at length, and having all his Wit
from Plays, ^pends it all in censuring them; so as it is no longer* Judgment
but Madness in him, beyond the Cure of Bedlam or Helibor. --

But why do I trouble my self with describing him in Prose, when it is done
already in Verse, in Answer to a certain Lampoon* made against* Plays and
Poets, entitled, A Sessions of Apollo.

The Answer.
A Sessions not of Apollo but Bacchus,
Was lately held in a Coffee or Sack-house,
Where all wod needs be Poets Dramatick*
Though none understood nor the Theory nor Practick*
And these forsooth with their little or no wits,
Wod sit in Judgment of Plays and of Poets.
Is It now enouf that Plays on the Stage
Have so long born the Brunt of Fanatical Rage,
Whilst out of the Pulpit, as out of the Cannon,
Th^ave thundered such Vollies of Railings upon 'um;
But such as these in a Tavern must sit,
And arraign and condemn the Plays and the Wit?
How Ti^es are changed! In our forefathers days,
Only those who had Wit were Judges of Plays;
But every one now is a Censurer grown*
And who more forward then those who have none?
But to conclude with our grave Tavern-Benchers,
Composed of riotous Gamesters and Wenchers,
Of half-witted Jeerers, and Hectoring Fighters,
Unless they give over their censuring the Writers,
They Will shortly repent it, when at their next Sessions
Their Names shall be told as well as Professions;
And they so described, as people shall say,
When they see but their faces, behold these are they.
Character 22. Of a Complementer.
He is a certain cringing thing, that stoops
Just like a Tumbler when he vaults through hoops;
Or Daw or Magpye, when at fruit it pecks
Alternately their tails above their beeks.
HE is the Rack of Conversation, that sets every ones Joints a stretching, and
had been banished Sparta* Infalliby, for adding so many superfluous words unto
the Dialect. He is a Puritan in Manners, as others are in Religion, and
troubles you more with his long Preambles, then the other with his long Graces;
and in this is less conscionable then they, in using Ceremonies too, to make it
more troublesome. The French has a good Etymology or derivation of his Name,
and ^ayes, that a Complementer is but an Acomply menteur, or an accomplished
Liar; and they say true, for Complementing is but a new way of Lying, not
directly, but by Circumlocution; and Truth has always been out of fashion,
since it came in. It Is a new Language added to those of Babel, and has brought
a greater confusion into the world; for those were invented for better
explaining and declaring of the mind, but this for hiding and concealing it.
It Is the Court Cipher, that is sometimes to be understood contra, or by
contraries; sometimes praeter, or besides, but never literally, and in the
genuine sense. In fine, it is the Language of Flattery, Irony, or Hypo^risie,
wholly unknown to our honest Ancestors, nor shall we be ever so honest as they
were, till we have quite left it off.

Character 23. Of a Makebate, or sower of Dissension.
SHe is a tatling Gossip, and one of the Devils Day-Labourers, that sowes his
Tares for him, or seed of dissension. She tells you this and this such an one
said of you, when you may be sure, it is either wholly false or never wholly
true, (she having either wholly invented it, or added so much to it, as makes
it an a^rant Lie.) She goes a fishing for secrets, and tells you those of
others, only to hook yours out of you, baiting men as they do fishes, one with
another still. She chooses the softest Breasts, as easiest to be corrupted, and
those (like an insinuating worm) she wriggles her self into, till she has quite
corrupted them; the oil with which she supples them, is Flattery; and that
which she chiefly flatters, is others Vices; for Virtues, she should be sorry
that they had any, lest they should be too virtuous for her company. In fine,
they talk of Serpents so venomous, as they infect and poison with their very
breaths; but if ever any's breaths were venomous, it is hers, (who wod set Man
and Wife at dissension the first day of their Marriage, and Child and Parents
the last day of their lives) Nor will innocence ever be safe, or conversation
innocent, till such as she be banished humane society, (the bane of all
Societies where they come) and if I could afford them being any where, it should
be only with Ariosto's Discord amongst mine Enemies; mean time 't shall be my
prayer, God bless my friends from them.

Character 24. Of a Chambermaid.
A Chambermaid by a certain Figure signifies no Maid at all; as homo pictus,
or a painted man does no man. She differs from the Waiting-Gentlewoman, as
single Roses do from double ones, and is a Maid of one Coat only, whilst
the other has many; yet there is more provocation in her single Petticoat and
Wastecoat, (as coming nigher Querpo) then the other has in all her Gowns and
Petticoats. She is like a Nettle, handle her gently, and she is angry, but towze
her soundly, and she takes it patiently; only she is coy and disdainful to the
Servingmen, telling them, she is for their betters; and so she is indeed, for a
Gentleman may do any thing with her, in a civil way. Above all, she is very
serviceable to her Master when her Lady lies in, who takes order to marry her
the sooner for it. In fine, if she be a right Chambermaid, and of the Game
indeed, say what you will, or do what you will unto her, she will be sure to be a
Maid still, till she be married: when, let her Husband look if she be one or
no, for others have often looked and found her none.

Character 25. Of troublesome Kindness.
WHen he meets you, he asks you with a great deal of joy, whether you be there
or no? and though you have never so much business, makes you stay. He shakes
you by the hand, till h'as shook it out of joint, and tells you twenty times,
he is glad to see you well; and if he embrace you, and get you in the hug, y'ad
as good fall into the hands of a Cornish Wrestler. He is troublesome at Table,
with bidding you heartily welcome, and often drinking unto you, whilst he winks
upon you without knowing wherefore himself, and carves you, and makes you eat
whether you will or no. He asks you so often how you do? as he makes you doubt
whether you be well or no; and when you are not indeed, he is more troublesome
yet, with his how d'ye's? and pray be well, etc. He has a Receipt for every
Disease, and twenty at least for an Ague, all one as good as another; and so
pesters you with them, as you would give as much to be rid of his visits, as
you are forced to give the Physician for his. In fine, he is so troublesome, as
you are forced to put it in your Letanies, to be delivered from him, and all will
scarcely do.

Character 25. Of your Town-talkers. Made Anno 1654.
YOur Town-talkers are a company in Town, who make a trade of talking of every
thing; and they are such excellent Embroiderers of Lies, as any ground will
serve their turn, (nay, most commonly they will do it without any ground at all.)
They deal more by Conjecture then Almanack-makers; and will venture the repute
of Liars twenty times, for that of Prophet once. They wish more for ill news,
then Ingrossers of Corn do for dear years; and are sorry with Caligula, when no
public calamity happens in their times. They hunt with full cry, and run
faster away with a Rumor, then a pack of Northern Hounds with a full scent;
and their chiefest Game is who, and who! They make more Marriages then Justices
of Peace; and for Weddings, (now the Arches are down) they are the only Bawdy
Court. Instead of the Star Chamber they censure every one, and judging of
others by themselves; no wonder they judge ill of every thing. Their talking is
their disease, and they speak ill, because they know not to speak well. It Is
the malignity of their nature, and we must have patience with it, as they must;
if making bold sometimes with us in the Country, we this once make as bold
with them in Town.

Character 27. Of a shrewd old Catholic Gentlewoman.
SHe goes to Confession, and leaves off all her old shrewishness to begin anew;
and when she has sufficiently thumb'd over her Hours and Rosary, thinks she
has privilege to be as shrewish as she was before. She chides others with the
same zeal as she prays; and beats her Breasts at Mass, and Maids afterward
with the same fervor and devotion. She thinks spiritual Vices nothing, so long
as she abstains from carnal ones; and whilst she makes a mortal sin of eating
Flesh on Fridayes, or Eggs in Lent, makes no scruple of rash judgment, and
condemning others without a cause. Her Devotion in the Chapel chiefly consists
in saying over a great many Prayers, and out of it, in making a Caudle for the
Goodman, which he eats as devoutly, and prays for Benefactors. In fine, she is
always chiding, and would have every one perfecter then her self; and looks so
much to others faults, as she has no leisure to look unto her own; whence she
turns away her Maids so fast, as she scarcely knows her own Family; and you
shall come twice into the house, but never twice into the same house again.

Character 28. Of a common Acquaintance.
HE wearies out his bosom with embracing every one, and dirties his Palm with
shaking them by the hand. Like a Spanniel, he fawns upon every one he meets,
and will needs know them whether they will or no. If they but look on him, he
smiles on them; and but smile on him, and the Acquaintance straight is made. He
picks acquaintance out of every face he has but seen once before, and calls
every one he has but seen twice, a friend. After which follows Kindred and
Affinity, he having more Couzens then your common Curtizans, or Will Summers
had; and they are much as near a kin as Patch and he. Mean time, he glories in
the store of them, and thinks himself rich, never considering, that one finds
enough of such acquaintances every day in che streets, whilst procul and de
ultimis sinibus terrae, a Friend is a Cabinet-piece indeed, and one we should
go to the end of the world to seek: Betwixt whom and such common Acquaintance
there is as much difference, as betwixt Diamonds and Pebble stones: and he
ought to be ashamed, that every ordinary Carver should be more choice of the
wood he makes his Statua's of, then he of the men whereof he makes his friends;
one being too hard and knotty to work upon, the other too light and spungy, and
worth nothing when they are wrought. Non ex omni ligno sit Mercurio, one makes
not Friends out of every sort of Wood.

Character 29. Of one who falsely styles himself Colonel
NOt to be Soldier he was made Colonel at first, and to 'scape fighting, has
continued so ever since; whence he is a Superlative without a Positive; or like
a Hovel, all Roof, without Foundation. He drunk formerly when he should be
fighting, and now talks only of fighting in his drink, whence his Sword can so
little boast of its Blood, as all its Gentility lies in the Hilt and Belt; and
it derives its Honor more from the Scabbard then the Blade. To avoid fighting,
he brags how often he has fought, and how many he has killed* and some
believe him, because they cu'd never see any he had fought withal alive: But
others say, that of all men living they would choose to be killed by him, for so
they should be sure to be still alive. Yet he will quarrel, or wrangle with you,
(which is half quarrelling at least) and let him alone, and he will threaten to
fight w'ye too; such as he being of the nature of Nettle^, handle them gently,
and they prick you; but roughly, and you break the point^ of them. After which
(as before) he was the Fools Valiant man, so he becomes the Valiant man's Fool*
and every one laughs at him, when he goes away offended, saying, He cares no
more for others, then they for him: and if so, he is the happiest man alive;
for I know none lives freer from care then he.

Character 30. Of the Patrons Lives. To the Lord -- Anno 1664.
MY noble Lord, if you would know
Both how to ^ive, and live well too,
But only your A^^ention give,
I^le tell you how ^he Patrons live.
First of all, they never ^are
Nor for Clock nor Calendar;
Next they never desire to know
Ho^ Affairs of the World do go:
Above all, they never resort
To the busy Hall nor Court;
Where poor men do nothing else,
But trouble others and themselves:
All the business they look after.
Only is their sport and laughter,
With a Friend and cheerful Cup
Merrily to dine and sup^;
Hear good Music, s^e a Play,
Thus they pass the time away:
Doing no harm to a^y man,
Rather all the good they can.
So 'twixt Saint and Sinner here.
Equally their Course they steer,
Till thi^ Voyage over-past,
They arriv^ to the Po^t at last;
Where those after Death arrive,
Who so ^armless were alive:
And I ^hink, as the world now goes.
Th'a^e not worst of Livers those.
If you like the Living thus,
Come, my Lord, and Live with us.
Character 31. Of a miserable old Gentlewoman.
HEr word is, Pity any thing should be lost; but others say, Pity any thing
should be saved as she saves it; for she hoards up Candles ends, and scrapes up
Grease, being so rich in Kitchin-stuff, as her very clothes are nothing else,
excepting her old brancht Velvet Gown, (as thin as a groat, with the figures
all worn out) which she keeps only for Sundays and Holidays; never wondering
that the Jews cu'd wear their Clothes forty years together in the Desert, since
she has worn her Petticoat as long; and her Stomacher is a piece of venerable
Antiquity, derived from the Velvet of Queen Mary's Gown. For her Prayer Book,
it was a Relic of her Grandmothers, till first grown greazy, and after
falling into the Dripping-pan, the Dog and Cat fell out about it, and eat it
up, since when she prays without book, with a God help you when they ask her
any thing, for which the Beggars curse her, but the Sneezers thank her, (as
expecting nothing else of her.) You enter her house with no less honor, then
you would one the Witches kept their Sabot in; for she fits like one in the
Chimney-corner, purring like a melancholy Cat, and mumping like an old Ape.
When she would show you good countenance, and when she would Regal you indeed, she
sends up for a Bottle of Sack, (as everlasting as the Widows Cruse of Oil) that
has served this twelve-moneth all strangers that come to house; with a Box of
Marmalade so old and dry, as the Flies have quite given it over, in despair of
extracting any more sweetness out of it: Which together with her other
niggardliness and sordidness makes me forswear the house, with resolution never
to come there again.

Character 32. Of an Excellent Companion.
HE is the life and spirit of the Company, and sparkling liquor, whilst others
are but dregs and lees. He is never dry nor pumping, but alw^yes full and
flowing; every thing affording him matter of merriment; and for a need he can
extract it out of nothing too. He differs from the Buffoon, as an excellent
Comedy does from the Farse; and is all wit, the other only* foolery. He is
neither scurrulous nor profane, but a good man as well as a good companion;
and so far a good fellow, to take a cheerful cup or two, (for wine's a good
whetter of a fine edged wit, so with too much they whet it not quite away) and
though to men of business he seems to confer but little to the seriouser part
of life; yet he whets the knife of the serious man, and makes them more apt for
business afterward, (as Music makes them apter for Devotion) and those who
are displeased with his mirth, are just like Saul displeased with David's
music, possessed with ^ome melancholy devil, or other, which only such as he
can cast out; for which they send for him farther, then they did for Dr.
Butler, and every one loves and cherishes him, he being the Darling of all the
nobler sort, the Favorite of Kings, and Companion for any Prince.

Character 33. Of one who Zany's the good Companion.
HE is a Wit of an under Region, like Jack Pudding, grossly imitating on the
lower Rope what the other does neatly on the higher, only for the laughter of
the vulgar sort, whilst the better and wiser can scarcely smile at him. He is a
Buffoon, not a Wit, and in a Tavern is only ^n hi^ Element, (the Bedlam of
Wits, where men are rather mad then merry, and where there is only noise
instead of mirth*) He has nothing but old ^tories to make you laugh, (long
since laughed thred-^ate) or some stale Jest or other, (broken twenty times
before) at which if you laugh not, you put him out of countenance, and mar
the faces, which only were his own before. In fine, he is only a Wit at the
second hand, or a frippery of it, just as Long Lane is, compared unto
Cheapside, and rather a Channel of other Wits, then a Fountain of his own; his
W^t being rather the hogsheads then his own heads; savouring more of
Heidelberge then Helicon, and he rather a drunken then a good Companion.

Character 34. Of one who imitates the good Companion another way. Made in the
1654.
HE is one, who now the Stage is down, acts the Paras^tes part at Table, and
since Tailors death none can play Mosca so well as he. He is all for those who
have best wine and fare, even to be of the same Religion with them too; and
though he be specially devoted to the Patron, he praises the Cook, shakes the
Butler by the hand, and is familiar with all the rest of the Servingmen;
calling one Father, another Son, as they are of Age or Office in the House. His
mimick Gesture, together with his Buffoon faces, is all his mirth, excepting an
old story or two, which you grow weary of presently, and then he must change
his bank, or change his style, and fall to plain flattery, (which is his
chiefest ^alent) with which he infects Persons, and marrs those who are taken
with him; as Plutarch well observes those do, who fish with sophistical baits,
which catch fish sooner, ('it is true says he) but renders them nothing worth
when they are caught.

Character 35. Of a Grave Formal Sir.
HE declaims when he speaks like a Grammar Schoolmaster, and keeps his gravity
even in spitting, whilst it serves him for distinguishing his periods. He walks
like a piece of Dutch Clock-work moved with wiers, and looks like an Image
carried in Procession. He thinks them all ignorant, who admire not all he says
and does; and the Age declining toward Barbarism amain, that they do not
i^itate all his words and actions. He holds the only observation of him a
sufficient breeding for young Gentlemen, far beyond the Court and Univ^rsi^y*
and when they have but traveled over his good parts once, they need (not travel
farther to Fra^^^ nor I^aly. He inveighs against the vanity of the time with
greater vanity* and shows when he has the commodity of another purse, how
vain he wo^d be, had he the commodity of his own. He complains of Fortune, that
like water she bears up light things, and lets the more mighty sink, (meaning
himself with all his gravity) and is malecontent, that he is not rewarded
according to his deserts; when (...) d^serts, he only deserves to be laughed
at, and that is all. In fine, he is a Compound of a formal Pedant, an affected
traveller, and Plautu^ miles gloriosus altogether; though he thinks himself
tans Mart quam Mercurio without compare, whilst I can find nothing to admire
in him, but only that he can admire himself so much.

Character 36. Of an all-admirable Person.
ALL that is sweet and ravishing is in her looks, with a cheerfulness it is joy
to behold, and a perpetual sunshine, without any clouds at all, joined with so
much noble virtue, and attractive sweetness, as she draws youto a certain
distance from her, and there suspends you betwixt Love and Reverence, none ever
daring to approach her nigher, nor having power to go farther off: So as that
Beauty which in (...) days of Ethnicisine, had excited to Idolatry, now
excites only to Devotion; sufficient to fill the place where she is with
votive Tables, and to work miracles, whilst she is the greatest miracle her
self; and so all surprising, as a Disease but half so taking as her eyes, would
be Epidemical, and depopulate all the world. Then she is so courteous and
obliging, as the sun and air are not more diffusively good then she; and her
speech and behavior so gentle and affable, as you may talk of Magic, but
there is none charms but she. In a word, her Gentleness is so great, as it is
enough to tame the fiercest Lions, and civilize the most barbarous Savages; and
if there be any fierceness or savageness in the world, it is only where she is
not, and because she cannot be every where. In fine, her Beauty, Virtue, and
Obligingness is so great, as Heaven seems to have made her as she is, only to
make Beauty more virtuous, and Virtue more beautiful, by ^oyning them together
with so much sweetness and gentleness.

Character 37. Of a Suspicious Person.
SHe torments her self and others, by putting every thing on the Rack of doubt,
and wresting all unto suspicion; mean time she makes them rather confess what
she would have them, then what is true indeed. As all things seem yellow to those
infected with the Iaundies, so all things seem of the color of her suspicions.
She affixes an ill sense still unto your words, and an ill meaning to all your
actions, and like French Poast Horses, goes on with her suspicions, who when
they stumble once, never leave till they be down. Like Snow-balls; she revolves
slight offenses in her mind, till sh' as made mighty injuries of them at last,
and her Surmizes are always wiser then the Truth, when both for her own sake
and theirs, her friends could wish they were but as wise at least. She
explicates others words and actions, as Heretics do Scripture, in the dark and
mystic sense, when the literal is obvious and clear enough; and there is as
little hopes of converting the one as the other from their erroneous opinions. So
whilst her mind is just like the Winters Sun, that exhales more vapors then
it can dissipate again; she both loses her self in the mists she makes, and
loses her Friends, by mistaking them for her Enemies.

Character 38. Of a Talkative Lady.
THere is no coming into her company, under pain of a days Headache, and a
ringing in the ears a fortnight after; and whosoever hears her, wishes that
either she were dumb, or they were deaf. To hear her talk, you would wonder at
her matter, and at her talk when you heard her matter; but considering both
together, you would admire at neither, but only exclaim with him who plumed
the Nightingale, Vox est, and praeterea nihil, she is a voice, and nothing
else; for it is only a noise she makes, and the labor not of her Brain but
Tongue, and you would wonder how that holds out so long, but for that it moves
with as great facility, as leafs shaken with the wind, (give it but breath
enough, and it will never lie still) or rather indeed as Atoms move ^'th' Air;
for it is quite unhung, and depends neither on nerve nor imagination. There
being as much difference betwixt a voluble Tongue and hers, as betwixt an
excellent Vaulter, who artfully moves himself, and one who precipitates himself
without any art at all. All the wonder is, how she makes so different ends hold
together, whilst ^he speaks only Thrums, (much like the composition of a
Tailors Cushion, all of shreads) but for that she cares not, all her care is
for ^ome body to hear her talk, (which shortly she must be forced to hire, (for
it is too great a pain to do gratis) mean time a Machin with so constant a
motion as her Tongue, would be far better then a murmuring Fountain to make one
sleep; and she wants only the faculty of talking in her sleep her self, to
make the perpetual motion with her Clack.

Character 39. Of a Taciturne Person.
HE is the contrary extremity, and knows as little to speak, as the other to hold
his peace. Friar Bacons Head was a talkative one to his, and there is nothing
so dull and phlegmatic, as his discourse. You might have patience to tend a
Still as well, that drops but once a quarter, and the counting a Dutch Clock
and his words, were an Exercise much alike. The wheels of his Tongue like those
of a rusty Jack, must be perpetually oiled, or else they are at a stand; and he
is just like Pharatius picture, all Curtain, and whosoever thinks there is
ought under it, like Zeuxes are deceived. Yet such veiled Shrines as he, in
Cloisters are counted very Oracles, where ^ilence is in precept and veneration,
and where their wisdom is the folly of the world; and be they their wise men,
they shall be my Fools still, who admire none for being always silent, nor
more admire their silence, then that of a Tree or Plant; who shall never count
Impotency perfection, but rather when the power of speaking never proceeds to
act, shall suspect there is somewhat in it more then want of will. Only for
this once, (since they will needs have it so) I will believe there is somewhat
in him, 'cause I co'd never yet see any thing come out of him.

Character 40. Of a Table-Disputant.
DIsputation is only for the School, and who disputes too much out of it,
should be sent to School again. Of all places, it is least proper for the Table,
where their discourse should be like their Fare, easy and of light digestion,
and not too hard nor difficult. Such love to hear themselves talk, and if they
would hear more, and talk less, they would be wiser then they are. The contrary
extremity to these are your too easy Assenters to all you say, who let
discourse fall too soon, as the other holds it up too long. The mean betwixt
both, is to continue discourse with a handsome reparty or two, and never to
pass beyond the third reply. Mean time, the wise avoid disputing with them, as
they do quarrelling with Hectors, (there being no repu^ation to be got by
either) and it is with disputing just as it is with quarrelling, where some are
so foolish to draw quarrels upon themselves, others so wise to avoid them,
which those best may do, without any loss of Reputation, who have sufficiently
declared on other occasions, that it is rather discretion then weakness in them,
and want of will then ability, that they avoid them now. For my part, of all
Surfeits, I hold that of talking the worst, and conclude with Balzac, that
whosoever thinks with a long-winded discourse, or raising his voice a tone or
two higher then mine, to carry it, he shall have his opinion and mine too,
rather then I Will contend with him.

Character 41. Of a Flaunders Devote. Made at Antwerp.
SHe is so pure and nice, as when she comes but where men are, she takes the
wind of them, for fear of being got with Child, (as Spanish Gynnets are) and
brushes her self when she goes away again, for fear of a spice of fornication,
ever since she understood that man is but made of dust. She wears her eyes like
Spectacles on her nose, and looks as soberly and demurely as Cows in Bongraces.
She dares not scratch, (though it itch never so furious) for fear of
transgressing the Rules of Modesty; and a Fly is as safe on her Nose, or a Flea
in her Bosom, as a Thief in Sanctuary. She defies the World with all its
vanities, and for the Devil, knows all his tricks so well, as that Devil must
rise betimes that couzens her. As for the Flesh, she not only mortifies it in
her self, but in her Hotch-pot too, giving it such an allay of Carrots and
Turnips, as there is no danger of its insurrection. She holds her Confessor, and
the Patron of his Order for the greatest Saints; and salutes all the rest, even
to the Dog of the house, with a Beati qui habitant. By the color of her
Petti-coat you may easily perceive what Order she is addicted to; and as your
Maremaids are half fish, half flesh, so she is Religious below the Girdle, and
Secular above. Of her Faith there is no doubt, and for her Good Works, you may
have a pattern of them when you please, for she is commonly the best
Bone-lace-maker in all the Parish, though her principal trade be making of
Scruples; of which she makes more in a day, then her Confessors can undo in
ten; for which, though I would not be him, yet I co^d wish my Soul with hers at
any time, but only on Ladies Eves, and other particular days of Devotion,
when she fasts and prays, and disciplines most intollerably.

Character 42. Of a Green Sickness Girl.
SHe is like a Mouse in a Holland Cheese, her house and diet all the same;
whence the more she spends in it, the worse house she keeps; the walls being
her constant diet, of which she eats so long, till she fulfill the old Proverb
at last, the weakest goes to the walls; for which should they accuse her of
Burglary, she has this commodity that she could never be starved in prison:
Nay, whilst some eat themselves into prison, she by the Estridges help might
eat her self out again. She is a great Benefactrix to Masons, who where they
find her, are sure to find work enouf: And she has a great devotion to the
Church walls too, where she might sooner eat (...) the ten Commandments, by
breaking her fast, then break the Commandments of the Church by eating. No
Nunnery would hold her, but she^d break. Enclosure presently, though for the
rest she would pass them all for strictness of diet; and though she eat white meat,
wo^d put down the ^innums and Carthusians. By her complexion (...) seems rather
made of Marble or C^alk, (...) that red Earth Adam was made of* and though she
be so Meagre a Soil,* as she grows never the fatter by it, yet one knows not
what a good Husbandman may do, which they say she wants extremely: But fe^
would take a Wife with so much ^ll Housewifery, a^ if she holds on as she
begins, she would soon eat her Husband out of house and home; only a Mille^
might venture on her with all faults, she being much of his Complexion; and for
her Diet* the eating of Meal would be at others charges* and the walls of his
Winde^ill are not comprised in her Bill of Fare.

Character 43. Of Liberty.
1*
F^ee as I was (...) I^le li^^,
So should every wi^e m^n do*
Only ^ools they (...), who give
(...) Freedo^^^ (...) I ^now not who.
2.
If my weak^ess cannot say it,
B^t t'must ^o, (^ha^ e're it cost)
(...) more str^^^^ the^ I shall have it,
Can make goo^ what I have los^.
3.
S^ill foam E^c^llen^y should be
More i'^h' Master then the Slave;
Which in ^ther's till I s^e,
None ^y Liberty shall have.
4.
Nor i^'t Exc'llency enouf,
Time or chance can mar or make*
But t'must be more lasting Stuff,
Shall from me my freedom take.
5.
I for Fortune nothing ^are,
Bea^t^e's (...) a glittering (...),
Wh^ without so g^^rio^^ are,
^ave no m^re th^^ I within.
^.
Those to who^^ (...) away,
That w^i^h non^ (...),
Shall ^e made of b^tter Clay,
and have (...) Soul^ th^n (...)
Character 44. Of a very Widow.
SHe shoots off Husbands as fast as Boys do Pellets out of Pot-guns, and one
discharged, all her care is to charge again. She is as curious of her mourning
dress, as if she rather courted a new Husband, then mourned for the old; and
her Glass and woman have more ado with putting on her Veil and Peak* then
formely (in the days of Revelling) with putting on her masking Clothes.
Before company she makes lament^ble moan, and squeezes out a tear or two; but
when she is alone with her woman, she laughs at it, and all their discourse is,
Who is the properest man? and who would make the best Husband, etc. She counts
her self widdowed, not for her bosom, but her bed, (wisely making difference
betwixt a Husband and a Friend) and procures to have that warm still, when her
Husband is scarcely cold; whom she so soon forgets, as she never makes mention
of any former Husband, but only as a spur to the latter, with God be with him,
he would have done thus and thus; and if he do not so too, is as ready to bid
God be with him. In fine, she only marries for a good Dowery, and when she
has that, she cares not how soon she is rid of you; so as were I to marry her,
one of the Conditions of the Marriage should be, that she should be a Widow no
more, or beshrew me I Would none of her.

Character 45. Of a Mendicant Irish Priest. Made at Antwerp.
HE goes over Seas in Trouses; and there turns Beggar before he turns Student;
and learns the art of craving before any other Art: By which he brings all the
Town where he lives into contribution for his maintenance, one giving him
victuals, another clothes, even to the devout honest Cobbler, who gives him the
mending of his Brougs or shooe^. If they be many of them, they beg some old
House or other, (which they call a College) and there live together like so
many Beggars in a Barn* and to stir up the peoples Charity and Compassion
toward them, they tell them lamentable Stories of Ireland, and St. Patricks
Purgatory, (which they believe the sooner, because they look like so many poor
souls come out of it themselves.) Having thus provided for his other
necessities, he begs his Learning, and having got a few scraps of Latin
together, is made Priest; when li^e a ragged Colt, he changes his Coat for a
Cassock, so old and threadbare, as to ha^^ neither lining nor outside, and you
would doubt where ever it were new or no. Then by recommendation to some under
Sacristan, he gets to say Dirges, by which and the Candles ends, he picks up a
pretty Living, and is as sure as the Beggars of the Parish to be at every Dole
and Funeral. After this, if he get a Chapel of some twenty Nobles a year, or
to be under Pater to some Monastery of Nuns, he thinks himself a Bishop and
very Patriarch; and if he chance to come to any higher promotion, he is so
glorious, as all this is forgot, and in short time himself too.

Character 46. Of an irresolu^e Person. Made Anno 1653.
HE hovers in his choice just like an empty balance without any weight of
judgment to incline him to either Scale. Every thing he thinks on, is matter
of deliberation* an^ he does nothing read^ly, but what he thinks not on; so as
discourse, that helps others out of Labyrin^^s, is a Labyrinth to him; and he
of all creatures living would be far wiser, if he had none at all. He begins
nothing without consideration, and when he begins to consider once, never makes
an end. He has some dull Demon in him cries do not, do not still, when he is
going to do anything, which he obeys as a divine Revelation; and he plays at
shall I, shall I so long, till opportunity of doing it be past; and then (as he
committed the faul^) he repents at leisure. He still mislikes the present
choice of things, as Scoggin did the Tree he was to be hanged on, and is enemy
to resolution; or rather, as resolution were enemy to him, he is afeard of it,
as often as he comes unto it. He could never bet at Cocking no^ Horse Race yet,
because the Battle or Race was always done before he cu'd resolve which side
to take; and he is only happy in this, that his irresolution hitherto has
hindered him from marrying and entering into bonds. And it is not the least part
of his happiness, to be so long in choosing his Religion, (if he be yet to
choose) amongst so many Sects as we have now adays, though it is supposed he is
a Quaker, by his wavering disposition; and if he ^e, the next news you hear
from him will be from B^dlam.

Character 47. Of a changeable Disposition.
HEr life is a perpetual contradiction, she would and she would not, and make
ready the Coach, yet let it alone too drive to such a place, yet do not
neither, is her ordinary Dialect. She differs from the irresolute, in that they
are always beginning, and she never makes an end; and she writes and blots out
again, whilst he is deliberating what to write. One being endless a part ante,
the other a part post; one being a resty, the other a restless pain. So you can
tell what to make of t'ones Negative and how two Negatives make an Affirmative;
but of her yea and nay together you know not what to make, but only that she
knows not what to make of it her self. Her thoughts and imaginations differ
from others, as Grotesque figures do from natural; and from Grotesque, in that
these have some design in them, but they have none; for she will call in all haste
for one, and have nothing to say to them when they come; and long and dye for
somewhat, which when she has, she instantly throws away, never looking toward
the end, but only the beginning of things, nor standing still in her choice,
but whirling perpetually about; so as those who are of one mind to day, and
another to morrow, are constant, compared to her, and Saturns Revolution,
compared unto the Moons. For you know not where to have her a moment; and
whosoever would hit her thoughts, must shoot flying and fly themselves,
whosoever would follow them.

Character 48. Of a petty Politic.
IF you would deceive him, tell him Truth, and believe what he says, if you
would deceive your self. He goes ever vizzarded, and you can never know his
true face, but may always know it is false. He cares (...) in whose light* he
stands, so he may see, nor whose E^i^ice he ruins, so he may build his own* so
as they look on him not as a Man, but as some ravenous beast, homo homini
Lup^^, that does all the harm and mischief he can to others; by which he has
got so ill a name* as he is half hanged already, and no body (that knows him)
but wishes him wholly so: and this fine Reputation he has got by his petty
Pol^^y, that is nothing else but Wisdom distempered into Cra^t, far worse then
Lying, ^or that makes only the Tongue false, but this the Heart too; and has
a far worse effect, for that makes them not believe his words, but this, that
they will not believe his deeds; so as should they see him do the best action in
the world, they would imagine he did it with some ill intent, and out of petty
Policy, which is nothing else but Treachery in Fight, Per^id^ousness in
Friendship, Couzenage in Gaming, and Deceit in Bargaining; and whosoever uses
it, in plain English is a Knave, though the qualifying Term be a Politician.

Character 49. Of a good honest Catholic
HE is that ve^us Israelita, or true Israelite, in whom there is no deceit; and
you may as safely take his word, as another bond or oath; he had rather suffer
then do wrong at any time; and is so scrupulous, as he may often deceive himself,
but never you. He does as he says, and says as he thinks, and means well and
hone^t^y in every thing; and to see his Innocence and honest simplicity, you would
think the Golden Age were returned again. He counts Conversation b^^wixt man
and man, his second Religion* and for his first, betwixt God and himself, you would
take him for one of the Primitive Christians; and the Primitive Church were
again revived in him, where the name of Dishonesty was wholly unheard of
amongst them; and the thing it self amongst the Idea's of things unknown* a
Virtue as rare as the Phoenix now adays; when amongst such variety of Sects,
there are far more Saints then honest men; when amongst the boast of Christian
Virtues, they have forgotten all Moral ones; and when for pure scarcity of
Honesty, he is counted an honest man, who is not altogether a Knave.

Character 50. Of a degenerate Nobleman. Made Anno 1652.
HE is a certain silly thing, who now he has no voice in Parliament, scarcely
knows what to say. He has made the name of Lord only a mock-name, more
ridiculous then the name of Lord of misrule in ancient times; and they shun
him, as they do Lord have mercy upon us, upon doors: and this plague he has
brought upon himself, by foolishly imagining he should be any thing, when those
were nothing who made him all he is. As if the Stars should conspire to deprive
the Sun of light, or Streams to dry up the Fountain whence they flowed: when no
wonder if every Glowworm or farthing Candle out-shines them now; or that their
greatness should be at so low an ebb, as every one boldly strides over them, who
durst not a^proach so nigh as their brinks before. So they just^e him now in
the streets, who was wont before like Manderins, to make whole streets to give
him way* and no body takes notice of him, unless some one in scorn points at
him (perhaps) and says, there goes a Lord* and this is all the privilege of
Peerage they have now; besides the having every base fellow without Commission
to search their house, every Tradesman cite them before their Worships at next
Shire-Towns, and every common Sergeant drag them away to Prison, where ^hey lie
in the Dungeon or Common Goal: And this fine Prerogative they have got, who
would needs pluck down the King, only to be promoted to the Kings Bench
themselves.

Character 51. Of one that is truly Noble. Made at Antwerp, Anno 1651.
HE is a Nobleman indeed, the other only in name and title; and his Titles
become him, and seem only made for him, whilst the other appears in them like
Dwarf^ in G^an^^ Clothing. He blazons his Arms by V^rtues, not by Colors; and
his Pedigree* which is boast with the other, is only chron^cle to him* He does
praise wort^y things himself, well knowing the p^aise of his Ancestors are none
of his; and suffers them to get the start of him in nothing but priority of
Time. Mean while he holds Courtesy so man^ a part of Nobility, as he imagines
That Nobleman does ^ut disguise himself, and puts on Peasants Clothing, who is
discourteous. Above all, he holds Loyalty so essential to Nobility, as he
imagines he who is Disloyal once, not only degrades himself, but all his
Posterity of their Nobility. Of his Liberality. I say nothing, but only
imagine how liberal he would be i^ he had it now, when no worthy person co'd
want it whilst he had any thing. To conclude, his mind is erect, what ever his
Fortunes be; and the Poverty of the time can no ways deject him, who like an
ancient Ruin, stands great whilst he stands, and would fall great, however low
he fell.

Character 52. Of an uncertain Nature.
SHe is the Anomula of her Sex, not to be comprised in any general rule, nor
can any particular one be given of her. She is a Sea without a North-Star, and
so full of shift^ng sands, as there is no sailing by Compass with ^er, nor
venturing without the Plummet st^^l in hand; and you may spell Hebre^ backwa^d^
and decipher the hardest Characters, b^t there is no spell^^g nor de^iphering
her. One benefit she has by it, that Flattery can nev^^ sinde her out* for now
she likes a thing, and presently dislikes i^; now she is of one opinion, and
presently of another; so as you may go twice into her company, and not twice
into the same company; and when she is in good or bad humor, you must go to a
Cunning woman to know, for she is not cunning woman enouf to know her self. In
fine, she is a very Chamelion or Proteus in disposition, changing fashions of
mind ofner then the French does fashions of the body; and did she change but
shapes as often, there is none would know her: and the reason of all is
(perhaps) because she does not know her self.

Character 53. Of a Dull Country Gentleman.
HE comes up to Town to get a Wife, and when he is there he knows not what to
^ay, for he is the Mute of the Company where he comes, and only plays a part
in the Dumb Show. Or if he say any thing, he labors for it like a Pump, and
presently his Spirits sink down again and leave him dry. He sits nodding in
company like a sleepy person over-watcht; and rowse him with a Question, and he
stares on you just like one newly wake^ out of sleep. He looks with his mouth,
and thinks you would sell him a Bargain when you ask him any thing, (and it is
impossible to ask him any thing he understands) yet when he is alone, he and
his man John have many a dry Discourse about Wiving; and his man give^ him as
many cautions about good Husbandry, which he is apt to follow, being so
miserable, as he grudges at Coach-hire, trembles at the name of Hide Park,
Mulberry Garden, and the New Exchange; and never bestows any thing on his
Mistress above a Bottle of Ale, or pound of Cherries when they are at cheapest:
So that unless he be rich, it may be long enough before he get a Wife; and if
he be, a hundred to one but some Wife or other gets him, and afterward make an
Ass, if not an Ox of him.

Character 54. Of a Schoolboy.
HIs Parents may well say of him, as another did of their Son, that they had
prayed sor a Boy so long, as they feared he would prove one all his life; to
which much confers their Breeding in Grammer-Schools, where they learn nothing
but lying and loytering, and converse so much with Boys, as they are quite
marred for ever becoming Men. He has nothing so ready as his Hat at his
fingers ends, which he twirles about in mighty agony, when he is out of his
Lesson, and knows not what to say; and ask him any question, and he looks
about, as if he were seeking for an answer; and when he answers you, scrapes
such another leg, as Jack of the Clock-house, when he goes about to strike. He
speaks in the tone he repeats his Lesson in, so fast as if his tongue were
running away with it; and so loud, as if all the company were deaf; and out of
his Lesson knows not what to say. Of his Manners I say nothing, for he has
none at all; nor is there any hope he will ever learn; whose Head is so doaz'd
with knocking, and Breech hardened with whipping, as he has neither fear nor
wit. So as had I a Son whom I loved indeed, I Would rather send him to
Parish-Garden, to learn such tricks as the Ape does there, rather then such
tricks as they learn at School.

I mean not by this now your public Grammar Schools, those Fountains of
Learning, whose clear Streams flow into the Universities, but those dirty
Puddles, where Children are rather defiled then imbued with Learning; whilst
they learn nothing but to read Scripture, and then misinterpret it; from which
foul sink so many Fanatics, like so many Ta^poles: have entered into the world.

Character 55. Of your Fanatic Reformers.
THey complain of the old Reformation, that they plucked not down Churches and
Cathedrals, as well as Abbeys, and think they were not zealous enough, to leave
so many Cross-styles to stumble the Brethren, and Cross-wayes, to make them
err and stray from Righteousness; and for the Signs in the City, cry out
against them, as the abomination of abominations, to see so many Popes-heads,
so many Triple-Crowns, Bishops Miters, and Cardinals Caps, with Friars and
Nuns, Beads, Agnus Dei's, and the like, which makes London look like a very
Babylon: Whereas had they their will* a Bird should not fly in the air with its
wings across, a Ship with its Cross-yard sail upon the Sea, nor profane Tailor
sit cross-legg'd on his Shop-board, or have Cross-bottom to wind his thread
upon. As for the Signs, they have pretty well begun their Reformation already,
changing the Sign of the Salutation of the Angel and our Lady, into the
Soldier and Ci^izen, and the Katherine Wheel into the Cat and Wheel; so as
there only wants their making the Dragon to kill St. George, and the Devil to
tweak St. Dunstan by the Nose, to make the Reformation complete. Such
ridiculous work they make of their Reformation, and so zealous they are against
all Mirth and Iollity* as they would pluck down the Sign of the Cat and Fiddle
too, if it durst but play so loud as they might hear it.

Character 56. Of a French Dancing Master in London.
A French Dancing Master or Baladin, thinks himself a very Paladin of France,
when h'a^ left off being Usher, and is a Master once. He has the Regimin of
the Ladies Legs, and is the sole Pedagogue of their Feet, teaching them the
French Language, as well as the French Pace, as Coupez, Passez, Levez etc.,
(which they understand as perfectly as English) he fetches them up in their
Courant with a hei Courage! as a Carter does his Horses with a Whip; and makes
as many antic Gestures the while, as a Bowler does when his Bowl's a
trundling. He makes a Pilgrimage every year to Paris to learn new Dances, and
distributes at his return his Branles, Gavots and Sarabands amongst his
Scholars, as Pilgrims do the Relics of the Shrine where they have been;
speaking as reverently of Monsieur Provost the while, as they do of the Saint
whose Shrine they have visited. There was a long contention betwixt the French
Tailor and him, in point of Gentility, till by Montague's means the French
Dancing Master carried it. In fine, he lives a merry life and a long; for his
Dancing-days are never done, whilst he makes all dance after his Fiddle, and he
is a brave Fellow all the year; but on a Ball or Grand Ballet night without
compare.

Character 57. Of a School of young Gentlewomen.
TO show how far they are removed from Court-breeding, their Schools most
commonly are erected in some Country Village nigh the Town, where to save
charges, they have the worst Masters as can be got for Love or money, learning
to quaver instead of singing, hop instead of dancing, and rumble the Virginals,
scratch the Lute, and rake the G^itar, instead of playing neatly and
handsomely. As for their Languages, a Mag pie in a Month would learn to
chatter more then they do in a year. And for their Behavior, it is nothing
else but a low Courtzie, with a bridling cast of their Chin to fetch it up
again. And lastly, for their Work, (in which they chiefly glory) there are
frequent Examplars of it, how some one or other makes such work with them, as
the stitches of it can never be picked out again without the Midwives help. Mean
time I will not say their reverend Mistress is a Bawd, (who thinks her self
another Deborah for Government) but certainly she is little less, to give
admittance to such Vermin into their Buroughs, (under the name of Couzens) who
when their heads are in once, all their body naturally follows; no Sweet-meat
nor Comfit-makers Shop being more haunted in hot weather with Wasps and Flies,
then these Schools be, with all the wild Gallants about the Town.

Character 58. Of a Lady of excellent Conversation.
YOu would imagine all the Muses and Graces were in her when she speaks; Her
Conversation both for words, matter, and manner of delivery, is so charming,
pleasant, and delightful, even to the tone and accent of her voice, which is so
sweet and harmonious, as it is more Music to hear her speak, then others sing.
Discourse, which is a Tyranny with others, is a Commonwealth with her, (where
every ones opinions are free) and she is so easy company, as it is pleasure to
be in it, whilst (like uneasy Garments) you are not in others without pain.
She never contradicts any, but only blushes when they speak impertinently, (a
greater reprehension (to those who understand blushes) then can be expressed in
words) and has too much Reason to use Pa^sion, (the Arms of falsehood) to
defend the Truth* But having delivered her opinion, if you yield not, she does,
rather then contend with you, and leaves you the shame of the Victory, when
with more honor you might have been overcome. She does not rashly take up
argument, nor abruptly lay it down again, but handsomely assumes it, delightful
continues it, and like an Air in Music, just comes unto the close, when the
ear expects it. In fine, her Conversation is ^ar more cheerful then theirs, who
laugh more, and smile less; true joy being a cheerful thing, and as far
different from light and giggling mirth, as Elemental fire from Squibs and
Cracker; so as Promethian-like, she inspires all who converse with her with
noble flame and spirit; it being Virtue to know her, Wisdom to converse with
her, refinest Breeding to observe her, and a Species of the joy and happiness
of the other life, to enjoy the happiness of her Conversation in this.

Character 59. Of a young Enamourist
HAving left the School, and School-boyes Toys, next Toy he gets is a Mistress,
whom he courts with legs and faces, out of Ovid, or some of your modern Poets*
and he talks of Phoebus and Cupid, and of so many Gods and Goddesses, as you would
take him for some Pagan never converted to Christianity. He sighs like a dry
Pump, or broken winded Bellows; and to hear him, you^d never wonder at Lapland
Witches selling wind so cheap. There is nothing so cold, as to hear him talk
of Flames* nor so dull, as to hear him talk of Cupids darts; and you would forswear
Love, to hear but how he makes it. Mean time, his Mistress lets him know, that
it is in Love as it is in War, which declared once, you are to expect nothing but
Hostility; and knows it is with Lovers, as it is with Anglers, who feed fishes
till they are caught; but caught once, feed on them; so it is long e're she bite
at the bait, unless he be rich, and then she nibbles a little to draw him on,
else she jears him to death, as they Rhyme Rats in Ireland, and he dies a
Quaker in Love at last, (of all Sects the most ridiculous) the subject of some
lamentable Ballad, that tells you how he is gone to the Elizian Fields,
when'tis only by Moor Fields, (perhaps) where they are buried amongst the mad
men and Quakers, and there is an end of them.

Character 60. Of a Precieuse; or, Artificial Beauty.
SHe uses ^he Trewel instead of the Pencil, and paints so palpably, as if she
sought not color to hide it, but rather to publish it. She is as dextrous at
the Fan, as a Butcher at the Fly-flap, and has as much need to keep the flies
from her face, as he from his meat. She goes a sowling for Gallant's, and now
makes Springes for them of her hair, now Pit-falls of her breasts, and now
Lime-twigs of her looks; and more glories in the multiplicity of them, then a
Lawyer of his Clients, or Physician of his Patients. Mean time, who treat her,
may entreat any thing of her; and he who has the Coach, may carry her any
where: she thinking the point of honor to consist more in Reputation of
Beauty, then Fame; and of being fair, then good. So passes she the Springtide,
and Summer of her Bea^ty, merrily, till growing tow^rds Autumn with her, more
Arts are necessary to repair the defects of Beauty, and decays of Age; no old
Cottage ever needing more reparations then she, nor more Arts to maintain it:
She now complaining she has got a Cold, or sleeps not well a nights, that her ill
looks may be imputed unto that accident; now seeking dark corners to show her
warpt Complexion in, as couzening Citizens do to show their counterfeited*
Ware* until at last, when none of these miserable shifts will serve, she
pretends to Wisdom when her Folly will hold out no longer; and courts the
reputation of Good, when she can have no longer that of Fair.

Character 61. Of a Natural Beauty. Made at Cobham, Anno 1655.
WHether a cheerful Air does rise,
And elevate her fairer Eyes;
Or else a pensive Heaviness
Her lovely Eyelids does depress,
Ever the same becoming Grace
Accompanies her Eyes and Face:
Ever you would think that Habit best,
In which her Countenance last was dressed.
Poor Beauties! whom a Blush or Glance
Can sometimes make look fair by chance;
Or curious Dress, or artful Car^,
Can make seem fairer then they are:
Give me the Eyes, give me the Face,
To which no Art can add a Grace;
Give me the Looks, no Garb nor Dress
Can ever make more fair, or less.
Character 62. Of a Novice of the -- 's Order.
HE is a young Lover, and his Order is his Mistress, that to try his constancy,
makes a fool of him; the more doz'd and bemoapt he is, the better still, it is a
sign he is right, and has a true vocation; and if he have any wit or judgment
of his own, they cry out on him for a very Reprobate. He hates all womenkinde,
and calls a Petticoat Leviathan, and a Smock (but innocently blanching on a
hedge) Asteroth, or the foul Devil of Fornication. He walks with his Eyes as
fixed in his head, as a dead Hares in a Poulterers shop, and crumples up
himself like a Hog-louse, for fear of ^ffusion. He makes as many stops as he
goes, as an old rusty Jack, and winds up himself as often to rectify his
intention. He says his Our Fathers as devoutly as others their Our Father; and
counts the Patron of his Order the greatest Saint in Heaven. He is no more
moved then a Statua at a chiding or reprehension, and is as peart and brisk
after a good Discipline, as an Ape after a whipping. He breaks Glasses, and
thinks to make all whole again, with a Deo gratias, which is the word when he
does any thing (as he does every thing) untowardly. In fine, his Novitiat
passes just like an enchantment with him, and he is in Ex^asie all the while,
till toward the end he recovers by degrees, and the Charm expired, he becomes
like other men.

Character 63. Of a wicked debaucht Person.
HIs mind is a Room all hung with A^etins Pictures, and he is practicing a
pace to design after them, and de facto has coppied out most of them already.
He is not capable how any one can be chaste, and when he cannot sin in act, he
does it in imagination: Every thing with him is incensive unto Lust, and show
him but so much Smock as would scarce make Tinder, and he is all afire with it
presently. His words are able to defile the ears, and corrupt the manners of
any one that hears him; and there is no such dirty Habitation, nor unwholesom
air, then that wherein he breathes. He is so little ashamed of his Vices, as he
glories in them, and should be sorry an^ ashamed that any one should be more
vicious then he. He knows no crying sins but his own Bastards, nor cries for
any himself, but thos^ which send him to the Surgeons every Spring and Fall,
(when his sweats are more for his own then Adams sins) and if he lose a Nose
(or so) in the service, he as much glories in it, as a Soldier in wounds he
has received in the Wars; and shows that one may be as impudent in being
noseless as frontless at any time. To give you his Character in brief, he
laughs at Conscience and Religion, his God is his lust, and he believes there
is no Devil but only a handsome Wench: He thinks Hell only a good Winter
Parlour, Heaven only a pleasant Summer Seat; and for the narrow way thither,
knows no other, but only the Highway to Maidenhead.

Character 64. Of an English Papist Ass.
KIng James (of happy memory) was wont to say, that the Papist was his honest
Ass, he might lay what load he would upon him, and he would bear it patiently;
but the Presbyterea^ was such a skittish Jade, as he kicked and winc't at the
least load laid on him. Certainly if Persecution be not the nighest way to
Heaven, he goes the farthest way about; for every one persecutes him, and he
bears the burden of every one: Nor will they allow him the privilege of
Balaams Ass, to speak when he is beaten, but like Horace's, he must only be
patient, and shak^ his ears. Mean time, he bears the faults of every one; and
as The Assembly man, page 18.
one said wittily, They rail at Popery, when the Land is almost lost in
Presbytery; and cry out Fire, fire, in Noah's Flood. And though the wiser sort
perceive their cunning in it, to find fault first, when they are faulty
themselves, yet the ignoront are cheated with it, who still think those most
faulty, who are most cried out upon, and take the poor Ass for some terrible
monster of the Sea of Rome, (as the Major of Huntington did a Colt for a
Sturgeon) whilst others know, he is a good honest Ass, who never failed his
Master in time of need, as most of those who rail on him have done. In fine,
all I will say of him is this, he is a scrupulous Ass, he is a patient Ass, and
your French Ass would never bear half so much, not of the Pop^ himself.

Character 65. Of a Physician.
BY Sin Sickness first entered into the world, and by Sickness Death and the
Physician* behold how some derive his Pedigree. Others say, that as Laws beget
Abuses, and Lawyers Processes, so Physicians do Sicknesses and Maladies.
Certain it is, he and Death are but Cousen Germans once ^emov'd, and both of the
same Trade and Occupation of killing men, however (by corruption of the Judge)
the Physician escapes, and Death is condemned for it. Another reason why
Physician never yet held up his hand at the Bar for killing Patient, is because
the Crowners Quest find it self-murder in those who take Physic of them. They
do more harm then good in the world (certainly) for all his saying, that did
not Physicians kill men so fast as they do, the world would be too full of them;
and who say we must honor Physicians for n^cessity, mean only that they are
necessary Evils, against whom David prayed infallibly, when he desired to be
delivered from his Necessities. And for my part, as it is said, Necessity has no
Law, so I could wish it had no Physicians too, for so we should have no
Diseases, or at least be rid of them, the greatest Disease of all.

But all this now is to be understood not of our English, but the Physicians
here, who with their six penny 'Fees have Skill accordingly; whilst ours with
their Golden Fees have Golden Skill, and therefore we honor them: whilst here
your poor* Signieur Doctore, is always beaten, and made the ridiculous subject
of every Farse.

Character 66. Of an English Merchant, resident in Foreign Parts. Made Anno
1648. during his Travels in the Levant.
HE is one who goes abroad with a stock of Honor as well as Money to traffic
with, and makes a brave return of either. He is a Master and not a Slave to
Wealth, and such a Master, as puts it only to noblest us^s, (neither sticking
at trivial expense nor gain.) He anticipates not poverty, for fear of being
poor, (like those who kill themselves for fear of death) nor accelerates it
with vain glory of appearing rich, (like those who guild over ruinous Palaces)
but whilst he neither starves the Channel with penuriousness, nor exhausts the
Spring with prodigality, has the art to keep the Stream still running, and the
Fount still full; so as look in his Warehouse, and you find him a wealthy
Merchant, in all the rest of his House a noble Gentleman, and he only follows
his profit on writing days, and on all other days his pleasure, etc. So as we
may truly say in these dead times, there are none live but he; who whilst your
landed men are outed of all they have, as long as the Sea is open, is sure of
his coming in. To conclude he is the Honor of his Nation abroad; and his
Nation should be most ungrateful, should it not always honor him.

But now you must understand, I speak of such an one, as either live^ where
they pretend to the Universal Monarchy at this day, or else where they had it
in former times; and not of those penurious ones, who live in your colder
Climates nigher home, betwixt whom and him there is as much difference, as
betwixt them and your Scotch Pedlars.

Character 67. Of a timorous Disposition. Made Anno 1657.
HE is only for facile and easy things* and if you employ him not in what he
is good for, he is good for nothing. He is a^ unfit for dangerous Negotiations,
as a London Wher^y for an East India Voyage, and dares not offend the present
Authority for his life. He is not Cavalier enough, to understand your Gallantry
of dying; nor Divine, nor Philosoph^r enough, to know what good he can do when
he is dead. Like the slavish Americans, he offers as much Incense to those who
may harm him, as those who can do him good. Mean time, sacrificing more out of
Fear then Love, he is but half an Idolater at least. Whence in times of Trouble
and Persecution, he pretends not so much to Merit as Excuse; and though he be
far from a Rubric Saint himself, yet at least he honors those who are; and
hopes to be saved by others merits, though not his own, amongst the common sort
of Christians; who when any storms of persecution rise, will be sure, which way
soever the wind does blow, to keep on the windy side of danger still.

Character 68. Of a petty French L^tenist in England. Made Anno 1653.
HE is a Fellow, who with ill clothes, and worse mien comes over into England,
and there sets up a Court of Judicatur^, arraigning our Mu^ick, Instruments,
and Musicians here, for not being a la mode de France; and almost the Hands
too, for not being mangie about the Wrists like his. Especially, he cannot away
with the double Neck, and twelve ranks of strings upon the Lute, (though far
more easy and commodious) because it is not of their Invention. If his fingers
be so weak, they can scarce crawle over a Lute, then to play gently and softly
is the mode, and doucement is the word; and if they be so gouty and
chilblain'd, as they rake the strings worse then if they were grated on with a
ragged staff, then strong and lusty is the mode, and fort and gallyard is the
word again. If you like not his play, he tells you he has at least the new
method of Paris, and that he teaches a ravir and ^on pareille; and for his
Pieces, (though raked out of Gualtiers Dunghill, or collected from the
Privyhouse of Desaut) he keeps them as precious Relics, and gives out such
for new, as were made before the Avignon, or the Popes coming there. In fine,
he is the Mountebank of himself, and though he has nothing to commend him
besides himself, and the being French, (for which reason you may commend the
Pox as we^l) yet your English are so foolish to admir^ him; nor will it ever be
otherwise, till some such zealous Patriot rise up against them, as he, who
hearing them talk of the F^e^ch Pox* bid them call it the English, with a Pox
to them, for we had as good as the French ha^ any.

Character 69. Of an English Inn. Made Anno 1654.
AN English Inn is a House of so ancient standing, as it is ready to fall down
again; only its Sign-poast is new, and in that consists its greatest Gallantry.
Within it is a great Machin of four wheels, Ostler, Cook, Tapster, and
Chamberlain, with mine Host and Hoastis, the main Springs that move all the
rest. Being entered, they all fall to couzening you in their several Vocations;
the Ostler your Horses, the rest you; the Cook with meat so tough and raw
roasted as spite of your teeth you are forced to leave it to the house, the
Tapster in so miscounting his stone Iuggs, as you may as well count the
Stoneage as them; then the Chamberlain uses such couzenage with his Faggots, as
the fire it self can scarcely bring to light. For your Chamber, it seems the
Pressyard by the pillars of the bed, with a Teastern so heavy, as if it fall on
you, Lord have mercy upon you, and for more exquisite torment and lingering
pain; you have a heavy Tapestry for Coverlet, in Summer kills you with heat,
and in Winter with cold as well as weight; with a Feather-bed, whose feathers
(as if you flounc't into the water) part on either side, and leave you in the
midst to sink unto the bottom. For mine Host and Hoas^is, who were wont to be
good fellows in the days of jollity, their humors are spoild in this time of
godliness an^ stumm'd Sack and Religion has quite mar^d their mirth; only
mine Host will make a shift still to b^ half drunk every day, and on Market
days outright, when he is wondrous kind: and his kindeness chiefly consists
in a pin^ of Sack to the Master, and a double Iug unto the Servingman, always
in order to the Reckoning, which as a Warning-piece being discharged once,
there follows a whole volley of Welcomes, like small shot discharged on every
side, and you are discharged too.

Character 70. Of a Chymerical Poet. Made in Africa.
WIth his monstrous Simile's and Hyperbole's he is like a Painter, who makes
only Chimera's and Grotesque work, whilst others Figures are natural, and to
the life; by seeking out new ways, he mistakes the way to Helicon, and loses
himself by going out of the common Road. He is like Statius on his great Horse,
now on the top, now on the bottom of Parnassus, and has not art enough to keep
him to a constant pace. His Conceits come across from him, and stick by the
way; and his many Parenthesis's are but like the boggling of resty Jades, when
they cannot or will not advance. His Muse is none of the Nine, but a Mungril or
By-blow of Parnassus; and her Beauty, is rather Sophistical then natural. He
offers at Learning and Philosophy, as Pullen and Stubble-Geese offer to fly,
and presently come fluttering down again. His high-sounding Words and Verses are
but like empty Tunns or Hogs-heads, which make the greater sound the emptier
they are. A long while some admi^'d him, because they understood him not, and
for the same reason he admired himself: But now they have 'found out the Cheat,
it is thought Ica^us fate will be his, who for flying too high, came to be
drowned at last* and he had sunk long since, had not some like bladders b^lovd
him up; which support now failing him, he will sink faster then heavy bodies
fall unto the Center.

Character 71. Of a too ordinary Courtier. Made at Lisbon in Portugal.
BEsides his own, he has the Iesters Office too, and by ^t a double
privilege, to say what he list, and not to be whipped for it when h'as done. He
is a perpetual Libel; in the Court, of others; and to others, of the Court: and
they repeat but his bold speeches, when they would speak ill of it. His railing
differs as much from Raillery, as Butchers playing at Cudgels does from
Gentlemen's playing at Foyles; and he is worse then Aretin, who demanded why he
spoke not ill of God, (since he spoke ill of every one) answered, Porche no IN
cognosco, because I know him not, (for he speaks ill as well of those he knows
not, as those he knows) and if Bashfulness and Modesty be a Virtue in the
Country, but a Vice in Court, it is the only Vice he is free from; for he is
never from about the Prince, nor ever without some suit to beg of him* so as a
fawning Spanniel with this Motto, Quid me ^ultis dare? or what will you give
me, would be the right Emblem of him. Though he g^t^ more then h^ deserves, yet
he is always complaining, and thinks he gets not so much as he deserves; when
had he his deserts, he should be banished the Court, since if it be a Heaven or
Firmament where the Prince is the Sun, and other Courtiers bright Stars of
several Magnitudes, he is a dark Cloud that obscures all the rest, and the
Court would shine far brighter, were he away.

Character 72. Of one who troubles her self with everything.
HEr mind is just like their Stomachs, who convert, all the nourishment they
take, unto Di^eases,; for every thing is matter of trouble with her, and not
contented with her own, she troubles her self with those of others too, and
will go a thousand miles out of her way to seek it, if she find none nigher
hand. She is perpetually haunted with a panick fear of, Oh what will become of
us! etc. and the stories of Apparitions in the Air, and Prognostics of
extraordinary accidents to happen in the year 66. (when perhaps it is nothing
but the extraordinary gingle of numbers) makes her almost out of her wits again.
She troubles her self besides with conditionary thoughts of things that never
were, nor are, nor are like to be* and for her own business, she makes such
work of it, as what betwixt doing and undoing it, like Penelope's web, she
never makes an end, (nor can any else for her at last, she so intangles it) and
all this only for want of knowing how much care and thought she is to bestow
on things. Whence bestowing all she has on every thing, as long as there is a
world, or she is in the world, her care must needs be infinite and immense. To
conclude, her mind seems nothing else but an Hospital of sick and diseased
thoughts; so thronged and pestered with 'um, as there is no room for any healthy
ones. Whence her preposterous lodging, all her care and solicitude within
doors, and her comfort all without; she is so unfortunate, to have the one
still at hand when she needs it least; and the other still to seek, when she has
most need of it.

Character 73. Of one who troubles himself with nothing.
HE thanks God for giving him such a mind, as he neither cares for what he
cannot have, nor scarce for any thing others can deprive him of. He places all
his contentment within himself, and suffers nothing without to trouble him. He
counts it folly to grieve and sorrow for any thing but our sins, since grief
and sorrow can remedy nothing else. He loves easy Company as he does easy
Garments, and throws off either when they pain and trouble him. He so loves his
Liberty, as he will not be Slave to any, much less to his own Passions, (to have
his mind free at least, and not still carry his master along with him.) Even
in Friendship he takes the more delightful part, and leaves the more
troublesome of Adieus and condoling, and the like, and so hates to be in debt,
as he loves not to be too much obliged by any one. He avoids all high ways of
the vulgar, and by-ways in Religion, not to err in Faith nor Opinion; and
strives so to live in this life, as he may have no fear of the other when he
comes to dye. To enjoy its pleasures more purely, he willingly relinquishes all
the honors and profit of this world; living neither in the higher Region of
the Air, where storms and tempests are engendered; nor in the lower, where they
are most subject to them; but in the middle, where all is quiet and tranquile.
So lives he in this world, as if he were out of it, enjoying all its innocent
pleasures, and for the rest --

They have most pleasure who enjoy them least.

Character 74. Of a Jovial Old Nobleman.
UNder whatsoever Constellation he was born, he is all Jovial, when others are
Saturnine; and no man was ever more beholding then he to Nature, who even in
old Age has given him the spirit and vigor of Youth; and is so feared he should
be ever wholly old, as she gives him a youthful mind in an aged body still. He
is the Scharamacchio of Court and State, and is a Statesman and Courtier
travesty, doing more business with trifling, then others with their
seriousness; and his Grimaces are more worth then all their Gravity; for whilst
they by laying open siege, but allarum men, and put them on their defense, he
by intelligence with the humors of every one, suddenly enters their bosoms,
and takes them by surprise. He knows so, how to multiply himself, as he is all
to all, and all to every one; especially amongst the Ladies he has Kindred and
Affinity with every one; and he will call an old Lady of four-score, Wife or
Daughter; and a young one of fourteen, Mother or Grandmother, (only to be more
merry and facetious) He comes in singing, and goes out dancing still; so as
it is impossible to be melancholy where he is; and even Heraclitus in his
company cu'd not without laughter pass over this vale of tears. In fine, he is
the Democratis of the Age, and whilst others act Tragedies or Trage-Comedies on
the Theater of the world, he only acts Farses and Comedies whilst he lives;
and when he dies, they should only write been per acta fabula, he played his
part well, on his Tomb for Epitaph.

Character 75. Of an old Lady, who looked ill upon him, Under the name of Misa.
Made Anno 1653.
NOw what a Devil, Misa, makes
Thee with such Eyes behold me still?
'Cause from thee Time thy good looks takes,
Must I needs therefore have thy ill?
I prithee Misa don'^ behol^
Me thus, as if I were thy foe,
For howsoever thou art old,
I am not Time that made thee so.
And rather then to quarrel with me,
As if it were I had done thee wrong,
Go quarre^ with thy Age I prithee,
Whose fault it is thou have lived so long.
However for me thou well may spare
Thy Anger, and thy Frowns may ^^ase;
Who for thy good looks little care,
Does for thy bad ones care much less.
Character 76. Another on the same.
LEt A^tumn paint her withered leaves,
And Winter dye his snowy Hair;
Yet he is a Fool that not perce^ves,
That both but counterfeited are.
So whilst you will needs look young again,
And still seem fair unto our sight;
Misa, your labor's all in vain,
Like his, would wash ^he Ethiope white.
Nature by Art is b^tter made,
Whilst Art ha'^ ground for what it does*
But when the Gr^und-work's once decayed,
All Art but ^ore deformed shows.
Who looked w^ll in King James his Reign,
And i^ ^ing Charles his old appeared,
Will hard^y now look young again,
When ^h' Commonwealth has got a Beard.
Then Misa, follow my advice,
And leaving off thy bootless care,
Stri^e rather to win Hearts then Eyes,
And to appear more Good then Fair.
Character 77. Of a Valiant Man.
HE is only a Man; your Coward, but a Tame and rash, a wild and savage Beast.
His Courage is still the same, and drink cannot make him more valiant, nor
danger less. His Sword is not always out, like Childrens Daggers, but he is as
feared to enter into quarrels, as he is fearless when he is in them once. He is
never in passion, and knows no degree beyond clear Courage, being always
valiant, but never furious. He holds Boast (the Cowards valor) and Cruelty
(the beasts) unworthy a valiant man; and is only Coward in this, that he dares
not do an unhandsome action. He is neither quarrelsome nor querulous, nor
forwards in harming, nor too fearful in being harmed; but his Sword in War, is
the same as Justice's Balance is in Peace. The more fierce he is in the Field,
the more g^ntle he is in the Chamber; and he is not all outside, like those
Soldiers who are nothing but Buff and Feather, but he has the inside of a
Soldier, with the outside of a Courtier; and is as gallant amongst the Ladies,
as in the face of an Enemy: they well therefore joined Mars and Venus together,
for the one is too harsh and rough, the other too soft and Effeminate; both
together make the best Composition of a Valiant man.

Character 78. Of Mrs Stuart.
STuart a Royal Name that springs
From Race of Calidonian Kings;
Whose Compositio^ and fair Frame
Adds honor to tha^ Royal Name:
What praises can I worthy find,
To celebrate thy Form and Mind?
The greatest power that is ^n Earth,
Is given to Princes by their Birth;
But ther^'s no power in Earth ^or Heaven
More great then what is to Bea^ty given*
Tha^ makes not only men relent*
When unto Rage and Fury bent;
B^^ Lions (...), and Tigers mild,
All f^erceness from their Breasts exiled.
Such wonders ye^ could never be done
By Bea^tie's force and power alo^e,
Without ^he power and force to boot
Of excellent Goodness adde^ to it.
For just as D^amonds we behold
More ^rightly shine when set in Gold:
So Beauty shines far brighter yet,
I^ Virtue and in Goodness set.
Continue then but what you are,
So admirably Good and Fair;
Let Princes by t^eir Birthrights sway,
You Will have a Power as great as they.
I represent this Lady op^nly, and without Enigma, since her Beauty is so
bright, and Virtue's so transp^rent, as they cannot be shaddow'd nor
over-clouded; and with her conclude th^se Characters, since I cannot con^lude
them with a fairer Subject.

FINIS.

