The Occasion of Writing this Life.
HAd there been any hope, Tomaso's malice would ever have had an end, I had
expected it; but seeing that my suffering one injury, but invited a second, and
that a third, etc. and that, as my patience at first heapt hot burning coals
upon his head, so afterward it poured Oil upon the Fire, and made it but
flame the more; I knew not what Resolution to take. I knew him a man of a
dangerous Tongue, and therefore desired to have nothing to do with him; not
that I feared what he could say of me, but only, what I could say of him, being
loath to use the advantage I had over him; but since he would needs urge me, and
there was no end of his malice: I resolved at last, if a little sprinkling
would not quench the fire, to cast on whole Cataracts, but I would do it; how
ever, I owe him for this security, that I cannot make him more mine enemy then
be is.

LIFE OF TOMASO THE Wanderer.

AN EPITOME.

LICENSED According to Order.

Printed for the Author 1667*

To Mr. Thomas Killigrew.
SIR,
THE idle Time I was wont to spend at Plays, I employ more profitably in
writing Tomaso's Life; who being a person not unknown unto You; I shall send it
to You, as I writ it to Peruse, that having past your Approbation, it may
afterward more confidently appear abroad: So shall I do a good office to the
public, (for it is a work of no less profit and instruction, to set forth Vice
foul and ugly, to detest and avoid it, then Virtue fair and lovely to embrace
and follow it) and in particular, Sir, declare how much I am,

Your humble and Obedient Servant Richard Flecknoe.

THE LIFE OF Tomaso the Wanderer.
PROEMIVM.
W'Ave had full many famous Wights,
Some styled Squires, and others Knights,
Who for Arms, as well as Arts
Were counted men of Excellent Parts.
As Sir Hudibras for fighting.
Gregory Nonsense for his writing.
Archy for a crafty Courtier.
Muckle John for making sport there.
Coriat one that loved to wander:
And Squire Apple-John for pander.
Clancy for a Furb and Cheater;
(None e're knew the slights often better:
But for all (I Will boldly say so,)
None more famous then Tomaso.
But to leave Verse, and fall to Prose.

BEing to write Tomaso's Life, I know not well what style to write it in; for,
he is too vicions for Raillerie, and not worth a serious thought; but he is more
fit for the Satirical style, less fit he is for any other; in that it shall be
then.

He was one born to discredit all the Professions he was of; the Traveller,
Courtier, Soldier, Writer, and the Buffoon, in all: All which we shall Treat
of, severally and apart, after w'ave told you his Nature and Disposition.

Of his Nature and Disposition.
HE was so ill Natured, as he cared not in whose light he stood, so he might
see; nor whom he indamag'd, so he might gain by it; and if he had a kindness
for any one, 'twas only for being as vicious as himself: So even his good
Nature was but an effect of his ill; and his ill in every thing predominant.

He thought all the World made for him, and he for none; and that all wisdom
consisted in keeping his own, and getting as much as he could of another Man's.

He was another Titus reverst; and thought he had lost a day when he had harmed
and mischiev'd none; and was so pernicious to every one, as if that saying be
true, that one man is a Wolf unto another; 'twas never more verified then in
him; so as if King Lucius were alive again, he would give more for freeing the Land
from him alone, then formerly he did for all the Wolves together.

How he Wandered Abroad.
HE talks of Banishment, but it is well known he was forced to fly his Country
for debt, long before any other Banishment was talked of, and he bandited
himself but as Citizens turn Bankerouts to cousen their Creditors. Besides,

To add to his evil nature as evil Arts, he went abroad, and in Italy studied
the Putana Errante, the Picaro in Spain, and all the Fripons and Friponeries in
France, till he had perfectly learnt all their Arts, and was completely
qualified to deboish and cousen every one.

To tell you of his Deboisheries I should offend all modest ears; and I would I
had some qualifying Term, to call his deceits and Cozenages by, (for to call
every thing by their proper Names is course, and savouring of Rusticity;) but
be the name what it will, the thing's the same.

'Twere endless to tell you how he deceived and coz'ned every one, of all
Qualities, Nations, and Religions, Jews, Italians, Courtesans, etc. but
especially those of his own Country; nor was ever any more adopted for it then
he, who was flattering and insinuating, and had learnt of Lysander, that as
Children are coz'ned with Nuts and Apples, so Men are with good words and fair
promises; and he was so wrapped up in craft and dissimulation, as you might
sooner peel a Bulbus Root out of all his Rinds, then unfold him out of all his
subtilties; and sweep an Earthen Flore to its last grain of dust, then come to
an end of his dissimulation. So wandered he up and down, (worse then a Mount
bank, for he cures Men, but Tomaso made them worse* those fell Druggs, but ^he
Fumo* or smoke, and their Receipts were for others, but his was for himself,)
till finding no more abroad, to cozen and deboish, without which there was no
living for him; (the one maintaining the other, and either him,) he returned
home at last, and might well say with Buscon his fellow-Wanderer: Con l' Art e
con l' Inganno
Vivo l' mezzo part l' Anno;
Con l' Inganno e con l' Art,
Vivo l' Altra mezzo part.
That is in English, With my Art, and with deceit,
Part of my Living I do get,
And I get the other part
With deceit and with my Art.


Being returned, he fell to practicing at home the Arts he had learnt abroad,
and had a more profitable field for it, though not so ample as he had before.

How he was a Courtier.
ALthough he had a better place in Court, then he deserved, yet he would needs
add the Buffoon's place unto it, as more suitable to his humor and
disposition, and more privilege to abuse and rail at every one: there being
none of any Dignity in Church or State whom he had not saucily abused with his
lewd and scurrilous Tongue; for he was of a bold abusive wit; and whilst others
took care of what they said, he talked madly, dash, dash, and never cared how he
be spatter'd others, or defiled himself, sparing neither his own, nor others
shames; and his impudent boldness was all his wit, with which he caused
Laughter, but 'twas rather forced then natural, and as they laughed at mischief,
so they laughed at him; his Jests having always somewhat of malice in them, and
he being the worst sort of Satyr, not against Vice, but Virtue; a professed enemy
to all that were Virtuous, and never pardoning Virtue in any one.

So he was a perpetual Libel in the Court of others, and to others of the
Court; and they but repeated his bold speeches, when they would speak ill of
it, though the worst they could say of it, was only that he was one of it.

Whence if the Court (as they say) be a Heaven or a Firmament, where the Prince
is the Sun, and other Courtiers, (as they are nigh to him in place) bright
shining Stars, he certainly was a dark Cloud obscuring all the rest, and the
Court would shine far brighter if he were but away.

How he was a Soldier.
DUring the Wars, not to be a Soldier, he made himself a Captain, and to escape
fighting, has continued so ever since, his Sword being so little able to boast
its blood, as all its nobility lies in the Hylt and Belt; and it derives its
honor more from the Scabbard then the Blade.

All the Employment he had during the Wars, was now and then to bring up a
Convoy of Wenches to the Camp, (a sort of terrible Engines of War, that do as
much harm and execution by Land, as Fireships do by Sea) whence he gained the
honorable Title of Pimp-Master General of the Army; in which office he
continued till (chiefly for his sins) his side at last being overcome; he, as
from some common shipwreck was the first that saved himself; and so he were
safe, cared not what became of all the rest.

Of his second Expedition.
I Could tell you, but that 'twere too long a digression, how in this his
second Expedition, Cum Privilegio of Cavalier and Royalist, he coz'ned more in
the Kings name, then ever Constable apprehended, or Judge condemned. Only I
will say that if he fleec't them before, he flayed them now; and plain Coz'nage
might have past for Honesty, compared to the tricks, slights, project, and
inventions, which he had to cozen them, especially his own Countrymen; so as
his name became as formidable to 'um as ever Drakes was to the Spaniards, or
Talbots to the French; and so it has continued ever since. And in this* and his
first going abroad it was, when he fell to writing Plays, and h'ad good
witness, he could write one in a day, or two; imagine but what stuff it must be
the whi^st.

Of his Writings.
It Is a great Commendation for a man to be, tam mart quam mercurio; as good at
Arts and Arms; and so was he, for he was good at neither; yet he would needs
be writing, though he could not spell, and be an Author, without Rhyme or
Reason; and without any other learning, then only that of vice and debaucherie:
Whence his writings were so scurrilous and profane, as for less, the Heathens
banished their Writers formerly, and the Christians burn their writings by the
hand of common Hang-men, for less Martial's Poet was damned, when forced by the
Furies to confess his crime, he only cried out Scripsi, that he had writ: and
whilst others shall have other Books at the latter day produced against them,
he shall only need his own to condemn him and thousands others too; (there is so
much of the Devil and of Tomaso in them) but that fevv or none ever read what
he has writ, excepting only such as are so bad already, his writings cannot
make them worse, and so corrupted, as they cannot corrupt them more.

Which he perceiving, was so impudent to bring them upon the stage, to infect
that with it too, by which he has frighted all chaste ears from thence, and will
all the rest in time, if he may have but his Plays Acted, or the appointing of
those which are.

Of his Religion.
OF his Religion I say nothing, since he had none at all, (having left it long
before that he might make no scruple nor conscience of any thing) and your
Athiest and Heathen were Names too serious for him, who only made a mockery of
it, and counted it all a cheat; Devotion, foppery; Scripture, fabulous; Heaven
and Hell, nothing; and Gods and Fiends, only inventions of men to fright and
terrify Fools from being as bravely wicked as himself; who laughed and made a
fool of Machiavel, for holding that none could be extremely vicious.

L' Envoy.
FOr his Diseases I will not touch them, not to defile my self, who had truckt
vices for diseases so long, till he had enough to furnish an Hospital; nor will
I describe his Person, who being a Monster of a man, I should shame and
dishonor Humanity to set him forth in any humane shape; imagine him as ugly as
you please, whilst I declare his ugly qualities.

Only to make an end of depainting him, He is most commonly pictured with a
Dog, the right emblem of his disposition; only a Mastive is too generous a
beast for him, it should have been rather some moungril Cur, always craving,
and never satisfied, fawning on his greatest enemies to serve his ends, and
those once served, barking at his dearest friends; by which Dog-tricks of his,
as he was an enemy to all, so he made every one an enemy to him.

Thus have I briefly and in Epitome, set forth his Life, reserving the making
his History more at large, until I shall hear that he is not content with this.

FINIS.

