THE Damoiselles A LA MODE. A COMEDY.

Composed and Written by RICHARD FLECKNOE.



LONDON: Printed for the Author, 1667.

Licensed

May the 15th, 1667. By Roger L'Estrange.

TO THEIR GRACES THE DUKE and DUCHESS OF Newcastle, THE AUTHOR DEDICATES THIS
HIS COMEDY MORE HUMBLY THEN BY WAY OF EPISTLE.

THE PREFACE.
THis Comedy is taken out of several Excellent Pieces of Moliere. The main plot
of the Damoiselles out of his Pretieusee's Ridiculee's; the Counterplot of
Sganarelle, out of his Escole des Femmes, and out of the Escole des Marys, the
two Naturals; all which like so many Pretieuse stones, I have brought out of
France; and as a Lapidary set in one Jewel to adorn our English Stage: And I
hope my setting them, and giving them an English foil, has nothing diminisht
of their native luster. And I have not only done like one who makes a posie out
of diverse flowers in which he has nothing of his own, (besides the collection,
and ordering them) but like the Be, have extracted the spirit of them into a
certain Quintessence of mine own.

For the Language of the Pretieuse, it may be wondered that I durst attempt the
Englishing it (so often attempted by our best English wits, and as often
despaired of) it being a Language even new unto the French themselves, and so
little understood by most of them, as they are forced to make a Dictionary for
it apart; which notwithstanding I have done, and I hope with that success, as I
have not only made the Language of the Author, English, but even the spirit,
life, and quickness of it too.

For my Printing it before it is Acted, it is only to give the Auditors their
Bill of Fare before hand; so far from taking away their Appetites of seeing it
afterward, as (on the contrary) if they like it, it increases it but the more;
and if every one who writes for the Stage would but do the like, there would
not be so much deceit in it as there is* Nor do I it to render it more public,
but only more legible, (few having patience to read more then a Letter in
written hand) and I may well say I have found out the secret of Printing, since
written Copies communicated to many, and Printed only to few, are secrets alike.

For the Acting it, those who have the Governing of the Stage, have their
Humors, and would be entreated; and I have mine, and w'ont entreat them; and
were all Drammatick VVriters of my mind, they should wear their old Plays
Threadbare, e're they should have any New, till they better understood their
own Interest, and how to distinguish betwixt good and bad.

Mean time I suppose 'twill not be difficult for all who read this Comedy, to
comprehend, how the World's a a Theater, every place a Stage, all who read
and understand, Actors and Auditors, and there may be as good Plays now a
days not Acted, as Acted, at our Theaters, and by our Actors here.

Richard Flecknoe.

AA


THE INTRODUCTION.
The Candles lighted, before the Curtain's drawn, Enter one of the Actors,
another (supposed no Actor) calling after him. 1. HArk you, hark you, whither
away so fast?


2. Why to the Theater, it is past three o'th Clock,
and the Play's ready to begin.

1. Stay a little, and I Will go along w'ye.
They say you have a new Play to day?

2. We have so.


1. And who is the Author? who made it?


2. For that it is no matter, so the Play be good.


1. By your favor, but it is though,
and a great matter too; for oftentimes
the reputation of the Author, is more
then half the goodness of the Play.

2. Let it suffice, it is one who has been more
then a Prentiship at the Trade,
and it is with Poets, and their Plays,
as with Potters, and their Vessels,
where (most commonly) your young beginners
Mar half a dozen
before they can make one.

1. But has he any Faction for him?
has he any to cry him up, in court or town?
else he will be sure to be cried down
before the Curtain's drawn, or Music
play.

2. For that he is of an odd humor,
and says h'ad rather stand on his own legs,
then stalk on stilts of others favors.

1. That Is the surest way indeed,
but the other (now adays) the more plausible

2. And what thinks he of it himself? for
none can do any thing but by chance,
who knows not how well he does it.

2. For him to praise or dispraise it
were vanity,
and but to usurp
upon the privilege of the Auditors,
only this he dares say, it is a Merry Comedy,
and he hopes will please all, but only such
as would have Plays as serious as their business,
and as sad as Funeral Orations.

1. But let him not be too confident of it though,
for it is a Critical Age that finds out spots
even in the Sun it self;
and men's expectations
never deceive them more
then in others judgments of their Plays;

2. For him, he is so little presumptuous,
as he submits his Play wholly unto
the judgment of the Auditors
with this Protestation,
that he shall be as little offended with
those who shall justly find any fault with
it, as he should be with those who
should find any dirt
or spot of dirt,
on his Hat, or Clothes, to brush off,
or wipe away; --
nay he should take it
as a courtesy from them rather.

1. As for that
he shall find enough
to do him that courtesy
(I Will vvarrant him)
and me amongst the rest.

2. Come, let us go then.


Exeunt. Of the Persons Represented, and Actors Representing them.
TOgether with the Persons Represented in this Comedy, I have set down the
Comedians, whom I intended should Represent them, that the Reader might have
half the pleasure of seeing it Acted, and a lively imagination might have the
pleasure of it all entire. The Scaenes and Clothes being the least Considerable
in it, any Italian Scaenes with four Doors serving for the one, and for the
other any French Clothes A la Mode.

The Persons Represented.
Monsir Bonhomme, Father to the Damsels. In love with Isabella. His Friend.
Monsir Valerio, Monsir Ergasto,
Suitors unto them.
Monsir Du Buisson Monsir La Fleur
Sganarelle, Guardian to Isabella. Two Laquys disguised.
Marque Mascarillio, Count Iodelet.
Two Natural Fools, Sganerelle's Houskeepers. Madmoiselle Mary. Damoiselles a
la Mode. Madmoiselle Anne. Damoiselles a la Mode. Isabella A vvitty Damoiselle
Lysette, the Damoiselles waiting Woman. Mutes.
Two Chair-Men. One of the Music. Gentlemen and Ladies for the Ball, etc.

The Scaene PARIS. The Unity of Persons, Time, and Place, exactly observed.

The Representers, as they were first designed.
Cartwright. C. Heart. W. Winterson. Burt. E. Keninston. I. Lacy. M. Moon. R.
Shatterel. Alexander and Wilbraham. The Two Marshalls. Mrs. Rutter. Nel Guin.
PROLOGUE.
Intended for the Overture of the Theater, 1666.
IN these sad Times our Author has been long
Studying to give you some diversion;
And he has ta'n the way to do it, which he
Thought most diverting, mirth, and Comedy:
And now he knows there are enough in the Town
At name of Mirth and Comedy will, frown,
And sighing say, the times are bad what then?
Will their being sad and heavy better them!
Or rather will not their sad and heavy cheer
Make these our times worse then they are appear?
Sadness for Physic may be sometimes good;
But cheerfulness should be our daily food;
Without whose most delightful seasoning,
Even life it self were an insipid thing.
It Is a great happiness when men are sad,
Divertisments may any ways be had:
And we do hope our Comedy to day,
May so divert you, as you all shall say,
Whilst every one some Recreation has,
The best and most delightful ones, are Plays.
THE DAMOISELLES A LA MODE.
Actus I.
Scaena I.
Enter Sganarelle and Monsieur Bonhomme. Bonhomme. NAy but will you hear me a
little?


Sgan. Perhaps I will, perhaps I will not. --
You don't come to chide me I hope?

Bonh. No, but to give you good counsel rather.


Sgan. And that is little better then chiding.


Bonh. And to tell you as a friend what the world says of you.


Sgan. What care I what it says?


Bonh. I there it is now! you care not for the world, nor the world for you; who
live in it so sequestered from all society: You seem no more a part of the
Universe, then a loose stone in a wall, a part of the building, or Edifice.


Sgan. Well it is my humor, what then?


Bonh. Then you are as froward as young Children, as wayward as old age; and for
courtesy and civility the chiefest bond of humane Society, you are a mere
stranger to it, and know no more then the very Savages in America.


Sgan. Ha, ha, ha.


Bonh. What do you laugh! and are you not moved with this?


Sgan. Yes to a little vanity or so, to hear so much of my Commendations.


Bonh. If you count this your commendations, what do you count discommendations I
pray?


Sgan. Why to be counted such a silly fool, to have them say of me, Oh! he is a
very good! a very honest man!


Bonh. And is goodness, and honesty, a discommendation with you then?


Sgan. I marry is it, as the world goes now adays, when it only serves to fool
us, and makes us but a prey to every knave. --

And what do they say beside?


Bonh. Why since you will needs have it, for Madmoiselle Isabella. --


Sgan. I, what do they say of her?


Bonh. Why they say, she was not left unto your care by her deceased father, to
be made a slave and prisoner by you.


Sgan. And was she left unto your care I pray?


Bonh. Why no, who says she was?


Sgan. Then meddle with that you have to do withal, -- you would have me bring her
up, I Will warrant you, as you do your fine Daughters there, to be always gadding
abroad a visiting.


Bonh. Well.


Sgan. Or visited at home?


Bonh. And that too?


Sgan. And have all your fine youths and Gallants of the Time (who stoop like
Pyes or Dawes when they peck at fruit, alternaetly, their tayls above their
becks) complement them, and give them Balls and Collations?


Bonh. And what then?


Sgan. Why then you are a fool, Cousin, and if you were twenty Cousins I Would tell
you so; -- for her, being committed to my care, either to marry her, or see her
well married, I Will bring her up in manner as befits a wife, in the blessed
state of ignorance, she shall see and know nothing; for this seeing and knowing
too much, undid the first woman in Paradise, and has undone all your Women ever
since.


Bonh. Should your Women but hear you, they would claw out your eyes for this.


Sgan. Then she shall have no Books to read in, for that but corrupts them at
second hand; and if she had not learnt to write and read before her fathers
death, she should have never learnt for Sganarelle.


Bonh. And this you count good breeding now?


Sgan. Better then your fine Daughters have, I wuss, to be always a' the mode,
dressed up unto the height, as if such Beauties simply of themselves, wear not
darts killing and dangerous enough, but they must be poisoned too? no, I Will
keep her untainted from the vanities of the Time.


Bonh. Alas! you know she is too wise to be corrupted by them.


Sgan. No matter for that, I Will trust rather to mine own wisdom, then unto
hers, and keep so strict a hand over her, as she shall not be corrupted, though
she would.


Bonh. And I so gentle an one over mine, as I hope they would not, though they
could.


Sgan. Well then since you are so resolved, take you your course, and I Will take
mine, and see who will have the better of it at the end.


Bonh. Content, and see:

Here comes my Daughters -- they have done their visit it seems.


Sgan. And Isabella with them! I like not that.


SCENA II.
Enter Madmoiselle Anne, Mary, Isabella, and Lysette. Mary. ANd does he coop
you up so?


Isab. So as you see.


Mar. Nor suffers you to be visited by none.


Isab. By none but you, and that he grumbles at too!


An. How do you pass your time then -- learn to Preserve perhaps?


Lys. I -- to preserve her shoes, if she never stirs abroad.


Mar. And yet does he make Love to ye?


Isab. I, as Cats do, or High Dutch to their Mistresses, you would think they chid
the while.


Lys. And I Would scold as fast, were it to me.


Mar. Come you shall go abroad with us and take the air.


Isab. He Will never suffer it.


Mar. I Will warrant you.


Sgan. Now! whither away so fast w'ye?


Isab. I tremble every joint of me!


Lys. Fie for shame! -- e're I Would stand in such awe of any man, I Would see him
hanged, if he were worth hanging.


Mar. W'ave entreated our Cousin here along with us to take the air.


Sgan. for you, you may go if you please; but for her, she shall tarry at home,
I Will have no gadding with her.


Bonh. Pray let me entreat for her this once, -- we must allow youth some
Recreation.


Sgan. Youth's a fool, and Age is little better; -- she'as Recreation enough at
home, she needs not go abroad for it.


Lys. What? to make you Night-caps! or piece your old Stockins at heels perhaps!


Sgan. I Will none of these Recreations, I, in her whom I intend to make my wife.


Lys. Your wife! what should you do with a wife I pray? a dainty Itch well
scratcht, or Curry-comb neatly handled, would do your business.


Bonh. Peace, huswife, you are too bold.


Mar. Shall Not we entreat so much for her this once then?


Sgan. No indeed Shall Not you, and I Would entreat you to come and visit her no more
if this be your business, -- I fear she learns no good of you, so she does not.


Lys. More then of you for all your
sour countnance
and venegar mien -- in faith, in faith were I
as she, if you should use me thus, I Would make
you a Cuckold if ever I married you.

Sgan. And were she
as you, I think she would indeed;
but as she is, I Will look to her well enough,
she shall have none of your mothers
Daughters for Counselors.

Lys. And if she had, she would be better counseled then by your father's son, I
wuss.


Bonh. Come, come, leave your prattle, and Daughters go you home, where you are to
expect two honest Gentlemen, in nature of Suitors to come and visit you.


Mar. Fine Gentlemen spoken scornfully.
I Will vvarrant them!

Bonh. And look you use them kindly when they come, and entertain them well,
do you hear?


An. Never fear it, we will entertain them as they deserve.


Bonh. Do so then -- so go and take your leaves.


Sgan. I good Lady Eve begone and take your Tempter there, your waitingwoman
along w'ye.


Lys. In Faith, in faith, were I your Tempter, I Would only tempt you to hang
yourself, or so.


Bonh. Go, go, begone I say, and I Will but only go dispatch a little business I
have in the Town, and strait ways follow you.

Exeunt Damoiselles. As for you Cousin, I'ave only this to say to ye before I
go, --

Those who seek to be rather feared then loved, shall find themselves rather
hated then feared at last, -- and so farevvell.


Sgan. Very good -- and I Have only this to say to you too before you go -- let
them hate me so they fear me, and so farewell to you again.


Exit Bonhomme. Manent Sganarelle and Isabella. Sgan. So -- now get you in and
expect no more this liberty, do you hear? she whom I intend to make my wife, must
imagine my house is all the world, and that there is no other company in the
world but only she and I.


Isab. bless me! that imagination would make me desperate!

Aside.
Sgan. So -- make your curtsie, and be gone, -- * very good -- and look to your
business, do you hear!


Isab. Which is only to be rid of you, which till I am,

Aside. I will be nothing but Plot and Stratagem.

Exit.
Sgan. Now let me think a little.


SCENA III.
Enter Valerio and Ergato, Sganarelle. Valerio. Yonder Is the waking Dragon that
has my Golden fruit in Custody, I Would fain be acquainted with him.


Sgan. Let me see, what am I about now? to marry -- very good, an honorable
calling! and if there be any pleasure and contentment in this life, your
married man has it -- I Will go marry presently, I am resolved on it.


Valerio salutes him, and he minds him not. Er. He sees you not, to him again.


Sgan. But stay Sganarelle, consider a little first, how besides the care and
trouble of wife and children, all married men, or are, or may be Cuckolds --
hum! I Will none often, marry who is list for me.


Val. He Is blind a' this side (sure,) I Will try the other.


Sgan. Well, I Will take some further time to consider on it; mean time I Will out
of Town as soon as I can, for there is no keeping a woman here without a hundred
eyes.


Erg. Now, now.


Espies him. Sgan. Whoo! what a does here, this is no English Quaker sure, he
makes so many Reverences -- again? sure he is some young Reveller, practicing to
make his honors here -- with me Sir?


Val. Yes Sir, I have the happin^ss to be your Neighbor here hard by.


Sgan. It may be so.


Val. I should be glad of your better acquaintance.


Sgan. And why so I pray?


Val. Only to come and discourse w'ye sometime, o'th affairs o'th time, and
news o'th Town, as who is married, to whom.


Sgan. Let them be hanged, what care I.


Val. And what is said or done at Court, amongst the rest, do you hear the News
Sir?


Sgan. No, nor I don't care to hear it.


Val. No fastening any discourse on him?
I perceive Sir you live solitary Aside.
and retired at home.

Sgan. What Is that to you?


Val. And should be glad of company sometimes.


Sgan. Who told you so?


Val. And in faith how do you pass your time at home.


Sgan. Why, as I please my self.


Val. You do very well in it, and so should every one do that is wise; and if you
please, I should be glad sometimes to come and pass an Eve'ning w'ye, or so.


Sgan. Serviteur.


Exit abruptly. Manent Valerio and Ergato. Erg. Ha, ha, ha!

If he fight at this ward as he speaks, I Will warrant any one for hitting him,
-- Now -- what do you think of him, and of his brisk replies?


Val. Why I think he is one of the race of the ancient Spartans, or
Pythagoreans, h'as so few words with him.


Erg. And those he has, are all rusty, and want oyling; the whoreson speaks
nothing but old Iron and Hobnails.


Val. Rather Daggers and Punyards that stab me to the heart; -- what a misery
is it to have her I love, guarded by such a Cerberus as he?


Erg. Rather it is your happiness; for take this from me, a Woman guarded, is
half won; and he who but delivers her from her Guardian, gains the other half
of her.


Val. I, but how to do it, there is all the difficulty.


Erg. Think, think, have you no invention in you? I never saw a man so dull; --
did you ever speak unto her?


Val. Never.


Erg. Nor writ unto her?


Val. Neither.


Erg. Why then you have done nothing yet; -- has she no servants to make your
confidents?


Val. None as I know of; only as often as she goes abroad, I follow her; nor
does the Hyacinth that amorous flovver, e're follovv the Sun with more
assidual regards, then I do her.


Erg. But does she take notice of it?


Val. That I know not neither.


Erg. Why then you know nothing -- think, think on some way to let her know
your love for shame.


Val. I but what? the more I think on it, the more impossible I find it.


Erg. Hang impossibilities! there is no such things in nature, it is hope enough,
you love a Woman, and she a living one; Pigmalion only loved the dead Statua of
one, and yet (you see) he put life into it at last. -- Think, think again then,
and I Will vvarrant you, the brain's a fertile soil; and let our wit but sovv
the seed, Time soon will ripen it.


Exeunt. SCENA IV.
Enter Sganarelle and Isabella. Sganarelle. SAy no more, I know the man, and
the house he lives at -- Valerio do you call him?


Isab. So they tell me Sir.

Heaven prosper my plot, as my intent is innocent.


Aside. Sgan. Go, go in, and let me alone with him: Gramercy for this
Intelligence in faith now I see thou love me.


Isab. I, as I do a Snake or Toad.


Aside. Manet Sganarelle. Exit. Sgan. I! are you such an one indeed! I Am glad I
know it, -- no vvonder he made me so many Reverences, and desired to come and
visit me, -- I Will none of that I thank you; that were to let a Thief into my
house, or Wolf into my sheepfold; but he that is vvarn'd is Armed, I Will to him
strait, and tell him soundly of it; -- but stay before I go, let me make all
sure at home: Where are my Urchins? where are my Changlings there?


SCENA V.
Enter two Natural Fools. 1. HEre Master.


2. Here Master.


Sgan. These are all the servants I keep, or rather the Parish keeps them, and
they serve well enough to keep my house, there is thrift and policy together
now: I suppose they will be faithful, 'cause they have not wit enough to be
otherwise, Come hither, you must stand modestly whilst I speak unto ye; how
often have espyes them Playing. I told you of this!

I must go abroad, do you hear?


1. I Master.


2. I Master.


Sgan. And be sure in my absence you look well unto my house.


1. I Master.


2. I Master.


Sgan. If any Trades-woman come, under pretense of selling their Ware, be sure
you keep them out, for they are all Bawds, do you hear?


1. I Master.


2. I Master.


Sgan. As for the men, I need not tell you how dangerous it is to let them in
who talk to women of nothing but fire and flames.


1. I Master.


2. I Master.


Sgan. Then though your Mistress fall into a swound, be sure you let no
Physician in unto her, for their looking to their waters is altogether as
dangerous as t*others fires.


1. I Master.


2. I Master.


Sgan. So, being so well instrusted, 'go, look carefully to your charge, and my
benediction w'ye.


1. I Will go for fear the Cat eat up my Bird.


2. And I for fear the Dog lap up my Porridge.


Exeunt. Manet Sganarelle. Sgan. Now for my other business, this is the house
as I take it.

Holla, who is within there?


Knocks. SCAENA VI.
Enter Valerio and Ergasto. Valerio. Who knocks there? Oh Sir is it you, you are
very welcome.


Sgan. I Will none of your welcomes.


Erg. He Is at's old ward again.


Sgan. Is your name Valerio?


Val. It is Sir, at your service.


Sgan. I Will none of your services neither, but I come to ask you whether you
know that I am Guardian to a certain Damoiselle called Isabella there.


Val. I do Sir very well.


Sgan. Well then, if you know it, I need not tell you so -- next, if you know
that, having the disposing of her in Marriage, I intend to marry her my self.


Val. That I know not yet.


Sgan. Well then, if you don't, I Would have you know so much, and that I take it
very unkindly at your hands, that she can never stir abroad, but you are
hanting her like a Ghost, and following her so, she may as well be rid of her
shadow, as of you.


Val. I Sir!


Sgan. I you Sir.


Val. Who tells you so I pray?


Sgan. Marry those who best can tell, even she her self.


Erg. There Is some comfort, she takes notice of thee yet.


Sgan. 'And besides she bids me tell you that she marks the amorous glances
that you give her too.


Erg. Ah, ha, Boys! this works.


Sgan. And having perceived thus much she would advise you to take some other
course, for this will not do she says.


Erg. Why this is clear, she is thine own I Will warrant thee boy.


Sgan. And this she says she would have told you soon, but that she wanted
opportunity of a fit messenger, and was loath to trouble me.


Erg. A notable witty wench!


Val. Well, Sir I Am sorry I Have put you to this trouble, and pray tell her I
follow her it is true, and look on her, with the same Reverence as adoring
Persians look upon the Sun.


Sgan. Pray lets have no more of your Reverence; w'ave had enough of them to
day already, and for your looks pray keep them to your self, for if I catch you
looking on her any more. --


Val. What then?


Sgan. Why then -- I Would entreat you to look on some body else.


Val. Oh! is that all?


Sgan. And so farewell unto ye.


Val. I dare not bid him farewell again now, least he should be angry -- well
what do think of this?


Sgan. I Have made him stare like a Pig! little did he look for such a message
from her.


Erg. Why she is done thy business to thy hand, and prevented thee.


Val. Peace he observes us, let us in, and think what use to make of it.


Exeunt. Manet Sganarelle. Sgan. I think I have put him to his dumps. I marry
here is a virtuous woman now! that is offended if a man but look on her! where
shall you find such another? and how long would it bee're my Cousin's Daughters
would do so much, who dress up themselves a purpose to be looked upon? but
Isabella defyes them all, and I defy all the world to show me such another;
thanks to my care of her, and her good Breeding and Education.


Exit. Finis Actus Primi.
Actus II.
Scaena VII.
Enter Monsieur Du Buisson, and La Fleur. La Fleur. Well, and what think you
of our Entertainment now?


Du Buis. Why I think, had we been of the lowest rank of men, no higher then
Grooms and Foot-boys, they could not have entertained us more scurvily, nor
with more contempt and scorn. --

Proud pets! not so much as salute us, nor offer us to sit!


La Fl. No, nor speak to us, and when we spoke to them, not so much as daign to
answer us with yea nor no!


Du Buis. Then there was such winking and whispering, such laughing and
teehying with them?


La Fl. I, and such yavvning and rubbing of their eyes, with ever and anon
looking on their Watches, as if they thought the time too long, and were a
weary of our Companies.


Du Buis. And at last they fairly rose and went away without so much as bidding
us farewell: -- But I know the reason of this, and if I do not fit them for it.
--


La Fl. As how I prithee?


Du. Buis. Why I have observed your Damoiselles in Paris here, and almost all
France over, are grown of late as mad with reading your modern Romances, as Don
Quixot was with reading your ancient Books of Chivalry; and look that all who
visits them should be as mad and Romansick as themselves; and cause we were not
so, they slighted us as they did; now will I cloth my Laquey like one of your
Gallants, whom they admire so much, all Fool and Feather, and send him thither,
and see how they will entertain him.


La Fl. Content, and I Have another as foolish and fantastical as he, who can
imitate all their Cringes and Complements, talk bilk as loud and confidently as
any of them, and throw himself like a Tumbler after the Ladies, and he shall
along with him.


Du Buis. The more the merryer. -- But see here comes their Father Monsieur
Bonhomme, good honest Gentleman, one who speaks as he thinks, and does as he
says, and means well and honestly in every thing.


SCAENA II.
Enter Monsieur Bonhomme. Bonhomme. THis Paris is nothing but noise and hurry,
and one loses more spirits in a day with it here, then they can recover in a
month in the Country. --

What Monsieur Du Buisson and Monsieur La Flour? my sons I hope they shall be!
and how is it ha? have you been with my Daughters?


Du Buis. Yes we have seen them Sir.


Bonh. And how do you like them ha?


La Fl. Their person's well, but their Entertainment not so well.


Bonh. How so?


Du Buis. Nay for that y'ad best ask them themselves, and so we take our leaves
and humbly thank you for all your courtesies and civilities.


Exeunt. Manet Bonhomme. Bonh. Hovv's this? this is very strange and abrupt?
I Will lay my life these scornful Baggages have said or done somevvhat now that
has offended them. -- I shall know that presently, and if they have, they
shall hear of 't soundly. --

Who Is within there?


SCAENA III.
Enter Lysette. Lysette. What Is your pleasure Sir?


Bonh. Where are your Mistresses?


Lys. Above in their Closet forsooth.


Bonh. What a doing I pray.


Lys. Making Pomatum forsooth.


Bonh. Go call them hither presently. -- I Will no more of these Pomatums, they
mean to undo me with them I think; I could keep half a dozen servants with
the milk, vvhites of Eggs, and sheeps Trotters, which they spend in daubing
their fine Muzzles every day, -- they are quite spoiled again since their Mothers
death, she kept them to their work, but now there is nothing but idleness
with them, and reading of these paltry Romances, that fill their heads with
nothing but vvhimseys and vvindmills that are perpetually turning round; --
would they were all burnt for me.


SCAENA IV.
Enter Madmoiselle Ann, Mary and Lysette. Bonhomme. COme, where are you? --
and how did* you use those Gentlemen I pray, whom I recommended for Husbands
to ye that they are gone away so discontent?


Mar. Better then they deserved I Am sure.


Bonh. How so?


Mar. Fine Gentlemen indeed! to begin their addresses to us with Matrimony at
first dash!


Bonh. And how would you have them begin, with Concubinage, I pray? I Am sure
'tas been the beginning of all who 'ave meant well and honestly ever since I
was born.


Mar. Fie Father, how simply and vulgarly you talk? in troth I Am, ashamed of
you! had the Grand Cyrus begun with Mandana a' this manner, or else Aruns with
Clelia, w'ad had a fine Romance no doubt of it, no longer then the Posie of a
Wedding Ring.


Bonh. What have I to do with Aruns and Clelia, or the Grand Cyrus either?


An. Nay father my sister tells you right, for to begin with Marriage, was to
begin at the wrong end, and to take the Romance by the tail, as they use to
say.


Mar. No father, a hundred Adventures must precede, and a hundred Intrigues,
before it comes to that; as first the Cavalier must see the Lady in some Ball
Temple or public solemnity, and there fall desperately in love with her.


An. Then by some friend or near parent or so, he is to be brought to kiss her
hands, when he is to endeavor by a thousand Gallantries, to gain her favor and
good esteem.


Mar. But not a word of Marriage all this while, until at last in some Terrase
or private walk in the Garden, remote from Company, he is to declare his love unto
her.


An. When presently in mighty displeasure she is to leave him, and banish him
her presence.


Mar. Then is he to pine, languish, and consume away, ('twould pity you to see
him) till at last by mediation of some friend, and's humble submission, her
anger is appeased, his banishment revokt, and he restored unto her favor and
grace again.


An. But not a word of Marriage, all this while.


Bonh. Never have done!


An. Till after a hundred persecutions of Parents displeasures, servants
Treacheries, and Rivals Jealousies, with two or three duels at least (happy if
he scapes with life) by mutual consent he is to steal her away at last, and so
to marry her.


Bonh. I thought they would never have done,


Mar. This father in true Gallantry now, is to marry a la mode, a la Belle
maniere as they say.


Bonh. Fidle fadle! without all these ceremonies and ado's, you shall marry
these Gentlemen, and that presently, or I Will know why you shall not, do ye
hear? you Mary and Anne, I say you shall*


Mar. Oh father! for heavens Love call us no more by those scurvy trivial names
of Anne and Mary, able to spoil the best Romance as e're was writ.


Bonh. Yet more Romances!


An. My Sister tells you true Father, and be you Judge your self, whether
Amaranthe and Polixene, Names which w'ave chose ourselves, sound not a hundred
times better then Mal and Nane, Names only for Orange women, able to shock any
curious ear; out upon it, I wonder you can endure to hear them!


Bonh. Go to, I say, I Will none of these Amarantha's and Polixens, but have you
called by the names you were Christened by at the Font and Baptism, by your
Godfathers and Godmothers.


Mar. Still Father will you be vulgar and trivial? to talk of Godfathers and
Godmothers, Christendom, Fonts, Baptism, and I know not what, as if you were
Catechizing! when I pray did you ever read of these in a Romance.


Bonh. And when did I ever read a Romance I pray?


An. I that it is that makes you so ignorant as you are, if you had, in faith you
would have better known what belongs to Gallantry and a la mode.


Bonh. Mode me no modes, but leave these Fopperies, and marry these Gentlemen
presently, or else you both go to a Nunnery, there is the short and the long of
it: My shoulders are too weak I tell you plain, to carry any longer so heavy a
burden as two such as you unmarryed in my house.


An: For my part father I could be well content to marry, so it were with
one I likt.


Bonh. And what is it you dislike in these I pray?


Mar. Why a hundred things, first for a man to come a wooing in a plain and
simple leg, without canons, a Hat without Feathers, and so horrible and furious
an indigence of Ribbons and Garniture of his clothes, who could endure it?


An* Then their Linen was none of the finest, nor o'th best Linniners making
neither:


An: Besides 'tvvas all plain as my Sock without, or point of Geneva, Venice,
Ragusa, Sedan, or Oreliaek.


Bonh. What faults they find?


An. Besides their hair instead of falling handsomely and regularly unto curls,
as it ought to do, either stood wildly staring up an end, or else hang loosly
dangling down as 'f 'twere combed a' the German manner, only with four fingers
and a thumb.


Bonh. Tush, toys and trifles! Tell me, are they not honest and proper men?


Mar. Proper enough I must confess to make Noble men's Porters, or Swizers of
the Guard, and for their Honesties, they look indeed as if they had their
Maidenheads still, and that is as much out of fashion with Gallants, a't'other
side*


An* Then for their Language 'twas as unfashonable as their clothes, all
clownish, savouring of the Country, far from the Elegance and Gallantry of
Court, where they speak such douceurs, such dainty and delicate things, as it is
a very Banquet for Ladies Ears:


Mar: Besides do you think we'd marry only with simple Gentlemen, without any
honor or Titles to set them off, but bare Monsieur du Buisson and Monsieur
LaFleur -- one poor Hawthorn bush in France would make four or five as good
Gentlemen as they:


Bonh* Come, all this is but trifling, and I Will hear no more of it: In a word,
resolve to marry these Gentlemen, or you know what follows; for the rest
whilst you are in the Town I give you free liberty to see and follow the fashion,
visit, and be visited, do what you will, you are Mistresses of my house, and of
your selves; but in point of Marriage I Will be Master, and so farewell.


Exit. Manent the Damoiselles: Mar. Alas poor man, in troth I pity him! he is
so simple and ignorant, I see the form was deeply sunk into the matter when he
was born, which makes his brain so muddy ever since.


An. I must needs say he is a very honest man; but for the Mode and Gallantry
it is terra incognita to him.


Mar. This comes o'th want of reading Romances now; I Will warrant ye they re'd
nothing when he was young, but only Homelies and dull Morality.


An. Or at best but the History or Barlaam and Iosaphat.


Mar. In Troth I have wondered with my self a hundred times, how one so heavy and
dull as he, could ever beget so lively and sprightly a child as I! sure he is
none of my Father, but I am Daughter of some King, or Emperor, lost in my
Cradle by some strange accident, and look e're long, by one as strange for to
be found again, -- I Have read of as strange things as these have come to pass.


An. And I look to marry some Duke or Prince, or Marquis, or Count, at least; I
was a dreamed of one last night.


SCAENA V.
Enter Lysette. Mary. NOw! what news with you?


Lys. Yonder Is one Marquis Mascarillio, forsooth, has sent his Valet to know if
you will be within this Afternoon, and please to be visited.


An. Oh sister! my dream as right as may be.


Mar. Go tell him he shall much honor us, but will you never learn to denounce
handsomely, and a la Mode?


Lys. Why forsooth?


Mar. You should say now, yonder is Marquis such an one, desires to be informed
whether you please to render your self visible or no.

This now is to speak your precious Language, and a la mode.


An. Well, go and dispatch the Messenger with an answer affirmative, and when
you come again, we will read you a lecture of it. --

Exit Lysette. Oh my Toutebonne, now w'ar in pass to be famous indeed, when no
less then Marquisses come to visit us!


Mar. I, this it is to live in Paris now, we might have lived in the Country
long enough, e're ever we had had this honor.


Enter Lysette. An. Well, have you dispatched the Messenger?


Lys. Yes forsooth.


An. Then hearken to your Lesson, -- Always before Company, be sure you elevate
your style, and speak a Language which none may understand but the Precious
Cabal, -- - that which they understand not they will admire, and admiration begets
Esteem and Reverence.


Mar. As for example, go presently and fetch me my Zephirus hither.


Lys. Her Zephirus! what is that!


An. She means her Fan you fool.


Lys. Oh! is that her Zephirus.


Mar. And bring the Councellor of the Graces along with you.


Lys. The Councellor of the Graces! what is that I wonder?


An. Her Looking-Glass she means.


Lys. Oh now I understand.


Mar. And look you do not soil and sully it with reflection of your Phisiognomy.


An. This now is to speak the precious Language, and a la mode, which 'twere to
endear on Ridiculousness it self, for any Damoiselle a la mode to be ignorant
of.


Mar. This, only to give you a taste of it, for this time is enough; go now and
make ready the House as we shall do our selves, against he comes, and look you
perfume the Rooms till we may loose our selves in the precious miste.


Lys. I go forsooth.


Exit Lysette. An. Marquis Mascarillio do you call him! oh my dear! what a fine
name is that?


Mar. And he is as fine a man I Will warrant you.


Exeunt. SCAENA VI.
Enter the Two Naturals. 1. COme, now let us Play a little 'till Master comes.


2. Content; Hi, hi, hi, hi, hi.


They play a many fools Gambols. 1. No, but I Will teach you a fine Play now, --
See saw, see saw.


2. Nay now you play foul play, so you do.


1. Foul play! what is that?


2. Why it is -- to play foul play.


1. Oh now I understand.


2. Now stand you there, and I Will stand here -- and I Will lay you a wager I Will
meet you before you shall meet me.


1. Come on then:


2. Lo ye there now.


1. Nay I met you first.


2. But you did not:


1. But I did.


Sganarelle knocks within. Sgan. Who Is within there?
Open the door here.

1. 'Uds so! it is Master knocks;
Go you and let him in.

2. Go you and you will.


1. I will not.


2. And I wont neither.


Sgan. Will no body come there! are ye all deaf? I Will make you hear.


1. 'Uds so, Master's angry.
I Will go and open the door.
Knocks.
2. Nay, I Will go.


They strive, and open it betwixt them. 1. But you shall not.


2. But I will.


SCAENA VII.
Enter Sganarelle, and whilst they fight, all the blows light on him betwixt
them. 1. I Will teach you to take my office from me.


Sgan. Why how now! what is the matter? hold, hold I say, what beat your Master?
Nay if you will needs fight, I Will fight with you.


Beats them. 1. Oh, oh, oh.


2. Oh, oh, oh.


Sgan. Here Is fine doing indeed! it is time to look to you!

Go leave your bawling, and call your Mistress presently.


1. I Will go.


2. Nay I Will go.


1. But you shall not.


2. But I will.


They strive to go out together, and are set in the Door* Sgan. Again! agree, or
I Will make you agree. So this is fine! I Will set you going with a vengeance. --
Shoves them in* Now I know she longs to hear what news I bring.


SCAENA VIII.
Enter Isabella. Isabella. I Have done an Act here, of so bold a strain as well
might put a Virgin to her shame; but Love and my extreme necessity, or never
blush, or let them blush for me. -- Well have ye been there?

A Box in her hand. Aside
Sgan. I have.


Isab. And what says he?


Sgan. Why he says, He looks upon you or so, sometimes it is true, but he means
no harm by it.


Isab. And would you believe him? y'ad best say he meant no harm by this too.
Just now as I was standing at my Window to take the air, who should come by but
he? and what did he? but just as I turned my back, threw me this Box with this
Letter in it here, into my Chamber:


Sgan. How a Letter!


Isab. I, and when ha'd done, away he went like Lightning, or I had thrown it
like a Thunderbolt at his head; -- insolent as he is! to offer to send his
Letters unto me!


Sgan. What Is in it do know?


Isab. Not I, nor desire to know.


Sgan. Why have thou not re'd it then?


Isab. Not for a world; for but imagine Sir, what dishonor 'twere to me, and
encouragement to him, if he should think, I Would the vicious curiosity to open and
read his Letters!


Sgan. Let me see it, I Will read it then.


Isab. That were the same, for then he would think 'twere I; -- no pray Sir let me
send it back as it is.


Sgan. Well go thy ways for a mirror of Prudence and Discretion!


Isab. Besides words are but air, but when enclosed in Letters once, I should
think their poysnous damp would kill me presently, should I but open them; --
could I but find one now to send it by.


Sgan. I Will do it, I Will do it.


Isab. And tell him how I scorn to read his Letters.


Sgan. Let me alone.


Isab. Yet Sir, to satisfy your Curiosity, you may read it if you please.


Sgan. Not I, I promise you, without an Antidote, if 't, be so dangerous as you
say it is.


Isab. Well, then pray carry it him as it is; methinks I am in pain until he
have it.


Sgan. I Will soon rid thee of that pain I Will warrant thee, and assure thy self
I Will marry thee a week sooner then I thought to have done, only for this my
little pretty Rogue.

Caresses her.
Isab: His kindness and unkindness equally does kill, As poison, though sugared,
is poison still.

Aside. Manet Sganarelle. Exit.
Sgan. I, are you good at writing Letters in faith? I Am glad I know it; you
shall find that I Am as good at carrying them. -- Now could I preach against
Love Letters, and bid your Damoisells by her example take heed of them; for
just as Mountebanks wrap up their poisonous Drugs in paper, so if you look on
the outside of these Letters they are are only paper, but open them and look on
them within, you find them poison, very poison, the bane of Virginity, the
ratsbane that makes them swell again; -- methinks I Am in an excellent vein of
Preaching now. --

But to my business, holla, who is within there.


Knocks* SCAENA IX.
Enter Ergasto. Ergasto. Who's there? what Monsieur Sganarelle? your pleasure
Sir?


Sgan. Pleasure me no pleasures, where is your friend? your friend Valerio
there, that is so good at writing Letters.


Erg. He Is not within at present.


Sgan. No matter, there give him that Letter, and tell him, his piece will not
off, his powder's damp, and wont take fire, h'as mist of his aim this once.


Erg. What Is all this!


Sgan. In plainer terms, tell him, Isabella scorns to read his Letters, but
h'as sent it back to him, as 'twas sent to her.


Erg. I understand nothing of all this now?


Sgan: And do you hear? take notice I pray that I deliver it as 'twas delivered
Sealed and unopen'd, and so farewell.


Exit. Erg. What should the meaning of this be I wonder?


SCAENA X.
Enter Valerio. Valerio. O Hi I Am glad you are come.


Val. Why?


Erg. Here has been your old Messenger again.


Val. Who! Sganarelle?


Erg. The same, and he has left this Letter for you.


Val. It Is not a Challenge, is it?


Erg. if it be, it is from Isabella, for she sent it he tells me.


Val. From her! Oh give it me straight then, that I may kiss it a thousand
times; how is this? the Superscription is to her!


Erg. But open it, and see from whom the Subscription is.


Reads. Isabella's Letter.
Noble Sir,
IF I have rightly interpreted your Love,
I hope you will not be so unjust
to misinterpret mine; I am here in the hands
of one I hate, and if you deliver me not
the sooner, death shall; mean time
I am the miserablest alive, unless you find
some way to make me happy.
Yours till Death ISABELLA:

Erg. Now, what think you of this piece? is it not an Original!


Val. Yes Ergasto, and that of such a hand I shall think it no Idolatry to
adore: Now I perceive she is as wise as fair, and I am happy, nor shall I ever
rest till I have made her so:

Kisses it.
Erg. Ha, ha, ha! what an Ass has she made of him? to make him carry this
himself!


Val. Peace, here he comes.


SCAENA XI:
Enter Sganarelle: Sganarelle: IT does me good to think how blank he will look
when he receives this Letter; I long to see him, and laugh at him: Now Sir
you have received your Letter?


Val. I have so Sir.


Sgan. And you perceive by it the difference of persons, and how some have the
happiness to be beloved, and others not?


Val. I do so Sir, and must have patience.


Sgan. Poor man! he is ready to cry again; -- well, and what service will you
command me back? you see, I Am good at carrying Messages.


Val. Why you may tell her Sir, that as I only live for her so I shall die to
serve her.


Sgan. The poor man's even desperate I see?


Val. And for this Letter here which you esteem so high disgrace, tell her I
take it for the highest grace and favor she could do me.


Sgan. Even much good do it ye with it, and when w'ar married, you shall come if
you please and give her thanks for it.


Val. How married!


Sgan. Yes, I Will invite you to my Wedding.


Erg. Can you endure this?


Val. Peace, inconsiderate man? is it fit that I should offend him, who has power
to injure her? -- I Will fright him yet, and see what that will do, -- Hark you
Sir, methought I heard you talk of marrying Isabella.


Sgan. I did so Sir, what then!


Val. Why then y'ad best to make your Will before, or see me dead, 'twill be
dangerous else, and say, I told you so.


Sgan: How Is this! the man's desperate I think indeed; if he be such an one,
I Will not invite him to my Wedding beshrew me: Hark ye Sir, now I better
consider on it, I mean to be married privately*


Val. Talk of Marriage again?


Sgan: Cry mercy Sir, if you be so angry I Am sorry I Have troubled you, and so
farewell: -- I Will no more Messenges if he be such an one.


Steals away. Manent Valerio and Ergasto. Val: So, this will defer his Marriage
a while I hope, till I may think on some prevention, but what I cannot imagine?


Erg: Come never torment nor vex your self, but leave it all to her; imprisoned
winds either enforce their way, or cause an Earthquake; so now she has begun
she will never give over, till she has thoroughly done:


Exeunt: Finis Actus Secundi.
Actus III.
Scaena I.
Mascarillio brought in, in a Chair by two Sedan-Men. Mascarillio. HOlla,
holla, these baptized Mules I think have a plot to break my bones, they do so
joult and jostle their Chair against every post they meet.

Opens the Chair.
1. The Entry's strait Sir, and you would be carried in.


Mas. And good reason, Goodman Faquin, do you think I Would expose my Feathers to the
humidity of the air, and shoes to the rude assault of Paris dirt?

Comes out. So now take up y'ur luggage and begone.


1. You Will pay us first, Sir?


Mas. How!


1. Our Money Sir.


Mas. Was ever heard of such an Insolence, to demand money of me?


1. How would have us live Sir, if you do not pay us?


Mas. If you cannot live without paying, there is payment for you, and there --
saucy Rogue, to demand money of such Gallants as I!

Beats him.
2. But we will be paid in another manner Sir, before you go, for all your
Gallantry.


Takes out the Lever of the Sedan. Mas. How now! what mean you?


2. Or pay us our Money, or --


Mas. Hold, hold! there it is; now thou ask'st it in good manner, and as thou
oughts, but that is an unmannerly Rogue there: -- Now, are you satisfied?


2. Yes Sir.


Mas. Then begone and leave me.


1. Stay Sir, now I Will be paid for your beating of me too, before we go, or
else. --


Takes the other Lever. Mas. Hold, and good reason, there is somewhat for thee
too; you shall find me the reasonablest man in the world, when you ask things in
good manner, and as you ought. Now are you satisfied?


1. Yes, I thank you Sir.


Mas. No, thank your Ignobility you Rogues; for, but I scorn to draw my Sword
upon such base Faquins as you, by this bright steel I Would killed you both e're
this -- this excuse I learnt of a Gallant who was beaten by a Hackny-Coachman
the other day. -- Well, get you gone now, and take heed of provoking my fury
another time.


2. At your service Sir.

Exeunt. We hope you cannot say but w'ave used you civilly?


Mas. I, I, I must needs say that: -- So, thus far I have played the Gallant
right, never to fight when I can help it; nor pay debts, but when I cannot
choose: -- Now for the Ladies, which is the main business of your Gallants in
the world, and when there are no more to Court and Complement, they may go out
of it, as having no more to do.


He sings, Adjusts his Canons and Feather, Surveys himself, and does all the
Antic tricks Of a Fantastic Mounsieur. SCAENA II.
Enter Lysette. Lysette. MY Ladies desire you to have a little patience, Sir,
and they will instantly wait upon you.


Mas. No have, no have, my pretty Carryer of Messages; I can entertain my self
well enough here the whilst, with contemplating the Historical Ornaments of
the place.


Lys. Methinks this Monsieur in these clothes, and that feather there, looks
just like some Amphibious Animal, half Bird, and half Baboon.


Mas. Now don't I know whether in true Gallantry, I were not to fall on the
Waiting Woman first; I have a gallant Itch come upon me, and cannot hold: Hark
you, hark you sweet heart, suppose one should ask you an Enigmatical Question
now?


Lys. Excuse me Sir, I Am none of those I can assure you.


Mas. Right! -- Thus whatsoever they understand not, they interpret strait to.
-- you know what: -- Come, come, there is somewhat for thee; you must not be so
coy -- you understand me.


Lys. Yes very well Sir.


Mas. Or else thou were no right Waiting Woman: -- Come then.


Lys. Soft Sir, another time* I hear my Ladies coming.


Mas. This now is another trick of Gallantry, to have Wenches cozen them of
their money.


Lys. And see they are hear.


SCAENA III.
Enter Mademoiselle, Mary and Anne. Mascarillio Addresses himself unto them: OH
Heavens! Oh paradise!

Lys. Hai day! this Mounsieur has got the French staggers right.


Mas. Most fair, and most accomplished Ladies, If I importune you with my visit,
it is your perfections have brought this trouble on your selves, of which I am
so great an Idolater, as where e're it is found, I needs must go to reverence
and honor it.


Mar. Noble Sir, there is no perfection here, but only what you bring along with
you.


Mas. Now by your fair Eyes Ladies, which like Suns, illuminate all this other
Hemisphear; your Graces and Perfection are so great, as for Wit, Beauty, and
true Gallantry, you pic, repic, and Capot, all the Ladies in Paris else.


An. You may say what you please Sir, but we are not so vain to lend the
serious of our belief, unto the Raollery of your Complement, -- I marry sister,
this is a brave man indeed! you may see Nobility in his very Mien!


Mar. I, and in's fashion and behavior too! who is there? some Chamber Pulpits
strait.


An. Some Chairs, They set Chairs. some Chairs there, -- please you Sir to sit,
here is a Chair that stretches forth its arms, and should be glad and proud o'th
honor of embracing you.


Mas. All here speaks civility even to the Chairs and Stools; but pardon me
Ladies, I would fain tarry, but I see certain dangerous eyes here, that look as
if they would kill men, or rob them of their liberties at least.


An. We Will warrant you Sir.


Mas. Well Ladies, on your security I Will venture this once; nor can I sacrifice
my Liberty any where better then at the Altar of your feet.


An. Don't ye admire him Sister?


Mar. Admire him! I am rapt a thousand degrees beyond Admiration!

They sit.
Mas. And what think you of my Feather Ladies?


An. Oh, it is the very top, and top-gallant of all I ever saw! and you are the
true Estridge, the other but a counterfeit.


Mas. And my Canons.


Mar. Oh most heavenly wide!


Mas. I can assure you there is more in them by half an Ell Paris measure, then
in any are worn in Town beside.


Mar. I never saw the Elegance of Adjustement carried so high by any one before!


An. I Sister, this it is to know the fine of things, the superfine, the very
fine of fines!


Mas. And how long Ladies is it since you made this Town happy with your
Residence and abode?


Mar. So short a time Sir yet, as we count only by days the age of our being
here.


Mas. And what do you think of Paris? is it not the Paradise of all Delights! the
Treasury of all that is rich and precious, and compendium and abridgement of all
wonders and rarities!


An. It Is incontestible truth Sir; and I do not see, I protest, how it is
possible for any Lady to be saved out of Paris here.


Mas. Why now you ravish me! and what Recreations have you had since your
arrival here?


Mar. O Lord Sir! w'ave had so horrible a want and dearth of them, as w'ar even
starved and famished again.


Mas. I Will carry you to the next new Play that is played, but then you are
obliged to cry it down what e're it be, it is the fashion of your Gallants now,
and will get you the reputation of Wits.


An. That Sir we shall not fail to do, before the Music plays, or Curtain's
drawn.


Mas. And what acquaintances, Ladies, have you made, since you came to Town?


Mar. None at all Sir yet.


Mas. I Will bring you acquainted with all the Wits of the new Collection, they
come unto my Chamber every day; and but this morning I Would a dozen of them there;
nay, if please, they shall keep an Academy at your Lodging every week.


An. O Lord Sir, you will infinitely oblige us, for only such as they, govern the
Fames of the Ladies here in Town, and with a Copy of Verses cry them up, or
Lampoon, cry them down, when e're they please.


Mas. Right; and besides, they can inform you to a half Stanza of all the
Verses that are made in Paris every day, as who made a Madrigal of's Mistress
Beauty, who an Ede of enjoyment, who sent an Elegy to his Mistress over night,
and the answer she made unto't by next day noon.


An. I, these are things to be known 'bove all your dull Morality and
Philosophy.


Mar. I, and Divinity too Sister.


Mas. Still Ladies you ravish me more and more; and since I see you are delighted
with Poetry, I Will recite you some compositions of mine own.


A: Beseech you Sir.


Mas. For you must know I Have a Poetical itch sometimes, and scratch for it on
paper too; amongst the rest you shall hear recited in all your most celebrous
Assemblies here, some hundred Songs and Sonnets of mine, as many Odes and
Elegies, a thousand Madrigals, and Epigrams sans number.


An. And I'ave a very furious Tender for those Epigrams, methinks they are the
finest things!


Mas. And for those I shall fit you, for I am turning all Roman story into
Epigrams.


Mar. And that must needs be rare and excellent! but touching the Verses Sir,
you promised us.


Mas. You shall have them as soon as I can entreat them of my Memory; and these
they are, made of a Ladies stealing my heart away, imagine it your selves.

The VERSES.
Ah, ha! and have I caught you (as they say,
Mos did his Mare) stealing my heart away.
And would you run awaywith't wheny' avedon;
In Faith, in faith, for all you would fain be gone,
I Will make you dearly pay for it e're you part;
Stop Thief, stop Thief, my heart, my heart, my heart.

An. Rare!


Mar. Excellent!

Enter Lysette.
An. The best as e're I heard!


Mas. Do You mark that Ah, ha! at my entrance into style, what a natural
Expression it is, as much as to say, are you there in faith? or have I caught
you? as I express it afterward ah, ha!


Mar. That ah, ha, alone is worth a whole Epick Poem.


Mas. Then have I caught you as Mos did catch his Mare; there is an Erudition
for you now? taken neither from Greek nor Latin, but from an English Proverb,
nothing savouring of Homer nor Virgil, and a thousand degrees at least removed
from the Scholar or Pedant.


An. I, and a thousand, and thousand more to that!


Mas. But you would be ravished now to hear the air, I Have set unto't.


Mar: Why are ye a Musician too! have you learnt Music Sir?


Mas. Not learnt it, but such Gallants as I, know every thing without learning.


An. Assuredly my dear?


Mar. Pray let us hear it Sir.


Mas. You shall, but you must consider it is a la Cavalier, hem, hem, ah, ha!
etc.


He sings hoarcely and ridiculously with all the Grimaces of an affected
Singer. An. Oh! most divine! the very Harmony of the Spheres.


Mar. I Am enthusiasm'd with it!


An. It Is pure Chromatick, this!


Lys. Methink it is pure Caterwouling, if this be a la Cavalier, I have enough
of it.


Exit: Mar. Did you mark the humouring of the words? how at stealing, the
Music stole away, as 'twere, and then at running, it ran away as fast.


An. We did, and admired it.


Mas. Besides, if you marked it at the word stop Thief, there was such a Hubbub,
as you would have thought a whole Heu and Cry had been following, the rest was in
stilo Recitativo.


An. This it is now to know the height and depth, the longitude, latitude, and
every dimension of Art!


Mas. I can hold no longer, ah, ah!


Cries vehemently out, they start up. Mar. What ayle you Sir?


Mas. Now by your soft and sweeter bosoms Ladies, those perfumed pillows that
love does rest upon! you even ravish my heart out of my breast; methinks it
hangs only by a slender string: Oh, oh, oh! I languish, faint, and die!


Lies down. Mar. Does he not do it rarely Sister? those two Monsieurs who came
a wooing to us, are not worthy to be his Laquys.


An. I have a certain curiosity to know if he be married, or no.


Mar. I, are you there Sister? I Am glad I know it*


An. And are you jealous Sister? I Am glad I know that too.


Enter Lysette. Mar. Now what is the news with you.


Lys. Yonder Is one Count Iodelet without, desires to know whither you please to
render your selves visible.


Mar. Oh! I see you will learn in time.


Mas: How Count Iodelet?


Starts up. An. I, do you know him?


Mas. Know him! my only Comrade in all our former Wars; why Piladis and
Orestes, and Damon and Pithias were mere strangers and enemies, compared unto
us two.


Mar: Go introduce him strait.


Exit Lys. Mas. Count Iodelet! now Ladies I Will promise you, you shall see the
gallantest man in France, and bravest Soldier, brave upon brave, a three pyld
brave.


SCAENA IV:
Enter Iodelec fantastically habited a la Soldatesque, Lysette, etc. Iodelet.
What Marquis, art thou here?


Mas* Count! I am ravished to see thee, go and salute these Ladies, that
afterward I may more freely pour out my self into thy Embraces.


Iod. By your fair leave Ladies.


Kisses their Hands. Mas: And how do, ha! thou lookst somewhat pale methinks!


Iod. The fatigues of the War, and Vigils of the Court, but I Am resolved to
leave it, there is no reward for men of our merits and deservings now a days,
who have lost our lives in our Countries service.


Mas. I, the Children of peace carry all away now, from us the sons of War. --
And how long is it in faith since thou and I met first in the Wars.


Iod. Let me see -- some sixteen years as I take it*


Mas. It Is more, it is more man, by the same token thou commandst a Regiment of
Horse on the Galleys of Malta.


Iod. I, we had hot service there.


Mas. But not so hot as afterward at taking the half Moon at siege of Graulin.


Iod. Half Moon! 'twas a whole one man, thou have forgot.


Mas. I think it was indeed, I Am sure I Have good reason to remember it, for I
received this Musquetad there, -- pray Ladies vouchsafe to feel here.


An. A very terrible wound indeed!


Lys. I feel nothing but only the nape of his neck.


Iod. And I, this other coup de Granad, pray Ladies stoop, and feel here.


Mar. A horrible one too!


Lys. There Is nothing but only the hollow of his Ancle; I think these Gallants
swear nothing but Wounds, there is so many Wounds with them.


Iod. But now I Will show you a terrible one indeed.


Offers to put down his Hose. An. Oh no, we beseech you Sir, w'ave seen enough
already, you will fright us with sight of more.


Iod* Well, as you please; these are honorable marks and signs what men are.


Lys. And that is the reason it seems your Gallants now a days, especially in
Ladies companies, stand with their hands in their Codpieces only to show what
men they are.


Mas. And when did see the Duke thine old Comrade?


Iod. We supt together yester night, and h'as invited me for to morrow to hunt
the Stag with him; wilt' be o'th party sirrah?


Mas. In Faith, I cannot, I Am obliged to wait on the Duchess thou wot'st of, out
of Town.


Mas. They Are acquainted with all the Grandees of the Town it seems?


An. More honor for us to be acquainted with them.


Mas. But we neglect the Ladies, -- Sirrah as thou camst in, these Ladies and I
were discoursing of Verses, and thou art excellent at them I know.


Iod. A little at Inpromptuses or extempore ones.


Mar. And that is the very Touchstone of a prompt and ready wit!


Mas. Thou shall make some of these Ladies here.


An. We beseech you Sir.


Mas. And the subject shall be of their fair eyes.


Iod. You put me strangely to it, Marquess, but I Will try.

Of your fair Eyes Ladies what should I say? what should I say?


Repeats them, and is at a stand. Lys. I think he knows not what to say indeed.


Iod. Pox on it, I can easily make the first verse; all the difficulty is, to
make the second Rhyme unto't.


Lys. I think so too.


Iod. Well Ladies, pardon me this once I have lately let blood so much in thee
Poetic vein, as my Muse is but weak and feeble yet, but as soon as I shall have
recovered a little strength, you shall see I Will make you as good extempore
Verses (with a little study) as ever you heard.


Mas. Mean time what shall we do? shall we carry these Ladies abroad to take
the air?


Iod. Content, thou have thy Coach here Marquess, have thou not?


Mas. Not I, I came in a Chair.


Iod. And I Have sent mine away.


Mar. No matter, 't shall be for another time; -- shall we have a Ball then?


Mas. I, but for the Violins? the Animaters of the feet, and paradise of the
Ears?


Iod. I Will send one of my Valets for them; holla, who is there without? Basque,
Lorrain, Piccard, Burquenot, Bretain, Gascoin, Norman, Perigot, none of these
Valets there? par la mort bleu, there is never a Signeur in all France worse
served then I, I think.


Lys. Faith, and I think so too.


Iod* To have never a Valet at hand when one has most need of them!


Lys. The devil of Valet did they bring along with them.


An. No matter, ours shall go; but then for filling parts unto our Ball 'twill
be too empty else.


Mar. We Will send to invite our Neighbors here hard by, amongst the rest Lysette
you shall go to our Cozen Isabella's, and see if the clown her Guardian will
let her come:


Au. I know he will not, wherefore it is in vain.


Exit Lysette. Mar: No matter, she shall go only to vex him; -- mean time
please you to honor us so much to accept of a slight Banquet w'ave prepared
within, you shall infinitely oblige us.


Mas. You Have abundantly regall'd us Ladies with your fairer sights, but we shall
wait upon you.


Exeunt. SCAENA V:
Enter Sganarelle, Lysette, stealing in after him. Sganarelle. SO, I Am glad I Am
come home; were I the King, I Would make a Law against this saluting and
complementing, the very Rack of coversation that sets every ones joints a
stretching, with I Am your humble servant, and I know not what; -- your Porters
Salutation with a thump o'th back at meeting, and a kick o'th breech at
parting, is not half so troublesome.


Lys. I Have stolen in after him, and he will wonder to see me here.


Aside: Sgan. I like your Hollander yet, who goes plodding about his business,
and never troubles himself nor others with good manners; -- besides, it is the
very University of lying, for they will tell you they are your servants, when they
think themselves far better men then you, and say they are glad to see you well,
when they would be far more glad to see you hanged.


Lys* Now will I show my self.


Sgan. How now? how came you here?


Lys. Why thorough the door, which way else should I come? you don't take me for
a Lapland witch I hope, to enter by the Chimney riding upon a broom-staff?


Sgan. I do not know; -- and what would you here I pray?


Lys. I Would only speak with Mademoiselle Isabella*


Sgan. And from whom?


Lys. From my Ladies.


Sgan. And what to do I pray?


Lys. This man would make an excellent Catechist: -- why they would entreat her
company at a Ball.


Sgan. A Ball!


Lys. Yes, there is the Marquess Mascarillio and Count Iodelet at our house, and
they would desire her to come and bear them company.


Sgan. Why thou art not mad? or do thou think me so? that I should suffer her go
unto a Ball, especially in such company as those; I Will send her to the Burdell
rather.


Lys: Why I hope you take my Ladies for honest women? and I can assure you
they are very honest Gentlemen?


Sgan. No matter for that, your women may be honest women, and men honest men,
but put them together once, and I Will not answer for their honesties.


Lys. You will not let her go then?


Sgan. No indeed will not I, and get you gone the sooner, or I Will set you going.


Lys. And can you find in your heart to deny me then?


Sgan. I indeed can I, and beat you too if you get you not gone the sooner.


Lys. I who am so much your servant.


Sgan. She Is at her Complements!


Lys. And have always spoke so well of you*


Sgan. I so you did to day, if you be remembered.


Lys. And said, that Isabella would be most happy in marrying you, and that I
wondered at my heart that every one was not in love with you.


Sgan. And are you lying too?


Lys. Now tell me in conscience don't you think this true now?


Sgan. Perhaps I do, what then?


Lys. Why then you are an Ass to believe any one can be in love with that Owls
face of yours, and those Asses ears, which one would swear wear horns, if you
were but married once.


Sgan. Why thou damned Baggage, how how dare thou provoke me thus?


Lys. Or that proper person of yours half Bear, half drill, and all a Beast.


Sgan. If I could catch you*


He follows her. Lys. And so I humbly take my leave, and rest your most humble
servant.


Exit Lysette. Sgan. She Is at her Complements again! this woman is a compound of
all women together, and h'as more ingredients in her then Mithridate or
Treacle, but the main is Mercury and Quicksilver.

But where are my Urchins, where are my changlings there? I Will talk with
them for this.


SCAENA VI.
Enter the Changelings. 1. HEre Master.


2. Here Master.


Sgan. Come hither you egrigious Idiots.


2. Uds so Master's angry.


Sgan. Did not I charge you to let no Trades-woman in, because I said they were
all Bawds? and do you let waiting women in now? look better to your charge, or

They tumble over one another for fear. I Will so bang your fools coats, I Will
make them stick like playsters to your sides: -- Go call your Mistress, and
leave your Tumbling tricks.

Exeunt. Manet Sganarelle. I must not let her know*

she is invited to a Ball, for fear of stiring up light species in her mind.


SCAENA VII.
Enter Isabella. Isabella. HE never sends for me, but I Am afraid my plot's
discovered; but custom of fearing now, has almost made me fearless: Well, have
you delivered the Letter?


Sgan. I, I'ave paid him in his own coin I think.


Isab. And what said he?


Sgan. A great many good morrows, I know not what, but I Have poured water to his
wine I Will warrant ye.


Isab. Rather oil to his fire, for he is grown more violent and outrageous
then ever.


Sgan. How so?


Isab. Why as I Am credibly informed, he intends a terrible Riot on your house,
and to come to night and take me away by force.


Sgan. Methought he talked somevvhat desperately indeed; but how come you to
intelligence of this?


Isab. Why this Note with a stone vvrapt in it was thrown into my Chamber
vvindovv, I know not by whom.


Sgan. I must have that window damned up.


Isab. But I imagine by one of my Cozens.


Sgan. Very like; and what shall we do then?


Isab. Why go to him, and tell him soundly of it, ask him if he been't ashamed;
you deal too gently with him, tell him I desie his worst, let him come and take
me away if he dare -- offer to take me away from my dear Guardian!


Fayns. Sgan. He shall not, he shall not, never fear, I Will defend you.


Isab. You will not sight with him?


Sgan. Not I beshrew me, I have not so much o'th Cavalier, I thank heaven, to
fight and die for my Mistress, that is just like selling ones horse to buy him
Provender, so plays fools.


Isab. Well go then, and tell him withal that less he makes an end the sooner,
he will put me to terrible straits and plunges, and make me take some desperate
resolution, would I might speak with him, you should hear how I Would rattle him.


Sgan. I would you did for me, for I'ave no mind to it, now I know what a
dangerous man he is; well, get you in, and let me alone with him.


Isab. I go most gladly to avoid his sight, which I so abhor, and hate as I
should fear to go even to paradise if he were there.


Manet Sganarelle. Exit. Sgan. I Will marry her, that is certain, for I see she
loves me, and there is like to be no love lost if she holds on as she begins, --
but let me see, it behooves me now more then ever to look unto my house*

Where are you there?


SCAENA VIII.
Enter the Changelings. 1. HEre Master.


2. Here Master.


Sgan. I Would best get a couple of Halberts for them, -- come hither I Am to go
abroad do you hear, and now be sure you be more careful then ever, to let none
enter, especially if any young Gentleman come be sure you keep him out.


1. I Master.


2: I Master.


Sgan. Suppose me the man, now let me see how you will deal with him.


1. Get you gone.


2. Get you gone I say.


Sgan. Good, and if he go not the sooner thrust him out. Let Us see.


1. Away.


2. Away I say.


They thrust him. Sgan. Very good, and if he will not go, beat him soundly, I Will
bear you out in it.


1. Will Not you go, I Will make you.


2. And so will I.


Sgan. Excellent!

They beat him* Hold, hold, it is well they have no Halberts now, these fools
lay on without any mercy; -- Now suppose he should flatter you, and say, pray
let me in, and offer you money, let us see what you would do!

They offer to take the Money. What would you take it?


1. Yes, and then we'd beat him again for offering it us.


Sgan. That Is well, They beat him again. or else I Would beaten you for taking it;
-- Hold, hold, it is enough -- I see they are not such very fools as I take them
for, or in taking Money all are wise alike.

Well, being so well instructed, go and look well to your charge, and my
benediction w'ye.

Exeunt: This it is to do things wisely; now will I go and do my other business
as wisely as I can.


Exit. Finis Actus Tertij.
Actus VI.
Scaena I.
Enter Lysette* I Am glad ^h'ave almost done within, there was such eating I
thought they would have eat us all; if these be your French Counts and
Marquisses, they are the hungryest ones as e're I saw! then they pocketed up
more sweetmeats and banqueting stuff then twenty Gossips at a Christning. Oh!
here they come at last.


SCAENA II.
Enter the Damoiselles with Mascarillio and Iodelet, and other Gallants, and
Ladies for the Ball. Mascarillio. What are the Violins come yet?


Lys. Yes Sir.


Mas. Let them strike up then, and play me a Corrant, I Will take the hardiess
for Prologue to the Ball to dance you a Corranto Ladies.


Mar. You Will much honor us.


Lys. Faith if his dancing be no better then his singing, the dancing Bears
shall dance the Tricotees with him for a wager.


Mas. Sa -- begin there. Tout beau, tout beau, not so fast, not so fast I say,
-- firm, firm, en Cadence, en Cadence and be hanged! Oh Diable! there is no
enduring them, Violins de village!

Dances.
Lys. They play well enough if he could but dance as well, I knew well enough
what a manner of dancer he was.


Mar. Come now, lets have our Ball.


They dance singly and together, and at the end. SCAENA III.
Enter Du Buisson and La Fleur, with Cudgels. Du Buisson. OH! have we found
you! must you be dancing here, and make us dance attendance for you at home?
there is music for you if you will needs be dancing.


La Fl. And there.


They beat the Laqueys, the rest, all but the Damoiselles run off. Mas. How
now! what insolence is this.


Mar. Hold, hold, this was not in the bargain though.


Du Buis. Had you none, you insolent Rascals, to abuse with your impostures!
but these Ladies here whom we both love and honor.


La Fl. We Will make ye an example for it.


Exeunt hastily. Manent the Damoiselles with Mascarillio and Iodelet. An.
What Is the matter do you know?


Lys. The matter's clear, they have been soundly beaten.


Mas. Pho! only a wager.


Iod. Never trouble your selves, all this is nothing.


Mar. Do You make nothing of a beating then!


Mas. Pho! a hundred such things as these pass amongst Friends.


An. For you, your Gallantry privileges you from fighting; but for him so
great a Soldier, and so brave a man, Brave upon brave, a three pyl'd brave.


To Mas. Iod. Why there it is now, the more valiant, hardier to provoke to anger
still; but when their anger's up once, woe to those who provoked them.


Mas. Were they but here again you should see now how we would handle them.


Mar. Behold them here.


Lys. They look methinks as if they could wish them away again.


SCAENA IV:
Enter Du Buisson and La Fleur again with Servants. Du Buisson. THere, strip
them, strip them, that that these Ladies may see when their borrowed Plumes are
of, what pitiful Jack-Dawes they are.


Mar. Why who are they?


La Fl. Why Ladies if you will needs have the naked truth, these are our Laqueys.


Both. How! Laqueys!


Laqueys. At your service.


Lys. I knew what manner of Counts and Marquesses they were.


Mar. Were ever any so abused!


Du Buis. Right Ladies, and that makes us so severe in punishing them.


La Fl. Nor is this but a light preparative to the punishment we mean to
inflict on them at home.


Du Buis. Dispatch, dispatch there.


Iod. There goes the County.


As they take away their Cloths. Mas. And there the Marquisat.


Mar. I am so confounded and ashamed I know not what to say, nor what to do.


La Fl. Our shame and confusion is no less then yours, that any who had any
Relation unto us, should presume to offer ye this injury and affront.


Du Fl. And we beseech you to believe we had no hand in it, but only in the
punishing it.


La Fl. And if you think them not sufficiently punished, we leave them w'ye to
punish them more; and so for this time we take our leaves.


Exeunt. Manent the Damoiselles and Laqueys stripped to their shirts and Calcons.
An: Get ye gone ye Rogues, how dare ye tarry here, considering how you have abused
us:


Mas. We only tarry to know what farther service you please to command us, if
you need one now to run a race for you behold your man ready stripped:


Iod. And I to do the double supersault for you, if you love feats of Activity.


Mar: Away ye Rogues, away.


Mas. This! to Counts and Marquesses.


An. Yet dare ye usurp those Names?


Iod. Why not, I Am sure if we were elsewhere, we might pass for such, and no
body question it.


Enter one of the Music. 1. Who pays us for our Music here?


Mas. Ask Monsieur le Count.


1. Will you Sir?


Iod. Ask Monsieur le Marquess there.


Mas. Why thus goes the world, when men once are fallen into adversity every
one falls upon them:


Lys. Hark ye, hark ye Sir, do you know me I pray?


Mas. The waiting woman too!


Lys. Do You remember how you would have deboiched me to day? now could I find in my
heart to beat you for it, but that you are sufficiently beaten already.


SCAENA V.
Enter Monsieur Bonhomme. Bonhomme. Where are these Bagages? where are these
Damoiselles a la mode here?


Mar. My Father, here! then we are shamed for ever!


Bonh. Here Is fine doings! fine Revels w'ye, is there not?

Monsieur Du Buisson and La Fleur yonder have told me all; you must have your
Counts and Marquesses, no worse men serve your turns, -- and are these they I
pray?


Mas. All that are left of them.


Bonh. Get ye gone, and that presently too, or I Will not leave you so much as
your skins, but strip you of them as others have of your Clothes.


Mas. Come Brother w'ad best be gone and leave this ungrateful place where men
of our good parts for singing and dancing are no more rewarded.


Iod. And where naked virtue's not looked upon, but men are more regarded for
their Cloths, then for themselves.


Exeunt. Manent the Damoiselles and Monsieur Bonhomme, etc: Bonh. Go, get you
in too, for I Am too angry w'ye to chide you now, but when my anger's over once,
expect to hear from me, and that soundly too.


Mar. Come Sister lets go and think on some way of repairing our honors.


Exeunt. 1. Will you pay us for our Music Sir?


Bonh. I marry will I, there is payment for you, and there again, must you be
fidling here amongst the rest? I Will fiddle you. --

Beats him. I Am vexed at heart with these foolish Baggages, and shall be more;
when once it is known in Town, we shall have the Boys hoot them as they pass the
streets, and call one Madam the Countess, the other Madam the Marchioness:
besides, I fear th'as quite broke off the match with these Gentlemen and them;
-- I must go seek to make all whole again, or else I shall not know what to do
with them.


Exit. SCAENA VI.
Enter Sganarelle. Yonder Is the house, but I know not what is the matter, I Am
nothing nigh so forwards to knock as I was wont to be; but fall back fall edge:
I am resolved, yet softly, softly Sganarelle, for fear of angring him, -- and
see here he comes already, now have NOT I breath enough to blow up the bladder of
a whiting mop.


Knocks: SCAENA VII.
Enter Valerio and Ergasto: Valerio. IAm enraged, that I can think of no
expedient to free her from this savage beast?


Erg. Peace, yonder he is.


Sgan. Methought I heard him say, he was enraged. I Am more and more afraid of
him.


Val. Now Sir what news with you? you are never without some or other I know.


Sgan. Pardon me Sir, I Am afraid I trouble you too often.


Speaks fleeringly. Val. Not a whit, not a whit, never fear it.


Erg. Has strangely changed his Tone and Countenance, what e're's the matter.


Sgan. But I am but a Messenger, you must consider.


Val. I do consider it.


Erg. The Rogue's abominably afraid, now I perceive, fogh! how he stinks!


Val. And what says Mademoiselle Isabella? for I know you come from her!


Sgan. Why she commends her to ye, and says that she is credibly informed you
intend a terrible Riot on my house, and to come to night and take her away by
force.


Erg. Slid! she but instructs thee what thou shu'dst do.


Val. Well, and what more?


Sgan. And says, that if you make not an end the sooner, you will put her to
terrible straits and plunges, and make her take some desperate resolution.


Val. Poor soul! it grieves me at heart to think what straits and plunges
indeed I put her to; --

Aside. But does she say this indeed?


Sgan. If you wont believe but go along with me, and you shall hear her say so
much her self; -- I must do any thing to content him.


Aside. Erg. Slid take him at his word.


Val. Well Sir, since you will needs have it so, I Will go along w'ye, though
unwillingly.


Sgan. I cannot blame you, for I Will warrant ye a sound chiding: -- I Will but go a
little way, and call you presently.


Val. We Will go along w'ye if you please.


Sgan. Pox on him! would I were well rid of him.

Aside. I Will instantly be here again.


Val. what need you make more labors then one of it? we will go together; -- Come.


Sgan. What before you Sir! pray.


Val. Beseech you.


Sgan. Never Sir.


Val. Nay't must be so.


Sgan. To obey your commands then since you will needs have it so, and show you
the way.


Val. This is the first time I think that ever he Complemented.


Erg. It Is strange indeed! but what is it fear cannot do?

that tames wild beasts, and makes him civil too.


Exeunt. SCAENA VIII.
Enter Monsieur Bonhomme, Du Buisson Bonhomme. COme never deny it, I know it
was your plot, and thank you for it, thank you heartily, they may well style
you their Esculapius, you have done so miraculous a cure on them, to let them
see their follies and vanities, see them to their shame, and shame unto
amendment.


DuBuis. If It be so w'ar most glad of it, for we confess we love them, love
them heartily; but were their Beauties and their Fortunes centuplied, we would
not marry them as they were before; -- I love a little noble Pride in Women,
but hate a disdainful one.


La Fl. And I a little vanity in the sex, it shows handsomely in them, for
vanity in women it is like allay in Coin, a little no ways abases it, but
renders it only more ductil and pliable.


Du Buis. But in such excess there is no enduring it, and all our whole Estates
in a year or two, would be set flying after the mode and fashions, and one half
acre of St. Germans Fair would consume a hundred of ours in the Country, only
in toys and trifles.


Bonh. Never fear, for I tell you they are quite changed from what they were, and
never Circes so transformed others, nor Proteus himself, as you have
transformed them.


La Fl. If it be so, it is well; but still we doubt it.


Bonh. And if you will not believe me, but go along with me, and believe your
selves.


Du Buis. Well, once more we will venture; but if once more we find our selves
deceived --


Bonh: Never trust me again; for more assurance; I Will go before, and leave you
to come after, mean time pray put your selves a little more in the mode and
fashion.


La Fl. Why so?


Bonh. For a Certain reason I have, women's affections follow their eyes, and
the way to take the one is to take the other first, they love to see men
gallant and fashionable, and the neglect of it, they take as a neglect unto
themselves.


Du Buis. Well, for this once we will follow your advice.


Bonh. Pray do, you will oblige me in it, and so farewell, within this hour I shall
expect you.


La Fl. And we shall not fail to come.


Exeunt Several ways. SCAENA IX:
Enter Sganarelle, Valerio and Ergasto, a Song within. Sganarelle. That Is she
that sings there:

So, now tarry here a little, and I Will go fetch her strait, but expect a sound
chiding.


Exit. Va. And I deserve it, I know not with what face to look on her, but I
hope she will be so merciful to think t'has rather been want of ability then will,
that I Have obeyed her commands no sooner, and that occasion has rather been
wanting unto me, then I to it.


SCENA X.
Enter to them Sganarelle and Isabella. Isabella: NOw what is it you will show me?


Isab. That which you will wonder to see I Am sure:


Sgan. Some fine sight I Will warrant you:


Sgan. Look! do you see who is yonder!


Isab. Ha! Valerio!


Sgan: I knew you would wonder to see him here.


Isab. Help me dissimulation, or else I shall betray my joy to see him.

Aside. And was it you that brought him hither?


Sgan. Who else do think?


Isab. You Have done very well, and I Am much beholding to ye, to bring such
Gallants as these unto your house; I wonder what you mean by it!


Sgan: Nay, be not angry now, -- I only brought him to hear confirmed by you
what I have told him from you; as first, that you observed well enough how he
followed you, and the amorous glances he gave you too.


Isab. All this I bid him tell you.


Sgan. Go too then, these are Truths I hope, -- and you would not believe me
now; -- then for the Letter. --


Isab. I confess I sent that too.


Sgan. Go too then, these are truths I hope still, -- and did you not bid me
tell him you were informed he intended a terrible Riot in my house, and to come
to night and take you away by force?


Isab. I did so.


Sgan. Very good still all these are truths I hope.


Isab. And that if you made not an end the sooner you would put me to terrible
straits and plunges, and make me take some desperate resolution.


Val. All this he told me too:


Sgan. Very good then, all these are truths I hope still.


Isab. And are you not ashamed all this being so, that I woman should send unto
ye so often, and you a man should never answer me; or only by words, not by
effects and deeds: -- Was this done like a Gentleman?


Sgan. Well said, I told you she would chide you; but thou do not chide him
enough.


Val. I confess your Reproaches are just, but I beseech you to consider all the
difficulties I had, and believe that I Am more unfortunate then criminal. --


Isab. Well then, for your greater satisfaction (if yet you be not satisfied)
know there stands a couple of you, of which the one I love, the other hate as
much.


Sgan. Mark that now.


Isab. The one is all my pleasure and delight, the other all my pain and torment.


Sgan. Mark that again.


Isab. The One, finally, I Would have for Husband rather then my life,
The Other I Would sooner die -- then be his wife.
Does this content you now?

To Sgan. Sgan. I child of mine own Education, it does; and in sign of it --
there kiss my hand.


Erg. A special favor.


Isab. Well, now if you be satisfied, will you get you gone!


Val. Yes Lady, I go, and since I well perceive who it is you love, and who you
hate so much, I shall soon rid you of his hateful sight.


Isab. Pray do then, and know in any one Action you cannot oblige me more; for I
confess I Would rather see a Basilisk.


Sgan. Aye, say not so.


Isab. Why?


Sgan. Thou Wilt kill him quite, do not see how sad he is already; -- poor man!
I pity him, but I cannot cry.


Isab. Nor shall you laugh long I hope.

Aside.
Sgan. What are you here still, I thought you had been gone with a nose thus
long at least; -- now I Am on mine own dunghill I may crow over him.


Val. It Is well Sir, you are a happy man that may tarry here whilst I must part
from hence; yet shall I never repent my love to her, nor envy here is to you.


Sgan: Do what you will, so you get you gone, for you know she cannot endure to
see your face, wherefore I pray try a little how she will endure to see your back.


Erg. How I could beat the Rogue!


Val. Come, come, lets go and never mind him.


Sgan. So, so, it is very well, Oh what a comfortable sight it is yet a little
more, -- so now it is well.


Exeunt Valerio and Erg. Manent Sganarelle and Isabella. Isab. Fie, fie, you
jeer him most unmercifully.


Sgan. No it is you, this was but a little pleasant Raillery; but thou were too
bitter with him, in faith thou were; that of the Basilisk killed him quite: I Will
marry thee presently for that conceit.


Isab. How!


Sgan. I am resolved on it, and tomorrow morning fresh and fasting I Will dispatch
the business.


Isab. I Am justly plagued for my dissembling, -- you wont have time sufficient
to prepare and put all things in readiness so soon for the Wedding, Sir.


Sgan. I Will warrant you a little preparation will suffice.


Isab. Nor I to provide my Wedding Clothes.


Sgan. There Is no need of provision.


Isab. My Cousins will look to be invited too.


Sgan. I Will none of these Invitations, it is but an unnecessary charge and
trouble.


Isab. No way to prevent it! -- Oh! I feel my self very ill on the sudden.


Sgan. It Is but a qualm that presently will over, I Will but go and see the
writings drawn and look to find you well at my return.


Isab. But pray let me not be molested then, for I Will to bed, and hope a little
rest will make me better.


Sgan. Do, and sleep soundly; and so good night.


Exit. Manet Isabella. Isab. What shall I do? this makes me desperate, and just
like those who fly great fires, rather consider what it is they fly, then
whither it is they go; so to avoid his hateful Nuptials, I must do somewhat, and
care not what I do. The worst is dying, and however death be Hateful enough,
it is lovelier yet then he:


Exit. Finis Actus Quarti:
Actus V.
Scaena I.
Enter Isabella. HAving consulted all my love and hate, I am resolved by favor
of the night to leave this loathed house, and take my flight unto Valerio's, I
know there is danger in it,

But those who weigh all dangers may befall e're they resolve, shall never
resolve at all.


SCAENA II.
Enter Sganarelle. Sganarelle. SO, I Have got the writings drawn. --


Isab. Aye me! Who do I hear?


Sgan. Let me see if I have not lost them.


Searches his Pockets. Isab. Envious Fortune! that never yet were it friend to
virtuous love, had thou no time but now to declare thy self an enemy?


Sgan. No, here they are, I was afear'd I Would lost them.


Isab. Fixed and surprised 'twixt fear and strong desire,

I neither dare go on, nor yet retire, this is such a misfortune, there is no
remedy against but poison and precipices.


Sgan. So now I Will go home.


Isab. But this is not a time to spend in vain complaints, Somewhat I must do.


Sgan. Holla! who goes there? I Am afear'd it is Valerio come to steal Isabella
away, -- Oh for three blanks of courage more, for what I have will hardly serve
my turn.


Isab. It shall be so; -- who is there Guardian.?


Sgan. Isabella!


Isab. The same.


Sgan. What make you here? you said you were ill, and meant to go to bed, and I
thought y'd been in your first sleep over this.


Isab. And so I had, but for an extraordinary accident that happened me.


Sgan. What accident?


Isab. Not so hasty I beseech you, -- Why just as I was ready to go to bed, who
should come to visit me but my Cousin Mademoiselle Mary.


Sgan. At this time of night?


Isab. Yes Sir, and what do you think her business was?


Sgan. Nay -- I know not.


Isab. Nor could you imagine I Will warrant you -- I would I could --


Aside. Sgan. What was it? ha!


Isab. Why Sir, having heard it seems that Valerio intended to come and steal
me away to night* --


Sgan. Oh? that shows that it was she who gave you the intelligence of 't: --
well on.


Isab. What does she, but entreat me of all loves that she might come and take
my place to night.


Sgan. And so be stolen away instead of you?


Isab. Right Sir.


Sgan. But why this?


Isab. Why Sir you must know she has loved Valerio long, and quite despairing
of all other ways, she would needs try this way to gain his love*


Sgan. And so put a trick upon him?


Isab. Yes Sir.


Sgan. She Is nothing else but tricks I think; -- and would you consent to this?


Isab. Oh no Sir, but I dissuaded her all I could, and told her what a
dishonor it would be to her, and to my self, till seeing all my disswasions
were in vain, I seemingly at last consented, intending privately to ask your
Counsel and advice in it.


Sgan. Where is she?


Isab. Within Sir.


Sgan. Why then go presently and turn her out of doors, I Will no such tricks
played in my house, and why are you out of doors at this time of night? -- let
me examine that.


Isab. Why only to see if I could 'spy you coming, I did so long for your
coming home.


Flatters him. Sgan. Oh! it is well, -- well* go your ways, and do as I bid you:
-- Where is she! let me come to her, you shall hear how I Will rattle her.


Isab. Oh by no means Sir, you will shame her quite, and me too, for she will think I
have betrayed her to ye; rather let me by fair persuasions seek first to send
her hence, and then if that wont do, use your discretion*


Sgan. Do It any ways so you rid the house of her.


Isab. And as she passes by, pray seem to take no notice of her*


Sgan. Well, well, at your request I will not, -- go and dispatch presently:


Isab. So, thus far all goes well, Aside: now muster up thy whole self Isabella
to deceive him, and get away from him, the rest were only light assayes, but
this when it is done shall be my Masterpiece.


Manet Sganarelle. Exit. Sgan. Here Is brave doings! and fine order in my
Consins house, I have heard of all their Rex to day, and would not for twenty
pound but have heard of it; but this surpasses all, to have his Daughters
rambling abroad at this time of night alone, and on such Errants too! were she
my charge, I Would break the neck of her; but Isabella is far from doing thus,
thanks to her good breeding and education* But where are my Urchins, I Will talk
with them for this; where are you there?


SCAENA III.
Enter the Two Fools. 1. HEre Master.


2. Here Master.


Sgan. Why ye Changlings* ye Idiots.


2. 'Uds so Master's angry!


Sgan. Did not I charge you to look well to my house, and let none enter whilst
I was abroad, and do you let your Damoiselles Errant in!


1. Oh, Oh, Oh.


2. Oh, Oh, Oh.


1. Why do you beat us? we saw none indeed:


Sgan. Therefore I beat you, you negligent Dog-boults, for you should have seen
them, and kept them out too; -- Well, go your ways, and as you like this, look
better to your charge hereafter.


Manet Sganarelle. Exeunt. Sgan. I perceieve that those who care not how things
are done, may trust others* but those who'd have them well done indeed, must
trust unto themselves; here after I Will look to my house my self, and then
deceive me those who can. Hark! I hear some stiring within, I think she be
coming forth.


Isabella within. Well Cousin to disabuse you, in fine, your stay is all in
vain, there is no Valerio comes here to night, I can assure you, my careful
Guardian has ta'n order for that, wherefore I pray be gone.


Sgan. I like her well, she tells her plainly of it without dissembling.


Isab. As for my Clothes you may keep them, and send them me to morrow morning,
and so good night; you will excuse me that I do not wait upon you out.


Sgan: Now, now, she is coming, I Will stand close and observe her.


SCAENA IV.
Enter Isabella Veiled. Isabella. NOw Night, put on thy darkest mantle, and
hide me in it.


Sgan. So -- I Am glad my house is rid of her, which way goes she? what directly
to Valerio's? Here Is a desperate wench now? cares not to put fire and tow
together, we shall have a brave flame of it anon.


Isab. This is the house, now Love after so many storms and dangers past, here
let me find a happy port at last*


SCAENA V.
Enter Valerio rushing out. Val. I Am resolved I Will either die, or free my
Isabella from her Captivity.


Isab. Live, live Valerio, for behold her here*


Val. Ha! Isabella?


Isab. The same.


Sgan. But you lie* though, for all your counterfeiting her, and her voice so
well.

Aside.
Isab. I fear now my Valerio may less esteem his Conquest of me, having gained
me so early as has done.


Val. Rather the more, the more a thousand times, for what we gain with
difficulty we use to attribute chiefly to our own industry, but coming by you
so easily as I do, I must attribute all the thanks to you.


Isab. I fear I shall be seen here*


Looks fearfully about. Val. Come in then dearest, and hide you in mine Arms.


Isab. But by the port o'th Temple I dare not enter, Honor forbids it.


Val. You are a thing so sacred, you make each place a Temple where you are:
Mean time your scrupulous honor needs not fear.

By that port only you shall enter here.


Exeunt. Manet Sganarelle. Sgan. So, get you together with all my heart, pity
two houses should be troubled w'ye, and I Am glad mine is rid of you: Now could I
but meet mine honest Cousin to confer notes together, how I should laugh at him?
and see in good time he is here.


SCAENA VI.
Enter Mounsieur Bonhomme Sganarelle. OH Cousin! my dear Cousin well; met, I Am
heartily glad to see you well.


Bonh. And I you; you are grown very kind and Complemental of late methinks! I Am
glad to see it, it is a good sign.


Sgan. Right Cousin, a very good sign, a sign that all goes well, and I
congratulate w'ye.


Bonh. For what?


Sgan. Why for the high advancement of Madamoiselles your Daughters there.


Bonh. To what I pray?


Sgan. To the Dignity of Countess and Marchioness; -- and how I pray does the
honorable Lords the Count and Marquess their Husbands?


Bonh. You Are very pleasant.


Sgan. Have I not reason? being allied unto such noble Personages? and where I
pray is your Daughter Mademoiselle Mary, if one might be so bold to ask?


Bonh. Why at home I think.


Sgan. Oh! you do but think so; but I should be ashamed were I as you, and she
my charge, not to know for certain where she were.


Bonh. But why do you ask the question?


Sgan. For a certain reason I shall tell you presently, do you know that house I
pray? and who lives there?


Bonh. Why Mounsieur Valerio as I take it.


Sgan. You take it right, and thereby hangs a tale:


Bon. What tale?


Sgan. Why of him and your Daughter, and both together; for the plain truth
is, she is run away from you, and has married Valerio.


Bonh. It cannot be!


Sgan. Nay, pray heaven it be no worse; and now I hope you see the difference
Cousin betwixt our two procedures, yours by the way of mildness and gentleness,
and mine by that of rigor and severity.


Bonh. I see nothing yet, and shall believe nothing of all you say, until I see
it with these eyes of mine.


Sgan. If that be all your difficulty, you shall soon see it. Holla! who is
within there?


SCAENA VII.
Enter Valerio and Isabella Veiled. Valerio. Who knocks there?


Sgan. None but friends; -- Look there, do you see her now?


Bonh. Why this is Isabella.


Sgan. Ha, ha, ha! he is deceived as well as the other there, -- conceal your self
still, and I Will keep your council since he will needs be deceived, you shall see
how finely I Will deceive: Well, are you contented who e're it be, that he should
marry her?

To Isab:
Bonh. I am with all my heart; and are you so too?


Sgan. with all my heart too, there is my hand on it.


Isab. Why then I thank you Sir.


unvails Sgan. How! Isabella!


Isab. Yes Sir.


Bonh. Did I not tell you so!


Sgan. Poor Sganarelle! how art thou coz'ned then?


Bonh. And now I hope you see the difference betwixt our two procedures, yours
by way of rigor and severity, and mine by mildness and gentleness?


Sgan. Now were I a Poet what Lampoons could I make against all womankind.


Isab. As for my portion, by good fortune Sir 'twas left in your hands by my
deceased Father to be paid me at day of Marriage.


Bonh. It Is confessed, and I shall be ready to pay it whensoe're you please to
demand it.


Isab. Then Sir to you, I Have nothing else to say, but only to thank you for the
care you have had of my good breeding and education:


Sgan. And is this the fruit of it?


Isab. Even such as it deserves, and when I have any slaves to breed hereafter,
I Will commend them to your care.


Val. And I thank you Sir for all the good offices you have done me of carrying
Letters and Messages betwixt us; without whose mediation I confess w'ad never
been so happy as we are.


Sgan. Nor I so unhappy* -- mocked and jeered on all sides; Well, I dare not be
angry with them, but when I Am at home my Changlings shall dearly pay for it; --
mean time my comfort is, you have as little joy of your Daughters as I of her
here, and have as much reason to grieve for the marring of their Marriages, as
I for the making of hers here.


Bonh. You Are deceived Sir, their Marriages are forwarder then you imagine: And
here behold the Bridegroom's come, ready prepared for it.


SCAENA VIII.
Enter Monsieur Du Buisson, and La Fleur, gallantly Attired, Mascarillio and
Iodelet in their Laqueyes Clothes. Sganarelie. NAy, if all be Married but I,
it is time for me to go home, and hang my self; but first, though it failed the
last year, I Will go and preach the end of the World this year infallibly.


Exit. Bonh. So, now I like you, you appear like Bridegrooms, and your selves,
and your Mistress, needs must like you too. What? my Count and Marquess! I am
glad to see your Honors well.


Mas. Quelque chose Monsieur pour boire vostre sante.


Iod. Somewhat to drink your health Sir*


Bonh. What Counts and Marquesses beg?


Mas. Yes in Court Sir.


Iod. And out of Court sometimes too.


Bonh. Well, there is somewhat for acting your parts so well.


Mas. Gramercy Monsieur.


Iod. We thank you Sir.


SCAENA IX.
Enter Lysette: Bonhomme. Well, where are your Mistresses?


Lys. In the other world I think by this time.


Bonh. How so?


Lys. Why yonder is the strangest change and alteration with them, the one instead
of Romances, reads nothing now but spiritual Books, amongst the rest she has got
the Spur of Devotion, and reads it all day, and I think mean*s to lie with it a
nights too.


Du Buis. He should have but a cold bedfellow then that marries her.


Lys. The Other has got the Sick-mans salve, and instead of making Pomatum,
studies nothing now but making Salves and Unguents for the poor.


La Fl. Hei day!


Lys. And means to go shortly and practice in an Hospital.


La Fl. There let her practice for me, I should be sorry my wife should smell of
nothing but Salves and Plasters, and talk of nothing but scald heads, and
scab'd skins.


Bonh. Here Is a strange and miraculous Conversion now!


Du Buis. A conversion and a half! I Would rather have my wife bodily then
spiritually proud and vain.


La Fl. We shall have them preach shortly, and of all things bless me from a
preaching-wife


SCAENA X.
Enter Mademoiselle Mary with a Book, Anne with a Gally pot in her hand, etc.
Du Buisson. OH! here they come.


Bonh. And see there is the Spur of Devotion, and there the Sick-man's Salve,
let us stand close and observe them.


Mar. Look Sister, in the first part of the Grand Cyrus here, there is the
prittiest story of the Belle Incognita, as e're thou re'dst:


Bonh. How Is this! is this her Spur of Devotion!


An: And here is the best Pomatum as ever skinned Ladies face.


La Fl. And this her Sick-mans Salve? I Am glad of this in faith.


Bonh. Why thou lying Baggage did thou not tell me they were converted, and
had quite left off their follies and vanities.


Lys. And so they have Sir if one may believe themselves, I Am sure they told me
so; -- Come, come, and leave off your dissembling, you make me be chid for you
here.


Mas. It Is true, we but dissemble indeed.


Bonh. Oh! that is well yet:


Mar. For we are truly converted.


La Fl. What! more turnings yet?


Mar. And mean to leave off this vain and wicked world, and betake us presently
to a Nunnery.


Lys. Beshrew me if you do, you shall go alone for me, for I Will not follow you.


Bonh. Come, come, leave this sooling, and talk no more of Nunneries, but think
of Marriage; behold your Husbands here:


An. Which?


Bonh. Why these here, don't you see?


An. Who, those? with those profane legs there in surplices!


Du Buis. They Are turned Fanatics!


Mar. And those light shuttle-cock heads that look as if they would fly?


An. No, those whom we were to marry, were grave and sober Gentlemen, and far
from the folly and levity of these:


Mar. Sure these are the Lacqueys again!


Bonh. Come, come, leave your fooling I say, I tell you these are they.


Mar. If they be, we are much beholding to them sure, to inveigh against the
fashion and the mode, and cry out against vanity, whilst they are a hundred times
more vain themselves.


Du Buis. Oh now I perceive what they would be at* -- no, no, far be it from us to
prohibit you any thing you have a mind unto, or seek to be your Masters, but
follow the mode and fashions, read Romances, do what you will, you shall find
us always your servants*


Mar. Nay then to show our selves right women, now we may, we will not, but
thus we throw them all away, which had you sought to have made us do by any
other way then gentleness, we would have died e're ever we would have done.


They throw away their Book and Pot. An. Mean time don't think you have
deceived us with your fine plot there, for I hope by what w'ave done, you see
we have our plots as well as you, and could too if we list deceive you too.


Du Buis. We confess and acknowledge it.


Mar. And now we will be idolatrous of the mode no more, nor think that Lady
damned who is out o'th fashion.


An. Nor call a leg without Canons, a leg in Herauldry, or Hat without
Feathers, the Quakers block.


Mar. Nor read Romances so long till we imagine our selves, the Amaranths and
Polixens we read of.


Lys. And pray leave off your precious Language too, and speak intelligibly,
that I may understand you.


Du Buis. Enough, enough.


Bonh. So, so, I Am glad you are so well agreed; -- And now behold this other
couple too, who are in Love agreed as well as you.


La Fl. Noble Valerio and fair Isabella, we heartily congratulate w'ye.


Val. And we with you.


SCAENA XI.
Enter Ergasto. Valerio. COme Ergasto, where are you in all this joy?


Erg. Now you have got another Companion, there is no need of me, I may be gone.


Val. That Is unkindly said, Ergasto, a friend's my better self, and no
companion can be more dear to me then such an one, know him and love him my
dear as one whom you and I have special obligation to.


Embraces him. Bonh. Come, come, it is late, and time each loving couple part,
to meet again with greater joy to morrow, to night's a fast, and Venus vigil, to
morrow Heymen's feast, to which I invite each one that is here my Guest.


Mar. What my Count and Marquess, are you here?


Mas. At your service.


Mar. No, -- we'd rather counsel you to continue Actors still, you did your
parts so well.


Iod. Well then*

Gentlemen and Ladies you hear what is said, and we are ready for our parts so
you are content, to be Actors still for your divertisement.


EPILOGUE.
Mascarillio* ANd now what
think ye o'th Damoiselles a la Mode?
We hope none grutches money they have bestowed
In seeing them; or if that any here
Thinks that for seeing them theypaid too dear;
We wish that for the mode and Damoiselles too,
They never may dearer pay then now they do.

FINIS. Quinti and Ultimi Actus.

