THE TRAGEDY OF THIERRY King of France, and his Brother THEODORET. As it was
diverse times acted at the Blacke-Friers hy the Kings Majesty's Servants.
Written by JOHN FLETCHER Gent.

printer's device of Humphrey Mosley, featuring a fleur-de-lis seeding (c.f.
McKerrow 263-272) IN DOMINO CONFIDO


LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Mosely, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1648.

THE TRAGEDY OF THIERRIE AND THEODORET.
Act. 1.
Scoe. 1.
Enter Theodoret, Brunhalt, Bawdber. BRVNHALT. Tax me with these hot tainters?

Theodoret. You are too sudaine;
I do but gently tell you what becomes you,
And what may bend your honor! how these courses
Of loose and lazy pleasures; not suspected
But done and known, your mind that grants no limit
And all your Actions follows, which loose people
That see but through a mist of circumstance
Dare term ambitious; all your ways hide sores
Opening in the end to nothing but ulcers.
Your instruments like these may call the world
And with a fearful clamor, to examine
Why, and to what we govern. From example
If not for virtues sake ye may be honest:
There have been great ones, good ones, and it is necessary
Because you are your self, and by your self
A selfe-peece from the touch of power and Justice,
You should command your self, you may imagine
Which cozens all the world, but chiefly women.
The name of greatness glorifies your actions
And strong power like a pent-house, promise
To shade you from opinion; take heed mother,
And let us all take heed these most abuse us
The sins we do, people behold through optics,
Which shows them ten times more than common vices,
And often multiplyes them: then what justice
Dare we inflict upon the weak offenders
When we are thieves our selves?

Brun. This is, Martell,
Studied and pend unto you, whose base person
I charge you by the love you owe a mother
And as you hope for blessings from her prayers,
Neither to give belief to, nor allowance,
Next I tell you Sir, you from whom obedience
Is so far fled, that you dare tax a mother;
Nay further, brand her honor with your slanders,
And break into the treasures of her credit,
Your easiness is abused, your faith fraited
With lies, malicious lies, your merchant mischief,
He that never knew more trade then Tales, and tumbling
Suspicious into honest hearts; what you or he,
Or all the world dare lay upon my worth,
This for your poor opinions: I am she,
And so will bear my self, whose truth and whiteness
Shall ever stand as far from these detections
As you from duty; get you better servants
People of honest actions without ends,
And whip these knaves away, they eat your favors,
And turn em unto poisons: my known credit
Whom all the Courts a this fide Nile have envied,
And happy she could fite me, brought in question
Now in my hours of age and reverence,
When rather superstition should be rendered
And by a Rush that one days warmth
Has shot up to this swelling; give me justice,
Which is his life.

Theod. This is an impudence,
And he must tell you, that till now mother
Brought ye a sons obedience, and now breaks it
Above the sufferance of a son.

Bawd. Bless us?
For I do now begin to feel my self
Turning into a halter, and the ladder
Turning from me, one pulling at my legs too.

Theod. These truths are no man's tales, but all men's troubles,
They are, though your strange greatness would out stare v'm:
Witness the daily Libels, almost Ballads
In every place, almost in every Province,
Are made upon your lust, Tavern discourses,
Crowds crammed with whispers; Nay, the holy Temples,
Are not without your curses: Now you would blush,
But your black tainted blood dare not appear
For fear I should fright that too.

Brun. O ye gods!

Theod. Do not abuse their names: they see your actions,
And your conceald sins, though you work like Moles,
Lies level to their justice.

Brun. Art thou a son?

Theod. The more my shame is of so bad a mother,
And more your wretchedness you let me be so;
But woman, for a mothers name has left me
Since you have left your honor; mend these ruins,
And build again that broken fame, and fairly;
Your most intemperate fires have burnt, and quickly
Within these ten days take a Monastery,
A most strickt house, a house where none may whisper,
Where no more light is known but what may make ye
Believe there is a day where no hope dwells,
Nor comfort but in tears.

Brun. O misery!

Theod. And there to cold repentance, and starved penance
Tie your succeeding days; or curse me heaven
If all your gilded knaves, brokers, and bedders.
Even he you built from nothing, strong Portalyde,
Be not made ambling Geldings; all your maids,
If that name do not shame vm, fed with spunges
To suck away their rancknesse; and your self
Only to empty Pictures and dead Arras
Offer your old desires.

Brun. I will not curse you,
Nor lay a prophecy upon your pride,
Though heaven might grant me both: unthankful, no,
I nourished ye, 'twas I, poor I groand for you,
'Twas I felt what you sufferd, I lamented
When sickness or sad hours held back your swetnesse;
It Was I paid for your sleeps, I watch your wakings:
My daily cares and fears, that rid, played, walked,
Discoursd, discoverd, fed and fashioned you
To what you are, and am I thus rewarded,

Theod. But that I know these tears I could dote on em,
And kneel to catch vm as they fall, then knit vm
Into an Armlet, ever to be honored;
But woman they are dangerous drops, deceitful,
Full of the weeper, anger and ill nature.

Brun. In my last hours despisd.

Theod. That Text should tell,
How ugly it becomes you to err thus;
Your flames are spent, nothing but smoke maintains ye;
And those your favor and your bounty suffers
Lie not with you, they do but lay lust on you,
And then embrace you as they caught a palsy;
Your power they may love, and like spanish Iennetts
Commit with such a gust.

Bawd. I would take whipping,
And pay a fine now. Exit Bawdber

Theod. But were ye once disgraced,
Or fallen in wealth, like leaves they would fly from you,
And become browse for every beast; you willed me
To stock my self with better friends, and servants
With what face dare you see me, or any mankind,
That keep a race of such unheard of relics,
Bawds, Leachers; Letches, femall fornications,
And children in their rudiments to vices,
Old men to show examples: and lest Art
Should loose her self in act, to call back custom,
Leave these, and live like Niobe. I told you how
And when your eyes have dropped away remembrance
Of what you were. I am your son! perform it.

Brun. Am I a woman, and no more power in me,
To tie this Tiger up, a soul to no end,
Have I got shame and lost my will; Brunhalt
From this accursed hour, forget thou bor'st him,
Or any part of thy blood gave him living,
Let him be to thee an Antipathy,
A thing thy nature sweates at, and turns backward:
Throw all the mischiefs on him that thy self,
Or women worse than thou art, have invented,
And kill him drunk, or doubtful.

Enter Bawdber, Protaldie, Lecure. Bawd. Such a sweat,
I never was in yet, clipped of my minstrels;
My toys to prick up wenches withal; uphold me,
It runs like snowballs through me.

Brun. Now my varlets,
My slaves, my running thoughts, my executions.

Baw. Lord how she looks!

Brun. Hell take ye all.

Baw. We shall be gelt.

Brun. Your Mistress,
Your old and honored Mistress, you tired curtals
Suffers for your base sins; I must be cloistered,
Mewed up to make me virtuous who can help this,
Now you stand still like Statues; Come Protaldye,
One kiss before I perish, kiss me strongly
Another, and a third.

Lecure. I fear not gelding
As long as she holds this way.

Brun. The young courser,
That unlickt lump of mine, will win thy Mistress;
Must I be chaste Protaldye?

Fro. Thus and thus Lady:

Brun. It shall be so, let him seek fools for Vestalls,
Here is my Cloister.

Lecure. But what safety Madam
Find you in staying here?

Brun. Thou have hit my meaning,
I will to Thierry son of my blessings,
And there complnine me, tell my tale so subtly,
That the cold stones shall sweat; and Statues mourn,
And thou shall weep Protaldye in my witness,
And there forswear.

Bawd. Yes, any thing but gelding,
I am not yet in quiet Noble Lady,
Let it be done to night, for without doubt
To morrow we are capons.

Brun. Sleep shall not seize me,
Nor any food befriend me but thy kisses.
E're I forsake this desert, I live honest;
He may as well bid dead men walk, I humbled,
Or bent below my power? let night-dogs tear me,
And goblins ride me in my sleep to jelly,
Ere I forsake my sphere.

Lecure. This place you will.

Brun. What Is that to you, or any,
Ye dosse, you powdered pigsbones, rubarbe glister:
Must you know my designs, a college on you,
The proverb makes but fools.

Prota. But Noble Lady.

Brun. You a saucy ass too, off I will not,
If you but anger me, tell a sow-gelder
Have cut you all like colts, hold me and kiss me,
For I am too much troubled; make up my treasure,
And get me horses private, come about it.

Exeunt. Act. 1. Scoe. 2.
Enter Theodoret, Martell. etc. Theod. Though I assure my self (Martell) your
counsel
Had no end but allegiance and my honor:
Yet I am jealous, I have passed the bounds
Of a sons duty; for suppose her worse
Then you report, not by bare circumstance,
But evident proof confirmed has given her out:
Yet since all weaknesses in a kingdom, are
No more to be severely punished than
The faults of Kings are by the Thunderer
As often as they offend, to be revenged:
If not for piety, yet for policy,
Since some are of necessity to be spared,
I might, and now I wish I had not looked
With such strict eyes into her follies.

Mart. Sir, a duty well discharged is never followed
By sad repentance, nor did your Highness ever
Make payment of the debt you owed her, better
Than in your late reproves not of her, but
Those crimes that made her worthy of reproof.
The most remarkable point in which Kings differ
From private men, is that they not alone
Stand bound to be in themselves innocent,
But that all such as are allyde to them
In neernesse, or dependence, by their care
Should be free from suspicion of all crime;
And you have reaped a double benefit
From this last great act: first in the restraint
Of her lost pleasures, you remove the example
From others of the like licentiousness,
Then when it is known that your severitie
Extended to your mother, who dares hope for
The least indulgence or connivence in
The easiest slips that may prove dangerous
To you or to the Kingdom?

Theod. I must grant
Your reasons good (Martell) if as she is
My mother, she had been my subject, or
That only here she could make challenge to
A place of being; but I know her temper
And fear (if such a word become a King,)
That in discovering her, I have let loose
A Tygres, whose rage being shut up in darkness,
Was grievous only to her self; which brought
Into the view of light, her cruelty,
Provoked by her own shame, will turn on him
That foolishly presumed to let her see
The loathed shape of her own deformity.

Mart. Beasts of that nature, when rebellilious threats
Begin to appear only in their eyes,
Or any motion that may give suspicion
Of the least violence should be chaind up;
Their fangs and teeth, and all their means of hurt,
Pared off, and knocked out, and so made unable
To do ill; they would soon begin to loath it.
I Will apply nothing, but had your Grace done,
Or would do yet, what your less forward zeal
In words did only threaten, far less danger
Would grow from acting it on her, then may
Perhaps have being from her apprehension
Of what may once be practiced: for believe it,
Who confident of his own power, presumes
To spend threats on an enemy, that has means
To shun the worst they can effect, gives armor
To keep off his own strength; nay more, disarmes
Himself, and lies unguarded against all harms,
Or doubt, or malice may produce.

Theod. It Is true.
And such a desperate cure I would have used,
If the intemperate patient had not been
So near me as a mother; but to her,
And from me gentle unguents only were
To be applied: and as physicians
When they are sick of fevers, eat themselves
Such viands as by their directions are
Forbid to others though alike diseased;
So she considering what she is, may challenge
Those cordialls to restore her, by her birth,
And privilege, which at no suit must be
Granted to others.

Mart. May your pious care
Effect but what it aimd at, I am silent.

Enter Devitty. Theod. What laughed you at Sir?

Vitry. I have some occasion,
I should not else; and the same cause perhaps
That makes me do so, may beget in you
A contrary effect.

Theod. Why, what is the matter?

Vitry. I see and joy to see that sometimes poor men,
(And most of them are good) stand more indebted
For means to breathe to such as are held vicious,
Than those that wear like Hypocrites on their foreheads,
The Ambitious titles of just men and virtuous.

Mart. Speak to the purpose.

Vitry. Who would e'rehave thought
The good old Queen, your Highness reverend mother,
Into whose house (which was an Academ,)
In which all principles of lust were practiced:
No soldier might presume to set his foot;
At whose most blessed intercession
All offices in the state, were charitably
Conferred on Panders, o're-worne chamber wrestlers,
And such physicians as knew how to kill
With safety under the pretense of saving,
And such like children of a monstrous peace,
That she I y should at the length provid
That men of war, and honest younger brothers,
That would not owe their feeding to their cod-peece,
Should be esteemed of more than mothers or drones,
Or idle vagabonds.

Theod. I am glad to hear it,
Prithee what course takes she to do this?

Vitry. One that cannot fail, she and virtuous train,
With her jewels, and all that was worthy the carrying,
The last night left the court, and as it is more
Then said, for it is confirmed by such as met her.
She Is fled unto your brother.

Theod. How?

Vitry. Nay storm not,
For if that wicked tongue of hers has not
Forgot its pace, and Thierry be a Prince
Of such a fiery temper, as report
Has given him out for; you shall have cause to use
Such poor men as my self; and thank us too
For coming to you, and without petitions;
Pray heaven reward the good old woman for it.

Mirt. I foresaw this.

Theod. I hear a tempest coming,
That sings mine and my kingdoms ruin, have,
And cause a troop of horse to fetch her back:
Yet stay, why should I use means to bring in
A plague that of her self has left me? Muster
Our Soldiers up, we'ele stand upon our guard,
For we shall be attempted; yet forbear
The inequality of our powers will yield me
Nothing but loss in their defeature: something
Must be done, and done suddenly, save your labor,
In this i will use no counsel but mine own,
That course though dangerous is best. Command
Our daughter be in readiness, to attend us:
Martell, your company, and honost Vitry,
Thou will along with me.

Virty. Yes any where,
To be worse then I am here, is past my fear.

Exeunt Act. 2.
Scoe. 1.
Enter Thierry, Brunhalt, Bawdber, Lecure, etc. Their. You are here in a
sanctuary; and that viper
(Who since he has forgot to be a son,
I much disdain to think of as a brother)
Had better in despite of all the gods,
To have raized their Temples, and spurned down their altars,
Then in his impious abuse of you,
To have called on my just anger.

Brun. Princely son;
And in this worthy of a near name,
I have in the relation of my wrongs
Been modest, and no word my tongue delivered
I express my insupportable injuries,
But gave my heart a wound: nor has my grief
Being from what I suffer; but that he
Degenerate as he is, should be the actor
Of my extremes; and force me to devide
The fires of brotherly affection,
Which should make but one flame.

Their. That part of his
As it deserves shall burn no more, if or
The tears of Orphans, widows, or all such
As dare acknowledge him to be their Lord,
Joined to your wrongs, with his heart blood have power
To put it out: and you, and these your servants,
Who in our favors shall find cause to know
In that they left not you, how dear we hold them;
Shall give Theodoret to understand,
His ignorance of the prizelesse Jewel, which
He did possess in you, mother in you,
Of which I am more proud to be the doner,
Then if the absolute rule of all the world
Were offered to this hand; once more you are welcome,
Which with all ceremony due to greatness
I would make known, but that our just revenge
Admits not of delay; your hand Lord General.

Enter Protaldie, with soldiers. Brun. Your favor and his merit I may say
Have made him such but I am jelious how
Your subjects will receive it.

Their. How my subjects?
What do you make of me? Oh heaven! my subjects!
How base should I esteem the name of Prince
If that poor dust, were any thing before
The whirlewinde of my absolute command?
Let them be happy and rest so contented?
They pay the tribute of their hearts and knees,
To such a Prince that not alone has power,
To keep his own but to increase it; that
Although he has a body may add too
The famed night labor of strong Hercules:
Yet is the master of a continence
That so can temper it, that I forbear
Their daughters, and their wives, whose hands though strong,
As yet have never drawn by unjust mean
Their proper wealth into my treasury,
But I grow glorious, and let them beware
That in their least repining at my pleasures,
They change not a mild Prince, (for if provoked
I dare and will be so) into a Tyrant.

Brun. You see there is hope that we shall rule again,
And your fallen fortunes rise.

Bawdb. I hope your Highness
Is pleased that I should still hold my place with you
For I have been so long used to provide you
Fresh bits of flesh since mine grew stale, that surely
If cashir'd now, I shall prove a bad Cator
In the Fish-market of cold chastity,

Lecure. For me I am your own, nor since I first
Knew what it was to serve you, have remembered
I had a soul, but such a one whose essence
Depended wholly on your Highness pleasure,
And therefore Madam --

Brun. Rest assured you are,
Such instruments we must not lose.

Lecure-Bawdb. Our service.

Their. You have viewed them then, what is your opinion of them?
In this dull time of peace, we have prepared them
Apt for the war. Ha?

Prota Sir, they have limbs
That promise strength sufficient, and rich armors
The Soldiers best loved wealth: more it appears
They have been drilled, nay very prettily drilled
For many of them can discharge their muskets
Without the danger of throwing off their heads,
Or being offensive to the standers by,
By sweating too much backwards; nay I find
They know the right, and left hand file, and may
With some impulsion no doubt be brought
To pass the A, B, C, of war, and come
Unto the Horne-booke.

Their. Well, that care is yours;
And see that you effect it.

Prota. I am slow
To promise much; but if within ten days,
By precepts and examples, not drawn from
Worm eaten presidents of the Roman wars
But from mine own, I make them not transcend
All that e're yet bore arms, let it be said,
Protaldye bragges, which would be unto me
As hateful as to be estem'd a coward:
For Sir, few Captains know the way to win him,
And make the soldiers valiant. You shall seem
Lie with them in their trenches, talk, and drink,
And be together drunk; and what seems stranger,
We Will sometimes wench together, which once practiced
And with some other care and hidden acts,
They being al made mine, i will breath into the^
Such fearelesse resolution and such fervor,
That though I brought them to beseege a fort,
Whose walls were steeple high, and cannon proof,
Not to be undermind, they should fly up,
Like swallows, and the parapet once won;
For proof of their obedience, if I willed them
They should leap down again and what is more,
By some directions they should have from me,
Not break their necks.

Thy. This is above belief.

Brun. Sir, on my knowledge though he has spoke much,
He Is able to do more.

Lecure. She means on her.

Brun. And howsoever in his thankfulness,
For some few favors done him by my self,
He left Austracia, not Theodoret,
Though he was chiefly aimed at, could have laid
Withal his Dukedomes power, that shame upon him,
Which in his barbarous malice to my honor,
He swore with threats to effect.

Their. I cannot but
Believe you Madam, thou art one degree
Grown nearer to my heart, and I am proud
To have in thee so glorious a plant
Transported hither; in thy conduct, we
Go on assured of conquest our remove
Shall be with the next sun.

Enter Theoderet, Memberge, Martell, Devitry. Lecure. Amazement leave me, it is
he.

Bawdb. We are again undone.

Prot. Our guilt has no assurance nor defense.

Bawdb. If now your ever ready wit fail to protect us,
We shall be all discoverde

Brun. Be not so
In your amazement and your foolish fears,
I am prepared for it.

Theod. How? Not one poor welcome,
In answer of so long a jorney made
Only to see your brother.

Their. I have stood
Silent thus long, and am yet unresolu'd
Whether to entertain thee on my sword,
As fits a parricide of a mothers honor;
Or whether being a Prince, I yet stand bound
(Though thou art here condemned) to give thee hearing
Before I axecute. What foolish hope,
(Nay pray you forbear) or desperate madness rather,
(Unless thou come assurde, I stand in debt
As far to all impiety as thy self)
Has made thee bring thy neck unto the axe?
Since looking only here, it cannot but
Draw fresh blood from thy seared up conscience,
To make thee sencible of that horror, which
They ever bear about them, that like Nero,
Like said I? thou are worse: since thou dare strive
In her defame to murder thine alive.

Theod. That she that long since had the boldness to
Be a bad woman, (though I wish some other
Should so report her) could not want the cunning,
(Since they go hand in hand) to lay fair colors
On her black crimes, I was resolved before,
Nor make I doubt but that she has impoyson'd
Your good opinion of me, and so far
Incensed your rage against me, that too late
I come to plead my innocence.

Brun. To excuse thy impious scandalls rather.

Prot. Rather forced with fear to be compelled to come.

Thierry Forbear.

Theod. This moves not me, and yet had I not been
Transported on my own integrity,
I neither am so odious to my subjects,
Nor yet so barren of defense, but that
By force I could have justified my guilt,
Had I been faulty, but since innocence
Is to it self an hundred thousand gardes,
And that there is no son, but though he owe
That name to an ill mother, but stands bound
Rather to take away with his own danger
From the number of her faults, then for his own
Security, to add unto them This,
This has made me to prevent the expense
Of blood on both sides, the injuries, the rapes,
(Pages, that ever wait upon the war:)
The account of all which, since you are the cause,
Believe it, would have been required from you;
Rather I say to offer up my daughter,
Who living only could revenge my death,
With my heart blood a sacrifice to your anger
Then that you should draw on your head more curses
Then yet you have deserved.

Their. I do begin
To feel an alteration in my nature,
And in his full sailed confidence, a shower
Of gentle rain, that falling on the fire
Of my hot rage has quenched it, ha! I would
Once more speak roughly to him, and I will
Yet there is some thing whispers to me, that
I have said too much. How is my heart divided
Between the duty of a son, and love
Due to a brother! yet I am swayed here,
And must ask of you, how it is possible
You can effect me that have learned to hate,
Where you should pay all love?

Theod. Which joynde with duty,
Upon my knees I should be proud to tender,
Had she not used her self so many swords
To cut those bonds that title me to it.

Their. Fie no more of that.

Theod. Alas it is a theme,
I take no pleasure to discourse of; would
It could as soon be buried to the world,
As it should die to me: nay more, I wish
(Next to my part of heaven) that she would spend
The last part of her life so here, that all
Indifferent Judges might condemn me, for
A most malicious slanderer, nay texde it
Upon my forehead, if you hate me mother,
Put me to such a shame, pray you do, believe it
There is no glory that may fall upon me,
Can equal the delight I should receive
In that disgrace; provided the repeal
Of your long banished virtues, and good name,
Vsher'd me to it.

Their. See, she shows her self
An easy mother, which her tears confirm.

Theod. It Is a good sign, the comfortablest rain
I ever saw.

Their. Embrace: why this is well,
May never more but love in you, and duty
On your part rise between you.

Baudb. Do you hear Lord General,
Does not your new stamped honor on the sudden
Begin to grow sick?

Prota. Yes J find it fit,
That putting off my armor J should think of
Some honest hospital to retire to.

Bawdb. Sure although J am a bawd, yet being a Lord.
They cannot whip me for it, what is your opinion?

Lecure. The beadle will resolve you, for J cannot,
There is something that more near concerns my self,
That calls upon me.

Mart. Note but yonder scarabes,
That liude upon the dunge of her base pleasures,
How from the fear that she may yet prove honest
Hang down their wicked heads.

Vitry. What is that to me?
Though they and all the polcats of the Court,
Were trust together, I perceive not how
It can advantage me a cardekue,
To help to keep me honost. A horn.

Enter a Post. Their. How, from whence?

Post. These letters will resolve your grace.

Their. What speak they? Reads:
How all things meet to make me this day hppy?
See mother, brother, to your reconcilement
Another blessing almost equal to it,
Js coming toward me; my contracted wife
Ordella daughter of wife Dataricke
The King of Aragon is on our confines;
Then to arrive at such a time, when you
Are happily here to honor with your presence
Our long deferred, but much wished nuptial,
Falls out above expression; heaven be plea'd
That J may use these blessings powerd on me
With moderation.

Brun. Hell and furies aid me,
That J may have power to avert the plagues
That press upon me.

Their. Two days journey say thou,
We will set forth to meet her, in the mean time
See all things be preparde to entertain her
Nay let me have your companies, there is a Forest
Jn the mid way shall yield us hunting sport,
To ease our travale, i will not have a brow
But shall wear mirth upon it, therefore clear them.
We'ele wash away, all sorrow in glad feasts
And the war we mean to men, we will make on beasts.

Exeunt omnes, praeter Brun. Bawdber, Portaldy, Lecure. Brun. Oh that I had the
Magic to transform you
Into the shape of such, that your own hounds
Might tear you piece meal; are you so stupid?
No word of comfort? have I fed you mothers
From my excess of moisture, with such cost
And can you yield no other retribution,
But to devour your maker, pandar sponge,
Impoysner, all grown barren?

Prota. You your self
That are our mover, and for whom alone
We live, have failed your self ingiving way
To the reconcilement of your sons.

Lecure. Which if
You had prevented, or would teach us how
They might again be severd, we could easily
Remove all other hindrances that stop
The passage of your pleasures.

Bawdb. And for me,
If I fail in my office to provide you
Fresh delicates hang me.

Brun. Oh you are dull, and find not
The cause of my vexation; their reconcilement
Is a mock castle built upon the sand
By children, which when I am pleased to overthrow,
I can with ease spurn down.

Lecure. If so, from whence
Grows your affliction?

Brun. My grief comes along
With the new Queen, in whose grace all my power
Must suffer shipwreck: for me now,
That hitherto have kept the first, to know
A second place, or yield the least precedence
To any others death; to have my sleeps
Less inquired after, or my rising up
Saluted with less reverence, or my gates
Empty of suitors, or the Kings great favors
To pass through any hand but mine, or he
Himself to be directed by another,
Would be to me: do you understand me, yet
No means to prevent this.

Prota. Fame gives her out
To be a woman of chastity
Not to be wrought upon; and therefore Madam
For me, though I have pleased you, to attempt her
Were to no purpose.

Brun. Tush, some other way.

Bawdb. Faith I know none else, all my bringing up
Aimed at no other learning.

Lecure. Give me leave,
If my art fail me not, I have thought on
A speeding project.

Brun. What is it? but effect it,
And thou shall be my Aesculapius,
Thy image shall be set up in pure gold,
To which i will fall down and worship it.

Lecure. The Lady is fair.

Brun. Exceeding fair.

Lecure. And young.

Brun. Some fifteen at the most.

Lecure. And loves the King with equal ardor.

Brun. More, she dotes on him.

Lecure. Well then, what think you if I make a drink
Which given unto him on the bridal night
Shall for five days so rob his faculties,
Of all ability to pay that duty,
Which new made wives expect, that she shall swear
She is not matched to a man.

Prota. 'Twere rare.

Lecure. And then,
If she have any part of woman in her,
She Will or fly our, or at least give occasion
Of such a breach which nere can be made up,
Since he that to all else did never fail
Of as much as could be performed by man
Proves only ice to her.

Brun. It Is excellent.

Bawdb. The Physician
Helps ever at a dead lift; a fine calling,
That can both raise, and take down, out upon thee.

Brun. For this one service I am ever thine,
Prepare it; i will give it him my self, for you Protaldye,
By this kiss, and our promised sport at night,
(Do conjure you to bear up, not minding
The opposition of Theodoret,
Or any of his followers; what so ere
You are, yet appear valiant, and make good
The opinion that is had of you: for my self
In the new Queens remove, being made secure,
Fear not, i will make the future building sure,

Exeunt. Wind horns. Enter Theodoret, Thierry. Theod. This Stag stood well,
and cunningly.

Thierry My horse;
I am sure, has found it, for her sides are
Blooded from flank to shoulder, where is the troop?

Enter Martell. Theodoret. Past homeward, weary and tired as we are,
Now Martell, have you remembered what we thought of?

Mart. Yes Sir, I have snigled him, and if there be
Any desert in his blood, beside the itch,
Or manly heat, but what decoctions
Leaches, and callises have crammed into him,
Your Lordship shall know perfect.

Their. What Is that, may not I know too?

Theod. Yes Sir,
To that end we cast the project.

Thierry. What is it?

Mart. A desire Sir,
Upon the gilded flag your Graces favor
Has stuck up for a General, and to inform you,
For this hour he shall pass the test, what valor,
Staid judgment, soul, or safe discretion
Your mothers wandering eyes, and your obedience
Have flung upon us, to assure your knowledge,
He can be, dare be, shall be, must be nothing,
Load him with piles of honors; set him off
With all the cunning foyles that may deceive us:
But a poor, cold, unspirited, unmanner'd,
Unhonest, unaffected, undone, fool,
And most unheard of coward, a mere lump
Made to load beds withal, and like a nightmare,
Ride Ladies that forger to say their prayers,
One that dares only be diseased, and in debt,
Whose body mewes more plasters every month,
Than women do old faces.

Their. No more, I know him,
I now repent my error, take yourtime
And try him home, ever thus far reserved,
You tie your anger up.

Mart. I lost it else Sir.

Their. Bring me his sword fair taken without violence.
For that will best declare him.

Theod. That Is the thing.

Their. And my best horse is thine.

Mart. Your Graces servant. Exit.

Theod. You Will hunt no more Sir.

Their. Not to day, the weather
Is grown too warm, besides the dogs are spent,
We Will take a cooler morning, let us to horse,
And hollow in the troop.

Exeunt. Wind horns. Enter 2 Huntsmen. 1. I marry Twainer,
This woman gives indeed, these are the Angels
That are the keepers saints.

2. I like a woman
That handles the deeres dowsets with discretion;
And pays us by proportion.

1. It Is no treason
To think this good old Lady has a stump yet
That may require a corrall.

2. And the bells too.
Enter Protaldye. She has lost a friend of me else, but here is the clarke,
No more for fear ath bell-ropes.

Prota. How now Keepers,
Saw you the King?

1. Yes Sir, he is newly mounted,
And as we take it ridden home.

Pro. Farewell then.
Exit. Keepers Enter Martell. My honored Lord, Fortune has made me happy
To meet with such a man of men to fide me.

Protald. How sir, I know ye not
Nor what your fortune means.

Mart. Few words shall serve, I am betraide Sir:
Innocent and honest; malice and violence.
Are both against me, basely and fowlely laid for;
For my life Sir, danger is now about me,
Now in my throat Sir.

Protald. Where sir?

Mart. Nay I fear not,
And let it now power down in storms upon me,
I have met with a noble guard,

Prot. Your meaning Sir,
For I have present business.

Mart. O my Lord,
Your honor cannot leave a gentleman
At least a fair design of this brave nature,
To which your worth is wedded, your profession
Hatched in, and made one piece in such a peril,
There are but six my Lord.

Prot. What fix?

Mart. Six villains sworn, and in pay to kill me.

Protaldye. Six?

Mart. Alas Sir, what can six do, or six score now you are present,
Your name will blow em off, say they have shot too,
Who dare present a piece? your valor's proof Sir.

Prot. No, i will assure you Sir, nor my discretion
Against a multitude; It Is true, I dare fight
Enough, and well enough, and long enough:
But wisdom Sir, and weight of what is on me,
In which I am no more mine own, nor yours Sir,
Nor as I take it any single danger,
But what concerns my place, tells me directly,
Beside my person, my fair reputation,
If I thrust into crowds, and seek occasions
Suffers opinion, six? Why Hercules
Avoided two men, yet not to give example:
But only for your present dangers sake Sir,
Were there but four Sir, I cared not if I killd them,
They will serve to whet my sword.

Mart. There are but four Sir,
I did mistake them, but four such as Europe
Excepting your great valor.

Prot. Well considerd,
I will not meddle with um, four in honor,
Are equal with fourscore, besides they are people
Only directed by their fury.

Mart. So much nobler shall be your way of justice.

Prot. That I find not.

Mart. You will not leave me thus?

Prot. I would not leave you, but look you Sir,
Men of my place and business, must not
Be questioned thus.

Mart. You cannot pass Sir,
Now they have seen me with you without danger.
They are here Sir within hearing, take but two.

Prot. Let the law take um take a tree Sir,
I Will take my horse, that you may keep with safety,
If they have brought no hand-sawes, within this hour
I Will send you rescue, and a toil to take um.

Mart. You shall not go so poorly, stay but one Sir.

Prot. I have been so hamperde with these rescues,
So hewde and torturde, that the truth is Sir,
I have mainely vowde against um, yet for your sake,
If as you say there be but one, i will stay.
And see fair play a both sides.

Mart. There is no
More Sir, and as I doubt a base one too.

Prot. Fie on him, go lugge him out by the ears.

Mart. Yes,
This is he Sir, the basest in the kingdom.

Prot. Do you know me?

Mart Yes, for a general fool,
A knave, a coward, and upstart stallion bawb.
Beast, barking puppy, that dares not bite.

Prot. The best man best knows patience

Mart. Yes,
This way Sir, now draw your sword, and right you,
Or render it to me, for one you shall do.

Pro. If wearing it may do you any honor,
I shall be glad to grace you, there it is Sir.

Mart. Now get you home, and telll your Lady Mistress,
She has shot up a sweet mushrump, quit your place too,
And say you are counselde well, thou will be beaten else
By thine own lanceprisadoes; when they know thee,
That tunns of oil of roses will not cure thee;
Go get you to your foyning work at Court,
And learn to sweat again, and eat dry mutton;
An armor like a frost will search your bones,
And make you roar you rogue; not a reply,
For if you do, your ears go off.

Prot. Still patience. Exeunt.

Loud music, A Banquet set out. Enter Trierry, Ordella, Brunhalt, Theodoret,
Lecure, Bawdber. etc. Their. It is your place, and though in all things else
You may and ever shall command me, yet
In this i will be obeyde.

Ordella. Sir, the consent,
That made me yours, shall never teach me to
Repent I am so, yet be you but pleased
To give me leave to say so much; the honor
You offer me were better given to her,
To whom you owe the power of giving.

Their, Mother,
You hear this and rejoice in such a blessing
That pays to you so large a share of duty,
But he no more, for as you hold a place
Nearer my heart than she, you must sit nearest
To all those graces, that are in the power
Of Majesty to bestow.

Brun. Which i will provide,
Shall be short liude, Lecure.

Lecure. I have it ready.

Brun. It Is well, wait on our cup.

Lecure. You honor me.

Their. We are dull,
No object to provoke mirth.

Theod. Martell,
If you remember Sir, will grace your Feast
With some thing that will yield matter of mirth,
Fit for no common view.

Their. Touching Protaldye.

Theod. You have it.

Brun. What of him, I fear his baseness aside
In spite of all the titles that my favors
Have clothed him, which will make discovery
Of what is yet concealed.

Enter Martell. Theod. Look Sir, he has it,
Nay we shall have peace when so great a soldier
As the renoun d Protaldye, will give up
His sword rather then use it.

Brun. 'Twas thy plot,
Which I will turn on thine own head. aside

Their. Pray you speak,
How won you him to part from 't?

Mart. Won him Sir,
He would have yielded it upon his knees
Before he would have hazarded the exchange
Of a phillip of the forehead: had you willed me,
I durst have undertook he should have sent you
His nose, provided that the loss of it
Might have saved the rest of his face: he is Sir
The most unutterable coward that ere nature
Blessed with hard shoulders, which were onley given him,
To the ruin of bastinados.

Thierry Possible.

Theod. Observe but how she frets.

Mart. Why believe it:
But that I know the shame of this disgrace,
Will make the beast to live with such, and never
Presume to come more among men; i will hazard
My life upon it, that a boy of twelve
Should scourge him hither like a parish top,
And make him dance before you.

Brun. Slave thou lie,
Thou dare as well speak treason in the hearing
Of those that have the power to punish it,
As the least syllable of this before him,
But it is thy hate to me.

Martell. Nay, pray you Madam,
I have no ears too hear you, though a foot
To let you understand what he is,

Brun Villain.

Theod. You are to violent.
Enter Protaldye. The worst that can come
Is blanketting; for beating, and such virtues
I have been long acquainted with.

Mart. Oh strange!

Bawdb. Behold the man you talk of,

Brun. Give me leave,
Or free thy (self think in what place you are)
From the foul imputation that is laid
Upon thy valor (be bold, i will protect you)
Or here I vow (deny it or forswear it)
These honors which thou wearest unworthily,
Which be but impudent enough and keep them,
Shall be torn from thee with thy eyes.

Prot. I have it,
My valor! is there any here beneath,
The style of king, dares question it?

Their. This is rare.

Prot. Which of my actions, which have still been noble,
Has rendered me suspected?

Thierry. Nay Martell,
You must not fall off.

Mart. Oh Sir, fear it not,
Do you know this sword?

Prot. Yes.

Mart. Pray you on what terms
Did you part with it?

Prota. Part with it say you?

Mert. So.

Their. Nay study not an answer, confess freely.

Prota. Oh I remember't now, at the stags falls,
As we to day were hunting, a poor fellow,
And now I view you better, I may say
Much of your pitch: this silly rech I spoke of
With his petition falling at my feet,
(Which much against my will he kissed,) desired
That as a special means for his preferment,
I would vochsafe to let him use my sword,
To cut off the stags head,

Brun. Will you hear that?

Bawdb. This lie bears a similitude of truth.

Prota. I ever courteous, (a great weakness in me)
Granted his humble suite.

Mart. Oh impudence?

Their. This change is excellent,

Mart. A word with you,
Deny it not, I was that man disguisde,
You know my temper, and as you respect
A daily cudgelling for one whole year,
Without a second pulling by the ears,
Or tweakes by the nose, or the most precious balm
You used of patience, patience do you mark me,
Confess before these kings with what base fear
Thou did deliver it.

Prot. Oh! I shall burst,
And if I have not instant liberty
To tear this fellow limb by limb, the wrong.
Will break my heart, although Herculean,
And somewhat bigger, there is my gage, pray you here
Let me redeem my credit.

Thierry. Ha, ha, forbear.

Mart. Pray you let me take it up, and if I do not
Against all ods of armor and of weapons,
With this make him confess it on his knees
Cut off my head.

Prot. No, that is my office.

Bawdb. Fie, you take the hangmans place.

Ordella. Nay good my Lord
Let me atone this difference, do not suffer
Our bridal night to be the Centaures feast,
You are a knight and bound by oath to grant
All just suits unto Ladies; for my sake
Forget your supposed wrong.

Prot. Well, let him thank you,
For your sake he shall live, perhaps a day,
And may be, on submission longer,

Theod. Nay, Martell, you must be patient.

Mart. I am yours,
And this slave shall be once more mine.

Their. Sit all;
One health, and so to bed, for I too long
Defer my choicest delicates.

Brun. Which if poison.
Have any Power, thou shall like Tantalus
Behold and never taste; be careful.

Lecure. Fear not.

Brun. Though it be rare in our sex, yet for once
I will begin a health.

Their. Let it come freely.

Brun. Lecure, the cup; here to the son we hope
This night shall be an Embrion.

Thierry. You have named
A blessing that I most desired, I pledge you,
Give me a larger cup, that is too little
Unto so great a god.

Brun. Nay, then you wrong me,
Follow as I began.

Thierry. Well as you please.

Brun. Is It done?

Lecure. Unto your wish, I warrant you,
For this night I durst trust him with my mother.

Their. So, it is gone round, lights.

Brun. Pray you use my service.

Ordella. It Is that which I shall ever owe you Madam,
And must have none from you, pray you pardon me.

Their. Good rest to all.

Theod. And to you pleasant labor.

Mart. Your company, Madam good night

Exeunt all, but Brunhalt, Portal Lecure, Bawdber. Brun. Nay you have cause to
blush, but I will hide it,
And what is more I forgive you; is it not pity
That thou that art the first to enter combat
With any woman, and what is more, overcome her,
In which she is best pleased, should be so fearful
To meet a man.

Prot. Why would you have me lose
That blood that is dedicated to your service
In any other qaurrell.

Brun. No, reserve it.
As I will study to preserve thy credit,
You sirrah; be it your care to find out on
That is poor though valiant, that at any rate
Will, to redeem my servants reputation,
Receive a public baffling.

Bawdb. Would your Highness
Were pleased to inform me better of your purpose.

Brun Why one Sir, that would thus be box'd
Or kicked, do you apprehend me now?

Bawdb. I feel you Madam,
The man that shall receive this from my Lord,
Shall have a thousand crowns.

Prot. He shall,

Bawd. besides
His day of bastinadoing past over,
He shall not lose your Grace, nor your good favor.

Brun. That shall make way to it.

Bawdb. It must be a man
Of credit in the Court, that is to be
The foil unto your valor.

Brot. True, it should.

Bawdb. And if he have place there, it is not the worse.

Brun. It Is much the better.

Bawdb. If he be a Lord,
'Twill be the greater grace

Brun. Thou art in the right.

Bawdb. Why then behold that valiant man and Lord,
That for your sake will take a cudgelling,
For be assu'd when it is spread abroad
That you have dealt with me, they will give you out
For one of the nine Worthies.

Brun. Out you pandar,
Why to beat thee is only exercise
For such as do affect it, lose not time
In vain replies, but do it: come my sollace
Let us to bed, and our desires once quenched
We Will there determine of Theodorets death
For he is the Engine used to ruin us;
Yet one work more, Lecure, art thou assurde
The potion will work,

Lecure. My life upon it,

Brun. Come my Protaldye, then glut me with
Those best delights of man, that are denied
To her that does expect them, being a bride.

Act. 3.
Scoe. 1.
Enter Thierry and Ordella, as from bed. Their. Sure I have drunk the blood of
Elephants.
The tears of mandrake and the marble dew,
Mixed in my draught, have quenched my natural heat,
And left no spark of fire but in mine eyes,
With which I may behold my miseries:
Ye wretched flames which play upon my sight,
Turn inward, make me all one piece, though earth.
My tears shall overwhelme you else too.

Ordella. What moves my Lord to this strange sadness?
If any late discerned want in me,
Give cause to your repentance, care and duty
Shall find a painful way to recompense.

Their. Are you yet frozen veins, feel you a breath,
Whose temperate heat would make the North star reele,
Her icie pillars thawed, and do you not melt?
Draw nearer, yet nearer,
That from thy barren kiss thou may confess
I have not heat enough to make a blush.

Ordella. Speak nearer to my understanding, like a husband,

Their. How should he speak the language of a husband,
Who wants the tongue and organs of his voice?

Ordella. It is a phrase will part with the same ease
From you with that you now deliver.

Their. Bind not his ears up with so dull a charm
Who has no other sense left, open; why should thy words
Find more restraint than thy free speaking actions,
Thy close embraces and thy midnight sighs
The silent orators to slow desire?

Ordella Strive not to win content from ignorance
Which must be lost in knowledge: heaven can witness
My farthest hope of good reached at your pleasure,
Which seeing alone may in your look be read:
Add not a doubtful comment to a text
That in it self is direct and easy.

Their. Oh thou have drunk the juice of hemlocke too,
Or did upbraided nature make this pair
To show she had not quite forgot lier first
Justly praised workmanship, the first chaste couple
Before the want of joy, taught guilty sight
A way through shame and sorrow to delight:
Say, may we mix as in their innocence
When turtles kissed, to confirm happiness,
Not to beget it.

Ordella. I know no bar.

Their. Should I believe thee, yet thy pulse beats woman,
And says the name of wife did promise thee
The blessed reward of duty to thy mother,
Who gave so often witness of her joy,
When she did boast thy likeness to her Husband.

Ordella. It Is true, that to bring forth a second to your self,
Was only worthy of my Virgin loss;
And should I prize you less unpattern'd Sir,
Then being exemplified, is it not more honor
To be possessor of unequaled virtue,
Then what is paralleled? give me belief,
The name of mother knows no way of good,
More then the end in me: who weds for lust
Is often a widow; when I married you,
I lost the name of maid to gain a title
Above the wish of change, which that part can
Only maintain, is still the same in man,
His virtue and his calm society,
Which no gray hairs can threaten to dissolve,
Nor wrinkles bury.

Their. Confine thy self to silence, lest thou take.
That part of reason from me is only left
To give persuasion to me, I am a man:
Or say thou have never seen the rivers haste
With glad-some speed to meet the amomorous sea.

Ordella. We are but to praise the coolness of their streams.

Their. Nor viewed the kids taught by their lustful sires,
Pursue each other through the wanton lawnes,
And liked the sport.

Ordella. As it made way unto their envied rest
With weary knots binding their harmless eyes.

Their. Nor do you know the reason why the Dove,
One of the pair your hands wont hourly seed,
So often clipped and kissed her happy mate.

Ordella. Unless it were to welcome his wished sight,
Whose absence only gave her mourning voice.

Thierry. And you could dove-like to a single object
Bind your loose spirits to one, nay such a one
Whom only eyes and ears must flatter good,
Your surer sense made useless, my self, nay
As in my all of good already known.

Ordella. Let proof plead for me, let me be mewed up
Where never eye may reach me but your own;
And when I shall repent, but in my looks, if sigh,

Their. Or shed a tear that is warm.

Ordella. But in your sadness.

Their. Or when you hear the birds call for their mates.
Ask if it be St. Valentine, their coupling day.

Ordella. If any thing may make a thought suspected
Of knowing any happiness but you,
Divorce me by the title of most falsehood.

Their. Oh who would know a wife, that might have such a friend?
Posterity henceforth lose the name of blessing
And leave the earth inhabited to people heaven.

Enter Theodoret, Brunhalt, Martell, Protaldye. Mart. All happiness to Thierry
and Ordella.

Their. It Is a desire but borrowed from me, my happiness
Shall be the period of all good men's wishes,
Which friends, nay dying fathers shall bequeath,
And in my one give all: is there a duty
Belongs to any power of mine, or love
To any virtue I have right to? here, place it hear,
Ordellas name shall only bear command,
Rule, title, soverainty.

Brun. What passion swayes my son?

Their. O mother, she has doubled every good
The travail of your blood made possible
To my glad being.

Prot. He should have done
Little to her, he is so light hearted;

Their. Brother, friends, if honor unto shame
If wealth to want in large the present sense,
My joys are unbounded, instead of question
Let it be envy, not bring a present
To the high offering of our mirth, banquets, and maskes;
Keep waking our delights, mocking nights malice,
Whose dark brow would fright pleasure from us,
Our court be but one stange of Revells, and each ye
The scene where our content moves.

Theod. There shall want
Nothing to express our shares in your delight Sir.

Mart. Till now I never repented the estate
Of widdower.

Their. Music, why art thou so slow voycte? it stays thy presence
My Ordella, this chamber is a sphere
Too narrow for thy al-moving virtue.
Make way, free way I say;
Who must alone, her sexes want supply,
Had need to have a room both large and high.

Mart. This passion's above utterance.

Theod. Nay credulity.

Exit all but Thierry, Brunhalt. Brun. Why son what mean you, are you a man?

Their. No mother I am no man, were I a man?
How could I be thus happy?

Brun. How can a wife be author of this joy then?

Their. That being no man, I am married to no woman;
The best of men in full ability,
Can only hope to satisfy a wife,
And for that hope ridiculous, I in my want
And such defective poverty, that to her bed
From my first cradell brought no strength but thought,
Have met a temperance beyond hers that rockt me,
Necessity being her bar; where this
Is so much senseless of my deprived fire,
She knows it not a loss by her desire.

Brun. It is beyond my admiration.

Their, Beyond your sexes faith,
The unripe virgins of our age to hear't
Will dream themselves to women, and convert
The example to a miracle.

Brun. Alas it is your defect moves my amazement,
But what ill can be separate from ambition?
Cruel Theodoret.

Thierry. What of my brother?

Brun. That to his name your barrenesse adds rule;
Who loving the effect, would not be strange
In favoring the cause; look on the profit,
And gain will quickly point the mischief out.

Their. The name of father to what I possess is shame and care.


Brun. Were we begot to single happiness
I grant you; but from such a wife, such virtue
To get an heir, what hermet would not find
Deserving argument to break his vow
Even in his age of chastity?

Their. You teach a deaf man language.

Brun. The cause found out, the malady may cease,
Have you heard of one Forts?

Their. A learned Astronomer, great Magician,
Who lives hard by retired.

Brun. Repair to him, with the just hour and place
Of your nativity; fools are amazed at fate,
Griefs but concealed are never desperate.

Their. You have timely wakn'd me, nor shall I sleep
Without the satisfaction of his art

Exit Thierry. Enter Lecure. Brun. Wisdom prepares you to'r, Lecure, met
happily.

Lecure. The ground answers your purpose, the conveniance
Being secure and easy, falling just
Behind the state set for Theodoret.

Brun. It Is well, your trust invites you to a second charge,
You know Lefortes cell.

Lecure. Who constellated your fair birth

Brun. Enough, I see thou know him, where is Bawdber?

Lecur. I left him careful of the project cast,
To raise Protaldies credit.

Brun. A sore that must be plaster'd, in whose wound
Others shall find their graves, think themselves sound,
Your ear, and quickest apprehension.

Exeunt. Enter Bawdber, and a servant. Bawdb. This man of war will advance.

Lecure. His hours upon the stroke.

Bawdb. Wind him back as you favor my ears,
I have no noise in my head, my brains have hitherto
Bin employed in silent businesses.

Enter Devitry. Lecure. The gentleman is within your reach Sir. Exit.

Bawdb Give ground whilst I drill my wits to the encounter,
Devitry, I take it.

Devitry. All that is left of him.

Bawdb. Is there another parcel of you, if it be at pawn
I will gladly redeem it to make you wholly mine.

Vitry You seek too hard a penyworth.

Bawdb. You to ill to keep such distance, your parts have been long known
To me, howsoever you please to forget acquaintance

Vitry. I must confess I have bin subject, to leawd company.

Bawdb. Thanks for your good remembrance,
You have bin a soldier Devitry, and borne arms.

Vitry. A couple of unprofitable ones, that have only served to get me a
stomach to my dinner.


Bawdb. Much good may it do you Sir.

Vitry. You should have heard me say I had dined first, I have built on an
unwholesome ground, raised up a house before I knew a tenant, matched to mere
weariness, sought to find want and hunger.


Bawdb. It is time you put up your sword, and run away for meat sir, nay if
I had not withdrawn ere now, I might have kept thee; fast with you: but since
the way to thrive is never late, what is the nearest course to profit think
you?


Vitry. It may be your worship will say bawdry.


Bawdb. True sense, bawdry.


Vitry. Why is there five kinds of them, I never knew but one.


Bawdb. I Will show you a new way of prostitution, fall back, further yet,
further, there is fifty crowns, do but as much to Protaldye the Queens
favoret, they are doubled.


Vitry. But thus much.


Bawdb. Give him but an affront as he comes to the presence, and in his drawing
make way like a true bawd to his valor, the son's thy own; if you take a
scratch in the arm or so, every drop of blood weighes down a ducket.


Vitry. After that rate, I and my friends would beggar the kingdom. Sir you
have made me blush to see my want, whose cure is such a cheap and easy
purchase, this is male bawdery belike.


Enter Protaldy, a Lady, and Revellers. Bawdb. See, you shall not belong
earning your wages, your worke's before your eyes.


Vitry. Leave it to my handling, i will fall upon it instantly.


Bawdb. What opinion will the managing of this affair
Bring to my wisdom? my invention tickles
With apprehension on it:

Pro. These are the joys of marriage Lady,
Whose fights are able to dissolve virginity.
Speak freely, do you not envy the brides felicity?

Lady. How should I, being partner often?

Protall. What you enjoy is but the banquets view,
The taste stands from your palate; if he impart
By day so much of his content, think what night gave?

Vitry. Will you have a relish of wit Lady?

Bawdb. This is the man.

Lady. If it be not dear Sir.

Vitry. If you affect cheapnesse, how can you prize this sullied ware so much?
mine is fresh, my own, not retail'd.


Prot You are saucy firra.

Vitry. The fitter to be in the dish with such dry stockfish as you are, how
strike?


Bawdb. Remember the condition as you look for payment.


Vitry. That box was left out of the bargain.

Prot. Help, help, help.

Bawdb. Plague of the scriveners running hand,
What a blow is this to my reputation?

Enter Thierry, Theodoret, Brunhalt, Ordella, Memberge, Martell. Their. What
villain dares this outrage?

Devitry. Hear me Sir, this creature hired me with fifty crowns in hand, to
let Protaldye have the better of me at single rapier on a made quarrel; he
mistaking the weapon, lays me over the chops with his clubfist, for which I
was bold to teach him the art of memory.


Omnes. Ha, ha, ha, ha.

Theod. Your General, mother, will display himself.
Spite of our peace I see.

Their Forbear these civil jarres, fie Protaldy,
So open in your projects, avoid our presence sir.

Devi. Willingly, if you have any more wages to earne,
You see I can take pains.

Theod. There Is somewhat for thy labor,
More than was promised, ha, ha, ha.

Bawdb Where could I wish my self now? in the Isle of dogs,
So I might escape scratching, for I see by her cats eyes
I shall be clawed fearfully.

Their. We Will hear no more on it, soft music
Music drown all sadness;
Command the Revellers in, at what a rate I do purchase
My mothers absence to give my spleen full liberty.

Brun. Speak not a thoughts delay, it names thy ruin,

Prot. I had thought my life had borne more value with you.

Brun. Thy loss carries mine with it, let that secure thee.
The vault is ready, and the door conveyes roo't,
Falls just behind his chair, the blow once given,
Thou art unseene.

Prot I cannot feel more than I fear, i am sure. withdraws

Brun. Be gone, and let them laugh their own destruction.

Their: You will add unto her rage.

Theod. Foot I shall burst unless I vent my self, ha, ha, ha.

Brun. Me Sir, you never could
Have found a time to invite more wilingness
In my dispose to pleasure.

Memb. Would you would please to make some other choice.

Revel. It Is a disgrace would dwell upon me Lady,
Should you refuse.

Memb. Your reason conquers; my Grandmothers looks
Have turned all air to earth in me, they sit
Upon my heart like night charms, black and heavy.

The Dance. Their. You are too much libertine.

Theod. The fortune of the fool persuades my laughter
More than his cowardice; was ever ratt
Taken by the tail thus? ha, ha, ha.

Their. Forbear I say.

Prot. No eye looks this way, I will wink and strike, Behind the State
Lest I betray my self: stubs Theodoret?

Theod. Ha, did you not see one near me?

Their. How near you, why do you look so pale brother?
Treason, treason.

Memb. Oh my presage! Father.

Ordella. Brother,

Mart. Prince, noble Prince.

Their. Make the gates sure, search into every angle
And corner of the Court; oh my shame! mother,
Your son is slain, Theodoret, noble Theodoret,
Here in my arms, too weak a sanctuary
Against treachery and murder, say is the traitor taken?

1 Guard. No man has past the chamber on my life Sir.

Their. Set present fire unto the place, that all unseene
May perish in this mischief, who moves flow to it,
Shall add unto the flame.

Brun. What mean you? give me your private hearing.

Their. Persuasion is a partner in the crime,
I will renounce my claim unto a mother,
If you make offer on it.

Brun. Ere a torch can take flame, I will produce
The author of the fact.

Their. Withdraw but for your lights.

Memb. O my too true suspicion.

Exeunt Martell, Memberg. Their. Speak, where is the engine to this horrid act?

Brun. Here you do behold her, upon whom make good
Your causeless rage; the deed was done by my incitement,
Not yet repented.

Their. Whether did nature start, when you conceived
A birth so unlike woman? say, what part
Did not consent to make a son of him,
Reserved it self within you to his ruin.

Brun. Ha, ha, a son of mine! do not dissever
Thy fathers dust, shaking his quiet urne,
To which my breath would send so foul an issue.
My son, thy brother?

Their. Was not Theodoret my brother, or is thy tongue
Confederate with thy heart, to speak and do
Only things monstrous?

Brun. Hear me, and thou shall make thine own belief,
Thy still with sorrow mentioned, father lived
Three careful years in hope of wished heirs,
When I conceived, being from his jealous fear,
Enjoined to quiet home, one fatal day:
Transported with my pleasure to the chase,
I forced command, and in pursuit of game,
Fell from my horse, lost both my child and hopes.
Despair which only in his love saw life
Worthy of being, from a gardners arms
Snatched this unlucky brat, and called it mine,
When the next year repaid my loss with thee:
But in thy wrongs preserved my misery,
Which that I might diminish, though not end,
My fighes and wet eyes from thy fathers will,
Bequeath this largest part of his Dominions
Of France, unto thee, and only left
Austracia unto that changeling, whose life affords
Too much of ill against me to prove my words,
And call him stranger.

Their Come, do not weep, I must, nay do believe you,
And in my fathers satisfaction count it
Merit, not wrong, or loss:

Brun. You do but flatter, there is anger yet flames
In your eyes.

Their. See, I will quench it, and confess that you
Have suffered double travail for me.

Brun. You will not fire the house then?

Their. Rather reward the author, who gave cause
Of knowing such a secret, my oath and duty
Shall be assurance on it.

Brun. Protaldye, rise good faithful servant, heaven knows
How hardly he was drawn to this attempt.

Enter Protaldye. Their. Protaldye? he had a gardners fate i will swear
Tell by thy hand, Sir, we do owe unto you for this service.

Brun. Why look thou so dejected?

Enter Martell. Prot. I want a little shift Lady, nothing else.

Mart. The fires are ready, please it your grace withdraw,
Whilst we perform your pleasure.

Their. Reserve them for the body; since he had the fate
To live and die a Prince, he shall not lose
The title in his funeral. Exit.

Mart. His fate to live a prince,
Thou old impiety, made up by lust and mischief, Exeunt with the body of Theod.
Take up the body.

Enter Lecure, and a servant. Lecure. Do think Lefortes sure enough?

Serva. As bonds can make him, I have turned his eyes to the east; and left him
gaping after the morning star, his head is a mere Astrolobe, his eyes stand
for the poles, the gag in his mouth being the coachman, his five teeth have the
nearest resemblance to Charles Waine.


Lecure. Thou have cast a figure which shall raise thee, direct my hair a
little; and in my likeness to him read a fortune suiting thy largest hopes.


Serva You are so far 'bove likeness you are the same,
If you love mirth, persuade him from himself.
It Is but an Astronomer out of the way,
And lying will bear the better place for it

Lecure. I have profitabler use in hand, have to the Queen?
And tell her how you left me changed.
Exit Servant. Who would not serve this virtuous active Queen?
She that loves mischief 'bove the man that does it,
And him above her pleasure, yet knows no heaven else.

Enter Thierry. Their. How well this loanes suits the art I seek,
Discovering secret and succeeding fate,
Knowledge that puts all lower happiness on,
With a remiss and careless hand,
Fair peace unto your meditations father.

Lecure. The same to you, you bring Sir.

Their. Drawn by your much famed skill, I come to know
Whether the man who owes this character,
Shall ere have issue.

Lecure. A resolution falling with most ease
Of any doubt you could have named, he is a Prince
Whose fortune you enquire.

Their. He is nobly borne.

Lecure. He had a dukedom lately fallen unto him
By one called brother, who has left a daughter.

Their. The question is of heirs, not lands.

Lecure. Heirs, yes he shall have heirs.

Their. Begotten of his body, why look thou pale?
Thou can not suffer in his want.

Lecure Nor thou, I neither can nor will
Give farther knowledge to thee.

Their. Thou must, I am the man my self,
Thy sovereign, who must owe unto thy wisdom
In the concealing of my barren shame.

Lecure. Your grace does wrong your stars; if this be yours,
You may have children.

Their. Speak it again.

Lecure. You may have fruitful issue.

Their. By whom? when? how?

Lecure. It was the fatal means first struck my blood
With the cold hand of wonder, when I read it
Printed upon you birth.

Their. Can there be any way unsmooth, has end
So fair and good?

Lecure. We that behold the sad aspects of heaven,
Leading sense blinded, men feel grief enough
To know, though not to speak their miseries.

Their. Sorrow must lost a name, where mine finds life;
If not in thee, at least ease pain with speed,
Which must know no cure else.

Lecure. Then thus,
The first of females which your eye shall meet
Before the sun next rise, coming from out
The Temple of Diana, being slain, you live
Father of many sons.

Their. Callst thou this sadness, can I beget a son
Deserving less then to give recompense
Unto so poor a loss? what e're thou art,
Rest peaceable blessed creature, borne to be
Mother of Princes, whose grave shall be more fruitful
Then others marriage beds: me thinks his art
Should give her form and happy figure to me,
I long to see my happiness, he is gone,
As I remember he named my brothers daughter,
Were it my mother, 'twere a gainful death
Could give Ordella's virtue living breath.

Exeunt. Act. 4.
Scoe. 1.
Enter Thierry and Martell. Mart. Your Grace is early stirring.

Mart. How can he sleep,
Whose happiness is laid up in an hour.
He knows comes stealing toward him, O Martell!
Is It possible the longing bride, whose wishes
Outrunnes her fears, can on that day she is married
Consume in slumbers, or his arms rust in ease,
That hears the charge, and sees the honored purchase
Ready to gild his valor? Mine is more
A power above these passions; this day France,
France that in want of issue withers with us;
And like an aged river runs his head
Into forgotten ways, again I ransom,
And his fair course turn right: this day Thierry,
The son of France, whose manly powers like prisoners
Have bin tied up, and fettered, by one death
Give life to thousand ages; this day beauty
The envy of the world, pleasure the glory,
Content above the world, desire beyond it
Are made mine own and useful.

Mart. Happy woman
That dies to do these things.

Their. But ten times happier
That lives to do the greater; O Martell,
The Gods have heard me now, and those that scorned me
Mothers of many children, and blessed fathers
That see their issues like the stars unnumber'd,
Their comfort more then them, shall in my praises
Now teach their infants songs; and tell their ages
From such a son of mine, or such a Queen,
That chaste Ordella brings me blessed marriage
The chain that linkes two holy loves together
And in thee marriage, more then blessed Ordella,
That comes so near the sacrament it self,
The Priests doubt whether purer.

Mart. Sir, you are lost.

Their. I prithee let me be so.

Mart. The day wears,
And those that have been offering early prayers,
Are now retiring homeward.

Their. Stand and mark then.

Mart. Is it the first must suffer.

Their. The first woman.

Mart. What hand shall do it Sir?

Their. This hand Martell,
For who less dare presume to give the gods
An incense of this offering?

Mart. Would I were she,
For such away to die, and such a blessing
Can never crown my parting.

Enter 2 men passing over. Their. What are those?

Mart. Men, men, Sir, men.

Their. The plagues of men light on vm,
They cross my hopes like hares, who is that?

Enter a Priest. Mart. A Priest Sir.

Thierry. Would he were gelt.

Mart. May not these rascals serve Sir,
Well hanged and quartered?

Thierry. No.

Mart. Here comes a woman.

Enter Ordella, veiled. Their. Stand and behold her then.

Mart. I think a fair one.

Their. Move not whilst I prepare her: may her peace
Like his whose innocence the gods are pleased with,
And offering at their altars, gives his soul
Far purer then those fires; pull heaven upon her,
You holy powers, no humane spot dwell in her,
No love of any thing but you and goodness,
Tie her to earth, fear be a stranger to her,
And all weak bloods affections, but thy hope
Let her bequeath to women: hear me heaven,
Give her a spirit masculine, and noble,
Fit for your selves to ask, and me to offer.
O let her meet my blow, doat on her death;
And as a wanton vine bows to the pruner,
That by his cutting off more may increase,
So let her fall to raise me fruit; hale woman.
The happiest, and the best (if thy dull will
Do not abuse thy fortune) France ere found yet.

Ordella. She is more then dull Sir, less and worse then woman,
That may inherit such an infinite
As you propound, a greatness so near goodness;
And brings a will to rob her.

Their. Tell me this then,
Was there ere woman yet, or may be found,
That for fair same, unspotted memory,
For virtues sake, and only for it self sake
Has, or dare make a story?

Ordella. Many dead Sir,
Living I think as many.

Their. Say, the kingdom
May from a woman's will receive a blessing,
The king and kingdom, not a private safety.
A general blessing Lady.

Ordella. A general curse
Light on her heart denies it.

Their. Full of honor;
And such examples as the former ages
Were but dim shadows of, and empty figures.

Ordella. You strangely stir me Sir, and were my weakness
In any other flesh but modest woman's,
You should not ask more questions may I do it?

Their. You may, and which is more, you must.

Ordella. I joy in it,
A bove a moderate gladness, Sir, you promise
It shall be honest.

Their. As ever time discovered.

Ordella. Let it be what it may then, what it dare,
I have a mind will hazard it.

Their. But hark ye,
What may that woman merit, makes this blessing!

Ordella. Only her duty Sir

Their. It Is terrible.

Ordella. It Is so much the more noble.

Their. It Is full of fearful shadows.

Ordella. So is sleep Sir,
Or any thing that is merely ours and mortal,
We were begotten gods else; but those fears
Feeling but once the fires of nobler thoughts,
Fly like the shapes of clouds we form to nothing

Their. Suppose it death.

Ordella. I do.

Their. And endless parting
With all we can call ours, with all our sweetness,
With youth, strength, pleasure, people, time, nay reason:
For in the silent grave, no conversation,
No joyful tread of friends, no voice of lovers,
No careful fathers council, nothing's hard,
Nor nothing is, but all oblivion,
Dust and an endless darkness; and dare you woman
Desire this place?

Ordella. It Is of all sleeps the sweetest,
Children begin it to us, strong men seek it,
And kings from height of all their painted glories
Fall like spent exhaltations, to this center;
And those are fools that fear it, or imagine
A few unhandsome pleasures, or life's profits
Can recompense this place; and mad that stays it,
Till age blow out their lights, or rotten humors.
Bring them despers'd to the earth.

Their. Then you can suffer.

Ordella. As willingly as say it.

Their. Martell, a wonder,
Here is a woman that dares die, yet tell me,
Are you a wife?

Ordella. I am Sir.

Their. And have children,
She sighs and weeps.

Ordella. O none Sir.

Their. Dare you venture
For a poor barren praise you never shall hear,
To part with these sweet hopes.

Ordella. With all but Heaven;
And yet die full of children; he that reads me
When I am ashes, is my son in wishes,
And those chaste dames that keep my memory,
Singing my yearly requiems, are my daughters.

Their. Then there is nothing wanting but my knowledge,
And what I must do Lady.

Ordella. You are the King Sir,
And what you do i will suffer, and that blessing
That you desire the Gods shower on the Kingdom.

Their. Thus much before I strike then, for I must kill you,
The Gods have willed it so, they are made the blessing
Must make France young again, and me a man,
Keep up your strength still nobly.

Ordella. Fear me not.

Their. And meet death like a measure.

Ordella. I am steadfast.

Their. Thou shall be sainted woman, and thy tomb
Cut out in Cristall, pure and good as thou art;
And on it shall be graven every age,
Succeeding Peers of France that rise by thy fall,
Tell thou lie there like old and fruitful nature.
Dare thou behold thy happiness?

Ordella. I dare Sir.

Their. Ha? Pulls off her veil, letts fall his sword.

Mar. O Sir, you must not do it.

Their. No, I dare not.
There is an Angel keeps that paradise,
A fiery Angel friend; O virtue, virtue,
Ever and endless virtue.

Ordella. Strike Sir, strike;
And if in my poor death fair France may merit,
Give me a thousand blows, be killing me
A thousand days.

Their. First let the earrh be barren,
And man no more remembered, rise Ordella,
The nearest to thy maker, and the purest
That ever dull flesh showed us, -- O my heart strings. Exit.

Mart. I see you full of wonder, therefore noblest,
And truest amongst women, I will tell you
The end of this strange accident.

Ordella. Amazement
Has so much wove upon my heart, that truly
I feel my self unfit to hear, O Sir,
My Lord has slighted me.

Mart. O no sweet Lady.

Ordella. Robbed me of such a glory by his pity
And most unprovident respect.

Mart. Dear Lady,
It was not meant to you.

Ordella. Else where the day is,
And hours distinguish time, time runs to ages,
And ages end the world, I had been spoken.

Devi. I Will tell you what it was, if but your patience
Will give me hearing.

Ordella. If I have transgrest,
Forgive me Sir.

Mart. Your noble Lord was counseled,
Grieving the barrenness between you both,
And all the Kingdom with him, to seek out
A man that knew the secrets of the Gods,
He went, found such a one, and had this answer,
That if he wooed have issue, on this morning,
For this hour was prefixed him, he should kill
The first he met being female, from the temple;
And then he should have children, the mistake
Is now too perfect Lady.

Ordella. Still it is I Sir,
For may this work be done by common women,
Durst any but my self that knew the blessing,
And felt the benefit, assume this thing
In any other, t'ad bin lost, and nothing,
A curse and not a blessing; I was figured;
And shall a little fondness bar my purchase?

Mart. Where should he then seek children?

Ordella. Where they are
In wombes ordained for issues, in those beauties
That bless a marriage bed, and makes it proceed
With kisses that conceive, and fruitful pleasures;
Mine like a grave, buries those loyal hopes,
And to a grave it covets.

Mart. You are too good,
Too excellent, too honest; rob not us
And those that shall hereafter seek example,
Of such inestimable worthies in woman,
Your Lord of such obedience, all of honor
In coveting a cruelty is not yours,
A will short of your wisdom; make not error
A tomb stone of your virtues, whose fair life
Deserves a constellation: your Lord dare not,
He cannot, ought not, must not run this hazard,
He makes a separation nature shakes at,
The Gods deny, and everlasting justice
Shrinkes back, and sheathes her sword at.

Ordella, All Is but talk Sir,
I find to what I am reserved, and needful,
And though my Lords compassion makes me poor,
And leaves me in my best use, yet a strength
Above mine own, or his dull fondness finds me,
The Gods have given it to me.

Draws a knife. Mart. Self destruction,
Now all good Angels bless thee, O sweet Lady,
You are abused, this is a way to shame you,
And with you all that knows you, all that loves you,
To ruin all you build, would you be famous,
Is that your end?

Ordella. I would be what I should be.

Mart. Live and confirm the Gods then, live and be laden
With more than olive bear, or fruitful Autumn;
This way you kill your merit, kill your cause,
And him you would raise life to, where, or how
Got you these bloody thoughts? what Devil durst
Look on that Angel face, and tempt? do you know
What it is to dye thus, how you strike the stars,
And all good things above? do you feel
What follows a self blood, whether you venture,
And to what punishment? excellent Lady,
Be not thus cozened, do not fool your self,
The Priest was never his own sacrifice,
But he that thought his hell here.

Ordella. I am counseled,

Mart. And I am glad on it, lie I know you dare not.

Ordelld. I never have done yet.

Mart. Pray take my comfort,
Was this a soul to lose? two more such women
Would save their sex; see, she repents and prays,
O hear her, hear her, if there be a faith
Able to reach your mercies, she has sent it.

Ordella. Now good Martell confirm me.

Mart. I will Lady,
And every hour advise you, for I doubt
Whether this plot be heavens, or hells; your mother
And I will find it, if it be in mankind
To search the center of it: in the mean time
I Will give you out for dead, and by your self,
And show the instrument, so shall I find
A joy that will betray her.

Ordella. Do what is fittest;
And I will follow you.

Mart. Then ever live
Both able to ingrosse all love, and give.

Exeunt. Enter Brunhalt, Protaldye. Brun. I am in labor
To be delivered of that burthenous project
I have so long gone with; ha, here is the midwife,
Or life, or death.

Enter Lecure. Lecure. If in the supposition
Of her death in whose life you die, yo^ ask me,
I think you are safe.

Brun. Is she dead?

Lecure. I have used
All means to make her so, I saw him waiting
At the temple door, and used such art within,
That only she of all her sex, was first
Given up unto his fury.

Brun, Which if love
Or fear made him forbear to execute
The vengeance he determined, his fond pity
Shall draw it on himself, for were there left
Not any man but he to serve my pleasures,
Or from me to receive commands, which are
The joys for which I love life, he should be
Removed, and I alone left to be Queen
Over any part of goodness that is left in me.

Lecure. If you are so resolved, I have provided
A means to ship him hence: look upon this,
But touch it sparingly, for this once used.
Say but to dry a tear, will keep the eye lyd
From closing, until death perform that office.

Brun. Giv't me, I may have use of it, and on you
I Will make the first experiment: if one sigh
Or heavy look beget the least suspicion,
Childish compassion can thaw the ice
Of your so long congealed and flinty hardness.
Slight, go on constant, or I Shall.

Prot. Best Lady,
We have no faculties which are not yours.

Lecure. Nor will be any thing without you.

Brun. Be so, and we will stand or fall together, for
Since we, have gone so far, that death must stay
The journey which we wish should never end,
And innocent, or guilty we must die,
When we do so, let us know the reason why.

Enter Thierry, and Courtiers. Lecure. The King.

Their. We Will be alone.

Prot. I would I had
A convoy too, to bring me safe off,
For rage although it be allaid with sorrow,
Appears so dreadful in him, that I shake
To look upon it.

Brun. Coward, I will meet it,
And know from whence t'as birth: son, kingly Thierry.

Their. Is cheating grown so common among men,
And thrives so well here, that the Gods endeavor
To practice it above?

Brun. Your mother.

Their. Ha! or are they only careful to revenge,
Not to reward? or when for your offenses
We study satisfaction, must the cure
Be worse then the disease?

Brun. Will you not hear me?

Their. To lose the ability to perform those duties
For which I entertained the name of husband,
Asked more then common sorrow; but t'impose
For the redress of that defect, a torture
In marking her to death, for whom alone
I felt that weakness as a want, requires
More then the making the head bald? or falling
Thus flat upon the earth, or cursing that way,
Or praying this, oh such a scene of grief,
And so set down, (the world the stage to act on)
May challenge a Tragedian better practiced
Then I am to express it; for my cause
Of passion is so strong, and my performance
So weak, that though the part be good, I fear
The Will acting of it, will defraud it of
The poor reward it may deserve, men's pity.

Brun. I have given you way thus long, a King, and what
Is more, my son, and yet a slave to that
Which only triumphs over cowards sorrow
For shame look up.

Their. Is It you, look down on me;
And if that you are capable to receive it,
Let that return to you, that have brought forth
One marked out only for it: what are these?
Come they upon your privilege, to tread on
The tomb of my afflictions?

Prot. No not we Sir.

Their. How dare you then omit the ceremony
Due to the funeral of all my hopes,
Or come unto the marriage of my sorrows,
But in such colors as may sort with them.

Prot. Alas; we will wear any thing.

Brun. This is madness,
Take but my counsel.

Their. Yours? Dare you again
Though armed with the authority of a mother,
Attempt the donger that will fall on you
If such another syllable awake it?
Go, and with yours be safe, I have such cause
Of grief, nay more, to love it, that I will not
Have such as these be sharers in it.

Lecure. Madam.

Prot. Another time were better.

Brun. Do not stir,
For I must be resolved and will, be statues.

Enter Martell. Their. I, thou art welcome, and upon my soul
Thou art an honest man; do you see, he has tears
To lend to him whom prodigal expense
Of sorrow has made bankerout of such treasure,
Nay thou do well.

Mart. I would it might excuse.
The ill I bring along.

Their. Thou make me smile
In the height of my calamities, as if
There could be the addition of an Atome
To the giant body of my miseries.
But try, for I will hear thee; all sit down, it is death
To any that shall dare to interrupt him
In look, gesture or word.

Mart. And such attention
As is due to the last, and the best story
That ever was delivered, will become you,
The grieved Ordella, (for all other titles
But take away from that) having from me
Prompted by your last parting groan, inquired,
What drew it from you, and the cause soon learned:
For she whom barbarism could deny nothing,
With such prevailing earnestness desired it,
'Twas not in me though it had been my death,
To hide it from her; she I say, in whom
All was, that Athens, Rome, or warlike Sparta,
Have registered for good in their best women:
But nothing of their ill, knowing her self
Marked out, (I know not by what power, but sure
A cruel one) to dye, to give you children;
Having first with a settled countenance
Looked up to heaven, and then upon her self,
(It being the next best object) and then smiled,
As if her joy in death to do you service,
Would break forth in despite of the much sorrow
She showed she had to leave you: and then taking
Me by the hand, this hand which I must ever
Love better then I have done, since she touched it,
Go, said she, to my Lord, (and to go to him
Is such a happiness I must not hope for)
And tell him that he too much prized a trifle
Made only worthy in his love, and her
Thankful acceptance, for her sake to rob
The Orphan Kingdom of such guardians, as
Must of necessity descend from him;
And therefore in some part of recompense
Of his much love, and to show to the world
That 'twas not her fault only, but her fate,
That did deny to let her be the mother
Of such most certain blessings: yet for proof,
She did not envy her, that happy her,
That is appointed to them, her quick end
Should make way for her; which no sooner spoke,
But in a moment this too ready engine
Made such a battery in the choicest castle
That ever nature made to defend life,
That strait it shook, and sunk.

Their. Stay, dares any
Presume to shed a tear before me? or
Ascribe that worth unto themselves to merit
To do so for her? I have done, now on.

Mart. Fallen thus, once more she smiled, as if that death
For her had studied a new way to sever
The soul and body, without sense of pain;
And then tell him quoth she what you have seen,
And with what willingness 'twas done: for which
My last request unto him is, that he
Would instantly make choice of one (most happy
In being so chosen) to supply my place,
By whom if heaven bless him with a daughter,
In my remembrance let it bear my name
Which said she di'd.

Their. I hear this, and yet live;
Heart art thou thunder proof, will nothing break thee?
She Is dead, and what her entertainment may be
In the other world without me is uncertain,
And dare I stay here unresolved?

Mart. Oh Sir!

Brun. Dear son.

Pret. Great King.

Their. Unhand me, am I fallen
So low, that I have lost the power to be
Disposer of my own life?

Mart. Be but pleased
To borrow so much time of sorrow, as
To call to mind her last request, for whom
(I must confess a loss beyond expression)
You turn your hand upon your self, 'twas hers
And dying hers, that you should live and happy
In seeing little models of your self,
By matching with another, and will you
Leave any thing that she desired ungranted?
And suffer such a life that was laid down
For your sake only to be fruitless?

Their. Oh thou do throw charms upon me, against which
I cannot stop my ears, bear witness heaven
That not desire of life, nor love of pleasure
Nor any future comforts, but to give
Peace to her blessed spirit in satisfying
Her last demand, makes me defer our meeting,
Which in my choice, and sudden choice shall be
To all apparent,

Brun. How? do I remove one mischief
To draw upon my head a greater?

Their. Go, thou only good man, to whom for her self
Goodness is dear, and prepare to interre it
In her that was; O my heart! my Ordella,
A monument worthy to be the casket
Of such a jewel.

Mart. Your command that makes way
Unto my absence is a welcome one,
For but your self there is nothing here Martell
Can take delight to look on; yet some comfort
Goes back with me, to her, who though she want it
Deserves all blessings. Exit.

Brun. So soon to forget
The loss of such a wife, believe it will
Be censured in the world.

Their. Pray you no more,
There is no argument you can use to cross it,
But does increase in me such a suspicion
I would not cherish, -- who is that?

Enter Memberge. Memb. One, no guard
Can put back from access, whose tongue no threats
Nor praises can silence, a bold suitor and
For that which if you are your self, a King,
You were made so to grant it, Justice, Justice.

Their. With what assurance dare you hope for that
Which is denied to me? or how can I
Stand bound to be just, unto such as are
Beneath me, that find none from those that are
Above me.

Memb. There is justice, 'twere unfit
That any thing but vengeance should fall on him,
That by his giving way to more then murder,
For my dear fathers death was particide)
Makes it his own.

Brun. I charge you hear her not.

Memb. Hell cannot stop just prayers from entering heaven,
I must and will be heard Sir; but remember
That he that by her plot fell, was your brother,
And the place where, your Palace, against all
Th'inviolable rites of Hospitality,
Your word, a Kings word, given up for his safety,
His innocence, his protection, and the Gods
Bound to revenge the impious breach of such
So great and facred bonds; and can you wonder,
(That in not punishing such a horrid murder
You did it) that heavens favor is gone from you?
Which never will return until his blood
Be washed away in hers.

Brun. Drag hence the wretch.

Their. Forbear: with what variety
Of torments do I meet? Oh thou have opened
A book in which writ down in bloody letters,
My conscience finds that I am worthy of
More then I undergo, but i will begin
For my Ordella's sake, and for thine own
To make less heavens great anger: thou have lost
A father, I to thee am so; the hope
Of a good husband, in me have one; nor
Be fearful I am still no man, already
That weakness is gone from me.

Brun. That it might aside
Have ever grown inseparably upon thee,
What will you do? Is such a thing as this
Worthy the loved Ordella's place, the daughter
Of a poor Gardener?

Memb. Your son.

Their. The power
To take away that lowness is in me.

Brun. Stay yet, for rather then thou shall add
Incest unto thy other sins, I will
With hazard of my own life utter all
Theodoret was thy brother.

Their. You denied it,
Upon your oath, nor will I now believe you,
Your Protean turnings cannot change my purpose.

Memb. And for me, be assured the means to be.
Revenge on thee vile hag, admits no thought,
But what tends to it.

Brun. Is it come to that?
Then have at the last refuge; art thou grown
Insensible in ill, that thou go on
Without the least compunction? there, take that
To witness that thou had a mother, which
Foresaw thy cause of grief, and sad repentance,
That so soon after blessed Ordella's death
Without a tear thou can embrace another,
Forgetful man.

Their. Mine eyes when she is named
Connot forget their tribute, and your gift
Is not unusefull now

Lecure. He Is past all cure, that only touch is death.

Their. This night i will keep it,
To morrow I will send it you, and full of my affliction. Exit Thierry.

Brun. Is the poison mortal?

Lecure. Above the help of physic.

Brun. To my wish,
Now for our own security, you Protaldye
Shall this night post toward Austracia,
With letters to Theodorets bastard son,
In which we will make known what for his rising
We have done to Thierry: no denial,
Nor no excuse in such acts must be though of,
Which all dislike, and all again commend
When they are brought unto a happy end

Exeunt. Act. 5.
Scoe. 3.
Enter Devitry, and 4 Soldiers. Devitry. No war, no money, no Master; banished
the Court, not trusted in the City, whipped out of the country, in what a
triangle runs our misery: let me hear which of you has the best voice to
beg in, for other hopes or fortunes I see you have not; be not nice, nature
provided you with tones for the purpose, the peoples charity was your heritage,
and I would see which of you deserves his birthright.


Omnes. We understand you not Captain.


Devit. You see this cardicue, the last and the only quintessence of 50
crowns, distilled in the lembicke of your gardage, of which happy piece thou
shall be treasurer: now he that can soonest persuade him to part with it,
enjoyes it, possesses it, and with it, me and my future countenance.


1. If they want art to persuade it, I Will keep it my self.


Devit. So you be not a partial judge in your own cause, you shall.


Omnes. A match.


2. I Will begin to you, brave Sir; be proud to make him happy by your
liberality, whose tongue vouchsafes now to petition, was never heard before
less then to command. I am a soldier by profession, a gentleman by birth, and
an officer by place, whose poverty blushes to be the cause that so high a
virtue should descend to the pity of your charity.


1. In any case keep your high style, it is not charity to shame any man, much
less a virtue of your eminence, wherefore preserve your worth, and i will
preserve my money.


3. You persuade? you are shallow, give way to merit: ah by the bread of good
man, thou have a bonny countenance and a blithe, promising mickle good to a
sicker womb, that has trod a long and a soar ground to meet with friends that
will owe much to thy reverence, when they shall hear of thy courtesy to their
wandering countreyman.


1. You that will use your friends so hardly to bring them in debt Sir, will
deserve worse of a stranger, wherefore pead on, pead on I say.


4. It is the welsh must do it I see, comrade man of urship, St. Tavy be her
patron, the Gods of the mountains keep her cow and her cupboard, may she
never want the green of the leeke and the fat of the onion, if she part with
her bounties to him that is a great deal away from her cozines, and has too
big suites in law to recover her heritage.


1. Pardon me Sir, I will have nothing to do with your suites, it comes within
the statute of maintenance: home to your cozines, and sow garlic and
hemp seed, the one will stop your hunger, the other end your suites, gammawash
comrade, gammawash.


4. Foot he will hoord all for himself.


Vitry. Yes, let him; now comes my turn, i will see if he can answer me: save
you Sir, they say you have that I want, money.


1. And that you are like to want, for ought I perceive yet.


Vitry. Stand, deliver.


1. Foot what mean you, you will not rob the Exchequer?


Vitry. Do you prate?


1. Hold, hold, here Captain.


2. Why I could have done this before you.


3. And I.


4. And I.


Vitry. You have done this, brave man he proud to make him happy, by the bread
of God man thou have a bonny countenance, comrade man of u^ship, St. Tavy be
her patron, cut upon you, you uncurried colts, walking cans that have no souls
in you, but a little rosin to keep your ribs sweet, and hold in liquor.


Omnes. Why, what would you have us to do Captain?


Devitry. Beg, beg, and keep Constables waking, wear out stocks and whipcord,
mander for buttermilke, dye of the jaundice, yet have the cure about you, lice,
large lice, begot of your own dust, and the heat of the brick-kills, may you
starve, and fear of the gallows, which is a gentle consumption to it, only
prefer it, or may you fall upon your fear, and be hanged for selling those
purses to keep you from famine whose moneys my valor empties, and be cast
without other evidence; here is my fort, my castle of defense, who comes by
shall pay me toll, the first purse is your mittimus slaves.


2. The purse, foot we will share in the money Captain, if any come within a
furlong of our fingers.


4. Did you doubt but we could steal as well as your self, did not I speak
welsh?


3. We are thieves from our cradles, an will dye so.


Vitry. Then you will not beg again.


Omnes? Yes, as you did, stand, and deliver.


2. Hark, here comes handsell, it is a trade quickly set up, and as soon cast
down.


Vitry. Have goodness in your minds varlets, and to it like men; he that has
more money than we, cannet be our friend, and I hope there is no law for
spoiling the enemy.


3. You need not instruct us farther, your example pleads enough.


Devitry. Disperse your selves, and as their company is, fall on.


2. Come, there are a band of them, i will charge single. Exit soldiers.


Enter Protaldye. Prot. It Is wonderful dark, I have lost my man, and dare not
call for him, lest I should have more followers then I would pay wages to; what
throws am I in, in this travail? these be honorable adventure; had I that
honest blood in my veins again Queen, that your feats and these frights have
drained from me, honor should pull hard ere it drew me into these brakes.


Devitry. Who goes there?


Prot. Hey ho, here is a pang of preferment.


Devi. Heart, who goes there?


Prot. He that has no heart to your acquaintance, what shall I do with my
jewels and my letter, my cod-peece, that is too loose, good, my boots, who is it
that spoke to me? here is a friend.


Devit. We shall find that presently, stand, as you love your safety stand.


Prot. That unlucky word of standing has brought me to all this, hold, or I
shall never stand you.


Devitry. I should know that voice, deliver.


Enter Soldiers. Prot. All that I have is at your service Gentlemen, and much
good may it do you.


Devitry. Zones down with him, do you prate?


Prot. Keep your first word as you are Gentlemen, and let me stand, alas what
do you mean?


2. To tie you to us Sir, bind you in the knot of friendship.


Prot. Alas Sir, all the physic in Europe cannot bind me.


Devit. You should have jewels about you, stones, precious stones.


1. Captain away, there is company within hearing, if you stay longer we are
surpised.


Devitry. Let the Devil come, i will pillage this frigot a little better yet.


2. Foot we are lost, they are upon us.


Devitry. Ha, upon us, make the least noise, it is thy parting gasp.


3. Which way shall we make Sir?


Devitry. Every man his own; do you hear, only bind me before you go, and
when the companie's past, make to this place again, this karvell should have
better ladine in him, you are slow, why do you not tie harder?


1. You are sure enough I warrant you Sir.


Devitry. Darkness befriend you, away.


Exit soldiers. Prot. What tyrants have I met with? they leave me alone in the
dark, yet would not have me cry. I shall grow wondrous melancholy if I stay
long here without company; I was wont to get a nap with saying my prayers, i will
see if they will work upon me now; but then if I should talk in my sleep, and
they hear me, they would make a Recorder of my windpipe, slit my throat:
heaven be praised, I hear some noise, it may be new purchase, and then I
shall have fellows.


Devitry. They are gone past hearing, now to task Devitry, help, help, as
you are men help, some charitable hand, relieve a poor distressed miserable
wretch; thieves, wicked thieves have robbed me, bound me.


Prot. Foot would they had gagged you too, your noise will betray us, and fetch
them again.


Devit. What blessed tongue spoke to me, where, where are you Sir?


Prot. A plague of your bawling throat, we are well enough, if you have the
grace to be thankful for it, do but snore to me, and it is as much as I
desire, to pass away time with till morning, then talk as loud as you please
Sir, I am bound not to stir, therefore lie still and snore I say.


Devit. Then you have met with thieves too I see.


Prot. And desire to meet with no more of them.


Devit. Alas what can we suffer more? they are far enough by this time; have
they not all, all that we have Sir?


Prot. No by my faith have they not Sir; I gave them one trick to boot for
their learning, my boots Sir, my boots, I have saved my stock, and my jewels
in them, and therefore desire to hear no more of them.


Devit. Now blessing on your wit Sir, what a dull slave was I, dreampt not of
your conveyance? help to unbidd me Sir, and i will undo you, my life for yours
no worse thief than my self meets you again this night.


Prot. Reach me thy hands.


Devit. Here Sir, here, I could beat my brains out, that could not think of
boots, boots Sir, wide topt boots, I shall love them the better whilst I
live; but are you sure your jewels are here Sir?


Prot. Sure say thou? ha, ha, ha.


Devit. So ho, illo ho. Within soldiers.
Here Captain, here.

Prot. Foot what do you mean Sir?


Enter Soldiers. Devit. A trick to boot, say you; here you dull slaves,
purchase, purchase the soul of the rock, diamonds, sparkling diamonds.


Prot. I am betrayed, lost, past recovery lost, as you are men.


Devit, Nay Rooke, since you will be prating, we will share your carrion with you,
have you any other conveyance now Sir?


1. Foot here are letters, epistles, familiar epistles, we will see what treasure
is in them, they are sealed sure,


Pro, Gentlemen, as you are gentlemen spare my letters, and take all willingly,
all: i will give you a release, a general release, and meet you here too morrow
with as much more.


Devit. Nay, since you have your tricks, and your conveyances, we will not
leave a wrinckle of you unsearcht.


Prot. Hark, there comes company, you will be betrayed, as you love your
safeties beat out my brains, I shall betray you else.


Devitry. Treason, unheard of treason monstrous, monstrous villainies.


Prot. I confess my self a traitor, show your selves good subjects, and hang
me up for it.


1. If it be treason, the discovery will get our pardon Captain.


Devit. Would we were all lost, hanged, quartered to save this one, one
innocent Prince; Thierry's poisoned, by his mother poisoned, the Mistress to
this stallion, who by that poison never shall sleep again.


2 Foot let us mince him by piecemeale, till he eat himself up.


3. Let us dig out his heart with needles, and half broile him, like a mussell.


Prot. Such another and I prevent you, my blood's settled already.


Devit. Here Is that shall remove it, toade, viper, drag him unto Martell,
unnatural parricide, cruel, bloody woman.


Omnes. On you dogfish, leech, caterpiller.


Deuit. A longer sight of him will make my rage turn pity, and with his
sudden end prevent revenge and torture, wicked, wicked Brunhalt. Exit.


Enter Bawdber, and 3. Courtiers. 1. Not sleep at all, no means.


2. No art can do it.


Bawdb. I will assure you he can sleep no more
Then a hooded hawke, a centinell to him,
Or one of the City Constables are tops.

3. How came he so?

Bawdb. They are too wise that dare know,
Somethings amiss, heaven help all.

1. What cures has he?

Bawdb. Armies of those we call Physicians, some with glisters,
Some with lettice caps, some posset drinks some pills,
Twenty consulting here about a drench,
As many here to blood him;
Then comes a Don of Spain, and he prescribes
More cooling opium then would kill a turk,
Or quench a whore in the dogdayes; after him
A wife Italian, and he cries, tie unto him
A woman of fourscore, whose bones are marble,
Whose blond snow water, not so much heat about her
As may conceive a prayer: after him
An English Doctor, with a bunch of pot herbs,
And he cries out Endiffe and suckery,
With a few mallow roots and buttermilke,
And talks of oil made of a Churchmans charity,
Yet still he wakes.

1. But your good honor
Has a prayer in store if all should fail.

Bawdb. I could have prayed, and handsomely,
But age and an ill memory.

3. Has spoll'd your primmer.

Bawdb. Yet if there be a man of faith in the Court,
An can pray for a pension.

Enter Thierry on a bed, with Doctors and Attendants. 2. Here Is the King Sir,
And those that will pray without pay.

Bawdb. Then pray for me too.

1. Doct. How does your Grace feel your self now?

Their. What Is that?

1. Doct. Nothing at all Sir, but your fancy.

Their. Tell me,
Can ever these eyes more shut up in slumbers,
Assure my soul there is sleep? is there night
And rest for humane labors? do not you
And all the world as I do, out-stare time,
And live like funeral lamps never extinguished?
Is there a grave, and do not flatter me,
Nor fear to tell me truth; and in that grave
Is there a hope I shall sleep, can I die,
Are not my miseries immortal? oh
The happiness of him that drinks his water
After his weary day, and sleeps for ever,
Why do you crucify me thus with faces,
And gaping strangely upon one another,
When shall I rest?

2. Doct. O Sir be patient.

Their. Am I not patient? have I not endured
More then a maingy dog among your dosses?
Am I not now your patient? ye can make
Unwholesome fools sleep for a guarded foot-cloth,
Whores for a hot sin offering; yet I must crave
That feed ye, and protect ye, and proclaim ye,
Because my power is far above your searching,
Are my diseases so? can ye cure none
But those of equal ignorance, dare ye kill me?

1. Doct. We do beseech your grace be more reclaimed,
This talk does but distemper you.

Their. Well, I will die
In spite of all your potions; one of you sleep,
Lie down and sleep here, that I may behold
What blessed rest it is my eyes are robbed of:
See, he can sleep, sleep any where, sleep now,
When he that wakes for him can never slumber,
Is It not a dainty ease?

2. Doct. Your Grace shall feel it.

Their. O never I, never, the eyes of heaven
See but their certain motions, and then sleep,
The rages of the Ocean have their slumbers,
And quiet silver calmes; each violence
Crowns in his end a peace, but my fixed fires
Shall never, never set, who is that?

Enter Martell, Brunhalt, Devitry, Soldiers. Mart. No woman,
Mother of mischief, no the day shall die first,
And all good things live in a worse then thou art,
Ere thou shall sleep, do thou see him?

Brun. Yes, and curse him,
And all that love him fool, and all live by him.

Mart. Why art thou such a monster?

Brun. Why art thou
So tame a knave to ask me?

Mart. Hope of hell,
By this fair holy light, and all his wrongs
Which are above thy years, almost thy (...)
Thou shall not rest, not feel more what is pity,
Know nothing necessary, meet no society.
But what shall curse and crucify thee, feel in thy self
Nothing but what thou art, bane and bad conscience,
Till this man rest; but for whose reverence
Because thou art his mother, I would say
Whore, this shall be, do ye nod? i will waken ye
With my swords point.

Brun. I wish no more of heaven,
Nor hope no more, but a sufficient anger
To torture thee.

Mart. See, she that makes you see Sir
And to your misery still see your mother,
The mother of your woes Sir, of your waking,
The mother of your peoples cries and curses,
Your murdering mother, your malicious mother.

Their. Physicians, half my state to sleep an hour now;
Is it so mother?

Brun. Yes it is so son;
And were it yet again to do, it should be.

Mart. She nods again, swing her.

Their. But mother,
For yet I love that reverence, and to death
Dare not forget you have been so; was this,
This endless misery, this curelesse malice,
This snatching from me all my youth together,
All that you made me for, and happy mothers
Crowned with eternal time are proud to finish,
Done by your will?

Brun. It was, and by that will.

Their. O mother, do not lose your name, forget not
The touch of nature in you, tenderness
It Is all the soul of woman, all the sweetness;
Forget not I beseech you what are children,
Nor how you have gron'd for them, to what love
They are borne inheritors, with what care kept,
And as they rise to ripeness still remember
How they impe out your age; and (...) time calls you,
That as an Autumn flower you fall, forget not
How round about your hearse they hang like penons.

Brun. Holy fool,
Whose patience to prevent my wrongs has killed thee,
Preach not to me of punishments or fears,
Or what I ought to be, but what I am,
A woman in her liberal will defeated,
In all her greatness crossed, in pleasures blasted,
My angers have been laughed at, my ends slighted,
And all those glories that had crowned my fortunes,
Suffered by blasted virtue to be scattered,
I am the fruitful mother of these angers,
And what such have done, read, and know thy ruin.

Their. Heaven forgive you.

Mart. She tells you true, for millions of her mischiefs
Are now apparent, Protaldye we have taken
An equal agent with her, to whose care
After the damned defeat on you, she trusted
Enter Messenger. The bringing in of Leonor the bastard
Son to your murdered brother; her physician
By this time is attacht to that damned devil.

Messen. It Is like he will be so, for ere we came,
Fearing an equal justice for his mischiefs,
He drench't himself.

Brun. He did like one of mine then.

Their. Must I still see these miseries, no night
To hide me from their horrors, that Protaldy
See justice fall upon.

Brun. Now I could sleep too.

Enter Ordella Mart. I Will give you yet more poppy, bring the Lady
And heaven in her embraces; gives him quiet
Madam, unvaile your self.

Ordella. I do forgive you,
And though you sought my blood, yet i will pray for you,

Brun. Art thou alive?

Mart. Now could you sleep.

Brun. For ever.

Mart. Go carry her without wink of sleep, or quiet,
Where her strong knave Protaldy's broke oath wheel,
And let his cries and roares be music toner,
I mean to waken her.

Their. Do her no wrong.

Mart. Nor right as you love justice.

Brun. I will think,
And if there be new curses in old nature,
I have a soul dare send them.

Mart. Keep her waking.

Exit Brunhalt. Their. What Is that appears so sweetly? their's that face.


Mart. Be moderate Lady.

Their. That angels face.

Mart. Go neraer.

Their. Martell, I cannot last long, see the soul,
I see it perfectly of my Ordella,
The heavenly figure of her sweetness there,
Forgive me Gods, it comes, divinest substance,
Kneel, kneel, kneel every one, Saint of thy sex,
If it be for my cruelty thou come,
Do ye see her hoe?

Mart. Yes Sir, and you shall know her.

Their, Down, down again, to be revenged for blood,
Sweet spirit I am ready, she smiles on me,
O blessed sign of peace.

Mart. Go nearer Lady.

Ordella. I come to make you happy

Their. Hear you that Sir?
She comes to crown my soul away, get sacrifice,
Whilst I with holy honors.

Mart. She Is alive sir.

Their. In everlasting life I know it friend,
O happy, happy soul.

Ordella. Alas I live Sir
A mortal woman still.

Their. Can spirits weep too?

Mart. She Is no spirit Sir, pray kiss her; Lady,
Be very gentle to him.

Their. Stay, she is warm,
And by my life the same lips tell me brightness,
Are you the same Ordella still?

Mart. The same Sir.
Whom heavens and my good Angel staid from ruin.

Their. Kiss me again.

Ordella. The same still, still your servant.

Their. It Is she, I know her now Martell; sit down sweet,
O blessed and happiest woman, a dead slumber
Begins to creep upon me, O my jewel!

Enter Messenger and Memberge. Ordella, O sleep my Lord.

Their. My joys are too much for me.

Messen. Brunhalt impatient of her constraint to fee
Protaldye tortured, has chokt her self.

Mort. No more, her sins go with her.

Their. Love I must die, I faint, close up my glasses.

1. Doct. The Queen faints too, and deadly.

Their. One dying kiss.

Ordella. My last Sir, and my dearest, and now
Close my eyes too.

Their. Thou perfect woman,
Martell, the Kingdome's yours, take Memberge to you,
And keep my line alive; nay weep not Lady,
Take me, I go.

Ordella. Take me too, farewell honor.

Dies both. 2. Doct. They are gone for ever.

Mart. The peace of happy souls go after them,
Bear them to their last beds, whilst I study
A tomb to speak their loves; whilst old time lasts,
I am your King in sorrows.

Omnes. We your subjects.

Mart. Devitry, for your service, be near us,
Whip out these instruments of this mad mother
From Court, and all good people; and because
She was borne noble, let that title find her
A private grave, but neither tongue nor honor:
And now lead on, they that shall read this story,
Shall find that virtue lives in good, not glory. Exeunt Omnes.

FINIS

