THE Flying Serpent, OR, Strange News out of ESSEX BEING A true Relation of a
Monstrous Serpent which has diverse times been seen at a Parish called Henham
on the Mount within four Miles of Saffron-Walden.

Showing the length, proportion, and bigness of the Serpent, the place where it
commonly lurks, and what means has been used to kill it.

Also a discourse of other Serpents, and particularly of a Cockatrice killed at
Saffron-Walden.

The truth of thy Relation of the Serpent is attested.

By Richard Jackson Churchwarden* Thomas Presland-Constable. John Knight
Overse^^ for the Poor. Householders.
Barn (...) Thurgood Samuel-Garre^ Richard Seely William Green.


With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed and sold by Peter Lillicrap in Clerkenwell.

woodcut of serpent and armed men

Strange News out of Essex, OR, The Winged Serpent.
GUests, Fish, and news grow stale in three days time, and nothing delights an
English-Mans fancy so much as new novelties, for like the Athenians we have
still itching Ears after News, which once told we soon grow weary of it and
hearken after more; being still desirous of that which is new, which makes so
many tautoligies in the title of Books; some stiling them new news, whereas if
it be news it must needs be new; so also a new Almanac for the Year, 1669.
Whereas an Almanac for such a year were as proper, if not properer; or if it
be only for that year it can neither be new nor old for any other. But this
news which I shall now relate, as it is certain; being attested by many
credible persons, so it is also new, the venomous creature being still living
though oftentimes attempted by the inhabitants to be killed.

The place of his abode and where he has been oftentimes seen, is called
He^ham, but most commonly Hc^ham on the Mount, the Town standing upon a Hill,
having many fair Farms and Granges belonging to it, in one of which named the
Lodge, near to a VVood called Bir^h-Wood, by reason of the many Birches growing
there, in a pasture ground close by the same, has this monstrous Serpent been
often seen as he has lain upon the sides of a Bank, beaking and stretching
himself out upon the same, at such time as Sell did parch the earth with his
r^fulgent beams.

Then when the Sun shines hot he nimbly hurls
His wanton body into numerous curls;
Gathered in folds, shoots out his forked tongue
To save himself, and give his foes the wrong.
The first time that he was seen was about the 27 or 28 of May last a
Gentleman's way lying by the place where this Serpent keeps hi^ station, as he
rid carelessly on, expecting to receive no hurt as he intended none, on a sudden
this Serpent assailed his Horse, affirighting the Rider so much with his
monstrous proportion and bold courage to give such an onset, that all in a maze
he spurred his Horse, who almost as much afraid as his Master, with winged
speed hasted away, glad that they had escaped such an eminent danger.

Being come home he acquaints his Friends and Neighbors with what he had seen
of this monstrous Serpent, especially makes it known to a Neighbor in whose
grounds this Serpent does lurk, wishing him to beware of his Cattle, and to use
his best endeavor for destroying it, least by protraction of time it might do
much mischief when had I wist would be but small comfort to him for the losses
he might sustain.

Not long after two men of the same Parish walking that way, espied this
Serpent as he lay on a Hillock beaking himself against the Sun, where they
beheld his full proportion, being as near as they could guess 8 or 9 foot long,
the smallest part of him about the bigness of a Man's Leg, on the middle as big
as a Man's Thigh, his eyes were very large and piercing, about the bigness of a
Sheeps eye, in his mouth he had two row of Teeth which appeared to their sight
very White and sharp, and on his back he had two wings indifferent large* but
not proportionable to the rest of his body, they judging them not to be above
two handfulls long, and when spreaded, not to extend from the top of one wing
to the utmost end of the other above two foot at the most, and therefore
altogether too weak to carry such an unweildy body. These Men though armed with
clubs and staves, yet durst not approach to strike this Serpent, neither it
seems was the Serpent afraid of them, for raising himself upon his breast about
the height of two foot, he stood looking on them as daring them to the
encounter, like to that of the Theban Serpent, of which thus the Poet.

Which with a hissing from his Den appears
Amazing both at once the Eyes and ears,
Fire from his threatening eyes like lightning shot
And S^ygian blasts exhaled from his dire throat.
Not knowing on a sudden what to do, at last it was resolved by them that the
one should go to the Lodge (which was not far off) to fetch a Gun, and the
other in the mean time to watch the Serpent, who still stood facing them as
though he dreaded no danger that could happen to him; being as fierce and
undaunted as that Serpent of which the Divine Du-Bartas gives us this
description.

The several Snakes that out of Libia's slime
Are bred, they all in him might well combine,
Nor could Medusa's head had all the blood
In one place fallen, produce a deadlier brood;
Whose speckled belly with more spots is decked
Then various Theban marble is bespeckt.
But whilst the one was thus gone for the Gun, the Serpent as if he had waited
long enough, folds himself up, and darting forth returns to the Wood, making
such a rustling noise in the hedge as if some wild Boar, or other large Beast
had been breaking through it.

About 2 days after the same Serpent was seen by another, who gave the same
description of it with the two former as is above written.

Since which time it has been seen by diverse who have fruitlesly attempted to
kill it; for now upon the sight of a man, it presently betakes its self to the
Wood, where he remains safe, none daring to come nigh it with Clubs, and for
their Guns in that place where he can hide himself in Bushes, and Bents, they
are altogether useless; yet has there been and is still continued to this day,
great watching by several Persons with Muskets and Fowling-peices and such
like to shoot it but as yet it has been no Man's good fortune to light on him.

The report of this Serpent is so terrible to the inhabitants thereabout that
no women, children, nay nor a great many men durst not go near the place where
he lurks, yet we hear not of any mischief that he has yet done, though it be a
wonder to most people on what he subsists, and that hunger does not compel him
to range f^rther abroad, seeing he wants not for courage, as may be evidenced
in his so facing of the two men aforesaid.

We read in ancient Histories of a Serpent in Tripoli a Country in Asia that
was one hundred twenty and five paces in length, he had a mouth so wide, that
he could swallow a man on horseback, and each of his Scales were as big as a
large shield.

They also tell us of Hydra, a monstrous serpent on the Lake of Lerna who
having one head cut off, immediately had two other Heads grew up in the same
place; this Serpent was at last slain by Hercules.

Pliny tells us of the Rinocerote a small Serpent which winds himself about the
leg of an Elephant, who with his Trunk seeking to rid him, when forthwith, the
Serpent creeps into the Trunk, and so kills the Elephant, but long he injoys
not the conquest, for the Elephant kills the Rinocerote with his fall.

He also tells us of the Scorpion a venomous Serpent with 7 feet his sting is
in his Tail; sometimes they eat their young ones, and are of diverse colors;
the Female is the biggest and has the sharpest sting The Arcadian Scorpion
will not hurt their Countrymen, nor the Syrian Snakes, nor Tyrinthian Serpent.

We also read of a Serpent named Amphisbona, who had a head at both ends, as
also of a Serpent called Boas, of that bigness, that being found dead, there
was a whole Child in his Belly.

The Asp is a very venomous Serpent, they always go two and two together, and
if one of them be slain, the other will pursue him eagerly that slew him, and
if a man chance to be bitten by this Serpent it is present death if he cut not
off the member so bitten. Cleopatra Queen of Egypt being taken by Caesar
applying these Serpents to her body wilfully slew her self.

Nor can we here forget the Viper, a most venomous Serpent, the Male has but
one Tooth of each side, the Female more, when they engender, the Male puts
his Head in the Females Mouth, which she biteth off, and their young do gnaw
their dams belly, and kill her to get out the sooner.

But of all Serpents, the Basalisk or Cockatrice is the most venomous of all
other; It breaks stones, blasteth all Plants with his breath, it burns
every thing it goes over; no Herb can grow near the place of his abode, it is
poison to poison, and frighteth away all other Serpents, only with hissing. If
a man touch it though with a long pole it kills him, and if it see a man a far
off it destroys him with his looks. It is not above a foot in length, of color
between black and yellow, having very red eyes, a sharp head and a white spot
thereon like a Crown. It goes not winding like other Serpents but upright on
his breast. One of these most venomous Serpents in former time lurked about the
Meads near Saffron-Walden in Ess^x, who by his very sight, killed so many as
the Town become almost depopulated, when a valerous Knight making him a Coat of
Crystal Glass, boldly went to assail this Cockatrice, but her venomous Nature
not able to endure the purity of that fine mettle, she suddenly dyed in memory
where of his Sword was hung up in Walden Church, the effiigies of the
Cockatrice set up in Brass, and a Table hanged close by wherein was continued
all the story of the adventure; but in these late times of Rebellion, it being
taken for a monument of superstition was by the lawless Soldiers broken in
pieces, to show they were also of a venomous Nature as well as the Cockatrice.

We read that in the Reign of King Edward the third, Anno 135. near
Chipping-Norton in Oxfordshire, was found a Serpent having two heads, and two
faces like Women, one face attired of the new fashion of Women's attire, the
other face like the old attire, and had wings like a bat.

Therefore Serpents in this Kingdom are no new thing, and those far more
monstrous and prodigious then this, though this be one of the greatest that we
have heard of in this latter age. Nor is there any Countries in the whole World
exempted from them, saving only Creta or Candy an Island of Greece, for which
now there is so much stir betwixt the Christians and Turks, and the Country of
Ireland, which two places do neither breed any venomous Worms, nor hurtful
Creatures, nor will any live there if they be brought thither from Foreign
Countries.

And to this purpose I shall tell you a story and so draw toward a conclusion.
A certain Countryman coming up to London, a friend of his showed him all the
rarities of the City, amongst others one was Westminster Hall, which his friend
told him was s^iled with Irish Wood, the Nature of which is such as it would
endure ^o venomous Creature nigh it. Ah (said the Countryman) if the seats and
bars were made of that Wood, the Lawyers must find some other place to plead in.

And now for a Corollary to the whole, I shall insert some Verse made by an
excellent Poet upon a Serpent found near Millain in Italy.

The poisonous Serpent then himself extending,
His speckled Breast, and flamy main all benaing;
Above his Main his ugly odious Tail
And Back with fearful folds does wrigling trail;
His gagling eyes flashing forth blood and fire
His hissing mouth sharp tongue does flench expi^e;
With spacious windings rouling on the sand;
He kills all that comes near to hand.
Postscript.
Since I am informed by the Neighbors thereabout, that they intend to keep a
constant Watch upon it, till such time as they hope to kill it.

FINIS.
THIS SERPENT is of that Species called RATTLE-SNAKES, which scarcely being
known in this part of the World, it may not be improper to add to this
Advertisement, the Description given of it by Dr. Horseman, in his short
History of America, viz.

The RATTLE-SNAKE, says he, is the most surprising Creature that is found in
America, if not in the whole Universe; he is so called, from his Snake-like
Form, and having several thin hollow horny Substances, resembling the Heads of
a Row of Indian Corn, loosely jointed into each other, growing at the end of
his Tail, and increasing in their Number Yearly, upon the least tremor of which
they strike against each other, and rattle together, so as to be heard at a
considerable Distance.

He is a SERPENT full of Courage, Fire, and Spirit, gives way to no Creature
living, is easily provoked, and when so, always shakes his Rattles, which if
not regarded, so as soon to avoid him, he darts or throws himself swiftly
forwards, sometimes the whole Length of his Body, with his Mouth wide open,
attempting to bite at whoever affronts him. Whatever Creature he bites
immediately dies. He has in his Upper Jaw, four Fangs or curv'd Teeth two of
each side; sheathed, and turn over each other, lying backwards with their
Points up close to his Jaw Bone, so that he easily shuts his Mouth, but when he
opens it for Mischief he unsheaths them, and throws them forward, as a Lion
does his Talons. These Teeth are hollow quite through, very Sharp and opened, a
little above quite down to their Points. As if a part had been slop'd off with
some Instrument; The Cavities of which are always filled with liquid Poison, so
that wherever he wounds, some portion of this Venine Matter must be left in
each Puncture, which, though not the hundredth part of a Drop in Quantity, is of
that infinite Force, Subtilty and Activity, that as soon as mixed with the
Fluids of the Animal, it instantly affects the whole Body, by causing such a
praeternatural Ferment and Rarefaction of the Blood, and Juices, so as to burst
all the Vessels and overflow the Channels through which they pass, and at once
put an entire end to Circulation and Life together.

And yet the Flesh of these Serpents is often eaten by the Indians, and the Fat
of them; held in high Esteem among them, and is perhaps the greatest Anodyne
upon Earth, and no doubt of it, the very Remedy they cure themselves with when
bitten by them.

Nor is this Creature less wonderful in the Manner of Procuring his Prey, than
his Power of Destroying it; for as he chiefly lives upon Birds and small
Quadrupedes, so to this end he comes out into some open place near the Woods,
draws himself up into a Coil, and in that manner lies, exposing his Body to the
Beams of the Sun when in its full Luster; which being covered with smooth
shining Scales of a very solid Texture, adorned with a large Variety of lively
Colors most beautifully disposed, reflects the Rays of Light with such Force
and Strength, and in such an amazing manner, that Birds that accidentally cast
their Eyes upon him are arrested in their Flight, and Squirrels allured from
the very Tops of Trees, and so suddenly confounded, they hastily draw near to
the charming Wonder till they come within his fatal reach.

In short, so very powerful are the Charms of this most astonishing Creature
when thus exposed that no Human Eye can look steadfastly upon him without being
soon ensnared. This I dare venture to affirm, because I have my self, more than
once gazed at these Creatures in the Sun, 'till I had lost almost all my Reason.


