Licensed November 11. 1663 Roger L'Estrange.

Floddan Field IN NINE FITS BEING An exact History of that Famous memorable
Battle fought between English and Scots ON Floddan-Hill IN THE Time of Henry
the Eighth Anno 1513. Worthy the Perusal of the ENGLISH NOBILITY.

LONDON, Printed by P. L. for H. B. VV P. and S. H. and are to be sold in
I^y-lane and Gray's Inn gate 1664.

Floddan Field
NOW will I cease for to recite,
King Harry's Affairs in France so wide:
And of Domestic Wars i will write,
which in his absence did betide.
A fearful field in Verse to frame,
I mean if that to mark ye list,
O Floddan-Mount thy fearful name:
does sore affray my trembling fist.
Almighty Mars do me admit,
For to discourse with sounding praise
This bloody field this fearful fight
Which fought, was in our fathers days.
You muses all my mind incense,
And thou Polhymnia most prudent,
Least Nemesis for each offense,
With Poets rod make me repent.
Pardon ye Poets all I cry,
My simple rude and rugged rhyme,
And though your hill Pernassus hie
Presumptuously I press to climb.
For What is he with haughty style.
Such deeds of honor could contrive,
No not the learned great Vergil*
If that on Land he were alive.
Who could reveal in Volumne short,
The haughty Howards ^^liant act,
Though paper none did make report
Fame would not fail such noble fact.
Or thou O Stanley stiff in store,
Thou imp of Mars thy worthy meeds,
Who can discourse with due honor
Or paint with praise thy valliant deeds.
Thy doleful day work still shall be
Accursed in Scotland with an outcry,
For Hectors match this man was he
who calm the mount of Floddan hye.
What banners bravely blazed and born;
What standarts stout brought he to the ground,
What worthy Lords by him forlorn,
The sorrow in Scotland yet does sound.
Ye heavenly powers your aid I crave,
My slender muse help to awake
Grant of this work in hand I have,
A lucky fine and end to make
Before King Henry past the Seas,
And ere to France he did transfleet,
Least that the Scots should him disease,
He constitut^^ ^ains meet.
For he perusing in presence
Of English Kings their acts so bold,
He saw how Scots in their absence,
What damage they had done of old.
Wherefore least they should work some teen
As they had thought to have done indeed,
His Realm unto his royal Queen,
He left to be ruled by her read.
Then for the Earl of Surry he sent
And regent of the North him made
And bad him if the Scots were bent,
The Northern border to invade.
That he should raise a Royal band,
In Yorkshire and in Bishopric
In Westmorland and Cumberland,
In Lancashire and Cheshire eke.
And if thou need Northumberland,
Quoth he there be strong men and stout,
Which will not stick if need does stand,
To fight on horse back or on foot.
There is the doughty Dakers old.
Warden of the west marsh is he,
There are the bows of Kendall bold,
Who fierce will fight and never flee.
There is sir Edward Stanley stout,
For Martial skill clear without make
Of Lathom house by line came out;
whose blood will never turn their back.
All Lancashire will live and dye,
With him, so chiefly will Cheshire,
For through his Fathers force quoth he,
This Kingdom first came to my sire.
Lord Clifford eke a lusty Troop.
Will there conduct, a Captain wise,
And with the lusty knight Lord Scroope,
The power of Richmonshire will rise.
The warden all look that you warn
To hearken what the Scots forecast
And if they signs of War discern,
The Beacons bid them fire fast.
The Earl their sight with sorry heart,
And drowned his face with trickling tears,
when from his Prince he did depart
And from his Royal country Peers.
Grant thou quoth he Almighty God,
A shameful death that he may die.
Which is the cause of mine abode,
Bereaved of the Kings Company.
Some thought to the King of Scots that he
Did wish such foul fortune and fate
And some thought to the Earl of Darby
Between whom then was great debate.
The Earl then his Tennants tall,
Martially in Musters did elect,
And then his way by Journeys small,
To Pomfret Castle did direct.
Then did he send sir William Bulmer
And bad him on the borders ly,
With Ordinance and other gear,
Each house offense to fortify.
And bad him call the borderers bold.
And hold with him in readiness
And get him word with speed he could,
If Scots meant any business.
Then caused he watch in every street
And posts to prick through downs and dales,
So what was wrought he straight did weet,
from Carlisle to the coasts of Wales.
When flickering fame that monstrous wight
With hundred wings wapping was blown,
And in the Court of Scotland light,
And bruit abroad was blazed and blown.
Of King Henry's enterprise
And how he fared was into France.
With all his Peers in Princely wise
To bring that Land to his obeisance.
England to over run with rage.
The Scots then meant as was their guise,
Still when the King was under age,
Or Occupide some otherwise.
King James his courage began to increase,
And of his counsel craved to know,
If he were better bide in peace,
Or fight against his brother in Law.
Alas said he my heart is sore,
And care constrains me to weep,
That ever I to England swore
Either League or love a day to keep.
Had I not entered in that Band,
I swear now by this burnished blade
England and Scotland both one land,
And Kingdom one I could have made.
That Realm we should so overrun,
That England still after this age,
As our Elders to them have done;
Unto our Crown to do homage.
Then stood there up a Baron stout
A lusty Leird of Dowglasse blood.
My Liege quoth he have you no doubt,
But mark my words with mirthful mood.
The League is broak have you no dreed,
Believe me Liege my words are true,
What was the English Admirals deed,
When Andrew Barton bold he slew.
Your ships and armor eke they took
And since their King did nothing fear,
To send his aid against the Duke,
Of Gelders your own cosen dear:
Has not the bastard Hearon slain,
Your Warden with his spiteful Spear,
The league therefore and peace is vain
And frustrate do you nothing fear.
Then manful Maxwell answered soon
My Liege the League is broke by right,
For the English King ought not to have gone,
Against your friends in France to fight.
Have you in League not entered late,
With L^wis your cosen the French King,
And now you see what great debate
Betwixt the King and him does hing.
What greater kindness could you show,
Unto your friend the King of France,
Then with English blood your blade t'imbrew
Against that Land to lift your Lance.
You see what damage to you was done,
By English Kings in time of old.
Your B^rders burnt and Barwick Town
Still by strong hand they from you hold.
Wherefore more time lets not consume,
But fiercely sight that land again*
Then stood up Haughty Lord Hume
Of Scotland the chief Chamberlain.
My Liege quoth he in all your life
More lucky fate shall never fall
For now that Land with little grief
Unto your Crown you conquer shall.
For King Henry you understand,
Into France is past with all his Peers,
At home is left none in the Land,
But ^^ul^-head Monks and brosten Friars.
Of ragged rusticks without rules,
Or Priests prating for pudding shives.
Or Milners madder then their mules,
Or wanton Clerks waking their wives.
There Is not a Lord left in England
But all are gone beyond the Sea,
Both Knight and Baron with his band,
With Ordinance or Artillery.
The King then cried on Dallamount
Which Bodword out of France did bring,
Quoth he the nobles names do note
Which are encamped with the English King.
That shall I do my Liege quoth he,
As many as I have in heart,
For first there is the Earl of Darby,
With a lusty Lord called Harbert,
There is an Earl of Antique race,
Passing in pride and costly array
In his Banner brave he does display,
A half moon in gold glistering ga^^
That is the lusty Pier^y plain,
The King can say and gave a stamp,
There is not such a Lord again,
Not in all King Henry's camp.
There is a Lord that bold does bear
A Talbot brave a borely tike,
Whose Fathers scruk France so with sear
Their names made wives and children s^^ike.
The King then answered at one word,
That is the Earl of Shrewsbery.
There is likewise a lusty Lord
Which called is the doughty Darcy,
There is Dudley and Dallawar
And Decroy great Lords all three
The Duke of Buckingham is there
Lord Cobham and Lord Willowby.
There is the Earl of Essex gay,
And S^^ff^rd stout Earl of Wiltshire,
There is the Earl of Kent Lord Gray,
With haughty Hastings hot as fire.
There is the Marquis Dors^t brave,
Fitswater and ^isly Lords great,
Of doughty Knights the lusty lave
I never could by name repeat.
There is a Knight of the North-Country,
Which le^ds a lusty plumpe of Spears
I know not what his name should be,
A boisterous ball all black he bears.
Lord Hume then answered London hight
That same (...) sir John N^vill bold,
King Harry has not so har^y a Knight
In all his camp my coat I hold.
He does maintain withouten doubt
The Eearl of Westmorlands estate;
I know of old his stomach stout
In England is not lest his make.
The King then asked his Lords all round
If Wars or peace they did prefer,
They cried and made the Hall to sound,
Let peace go back and let us have War.
Our Armor is for usage marred,
Both Helmet, Haber^eon, and Crest,
Our st^^^ling Nags in Stables sparde,
Are waxen wild with too much rest.
Our Staves that were both tall and straight
Wax crooked, and are cast each where,
Wherefore in England let us go fight
Our Boutyes brave for them to bear.
The King rejoiced then to see
His Lords such lively heart; to have,
And to their says did soon agree
And plied to their ple^sures prave.
With that on Lion loud he cried
And took to him a letter broad;
Quoth he no longer look thou bide
But toward France soon take the rode,
To Torwin Town take thou thy way,
And Greece well there my Brother in-law
And bid him there no longer stay,
But homward to his Country draw^
And bid him cease his fury and force
Against on^ friend the King of France,
For fear Domestic wars prove worse
And make from me full defiance.
And summon him soon to return,
Lest that our power we ply apace,
With fire and sword we beat and burn
His Land within a little space.
Then Lion made him boun lightly,
And with his coat of Arms him deck^.
He ha^'d up Sail right heartily,
And toward France his way direct.
The second Fit.
MEan while the King can Letters write,
Which pricking Posts apace did bear,
To all his Lords which had delight
With him in England Arms to wears.
Then every Lord and Knight each where,
And Barrons bold in Musters met,
Each man made have to mend his ge^re,
And some their ru^^y Pikes did whet.
Some made a mell of massy Lead.
Which Iron all about did bind,
Some made a Helmet for his head,
Some did their grizly gisarings grind.
Some made their battle-axes bright
Some from their bills did rub the rust*
Some made long pikes and lances light
Some Pike-forks for to join and thrust.
Some did a spear for weapon weild
Some did their lusty geldings try,
Some all with gold did gild their shield
Some did with diverse colors dye.
The tillmen tough their ^eams could take
And to hard harness them conflate:
Some of a share can shortly make
A s^llate for to save his pate.
Dam Ceres did unserv'd remain
The fertile fields did lie until'd.
Outrageous Mars so so^e did reign
And Scotland all with fury filled.
Whereof the King in heart was fain
His men had all things ready mode
Did then command his Chamberlain
In England for to make a road
The Chamberl^in Lord Hume in have,
Over the East ma^sh Warden was also;
Within the Engli^h borders brast:
With eight thou^and ^^ll men and more.
And entered in Northumberland,
With banners bravely blazed and born
And finding none them to withstand
D^d straight destroy both hay and cor^.
And spoild and harried all abroad
And on each side Booties in brought
Some coursers caught some geldings good
Some droves of kin and cattle caught.
Ma^y stately halls and houses gay
And buildings brave they boldly burned
And with a mighty spoil and pray
Toward Scotland straight returned
Sir William Bulmer being told,
Of this great road and wild array
Did straight forecast all means he could
The Scots in their return to stay.
Two hundred men himself did lead,
To him their came the borderers stout
And diverse Gentlemen with speed,
Repaired to him with all their rout^
They were not all a thousand men,
But knowing where the Scots would come
The borderers best their coasts did ken,
And hid them in a field of broom.
The Scots came scouring homewards fast,
And proudly pricked forth with their pray:
Thinking their perils all were past.
They straggling ran clear out of ray.
The English men burst forth apace:
And skirmished with the Scots anon
There was fighting fierce face to face.
And many geldings made to groan.
There men might see spears fly in spells,
And tall men tumbling on the soil,
And many a horse turned up his heells.
Outrageous Mars kept such a coil.
The Scots their strength did long extend,
And broken ranks did still renew,
But the English Archers in the end,
With Arrow-shot so sore they slew.
The English spears on the other side
Among the Scots did fiercely fling
And thorrow their rants did rattling ride
And chase them through moss mire and ling.
The Chamberlain viewing this chance
And seeing his Host all put to flight,
He with the foremost forth advanced
And happy he had a horse so light.
For Prickers him so nigh pursued
His banner bearer down they bet,
And all the prey and spoil rescude
Besides a sort of geldings great.
Six hundred Scots lay slain on ground
Five hundred prisoners and more,
Of English men slain in that stound,
The number was not past threescore.
In August month this broile befell
The Scots black day with their blood,
As diverse old men yet do tell
The Scots call it the devilish road.
Thus while the Scots both nigh and far
Were through all Scotland occupide
In framing weapons fit for war
And mustring men on every side.
By this time came the herald sent
Before the Town of Torwin high,
Whereto King Harry straight did wend
And louting low upon his knee.
The King he reverently began greet
And took to him his Letters large
His Masters mind he let him weet,
And did his whole message discharge.
The Letters soon were looked upon,
And in the Kings presence perused,
The Scottish Kings cracks, who showed each one
And how his Majesty he misused.
And summond him his seige to cease
And stay his wars taken in hand;
Or else he with a mighty press,
Would straight invade his native Land.
King Henrys heart began to rise
And to the Herald hot can say,
Thy Master thus I did surmise
In our absence would partl^ play.
Indeed he does not now digress
From his old predecessors prave,
But if he do my Land distress
I hope he welcome hard shall have.
For in my Land I left a Lord,
Which with the aid of my noble Queen
Will stay your Prince at point of sword,
And turn such truthless guest to teen.
Let him not deem so destitute,
My Land of Lords and lusty Knights
For if he dare to prosecute
He shall find some Warlike wights
Which will withstand him stiffly in store
And eke his streaming standarts rent
He shall meet with many sharp showers
Before he pass the flood of Trent.
For since he perjured now does prove
And does so small esteem his Oath
Our siege we will not cease to move,
Be he never so wood nor wroth.
But a valiant vow now we shall make
At what time as we shall return
All Scotland we shall harry and sack
And never cease to spoil and burn.
And never peace with him contrive,
Nor never League nor love day take
While one false Scot is left alive
And till that Land be brought to wrack.
Then he to the King of Scots can write
A letter fast of full defiance
That he for all his ^re and spite
Would still proceed his Wars in France.
And took it to the Heralds hand
And gave him eke a rich reward,
Then homewards he away began ween'd
And toward Scotland forth he fared.
But while he waited for the wind
And for his Ship, did things ordain,
For all his have, he came behind,
He never saw his Prince again.
Anon King Henry the Scottish Bill
Unto the Earl of Surry sent
To Pomsret, where he stayed still,
And bade him be for battle bent.
The Earl all things began to provide,
The Scotch Kings purpose to resist,
And through all Scotland far and wide
All that was done straightway he wist.
For the Lord Dacres did perceive
The Scots meaning manifest,
Their meetings, and their Musters brave
And daily ridings without rest.
The sooth whereof he sent straightway
And told the Earl of Surry sage
That time was not to make delay,
But Soldiers soon to fee and wage:
Which when the Earl understood,
His Letters fast he forth did dress
Unto each man of Noble blood,
To have their men in readiness:
And eke what numbers they could make
Of warlike wights all well arrayed.
Then with sir Phillip Tillney he spoke,
How that their wages might be paid;
And after for Ordnance he sent
Unto Sir Nicholas Appleyard,
Which to his bidding soon was bent,
And toward him apace prepared.
With Culverings and Cortals great,
And double Canons two or three
He brought them on by stee and street
To Durham in the North-country.
That done, the Earl letters wrote
Unto each Castle, Fort and hold.
That they should furnish them with shot
And fortify their Bulwarks bold.
Which answered all with stomachs stout,
And every Captain with his Crew,
That they would beat the Scots quite out
Till the King came home their rescue.
Which answer of the Captains keen
The Earl greatly did delight
But this while what the Scots did mean,
And of King James then will I write.
For after he to his brother in law
Defiance into France had sent,
His nobles all to him did draw
Well busked and for battle bent.
When they were all assembled Sa^*
The town of Edenbrough before,
Fifty great Lords there were of Fame;
And Barons bold besides great store.
And Prelates proud, a populous lave,
And Abbots boldly there were bown,
With Bishop of St. Andrews brave
Which was King James his bastard son.
Surely it was an unseemly sight.
Contrary to our Christian laws,
A Prelate for to press to fight,
And specially in a wicked cause.
Are these the Sc^ts religious rules,
Who taught the Priests such pranks perverse,
To march forth mustred on their mules,
And soldier like to sue God Mars.
The messenger of Christ, St. Paul
Taught them to shoot at no such prick
Peter nor Christ, Apostles all
Never taught them any such trick.
Their Patron so did not them learn
St. Andrew with his shored cross,
But sure St. Triman of Quitor^e,
Or Doffin their Demigod of Ros.
This Bishop bold this bastard blessed
With other Bishops in his band,
And Abots eke as bold as the best
For beagle-rods, tooks, bills in hand.
And every Lord with him did lead
And mighty band for battle pr^st,
So that in number they did exceed
A hundred thousand men at least.
King James for joy began to jet
So huge an at my to behold,
Then soon he bade them forward set
And eke blaze out his banners bold.
Each Lord went on then with his band,
And every Captain with his crew,
Then Minstrels mirthed all the land,
And brazen trumpets loud up blew.
Then drums struck up with hideous sound,
And banners bravely waved wide,
Men might behold no where bare ground
But soldiers armed on every side.
In midst of ranks, there rode the King
On stately steed which stout did stamp,
A goodly sight to see him fling,
And how his fomy bits he champ'd.
King James thus gorgeously can ride
Great pleasure to his Peers to see,
Thus rode this Prince puffed up with pride
Whose lofty heart was but too high:
For he thought himself able enough,
Having so mighty a multitude,
All Europe then for to pass through
And that no hold could him exclude*
Nor any King in Christendom,
In field to meet him was of might,
No not the great Caesar of Rome
Had been of force with him to fight,
Nor Hercules, nor Haniball,
The Soulden, Sophy, nor the Turk,
None of the mighty Monarchs all
Such lusty blood in him did lurk.
But yet for all his armed host,
And eke for all his haughty heart,
Full soon abated was his bost,
And brought to London in a Cart.
Even in the midst of harvest tide
The two and twentieth of August
Did this proud Prince, puffed up with pride
Into the English borders burst.
The Third Fit.
WHere piles he pulled down apace,
And burly buildings brought to ground,
The Scots like grooms void of all grace,
Or Soldiers sacred to Mahound:
Fa^ Matrons they did force each where,
And ravished maidens fair and mild,
And houses burnt, and hent up gear,
And murdered many man and child;
For so the King commanded had
To waste and spoil with fire and flame,
And rifling so by Journies rad
To Norham Castle straight they came.
Which soon with siege he did beset
And trenches dig'd without delay,
With Bombard shot the walls he bet
And to assault it did assay.
But the Captain with courage stout
His Fortress fiercely did defend,
But alas too lewdly he lashed out,
And foolishly his Ordnance spend.
And powder did profusely wast,
And hailed out arrows every hour,
So that he lacked at the last
Which should have been his chief succor.
But yet five days he did defend,
Though with hard faults they him assaild,
And all their total strength extend,
But all their Power had not prevaild.
Had it not been a false traitorous thief
Which came King James his face before,
That in that hold had had relief,
The space of thirty years and more.
I say, quoth he, King James my Liege
Your deavours here are all in vain
For all your faults and hard besiege
Or Gunshot here ye get no gain.
But what reward shall I receive,
Quoth he express, and speak anon,
And I shall let you plain perceive
How that this C^stle may be won.
If that to pass thou bring this can
The King can say where he did stand
I shall make thee a Gentleman,
And living give thee in our Land.
Then first of all refuse this place
And down to yonder Valleys draw
The walls, so shall ye rent and raze,
And with brief battery bring them low.
Which as he said the King did so,
And against the Walls his Ordnance bent,
And er'e five pieces were shot or more,
The walls were all to razed and rent.
Which made the Captains sore aghast
Seeing the walls down rattling reeled,
His weapons all away he cast,
And to King James simply did yield.
The Scots anon they scoured in,
And plied apace unto their prey,
Look what was worth one point or pin
Ye need not bid them bear't away.
So when the Scots the walls had won
And rifled every place and nook
The Traitor came to the King anon
For his reward readly to look.
The King then asked him by and by
Where he was born, or in what place
The false knave nothing did deny,
But said a Scotchman born he was.
The King then asked him with words mild,
How long time he had lodged there,
Quoth he still, since I was a child,
A good deal more then thirty year.
Why, quoth the King, have thou thus wrought
Unto thy friends this frantic raige,
That in this building thee up brought
And still has given thee meat and waige?
But since thy faith thou have falsify'd
To them that gave thee meat and fee,
It is a token to be tried
That thou will not prove true to me:
Therefore for this thy traiterous trick
Thou shall be tied in a trace,
Hangman, quoth he, therefore be quick,
The groom shall gain no better grace.
What he had said fore-past was naught,
This Kings judgment was worthy praise,
If he in all things had so wrought
Belike he had driven forth more days.
By this time came the pricking Post,
Which made the Earl understand
How the King of Scots with a great host
Already entered had the Land;
Which when the Earl of Surry knew,
It was but vain to bid him have,
He sent to all his friends full true
That they their men should muster fast.
And shortly he sent to every shire
That the first day of September,
Both Gentlemen, Knights, Lords, and Squire
Unto Newcastle should repair.
Then with five hundred Soldiers stout
Himself set forth in seemly array,
And neither stint nor staid his foot
But strait to Durham took his way.
Where he devoutly did he^r Mass,
And worshipped God his Maker dear,
Then prayed he the prayer o^ that place
St. Cut^berts banner for to bear.
Then straight he to Newcastle came
Of August on the thirtieth day,
Where many a noble man of Fame
To him did draw without delay.
There dough^y Dacres and him meet,
And brought with him a burly bird
Of warlike wights right well ^^^leat
From Westmorland and Cum^^^land.
Sir Marmaduke Con^^^ble it (...),
Accompanie^ with his (...),
Sir William Bullmer with his (...).
Lord Clifford with his clapping Guns.
Then from Newcastle 'gan he fly
And took his way to Anwick ^^wn,
That weary men with weather b^t
Might h^re the m^re (...) and room.
Then should you have seen on every side
The ways all filled with men of War
And straggling streamers waving wide,
And helmets high, glistring afar.
From Lancashire and Cheshire fast,
They to the lusty Stanley drew,
From Hornby where as he in have
Set forward with a comley crew*
What Banners brave before him blazed,
The people mused where he did pass,
Poor husbandmen were much amazed,
And women wondering, cried alas!
Young wives did weep with woeful cheer
To see their friends in harness dressed,
Some rent their cloth, some tore their hair,
Some held their babes unto their breast.
And woeful mothers mourning stood
To see their sons in harness horse,
And shouting skrik'd when they forth rode,
And of their lives took little force.
But who could plainly express with pen
What masses said on hallowed stone?
What prayers of Religious men?
What sacred service eke was done?
That Stanley might come safe away,
And Victor valiently return;
The bells did sound a night and day,
The sacred fires bright did burn.
Men with gray heads drew to their beds,
And fast their prayers poured out,
Old wives for woe did wag their heads,
And Saints were sought on naked foot.
But Stanley over Stainmoore straight
Did pass, and resting there did view
A banner brave born up on high,
Whereunder went a warlike crew.
What l^sty Troop is yon I see?
Sr. Edward Stanley did enquire,
A Yeoman said, it is I see
Brya^ Tunstall, that bold Esquire;
For in his banner I behold
A Cock curling as he would crow,
He brings with him his Tenants bold,
An hundred men at least I know.
Then said the Stanley where he stood,
Would Christ that he would take our part,
His clean and undefiled blood
Good speed does promise at my heart.
Blaze out therefore, I bid you soon,
The ^^il of Derby's banner brave,
Perchance with us he will be one,
When it in sight he shall perceive.
But Tunstall took no (...) that tide,
Without saluting, forth (...) p^st
Upon the Valie^^ (...) ^nde,
His (...) ^e fix f^^st.
Then said the Stanley where he stood,
O doughty lads draw up your hearts,
Be not amazed in your mood,
For Tunstal will not take our parts.
Set forward Syr'es then can he say
Unto the Howards let us make have,
And being sore wearied with the way,
At Anwick town arrived at last.
Whose coming did greatly rejoice
The Earl and all his company,
Who but the Eagle bare the voice
With wings wapped as he would flee.
At Anwick while the army increast,
The weather wax't both soul and wet
With rain down rattling never ceased,
That every brook burst forth on float.
Such rustling winds, such blustering breast,
And rushing day and night did sound,
Which made the Earl sore aghast.
His son Lord Admiral should be drowned.
Which at his parting had promised plight
To his father if he were alive
At Newcastle with main and might
His Fleet in merry ray to arive.
Which promise he did fully keep,
Sir Neptune did such friendship show
And safely then he and his Fleet
To ^^p^y Ha^^n did bestow.
Then soldiers soon he set on land,
And to his father fast he hy'd,
With warlike wights in worthy band,
Two thousand men at least well tried.
With Cartains courageous and keen
At Anwick they arrived at last,
Whom when the Earl his army had seen,
With sudden fear they were aghast.
For seeing their armor as black as ink,
Some said it was some Scottish band,
And diverse did esteem and think
They were some force from foreign land.
Some took their harness, some their horse,
And forward fast busied to feight.
But when they saw St. Georges Cros^,
And English arms born up on height.
Some said it was some ^olly crew
The King had sent from France that ^yde,
The southern men the ^ooth so^^ knew,
And loud, Lord Admiral they cry^d.
Who when the Earl of Sur^y saw,
He thanked God with heart so mild,
And hand ^or joy to heaven did throw,
His son was said from waters wild.
A merry mee^ing there was seen,
For first they kissed and then embraced,
For joy the tears fell from the eyne,
All sorepost fears was (...) ^ac'd.
Then caused the Earl each Captain count
Under their wings what soldiers were,
Which done, the number did but mount
To six and twenty thousand seere.
Then the Earl called a Council ^oone
Of prudent Lords and Captains wife,
And how the battle might best be done,
He bade them show their best device:
Some said too small their number was
To atchieve so great an enterprise;
Some counseled posts back for to pass
For aid, and cause the countries rise:
And from the south, the Queen, some (...)
A band of soldiers soon would send,
And willed to stay, for while they staid
Their powers daily might amend.
Some said the Scots straightway would slay,
And powers daily would diminish,
Wherefore to stay was their counsel;
Thus they the Earl did admonish.
Up start the Admiral then in ire,
And stamping stood with stomach (...)
Why sir, said he, there to his ^ir^,
(...) cowardi^e lent you his (...)*
Let never King Harry hear for shame
That you should play this dasta^d part,
(...) never be blown by trump of feign
That you should bear a cowards heart.
Has not King Henry left you here
His Lieutenant to rule the Land?
Trusting that fiercely without fear
The scoulding Scots you would withstand.
Think on your Fathers valiance,
How fiercely he fought at Bosworth Field
Till time that he by Stanley's Lance
With grievous wounds his life did yield.
Would God, quoth he, my brother Edward
Were here alive this present day,
No foes there could have made him seat'd
In Camp here like a coward to stay.
What Royal fame, what high renown
Has he left to his Line and Race?
What ample fame, what great renown,
If life had lasted longer space?
The sea he did both scour and sweep,
No Pirate proud durst pear in sight,
Not Pirate John for all his power
That great renownad Zodian Knight.
How often the Royal Fleet of France
In cruel conflict by him was grieved,
If he had escaped that fatal ^^^nce
What worthy acts by him achieved*
No multitudes made him dismayed,
Nor numbers great his stomach swage,
Great shame then would to us be laid,
And to our (...) spring in ^^ch ^ge.
Your Fathers fame then should be ^ilde,
His worthy facts should be forgot
The chief renown eke of your child
Your beastith acts should clear out-blot.
If ye lie loytering here like lowns,
And do not sight you Scots again,
For still we hear how English towns
Are burnt, and sucking babes are slain.
And daily they pilser each place,
And spoils the people all about,
Wherefore let us stay no longer space,
But now step forth with stomach s^out.
The fourth Fit.
THen the Earl of Surrey again replied,
And to his son thus began he say,
No bashfulness does make me bide,
Nor stomach faint does make me stay.
The cause is for no cowardice,
So long time here we make delay,
And yet I fear this enterprise
Will prove no childish sport or play*
Great counsel therefore must be embraced,
With good deliberation,
Our Cards we had both need to count and cast,
Since it lies on such a weight and fashion.
Two hardy often good hap does hazard,
And over-bold often is not best,
That prove I by my son Sir Edward,
Which ever was too bold of breast.
He had been man alive this day
If he with counsel wise had wrought,
But he was drowned in Bartrumbs bay,
This end his great boldness him brought,
My Father at King Richards field
Under the Stanley's lance lay slain,
And I there did a Captive yield,
Our manhood great got us this gain:
We might have escaped that scurvy day
If warning could out wits have bet,
A friend of ours to cause us stay,
Upon my Fathers gate had set*
A certain scrall, whose scripture said,
Jack of Norfolk be not too bold,
And under that in Verse was laid,
Dick an thy Master is bought and sold.
My father fighting fierce was slain,
King Richard reav'd of life and Crown,
Such goodly guerdon often they gain,
Which rashly run to get renown:
For see, the Duke of York was brought
At Wakefield to his fatal fall,
Who might have escaped if he had wrought
The counsel wise of David Hall.
I read of Conquerors and Kings,
For lack of Council cast away,
Now since at hand such danger hings,
Our Council we had need to say.
It is not I am fright with fear,
Nor for my self such thought I take,
But for young babes and infants dear,
Which fathers sore I fear will lack.
Such fortune falls through fights doubtless,
Poor widows plenty shall be left,
And many a servant masterless,
And mothers of their sons bereft.
This is the cause I counsel crave,
This is the cause I cast such doubts,
I Would rather one English soldier save,
Then for to kill a thousand Scots.
I can no kind of compass cast
But many a life there must be lost,
And many a tall man death must taste,
The Scots are such a mighty host.
The Prince is there himself present,
With all his Peers prepared for War,
With Barons, Knights and Commons bent,
A hundred thousand men they are.
Put case our total English power
Were ready dressed and made in meat
They at meals two would us devour,
The Scottish army is so great.
Therefore let each man's mind be expressed,
How that the Scots we may convince,
And how to pass this peril best,
And save the honor of our Prince.
Then spoke Sir Edward Stanley stout,
Where fierce on the Earl he fixed his eyn,
What need have we thus for to doubt,
And be afraid of foes unseen.
Shall we lie loytering on this manner
And still permit the Scots in rest,
Fie, let them see an English banner,
And how our soldiers are seemly dressed.
What though our foes be five to one,
For that let not our stomachs fail,
God gives the stroke when all is done,
If it please him we shall prevail.
If ancient books we do peruse,
Set forth by famous Clerks of old,
Which of Christians, Pagans and Jews
Do plain describe the battles bold.
There may we certain see in sight
Many a mighty Prince and King
With populous armies put to flight,
And vanquished by a little wing.
With hundreds three Judge Gedeon
The Midian host over came in sight,
Sir Jonathan Readiness son alone,
The fierce Phillistians put to flight,
So Judas Machabeus the man
Of foremost fame amongst all Knights
Who can describe war fields he wan
With handfuls small of warlike wights?
The mighty Macedonian Prince
With a small puissance and power,
King Darius host did all convince
Who for one was in number four.
The great renowned Roman Peers
Their glorious praise never shall blin,
Nor fame that daily fills men ears,
Through numbers great did never win:
For Titus Livy does protest,
The less their power the more their gain,
When they were most they wan the least,
The greater press, more people slain.
Example, at Cambs fierce conflict
So many Nobles there were slain,
That bushels three there were collect
Of Rings from dead men's fingers drawn.
Where Scipio with numbers small
Of warlike wights of lusty blood
In field to flight put Haniball
And burnt with fire Carthage proud.
What further need I for to seek
Of Christian Kings the manful acts,
Since yet the fame does record reke
Of Harry with his famous facts.
All Europe yet afresh does sound
Of his high prowess with report,
What standarts stout brought he to the ground,
With numbers small at Agincourt.
All France yet trembles to hear talk
What Nobles unto death were dight,
Two thousand besides vulgar folk,
Simplest of whom was Squire or Knight.
He never stint from war and strife,
Till the heir of France he was proclaimed,
If fate had lent him longer life
With English Laws all France he had framed.
Of Bedford eke his brother John
The Dolphin bet with a small band,
Lord Talbott with his name alone
To tremble forced all the French land.
The Earl of Richmond with small power
Of England wan both Realm and Crown
At Bosworth where the braging bore
With all his host was overthrown.
So though the Scottish host be great,
Let us not stint, but them withstand
In battle hold we shall them beat,
For God will help us with his hand.
If we in field be fighting slain,
And be in battle brought to ground,
Perpetual praise then we shall gain,
Men will our fame for aye out sound.
The memory of our great manhood.
Amongst English men for aye shall last,
And then for vengeance of our blood,
King Harry home from France will have.
Our kinsfolk and our cousins free
Will wreak our deaths with doleful dint
Till time that they revenged be,
From sturdy strokes they will not stint.
Our Ghosts shall go to God on high,
Though bodies vile to death be dight,
In better case we cannot die,
Then fighting for our Countries right.
Put case the lot light contrary,
As firm my faith is fixed it shall,
And we to gain the Victory,
Good fortune on our side shall fall.
And that we give our foes the foil
What worthy praise then shall we win
What mighty prey, what plenteous spoil
What prisoners of Princely kin.
The Prince is there himself, King James,
With Prelates rich passing in pride,
Fifty great Lords there are of name,
Great Barons, Knights, and Squires beside.
Whose tents, if standing they be found,
When fight is done I do not fear,
But for entering our English ground,
Their charges they shall pay full dear.
Such fate shall fall to them I trust,
As Elders theirs have done before,
Who into England seld' did burst,
But they were burst in battle sore.
Their mighty Mars King Malchomy
Did valiantly this land invade,
At Tinmoth he was forced to flee,
And slain was by an English blade,
King David unto Durham came,
Who with the Scots in pitched field,
For all their pride, yet lost the game,
King David there did captive yield.
What shall I further mention make,
Of Henry the fourth how in his days,
The Earl of Morry and Lord Mordack,
Augons and Douglasse pricked with praise.
Did enter in Northumberland,
And murdered men without mercy,
Were they not bet by a small band
In battle by Sir Henry Pearcy.
The story says, who list to look
Ten thousand Scots in field was slain,
And through the valiant Pearcy's stroke,
All the Earls did Captives remain.
Such luck I trust to our foes shall light,
And all that wars do raise in wrong,
Wherefore against them let us fight,
It Is shame we loyter here so long.
If any seem abased to be,
That we in battle shall be bet,
Cheshire and Lancashire with me
Shall give the Scots the first onset.
When this was said the Stanley stout
All silent down did sit in place,
The eyes of all the Lords about
Were fixed upon his valiant face:
His wisdom great all wondered at,
And all his manful proffer praised,
All they that would have lingered late
Their courage keen now was up-rais'd;
Now they that lately would have stayed
With foremost cried, forth to the field,
With one voice all the Earl prayed,
That Stanley might the Vangard weild.
But on that side the Earl of Surry
Was deaf, for why he could not hear,
For stirred now up with Stanley's glory,
His rancor old it was up-rear'd;
Quoth he, the Kings place I supply,
At pleasure mine each things shall bide,
Then each Captain he did on cry,
In presence to appear that tide.
That done straightway he did ordain
His battle brief on this same sort,
Whose order and array right-plain
With Pen I shall make true report.
The fifth Fit.
FOr when Stanley with stomach stout
Did valiantly the Vangard crave,
The old Fa^l of Surrey sore did doubt
That he too high honor should have.
If that fortune sell on his part,
And valient victor did return,
'^^ainst Stanleys blood, such hateful heart
In the Earls breast did boiling burn.
Wherefore in foreward first of all,
Chief Captain constituted he
His loving son Lord Admiral,
With soldiers such as came from Sea.
Whom doughty Lords associate,
With Barons bold and hardy Knights,
Lord Ogle whom as then did lead
A lordly band of warlike wights.
In order next the Admiral
The lusty Knight Lord Clifford went
Who had been shroud i^ shepherds earn,
While twice twelve years were gone and spent.
For when his father at Wakefield
The Duke of York and his son had slain,
By friend in this wise he had sealed,
Till (...) ^^le of Richmond g^n his reign.
Who him restored to all his right,
And seated him in his sires land,
Or else to death he had been dight
While the house of York had the up' hand.
Now like a Captain bold he brought
A band of lusty lads elect,
Whose curious coats cunningly wrought
With dreadful dragon were bedeckt.
From Pennigent to Pendlehill,
From Linton to Longadingham
And all that Craven coasts did till
They with the lusty Clifford came.
All Staincliffe hundred went with him,
With striplings strong from Worledale,
And all that Hauton hills did climb,
With L^ngstroth eke, and Litton dale,
Whose milk-fed fellows fleshly bred,
Well broun'd with sounding bows up bend,
All such as Hort^n fells had fed,
On Cliffords Banner did attend.
Next whom Lord Lomley and Latimer
Were equal matched with all their power,
With whom was nex'd their neighbor near
Lord Comis stout and stiff in stoure,
With many a Gentleman and Squire
From Ryppon, Ripley and Rye-dale;
With them marched forth all Massamshire,
With N^isterfield and Nether-dale;
With till-men tough in harness store,
Which turned the furrows of Mittan field,
With bill-wen bold from Blaikamore
Most warlike wights these Lords did wield.
Next whom was placed with all his power
Lord Scroop of Upsall the agie Knight,
Then Sir Stephen Bull with all his power
Was matched next him with all his might.
Sir Walter Arisith sage and grave,
Was with Sir Henry Sherburn bent,
And under Bulmers banner brave,
The whole Bishopric of Durham went;
Whom ensued Sir Christopher Ward,
With him sir Edward Ethingham,
Next were sir Nicholas Appleyard,
Sir Metham, Sidney* Averingham
All these in foremost battle bold,
These valiant wights in vangard were,
Seven thousand men numbered and told,
Simplest of whom bare bow or spear.
Then the Earl Sir Edmond Haworth
'Gan call, whom Marshal he made,
My son, said he, now soon set forth,
With valiant heart the Scots invade:
Chief Captain of the right hand wing
To brother thine I thee ordain,
Now surely see thou serve the King,
Employ thy power, let for no pain.
Of Southern soldiers hundred two,
Under thy wing shall wend with thee,
A thousand thanks Sir Edmond tho,
Did render to his father free.
With him was matched as equal mate,
Bryan Tunstal a trusty Squire,
Whose stomach stout naught could abate,
Nor naught could sway his bold desire.
The glory of his Grandsire old
The famous acts eke of his sire,
His blood unblotted made him bold,
And stirred his stomach hot as fire.
For when debate did first begin,
And rancor raised most ruful work,
And ruffling ruled this Realm within,
'Twixt Lancaster and the house of York.
During which hurly burly and strife
Were murdered many a mothers child,
And many a Lord bereaved of life,
And many a noble house blood filled.
But this man's father void of fear,
While in this Realm such ruffling was,
To Harry the sixth did still adhere,
And for no pains did from him pass.
For he to York would never yield,
For all the struggling stir and strife,
Nine times he fiercely fought in field,
So often in danger was his life.
And when the King was captive caught,
And the Earl of Warwick overthrown,
To save his life best means he sought,
And was in Bark to Britain blown.
And with the Earl of Richmond remaind,
With Lords of the Lancastrian kin,
When the Earl in the end the garland gained,
And of England did the Empire win.
He rendered Tunstal to his right,
And knowing his blotless blood unblam'd,
He eke did cause this trusty Knight,
Undefiled Tunstal to be named.
Most fiercely he sought at Thallian field,
Where Martin Swart on ground lay slain,
When rage did reign he never reeled,
But like a rock did still remain.
Now came this man amongst the rest,
To match his father in manhood,
For battle ready bent and pressed,
With him a band of lusty blood.
Next went Sir Bold and Butler brave,
Two lusty Knights of Lancashire,
Then Barkerton bold, and By god grave,
With Warcop wild a worthy Squire.
Next Richard Chomley, and Chiston stout,
With men of Haafield, and of Hull,
Lawrence of Dun with all his rout,
The people fresh with them did pull.
John Clar^ice then was nexed near,
With Stapleton of stomach stern,
Next whom Fitz William forth did fare,
Whom martial 'ffairs was not to learn.
These Captains keen with all their might
In Right Hand wing did warlike wend,
All these on Edmund Haworth Knight
The Earl his sire ordained to attend.
Then next the Left Hand wing did wield
Sir Marmaduke Constable old,
With him a troop well tried in field,
And eke his sons and kinsfolk bold.
Next whom Sir William Pearcy proud
Went with the Earl Pearcy's power
From Lancashire of lusty blood,
A thousand soldiers stiff in store.
Then the Earl himself can undertake
Of the reereward the Regiment,
Whom Barons bold did bravely back,
And Southern soldiers seemly bent.
Next whom in place was nexed near
Lord Scroop of Bolton stern and stout
On horseback, who had not his peer,
No Englishman Scots more did doubt.
With him did wend all Wensadale,
From Morton unto Moisdel-more,
All they that dwelt by the banks of Swale
With him were bent in harness store.
From W^nsedale warlike wights did wend
From Bishops-dale went bowmen bold,
From Coverdale to Cotter-end
And all to Kidstone-cause cold.
From Mollerstang and Midleham,
And all from Mask and Midleconby,
And all that climb the Mountain Came,
Whose crown from frost is seldom free.
With lusty lads and large of length
Which dwelt on Seimar wather side,
All Richmondshire total strength
The lusty Scroop did lead and guide.
Next went Sir Phillip Tilney tall,
With him Sir Thomas Barkley brave,
Sir John Radcliffe in arms Royal,
With Sir William Gascoine grave.
Next whom did pass with all his rour
Sir Christopher Pickering proud,
Sir Bryan Stappleton stout,
Two valiant Knights of Noble blood.
Next with Sir John Stanley there yea^
The Bishop of Elyes servants bold,
Sir Lyonell Pearcy eke did lead.
Some hundred men well tried and told.
Next went Sir Mimham Markinfie
In armor coat of cuning work:
The next went Sir John Mounvile,
With him the Citizens of York.
Sir George Darcy in banner bright,
Did bear a bloody broken spear,
Next went Sir Magnus with his might,
And Chestane bold of lusty cheer.
Sir Guy Dawnie with glorious rou^,
Then Mr. Dawbies servants bold,
Then Richard Tempest with his roo^,
In Rereward thus their ray did hold.
The right hand wing with all his rout,
The lusty Lord Dacres did lead
With him the bows of Kendall stout.
With milk-white coats and crosses red.
All Keswick eke and Cockermonth,
And all the Capel and craggy hills,
All Westmorland, both North and South,
Whose weapons were great weighty bills.
All Carlisle eke, and Cumberland,
They with the Dacres proud did pass
From Branton and from Broughly sands,
From Craistone and from Ravens-glasse.
With stripplings strong from Stainmoore-side
And Austenmoore men marched even,
All chose that Gilsland grave did hide,
With horsemen light from Heshan leven.
All these did go in Dacres band,
All these ensued his banner broad,
No lustier Lord was in this land,
Nor more might boast of birth and blood.
Many houses strong and huge of height,
Were all his own to give or sell;
Fair Baronyes for his birthright
For heritage to him befell.
These royal Lords thus ray did hold
With ranges, ranks, and warlike wings:
But yet the man is left untold
On whom the matter wholly hings.
Whose worthy praise and prowess great,
Whose glorious fame shall never blin:
Nor Neptune never shall forget
What laud he has left to his kin.
Sr. Edward Stanley stiff in stoure,
He is the man on whom I mean;
With him did pass a mighty power
Of Soldiers seemly to be seen.
Most liver Ladds in Lonsdale bred,
With weapons of unwealdy weight;
All such as Tatham Fells had fed,
Went under Stanley's Streamer bright.
From Bolland bill men bold were bowne,
With such as Botten-Banks did hide:
From Wharmoore up to Whittington,
And all to Wenning waterside.
From Silverdale and Kent Sand-side,
Whose soil is sown with Cockle-shells;
From Cartmell eke and Conny-side,
With Fellows fierce from Forneys fells.
All Lancashire for the most part
The lusty Stanley stout can lead,
A stock of Striplings strong of heart,
Brought up from Babes with beef and bread.
From Warton unto Warrington,
From Wigham unto Wirsdale,
From Wedicar to Waddington.
From Ribchester to Ratchdale.
From Poulton and Preston with pikes,
They with the Stanley stout forth went;
From Pemerton and Pillingdikes,
For battle bilmen bold were bent,
With Fellows fresh and fierce in sight,
Which Horton Fields did turn in fores;
With lusty Lads liver and light,
From Blaikborn and Bolton in the Moors.
With Children chosen from Cheshire,
In Armor hold for battle dressed;
And many Gentleman and Squire
Were under Stanley's streamer pressed.
Thus Stanley stout the last of all
Of the Rereward the rule did wield,
Which done, to Bolton in Glendale
The total Army took the Field.
Where all the Council did consent
That Roug^rosse to the Scottish King
With ^raight Instructions should be sent
To know his Majesty's meaning.
The Sixth Fit.
AND whereas the Castle of Ford
He threatens for to overthrow,
Rougcrosse was charged word for word,
The Earls intent to let him know.
That if his Grace would so agree
To suffer that said Fort to stand,
And William Herron send home free,
Who then was captive in Scotland.
Whereto if the King would condescend,
The Earl promised to restore,
And to the King straightway to send
Of his Countrymen Captives four.
Lord Johnston, and Sr. Sandy Humes,
Richard Hume, and William Carr;
And where the King did sore presume
In wrongful sort to stir up war.
Against King Henry his Brother in Law,
And Commons cruelly did kill.
And Piles and Forts did fierce down throw,
And English blood spared not to spill.
The Earl charged the Herald straight,
To certify the said Scotch King,
That he in Field with him would fight
On Friday then next following.
And yet ere Rougcrosse forth did face,
The Admiral took him by aside,
And bad him to the King declare
His coming and access that tide.
That he from Sea descended was
With all his total power and might,
And that in foreward with his Grace
He should him find fit for to fight.
And when the Scots on him did call
At days of March to make redress
For Andrew Barton their Admiral,
Whom he with bloody blade did bless.
Now he was come in person pressed,
The said Andrews death to avouch,
And if it in his power does rest,
Quoth he, I shall serve them with such.
For there shall no Scot escape unslain,
The King his person sole except;
For so of the Scots, quoth he, again
No other courtesy I expect.
And yet ere Rougcrosse went his way,
The Earl and his Council did consent,
That the Scotch King without delay
An Herald would again direct.
Wherefore Rougcrosse commanded was
No Scotchman near the Field to bring,
Lest he their conduct might declare,
And thereby dangers great might spring.
Then Rougcrosse ready took his horse,
Bedeckt in coat of Arms most brave;
With him did weend a trumpet hoarse,
That Scots their coming might perceive.
Their Geldings were both good and light,
From galloping they seldom staid,
Till at the length they viewed in sight
Whereas their Enemies Army laid.
The Scots watch them, anon descride,
And them conveyed before the King,
Where he with Barons bold did bide,
Whom Rougcrosse did on knees kneeling,
With seemly salutation greet,
And after his instructions straight,
Each one he expressed in order meet,
And Letters 'livered there in sight.
Whom when the King of Scots had heard,
And eke had viewed his Letters large,
Even frantic like, he fuming fared,
And Bombard like, did boasts discharge.
If true, quoth he, let be expressed,
Thou Herald sent anon recite;
And was your Earl so bold of breast.
Thus proudly to a Prince to write.
But since he seems to be so rough,
I swear, quoth he, by Scepter and Crown,
In faith he shall have fighting enough,
On Friday before Sun go down.
For here to God I promise plight,
We never pass will from this hill,
Till we have tried your Earls might,
And given their folks fighting their fill.
Because he vexed our Land of late,
Perchance his stomach is extold;
But now we will withstand his Grace,
Or thousand pates there shall he poll'd.
To presence then he called his Peers,
To whom he read the Earls Bill,
And audience given with ireful ears,
So said it came of little skill.
An Earl of so simple a Shire,
To anointed King such words to write,
Some bad the Schedule cast in fire,
Some for to speak did spare for spite.
Some said the Herald of his own head
Such talk extempore did express,
And counseled with all possible speed
An Herald hastily to address.
To know of the Earl of Surrey plain
If he such message did procure,
And till the time he turned again
The English Herald to make sure.
Whereto the King did so^n consent,
And Rougcrosse sure in safety kept,
And home with the English trumpet sent
An Herald by name Il^y Klept.
Who was commanded for to know
Of the Earl and his Council sage,
If Rougcrosse truth to him did show,
Or if they had sent such Message.
And if he tidings t^^e had brought,
And to his Grace avouc'd no lie,
The King in mind anon for thought
How the Earl he might certify.
Wherefore he Ilay inst^ucted straight
With Letters l^rge and loquin^ue;
Which done, they soon set forth that night,
And toward the English Camp they drew.
But at a little Village poor,
Ilay did ^ight, and took lodging,
For the Army was two mi^es or more,
Whilst the trumpet shows of his coming.
The night was even at midst well near,
And the English Lords lying on grass,
Till time the trumpet did appear,
And told the Earl all the case.
How that the Scots they did detain
Rougcrosse, and credit would him not,
And for to know the truth more plain,
The King himself had sent a Scot.
Which he constrained for to stay
And lodged then in a little Village,
Lest he their order might display,
Which might turn to the Scots advantage.
Which when the Earl understood,
He viewed the Scotchmens dealings all,
With little sound and sober mood,
He straight did on his Council call.
Where he in presence did report
The total tale the Trumpet told;
The Council mused with marvel great,
Why the Scots their Herald did withold.
And causes none they could conject,
But all surmises were deferred,
And sage advice was clean defect
Till they the Scottish Herald heard.
Wherefore as soon as Phoebus fair
Dame Luna's light, and Stars did stain,
And burn in Chaffings fiery chair
His startling Steeds hailed forth amain.
The Earl and his Council sage
To horseback then they hyed round,
And every man did bring his Page
To hold their horses in that stound.
But when they stepped within the street,
The Scot was scarce from Capage got,
Where he their English Lord did greet
With little courtesy, like a Scot.
Which done, the Earl did command
His Message he should manifest,
Then Ilay hastily out of hand
His chiefest charge anon expressed.
My Sovereign Lord, quoth he, King James,
Would of your Honor gladly hear,
If Rougcrosse was charged in your name,
Such bold word to his Grace to bear.
My Mr. does mistrust his word
With leasing to be understood,
Likewise do all our peer^es^ Lords?
Then soon he told what Rougcrosse said.
Quoth the Earl, what does thy Mr. mean
Of Herald ours to make such dread,
His Message for to forge or feign
Of leasing we do stand no need.
Our Heralds words we will justify,
For verity he did reveil,
His writings eke the same will try,
Which of our Arms do bear the seal,
Wherefore I of thy Mr. muse
Our Herald why he handles so,
And against all reason does refuse
Our Message to make answer to.
Then Ilay again to him replied,
I say, quoth he, be said, my Lord,
And to your Message at this tide
I shall make answer word for word.
And for Ford Castle first of all,
Which to preserve ye did make suit,
To save the same from fire and fall,
My Mr. thereto bids mute,
And for the Owner of the Fort,
Who William Herr^n has to name,
My Mr. name to show you short,
He will not answer to the same.
For Johnston, and Sr. Sandy Hume.
Richard Hume, and William Carr,
Our Prince himself in person's come
Them to redeem by dint of war.
If ye your message dare make good,
On Friday next in Field to fight,
My Mr. with a manful mood,
To mighty J^ve has promised plight.
For to abide the battle bold,
And give their folks fighting their fill;
And that your Lordship show I should,
So grateful be his Grace until.
As any Earl England thorough,
For if ye had such message sent,
He being at home in Edenborough,
Would gladly have answered your intent
Now if wi^h dint of sword ye dare
Abide his Grace in battle bold,
On Friday next, he craves no far;
My Message whole now I have told.
A thousand thinks the Earl there
Unto the royal King did yield,
Whose princely heart did not forbear
So simple a Lord to meet in field.
And then a valiant vow he plight,
That he the battle bold would bide,
And on prefixed day to fight;
Which done he did command that tide,
The Scottish Herald Iley Klept,
A season there he should sojourn,
And in safe custody be kept
Till time that Rougcrosse did return.
When as the Herald Ilay heard,
Straight to the King his servant sent,
Who to his Grace all things declared,
With the Earls answer and intent.
The King then Rougercsse did discharge.
Who h^ed home to the Earl in have:
Then Il^y was let go at large,
When Rougcrosse came, who was kept fast.
Then Rougcrosse did make true report
To the Earl and Captains in like case,
As he had seen, and in what sort
The Scottish King encamped was.
Even on the height of Floddan Hill,
Where down below his Ord'nance lay,
So strong that no man's study or skill
To fight with him could find a way.
Such mountains steep, such craggy hills,
His Army on the one side did enclose:
The other side great grizly gills
Did sense with fenny mire and moss:
Which when the Earl understood,
He counsel craved of his Captains all,
Who bad set sorth with manful mood;
And take such fortune as would fall.
The Seventh Fit follows.
WHereto the Earl did soon consent,
And quickly called for a guide,
Le^ by the way he harm might hent;
But hark what happened that tide.
When the Army pressed was to proceed,
All ray'd in ranks, ready to fight,
Come scowring all in scarlet red,
With lusty Lance a horseman light.
His face with velvet vizard hid,
Thus plainly have I heard report,
Who radly by the ranks did ride,
And straight to the Earl did resort.
All the Army marvel'd at this man
To see him ride in such array;
But what he was, or whence he came,
No wight there was could certain say.
When he the Earl of Surrey saw,
From Saddle light he leaped there,
And down on knees did low full low,
Holding in hand his horse and spear.
And on this sort he silence brake,
My Lord; quoth he, grant me some grace,
Pardon my life for pity sake,
You have the Princes power and place.
Grant at your hand I grace may have,
Freely forgive me mine offense;
Perchance ye shortly shall perceive
Your kindness I may recompense.
Quoth the Earl then note us thy name,
Belike thou have done some heinous deed,
Thou dare not show thy face for shame.
What is thy fact declare with speed?
If thou have wrought some treason tell,
Or English blood by murder spilt,
Or thou have been some rude Rebel,
Else we will pardon thee thy guilt.
Then he to the Earl can reply,
And say, my Lord, for offense such
The total world I do defy,
With treason me no man can touch.
I grant indeed I wrong have wrought,
Yet disobedience was the worst,
Else am I clear from deed or thought,
And extremes they to me have forced,
And as for murdering English men,
I never hurt man, maid, nor wife;
Howbeit Scots some nine or ten
At least I have bereaved of life.
Else I in time of wealth or want
Still to my King persisted true;
Wherefore good Lord my life do grant,
My name then shortly I shall show.
Quoth the Earl, then pluck up thy heart*
Thou seems to be no person prave;
Stand up at once lay dread apart,
Thy pardon free here thou shall have.
Thou seems to be a man indeed,
And of thy hands hardy and wight,
Of such a man we shall stand need
Perchance on Friday next at night.
Then on his feet he start up straight
And thanked the Earl at that tide;
Then on his horse he leaped light,
Saying, my Lord, ye lack a Guide.
But I shall you conduct full straight
To where the Scots encamped are,
I know of old the Scottish slight,
And crafty stratagems of war.
Thereto experience has me taught,
Now I shall show you who I am;
On borders here I was up brought,
And Bastard Hearon is my name.
What quoth the Earl Bastard Hearon,
He dyed at least now two years since,
Betwixt Newarke and Northampton,
He perished through the Pestilence.
Our King to death had deemed the man
'Cause he the Scottish Warden slew;
And on our borders first began
Those ^aging wars for to renew.
But God his purpose did prevent.
He died of the Plague to prove
King Harry his death did since lament,
He wondrous well the man did love.
Would God thy tale were true this tide,
Thou Bastard H^aron might be found,
Thou in this gate should be our guide,
I wot right well thou knows the ground.
I am the same, said he again,
And therewith did unfold his face,
Each person then perceived plain;
That done, he opened all the case.
Quoth he, when I the Scots Warden
Had with blade bereaved of life,
I wist well I should get no pardon,
But sure I was to suffer death.
In have King Harry for me sent,
To whom I durst not disobey,
So toward London straight I went*
But hark what wile I wrought by the way.
I naught but truth to you shall note;
That time in many a Town and Borough,
The Pestilence was passing hot
And raging, reigned all England thorough.
So coming to a certain Town,
I said I was infected sore,
And in a Lodge they laid me down,
Where company I had no more.
But my own secret servants three,
For Townsmen 'fraid for fear did watch;
So in that stead no more I staid,
But homeward by the dark dispatch.
My servants secretly that night
Did frame a Corpse in cunning sort,
And on the morrow as it was light
My death did rufully report.
And so my servants soon that Morn
The Corpse to bury made them bowne,
Crying alas, like men forlorn,
And seemed for sorrow to fall down.
The Corpse they cunningly conveyed,
And caused the Bells aloud be rung,
And money to the Priest they paid,
And Service for my soul was sung.
Which done, they tidings straight did bring
Unto King Henry, how I was dead.
Christ have his soul then said the King,
For sure he should have lost his head.
If he up to the Court had come,
I promise had so by St. Paul;
But since God did prevent our doom,
Almighty Christ forgive his soul.
To Mansion mine I came at last
By journies nimbly all be night
And now two years or more are past
Since J aptly appeard in sight.
No wight did weet but I was dead,
Save my three Servants and my wife
Now I am start up in this steed,
And come again from death to life.
Which said the Lords and Captains Sam:
From laughing loud, could not abstain
To hear his ga^de they had good gam.
And of his welfare all were fain.
Whose policy they had perceived,
And often times his truth had tried
Which was the cause so sore they craved
This Hearon grave to be their guide.
Then forth before he fiercely flew
The Borders bold to him did draw
The total Army did ensue,
And came that night to Wallers Haw.
There the English Lords did lodge their Host
Because the place was plain and dry
And was within six miles at most
Whereas their Enemies host did ly
The morrow next they all removed
Though weather were both fold and ill
Along down by a pleasant flo^d
which called is the water of till.
And all that day they viewed in sight
Whereas the Scots for battle bold,
Because the day was spent that night,
The Army lodged at Barrin wood.
Then Valiantly with the Vantgard,
The morrow next with Mature skill
The Admiral did march forward,
And passed over the water of till.
At Toynsil bridge with ordinance
And other Engin^ fit for War,
His father eke did forth advance
And at Milford from thence not f^^
With the rear ward the river past
All ready in ranks and battle array
They had no need more time to wast,
For victuals they had none that day
But black fasting as they were born
From flesh or fish or other food
Drink had they none two days before
But water wan in running flood.
Yet they such stedful faiths did bear
Unto their King and Native land
Each one to other then did swear,
Against foes to fight while they could stand.
And never flee while life did last,
But rather dye by dint of sword,
thus over plains and hills they past,
Until they came at Sandifort.
A brook of breadth a Tailors yard,
Where the Earl of Surry thus did say,
Good fellows Soldiers be not feared,
But fight it out like men this day.
Like English men, now play your parts
Bestow your strokes with stomach bold
Ye know the Scottish coward hearts,
And how we have them scourged of old.
Strike but three strokes with stomach stout
And shoot each man sharp arrows three,
And you shall see without all doubt
The scolding Scots begin to flee.
Think on your Countries common wealth
In what estate the same shall stand,
To English men no hopes of health
If Scots do get the upper hand,
If we should not boldly abide.
But beastlike backs of them should turn,
All England North from Trent to Tweed,
The haughty Scots would harry and burn.
Your Faithful wives, your daughters pure
They would not stick for to defile,
Of life none should be safe and sure
But murdered be by villains vile.
But if yee'l fight like Soldiers fierce
So that by force we win the field,
My tongue cannot tell and rehearse
What plenteous soil we then shall wield
Beside all that perpetual praise,
Throughout all ages shall we gain
And quietly drive forth our days
And in perduring peace remain
All Sam. the soldiers then repl^d
And there to the Earl promised plight
There on that bent boldly to bide
And never flee but fiercely fight
Then Marched forth the men of War
And every band their banner showed
And Trumpets hoarse was heard afar
And glistering harness shining viewed.
Thus they past forth on the plain
And straight forth by a valley low
Where up above on the Mountain
The Scottish army in fight they saw.
Whom they did leave on the left hand,
And past forth on the sunny side
Till 'twixt the Scots and Scottish land
They were conducted by their guide
Now all this while the King of Scots
Beheld them fair before his eyne
Within his mind drove many doubts
Musing what the English men did mean.
Giles Musgrave was a Guileful Greek
And friend familiar with the King
Who said Sir King if you do seek
To know the English men's meaning.
Ye better notice none can have
Then that which I to you shall tell
What they forecast I full conceive
Yea I know their purpose passing well.
Your marshes they mean for to sack
And borders yours to harry and burn
Wherefore it^ best that we go back
From such intent them for to turn.
This Musgrave was a man of skill
And speak this for a policy,
To cause the King come down the hill
That so the battle tried might be.
The King gave credit to his word,
Trusting his talk was void of train,
He with consents of all his Lords,
Did march with speed down to the plain.
By North there was another hill,
Which Brankstone-hill is called by name,
The Scots annon did skoure there till
Lest the Englishmen should get the same.
The Letter which they left behind,
And other filth on fire they set,
Whose dusty smoke the wrestling wind,
Even straight between the Armies bet.
Still on the height the Scots them held,
The Englishmen march on below,
The smothering smoke the light so feald,
That neither Army other saw.
At length the weather waxed clear,
And smoke consumed within a while,
Now both the Hoasts in distance were,
Not past a quarter of a mile
Then the Admiral did plainly aspect,
The Scots aray'd in battles four,
The man was sage and circumspect,
And soon perceived that his power
So great a strength would not game stand,
Wherefore he to his father sent,
Desiring him straight out of hand,
With the rearward ready to be bent.
And join with him in equal ground,
Whereto the Earl agreed anon,
Then Drums struck up with dreadful sound,
And Trumpets blew with terrible tune.
Then sounding Bows were soon up bent,
Some did their Arrows sharp forth take,
Some did in hand their holberds hent
Some rusty bills did ruffling shake.
The Eight Fit.
THen Ordinance great anon out brast,
On either side with thundering thumps,
And roaring Guns with fire fast,
Then levelled out great leaden lumps.
With rumbling rage thus Vulcans art,
Began this field and fearful fight,
But th'archgunner on the English part,
The Master Scot did mark so right,
That he will bullet brast his brain,
And hurled his heels his head above,
Then pip'd he such a peal again,
That Scots he from their Ordinance drove.
So by the Scots Artillery,
The Englishmen no harm did hent,
But the English gunner grievously,
Them Tennis balls he sousing sent.
Into the midst of Enemies ranks
Where they with ragious caps down rushed,
Some shouting laid with broken shanks,
Some crying laid with members crushed,
Thus the Englishmen with Bombards shot
Their foes on heaps down thick they threw,
But yet the Scots with stomachs stout,
Their broken ranks did still renew.
And when the roaring Guns did cease,
To handy strokes they hyed apace,
And with their total power prease,
To join with Enemies face to face,
Then the Englishmen their fethered flights,
Sent out anon from sounding Bow,
Which wounded many warlike wights,
And many a Groom to ground did throw.
The gray gooswing did work such grief,
And did the Scots so skoure and skaile,
For in their battle to be bre^f,
They rattling slew as rank as ^^ile.
That many a soldier on the soil,
Laid dead that day through dint of darts,
The Arrows keen kept such a coil,
And wounded many wight men's hearts.
And pierced the scalp of many a Scot,
So that on ground they groaning fell,
Some had his shoulder quite through shot,
Some leaving life did loudly yell,
Some from his leg the Lance did pull,
Some through his stomach store was strickt,
Some bleeding belled like a Bull,
Some were through privy members pricked.
But yet the Scots still stout did stand,
Till Arrows shot at length was done,
And hyed apace to strokes of hand,
And at the last did battle join.
Then on the English part with speed,
The Bills stepped forth and Bows went back,
The morrish pikes and mells of Lead,
Did deal there many a dreadful thwack.
The Englishmen stretched East and West,
And Southward did their faces set,
The Scotchmen Norward proudly pressed,
And manfully their foes they met.
First westward of a wing there was,
Sir Edmond Haworth Captain chief,
With whom did pass in equal mace,
Sir Bryan Tunstal to be brief.
With whom encountered a strong Scot,
Which was the Kings chief Chamberlain,
Lord Humes by name of courrage hot,
Who manfully marched them again,
Ten thousand Scots well tried and told,
Under his Standart stout he led,
When the Englishmen did them behold,
For fear at first they would have fled.
Had not the vol^ent Tunstal been,
Who still stepped on with stomach stout,
Crying come on good Countrymen,
Now fiercely let us sight it out.
Let not the number of our foes,
Your manful hearts minish or shake,
Let it never be laid unto our nose,
That Scotchmen made us turn our back.
Like doughty lads let us rather dye,
And from our blood take all rebuke,
With edged tools now let us try,
Then from the ground he mould up took.
And did the same in mouth receive,
In token of his maker dear,
Which when his people did perceive,
His valiant heart renewed their cheer.
Then first before in foremost ray,
The trusty Tunstal bold forth sprung,
His stomach could no longer stay,
But thundering thrust into the throng.
And as true men did make report,
In present place which did on look,
He was the first for to be short,
On the English part that profer'd stroke,
All those that ho with Halberd raught,
He made to stacker in that stound,
And many a groan to ground he brought,
And dealt there many a deadly wound.
And forward still against foes he flew,
And threshing turned them all to teen,
Where he a noble Scotchman slew,
Which called was Sir Malkin^keen
And still his foes pursued fast,
And weapon in Scotch blood he warmed
And slaughters lashed till at last,
The Scots so thick about him swarmed.
That he from succor severed was,
And from his men which Scots had ska^ld
Yet for all that he kept his place,
He fiercely fought and never fail^d.
Till with an edged sword one came,
And at his legs below did lash,
And near a score of Scots all Sam,
Upon his Helmet high did dash.
Though he could not gainstand such strength.
Yet never would he flee nor yield,
Alas for lack of aid at length,
He slain was fighting fierce in field.
Down falls this valiant active Knight,
His body great on ground does lie,
B^t up to heaven with Angels bright,
His golden ghost did slickring fly.
After his fall his people fled,
And all that wing did fail to wrack,
Some fighting fierce died in that stead,
The rest for terror turned their back.
Save Sir Edmond Haworth all alone,
Who with his standard bearer yet,
Seeing his folks all fled and gone,
In ha^t to vangard hyed to get.
But he scotfree had not so escaped,
For why right hot Sir David Hume,
With troop of Scot^ had him entrapt,
Had not John Bastard Hearon come.
With half a score of Horsemen light
Crying now Haworth have good heart,
For unto death till we be dight,
I promise here to take thy part.
Which heard then Haworth heart up drew,
And with the spear-men forth he sprung.
And fiercely among their foes he flew
Where David Hume down dead lay flung.
And many a Scot that stout did stand,
With dreadful death they did reward
So Haworth through bold Hearons hand
Came safe and sound to the Vantgard.
Where the Admiral with strength extent,
Then in the field fierce fighting was
Against whom in battle bold was bent
Two Earls of an Antique race.
The one Crafford called the other Montrosse
Who led twelve thousand Scotch-men strong,
Who manfully met with their foes
With leaden meells and lances long.
Their battering blows made sallet sound,
There many a sturdy stroke was given;
And many a Barron brought to ground
And many a Banner broad was riven.
But yet in fine through mighty force,
The Admiral quit himself so well,
And wrought so that the Scots had worst,
For down in field both Earls fell.
Then the Earl of Surry next by east.
Most fiercely against his enemies fought
Against whom King James in person pressed
With banners blaised his battle brought.
Wherein was many a Barron bold,
And many a Lord of lusty blood
And trusty Knight well tried of old,
And mitered Prelates passing proud.
With the Earl of Catnesse and Castle
The Earl of Moarton and of Mar
With Arell and Adell and Athell
Of Bothwell bold and of Clenbar.
Lord Lovet led a lusty power,
So Clueston Inderby and Rosse
Lord Maxwell with his brethren four
With Borthwick Brogginy and Forbos.
Lord Arskill Sentclea^ and simpell
With soldiers tried a mighty some
All with the King came down the hill
With Cowell Kay and Caddie Hume.
With Captains of Commons stout
Above twenty thousand men at least
Which with the King most fierce on foot
Against their foes then adrest.
Now the Earl of Surry on the English side
Encouraged his Soldiers keen,
Crying good fellows strike this tide
Now let your doughty deeds be seen,
Then spears and pickes to work was put
And blows with bills most dure was dealt
And many a cap of steel through cut,
And swindging swaps made many svvelt
There many a soldier fell in svvound
On either side with wounds right sore
And many a strong man stricken down
Some dying ragiously did roar.
Then on the Scotch part right proud
The Earl of Bothwell then out brast
And stepping forth with stomach good,
Into the Enemies throng he thrast.
And Bothwell Bothwel cried bold,
To cause his soldiers to ensue,
But there he caught a welcome cold
The English men straight down him threw
Thus Haburn through his hardy heart
His fatal fine in conflict found,
Now all this while on either part
Were dealt full many a deadly wound
On either side were soldiers slain
And stricken down by strength of hand
That who could win none weet might plain
The victory in doubt did stand.
The Ninth fit.
Ti^l at the last the Stanley stout.
Came marching up the mountain steep
His folks could hard^y fest their feet
But forced on hands and feet to creep.
And some their boots left down below
That toes might take the better hold
Some from their feet the shoes did throw
Of true men thus I have heard told.
The sweat down from their bodies ran,
And hearts did hop in panting breast
At last the mountain top they wan
In warlick wise e're Scotchmen wist
Where for a space the Stanley staid
Till time his folks had taken breath
To whom all Sam even thus he said,
Most hardy mates down from this heath,
Against our foes fast let us hye
Our Country men to comfort and aid
With fighting fierce I fear me I,
Through lingrink long may be o'relaid.
My Lancashire most lively wights,
And chosen mates of Cheshire strong
From sounding bow your fethered flight
Let fiercely fly your foes among.
March down from this mountain top
And brunt of battle let us bide,
With stomach stout lets make no stop
And Stanley stout will be your guide.
A scourge for Scots my father was
He Barwick town from them did gain
No doubt so ere this day shall pass
His son like fortune shall obtain.
And now the Earl of Surry sore
The Scots I see besets this ti^e
Now since with foes he fight before
We Will suddenly set on their side;
The noise then made the mountains ring
And Stanley stout they all did cry
Out went anon the gray goose wing
Against the Scots did slickering fly.
Then showrs of arrows sharp were shot,
They rattling ran as rank as hail
And pierced the scalp o^ many a Scot
No shield nor pavish could prevail
Although the Scots at Stanley's name
Were stonisht sore yet stout they stood
Yet for defense they fiercely f^ame
And narrow dint with danger boad.
And when the shower of arrows shot
Did somewhat cease within a while
That the Earl of Huntley haughty and hot,
With the ^arl of Lenox and Argile.
Lord Bo^thick Bogginie and Forb^sse
With them ten thousand Scotchm^n strong.
Though death they endured with d^nger force
Right stoutly yet they stood to it long.
Which when the Stanley stout did see
Into the t^rong he thundering thrast
My lovely Lancashire lads quoth he
Down with the Scots the day we wast.
Then foes he forced to break their ranks
Where many a life was lost that while
No voice was heard but kill and slay,
Down goes the Earl of Argile.
The Earl of Lenox luck was like,
He fighting fier^e was slain that tide
So Lord Forb^sse Bogginie and Borthwick
Upon the bent did breathless bide.
And so the Earl of H^ntly's hap
Had been resembling to the rest
But that through skill he made a escape
With an English blade he had been blessed.
But he by hap had a horse at hand
On whom he skowring escaped away
Else doubtless as the case did stand
On Floddan hill he had dyed that day
After these Lords were fallen and sled
And companies left captain-lesse
Being sore stonisht in that stead
Did fall to flight both more and less.
Whom Stanley gits his total strength,
Persu^d right sore down on the plain
Where on the King he light at length
Which fighting was with all his main.
When his approach the King perceived,
With stomach stout he him withstood,
His Scots right bravely them behaved
And boldly there the battle bode
But when the English arrows shot
On each part did so pierce and gall
That e^re they came to handy strokes
A number great on ground did fall.
The King himself was wounded sore
An arrow fierce in his for head light
That hardly he could fight any more,
The blood so blemished his sight.
Yet like a warrier stout he said
And fiercely did exhort that tide
His men to be nothing dismayed
But battle boldly there to bide.
But what availed his valor great
Or bold device all was but vain
His Captains keen faild at his feet
And Standard Bearer down was slain.
The Archbishop of St. Andrews brave
King James his son in base begot
That doleful day did death receive
With many lusty Lord like Scot.
As the Earl of Catness and Castle,
Marton and Fiarr for all their power,
The Earl of Arel and Athel,
Lord Maxwel with his brethren four
And last of all among the lave,
King James himself to death was brought,
Yet by whose fact few could perceive,
But Stanley still most like was thought.
After the King and Captain slain,
The Commons straight did fall to flight
The Englishmen pursued a main,
And never ceased while Sun gave light.
Then the Earl of Surrey made to sound,
A Trumpet for to retreat anon,
And Captains caused to keep their ground,
Till morrow next while night was done,
But the English Soldiers all that night,
Although they weary were with royl^.
The Scotchmen costly slain in fight,
Of Jewels rich spared not to spoil,
The Corpse of many worthy wight,
They uncase of his comely array,
And many a Barron brave and Knight,
Their bodies there naked lay.
The carcass of the King himself,
Bare naked was left as it was born,
The Earl then could not know it well,
Searching the same upon the Morn,
Until Lord Dacres at the last.
By certain signs did him bewray,
The Corpse then in a Cart being cast,
They to New Castle did convey^
Great store of Guns and Warlike gear,
Whereas the field was fought they found,
Which they to Barwick then being near,
And to New Castle carried round.
The certain Sum being searched out,
Twelve thousand Scots dyed in that stead,
On the English side were slain about,
Some fifteen hundred as we read.
Yet never a noble man of fame,
But Bryan Tunstal bold alas!
Whose Corpse home to his burial came,
With worship great as worthy was,
This field was foughten in September,
In Chronicles as may be seen,
In the year of God as I remember,
One thousand five hundredth and thirteen.
Praconia Post funera manent FINIS.

