A FATHERS TESTAMENT. Written long since for the benefit of the particular
Relations of the Author, Phin. Fletcher; Sometime Minister of the Gospel at
Hillgay in Norfolk. And now made Public at the desire of Friends.

Prove. 4. 1, 2. Hear ye Children the Instruction of a Father, and attend to
know understanding. For I give you good Doctrine, etc. Prove. 13.1. A wise Son
hears his Fathers Instruction: but a scorner hears not rebuke. LONDON.
Printed by R. White, for Henry Mortlock, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
Sign of the White Heart in Westminster Hall, 1670.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
THe Design of the Author, in this little Book, was at first the private Use
only and Benefit of his own Children and Relations. Growing toward Old Age,
and consequently sensible that shortly he must leave them in this Wilderness
State, wherein they would meet with more than one Ignis-Fatuus to mislead them
out of the right way to bliss (it being natural to all the Children of men to
go astray after, and take up their Rest in, present enjoyments, and the things
of sense:) he was willing (therefore) to point, as with his finger, at those
Rocks, and dangerous Praec^^^s^ they might meet with here: And to chaulk ^^t
that narrow way that leads to the true, future, and eternal Happiness. So
that having recourse to this small Clue, which is spun out of, and grounded
upon the Word of truth, it might be, through the good hand of God, a Direction
in their Passage: being mindful therein of the duty of a Parent, and knowing
the dying words of a Friend, specially of a Father, has many times a deep
Impression. That he has concluded each Chapter with some Poetic Lines, I
hope, will be no offense to any Ingenuous Reader, nor reputed a blemish to the
gravity of the Profession of the Author. It may testify thus much, That he
was a Lover of the Muses: To which none that knew him but will readily assent.
The Original came to my hands not long after his decease, which was several
years since: And having lately been importuned by Friends, that have perused
it, to publish it, at first found some Reluctance; But if that which was
intended for Private, may be any way serviceable to the Public, it will be
sufficient satisfaction to me, and, I am confident, no way displeasing to any
of his Relations: And the rather, in that it may be Instrumental to preserve
the Memory of the Pious Author.

GO little Book, and to the World present
Out of Gods two one Father's Testament
Show it a Fletcher, with his quiver full
Of David's arrows, laboring to beget
Each child again; the Muses in Christ Schoo^
Plainness and pains in one, wit and grace met^
Go, challenge that which is deserved by few^
A Poets laurel, with a Preachers due.
Ioh. Arrowsmith. D. D.
A FATHER'S TESTAMENT.
CAP. I.
EVen the Sea Monsters draw out the breast; they give suck to their young ones,
Lam. 4.3.
I know well (my dear Children) that it is the Fathers duty to lay up for his
posterity, (2 Cor. 12.14.) Nor am I ignorant, or insensible of that heavy
censure, If any man provide not for his own, for those of his own house, he
has denied the ^aith, and is worse than an Infidel, (1 Timothy 5.8.) nor yet
forgetful, or careless, (as God has, or shall enable me in the way of my
calling,) to provide for you the needful comforts of this life: yet I have
learned that One thing is needful, (Luke 10.42.) and that Life consists not in
abundance (Luke 12.15.) Let me speak to you as those Apostles, Silver, and Gold
I have little, but such as I have I give you, Act. 3.6. I have ever esteemed
you the special blessing which God has given me upon earth, and desire to see
you rather blessed than rich. For even the most worldly, (though lamentably
blinded) affect riches for blessedness, and desire an overflowing wealth for no
other end, but that they may bathe, and swimm in a full tide of happiness.

The great Legacy which I desire to confer upon you is that which my dying
Father bequeathed unto me, and from him (through Gods grace) descended upon me,
whose last, and parting words were these; My Son had I followed the course of
this World, and would either have given, or taken bribes, I might (happily)
have made you rich, but now must leave you nothing but your education, which (I
bless God) is such, as I am well assured yo^ choose rather that I should dye in
peace, tha^ your selves live in plenty. But know certainly^ that I your weak,
and dying Father leave yo^ to an everliving, and All-sufficient Father, an^ in
him a never fading inheritance; who will no^ suffer you to want any good thing,
who hat^ been my God, and will be the God of my seed.

Thus he entered into peace, and slept in Christ; leaving behind the fragrant
perfume of a good name, to all his acquaintance, leav^ng to us a prevalent
example of an holy conversation, and that goodly heritage where the lines are
fallen to us in pleasant places, (Psalm. 16.6.) and leaving us to his
protection, who has never failed us. This I desire, and (as I am able)
endeavor to bequeath unto you.

When the men of this World have barter^d Heaven for Earth, and with loss of
their precious souls have gained false, and fading treasures, they can but
point to their full ^offers, and deliver their keys to their Children, they
can give them neither wisdom to ^se, nor providence to keep them. In the first
I am no whit short of them; I can point out to you the place where those
infinitely better riches are stored up for you. I can direct you in the way
wherein you shall find them; And in the second place (further than ^hey) I can
(through Gods grace) set you ^own a course, which if you take, you shall ^urely
unlock and enjoy them, and be ever ^lessed in the fruition of them.

If I could bequeath you mountains of ^arthly treasures, were you vain, and
care^ess, how soon would they melt to Mole-hills, ^^d vanish like a morning
cloud into nothing? If then earthly things, and perishin^ can neither be got,
nor kept without much labor, and carefulness, oh think not much of any pains,
or diligence in the search o^ that Heavenly portion, which will certainl^ be
found, when it is rightly sought, an^ when it is once found, can never be los^^
If it tarry, be not weary of seeking, for (...) will surely come, and will not
tarry, Hab. 2.3^ Shameful is it to faint in that labor, which will bring
infallible success, and eternal r^^freshing. My God leading me, I will lea^ you
the good, and right way, (1 Samuel 12.23^^ follow, that ye may apprehend, (Phil.
3.12^ Be ye followers of me (so far) as I am of Chris^^ 1 Cor. 11.1. All
treasures are hid up in hi^ (Col. 2.3.) whom if ye follow, you shall sure^^
have treasures in heaven, Luke 18.22. Fir^^ therefore take notice that,

CAP. II.
The Portion, or good of man lies not in (...) fruition of any, or all
creatures.

THe lear^ed Heathen, and wise Philo^^^phers, wonderfully toiled, tired, a^^
tormented their sharp Wits in cleaving (...) that knotted Question concerning
that End, or Good of man, in which his perfection, or happiness consisted.
Neither should I less vex my self, or you, if I should but reckon up their
numberless gross errors and jangling differences concerning that matter. All
their search was but as that of the Sodomites, groping for the door in a night
of blindness.

For (as the Apostle) what man knows the things of man, save the spirit of man
which dwells in him? Much more the things of God knows no man but the Spirit
of God, or they to whom that Spirit reveals them, 1 Cor. 2.11. we can easily
discern the works of men; their end, or intention in those works we cannot
know, till they some way declare it. How then should any creature find out the
End of that great Creator in his special work ( Man) if himself by his own
Spirit (in his word) had not clearly revealed it? For else, who has known the
mind of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor? Romans 11.34. Therefore our
gracious Lord has plainly discovered unto us what is that End, for which he
made us, and consequently what is our Good, and Happiness.

And because he well knew how easily our dimm eyes are deluded with colorable
shows, and painted shadows, hence he fully displayes unto us as well
(negatively) what is not (and yet we think is) our blessedness, as also
(positively) what is (though few believe it) the true happiness of man.

First therefore in general he teaches u^ that the Creature is no part of our
Portion^ we are not, no^ can be blessed by enjoying earth, no nor Heaven, nor
Heaven with earth^ nor any created thing, or all things in, o^ betwixt both; we
may have all these, an^ be miserable, want them all, and be blessed^ This truth
the Holy Ghost strongly proves, a^ frequently elsewhere, so specially in tha^
book of Ecclesiastes, which that infinite Wis^dom by his wisest Secretary
caused purposel^ to be written of this Subject, where first h^ evidently, and
frequently teaches us, tha^ all is vanity, vanity of vanities, and vexatio^ of
spirit, Eccles. 1.2. and 12.8. and 2.11^ True it is that no creature is simply
vain, bu^ very good (Genesis 1.31.) conducing as well t^ the general end, ( Gods
glory) as to their pa^^ticular ends for which they were made: a^ the Sun to
rule the day, the Moon the nigh^ (Genesis 1 16, etc.) But that which to some end
and work is very good, and useful, is to ano^ther vain, and frustrate. The
earth apt t^^ yield food, altogether vain to give light^ Our All-wise Creator
assigned to every crea^ture his proper work, and end, but made no^ any one, nor
all to bless, but to serve man^ Hence is it that as to their own ends they ar^
very profitable, so for this (namely to constitute man's blessedness) they are
wholely useless, and uneffectual, and therefore (in that respect) sheer vanity.
And when a man will wring, and wrest the creatures to a wrong end, and thinks
to make up his blessedness in them, it is but as wringing his nose, which
brings forth blood, Prove. 30.33. they do but grieve his Spirit, and fill it
with vexation and anguish.

Thus while Solomon was rifling the creatures ( riches, pleasures, etc.) to
find out the good of man, he solemnly protests to all the World, that in all
his search he found nothing but vanity, and vexation of spirit, Eccl. 2.3, 11.
In which respect so vain are the creatures, that he who enjoyes them at the
full, may not only be weary of them, but even hate his life for the vanity, and
vexation he finds in them, Eccles. 2.17. How then should that (in the fullness
of it) make our life blessed, which by emptiness, and torment makes it bitter,
and loathsome? which when we have in all abundance, and superfluity, yet our
selves may be altogether vanity, (Psalm. 39.5.) and lighter than vanity? Psalm.
62.9.

2. Secondly there is something in man which ^avours of Infiniteness; something
which cannot be satisfied, or rest in any thing which is finite. The eye is not
satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing, Eccles. 1.8. Cast into the
heart of man Silver as dust, heap up Gold into mountains, yet He that loves
Silver is not satisfied with Silver, nor he that loves abundance, with
increase, Eccl. 5.10. Advance an ambitious man to great honors, set him in the
Throne, load his head with many Diadems, fill both hands with Scepters; let him
drink down all the Kingdoms of the Earth, he will still be as thirsty as that
Macedonian Monarch. Now every Nature longs for things of like nature with it
self; hence this Infiniteness in man cannot rest till it have sound out
somewhat which suits with it self, some infinite Good, which may satiate the
longing spirit. But neither any one, nor all Creatures can exhibit an infinite
good: even the most excellent, and all (in all their excellency) conjoined have
their limits, and stints of goodness; Hence as the Taste in diversity of dishes
runs through many, but stays only upon that which fully aggrates the Palate,
so the spirit of man finding defects in every creature, cannot settle, nor rest
upon any.

3. Thirdly, as we call not that body healthy which is one day in good temper,
but many days sick; or that Steward wealthy, who having a rich office for a
year, at the years end is turned out into perpetual beggary; so cannot we
esteem him blessed who enjoying some momentany comforts, yet himself, with
them, soon perishes in an everlasting curse, and misery. Happiness if it last
not, is the more unhappy. Now all the things of the world are transitory, and
perish with the using, but the soul of man is an immortal substance. And this
spirit not only survives, but re-assumes the body, so that after the moment of
this present life is vanished, another ensues without end, or change. The
spirit of a beast indeed goes downward, but the spirit of a man upward, Eccl.
3.21. It returns to God that gave it, Eccl. 12.7. These things therefore which
cannot hold way with us, but leave us in the midst, nay indeed in the first
step of our journey, how can they be our inheritance, or make us blessed?

4. Fourthly, it is not possible a man should be happy in enjoying those
things, which the more he enjoyes, the less he esteems: for (as excellently
that most learned Father) He cannot be called blessed who has not what he
loves, whatsoever it be, or he, who has what he loves, if it be evil which he
has, or who loves not what he has, be it never so good, ( August. De morib.
eccl. l. 1. c. 2.) And who is so ignorant but knows that thus it is with the
heart of man, and all creatures. Before we enjoy them, how dearly, how highly
do we prize them? what refuse we to do, or suffer that we may gain them? we
long, we pine for them; we ride, we run for them; sweat, and toil for them;
venture limb, and life for them; but no sooner we obtain, but finding their
emptiness, our heart goes off from them to some other object, at least
nauseating what we possess, we burn in desire of what we suppose is wanting. It
is with us in these adulterous lusts, as with incestuous Amnon, whose heart
being inflamed with the beauty of Tamar, before enjoying could think of no
other heaven but her eyes, and arms; but in cooler blood he more loathes than
formerly he loved, as was not before so sick for her, as after sick of her, 2 Samuel 13.

5. Fifthly, the Creatures were ever inferior to us. In our first Covenant
they were given to us as servants, and we to them as Lords ( Genesis 1.26. Psalm.
8.6.) In the second^ our dominion enlarged rather than any whit empaired. All
things are ours: the world, life, death, things present, and to come, all are
ours, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22. And when the Lord of all the World in his wonderful
love, and special favor chose, and espoused us to himself, he endowed us with
all his goods, and gave all his servants to wait upon us in several offices;
some as Caterers, to provide our diet, some as Cooks, to dress it; some as
Taylers, Weavers, to cloth us; some as Physicians, to cure us; some as
Musicians to refresh, and delight us; the very Heavens, as Torchbearers to
light us; yea, even the most glorious Angels of Heaven as our Guard to secure
us. How then can the creature possibly advance us, whose advancement is to
serve us? how should that put the highest excellency (for so is blessedness)
upon us, which is so far inferior to us?

6. Lastly the creature is made unto us as instruments, and means of action,
and therefore (in the abundance of it) is not only burdensome, but dangerous.
It is like the Spartan Iron-Money; as much as would buy one horse, would load
three; As a great sail to a little boat in rough weather, and so is either
cumbersome, and makes our way heavy, or dangerous, and unwarily sinks us in
destruction. Thus Hamans preferment advanced him to the Gallows, Ahitophels
wisdom Weaved a noose for his own Neck: That Rulers wealth in his passage to
Heaven loads and sinks him, Mark 10. Nay in respect of blessedness they are so
needless, that we are never so blessed as when we have least of them, and least
need them. It is our highest happiness in Heaven, that we shall neither need,
nor possess food, apparel, wives, husbands, land, money, Sun, Moon, but God
shall be all in all, 1 Cor. 15.28. Rev. 22.5.

Object. But do not the creatures conferr something, and help forward our
happiness? Who can (at least comfortably) be without them?

Answ. There is a possibility (even in this life) of consisting (being, and
well-being) without them. Moses was never here more blessed, than when enjoying
the presence of God in the Mount, he neither had, or wanted food, etc. when the
Apostles had nothing, neither money, shoes, nor scrip, they wanted nothing,
Luke 22.35. Man lives not by bread but by every word of God: a lesson long
since taught Gods people, when in the Wilderness they neither had nor wanted
Corn, Wine, Oil, or any supply of clothing, etc. Deuteronomy. 8.3.

2. Though in this life we cannot (in an ordinary course) be without them, yet
do they not make up any part of our happiness; seeing neither it, nor any part
of it consists either of this life, or any thing belonging to it. Blessed are
they (none more) that dye in the Lord, Rev. 14.13.

3. Nothing in the Creature but only Gods word, and blessing upon them is that
which either fits them for us, or us to them, and so gives us some comfort from
them: as being all his servants (Psalm. 119.91.) going and coming at his Word,
(Luke 7.8.) They are all in his hand as instruments, which he employeth to
good, or evil as he pleases. (The Assyrian was but the Axe, or Staff in his
hand to chastise his rebellious Subjects, Isa. 10.5, 15.) when we have it, it
works not, moves not, but by his hand. If he use not the Axe, it cannot hew; if
he lift not up the staff, it cannot stir.

In a word it is with all Creatures (even the greatest rebels) as with that
Balaam, Numb. 22.20. God may say Go, but that which I say, and will, that shall
thou do. And therefore they are all ready to say unto thee, as that Prophet to
Balak: If thou would give me thy house full of Gold, and Silver, I cannot go
beyond the Word of the Lord to do either good, or bad of mine own mind, Numb.
24.13. Thy meat will tell thee, I cannot nourish thee; thy clothes, we cannot
warm thee if he command not. When the Lord says to a Crown, Go to Saul's head,
and from Saul to David, it goes. When he adds, Go to Jeroboam, to Ahab, etc.
fill them with trouble, sweep them and all their posterity from the face of the
earth as dung: so it does. When he says, Go to Solomon, and girt him with
power, peace, honor, it fails not to do it. When he says to the Quails, Go to
those murmurers, cover their tables, nay cover the ground two cubits high, go,
and fill their mouths, but not their bellies, feed them not, so it comes to
pass, Numb. 11.31, 32. And when he commands the Air, neither sow, nor Reap, yet
rain down bread upon my people, and nourish them forty years in the Wilderness,
it executes his charge.

Seeing then the creature is full of nothing but of emptiness, vanity, and
vexation: unsatisfying; of short continuance; least esteemed, where most
enjoyed; far beneath us; and even needless; yea in their abundance burdensome,
and dangerous, it is impossible they should constitute any part of man's
happiness. Now Religion, Reason, nay even Sense will tell us; All this is
infallibly true, and therefore will conclude, that it is irreligious,
unreasonable, senseless to rest, or build upon the creature.

And therefore when in searching our hearts we find too much of this Harlotry
in them, thus let us correct, and direct them.

I.
Fond Soul I is this
Thy way to bliss?
Grasp both the Indies, let thy mighty hand
The iron North, and golden South command;
Transcend the Moon,
Fasten thy Throne
Above the fixed stars: above expressions,
Above thy ^hought enlarge thy vast po^s^ssions^
Fond soul! all this
Cannot make up thy bliss.
II.
All these are vain,
Full, but with pain:
All Creatures have their end to serve, not bless thee;
As Servants they may help, as Lords oppress thee.
They vex in g^tting,
Used, lost with ^retting;
Can slaves advance, shades ^^ll, can grief give rest?
That, which was cursed ^or thee, cannot make thee ble^^.
They all are vain,
And bring not bliss, but pain.
III.
Fond Soul! thy birth
Is not of Earth?
Or Heaven: thou Earth, and Heaven it self surviv^st
Though born in time, thou dying time out-livest.
They ^ail, deceive thee,
They age, dye, leave thee;
So^^ up immortal spirit, and mounting fly
Into the arms of great Eternity;
Not Heaven, or Earth,
He, he thy End, and Birth.
Now if in the fullness of all Creature man can find no parcel of his
blessednes^ how much less in any one single creature As first,

CAP. III.
Not in Riches.

RIches are as Nebuchadnezzars golden Idol; (Dan. 3.) All people, nations, an^
languages fall down, and worship this golden Image; but all the honor the most
de^vout Zelots give it cannot wring from it the least degree of happiness. For
first, it is a mere Idol. 1. An Image has only a name, and appearance of what
it imageth; Thus these outward things are called, and to mop-eyed men seem to
be riches, but are unrighteous Mammon, and at best (and with the best) not true
Riches, Luke 16.11. Their very being is no being, and when they are, they are
not, Prove. 23.4. True riches are nothing else but plenty of such things as are
useful to the person whom they enrich. But, 1. The principal part of man (to
which the ^ody is but a servant) has no use of them, ^r benefit by them;
neither of the natural, meat, drink, etc.) or artificial, (gold, silver, etc.)
Nay, 2. Even to the body, while it is in the short Pilgrimage of this life
(where only they are current) they are ^ather as a little spending money, than
its ^ortion, or inheritance. For look as many Cart-loads of Laconian money
(that iron ^yn) could not enrich a Traveler, who ^as riding Post through that
Region to his ^^tive Country, but were rather a burden, ^ an a furtherance to
his journey: so the ^odies of men flying through this mortal life ^ immortality
are rather laden, than enrich^^ by the abundance of these earthly things, (...)
which they shall never have more need, or use after this momentary Pilgrimage.
2. Images are dead, helpless things; they have mouths, but cannot speak for us;
eyes, but cannot provide for us; hands, but can do nothing for us; feet, but in
our necessity cannot stir to help us, ( Psalm. 115.5, 6, 7.) Such are riches:
mere Images; profit us nothing, Prove. 10.2. Are we in trouble? visited with
sickness in body, with distress in spirit? etc. They cannot relieve us. Riches
profit not in the day of wrath, but righteousness delivers from death, Prove.
11.4. They shall cast their silver in the streets, and their gold shall be
removed; their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the
day of the wrath of the Lord, Ezekiel. 7.19. Zeph. 1.18. Are our Friends in
danger? They cannot redeem a brother, nor give a ransom for him, Psalm. 49.6,
7. when we would serve our selves of them, they take them to their wings, and
are gone, Prove. 23.4. would we sleep? They will not suffer us, (Eccles. 5.12.)
and instead of helping, hurt us, Eccles. 5.13. 3. As Idols make their
Worshippers like to themselves, even Idols, ( Psalm. 115.8.) thus men idolizing
riches become like to their coin, mere images of men: they have neither mouths
to eat, nor hands to enjoy, o^ take part of their labor, Eccles. 6.2. They
have not so much reason or sense to design some end of all their pains, or to
discourse with themselves, For whom do I labor, and bereave my soul of good?
Eccles. 4.8.


2. Secondly, whatsoever defect (in general) excluded the creatures from
challenging any part in man's happiness, the same (in particular) bars out
riches. 1. It is full of vanity and vexation, Eccles. 2.7, 8, 11. All his days
(the worldly rich) eate^h in darkness, and has much wrath, and sorrow with his
sickness, Eccles. 5.17. 2. It satisfies not; nay the more it is loved, the less
it satisfies. Man's eye is not satiate with riches, Eccles. 4.8. They shall not
satisfy their souls, nor fill their bowels, Ezekiel. 7.19. He that loves silver,
shall not be satisfied with silver, etc. Eccles. 5.10. 3. They are not durable,
they are of no continuance; Riches are not for ever, (Prove. 27.24.) They perish
(Eccles. 5.14.) have Eagles wings, Prove. 23.4. 4. The more we enjoy, the less
we love them. The soul that most dotes on them, goes utterly off from what it
has attained, and reaches after that which it would have, and yet has not,
and so indeed cleaves to that which is ^ot, Prove. 23.4. 5. They are far below
us; They have no reason, sense, life, no being ^ut what we give them in our
opinion, and ^ancy, no other end but to drudge for us.

6. They are not only (in respect of happiness) needless, so that never any was
(even on earth) so blessed, as he that had least of them: (witness our most
blessed Savior) but in their abundance a burden, which sinks the body, and
soul under them; and dangerous; stopping the way to Heaven, and barring the
entrance to our only happiness, Luke 8.14, and 18.25.

I will shut up this Chapter with a story very true, and as pertinent. Some ten
miles from Cambridge dwelt a man old, and poor, who hid his hoar head under a
very mean Cottage, with no other companion of his age, than his (as aged) Wife:
His means rose only from the flock of the Town (in which he lived, and) which
he tended. Following his sheep, it chanced that he found a Portmante^ full of
treasure. And almost distracted with joy, he bears it home, and acquaints his
Consort with this happy adventure. After deep consultation they concluded to
digg an hole under their bed, and there in a grave to conceal it. But in the
night being now become very wakeful, they were suddenly frighted with some
noise (perhaps the scrabling of their Cat or Dog) rose up in great
perturbation, searched every mousehole, and all the remainder of that night
neither closed their eyes, nor put ou^ their candel. Early in the morning they
took further advice, and resolved that every night one of them (by turns)
should watch their prisoner, lest happily he might break from them, and make an
escape. This they practiced so long, until both of them (who before were
well-near worn up with age) were now with care, fear, and want of sleep even
consumed, and pined. After more mature deliberation, they thought expedient to
hire some poor neighbors, (for now they mustered themselves not in so mean a
rank) every night to guard their Palace, and sentinel about them. Which when it
was noised abroad in the Town, wrought diverse strange surmises (though not any
yet harped upon the right string, nor once dreamed what was the true cause of
all this business;) some laughed, others pitied, fearing the old Couple would
end their days in Bedlam. About a month after they had intelligence who was
the Owner of this money, and heard of a competent reward offered to the finder,
and restorer. And now being much more weary, than greedy, they readily take
hold of the offer, rendered up their prisoner, purchased a Jayl delivery, hung up
their cares, freed their hearts, rescued their macerated bodies, and distracted
wits, and by parting with their money returned to their wonted peace, and
quietness.

This Ancient Couple, and our own reason will assure us, that felicity seldom
dwells with riches, never is patcht up with rags of earth. Philosophers
prove it, and Poets sing it. Thus in English,

Boethius. Libr. 2. Metr. 2. If Mammon empty all his baggs, to store
The greedy mind, (as Seas heap sands on shore)
If earth with Heaven vie Angels for her lovers,
And every star with golden Pieces covers,
If Plenty, hills of wealth, and mountains heaps,
And what it largely gives, as safely keeps;
The dropsy soul still whines, still thirsts, and pants
For earth, and feels not what it has but wants.
When God the mouth, the throat, the skin has cram'^
With gold, the heart still gapes, and gasps as clam'd.
Nor earth, nor seas, nor heaven can quench this drouth
As hell it ever yawns, never shuts the mouth.
What rein, what curb can bridle lustful fires?
And manage them in pace of just desires?
When all the gifts which from free Heaven came
Are but as oil, and fuel to the flame.
He never can be full who feeds on air;
He never can be rich, who dreams he is poor, and bar^
CAP. IV.
Neither can Blessedness consist in honor, and worldly advancement.

EArthly Honor, and Greatness in the world is like a ponderous leaden weight
in an earthly vessel; it breaks out the bottom: As too great a charge in a
Musket, either bursting the barrel, or recoyling upon the discharger. Great
Babel had so blown up, and bladdered the heart of great Nebuchadnezzar, that
swelling beyond the demensions of man, he burst. His vast thoughts shattered
his brain-pan, so that not only his Crown, but his senses fell from his head.
While he soars above the pitch of man unto a God, he falls beneath the lowest
degree of man into a beast, eats grass like an Ox, his Hairs metamorphosed
into Feathers; and his Nails into Claws; ( Dan. 4.30, 33.) so he exemplified
that infallible truth (which is therefore doubled by God) Man that is in honor
abides not, but is like beasts that perish, Psalm. 49.12, 20.

2. Secondly, As it is with Riches, so with honor; even when they are ours,
they are not our own. Riches are ours rather in the dispensation, than
possession. They are another, (Luke 16.12.) The state in another, in God: and
the benefit for others, for our Brethren. God is the true Owner, Psalm. 24.1.
The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof; the world, and they that dwell
therein. Rich men are but his Stewards. He gives substance, and takes it away
at his pleasure ( Job 1.21.) and we receive to give, and distribute. As God
fills the clouds to empty them upon the earth, so he poures in to the rich, to
pour out to the poor, Eccles. 11.1, 2, 3. And therefore a righteous Steward
thus dispenses them; He disperseth and gives to the poor, Psalm. 112.9. Even
thus is it with honor. It is not our own. It is in him that gives it, not in
him that receives it: and we receive it not for our selves, but for others.
Promotion proceeds from God, Psalm. 75.6, 7. and ends in his people; see 2 Samuel
5.12. 1 King. 10.9. 2 Chronicles. 2.11. The root in another, the fruit for other. If
then borrowed money cannot make rich, much less can lent honor make blessed.

3. Thirdly, It is liable to all those defects, and failings of other
creatures. 1. Full of vanity, and vexation. Even Solomon's greatness was but
vanity, Eccl. 2.9, 11. It ^s gotten (commonly) by wicked arts (flat^ery,
bribery, treachery) with grief, fear, envy. And when it is best gotten, yet
come we to it with much danger, hold it with much trouble, and cannot part from
it but with ruin. How many have swam to it in the blood of others, and sunk by
it in their own? read, 1 King. 16.

Look upon David, He rose from following the Ewes with young, to feed Gods
people, (Psalm. 78.71.) from the sheep-hook to the Scepter. Never any more truly
honorable. He received it freely, when he sought it not, it was cast in to
him, 1 Samuel 16. He came to it innocently, and would not stain his head with a
bloody Crown, 1 Samuel 24. and 26. He managed it wisely, justly, Psalm. 78.72. He
lived long, and dyed in it ripely: yet the many, and great dangers through
which he made toward it; the perils, and sorrows (by reason of those foul
practices of his Son Absalom) in passing through it; The troubles and tumults
of Adoniah, disturbing him in the farewell of it, will assure us, that there is
much vanity in honor, no felicity, and the Crown more heavy, than happy.

2. There is no power in Honor to satisfy the ambitious heart thirsting after
it; when he has gathered to him all Nations, and heaped to him all people, his
desire is still as death, and hell, and cannot be satisfied, Hab^ 2.5. He
cannot rest, or quiet his soul i^ the very top of earthly honor, and glory,
covets to ascend above the height of the clouds; stays not there, but will
climb up to heaven; neither are the Heavens high enough for him, he will exalt
his throne above the stars, an^ be like the most high, Isa. 14.13, 14. The
Prince of Tire cannot stop his glorious boasting in being wiser than Daniel,
but sets hi^ heart as God, Ezekiel. 28.2, 3. And truly it i^ worthy of
observation, that the heart o^ man (even when it is most carnal, and much more
when spiritual) cannot settle, or pitch upon any lower object than likeness to
God. But here lies the difference; the carna^ would be like him in an absolute
sovereignty, and supreme independancy, ( Genesis 3.5.) the spiritual in humility,
( Psalm. 113.5, 6. Matthew. 11.29.) in holiness, and purity, 1 Pet. 1.15. 1 John
3.3.

3. Neither is honor of any continuance; Man in honor abides not; his glory
shall no^ descend after him, Psalm. 49.12, 17. How many outlive all their
honor? Those that ar^ born in the Kingdom become poor, Eccles. 4.14^ They may
live like Gods, and yet dye lik^ men, Psalm. 82.6, 7. The life of man is but a
flower, of short continuance, and momentary, (Job 14.1, 2.) But the flower of
honor (commonly) budds long after him, and is blasted before him; certainly
parts with him at his grave, and returns to some other, perhaps his enemy.

4. This glittering Idol of honor is like the glaring Image of Beauty. It has
strong cords to draw a carnal heart, but weak threads to tie, and bind the
affection which it has drawn: how is the soul en^moured on those dazeling, but
false beams of honor not yet attained? how soon it languisheth, and loathes
what it has gotten, and enjoyed? It sparkles in our eyes, when we look on it
in distance; but no sooner is it worn, then soiled, and loses all the gloss,
and beauty. That great Emperor, and greater persecutor ( Diocletian) how
greedily did he hunt after the Imperial Robe, and Diadem? how eagerly followed
it? But when he had a while worn it, was soon weary, put it off, and hid his
head in a private dwelling.

5. All earthly honor is far inferior to that heavenly creature, which is the
principal part of man. The spirit of man framed after the likeness of his
Creat^ur, and again restored to that glorious image, infinitely transcendeth
the vain, and highest r^spects it can receive from man. Honor cannot ascend,
but descends: cannot be given by an Inferior to a Superior. When we are
precious in the sight of God (then, an^ never but then) we are truly
honourable^ Isa. 43.4.

6. Lastly, Honor is not only needless^ no way forwarding our happiness, (and
none so happy, or truly honorable, as who by men are most despised, witness
our most blessed Savior, Isa. 53.3.) but very dangerous, if not deadly,
stopping our way to the only true glory, and eternal blessedness, John 5.44.
and 12.43. Let me conclude this passage also with that Poetical Philosopher,

Boethius. Libr. 4. Metr. 2. Those earthly Gods you trembling view
Mounted on starry thrones,
Arrayed with Heaven (in spangled blue)
Guarded with armed drones,
With raging hearts, and lightning brows,
Storming with thundering mouths,
Could you unlace their vain attires,
And peep into their breast,
With chains, with gyves, with tortures, fires
Th 'Oppressors lie oppressed.
Closed in that show, and Heav'n-like shell
You Will find the kernel hell.
Distracting lusts with cruel twitches
Rack the di^joynted Ghost:
Hope backs the heart, and spurrs, and switches;
Wrath, anger ^ear, and ro^^:
Hate, Envy scourge with snaky wreath;
Griefs, pressing, squeese to death.
When then so many Tyrant Lords
Reign in one single breast;
How can it (bound with self-willed cords)
Do what it self thinks best?
He that rules men, serves lust, 's a thing,
Much greater slave, than King.
If then our Happiness is neither made, nor patcht up by Riches, Honors; how
much less by Pleasure?

CAP. V.
Bodily pleasure, earthly joy, and mirth have nothing to do with blessedness.

PLeasure is the Idol, and God of Epicures: like Childrens Babies, trickt,
(without) and trimmed with toys, and gauds, but within a rotten stick. It has
a double subject, either the body (where properly it is called pleasure, and
luxury) or the soul, where we term it joy, and mirth. Neither of both, if
carnal, and earthly, can possibly stand with the blessed estate of man, but are
rather unreconcileable adversaries to our blessedness. If we look well upon
them, and thoroughly eye them, and their attendants, we shall find that carnal
joy, and mirth dwell, live, and dye with grief. Even in laughter the heart is
sorrowful, and the end of that mirth is heaviness, Prove. 14.13. As we say of
swine There is a great cry, and little wool; much crackling of thorns, and
little heat, Eccles. 7.6. whosoever serves them, they bestow their livery upon
them, a fools coat, and cap: ( The heart of a fool is in the house of mirth,
Eccles. 7.4.) and will soon prefer them from the Hospital to Bedlam. I said of
laughter it is mad, Eccles. 2.2. And what is pleasure to the body, but an
itching worm, which when it is clawed breaks out into a scab? a vain tickling
of sense, till it end in an Hickup? It is common to a beast, and exists only in
that part of man, which is his beast, even flesh.

And their fruits (commonly) very pernicious. Carnal joy turns us out of Gods
house: ( Ier. 11.15.) ranks us amongst the most lewd, and wicked persons, whom
Gods spirit points out to us, marked with the De^ils brand; who rejoice to do
evil, and delight ^n the frowardness of the wicked, Prove. 2.14. ^leasure is to
our estates here a very pick^urse; a sly thief, that unwarily steals us unto
poverty, and misery. God has blasted ^t with his curse. He that loves
pleasure shall ^e a poor man, and he that loves Wine, and Oil, shall not be
rich, Prove. 21.17. It is a pal^ie to our bodies, unsinues them, and makes them
(as an unstringed Lute, or Voyal) fit ^or nothing. As we read of Hannibals
soldiers, that when they entered Capua, they were more then men, but dissolved
with the pleasures of that rich, and voluptuous City, they went out less than
women. To the soul it is a sweet poison; choakes it in the seed, and birth,
(Luke 8.14.) nourishes it to slaughter, Jam. 5.5. To the whole man it is a
per^umed grave: They that live in pleasure, are dead while they live, 1 Timothy
5.6. dead to God, dead to men, dead to themselves; the very soul dead in its
life, coffined, and buried in the body. How impossibly then can a voluptuous
man live happily, who is dead while he lives, and lives to an everlasting, and
ever-living death?

Lastly it is much more subject to all those defects, which before were
mentioned, that make it altogether unfit, and utterly impotent to make up our
happiness, or to help us i^ the pursuit of it. 1. It is sheer vanity, Eccles.
2.1^ nothing else but crackling of thorns under ^ pot, Eccles. 7.6. 2. It
satisfies not: witness tha^ Epicure, who proclaimed a reward to Inventers of
new pleasures. 3. It lasts not, is but for ^ moment ( Job 20.5.) and dies in
the very birth^ 4. It is not so alluring before, as loathes om^ after enjoying:
witness Amnon, 2 Samuel 13.15. 5. It is far beneath us, as being common with us
to beasts. And 6. needless and dangerous^ Woe to you that laugh now, Luke 6.25.
Thi^ Chapter let me conclude also with the same Philosophical Poet.

Boethius. Libr. 3. Metr. 7. All Pleasures ride with spurs: they goar the heart,
And drive it first to run, and then to smart.
Pleasures are Bees; Bees have their bag, and sting;
Those drops of sweet, these streams of torment bring.
The bag flies with the Be; the sting remains:
How flitting are our joys? how lasting pains?
He that in honied Hive of Pleasure dwells,
Soon dies to Heaven, lives to a thous^nd hells.
The happiness of man therefore stands not in outward things. They are all
heterogenies (of another nature) and cannot piece, or be united with us. They
are without us, and we without them happy. But there are other things which
close, and are within us. In our bodies Beauty, Strength: in our spirits
wisdom, morality. Do not these make us blessed? At least do they not concur as
necessary parts of our happiness? Certainly even these rather follow an happy
person, than constitute our happiness.

CAP. VI.
Blessedness is not in any thing corporal, or merely moral.

OUR Bodies are but the houses of our spirits, and houses of clay, Job 4.19. As
the house of a Snail, it is moved, and ^arried by the Inhabitant. And as those
^nail-shells are some black, and dusty, some ^littering in diverse colors, so
is it with these ^^ells of our spirits: Some the hand of our ^otter seems to
frame of finer earth, or at ^ast tinfoyls them with more lovely paint^^gs, some
formed of more course and dirty ^etal, or (being not leaded) have not that
^^oss, and glittering. As our houses some ^^e dawbed with plain lome, others
plaistered ^ith lime, and washed over.

Now as in our houses we look first to the materials, secondly to the form,
(the one giving strength, the other beauty to our buildings) so in the Body
strength, and beauty are the special endowments of it. Beauty is but the flower
of grass, (1 Pet. 1.24.) not all out so fair, full out as fading, blasted with
the wind, seared with the Sun, smitten with every worm: and (if it had no
outward enemy) rotting in the ripening, and ever slubbered in the using.
Sickness turn^ it into dust, death into dung, the one make^ it untoothsome, the
other loathsome. Favor (therefore) is deceitful, and beauty vai^ (Prove.
31.30.) nay often dangerous: A^ it has cords to draw a lusting affection, s^
has it snares to entangle us in these cords. It is a fire that may scorch
others, and consume our selves. How then should Beaut^ make happy, when many
thousands (a^ Absalom and his Sister Tamar) might have been much more happy, if
they had bee^ much less beautiful.

2. Secondly, What is there in bodil^ strength? (were it equal to Sampsons in
the latitude, and in the longitude to Calebs, Jos^^ 14.10, 11.) what can the
fullest dimensio^ of strength bring with them to make (...) happy? By strength
shall no man prevai^ 1 Samuel 2.9. The battle is not to the stron^ Eccles. 9.11.
It is not worth a smile, Ier. 9.23. An Ague unbends, and Age bends the
strongest back. It fills us with vain confidence, drives us to rash attempts,
fails us in the execution, and betrays us to destruction.

Nay if we travel further into this lesser world of man, and search into the
bowels of it, we shall find nothing in the Head, or Heart City, which will help
to build up our happiness. True indeed it is, Wisdom excels folly, as far as
light darkness, yet though the wise man's eyes be in his head, he cannot keep
off the event of fools; what happens to the fool happens to the wise, Eccles.
2.13, 14, 15. If it dwell with poverty, it is followed with scorn, Eccles.
9.16. It is ever married to pain; and sorrow the issue of the match, and grows
up with it, Eccles. 1.18. Some foolishness is wiser than it, and utterly
out-wits it, 1 Cor. 1.25. And as our natural wisdom most often perverts us, (
Isa. 47.10.) bladders, and swells us (often to bursting) Isa. 10.13. 1 Cor. 8.1.
so when it grows up in a carnal mind it turns foolishness (1 Cor. 3.19.) enmity
to God ( Romans 8.7.) and devilish, Iam. 3.15. We see it ordinarily that those
subtle heads which are ^utored in that Florentines universi^y, soon commence
Batcheler Machiavils, and Master Devils. And truly I think no wise man can
discern how that can merit the name of wisdom, which must necessarily first
proceed fool, before it can have the grace to go out wise, 1 Cor. 3.18.

But to help it a little, join with this natural wisdom moral honesty, and
stretch them both to the uttermost extent, yet will they still fall short, and
never reach to happiness. They are like that Scribe who answered discreetly; he
was not far from the Kingdom of God, Mark. 12.34. but stopping there was never
in it. Morality in those ethick Sages is like the rings and jewels of running
cheaters; brass but fairly gilded, fair stones, but counterfeit. They often
deceive, never enrich the Owner: precious to the view, but bring them to the
Touch, of no value. And as some Phidian statue exquisitely formed may seem to
live, breath, etc. yet is but a stone; so lifeless is all their morality: for
he that has the Son, has life, and he that has not the Son, has not life, 1 John 5.12. If some old Image gnawn with Rats, be trickt up again, with a new
dress, and garnished with choice colors, yet are colors indeed dead as the
rotten stock. Such were those old heathen Philosophers, Images of Virtue, or
rather (as the Apostle speaks of Sacrifices) shadows of good things, Heb. 10.1.
They were as all other, in nature dead in sins, and trespasses, Ephesians. 2.5. And
how shall the hand be living, when the heart is dead? the fruit good, when the
Tree is evil? The best of them professing themselves wise, became fools, Romans
1.22. Neither the wisdom of Socrates, the justice of Aristides, could in this
life secure them from earthly calamities, death, banishment, etc. How should it
help them in that other, with that Judge, where the Saints and their
righteousness (not washed in the blood of the Lamb, Rev. 7.14.) are all as an
unclean thing, and as filt^y rags, Isa. 64.6. As one speaks, all their fair
shows were ( splendida peccata) glistering ^ins: And truly sin glistering is no
less filthy, but more dangerous: brass, (as all other) but better polished. All
the former discourse let me shut up with another Poem of that Platonic
Philosop^er.

Bo^tius, Libr. 3. Metr. 8. When Ignorance leads fools (both blind) they stray.
How should they hitt, or miss their and, or way?
We seek not grapes on thorns^ on thistles figgs:
Who gathers pearls from Vines, or gold from twiggs^
He that would feast his guests with Lenten dishes,
Draggs not dry Mountains, nor thin Aye^ fishes.
He that with Ven'son would his palate please,
Swims not his Hounds in Brooks, or hunts the Sea^.
Tethis black Closets (hid with dark deep floods)
Men search, know, rifle, ransack all her goods.
Where brightest Pearls she hoords in Oyster cells,
Where Coral grafts, where stores her purple shells:
They know her Markets, Fairs, where, when to buy
Each kind of Fish; where Crabs, where Lobsters lie;
But where that good, which makes man blessed, lies,
They have no ears to hear, to see, no eyes.
On earth ^ools hunt, which far transcends the poles:
They tear, dig, delve, (oh are they men, or moles?)
What curse deserve such Bedlams? blind^old wretches
Tired let them still pursue their honors, riches,
And pressed with f^lse goods, give them eyes to view
The dross of false, the glory o^ the true.
If then in none of these,

CAP. VII.
Where lies the Portion of Man?

THE Portion, or Inheritance of man, which makes him blessed, lies not so low
as the highest creature. His Treasure is not buried in earth, but bagg'd up in
Heaven, Luke 12.33. Heaven indeed is his Storehouse, but not his Portion. He
that is infinitely higher than the Heavens, ( Heb. 7.26.) he whom the Heaven of
Heavens cannot contain, (2 Chronicles. 6.18.) he, and he alone is man's Inheritance.
Man is the great Favorite of Heaven, and of the King of Heaven: and though he
were made a little lower than the Angels, yet his Lord most highly advanced
him, set the Crown upon his head, crowned him with glory, and honor (Psalm.
8.5, 6.) and gave him dominion over the works of his hands. The gift was very
great, but not proportionable to the love, or person, of the Giver. Therefore
our gracious Lord, after he had bestowed all his creatures upon us to be our
servants, gave us himself to be our Lord: (a gift fully, and only answerable to
his love) Some service is more honorable than some command: A greater dignity
to serve the King, than to command sheep. Whosoever has tasted how good this
Lord is, (Psalm. 34.8.) counts all things dung, and loss in comparison of his
service, Phil. 3.8. They prefer his livery, and the meanest place in his house
before their Princely Robes, or any earthly honor? Psalm. 84.10. Even in our
Creation, when he gave himself to Adam, to be his Lord, he took Adam unto
himself to be his Son, Luke 3.38. therefore formed him after his own Image,
Genesis 1.26. And to what higher dignity can the most vast ambition of the
Creature aspire, than to be like his Creator, his Son, and Heir?

Now that our gracious Lord offers himself to be our Portion, himself
frequently testifies. He often takes upon himself this title, the Portion of
his people, Ier. 10.16. and 51.19. their exceeding great Reward, Genesis 15.1. And
as frequently his people with glad hearts acknowledge, The Lord is the Portion
of my inheritance; The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places, Psalm. 16.5,
6. I have a goodly heritage. Thou art my ^ortion, oh Lord, Psalm. 119.57. Even
in the deeps of bitter affliction (when they are drunken with Wormwood) this
upholds, and strongly props them up. The Lord is my Portion, says my Soul,
Lam. 3.15, 24. A portion so full, and sa^isfying, that (even here) the Saints
utter^y reject all things in earth, or Heaven as any way accessory, or needful
to make up any part of their happiness. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and
there is none in earth that I desire besides thee. My heart, and my flesh
fails, but God is the strength o^ my heart, and my Portion for ever, Psalm.
75.25, 26.

In this Portion lies all the the blessedness of man: which who can more fully
assure us, than those blessed Saints, who (filled with his most blessed Spirit)
out of their experience, and overflowing joy pour out abundantly such
expressions? Blessed is the man whom thou chusest oh Lord, and causest him to
approach unto thee, that he may dwell in thy house: we shall be satisfied with
the goodness of thy house even of thine holy Temple, Psalm. 65.4. Blessed are
they that dwell in thy house; they will ever be praising thee, Psalm. 84.4. He
is only blessed, and all Nations blessed in him only, Psalm. 72.17. Nay himself
(our Blessedness) teaches us. Blessed is the man that hearet^ me, watching
daily at my gates, and waiting at the posts of my doors; for who so finds me,
finds life, Prove. 8.34, 35.

Saints sometime, when either they are pressed down with afflictions, or newly
lifted up from their earthly burdens, are ready to think, and say, Happy are
the people who a^^ in such a case, (that is) whose garners a^^full, whose
sheep, grounds fruitful, no lead^ing into captivity, no complaining, etc. bu^
they soon reclaim themselves, and upon better thoughts recant: yea, happy is
the people who have the Lord for their God, Psal^ 144.15.

This will be yet much more clearly manifested, if we look upon God, first as
our ful^ defense, Secondly, as our full reward. Thu^ he Covenants to be unto
us, Genesis 15.1. Psal^ 84.11. For the first, God is a full, and entire defense to
all those who are under hi^ protection. They have indeed very many very strong,
and subtle, (yet more malici^ous) enemies; some without, some within^ but the
Lord ( their Shield) bears off from them all their force, frustrateth all
their spite, and turns all their mischief to the furtherance of his people,
and confusion o^ their enemies. Not an hair of them shall pe^rish, Luke 21.17,
18. I will strengthen thee yea I will help thee, yea I will uphold thee wit^ my
right hand. Behold they that were incense^ against thee shall be ashamed, they
shall be as no^thing: As many as strive with thee shall perish^ Isa. 41.10, 11.
No weapon that is forme^ against thee shall prosper; and every tongue tha^
rises against thee in judgment, thou shall con^emn. This is the heritage of
the Servants of ^he Lord; and their righteousness is of me says ^he Lord, Isa.
54.17. See it in particulars^

All Adversaries exercise a double enmity, ^ither hostile in assaulting, or
civil in ac^using. Principalities, and Powers, wrestle against us in a
dangerous conflict, armed with ^ery darts, and therefore we are charged with an
whole armor of God, Ephesians. 6.11, ^2, 16. 2. They are importunate Accu^ers,
Rev. 12.9, 10. Even when God himself ^ad not only justified, but so highly
commended his servant Job, that shameless Spirit was not ashamed to tax him for
an Hypocrite that served for hire, not love, Job 1.8, 9, 10. 2. The World is an
unreconcileable enemy, warring not only within us (by earthly lusts) Iam. 4.1.
but without, persecuting, oppressing, and consuming, Psalm. 119.61, 87, 157,
161. 2. Accusing also, and pleading against us by contradiction, slandering,
mocking, etc. Psalm. 119.23, 51, 69. Lastly, the Flesh warreth against our
souls, (1 Pet. 2.11. Romans 7.23.) and accuses ( Romans 2.15.) Against all their
assaults, all their weapons, and accusations, the Lord is our full protection.

In war there is a twofold defense, 1. Natural, in situation, as impassable
Rocks, Mountains, Rivers, Coverts, or Shelters. 2. Artificial, made by hand;
and some more distant, walls, towers, fortresses; and some nearer, shields, and
other armours. The Lord is all these unto his servants, 1. Moun^tains round
about them, ( Psalm. 125.1, 2.^ 2. The only Rock (2 Samuel 22.32.) 3. Broa^
rivers, where no ship can pass, (Isa 33.21.) 4. A Covert, or hiding place, (
Psalm. 32.7 and 119.114.) 5. A Wall, and that of fire^ ( Zech. 2.5.) 6. A Tower,
( Prove. 18.10.^ 7. A Fortress, ( Psalm. 18.2.) 8. A Shield^ (Prove. 30.5.) a
compassing shield, ( Psal^ 5.12.) like the Cherubims flaming sword, turning
every way for our protection. 9. Our Advocate (1 Ioh. 2.1.) to whom all the
Saints confidently repair upon all occasions to plead their cause, ( Psalm.
35.1. and 119.124.) 10. Neither is he only our defensive, but offensive armor
also, both Shield, and Sword, Deuteronomy. 33.29. He bears down our foes, and plagues
them that hate us, Psa. 89.23. In a word he is our Foreward, he our Rereward,
(Isa. 52.12.) compassing, and enclosing us with his Almighty arms, as with two
invincible Armies.

This is his promise, and the deed fully answers it. Look upon it in some
instances. The Lord Covenants with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob to be their
shield. They were few, Pilgrims in strange, and Heathen Coun^reys. What but
this Almighty Shield could ^ave given them protection? when it was in ^^e power
of Labans hand to have hurt Jacob, ^od held his hands, and lips also, Genesis
31.29. ^hen he was not a little (nor without cause) ^ighted, the Lord made his
enemies more ^fraid of him, than he of his enemies, Genesis ^5.5. when he was to
pass by Esau's Coun^^ey, God gave him a royal convoy, two ^^mies of Angels to
guard him, ( Genesis 32.1, 2.) ^elted into tears the bloody heart of his ^alicious
Brother, Genesis 33.4. In brief when ^^ey were a few, a very few in number, and
^rangers, when they went from one Nation to ^^other People, he suffered no man
to do them ^rong, yea he repro^ed Kings for their sakes, ^sal. 105.12, 13, 14.
David was sometime (...) the paws of Bears, sometime in the jaws ^f Lions,
encounters Goliath, but is still safe under Gods hand, (1 Samuel 17.) Saul pursues
^im, hunts him (1 Samuel 26.18, 20.) watches ^im at his house, (1 Samuel 19.11.)
com^asseth him about, (1 Samuel 23.26.) sur^rises him in a Cave, (1 Samuel 24.3.)
but ^ill he is safe under Gods wings. The whole ^ountrey opposes one poor
Prophet: Kings, ^^inces, Priests, People, all fight against him, ^ut all cannot
prevail: and what the reason? ^am with thee says the Lord to deliver thee,
^er. 1.18, 19. They smite him, put him in the stocks, (Jer. 20.) they question
him for his lise, ( Ier. 26.) imprison him, ( Ier. 32. search for him to kill
him, ( Ier. 36.) fli^^ him down into a miery, sinking, and stinking Dungeon, (
Ier. 38.) but the Lord is wit^ him in the stocks, in prison, in the dungeon his
enemies are destroyed, and he delivered. Saints may be stoned, shipwrackt
often, i^ stripes above measure, in prisons frequent; (...) death often, every
where in perils, and yet saf^ joyful, happy, 2 Cor. 11.23, etc. They man be as
safe in a Lions Den, as in a Palac^ Dan. 6. as cheerful in a burning Furnac^ as
in a Bed, Dan. 3. The truth is, we man have many changes, but he changes not,
an^ therefore we are not consumed, Mal. 3.6.

And because where so many, and so craf^^ Adversaries walk about to devour, (1
Pe^^ 5.8.) and prying into all advantages wa^^ upon all occasions to destroy
us, we have need of a good watch to secure us; the Lord himself sets the watch,
( Psalm. 141.3^. nay vouchsafes (in his own person) wh^ never slumbers, nor
sleeps, to watch an^ ward about us, ( Psalm. 121.3, 4.) and (...) countermining
all their underminings, blow^ up all their projects, impregnably fences ou^
hearts, and keeps them in his peace which passes understanding, Phil. 4.6, 7.

Object. But is this true? with our eye^ we see them (in this World) subject
not only to much evil, but often to death it self. Answ. 1. Know assuredly the
promise is infallible, and general: No evil shall befall thee, Psalm. 91.10, All
shall work together for good, Romans 8.28. 2. Many things are called, and counted
evil by carnal men, nay by Saints in their mistaking weakness, which are good.
Christ's departure in the flesh seemed a great misery to the Apostles, but they
were deceived, John 16.6, 7. Even all Saints after their blubberd eyes are
cleared, can see good in affliction, and Gods faithfulness in his
chastisements, where they feared his wrath, and felt his displeasure, Psalm.
119.71, 75. 3. Death is no evil where God has given Christ to be our Life.
Death is ours, (1 Cor. 3.22.) the gate to eternal rest, a sleep in the bosom
of Christ, 1 These. 4.14. desired by Saints in a godly manner, (2 Cor. 5.2, 4.
Phil. 1.23.) and envied us by wicked enemies, Numb. 23.10.

Object. 2. Nay they are not so fenced by their Shield, but that often they
receive grievous wounds of spirit, so that they roar for very disquietness of
heart, and are led captive by enemies, Psalm. 38.5, 8. Romans 7.23. Answ. 1. There
are two sorts of wounds: some of friends, some of enemies; some killing, some
healing. A Surgeon will wound, and lanch ^ sore; nay a Mother. These wounds are
as that of Jason Pher^eus, whose enemy intended to kill, but cured him. 2. The
Lord our heavenly Physician even by these wounds draineth our surrounding
corruptions, and purges, our deadly, and hellish filthines^. Peter's fall
broke the heart o^ his self-conceit, and the stiff neck of his pride, but he
lost not one Limb of the new man. Therefore Christ called it Winnowing, or
sifting of Wheat, Luke 22.31. The Corn falls on the Floar, but is cleansed from
the chaff, and dross, and so made fit for use. And it is much to be observed
that none have been more cleansed, than they who have most sinned. 4. This
Captivity is but a^ Iabins oppression of Israel; It forces to cry, who shall
deliver me? (Compare Judge. 4.3. with Romans 7.24.) this cry affects the soul of
our Savior, (grieved for the misery of his Israel Judge. 10.16.) so God arises,
scatters our enemies, and we are more than Conquerours in him that loved us,
Romans 8.37.

2. Secondly, As he is a full defense so is he an exceeding great reward;
exceeding indeed not only the possibility of our deserving, but the uttermost
reach of any created understanding. For as his love is incomprehensible, Ephesians.
3.19. so his greatness unsearchable, Psalm. 145.3. He is only good, Matthew. 9.17.
abundant in goodness, Exodus 34.6. For as he is the only Fountain distilling all
good into all Creatures: so is he an overflowing Ocean pouring out to men (not
in drops but) streams his Rivers of living pleasures, and goodness. See Psalm.
36.8, 9. They are abundantly satisfied with the fatness of his house, he makes
them drink of the Rivers of his pleasures: for with him is the Fountain of
life, and in his light we shall see light. Hence it is that his Servants wrapped,
and even swallowed up in this torrent with admiration, and exclamation
testify. Oh how great ( beyond expression, or comprehension) is thy goodness
to them that fear thee, which thou have wrought for them that trust in ^hee,
before the Sons of men? Psalm. 31.19. Where can we turn our selves but we shall
hear ^very Creature ready to join in consort with ^he Saints, and to sing? Thou
crownest the year ^ith goodness, and thy steps drop fatness: they ^rop upon the
pastures of the Wilderness, and ^he little hills rejoice on every side. The
^astures are clothed with flocks, the Valleys ^re covered with Corn, they
shout for joy, ^hey also sing, Psalm. 65.11, 12, 13. How ^^numerable are the
Creatures in the ^eaven, Air, Earth, Water? and every one ^f them proclaim his
goodness, being in their Creation Very Good? Genesis 1.28.) and daily by his good
Providence, feasted, and filled with good? Psalm. 104.28. It is not in vain that
Gods Spirit by the Psalmist compares our defense in God to a Shield, our reward
to the Sun, Psalm. 84.11. A Shield saves us by its own gashes; we cannot be
wounded till our shield be pierced. He is afflicted in our affliction, Isa.
63.9. when men tear the faithful (as Psalm. 35.15.) they scratch his eyes, Zech.
2.8. He is persecuted in his Members, Act. 9.4. All the wrongs all the stripes,
scoffs, derisions, abuses fastened upon his people lite upon him. For he is the
shield that bears off all. The Sun is the fountain of light: and not the Air
only, and every sublunary creature, but even those Luminaries of Heaven have no
other Tapers, but what they kindle at his fire. How freely, and plentifully
does that great Light shed his beams not only through the skies, and air, but
down to the earth, and every earthly Creature; It gilds every weed, and
dunghill: and though it lends so bountifully to all, yet it is self still as
full as ever. Such a reward is our Lord unto us. Seeing the^ he is first
infinitely great and all Nations nothing before him, and to him less than
nothing, (Isa. 40.17.) and (secondly) infinitely, and incomprehensibly good,
abundantly surrounding the most vast desires in his goodness, commanding us to
open our mouths wide, that is, to enlarge our hearts in thirsting, our mouths
in asking, and promises to fill them, ( Psalm. 81.10.) certainly they can want
nothing, ^o whom he is all things. And this is it which draws out the hearts of
his servants to all thankful acknowledgement: The Lord is my Shepherd, I
shall not want: Surely mercy, and goodness shall follow me all days of my
life, and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever, Psalm. 23. It is
altogether impossible for any Creature to think that God can be any such thing,
which can possibly be bettered, or excelled by any thing, as being a good
without limits, which the more we know, and enjoy, the more we esteem and
affect: It cannot therefore be denied that the highest, and only happiness of
man consists in the getting, and enjoying him. Hearken then to that sweet
invitation of that so often before mentioned Philosopher, and Poet.

Boethius. Libr. 3. Metr. 10. Come, hither come (poor Captives) you whose minds
^ith dust (cast in your eyes) Lust cheating blinds,
and to base earth with willing ^etters binds:
Come weary souls, here re^t, here quiet bide,
Come, anchor, here is your Port, here safely ride:
Your guilt in this close Sanctuary hide.
Nor Golden Tagus, nor bright Hemus streams,
Nor India's self, whose womb Sols hotter beams
Fill with rich seed, red, white, green glittering gems,
No sparkling Pearls your quenched snuff can tine:
The more ye cleave to their deceit^ul shine,
The more y' are buried in their Dungeon mine.
Their glistering rays, which kindle fond desire,
Are earthly, and beget but ^atuous fire;
Shine but in night: they rise, and set in mire.
But this Eternal Sun (whose splendor bright
Rules, quickens all, gives you both life, and light)
The eye that wistly views with fixed sight,
Will swear the Stars, the Moon, the Sun it self is night.
But you will say, How shall we possibly meet? God is in Heaven we on earth,
Eccles. 5.2. he of purer eyes than to behold evil, tha^ cannot look upon
iniquity (Hab. 1.13.) We all an unclean thing, and our righteousness a filthy
rag, Isa. 64.6. He higher than the Heavens, Heb. 7.26. we as low as Hell.
Observe therefore,

CAP. VIII.
How we attain this Portion.

SUch is the high favor which we (poor dust) have found in the eyes of our
glorious Creator, that he has not only set us out our Portion in himself, but
tied himself to us, and us to himself in the sure bond of an everlasting
Covenant, in which he has passed himself to us, and purchased us to himself: he
ours, (as before) and we his Portion, Deuteronomy. 32.9. Zech. 2.12. He our King,
(Hos. 13.10.) we his Kingdom: (Exodus 19.5, 6.) He to us a Father, (2 Cor.
6.18.) in love, and providence, (Hos. 14.4. Matthew. 6.26.) we to him Children,
in love, and obedience, Deuteronomy. 10.12. Ier. 7.28.

This his Covenant he has frequently en^grossed for us (that we might have it
ever in our eyes) not only in his word ( Genesis 17.7. Ier. 31.31, etc.) but in
our hearts also, Ier. 31.33. As Jonathan, because he delighted in David (1 Samuel
19.2.) and loved him as his own Soul, regarded not the disparity of their
condition, but divested himself of his Princely robes, to adorn his servant,
and having given, and tied his heart to him before, now gives his hand, and
binds himself to him in a sure knot of a friendly Covenant, (1 Samuel 18.1, 2,
3.) so our most gracious Lord, having his delights with the Sons of men (Prove.
8.31.) loving us beyond knowledge, (Ephesians. 3.19.) so far descended (in the
depth of his love) from the height of his Majesty, that he even bound himself
to the clay of his hands. Perhaps the learned Heathen might have some dimm
sight of this great Myst^rie, and veiled it under the Fable of P^gmalion; who
having framed a curious statue in the form of a Woman, fell into love with it,
and when he had gotten it enlivened married it. Love even desires union^ and
communion with the beloved. This incomprehensible goodness of God, and great
Mystery of Godliness will be best opened unto us by way of Question, and
Answer. Quest. 1. Has God never made more Covenants with man than one? Answ.
God has made diverse Covenants; (as Genesis 9.9, etc.) but specially two, the Old,
and New, (Jer. 31.31.) or the first, and second Covenant, (Heb. 8.7.) Quest. 2.
With whom did God make these Covenants? Answ. With the two Adams: the first
with the first Adam, and his seed: the second with the second Adam, and his
seed: the first made with a servant, and therefore a Covenant of works, in this
tenure, Do this and live, (Gal. 3.12.) The second made with the Son, and
therefore a Covenant of Grace, wherein God gives what he asks, and works,
what he commands: bids us, Live, and so gives us life, ( Ezekiel. 16.6.)
commands his Covenant, (Psalm. 111.9.) and so writes it in our hearts, Jer.
31.33. Thus our new Covenant is made first, and immediately with Christ our
Redeemer, and mediately with us through him our Mediator, See Isa. 59.20, 21.
Gal. 3.16. Quest. 3. Was then that first Covenant broken? Answ. By the first
Adam it was utterly broken, ( Genesis 3.) and so by all mankind, ( Ier. 31.32.)
And hence with the root dyed all the branches, ( Romans 5.12.) And certainly
never can we sufficiently admire, or bless that miracle of Gods mercy, in
which, after that by our treacherous revolture, and rebellion, we had broken
Covenant, and were utterly fallen into eternal death, and misery, he has taken
advantage (by our breach of Covenant) to make a better Covenant with us, and by
our sin, and rebellion to glorify his grace, in doing us more good than ever:
that seeing we so waveringly fell in the first, we might invincibly stand in
the second Adam; and having lost our selves, and all our blessedness in the
one, we might regain, and eternally re^ain i^ in the other.

And hence the first is called the figure of the second Adam, (Romans 5.14.)
because as the first was the Head, and Root of our first Covenant, in whom we
were all blessed if he stood, and cursed if he fell: so the second is the Head
of our second Covenant, with whom (because he cannot dye) our li^e is hid up in
God, (Col. 3.3.) in whose eternal blessedness we are everlastingly blessed.

Quest. 4. What is our new Covenant? and the matter of it? Answ. In a word, as
Christ Jesus is the Head, so is he also the matter of our Covenant. For
whatsoever God bestows on us is in Christ, and we receive it in him; and
whatsoever he requires of us, Christ does it in us, and we perform it in him:
so he all in all, Col. 3.11. Hence he is often called our Covenant, Isa. 42.6.
and 49.8. Observe it in some particulars: 1. He promises to save us from all
our enemies, (Luke 1.74.) and gives Christ to be our Salvation, Act. 13.47. He
Covenants to make us blessed, and gives him to be what he promises to give,
Genesis 22.18. 2. He sees that we are filthy, ( Psalm. 14.3.) and therefore demands
of us that we wash, ( Ier. 4.14.) and be pure as he is pure, (Levit. 11.45.) He
knows how unable we are to do it: For though we wash us with nitre, and take
much soap, yet our iniquity is marked before him, (Jer. 2.22.) As well can the
Ethiopian change his skin, or the Leopard his spots, (Jer. 13.23.) Himself
therefore undertakes it, and covenants to wash and cleanse us from all our
filthiness, Ezekiel. 36.25. Hence he opens a ^ountain to us (even in the side of
the Lord Jesus) for sin and for uncleanness, (Zech. 13.1.) gives us Christ, and
Christ washes us in his blood, Rev. 1.5. 3. He knows our foolishness. My people
are foolish, sottish children, (Jer. 4.22. Tit. 3.3.) that we are beasts, and
brutish in our knowledge, (Jer. 10.14.) And his infinite Wisdom can take no
pleasure in fools, (Eccles. 5.4.) commands us therefore to be wise, (Psalm.
2.10.) and often exhorts us to it. O^ that they were wise, (Deuteronomy. 32.29. Again,
Ye fools! when will ye be wise? (Psalm. 94.10.) but knows it is out of our
reach, ( Wisdom is too high for a fool, Prove. 24.7.) Himself therefore gives it
liberally, and upbraids not (Jam. 1.5.) gives Christ ( his wisdom, 1 Cor.
1.24.) to be our Wisdom, (1 Cor. 1.30.) 4. The Lord knows we are Captives of
Satan, taken by him at his will, (2 Timothy ^.26.) servants, or slaves to diverse
lust^, (Tit. 3.3.) commands us to loose our ^elves from our bonds ( Isa. 52.2.)
to deliver our selves, (Zech. 2.7.) knows we can never be free till the Son
makes us free, (Joh. 8.36.) Himself therefore proffers to be our Redeemer,
(Isa. 41.14.) and gives the Lord Jesus to be our Redemption, (1 Cor. 1.30.) In
a word; we are dead, and he our life; we hunger-starved, and he our food, (Joh.
6.35.) we naked, and poor, he our clothing, and riches ( Rev. 3.17, 18. Gal.
3.27.) we blind, and even darkness, (Ephesians. 5.8.) he our light, (Joh. 8.12.) we
excluded from the Kingdom of Heaven, he the Door to enter us, ( Ioh. 10.9.) we
straying, lost sheep^ he our way, (Joh. 14.6.) and Shepherd to conduct us, (1
Pet. 2.25.) we dull, he the Quickening Spirit, (1 Cor. 15.45.) we weak, and can
do nothing, ( Ioh. 15.5.) he our strength, through whom we can do all things^
(Phil. 4.13.) we altogether empty, no good thing in our flesh, (Romans 7.18.) he
our fountain and fullness of grace, Joh. 1.16.

Quest. 5. What special benefit do we receive by him, being now made the Head,
and matter of our Covenant? Answ. Infinite, and specially that fullness (even
now) in him which we cannot yet have in our selves, and that perfection whereby
our weak persons, and failing actions are accepted in him^ Thus the
righteousness of the Law is fulfille^ in us, (though not yet by us) Romans 8.3,
4^ for he is the end, or perfection ((...)) of the law for righteousness unto
every believer, Romans 10.4. we are in him unblameable, in him accepted, Ephesians.
1.4, 6. To which end he is made sin for us, (who knew no sin) that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21.

Secondly we receive in him a sure, and immovable estate: a Kingdom which
cannot be moved, Heb. 12.28. a life, that cannot dye: for being grafted in him,
we cannot ^ut live: because he lives, we shall live also, Joh. 14.19. He dies
no more, death has no more dominion over him: and ((...)) In the same manner
are we dead unto sin, but alive unto God in Jesus Christ our Lord, Romans 6.9,
11. And as grafts which are implanted ^n any stock, receive continual sap from
^he root, and by it live, and grow, and as ^hey increase in bulk, increase also
in the nourishment, which is supplied continually unto them through their
stock, till they come to their fullness; so the branches of this ^rue Vine make
increase, (Ephesians. 4.16.) hav^ng nourishment ministered, they increase with ^he
increasing of God, (Col. 2.19.) till we ^ome to a perfect man, to the measure
of the ^ulness of the stature of Christ, Ephesians. 4.13.

This is that great Prerogative of the second Covenant, made with the second
Adam, in which the Saints rejoice, triumph, and sing. Who shall separate? etc.
Romans 8.35. It was granted to Adam ( says August. de Correp. and great. c. 11.)
that he might persevere if he would, but not that he would what he might; but
to us, who are grafted into Christ, both tha^ we may, and will persevere. And
in the next Chapter. There is now given to the Saints not only such help as was
given unto Adam, but such as that perseverance it self is given them: not only
that without this gift they could not persevere, but also that by this gift
they cannot but persevere.

This is that unspeakable comfort to our drooping souls, and so strong a prop
to our weak faith, that being grounded on this Rock we cannot be overthrown.
Therefore that holy Father writing upon those words of the 88 Psalm, I will
build up thy Throne to all Generations, sets up this Trophy, and breaks out
into this Triumph: Christ (says he) sits in us, reigns in us, and shall
reign eternally in his Saints. This has God promised, if that be not
sufficient, this has God sworn. Because therefore the promise i^ sure, not
according to our merits, but hi^ mercies, we must not Preach that with fear,
which we must not think of with doubt.

What an Heaven of joy, and consolation flows from this blessed estate? we
indeed in nature are bent to backsliding, (Hos. 11.7.) and therefore he
undertakes to heal our backslidings, (Jer. 3.22. Hos. 14.4.) In us there is an
evil heart of unbelief ready to depart from the living God, (Heb. 3.12.)
therefore he Covenants to hold our hearts by his fear, that we shall not depart
from him (Jer. 32.40.) we are gadding, and changing our ways, Jer. 2.36. but
he changes not, and therefore we are not consumed, Mal. 3.6. It is a special
part of his Royal style, Keeping Covenant, (Neh. 1.5. Dan. 9.4. Psalm. 111.5.)
The Covenant consists of Promises and Duties: but those duties promised, for
whatsoever Duty God demands of us, he promises to give, and whatsoever he
promises, he ^urely, and fully performs, and exhibiteth in Christ; so
works all in us, and for us, ( Isa. 26.12.) much more perfectly, and
acceptably than we can.

Object. But if Christ be given us, as our Fountain, and we replenished from
his fullness, how then are we so empty, when he so full, and overflowing? how
are we full of nothing but wants, when he so abundantly replenished with an
unexhausted plenty? Answ. 1. There are some nourishing, some starving wants:
want of meat, without sense of want: pines the body: wants breeding hunger
drive to food, and food yields strength, and growth; were our wants without
feeling, we could not hunger for the Lord Jesus, and his righteousness. (...)
we are sensible of them, and therefore hunger, and thirst for Christ; we are
blessed, and shall certainly be satisfied, Matthew. 5.6^ when therefore we find
thirst and hunger^ why should we fear to repair with all assurance to this full
Fountain? What Well denies us water? how freely does light lend, and give
light? He that is the Sun of Righteousness, and Fountain of living Waters
invites thee to come, and when thou come, gives freely, Rev. 22.17. He draws
thee to himself, ( Ioh. 12.32.) pours out his Spirit unto thee, (Prove. 1.23.)
satiates the weary soul, ( Ier. 31.25.) and will surely make it to flow with
Rivers of living water, Joh. 7.38. This passage also may we conclude with that
excellent Poet.

Boethius. Libr. 3. Metr. 12. Thrice happy soul, that turns his Sphere of sight
To that great Sun, and Fount of goodness bright;
Thence fills his waining Orb with true, eternal light.
Happy! who loosing his clogged feet, and hands
From pressing earths, and hells oppressing bands,
Mounts, soaring up to Heaven, and at that haven lands.
Once Orpheus plaining at his Spouses bier,
Gave Rocks a weeping eye, and listening ear;
Brooks staid their hasty stream; woods left their roots to hear.
But when no Muse his wounded heart could plaster,
Songs fanned his fires, and flames brake out the faster,
His verses pleasing all, but easing not their Master,
Weary of life, to hell he desperate flings,
There fits his sweetest voice to sweeter strings,
And into pity Lords of Shades, and darkness sings.
There what his Mothers spring, there what his eyes,
(Griefs double fountain) what (which both out-vies)
Lost-longing love affords, he to stern Ghosts applies.
Hells bauling Dog pricks up his thrice two ears,
To houl, to bark, to snarl, to whine he fears:
Haggs still their hissing snakes; and Furies melt in tears.
Then first Ixion, and his wheel take rest;
Tantale neglects his taste, his ear to feast;
The Vulture, full of verse, scorns Titius loathed breast.
Di^ yields, and with this law restores his Love,
Till hell be left, his sight back must not move.
Who gives Love laws? alas^ Loves only law is love.
Now past black Stix, near to the verge of Skies,
Forced by desire, turning his longing eyes,
Euridice (at once) he saw, he lo^^, he dies.
This Fable looks to thee, who tired with night
Desir'st to draw thy soul to life, and light
On that Eternal Sun set, ^asten, fix thy sight.
If you turn back on hellish Shades to pore,
Thou ever losest what thou wan'st before:
Thy soul more barred from Heaven, in hell implunged more.
Seeing then this Covenant is all our salvation and desire, (2 Samuel ^3.5.) in
the next place Observe,

CAP. IX.
What is required of us to be entered into this Covenant.

ALL that our gracious God demands of us, is only to Seek him^ Seek the Lord,
and his strength, seek his face continually, 1 Chronicles. 16.11. Seek the Lord
while he may by found, Isa. 55.6. Naturally in this ^abour we are notorious
sluggards; ready to project vain, and imaginary dangers: There is a Lion in the
way; and when Gods gracious hand is stretched forth, reaching out his Covenant
to us, we hide our hand in our bosom, and will not draw it out to receive his
of^er: when he puts, and even thrus^s thi^ Bread of Heaven into our hand, it
griev^ ^s ^o bring it again unto our mouth, Prove. 26.^3, 15. Therefore our Lord
(who desires ^ot our death, Ezekiel. 18.32.) presses hard ^his duty upon us: Seek
the Lord, and ye shall liv^: Se^k me, and ye shall live: Seek ^im that makes
the seven stars, and Orion, that turns the shadow of death into the morn^ng,
and makes the day dark with night, ^mos 5.4, 6, 8. And because this Wisdom is
the principal thing, (Prove. 4.7.) therefore he commands us that it should be
the first of our thoughts, and ways: Seek first the Kingdom of God, and his
righteousness, Matthew. 6.33. This is his way, and we must walk in it. So do his
Saints: With wy whole heart have I sought thee, Oh let me not wander from thy
Commandments, Psalm. 119.10.

Conscious of their starting nature they enter into Covenant, and bind
themselves with an Oath, and penalty of death to seek the Lord with their whole
desire, 2 Chronicles. 15^12, 13, 14, 15. Even half servants, and such who have
nothing to show of his Service but a Coat, and Livery, and that so worn, torn,
and threadbare, that men may see their nakedness through it, even these
confess (sometime) the necessity of it, and in their manner set themselves to
this duty, and when they do, (oh mercy!) they lose not all their labor. Those
hypocrites, whose hearts were not upright with him, but flattered him with
their tongue, yet in their extremity sought him, and enquired early after God:
so he forbore them, and destroyed them not, Psalm. 78^34, 36, 37, 38. Iehoash in
the life of Jehojadah, (2 King. 12.2.) and Uzziah in the time of Zechariah
(mere temporisers, 2 Chronicles. 26.5.) sought the Lord and prospered.

And truly there is an absolute necessity which will enfor^e, and drive us to
this search with all diligence. For there are two things which compel the most
slothful heart to labor with all industry. 1. The great need of a thing, when
he cannot subsist without it. 2. The extreme want, when he has nothing of it.
Both here meet, and that in the highest degree. First, We are, in our nature,
wholly without him. Without Christ, without God in the world, strangers to the
Covenant of Promise, (and therefore) without hope, Ephesians. 2.12. we have utterly
lost him. As the Gileadites dealt with Iepthah, (Judge. 11.2.) we have driven
him from us, thrust him out of our doors, shut our gates upon him, and even
defied him: as they (Job 21.14.) Depart from us; or those in the Gosp^l, We
will not have this man reign over us, Luke 19.14. we have compelled him by our
sins to forsake us, and to separate from us, Isa. 59.2. We have broken him with
our whorish hearts in departing from him, Ezekiel. 6.9. and so forced him to leave
us, Isa. 2.6. 2. Our need of him is palpable. We can have nothing, do nothing,
be nothing without him; for, In him we live, move, and have our being, Act.
17.28. Our wants are innumerable, and he the only Fountain that supplies them:
Our enemies also numberless, strong, subtle, malicious, and he our only Shield
that defends us. Our weakness notorious: Of no strength, Romans 5.6. All our
strength, hope, comfort lies only in him. Get him therefore we must, or perish;
and seek him we must, or never get him. But wherein consists this seeking of
God? In all seeking. 1. The heart seeks in the desires, and longings of it. 2.
That sets it self, and the whole man on work constantly, and diligently to use
all means whereby we may attain what we may desire, and seek. The root is in
the heart, that blades in the desire, (mark 2 Chronicles. 15.12, 15.) ears, and
grows fruitful in the actions, and earnest endeavors. David seeks God, How? 1.
His soul thirsted, his flesh longed for God. 2. He follows hard after him,
Psalm. 63.1, 8. so those Saints (Isa. 26.8, 9.) in the night desire him with
their soul, seek him early in the morning, waiting for him in the way of his
judgments.

Again, that which we seek must be the end of our seeking: whatsoever we seek
not for it self, but for some other, we seek not it indeed, but that other, for
which we desire, and seek it. God must be sought for himself; we must not in
seeking him look to any thing beyond him: when we seek our Lord as the Jews
sought Christ, not b^^ause of the miracle, but because they had eaten, and were
filled, we seek not our God, but our bellies.

But what are the mean^ wherein we seek, and find? The Lord has given us
blessed means. 1. Holy Ordinances, the way of hi^ judgments: prayer, the Word,
Sacraments: (See Isa. 26.8.) 2. A powerful Mediator, and prevalent
Intercessour with God for man, God, and Man, the Lord Jesus Christ: he the only
Door, (Joh. 10.9.) the only Way, by which we come to God, Ioh. 14.6. His blood
has scored out our path to the Holiest, a new, and living way through the Veil
of ^is flesh, Heb. 10.19, 20. 3. Faith, which effectually applies both unto us.
The Ordinances not mingled with faith profit not, Heb. 4.2. Prayer without
faith God accounts howling, Hos. 7.14. the word, men who have no faith count
babbling, Act. 17.18. Christ is ours, and dwells in our hearts by faith, Ephesians.
3.17. but without faith we are still under the curse, Job. 3.36. He then that
thirsts for God, looks to Christ in every Ordinance, not to serve himself of
God, but to serve him in all faithfulness, this man seeks God.

Many there are which deceive themselves, and suppose they are not now to begin
that work: they have long ^ince (they hope) both sought, and found him. But
have they prep^red their heart? have they put aw^y iniquity far from them? do
they not suffer wickedness to dwell in their Tabernacles? Job 11.13, 14. How
should men seek, and find God in the ways of ungodliness? the righteous Lord
in all unrighteousness? Can God be found in Atheism? In such ways they find
God (as Balaam his Angel) with a drawn sword in his hand, not as a Father, but
a Judge, and Avenger. Indeed if we rejoice to work righteousness, remember him
in his ways, he will surely meet us in his mercy, Isa. 64.5. But if we seek
him after our own devices, and, though we walk after the imagination of our own
wicked hearts, yet dream we shall have peace (Deuteronomy. 29.19.) he will meet us,
not as a man, (Isa. 47.3.) but as a Lion to tear us in pieces, where none can
deliver, Psalm. 50.22.

And yet further (that we deceive not our selves in a matter of such
consequence) we must know that this seeking of God may be considered in diverse
periods of it. 1. When being without God in the World we seek to be initiated
into his service (see Act. 17.27.) 2. After some breach, when by our
misbehaviour we have caused him to withdraw his favor, and to hide himself
from us, as Cant. 5.6. 3. Even when we are in peace, and amity, we must still
seek him, laboring to get more union, and communion with him in a continual
waiting upon him, and looking unto him, Psalm. 105. 4. Some perhaps will think,
All this is needless: what necessity of seeking him, when he first seeks us? (
Luke 15.4, 8.) nay finds us before we seek him, ( Isa. 65.1.) God indeed loves
us first, (1 Ioh. 4.19.) and in his love draws us, (Jer. 31.3.) In infinite
love he gives us his Son, (Joh. 3.16.) Thus he seeks us lost Creatures, as that
Woman her lost Groat, Luke 15.8. He lights up the Gospel, and sends in with it
that great light, offers him, and in him offers us grace, and happiness: so he
seeks, and finds us, as Keepers their strayed De^r; he sends in Hunters, and
they hunt us from every Mountain, and every hill, and from holes of Rocks: he
sends those Apostolical Fishers, and they shall spread their Nets, ( Ezekiel.
47.10.) and fish them, Ier. 16.16. Till which time we do but (as thos^ blind
Heathens) feel after him, Act. 17.27. we sit in darkness, he sends in his Word,
and calls us ^orth unto his marvelous Light, 1 Pet. 2.9. we are enemies, he
beseeches us to be reconciled, and offers us peace in Christ; but further gives
his chosen an heart to know him, (Jer. 24.7.) an heart to fear him, (Jer.
32.39.) an heart to walk in his ways, (Ezekiel. 36.27.) He circumciseth their
hearts to love him, (Deuteronomy. 30.6.) opens the heart for Christ, (Act. 16.14.) and
brings in the Lord Jesus to dwell there, Eph^s. 3.17. so he first seeks us in
calling us, seek ye my f^ce; and then we (when he has given us that new heart)
seek him, when we answer Lord thy face will I seek, Psalm. 27.8. He first waits
to be gracious to us, then we wait on him, and ar^ blessed, Isa. 30.18. Let me
shut up this Chapter, with that Princely Preacher, and Prophetical Poet, in
this Paraphrase (in Verse) upon his Ecclesiast. 2.

I.
Oh I am tired, I faint, I swoon, I dye,
I travel all the world to find a station,
Where weary soul^ may sa^e, and happy lie,
I search for rest, feel but vexation;
I grope for substance, grasp but vanity;
I seek for life, and health, find death, damnation;
I meet approaching death, death to eschew:
Toiled with vain sweat, I wax old, to renew
My weary life: so spend, and hate what I pursue.
II.
To Pleasures house I failed, and safe arrived
I looked for Joy, but ^ound a Bedlam there:
Into rich Mammons baggs, and Chest^ I dived,
But saw them filled with grief, with care, and ^ear:
The Crown was but a Skep, where swarms are hiv'd
Of stinging thoughts; it wears me which I wear.
Has man no good? is it lost? or a^^ blind?
Who? who will point the way? or clear my mind?
To find what I should seek, to seek that I may find?
III.
Look as the industrious Be from flowr to flow^
Jumps lightly, vi^its all, but dwells in none:
Or as a sickly taste tries sweet, and sour,
Runs through a World of dishes, finds not o^^
To please his curious Pal^te^ has no power
To relish what it likes: this bit, that bone
Longed ^or, and loath'd^ thus my unquiet brea^^
In Earth, S^^^, Air, Heav'^ vainly (...):
But serving them is cursed, and served by them not blessed.
IV.
Can rivers seek, find re^^ in res^less Seas?
Can Air in stormy ayers quiet stay?
Can Heavens find in swiftest raptures ease?
Has only man no Center? none to lay
His weary soul to rest? no place to ^ase
His boundless thoughts? Me thinks I see a ray,
A glorious b^^^ break through Heavens Canopy;
Me thinks I hear a voice, Come Soul, and see,
Come; here, here lies thy rest; rest in my word, and me.
V.
It is thy lovely voice, great Love, oh where,
Where, Lord of love, where should I seek to find thee?
In every place I see thy footsteps clear,
Yet find thee not: what are the mi^^s that blind me?
I know Lord where thou art, and seek thee there,
Yet there I find not: thee before, behind me,
On every side I see, yet seeing blind
I find not what I see: but hark (my mind)
He speaks again: Soul seek, seek thou, and I will find.
A great encouragement which will much hearten us in this quest is that.

CAP. X.
We shall certainly find, when we rightly seek.

IF worldly and carnal men so zealously affect, and hotly pursue their earthly
objects; the ambitious straining for honor, till they crack their estates, and
brains in reaching after it, and yet are often overreached, and lose their
prize; the covetous (as horses) drawing iniquity with Cart^ropes of vanity,
defrauding, oppressing, piercing their souls with many sorrows, yet often put
all their gains into a bag with holes, ( Hag. 1.6.) or at the least in their
end are stripped, and turned out naked; voluptuous persons hunt after pleasures,
till they run themselves off their legs, and are brought to a morsel of bread,
and yet commonly either lose their game, or (as that Huntsman) are eaten up by
their dogs; how cheerfully should a Christian ^un his course in seeking that
immortal honor of being a Son, and Heir to the King of Kings, those durable
riches, treasures laid ^p in Heaven, those incorruptible pleasures, which are
at Gods right hand, and press hard toward the ^^rk for the prize of the high
calling of God in Christ, which following he shall surely obtain, and having
obtained shall never lose.

Never did our gracious Lord command his poor creatures, Seek ye the Lord in
vain, Isa. 49.15. he has past his word that in seeking him we shall certainly
find, and i^ finding him shall be ever blessed. His word is his deed, what he
speaks is done, what he commands stands fast, Psalm. 33.9. Be assured therefore
if thou seek him, ^e will be found of thee, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. 2 Chronicles. 15.^^
Matthew. 7.7. If you seek for honor, glory, immortality, you shall find eternal
life, Romans 2^7. Thus has he frequently promised, and all his promises are Ye^,
and Amen in Christ, 2 Cor. 1.20. Judah sought ^im and found him, 2 Chronicles.
15.15. Even Hypocrites find him, and some favor with him, when they seek, even
as much, and as far as they seek^ A^abs temporal humiliation obtained an
answerable mercy, 1 King. 21.29. As long a^ Vzziah sought God, so long he
prospered^ ^ Chron. 26.5. It is an infallible dispensation of his Providence
(in general) to give every man what he seeks. He that seeks good, shall have
favor; and ^e that seeks mischie^, it shall come unto him, Prove. 11.27.

It cannot be otherwise. For 1. (...) ^st sui di^^usivum; Good i^ o^ a
spreading nature. It cannot but com^unicate it self proportionably to the power
which it has, and to the object which i^ finds. He is good, and does good,
Psalm. 119.68. He is infinitely good, and therefore infinitely communicates
himself, as well to the (...), by generation, as to the Holy Ghost, by
procession; ye^ finitely (as they are capable) to all his Creatures, as well in
their Creation, making them very good, ( Genesis 1.31.) as in his providence, and
dispensation; his open hand fills them with good, Psalm. 104.28. and man being
created after his own image, and after his ^all capable of the divine nature,
he offers and imparts it to them who takes his offer, 2 Pet. 1.4.

Secondly, He is Love, (1 John 4^16.) gracious, (Exodus 34.6.) loving before,
above, contrary to our deserving^. Thi^ love our Savior thinks best to express
in the relation of a Father, (Luke 11.11, 12, 13^) so loving, that he waits to
be gracious unto us, (Isa. 30.18.) that he is found of those that seek him not,
and makes himself manife^^ to those that ask not after him, (Romans 10.20.) so
unexpressably, and unconceivably loving, that when he had bestowed all his
Creatures upon us, he yet satisfied not his love, till he had given (a gift
fully proportionable to his incomprehensible love) the Son of his love, his
only begotten, that we being destroyed by our selves, ( Hos. 13.9.) might
through him never perish; being dead in our selves might have eternal life in
him, ( Ioh. 3.16.) being enemies in our nature might be reconciled in him, Romans
5.10.

Thirdly, He is the Truth, Joh. 14.6. How frequently has he promised, that if
we seek we shall find (as before) and faithful is he that promises, who will
also do it, 1 These. 5.24. Thus Mercy, and Truth meet together, Psalm. 85.10. And
to this purpose are they met, fully to assure us of success in seeking, Deuteronomy.
4.25. to the 32. And observe that when for their rebellion the Lord had
scattered his revolting people among the Heathen, and given them up to their
whorish hearts, to serve wood, and stone, yet even from thence when they shall
seek the Lord, they shall find him. And what is the reason that after such
bitter provocations he will be found of them in their deepest misery? 1. His
mercy: for the Lord thy God is a merciful God, he will not destroy thee. 2. His
truth, and faithfulness; ( nor forget the Covenant of thy Fathers which he
swore unto them, ver. 31.) How then should any poor soul that seeks with
lo^ging miss in finding. Thou love him; he more (infinitely) loves thee:
Thou seek him, he first seeks thee. Thou would find him, he will surely
find thee: thou desire to meet him, does not he promise to meet thee? ( Isa.
64.5.) nay thou go to meet him, but he runs to meet thee, Luke 15.18, 20.

But that cunning, and lying Serpent, and our own unbelieving hearts will put
in a bar, and lay a notable stumbling block in our way concerning this truth.
They will object, It is not only apparent that many have not found the Lord,
who yet have earnestly sought, but the Lord himself plainly testifies, that
many shall seek, and not find, Luke 13.24. They shall go with their herds, and
with their flocks to seek the Lord, and shall not find him, Hos. 5.^. but we
must know that as in other actions, so in this, that which is not right, indeed
is not. It may seem to be, but is not what it seems: A lip-love is indeed no
love (1 Ioh. 3.17, 18.) A dead faith, no faith: so that seeking which is not
right, is indeed no seeking.

What then is that right seeking, to which God has annexed this promise of
finding? Three things are necessarily required in seeking to make it right, and
prosperous. 1. That the place, Where. 2. That the time, when. 3. That the
manner, how, be all right. He that seeks Grapes of Thorns, or Figgs of
Thistles, neither finds what he seeks, no^ indeed seeks to find: for he seeks
in a wrong place. He that seeks Grapes of the Vine, and Figgs of the Fig Tree,
but out of season (in Winter) seeks not in due time, and finds nothing but his
own folly. He that observes time, and place, but neglects the right manner of
seeking, is still out of the way of finding. The soul of the sluggard desires,
and ha^h nothing, (Prove. 13.4.) He will not Plow by reason of cold, therefore
shall he beg in Harvest, and have nothing, Prove. 20.4^ If a man go with his
Cart into the Field, (a place of Corn) and in Harvest (the time of Corn) but
never Ploughed, sowed, etc. he may load all his Harvest in an empty Wayn, and
return with an empty belly.

Where then must we seek? Not in our selves; not in our Righteousness, or
works; we are mere Thorns, and Briars, Ezekiel. 2.6. The blessed fruit of the true
Vine grows not in our cursed nature. Nothing there but sour, and wild grapes,
Isa. 5.4. Erring Israel following after the Law of Righteousness, attained not
unto the Law of Righteousness, Wherefore? Because they sought it not by faith,
but as it were by the works of the Law, Romans 9.31, 32. Only we find, and enjoy
God in Christ, only in Christ he is appeased^ 2 Cor. 5.19. only well-pleased in
Christ, Mat. 3.17. In him we are accepted, Ephesians. 1.6. By him we have access to
God with confidence, Ephesians. 3.12. One cannot possibly come to God as a Father
but by him, Joh. 14.6. In him adopted, Ephesians. 1.5. In him begotten to an
incorruptible inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4. In him blessed with all spiritual
blessings, Ephesians. 1.3.

But where shall we seek Christ? who shall ascend into heaven, to bring down
the fruit of Christ's resurrection, and ascension for life unto us? who shall go
down to the deep to fetch thence the death of the Lord Jesus, and apply the
virtue of it to our souls? The Apostle answers: The word is nigh unto thee in
thy mouth, and in thy heart. This is the Word of faith, which we Preach. For if
thou confess with thy mouth, and believe in thy heart that God raised him from
the dead, thou shall be saved, Romans 10.6, 7, 8, 9. Christ therefore is offered
thee in the Word, given by faith: the Word brings him to thee, thy faith
receives him, holds him, leads him into the chamber of thy heart, and there he
dwells with thee, Ephesians. 3.17. As therefore only Christ brings thee into favor
with God, so the Word brings Christ to thee, and faith grafts thee into Christ.

But although the Lord Jesus Christ with his own mouth, and his blessed Spirit
have so frequently, and clearly testified, that the Word Preached is the
incorruptible seed, whereby we are born again to this incorruptible
inheritance, (Luke 8.11. 1 Pet. 1.23. Jam. 1.18.) and the food, ( strong meat,
and milk) whereby we are nourished, and grow up into our Head in this life of
God; yet what in the World is more despised, and rejected? If you look to the
judgment of some (professed, and in name) Christians, they account it (as
those Greeks) foolishness, (1 Cor. 1.18, 23.) and therefore utterly despise it,
Act. 13.41. They dare deride it even in the mouth of Christ himself, ( Luke
16.14.) how much more in the mouths of his poor messengers? If you look unto
their wills, they are resolved against it, ( Ier. 44.16.) will not hear, but
reject it, ( Ier. 8.9.) If to their affections, they hate it; hate the
knowledge of it, ( Prove. 1.22, 29.) hate him that brings it, ( Amos 5.10.) yea
even him that sends it, Ioh. 15.22, 23, 24. Indeed if they would enquire of
Christ, and hearken unto him, teaching us where to find him, he would direct
us: Go thy way forth by the foo^steps of the flock, and feed thy Goats by the
Tents of the Shepherds, Cant. 1.8. But proud fond men know not (as that Eunuch,
Act. 8.31.) the need of a Guide. Their ^taff can better grope out their blind
ways, Hos. 4.12. They walk after their own devices, (Jer. 18.12.) and will
have no other Counselor but their own mouth, Ier. 44.17.

Some again seek him at ease, on their beds, and so find him but in a dream,
Cant. 3.1. some look for him in the broad ways of a common profession as those
Jews, Matthew. 3.9. Joh. 8.33. They are children of Abraham, Circumcised, etc. so
many Christians: They are born in the Church, Baptized, call Lord, Lord, etc.
but how should they find the True way in the false, the narrow in the broad?
There they shall hear him thundering as a Judge: I never knew you, Depart from
me ye workers of iniquity, Matthew. 7.14, 23. Know assuredly when the Spouse her
self thus sought, she found him not. She sought him on her bed but found him
not, sought him in the streets, and broad ways, but found not: but when she
enquired of the Watchmen, she soon found him, Cant. 3.1, 2, 3. Hear him
therefore in his word; Watch daily at his ^ates, and wait on the posts of his
doors, and he will make thee blessed, Prove. 8.34.

Secondly, what is the season, or right time ^f seeking? Gods time, not ours.
There is ^n acceptable time, (2 Cor. 6.2.) a time when ^od will be found, Isa.
55.6. The longest ex^^nt reaches no fur^her than the limits of this short
life. After death instantly follows Judgment, Heb. 9.27. where the tree falls,
it lies. 2. There is a time when the decree brings forth, Zeph. 2.2. which if
we prevent not, we perish. As far as I can discern by the word, God limits a
time, and after the Date is out, we are shut out ( Heb. 4.7. and specially,
Luke 13.25.) A time when the door stands open to give us entrance, a time when
the door is shut, and we knock, beg^ and plead hard, but all in vain. For
though God never excluded a repentant, humbled, and softened heart, yet when men
have despised his patience, forbearance, and offers of grace, God may justly,
and does frequently give men up to hardness, and leave them to their
impenitency, to treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, Ezekiel. 24.13. Romans
2.4, 5. 3. There is a set time; the Lords Day, or (as our Homilies call it) the
Christian Sabbath. And for mine own judgment I am persuaded, that as a Sabbath
is the bond, which holds the Church in the true Worship of God, so the neglect,
and contempt of that Ordinance is the bane of true Religion, the root of all
profaneness, and Atheism, and the great breach wherein Superstition, Error,
and Schism have overflown, and surrounded the Christian Churches; In this
matter therefore consider, and ponder these few observations.

1. A Sabbath is nothing else but a day of rest, separated from the labors of
our earthly, and consecrated to the labors of our Heavenly callings. This (I
take it) is apparent, Exodus 20.10. where not only a cessation from our earthly
vocations is required, but the sanctification (or keeping that day holy) is
enjoined. 2. A Sabbath instantly after the Creation was instituted, blessed,
and sanctified by God himself; and therefore (as far as I can discern) was born
with the world, has lived with it to this present, and shall never dye, but be
changed into that eternal Sabbath; yea even our heavenly Father himself, thus
far kept a Sabbath, that he rested that day from all his works which he made, (
Genesis 2.2.) and propounds his practice as a kind of precept to his Children,
Exodus 20.11. 3. By virtue of the Decalogue, (and that fourth commandment in it)
a Sabbath is of moral obligation to the Jews, and bound them to a necessary,
and religious observation of it. 4. A moral equity of the 4 Commandment is
generally by all confessed, obliging all men to a sufficient, and convenient
time for Gods Worship. Now that a Seventh-dayes Sabbath was (in the Jewish
Church) this sufficient, and convenient time I conceive will not be denied,
neither can any (I think) yield any good reason, why a seventh day should be
the equity of the Sabbath (a time sufficient, and convenient) then, and now
inconvenient. 5. We no where find this statute of a seventh days Sabbath
abrogated by the Lawgiver, (who then can repeal it?) but only translated to
the first day of the week: which that it is done, is apparent, but whether done
by Christ himself in person, or (which is equivalent) by his Spirit in the
Apostles, appears not. And therefore that Appellation of the Lords day used by
the Spirit, (Apocal. 1.10.) is the fittest title which Christians can give it.
But of all other seasons the most special, and happy is that, when God draws
near, and even offers himself to be found, Isa. 55.6. when by his voice in his
word he calls, Awake thou tha^ sleep, arise from the dead, and Christ shall
give thee light, Ephesians. 5.14. when he makes us that gracious proffer, Turn ye
at my reproof, behold I will pour out my Spirit unto you, Prove. 1.23. when (as
that Angel deals with Peter, Act. 12.) he smites sleep out of our eyes, shakes
us out of our drowsiness, and by corrections offers himself as a Father unto
us, (Heb. 12.7.) and so by his quickening Spirit moves, and stirs our secure,
and sluggish spirits. As when the waters in that pool were troubled, healing
followed, ( Ioh. 5.4.) so when the Messengers of God have by his word stirred,
and troubled us, if then we instantly step in, and take hold of his grace,
health, and salvation will certainly follow. But take great heed of delays
(see Psalm. 119.60.) If it be inhumanity to say unto a neighbor, it is most
impious to say unto God, Go, and come again to morrow, Prove. 3.28. Saints seek
early: ( Isa. 26.9.) and then the promises meet them. They that seek me early
shall find me, Prove. 8.17.

Object. But some may seek early, and not find, Prove. 1.28. Answ. There is Gods
day, and our day. The Lord himself rises early, and calls, Jer. 7.25. Then if
we stir up our selves to seek, we shall find him, Psalm. 63.1, 5. but if we let
pass his day, and seek in our day, our early will prove too late. When he slew
them, they sought him, and enquired early after God, Psalm. 78.34. But then he
had sworn in his wrath that they should not enter into his rest, Psalm. 95.11.
They lived long after, but never entered.

3. Lastly how, or after what manner must we seek? 1. As famisht persons, with
hunger, and thirst. Ho every one that thirsts, Come to the waters, and Isa.
55.1, 2. Thus we are constantly invited. Let him that is athirst come, Rev.
22.17. Thus accepted. I will give to him that is athirst of the fountain of the
water of life freely, Rev. 21.6. Now hunger, and thirst are those natural, and
ordinate affections of the body, rising from a sense, and grief of want,
whereby it vehemently, and constantly desires the food wherewith it is
nourished, and grows. But as there is an inappetence, so is there also an
inordinate desire of meats and drinks, rising from distemper; a disease; not
hunger, but the hungry evil; not thirst, but dropsie-thirst, coveting excess,
devouring rather than eating, and then vomiting, but never satisfied: Thus is
it with our spirits: The true ^unger therefore includes, 1. Emptiness. 2.
Longing. 3. A constancy; that is an ordinate, and seasonable return of this
desire, rising not from distemper, but emptiness, and such an emptiness as
proceeds from the right use of this food, well digested into the inward man for
growth. Some are full gorged with lusts, and so loath this honey comb, Prove.
27.7. some very empty, but not at all hungry, as those that are dead, or deadly
sick. Those Laodiceans were poor, empty, naked, but not hungry, as dreaming
that they were rich, and wanted nothing, Rev. 3.17. Some are full of longing,
but nothing emp^y; as that Ruler ( Mark 10.17, 22.) who had he been as empty of
temporal living, as he was greedy of eternal life, would have willingly
accepted that easy condition, to have bartered earthly for heavenly treasures.

When all these meet together in the heart, and make it hungry, they fail not
to satisfy, and make us blessed, Matthew. 5.6. But when they are severed, and
single, they prevail nothing.

Secondly, We must seek with the whole heart, not divided, nor double: so if we
seek, we shall surely find him, ( Deuteronomy. 4.29.) And blessedness with, and in
him, Psalm. 119.2. But a divided heart is ever faulty, Hos. 10.2. and a double
heart, (wavering betwixt God, and Mammon, Christ, and Lust) obtains nothing,
Iam. 1.7, 8.

Thirdly, With a Washed heart, purged from the love, and dominion of sin: For
as all Sacrifices (and even our prayers) are ^oathsome, when they are presented
with ^nclean hearts (Prove. 21.27.) so when we are washed, the most deep-died
sins cannot hinder our acceptance, Isa. 1.16, 17, 18. If we regard wickedness
in our hearts, the Lord will not hear us, (Psalm. 66.18.) but if we forsake our
sin, we shall find mercy, Prove. 28.13.

Fourthly, when we have thus sought, we must wait upon God; The Lord is good to
the^ that wait for him; to the soul that seeks, Lam. 3.25. The experience of
Saints will ratifi^ this truth. I waited patiently for the Lord and he
inclined unto me, and heard my cry, Psalm. 40.1. Our blessed God has long
waited upon us to be gracious unto us, and to show us mercy; and blessed are
they that wait upon him to receive mercy, Isa^ 30.18.

If then you seek your portion aright; if you seek God in Christ, Christ in his
Word^ if you seek him in due time, his time, hi^ day, when he offers himself,
and stirrs your hearts; if you delay not, but when God rises early to call
you, you wake early to meet him; if you seek with an hungry, entire, washed
heart, patiently waiting upon the posts of his doors, he will certainly open
the door, let you in, give you life, an^ make you blessed.

I will also finish this Chapter with a verse borrowed from diverse of those
Poetical Prophets.

Vast Ocean of light, whose rays surround
The Universe, who know nor ebb, nor shore,
Who lend'st the Sun his sparkling drop, to store
With overflowing beams Heaven, air, ground,
Whose depths beneath the Center none can sound,
Whose heights 'bove heaven, and thoughts so lo^ty soar
Whose breadth no feet, no lines, no chains, no eyes survey,
Whose length no thoughts can reach, no worlds can bound,
What cloud can mask thy face? where can thy ray
Find an Eclipse? what night can hide Eternal Day?
Our Seas (a drop of thine) with arms dispread
Through all the earth make drunk the thirsty plains;
Our Sun (a spark of thine) dark shadows drains,
Guilds all the world, paints earth, revives the dead;
Seas (through earth pipes distilled) in Cisterns shed,
And power their liver springs in river veins.
The Sun peeps through jet clouds, and when his face,
Are maskt, his eyes their light through ayers spread, and gleams
Shall dullard earth bury life-giving streams?
Earths ^oggs impound heavens light^ hell quench heaven kindling beams?
How miss I then? in bed I sought by night,
But found not him in rest, nor rest without him.
I sought in Towns, in broadest streets I sought him,
But found not him where all are lost: dull sight
Thou can not see him in himself: his light
Is maskt in light: brightness his cloud about him.
Where, when, how he will be found, there, then, thus seek thy love:
Thy Lamb in flocks, thy Food with appetite,
Thy Rest on re^ting days, thy Turtle Dove
See^ on his cross: there, then, thus Love stands nailed with love.
For surely know that Eternal life, even

CAP. XI.
All Blessedness is found only in the Lord Jesus Christ.

THE whole Portion of man, all treasures, and true riches, which fill man with
true blessedness, are stored up in Christ: Riches, and honor are with him, yea
durable riches, and righteousness, Prove. 8.18. In him are hid all the treasures
of wisdom, and knowledge, Col. 2.3. He is full of grace, and truth, and from
his fullness we all receive, and grace for grace, Joh. 1.14, 16. and so are we
filled with the fullness of God, Ephesians. 3.19. It will therefore be not more
needful, than delightful to take a further view of this glorious inheritance;
so to kindle, and inflame our dull hearts with more love, and longing after
him, to drive us to seek, and quicken us in seeking, that ^o we may find him.

Of all the Artifices devised, and practiced by that envious, and subtle
Serpent this is the principal, to draw a Curtain before this express Image of
Gods person; who being the Brightness of his glory, (Heb. 1.3.) if we could
behold with open eyes his Divine beauty, would wonderfully ravish our enamoured
spirits, and so attract, win, and hold our eyes, and hearts that he would
utterly raze out all other vain loves and washy colors, and cause us wholly to
despise all those painted flowers of counterfeit beauties, which grow not in
his face, and shine not in his eyes.

As therefore that our heavenly Father ( the Father of lights) in his gracious
wisdom, to draw us to Christ, commands his light to shine out of darkness, and
opens for it a window in our hearts, to give us knowledge of the glory of God
in (no other object but) the face of the Lo^d Jesus Christ, (2 Cor. 4.6.) so
this Prince of darkness imployes all his Engines, with all diligence, to
obscure that light of the Gospel, lest in it this Image of God should shine out
unto us, 2 Cor. 4.4. And as he by his false Apostles ( deceitful workers)
labors to distort those amiable lineaments, and darken the radiant beauties of
the Lord Jesus: so our God sets his servants of the Ministry on work, ((...))
Gal. 3.3. to limb out Christ in all his love, and excellency to us.

Now it is he who has committed that pencil of his Gospel into my weak hand. I
desire therefore, as I can, (a poor Apprentice in my trade) and as I have
learnt of him, to describe him to you; you know well, as other Princes, so this
King of Kings wooes by picture. He sends here unto you drawn by a rude hand his
pourtrait, which (as dimm as it is by reason of my unskilfulness) is able
(through his working) to inflame your hearts with love, with sickness of love,
with ardent desire, and restless longings after him.

As in the Creature there is a double quality which kindles affection, either
simple, whereby it self is perfect, or relative, whereby others are bettered;
so is there in our Lord, and Creator a double excellency, ^imply considered
wherein himself is incomprehen^ibly blessed in his most glorious perfections,
relative in his infinite both goodness, and fullness to supply our
imperfections, and fill us with blessedness.

For the first, because our infirm eyes would soon be dazeled with the rays of
that Sun of Righteousness (if in open light, and full view he were presented to
us,) therefore the Lord is pleased to mask the face of that glorious luster
with shadows of earthly comparisons, and to let us (here) see the ^ight of it
as through a cloud.

Now as corporal beauty consists, 1. Of a ^omely feature, (when the whole body,
and ^very limb is cast into a due frame, keeping ^ust proportions, and every
one fashioned in ^ right mould, neither excessive, nor defe^tive) and 2. Of an
amiable color, dispread ^ver the whole body, and every member; ^hen each part
is dressed, and tired in such ^livery as most commends it to the eye of the
^eholder; so also does the spiritual: view (...) curiously drawn, Cant. 5. from
the 10. v. (...) the end. There may you behold our be^^ved excellently
pourtrayed by the hand of (...) own Spirit, as well in all his excellencies,
(...) head, locks, eyes, cheeks, lips, hands, legs, (...) countenance, mouth,
as also in his most ^^vely colors, white, and ruddy, etc. The meaning is, Look
as a person excellently comely in all the lineaments, and proportions of every
member, and exquisitely fair in the natural tapestry of a pure complexion is a
most ravishing object to an eye of flesh; so in that second Adam ( the
quickening Spirit) could we lift up our eyes to take a full view of his dazeling
beauties (which now are veiled from our imperfect sight, for no man can see him
and live) could we behold (in their measures) those his most glorious
Attributes, and then clearly discern that infinite purity, shining, and
sparkling in every one of them, it would (as once it certainly shall) fill our
spirits with heavenly raptures, and ravishing ecstasies in contemplation of
those divine beauties.

Take a more particular, and distinct view of these most glorious perfections.
Look what comeliness is in man, that in Christ is Omnipotency, or
All Sufficiency. Comeliness i^ nothing else but that form of body, whereby
every limb is so placed, grown, and proportioned, that it is apted for its
office, an^ for the use of the body: were the Ey^ (the Spy of the body) placed
elsewhere tha^ in the Watch-towre, were the hand, or fo^^ turned backward; how
should they execu^^ their office, and discharge their duties? Bu^ when the eye,
the ear, and every part is (...) seated, and shaped, as that it is most fitted,
and best enabled for the work unto which it is designed, and no work of the
body which some part is not able to effect for it, then it is seemly, and
lovely: So what is that All Sufficiency, and Omnipotency in Christ, but that
infinite, and excellent measure in all his divine Attributes, whereby he is
able to do, and does all things in Heaven and earth?

Look then upon the Lord Jesus, and behold in him. 1. His Almighty eye of
Wisdom, and providence, running to and fro through the whole earth, to show
himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect with him, 2 Chronicles.
16.9. Consider that his Almighty ear of grace, and mercy, which hears from the
ends of the earth, (Psalm. 61.2.) and from the belly of Hell, Jon. 2.2. Behold
that his Almighty mouth, which speaks, and it is done, commands, and it stands
fast, Psalm. 33.9. Take a view of the Almighty arm of his ^ower, and hand of his
justice, effectually working, and equally distributing whatsoever, and
howsoever he wills in Heaven, and Earth, subduing all things to himself, and
^isposing all events, and Creatures at his ^leasure. As therefore it is the
Comeliness of ^an that all his limbs are so ordered, and ^amed that he can with
all facility, and agility do every work which concerns the good of the body; so
that which sets an excellent luster upon Christ in the eye of a Christian is
that his Almightiness, whereby (in all his Attributes) he is able perfectly to
work whatsoever is necessary, or convenient for his Body, and Spouse, and to do
whatsoever he will in all the world.

2. As all the limbs of the body are not a little commended to the eye by the
fairness of the skin, not dried in the smoke of a burnt constitution, nor
drowned in the paleness of a phlegmatic complexion, but every part dressed in
those colors of beauty ( red, and white) shining in their natural pureness; so
is there in Christ an excellence of spiritual purity, far surmounting the
expr^ssion of words, or comprehension of thoughts in any creature.

This purity is nothing else but his holiness; the beauty, and glory of all the
rest^ His wisdom is an holy wisdom, his merc^ an holy mercy. His mouth, a^m,
han^ altogether, and infinitely holy. When comely proportions of body march
under those lovely colors of Beauties ensign^ how easily do they make a breach
in the eye? conquer, and lead captive the heart and swear it a willing servant
to fleshly love^ But when the Lord Jesus looks forth of (...) Window when he
shows himself (but) through a lattise, (Cant. 2.) He wounds the hearts of
men, and Angels; he ravishes the soul, captivates the understanding, fires the
affection with unquenched longings: no such hell as to be estranged from him;
no such Heaven as union with him. We have a proverb that love will tune a very
harsh, and unstringed heart into poetry, and singing. But when the Creatures,
though with covered faces, (for who is able with open eye to behold the full
blaze of his beauty?) look upon the face of his Holiness, they are swallowed up
in admiration of his excellence, and fill their mouths, and the world with
songs of his beauty. They call up one another in their Antiphones, or Verses,
to praise him, Psalm. 30.4. and 97.12. and all (men, and Angels) join in the
Chorus, chanting Holy, Holy, Holy Lord of hosts, Isa. 6.3. Rev. 4.8. Clean
ways how easy, and pleasant? clean linen how sweet, and sightly? pure air
how wholesome? pure metals (gold, or silver) how precious? what then is that
purity of the divine essence? how glorious in holiness? Exodus 15.11. In this
alone see the excellency of it. It is a working beauty, mightily, almightily
working on every ob^ect that looks upon it. How long may we behold the fairest
Virgin on Earth, and yet our selves be no whit the fairer? But when we fasten
our eyes upon this beauty of Christ, it leaves the impression of the same
glory, and excellency upon us. And as it is with that great Light, (the Sun) it
guilds the Heaven, stars, earth, trees, and every Creature with which it
converses, and paints them with his light, and luster; so that greatest, and
uncreated Light, that Sun of Righteousness, when we behold him, stamps his
divine nature, and glorious image upon us: If Moses do but see his back only,
his face shines, and glitters, so that his Brother Aaron feared to approach
him, Exodus 34.30. If Christ in his humanity converses with his Father, not only
his face sparkles, as the Sun^ ( Matthew. 17.2.) but his very raiment shines, and
glitters in pure whiteness ( Mar. 9.3. Luke 9.29.) and hence is it that when we
shall see him as he is, we shall be as he is, 1 John 3.2.

Secondly, Look to that relative excellency wherein we communicate with him; w^
must know that whatsoever is his, is ou^^ also (by participation) when he is
ours, an^ we are his. He endows us with all his goods^ not only with these
outward things, ( Pa^^^ Apollos, Cephas, the World, life, death, things
present, future all are ours, 1 Cor. 3.22.^ but withal those excellencies
which are i^ himself: His arm of power, his hand of justice, his ear of mercy,
his eye of Providence, all is ours: he withholds nothing from us, not his
glory: he will have us to see it, and by seeing to have it, Ioh. 17.22, 24.

Nay he so far is pleased to descend unto us, that he not only gives himself
for us, but will himself be to us whatsoever we want. We are excluded, shut out
from God, without God in the World (Ephesians. 2.12.) he becomes a Door to let us
in Ioh. 10.9. we were strayed sheep wandering in our lost paths, ( Isa. 53.6.)
he is the Way to bring us back to the Heavenly flocks, and solds, Ioh. 14.6.
when we were darkness (Ephesians. 5.8.) he would be our Light, Joh. 8.12. we were
harbourless, without any continuing City, (Heb. 13.14.) He will be our House:
we dwell in him, (1 John 4.13.) for our house (or mansion) is not Heaven, but
in Heaven; not made with hands, but uncreated; not temporal but eternal, 2 Cor.
5.1. we were hungry, and pined, feeding on ashes, (Isa. 44.20.) himself will be
our Bread from Heaven, Joh. 6.35. he our drink indeed, Ioh. 6.55. we filthy,
and even stinking in our filthiness, ( Psalm. 14.3.) he our Fountain for sin and
uncleanness, Zech. 13.1. we naked, (Rev. 3.27.) he our clothing, Gal. 3.27. we
in debt, owed thousands of talents, had nothi^^ to pay, (Matthew. 18.24.) he our
Surety, (Heb. 7.22.) who has cancelled our bonds, and blotted out the
handwriting which was against us, (Col. 2.14.) we were Captives, (2 Timothy
2.26.) he the Price of our Redemption, (Matthew. 20.28.) we were fools, (Tit.
3.3.) he our wisdom, (1 Cor. 1.30.) we poor, ( Rev. 3.17.) he our Riches, (Col.
1.27. Rev. 3.18.) we Vile, (Job 40.4.) he our Praise, and Glory, (Deuteronomy. 10.21.
Luke 2.32.) we joyless, (our very joy madness, ( Eccles. 2.2.) he our exceeding
joy, Psalm. 43.4. To conclude, We dead, (Ephesians. 2.1.) he our Life, (Joh. 14.6.)
we Vanity at our best, (Psalm. 39.5.) and very nothing, (2 Cor. 12.11.) he All
in all (Col. 3.11.) we empty, he our fullness, Ephesians. 1.23.

Oh that the Lord would embrighten our eyes to behold some sparks of this
glorious excellency, and our happiness in beholding it! that the eyes of our
understanding being opened, we might know what is the hope of his calling and
what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the Saints, Ephesians. 1.18. If
our God should create for us as many worlds as we could number, what were all
these Creatures in comparison of the Crea^our? a drop of a bucket, or the dust
of the balance, Isa^ 40.15. He is the glorious Spouse of ou^ souls, but all
the Creatures his servants, and in him, ours. Let him therefore be the Covering
of our eyes unto all that are with us, and with all others, (Genesis 20.16.) upon
him let us fasten our sight with all admiration, and burning affection, but on
them (in comparison of him) let us look as upon loss, and dung, Phil. 3.8. A
chaste Spouse will respect her servants, and behold them, in their affliction
with pity, in their wants with mercy, in their diligence, and service with a
kind acceptance, but in competition with her husband (if they would presume to
be Rivals in his love, and sharers of her heart, and his bed) with disdain,
scorn, and hatred. Let us therefore stir up, and quicken our dull hearts with
some such meditation.

I.
How is it, my soul, that thou giv'st eyes their sight
To view their objects, yet have none
To see thine own?
Earths, ayers, Heavens beauties they discern; their light
Fair flowers admires; their several dresses,
Their golden tresses;
The Lilly, Rose, the various Tulip, scorning
The pride of Princes in their choice adorning.
II.
They joy to view the ayers painted Nations;
The Peacocks train, which the head out vies
With fairer eyes,
And emulats the heavenly constellations;
The Ost^ich, whose ^air plume embraves
Kings, Captains, Slaves;
The Halcions, whose Triton-bills appease
Curled waves, and with their Eggs lay stormy seas.
III.
Pilots fixed eyes observe the Artick Bear,
With all her unwasht Starry trains
In Heavenly plains.
Night-Travellers behold the Moon to steer
Her Ship, sailing (while Eol raves)
Through cloudy waves:
Our less Worlds sunns with pleasure view the light
Which gives all beauties beauty, them their sight.
IV.
Thou that giv'st ^ight to clay, to blackness light
How ^rt so dull, so dimm in duty
To view his beauty,
Who quickens every life, lights every light?
His height those Eagles eyes surpasses;
Thou wants thy glasses:
Take up that Perspective, and view those streams
O^ light, and fill thy waning Orb with beams.
V.
Then see the flowers clad in his Liveries,
And from his cheek, and lovely face
Steal all their grace.
See Fouls from him borrow their braveries,
And all their feather-painted dresses
From his fair tresses:
See Stars, and Moon, the Sun, and all per^ection
Beg light, and li^e from his bright eyes re^^ection.
VI.
Look on his lips; heavens gate there open lies:
Thence that grace-breathing Spirit blows,
Thence honey flows.
Look on his hands, the Worlds full treasuries;
Fix all thy looks his heart upon,
Loves highest Throne.
And when thy sight that radiant beauty ble^rs,
And dazels thy weak eyes; see with thine ears.
CAP. XII.
When our hearts are set upon our voyage, we shall meet with opposition, many
rocks, and Sirens in our passage.

BUT in this way to our happiness we shall meet with much opposition, we cannot
steal such a Nuptial: if we will needs be walking in this way of life, he that
has the power of death will beat us with many storms, assault us with many
encounters, before we can land in the arms of Christ, and be bedded in his
bosom.

That great enemy of man (Satan) swells with spite, and envy, to see us
presented with such an offer, and ready to embrace it; and therefore (in his
inveterate malice) will not cease to cross us (as he can) in this blessed
match, and high advancement. It bursts his gall to see us contracted unto the
Lord Jesus, us (poor worms, his captives^ plucked out of his chains, and
instantly draw^ into a covenant of marriage with the Go^ of Heaven! to be
admitted to such an union, and fellowship, instated in such a Jointure, of
divine glory, and eternal happiness, which he has utterly lost! Oh how can it
but grate his heart, and be another hell unto him, who is so stuffed with
malicious envy, and envious malice against the Lord Jesus, and his Spouse?

But as it is with those Locusts (his venomous army) so is it with their
Captain, (Rev. 9.19.) His power is in his mouth, and in his tail. He is a
Serpent, more subtle than strong, or strong only by subtilty. His lying tongue,
and ^inful stinging tail is his mighty and (almost) only weapon. Therefore in
your passage to your Heavenly Spouse he sets many crafty Bauds, and painted
Harlots to lay wait for you at every corner, ( Prove. 7.12.) we have great need
then to stand upon our watch, and to set a strong and faithful guard at our
gates (our eyes, ears, etc.) lest as he beguiled Eve with his subtilty, so he
should corrupt our minds, and inveigle us by those Strumpets, whose hearts are
nets and snares, and whose hands bands, Eccles. 7.26.

That old Baud (the world) and her Pandar Satan, have painted, and dressed up
diverse Harlots, which, attired in all deceitfulness of cunning allurements,
they present to our sight, and so draw away the wandering heart, and eye after
lying vanities. The Turks Saraglio is not so furnished with Concubines, as this
old Baud with filthy Stumpets; some enticing the mind, some the heart. Of the
former rank are numberless but beside those Triobolax, and obsolete (fit now to
work only in gross darkness upon blind, or mop-eyed creatures) she has newly
trimmed up two notable Harlots.

The first is that State of Rome; but so varied in unwonted tires, so curiously
painted by her last dresses (the cunning Jesuits) and turchest in new fashions,
that we have need of purged eyes, and much intention to know her, and to see
her leprous hide plastered with fair colors.

The second is that daughter of old Pelagius, which by abasing the grace of God
in Gods election, (binding his choice to the works of men) and advancing the
power of man, in man's election, (flattering him with false abilities of an
unrenewed will) perverts the right ways of the Lord; who hedging, and walling
us out of our wayes^ and conducting us only in the way of his grace, brings us
to immortality, and glory.

Whithersoever you turn you, one o^ these will be at your elbow; In every
corner you shall meet with the Lovers of these Harlots, doting on their
plaistered beauties, and drawing others to the same doteage^ Those Paramours of
Rome will deeply swear that their Mistress is the Queen of the World, that the
Sun (even the Scriptures) borrows all his beams from her eyes, that there is no
Paradise but in her arms, no Heaven but in her embraces, no hope but in her
anchour, no faith but in her breast, no truth but in her mouth: that if she
commands Vices, and prohibits Virtues, you were bound to believe that Vices
were good, and Virtues evil. So Bellarm. De Roman. Pontif. l. 4. c. 5.

The other not so lofty in their boastings, but as dangerous in their baits,
and lurings. They will promise you liberty, (and what is more suitable, and
sweet to nature) but make you (as themselves) servants to corruption.

Now if you should trust your own eyes, and lean to your own understanding, you
might easily be charmed with their enchantments. But if ever you mean to keep
your heart entire for the Lord Jesus, you must not afford one glance to these
his Rivals, but through the glass of his word. That (but else nothing) will
broadly display the putrid loathsomeness of these haggs, and rotten puppets.

Be ever asking, Where it is written: this was the buckler of the Ancients. I
adore the fullness of Scripture: Let the shop of Hermogenes teach us where it is
written: if it be not written, let him fear the woe pronounced against Adders,
and detracters, Tertul. This was the sword of the Spirit, whereby our Savior
himself warded his breast from all those fiery darts of Satan, and beat down
all his strong assaults, Matthew. 4.4, 7, 10.

But so cunning are some of these Imposters, that they will challenge you at
your own Weapon. They have learnt this fence of their old Master (the Devil)
who seeing our Lord standing upon this guard, had presently (in show) the same
weapon, and charged it against him; It is written (says he) Matthew. 4.6.
whereby you see how needful it is for you to have your senses exercised in the
word, to discern good, and evil, (Heb. 5.14.) and what necessity lies upon you
to meditate in the word of God, day and night, (Psalm. 1.2.) that you may breath
your soul in those breathings of that Holy Spirit. The enemy is crafty, the
issue of the combat, life or death eternal.

Another sort of Whores that old Baud, and Pandar, the World, and the Devil
dres^ up in another fashion, to lay battery to your heart (the will, and
affection) and they ar^ as (if not more) dangerous than the former. The first
is the Lady Mammon, boasting her self the only true Riches, but indeed a mere
slip, and counterfeit, brass, and copper covered with tinfoyl. Yet how many
unstable souls has she beguiled? She has all the tricks of a Whore, first in
quality, secondly in action. For 1. She is false, and lying: what content, and
happiness does she promise to her Paramours? yet did she never satisfy any
Lover, Eccles. 5.10. How should that give man content, which has no more worth
than man's fancy gives it? She drowns us in perdition, and destruction, and
pierces with many sorrows, 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. 2. She is inconstant, and light;
winged, and flies away, Prove. 23.5. 2. Her actions also whorish: she hunts for
the precious life of a man, Prove. 6.26. No less hire will purchase her company
than the price of our souls, Matthew. 16.26. when she has shut us within her
embraces, she shuts us out of the Kingdom of Heaven. As soon shall a Camel pass
through the eye of a needle, as a man loving riches through the strait gate of
life, Mar. 10.24, 25. 2. A Whore sells nothing but repentance, and mourning at
our latter end, Prove. 5.11. And what do men reap from the love of riches, but
weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth? Jam. 5.1. The way to keep off our
hearts from this false Strumpet is to fasten our eyes upon the heavenly Riches:
which are first true; the metal not base, but precious promises, 2 Pet. 1.4.
precious faith, much more precious than gold, 1 Pet. 1.7. The stamp upon them
is the Image of the King of Heaven, which makes them current in all his
Dominions. 2. They are durable riches, (Prove. 8.18.) they will never fail you.
In life, and death they will follow you, Rev. 14.13. He that looks upon God as
his Portion, and sees in what pleasant places the lines are fallen to him,
(Psalm. 16.5, 6.) He that looks upon Christ, ( his Treasure, Col. 2.3.) and
those glorious riches stored up in him, will look upon all other riches as
loss, and dung, ( Phil. 3.8.) and think the meanest room of his heart too
precious to be taken up with trash and trumpery.

The second Harlot is Honor, ( Reputation, and Credit with men) A proud
Strumpet, that carries her head aloft, but the veriest dirt of all the rest:
yet how strong are her allurements? How did she draw away those in
part-believing Jews, specially Rulers? Ioh. 12.42. how easily did she carry
them down in a stream of popularity from the fountain of life? She has a
strong faction in all men's hearts to work for her, but principally in those,
who are great in the world^ If ever you attain any eminence there, she will
prove a dangerous tentation. Take heed of casting one glance toward her, lest
you be overcome. Remember that warning of our Savior; you cannot entertain
faith, and her in one heart, Joh. 5.44. Take heed also of being dismayed with
her frowns. Assuredly know she will affront you with reproach, contempt,
disgrace; If ye cleave to Christ were you Kings, were you the King of Kings,
she would not be afraid to revile you, and spit in your face. David was torn
with her mocks, (Psalm. 35.15, 16.) because he followed that which was good,
(Psalm. 38.20.) The Son of David derided by proud Pharisees, Luke 16.14. Think
not, being servants, to be above your Master. It is enough for the Disciple to
be as his Master, and the servant as the Lord. If they have called the Master
of the house Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his household?
Matthew. 10.25. whosoever will live godly (be sure of ^t) shall suffer (at least
this) persecution, 2 Timothy ^.12.

But take off your eye from this shadow, and lie of honor, and set it upon
that true ^lory. Could you (with Moses) behold but ^ne spark of that heavenly
advancement. ^ou would (with Moses) account the reproach (...) Christ greater
honor than all the treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11.26. If you will take up the
^^count aright, thus you will value it: for indeed God himself is your praise,
Deuteronomy. 10.21. Christ himself the glory of his Israel, Luke 2.32. And what weight
then (in the balance of any impartial judgment) can the rotten breath of a
mortal creature, and the glittering of rotten wood in the night hold, when the
Creator is in the other scale?

The third Stale is Pleasure, a wanton, petulant, luxurious pack, which (in
respect of your youth) if God keep you not, will easily draw away your hearts
from the love of Christ. She has all the properties of an Harlot. By means of
a whorish woman shall a man be brought to a piece of bread, (Prove. 6.26.) and
he that loves pleasure shall be a poor man, (Prove. 21.27.) they that live in
pleasure are dead while they live, (1 Timothy 5.6.) stinking coarses, buried in
living bodies^ Oh take heed of this perfumed piece of Carrion.

Perhaps she will send in her Brokers; voluptuous, vain persons, (nay perhaps
she will have your own hearts) to plead for he^ What? should you bury the April
of you^ years in a Winter of sullen melancholy^ May you not (specially in
youth) enjo^ some pleasure? and refresh your selves wit^ the delights of the
Sons of men? Truly o^^ gracious Lord is far from interdicting us an^ lawful, or
true pleasure. To wallow as Swine in the mire, to pollute our souls, which he
has washed in that precious fountain opened (in the side of Christ) for sin,
and for uncleanness; as a Dog to lick up our vomit; as that Demoniack to dwell
among the Tombs, (Mar. 5.3.) and converse with the dead in their graves, this,
(if this be pleasure) our Lord has prohibited. But surely whosoever account
these things delightful, must needs also rank themselves with hoggs, dogs, and
demoniacks. Your Father allows you a sober, and wholesome use of all his
creatures for your comfort, and refeshing: and lest this should be too little,
gives himself to be your Pleasure, and joy; bidds you ^o rejoice in him, and
again to rejoice, Phil. ^4.4. he allows, and gives you joy unspeakable, and
glorious, (1 Pet. 1.8.) provides for you fullness of joy, and everlasting
pleasures, Psalm. 16.11. He will be to you a fountain ^f life, and will make you
to drink, and abun^antly satisfy you with rivers of his pleasures, Psalm. 36.8,
9.

The Lord of glory offers himself, and his ^onjugal love unto you, to endow you
with ^ll his goods, with himself, the supreme, the ^nfinite Good. Are there no
pleasures in his ^mbraces? If you sit down under his shadow, ^ou will find
great delight; and his fruit will (...) most sweet unto your taste, Cant. 2.3.
If a man who has married some fair, lovely, and loving Spouse, should yet dote
upon a stinking, but perfumed, and painted Harlot, who scorns not his folly?
who detests not his perfidious, and perjurious wickedness? who looks on him but
as a man impotioned, and with strong sorceries bewitched? God proffers himself
to you as a Father, offers the Son, and Heir of his glory into your bosom, and
shall we leave this glorious Spouse to follow those dirty Prostitutes, sinks of
all uncleanness, and filthiness? The good Lord keep our hearts from such a
witchery. Now therefore fence your hearts from such enchantments with these
thoughts.

No other passage? what? no way but this
Can bring my Pilgrim soul to rest, and bliss?
Proud Seas in Giant waves against Heaven ri^e,
And casting mounts, fight with loud^thundring Skies,
Skies charge their double Cannons, and let fly
Their fires, and bullets; waters hizz, and fry.
How shall my tired Bark climb those mounts? how sh^^
It fall, and not than hell much deeper f^ll?
How shall a Potsheard stand one Volly? how
Shall glass cut through such storms, with brittle prow?
Were sails as wings to mount me over those hills;
Who could secure me in those lesser rills?
Where Sirens fill the ear, and eye with wonder:
I more fear calm than storms, more songs than thunder.
Lend to the Latin Siren eyes, and ears,
Her face will seem an Angel, voice the Spheres.
The Belgian melts the soul with sugared strains,
Drops Wine, and looseness into swilling veins.
A third Gold, Plenty, Wealth, abundance sings:
And binds the captive car with ^ilver strings.
A fourth guilds all her notes with Thrones, and Crown^^
So Heaven in earth, glory in honor drowns.
The last powrs honey from her pleasant Hive,
So stings, and kills, and buries men alive.
Lord steer my Bark: draw thou mine eye, and ear
From those vain frights, thy Word, and thee to fear.
Lord tune my heart to hear (in Saintly throngs)
More music in thy thunders, than their songs.
Make me to think in all these storms, and charms,
In Sirens notes, and thundering Worlds alarms,
Thy presence is my guard, my Port thy, Bed and arms^
But is such a match feasible?

CAP. XIII.
There is no impossibility, or very much difficulty to attain it.

TRue it is that Satan as an old, and expert Pandar, with exquisite art, and
cunning labors both to obscure the radiant beams of that Sun of Righteousness,
lest that great Light the Image of God, and Brightness of his glory, (Heb.
1.3.) should shine forth unto us, (2 Cor. 4.3, 4.) and in dark shadows to
kindle those rotten sticks of superstition, error, profit, pleasure,
preferment; so with these glistering shows of false light to draw away our
eyes, and hearts from our Lord, and true Spouse to the adulterous love of these
painted S^rumpets.

And truly it is with us, as with some silly children: we are more taken with
the glaring dust of rotten wood, than with those glittering beams of that great
Light of Heaven: yet were not these eyes, and heart as wicked, and as (if not
more) deceitfu^ as he; ( deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked,
Jer. 17.9.) he could not s^ ^asily bewitch us with those false blazings of
plaistered, and painted beauties. But when he without, and our hearts within
are cunning to deceive, hence it comes, that these loathsome Harlots seem
altogether lovely (which indeed are sheer vanity) and he, who in truth is
altogether lovely, (Cant. 5.16.) has his visage so marred more than any man,
and his form more than the Sons of men, that he has, in our eyes, no form, or
comeliness; and when we see him there is no beauty why we should desire him,
Isa. 52.14. and 53.2.

I have therefore before (as I could, weakly) endeavored to uncover as well
the loathsome deformity of those hellish Stales, as also the glorious beauties
of our gracious Lord. But who is su^^icient? (2 Cor. 2.16.) and who less
sufficient than am I? Blessed be the Father of lights who has in any measure
purged, and cleared our dimm, and abused eyes to discern the abhorred
filthiness of the one, and the excelling excellency of the other.

Now if our poor souls enamoured on his perfections should say, Blessed indeed
is the hand that weds, and the heart that beds him! But I am a worm, and no
man: what hope to match with so great a Lord? I am a dead Coarse; dead in sins,
and trespasses; a painted Sepulcher, a grave full of dead Corpses, what
possibility for such a wretch to rise up to so high an advancement? How should
such a Body of death be espoused, and match with the Life of the world, with
Eternal Life? who shall woo him for me? who can win him to me? Let me satisfy
you in this doubt.

To conclude this match we have more use of our ears, than of our mouths. He
(oh incomprehensible mercy! oh unconceivable goodness!) He wooes us. He offers
treaties, nay entreaties of marriage with us. He employes Ambassadors
purposely to beseech us, and they pray us in Christ's stead, (2 Cor. 5.20.) nay
he gives us Liegers, who daily negotiate, and solicit this marriage, that we
would be espoused, as a chaste Virgin, to Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2.

Stay here awhile, and wonder. Let us take a better view of this strange love,
and dealing of our Lord: let us ravish our hearts with admiration of his
goodness. Shall the King of Kings beseech a Traitor to be reconciled? Shall the
Creator descend to wedd, nay to woo the Creature? the clay of his hands?
Shall the Lord of Angels (he is no less) offer himself in union, and communion
with Devils? we are no better, Ioh. 6.70. (children of Satan, Ioh. 8.44.
Children of hell, Matthew. 23.15. nay Captives of the Devil, 2 Timothy 2.26.) Shall
God the Father give his Son, shall God the Son give his life, shall both give
their blessed Spirit to such hellish, cursed enemies? Oh the infinite miracles
of this mercy! And yet is his mercy more miraculous, or our madness more
prodigious? We will not come, (Joh. 5.40.) we must be drawn to this happiness,
Ioh. 6.44. The traitor stripped for execution rejects mercy: the Creature
scorns the Creator, and worse than Devils (who have no such offer) refuses to
be restored to Heaven, and reunited to the Lord of Heaven: and yet he (after
many denyals) waits to be gracious unto us, (Isa. 30.18.) and we after so long
gracious waiting persist in our denial: and ye^ he persisteth still in his
gracious purpose, and never leaves us till overcoming our stony hearts with
his soft love, and tender mercies, he wins us to be happy in his grace, and for
ever blessed in his glorious embraces.

Is not he a God of purer eyes than to behold iniquity? Hab. 1.13. And what are
we but sinful dung, and corruption? Is not he a consuming fire to sinners? Heb.
12.29. And what are we but stubble, and fuel for everlasting burnings? How then
is it that we have found favor in his eyes? How is it that we are (as that
burning bush) unconsumed? Certainly because he is God, and not man, Hos. 11.9.
nay because he is God, and Man, delighting in mercy, Mic. 7.18.

Now that we may be the more willing, and ready (with all humility, and
thankfulness) to entertain, and with all confidence of faith to expect this
high and happy advancement, let us steadfastly fasten our eyes first upon our
selves, secondly upon him, and take a right view, (for a full, we here cannot)
as well of our misery, as his mercy; by his own hand exquisitely pencil'd out
to us. Let us set up the picture of it (being a piece very excellent) in the
best room of our hearts, that it may be continually in our sight, and
remembrance, we shall have it, Ezekiel. 16. from the 2 to the 15 verse.

First, Therefore Gods Spirit there presents to our eyes, (in gross) and shows
us our abominations, ver. 2. And hence so frequently in the world the Lord
culls out the most abominable, and loathsome things as parallels for us: our
very sacrifices, and service (infected with our contagion) abominable, Prove.
15.8. our very Incense (which should sweeten all our service) mere abomination,
( Isa. 1.13.) our very beauty abhorred, ( Ezekiel. 16.25.) and our excellency
hateful, and loathsome, Amos 6.8.

2. In particular. 1. Our Birth abominable, as cursed Canaanites, ver. 3. whom
the Land (as a loathsome vomit) spewed out, Lev. 18.27, 28. we are born
enemies, (Romans 5.20.) haters of God, (Romans 1.30.) 2. We are unwasht, filthily
polluted in our own blood, v. 4, 6. and even wallowing in our mire, and death;
rejoicing in evil, and delighting in froward wickedness, Prove. 2.14. 3. In all
this misery unpittyed, ver. 5. No creature, (not our selves) had any compassion
of our poor souls; helpless, hopeless, senseless. 4. Lastly, we were
Cast-awayes; despised, scorned, the Refuse of the Creatures, v. 5. As some
strumpets cast out their misbegotten births, and are asha^ed of their fruit, so
the earth was abashed to look on us (her misshapen Offspring) we were the shame
of our Mother. And what could now be added to this misery, but the end, and
last act of this Tragedy, even hell fire, and brimstone, into which we were
posting without stop, with all our might, by wilful rebellion, and stubborn
wickedness?

Turn now, and fix your eye upon that miracle of Gods love, and mercy. He whom
we had provoked, despised, he whom we hated, he, only he pitties us: so pitties
us, that even (when we were dead, and buried in the belly of hell) he gives us
life, ( v. 6.) the life of himself our God: even his Son, the life of the
world, eternal Life. 2. With life he gives us growth, and increase, v. 7. the
increase of God, (Col. 2.19.) to which end he gives ^s also faithful Pastors
to build us up till we attain to the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. 3. He enters into Covenant with us, swears, and
vows his love unto us, his conjugal love, v. 8. sends messengers to woo, win,
and espouse us to himself, 2 Cor. 5.20. and 11.2. 4. He washes, ( thoroughly
washes us from all filthiness, Ezekiel. 36.25.) and anoints us with Oil, (v. 9.)
neither thought he any Laver pure enough, till he had opened a Fountain for us
in his own side, and washed us in his heart blood, Zech. 13.1. Rev. 1.5. no
Oil he thought precious enough, till he had powered out his own Spirit to
anoint us, 1 John 2.27. 5. He clothes us as becomes the Spouse of such a
Majesty, v. 10, 11, 12. Neither could any Creature in Heaven, or earth give him
content in fitting us with ornaments. His own hand must frame our vesture, his
own righteousness must apparel us, his own glory Crown us. Yea he divests
himself to cloth us with himself, he puts on Christ upon us, Gal. 3.27. 6. He
furnishes a rich Table for us, v. 13. feasts us with fat things, full of
marrow, of wines on the l^es, well refined, Isa^ 25.6. No Bread ^avoury, and
fine enough for us (in his love) but the true Manna the Bread of Heaven: no
Wine pleasant enough, but that fruit of the true Vine, pressed, and wrung out on
the Cross; even his own Body, and Blood, Ioh. 6.35, 53, 55.

7. Lastly, He deforms our deformity, and conforms us to his own likeness: sets
his own beauty upon us, ( v. 14.) transforms us to the image of his own Son,
(Romans 8.29.) who is the Brightness of his glory, Heb. 1.3.

Know then, never did any passionate lover so deeply affect, and affectionately
woo his desired Spouse, as he the union of our souls with himself. A lover
watches diligently, and greedily catches all opportunities of conferring with
his beloved, and winning her heart. And does not he rise up early to draw, and
bring home our souls? Ier. 25.4. and 32, 33. A Lover breaks his sleeps to wait
at the door of his Love: and Is not his head filled with the dew? and his locks
wet with the drops of the night? Cant. 5.2. A Lover will not break off for
every denial, nor will be discouraged with many re^usals: and does not our Lord
wait to be gracious unto us? Isa. 30.18. even after we have wearied him with
our unkindness, Isa. 43.24. Some Lovers have ventured; He given his life for
his beloved, Ioh. 15.13. Seeing therefore such a Lover (so lovely) thus wooes
such wretches, (so loathsome) let us thus answer his suit, I.
Me Lord? can thou mispend
One word, misplace one look on me?
Call'st me thy Love, thy Friend?
Can this poor soul the object be
Of these love-glances, those life-kindling eyes?
What? I the Center of thy arms embraces?
Of all thy labor I the prize?
Love never mocks, Truth never lies.
Oh how I quake: Hope fear, ^ear hope displaces:
I would, but cannot hope: such wondrous love amazes^
II.
See, I am black as night,
See I am darkness: dark as hell.
Lord thou more fair than light;
Heavens Sun thy Shadow: can Sunns dwell
With Shades? 'twixt light, and darkness what commerce
True: thou art darkness, I thy Light: my ray
Thy mists, and hellish foggs shall pierce.
Wit^ me, black soul, with me converse.
I make the ^oul December flowery May,
Turn thou thy night to me: I Will turn thy night to day.
III.
See Lord, see I am dead:
Tomb'd in my self: my sel^ my grave.
A drudge: so born, so bred:
My self even to my sel^ a slave.
Thou Freedom, Life: can Life, and Liberty
Love bondage, death? Thy Freedom I: I tied
To loose thy bonds: be bound to me:
My Yoke shall ^as^, my bonds shall ^ree.
Dead soul, thy Spring of life, my dying side:
There dye with me to live: to live in thee I dyed.


If then the hopes of such a match are so fair,

CAP. XIV.
What are the means to bring Christ, and our Souls together?

AS it is in the earthly, so also in this heavenly Contract. The Man is the
Suitor; the Woman is Wooed. In him is required to ask, and seek; in her only to
accept, and consent. Christ loves first: then we, 1 Ioh. 4.19. He in love
proffers himself to us, and we (when he has wonn us) embrace his offer with
love, and willingly receive him. His hand whereby he give^ himself, is his
Word; (the Gospel, written, his Love Letters, Preached, his wooing) our hand
whereby we receive him is only our faith: by which the Understanding assents,
and the Will consents: so the only condition, and demand of God for
consummation of the ^ontract, is Faith.

First therefore, That Father of lights (by the light of his word) discovers to
us the person of the Lord Jesus in his nature; God, and Man. 2. In his Offices;
King, Priest, and Prophet. 3. In his Relation to us^ Husband, Head, Savior. 4.
In his love, and actions of love: Incarnation, Humiliation, Exaltation. This
light he so effectually brings home to us by the work of his Spirit; that
whereas (heretofore) we saw no beauty in him that we should desire him, ( Isa.
53.2.) now we see no beauty but in him: we behold his glory, as the glory of
the only begotten Son of God, Joh. 1.14. And so strong an impression does it
work, that the Understanding (convinced by Gods Spirit) receives the
testimonies, subscribeth, and seals to this truth of God, (Joh. 3.33.) and then
plainly sees, confesses, and with joy so judges that all things are dung, and
loss in comparison of the excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus his Lord, Phil.
3.8. And this is the first act of faith, wrought in the Understanding, whereby
the Apprehensive faculty conceives this truth, and the Judicial signs it.

The second is in the Concupiscible faculty; ^or the same word by the same work
of Gods Spirit, which persuaded the Judgment ^o assent, draws on the Will to
consent: and ^s it gives power to the one to conceive, (...) to the other to
receive Christ aright. To ^his end the Word clearly demonstrateth as ^ell the
misery of man without him, as the ^appiness with him, and both infinite, (as
^oh. 3.36. and 1 Ioh. 5.12.) It sets out him in relation to us as the Vine, us
in relation to him as the Branches, Ioh. 15.1, etc. grafted in him we are
cleansed, fruitful, ver. 3, 4. but without him we can do, we can have nothing;
neither sap, nor fruit, but are withered, and burned, Joh. 15.5, 6. In him, and
his house we flourish, grow fat; and the more we grow in age, the more we grow
in fruit^ulness, (Psalm. 92.13, 14.) but out of him, (as the branches of a Vine)
altogether useless, cast into the fire for fuel, the fire devours both the ends
of it, and the midst of it is burnt, Ezekiel. 15.4. Vine-branches, (of all other)
are in the Vine most useful, and noble, out of the Vine most base, and useless.

It propounds him to us as an Husband^ us to him as a Spouse: Woman was mad^
for man, and without him is unfruitful, an^ useless: him to us as an Head, us
to him a^ his limbs, and body; In him we live, move, an^ have our being, Act.
17.28. without him w^ are senseless, dead, nothing.

And whereas the heart is easily draw^ with that triple cord, of profit,
pleasure^ preferment, it evidently discovers to u^ 1. Our gain, and great
advantage by him i^ life, and death, (Phil. 1.21.) all other things loss, Phil.
3.8. 2. The infinite delight, an^ sweetness in his shadow, Cant. 2.3. the fu^^
carouses out of the Rivers of his pleasures, Psalm. 36.8. the woe (Hos. 9.12.)
and torments of his absence, Rev. 14.10. so that our spirits refuse all
comfort, and are utterly overwhelmed, Psalm. 77.3. 3. The height of honor, and
advancement in him, Ioh. 12.26. ( Honos est in Honorante) Honor is in the
giver, not receiver. The more excellent the person is who gives honor, the
more excellent is the honor received from his hands. What comparison then
between the honor which comes from man, and the honor which comes from God
only? we are never truly honorable, but when we are precious in his sight,
Isa. 43.4. In him we are Kings, (Rev. 1.6.) and this kingdom heavenly, (2 Timothy
4.18.) and everlasting, (2 Pet. 1.11.) that cannot be moved, Heb. 12.28. out of
him we are Children of the Devil, (Joh. 8.44.) and so devils, (Joh. 6.70.) who
being thrown out of Heaven, and unworthy to be seated in any (the very lowest)
place formerly designed for the Creature, have a new, and peculiar place
prepared for them beneath all other, the Deep, (Luke 8.31.) and bottomless pit,
Rev. 20.1. where they are bound up in everlasting chains of darkness, Jude 6.

And yet further the Word shows us the easy conditions which in this Contract
God demands of us, subjection, obedience, and service to our heavenly Spouse.
And le^t our dimm eyes (which are easily taken up with the empty show, and vain
name of liberty) might be frighted (as with Bug-bears) when they look upon a
yoke; he has laid open the nature, and manner of this service, (concerning
which I shall say more in the next) so that the spirit of man sees in it the
glorious liberty of the sons of God, (Romans 8.11.) and no liberty but in this
bond, no rest, joy, or comfort but in this sweet service. Most true it is that
no man can come unto Christ, unless the Father draw him, and as true, that
every man who has learned of the Father, comes unto Christ, Joh. 6.44, 45.
The cords therefore by which the Father draws us unto his Son, are those
lessons, whereby he teaches us. 1. In God, his love which passes knowledge,
(Ephesians. 3.19.) the love of the Father giving us his Son, that we might not
perish, but have everlasting life in him, ( Ioh. 3.16.) and the love o^ the
Son, giving his life for us, ( Ioh. 15.13.) when enemies, (Romans 5.10.) 2. In us
ou^ extreme necessity of him, being of all Creatures the most miserable without
him, and infinitely blessed with him.

These are those cords of a man (for the will of man cannot be drawn by
violence of compulsion) the bands of love, Hos. 11.4. Thus our heavenly Spouse
wooes us; thus he speaks comfortably unto our hearts, ( Hos. 2.14.) and allures
us. Then the Will cheerfully consents, calls him Ishi ( my husband) not Baali (
Lord). Thus our Savior betroths us to himself for ever, betroths us in
righteousness, in judgment, in loving kindness, and we know the Lord, Hos.
2.16, 19, 20.

This is that root of faith, Col. 2.7. which springing from the incorruptible
seed of Gods Word ( Romans 10.17.) sends up the stalk of love, and working by
love, (Gal. 5.6.) brings forth the ear, fruitful in every good work, increasing
in some thirty, in some sixty, in some an hundred fold, Matthew. 13.23. This is
that hand of faith whereby when the Lord Jesus is offered unto us we receive
him, (Joh. 1.12.) 1. In the understanding, by conceiving aright of him,
learning Christ as he is taught us, (Ephesians. 4.20, 21.) 2. In the will, by
embracing him, Heb. 11.13. This is that grace of the Spirit, by which when we
are questioned in the Church (after those wooings of Christ in his word) Will thou have the Lord Jesus Christ to thy wedded Husband? will thou love, honor,
obey, serve him, and keep thee only unto him? the soul answers, I will, and so
gives it self to Christ, and by the seal of baptism becomes the sealed fountain
of the Lord Jesus, (See Cant. 4.12. with Prove. 5.18.) and is tied unto him in
an indissoluble knot of those everlasting espousals: so that neither death, nor
life, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come
shall be able to separate from the love, (Romans 8.38, 39.) from the board, and
bed of the Lord Jesus.

And is this all which is required in such a match? does he ask neither
portion, nor beauty, nor honor (nay gives all these) nothing but our hearts?
(filthy hearts that he may cleanse them, dead hearts that he may quicken them,
beggarly, and empty hearts that he may enrich, store, and fill them with the
fullness of God?) Oh then shut not the door against such a Suitor. Open your
heart for him; give it to him: where can you so well bestow it? how graciously
will he receive it? how lovingly will he cherish it? how sweetly will he
embrace it? and oh how infinitely happy, and blessed will you be in his sweet
embraces.

But is there nothing else demanded but the heart, and will in this spiritual
match, and union with Christ? Nothing more to make the match; but after the
marriage, those conjugal duties are required, which will soon make us feel and
confess how happy we are in such an espousal. Hearken then willingly to his
suit, and thus in your hearts cheerfully answer him.

Behold, behold me: view, search every part:
Let beauty woo thy eyes, thy eyes thy heart.
Thou do, Lord, what thou speak; I somewhat see,
That I see nothing, nor my self, nor thee.
'Noint thee: what see thou now? What tongue can tell?
In thee ten thousand heavens, in me an hell.
How like thy self poor soul? how like thou me?
Lord, I am dung, and all things dung to thee.
I made thee first, and come, now, new to make thee;
I^ then thou like, stretch ^orth thy hand, and take me.
Take thee? Lord thou more rich than heaven can make thee^
I poor; take thou no portion but to take thee?
Lord I am naked, foul, thou can but loath me thee:
Ask'st thou no beauty but to cleanse, and cloth me?
Oh I am base: my self my self disdain:
Will thou no honor, but with thee to reign?
Is this thy whole demand, to leave mine own,
And take thee for my portion, beauty, Crown?
A glorious offer: madness to refuse it:
An easy choice: yet wretch I cannot choose it.
Maimed wretch! I see my bliss; yet, till thou make it,
I have no will to choose, no hand to take it.
Let the hand, which thee, which all thy glory proffers,
Give me an hand to take thy glorious offers.
Form, draw mine eyes; so shall I still behold thee^
Make, hold my hand: so shall I take, grasp, hold thee.
CAP. XV.
What are the duties of a Soul married to Christ?

THat humble Widow esteemed it no little grace, that a man so mighty a^ Boaz
should take any notice, or show the least favor to her so poor a stranger,
Ruth^ 2.10, 13. No doubt but looking upon her self in her Widow-hood, and
desolate condition, in a low ebb of poverty, and on her Nation branded by God,
and shut out of his Congregation ( Deuteronomy. 23.3.) she could see nothing in her
self worthy of his eyes, and acceptance. Yet had she many commendable
endowments; such as might prefer her to a very honorable espousal. Her wifely
kindness to her former Husband, ( Rut^ 1.8.) her obedient fast love to a
Mother-in-law; her strength of youth, and (no question) beauty; but above all,
virtue, and holiness known, and famed. All these meeting in one might make up a
worthy portion, when the Judgment held a right balance, and weighed things
not as they seem^ but are.

How then should we humble our abject souls before our heavenly Spouse? She was
a Widow; we (as our Proverb is) Grasswidows, neither Wives, nor Maids: we had
prostituted our selves to sin, and lust, and had played the harlots with many
lovers, Jer. 3.1, 2. She was poor: we miserable, and wretched, poor, blind, and
naked, Rev. 3.17. She a stranger: we Aliens from the commonwealth of Israel,
without God, without hope, Ephesians. 2.12. a corrupt, and corrupting seed, Isa.
1.4. She had many excellent endowments, we had none No good in our flesh, Romans
7.18. She a kind wife: we not only unkind, but treacherous, Ier. 3.20. She
obediently loving to a Mother in law; we hatefully disobedient, and obstinate
against an heavenly, and most gracious Father, Isa. 48.4. Tit. 3.3. She
youthful, beautiful: we full of the old man corrupt in lusts, Ephesians. 4.22.
Filthy, even to stinking, (Psalm. 14.3.) and loathsome, Prove. 13.5. She
virtuous, and holy: we out of measure sinful, and vicious. And he (our Spouse)
the true Boaz, (that is) strength, the mighty, the Almighty. How uneven a yoke?
yet our Will in all these defects received: willingness (in his unutterable
grace, and unconceivable mercy) being accounted, and accepted as our portion,
and beauty, and we in the day of our espousals) endowed with all his goods,
adorned with his beauty, and crowned with his glory.

But is it possible that when the Husband is so rich, great, excellent, nothing
should be demanded but heart, and will? To make the match nothing else, but
after it is made, all Conjugal duties required. And what are they? 1. Love, to
cleave to him in all dear affection. 2. Constancy, to hold us to him in all
estates, better, worse; 3. Chastity, to keep our selves only to him. 4.
Subjection, to obey, and serve him.

But this seems a very hard, and heavy burden. It is only so in seeming, and
to some only. As in the night many things seem very terrible, which in the day
are very delightful to the eye; As to a sick palate that meat seems very
i^ksome, which in health is sweet, and pleasing: so men that sit in darkness,
and look on these things with dimm eyes, imagine, rather than see many Buggs to
fright, and scare them; when their hearts are surfeted with sinful lusts, this
most sweet yoke is very distastful, and bitter: but where there is a new
Creature, and the sense uncorrupted, no soul is able to comprehend either the
full excellency of it, or to utter in any measure that little it does
comprehend. Let us therefor draw nigher, and take a better view of ^hese
things.

And 1. Love is as the object; very sweet, ^or very bitter: sometimes
excessively grie^ous, sometimes exceedingly pleasant. If ^he object be
loathsome, love is burthen^ome. Seven years for beauteous Rachel ^eemed but a
few days; but a few days for ^lear-eyed Leah would have been many years. 2.
Be the object very lovely, but not at all loving; such love is full of
vexation, and anguish. Thus Amnons fair Sister Tamar afflicted him to sickness,
and leanness, 2 Samuel 13.2, 3. 3. If the object be worthy, and reflecting our
love, yet if it prove unfruitful, it brings often more grief, than comfort.
Sarah's and Rebecca's beauty yielded their husbands less content, than their
barrenness trouble. The extraordinary kindness of Hannah's husband could not
(in barreness) so sweeten the bitterness of her soul, but that all meat was
distastful, and no drink relished but tears, 1 Samuel 1. But when all these meet;
when our hearts are pitched upon an object, 1. Lovely, and amiable; 2. Kind,
and loving; 3. Fruitful, and beneficial, our affection will rather need a
bridle than a spur; not a switch, but a snaffle.

If then we look upon our Heavenly Spouse, we shall see. 1. That he is fairer
than the Children of men, ( Psalm. 45.2.) altogether lovely, (Cant. 5.16.) his
beauty the longing of Saints, ( Psalm. 27.4.) the ravishment of Angels, ( Isa.
6.3.) from whose beams the whole world borrows its spark of beauty. 2. His Love
is first: preventing ours, 1 Ioh. 4.19. passing all (not only love but)
expressions, nay knowledge of all Creatures, Ephesians. 3.19. 3. The fruit of this
mutual love exceeding much, and glorious. It lifts up from a despised
condition, ( Cant. 8.1.) makes us honorable, Isa. 43.4. It prefers u^ from the
basest drudgery in the world, from the Skullery of Satan, to the bed of Heaven,
to the union, and glory of the Lord of Heaven, and earth, Ioh. 17.21, 22. In a
word it gives us perfection, elevates our abased nature above the Heavens, and
exalts it to the uttermost extent of which a Creature is capable: and therefore
justly termed the bond of perfectness, Col. 3.14.

To love therefore him, who is above measure lovely, above apprehension loving,
whose love ^ully perfects the beloved Lover, can be a burden to none but
those, who hate their rest, and love their burdens; yet were it a burden,
justly might he expect, and exact of us cheerfully to bear it^ For will not all
bonds of gratitude, and equity tie us to it? were it a burden for us to love
him our glory, life, heaven, it were far greater for him to love us his death,
hell, abasement. He loved us when dead, and no way but by his death to be
revived: he loved us when sunk into hell, children of wrath and Satan, and
never but by his descent into hell (even suffering that wrath) to be rescu^d.
He loved us when we were utterly fallen, thrown down from the highest honor to
the bottomless pit, when filthy, loathsome, stinking, and never but by his
abasement (from the form of God to the form of man, and of a servant) to be
restored, never to be washed but by his blood, never to be reformed but by his
deformity. If then not for love, yet for shame how should we deny to be pressed
for his, who was oppressed for our sake? to bear his cross, who has bor^ our
curse? to carry the heavenly burden (if any were) of his life, who has
undergone the hellish load of our death, and misery?

2. Secondly, We are enjoined to hold us close to him in all estates better,
and worse: This condition affrights many, and makes them shrink. But only
flesh, and blood is startled at it. Christ even to a carnal eye is beautiful in
his crown of glory, but in his crown of thorns they think he looks not like
himself: they have no pleasure in him: lovely on his Throne, loathsome on his
Cross. Alas poor souls! Is it another Sun which shines in his brightness, and
is shadowed in a cloud? The Moon interposing may eclipse the beams of the Sun
to us^ but can it stain, or diminish his glory, and excellence? A mask may
hide, but empairs not beauty. Is Christ less lovely, where he shows most love?
Look better upon him^ eye him at the whipping post, on the Cross. How do those
dying looks set out to life that incomprehensible love? Our words^ our thoughts
fall infinitely short of it^ Here only it stands out pencild to life in full
expression, and offers it self to our view in just proportion. How do those
fires ^^ love burn in his quenched eyes? what se^^ of love flow in every drop
of that precious blood? How many fountains of love, and life streaming from his
hands, feet, side open the very Cataracks of Heaven, an^ surround the World
with floods of love? w^ have no eyes if we stand not dazeld wit^ this Sun of
righteousness, more brightl^ shining forth in the beams of his love, from the
Axel-tree of his Cross, than from the sphere of his glory.

Some perhaps will confess that Christ never more manifested his love than on
hi^ Cross, but yet to take up his Cross, and follow him, cannot be but very
grievous, and painful. But Love is stronger than death, (Cant. 8.6.) and has
power to sweeten all pain, to overcome, and triumph over all trouble, and
grievance. The only reason why this way of Crosses is so tedious, is, because
there is none, or too little love to sweaten it. Why can Saints rejoice in
tribulation, but because the love of God is shed abroad in their hearts? Romans
5.3, 5. For if a little Sugar can sweeten the most bitter things which are
decocted in it, how much more shall that infinitely sweet love of God (with
great pleasure) relish the most distastful usages of the world, when they are
digested in it? How else did the Apostles rejoice to suffer shame? (Act. 5.41.)
How did Paul take pleasure in reproaches, necessities, in persecutions,
distresses for Christ's sake? 2 Cor. 12.10.

And yet what are these things which seem so intolerable to us? Certainly had
they not more frightfulness in our fancy, than in their own nature, they could
not possibly appear so fearful. Take out the worst of them, and view them with
a quiet, and settled judgment, and how will we laugh at our vain terrors?
Scorn, derision, and contempt of the world how strongly do they work on men's
fancies? or rather men's fancies on them? Who knows not that story of Socrates?
who when he was contumeliously abused, and kicked by a Ruffian, and his friends
in great anger, and disdain, asked him why he repayed not the injury, soberly
demanded, what revenge they would prescribe him: some counseled to serve a
Writ upon him, some to return the like, and to kick him again. He, pointing to
a^ Ass, not remote from him, answered, If that Ass had kicked me, should I
have sued him, or vied kicks with him? Even moral virtue could lift up this
Heathen to such an height of Wisdom, that looking down upon the bestiality of
such persons, he even scorned, that the scorn, and contempt of a creature so
much inferior, should reach so high as to dethrone his reason, and cast it
down into a brutish passion. How much higher does Christian wisdom mount up
the heavenly spirit, and enable it with contempt and pity to look down upon
scorn, and scorners, despising their insolences, and pitying their seduced,
and miserable persons, as no way able to reach up to that peace which it has
received in Christ, and to unsettle the quiet of a soul, whose conversation
((...)) is already in Heaven^ In a word, all these injuries are but so many
gemms in our crown; God weighing out to us for these momentary sufferings an
excelling excellent eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17.

May death, and the grave (the uttermost extent of worldly spite) though it
look grimm upon a carnal eye, yet a spiritual can behold it as a door of peace,
as rest in a bed ( Isa. 57.2.) where we sleep in the bosom of Christ, (1 These.
4.14.) as upon an estate much better than life, Philip. 1.23. Death to a
Chri^tian is his, his servant: (1 Cor. 3.22.) as Haman to Mordecai: It may set
up a gallows, ^egg us to execution, but by the power, and ^avour of the King
of Kings is suffered, nay ^ommanded to take us indeed, but to divest ^s of our
sackcloth, (our morning flesh, Job ^4.22.) to cloth us with the Kings robe
(his ^^ining righteousness) to mount us on his car^iages (who rides on the
Cherubims) to crown ^s with the royal diadem, and so to bring us ^^to the
eternal presence of the King of glory. ^he truth is, all that Christ asks of
us this ^ay is self denial; that emptying our selves ^f our selves, and of all
creatures, that we ^ay be filled with him, even with the fullness (...) God: oh
what in this is to be feared, if ^e fear not the height of our blessedness?

3. The third duty with he requires is, ^^at we should be entirely his, and
keep us ^^ly unto him. And this is nothing else but not to dishonor our selves
by debasing our souls, which he has so ennobled, to prostitute them to vile
lusts, and ignoble creatures; to use all other things as servants, and to enjoy
him as our Lord. If a great Prince should set his heart upon some poor Country
maiden; crown her his Queen, give her his subjects, some to serve her in her
chamber, some in the kitchen, and skullerie, some in higher, some in meaner
offices, what an abject baseness were it in her to take off her heart from such
a Spouse, and to set it upon some groom of her stable, or one of the
black-guard? Certainly the heart which once has tasted the kisses of the Lord
Jesus, is not only ravished with them, but looks upon all creatures (which are
but our servants) as dung (see Cant. 1.2. Philip. 3.8.) and knows well how
infinitely it should be debauched by changing his least favor for the highest
love of the highest creatures.

4. The last is obedience, and service: This also seems an hard condition to
those, who never knew what it was. Liberty is very sweet. How then should this
be bitter which is the only liberty, Gal. 5.1. the glorious liberty of the
Sons of God, Romans 8.21. For, 1. It is an easy, nay an easing Yoke: it taken off
all hateful Yokes, and heavy burdens. Isa^ 9.4. and 10.27. It gives rest.
Matthew. 11.29. Nothing commanded in this service, but what the heart chooses,
loves, freely does, and delights in doing: ( Psalm. 119.45, 97. and 40.8.)
nothing but what we prefer before meat, and drink; Job 23.12. But service is a
great abasement. Some service is more honorable than some command. This
obedience, and service renders us Kings, Exo. 19.5, 6. All this service may be
comprised in one word; Reign: Reign over thy lusts (which fight against thy
soul) by subduing them; reign over thy affections, and actions, by governing
them in that royal law ( Iam. 2.8.) In a word all his service is but ^oliness,
and holiness his likeness, and our blessedness: nothing but a double Heaven, an
Heaven within by Heavenly mindednes, and ^n Heaven without by an Heavenly
conver^ation: an Heaven on Earth by grace, walk^ng with God, and the Heaven of
Heavens ^ereafter in glory, reigning with God for ^ver.

Such our match, such our conditions: our ^oke is holiness; (and that the glory
of God) ^e is glorious in holiness (Exo. 15.11.) our ^oke fellow the most holy
God, the Prince of glory. ^hus then plead with your own spirits, and ^onfute
the lying sophistry of deceitful flesh.

I.
A grievous, heavy Yoke! bonds! burdens! cords!
Ungrateful Israel! his happy reign
Heaps plenty, peac^; mirth, sa^ety, honor hords;
Lades you with gold; is this your load? your Lords
Turns to your slaves; are these the bonds yea plain?
Tunes groans to songs: is this your Yoke, and chain?
Was wisest Solomon a Tyrant, peace
U^grateful Israel, thy ^alse grumbling cease:
Thy wealth his grievous bond; his heavy Yoke thy peace.
II.
Lord! Solomon was but thy shadow: he
A peaceful Prince, and thou the Prince of peace.
The world is Isra^ls type, who (blinded) see
Freedom in bonds, and bonds in liberty.
Thee they proclaym an hard man, hard to please^
Thy easy, easing Yoke lades with disease:
But murdering Satan, lust the soul oppressing,
The cheating world, by pleasing most distressing,
These are their gentle Lords, their cursed Yokes ^hei^ blessing^
III.
Poor souls have you no eyes? your eyes no light?
These old eyes nothing see^ see nothing true.
Get Perspectives; oh help your feeble ^ight;
Blind eyes make night as day, and day as night:
Turn to the light, and your old eyes renew.
Shake off hells spectacles, and better vieu
Your Lords, and service: had you light, and eyes,
How could you hate the truth, and love these lies?
Despise what you admire; admire what you despise.
IV.
Their Kings are servants; but his servants Kings.
Their rest an Iron Yoke; his Yoke your rest.
His wounds are salves: their salves are wounding stings.
His death brings life; their li^e death surely brings.
Their ^east a pining ^ast: his ^ast a feast.
His servants blessed when cursed; theirs cursed when ble^^.
Poor souls be wise: but if ye (fools) disdein
To serve this Lord in rest, serve those in pain.
Serve them in Hell, who scorn with him in Heaven to reign.
CAP. XVI.
What kind of service it is which his Spouse gives unto Christ.

THe hand is the bodies Steward, and Faith the souls hand. Both have a double
office, either to take in, or give out, to receive, or distribute what God
offers, faith takes; and gives what he demands. There is a bargain driven
betwixt God, and man, when God himself, and his Kingdom is assured upon man;
and man, and all his is passed, and made over to God by way of exchange, or
sale. Our Lord has not only laid down a price for us, even himself, ( Tit.
3.14.) and bought us (as we say) out, and out (1 Cor. 6.20.) but has also set
a price upon himself, and we must come up to his full price, or never have him.

We must buy that milk, honey, and feast of fat things, the sure mercies of
David, Isa. 55.1. etc. That gold tried by the fire, whereby we are made rich,
that white raiment, that ey^ salve (the riches of the Gentiles, the robe of
righteousness, the light of the world) the Lord Jesus must be bought, Romans
3.18. We must buy the truth, Prove. 23.23. The treasure in the field is bought,
and that Merchant sells all that he has to buy the goodly pearl, Matthew. 13.44,
46. Hence there is a mutual vouching. The Lord openly voucheth us for his
people, and we vouch him for our Lord, Deuteronomy. 26.17, 18. And to make the bargain
sure, and infallible, large, and precious; Earnest is given, even that blessed,
and Holy Spirit, (2 Cor. 1.22. Ephesians. 1.14.) which binds both seller and buyer to
stand to the bargain.

But what is the price at which God rates himself to us. 1. He challenges the
soul. All souls are his, Ezekiel. 18.4. he must have the heart, Prove. 23.26. all
the soul, all the heart, all the might, Deuteronomy. 6.5. The whole body must be
presented to him as a living sacrifice, Romans 12.1. He has paid for all, and so
(now) we are no more our own, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20. If he call for health, wealth,
life, all must be given him, Luke 14.26. else we (as that Ruler Mar. 10) go
away empty, sad, and hopeless.

But this seems to imply a contradiction: for to sell for a price, and to give
freely are contraries. Now Christ is given us, Ioh. 3.16. eternal life is the
gift of grace, Romans 6.23. Salvation is by gift, and grace, Ephesians. 2.8. We are
freely loved, Hos. 14.4. freely justified, Romans 3.23. Certain is it, and cannot
be denied, that never any thing was more freely, or bountifully given. We were
poor ( Rev. 3.17.) able to give nothing, unable to pay due debts; and our debts
infinite, Math. 18.24, 25. The Lord Jesus, our Surety, has purchased this
whole possession for us, and us for God, but he also most freely given us, and
all things with him, Romans 8.32. Nay even that which hereafter God demands of
us, (of which only here we speak) our trust in him, love to him, fear of him,
working for him, all these his most free gifts. He works all in us, and for us
( Isa. 26.12.) Will, and deed, Phil. 2.13. That therefore which we give him is
his own, and we cannot but confess (with that holy Prophet) All things come of
thee, and of thine own have we given thee, 1 Chro. 29.14. Indeed he commands us
to buy, yet asks he neither money, nor mony-worth, Isa. 55.1. Our righteousness
brings him neither profit, nor pleasure, Job 22.2, 3. and 35.7. No good we
can do reaches to him, Psalm. 16.2. when we give our selves, what give we but
vanity, ( Psalm. 39.5.) and nothing, 2 Cor. 12.11. The truth is God receives no
benefit from us, neither are they (if we speak properly) gifts to him from us,
but rather from him to us: not only because we first receive what after we
give, but specially because it is a great grace, and next to himself the
greatest gift he can bestow on us, that he will receive us, or any thing from
us. It is our infinite blessedness, and his infinite goodness, that he is ours,
and how much less is it (certainly next to that) that we are his, Cant. 2.16.
He calls for our bodies, and spirits: and are they out filthy, polluted,
abominable? how unworthy of him? But he calls for them to wash, and cleanse
them from all filthiness, Ezekiel. 36.26. they are dead in sins, he would have
them to quicken them, to put his Spirit into them, Ezekiel. 36.27. they are old,
corrupt in lusts, ( Ephesians. 4.22.) he would have them to renew them, Ezekiel. 36.26.
where can they be safe but under his wings? and how secure under his
protection? How miserable, and wretched when banished from his sight? but in
his house how infinitely blessed? Psalm. 65.4. How empty in his absence? but in
his presence is fullness of joy, and everlasting pleasures, Psalm. 16.11. And yet
God calls it buying, as well because he is pleased not only to demand it, but
accept it as our reasonable service, and testimony of our thankfulness. As
great persons lease out to some special servant, or favorite a fair land for
the annual payment of a pepper-corn; so deals our most gracious God with us,
gives us Heaven, and Earth, and himself the Lord of both, (because we have
found favor in his eyes) and desires no other rent but our poor selves, and
service, whose only riches it is to be his inheritance, and servants.

Thus the same hand of faith receives from our Lord himself, and his grace, and
gives to him our selves, and service, takes from him what he graciously offers,
and works for him (by love) what he justly commands. Now our work, and service
to our Lord is by himself sometime contracted into one head, or body, sometime
parted into three members. That which in one word comprizes our whole service
to God, is holiness. This he frequently, and straightly charges upon us, Be holy,
as I am holy, (Lev. 44.45.) As obedient children not fashioning your selves
according to your former lusts in your ignorance: But as he is holy, so be ye
holy in all manner of conversation, 1 Pet. 1.14, 15. It must be our daily work,
set work, which we must continually ply, and follow, until it be perfect, 2
Cor. 7.1.

Much I desire (if it please God to furnish me with means, and you with parts)
to see you bred up in all humane literature, that you may not be (as too many)
a burden only to others, mere cyphars in the world, to fill it up with idle
numbers: but much more do I longue to see you trained up in the School of
Christ, to be taught of him, as the truth is in Jesus. To put off the old man
corrupt in lusts, and to be renewed in the Spirit of your mind, and that ye put
on the new man, which is created in righteousness, and true holiness. Ephesians.
4.21, 22, 23, 24. Reason gives you a formal difference from other creatures,
and the polishing of it by humane learning will distinguish you from other
(almost brutish) men, but religion, and piety only makes you Christians,
perfect, and blessed.

Should I say, you cannot be complete men without holiness, it might seem a
paradox to carnal wisdom, but is a sure truth of Gods wisdom. For if
Philosophy will teach you that a man is a reasonable creature, Theology will
assure you that man was an holy creature, framed after the likeness of God,
without which likeness he is not perfect according to his creation. It is an
amiable sight to behold a mind beautified with all the lovely Ideas of humane
knowledge, and framed into a pleasant Garden, where all the various flowers of
earthly literature are planted, rooted, and fairly flourish. But oh what a
glorious Parad^se is that spirit of man which is grafted with all those
fruitful trees of Life? It is even Gods garden of pleasure in which his soul
delights: What an Heaven is that soul where all those glorious stars of
Prophets, and Apostles are fastened in the understanding, and the Throne of God
set up in the heart, where the Lord Jesus reigns, attended by all Saintly
thoughts, and Heavenly graces?

Now that you may willingly, nay joyfully yield up your spirits to be this
Paradise, and third Heaven, where God will dwell, work, and reign, let me show
you in brief^ 1. What holiness is. 2. How excellent. 3. How necessary. For the
1. As it is very easy for us to know the picture, if it be well drawn, when we
are thoroughly acquainted with the person, whose picture it is; so it will not
be difficult to know what holiness is in man, when we are informed what it is
in God^ because this holiness in us is nothing else but the image, and likeness
of the divine holiness.

Holiness in God is that substantial, and incomprehensible purity of the divine
nature, whereby he is wholly averse from all sinful filthiness, and infinitely
adverse to all filthiness of sin. He is a God of pure eyes that cannot behold
evil, that cannot look on iniquity: (Hab. 1.13.) nay in this respect he is a
consuming fire: (Heb. 12.29.) to Hypocrites, and sin^ers a devouring fire, and
everlasting burnings^ Isa. 33.14. Answerable (in our measure) i^ man's holiness.
For we are pure as he is pure, 1 Ioh. 3.3. In man therefore holiness is that
essential property of pureness, whereby he is averse from all sinful
uncleanness, nay contrary to all impuritie of sin. 1. Essential I call it, only
in that respect, as being the form differencing the true Christian from other
men, the spiritual from the carnal; And as in that gold with was dedicated for
the work of the Temple, the form, or shape of the golden Cherubims was
essential to that piece, distinguishing it from the Candlestick, snuffers, etc.
framed of the same matter, so this renewing of the Spirit of our mind, which
after God is created in righteousness, and true holiness, howsoever it be not
of the substance either of body, or soul, yet is it essential to the new man,
or faithful Christian, and of his being, by which he is a new creature.

Secondly this purity or divine nature of man consists of an averse, nay
adverse disposition to sinful uncleanness. It flies the corruption which is in
the world through lust, (2 Pet. 1.4.) hating it, (Romans 7.15.) loathing the
garment stained with it, (Jude 23.) nay themselves polluted with it, Ezekiel.
20.43. And no sooner is this new life brought forth in man, but instantly it
stands as adverse to sin as life to death, accounting it to be (as indeed it
is, nay so feeling, and accordingly hating it) as death, ( Romans 7.24.) a most
cursed, wretched, divelish, hellish death.

2. Secondly, the excellency of holiness will clearly appear in this, that it
is in man Gods likeness. To be like the Creator is the highest pitch of
honor, to which the most aspiring ambition of the creature can look. To be
above God cannot enter into a reasonable thought. As that excellent Father (
August.) so reason will testify, that every creature will contend for the
excellency of God, and cannot conceive God to be a substance, than which any
can be better. To be equal to God, and independent may be the ambition of the
devil, his Son Antichrist, or some transported with the like folly, and fury,
which yet ordinary reason will manifestly evince can never be attained, but to
be like to God is the supreme honor of the creature, and is not only possible
to be obtained, but obvious to Christians: God himself proffering, inviting,
nay entreating us to receive it. And surely if any thing in God could be more
excellent than other, holiness were it. For man verily swears by the greater,
but because God could not swear by a greater, he swore by himself, Heb. 6.13,
16. but when he chooses out any particular Attribute in himself to swear by it,
it is constantly his holiness. See, Psalm. 60.6. and 18.35. Amo. 4.2. Holiness
in God is his face, and beauty, frequently termed the beauty of holiness,
(Psalm. 110.3.) which the faithful soul most longues after ( Psalm. 90.17.) and
God stamps upon his beloved, Ezekiel. 16.14. And as in excellent substances their
excellence consists in their purity, when they are simple, and unmixt with
baser natures; (Thus in corporal substances gold the more pure, the more
precious, and in spiritual only the pure Angels, not the impure, are glorious)
so certainly in God his holiness, being the purity of the divine essence, is
the glory of it. He is glorious in holiness: (Exo. 15.11.) a glory far
surpassing all thought, or possibility of admiration; in which regard those
blessed Spirits, which stand in his presence, omitting other excellencies, but
ravished with the glorious beauty of his holiness, cry out in heavenly
ecsta^ies, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God! the whole Earth is full of his glory,
Isa. 6.3.

Herein then consists the eminency of holiness above all other qualities in
man, that he is not only by it, (and by it only) like unto God, but like him in
that, in which God is most excellent, even in his glory. The Heathens
themselves could discern a ravishing beauty in virtue, if men had but eyes to
behold it, but oh if God open to us an eye to discern these heavenly features
of the divine nature, and the bright beams of his holiness, ^he very Sun will
seem but dirt to it, and all the excellencies of all creatures mere dross, and
tinsoyl. Certainly the comely proportions of a perishing body (an earthly
flower) decked with the ornaments of some pleasing colors, are able to ravish
a fleshly eye, and winn unto it a carnal heart: But were the mind cleared to
behold a spirit (man, or Angel) shining in the divine beauty of Gods own
Image, how would that sight attract the soul, and strike it with amazement, and
wonder of that glorious luster?

3. Thirdly, as there is nothing in man, or Angel so excellent, so nothing so
necessary as holiness. For 1. This only gives us preeminency above other
creatures. Consider it well, and you shall easily find, that every creature
will justly challeng precedence, and outgo man without holiness. There is no
quality in us, this only excepted, but other creatures in it far surpass us.
If we boast of longer time, and durance than some other, the very stones in
this outgo us: If we plead, but with age we have life; even plants, and trees
outlive us: If we say we have sense also; how many beasts, etc. in hearing,
seeing, smelling, etc. go far beyond us? Some perhaps will object, we have
understanding, and discourse of reason, of which these are incapable: but in
this (alas!) the worst of all creatures (the Devils) claym a large
superiority, and wonderfully exceed us. Know it certainly without holiness,
you are inferior to every creature, even the most abject, and miserable.

2. All the blessings of God, and all his actions for our blessedness have this
mayn end to make us holy. We are elected by God in Christ that we should be
holy, Ephesians. 1.4. redeemed by Christ, that we should serve him in holiness, Luke
1.74, 75. called by the Spirit not to uncleanness, but holiness, 1 These. 4.7.
Therefore has God begotten us to himself by the word of truth, that we should
be as the first fruits of his creatures, (Jam. 1.18.) that is, sanctified, and
separated to his holy service. And as children cannot be but of the same kind,
and nature with their Parents, (else are they monsters) so must we as obedient
children be holy, as he is holy. 1 Pet. 1.14, 15, 16. Therefore has the Lord
Jesus espoused us, and given himself for us, that he might wash, and Sanctify
us, Ephesians. 5.26. Therefore the holy Ghost dwells in us as his Temples that we
should ^e holy, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. To the same end are all Gods ordinances given
us, the word, Prayer, Sacraments, even to Sanctify us, Joh. 17.17. Be assured
you can never have right to God ^s a Father, to Christ as a Savior, to the
bles^ed Spirit as your Comforter, without holiness. All these actions of God
for our good are ^rustrate to us, all his Ordinances unfruitful ^^us without
holiness: what soever Title, or ^steem we have with men in the world, yet ^ith
Christ, and Christians without holiness ^e are mere Infidels, and very echoes
of ^hristians.

3. There is no hope, nor possibility of glory, and that beatifical vision of
God without holiness. Without holiness no man shall see God, Heb. 12.14. nay no
man without it can possibly behold him. An inferior cannot possibly reach to a
nature transcendent, nor we without participation of this Godly nature see him
as God; there is no hope of this highest beatitude, unless we are thus
qualified.

4. Lastly, whatsoever we seem to men, (our selves, or others) what better are
we indeed than those cursed, and damned spirits without it? me thinks rather
worse. A wicked Angel is a sinful, filthy spirit; but a wicked man is both a
sinful spirit, and sinful flesh; filthy in both. The truth is, (and upon
serious consideration we cannot deny it) an unholy man is nothing else but an
incarnate f^end, a Devil in flesh, Ioh. 6.70. Now though even nature it self
will in general strongly incite the heart to seek with all diligence such
things as are for use most necessary, and mos^ excellent for our advancement,
yet for thi^ particular of holiness, even when our be^^ Judgment upon sound
deliberation has sub^scribed to these manifest truths, and we have seen, and
acknowledged the necessity, an^ eminency of this divine purity, yet th^^
cra^ty Enemy (by the assistance of those tw^ his special helpers, namely our
own wickedness within us, and the world without us) will ea^ily either dissuade
us for ever enterprizing such a quest, or at least cool, and dishearten us in
the pursuit of it.

Whenever Gods blessed Spirit has opened you an eye to behold with delight
the beauties of holiness, and drawing your heart to cleave unto it in love,
has set your face resolutely to a constant following it, Satan will not fail
to hinder by sending in some worldly person (yet under the pretense of a
friend, and welwisher) who shall counsel you not to be too forward, and shall
tell you, none are more despised than these hot zealous fellows; that they are
the table talk, and scorn of great ones; that such and such wise, and learned
men (who hope to come to Heaven with the first) laugh at this preciseness, and
take to themselves much more ^ibertie: that it is good to use moderation, and
so under the pretense of temper, (if ^ou take not good heed) they will bring
you ^o that abominable distemper of a lukewarm Christian, of whom Christ is
sick, and vows ^o vomit them out of his mouth, Rev. 3.16. ^ay he will get your
own heart to speak for ^im, and that will plead hard, and tell you: Oh! this
strictness, this Yoke of holiness is a ^ur, sad, melancholy life: no comfort,
no joy, no solace in it: and you are in your Spring: what? will you blast all
these fair blossoms of youth with such an austere, and sullen course? Nay, take
your time, while you may; use your youth, and pleasures, while the season, and
April of your age invites you.

But take great heed, and stop your ears against these Sirens: bind your selves
to that word of God, which will hold you fast, and keep you safe from these
strong enchantments. Open your ears to that best Counseler, the Lord Jesus, who
will tell you, that in the best of your service you are unprofitable, Luke
17.10. If you could run (but we hardly creep) yea could ye add wings to your
feet, to fly toward Heaven, yet could ye never be forward enough, when the Goal
is Heaven, and God himself, and his glory the Crown, the swiftest foot is too
slow to run, and the longest wing too sluggish to clip away to it.

But oh this disgrace, scorn, contempt We know not how to bear that. No? do w^
not see the Lord Jesus despised, rejected Isa. 53.3. Oh the base works, scoffs,
derisions which the Lord of glory suffered only for us, to bring us to glory!
It were a prodigious pride to desire, that we might b^ glorified by Christ's
sufferings, but never suffer for his glory. Nor let the contrary practice of
men wise, (in their way) and learned divert you. Yo^ know your calling: Not
many wise, not many learned, etc. 1 Cor. 1.26. A wiser than the wisest, the
Eternal wisdom of God calls us to zeal: Be zealous, Rev. 3.20. (...). Be
zealous for things spiritual, 1 Cor. 14.1. He that looks to the bu^ning love of
Christ toward his soul, flaming out even unspeakable sufferings, and thinks his
love to Christ, and his glory too hot, and fiery, proclaims to all the world
his gross hypocrisy, or rather palpable Atheism.

Let that sentence ever sound in your ears; He that is ashamed of me, and of my
words in this adulterous generation, of him shall the Son of man be ashamed,
when he comes in the glory of his Father, with his holy Angels, Mar. 8.38. But
that blasphemy, whereby sin, and Satan would persuade us that holiness is the
very damp, and death of all mirth, the bar that stopps our way to profit, or
honor, is a notorious slander of that Father of lies, a loud ly, that of all
the rest deserves the whetstone. When our Father commands us to be holy as he
is holy, does he interdict us pleasure, riches, honor? Is there any so holy as
our God? and does his holiness extinguish his joys, and the pleasures at his
right hand? Does his holiness impoverish him, dispossess him of Heaven, and
Earth, does holiness dethrone him, or embase his glory? nay is it not his
glory? Exo. 15.11. where did he forbid us pleasure, profit, honor? Indeed if
the drudgery to sin, and Satan be honor, such honor he has interdicted; if
bartering Heaven for Earth, our Angel-like souls for dust, if this be profit,
such profit has he forbidden; If the hoggish wallowing in the mire of sinful
filth, the dog-like licking up of an hellish vomit, the lying of our living
souls (rotting, and stinking) in a grave of lust, if this be pleasure, such
pleasure Hell affords, he denies. No, no, our gracious God has not only
permitted us to use all creatures for our good, and comfort, but has straightly
commanded us to set our hearts upon, and to covet, and that most earnestly, the
best gifts, 1 Cor. 12.31. He has purchased the rich portion of grace, and
inheritance of glory for us. He has stored up for us durable riches, ( Pro.
8.18.) and exhorts us to provide, and fill everlasting baggs with never failing
treasures, Luke 12.33. He has con^erred upon us most glorious honor, to be
heirs of his Kingdom, and gives us command to unbridle our ambition, and with
the most vast desires of our heart^ to seek this glory, and promises to fill us
Psalm. 81.10. Matthew. 6.33. Romans 2.7. Tha^ fountain of life pours out rivers of
pleasure, and commands us to drink abundantly, Psalm. 36.8, 9. Cant. 5.1. Beside
other numberless objects of joy he has given us himself, the greatest, the
only, the infinite good, and commands us again, and again to rejoice in him,
Phil. 4.4.

Let us therefore fire our hearts with earnest longuings after this divine
nature, follow hard toward it, and never faint in the pursuit. Be not ashamed
of Christ, and of his truth, in this hypocritical age, which profess Christ,
and serve the world, give to him the Title of Lord, but heart, and hand to
every lust. Think no age unripe to be Gods Child; no estate too great to be
Gods Heir. The service of Princes (how much more of God?) are great
preferments. Beware of that hellish proverb, A young Saint, an old Devil. Those
young Saints, Joseph, Samuel, Daniel, Jeremy, John Baptist, etc. how glorious
were they once in the militant Church? and now, and ever in the triumphant?
Seek for earthly literature, and knowledge; study, and labor for it, but
thirst for holiness, longue for it, strive, sweat for it, Let it be all your
ambition ((...), 2 Cor. 5.9.) to please God, and to be accepted with him. And
thus commune with your own hearts.

I.
Is this the Yoke which fools abhor, to be,
(Great Lord) made like to thee?
Is this a burden? Cannot flesh endure
To be as thou art, pure?
Is this so scorned, so loathsome a condition?
Poor swinish soul! can thou desire
To be an Hog? daubed, cased in mire?
Is this the height of thy deep ^al^ ambition?
II.
This all the service which thou do desire,
To wash me from my mir^?
This all the burden which thou laist upon me,
To set thy beauty on me?
That beauty, which those glorious Spirits viewing,
Are rapt in heavenly ecstasies,
Drink healths, and making drunk their eyes,
Sing, drencht in amorous joys, thy praise renewing.
III.
How beauteous is thy house? thy spangled Court?
Yet to thy beauty dirt.
How glorious is the Sun, the spring of light?
Yet to thy glory night.
How bright thy Angels in their spritely ^eature?
Yet to thy brightness smoke to fire.
How then should we (poor souls!) admire
Thy beauty, glory, brightness in thy creature.
IV.
Oh what am I (my Lord!) without thy likeness,
But a dull dying sickness?
Stripped of thy Image, and that God-like ^eature
I, less than any creature.
The meanest, senseless, liveless overgits me,
And goes beyond me; stones last longer,
Flowers are saire^, trees are stronger:
The beasts out-sense, the Devils self outwits me.
V.
Let Swine then serve their muddy lusts, and ly
Mir'd in their stinking s^ie.
Dogs serve the ravening world, devour, be sick,
Spew, and their vomit lick.
But oh let me renew my first condition,
Con^orm'd unto thy glorious beauty
Serve thee in every holy duty.
This my whole honor, this my sole ambition.
Holiness is the body of our service,

CAP. XVII.
What then are the branches?

HOliness spreads it self into three may^ branches, S^brietie, Righteousness,
and ^odliness, Tit. 2.12. Sobriety, or Temperance, may be thus described. It
is that fruit of the Spirit, whereby we are enabled to moderate our selves, our
affections, and actions in the use of the creature. 1. It is wrought in us by
the holy Ghost, and is his fruit, Gal. 5.22, 23. It is ta^ght us by the word of
grace, the Gospel, Tit. 2.11, 12. And thus it differs from that moral virtue,
with which we may observe many heathens fairly to glister. Have ye never seen
dishes of fruit stand out upon some shops, composed o^ wax, and curiously
painted? How much more fair, and lovely do they seem to the eye, than the same
natural fruit, which you pluck from the tree? But if you weigh them in your
hand, or (much more) if you ta^^ them, what a palpable difference do ye find
between these made, artificial apples, and the natural? Pictures may be fairer
than the substance, but they want the life, and use of the substance. I have
seen a crab more pleasant to the eye than the apple, which sprung from a noble
graft, planted on the same stock; but to the taste how hateful the crab? the
apple how delightful? Till we are cut off from the first Adam, and grafted into
the Second, all our fruits are as the apples of Sodom, abominable, and
loathsome. 2. Secondly, whereas our Lord has bestowed all his creatures upon
us, the act, and exercise of Temperance is so to moderate our minds in
receiving, our affections in desiring, and our actions in using them, that we
abuse them not, 1 Cor. 7.31. Let me more clear it by instancing in some
particulars.

1. A special inward gift to man is knowledge, which is (as the object) more
excellent in things spiritual. Here Sobriety will bridle, and rein in the
understanding when it is spurred on by Curiosity to pry into the Ark, and not
suffer it to break through to the Lord, lest we perish, Exo. 19.21. There are
things secret, and revealed, Deuteronomy. 29.29. as therefore it will not palliate
defects, but put us on diligently to search the scripture, and to find out the
things which belong to us; so in the excess it will stop us, when our itching
eyes, and ears would carry us beyond those bounds, ( Exo. 19.12.) which our
Lord has set us. It will curb the thoughts, and hold them in, that they shall
not think more highly than they ought, but think soberly, Romans 12.3. 2. Whereas
every member has his place, and proportion in the body of Christ, and several
duties allotted them (every one in his calling,) Sobriety will so temper our
spirits, that it will keep us in our rank; and not suffer us either to boast of
a false gift, lest we prove (as those spots in love feasts) clouds without
rain; (See, Prove. 25.14. Jude 12.) nor yet under a mask of voluntary humility
to intrude our selves in things which we have not seen, vainly puffed up in our
fleshly mind, Col. 2.18. Thus it moderated that great Apostle, and kept him as
we say in his tedder; that he should not exceed the compass of his own measure,
2 Cor. 10.13, 14, 15. And for want of this virtue, many in these times (which
bear a great hulk, and seem great ones in the eyes of deluded, and bewitched
professors, ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the
truth) breaking out of their rank, are neither sheep, nor dogs of the flock,
but wolves deceiving, and being deceived, 2 Timothy 3.13.
But much more apparent is the exercise of this grace in things without. As. 1.
It empales a man in his proper calling, and persuades him with quietness to
work, and eat his own bread; and suffers him not to live idly, or disorderly,
as a busy-body, (2 These. 3. verse. 11, 12.) and yet keeps off the shackles of
earthly cares; it empales, but imprisons not in his calling; nor so enslaves
him to worldly affairs, but that he may have all requisite liberty, and
enlargement to the heavenly. He serves not his calling, but God in it.

Secondly, in his estate it settles the heart in a quiet contentation.
Emptiness shall not breed greediness, nor fullness pride. It teaches him to
want without grudging, and to abound without swelling, Phil. 4.12. 3. In
recreations it keeps a middle way, equally distant from sullenness, and mad
mirth. It will suffer the heart sometime to be drenched in sorrow, never
drowned, to swim sometime, never to sink in pleasure. It will instruct the
spirit to be sometime thoughtful, sometime joyful, never cheerful. Lastly, for
things indifferent it moderates our desires, and practice, to use them with
comfort, without sin. In food it teaches us tim^, and measure; to eat in
season, to refreshing, and not to surfeting, Eccl. 10.17. to quicken, not damp
our spirits; to whet not dull them for our work. It apparrels us neither
garishly, nor gaudily; not slovenly, nor curiously; but fitts the matter, and
manner to the person, sex and calling. In marriage it teaches them that have
wives to be as if they had ^one, 1 Cor. 7.29. to rejoice with the wife of his
youth, not ravished with a stranger; to be satisfied, (not consumed) with her
love, Prov^ 5.19, 20. In sleep it allows renewing, not slugging; recovering of
strength, not mispending time. It is the special direction of Gods Spirit to
keep in the middle way, and not to turn to the right hand, or to the left,
Deuteronomy. 5.32. This is that middle path, the strait way to felicity: study to
find it, and strive to walk in it.

There are two bypath which Temperance (above the rest) loudly warns you to
decline. They are very broad, much beaten, strongly alluring, in which many
thousands every day perish. The first is Rioting, and drunkenness; the second
Chambering, and wantonness, Romans 13.13. Of the former we may now complain as
did once that holy Bishop ( August. epist. 48. Vincentio) This pestilence (of
drunkenness) far and near, so wastes men's souls, and with so much
Licentiousness reigns, and tyrannises, that I should much marvel if it did not
infect your little flock. How fi^ly does he call it a Pestilence? Never was any
plague so infectious, spreading, and dangerous: hardly, and seldom cured;
deadly, destroying soul, and body. We hear God damming it, (1 Cor. 6.9. Gal.
5.21.) heathens branding it, all (even drunkards) deriding it, none but ashamed
to own it, and yet see the most, most shamefully practicing it. Look on it in
the fruits, ( Prove. 23.29. to the end) Woe, sorrow, strife, babbling, causless
wounds, sore eyes, poison, death, lust, perverse speaking, security, hardness,
and lastly, an incurable habit of swilling, and following wicked company;
consequently beggary, (ver. 21.) and sudden perdition, Luke 21.34.

There was never such a monster bred in Africa as the Drunkard makes himself.
He has a Crabbs foot, (that cannot set one step forward) a Swines belly
(swelled with swill, a very hog-trough) the heart of Leviathan, (hard as the
neither millstone, Job. 4.24.) a Goats eye, (fired with lust;) and a Devils
mouth flaming in hellish blasphemy: His flesh is nothing but a Q^agmire, and
the whole lump a breathing swiltub, and (as one fitly speaks a walking, (and
steaming) dunghill. But sottish men will ordinarily (by way of excusing)
further accuse, and indict themselves.

Oh (say they) it is not so much the drink I respect, as good company. Good
company! how much better might thou find in a Pesthouse? and what worse in
hell? It is the company of which we are specially warned; Be not among
wine-bibbers, Prove. 23.20. To be drunken, and to sit, and drink with the
drunken is the same in the holy Ghosts expression. (Compare, Matthew. 24.49 with
Luke 12.45.) The good Lord keep you out of this quick-sand. For it is with
drunkards as with drunken sands. It swallows up irrecoverably, and drinks down
into the belly of hell who^soever strikes upon it.

Neither is uncleanness, or wantonness less dangerous, or loathsome. The more
ye grow up to youth, the more closely cleave to the guide of your youth, (
Prove. 2.17.) See, Psalm. 119.9. Lay near to heart, nay lock up in the midst of
your heart, all those precious counsels of that Eternal wisdom, and your
heavenly Father. My Son give me thy heart, and let thine eyes observe my ways:
for a whore is ^ deep ditch, and a strange woman a narrow pit, Prove. 23.26,
27. Read, and even get by heart, Prove. 2.23. to the end, and 7. chapter

Were it possible to cut off your arm, and to graft it into a Bear, and the
Bears leg into your shoulder, how would your soul abhor such an exchange? How
much worse is it to take the members of Christ, and make them members of an
harlot? 1 Cor. 6.15. Be careful also, and very watchful, (with all instance I
charge you) to avoid all single uncleanness; ( Onans sin, Genesis 38.) which is
the more dangerous, as it is less regarded. Give up your hearts day, and night
(in prayer) to God, and put them into his hand: importunately beseech him ( who
keeps his Israel) to watch over you, and to fence you from tentation; and
looking up unto his gracious providence, timely (as God shall provide for you)
retire unto his Ordinance of marriage, if the Lord endow you not with the gift
of continence. Remember your bo^dies, and souls are espoused to Christ; and the
wife has not power over her own body but the husband, 1 Cor. 7.4. Offer up
therefore your bodies to him as a living sacrifice, (Romans 12.1.) and glorify
him both in your bodies, and spi^its for they are Gods, 1 Cor. 6.20.

Lastly in your estate, this virtue will ^each you to pray as Agur: Give me
neither ^overtie, nor riches, ^eed me with food convenient for me, lest I be
full, and deny thee, and ^ay who is the Lord? or lest I be poor, and steal, ^^d
take the name of my God in vain, Prove. ^0.8, 9. A great sail to a little boat
is more ^angerous than helpful. That Philosopher in ^is Poetry will teach you,

Boethius. Libr. 2. Metr. 4. If safe thou would, and quiet dwell,
Re^use a Palace, choose a cell.
Would thou burn out thy fenced light
In peace, when winds, storms, tempests fight?
Would thou despise the curl'd-head waves,
And laugh, when gaping Neptune raves?
Let not thy house on mountains soar,
Trust not the swilling, spewing shore.
There envious winds, and spiteful blasts
Reign, rage, and tear: there nothing lasts.
Here sinking earth, and bibbing sands
B^tray the weight: here nothing stands.
Climb not aloft to seek f^esh air,
Or pleasant seat: build sure, not fair.
The lowly Rock make thy foundation;
A strong, a lasting situ^ation.
When thundering storms with ruins fill
The pleasant shore, and mounting hill,
Lodgd in thy trenches, safely lying,
Fierce winds, and ^oming seas defying,
Safe may thou mock the angry sky,
And quiet live, and quiet die.
This was the first branch of holiness, Sobriety.

CAP. XVIII.
What is the Second?

THe second branch is Righteousness, or Justice; that grace, whereby We render
to all their dues, (Romans 13.7.) not only which Civil, but divine laws
prescribe. And the fulfilling of all righteousness (in one word) is love.
(Read, Romans 13.7, 8, 9, 10.) The object of love is general, All men, even
enemies not excluded, Matthew. 5.44. The ^ubject, or seat of love is not the
mouth in ^omplement, (1 Ioh. 3.18.) but the heart, without dissimulation, Romans
12.9. The mea^ure, or quantity must be dispensed accor^ing to those relations
in which God has ^ed us. Some must have an higher place in ^ur hearts than
others, 1 These. 5.13. The ^ruit of love is doing good, which must be ^rdered,
and distributed, generally to all ^en, specially to the household of faith, Gal.
^.10. To handle all these particulars would ^k a large volume; For that
referring you (...) your best Father, and his divine instru^^ions (fully set
out unto you in his double^ ^estament) I desire to cull out some few
d^^rections, and commend them to your practice, and his blessing.

In conversing with men look first to your heart, secondly to your actions.
Cease from anger, and forsake wrath, (Psalm. 37.8.) put it off, (Col. 3.8.) Be
not hasty in spirit to be angry, (Eccl. 7.9.) for discretion in a man deferreth
his anger, Prove. 19.11. In anger si^ not, Ephesians. 4.26. Be sure the cause be just,
( Matthew. 5.22.) and the extent justifiable: for it rests in the bosom of
fools, Eccl. 7.9. and where it lodges all night, it has the Devil for a
bedfellow, Ephesians. 4.26, 27. Hate nothing in any man but sin, and his hate of God,
and therefore hate the sin, because ye love the man: and love the man to cast
out that hate, and plant in the love of God. Fall not out with any man but so
as to reconcile him to God. See, Lev. 19.17. Above all beware of repaying hate
for love, Psalm. 109.5. and tremble to hate whom God loves, Psalm. 38.20. It is
the brand, and seal of Satan upon his cattle.

Have nothing at all to do with Envy; Anger, and Hatred may be, and often are
evil, but Envy cannot be good. Love can b^ angry, and love can hate, but love
cannot envy, 1 Cor. 13.4.

The mouth is the door of life, (Prove. 13.3.) ^^ep it therefore under lock, and
key. Hel^ it self is not a more proper shop of the Devil than a wicked mouth.
His special warehouse is a sinful heart, and an evil mouth his shop where he
readily vents his wares. Thither he brings that fire of hell, Jam. 3.6. Wicked
lips are a burning fire, Prove. 16.27. The tongue his hammer, by which he frames
those hellish weapons, lies, slanders, mocks, to sadd the hearts of the
righteous, to arm, and strengthen the hands of the wicked, Psalm. 109.2.
Remember the tongue is an unruly, and untamed evil, Jam. 3.8. Deal with it as
that man after Gods own heart. He watches it, keeps it as with a bridle, (
Psalm. 39.1.) But finding his own hand too weak, he calls in better help; Set a
watch, oh Lord, before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips, Psalm. 141.3.
Learn that excellent lesson: Speak evil of no man, Tit. 3.2. Iugde no man, Romans
14.13. Neither only keep your tongues from wounding other men's ears, but
barricado your ears also, and keep out wicked tongues. The ear is the hearts
factour, ( Prove. 18.15.) and if the ear be naught, neither heart, nor hand is
good: for a wicked doer gives heed to false lips, and a Lier gives ear to a
naughty tongue, Pro. 17.4.

Love peace, ( Zech. 8.19.) follow peace with all men, (Heb. 12.14.) yea all
things which concern peace, Romans 14.19. If it be possible, as much as lies in
you, have peace with all men, Romans 12.18. And if you dwell with them that hate
peace, be you for peace when they are for war, Psalm. 120.6, 7.

The world will advise you to take no wrong, but God commands you to do none,
Ier. 22.3. Not to take wrong (here) I think is impossible; and not to do wrong
requires as much wisdom, as patience. But it is better to suffer an hundred
injuries, than to do one, 1 Cor. 6.7. for God will certainly punish the doer, (
Col. 3.25.) but thank the sufferer, 1 Pet. 2.20.

Take great heed of thrusting God out of his throne, and seating your selves in
it. This you do, when you usurp that highest office of God, to recompense
injuries, and to avenge your selves. It is Gods Prerogative royal: To me
belongs vengeance, and recompense, (Deuteronomy. 32.35.) Vengeance is mine, I will
repay, ^aith the Lord, Romans 12.19. It is his Regal Title. The Lord God of
recompenses, Jer. 51.50.

Print upon your hearts that golden rule of Gods blessed Spirit: In honor
prefer on^ another. Mind not ^igh things, but condescend to men of low estate,
Romans 12.10, 16. In lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than himself
Phil. 2.3. There is nothing more hated, o^ scorned by God, or man, than a proud
heart, and haugh^y eye, Prove. 6, 17. In the house o^ ^ride, Shame waits at the
gates, ( Prove. 11.2.) Strife, and Contention in the hall, ( Pro. 13.10.) and at
the back stayers Destruction, ( Prove. 16.18. and 29.23.) Put on therefore
^umbleness of mind, Col. 3.12. There is no ornament of so great price with God
as a low priced spirit, (1 Petr. 3.4.) nor in the eye of man any thing more
lovely than a lowly carriage. Humility (the Queen of virtues) is ushered by
favor, supported by honor, ( Prove. 29.23.) and followed by exaltation, Iam.
4.10.

Observe all men in their degrees: Honor Governors, and obey them: reverence
superiors, respect equals, be courteous to inferiors, and to all (and above
all) carry your selves humbly. Submit your selves one to another, and be
clothed with humility, 1 Pet. 5.5. Thus shall you travel through the world
with much peace: for certainly, as only by pride comes contention, (Prove.
13.10.) so the meek shall delight themselves in abundance of peace, Psalm.
37.11. As a general motive to all these duties seriously consider:

All mankind is but one Adam, and all men as one man. Man the body, men the
members of that body. Adam was the root, Eve the stock, (issuing from the root)
and we all, the branches produced from both. She the mother of all living, Genesis
3.20. All these numberless branches are united in the root, (that ^^rst Adam)
and all Christians reunited in that Root of Iesse, the Second Adam. No
creatures so united as man; united in the bond of humanity, they are one
flesh: ( all nations made of one blood, Act. 17.26.) reunited in the bond of
Christianity, they are one spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. Ephesians. 4.4. How strongly then
from this union does our Lord press upon us that unity of affection by love.
And that u^ity of our actions by peace. How naturally do all these precepts of
righteousness, or justice flow from this principle? were men not ^nnatural, how
could they be so full of unrighteousness? ( filled with all unrighteousness,
etc. and without natural affection, Romans 1.29, 31^) were we not carnal, how
could we maintain strife, and divisions? when there is among you envyings,
strife, divisions, are ye not carnal? 1 Cor. 3.3. Haters of men cannot be
ranked among men: we are all one flesh, and never any man hated his own ^lesh,
but cherishes, and nourishes it, Ephesians. 5.29. We are members one of another
(all one body,) ( Romans 12.5. Ephesians. 4.25.) yea one spirit: and who but Bedlams,
and Demoniacks wound, and destroy themselves?

Fasten these truths upon your hearts, and in all your conversation with men
have them in your eyes: so will you with ease (as your Lord, Psalm. 11.7.) love
righteousness, and be loved of him, who loves them who follow after
righteousness, Prove. 15.9.

Some thing of this truth that dark light of nature discovered unto that
Philosopher, who thus sweetly sings it.

Boethius. Libr. 3. Metr. 6. I.
The stock of man, the Root, the body, Boughs, (skies)
(Whose breadth or'e-spreads the earth, height tops the
One Parent has; he Sir^, and Dam; he plowes,
Plants, waters: he our birth, growth, all supplies.
He fills the Sun with Seas o^ ^lowing beams;
Surrounds, and drains the Moon with changing streams.
II.
He peoples Seas with fish, the Heaven with Stars,
Plants air, and earth with living Colonies.
He pounds man's God-like Spirit in fleshly bars,
And by that spirit earth to himself allies.
Men are of high descent: their Petigree
Mortals derive from great Eternity.
III.
Boast ye o^ Sires? and Grandsires? search ye earth
For Heaven? Heavens Register will show your race.
Heavens King your Sire: from Heaven, in Heaven your birth
A noble, royal line. No man is base
But such, as ^or base earth Heavens birthright sell,
By vice cut off from Heaven, and grafted into Hell.
CAP. XIX.
What is the last branch?

THe last branch is Godliness: which is nothing but the true worship of the
true God. And how should I more briefly, and yet more fully express it, than
that wise Father to his wisest Son? And thou Solomon my Son know the God of thy
Father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and willing mind, 1 Chro. 28.9.
where he comprizes all the inward worship in knowledge, and the outward in
service. Now this knowledge is not here (as properly it is) confined to the
understanding, but generally extended to every faculty of the soul. As our
senses are said to know when, employing their faculties in their several
objects, they do their office. (The eye knows the color it sees, the ear the
voice it hears.) So every faculty of our spirit is said to know, when
exercising it self in its proper office, it executes its own duty. In the
understanding when the Apprehension discerns, and conceives aright, it knows, 1
Cor. 2.16. when the Judgment highly prizes things that are of high esteem, it
is said to know, 1 These. 5.12. Even the choice of the will is called knowledge,
Amos 3.2. Romans 8.29. Thus the affections are said to know what they love, and
delight in, ( Psalm. 144.3. expounded, Job 7.17.) And this is that excellent
knowledge preferred before sacrifice, ( Hos. 6.6.) in which consists our eternal
life, Ioh. 17.3.

First therefore you must know God by an act of the understanding, that is, so
conceive of him, as himself in his word, not in men's dreams, has pictured out
himself unto you: which is a spiritual, and the only warrantable Image allowed
by God: This you must hang up, not in your Hall, or parlour, but in that true
Oratorie, the Closet of your hearts. There you shall ^ind him pencil'd, 1. As
he is simply in himself: 2. Relatively to us. In himself he is a Spirit, (Joh.
4.24.) Incomprehensible, glorious, merciful, gracious, strong, long-suffering,
pardoning sin, and iniquity, etc, (See, Exo. 34.6, 7. etc.) In relation to us
our Creator, (Isa. 64.8.) our Redeemer, (Deuteronomy. 32.6. Psalm. 19.14.) our Lord,
(Psalm. 8.1.) in whose service is all our happiness, ( Psalm. 144.18.) our
Portion, and Inheritance, Psalm. 16.5, 6. the strength of our heart, our only,
and full comfort, Psalm. 73. verse. 25, 26. The heathens were not altogether
ignorant of God, his eternal power, and Godhead, (Romans 1.19, 20.) but our
redemption by his Son, our communion with him by his Spirit, and consequently
our salvation, and blessedness by our union with him, was wholly hid from them.

The necessity of this knowledge appears. 1. By the misery of ignorance:
without it the wisest are fools, very Sots, of no understanding, Ier. 4.22. All
sin, and disobedience flows from want of this knowledge, ( Ier. 9.3. Hos. 4.1,
2, etc.) 2. By the happiness that follows it: All grace attends it; Faith, (
Psalm. 9.10.) the whole new man, Col. 3.10. 2 Pet. 1.2, 3. and all blessedness,
Ioh. 17.3. Certainly if the study of men be above other natural studies, oh
what is the study of God? how pleasant? how profitable? Prove. 2.10. when sin
affrights us how sweet the knowledge of his pardoning mercy? Psalm. 86.4, 5. and
103.11. when men are oppressed by tyrants, how sweet the knowledge of his
Justice? Rev. 15.3. and 16.5. nay even in our humiliations for sin how does the
knowledge of his Justice, and faithfulness refresh us? (1 Ioh. 1.9.) upon all
occasions how com^ortable the knowledge of his power? In temporal distresses, (
Dan. 3.17.) in spiritual, as pardon, ( Number. 14.17.) subduing iniquities, (Mic.
7.18, 19.) in protecting from all evil, and keeping us to eternity, Ioh.
10.29. 1 Pet. 1.5.

2. Secondly, we must know him in our Judgments, to prize him as he is, even
all things less than nothing in comparison of him, Isa. 40.17. For him Abraham
despises his Country: Moses the treasures, and pleasures of Egypt; David
regards nothing in Heaven, or earth with him, Psalm. 73.25, 26. Paul esteems all
things dung, and loss for the excellent knowledge of Christ, Phil. 3.8.

Hence all the Saints deny themselves, and all for him, and exalt him by their
own abasement: Kings will be vile to honor him, 2 Samuel 6.22. John Baptist
contented to wane, that he may appear in fullness, Ioh. 3.13. Paul will be a
servant to every man for his sake, who is Lord of all, 2 Cor. 4.5. They make
their honor wait upon his, Prove. 4.8. For they know, He is their praise, Deuteronomy.
10.21. They will cheerfully buy him with loss of all, buy him at any price,
sell him at none, Matthew. 13.44. Prove. 23.23. If he calls for their pleasures,
profits, credit, life, they part with all. If he will have body, and soul, they
will give him all, and when they have done all, and given all, look upon this
all as a very nothing.

The will also must know him to choose, take, embrace him as he offers himself
to us. He proffers himself to be our Lord, (Exo. 6.6.) to redeem us from all
Usurpers, to his service, ( Luke 1.74, 75.) to be our King, ( Hos. 13.10.) to
govern us under his holy, and wholesome laws. He offers himself to be all to
us, our portion, inheritance, shield, our exceeding great reward, ( Ier. 10.16.
Genesis 15.1.) More particularly he offers himself in his persons to be to us, 1.
A Father, ( Deuteronomy. 32.6. 2 Cor. 6.17, 18.) 2. An Husband, (2 Cor. 11.2. Hos.
2.19, 20.) the Savior of his Spouse, ( Ephesians. 5.23.) 3. To be our Quickner, and
Comforter, Joh. 16.13. 1 Cor. 15.45. Thus he offers himself to us, and thus
must we receive him, as a child the Father, to obey him, as a wife her Husband
to be subject unto him, as a Body the Soul to be informed by him, and in all
things conformed to him.

Choose him therefore as your support: without him you can do nothing, ( Ioh.
15.5.) without him we are nothing, at our best sheer vanity, Psalm. 39.5. The
very plants will teach us. The weak Ivy, and wood-bine, etc. conscious of
their infirmity, clasp about the strong, which may bear them up, even dint the
trees with their close embraces. He is a Lord that in our service looks not to
his own, but his servants profit. He needs not us, but we him. But why then
does he call, and draw us to his service? To make us blessed. He takes
pleasure in the prosperity of his servants, ( Psalm. 35.27.) he delights to do
us good, ( Ier. 32.40.) and to give us the Kingdom, Luke 12.32. Men grossly
ignorant foully misconceive of his service: they look on it as cords, and bonds:
but indeed there is nothing so blessed as it, no blessedness but it, Psalm.
84.4. Oh the incomprehensible love in which he has chosen us! what was there
in us worthy of his choice? were we wise? no, we were foolish, Tit. 3.3. were
we strong? no we were of no strength, Romans 5.6. were we noble? no, we were
servants to lust, to corruption, to filthiness, and most filthy in that
^ervice, Tit. 3.3. 2 Petr. 2.19. Psalm. 14.3. were we any thing? no, we were
very nothing, and to him less than nothing, 2 Cor. 12.11. ^sa. 40.17. yet has
God chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise, God ^ath
chosen the weak things of the world to confound the mighty, and the base things
of the world, and things despised has God chosen, yea and things that are not
to bring to naught things that are, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28. But in him what is there
which is not infinitely excellent, infinitely desirable, delectable? s^all he
then choose such dung to be his children, heirs, his peculiar inheritance, and
should not we (when he offers himself) choose him (the glory of all glory) to be
our Father, our Lord, our Portion?

4. The Affections also are said to know that which they love, in which they
delight, and for which they longue: we therefore must know God to love, fear
him, delight in him, and longue after him. Frequently in every page of
scripture me meet not only with Gods precepts (in these duties) but the Saints
practice. To provoke our hearts to love, we must consider him, 1. In himself:
He is good, (Psalm. 100.5.) only good, (Matthew. 19.17.) abundant in goodness,
(Exo. 34.6.) he is Love, (1 John 4.16.) altogether lovely, (Cant. 5.16.) 2. In
relation to us. He is our Father, Husband, Life, etc. (as before.) 3. in his
dealing with us. He has manifested his love to us above all the works of his
hands. In our creation advanced us above all, crowned us with glory, (Psalm.
8.5, 6.) In our redemption preferred us above the Angels, assuming ours, and
refusing their nature, Heb. 2.16.

Now then take great heed that your love be true. Relative affection is not
right if the measure be not right. An Husband loved as another man is not loved
as an Husband. Admit no rival, or partner in his love; no creature not our
selves must be preferred before him, or equaled to him: we must love him more
than life, for his love is better than life, Psalm. 63.3. He our quickening
Spirit, we his body; he our head, we his members: why should not the hand
prefer the head, or the body the soul before it self? As we may love him for
his gifts, so much more for himself. Stir up your unthankful nature to this
great duty. Consider why you love any creature, why more one than another; why
you should love the world, riches, pleasures as God, a drop as the fountain. It
is even here too true, Love descends; Get your hearts baptized with fire, and
the holy Ghost, buried with Christ into his death, and raised in his
resurrection, that your affections may be set, and settled on things not on
earth, but on things above, even on him who is infinitely above all things, who
is blessed for ever, and your eternal blessedness.

2. Secondly, the outward worship consists either in his speaking to us, or our
speaking to him: He speaks to us either to our ears in his word, or to our eyes
in his Sacraments, we to him either in prayers, or vows. Hearing is a chief
part of Gods service, ( Eccl. 5.1.) The special gate whereby the Wisdom of God,
all knowledge, and life enters, ( Prove. 2.2, 3. and 1.5. Isa. 55.3.) An hearing
ear is Gods special gift to us, ( Prove. 20.12.) and our acceptable gift, and
sacrifice to him, ( Psalm. 40.6. 1 Samuel 15.22.) An obedient ear is a graceful,
and precious ornament, ( Prove. 1.8, 9.) The ear the most happy factour of the
soul, whereby it seeks, and gets, ( Prove. 18.15.) that rich merchandise, which
is better than silver, and fine gold, Prove. 3.14. But he who has a disobedient
ear, or careless, refusing to hear is good for nothing, (Jer. 13.10.) and an
itching ear has certainly a rotten heart, Isa. 30.9, 10, 11. The word of God
preached is the seed in the hand of the Sower, ( Mar. 4.14.) taken out of the
Granarie of the scriptures, and cast into the furrows of the heart by Gods
Spirit, an incorruptible seed of a life incorruptible, (1 Pet. 1.23.) by which
we are begotten unto God, Jam. 1.18. And as it is the seed whereby we are born,
so is it the food also whereby we are nourished in that life of God, as well
m^^k for babes, as strong meat for the strong, 1 Pet. 2.2. Heb. 5.12. etc. It
is an heavenly treasure in earthen vessels, 2 Cor. 4.7. a rich Mart of all
spiritual commodities, where our Lord sells, and we buy (without money) all
heavenly riches: Be swift therefore to hear, Jam. 1.19. value it above
thousands of gold, and silver, Psalm. 119.72. Sell all you have to purchase it,
Matthew. 13.44. Buy the truth at any price, sell it at none, Pro. 23.23.

Neither hear only, but read it: we cannot use too many ways in trading with
this rich commodity. Had we as many distractions as Princes, they can yield us
no exemption from this duty, Deuteronomy. 17.18. Josh. 1.8. Our frequent conversing
with it, and meditating in it will not take so much from our time, as it will
add to our opportunities. Morning, and evening, day, and night exercise your
selves in it: so shall ye be like ^ fruitful tree planted by the rivers of
water; so shall ye make your may prosperous, so shall ye have good success,
Psalm. 1.1, 2, 3. Josh. 1.8. ( Nulla dies sine linea) Think the day lost wherein
you have mist this market.

2. The Sacraments are ( visibile verbum) Christ's sermons to our eyes;
passion-sermons, ^ou know that verse, More dully stirs the mind what through
th'ear passes,
Than what is viewed to life in the eyes true glasses.
They are not only teaching signs, printing in our eyes, and hearts the death
of the Lord Jesus, but assuring seals, presenting, and conveying unto us the
grace which they represent. There are many large, and learned volumes printed
concerning them, and in every Catechize you may meet with pious instructions in
this subject. I will only therefore advise you concerning the Lords Supper. 1.
That you neglect no opportunity (so far as may be) of coming to the Lords
Table. For is it not our communion with Christ? 1 Cor. 10.16. Look as wholesome
meats are the means whereby spirits are renewed, strength increased, union
between body and soul maintained; so the Supper of the Lord is his Ordinance,
whereby our everlasting life is confirmed, our dull spirits revived, and our
union with the Lord Jesus Christ much strengthened.

Certainly the frequent use of it was the special means, whereby the Primitive
Churches so far excelled us in Christian fortitude, resolution, and every
spiritual gift. Above all other take heed of that carnal, or rather divelish
plea of hellish persons; namely that they are not in charity; whereby they
plainly discover, how much they prefer their revenge before their salvation,
and that hellish Murderer before the heavenly Savior. Surely he that will
rather nourish his malice, by abstinence from the Lords Table, than his
fainting soul by that Bread of Heaven, deserves (and surely dos) in his hellish
fast to eat, and drink his own damnation.

2. Come prepared in some good measure; and for that end set apart some day in
that week for humiliation, to afflict your souls by fasting to seek a right
way, (Ezra. 8.21.) And because one especial end of this ordinance is the
remembrance of our Savior, and showing forth his death, (Luke 22.19. 1 Cor.
11. verse. 25, 26.) spend much of that time in meditating upon it, and
principally the causes of it, 1. The abhorred filthiness, and dreadful nature
of sin, which could not be expiated, or purged but by the blood of God; 2. The
fierce wrath of God, and terrible severitie of his justice, which exacted even
of his most beloved Son (undertaking for us) the uttermost farthing, even to
make him Sin, who knew no sin, and a curse, who was God blessed for ever. 3.
The infinite mercy of our gracious Father who gave his beloved Son to reconcile
such hateful enemies; and, 4. The incomprehensible love of the Lord Jesus, who
vouchsafed to purchase our redemption at such a rate. And leave not your soul
till you find it abhorring it self in dust, and ashes, bleeding with Christ on
his Cross, sick of your sin, and of his love, and swelling with the fruit of
the lips, the sacrifice of praise.

3. Prayer is the mouth of faith, whereby it utters holy desires to God. Many
think they pray when they do but houl, ( Hos. 7.14.) or babble, Matthew. 6.7. we
neither know what, nor how to pray till we be instructed: neither can any
doctor inform us but that Spirit of adoption, who teaches us to cry Abbae
Father, Romans 8.14. Gal. 4.6. He will instruct you to go unto God, 1. As to a
Father, and therefore with all reverence, and ^ubmission, and, 2. With all
assurance, and confidence; 2. He is the Spirit of the Son, and therefore will
carry you to the Father by the Son, to God by Christ. He will not suffer you to
make your addresses by your selves, or any creature, but by that only
Mediator, and Advocate. Sacrifice must be brought to the Temple, to the door
of the Tabernacle, offered only upon Gods chosen Altar, and by none but the
Priest: Christ is that Temple, ( Ioh. 2.21.) He the door, ( Ioh. 10.9.) he the
Altar, ( Heb. 13.10.) which sanctifies all our gifts, and the ^igh Priest, whom
only God accepts, Heb. 7.26, 28.

That blessed Spirit who baptizeth with fire, will not only inflame your
hearts, but kindle also your lips with all fervencie of prayer. Prayer is a
special sacrifice, and sacrifices must burn upon the Altar. Prayer is our
Incense, ( Psalm. 141.2.) which till it burns in the fiery censer, yields no
odor, or sweetness. That holy Spirit will quicken you to frequent, and
continual prayer, and does not only whisper in your ear, but draw out your
heart to pray always with all manner of prayer, (Ephesians. 6.18.) to pray without
ceasing, (1 These. 5.17.) to continue in prayer, and watch in the same, (Col.
4.2.) not to slip any occasion, but to improve all opportunities which God
offers us in petition, thanksgiving, intercession, deprecation, supplication.

No marvel if the Ancients called it the key of Heaven, for it opens all to us.
It opens the womb, ( Genesis 20.17, 18.) It opens the prison, ( Act. 12.) It opens
Heaven when it is barred with brass, ( Iam. 5.18.) It opens Gods ears when he
has even shut them against us, 2 Chro. 7.13, 14, 15. The Doctors call it the
scourge of the Devil. It drives away his tentations, Matthew. 26.41. Nothing in
the world so prevalent: For it sets even God himself on work, in whose hands
are all creatures, and with whom nothing is impossible. Gird up therefore the
loins of your minds, and whet your voices to pierce through the Heavens. And oh
that I could be the means to put that perpetual motion of praying, and crying
into your hearts!

Look about you, and you shall see abundant matter of crying, of loud crying:
would we advisedly behold what we see, there is hardly one object of our eyes,
which would not skrue up our voices a note higher, and set us a roaring. Look
upon the dark places of the earth, and they are full of the habitations of
cruelty, Psalm. 74.20. And should not this raise up a cry, Remember Lord the
enemy has reproched, and foolish people have blasphemed thy name; oh deliver
not the soul of thy Turtle dove unto the multitude of the wicked, oh let not
the oppressed return ashamed, Psalm. 74.18, 19, 21. when you look into the place
of judgment, and wickedness is there, and to the place of righteousness, and
inquitie is there, (Eccl. 3.16.) will not so crying a sin force a loud cry
from your hearts? when you consider all the oppressions under the Sun, and
behold the tears of the oppressed, and they had no com^orter, and on the side
of the Oppressors was power, but on their side no com^orter, (Eccl. 4.1.) how
can you forbear to weep with those that weep? when you hear the groans of
widows, the sighs of the fatherless, the lamentations of the hungry, naked,
distressed, can you choose but bear a part in this doleful music? when you look
on the pride, wherein the land is disguised in monstrous attires, the
prodigious excess in riotings, the general lightness, and impudence of all
behavior, when you hear the vollies of blasphemous tongues thundering against
Heaven, the stench of drunkenness infecting the air with plagues, poxes, etc.
the ignorance, superstition, idolatry, profaneness, Atheism in the world, the
hellish contempt of God, and all his Ordinances; In a word a deluge of
corruption overwhelming all degrees, sexes, ages, and the wrath of God flaming
in revenge against such execrable provocations, where can you find hearts large
enough to hold, or throats wide enough to utter cries, and ejulations to Heaven.

But had you no eyes to look abroad, yet look within, and you shall find more
matter of crying than possibility of expressing. See there what ignorance,
unbelief, deadness, vanity, security, pride, hypocrisy, obstinacy,
backsliding, self-love, self-seeking, inordinate passion, what a world, what an
hell of wickedness couches it self in a desperately wicked heart, it will
stretch out your throats and force you to a loud cry, and bitter. Oh wretched
man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Certainly if
you have any spirit in you, it will fill your hearts with a fountain, and your
eyes with rivers of tears. Were you heathens it would drive you to send out the
proclamation of Nineve into every part of body, and soul, Let man and beast
(reason, and sense, flesh, and spirit cry mightily unto God, Jon. 3.8. Let us
whet these things upon our hard hearts, to sharpen our dull prayers, that they
may pierce the Heavens, and prevent the birth of that decree, which if it once
bring forth, will prevent all prevention. Pour out day and night some such
petition, when you have prepared your hearts by some such like meditation.

Oh my drowsy soul, can thou ly down with Jonah, and sleep in such a
Tempest? See thou not these waves of wickedness which mount up against
Heaven, and sink down again into bottomless depths, and is not thy spirit
melted because of trouble? The floods have lifted up, the floods of the ungodly
have lifted up their voice, and can thou be silent? See how that little Bark,
fraught with Christ and his Spouse, is filled with water, nay with blood: see
what a storm is come down into the lake, and how the waves dash into the ship,
whilst thy Lord, and Savior ^s asleep in the stern upon a pillow, and will thou not with loud cries awake him? See what a troubled sea is in thine own
heart, foming out mire and dirt, and can thou rest? Are not the waters come
into thy soul? Sinkst thou not in the deeps where is no standing? Is not the
belly of hell ready to swallow thee? and can thou cease crying? Hark how sin
cries, and will thou be silent? hark how the Saints cry, and can thou hold
thy peace? If thou have no words in thy tongue, have thou no groans, no sighs
in thy heart? Oh my soul! is thy Lord so ready to hear? and art thou so slow to
speak? Shall his ear stand so wide open to thee? and thy mouth, and heart so
fast shut to him? Do not his commands draw thee? thy necessities drive thee? do
not his mercies invite, his promises assure thee, thy poverty enforce thee?
Art thou a child, and can not speak? He has provided thee two Almighty
Intercessours, one his Son to plead for thee, the other his Spirit to plead in
thee. How should the weakest arm faint, which has such supporters, such an
Hur, and such an Aaron, to under-prop them?

Oh thou my gracious Savior! who in the days of thy flesh offeredst up
prayers, and supplications with strong cries, accent my flat heart, and voice
with thy sharp cryings. Thou who helpest the infirmities of our utterance,
teach my heart to groan beyond all power of utterance. And Thou who know the
mind of the spirit, and art ever well pleased in thy beloved, hearken
graciously to the stammerings of my Infant spirit, and accept them in him, in
whom thou art ever well pleased.

4. Lastly for vows, I can give you no better direction than his Spirit, to
whom you vow. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy spirit be hasty to
utter any thing before God, Eccl. 5.2. Be very sparing and slow in making, but
sure, and timely in paying vows, Psalm. 67.11. Eccl. 5.4. Let your vows promise
some warrantable service, as Jacob, Genesis 28.21, 22. General vows made in
Baptism pay daily, ( Psalm. 61.8.) particular seasonably, Deuteronomy. 23.21. Let your
vows be ever conditional, if God will help, and assist you; then looking to
his gracious promises, beg strength, and stir up your selves to a diligent,
and cheerful performance. Pay them not grudgingly, or of necessity: for God
loves a cheerful giver, 2 Cor. 9.7.

Frequently thus meditate.

Great Fount of light, whose overflowing streams
Lend stars their dimmer ^parks, Suns brighter beams,
Thy mouth spoke light, thy hands at first did shed it
Along the sky, and through the air did spread it,
So shadedst earth with curtains of the night,
And drewst those curtains to give days their light.
Then gathering all that scattered light, compacted^t
In one vast burning Lamp, and strait enactedst
That all less lights should beg their borrowed beams,
And from that ^ountain fill their narrow streams:
So that more spiritual, and sacred ray
Which ri^ing from thy mouth gave spirits day,
In those first ages had no certain sphere,
But breathed by thee, shined forth from mouth to ear;
A^ length collected by thy gracious Spirit,
Fills all the world with light, with life, and spirit.
There I behold thy self, thy Lamb, and Dove,
Shining in grace, burning in heavenly love:
There I my death, and thine; thy power, my duty
See, and by seeing change into thy beauty.
Lord let thy light draw off my wandering eyes
From emp^y forms, and lying vanities;
Oh fix them on thy self, and make me see
(My Light!) in all things nothing, all in thee.
Thou bought^t me all, oh make me all thine own;
Be all in me, I all in thee alone.
CAP. XX.
Man, as man, is not man, but Vanity.

THere is but one end to which all men aim all their thoughts, desires, and
actions, even Blessedness; and but one way leading to this end, knowledge: but
this way has two periods, 1. The knowledge of our selves, 2. Of our God: a
truth so palpable, that even heathens in their midnight (without eyes) could
feel something of it: and not only find it themselves, but commend, and prove
it to others. The whole scripture was penned by the Holy Ghost to this very
end, to be our light, and guide in this way; yet as far as I conceive, no where
so briefly, and clearly does this Guide point out this way unto us, as in that
short, but full sentence, Ephesians. 2.5. Even when we were dead in sins, he has
quickened us together with Christ.

Look as it is with some double-faced pictures; if ye view them on the one
^ide, you shall see a beautiful pourtrait of some lovely virgin, or such like;
if ye change your place, and look on the other side, ye see an Owl, Ape, or
some deformed creature; so has Gods blessed Spirit (as in Tableture) drawn the
picture of man. If you behold him in himself, in his own, and old nature, he is
but a body o^ death; if you look on him in his new nature, and in the second
Adam, full of glorious life. One side no better than a Devil, if not worse; the
other no worse than an Angel, if not better. In the first he is dead, dead in
sin, the death of hell. In the second he is alive, quickened with Christ, in the
life of God.

Let this piece therefore be the last Legacy, which (in the conclusion of this
Testament) I bequeath to every one of you, that you may hang it up in the best
room of your heart, where you may have it ever in your eye, and there behold
your selves. 1. In your tombs, dead in sins, and buried in the graves of lust;
2. In your resurrection, quickened in, and with the Lord Jesus Christ. Death
consists, 1. In the privation of life, when life is not, or is now nothing. 2.
In the consequents of this privation, corruption, putrefaction, stench,
loathsomness.

Consider then the picture of your old man, 1. In the rude draught (the (...))
2. In the full pourtrait, when all the colors, and complements are added. In
the former, Man (in the first Adam) howsoever magnified by himself, or others,
considered not physically, or civilly, but spiritually, is a base, abject
creature, hardly to be called a creature, a very privative, and therefore
nothing: He is (as we say) a may be: possibly he may be some thing, but as yet
(in this estate) a sheer vanity, and a mere nothing. He is but ( Somnium
hominis) a dream, and so are all his actions. Though he mount up in ex^ellencie
unto the Heavens, and his head reach unto the clouds, he shall fly away as a
dream, and not be found, chased away as a vision in the night, Joh. 20.6, 8. As
when an hungry man dreams, and behold he eats, but he awakes, and his soul is
empty, and a thirsty man dreams, and behold he drinks, but he awakes, and
behold he is faint, and his soul has appe^ite, Isa. 29.7, 8. voluptuous men in
their feasts, and riots, do but dream that they eat, drink, and are merry;
worldlings do but dream that they find treasures, and very joyful they are in
gathering, pocketing and chesting it; but they awake, and in their hand is
nothing, Eccl. 5.14. As a dream when one awaketh, so (oh Lord) when thou
awakest, thou shall despise their glory, Psalm. 73.20.

M^n is like to vanity, Psalm. 144.4. A very small, but very like and lively
picture: so like that (as it is spoken of the blind man, Ioh. 9.) we may say,
this is he; others, he is very like him, but himself (when he has his eyes)
will fully confess, I am he; I am a mere dream, and a sheer vanity.

Attentively observe that fuller picture, Psalm. 39.5. Mine age is as nothing
before thee; and verily every man in his best estate is altogether vanity.
Where this emptiness of man is excellently set out in diverse propositions. 1.
Man is vanity. You may say perhaps, some men, the poor, are despised: nay, 2.
Every man. Indeed take him at his worst, in sickness, trouble, etc. nay, 3. In
his best estate. In some respects it may be, as subject to losses, crosses,
death, etc. nay, 4. In all respects; Altogether vanity. But is not this an
hyperbole? more spoken, than intended? No, it is an infallible truth, which the
Spirit of truth has bound with an asseveration, Verily: Verily every man in
his best estate is altogether vanity. Nay the Lord proceeds yet further, and
to convince our self-conceit, and fond pride assures us, that as men of low
degree are vanity, so men of high degree are worse, a lie: so that high and
low, weighed in a true balance, are lighter than vanity it self, Psalm. 62.9.
A lie? what? great men, glittering in their pomp, admired by some, feared by
others; are these a lie? How can it be? The reason; because nothing more
deceives. Greatness makes great promises, but performs nothing. Let the Apostle
expound it. If any man seen to be some thing, ((...)) being indeed nothing, he
deceives himself, (Gal. 6.3.) He is a lie to his own soul: hence that great
Apostle confesses that himself is nothing, 2 Cor. 12.11.

And as man himself, so all that belongs to him is mere vanity, made for him,
and suited to him. For when man had transformed himself into vanity, the Lord
fitts the creatures to him, which were made for him, and subjects them unto
vanity, Romans 8.20. His life vain, (Eccl. 6.12.) His age nothing, (Psalm. 39.5.)
His beauty vanity, (Prove. 31.30.) His riches, ( Prove. 23.6.) His mirth,
(Eccl. 2.2.) All his works, all his delights mere vanity, Eccl. 2.11.

Object. But men do not think so. Answ. So much the more are they so: For while
they think better of themselves than they are, they do but deceive themselves,
and are a lie. 2. Though in their words they deny it, yet in their works they
loudly speak it, and evidently discover, that they do thus think: For we will
sell nothing under the price we value it, but men sell themselves for vanity,
for very nothing: They sell themselves for trash, they lay out their money for
that which is not bread, and their labor for that which satisfies not, Isa.
55.2.

Object. But yet they are men, and therefore something. Answ. We speak not of
man in natural respects, as he consists of soul, and body, or in Civil, as he
is a Father, Go^ernour, etc. but in spiritual, in which regard he rather seems
than is man: rather a worm, ( Psalm. 22.6.) as other Brutes, flesh also, (Genesis
6.3.) and that flesh but grass, (Isa. 40.6.) the very spirit fleshly. ((...),)
Jude 9. animals, not having a spirit: when in Jerusalem there was none that
sought the truth, there was no man among them, Ier. 5.1. Observe how evidently,
and fully Gods Spirit concludes this argument, I beheld, and ^here was no man,
even among them; no Counselor, that when I asked, could answer a word; They
are all vanity, and their works nothing, ^sa. 41.28, 29. He is dead, and
therefore not ^ruly, but falsely, and in appearance called ^ man. Man if we look
upon him in his Creati^n, is a creature not only composed of soul and body,
which (both) are but the matter of which he is framed, but made after Gods
im^ge, which is his form, and differs him from other creatures. Now as it
cease to be an ^ouse, when the materials (stone, tim^er, etc.) are all safe,
but the form destroy^d; so though body and soul in the matter ^f them remain
entire, yet when that speci^^cal difference, and form of man ( Gods image)
(...) defaced, he ceases to be what first he was; now not man, but the ruins,
and carcass of man.

In a word, look as it is with childrens Babies, they have a gorgeous
appearance in their eyes, but all is copper, cast clouts, torn rags, and a
painted rotten stick; so is it with us. Our bodies, and souls have some rags,
and old clouts of our creation, and dressed with beauty, learning, etc. are no
small babes in a simple man's eye, but all this show is nothing what it shows,
but a very mock-man, a mere vanity, and sheer nothing.

2. Secondly seeing man is not only dead, but dead in sin, as a dead man, shut
up, and closed in a loathsome grave, we are plainly taught by God, that man is
not only nothing, but a miserable, abominable nothing. He is miserable,
wretched, poor, blind, and naked, Rev. 3.17. supposing himself full but only
swelled with wind, and indeed wholly empty; conceiting himself well adorned,
and set out with goodly endowments, but shameful in nakedness; dreaming of an
Eagle sight, and sharpness of wit, but not a blink of an eye in him; a mere
flash; and in, and with all these wants, when he is most bladder'd up with a
dream of happiness, extremely miserable, and wretched. In all his pomp an^
glory, he is but as his own dung, ( Job 20.6, 7.) stinking, (Psalm. 14.3.) not
the baseness, bu^ excellence, not of heathens, but of Jacob, not despised only,
but abhorred, Amos 6.8. And lest we might think it an hyperbolical speech, the
Lord takes a solemn oath, and swears by himself, that he abhors the excellency
of Jacob.

Hence is it that God culls out the most loathsome creatures to be as parallels
to us, that in them (as in a glass) we might see our filth, and abhor our
selves: we are resembled to hoggs, dogs, serpents, to dead carcasses, to
s^pulchres full of rotten carcasses, Matthew. 23.27. so abominable that we infect
all the creatures with which we deal, all the actions that proceed from us. The
creature is not only subject to vanity, but to a curse for our sakes, Genesis
3.17. our very blessings cursed, Mal. 2.2. not our want, but store, not our
barreness, but fruit accursed, Deuteronomy. 28. verse. 17, 18. Our days not only few
but evil, Genesis 47.9. our very life not only grievous, but hateful, (Eccl.
2.17.) nay our prayers, our service abomination, Prove. 15.8. and 28.9.

Object. If the estate of men were so loathsome, it is strange that they should
not see, nor feel it. Answ. They who have sense know, and acknowledge it. They
loath themselves, (Ezech. 20.43.) they abhor themselves, (Job 42.6.) they
lament themselves, ( Romans 7.24.) But such as are blind and senseless, how should
they discern it? And this the depth of their misery, which makes it incurable:
yet some glimps they have of this truth; for in that they sell themselves to
work wickedness, and abomination, (1 King. 21.25. Romans 7.14.) sell themselves
for oaths, (so vain a filthiness) for drunkenness (so filthy vanity) they
openly testify at what rate they prize themselves.

This our dead, vain, loathsome condition will more clearly be manifested unto
us, if 1. We consider our contrariety to God, who is both the supreme Being,
the most pure Essence, and the only Life. So adverse is the corrupt nature of
man to God, that he hates him, all that belongs to him, all that he loves, and
all that love him. Hence called enemies, ( Romans 5.10.) haters of God, Romans
1.30. they hate his wisdom, and counsel, (Prove. 1.29.) his power, (Rev. 16.9.)
his truth, (Isa. 30.11.) his word, (Jer. 6.10.) his light, (Joh. 3.19.)

And as the holiness of God is his pureness, glory, beauty, excellency, which
passes through all, and (to us) is above all his Attributes, so above all they
hate this his holiness, wheresoever they see any stamp or print of it; His holy
word, his holy days, his holy children. As the Panther so hates man, that
wheresoever he sees his picture, he flies upon it, and with his teeth, and
nayls, rents, and tears it, so these wild creatures wheresoever they see any
spark of Gods image shine in man, tear, and devour, Psalm. 7.2. and 35.15. That
Eternal wisdom, Power, Love, Life, (their Savior) after they have seen, they
hate, ( Ioh. 15.24.) and all that he loves, or love him; all his members, (
Mar. 13.13.) though they be their own flesh, and that even to death, Luk^
21.16, 17. Excellently is this condition expressed in that metaphor, wherein
carnal men are called spots, and blemishes, 2 Pet. 2.13. A wicked Father, or
Child, a wicked Husband, or wife, a wicked Master, or Servant is a spot in a
family; a wicked Governor, or Subject a spot in the Common wealth; a wicked
Minister, or Professor a spot, and blemish in the Church. And as a spot, or
blemish is nothing but filthiness, or a filthy nothing, so is every man in his
corrupted nature.

2. Man in the first Adam is a child of the Devil, ( Ioh. 8.44.) and a very
Devil in flesh, ( Ioh. 6.70.) Satan a filthy spirit, but he filthy in flesh,
and spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. he a captive of the Devil, 2 Timothy 2.26. a servant to
sin, (which is the very dung of Satan,) Romans 6.17. fettered in the very bond of
it, ( Act. 8.23.) servant to corruption, (2 Pet. 2.19.) and to diverse lusts,
(Tit. 3.3.) the hand serves one, the eye another, the ear a third, the heart a
thousand. He is even cut out, and mangled into a base, and cursed slaverie. Now
the servant is more base than the Master; Take good notice therefore of this
estate of man. Lust is the servant of Satan, man the servant of lust: the
Devils servants servant. Sin the corruption, and dung of Satan, man the servant
of sin, and corruption.

In a word a carnal man is the prey of Satan, devoured by that roaring Lion,
who has digested him into filthiness of flesh, and spirit, and hell the
draught into which he is purged. Thus then think in your hearts.

I.
Aye^ o^ her sel^ is dark, and has no light
But what Heaven lends her, and when angry skies
Call in their debt, she sinks in dungeon night.
Nay while she borrowes light, o^t fogg^ arise,
Or storms, and filch by stealth, or rob by might
Her lone: her day in youth, or childhood dies.
But while the present Suns with conquering ray
Dispel the shades, and their strong beams display,
She sparkles all with light, and broider'd gold-array.
II.
Such now is Man: inform, void, empty, dark,
A Chaos, dungeon, grave, a starless night:
Rake all his ashes up, there is not a spark
To tine quenched life, or kindle buried light:
And what he steals from others, (empty shark!)
Hell with his mists depraves: so robbs him quite.
But when his Life, and Light shines in his eyes,
In him he lives as he, and never dies;
Glittring in light divine, he heaven, stars, Sun out-vies.
III.
For as in earthly sight the bodies eye
(To the object bent) is like the object ^orm'd;
So when the soul turned to the Deiti^
Receives hi^ lik^ness, it is soon tran^form'd
To what it sees: death, hell, and darkness ^^y,
And all the spirit to Light, and Li^^ conformed.
Soul of my soul! draw my souls eyes to thee;
Set them upon thy face; make me to be
By seeing Life, and Light, the Light, and Li^e I see.
You have seen what you are in the first Adam, look now on the other side of
this picture, and see what you may be in the second.

CAP. XXI.
Man in Christ is above other men, and all creatures, next the Creator.

IN our selves we are. 1. Dead, a mere privative, a nothing, 2. Dead in sin,
mere corruption, corruption of Hell; what we are, or may be in Christ now
consider. We are quickened together with Christ. Christ is that overflowing
Fountain, by whose fullness of grace our empty channels are not only 1. Scoured
from that choking mire, which stops all passages; but 2. Stored with the water
of life, with the fullness of God: (see, Hab. 2.14. Ephesians. 3.19.) But how are we
quickened with Christ, raised, and sit together in heavenly places with him?
(Ephesians. 2.6.) Not only virtually, as the fruit lies in the seed, or root, but in
some kind actually. As in the first fruits the whole field, and in the Cake of
the first dough the whole lump was sanctified, and an actual blessing conveyed
in it, so Christ being ra^sed is the first fr^its of them that sleep, (1 Cor.
15.20.) the first Cake of the new lump, (1 Cor. 5.7.) and in him even actually
(in a kind) are they quickened, who are yet unborn. As a wife, or child takes
possession of that land in the husband, or Father, which he has purchased in
their name.

Hence we evidently see, first that the only life of man by which he is a
C^ristian, a blessed creature, nay indeed by which he is a right man, is not
that natural, and fading, but this spiritual and eternal life which we have in
Christ: hence called the life of God, Ephesians. 4.18. ( begotten by God, Jam. 1.18.)
the life of Christ, (2 Cor. 4.10.) he our life, (Col. 3.4.) and lives in us,
(Gal. 2.20.) and the life of the Spirit: he gives it, (2 Cor. 3.6.) And as the
vegetative life of plants, the sensitive life of beasts, the rational life of
man is nothing elss but the Act of such a soul, giving the creature such a
being, and enabling it unto such actions; so the divine, and spiritual life is
nothing else, but that A^^ of Gods Spirit dwelling in man, and giving him a
spiritual being, a divine nature, and enabling to spiritual, and Godly actions;
or (to use the Scripture phrase) to live, and walk in the Spirit, Gal. 5.25.)
whereby we live in God, and to God (see, Romans 8.9, 10. Gal. 2.20. 1 John 5.11,
12.)

For without question the true life of man differs from all other life in
inferior, or contrary creatures: but in this natural life, the faculties, and
actions of it) man differs not from plants in growth, from beasts in sense,
from wicked spirits in reason. That form then, which gave man his difference
(doubtless) was that Image of God, in which he was created perfect; by the loss
of which he lost the per^ection, and truth of humane nature. He therefore that
has no other, but this natural life, is but an half-man; has little or
nothing of a man, but is partly a beast, in respect of sense, partly a Devil in
regard of his perverted, and distor^ed reason.

2. Secondly, here we may easily observe, that howsoever a carnal man glisters
in carnal eyes, honored, admired, yet is he a very Abject, and the skumm of
the creatures: so a spiritual man (contrary) though he seem a base thing in the
eye of the world, and more base in his own, a reproach of men, and scorn of the
people, (Psalm. 22.6.) yet is he indeed the most noble, and excellent creature
in the world, and next the great Creator. Hence the Saints (in terms) are
called the Excellent, (Psalm. 16.3.) preferred in their excellency before
others, whatsoever are their earthly advancements. The righteous is more
excellent than his neighbor, Prove. 12.26. and 28.6. This is Heavens, this is
Gods Heraldry. Now are they Sons of God, and Heirs apparent, 1 John 3.1.

But because their pr^rogatives are such, as never eye saw, ear heard, or
entered into the heart of man, (1 Cor. 2.9.) such as infinitely transcends our
vastest thoughts, therefore are they veiled under many similitudes, and
compared to those things which are most honorable, and highest in the eyes of
man. They are Kings, (Rev. 1.6.) and their Kingdom not fading, but unshaken,
(Heb. 12.28.) not earthly, but heavenly, (2 Pet. 1.11.) they have their
sceptres, ( Heb. 1.8.) their Palaces, (Psalm. 45.8.) their thrones, ( Rev.
3.21.) their crowns, (2 Timothy 4.8.) God himself their diadem, (Isa. 28.5.) they
have their glory, even the glory of God, (1 These. 2.12.) Christ himself their
glory, (Luke 2.32.) and they the glory of Christ, Isa. 46.13.

This eminency of Saints may be clearly showed in an evident demonstration.
For no creature can stand in competition with them, but only other men, and
Angels. For the first their eminency will easily appear by comparison, even in
those things, wherein men challenge precedencie before others.

Men are counted more honorable, as they go before others in birth, estate, or
end. Look then first to that broad difference betwixt the birth of the
spiritual, and the carnal creature. Flesh is born of flesh, Joh. 3.3. The
natural man is of earth earthy, 1 Cor. 15.47. nay of hell, and therefore
hellish. His Father in the flesh is a sinful man, his spiritual Father those
spiritual wickednesses, even Satan, Ioh. 8.44. But Spirit is born of Spirit.
The new man is not born of flesh, and blood, not of the will of man, but of
God, Joh. 1.13. God his Father, who has begotten him, 1 Pet. 1.3. God his
Mother also, who ((...)) conceiving has brought himforth, Jam. 1.18. In their
generation, or birth there is no comparison.

2. For their estate, what infinite disparitie? 1. in life. 2. In things
belonging to life. The life of Saints is the life of God, (Ephesians. 4.18.) their
nature the divine nature, (2 Pet. 1.4.) the blessed Spirit the soul of this
life, which animates him, ( Romans 8.9, 10.) Carnal men have a filthy spirit,
informing, and working in the children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. In the one
God works all their works, (Isa. 26.12.) will, and deed, (Philip. 2.13.) in the
other Satan, and Sin. Things belonging to life are (as the life) temporal, or
spiritual. The Saints spiritual portion in one word is God. Christ his Bread
and meat, Joh. 6.35, 55. he the portion of his cup, (Psalm. 16.5.) the cup of
salvation, (Psalm. 116.13.) the drink indeed, (Joh. 6.55. 1 Cor. 10.4.) Christ
his garment; (a most royal robe.) He puts on Christ, (Gal. 3.27.) Christ his
house: ( he dwells in him, 1 John 4.13.) he our everlasting habitation, (Psalm.
90.1.) Heaven, or rather the God of Heaven his inheritance, Psalm. 16.5. how
contrary is the other? his portion for the present is nothing but sin, his
bread ashes, and a deceitful heart, (Isa. 44.20.) and his drink iniquity, (Job
15.16.) and he drunk with it, ( Isa. 29.9, 10.) his reckoning cup fire, and
brimstone, (Psalm. 11.6.) his garments cursing, (Psalm. 109.18.) and his
inheritance hellfire, Matthew. 25.41.

But surely in temporal conveniences th^re the men of this world much exceed
the other: So indeed they boast, but lie. The little of the righteous is much
better than the superfluity of others, ( Psalm. 37.16. Prove. 16.8.) The
prosperity of the wicked deadly, Prove. 1, 32. the troubles of the righteous
wholesome, Psalm. 119.71. The one cursed in blessings, the other blessed in
curses. In a word the one in his best, and most comfortable estate a w^eful
creature; the other in his worst ever blessed, Luke 6.20. to 27.

3. For their ends, the one shall flourish i^ never ending peace: the other is
cut off for ever, Psalm. 37.37, 38.

Lastly, it has pleased the Lord of all creatures to prefer them even above
the Angels. First in our Creation we were made a little inferior to them, but
as Princes prefer their Favorites, by some honorable office, above others,
who are more nobly descended, so our Lord has advanced us above them in
setting the crown upon our heads, crowning us with honor, and glory, and
giving to us (as his Viceroyes, not to Angels) dominion over the works of his
hands, (Psalm. 8.5, 6.) appointing even them to be ministering spirits for us,
who are heirs of salvation, (Heb. 1.14.) our guards to defend us, (Psalm. 34.7.)
our Guardians in all our ways to keep us, Psalm. 91.11.

2. In the work of Redemption our nature assumed, theirs refused, Heb. 2.16. we
r^de^med, they rejected. And as our nature is infinitely exalted above the most
glorious Angels in the person of Christ: so by him many great Prerogatives
granted to us who are his members, whom he redeems with his blood, nourishes
with his flesh, dwells in us by his Spirit, and crowns with his glory, Joh.
17.22. In a word, Saints are the highest Favorites of the most Highest; having
fellowship and communion with God, (1. Joh. 1.3.) nay union with the Father,
and the Son (one Spirit with Christ) and one in them, as they are one, Joh.
17.21.

Seeing then our Father is in Heaven, our H^ad in Heaven, ou^ life, our
Country, and Portion in Heaven; seeing our spirits were born in Heaven, and our
bodies look to Heaven, let our treasure, minds, and conversation also be in
Heaven. So shall we (even here on earth) live in the Suburbs of Heaven, and in
due time being advanced to that glorious City ( the heavenly Jerusalem)
eternally reign with the King of Heaven. Amen. Amen.

Let me shut up all in that sweet Poem.

Boethius. Libr. 5. M^tr. 5. I.
Into what different moulds does Gods wise hand
Cast his wet clay? and to their various ^orms
Their diverse postures fitts? some sweep the sand
Drawn out at length; as tottering boats in storms
They mount, and ^all, dragging their lazy trains
They plow long ^urrowes on the dusty plains.
II.
Some (light as air) mounted on liquid sky
Spread to the gentle winds their featherd sails;
Swimming with plumed o^rs through Heavens fly:
Some shod with hoofs, some frosted with sharp nails
Through woods and forests, plains, and mountains trace,
And set their prints upon the earths scarr'd face.
III.
Yet though their various shapes, and gate betray,
How ^ar their natures differ each from other,
All meet in this: All gaze upon the clay
From which they spring, and st^re upon their Mother.
Pressed down with earthy Yoke, their dullard sight
Pores on dark shades; they use, not view the light.
IV.
Man only rears alo^t his honored head:
His body stands, and walks upright: his eyes
Transport his soul, where it was highly bred,
To keep acquaintance with his near Allies.
On earth his down-cast look he never places,
But when he stoops, and losty head abases.
V.
I^ then thou art not beast, or earth; if man,
Thy body guides the soul, thy eye the mind:
Thy flesh looks where it tends, not wher't began
Oh shall the Heaven-born soul forget his kind?
Shall heavenly minds mind earth? while earthy eyes
Eye Heaven? soar up my soul: trans^end the skies.
Else while thy body lives, thy spirit dies.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Henry Mortlock, at the sign of the White Heart
in Westminster Hall.
A Rational account of the grounds of Protestant Religion, being a vindication
of the Lord Archbishop of Canterburys Relation of a conference, etc. from the
pretended answer of. T. C.

Origines Sacrae; or a Rational account of the grounds of Christian Faith, as
to the Truth and Divine Authority of the Scriptures, and the Matters therein
contained, 40.

Irenicum: A weapon salve for the Churches wounds, or the Divine right of Forms
of Church government, Examined and discussed, 40.

Six Serm^ns; with a Discourse Annexed, concerning the true Reason of the
sufferings of Christ, wherein Crellius his answer to Grotius is considered, 80.
large.

A Sermon preached before the King, Ian. 30. all these by Edward Stilli^g
fleet, D. D.

Knowledge and Practice; or a plain discourse of the chief things necessary to
be ^nown, believed, and practiced in order to s^lvation, by S. C^ado^k, 40.

The being and well being of a Christian, in 3. Treatises, The first setting
forth the properties of the Righteous; The 2. the Excellency of grace; The 3.
the nature and sweetness of fellowship with Christ, by Edward Reyner late
Minister at Lincoln, published by his Son John Reyner, 80.

The Triumph of Rome, over Despised Protes^ants, by Phil. Hall, 80.

The Moral Philosophy of the S^oicks, Translated out of French by Charles
Cotton Esquire. 80.

A Word in Season; or 3. great Duties of Christians in the worst of times, viz.
Abiding in Christ; thirsting after his Ordinances, and submission to his
providence, by I. C. D. D. To which is added by way of Appendix, the Advice of
some Ministers to their people, for the Reviving of the power and practice of
Godliness in their families, 80.

Propugnaculum Pietatis; The Saints Ebenezer, and Pillar of hope in God, when
they have none left in the creature; or the Godly man's crutch or staff, in
times of s^dning disappointments, sinking discouragements, shaking desolations,
by F. E. 80.

The voice of one crying in a wilderness; or the whole business of a Christian,
both Antecedaneous to, Concommitant of, and Consequent upon, a sore and heavy
Visitation represented in several Sermons, by S. S. a Servant of God in the
Gospel of his Son, 120.

Immanuel; or a Discovery of true Religion, as it imports a living principle in
the minds of men, grounded upon Christ's discourse with the Samaritaness, John
4.14. being the Latter clause of the voice crying in a Wilderness; or a
Continuation of the Angelical Life by the same Author, 120.

Common Prayers in Welsh, fol.

FINIS.

