An Historical ACCOUNT OF THE Manners and Behavior OF THE CHRISTIANS: And the
Practices of CHRISTIANITY Throughout the SEVERAL AGES OF THE CHURCH.

Written originally in French by Msr. Cl. Fleury, Praeceptor to Monseigneur de
Vermandois; and to the Dukes of Burgundy and Anjou.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Leigh at the Peacock against St. Dunstan's Church
in Fleet Street. School.

THE PREFACE.
THE Learned Author of this Book gives several Instances of his Ingenuity and
Candor. He recommends some Primitive Practices that justify our Reformation;
Particularly the continual reading and studying of the Holy Scriptures.
Speaking of the Ancient Christians, he says, that they studied the Word of God
in private, Meditating upon it Day and Night. They read over in their Houses
what they heard at the Church. Masters of Families took care to repeat those
Expositions of Scripture they had Learnt from their Pastors.

Many Lay-Christians could say the Holy Scripture by heart. They generally
carried a Bible about with them; and many Saints have been found Buried with
the Gospel lying on their Breasts.

Women, no less than Men, read the Holy Scripture; and in the Persecution
regretted nothing so much as the loss of their Bibles.

Parents took such care to Instruct their Families, that in all Antiquity we
find no Catechism for little Children, nor any public provision made for the
Instruction of those that were Baptized before they came to Years of
Discretion. Every private House was then as a Church.

He observes that St. John was the Chief in our Savior's Affection; Jesus
Christ had a particular Kindness for his Disciples, and for his Apostles; and
among them for St. Peter, and the two Sons of Zebedee, and for St, John above
all the rest.

He does not found the Preference of the Blessed Virgin, upon Blood and natural
Relation; but upon the Endowments and Qualifications of her Mind.
Notwithstanding the most tender Affection which JESUS CHRIST had for his
Mother, He seems sometimes to have expressed himself harshly toward her; and
reproved the Woman that Blessed her barely upon the account of her being his
Mother, and declared that he owned no other for his Mother and Kindred, but
they that did the will of his Father. He knew what that great Person was able
to bear, and was willing to let the World see, that Flesh and Blood had no
share in his affections.

Mr. Fleury well observes, that the Church of Jerusalem which JESUS CHRIST,
with his own Hands began to Build upon the Foundaion of the Synagogue was the
Root and original of all other Churches.

He seems in nothing more to censure the Reformation, than in what he writes of
the Celibacy of Priests; although Platina a Contemporary with Aeneas Sylvius tells
us that, that Learned Pope Pius II. used to say; 'There was great reason for
Prohibiting Priests to Marry, but greater for allowing it again. And Mr. Fleury
writes thus of the Primitve Christians; they knew but two States, Marriage or
Continence. They generally made chocie of the Married State, having no good
opinion of the Celibacy of the Heathen; though they preferred the State of
Continence as knowing its Excellency, and often found a way of Reconciling both
these States into One; for there were many Married Persons, who yet Lived in
Continence. They considered Marriage as an Emblem of that Union, which is
between Christ and his Church. They knew that the Relation of Father and
Mother, was an High and Honorable Character, as being the Images of God, in a
more peculiar manner, and cooperating with him in the Production of Men. It is
Certain by the Gospel, that St. Peter was a Married Man. Tradition tells us the
same of St. Philip the Apostle; and that both of them had Children; and it is
particularly observed that St. Philip gave his Daughters in Marriage. Among the
Rules they give for the Education of Children this is one, that to secure their
Virtue, they should timely dispose of them in Marriage: And they advised those
that out of Charity Bred up Orphans, to match them as soon as they came to Age;
and that to their own Children rather than to Strangers; so little did they
regard Interest.

What He says of their Communicating in both Kinds; publicly Reading the Holy
Scripture always in the Vulgar Tongue: The Custom of Sitting in their Churches;
the Length of their Sunday-Service, is also Remarkable. When they reserved part
of the Sacrament as a Viaticum for Dying Persons, that which they carried
Abroad, was only the Bread; though in their public Assemblies, all in general
Communicated under both Kinds; excepting little Children, to whom they gave
only the Wine.

All the Lessons of the Scripture were Read in the Vulgar Tongue; i. e. in the
Language Spoken by the better sort of People in every Country.

During the time of the Lessons and Sermon, the Audience was regularly Seated,
the Men on one side of the Church, and the Women on the other: When all the
Seats were filled the younger sort of People continued Standing. In Africa St.
Augustine takes notice that the People stood all Sermon-time; but he better
approved the Custom of the Transmarine Churches, as he calls them, where they
heard Sitting.

Their Litnrgy must needs have been very long: Indeed Christians did not then
think that they had any thing else to do on Sundays, but to serve God. St.
Gregory to show how much his Strength was decayed, says, that he was scarce
able to keep himself standing for those Three Hours, while he performed the
Office of the Church; and yet his Sermons that are left us, are very short

What Mr. Fleury says of the Compassion, the Church had for Heretics must not
be omitted, because nothing seems more to have increased the scandalous
Divisions of Christendom, than severity. The Church Interceeded in behalf of
her own Enemies. We have many Epistles of St. Augustine where he Begs the favor
of the Magistrate in the behalf of the Donatists, convicted of horrid
violencies, and even Murders committed on the Catholics. He pleaded that it
would be a dishonor to the Sufferings of the Murdered, to put to Death the
Authors of them, and that if they could find no other penalties for them but
Death, they would thereby bring themselves to that pass, that the Church who
delighted not in the Blood of her Adversaries, would not dare to demand Justice
against them. This was a general Rule, that the Church should never seek the
Death of any Man. They were content that Christian Magistrates should Correct
or over-aw Heretics, by Banishment or Pecuniary penalties, but they would have
their Lives Spared: And the whole Church declared against the proceeding of the
Bishop Ithacius who Prosecuted the Arch Heretic Priscillian to Death. Yet the
Bishops could not always obtain the Pardon they desired for these sort of
Offenders, no more than they could for others. Princes, to preserve the public
Peace, Enacted the penalty of Death against Heretics, and their Laws were
sometimes put in Execution.

If in these latter Ages the Vows of Celibacy, and Poverty have been
inconvenient, and but ill kept; this might have been prevented by the Omission
of of them; for as this Author observes; We see no Solemn Vows in these first
times. St. Chrysostom speaks of a Monks returning to the World as of a thing
altogether free.

Again He tells us that the Monks, in imitation of the Primitive Christians,
spent much of their time in Reading the Holy Scriptures. The Rule of St.
Benedict prescribes the same to his Monks; and more particularly that all the
time of Lent, and on Sundays, they should apply themselves only to this
Exercise.

He Judiciously remarks how Forged Books and pretended Miracles gained Credit:
For want of critical Learning, and the knowledge of Antiquity, they were ready
to receive such Suppositious Writings as were Imposed upon the World, under the
specious Names of Ecclesiastical Authors, and also became too Credulous in
believing Miracles. So certain it was that the Apostles and their Disciples had
wrought Miracles, and that many true one's were Daily performed at the Tombs of
the Martyrs, that they were not now overcurious in examining so as to
distinguish the true from the false. The most surprising Relations of this kind
in History, were the best received. Ignorance in Philosophy, and the little
knowledge they had of Nature, made them take all strange Appearances for
Prodigies and interpret them as the Supernatural signs of God's wrath. They
believed there was something extraordinary in Astrology, and dreaded Ecclipses
and Comets as dismal Presages.

To give but one Example more; Religion, says Mr. Fleury, cannot subsist without
Study and Preaching to preserve the Soundness of its Doctrine and the Purity of
its morals. It must necessarily fall into Decay, unless the Holy Scripture be
diligently Read, taught, and expounded to the People; unless the Apostolical
Traditions be preserved in their Purity, and Purged from time to time of those
Spurious Additions, which the Inventions of Men, without any just Authority
have made to them.

Would but the Church of Rome take away these and all other Additions, that are
contrary to and Inconsistent with the Doctrine and Practice of the Church of
Christ, in the first and purest Ages of Christianity, and forbid all
Disputation etc. as Innocent XI. by his Decree of the 19. of Feb. 1678.
entirely abolished the Office of the Immaculate Conception, etc. Approved by
Paul V. They might happily put an end to the great Division that has so long
made the Enemies of Christianity to rejoice; or, be able to maintain the charge
of Schism against those that should then refuse their Communion.

What Passages or Expressions occur in this Treatise, which may be judged
contrary to and Inconsistent with the Doctrine, Worship and Government of the
Church of England, as by Law Established; the Author and Editor of this Book
are not answerable for, nor pretend to justify, considering that it is only a
Translation of an Historical Tract, written in French, and often Printed by a
Learned Author of the Roman Communion, whose Name is mentioned in the
Title Page of this Book.

What he has said in favor of several of the Doctrines of the Reformation,
and the admirable Moral Reflections, which frequently occur throughout his
History, and especially the former part together with other pious Relations, of
it, are enough to show, that excellent use may be made of this Treatise, and
hence to justify the Publication of it in our own Language. And the more
exceptionable passages that are in it, I must Entreat the Reader to consi^^^
(...) the mere effects of our Author's (...) the Communion wherein he (...) and
to admire rather, that he (...) said so much on our side, than that (...) has
said no more.

ERRATA
PAge 8. Lines 16. read to establish. p. 13. l. 13. r. in mind of p. 27. l. 22.
dele and. p. 35. l. 22. r. Orchard. p. 37. Ibid. l. 22. r. disease. p. 41. l.
11. r. furnish. Ibid. 18. r. Christians. p. 42. l. 24. r. Paedagogus. p. 45. l.
8. r. Sanctify. p. 47. l. 29. r. giveing. p. 54. l. 32. r. itself. p. 56. l.
27. r. used. p. 77. l. 18. for where r. were. Ibid. l. 24. r. Zealous. p. 86.
l. 26. r. occasion. p. 87. l. 13. r. Gnostics. p. 99. l. 15. r. Tutelar. p.
103. l. 18. r. Equueus. p. 104. l. 28. r. lewd way. p. 105. l. 5. for of r.
off. Ibid. l. 6. r. Spit it. p. 106. l. 17. r. Martyrs. p. 107. l. 23. dele
the. p. 110. l. 25. r. reduced. p. 119. l. 25. r. Slaves. Ibid. r. State. p.
124. l. 22. r. such cases. p. 129. l. 9. for Bells r. Belles. p. 136. l. 7. for
thy r. they. Ibid. r. delivered. p. 148. l. 12. r. Wife. p. 149. l. 25 r.
Fifty. p. 156. l. 1. r. to each other. p. 157. l. 2. r. Priests. p. 158. l. 17.
for them r. him. p. 165. l. 20. for this r his. p. 182. l. 24. r. Martyrium. p.
204. l. 30 dele or the least sign. p. 205. l. 15. r. has retem'd. p. 240 l.
22. r. Sylvester. p. 241. l. 5. r. ornamented. Ibid. l. 30. r. Candlesticks. p.
242. l. 15. dele with. p. 251. l. 8. r. Pestilence. p. 259. l. 15 r. soever. p.
266. l. 17. r. many p. 272. l. 1. for for r. the p. 289. l. 24. r. thereupon.
p. 305. l. 30. r. Conversions. Ibid. l. 32. for was r. were. p. 306. l. 1. r.
Religion. Ibid. l. 17. r. Hungarian. p. 307. l. 13. r. could. p. 310. l. 2. r.
Canons. Ibid. l. 31. r. how miserably. p. 313. l. 30. r. Barbarous. p. 314. l.
2. r. do that. Ibid. l. 6. r. Modesty. p. 318. l. 10. r. Chaplains. p. 322. l.
6. r. our way of Liveing. p. 326. l. 20. r. Journeys. Ibid. l. 26. r. Travells.
p. 327. l. 32. r. upon them. p. 328. l. 15. r. bear. p. 330. l. 28. r.
assistance. p. 332. l. 31. r. multitude.

THE BEHAVIOR AND MANNERS OF THE Christians.
Part the First.
I Shall divide my Work into four Parts: The first will represent the Manners I.
of the Christians of Jerusalem, to the The division of the whole.
Destruction of that City, under Vespasian. This first state of Christianity,
though but of a short continuance, was so supereminent in its Perfection, that
it will deserves a separate Consideration.

The second will take in all the Time of the Persecution; that is the entire
space of three Centuries.

In the third I shall describe the State of the Church in its Liberty, which
Commenced in the fourth Age. And

In the last consider the Changes it afterward underwent; and endeavor to
discover the Causes of them.

The Christian Religion, as it was not the Invention of Man, but the Work of II.
God; so like the Universe, it had its full The first part, the Church of
Jerulem.
Perfection in its first Birth, and was most Glorious in its earliest
Productions. It is not to be imagined, says Tertullian, that the Apostles were
ignorant of any Truth, profitable to Salvation, or that the Invention of
Tertul. Praescript. C. 22.
after Ages has found out any new Rule of Living more perfect, or more Sublime
than what Jesus Christ taught his Disciples. But this Heavenly Doctrine did not
always produce the like effects, but had its different Operations according to
the different Dispositions of those that received it, or the different measures
of Grace, with which God was pleased to Accompany it. The true Israelites, who
had by the Tradition of their Fathers, and the use of the Holy Scriptures, been
bred up in the knowledge of the true God, and from their Infancy inured to the
observation of his Laws; the Gospel found them well prepared for that higher
Perfection it required, when that perfection should be discovered unto them,
and they should be made to understand, what kind of Salvation that was, which
their Messiah was to bring them, and what kind of Kingdom, his Kingdom was to
be. But as for the Gentiles, who had hitherto Ephesians. 2. 12
lived without God, and without Law, trained up (according to the custom of the
then Deluded World) in the most horrid 1 Cor. 12. 2
Superstitions; Worshipping (with as little understanding as the Beasts of their
Sacrifice) dumb Idols, plunged in sensuality, and habituated to all sorts of
Impieties and Impurities, it was far more difficult for them to Rise to the
same Perfection. So that it is among the Christians of this first Church of
Jerusalem, we must look for an Example of a Life, the most perfectly Christian,
and consequently the most perfectly happy, that Mortality is capable of.

We must begin with the Life of Jesus Christ himself, who is both the Original,
and the Model of all perfection. He Jo. 13. 15.
has given us an Example that as he has done, so should we do. And this is
one of the grand Advantages we receive by the Incarnation, that thereby the
Word became sensible, and by conversing with Man, as Man rendered himself the
Object, not only of our Admiration and Adoration, but of our Imitation also;
having in his Life set us that perfect Exemplar, in conformity to which, we are
to Regulate ours. I know very well, that a Life so Divine cannot he worthily
described, but by those who have seen with their Eyes and heard with 1 Jo. 1. 1.
their Ears, and whose hands have handled the Word of Life, and who were
themselves acted by his Spirit. Yet may every Man according to the measure of
his Capacity, employ his thoughts and meditations upon it, and point out some
of the particulars which he Judges more proper for our Imitation; leaving it to
others more advanced in the exercises of Devotion and the practice of Christian
Virtues to make still farther Discoveries in so Inexhaustible a Subject.

In the Life of Jesus Christ we cannot go too far back. He was an Example from
the Cradle, and in his first Years set us a Copy of the first Virtues we are
capable of Learning, that is, the Virtues of Childhood. He showed himself in
that Age Docile, Tractable and Submissive toward his Parents, and of such a
sweetness of Temper and Behavior, that rendered him amiable in the sight of all
that beheld him. For thus says the Scripture; As he Increased Luke 2. 40. 52.
in Stature, so he increased in Wisdom, and in favor with God and Man. As for
all the rest of his Youth till he came to be thirty Years of Age; we have no
other Account of it, but that he abode in the little City of Nazareth, passing
there Matt. 3. 5^.
for the Son of a Carpenter, and was a Carpenter himself. This Silence of
History Mar. 6. 3.
expresses better than any Words could have done, the State of Privacy in which
as yet he lived. Jesus Christ himself (He who came to be the light of the
World) passed the greatest part of his Days upon earth in obscurity. He spent
thirty years in the condition of a private Life, and only three or four in
Preaching, and the public exercise of his Ministry, to show that it is the duty
of the generality of men to keep themselves within a private Station, and
labor in silence, and that it is only for some few persons to put themselves
upon public Functions, and that only so far forth as they shall be by the
Designation of God, or by Charity toward their Neighbor, obliged thereunto.

The Occupation which he chose to follow is also worthy our Reflection. To live
by the labor of ones Hands, is a state of Life more Poor, than to have Lands
to Till or Cattle to Feed. Whether his Trade of a Carpenter was to build
Houses, or (as ancient Tradition reports) to make Justin in Tryph.
Plows and other Instruments of Husbandry; it is certain 'twas a mean and
laborious employment: but at the same time a very useful and necessary one to
Society, and such without which there would scarce be any living in the World;
and therefore a more laudable way of getting a livelihood than any of those
that Minister only to Pleasure and Vanity. Thus he passed his younger days in
the Family of his Father, and place of his Education, leading a life not
slavish or reproachful, nor trifling and insignificant; but serious, employed,
and laborious, submitting to the Penalty imposed upon the Posterity of Adam, of
earning their Bread with the sweat of their Brows, and showing himself an
Example of those two Virtues he so much recommended to others, Ma. 11. 27
Meekness and Humility.

Before he ent'red upon the execution of his Mission, he prepared himself for
it by Baptism, Prayer and Fasting; not that Luke 3. 21.
he had any need of these Preparatories, but that he might (as he himself
expresses it) fulfill all Righteousness, and give us an Example. Mat. 3. 15.
His Fast of forty Days and forty Nights, and subsisting so long without Food,
is ordinarily looked upon as a Miracle, as well as the like in Moses and Elias.
But I know not whether we do in this matter sufficiently understand the
strength of Nature it self. St. Simeon Stylites did more than once pass
Theodor. Hist. Relig. P.
an whole Lent together without Eating, having by degrees brought himself to so
prodigious an Abstinence. And at this Day there are Idolaters in India, who can
pass twenty days or more, without tasting a bit all that while.

During this Fast, and all his long abode in the hideous solitude of the
Wilderness; in what can we imagine he employed his Time but in Prayer? But who
dares pretend to describe the Praying of Jesus Christ? Let us humbly Meditate
upon what the Scripture has left to us concerning it; and more especially upon
that Heavenly Prayer, recorded by St. John: Joh. 17.
Nay, let not the Manner after which he prayed, nor the Circumstances, of it
escape our Observation. He prayed in the darkness of the Night, and sometimes
whole Nights together. He Prayed in Public, and he Prayed in Private; in the
Garden, in the Mountains, in the Wilderness, removed out of the noise of the
World, where no mortal Eye could see him. He lift up his Eyes and his Hands to
Heaven, he cast himself upon his bended Knees; He prostrated his Body on the
Earth; testifying by all this his profound Veneration and Submission to his
Heavenly Father.

He suffered himself to be tempted, to animate us after his Example,
courageously to resist the evil one. He repelled every assault by Scripture
instances, to teach us among other things, to be always Meditating upon these
sacred Writings, to have recourse to them upon all occasions, and to regulate
every Action according to their Directions.

After that he takes upon him his Character, and makes his Public Appearance
in the World; beginning from that time to lead a Life which is the Model, after
which Priests, Bishops, and all public Persons ought to form theirs. His
principal employment was the Instruction of Mankind, and the Conversion of
Sinners. Luke 19. 10.
He came (as he himself declares) to seek, and to save that which was lost. To
that end, by the Miraculous Cure of Diseases, and his many other Works, he drew
the Eyes of all the World upon him; thus at the same time convincing their
Judgments by the Proof of his Power, and gaining their Affections by instances
of his Goodness. For Miracles as they were necessary establish his Mission, so
were they of no less Efficacy to recommend his Doctrine: And it is in this, that
the holy Bishops of old, though without the gift of Miracles, knew how to imitate
their Master; they knew what weight their Works would add to their Doctrine;
and therefore by the largeness of their Alms, the Protection of the Oppressed,
the Reconciliation of Differances, and other such like good Services they did
to Mankind, endeavored to recommend themselves to the World, and gain Respect
and Love to their Persons; though even the Works themselves of Jesus Christ; as
to the manner of them, are not altogether above our imitation, for they may
serve to teach us the Virtues of Simplicity, Humility, and Patience. He did his
Miracles without Affection, without any thing of Ostentation or Vainglory, and
without so much as being entreated, unless sometimes when he found it
necessary, either to exercise the Faith of those who wanted his help, or to
discover it, and make it the more Exemplary to others. He generally concealed
his glorious Performances, with as much care as others do their disgraces. He
seems to attribute them rather to the Faith of the Patients, than to his own
Power. And this is given as the reason, why he did so few of them at Nazareth,
because of their Mar. 6. 6.
unbelief, at which it is said, he himself marvelled. He ascribed all to the
Glory of his Father, I can of mine own self do nothing, Joh. 5. 30.
says he, my Father that dwells in me, it is Joh. 14. 10
he that does the works.

He must needs have had a wonderful Patience to endure that incredible
multitude; and the greatest part of them Diseased, Poor and miserable
Creatures, that continually crowded after him, and pressed with that violence
to come within the reach of him, that they even threw themselves upon him, as
appears when he healed the Woman who labored under Mar. 5. 24. Mar. 3. 9.
the Issue of Blood; and when he bad his Disciples provide a small Ship to wait
on him, to save himself from the Throng. When he was in any House, all the City
Mar. 1. 33. and 3. 20.
crowded to the Doors, as it were besieging him, and not giving him time to
eat; so that he could not so much as enter into the Cities but by stealth, and
was fain to Mat. 1. 45.
abide without in the desert places; and yet even there the People in vast
multitudes flocked after him; as appears by the five thousand Men he fed in the
Wilderness; so that he was forced to retire to the Mountains for Prayer, to
spend whole Nights there, and sleep only at broken intervals, passing from
place to place; as appears by his sound sleep in the Ship, when in the midst of
a tempest at Sea. Mat. 8. 24.


His Life was far more painful now, than it was when he lived by the Labors of
his Hands; for now it appears he had none of his former leisure, by his
permiting some Women to follow after him to Luke 8. 2
supply him with Necessaries, and by his keeping some money by him, of which
Joh. 12. 6. Joh. 13. 29
Judas had the charge; which shows how little he valued his Money by the choice
he made of its Keeper. He is observed to have given Alms; and yet at the same
time he wanted himself; so that he was forced upon working a Miracle, to pay
for himself and St. Peter, the Tribute of the first born, which was but half a
Shekel, that is of our Coin about fifteen Pence.

And indeed, he always lived in great Poverty. He says himself, That he had
not Mat. 8. 20.
where to lay his Head. He had no habitation of his own, nor so much as a place
to lodge in but upon courtesy. At his Death we do not find that he had any
thing to leave behind him but only his Garments, He says, that he came not to
be Ministered unto, but to Minister. He Journied from Ma. 10. 45.
place to place on Foot; and when he made his entrance into Jerusalem riding
upon an Ass; it is plain that was an extraordinary Action. He traveled in the
heat of the Day. When he met the Woman of Samaria, it is said, that was about the
sixth Jo. 4. 6.
Hour, that is, about Noon, and that he rested himself by the Well, being
wearied with his Journey: For though he was the Lord of Nature; yet we do not
find that ever he wrought a Miracle for his own private Benefit, or to save
himself any Labor. It Is once said, that the Angels came and Mat. 4. 11.
Ministered to him, to show the right he had to command them, had he been
pleased to have made use of it.

In this same instance of his meeting with the Woman of Samaria, we see his
wonderful Modesty, for it is said, That his Disciples marvelled that he talked
with a Jo. 4. 27.
Woman. And his very Enemies themselves had never the Face to invent any
Calumny against him that could call his Chastity into Question. Nor was this a
forced Modesty? There was nothing streined nor Affected in him, who was the
declared enemy of Hypocrisy, and who was the very Truth it self. His
Conversation was simple, easy, Natural; yet lively and Affecting. He observed
the Countenances of People, as when it is said that he beheld the Rich young
Man, and loved him, Cherishing with a Compassionate look the very first
beginnings of goodness in him, how weak and Imperfect so ever they were. He is
often observed to have Stretched forth his Hands, and used other such like
expressive Gestures. Sometimes by his Looks, and by his Words, He discovered
the Sentiments of Admiration, Indignation, Anger, and of that uneasiness which
the unbelief of Men put him to. At other times again, he Expressed the softest
Affections of Tenderness and Indulgence; as when he caused the little Children
to be brought unto him; laid his Mar. 9. 46. and 10. 14.
Hands upon them, Embraced them in his Arms, and Recommended to his Disciples
the Imitation of their Innocence and Humility.

As to his outward Appearance, there was nothing singular or Extraordinary in
it. He conformed himself to the same way of Living with the other Jews,
appeared as a private Person, and had no External Marks to Distinguish him from
the Common People; one of whom he makes himself, by the name of the Son of Man;
for that is the meaning of that Appellation. He led a Life full of Hardship and
very Laborious, but without any singular Austerity. He Fed as others did, he
abstained not from Wine, nor made any Scruple of being seen at great
Entertainments; as at the Marriage in Cana, and at St. Matthews's Feast. Luke
5. 29.
And yet he so little regarded Eating, that his Disciples once putting him in
mind taking some Food; when he had manifestly occasion enough for it, his
answer was, I have other Meat to Eat that ye Jo. 4. 32. 34.
know not of: My Meat is to do the will of my Father.

Yet notwithstanding this mean and simple outward Appearance, he maintained a
Mavelous Dignity, and kept himself far above Contempt. His Deportment was
always serious, Grave and Composed. Upon two Several occasions it is taken
Notice of him that he Wept; but not at all that he Laughed; nay or ever so In
Matt. Hom. 6. Mar.
much as Smiled, at least, as St. Chrysostom observes. He never asked any Man a
Farthen, choseing rather to Work a Miracle than be beholden to any Body for a
piece of Money, to pay his Tribute with. But when he sent his Disciples to seek
an Ass to make his Entrance into Jerusalem, and to take up for him an upper
Room where he might keep the Passover; he shows by his manner of Speaking that
he well knew no Man could have denied him any thing he should have asked. He
proved his own saying by his Actions. That it is more blessed to Give than to
Receive, Act 20. 35.
since continually dispencing so many benefits to others he received so little
from them. All the World sought to him and ran after him, and he sought to no
Man; but going from City to City, Exhorted all Men every where to Repentance.
He was free of Access to all Persons that were any way Diseased, and to all
Sinners whom he found disposed for Conversion. To these last sort he showed
himself so easy and Familar as even to Eat with them, and Lodge in their
Houses. So that upon this occasion he suffered a certain Woman to kiss his Feet
and Anoint Luke 7. 38.
them with Ointment; a sort of Indulgence, which might otherwise have seemed
very opposite to that Poverty and Mortification he always Professed.

As he came into the World for the Instruction of all Mankind, he was
continually upon his Work of Teaching both in Public and Private. On the
Sabbath Days, he used (according to the custom of Luke 4. 16.
the Jewish Doctors) to Expound the Scriptures in their Synagogues; and thence
they gave him the Title of Master or Rabbi. But he had a peculiar Air of
Authority which sufficiently distinguished him from their Doctors. He taught
them Mat. 7. 29.
as one having Authority, says the Evangelist, and they wondered at the
Gracious Luke 4. 22.
Words which proceeded out of his Mouth.

His discourse was plain and clear, without any other Ornament than those
lively and natural Figures, which are never wanting to a man fully persuaded
and affected within himself, and which are therefore the most powerful to
persuade and affect others. He spoke much in a little, and sometimes answered
Questions put to him, more by his Actions than by his Words, as when he says
to the Disciples of St. John the Baptist, Go and show John Mat. 11. 4.
again those things which you do hear and see. He lays down great Principles
without showing himself much concerned to demonstrate them, or to draw any
Consequences from them. These Principles carry in themselves such a light of
Truth, that if any Man withstand them, it is because he is wilfully Blind. And
'twas to punish this Depravity of their Hearts, that sometimes he spoke to them
in Parables and dark sayings. If at any time he made use of Proofs and
Arguments, they were generally simple and natural, taken from sensible Objects
and Familiar Comparisons. His Miracles and his Virtues were of all others the
most Powerful Proofs, and which he most insisted on, as being adapted to all
sorts of Capacities, and therefore far more Convincing than all the Syllogisms
of Philosophers. The learned, as Nicodemus, and the unlearned as the Man that
was born blind, were equally affected with this way of Proof. To this he often
joins the Testimonies of the Law and the Prophets, demonstrating that his
Doctrine proceeded from the same Wisdom, and his Miracles from the same Power,
and that the Old and New Testament are both founded upon the same Divine
Authority. It Is to this purpose, he so often makes use of the writings of Joh.
2. 3. Joh. 9. 31.
the Old Testament, either by express Quotations of the very Letter of it, or
by manifest Allusions to it.

'Twas in this Spirit of Submission to Divine Authority, that he Nurtured up
his Disciples; afar different method from what the Philosophers took with
theirs; who under the pretense of seeking after the Truth, encouraged nothing
more in their Pupils than a Spirit of Disputation and Contention. But Jesus
Christ came not to seek the Truth, but to discover it, in such measure as he
(who had the full possession of all Truth, or rather who was himself the very
Truth it self) should think fit: To the intent that they might the more profit,
both by his discourses and by his Example; he seldom suffered them to be long
out of his Sight, living in common with them, and making of Tertul. de praes^r.
C. 22.
all but one Family. They accompanied him whether soever he went, they eat and
lodged together with him; so that they had the opportunity of being continually
taught by him and learning every Moment. He inured them to the imitation of his
Poverty, sending them abroad with out furnishing them either with money or any
other sorts of Provisions; nay, and when he kept them with him, hunger
sometimes forced them to take up with what they could meet with in the Fields;
as when they plucked the Ears of Corn on the Sabbath Day.

He took great care to Instruct them; Mat. 13. 11. 15, 16.
what they understood not of his Public Discourses he explained to them in
Private, using them as his Friends and Companions, and making known to them Jo.
15. 15.
whatsoever he had learned of the Father; that is, so far as they were Able to
bear it. And yet he did not fondly humor them in their vain Curiosity: On the
contrary, we sometimes find him expressly Reprimanding them for their bold
Enquiries, both before and after his Resurrection; as when they Questioned him
concerning Mat. 24. 36.
the End of the World, and when St. Peter would have known what was to become
Act. 1. 7. Jo. 21. 22.
of St, John. At other times, he contented himself with passing by their
Questions and giving no answer to them; as when St. Jude asked him why he would
Jo. 14. 22.
not Manifest himself to the World. He patiently bore with the slowness of
their Apprehension, their Ignorance, their Vanity and Emulation, with all their
other Weaknesses, and never ceased Laboring to correct them.

By his Disciples, I here understand those Twelve he had chosen to be always
with him. But the Scripture gives the name Mar. 3. 14.
of Disciples also to all those that had Embraced his Doctrine and received his
Baptism, of whom there were a great Number, since there were an hundred and
twenty of them met together in the same Room with the Apostles at the Election
Act. 1. 15.
of St. Matthias, and there were more than five hundred of them together who 1
Cor. 15. 6.
all at the same time saw Jesus Christ after his Resurrection. This Church
therefore consisted of two Parts; The common sort of Believers who are simply
called Disciples, or the Brethren; and of those whom Jesus Christ had chosen
out for the Public Ministry, as the twelve Apostles, and the seventy two
Disciples, whom he sent before him by two and two together Luke 10. 1.
into every Place where he himself was to follow. By these Distinctions we have
set before us the several Degrees of Charity worth our Observation: Jesus
Christ has taught us, that we are to look upon every Man Luke 10. 29.
as our Neighbor, whom we ought to Love as our selves; as indeed he himself
laid down his Life for all Men: Yet he had a more particular Kindness for his
Disciples, and amongst them for his Apostles, and amongst them for St. Peter
and the two Brothers the Sons of Zebedee; and for St. John above all the Rest.
I shall nor here enquire into the Reasons of this Distinction, or why St. Peter
and St. John should have received such especial Marks of his Favor? I shall
only observe, that he has by this his Example, Authorized and Sanctified the
Relations of Friendship, and those closer Bands of Amity which natural
Affection or special Inclination may form between particular Persons without
any Prejudice to a General Charity. He had other Friends besides his Apostles.
He loved Lazarus Jo. 11. 5. 11. 35.
and his two Sisters, he himself calls him his Friend; he expressed a very
sensible Grief at his Death, and Wept as he was going to raise him out of the
Grave.

Who can doubt but that he had a most tender Affection for his Holy Mother,
especially if we consider the care he took of her when he was Dying? And yet he
seems some times to have expressed himself somewhat Harshly toward her: As
when she found him Disputing in the midst of the Doctors, and when at Luke 2.
49.
the Marriage Feast she told him that their Wine failed them. He reproved the
Woman that Blessed her barely upon the account of her being his Mother, and
declared, Jo. 2. 4.
that he knew no other for his Mother or Kindred but they that did the will
Luke 11. 28.
of his Father. He well knew, what that strong Soul was able to bear, and was
willing to let the World see that Flesh Mat. 12. 48.
and Blood had no share in his Affections.

His Charity extended to al lthe World. Come unto me, says he, all ye that
Labor Mat. 11. 28.
and are heavy Laden and I will give you Rest. It is said, that seeing the
Multitude that followed him, he was moved with Compassion Mat. 9. 36.
on them, because they fainted and were scattered abroad as Sheep without a
Shepherd. 'Twas this his Compassion Ma. 14. 14.
that forced him at two Several times to multiply the Loaves of Bread; 'twas
this his Compassion that forced him to raise Luke 7. 13.
from the Dead the Son of the Widow of Naim. He was a true Lover of his
Country, and deeply concerned for the Welfare of the People of Israel, and City
of Jerusalem. In the midst of his Triumph he took up a sad Lamentation over
Luke 19. 41.
her, as foreseeing the direful Calamities she was by her own Guilt drawing
upon her self. He taught Men their Duty of Obedience to their Prince, Reverence
to the Priests and Doctors of the Law how corrupt soever they might be; and he
himself paid an Exact Observance to the Laws and Ceremonies of the Jewish
Religion, though at the same time he was come to put an end to those
Ceremonies, being Master both of the Sabbath and of all the Laws. Yet would he
never Mat. 12. 8.
take upon him to exercise any Authority as to Civil affairs, no not so much as
to Arbitrate a Difference between two Brothers. Luke 12. 14.
Being Interrogated by Authority, he severally answered his Judges according to
what Properly fell under their Cognizance. To the High Priest, concerning his
professing himself Christ and the Son of God; and to Pilate, concerning the
Title of a King. He declared that his Kingdom was not of this World, and
consequently that his Doctrine threatened no danger to the Public, but as to
Civil Government left all things as it found them. It would be too Presumptuous
an Undertaking to pretend to display all his Virtues and Excellencies. It Is a
subject in which thought could never come to an end, and those Pious Souls who
apply themselves to a close and intent Meditation upon the Gospel, do still
discover fresh Wonders in it. Let me just add a Word or two concerning his
Passion, where as the example was singularly Great and Extraordinary, so are we
nearly concerned in the Virtues it teaches; the Virtues of knowing how to bear
Sufferings; a Trial we can scarce live in the World and Escape.

The Sorrowful Estate into which Jesus Christ was reduced in the Garden of
Olives, Sufficiently proves that he was Subject to the like Natural Passions of
Fear and Grief with other Men, and that therefore 'twas not Insensibility but
Resolution that carried him through his Sufferings. He bore them all with an
Invincible Constancy, without making any Defense, without Resisting, without
Refusing to submit to whatsoever his Tormenters laid upon him: Immovable as a
Rock he received all their Scourgings and Outrages. His Silence was such as
made his Persecutors themselves admire. He who with a Word Speaking could have
confounded his Accusers, the false Witnesses, and his Judges themselves; yet he
opened not his Mouth, and that because he knew they were not disposed to hear
any thing in his Justification. Upon the Cross it self, and under the last
Agonies of his Suffering, he still Maintains the same firmness of mind, the
same Freedom, nay the same Tranquillity of Spirit. He Prayed for them that put
him to Death; he recompensed the Faith of the good Thief; he took care to
provide for his disconsolate Mother; he fully accomplished the Prophecies; he
recommended his Spirit to God.

The Apostles after their having received the Holy Ghost appeared in the World
as so many Living Images of Jesus Christ, and as it were Transcripts of that
Original, according to which the Faithful were to form themselves. Nor do they
stick to declare as much. Be ye followers of me says St. Paul even as I am of
Christ, 1 Cor. 11. 1.
and again. Be followers together of me and mark them which walk so as ye have
us for Phil. 3. 17
an ensample.

So that though they diligently applied themselves to Teaching, they did it
more by their Examples than by their Discourses. Among the Faithful the
Apostles chose out some select Persons whom they made their Disciples, and upon
whom they bestowed more full and distinct Instructions, using them as they
themselves had been used by Jesus Christ. These their Disciples in particular,
always attended their Persons, living in the same House with them, Eating at
the same Table, and Lodging in the same Room: At least it is after this manner,
that the Author of the Recognitions describes St. Peter to have Lived with his
Disciples. Nor is this Tradition (as will afterward appear) lightly to be
rejected. These Disciples accompanied the Apostles in their Travels, and as new
Churches were established had the Government of them committed into their Hands

Thus we find St. Peter attended by St. Mark whom he calls his Son; by St.
Clement, so famous throughout all the 1 Pet. 5. 13.
Churches; St Evodius who succeeded him at Antioch; St. Linus and St. Cletus
who succeeded him at Rome. With St. Paul we find St. Luke, St. Titus, St.
Timothy, and the same St. Clement. With the Apostle St. John, we find St.
Polycarp and Eusebius. 3. hist c. 38.
St. Papias. These Saints took care to preserve the Doctrine of the Apostles,
rather in their Memory than in writing, and to teach it more by their Practices
than by their Discourses. And thus imitating their Masters, they made
themselves as St. Paul expresses it, the examples of Believers, 1 Timothy 4. 12.
Tit. 2. 7.
in Word, in Works, in Faith, in Charity, in Purity, in Gravity, and in all
manner of holy Conversation. Besides these Disciples, after the same manner
took to themselves other Disciples, whom they formed and Disciplined as they
themselves had been by the Apostles; Qualifying and Capacitating them also to
do the like to others. This is the charge given by St. Paul to Timothy. The
things which thou have heard of me, among many Witnesses; the 2 Timothy 2. 2
same commit thou to faithful Men, who shall be able to teach others also.

But to return to those that were taught and governed immediately by the
Apostles themselves; and particularly, to this Church of Jerusalem; which Jesus
Christ had begun with his own Hands, to build upon the Foundation of the
Synagogue, and which was not only the Example but also the root and Original of
all others: Let us see therefore after what manner the Scripture describes unto
us these first Believers.

They continued steadfastly in the Apostles Act. 2. 42. Ibid. 43.
Doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of Bread, and in Prayers. All that
believed were together, and had all things common, and sold their Possessions
and Goods, and parted them to all Men, as every Man had need. They continued
daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread from House to House,
they did eat their Meat with gladness and singleness of heart, Praising God,
and having favor with all the people; and again, The multitude of them that
believed, were of Act. 4. 35.
one Heart, and of one Soul: Neither said any of them, that ought of the things
he possed was his own, but they had all things in common. Neither was there any
among them Ibid. 34, etc.
that lacked: for as many as had Possessions of Lands or Houses, sold them, and
brought the prices of the things that were sold, and laid them down at the
Apostles Feet: and distribution was made unto every Man according as he need.
And by the Hands of the Apostles Acts 5. 12.
were many Signs and Wonders wrought amongst the People: and they were all with
one accord in Solomon's Porch. And of the rest durst no Man join himself to
them: but the People magnified them. And believers were the more added to the
Lord, multitudes both of Men and Women.

The sum of which description may be reduced to these following Heads; amongst
themselves, Preaching, Praying, Communion, mutual Affection, Communication of
Goods, inward Satisfaction; and from without, the Respect, Esteem and Favor of
the People. This first Church was composed of Persons of every Sex and
Condition, and grew quickly very numerous: For there were three thousand
Converted at the first preaching of St. Peter, and five thousand at a second.
It is said more than once, that the number of Believers increased every Day;
and one Acts 21. 20 many thousand, it is ^n the Original Myriads.
passage there is, that seems to imply, as if there were many ten thousands of
them. They were the greatest part of them married Persons. (absolute Continence
being a thing rarely practiced in those Days) They lived separately; for it is
said, they went from house to house breaking bread, that is, Consecrating and
distributing the Holy Eucharist; yet they lived in common, reducing all they
had into ready money which at first the Apostles, and afterward the seven
Deacons distributed to every one according to his need; and with such fidelity
and discretion did they manage this affair, that there were no Poor amongst
them.

Here therefore was to be seen a visible and real Example of that Communication
of Goods, and living in common, which the old Legislators and Philosophers
looked upon as the most proper means of making mankind happy; but without ever
being able to bring it into practice: 'Twas to Arist. polit. lib. 2.
compass this, and that Minos in the first times of Greece would have
established in Creet his Tabulae Communes, and that Lycurgus took such
Precautions to banish from among the Lacedoemonians all excess, and the use of
Riches. But Plato pushes his Idea of Community a little too far, when to leave
nothing uncommon, he was for taking away the distinction of Families. They well
saw, that to make a perfect Society, there must be left no Meum and Tuum, no
room for private and separate Interests. But they could only make use of
Penalties to constrain, or Arguments to persuade Men to accept of their
Regulations; and therefore all their labor was in vain. 'Twas only the Grace
of Jesus Christ that could change the Hearts of Men, and cure the corruption of
their Natures.

Thus this Communication of Goods among these Christians of Jerusalem, was the
pure effect of that singular Charity with which the Gospel had inspired them,
which made them all Brethren to each other, and as it were of one and the same
Family; where out of one and the same Estate, the Father provides for all his
Children, and loving them all equally, suffers none of them to want. They had
always before their Eyes the Commandment of Jesus Christ, of loving one
another, so often repeated by him, and particularly the night before he
suffered, making this the distinguishing Character by which all men were to
know that they were his Disciples. But that which obliged them to sell their
Possessions, and reduce all into ready Money, Joh. 13 35.
was our Savior's Command of forsaking all that they had; which they practiced
not only in the inward disposition of the Heart, in which terminates the
obligation of this Precept, but in reality of Fact, according to that Counsel
of our Savior If thou will be perfect, go and sell all that Ma. 12. 21.
thou have, and come and follow me. For a Aug. de Catech. Rud. C. 23.
man more effectually secures himself from being encumbered with the things of
this Life, if he really parts with them, than he can be while he keeps them in
his Hands. Besides they considered that our Savior had foretold the
Destruction of Jerusalem, Ma. 24. 34.
and that he had limited the time of it to be before that Generation should
pass away; which made them willingly clear themselves of all the concerns they
had, either in that accursed City it self, or in the Country belonging to it,
devoted to Destruction.

So that the Believers living in common, was a practice peculiar to the first
Church of Jerusalem, and suitable to the condition of those times and Persons.
For it would have been an hard matter, at least Humanly speaking, for so
numerous a Church to have long Subsisted without the support of some fixed Fund
and Revenues that were certain; and by the Acts of the Apostles and the
Epistles of St. Paul we see, that during the short time of its continuance,
Act. 24. 17.
it stood in need of Relief from other Churches, and that out of all the 1 Cor.
16. 3.
Provinces there were remitted considerable sums for the use of the Saints at
Jerusalem, And yet St. Chrysostom so Hom. 11. in Act.
long time after sticks not to propose this Example of Believers living in
Common as a thing still Practicable, and as a means of converting all the
Infidels. It Is to be supposed that these Saints of Jerusalem Labored with
their own Hands, since in so doing they did but follow the most perfect
examples of Jesus Christ and his Apostles; nor can we suppose any thing too
perfect of them: And this was also a considerable means of supplying their want
of fixed Revenues.

It Is said that they continued steadfast in the Doctrine of the Apostles, and
they are commonly called by the Name of Disciples, from their applying
themselves to the Learning of the Doctrine of Salvation; both by hearing the
Apostles, who made frequent Discourses to them, and diligently Instructed them
both in Public and Private, delivering to them the same saving Truths, they
themselves had received from the Lord: And likewise in reading the Holy
Scriptures and conferring upon them among themselves, It Is added that they
continued in Prayer, and that they went Daily to the Temple, assembling
themselves in Solomon's Porch, and there with Act. 3. 1.
one accord joining in Prayer. The Example of St. Peter and St. John going up
together into the Temple at the hour of Prayer, being the Ninth hour, makes it
probable, that they then observed the same hours of Prayers which the Church
has Baron. an. 34. 12. 250.
always since kept to. As to their outward way of living, they conformed
themselves to the rest of the Jews, observing all the Ceremonies of the Law,
even to the Offering of Sacrifices; which they continued to do as long as the
Temple was standing: And this is what the Fathers called, Giving the Synagogue
an honorable Interment. Aug. ep. 19.


After Prayer the Scripture takes notice of the breaking of Bread, by which
there, as in several other Places of the New Testament, is signified the
Eucharist. They Celebrated this Mystery not in the Temple, where they could not
be at liberty enough to do it, and where the Christians were intermixed with
the Jews; but in private Houses with only the Faithful amongst themselves. It
was attended, as the Peace Offerings under the Law, with a Repast; the use of
which continued for a long time amongst Christians under the Name of Agapae,
which Word signifies Love, as much as to say, Love Feasts. It is said, that
these Feasts were accompanied with Gladness and singleness of Heart. And indeed
all the Faithful by their Humility, Simplicity and Purity of Heart were as so
many little Children; Innocent and Inoffensive. And by their renouncing the
vain hopes and Enjoyments of this Life, they cut off all occasions of Vexatious
and Disquieting Passions, as leaving no matter for them to work upon, and
having their Thoughts wholly taken up with the hopes of Heaven, and the
expectation of the Kingdom of Christ, which they looked upon as very near at
hand. And if we cannot without wonder so much as Read that little which the
Scripture has left to us in Writing concerning the first Church, we may easily
imagine how much they must have been beloved and admired by those who were the
Spectators of their Virtues.

This first Church Subsisted at Jerusalem for near the space of forty Years
under the Direction of the Apostles, and particularly of St. James their
Bishop; till the Christians seeing, according to the Predictions of our
Savior, the Judgments denounced against that unhappy City near approaching,
Separated themselves from the Unbelieving Jews, and retired to the little City
of Pella, where they enjoyed a safe retreat, during the Siege of Jerusalem.

II. PART.
IN the mean time there were formed several other Churches in diverse parts of
the World, Composed both of Jews and Gentiles; which though they came not up
The time of the Persecutions. The state of the Gentiles before their Conversion.
to this height of Perfection, yet were great Examples of Virtue and Holiness;
especially if we consider the state of the Gentiles before their Conversion.

They who are unacquainted with the History of past Ages are apt to imagine,
that the Men who lived in the World sixteen hundred Years ago were more simple,
more innocent, and more easily nstructed than are the Men of this Generation:
And that because they have heard say, that the World is in a state of
Declension and grows worse and worse; and because they still see the marks of
the Simplicity and easy Temper of our honest Forefathers. But they who have
made any Reflection on the Writings left us by the Greeks and Romans, plainly
see the contrary. The Preaching of the Gospel began under the Reigns of the
Emperors Claudius and Nero. What kind of Courts these Emperors had, and the
Vices that there Reigned we may see in Tacitus: The Manners and practices of
the same Age are to be seen in Horace, in Juvenal, in Martial, and in
Petronius. That these Authors blushed not at the Infamous Impurities with which
they have stuffed their Writings, is because the Men of that Age blushed not to
commit them. They thought they might take the Liberty of Publicly exposing
what others as Publicly practiced. And there seems to be a special Providence
in it that these Books, otherwise so pernicious, should be preserved to us, to
show out of what an Abyss of Corruption, Jesus Christ recovered Mankind. We
find the same Ordures in Suetonius, in the other Writers of the Historia
Augusta for the two Ages following, in Lucian, in Apuleius, in Atheneus, in a
Word, in all the Authors who give us an account of their Manners. Aug. Civit.
ii. C. iv. Cypr. ep. i. Clem. Alex, Paedag. lib. ii.
The Fathers themselves upon this Subject are forced to use great openness and
freedom of Speech, as amongst the rest St. Austin, Tertullian, St. Clemens
Alexandrinus; so that, that frightful Catalogue of the Vices of the Heathen
World, which St. Paul has given us in the beginning of his Epistle to the
Romans will not appear strange.

This Corruption of Manners took its course through Greece, Egypt, and the
East to Rome. It Is but casting ones Eyes upon Aristophanes to see to what
height of Dissolution the Greeks were even in those Days arrived; and it is a
thing but too certain that they did not after his time become more Wise; on the
contrary, they made still farther Improvements in Luxury and Effeminacy. The
Lives of the Kings of Macedonia, of Egypt, and Syria furnished History with a
New stock and variety of examples of the most monstrous Vices and Impurities.
It Is well known for what Alexandria, Antioch and Corinth were famed, and how
noted for their Voluptousness and Effeminacy were the Cities of Jonia and the
Lesser Asia: Yet in the midst of this general Corruption was it, that
Christianity took its Birth: 'twas in the midst of these very Cities that the
most famous Churches were founded. This Dissolution was not only Univerfal,
overspreading the whole Roman Empire; but public, open, avowed and Authorized,
nay even Consecrated by their Religion its self. Learned Men know what were the
Ceremonies of Bacchus, and Cybele. Wherever one passed one met with a Venus, an
Adonis, a Ganymede, and a Jupiter in all Disguises. There was not a Garden or
Orchard without the Idol of that Ridiculous God whom they made the Guardian of
the Place. Their common Songs and Poems were upon the Amors of their Gods, and
most of their Public Spectacles, were abominable Scenes either of Impurity or
Cruelty.

The ordinary Divertisements of the Roman People were to force Men to fight and
Murder one another, or to see them torn to pieces by Wild Beasts: Frequently
upon the most trifling occasions, they put their Slaves to the Rack, and to the
most horrible Tortures. The Governors of Provinces did often exercise
excessive Cruelties upon such as were not Romans. The Emperors put to Death
whomsoever they pleased, without any Form of Law, so that bad Princes spilt a
great deal of Blood, even of the most Noble Roman themselves. Nor was their
Avarice inferior to their Cruelty. All the World Groaned under their Frauds,
Perjuries, Falsities, unjust prosecutions and violent Oppressions; of all
which, we need no other proof than Cicero's Orations. If in the time of the
Republic, Verres in one Province, in the space of three Years, committed so
many Enormities, V. Juv. Sat. viii.
what must have been done throughout the whole Empire under Nero or Domitian by
the many Governors, chosen out of their own Favorites, who were in no fear of
being called to account, but on the contrary, both encouraged by the Example
and supported by the Authority of their Princes? But I fear I spend too many
Words upon a thing too evident in its self.

Such then were those out of whom were made those Christians I am going to
describe. When once they were washed and Sanctified, they were no longer I Cor.
vi. xi.
the same Creatures they had been before: Yet not to conceal that Good that was
in them, we must not disown but that there were in many of the Greeks and
Romans, some kind of hopeful Dispositions and Tendencies toward Virtue.

In the first place, they had much of that Politeness that necessarily carries
along with it many good qualities, which we may call superficial Virtues as
Gravity, Patience and Obligingness in Conversation, Complaisance, Cheerfulness,
and a lively way of expressing their Esteem or Affection, with a true sense of
Decorum and decency in every Action, of which the Greeks were complete Masters.
All this a Man may have without solid Virtue, or be wanting in these things
without being an ill Man, or a vicious Person: And yet Virtue seems not
Completely perfect without this exterior Dress to recommend her Beauty, and
set her off to advantage. Besides this, there were amongst them, the Greeks
especially, many true Philosophers, that is to say, Persons who did in good
earnest, and with the utmost powers of their Reason seek after the means of
becoming Happy; who seriously labored to come to the Knowledge Recognit. Clem.
init.
of the Truth, who honestly applied themselves to the practice of Virtue
Justin. in. Tryph. init.
according to the best of their knowledge; and who to pursue this study,
renounced all other Interests and Engagments, sparing neither Cost, nor Labor,
nor Travails to attain to the knowledge of those things which they accounted
the most excellent. Nor were the Romans so universally Degenerate, but that
there were many among them who maintained that Generosity, that Greatness of
Soul, that Constancy and firmness of Mind, and other such like Virtues for
which their Ancestors were so Renowned,

The Grace of the Gospel being superadded to these happy dispositions of
Nature, could not but produce admirable Effects. St. Cornelius, the first of
the Gentiles that teceived this Grace, was a Roman Captain. The bravery of the
Roman spirit appears in many of the glorious Martyrs, as St. Laurence, St.
Vincent, St. Sebastian, and in many great Bishops; as St. Cyprian, St. Ambrose,
St. Leo, etc. As for the Gravity of the Greek Philosophers, one may see it in
the Acts of S. Polycarp, in those of St Pionius, Priest of Smyrna; and in the
Writings of St. Justin and St. Clemens Alexandrinus, and in the same writings
we also find a vast reach of Learning, joined with the finest Politeness. The
Humility of a Christian having qualified the haughty Air of the Romans, and the
scornful Pride of the Philosophers, made of them true Sages: Faith having once
discovered to them the true end upon which they ought to fix, from that time
forward they minded nothing else. These Persons (even in their Gentile state)
so improved, and refined being now by the grace of the Gospel further cleansed
from all their Impurities, and having learnt to be sincere, became also Gentle,
Meek and Peaceable, without Artifice and Disguise.

Thus the Christian Religion established its self in the midst of the Roman
Empire, and in Rome its self, when it was in its most flourishing Condition, in
the most enlightened Age that ever was; and at the same time the most corrupt.
Nor could the Divinity of the Gospel more gloriously have displayed its Power,
than in triumphing over those two dispositions in Man, that are most opposite
to it; that is Vanity of Knowledge and Corruption of Manners; so victoriously
carrying on its Progress in the World; while on the one hand Science, an
exalted Understanding resisted the simplicity of its Doctrine; and the Humility
of Faith, on the other, Depravity of Heart, and corruption of Manners, opposed
the purity of its Morals, and the severity of its practices. This was necessary
to be the more particularly insisted on, that none may imagine as if the
Apostles had to do with only a Gross heavy sort of People, that might easily be
made to believe any thing that was told them. And this Consideration has
Tertullian long since urged against the Heathens 'Twas not (says he) with Jesus
Apolo. c. 21.
Christ as with Numa. He had a rough unhewn sort of People to deal with, stupid
and easy be to imposed on; and therefore to tame and break them into some kind
of Discipline, invented a Religion suited to their gross Capacities, and proper
to serve his ends; embarressed them with a multitude of Deities, and
prescribing a number of Ceremonies, by which he assured them of their Favor.
But Jesus Christ coming into the World, when Learning was at its height, when
Men were blinded with too much Wisdom, and Knowledge was their Diseaes; even
then opened their Eyes to the discerning of the Truth, and made Faith to
Triumph over Philosophy.

THE Method they used in Preaching IV. Preaching, teaching and Baptism.
the Gospel, was different, according to the different Dispositions of the
Persons they had to deal with. The Jews they pressed with the Prophecies, and
other proofs taken Ambros in Luc 9. 21. lib. 6. c. ult.
from the Scripture, and with their own Traditions. The Gentiles they managed
by Arguments and Ratiocinations; and those sometimes more plain and simple,
sometimes more subtle and elaborate, variously Accommodating themselves to
their Capacities; and therefore frequently urging against them the Authorities
of their own admired Poets and Philosophers. Miracles raised the attention, and
had equal force upon both Jews Act. ii. xiv. iii. xii. xiii. xvi. xiv. xiv.
xvii. xxii.
and Gentiles. The Acts of the Apostles furnished us with Examples of all these
different kinds of Preaching. They spoke of the things of God only to those
that Cle. Recog. I. Just. in Tryph.
heard them with seriousness and attention. As soon as they perceived the
Infidels to grow weary of their Discourses, or (as it often happened) begin to
laugh at them; the Christians presently broke off, and said no more; least they
should profane Holy things, and give occasion to the Heathen to Blaspheme. In
time they began to publish some Writings, to show the Heathens upon what weak
Foundations the Pagan Worship stood, and disengage them from their Prejudices;
such are St. Justin Martyr's Admonition to the Gentiles, and that of St.
Clemens Alexandrinus. But that by which they most prevailed, was Miracles, (yet
frequently in the Church) the holy Lives of Christians, and their constancy in
suffering Martyrdom.

When any one desired to become a Christian, they lead him to the Bishop, or to
some Priest, who in the first place took him into Examination, to see whether
his Profession was sincere and well grounded: Acta. S. S. Hippol. and Eus. ap.
baron. an. n. xii.
For sometimes they were imposed upon by Impostors, who pretended themselves
Converts only to ensnare the Christians, and betray them to their Persecutors.
Besides they were afraid of charging themselves with weak and unstable Souls,
who might by their falling away upon the first Trial of Persecution, dishonor
Orig. Contr Cells. 8.
the Church. After all these precautions, they carefully instructed the
Catechumen in all the Principles of Religion, but chiefly in the Practices of
it; that he might know before Hand how he was to govern himself after his
Baptism. To teach these Rules of good Living, is the subject of the Paedagogues
of St. Clemens, who succeeded St. Pantenus the Philosopher, in the School of
Alexandria; that is, in the Office of Instructing those who were disposed to
turn Christians. St. Clemens was succeeded in the same charge by Origin; who to
ease himself of part of Eusebius. 6. Hist. 15.
the burden, took to his assistance St. Heraclas, committing to his care the
new comers to be initiated in the first Rudiments of Religion.

When the Bishop judged the Catechumens sufficiently instructed and approved,
he admitted them to Baptism; this was done (if they could choose the time) on
Easter or Whitsunday Eve: But if there were any pressing Occasions, (as when
the Persecution was on foot,) they Acta. S. Cornelii P. ap. Bar. an. 255. n.
60. Acta. SS. Hippoly. and Eus. sup. n. x, xi.
Baptized at any time; yet they had then also their Baptisteries Consecrated to
this use, and took care to prepare the Catechumen; obliging him to fast the
whole Day before he was Baptized, Interrogating him, and making him give an
account of his Faith. After Baptism, the Bishop Acta. S. Steph. P. P. ap. Bar.
an. 259. n. 2.
immediately Confirmed him; and at the same time offered the holy Sacrifice,
and gave him the Communion; and caused Acta. S. Sus. an. 194 9. 12. Tertuliin
Marcion. c. xiv.
him to eat of the Blessed Milk and Honey, in token of his Spiritual Infancy,
and entrance into the true Land of Promise; that is the Church. They Baptized
the Children of Believers, whenever their Parents presented them, though under
S. Cypr.
the years of Discretion, and even before the eighth Day; and generally chose
to give them the Names of the Apostles, or of other Dionys. Al. ap Eus. lib. 7.
c. 20.
Persons that had been remarkable for their Piety. But as for Persons Adult it
does not appear that they changed their names; since we meet with so many
Saints, whose names came from the false Gods, as Dionysius, Martinus, Bacchus,
Demetrius. The new Baptized were afterward assisted by those who had presented
them to Baptism; as also by the Priests, who for a long time after, overlooked
them that they might improve in the practice of Christianity.

AND now they began a new Life, a Life V. The Christian Life. Prayer. 1 Timothy 2.
8.
altogether Spiritual and supernatural. The first and principal thing to which
they applied themselves was Prayer, as being that which St. Paul also in the
first place recommended. And as the Apostle according to the Precept of Jesus
Christ, exhorts Christians to pray without ceasing; i These. v. xvii.
so they avoided as much as was possible all Avocations that might interrupt
their Devotions, or take off the Soul from God and Heavenly things. They Prayed
as Ignat. Ep. ad Ephesians. and al. Tertul. Apol. c. 39.
often as they could in Common; as believing that the more they were, who
joined together in putting up the same Petitions to God, the more prevailing
would they prove to obtain the grant of them; according to that saying of our
Savior, If two Mat. xviii. xviii, xix.
of you shall agree on Earth, as touching any thing that they shall ask, it
shall be done for them of my Father which is in Heaven: For where two or three
are gathered together in my name; there am I in the midst of them. Besides, the
presence of their Pastors gave more solemnity to their Prayers, and the
reciprocal Examples of each others Fervor and Humility, mutually heightened
their Devotions.

Of their Public Prayers, the most usual and most frequented were those of
Morning and Evening; now called Matins and Vespers. Thus were they taught
Constable. Ap. 2. 59.
to sancti^fy the beginning and ending of the Day, and not allowed to excuse
themselves upon the pretense of Business; these Spiritual concerns being a
business of that Importance, that all other ought to give place to it. The
Matins or Morning service, now called Lauds from those Hymns there rehearsed,
that seem to have succeeded in the room of the Morning Sacrifice of the old
Law: It still continues one of the most solemn Parts of the Office, as appears
by the Commemorations, the Lumiary, and the Incense. The Vespers stand in stead
of the Evening Sacrifice, and were appointed to Sanctify the beginning of the
Night. They are sometimes called the Lucernarium.
Prayer of the Lamps, being performed at the close of the Day, or toward
Candlelight: O Lux. beata Trinit. Lucis Creator Opt. Conditor alme sid. Verg.
mundi vespere. Ad caenam Agni prove.
And in the Hymns yet used in these Vespers, we find mention of Light, and of
Supper, which generally followed soon after the end of these Prayers. Such as
could not pay their attendance upon the Public Prayers of the Church, as
Persons Sick, Imprisoned, or Traveling met together as many as could in
Private; or if they were wholly alone; yet every one observed to make his
Prayers at the stated Hours.

For besides these Matins and Vespers, v. Baron. an 34. n. 251, etc. Constable. Ap.
8. 34, 35, etc. Tert. adv. Psych. c. 10. Cypr. de Orat. dom. in fine. Athan. de
virg.
they had their Prayers also at the Third, Sixth, and Ninth Hours, and within
Night. Tertullian, St. Cyprian, and St. Athanasius make express mention of all
these Prayers, founding them upon Examples taken out of the Old and
New-Testaments, and giving Mysterious Reasons for the several Appointments.
These Hours were reckoned according to the usage of the Romans, who divided the
whole Day from Sunrising to Sunsetting into twelve Hours, equal in every Day;
but unequal in the course of the Year, always changing their Proportions
according to the length or shortness of the Days. The Night they also divided
into twelve Hours, and four Parts, which they named watches or Stations;
because in their Armies, the Guards were relieved but four times a Night; so
that reducing their Hours to the present computation, and taking an
Aequinoctial Day to do it by; the Prime or first Hour of the Day with them,
begins at our Six at Morning, their Third at our Ninth, their Sixth at our
Twelvth, their Ninth at our Three in the Afternoon, and their Twelvth at our
Six at Night: So that their daily Prayers returned every third Hour.

They had also their Midnight Prayers, Bar. an. 51. n. 68, etc. Ps. 119. 62.
Act. 16. 25. Tertul. 2. ad uxor. c. 4. Cypr. de Or. in fine. Cle. Alex. 2 paed.
c. 9. Chry. Hem. 26. in Acta. 14. in ep. Romans
according to the president set them by the Psalmist, and by St. Paul and
Silas, who after having been Scourged and cast into Prison, were heard Praying
and Singing Praises unto God at Midnight. Turtullian makes mention of this
Night Prayer, St. Cyprian highly applauds it; and this practice of Watching
unto Prayer, is recommended by all the Fathers as an excellent means of
Mortifying the Flesh, and of lifting up the Soul to God more freely in that
still Season. They were also taught to make the best use of their waking
Intervals, in Meditating upon the Psalms and the Lord's Prayer; and every
Morning, or when ever they were threatened with any danger, to repeat the Creed.

In a Word, to take all occasions of making still fresh and fresh Applications
to God, and to come as near as possibly they could, to the rule of Praying
always; they had their particular Prayers for every action, taking their rule
from Col. iii. vii.
the Words of St. Paul; whatsoever ye do in Word or Deed, do all in the name of
the Lord Jesus, giv^^^ing thanks to God the Father by him. Thus all their
Country labors, as Plowing the Ground, Sowing it, Reaping their Corn;
gathering their Fruits, were all begun and ended with Prayer. The building of
an House; the entering to inhabit it; the making a piece of Cloth, or Suit of
Cloths; the putting it on, and so of the rest; even the most common Actions of
Life were in like manner begun with Prayer. We have still remaining in the
Chrysostom. Hom v in Ep. ad These.
Rituals, some of those Prayers in several sorts of Benedictions. The
Salutation at the beginning of an Epistle, at the first Interview, or upon
other such like occasions, was not only a Testimony of Friendship, but also a
real Prayer. Upon all the most inconsiderabe occasions, they Tertul. de. Cor.
c. iii.
made use of the sign of the Cross, as being a more compendious way of a Prayer
and Blessing. They Crossed themselves St. Cyr. Hierosol. Catech. iv. de.
Aseens. et xiii. circa. fin. Tertull ad uxor. v. Martyrol. Romans xii. Janu. de.
S. Satyro.
upon the Forehead, and that almost every Minute; at every coming in, and going
out; beginning a walk, sitting down, rising up, going to Bed at Night, dressing
themselves in the Morning, putting on their Shoos, Eating, Drinking, etc. Upon
any Temptation, they added to it the Sufflation, to drive away the Devil.

THE greatest part of their Prayers was VI. The Study of the holy Scriptures.
made up of the Psalms, which being Pronounced with a Grave and distinct Voice
were highly Instructive, as containing in them a kind of summary or Abridgment
of what lies more dispersed in the other sacred Books, and supplying a
collection of those thoughts and reflections which a Man should make in every
condition Athanas. Epist. ad Maroellin.
of Life and upon every Emergency. With the Psalms they always joined the
reading of some other parts of Scripture, and from thence came in the little
Chapters of the Hours. As the Night Prayers were always the Longest, so they
had more Lessons belonging to them: And as the Mass is the most solemn part of
all the Office, so it is that which had more of the Instructive part mixed with
the Devotional. Nothing was read in the Church as Scripture and of Divine
Inspiration but what was received into the Canon; that is to say, such as the
Constant Tradition of the Churches had Authorized. Those other Writings which
some Private Persons would have introduced where called Apocryphal, that is,
hidden or obscure. To secure the Ecclesiastical Books from all change, and that
neither the Boldness nor carelessness of the Transcribers, might make any
Alterations in them, there was sometimes Joined to them a Protestation
Conjuring in the name of God, whosoever should Transcribe the Writing to do it
Faithfully. Such an one did St. Irenaeus add to the end of his Epistle to
Florinus, and of the Eusebius. Hist. v. xx.
the like nature is that Menacing Clause affixed to the Apocalypse. Apoc. xxii.
18.


The Church therefore was not only the House of Prayer, but the School of
Salvation. The Bishops expounded to the People the Gospel and the other sacred
Books, with the diligence of a public Professor, but with far greater
Authority. And therefore in the Style of the Ancients the Title of Doctor, that
is Teacher, is scarce given to any but Bishops. They Instructed their Flock
both Publicly in the Congregation of the Faithful, and Privately, going (as
was St. Paul's own Act. xx. 20.
Practice) from House to House: And as the same Apostle directs in his Epistles
to Titus and Timothy, they variously applied their Instructions to the several
conditions Ignat. Ep. ad Polycarp.
of Men. They professed that they Spoke nothing of themselves, that they
Tertull. Pres^r. c. viii.
kept to what was revealed; not pretending to make new discoveries after the
Gospel, but Faithfully to Deliver to others what they themselves had received
from St, iren. ad Florin. ap. Eus. v. Hist. 20. St. Clem. Al. Strom. init.
their Fathers, that is, from the most Ancient Priests and Bishops living
within the memory of Man, and they in like manner from others before them, and
so backward by an uninterrupted Tradition, ascending up to the Apostles
themselves. They Imprinted in the minds of the Faithful, an Abhorrence for all
kind of Novelties, Pap. apud Eus. Hist. iii. c. 38.
more Especially in the Doctrinals of Religion: So that if any private Persons
heard any thing contrary to the Faith, they never amused themselves about
contradicting or confuting it; that care they left to their Pastors: They only
stopped their Ears against it, and would have nothing to do with it. And this
is the reason why so many Heresies, Ignat. ep. ad Trall. et al.
which started up in the first Ages, were silenced and came to nothing without
the Interposing of Councils, or any formal proceedings of the Church against
them. The Catholic Pastors unanimously consented in the same Traditions, and
the People inviolably adhered to the Doctrine of their Pastors.

The Faithful studied the Word of God in private every one by him self,
meditating upon it both Day and Night. They used to read over again in their
Houses what they had heard read at the Church, to fix in their Memories the
expositions of the Pastors, and to discourse them over among themselves. Above
Constable. Apost. iv. c. 10.
all, the Fathers of Families took care to make these Repetitions to their
Domestics. For every Master of a Family was within the Walls of his own House
as it were a private Pastor, keeping up therein a regular Course of Praying and
Reading; instructing his Wife, Children and Servants; and in a plain and
familiar way Administering proper Exhortations to them; and thus preserving all
that belonged to him in the Unity of the Church, by the entire Submission, he
himself paid to his Pastor. What I have said of Fathers is also to be
understood of Mothers, who took the same Religious care of their Children. St.
Basil, and his Brother Basil. Epist. Lxiv. Lxxv. Lxxix. Greg. Vita Macr. ^un.
St. Gregory Nyssene, Glory in their having kept the Faith, which they received
from their Grandmother Macrina, and she from St. Gregory Thaumaturgus. And it
seems to be upon this account that St. Paul gives so particular a Character of
the Faith of the Mother and Grandmother of St. Timothy. One proof of the 2 Timothy i. 5.
special care that Parents took in the well instructing their Families, is that
we do not find in all Antiquity any such thing as a Catechism for little
Children, nor any public provision made for the Instruction of those that were
Baptized before they came to Years of Discretion. Chrysostom. Hom. xxxvi. in Ep. ad
Cor.
Every private House was then, says St. Chrysostom, as a Church to it self.

There were even many Lay Christians that had the Holy Scripture by heart; so
constant were they in the Reading of it. They generally carried a Bible about
them, making it their Companion where ever they went; and many Saints have been
found Buried with the Gospel lying on their Breasts. St. Chrysostom tells In
Mat. Hom. Lxxii.
us that in his time, many Women wore it hanging at their Necks: That they
washed their Hands, when they received those Holy Books: That every one
expressed his inward Regard for them by the tokens of external Reverence, at
the In Jo. Hom. Liii. Mor.
Reading and Hearing of them, the Men uncovering their Heads, and the Women
(such was their way of expressing Reverence) covering theirs. For Women read
the Scriptures no less then Men. We find some of those Holy Female Acta SS.
Agapes, etc ap Bar. an. 304. n. 46.
Martyrs, who in the Diocletian Persecution having been forced to quit all they
had, and hide themselves in Caves, Regretted nothing else but the loss of their
Bibles, and their being thereby deprived of those Blessed Consolations which
they before enjoyed in exercising themselves Day and Night, in those sacred
Writings.

Besides the Scriptures themselves, the Christians had also for their reading
the Writings of their Bishops and other Ecclesiastical Authors; plenty of whom,
and those of great Note, these first Ages produced. Eusebius gives us an
account Eusebius. iv. et v. Hist.
of about forty by name, besides those whose Works came forth without the name
of the Author, and those whom he only mentions in general. Not but that the
greatest part of the Bishops of these times, declined Writing Books, out of
Modesty, for fear of divulging the Mysteries of their Religion, for want of
Leisure, and by reason of the Persecutions, which suffered but a few of them,
to Live any great Age. But many occasions there were that forced some of them
upon Writing, both concerning the affairs of the Churches, and in the defense
of Religion against the Heretics and Pagans. Besides, there were so many
Persons of learning, so many Philosophers and Orators, throughout the whole
Empire, especially in Greece and the East, that there were always found among
the Christians a great number of good Writers.

The Faithful were Advised to abstain from reading the Books of the Heathens,
since they might possibly overthrow the Faith of the Weak, and at best
signified Constable. Apost. i. 5.
little. For what, faith an ancient Author, would you have, which you may not
meet with in the Word of God? If you are for History; you have the Books of the
Kings: If for Philosophy and Poetry; you have the Prophets, the Book of Job,
and the Proverbs of Solomon; where you will find more true Wit and Spirit, than
in all the Poets and Philosophers, because they are the Words of God, who is
Wisdom its slef: If for Songs; you have the Psalms: If for Antiquities;
Geneses; In a Word, the Glorious Law of the Lord, furnishes you with all
necessary, precepts and useful Directions. Yet the Bishops and Priests found it
to their purpose, to read the profane Authors, and made good use of them in
their Contests with the Gentiles, Fighting them with their own Weapons, the
Authorities of their Poets and Philosophers. They professed to embrace all
Truth, whence soever it came; and wheresoever they found it, they challenged it
for their own, as being the Disciples of Jesus Christ who Logos St. Clem. Al.
I. Strom.
is the Word, that is to say, the sovereign Reason.

'T WAS principally to the Rich that VII. Their Employments, Occupations, and
Professions.
they recommended the reading of the Scripture as their constant Employment,
and a proper Remedy against the Sins of Idleness and Curiosity. As for others,
they followed every one his Calling, that they might have where withal to
maintain Constable. Apost. i. iv.
themselves, pay their Debts, and give Alms. And they took care to choose such
callings as were most consistent with Retirement and Humility. Many of their
Rich ones reduced themselves to a voluntary Poverty by distributing what they
had among the Poor; especially in times of Persecution, thereby to put
themselves in a readiness for Martyrdom. The first Disciples of the Apostles,
who labored together with them in the Propagation of the Gospel, practiced the
same Method; but for a nobler end. They sold their Possessions, and gave the
price of them to Eus. iii. 17.
the Poor, that so they might be more disengaged, and at liberty to quit their
Country, Travel abroad, and carry the Gospel into the most distant parts of the
World. Many Christians labored with ii These. iii. 6, etc. Cass. de Sp. Acced.
c. vii. Constable. Ap. i. iv. ii. ult. Clem. Paedag. iii. c. x.
their Hands only to avoid the Sin of Idleness. For they were earnestly
exhorted to shun this particular Vice among many others, the inseparable
Companions of it; as a restless temper, Curiosity, Dectraction, insignificant
Visits, Gadding and Rambling, Prying into and Censuring the Actions of their
Neighbors. On the contrary, all Persons were advised to keep themselves quiet
and not meddle in other Men's matters, and to be employed upon some useful
Business, but principally in the Works of Charity toward the Sick, the Poor,
and all others whose Condition required their Assistance.

The Christians Life therefore, was a continued course of Prayer, Reading and
Labor, which regularly succeeded one the other in their proper Hours, and
suffered no other interuptions than just what the necessities of Life required.
But what Occupation soever they followed, they always made it but as by-work in
comparison of Religion, which they looked upon Constable. Ap. ii. 61. 63.
as their main concern, and that one thing needful about which they were to be
employed all the Days of their Life. They pretended not to any particular
Profession or Denomination; but purely and simply to be Christians. They owned
no other Title or Character but that; and when the Judge Interrogated them
concerning their name, their Country, their Quality; their answer to all was, I
am a Christian.

They liked not such Employments as too much busy and dissipate the Thoughts,
as Merchandising, Soliciting of Business, bearing Public Offices: Yet they
always continued in the Callings they followed Orig. Cont. Cells. viii. in fin.
I Cor. vii. xx. Tertul. de Cor. c. xii. Tert. Apol. c. xxxvii.
before their Baptism, if there were nothing in them inconsistent with
Religion. Thus Soldiers were not upon their turning Christians obliged to quit
the Service; they were only taught to observe the Soldier's Rule laid down in
the Gospel; to be content with their Wages, and to Luke iii. 13.
abstain from Fraud and Violence. There were a great number of Christians that
bore Arms; Witness the Legio Fulminans in the time of Marcus Aurelius, and the
Theban Legion, who all of them, togegether with their Tribune St. Mauritius,
Patiently submitted to Martyrdom; though with their Swords in their Hands. The
old Military Discipline of the Romans, as yet continued in force, which
consisted principally in Frugality, in Labor, in Obedience, in Patience; all
of them Virtues proper for a Christian to be Exercised in: Yet some of them
refused to list Acta Mar. Theb. ap. Baron. an. ccxcvii. Acta St. Marcelli.
Centur. ap. Bar. an. ccxcviii. n. ii.
themselves, and others, already engaged quitted the Service, to avoid the
joining with the Infidels in their Superstitions; as the Eating of things
Offered to Idols, the adoring the Ensingns, and in them the false Gods, whose
Images they bore; the Swearing by the Genius of the Emperor, and Crowining
themselves with Flowers at Tertul. de Corona.
their profane Solemnities.

THE Christians Fasted often, according VIII. Their Fasts. Mat. ix. xv.
to what our Savior had said; That after he should be taken from them, his
Disciples should Fast. From the very first Ages of Christianity in Remembrance
of this; that is, of the Passion of Jesus Christ, they had their fixed and
solemn Fasts; as that of Lent for every Year; and of Wednesday and Friday for
every Week: They Fasted also for the Ordinations; and upon several other
occasions, when the Bishops prescribed Fasts for the public Necessities; tosay
nothing now of their Pennances and particular Devotions.

On their Fasts they eat but once a Day, and that not till toward the Evening;
that is, in Lent, not till after the Vespers, toward the beginning of the
Night; and on other Days not till after three a Clock; and such were their
ordinary Fasts. They had also their greater Fasts; as that of the holy Week,
the whole of v. Ep. Can. Dion. alex.
which, many amonst them passed without eating, at least the three last Days of
it. Many also out of their private Devotion kept their particular Fasts to
themselves, and abstained from eating for two or three Days together;
especially upon great Occasions, as when they prepared themselves for
Martyrdom: Some there were who passed whole Weeks or ten Luc. in Philopatr.
Days without taking any Food, as Lucian (an unsuspected Witness in this
Matter) assures us. All in general on their Fast-Days abstained from drinking
Wine and eating Flesh; the greatest part fed only on Herbs or Pulse, with a
little Bread, others allowed themselves little Fishes; but on those Days never
use any sort of high Sauces or relishing Delicacies: They confined themselves
to cheap and Ordinary Diet, always expending less upon their Tables on
Fast-Days, then at other Seasons. Some observed Omophagy; that is to say,
eating their Food raw and undressed; others Xerophagy; that is, feeding only
upon dry Diets, as Nuts, Almonds and such like Fruits; and others confined
themselves only to Bread and Water.

I know that Men will now a Days think themselves little concerned with these
Examples: They imagine that these ancient Austerities are now become
impracticable. The strength of Nature, say they, is impaired by the course of
so many Years: Men do not live so long now as they did of old; nor are their
Bodies so Robust. But I would fain have them give some Proofs of this
alteration; for we are not here speaking of the Heroic times of ancient
Greece, nor of the Lives of the Patriarchs, nor of those who lived before the
Flood: We are upon the times of the first Roman Emperors, and of the other
Greek and Latin Writers, sufficiently known to us. Let them drive the matter as
far as they please, they will not be able to show that the Life of Man has
been shortened for sixteen hundred Years: From thence, and from a long time
before, the Age of Man was limited to Threescore and ten, or fourscore Ps. xc.
x.
Years. In the first Age of Christianity, though there were as yet some Greeks
and Romans who practiced the Gymnastick Exercises to preserve their Bodies in
good Health; yet there were more who enfeebled them by their excesses;
particularly by those kind of Debauches which tend most to the ruin of Health,
and which still make so many of the Eastern People grow old so long before
their time. In the mean time, out of these most corrupted places, as Egypt and
Syria, came the greatest Fasters, and these Persons prolonged the term of their
Lives beyond other Men. It Is true such Fasting was a thing more easily
practiced by the People of those hot Countries, than it can be by us. And yet
we find great Examples of Abstinence, even in Gaul, and other colder Regions;
and that more than a Thousand Years after the Apostles; for the ancient Rule of
Fasting (as we shall see hereafter) continued down to the time of St. Bernard.

The Christians, as well as Jews, considered Fasting as a State of Affliction:
It Is true, the Jews applied it to the satisfying the natural Passion of Grief;
as when they fasted upon the loss of some dear Friend or Relation; or upon any
other misfortune purely Temporal: To the same purpose was it practiced by other
Nations. And we find that the Greeks and Romans, together with other signs of
Mourning, joined that of Fasting. But the Christians applied all to a Spiritual
end; using these exterior Testifications of Grief only as they tended to
excite in them that Godly sorrow that works 2 Cor. vii. x.
Repentance to Salvation; that is, to give them Compunction for their Sins. A
sinner says St. Cyprian, ought to lament the Cypr. de Laps. Chrysostom. de Compunct.
Death of his Soul, at least as much as the loss of a Friend; and St.
Chrysostom makes use of the same Comparison. They considered Fasting also as a
Preservative against Temptation by weakening the Flesh, and and bringing it into
Subjection to the Spirit; and therefore with their Fastings, they Joined the
Abstaining from all sorts of Pleasures even the most Innocent. Married Persons
during those Seasons, observed Continence. They all in general lived in greater
Silence and Solitude, were more frequent in visiting the Churches, and spent
more of their Hours in Reading and Praying on their Fast-Days than at other
times.

IN their Diet, and way of Eating, IX. Their Eating.
the Christians always (even out of their Fast-Days) observed great Frugality
and Moderation. They were taught not St. Clem. Alex. ii. Paedag. i.
to Live to Eat, but to Eat to Live. That the end of Food being Health and
Strength, and the keeping the Body in a condition fit for Labor; all bcyond
this was Superfluous and Excessive. It Was not therefore for a Christian to Study
the Art of Eating, or to Indulge the wantonness of the Appetite; to hanker
after curious Dishes, sumptuous Feasts, or those delicacies of the Palate which
could not come to the Table, without the Assistance of skilful Cooks and the
Science of the Kitchen. They applied to themselves that saying of St. Paul in a
literal Sense, and made a general Rule of it: It is good 1 Romans xiv. xxi. Hier.
ad Furiam. Clem. 2. Paedag. 2. Rud. Hymn ante cih.
neither to eat Flesh nor to drink Wine. It Was more especially to Women, and all
young People; they prescribed the abstaining from Wine; and as for them that
Drank it, they always qualifyed it with Water. If they fed on Liveing
Creatures, it was rather of Fish or Fowls, than of the grosser Substance of
four-footed Tertul. Ap. c. ix.
Beasts, which they looked upon as too Succulent and over Nourishing. But they
always abstained from Blood, and Acts xv. xxix.
from things Strangled, according to the Decision of the Council of the
Apostles Min. Fael.
which continued to be observed for many Ages; so that many of them lived only
upon Sallads, Fruits or Pulse: Nay farther yet, many there were, who finding
Pulse (as Peace, Beans and Lentils) too nourishing for them that would subdue
the Flesh, reduced themselves to the living simply on Herbs with a little Bread
Olus. Romans xiv. ii.
and Salt, taking the Words of St. Paul in a litteral Sense, Another who is
weak eats Herbs.

It Is true, this Abstinence was not a thing so Extraordinary in their Days as
it would be in ours: For though the Luxury of the Table was then grown to great
Excess, as one may see in the Greek and Latin Writers of those times,
particularly in Athenaeus; yet it fell short of that extravagance to which we
have now advanced it. The Egyptians and many other Orientalists still kept up
their Religious Abstinences. The Abstinence of the Pythagoreans was in great
reputation, as appears by the Example of Apollonius Tyanaeus, Inde domum me Ad
porri and ciceris refero laganique catinum. lib. i. Sat. 6. Nec modica caenare
times olus omne patella. i. ep. v. Suet. in Aug. 76.
and by the Writings of Porphyry. Horace, as great an Epicurean as he was,
names only some Pulse and Herbs as his ordinary Diet, and inviting his Friend
to Supper, Promises him no better Cheer. The Emperor Augustus lived mostly on
Brown-Bread, Cheese, Figs, Dates, Raisons, and small Fish. One might produce a
Multitude of like Examples. Their common usage was to make but one set Meal a
Day; and that at Night when all the Business of the Day was over, and every one
was retired to his Home; this was their Supper or Caena: For as for that which
they called Prandium, it was rather a Breakfast than a set Dinner, after the
manner of our Dinners, since it Pransus non avide quintum interpellet inani
ventre diem durare. Hor. i. lat. vi.
was only a light repast to support Nature throughout the whole Day following;
and many made no Dinner at all. It Is reckoned as an high instance of the
Intemperance of the Emperor Vitellius, that he often made four Meals a Day, but
always Suet in Vitel. c. 13.
three.

The Christians lived at least as regularly as the Heathens; I mean as the
wisest among them, and used only a very simple Diet; rather of such things as
did not require Fire or much dressing, than such as could not be eaten without
being first prepared by Fire. They made at most but two Meals a Day; absolutely
Gal. v. 21.
condemning (according to what the Apostles had taught them) those Revellings
Romans xiii. 13.
or Collations after Supper which were called Comessations; by means of which,
i Pet. iv. 3.
the Nights were commonly passed away in Debauches. The Meal how simple and
light soever it might be, both began and ended with long Prayers; And
Prudentius Cathemer iii, iv.
has composed two Hymns to this purpose; in which we may see the Spirit of
these first Ages set forth in lively Colors.

It was in these times, a common Custom to have something read to them as Pli.
iii. ep. v. Sat. xi.
they sat at Meals. Pliny always used it, and Juvenal inviting one of his
Friends to sup with him, promises that he should have Homer and Virgil Read to
him at Table. Instead of those profane Songs and Buffooneries with which the
Heathens heightened Clem. ii. Paedag. iv.
the Pleasure of their Entertainments. The Christians at theirs, had the Holy
Scriptures read to them, and the Singing of Spiritual Hymns, set to Grave and
Composed Airs: For they were not against Music, nor did they condemn Mirth,
provided it was an holy Joy and had God for its Object. They never eat together
with Heretics, or Persons Excommunicated, i Cor. v. 10. 11. ibid. x. 27.
nor so much as with the Catechumens: But with the Infidels they sometimes did
Eat and Converse.

THE same Modesty and Moderation X. The Modesty, Gravity, and Seriousness of
Christians
did the Christians maintain in all their Actions, and throughout the whole
Course of their Lives. They sought after no other greateness but the greateness
and nobleness of Spirit, coveted no other Riches but their Spiritual Treasure,
the Riches of the inner Man. They could not approve of those profuse
Extravagances which had been introduced into the World by the Prodigious Wealth
of the Roman Empire, as the vast expenses of their stately Buildings, and
costly Furniture; their Tables of Ivory, Bedsteads Clem. Alex. ii. Paedag. iii.
of Silver, and Hangings of Purple and Gold, Gold, and Silver Plate, enchased
and ornamented with Precious Stones. When the Persecutors searched the Lodgings
Acta. Martyr. Nicom. ap. Bar. an 293.
where St. Domna, a vast rich Virgin of Nicomedia, kept her self, and together
with the Eunuch St. Indus, were shut up from the rest of the World; this was
the rich Furniture they found in it: a Cross, the Acts of the Apostles, two
Mats lying upon the Ground, an earthen Censer, a Lamp, a little Wooden-box
where they kept the Holy Sacrament to Communicate themselves.

With the like Modesty did the Christians decline all gaudy Habits, and above
all the wearing of Silk; a Commodity in those Days so precious, that it was
Sold for its weight in Gold: All over-costly Ornaments, as Rings beset with
precious Clem. Alex. ii. Paedag. S. xi. xii. and iii. i. ii. iii. Constable. Ap. i.
c. iii. and v. c. ix.
Stones, Jewels, and the like; Curled Locks, Perfumes and Unguents; the too
frequent use of the Bath; and the too great Affectation of Modishness; in a
Word, all that might tend to excite sensual desires, or gratify a voluptuous
Inclination. Prudentius, as one of the first marks of the Peri. steph* Hymn.
xiii.
Conversion of St. Cyprian, observes the change of his outward Deportment, and
the Neglect of his Dress. Apollonius, an ancient Ecclesiastical Author, Writing
against the Montanists, and speaking of Ap. Eusebius. v. Hist. xviii.
their pretended Prophets, thus reproves them. Tell me, says he, does a
Prophet Dye his Hair? Does he Paint his Eyebrows? Does he love gay Clothes?
Does he play at Dice? Does he lend upon Usury? Let them Speak. Are these things
Justifiable? For I can prove that they Practice them. An Act. St. Sebast. apud
Baron. an. 289. n. xvi. xvii.
Holy Martyr to prove by matter of Fact, that a certain Impostor, who took upon
him the name of a Christian was no better than a Cheat; Represented to the
Judges that this pretender Curled his Locks, Haunted the Barbers-Shops, looked
too Affectingly upon the Women; Fed high, and smelt of Wine: Sufficient
evidence that he could be no Christian. As for their whole outward Garb, and
what Figure they made in the World; the Christians showed themselves very
indifferent and Incurious, at least very plain and Grave. Some of them quitted
the common Habit, to take upon them that of the Philosophers, as Tertullian and
Tertull. de Pall Eureb. vi. Hist. xx.
St. Heraclas, the Disciple of Origin.

There were but few Divertisements, which they would allow themselves the use
of. They were obliged to shun all the Public Shows, whether of the Theater, of
the Amphitheatre, or of the Circus. At the Theater were acted Tragedies and
Comedies, on the Amphitheatre were seen the Combating of the Gladiators, and
the Fighting with Wild-Beasts, the Circus, was for the Racing of Chariots. All
these Constable. A post. ii. Lxii Tertull. do Spect.
Spectacles with the Heathens, made part of the Worship of the false Gods;
which had been of its self sufficient to have kept the Christians from coming
near them. But they considered them also as a Poisonous Fountain of Debauchery
and Dissoluteness, that tended only to the Corruption of Manners. The Theater
was a School of Immodesty, the Amphitheatre of Cruelty; and the Plays fomented
all Augus. vi. Confess. cap. vii.
sort of Passions. Even those of the Circus, which appeared the most Innocent,
were detested by all the Fathers because of the Factions that there Reigned,
and the Quarrels and Animosities every Day created by them, which often ended
in Bloody Frayes. In short, they could not Clem. iii. Paedag. ii.
but disapprove of the vast Expenses thrown a way upon these Spectacles, the
Idleness Cypr. de oper et Clem.
they cherished, the Indiscriminate Herding together of Men and Women at these
public Entertainments, and the suspicious Consequences of so Promiscuous and
familiar an Interview.

The Christians condemned also Dice, Clem. Paed iii. c. xi.
and other such like sedentary Plays, looking upon the loss of time as but one
of the least of the Mischiefs that attend them. Apollon. ap. Eusebius. lib. v. c.
xviii.
They censured intemperate Fits of Laughter and every thing that tended to
raise Idem. ii. Paedag. v. vi. vii.
them; as ridiculous Words or Actions, merry Tales, Buffoonerys, foolish
Jestings, fantastic Tricks and Gambols. Ambros. i. Off. xxiii.
Much more did they Loath all kind of unseemly Words or Gestures, or such
Constable. Apost. v. c. ix.
which might savor of Immodesty. They were for having a Christian maintain the
Ephesians. v. 4. Scurrilitas.
Dignity of his Character, and that therefore he should take care in all his
Behavior, to discover nothing Indecent, Base or Unbecoming an Ingenuous
Person: nor did they allow of those unsavory Discourses, and unprofitable
Tattle to which the meaner sort of People, and especially the Female Sex, are
so much addicted; expressly condemned by St. Paul, when he directs that our
Speech should be always Col. iv. 6.
seasoned with the salt of Grace. 'Twas to cut off these Excesses of the Tongue
that silence was so highly recommended to Christians.

This Discipline would appear now a Days very Severe. Yet why should it? If we
consider how expressly Scoffers and Scorners are condemned in the Scriptures,
Prove. iii. 34. ix. 7. 12. xii. xxix. 9.
and the theatning Denounced against them; and how Grave and Serious was the
Life of Jesus Christ and his Disciples. Besides, Chrysostom. Hom. vi. in Matt. Mor
the tasting pleasure in the things I have mentioned is Vicious, or at least
Dangerous; and a Christian even in the most Innocent matters ought to Regulate
himself with the greatest Sobriety and Moderation. Indeed the whole Life of a
Christian should be taken up in little else, than in expiating his past Sins by
Repentance, and in Guarding himself against the like for the future by the
Mortification of his Passions. The true penitent to Chastise himself for having
Abused the Pleasures, of sense, must begin by denying himself even the Lawful
use of them, and to extinguish, or at least weaken natural Concupiscence, must
(as much as is possible) deny all its Cravings. So that a true Christian must
never make it his business to seek the pleasures of Sense, but just take so much
of them as the necessities of Life require, and which cannot be withheld; as
Eating, Drinking, and necessary Repose; if ever he take any Recreation, it must
be a Recreation properly so called, that is to say a Refreshment and Ease, to
Recreate or relieve the weakness of Nature, which would sink under the weight
were the Body always kept up to hard Labors, or the Mind always bent upon
close Thinking. But to seek Pleasure for Pleasures Sake, and as making it our
end: Nothing can be more contrary to the Obligation we lie under of Renouncing
our selves, which is the very Life and Soul of all Christian Virtues.

This Serious and mortifyed Disposition of the true Christians appears even
from the Genius of the Heresies of these first times, which for the most part
were occasioned by an excess of Discipline and corporal Austerity. The
Marcionites, and after them the Manichees, held that the Flesh was an Evil
thing, as being the work of the evil Principle, and therefore concluded that it
was not lawful either to eat Flesh, or to multiply it by Procreation, and that
the Resurrection of the Flesh, was a thing neither to be expected nor desired.
This contempt of the Body, this Abstinence and Continence made a very specious
Appearance. The Montanists added many other Fasts as of necessary Obligation to
those appointed by the Church; condemned second Marriages, and wholly disallowed
of Penance, as not granting that the Church had Power to restore them who had,
after their Baptism fallen into the commission of any grievous Sin. He that
should now a Days advance Errors of thsi Nature would scarce gain many
Proselytes.

But how severe soever the Life of those Primitive Christians may appear to
have been; yet we are not to imagine it was sad and Melancholy. St. Paul
required no Phil. iii. 1. and iv. iv.
impossible thing of them, when he bid them rejoice; if they denied themselves
those Excesses of Pleasure which other Men hunt after, they were freed also
from all that Chagrin and other Passions which are so very troublesome; leading
a Life free from Ambition, from Covetousness, and all Fond doting upon the
things of this Life. They enjoyed the Peace of a good Conscience, the
Reflections of a well spent Life; and the assurance thereupon following of their
being in the Favor of God; and above all, the blessed hopes of the Life to
come, which they always looked upon as near at Hand: For they knew that this
World must suddenly pass away; and the Persecutions seemed to be but
forerunners of the universal Judgment.

So that they little troubled their Thoughts about what would become of their
Families after their Death: If they left their Children Orphans, as was often
the Case of the Martyrs, they knew that the Church would be their Mother, and
that they should want for nothing. They lived for the most part only from Hand
to Mouth, upon their Labor, or upon their Estates, which they divided among
the Poor, without distraction of Thought, without the hurry of Business;
standing off not only from all sordid Methods of Gain, or whatsoever might bear
the least suspicion of injustice, but also from the very desire of heaping up
Treasures and enriching themselves; so that the Prelates complain of it as a
great disorder, and a Cpyr. de Laps.
new thing among Christians, that in the intervals of the Persecutions, they
began to forget themselves, and fell to getting Estates; as if they were for
establishing to themselves Mansions upon Earth. And they that stood thus
indifferent to Earthly Possessions, could have no great hankering after sensual
Pleasures: and if in these things we do not at least in the sincerity of our
Desires emulate them, we are no good Christians.

WITH all this indifferency to the things XI. Marriages.
of this Life; yet the Christians generally made choice of the Married State:
They could have no good opinion of the Celibacy of the Heathens; since they saw
it founded only upon Licentiousness and Debauchery. So that the Civil Laws
themselves aimed at the restraint of it, both by affixing some kind of
Penalties Tac. An. iii. v tit. cod. de infirm. paen. coelib. v. Baron. an. 57.
n. 44, etc.
upon those who continued unmarried after such a Term of Years; and rewards to
those who in lawful Matrimony increased the number of the People. The
Christians knew but two states; that of Marriage, or Continence. They preferred
the latter, as knowing its Excellencies, and they often found the means Tertul.
ad uxor. c. vi. and de Resur. car. c. 8.
of Reconciling them both in one; for there were many Married Persons who yet
lived in Continence. But all Christians in general abstained from the use of
the Bed on the Feasts and Fasts of the Cypr. de sing. Cle.
Church, as well as at other times, when (according to the Apostles Rule) they
were disposed more Freely to give Cor. vii.
themselves to Prayer: Second Marriages were looked upon as a weakness:
insomuch as in some Churches they enjoined Hier. ad Salvin in fi.
the Persons so remarrying, Penance.

But how highly soever they esteemed Continence, they had an esteem for
Marriage, as being a great Sacrament: They had honorable Thoughts of it,
considering it as an Emblem of that Union which is between Christ and his
Church, and that Blessing Pronounced by God upon Mankind at the first Creation;
which Orat. in Bened. Spons.
neither Original Sin nor the Deluge has taken away; that is, of increasing
and multiplying. They knew that the relation of Father and Mother was an high
Clem. Alex. ii. Paedag. c. x.
and honorable Character; as being the Images of God in a more peculiar
manner, and Cooperating with him in the Production of Men. It Is certain by the
Gospel, that St. Peter was a Married Man; and Tradition, (as St. Clemens
Alexandrinus relates it) tells the same of Clem. iii. strom.
the Apostle St. Philip, that they had both of them Children; and particularly
of Eusebius. iii. Hist. 30.
St. Philip, it is observed that he gave his Daughters in Marriage.

Among other Directions, for the Education Constable. Ap. iv. c. x.
of Children, this is one, That they should (to secure their Virtue) timely
dispose of them in Marriage; and they who had Charity enough to take upon them
the charge of breeding up Orphans, were advised to Match them as soon as Ibid.
c, i.
they came of Age; and rather to their own Children than to Strangers: a Proof,
how little the Christians of those days Ignat. Ep. ad Polycar.
regarded Worldly Interest in the matter of Marriage. They advised with their
Bishop about Marriages (as indeed they did about all Affairs of greater
Importance) that so, says Ignatius, they might be made according to God, and
not according to Concupiscence. When the Parties were agreed, the Marriage was
publicly and solemnly performed in the Church, and Tertul. ii. ad ux. in fi.
there Consecrated by the Benediction of the Pastor, and Confirmed by the
Oblation of the holy Sacrifice. The Bridegroom gave his Hand to the Bride, and
the Bride received from her Husband a Ring engraved with the Sign of the Cross,
or at least having on it some Symbolical Figure representing some Christian
Virtue; as a Dove, an Anchor, or a Fish, for of such Clem. Alex. iii. Paedag.
c. xi.
Figures did the Christians make their Seals; and among the Ancients their
Rings were also their Seals or Signets.

HITHERTO have we considered XII The Union of Christians.
Christians in their Private Capacities; let us now take a view of them as
United into a Body and making a Church. The name of Ecclesia, i. e. Church,
signifies no more than an Assembly, and was taken in the Cities of Greece for a
meeting of the People, who commonly came together in the Theater, for the
dispatch of Public Affairs. We have in the Acts of the Apostles an Example of
this profane Acts xix. 32
Ecclesia or Assembly in the City of Ephesus; and therefore the Christians by
way of distinction from these profane Ecclesias, where called the Ecclesia or
Church of God. Origin in his Dispute against Celsus, compares these two sorts
of Assemblies together, and lays it down as a thing certain and manifest, that
the less Zeal of the Christians (who were but few in comparison of the rest)
did so much excel other Men, That the Christian Assemblies appeared in the World
like Stars in the Firmament. The Christians therefore of every City made up but
one Body; and this was one principal pretense of Persecuting them. Their
Assemblies were represented as Illegal Meetings, not being Authorized by the
Laws of the State. Their Unity and Love passed fot a Crime, and was Objected
against them as a dangerous Confederacy.

And indeed all the Christians living in the same Place were well known to each
other; as it could not be otherwise, considering how often they joined in
Prayer, and other exercises of Religion, upon which occasions they met together
almost every Day. They all maintained a Friendly Correspondence among
themselves; often met and conferred together, and even in indifferent matters
conformed to one another. Their Joys and their Griefs were in common: If any
one had received of God any particular Blessing, they all shared the
satisfaction. If any one were under Penance, they all Interceeded on his
behalf, and begged that Mercy might be shown him. They lived together as
kindred of the same Family, calling one another by the Name of Father or Child,
Brother or Sister, according to the difference of Age or Sex.

This Unity was maintained by that Authority which every Master of a Family had
over those of his own House; and by the Submission that all of them paid to the
Priests and their Bishops; a Duty so earnestly recommended to Christians in the
Epistles of the holy Martyr St. Ignatius: But above all, the Bishops were most
closely United* among themselves. They all knew one another, at least by their
Names and Characters, and held a constant Epistolary Correspondence; which was
easy to be done at that time, by reason of the vast extent of the Roman Empire;
Bardesan. apud Eusebius. vi. Praepar. c. 8.
which God in his Providence seems to have so ordered, as it were on purpose
for the Propagation of the Gospel. But as the Church was extended far wider
than the Empire, reaching to all the Nations round about it; that uniformity of
Faith and Manners, which was found among all the Christians was still the more
wonderful, considering the Diversity of Nations among whom they were scattered.
And herein appeared the Power of true Religion, Correcting in all that embraced
it, all those Barbarous and unreasonable Eusebius. i. Praep. c. iv.
Customs in which they had been educated: In short, the universal Church was in
reality but one Body, all the Members whereof were United to each other; not
only by the same Faith, but also by the same most Comprehensive Charity.

EVERY Particular Church met together XIII. Their Church Assembly's Liturgy,
and outward form of Worship. Justin. ii. Apol. in fi.
on the Lord's Day, which the Heathens called Sunday, and which the Christians
honored above all Days, in the Memory of the Creation of Light, and of the
Resurrection of Jesus Christ. The place of their Assembly, was generally some
private House, where they chose for this purpose one of the dining Rooms, which
the Latins called Caenacula, and which were the upper Chambers of the House;
such was that upper Room Act. xx. 7, etc.
from whence fell the young Man Eutychus whom St. Paul recovered to Life, which
we find was three Stories high, enlightened with many Lamps, where the Faithful
were met together on the Night of the Lord's Day for the Breaking of Bread;
that is, for the Celebration of the Mysteries which was followed with a repast,
viz. the Love-Feast. In the Persecutions they were often forced to hide
themselves in the Cryptae or Hollow places v. Baron. an lvii. n. xcix.
under Ground, without the Cities; like the Catacombs still to be seen at Rome.
When they had more Liberty, they met in Public Places, known by all to be the
Idem. an. ccxxiv. n. iii. an. 245 n. 302. Eusebius. viii Hist. c. iii.
Churches of Christians. We see Examples thereof in the reigns of the Emperors
Alexander and Gordianus. The Emperor Gallienus causing a stop to be put to the
Persecutions, gave order that the Christians should have their Cemiteries
restored to them; near which commonly stood their Churches; and when Paulus
Samosatenus was deposed, the Emperor Aurelian commanded the Church, viz. the
Ibid 30.
Material Church of the place, to be restored to those who continued in
Communion with the Bishop of Rome. Some of these public Churches had been
before Private Houses; as that of the Senator St. Martyr. Romans xx. Jun.
Pudens, the happy Father of so many blessed Children, St. Novatus and St.
Timotheus the Priest, and the Virgins St. Pudentiana and St. Praxeda. This
illustrious Family had been instructed in the Faith by the Apostles themselves;
and their House was turned into a Church by the Priest St. Pastor. There were
often also new Buildings erected on purpose for this use: A little before the
Dioclesian Persecution, they had in all Cities Churches new built from the
Ground; so mightily was the number of the Faithful increased; and the
Persecution began by the pulling Eusebius. viii. Hist. c. iii.
down these Churches.

In these Assemblies they said their Prayers before mentioned, at the stated
Hours of the Day and Night: But the chief work of their meeting together was to
offer the Sacrifice, which could not be done without a Priest. They called it
either by the Scripture names of the Supper, the breaking of Bread, the
Oblation; or by the names afterward received in the Church, as the Synaxis;
that is to say, Assembly, Dominioum. Collecta. Cypr. Ep. lxiii ad Caecil.
in Latin Collecta: the Eucharist; that is, Thanksgiving; the Liturgy; that is,
the Public Service. In the time of the Persecutions, for fear of meeting with
disturbance from the Infidels, they sometimes administered it before Day. There
was but one Sacrifice in each Church; that is, in each Diocese: 'Twas the
Bishop that Offered it; nor did the Priests do it, but in case of the absence
or Indisposition of the Bishop. But they assisted him in performing the
Service, and all of them Offered together with him. The Order of the Liturgy
has been changed according to the difference of Times and Places: Some
Indifferent Ceremonies have been added to it, and some others retrenched; but
the Essentials have remained always the same. The Account we find of it in the
first Times, is this;

After some Prayers, followed the reading St. Just. ii. Apol. in fi.
of the Holy Scriptures, first out of the Old Testament, and then out of the
New. They always concluded with a Lesson out of the Gospel, which when Read the
Bishop Expounded, adding thereto some proper Exhortation suited to the
occasions of his Flock. That ended, they all rose up, and turning their Faces
to the East, with hands lift up to Heaven, they Prayed for all sorts and
Conditions of Men, for Christians and Infidels, great and small; particularly
for all that were any ways afflicted or distressed in Mind, Body, or Estate. A
Deacon called upon them to Pray, a Priest pronounced the Words of Prayer, and
the People gave their Assent by answering, Amen. Then Cypr. Ep. lxiii.
the Gifts were offered, that is the Bread and Wine, mingled with Water, which
was to be the matter of the Sacrifice. The People gave the Kiss of Peace, Men
to Men, and Women to Women in token of their perfect Unity. After that every
one gave his Offerings to the Priest, and he in the name of them all offered
them up to God. Then he began the solemnity Cypr. de. Orat.
of the Sacrifice, calling upon the People to lift up their Hearts to God, and
with the Angels and all the Heavenly powers to Laud and Magnify his glorious
Name; next he proceeded to repeat the History of the Institution, and
pronoucing the Words of our Savior, he St. Just.
made the Consecration; after that together with the People he rehearsed the
Lords-Prayer, and having himself received the Communion, he gave it the Deacons
for the rest of the Congregation. For Regularly all those that entered the
Church were to Communicate, especially Can. Apost. ix. 10.
all that Ministered at the Altar.

As for those who had not the opportunity of assisting at the Sacrifice in
Person, the Eucharist was sent to them by the Hands of Deacons or the Acolythi.
They reserved part of it also to be always in readiness for the Viaticum for
Dying Persons, as a provision for their Journey. They permitted the Faithful to
carry it Home; to take it every morning before they touched any other Food,
Tertull. i. ad uxor. c. v.
or upon sudden occasions in case of Danger; as when they should be called to
suffer Martyrdom. These things were admitted in those Days. For they had not
then the liberty of meeting together and celebrating the Mysteries when they
pleased. That which was thus carried abroad was only the Bread. Though in
their public Assemblies all in General communicated under both kinds,
excepting little Children, to whom was given only the Wine. The Agapa or
Love-Feast, which in these first times followed the Communion, was a Repast of
ordinary Food, which they took altogether in the same place, where they had
Communicated. In after times it was given only Constable. Apost. ii. c. xxviii.
to the Widows and the Poor. There was always set aside a Portion for the
Pastor though Absent. The Priests and Deacons had a double Portion. Every one
also of the Readers, Singers, and Door-Keepers had their share of it.

'TWAS in these same Assemblies that XIV. The secret of the Mysteries.
(as far as was possible) they Administered the other Sacraments, which was the
cause of the special care they took not to admit any Infidel. For they
inviolably observed that command of our Savior, of not giving Holy things to
Mat. vii. 6. v. Method des peers. chapter viii.
Dogs, or casting Pearl before Swine. This is the reason why they called
Sacraments by the name of Mysteries, that is to say things Concealed, and that
they kept them to themselves with a sacred secresy. They kept them concealed
not only from the Infidels, but from the Catechumens also. They not only
declined to Celebrate the Mysteries before them, but would not so much as
inform them what was done at the Celebration, nor pronounce in their presence
the solemn words, nor Speak a syllable in their Hearing concerning the nature
of the Sacraments. Much less did they Write upon this Subject. And if in their
public Discourse, or in any Writing which might fall into profane Hands, they
were obliged to Speak of the Eucharist, or of any other Mystery, they did it in
obscure and Aenigmatical Act. ii. 42. 46. Act. xx. 7. 11.
Terms. So in the New Testament to break Bread, signifies to consecrate and
distribute the Eucharist, a Phrase by which the Infidels could not guess what
was meant. This Discipline of the Church Continued for many Ages after the
Persecutions ceased.

'Twas not strange to the Heathens to see Mysteries in Religion: They
themselves observed the like in their Profane Ceremonies. They who were
Initiated into the Mysteries of Isis, or Osiris, or Ceres Eleusinia, or Cybele,
or the Samothracian Gods, or other such like, were bound under the most
dreadful Maledictions to conceal the secret of the Mysteries; and he that
should have divulged them, would have been looked upon as a most accursed
Wretch. Hereof Apuleius gives us a Apul. Asin. lib. xi.
lively Instance; and it is upon this account that Herodotus as he is speaking of
the diverse ceremonies of the Religion of the Egyptians, or other People, often
adds: I know the reason of these things, but I dare not tell it.

YET this secret of the Mysteries gave XV. The reasons of the general Odium
against the Christians.
accasion to many false and scandalous Reports against the Christians. For Men
generally conceal themselves rather for Hurt than Good. And 'twas a thing but
too Notorious, that in other Religions, the Mysteries which they took such care
to Conceal were indeed no better than a Orig. in Cells. i. Tertull. Apol. vii.
Cover for the most infamous Practices; as in the ceremonies of Ceres and
Cybele, and in the Sacrifices of Bacchus, which were forbidden at Rome, by a
Decree of the Senate A. V. C. 568. in which were Perpetrated Live. lix. c. 9.
most horrid Cruelties. The Prejudice they had against the Christians made them
readily Imagine, that what they kept so secret, was something of the like
Nature. And these suspicions were Castor. ap. Eusebius. iv. Hist. c. vii. Bar. an.
cxx. n. 22. etc. Epiph. Hares. xx. and xxvii. Iren. lib. i. c. xxiv.
supported by the destable Villainies committed in their Conventicles by the
Gnostick, the Carpocratians, and other Heretics, which indeed were such that
one would scarce believe the account the Fathers give us of them. Now all these
Heretics went under the Common Denomination of Christians, Besides, from among
the Catholics themselves, there were always some Apostates who Revolted to
Paganism; eithere out of levity of Mind, or refusing to submit to Penance
after the Commission of some grievous Sin, or as not being able to bear
Persecution. These Apostates in their own Defense, Invented Calumnies against
the Christians, or at least confirmed and heightened those that were already
forged against them: And having been themselves Initiated in the Mysteries of
the Christians their Testimony passed for Undoubted.

Thus came to be spread that Lie, that the Christians in the Night assemblies,
cut the Throat of a young Child to dip their Bread in his Blood, and after that
Roasted him, covered him over with Flower and so fed upon his Flesh: Which
false Report plainly arose from the Mysteries of the Eucharist Misrepresented:
To this they Farther added, that after having taken together their common
Repast, in which they eat and drank to Excess, they cast a bit of Meat to a Dog
who was tied to a Candlestick, so that the Dog leaping at the Bait threw down
the Candle, after which being now in the Min. Fael.
Dark all the Men and Women were Promiscuously together, like so many Beasts
without any choice or Distinction as it happened. How absurd soever these
Fables were, yet the People believed them, and the Christian Apologists,
Ter^^ll. Apol. c. vii. 8. 9. Orig. Contr. Cells. vi. p. 293.
were obliged to bestow a serious Answer upon them. The Example of the
Bacchanals in Rome about two Hundred Years before, in which were Discovered
such horrid Villainies, had taught them to believe in general that there could
be nothing so Abominable that might not be Introduced under the color of
Religion.

The Christians were also charged with being Enemies to all Mankind, and to the
Roman Power in particular. That they rejoiced at the disasters of the Public;
Luc. in Philopat.
were grieved at its Successes, and wished the ruin of the Empire. That which
gave occasion to all those Surmises was, That they heard the Christians talk so
much of the Vanity of all Earthly Glories, of the end of the World, and of the
last Judgment; or perhaps they were somewhat Allarmed from what some indiscreet
or malicious Persons might have told them, concerning the Tertul. Ap. c. xxxv.
Punishments denounced in the Apocalypse, against Idolatrous Rome, and the
Vengeance which God would one Day take on her for the Blood of the Martyrs,
which she had spilt. That which further increased these Suspicions against the
Christians, was their not joining with their Neighbors in their Public
Rejoyings, which consisted in Sacrifices, Profane Feasts, and Spectacles full
of Idolatry Constable. Ap. v. c. 9. Clem. ii. Paedag. Ambros. Sermon. xvii. deCal.
Jan. Aug. in Ps. xcviii. n. v.
and Dissoluteness. On the contrary, they rather chose to pass those Days in
Penance and Mortification, in consideration of the numberless Sins and
Provocations then committed against God, and they rejoiced on those Days which
the Supersttion of the Pagans had marked for Calamitous and unfortunate. They
avoided their Fairs because of the profane Plays there Acted. If ever they went
to them, it was only just to provide themselves necessaries, or to buy some
Slave, in order Constable. Ap. ii. c. xxvi.
to convert him.

And indeed this one thing was sufficient to render them odious to the People,
their openly declaring against all the established Religions. 'Twas to no
purpose to tell them that they worshipped the only true God, maker of Heaven and
Earth, and that they worshipped him in Spirit, daily offering up to him the
Sacrifices of their Prayers. This was a sort of Language these blind Idolaters
knew not what to make of. They demanded of the Christians to tell them the name
of their God; and called them downright Atheists, because they Worshipped none
of the Gods that stood in their Temples: had no burning Altars, nor Bloody
Sacrifices. The Sacrificing Priests, the Augurs, the Aruspices, the Diviners of
all sorts; in a Word, all those whose Employment and dependence was upon the
Idolatrous worship, spared not to foment, and blow up the Rage of the People
against them: To that purpose they made use of pretended Prodigies, accusing
the Christians as the Causes of all the Public Calamities that befell them;
when they were plagued with Famine, Pestilence, War, or the like; all was
charged upon the score of the Christians, by means of whom, said they, the
Wrath of Tertul. Ap. xl. Arnob. init.
the Gods is drawn down upon places where they are suffered to live.

These violent Prejudices against the Christians, made them fly in the Face of
their very Virtues, and turn them to their reproach. The Love they bore to one
another was scandalously Interpreted; the common Appellation used Tertul. Ap.
c. xxxix. Petro.
amongst themselves of Brother and Sister, were wrested to an ill sense; as
indeed the Heathens had abused those Names in their infamous Amors. The large
Alms they distributed were Censured to be done with an evil Design, to seduce
the Poorer sort Acta S S. Hippolyti. etc. apud Baron. an. 259. n. xiii.
of People, and strengthen their Faction; or as a contrivance of the covetous
Bishops to draw into their Churches vast heaps of Treasure to lie at their
disposal. As for Miracles, they said, they were only pieces of Sorcery and
Magical Impostures: And Prud. hymn S. Laurent.
indeed the World was then over run with cheating Quacks, Jugglers and Fortune
Tellers, who had their several ways of Divination, by which they pretended to
foretell things to come; and by Virtue of their Spells and Charms, by the Power
of some Barbarous and unintelligible Words, and Fantastic Figures and
Characters, to be able to cure Diseases. And whether it were all done by trick,
or whether they were really assisted by some evil Spirit; they imposed upon the
Eye sight, and did actually perform many strange Feats, to the Amazement of the
Beholders; so that 'twas no new thing to hear talk of Miracles; nay, nor to see
them. They confounded the true with the false, and equally despised all
pretenders to them. And the Country out of which the Apostles and first
Christians came, increased this contempt of them. For the greatest part of
these kind of Imposters came out of the East.

The Persecutions themselves were a sufficient Ground of hatred against the
Christians; People supposed them Criminals, because they were every where
treated as such, and judged of the greatness of their Crime by the severity of
their Punishment. Thus they were looked upon as an accursed Race of Mortals,
Tertul. Ap. c. l. Baron an. cxxxviii an. v.
devoted to destruction, and marked out for Flames and Gibbets. And to add
contumely to Injustice, they branded them with ill Names. And these are those
mighty things which rendered the Christians so odious to the ignorant and
unthinking Multitude. Upon these wild and general Notions, Suetonius and
Tacitus, following common Fame, found all they say concerning the Christians.
The Emperor Claudius (says Suetonius) Judaeos impulsore Chresto assidue
tumultuantes Roma expulit.
banished the Jews from Rome; who at the Instigation of Chrestus, were always
making disturbances; as if Jesus Christ had been then living, and the Head of a
party among the Jews. The same Author reckons Suet. Ner. n. 16. Affecti
suppliciis Christiani, genus. Hominum Superstitionn novae and maleficae.
among the good Actions of Nero his having caused the Christians to be brought
to Punishment, A Sect, says he, of a new and dangerous Superstition. Tacitus
speaking of Nero's having fired Rome only to divert himself with the sight,
says that he charged it upon those who were commonly Tac. xv. annal. quos per
stagitia invisos vulgus Christianos appellabet.
called Christians, a sort of People who were generally hated for their
Practices. After which he adds, They took their Name from a certain Person
called Christ, who in the reign of Tiberius Caesar, was put to Death by Pontius
Pilate. But this Pernicious Superstition, Repressaque in praesens exitiabilis
Superstitio, etc.
after having suffered some little check, brake forth a new, and spread it self
not only throughout all Judea, where it took Birth; but also to Rome its self,
the place where every thing that is black and infamous Quo omnia undique
atrocia^ and pudenda confluun^ celebranturque.
seems to Center and Rendesvouse: First, there were some seized who confessed,
and upon their discovery vast numbers were Condemned, not so much upon the
account of the Fire, as being a Sacrifice to the common Odium. He treats them
afterward as a Mischievous sort of People, and such as well deserved the most
Exemplary Punishments.

Even the Men of Learning and Ingenuity among them, that would Vouchsafe to
enter into any examination of the matter, were not without their aversions
against the Christians. Those persons of Learning were either Greeks or Romans,
who used to despise other Nations under the notion of Barbarians, and above all
People the Jews; a Nation that had for a long time made but a Despicable
Appearance in the World, and stood particularly Branded for a People of a
ridiculous Superstition and sottish Credulity. This may a Jew believe, not I;
says Horace Credat Judaeus Apella, non ego. Hor. i. Sat v.
speaking of a Prodigy. When therefore they were told that there were some Jews
who adored as the Son of God, a Person that had been publicly put to Death
upon the Cross, and that the grand Controversy between them and the other Jews
was, whether this Person was Act. xxv. 19.
yet Living after his Death, and whether he were the true King of the Jews; one
may readily imagine how Ridiculous these Disputes would appear to the Heathens.
They saw that those of this new Act. xxviii. 22.
Sect were hated and Persecuted by all the other Jews, so that it often proved
an occasion of great Commotions among them, and therefore they concluded that
these were a worse sort of Jews than all the rest.

They further Objected, that those of this new Religion used neither arguments
nor Eloquence to convince Men's Understanding, but barely bad them Believe what
was told them without disputing it, pretending Miracles for all they said. That
the Greatest part of them were poor ignorant Souls, that never looked into any
Books, but the Writings of the Jews. That they set up for Teachers and
Instructers, but 'twas only of People Simple and Ignorant Orig. Com. Cells.
like themselves, as Women and little People; finding them more forward to
receive their Doctrine, then Persons of Sense and Learning. And indeed this was
a thing altogether new to them. For there was no Provision made by the Aug. de
vera Rel init.
Heathens for the Instruction of the common People in matters of Religion. They
had only the Lectures of their Philosophers, who Read to them the precepts of
Orig Contr. Cells.
Morality, but never meddled with the proper Offices of Religion. Besides, as
all the Heretics passed under the name of Christians, they ascribed to the
whole Body of Christians all the Wild Fancies of the Velentinians and the other
such like Visionaries encountered by Irenaeus. The Heathens confounded all these
Extravagancies with the Catholic Faith; so that the Religion of the Christians
appeared V. Baron. an. cl xxix. n. 17. and 28.
to them a mere mess of Infatuations, vented by a parcel of Ignorant
Crack-Brain'd Fools.

For what reason, said they, can you Eusebius. Praepar. i. cap. ii.
give us why we should quit the established Religions, Pleading so long a
Prescription of Time, recommended with such a pomp of Ceremonies, confirmed by
the Authority of so many Kings and Legislators, and received by the Consent of
all People, both Greeks and Barbarians; and that to embrace a Novel Invention
of we know not who, and run our selves a ground upon the Jewish Fables: Or if
you have a mind to turn Jews, why are you not Jews through out? But your
Extravagancy is unaccountable in Worshipping the God of the Jews whether they
will or no, and in Worshipping him in such a manner as the Jews themselves
Condemn as much as we, and in pretending to their Law with which you have
nothing to do.

It Is true the Morals of Christians were very Exact, and their Practices
answered their Principles. But all the World was then full of Philosophers, who
pretended no less than the Christians both to the teaching of Virtue, and to
the Practicing of it. There were among them also many who in the first Ages of
the Church, (perhaps in Imitation of the Christians) ran about the World from
Place to Place pretending to make it their business to reform Mankind, and
thereupon submitting themselves to many Hardships, and undergoing a kind of
Persecution by the ill Treatment they sometimes met with, as Apollonius
Tyanaeus Musonius, V. Baron an. l xxv. n. 6.
Damis, Epictetus, and some others. The Philosophers had for many Ages before
been in great Reputation. 'Twas taken Orig. Con. Cells.
for granted that nothing more could be added to what had already been said by
some of them. They could not imagine that Barbarians should have any thing
better to offer than Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, or Zeno. They concluded that
if these new Pretenders had any thing that was good in them, 'twas but somewhat
which they had borrowed from those Old Sages.

Besides, the Philosophers were a more Agreeable sort of Professors, and their
Principles better Accommodated to the inclinations of Mankind, than those of
the Christians. The greatest part of them did not condemn Pleasure, nay some of
them made Pleasure the Sovereign good. They left every one to enjoy his own
Opinion, and take his own way of Living. If they could not persuade Men, their
method was to rally and despise them; and that was all the trouble they gave
them. But above all they took care not to pick Quarrels with the established
Religions. Some believed them, and gave Mystical Explications of the most
Ridiculous Fables. Others troubled their Heads no farther about matters of
Religion, then to Acknowledge some first being, the Author of Nature, leaving
the public Superstitions to those whom they believed incapable of higher
seize. Even the Epicureans, who of all others discovered themselves the
most Openly against the popular opinions concerning the Gods, Assisto Divinis
Horat.
yet freely Assisted at the Sacrifices, and in what part of the World So ever
they were, joined with the rest in the outward Forms of Religious Worship there
Practiced. In this all their Wise Men agreed, not to oppose the Customs
established either by the Laws of the Country or Prescription of Time.

Their Belief of a Plurality of Gods went so far that they imagined every
Nation, every City, every Family had Gods of its own, who took a more peculiar
care of them, and whom therefore they were to Worship after a more peculiar
Manner. So that they counted all Religions good in such Places where they had
been of a long time Received. But the Superstitious Women among them, and other
Weak and Ignorant People were always hunting after new Religions, imagining
that the more Gods and Goddesses they worshipped, and the greater number and
variety of Ceremonies they observed, the more Devout and Religious they were.
The Wise Men among Live. xxix.
them and their Politicians did what they could to Restrain this restless
Humor and keep it within some Bounds; and therefore were against all
Innovations in matters of this Nature. Above all they Forbad all strange and
Foreign Religions; and this the Romans made a Fundamental Principle of their
Politics. To persuade their People to believe that 'twas to the Beneficence of
their Titlar Deitys that Rome was beholding for all its Glorious Successes, and
the Grandeur of its Empire. That their Gods must needs have been more Puissant
Deitys than any of the rest, since they had brought under their Subjection all
the Nations of the World. Thus when the Christian Religion was entirely
established, the Pagans failed not to Impute to this Change of Religion, the
Fall of the Empire which Succeeded soon upon it. And to answer these False
Suggestions, was St. Augustine obliged to compose his large Treatise entitled
De Civitate Dei.

The Contempt the Christians had of Death, was not by the Heathens looked upon
as any great matter. They saw every Day their voluntier Gladiators, who for
some inconsiderable Reward, or perhaps for just nothing at all but to show
their own Bravery, fearlessly exposed themselves to the Swords of their
Antagonists, and ventured having their Throats Cut in the open Amphitheatre.
They had Daily examples before them of Persons (and those of the best sort) who
upon any little Disgust would fairly Dispatch themselves out of the World. Some
of Vel jactatione ut quidam Philosophi. l. vi.. vii. F. de injusto rump. and
ire.
their Philosophers (as the Lawyers report of them) did the like purely out of
Vanity, of which Lucian's Peregrinus is a famous Instance. And therefore seeing
the Christians Prosessing a Renunciation of the Enjoyments of this Life, and
placing all their happiness in that to come; they rather wondered that they did
not kill themselves. They tell us, Says St. Justin, Justin. Ap. ^. init.
Go then kill your selves without any more ado, get you gone to your God, and
let us hear no more of you. And Antoninus, Pro-Consul of Asia, seeing the
Christians Crowding the Court, and offering themselves to Martyrdom, cried out
to them, Ah! Tertul. ad Scap. c. ult.
Wretched Creatures as you are; if you are so fond of dying, can you not find
Ropes to hang your selves, or Praecipices from whence you may break your Necks.

Thus all the World were set against the Christians; the People and the
Magistrates, the Ignorant and the Wise. By the one they were abhorred as
Impostors and abominable Impious Wretches; by the other they were despised as a
company of Man haters, Visionary, Foolish and Melancholic People. Intoxicated
with an unaccountable Frenzy of throwing away their Lives for nothing: So
Odious and Despicable were they in the sight of the World, that scarce any one
would vouchsafe so much as to change a Word with them; such was the Prejudice
all Men had conceived against the Christians, that the very Name of Christians
was sufficient for their Condemnation, and destroyed BonusV^ C. Seius tantum
quod Christianus. Tertul. Ap. c. iii.
whatsoever else of good was found to be in them. Such a one (was their common
saying) is an Honest Man, were it not for the misfortune of his being a
Christian.

THAT the Christians being so universally XVI. The Persecutions. the manner of
proceeding against them. Their Punishments.
hated, should be Persecuted is not strange, but this one may justly wonder at,
That the Romans, who in their Laws and Government, and in their other Conduct
gave such Proofs of their Wisdom and Equity, should practice against their
fellow Romans; or indeed against any human Creatures, such cruelties as we read
of in the History of the Martyrs: That the Judges should cause the Person
accused to be put to the Torment in their own Presence, in open Court, in the
view of the whole World; that they should employ such different sorts of
Tortures upon them, and that (as for all that appears) merely Arbitrary. It may
be worth our while therefore, to observe in all this, what was owing to the
standing Customs and Constitutions of their Government: and what was
supperadded thereto by a false Zeal for Religion, and Reasons of State.

The Romans tried all Causes in open Court; all their Processes as well
Criminal as Civil, the Charge as well as the Sentence was given in some public
place, where under a covered Gallery the Magistrate Cic. iv. Ver. i. l. c. xl.
seated himself in his Tribunal, raised on high above the rest of the People,
and surrounded with the Officers of the Court; the Lictors with Axes and
Bundles of Rods in their Hands attending him, and the Soldiers standing by,
always in a readiness to execute his Orders: For the Roman Magistrates had in
their own Hands the Power of the Sword, as well as the Administration of
Justice. The Penalties for every Crime where fixed by ^. 6. 2. F^de Paen. l. 9.
11. l. x. l. xxviii. etc. ibid.
the Laws; but so as to vary according to the Quality of the Offenders; and
always more rigorous against Slaves than against Freemen; against Foreigners
than against the Roman Citizens: Therefore St Paul was Beheaded, as being a
Denizen of Rome, and St. Peter Crucified as a Jew. The Cross was the most
infamous of all their Punishments; and they that suffered that Death, were
generally first beaten with Rods, and had their sides burned with red hot
Irons, or flaming Torches, before they were nailed to the Cross; their putting
to the Rack was done in Public, and the manner of it was extremely Cruel; but
it was seldom exercised Cic. ver. ult. n. lxiii.
upon any save Slaves or Persons of the lowest consideration. The Martyrology
Martyrol. Romans xii. Janu.
observes it as a thing Extraordinary, that St. Marinus being one of the
Senatc^ian Order, was put upon the Eouleus and Tormented with the Vngulae
Ferreae, or Iron Pincers, with which they pinched or burnt the sides of
Malefactors upon the Rack. And yet 'twas after this way of Proceeding that most
of the Martyrs were Tormented. The Roman Laws as well as ours of France,
permitted none to be put to the Rack, save only for Examination sake. But they
used the same means to make Christians deny their pretended Crimes, as they did
to make others confess their real ones. The same manner of trying Criminals by
putting them to the Rack, of stretching out their Limbs with Pullies, whipping
them, tearing and Searing their Flesh; continued in use under Christian
Emperors; as appears by the Examples of St. Eutropius and St. Tigrius, who were
thus Tortured, under other Sozom. viii. Hist. c. xxiv.
pretenses, but really out of spite to St. Chrysostom.

It was an ordinary thing to condemn l. viii.. iv. v etc.. xi. F. de paen.
the meaner and more infamous sort of People to the Mines, as now to the
Galleys; or to expose them to be torn to pieces by wild Beasts in the
Amphitheatre, for the diversion of the People. It Is not unlikely but that there
were several other kinds of Punishments used in the Provinces; nor can it be
denied, but that the Magistrates invented several new ones against the
Christians; especially in the latter Persecutions, when their vexation to see
the number of Christians still multiplying upon them doubled their Fury; and
when the Devil Suggested to them the means of destroying rather their Souls
than Martyr. Romans xxviii. Jul.
their Bodies. I believe the being Condemned to Prostitution is a kind of
Punishment never thought of in the World, but against the Christian Virgins.
The extraordinary Admiration which they saw the Christians had for Chastity,
put them upon that lewd of Persecution. And of the like nature was that which
St. Jerome Hier. init. vitae S Paul.
relates of a young Martyr, whom they gently tied to a Bed of Roses, and under
the most delightsome Circumstances, with an Immodest Harlot placed by his side;
but so far was he from being overcome with the Temptation, that he bit of his
Tongue and spit in her Face; in short, there were a multitude of Martyrs
Massacred or put to Torments, without any form of Justice; either by the Fury
of the enraged Populace, or by the revenge of their particular Enemies.

The Persecution generally opened with some Edict, forbidding the Assemblies of
the Christians, and condeming to certain Penalties all those who refused to
Sacrifice to the Gods. The Bishops presently gave Cypr. Ep. xv, etc.
notice thereof, Exhorting each other both to redouble their Prayers to God,
and to Encourage their People. Many of the Christians hereupon took the advice
given by Jesus Chrst to his Disciples, and fled Mat. x. 23.
for it. The Pastors and Priests divided themselves; the one part withdrew, the
other part remained with the People; they kept themselves concealed with great
care; for they were the Persons the most sought after, as being those upon
whose loss the Flock would be scattered. Some of them Acta. S. Pion. Bar. an.
254. n. x. Can. xii. Petri Alex. to. i. Council.
the better to keep themselves unknown, changed their Names; others were
content to purchase their quiet, and to give Money to save themselves from
being Persecuted: And thus by suffering in their Estates, they showed how much
less they valued their Temporal concerns than their Spiritual. But if any one
gave Money to procure Cypr. Ep. lii. ad Anconian. Libellatici.
false Certificates, that he had obeyed the Emperors Edicts, he was counted in
the number of Apostates; this being a tacit owning of himself an Idolater. The
Rules of the Church forbad a Man voluntarily to expose himself to Martyrdom, or
the doing any thing which might provoke the Heathens, and occasion Persecution;
as the overthrowing their Idols, Firing their Temples, speaking Contemptuously
Orig. Cells. viii.
of their Gods, or publicly opposing their Superstitions: Not but that there
are Examples of holy Mattyrs that have done such like things, and of many
others who declared themselves, and owned their Religion: But those
extraordinary Persons we must suppose to have been acted by a special impulse;
so that their singular Examples are not to be drawn into Precedent. The general
Constable. Ap. v. c. v.
Rule was not to tempt God, but to wait with Patience till one was Discovered,
and called upon by Authority to give an account of his Faith. In this matter
there were two opposite Haeresies to be avoided, the Gnostics on the one hand,
and the Marcionites on the other; the Gnostics and Valentinians decried the
suffering of Martyrdom as a needless thing, alleging Baron. an. cxlv. n. iii.
etc. x. an. ccv. n. xii. etc.
that Christ had died to save us from Death; not distinguishing what kind of
Death it was that Christ died to save us from. They pretended also, that
flinging away our Lives, was to affront God; who since he refused the Blood of
Bulls and Goats, it was not likely that he should delight in the Blood of Men.
The Marcionites on the other hand causelessly Bar. an. cxlvi n. xii.
ran themselves upon Martyrdom, out of their hatred of the Flesh, and of the
maker of it, who they said was the evil Principle: So that the Church found it
necessary to make inquiry into the Principles of those that had suffered Death
for the Faith, to know upon what Grounds they proceeded, and whether they
deserved to be Honored as Martyrs; and Bar. an. cccii. n. c. xxvi.
this seems to have given the Original to Canonisations.

When the Christians were Apprehended, they were carried before the the
Magistrate, and by him Interrogated in open Court. If they denied themselves to
be Christians, they were generally dismissed upon their own bare Word: For they
knew that those who were true Christians would never deny their Faith, or that
if they did once deny themselves to be Christians, they would effectually cease
to be so. Yet sometimes for greater Assurance they made them do upon the spot
some act of Idolatry, or utter some Contumelious Word against Jesus Christ. If
they confessed themselves to be Christians, then they endeavored to beat them
off from their Constancy, first by Persuasions or Promises, then by
threatenings, or if neither of those prevailed, at last by Torments. They tried
also to surprise them into the involuntary Commission of some Impiety; and then
to make them believe that they had already Renounced their Religion; and that
'twas now too late to Recant. As they were brought upon their Trials in the
Court, there were always standing near them some Idol and Altar: There the
Heathens offered Victims in their Presence, and tried to make them eat some
part of the Sacrifice; wrenching open their Mouths, and forcing down their
Throats some bit of Flesh or at v Can. xiv. Petr. Alex. to i- Conc. p. 967.
Acta. SS. Tharaci Probi and Andron. an. 290. Mat. xv. ii. 18.
least some drops of Wine offered to the false Gods: And though the Christians
well knew that not that which goes into the Mouth defiles a Man, but that
which proceeds out of the Heart; yet for fear of giving the least occasion of
Offense to those that were weak in the Faith they resisted with all their
Might. Some having live Coals and Incence clapped into St. Cyrilla Martyr. v.
Jul.
their Hands together, held them burning there for a long time, least in
throwing away the Coals they should at the same time seem to offer the Incence.

The most usual Tortures they were put to was, to stretch them out at Length
Eqvuleus.
upon the Rack or Wooden Horse, with Cords tied to their Feet and Hands, and
drawn at both ends with Pullies, or to Hang them up by the Hands with heavy
weights fastened to their Feet: to beat them with Rods or great Clubs, or with
Whips stuck with sharp pieces of Iron, which they called Scorpions, or with
Thongs of raw Leather, or Leather loaded with Balls of Lead; so that many of
them Dyed under the Blows. Others they stretched out at Length; Burnt and tore
their Flesh and Skin asunder, either with Pincers, or Iron Curry-Combs; so that
they often Bared them to the very Ribs, and opened the Hollow of their Bowels
till, the Fire pierced into their Entrails and Choked them to Death. To make
their wounds yet more intolerable, they some times rubbed them over with Salt
and Vinegar, and as they began to close up Rip't them open again.

During all the time of their Torments they were still putting Questions to
them, and every thing that was Spoken either by the Judge or by the party
Suffering, was taken down in writing Word for Word, by the public Notaires: So
that upon every Trial there was left upon Record a verbal Process far more
exact than any of those made now a Days, by the Officers of our Courts of
Justice. For as the Ancients had the Art of Writing by Abreviatures, or a sort
of short Notes where every single Character stood for a word, they wrote as
fast as they Spoke. and took down precisely the very self same Words that were
Uttered, making every one Speak directly and in his own Person, whereas in our
verbal Processes all the Discourse runs in the Third-person, and the whole is
put into order, and worded by the Register.

These verbal Processes were what they called Acts. The Christians were very
careful to get Copies of these Processes against their Brethren: And out of
those Acts, as well as from what they themselves, who were present farther
observed, were the Passions of the Martyrs reduce into Writing, and thus
Authentically engrossed and preserved in the Churches. At Rome St. Clement set
up Lib. Poncif. in Clem.
seven Notaries, every one of which had the Charge of this Affair, and two
Quarters of the City assigned him: And St. Cyprian gives it as a special
Direction to Cypr. ep. xxxvi.
his Priests and Deacons, that they should carefully note the particular Day on
which every one suffered Martyrdom. The greatest part of these Acts of the
Martyrs were lost in the Diocletian Persecution, and though Eusebius
Cesariensis had made a great Collection of them, yet that is lost too. So that
we have but few of them now remaining. Yet the Names of the most eminent
Martyrs are preserved in the Menologies and Martyrologies, which set down for
every Day the Martyrs, of the Day and the Place, where their Feasts are
Colebrated; to which were afterward added the other Saints.

During these Interrogatories, they were Pressed to Discover their Accomplices,
that is the other Christians, and Particularly the Bishops and Priests who
Instructed them in their Religion, and the Deacons who assisted them; as also
to Deliver up the Holy Scriptures. It Was in the Diocletian Persecution, that the
Heathens were more particularly bent upon destroying the Books of the
Christians, looking upon that as the most Effectual means of destroying their
Religion it self. They sought after them with the utmost Diligence, and burned
all they could Seize. Acta. C. tens. an. 303.
They searched the Churches for them, the Lodgings of the Readers, and all
private Houses. Upon all these Queries the Acta Mar. Alutin apud Bar. An. 303.
n. 35, etc.
Christians kept their secrets as Inviolable as they did their Mysteries. They
never Acta S S. Agapes etc apud Bar. an. 304. n. 40, etc.
named any Man's Person; they answered that they were Taught of God, they were
assisted of God, they carried the Holy Scriptures engraven on their Hearts.
They who were so Cowardly to Deliver up their Bibles, or Discover their
Brethren or their Priests, were Branded with the Odious name of Traitors, If
the Martyrs under their Torments uttered any Words at all, they seldom were
upon any other Subject than that of Glorifying the goodness of God and
Imploring his Mercy and Assistance.

AFTER this cruel Examination they XVII. Prisons,
who still persisted in the profession of Christianity, were dilivered over to
Punishment; but they were often remanded to Prison, to be kept yet longer upon
trial of their Patience, and reserved for fresh Torments; and indeed, the
Prisons themselves were but another sort of Torment. These Confessors of Jesus
Christ were thrown into the Darkest and most Infectious Dungeons, their Hands
and Feet loaded with Irons, heavy clogs of Wood hanging upon their Necks, or
Fetters with cross Bolts, contrived so as either to keep them standing, or
their legs distended if they lay. Sometimes they strewed the Dungeon with
little pieces of Pot-sherds or broken Glass; and there Prudent PaeriSteph. 4 de
S. Vin. and al.
they forced them to lie Naked, all full of Cuts and Wounds. Sometimes they
left their Wounds to fester and putrify upon Mart. xvi. April. de S Encratide.
them, and in that condition suffered them to dye, with Hunger and Thirst.
Sometimes they carefully fed and tended them but only to keep them in Heart for
fresh Torments. They were generally denied the liberty of speaking one Word to
any Person living; it having been found by experience, That under that
Condition they had Converted many of the Infidels, even to the very Goalers and
Soldiers themselves that guarded them. Sometimes they ordered to be brought
unto them Act. SS. Perpet. and Felic.
such Persons as they thought most likely to shake their Constancy; as their
Fathers, their Mothers, their Wives, their Children; whose Tears and melting
Discourses were another sort of Temptation; and many times of more dangerous
Consequence than their Torments. If a Martyr Martyr. 31. Aug.
were with Child they deferred her Execution till she was Delivered; for so the
Law required. Thus the famous Martyr St. Mamas, was born in Prison of his
Mother Martyr St. Rufina.

In the mean time the Church took a Constable. Ap. v. c. ii. Cyp. Ep. xi. Martyr.
xxiii. Dec.
particular care of these Holy Prisoners. The Deacons often visited them, to do
them all the Service they could, to go on de Diacono S. Anthimii.
their Errands, and to supply them with Necessaries. Their Brethren also
frequently waited upon them, to support and encourage them to Suffer: They
Congratulated their Torments, and wished to have a share in them; they kissed
their Martyr. iii. Jun. de S. Zena. Tertul. ii. ad uxor. c. iv. Tertul. de
jejun. c. xii. Martyr. xi. Dec. de S. Thrason.
Chains, looked after their Wounded and supplied them with all Conveniences,
as Beds, Clothes, Diet, and other refreshments; insomuch, that Tertullian
complained that they fared but too well in the Prisons; the Faithful spared no
costs upon these Occasions. If they were denied entrance, they freely gave
large Bribes to the Keepers and Soldiers to gain Access; nor would they be
repulsed by their rudeness. They submitted to Blows and Contumelies, put up all
Affronts and Injuries, patiently waited at the Prison Doors whole Nights
together, in hopes of gaining the favorable Minute of satisfying their
Charity. Whenever they could gain admittance, they looked upon the Prison as v
Cypr. Ep. v. and vi.
a Church, Consecrated by the presence of the Saints; there they made their
Prayers, and thither the Priests resorted to Celebrate the Sacrifice, and
afford the Confessors the blessed Consolation of not going out of the World
without the Protection of the Body and Blood of Jesus Christ. But if it were a
Bishop or Priest that was in Prison, the Faithful there Assembled themselves
together, that they might not lose the Opportunity of receiving the Eucharist,
and carrying it home with them to their Houses; and in such Cases as these,
they made use of any means they could. Sometimes the Priests for want of
Altars, made the Consecration upon the hands of the Deacons; and that
Illustrious Martyr St. Lucian of Antioch, being so staked down that he could
not stir, Acta apud Bar. anno 311.
made the Consecration on his own Breast. One may well imagine with what force
of Exhortation these Administrations were attended. All the Church looked upon
these holy Prisoners as it were already Crowned in Heaven. They had a great
influence upon the Prelates to obtain favor on the behalf of those whose
weakness had betrayed them into Idolatry; insomuch, that it was found necessary
to prescribe some Cautions and Limitations Cypr. de Laps. and ep. x. xi. xii,
etc.
against the indiscreet Recommendations of some of the Confessors.

WHITHERSOEVER the Persecutors XVIII. Their ear of Relics.
carried the Martyrs, the rest of the Faithful followed them; whether it were
to the Rack or to the Execution: For the places of Execution were generally
without the Walls of the City, and there the greatest part of the Martyrs,
having either by the strength of Nature, or by Miracle out lived their
Torments, were beheaded; thither did the faithful in vast numbers follow them,
crowding the Streets as they passed along, and standing by them to the last,
both to admire their Constancy, and by their Examples to fortify themselves
against the like Trials. They carefully observed the last Words that came from
their Mouths, which generally were Prayers: as that of St. Polycarp, recorded
in the Epistle of the Church of Smirna; as also the Hymn of St. Athenogenes, an
old Divine of the same Ap. Eusebius. 4. Hist. 15. Martyrol. xviii. Januar.
Age, which he sung with a Joyful Heart just as he was entering into the Flames,
and left a Copy of it to his Disciples. Many times also the standers by
encouraged Eusebius. vi. Hist. 3.
the Martyrs. Origin often hazarded his Life upon such Occasions; and there are
many Examples of those who suffered Martyrdom themselves, for having exhorted
others to it, as those mentioned Ap. Eusebius. iv. Hist. 34.
in the Epistle of St. Dionysius of Alexandria, and in the famous Epistle of
Ap. Eus. v. Hist. i.
the Church of Vienna.

The Faithful undauntedly stood by their Martyrs while they were under their
Torments, to receive in Spunges or pieces of Linen, the Blood that streamed
from Martyrrol. Romans iii. Fib. idem. iii. Jun. de S. Paula.
their Wounds, and to preserve it in Vials and put it in the Sepulchers with
their Bodies. Seven Women were put to Death for having thus gathered up the
drops of the Blood of St. Blaesus. And when St. Pont. Diac.
Cyprian was Beheaded, the Faithful spread pieces of Linen Cloth all about V
Acta. SS. Thara. etc. an. 290. and St. Bonif. an. 505. Martyr. Romans xxi. Aug.
de S. Paterno.
him, to receive his Blood: They were no less careful to carry off the Bodies
of the Martyrs, or gather up the remainders of them; for there was often
nothing left of them but Bones or Ashes; as when they were burnt to Death or
devoured by wild Beasts: And thence came the name of Relics. They spared no
expenses to redeem them out of the Hands of the Executioner, and give them an
honorable Interment: And this very thing cost many of them their own Lives.
There are many Examples of those who Martyr. Romans xvii. Feb. de S. Juliano vii
Dec. de. S. Agathone. v. Mart. de S. Nicandro. xxi. Aug. de S. Paterno. iii.
Mart. de S. A^^erio. xvii. Dec. xxvi. Aug. de S. Irenaeo and Abundio.
suffered Martyrdom themselves, for having kissed the dead Bodies of the
Martyrs, or for having hindered others from insulting them after their Death,
or for having searched for their Corpse, to give them Christian Burial. Some
have been thrown into the Common Shoars for having drawn out of them the Bodies
of the Saints. St. Asterius the Senator, gained to himself the Crown of
Martyrdom, by his having been seen to carry on his Shoulders the Dead Body of a
Martyr. The Disciples of St. Ignatius carried his Relics as far as from Rome
to Antioch.

This care which the Christians showed Roma. Subterran. l. i. c. ii. iii.
Epist. Eccles vien. apud. Eus. v. c. i.
to preserve the Relics of the Saints, made their Persecutors on the other
side as careful to mangle and tear asunder the Bodies of the Martyrs after
their Death, and scatter abroad every part, and particle of them: And thus they
thought they should lessen their Hopes of a future Resurrection. You do but
abuse your selves, (said they) with false hopes, in imagining that your Bodies
shall be preserved to that Day; you expect to receive them again; you think to
have them embalmed and wrapped up in the rich dresses those Women infatuated with
your idle Fancies, designed to bestow upon them; but leave that care to us,
we'll see your Bodies fairly disposed of. They cast them to be devoured by wild
Beasts: they threw their Corpse among those of the Gladiators, Acta S. Tharaci.
etc. Prudent. de S. Vinc.
or other Malefactors; they tied great Stones to their Bodies, and so cast them
into deep Rivers; they burnt them and scattered their Ashes in the Air. But for
all these Precautions, the greatest part of their Relics were preserved,
either by the extraordinary Zeal of the Faithful, or by the Miracles which God
himself often wrought upon these Occasions.

As soon as they had laid the Bones of the Martyrs in their Tombs, they paid
great Honors to the Tombs themselves, Ap. Bar. in Martyr. ix. Aug.
where they lay. After they had put S. Laurence in the Grave, (says the Acts)
They Martyr. xvii. Janu: de S. S. Diodoro etc. xii. Aug. de S. Hilaria. xiv.
Febr. de S. S. Proculo etc. xxiii. Janu. de S. Emerent. Tertull. de Corona. c.
iii. Cypr. Ep. xxxiv.
Fasted and watched there three Nights together, with a vast concourse of
Christians. The Priest St. Justin offered the Sacrifice, and they all
Communicated. Many Saints have suffered Martyrdom for being taken Watching or
Praying at the Sepulchers of the Martyrs, or Celebrating their Feasts; which
was Annually done, as appaers by the Testimonies of Tertullian and Cyprian.

THEY whose Lives they spared were either Banished at large or else obliged to
XIX. The Confessors.
suffer that which the Roman's called Deportation, which was a more Rigorous
sort of Banishment, and accounted a Civil Death. These Exiles were sent either
into the less Inhabited Islands, or into Barbarous Countries, upon the
Frontiers of the Empire. Banishment at large was for Persons of the best
Quallities; Deportation for those of a lower Condition: but the meanest of all
were commonly condemned to labor in the public V. Sermon. Cypr. ad Martyr.
Works, especially in the Mines. They were made Slave to the states, and
therefore generally had a mark Branded on Inscripti.
their Forehead with a Red-Hot-Iron, by which they might be known if they made
their escape. They had always Iron on their Legs, were poorly Fed, pitifully
Clad, often Beaten and wretchedly abused; in short, their Condition was at
least as miserable, as is now that of Gally-Slaves. Constable. Apost. v. c. i. 3.
Their Fellow Christians took great care to Relieve them, and as much as was
possible to make the hardships put upon them more Tolerable. All those that
Dyed in this condition, for the Faith, were Martyr. xi Dec. de S. Thrasone.
counted in the number of Martyrs: And they who ever returned out of their
Exile or Slavery, were placed in the Rank of Confessors: For this was a Name
given in Common to all those who had undergon any Suffering for the Faith, and
generally to all those who had made a public Confession of their Faith before
the Judges. They had great Honors paid them all the rest of their Lives, and
were often Advanced to Holy Orders for their Constancy.

BUT as for such who had been Overcome XX. Excommunication and Penance.
by Persecution, So as to have Renounced their Faith, though it were Purely out
of Weakness and under the Violence of Torments, yet unless they Submitted to do
public Penance, they were Excommunicated. Excommunication deprived them not
only of the use of the Sacraments, but also debarred them Constable. Apost. v. c.
ii.
from entering the Church, or holding any correspondence with the Faithful. No
Man would Eat with them or so much as speak to them; every one shunned them, as
one would do Persons infected with the Plague. And so St. Paul commands 1 Cor.
v. 9. 10.
that wicked Christians should be more shunned than even the Heathens
themselves; for from the Heathens they could not absolutely Separate without
going out of the World. Nor were the Apostates to Idolatry the only Persons
thus used: The same Discipline passed upon Heretics, Schismatics and all
notorious Offenders. For there were some bad Christians even in the best Times
of the Church. St. Paul writing to the Corinthians, complains 2. Cor. xii. 21.
that there were among them many Persons guilty of Gross Uncleaness, who had
not done Penance for their Sins: And to the Philippians, that there were many
among them whom he calls Enemies to the Cross of Christ. Such as Phil. iii. 18.
these were cut off from the Congregation of the Faithful. There were scarce
Epist. Cleri Rom ad Cypr. xxxi.
any but Bishops or Priests that might Converse with them, and they only in
order to bring them to Repentance, so long as there was any hopes of it.
Besides they did not cease to Pray for them. And thus they treated those who
did not offer themselves to Penance.

As for those that did, they were received with a great Compassion, but
tempered with Discretion. They were made to understand that this was a favor
not over hastily to be granted, and therefore they commonly took some time to
try whether their Return was hearty and sincere. Penance was Imposed publicly
in the Church; where the Offender Clothed in Sackcloth, and covered with Ashes,
threw himself down in the midst of the Congregation; embraced the Knees
Tertull. de Poenitent. c. xi. and de Pudic. c. xiii.
of the Faithful, and kissed their Feet, to move their Compassion and obtain
their Prayers; to which the Bishop also Exhorted them in a discourse
particularly made upon that occasion. The Penitent was still kept upon Trial,
and enjoined many Laborious Exercises. They obliged him to Fast either
constantly, or at least very often, and live only on Bread and Water or some
such hard Fare; proportioning his Abstinence according to the strength of his
Nature, the grievousness of his Sin, and the fervor of his Repentance. They
caused him to continue in Prayer for a long time together, either kneeling upon
his Knees, or lying flat upon the Ground: To watch, to lie upon the bare
Ground, to give Alms according to his Abillity. During the time of his
Penance, he was to abstain not only from all Recreations, but also from
ordinary Conversation to keep no Company, meddle with no Business, nor have any
communication so much as with the Faithful themselves, except in Cases of great
Necessity. He went to the Church, but it was only to hear the Sermon and Prayers,
and was not admitted to the Sacrament.

In the mean time the Bishop, either in Constable. Apost. lib. 2. c. 61. 7, etc.
his own Person, Visited the Penitents, or sent some Priest to Examine and deal
with them according to the Dispositions he found in them, upon which he was
very exact in making his Observations: Some he awakened with Terrors, and to
others Ibid. xli.
he administered Consolations; variously Chrysostom. ii. Sacerd. init.
accommodating his Applications to the quality of the Patient and the symptoms
of the Distemper. For the Prelates looked upon the discipline of Penance as a
sort of Spiritual Physic, and concluded that Ambros. in Psalm. 37. and 3.
Epist. xix.
the Cure of a Diseased Soul required at least as much Skill, and Management,
and Patience, and Attendance as that of the Body: For they knew that vicious
Habits are not to be removed but by a long Course of time and a most exact
Regimen. Thus in time Penance came Epist Can. S. Greg. Thaum Epist. Can. Petr.
Alex.
to be distinguished into its different Degrees, and to have the term of its
Continuance Stated. But all that depended much upon the Descreton of the
Bishops. As they were careful not to discourage Cypr. Ep. 52. ad Antonian.
their Penitents by too excessive a Severity which might make them become
Desperate, and prove a Temptation to them to Relinquish the Faith, and to
Revolt to Paganism: So on the other hand they found it necessary to check their
Impatience; Cler. Romans ep. 31
as knowing that nothing could be more Hurtful to them than too early an
Absolution. Aperfect Reconciliation was never granted till they saw it sought
Cypr. Ep. Iv. ad Corn.
for with Tears, and Merited by an Effectual Reformation of their Manners.
There was nothing to be got by Importunities, much less by Menaces. Those
Bishops who outbraved the Persecutions of the Heathens, were not to be
frightened with Words from their own Children. The time of Penance was always
long, at least, unless there were some special Reason for the shortning of it;
as the Extraordinary fervor of the Penitent, a mortal Distemper, or present
Persecution: V. S. Cypr. Ep. li. Epist. 3. apud Cypr, etc.
For in such a Cases they were careful not to let them Dye without the
Sacraments. This Dispensation which shortened the Regular Penance was called
Indulgence, and was often granted upon the request of Confessors in Prison or
Exile.

If the Penitent during the time of his Penance, committed any new Crime, he
was obliged to begin his Penance again. If they saw his Punishment did no good
upon him, nor produced any change in his Life, they let him continue in that
State; not admitting him to the Sacraments; and if after having received
Absolution, he relapsed into any hanious Sin, there were no more Sacraments for
him: S. August. Epist. live. ad Maced. c. vii.
For public Penance was never granted for more than one time: All they could
now do, was to pray for him, and to Exhort him to Repentance and newness of
Life, and to bid him have hope in the Mercies of God, which are boundless.
There were some Sins, for which, the Penance how sincerely and fully soever
performed, was to continue one's whole Life time; after the Commission of which
the Communion was never to be given, but upon the point of Death. Apostates
Cypr ep. liii. ad Anton. Conc. Arel. i. c. xxii.
who never prayed, Penance till they saw themselves in danger of Death, were
not then admitted to it: And though it was granted in that Extremity to other
sorts of Sinners; yet they did but little depend upon that Repentance, which
looked as if it had been forced upon Men only by the present dread of
Punishment. They who had been once placed among the Penitents, though Absolved
and Reconciled; yet could never after that be capable of receiving holy Orders,
or of being advanced to any Ecclesiastical Ministry. And if a Priest or any
Clerk had committed a Sin deserving public Penance; he only lost his station
in the Church; that is, he was for ever after Interdicted the Exercise of his
Function, and reduced to the state of a simple Laick. But that they might not
Can. Apost. xxiv.
punish the same fault twice over, and out of Reverence to the Sacrament of
Orders, they imposed on him no other Penance.

If any one shall wonder at this Discipline of the Ancients, let him consider
that the Sins to which Penance was due, were in those Days rarely known among
Christians; for as with us, Persons of Honor, who are well Educated and settled
in the World, seldom fall into those Crimes which bring them so far under the
lash of the Law, as to make them liable to the infamy of Public Punishments;
so of old, it did not often happen that Christians so carefully admitted, and
so well instructed, should be guilty of Adultery, Homicide, or other such like
hanious Sins which deserved Death. Tertullian declares that the Catholics were
easily distinguished from De praescript. c. xli. xlii. Apol. c. iv. v.
the Heretics, by the difference of their Behavior; and he boldly upbraids
the Heathen, that their Goals were filled with none but Heathens like
themselves; or if any Christians were there, it was upon no other account but
barely for their being Christians: Or if (says he) any other Crime can be baid
to their charge, they are no longer Christians. Innocence with us is a
necessary Virtue; we understand it perfectly, as having learned it of God who
is the best Master, and we practice it with the greatest Care, as being obliged
to it by that Judge whom we must not despise.

THERE were some Christians who XXI. Asceticks, Virgins, Widows, Deaconesses.
Practiced all the Exercises of Penance without being obliged to them, and
without being excluded the Sacraments; but then it was out of their own
voluntary Devotion, in imitation of the Lives of the Prophets and St. John the
Baptist, and following the Councils of St. Paul, for Exercising themselves unto
Godliness, and 1 Timothy iv. 7. 1 Cor. ix. 27.
keeping under the Body to bring it into Subjection. These were called
Asceticks; that is to say, Exercisants. They generally kept themselves close
shut up in their own Houses, where they lived in great retirement; adding to
the usual Frugality of Christians, some extraordinary Fasts and Abstinences.
They kept themselves to what they called Xerophagy, that is feeding only upon
dry Diets, and held out their Fasts to two or three Days together, or some
times longer. They accustomed themselves to wear Sackcloth, to walk Barefoot,
to sleep upon the Ground, to Watch the greatest part af the Night, to be
constantly reading the holy Scriptures, and as much as was possible to Pray
without ceasing. Origin Eusebius. Hist. vi. c. iii.
for some time led this Life; and many of these Asceticks became great Bishops
Hier. de Script. 87. in pierio.
and Doctors.

All the Asceticks lived in great Continence, and all Christians in general
highly admired that Virtue so much recommended by Jesus Christ and his
Apostles. Just. Orat. ad Anton. Pium.
A young Man of Alexandria, under the reign of the Emperor Antonine, presented
a Petition to the Governor of that City, that he might have a Surgeon allowed
him to make him an Eunuch; and many there were who did so in good earnest; Can.
Nic. i.
so that the Church was obliged to make a Law on purpose to repress that
indiscreet Zeal.

There were a great number also of young Persons of the Female Sex, who
Consecrated their Virginity to God either by the Advice of their Parents, or of
their own proper Motion: These Virgins led the Ascetick Life; for they did not
look upon Virginity as any thing, if it v Hier. Ep. de Asella.
were not attended with great Mortification, with Silence, Retirement, Poverty,
Labor, Fastings, Watchings, and continual Praying. They were not esteemed as
Virgins who would not deny themselves the common Diversions of the World, even
the most Innocent; as the taking too great a delight in Conversation, the
affecting a Pleasantness and agreeableness of Humor and Discourse, so as to
make a show of their Wit and Ingenuity; much less would they endure those that
set up for Bells, for Dressing, Perfuming Long-Trains, and moving with an
affected Air. St. Cyprian recommends scarce Cypr. de Hab. Virg.
any thing else to Christian Virgins but the renouncing all the vain Ornaments
of the Body and Ostentation of Beauty. He well knew how fond young Women are of
such gaudy Trifles, and of how pernicious a Consequence they might prove to
those of their Profession. In the first Ages the Virgins Consecrated to God,
generally lived at home with their Parents, or in private by themselves, two
and two together, never going abroad but when they went to Church, where they
had a place allotted them to sit by themselves, separate from the rest of the
Women. If Ambros de virg laps. c. vi.
any one violated her Holy Resolution and Married, she was enjoined Penance.

The Widows who renounced second Marriage, passed their time much after the
same manner as the Virgins, in Fastings, v Heir. in Ep. Paulae.
Praying, and the other Exercises of the Ascetick Life; but they did not keep
themselves so close shut up, as being more employed in the outward Acts of
Charity, as in visiting and relieving the Sick and Imprisoned, and more
especially the Martyrs and Confessors; in taking care of the Poor, in
entertaining and attending upon Strangers, in burying the Dead, and generally
in the Offices of Charity: And indeed all Christian Women, whether Married or
Widows, made these kind of Works the greatest of their Employment, rarely
appearing abroad, but upon the doing of some good Office, or when they went to
Church. But the Widows being more at liberty from other Engagements, didicated
themselves Tertul. ad ^xor. c. iv.
wholly to these Services: If they were Rich, they liberally Distributed their
Alms; if they were Poor, the Church maintained them. They chose for their
Deaconesses the most Aged of their Widows, 1 Timothy v. 9.
of Sixty years or upward; the most v Constable. Apost. l. iii.
discreet, and those who had best approved themselves in all the Exercises of
Charity: This Office was also sometimes assigned to Constable. Apos. vi. c. xvi.
Virgins. They were called Deaconesses, not as if they were counted of the
Clergy; for Women cannot partake of any part of the Priesthood; but because
they exercised toward the Women some part of the Deacons Office. Their business
was to visit those of their own Sex, whom Poverty, Sickness, or any other
distress rendered proper Objects of the Churches care; to instruct the Female
Catechumens, Con. Apost. iii.
or rather to repeat to them the Instructions of the Catechist. They presented
them to Baptism; and upon that occasion assisted them in dressing and
undressing them, and for sometime after overlooked these new Converts, to break
and Discipline them into a Christian Behavior. In the Church, they kept the
doors on the Women's side, took care to see every one seated in her proper
place, and that all behaved themselves there with a Silence and Modesty
becoming the Place. The Deaconesses gave an account of every thing they did to
the Bishop, or by his Order to the Priests or Deacons. They served Principally
to inform the Church of the Necessaries of the other Women, and to do for them
by their directions, those things which they could not with decency perform in
their own Persons.

There was required a more than Ordinary share of Patience and Discretion in
the Prelates to Govern all these Women. To keep up these Deaconesses to that
Sobriety and Industry, which was so necessary for their Office, but difficult
for their Age; to keep them from growing either too easy and credulous in
their charge, or from being troublesome, maliciously curious, Choleric and
excessively Severe. Care also was to be taken lest under the Constable. Apo. iii.
c. v. 67.
pretense of Catechizing, they should set up themselves for Spiritual
Directresses and Judges; lest they should speak indiscreetly concerning the
Mysteries; lest they should misreport matters, and spread abroad Errors and
Falsities; lest they should prove great Talkers, and giddy Ramblers and
busey-bodies. There was required also a wonderful gentleness of Spirit, to bear
with the Infirmities of the Chrysostom. iii. de Sacerd.
other Women and Widows, besides Deaconesses. and to cure them of their
weaknesses, as Sadness, Emulation, Envy, Evil-speaking, Exceptiousness, and
Murmuring, even against their Pastors themselves; in a Word, all those ill
Dispositions usually attending their Sex and Age; especially when it is attended
with Poverty, Sickness, or any other such like uneasy pressure.

THE Church took care of all her XXII. Their care of the Poor.
Poor, of what Age or Sex so ever; but they did not count those Poor that were
able to work for their living; because they were in a Condition of not being
burdensome to any, and in a Capacity of assisting the other Poor: Nor did they
think it sufficient for a Christian to labor just enough for his own
Subsistence, but that he ought also to contribute toward v. Basil. Reg. fus.
inter al. xlii, etc.
the maintaining of those who could do nothing for themselves: Besides, the
Civil Law had made Provision against lusty Beggars and Vagrants. For as slavery
L. vii. Cod. de Mend valid. l. xi.
was as yet in use; if they were free, they were forced to serve the Public,
and labor in tilling the Earth as Slaves to the Colonatu perpetuo fulciatur.
State, or if they were Slaves before, any one that would, might seize them. It
was the same case with exposed Children or Foundlings. They belonged to any one
that would take them and be at the Argument: l. iii. Cod. de inf. expos.
Charge of bringing them up; so that there were scarce any other Beggars but
old Slaves, whose Masters were Inhuman enough to cast them off, when they were
past their Labor; or those that were Blind, Maimed, or otherwise disabled.

And these the Christians took into their Peristeph. 2.
Care. Prudentius has given us a draught of them in the Description he makes
of those which St. Laurence presented to the Prefect of Rome as the Treasures
of the Church. They took care of Children also: as in the first place, the
Orphans of Christian Parents, and especially the Martyrs; Constable. Apost. iv. c.
i, ii.
next they took into their keeping, Children exposed, and all others they could
get into their Hands, to breed them up in the true Religion: For in all this
care they took of the Poor, their principal regard was to their Spiritual
Concerns, and to their Temporal Welfare only in order to their Spiritual.
Therefore in their Charity, they always preferred Christians before Infidels;
and among Christians, those that were most remarkable for Virtue were taken
care of first; but as for the incorrigible, they left them to shift for
themselves. They would not so much as receive Alms indifferently from any one
that offered it: They would not accept of it from Persons Excommunicated, or
from Public and Notorious Sinners; as Usurers and Adulterers. They chose
rather Constable. Apost. iv. c. v, vi, vii. ix.
to expose their Poor to the want of Necessaries; or more properly speaking, to
trust divine Providence with them, which could otherwise provide for them.

Every Church raised a good Fund for v. Bar. an. 44. n. lxviii. etc. Tertull.
Apol. c. xxxix.
the subsisting of its Poor, entertaining Strangers, Burying of the Dead, and
other such like common Expenses, as the providing for its Clerks, the Luminary,
the sacred Vessels, and all the rest. The Church of Rome, under the Pope St.
Cornelius, Eusebius. lib. vi. c. xliii.
An. 250. maintained one hundred and fifty four Clerks, and more then fifteen
hundred Poor; and besides that, from its first Foundation during all the time
of the Persecutions, it always took care to send large Supplies to the Poor
Churches of the Provinces, and to the Epist. Dion Corinth. ap Eusebius. iv. c.
xxiii.
Confessors condemned to the Mines: The common Goods of the Church for the
three first Ages, consisted in few things else but Movables, in Provisions, v
Acta ColonCirtens. an. xxx.
Clothes and ready Money; all which arose out of the Offerings made by the
Faithful Weekly or Monthly, or as every one was pleased to make of himself: For
Tertull. Apol. c. 39.
in these Offerings there was nothing fixed or Constrained. As for Lands, the
Persecution made both the purchase and the keeping of them any long time
Impracticable.

And these were the Treasures of the Church the Heathens were so eager to get
into their own Hands, and which often proved one principal cause of the
Persecutions; as appears by the example Prudent. peri. Steph. Hymn ii.
of St. Laurence: It belonged to the Deacons to take care of all these things.
It was their business to receive all that was offered for the common uses of
the Church, v. Bar. an. xxxiv. n. 227.
to see it carefully laid up, and safely kept, and to distribute it according
to the direction of the Bishop, who ordered the disposal of it according to the
account he received from them of the particular occasions of those that wanted
Relief: They were to inform themselves of these Particulars, and report them to
the Bishop; and to keep exact Lists both of the Clerks the Virgins, the Widows,
and all the other Poor, whose dependence was on the Church; to enquire into all
Persons when Constable. Apost. iii. c. xix.
they first presented themselves to the Churches Charity, and to inspect the
Behavior of those already received into it; to observe whether thy were worthy
of that relief; to provide Lodgings for Strangers, and to consider by whom and
how those Expenses should be defraied. Upon all occasions the Laics had either
to desire any thing of the Bishop, or to Communicate any thing to him, they
first Addressed themselves to the Deacons, for Constable. Apost. ii. c. 28.
they would not press and intrude upon the Bishop himself, both out of respect
to his Person, and for fear of being troublesome; So that the Deacons led a very
busy, Active Life. It was necessary for them to walk much about the Town; and
sometimes they were obliged to take longer Journies and Travail abroad; and for
that reason, they had neither Cloaks, nor any Constable. Apost. ii. c. lvii.
of the larger sort of Garments worn by the Priests; but only Tuniques and
Dalmaticks to be always more at liberty, for Action and Motion.

HOSPITALITY was commonly XXIII. Their Hospitality.
used even amongst the Heathens themselves. Among the Greeks and Romans, their
Inns and Publick-Houses of Entertainments were rarely frequented by Persons of
any Fashion or Quality. In every Town where their Concerns might lead Vide
Thomassin de Tesser. Hospital.
them, they took care to make themselves some particular Friend; in whose
Family they might be entertained during their Abode in that Place; repaying
their Friend who entertained them the like Kindness at their own Houses, if his
occasions ever brought him that way. This usage grew to Prescription in
Families. It was the principal cement of Friendship and Correspondence between
the Cities of Greece and Italy; and afterward spread over the whole Roman
Empire. Nay so sacred was this Privilege of Entertainment, that they made it a
part of their Religion. Jupiter, said they, Presided over the Affair; both the
Persons entertained, and the Table at which they Eat were counted Sacred.

It Is no wonder then that the Christians should be so forward in Exercising
Hospitality, who lookd upon themselves as Friends and Brothers to one another;
and who knew that Jesus Christ had recommended Hospitality, as one of the Mat.
xxv. 35.
most Meritorious Performances. If a Sranger discovered to them that he made
Profession of the Orthodox Faith, and lived in the Communion of the Church,
they received him with open Arms. He that should have shut his Doors against
such an One, would have been thought to have shut out Jesus Christ himself. But
first they Expected that he should make himself fully known. To that purpose
those that Travailed, took with them Letters from their Bishop: And V. Baron
An. 142. n. 7. V. Prior. de Lit. Canon.
these Letters had certain Marks, known only to Christians among themselves.
These Letters gave an account of the Quality and Condition of the Bearer;
whether he was a Catholic; whether after having been an Heretic or
Excommunicate he was again Reconciled; whether a Catechumen or a Penitent;
whether in Holy Orders, and in what Degree of Orders: For the Clergy never
Travailed without Dimissory Letters from their Bishops. They had also their
Recommendatory Letters to Distinguish Persons of Merit; as Confessors, or
Doctors, or those who stood in need of any particular Assistance.

The first Act of Hospitality was to wash the Feet of their Guests. Instances
of which we meet with often in Scripture. And this was but a necessary Manners
of the Israelites. in English. Page 77. 1 Timothy v. 10.
Refreshment, considering what sort of Shoes they anciently Wore. And therefore
St. Paul joins the Lodging of Strangers and the washing of their Feet together.
If the Guest was in full Communion with the Church, they joined in Prayer, and
gave him all the respect of the House: As to Pray before them, to sit uppermost
at Table, to Instruct the Family. They counted themselves Happy in having his
Company, and looked upon their Meat as in some sort Sanctified by his taking
part with them. The Clergy were every where Honored proportionably to the
Station they held in the Church. If a Bishop Traveled, he was in all places
where he passed, invited to perform the Office, and to Preach among Constable. Ap.
ii. c. 58.
them; showing thereby the Unity of the Priesthood and of the Church. There
have been some Saints to whom their Hospitality in entertaining the Clergy or
such others as came to preach the Gospel, proved the occasion of their
Martyrdom; as Martyr. xxii. Jun. id. 11. December.
the Famous St. Alban in England and St. Gentian at Amiens.

The Christians were Hospitable even toward the Infidels themselves. Thus they
Executed with a great Forwardness of Affection, the orders of their Prince,
obliging them to Lodge his Soldiers, Officers, or others Travailing upon the
Service of the State, and to furnish them Vie de St. Pacomre. c. iv.
with Provisions. St. Pacomus having Listed himself very Young into the Roman
Army, he and the Party to which he belonged were Embarked on Ship board, and
Landed at a certain little City: were he was amazed to see with what Civilities
the Inhabitants received them; Treating them not like Soldiers, but as if they
had been their Old Friends and Acquaintance. And upon inquiry who they were, he
was told they were a People of a particular Religion, called Christians. From
that time he informed himself of their Doctrine; and this was the Occasion of
his Conversion.

THE Christians took great care to visit XXIV. Their Care of the Sick and
Burial of the Dead. Mat. xxv. 36. Dionys. Alex. ap. Eusebius. 7. Hist. c. 22.
the Sick, an Office of Charity, so much Recommended in the Gospel. The City of
Alexandria being afflicted with a great Mortality under the Emperor Valerian,
The Christians readily took that opportunity of showing their Charity even
toward their Persecutors. They so freely offered themselves to assist the Sick
under their Extremities; that many both of the Clergy and Laics Dyed
themselves of the common Distemper, and were honored as Martyrs. The Priests
visited such Christians as were Sick to Comfort them, to Pray by them, and
Administer to them the Sacraments. In such Cases the Viaticum was given only
under the Species of Bread, and in case of Necessity might be carried to them
by a Laick, as appears by the History of Old Serapion. Besides the unction of
the Consecrated Eusebius. vi. Hist. xliv. Jam. 5. 14.
Oil, administered by the authority of St. James, Sick Persons were often
recovered by the Application of another Oil, called the Oleum Benedictum or
Blessed Oil, which was Indifferently applied either to the Faithful or
Infidels, either by V. Baron. an. lxiii. n. 16.
Priests or Laics, according as they had received the gift of Miracles; some
times they made use of the Oil of the Lamps for this purpose, which were kept
Burning before the Tombs of the Martyrs.

The Heathen having no hopes after this Life ended, looked upon Death either
purely as an Evil which deprived them of the Enjoyments of this World, or as
Adeone me delirare censes, ut ista credam? Cic. Tus. Quest. l. i. n. vi. Nec
Pueri credunt. Juven.
an Aunihilation that Delivere them from all the Sufferings of it. There were
scarce any among them that gave any Credit to the Fabulous Tales of the Poets
concerning the Punishments and Rewards of another Life. So that as for Dying
Persons their Business with them was not to Instruct or Exhort, but to Divert
them; and as for themselves, their only care was to prolong as far as was
possible the Pleasures of Life. The only Rule they had to go by was, as St.
Paul after the Prophet Isaia Expresses it, Let Is. xxii. 13. 1 Cor. xv. 31.
us Eat and Drink for to Morrow we Dye. And this is the Point in which Horace
Terminates all his Morals. And the Death of Petronius under Nero is one of
Tacit. Annal. xvi.
the fullest Instances I have met with of these Principles reduced into
Practice. Those that were more Grave and Serious endeavored to Support
themselves by the Maxims of Philosophy, seeking thereby to Banish out of their
Minds the Terrors of Death, and to learn the Art of being willing to Dye.

The Christians proceeding upon other Principles, looked upon Death only as an
Entrance upon Eternity. So that leading good Lives, as most of them did, they
saw cause rather to wish for Death than to Dread it; and the present loss of
their Friends or Relations, was the less afflicting, for the hopes of their
Happiness; and the expectation of seeing them in Heaven, made their Satisfacton
excel their Grief. They looked upon Death to be only in the Language of the
Scripture, a 1. King. ii. 10. 11. xliii. 14. 20, etc.
Sleep; and thence comes the Name which they gave their Places of Buryal, a
Cemitery, which in Greek signifies a Dormitory. In farther Testimony of their
Belief of the Resurrection of the Flesh, they took great care about the
Sepulchers of the Dead; and according to their several Abilities, were at great
Expenses upon them. They did not burn the Bodies of their Dead as the Greeks
and Romans; and as little did they approve of the Curiosity of the Egyptians,
who Embalmed the Bodies of their Dead, and kept them by them in their Houses
lying upon Beds exposed to open View. St. Antony Vigorously Vie S. Ant. c. xxxi.
opposed this Custom which continued in use to his time.

The Christians buried their Dead after V. Baron. an. xxxiv. n. 310. etc.
the manner of the Jews. They first washed, then Embalmed them; Employing
(says Tertullian) more Perfumes and Aromatic Gums in this use, than the Apol
c. xlii.
Heathens did in their Sacrifices. They Wrapped them up in fine Linen, or
Silk, and some times put them on rich Habits. They laid them forth for the
space of three Days; during which time they constantly attended the Dead Body,
and passed those Days in Watching and Praying by it. Then they carried it to
the Grave, accompanying the Corpse with Torches Constable. Apos. vi. c. ult. viii.
c. xli. 42. etc. Prud. Him. in Exeq.
and Flambeaus, with singing of Psalms and Hymns to the Praise of God, and in
Testimony of their Hope of the Resurrection. They made Prayers also on their
behalf; offered the Sacrifice, and made their Agape or Love-Feast for the Poor,
distributing likewise other Alms Tertul. de. Cor Mil. c. iii. Orig. in Job.
Hem. iii. Cypr. ep. lxvi.
among them. At the end of the Year they made a fresh Commemoration for them,
and so from Year to Year, besides the standing Commemoration for the dead
always joined with the Sacrifice.

The Church had Officers appointed on purpose for the Burying of their Dead,
Fossores. laborantes. vid. Bar. an. xiv. n. 288.
who were called Grave-makers or Laborers, and who are sometimes reckoned
among the Clergy. The Priests and Bishops themselves looked upon the Employment
as an Honor; and St. Eutychian the Pope, who was himself a Martyr. vjii. Dec.
Martyr, is reported to have Interred with his own Hands the Bodies of three
hundred and forty two Martyrs. There were often together with the Body put into
the Sepulcher several other things, either as marks of honor to the deceased,
or to preserve his Memory; as the Badges of his Dignity, the Instruments of his
Martyrdom, Vials or Spunges filled with his Blood, the Acts of his Martyrdom,
an Epitaph on him, or at least his Name, Medals, Leaves of Laurel or of some
other Ever-green, some Crosses and the Gospel. They used to lay the Body on its
Back, the Face turned to the Fast. The Heathens, to preserve the Memory V. Tim
isa. Disc. p. ii. live. iii. c. xiii. xiv.
of their Dead, Built stately Sepulchers over them; either by the sides of the
great Roads, or in the open Fields. The Christans on the contrary, removed
their Dead out of Sight, either after the common way of Interment, or laying
them in Vaults under Ground; such as were the Tombs or Catacombs near Rome.

These Catacombs were places under Ground, cut out of Quarries of soft and
brittle Stone, or hollowed out of the Beds of Sand; thus contrived by the
Christians for their Burying Places: There are winding Stairs leading down to
them, and long Walks or Streets which have on each side of them, cut into the
Earth two or three rows of deep Nitches, in which the Bodies were placed at
first; for now the greatest part of them are taken away. At certain distances
from each other, are spacious Chambers, vaulted over and Solid as the rest,
having also Nitches cut in them like those of the Walks. The greatest part of
these Chambers are painted with diverse Histories of the old and new Testament;
as their Churches also were wont to be. And in some of these Caemiteries, there
are Subterranean Churches: In many of them there have been found Marble
Coffins, adorned with Figures of Bass Relief, representing the same Histories
as the Paintings do. These were the Sepulchers of the most considerable
Persons; every one of these Caemiteries is like a City under Ground, and some
of them two or three Stories deep: In them the Christians found a place of
retreat during the Persecutions; there they kept the Relics of the Martyrs;
there they met and Celebrated the holy Offices; nay, and there some of them
constantly resided, as is written of many of the Popes. The Book called Roma
Subterranea, is a description of these ancient Caemiteries: They remained the
greatest part of them, for a long time unknown; the entrance into them having
been stopped up; and 'twas but about the end of the last Century that they were
discovered. These Caemiteries Baron. ad Martyr. iii. Jan. xxiii. Jun. and iii.
Sep. Arena. Sand.
are sometimes called the Councils of the Martyrs; their Bodies being there
Assembled together; or Arenarea from the Sandy Soil where they were generally
placed. In Africa they were also called Areae.

They had of old a Religious ambition Thomass. Disc. p. i. live. i. c. lv. n.
ii. etc. Constable. Apost. vi. c. ult.
of being buried near to the Bodies of the Martyrs; and this is that which at
last brought so many Graves and Tombs into the Churches: For it was of a long
time observed not to bury the Dead but without the Walls of Cities. The
Veneration they had for Relics, and their distinct Belief of the
Resurrection, wore out that Aversion among the Christians which the ancients,
even the Israelites themselves had for dead Bodies and Graves.

TO finish the Character of these first XXV. Their Bishops, Priests, and Clerks.
Times, I must necessarily add a Word or two concerning the Pastors and
Ministers of the Church. Origin making the Comparison before mentioned of the
profane Contr. Cells. iii. p. 130.
Ecclesias with the Christian Churches, openly Avers it as a thing undeniable,
That those who preside over the Christian Churches, had in reality that
Eminency of worth and Virtue above others, which the Magistrates of Cities had
only in Name and show; and this he speaks in his Book against Celsus, where he
had ridiculously exposed himself to the Heathens had not the thing been
manifestly So. It Is indeed plain Matter of Fact: The one and thirty Popes who
filled up the three first Ages, were all but two of them Martyrs; and during
the six Ages following to the ninth Century, there are not above three or four
of them whom the Church has not acknowledged for Saints. Most of the Bishops
mentioned in History for the three first Ages, stand upon Record for singular
Examples of Virtue and Piety; so that the Emperor Alexander Severus Lamprid in
Alex.
proposes the Christians Method of choosing their Clergy as an Example of the
Care which ought to be taken of enquiring into the Manners and Qualifications
of all Persons to be admitted into public Employments. They chose therefore
Tertul. Ap. c xxxix. v. Orig. Contr. Cells. lib. 8. in fi. Cypr. Ep. 33, 34, 35.
to put into the sacred Functions those Christians whose Sanctity was more
Eminently remarkable, and whose Virtue was the most approved: This honor was
ordinarily the recompense of such Confessors whose Faith had been sufficiently
proved by Torments; such were Aurelius and Celerinus, whom St. Cyprian made
Readers; the last of whom, had his Body deeply marked with many Scarrs, for the
Testimony of his Constancy; besides that, his Grandmother and his two Unckles
were glorious Martyrs. Such was Numidicus the Priest, who exhorted and
persuaded many others to suffer Martyrdom, and his own Wise among the rest, was
himself led with them to the place of Execution, and there left for Dead. Cypr.
Ep. xxxiii.


The Bishop often chose his Clerks at the instance of the People, at least not
without their Knowledge, and always with the advice of his Clergy. But whether
the Persons themselves to be Ordained were desirous of it or not; that they
little regarded. They did not only not wait till they should offer themselves
to Ordination; but many times, partly by force, partly by Artifice, constrained
them to take holy Orders upon them, even against their own Will; so that some
Persons so ordained, could never prevail with themselves to exercise their
Functions. Cypr. ep. 68.
The Bishop was chosen in the presence of the People by the Bishops of the
Province, Assembled together in the vacant Con. Ap. viii. ^. 4, etc.
Church, at least to the number of two or three of them; for it was not easy in
those times to hold great Synods, unless in the Intervals of the Persecution;
and therefore sometimes the Sees of the ancient Greg. Tur. x. hist. c. 31.
Churches have continued vacant a long time together.

The Ordinations were always preceeded Act. xiii. 2, 3. v. Bar. an. xliv. n. 74.
by a Fast, and accompanied with Prayers: These Prayers were generally
continued from the Saturday-Eve to the Sunday following; all that Night they
passed in Watching and Praying, and the next Day came on the Ordination; the
principal Ceremony whereof has always been the Imposition of Hands. The
Ordination was followed by the Sacrifice.

The Bishop ordained no more Priests, Deacons, or other Clerks, then just so
many as were necessary for the Service of his Church; that is to say, for all
his Diocese. This number was not great, since in the time of the Pope St.
Cornelius, Eusebius. vi. Hist. c. 43.
Anno Christi 250, the Church of Rome had but forty six Priests, and but one
hundred fity four Clergy of all sorts; though the People belonging to it were
vastly numerous. The Bishops were Lib. Pontifical.
much more numerous in Proportion; every City that had any considerable number
of Christians in it, had also its Bishop. Hence it is, that in the Lives of the
first Popes, we find more Bishops ordained by them than Priests: They ordained
Priests only for their own Diocese, but made Bishops for the greatest part of
Italy. The Clergy depended entirely upon the Bishop, living under his direction
in the nature of Disciples; and 'twas his business to instruct and Discipline
them; to advance them from one Degree to another, and allot to every one their
different Functions, according to the different Talents he found in them. The
young Martyrs that suffered with St. Babylas, Martyr. xxiv. Jan. iii. Feb. xxx.
Apr. de S. Laurent. xi. May. de S. Valente.
St. Blaesus, and with some other Saints, were manifestly some of those which
were breeding up for holy Orders. The Clergy ordained by one Bishop, could not
without his permission quit him to go serve under another; and one Bishops so
receiving another Bishops Clergy, would have been condemned as a kind of Can.
Apost. xiv.
Theft.

Yet this Authority of the Bishops over their Clergy was no Arbritrary and
Despotick 1 Pet. v. 3.
Power, but a Government mixed with Love. The Ecclesiastics shared some part
of the Authority with the Bishop, since he did nothing of Importance without
their Advice: The Priests especially were consulted with, who made as it were
the Church's Senate. The Priests were so Venerable and the Bishops so Humble,
that to common appearance there was but little difference between them. Nay the
Clergy had some kind of Authority over the Bishop himself, being the continual
Inspectors both of his Life and Doctrine. They attended on Constable. Apos. ii. c.
28.
him in all his Public Functions as Officers do on the Magistrate, or rather
as Disciples on their Master. For the Clerks were to the Bishops as the
Apostles to Jesus Christ, his constant Attendants. If therefore any Bishop
should have presumed either to Teach or Practice any thing contrary to
Apostolical Tradition; the more elderly of the Priests and Deacons would
presently have Remonstrated against it. They would first in a Friendly manner
have Advertised him of his Error; if that took no effect, they would have made
their complaints against him to the other Bishops, or at last have accused him
before a Council.

The greatest part of the Clergy led the Ascetique Life, feeding only on Pulse
or dry Dyets; Fasting often, and practicing other such like Austerities as far
as the great Labors of their Callings would admit of. Above all Continence was
in a more especial manner required of Bishops, Priests, and Deacons. Not but
that Married Persons were often advanced to these Orders; For how could they
have found amonst the Jews and Heathens that were Daily Converted to
Christianity any considerable number of Persons that had preserved an absolute
Continence to their advanced Years. It was much to find those that had confined
1 Timothy iii. 2.
themselves only to one Wife, in that liberty which the Jews and other Eastern
People took, of having many Wives at once, and the custom of Divorce
Universally admitted, which put them often upon changing their Wives. But when
a Married Person was made a Bishop, he began from that time forward to look
upon his Wife only as his Sister: And to the same Rule has the Ep. Dccret.
Siricij ad Himer. c. vii. Can. Apos. vi.
Latin Church all ways kept her Priests and Deacons. Yet they were still
obliged to provide for their Wives, and not to cast them off as Strangers. And
the Women out of Regard to the Dignity of their Husbands, were sometimes called
Presbyterae.
by the Name of Priestesses. In Greece and the East, this strict Rule of
Continence Episcopae.
came in Course of time to be less and less regarded. But in no place
whatsoever Can. Neocae^. i.
did the Catholic Church ever allow a Priest to Marry after his Ordination: If
he did, he was for his Incontinence Degraded of his Order, and reduced to the
State of a simple Laick. As for the Inferior Clerks, as Readers and
Doorkeepers, they were commonly Married Persons, and Cohabited with their
Wives. So that a great part of them passed their whole Lives in these lower
Orders, at least they continued in them for many Years, till they either lost
their Wives, or else by mutual Consent, they agreed to Separate from each
other, in order to the leading a more perfect Life: Yet was Marriage always
spoken of by Christians as an Honorable State: And that the rather, because
there were some Heretics who professed an Abhorrence of it, and others who
Absolutely condemned all second Marriages as Unlawful.

All the Clergy even to the Bishops themselves, Lived after a Poor, at least a
Plain and Ordinary manner; having no thing as to outward appearance to
Distinguish them from the common People. In the Persecutions, as they were the
Persons, the most sought after, they had no mind to make themselves known by
their Habit or any other mark of their Profession. If in any thing they
Differed from the common People, it was in appearing more like the Philosophers.
Many of them had parted with all their Temporal Possessions to the Poor, before
their being advanced to Holy Orders; and many of them again after their
Ordination still continued, like St. Paul, to Live by the Labor of their
Hands. Not that they were obliged so to do. The Church always took care of her
Clergy, supplying them with all Necessaries out S. Cypr. Ep. xxxiv.
of her common Treasure. And accordingly, every Clerk received either Weekly or
Monthly, a certain Distribution, either in Money or of Provisions in Specie,
answerable to the Exigencies of their Condition, or the Quality of their
Office. For the Clerks of an higher Station, and consequently charged with
greater Labors, received (according to the precept of St. Paul) more liberal
Allowances. 1 Timothy v. 17.
Some there were also that kept their own temporal Estate, together with their
Spiritual Dignity. St. Cyprian at the Pont. Diac. Hortos.
time of his Martyrdom, had still left him a little Country-Farm, the only
Reserve he made to himself out of the vast Possessions he had quitted.

The Pastors and Clerks rendered themselves no less amiable by their Charity and
their Application to the Services of Religion, than they were Venerable for
other Excellencies. The Bishop dispensed not with himself from performing the
Duties of his Place in Person; presiding always at the public Prayers;
Expounding the Holy Scriptures, and Offering the Sacrifice on all Sundays and
Stationary Days. He and his Priests found themselves always fully Employed, and
never wanted Work; to Instruct the Catechumens, Comfort the Sick, Exhort the
Penitents, and Reconcile such as were at Variance: For to them it belonged to
make up all Differences. They would Constable. Apost. ii. c. xlv. 46, etc. 1 Cor.
vi.
by no means allow what St. Paul had expressly Forbidden, that Christians should
bring their Causes before the Heathen Courts; and they that would not Submit V.
Patres apud Baron an. lvii. n. 37. 38, etc. Tertul. Apol. c. xxxix.
to the Arbitration of the Bishops were Excommunicated for Impenitent and
Incorrigible. But such Disputes could not often happen among Christians so
Disinteressed, so Humble, and Patient as they were. Monday was ordinarily the
Day which the Bishop took to determine Differences; so that if the Parties
should not readily Acquiesse in the Sentence, they might yet have time before
them to Moderate matters and bring them to a Right understanding before the
Sunday following; when they were all to meet again in the Church, and Pray and
Communicate together. On the Day of Hearing, the Bishop seated in his Chair,
the Priests sitting down by him, and the Deacons attending; the Parties
Presented themselves before him, respectfully standing on their Legs, in the
midst of the place of Audience. After having heard the Cause, he first did all
that was possible to Reconcile them each other, and to persuade them to make up
the Difference in a Friendly manner between themselves before he pronounced
Sentence. At the same time also they heard Complaints and received Informations
against Persons accused of not leading their Lives like Christians.

The Bishop was fully entrusted with Constable. Apost. ii. c. xxiv. 25.
the Churches Treasure, all which lay absolutely at his Disposal. Nor were they
under the least Apprehension of its being Misapplyed. Had they had the least
suspicion of his Integrity and Uprightness, they would never have committed to
his Care the Government of Souls, a concern of Infinitely greater Moment than
Constable. Apost. xli.
all Earthly Treasure. It Was to him therefore that all who stood in need of
Relief, were to apply themselves. He was the Father of the Poor and the Refuge
for all in Misery and Distress.

After all this what Wonder is it that their Prelates should be so beloved and
Respected by the Faithful as they were? It Is observed of St. Polycarp that he
had not for many Years together pulled off his own Shoes; the Faithful that
were Epist. Eccles. Smyrn.
near him always offering themselves and Ambitiously Courting the Honor of
that humble Office. So that he had not of a long time before done it with his
own Hands, till at his Martyrdom, as he undrest himself and prepared for the
Stake. Acta. S. S. Hippolyti, etc. Apud. Baron. an. 259. n. viii. Acta. S. Sus.
an. 294. n. viii. 10. 12.
Their usual way of Approaching their Priest was to Prostrate themselves before
them; Kiss their Feet, and in that Supplicating Posture crave their Blessing:
And the first Words the Priest gave them were some short Prayers like the
Collects of the Mass or Office. Happy was the Man that could have but so much as
a Deacon lodging in his House, or eating at his Table. They never entered upon
any Important Affair, with out taking Ignat. Passim in Epist.
the advice of the Pastor, who was the sole Director of his whole Flock. They
looked upon him as a Man of God, and as the Vicegerent of Jesus Christ. So that
they were not without some fears, Constable. Apost. viii. c. i.
upon the account of their Priests and Bishops, least they should not be Able
to withstand the great Temptation they lay under, of the Pride and contempt of
others. They were apprehensive of the same Miscarriage in those that had the
gift of Prophecy, or working Miracles; for these gifts were as yet common in
the Church. 'Twas the filial Love and Respect, which their Flock bare to them
that made their Pastors so well obeyed. Chrysostom. Sacerd. lib. ii.
For they had no other way of Commanding their Obedience but the methods of
Persuasion, or Spiritual Penalties. They could use no other Constraint upon
them then to over awe their Consciences; and they who were Impious enough to
despise their Censures, were in no danger of any Temporal Corrections.

THUS upon the matter the Christians XXVI. The Discretion, and Patience of the
Christians.
Lived during the times of Paganism and Persecution. This condition obliged
them for the most part to great Circumspection; to be always waiting upon God,
and watching over themselves. For when once the Persecution began, a Man had
nothing else to expect but to be the next hour Impeached, even by his own Wife,
or by his nearest Relation; who either out of Covetousness to get his Estate,
or out of a bigoted Zeal for their Idolatries, might be prompted to Betray
them. This Martyr. xxx. Jul de S. Julitea.
was a ready way for Debtors to get rid of their Creditors; or Slaves, of their
Masters. If a Pagan fell in Love with the Daughter of a Christian, he either
put her upon the sad necessity of compliance or of exposing her self to
Torment. St. Justin gives us an Instance of a Wife that was informed against,
Just. i. Apol. init.
by her own Husband, only because she would no longer be a party to his
Wickedness; and of another who was put to Death Himself for daring to ask the
Judge why he Sentenced another Man. (who was the Person had Converted that
Woman) Barely upon the name of a Christian, without any other Accusation,
so much as pretended against him. Though the Church had its short Intervals of
Peace, yet they were always in expectation of the War breaking out again. Nor
was the Peace ever so entire; but that in the most Quiet times, many Christians
suffered either by Popular Commotions or other means. For we find a great
number of Martyrs even under the Emperors who would not be engaged in
Persecuting the Church. St. Melito complains to the Emperor Antonine, Ap.
Eusebius. 4. Hist. xxvi.
that the Christians were without control; Robbed and Plundered at Noonday,
under pretense of an Order from the Emperor when he knew nothing of the matter.
Or if they did enjoy some little Respite from Persecution, and open Violence,
yet they still were exposed to the utmost contempt and Hatred. Every one had
the liberty of Speaking against the Christians, whatever he pleased, True or
False; of Discoursing and Writing against them, of Ridiculing and exposing them
and their Religion, upon the open Theater. All this was not only Connived at,
but Authorized and Encouraged. And the passages of Celsus quoted by Origin, are
sufficient proofs, with what Scorn they were Treated. They could not avoid
seeing the profane Ceremonies of the Pagans every Day, meeting where ever they
went, with their Infamous Statues and public Places of Debauchery; having
their Ears filled with their Lewd and Impious Discourses. The Christians of
these times must of necessity have had a more then ordinary Strength, and
firmness of Mind, in the Midst of so many Difficulties and Temptations to keep
up their Faith and Practice so lively and Unexceptionable.

It required also agreat Discretion to Moderate themselves, and to keep within
due Bounds, that liberty of the Children of God, and that Boldness of Spirit 1
Pet. ii. 16.
which arises from the Testimony of a good Conscience. They knew how to
Contemn, Contempt unjustly cast upon them, to bear the most Injurious Calumnies
without quarreling; those that aspersed them without either hatred or
Complaint. They were very cautious of doing any thing that might draw
Persecution upon them. They Romans xii. 18. 1 Pet. ii. 15.
Studied as far as was possible, and as much as in them lay, to Live Peaceably
with all Men, and by well doing to put to Silence the Ignorance of Foolish Men.
To this End they found it necessary to refrain from all things, (the
Indispensable Duties of their Religion Excepted) which might give occasion of
Offense to the Heathens, or Provoke their Displeasure; and on the contrary, to
study all Honest means of obliging them. The Necessary Practices of a Christian
Life, did sufficiently Distinguish them from the rest of the World, without
their Affecting any Superfluous Singularities. So that as to their outward Form
of Living, in all things not contrary to Piety and good manners, they conformed
themselves to the Customs and Manners of the Romans or Greeks, or the People of
the other Countries, where they Lived. They never forced themselves upon
Disputing or Preaching to those whom they found not Disposed to Regard them.
They contented themselves with Praying for them, and strove to Edifye them by
the Example of their Patience Epist. ad Romans
and good Works; never ceasing to return Good for Evil. St. Ignatius Speaking
of the Soldiers who were his Keepers, I am, says he, Tied to ten Leopards, who
are the Worse for being obliged. But their Malice is my Instruction. St.
Polycarp Epist. Eccles. Smyrn.
gave a friendly Welcome to those who came to Apprehend him; made them Sup and
Lodge with him, and entertained them with all manner of Civility and Respect.
St. Cyprian ordered twenty pieces of Gold to be given to the Executioner,
Martyr. vii. Sept. de. S. Eupsychio.
that was to Strike off his Head. Another Ancient Martyr, having been accused
of being a Christian, and thereupon cast into Prison, upon his Discharge, Sold
all that he had, and gave it part to the Poor, and part to his Enemies, as if
they had been his Benefactors. Another being Condemned to lose his Head,
desired xxv. ^ul. de S. Paulo.
some little time to Pray; which was granted, and he Prayed to God for his
Friends and Neighbors; for the Jews, for the Gentiles, for all the Spectators;
and in the last place, for the Judge who had Condemned him, and the Executioner
who was to give the Stroke.

But more remarkable was their Patience toward their Princes, Magistrates, and
the secular Authority: They were never heard complaning against the Government,
nor ever spoke contemptuously of the Civil Power. They gave them all the honor
and obedience they could on this side Idolatry; they paid their Tributes not
only without resisting, but without repining; and rather then defraud them of
their Rights, if they had not otherwise to answer; they made it up out of the
labor of their Hands.

So far were they from raising Sedition Tertul. Apol. c. xxxv, xxxvi xxxvil.
or Rebellions, that in all the many Conspiracies which were formed against the
Emperors, one after another, for the space of three hundred years, no Christian
was ever found to have had an Hand in any of them; though the Emperors were never
so bad, and the Persecutors never so cruel. The Christians were the only
Persons who did not make it their business to get rid of Nero, Domitian,
Commodus, Caracalla and so many other Tyrants; Oppressed, and Harrassed as they
were with all sorts of injuries, and groaning under the most unheard of
Cruelties: Yet it never entered into their Thoughts to resist the Powers, or to
take up Arms in their own Defense, though they were numerous enough to have
made up a greater Body of Men, than any of the Nations could, that made War
against the Romans: Nay, more than that of so many Christian Soldiers, with
which the Roman Armies were filled; none ever made use of the Sword they had in
their Hands, but to Execute the Orders of their Prince or their Commanders; and
we read of entire Legions, (as that of St. Mauritius) that without the lest
resistance suffered themselves to be cut to pieces, rather than to fail of
doing their Duty either to God or Caesar.

Scarce could they persuade themselves so much as to open their Mouths in their
own Defense, and Publish some answers to those horrid Calumnies most wrongfully
laid to their Charge. For near the Orig. Cont. Cells. init.
space of an Age, they were content to suffer with silence, after the Example
of their Master, who answered nothing to his Accusers, but without resistance
submitted himself to the unrighteous Judge. v. 1 Pet. ii. 21.
They were content to be justified by their works, and let their Actions plead
their Cause. 'Twas not till the Emperor Adrian, that they began to Write some
Apologies; but those in so respectful a manner, so Solid and so Grave, as made
it v. Eusebius. iv. Hist. iii. and xxv.
plainly appear, that it was only Zeal for the Truth made them take Pen in Hand.

This invincible Patience at last surmounted all opposition, and forced the
Powers of this World to submit to the Power of the Gospel. Even under the
Persecutions, the number of Christians was grown Prodigiously great. We are
(says Tertullian,) but of Yesterday, and Apol. c. xxxvii.
yet the World is filled with us; your Cities, your Houses, your Garrisons,
your Villages, your Colonies, your very Camps, your Tribes, your Palaces, your
Senate, your Courts of Justice. And indeed there were Christians of all
Degrees, and some of the first Martyrol. 18. Apr. x. etc. 19 Ma. xix. Aug.
xiii. Sept. viii. Oct. Martyrol. Martii. xii xxvi. May. xvii. xix. Jun. xx Jul.
Quality. We see in the Martyrology, Senators, Prefects, Proconsuls, Tribunes,
Quaestors and even Consuls themselves; we find Christians in the Court, and
among the Domestics, and principal Officers of the Emperors, as under Nero,
Trajan, Alexander, Decius, Valerian, Diocletian. The Court of Diocletian served
also iii. Sept. v. Oct. xviii. Eusebius. vi. Hist. xxviii. Act. S. Sebast. and S.
Susan.
sometimes for a safe retreat to the most Zealous Confessors of Rome. The Pope
St. Gaius, and St. Gabinius, the Father of St. Susanna, were his own Nephews;
and St. Serena his Empress was a Martyr.

The People affected with these virtues of the Christians, and with the many
Miracles wrought among them, began at length to do them Justice, loudly
declaring that great was the God of the Christians, Acta S. Bonif, an. 305
Martyrol Ja. iii. Feb. xvi. xvii. xxvii. Mar. ix. xxvii. 30. May. 31. Jun. 30
Jul. 7. Aug. 21. Sept. 20 25. Oct. 10. 19. Nov. 26. Dec. 3.
and that the Christians were Innocent Persons. It sometimes happened that as
they were Tormenting the Martyrs, the common People themselves whom this sight
had drawn together, took part with the Christians on their own accord, and
Pelted the Magistrate with Stones off this Tribunal, and made him fly the
Court. The Clerks of the Court, the Goalers, the Soldiers, the Executioners,
were many times all on a sudden Converted; openly calling out that they were
Christians too, and offering themselves to the same Punishments. Even
Comaedians themselves, as they were in Derision Martyrol. 25. Aug. 15 Sept.
Baron. an. 303. n. 118
acting upon the Stage the sacred My steries, have been Converted on the spot,
and made Illustrious Martyrs: Hence proceeded the extreme violence of the last
Persecution. They saw the whole World turning Christian: And this last
Persecution also, as all the former had done, served only to spread it farther
and give it the deeper Rooting: So that all the World bare a favorable Aspect
toward Religion, when Constantine declared himself the Protector of it.

Part III.
I AM now come to the third part of my Work, where I am to represent the XXVII.
The Church out of Persecution.
Behavior of the Christians, when the Church came to be in a state of Peace
and Liberty. For three hundred years they had been longing and sighing after
these happy Days of serving God without any let or hindrance: But experience
as sad as it was, taught them that Persecution was more for the advantage of
Religion than Liberty: Not but that the same Manners before described,
continued yet a long time after. So that I have nothing to do here but to
observe those differences which the free exercise of Religion forthwith
produced.

Though they had always used great The Examination and Preparation for Baptism.
care in Examining such as demanded Baptism; yet there was now required a far
greater Circumspection, when there was no longer any danger to become a
Christian: For Worldly Interest and diverse other bad Motives might make Men
desirous of taking upon them that Name: Therefore every one that presented
himself v. Methodedos Pere. c. iii. ix.
to Baptism, was in the first place taken into strict Examination, and obliged
to give an account of the causes of his Conversion, of his Condition in the
World; whether he was a Slave or a Freeman; of his Behavior, and of his past
Life. They who lived in any unlawful Constable. Ap. viii. c. 32. S. Aug. xi. de
sermon. dom. in. mont.
Calling, or in a customary way of Sinning, were not admitted till they had
actually renounced that course of Life. Thus they rejected all common Women,
and those that made a Trade of Prostituting their Bodies; Actors upon the
Stage, Gladiators, Racers in the Circus, those whose Employment it was to Dance
or Sing in Public; in a Word, all retainers to the Theater; all who had any
part in, or were much addicted to the public Shows; all Jugglers, Enchanters
and Diviners of what sort soever; all dealers in Charms or Spells, used either
by way of Cure or Preservative; all that exercised any sort of Heathenish
Superstitions; none of these sort of People were received into the Church till
they had first quitted their evil Practices; nor were their bare words taken
for it, till they had given substantial Proofs of the sincerity of their
Conversion, and that for some considerable time.

When a Person was judged duly qualified The Catechumens.
to become a Christian, he was made a Catechumen; which was done by the
Imposition of Hands, either of the Bishop himself, or of some other Priest by
him appointed to that Office, who at the same time, signed him with the sign of
the Cross, and Prayed over him, That God would grant him the Grace to benefit
by the Instructions should be given him, and to behave himself so as to be
become fit to receive Holy Baptism. He continued two or three years in this
State of a Catechumen, which is a kind of Probationership: He was present at
the Public Sermons of the Church; to which even the Infidels were admitted.
But besides the public Preaching, there was an Order of Catechists, whose
proper business it was to inspect the Catechumens, and instruct them in the
first Rudiments of Faith, without entering into deeper Mysteries, which these
Novices were not yet judged able to bear. The time allowed for this institution
of them, was longer or shorter, according to the Proficiency of the Catechumen:
Nor did they regard only his understanding in the Doctrinals of Religion, but
marked whether he mended his Manners, and they let him continue in this State;
till they saw he was perfectly become a new Man. Hence it came to pass that
many deferred their Baptism till they were at the point of Death: For they
never gave it but upon Desire, though they often exhorted People to ask it. They
who desired Baptism, and were thought qualified at the beginning of Lent, gave
in their Names to be entered in the Roll of Competents or Illuminated; for these
Competents were distinguished from the other Tertul. de paenit. init. Hier.
advers. Jo. Hier. Photizomeni.
Catechumens: They fasted the forty Days as the rest of the Faithful; and then
they were more fully instructed, and the Creed was explained to them, and
particularly the Mysteries of the Trinity and the Incarnation. They were from
time to time brought to the Church, to be there publicly examined in the
presence of the Faithful, to have the Exorcisms made over them, and the Prayers
of the Church on their behalf: This is it they call the Scrutiny, which
continued to be observed v. God Sacram. edit. Romans 1680. ord. Romans Missa. Fer.
iv. post. Domin. iv. Quadrag and ibi. durand
for many Ages; even toward little Children; and some traces of it appear still
in the Office of the Church. At the end of Lent, they were taught the Lord's
Prayer and well informed of the Nature of the Sacraments they were then about
to receive; which were afterward to be explicated to them more at large. This
order of Instruction plainly appears in the Catechisms of St. Cyril of
Jerusalem, and in one of Fulgentius's Sermons. Fulg. Sermon 78.


After all these Preparations, they were at last solemnly Baptized; either on
Easter-Eve, to put them in mind of rising up with Christ to newness of Life: or
on the Eve of Pentecost, that they might then with the Apostles receive the
Gift of the Holy Ghost: For at the same time that they received Baptism, they
had Confirmation also. Baptism was regularly Administered only upon those two
Feasts; but in case of danger, they Baptized at any time. The new Baptized, of
what Age soever they were, were called by the name of Children. They wore
during the whole first Week the white Robe they had received at their Baptism,
in token of the Innocence wherein they were to walk all the Days of their Life:
Nor might Tertul. de cor. c. iii.
they during that time, wash themselves in any of the ordinary Baths. From that
time forward they were freely admitted to all the parts of the Church service.

Constantine having put an end to the Eus. x. Hist. c. iii.
Persecution, one might have seen (as Eusebius relates it) in all Parts of the
World Dedications of Churches, and Assemblies of Bishops. The dispersed
Christians now meet together again. The Churches were now in all places
frequented more than ever: The Psalmody, the Celebration of the Mysteries, and
all the Ceremonies of Religion were performed with greater Solemnity then ever:
So that this is the proper place to speak of their outward form of Worship. Let
us begin with the Description of the ancient Churches; according to the best
Account we can gather both out of the oldest Writings, and the oldest Buildings
that are left us.

THE Church was separated as much XXVIII The form of the Churches and their
ornaments.
as possibly they could, from all profane Buildings, and placed at a distance
from noise; surrouuded on every side with Courts, Gardens, or Buildings
belonging to the Church. At the first entrance, v. Eusebius. Hist. Eccle. x. c.
iv. de vita Constable. lib. iii. cap. 34, 35, etc. 50 lib. iv. c. 58. Propylaeum
Paulin. ep. xii and Natal. x. S. Greg. iv. Dialog. c. xiv.
you saw the Porch or outer Vestibulam, which led you into the Peristilium or
square Court, surrounded with covered Galleries standing upon Pillars; such as
the Cloisters of our Monasteries are at this Day: Under these Galleries stood
the Poor, that were permitted to Beg at the Door of the Church; and in the
middle of the Court were several Fountains for them to wash their Hands and
Faces at, before Prayers; in the room of these Fountains, succeeded afterward
the Holy Water Pots. At the farther end of this Court, was a double Porch; and
through it there was a passage by three Doors into the Hall or Basilique, which
was the Body of the Church. I call it Double, because there was one without,
and anothere within, which the Greeks called the Narthex. Near the Basilique on
the inside, were generally two Buildings; the Baptistery at the Entry; and at
the other end the Sacristry or Treasury, called also Cellae.
the Secretarium or Diaconium. Along the sides of the Church, were often placed
Exhedrae.
little Chambers or Cells, for the convenience of them that had a mind to
retire, and meditate or Pray by themselves: So that they were in effect, so
many little Chapels.

The Basilique or Church was Parted into three Divisions, proportionable to its
Largeness, by two rows of Pillars supporting the Galleries on each side, and
the Middle between these Galleries was the Nave, as we see it in all Old
Churches. Toward the East end was the Altar; and behind that, the Presbytery or
Sanctuary, where the Priests sat in time of Divine Service, with their Bishop
in the Middle of them, whose Chair was at the very end of the Basilique, and
terminated the prospect of them that came in at the principal Door. There was
before the Altar, a Partition enclosed within Balasters, which we may call the
Choir or Chancel; Cancelli.
and in the Middle of the Entrance into it, stood the Pulpit or Ambo for the
Reading the public lessons; which was a kind of Tribunal Seat, Erected on high
above the rest of the Congregation, and had a pair of By-Staires on each side.
Sometimes they made two of these Pulpits, Deser. S. Mar. May.
over against one another, with a little void Space between them, so as to
leave the Middle open, that the Altar might not be out of Sight. On the right
Hand of the Bishop and the left of the People stood the Desk for the Gospel;
and on the other side, that for the Epistle. Behind the Pulpit, up to the
Altar, was the place for the Singing Men; who were Clerks also, but Ordained
only to this Office.

The Altar was a rich Table of Gold or Silver, Ornamented with precious Stones.
It was at worst of Marble or Porphyry, for they thought they could never employ
matter good enough for the bearing of the Holy of Holies; and the Ceremonies
they used in the Consecration of Altars, sufficiently declare in what
Veneration they held them. The Holy Table was always kept uncovered, but at the
time of the Sacrifice. It stood upon four Feet, or little Pillars as rich in
proportion as the Table its self, and it was Placed, if possible, over the
Grave of some Martyr. For as they had been formerly accustomed to meet at their
Tombs, so now they built their Churches there, or else Translated their Bodies
to the Places where they built them: And thence it came to be a stated Rule,
never to Consecrate an Altar without putting Relics under it. And these Tombs
of the Saints they called Memoriae or Confessions. They were laid under Ground,
and there was a way Baron. in Martyr. 6. Jul.
down to them, opening before the Altar, which stood directly over them. There
was nothing standing inmediately upon the Altar it self, but it was surrounded
with four Pillars at the four corners of it, Supporting a kind of Tabernacle,
that covered the whole Compass of the Altar, and was called the Cupelo from its
resemling in figure a Cup revers't.

Behind the Altar (as I said before) was the place for the Priests. And here
the roof was built lower than the rest of the Church, and was called the
Concha, as being in the form of a Scallop-shell, or the Absis from the Arch,
with which the Front of it was Terminated. This end of the Church was also
called the Tribunal, because in the Heathen Palaces it was the place where the
Magistrate, with his Officers about him sat in Judicature. This part of the
Church was raised somewhat higher than the rest, so that the Bishop came down
some Ordo Romans
steps from thence to the Altar.

All this was set off with Magnificent Ornaments. The Cupelo, and the Pillars
that sustained it, were often all of Silver; some of them weighed three Anast.
in Silvest. and in Leone iii. etc. Id. in Steph. iv.
thousand Marks. Between these Pillars hung Curtains of the Richest Stuff,
drawn on all sides to keep the Altar from being seen. The Cupelo was adorned
with several Images and other pieces of Art wrought in Gold or Silver, and the
top of it was made in Resemblance of the Cross. There were hanging also over
the Altar, Gold or Silver Doves, to Conc. Constantin. an. 536. Act. v.
Represent the Holy Ghost: Here some times they laid up the Eucharist for the
Sick, and sometimes kept it in plain Boxes like our Pixes. Sometimes the whole
Absis was all overlaid with Silver, or at least faced with Marble, as was also
the Concha. The Pillars that Supported the Church were of Marble, with Capitals
of Brass guilt with Gold. It was Paved with Marble, and many times the inside
of the Walls was Rough cast with polished Stones.

They most affected in their Churches (especially in the following Ages) the
Mosaick-work, Opus Musivum.
which is a kind of inlaying with little pieces of Glass, painted with diverse
Colors; and thus they could make all sorts of Figures, that would never fade
or decay. Not but that their Churches had other sorts of Paintings besides
this. v. Roma Subterr. lib. iv cap. 6. 7. etc.
Their Walls were all covered with them: There were to be seen on them diverse
Histories of the old Testament, and more especially such as were Types of the
Mysteries of the New; As Noah's Ark, Abraham's Sacrifice, the passage thorough
the red Sea, Jonas cast into the Sea, Daniel among the Lions. Our Saviors
Picture was in several places of the Church, and the representation of some of
his Miracles, as the Multiplication of the Loaves, the Resurrection of Lazarus.
Eusebius assures us, Eusebius. vii. Hist. c. 18.
That from the very first times there were some who had the Pictures of St.
Peter, St. Paul, and our Savior himself drawn in Colors. The way of Honoring
Benefactors by preserving their Pictures, having been (as he observes) a
custom of a long standing in the World; besides this, every Church had in
particular, painted upon its Walls the History of the Martyr, whose Relics
were thereunder deposited; of which Prudentius gives Prud. Peristeph. ix. de S.
Cass. ibid xi. de S. Hippoli.
us two lively Representations in the Examples of St. Cassian and St.
Hyppolytus. These Paintings were designed chiefly for the use of the more
Ignorant; to whom they served instead of Books, as Pope Gregory the second
Argues on their behalf, Greg. ii. ep. i. in Conc. Nic. ii.
in his Epistle to the Emperor Leo. The Author of the opinion of the
Iconoclasts, Men and Women (says he) holding in their Arms their New Baptized
Children, point out to them those Painted Histories, show them to other young
People, or to the Gentile Strangers; and thus they Instruct and edify them, and
raise up their Thoughts and Hearts to God. The Doors of the Church were adorned
with Ivory, Silver or Gold, and were always furnished with Curtains. At the
Principal Gates were Hieron. ad Demetr. Paul. Natal. iii. and vi. Anast. in
Leon. iii. Baron. ad marty. xviii Nov.
placed some Relics: And that is the Reason why the faithful always expressed
some particular marks of respect upon their entering in at the Doors of the
Church.

The Diaconicum, or Sacristy was a considerable building adjoining to the
Church. It was the Repository for the Consecrated Vessels; the Books, the
Habits of the Priests, and the other choicest Furniture of the Church. The
Oblations of the faithful were also kept there, and sometime the Eucharist.
There it was that the Bishop and his Clergy usually met to consult together
about the affairs of the Church, or to prepare themselves for the Sacrifice. As
it was St. Martin's Custom Sever. de vita S. Mart.
to pass three Hours in praying by himself in the Sacristy before Mass. And
from this use of it, we find it took the name of Secretarium: Some of them were
so Conc. Carthag. Con. Agath can 66.
spacious that Councils have been held in them. None but Persons in holy Orders
might go into them, or touch the Consecrated Vessels. In some Churches there
were two different Apartments for these Paul. ep. xii.
two several uses, one to lock up the Consecrated Vessels in, and the other for
the Ministers to retire into and meditate there or to meet together and Consult.

They had a great number of Calices and Patins, which in the first times were
often of no better Materials than Glass; but sometimes also of Silver or Gold,
even during the Persecutions. Their Calices Lib. Pont. in Mar. and alibi passim
lib. 30 lib. 20.
were like the ordinary drinking Cups among the Romans, as their Patins, the
Dishes in which they served up their Meats to Table. The Calices of the Church
were generally of about the weight of three A Mark weighs 8 Ounces.
Marks, but their Patins were large deep Dishes weighing some of them forty
five Marks, but commonly about thirty: 'Twas in these times that they brought
into the Church the use of Wax Tapers, great numbers of 'em always kept burning
together, and that V. Hier. in Vigilant. c. iii.
even at Noonday, and at the same time also many lighted Lamps: Light and Fire
were the old Symbols of Joy. They carried Fire before the Roman Magistrates:
Horace to Redicule the vanity of the Praetor of the little Town of Fundi, very
pleasantly Prun. eque batillum. 1 Sat. v.
describes him with his Chaffing-Dish of Coals carried before him. And the
Notitia Imperii informs us that among the other Badges of Honor, generally be
longing to the principal Officers of State, there was a Table had upon it a
Book lying on a Cushion; sometimes covered over with alarge Veil, sometimes
uncovered, and two Candlesticks standing by with lighted Tapers in them; which
nearly resembles our Altars. We find that there were in the Primitive times
Golden Candlesticks of thirty seven Marks weight a piece, and Silver ones of
forty five given to some Churches: And in the Provinces we find also mention
made of perfumed Tapers, as at the Baptism of Clovis.

The Baptistery was generally built in Anastas in Sylvestr. Greg. Tur. lib. ii.
a round form, having within it a place sunk into the Ground (after the manner
of a Well) with some steps down to the Water: For indeed it was properly a
Bath. In Aftertimes they contented themselves with a large Cistern of Marble
or Porphyry, as a kind of Baignoire, and at last they reduced it to a large
Basin much like our present Fonts. The Baptistery was always beautified with
Paintings agreeable to that Sacrament, and furnished with a great deal of Gold
and Silver Plate to keep both the Consecrated Oils in, and the Water: These
were often Paulin. ep. xii. Lib. Pont. in Innoc. i. and at Psalm. xlii. 1.
made in the form of Lambs or Hearts, to represent the Lamb of God, by whose
Blood we are washed, and to signify the longings of devout Souls after God, as
to use the Expression of the Psalmist, The thirsty Heart pants after the Water
Brooks. There was also to be seen the Image of St. John Baptist, and a Gold or
Silver Dove hovering over the sacred Bagnio, to represent to the Eye the
History of the Baptism of Jesus Christ, and the Power of the holy Ghost
descending upon the Baptismal Water; and in allusion to the same History, we
find the Font called by Conc. Constantin. an. 535.
the name of the Jordan.

Much after this manner (generally Speaking) did the Ancients Contrive their
Churches, and the buildings belonging to them; not to speak here of the Bishops
House and the Lodgings for his Clergy, whence came in after Ages the Cloisters
of the Cannons; nor to mention the Hospitals of diverse sorts, which were
commonly seated near the principal Church.

In the mean time, the Gentiles upbraided the Christians for having neither
Temples, nor Altars, nor Images, nor Sacrifices, nor Feasts. To which the
Christians Orig. in Cells. lib. viii.
made no other answer, but that neither Temples, nor material Altars, nor
Bloody Sacrifices were worthy of the Majesty of God: That God could have no
other Image but his own Son, and reasonable Souls, who by Imitating the Son
rendered themselves like unto the Father. That they did at all times, and in all
places offer up to God the Sacrifice of Praise, upon the Altars of their
Hearts; burning with the fire of Charity. In fine that the true Christians do
keep every Day a Feast, by their disengagement from the Affairs of this World;
by the rest of a good Conscience, and their Rejoycings in the hope of Heaven.
This was the Defense the Christians made for themselves against the reproaches
of the Heathens. They did not pretend to say, we have Temples and Altars as
well as you, though not of the same form and Figure.

To have said so, would have given the Heathens quite different Conceptions
concerning our Religion, from what it is in Reality. An Altar with them, was a
Fire-hearth of Stone Erected either before some Idol or before some Temple, but
always in the open Air, designed for the Burning of their Victims, and to pour
Wine, Milk, Honey or other sort of Libations upon it. A Temple was a round or
oblong Building, where the Bigness, Figure and Proportion were particular
according to the different Divinities to which they were Consecrated; as one
may see in Vitruvius. They were for Vitruv.
the most part of small Extent, made without Windows, or at least admitting
little Light; nor did they contain any thing in them, but the Idols and things
offered to them. The People never entered them, but remained without
Surrounding the Altar.

Our Churches were more like the public Schools, or Town-Halls designed for
business, which the Ancients called Basilicae; Virtruv. lib. v. c i. Baron. ad
Martyr. v. Aug.
and the Description of them is also given us by Vitruvius. They saw in our
Churches a Tribunal raised up on High, with a Chair for him that Presided in
the Assembly, a Desk for the Reader, Benches for the Auditors; Books, Presses,
Lamps and Candlesticks; and amongst other things a Table, the use of which,
they that were Strangers to our Religion could not tell what to make of; only
concluding in general, that it was for taking some kind of Repast upon among
our selves. The Christians did not agree in the same Names with the Heathens.
They gave to the places of their public Assembly, the Name of Ecclesia,
Basilica, Oratorie, Martyriam, Titulus, the House of God, or the House of the
Lord; they rarely made use of the name of Temple, and never (within the Compass
of my reading) of Delubrum or Fanum. The names of Particular Churches were
often taken from their Founders, as at Rome, the Titulus Pastoris, the Basilica
of Liberius or Sixtus, which is now St. Mary the great; or from the Ancient
Name of the House, as Basilica Laterana. Afterward they came also to make use
of Churches built by the Heathens; when they found them fit for the use of
Religion. So in Rome they Converted the Pantheon, the Temple of Minerva, of
Fortuna Virilis with some others into Christian Churches.

The Churches were not only large and Beautiful as to the make of them, but
also looked after with great care, and always kept Neat and Clean. St. Jerome
Epist. de fun. Nepot.
gives a special Commendation of Nepotian the Priest, for the care he took of,
keeping his Church in good order: The Walls dry and free from Smut and Mould;
the Pavements rubbed, the Sacristy clean, the Vessels shining, the Doorkeeper
always upon his Office. This was the business of the inferior Officers, under
what Name soever they went, as Door-keepers, Mansionaries, Camerarii,
Sacristans; and Cubiculari Aeditui.
there was a great number of these Officers in the larger Churches. We may see
Pontific. Romans V. Baron. an. lviii. n. 102.
yet in the form of Ordination what was the proper charge of the Ostiaries.
They were at the Regular Hours to give notice for Prayers, and consequently it
belonged to them to Ring the Bells, when once the use of Bells was brought into
the Church, which was about the seventh Age. It was their business to open the
Church Doors at the usual time, and to stand at them upon their Duty, to keep
Infidels or Excommunicated Persons from Entering. They kept the Keys, and took
care that nothing was lost. We find in Dial. i. c. v. and iii. c. xxiv. Paul.
Not. iii. and vi.
the Dialogues of St. Gregory that the Mansionaries had the charge of the
Lamps. 'Twas these Inferior Officers that Dres't up the Church against the more
solemn Festivals, either with Silk Tapesteries or other rich Hangings, or only
with Boughs and Flowers. In a Word, they were to do every thing that was
necessary to keep the Holy Place fit for making Impressions of Reverence and
Piety upon those who approached it. All these Functions appeared too
Considerable to be permitted to pure Laics. So that 'twas thought necessary to
Establish these new Orders of Minor Clerks on purpose to ease the Deacons, and
to take off some part of their Charge.

THOUGH it is true, the Christian XXIX. Devotion assisted by Sense.
Religion is altogether Inward and Spiritual; yet Christians are Men as well as
others, and therefore not above the power of Sense and Imagination. Nay, we may
say that the greatest part of Mankind scarce Act or Live upon any other
Principle. How few apply themselves to Operations purely Intellectual; and they
that do so, find their thoughts easyly Diverted from Spiritual Objects.
Devotion therefore must be assisted by the Impressions of Sense. Were we
Angels, we might Pray in all places alike, in the hurry of the Roads, in the
Crowd of the Streets, in the Noise of the Guard-Chamber, in the Roaring and
Riots of a Tavern; over the Stenches of a Common-Shore. Why then do we shun
these places of Distraction; and when we would be Devout, seek after Silence
and retiredness, but only as a Remedy against the Impotence of Sense and
Imagination? It Is not God that has need of Temples and Oratories, but We. He
is equally present in all Places, and always equally ready to hear us
everywhere, but we are not always in a frame of Spirit fit to Speak to him. So
that it is a needless and useless piece of Work to Consecrate particular places
to his Service, unless they be also put into a Condition proper to assist our
Devotion.

Let us Suppose for Example, that which we see too often in these later Times,
a Church so ill Situated, that it Echoes with the Noises of an Adjacent
Street or a Neighboring Market; and so nastily kept that one can scarce sit
down or kneel in it for Dirt; suppose it throned with such a Herd of People
promiscuously crowded together, that, they who attend upon Prayer, are every
Moment justled and trampled upon by others pushing on their way through them,
and continually interrupted with Children's Crying or Playing, Loud Beggars
Bawling about their Ears: Add to this, that you have nothing before your Eyes
but disagreable Objects, the Walls covered over with a filthy Smut and
Mouldiness, the Pictures disfigured with Dust and Cobwebbs, and placed in an
ill Light; the statues of a deformed Make, or half of them broken off, and the
other Ornaments in as ill a condition. In fine, to omit nothing offensive to
sense; for Incense an horrid fume of stinking Vapors; and for Music, a
multitude of untuned Voices jumbled together in Croaking Sounds: It will be
much easyer for a Man to Pray in an open Field, or in a lone uninhabited House
then in such a Church as this. On the contrary, let a Man go into a Church well
built, beautifully adorned, and neatly Kept; where all things are still and
quiet, the People well placed, and the Clergy performing the Office in a
regular manner, and with a becoming Reverence and Humility; he will find
himself insensibly Engaged to attend the Service he is upon with a composedness
of Thought, and be able to Pray with the Heart at the same 1 Cor. xiv. 14.
time he speaks with his Lips.

Of this the Bishops of the First Ages were very sensible. Those Holy Persons
were either Greeks or Romans, many of them great Philosophers, all of them
trainep up in the nicest observance of all the Rules of Decency. They knew that
the order, Grandeur and agreeableness of exterior Objects, have a natural
Efficacy in them of exciting in the mind Noble, pure, and well regulated
Thoughts; and that the Affections follow those Thoughts: But that it is next to
impossible to keep the Soul Intent upon that which is good, while the Body is
uneasy or the Imagination disobliged: They thought Devotion a matter of that
Importance that it required all the assistance which could handsomely be given
it; and therefore took care to have the public Services of the Church,
especially that of the Sacrifice, Celebrated with all possible Majesty, and the
People assisting at it, accommodated with all imaginable Conveniences, that so
they might be brought on to take delight in the House of Prayer and to approach
it with Reverence. And they were at the same time sufficiently Cautions also to
keep out of the Holy Places, all the Extravagances of a Worldly Pomp; all the
appearances of a wanton Vanity, or whatsoever might have a tendency to
Effeminate the mind or strike the Senses with dangerous Impressions. 'Twas not
their design to Flatter Sense, but to assist it. This will better appear in
describing the whole Form and Manner of their Outward Worship.

THEY offered the Sacrifice every Sunday, XXX. Their Liturgy and outward Form
of Worship. V. S. Epiph. haeres in fi. Bona i. Liturg. c. xviii
on all the Feasts of the Martyrs, on all Fast Days, or oftener as the Custom of
every Church in particular required. They had also both upon Public and
Private occasions, their Votive Masses; Sometimes they had many Masses (...)
the same Day, as when the Office of a Saint fell upon some other Festival, or
when there was a Burial. It was always ^^her the Bishop himself, or one and the
(...) Priest that performed them all; as it is still observed by us on
Christmas Day. On Sundays and the other Festivals, Mass was said about nine or
ten of the Clock in the Morning; on Fast Days later, for V. Cod. Sacram. edit.
Romans 1680.
they were not to eat on those Days till after Evening Service, past three of
the Clock in the Afternoon. The Hour being come, the People met together at the
principal Church, to attend the Bishop with all his Clergy to the place where
the Station for that Day was appointed. And after this manner the Bishop took
his V. Ord. To.
round, and visited all his Churches one by one, every one in its Course: And
that this Progress might be orderly made, and in a full Body, Processions were
Instituted.

As they were entering the Church and taking their places, the Choir sung a
Psalm with its Anthem; which from thence took its name of the Introit. The
Constable. Ap. ii. c. lvii.
Deacons and their assistants, the Subdeacons and Door keepers gave every one
his place in order as they came; so that all was done without any thing of
Confusion; being all seated there, they prayed for some time in Silence, every
Man to himself; then the Bishop Saluted the People, and put an end to their
private Prayers, Pronouncing with a loud Voice his public Prayer, which from
thence took its name of the Collect.

Then the Bishop seated himself on his Throne that stood at the very end of the
Church, and terminated the prospect of the whole Congregation. Thus every
Bishop was as it were the visible Image of 1 Cor. xi. 1. 1 Timothy iv. 12. Tit.
ii. 7.
God in his Church, placed there eminently, as St. Paul expresses it, to be the
pattern to his own Flock, as Jesus Christ was to him. The Priests were seated on
each side about him, some on the right hand, and others on the left, in the
Semicircle of the Absis; and next to them stood the Deacons: Thus the Church
seemed to resemble that Image of Paradise given us Apoc. iv.
by St. John in the Apocalypse.

The Bishop on his Throne with a Book in his Hand, as the Fathers are commonly
painted, represented that Figure of a Man under which God appeared; the Priests
were that August Senate designed by the four and twenty Elders; the Deacons and
other Officers were the Angels standing always in a readiness to receive Ordo.
Romans Apoc. viii. iii.
and execute the Orders of God. Before the Bishops Throne stood seven
Candlesticks, and the Altar on which they offered the Incence (that Symbol of
Prayer) Apoc. v.
where they were afterward, though under a borrowed form, to offer the unspotted
Lamb of God. Under the same Altar were the Bodies of the Martyrs, as under that
St. John saw were the Souls of those to whom it was said, That they should rest
Apoc. vi. ix. Baron. ad Martyr. vi. Jul.
yet for a little Season. And lastly, the number of the Faithful which filled
the other part of the Church, represented the innumerable Multitude of the
Blessed, who being Clothed in white Robes, and Apoc. vii. 9.
with Palms in their Hands, sung with a loud Voice the Praises of their Marker:
Such was the Face then of their Church Assemblies.

The whole Congregation being seated, the Reader went up to the Desk and read a
Lesson, first out of the Old Testament, and after that another out of the new;
that is, out of the Acts or Epistles of the Apostles; for the reading of the
Gospel was reserved to some Priest or Deacon. To render these Lessons the more
agreeable, and to give the People leisure to meditate upon them, and the
Readers some respite, there were intermingled with them Psalms, Anthems, and
the singing of Allelujas; which were afterward placed before the Gospel. All
these Lessons of the Scripture, were read in the vulgar Language; that is, in
the Language spoken by the better sort of People in every Country: For though
in Africa the Punick Language was vulgarly spoken among the inferior sort of
People in the time of St. Austin; yet we do not find that it was used in the
Church. But in Thebais the Scriptures must needs have been read in the
Egyptian Language since St. Antony, Vi. S. Ant. c. i.
who understood no other, was converted by his having heard the Gospel read in
the Church. In the upper Syria, the greatest part of the Bishops understood
nothing of Greek, nor of any other Language but the Syriack, as it appears by
the Councils, where they were forced to make use of Council. ephesians. Council. Call.
ced Act. x.
Interpreters.

AFTER the Lessons, the Sermon begun, XXXI. Their Sermon.
the Bishop Expounded the Gospel or some other part of Scripture, and often
continued a course of Expositions upon some entire Book of the Bible, from the
beginning to the end, or else passing over some part of it, he made choice of
the most important Subjects. Of these continued Expositions we have Examples in
many of St. Chrysostom's Homilies, in St. Austin upon the Psalms, upon St.
John, and upon the Epistles of St. Paul. In St. Ambrose we have a selected
Argument, which begins with the six Days work, in imitation of St. Basil; then
the Exposition proceeds to the History of Noah, Abraham, and the other more
Illustrious Saints of the Old Testament; but still observing the Order of the
Holy Bible. The greatest part of those Tracts and Commentaries of the Fathers
upon the Scriptures are nothing else but Sermons preached to their People;
which they afterward reduced into Form, or were taken down in Writing as they
spoke them by the Art of short Hand before mentioned.

These holy Preachers were none of your idle Haranguers, like the Sophists of
the Profane Schools, who filled the World with endless disputes only out of a
vain Emulation of Contradicting and refining upon each others Notions; or like
those who labored in their Closet to show their Learning and fine Parts: These
Prelates v. Aug. de oper. Monach c. 29. and Epis. ad Diosc. v. Synes. Ep. 55.
were laborious Pastors, who had always their Hands full of business, and were
too intent upon the works of Charity, to spend all their time in their Studies;
and they were principally employed upon that necessary Office of reconciling
Differences and making up the Breaches of Friends Yet did they not suffer their
other Engagements to take them off from Preaching, and that very often too; as
thinking that they could not otherwise discharge the Duty of their Place, and
looking upon the work of Preaching as one of the most Essential parts of their
Ministry: For in the first Age all Bishops were Preachers, and scarce were
there any other Preachers besides them. 'Twas in the East they first began to
make here, and there, a Priest of an extraordinary Talent, Eusebius. vi. Hist. 20.
a Preacher, as Origin; nay, and sometimes the Laics themselves, when they
found them very understanding Men. We find also in the West, during the
Persecutions, S. Paulin. not.
that St. Felix, though no more then a Priest, was a Preacher at Nola. But
these Examples were so unfrequent, that many have taken St. John Chrysostom
and St. Austin to have been the first Priests, to whom the Bishops entrusted
this Ministry.

Hence it is that our Modern Preachers find the Sermons of the Fathers so
different from that Idea of Preaching which they have formed to themselves.
Their Discourses are plain, without any appearance of Art, without the
exactness of Method, without the subtilties of Ratiocination, without the
curiosity of Learning; nay, some of them without any Pathos, and the greatest
part of them very short. And it is true, these holy Bishops did not set up for
Oratory and Harranguing: They pretended to no more than to instruct their
People in a plain and Familiar way, as Parents speak to their Children, or
Masters to their Scholars. And therefore their Pulpit Discourses were called in
Latin, Sermons, and in Greek, Homilies, which words note such kind of Discourse
as is used in common Conversation. Their business in expounding the Scripture,
was to handle it after such a manner as might prove most to the edification of
their Hearers; so that they did not pretend to examine every Word and Phrase
with the exactness of a Critic, or to Lanch out into curious Enquiries, as the
Grammarians explained Homer and Virgil in their Schools. They expounded the
Scriptures according to the Tradition of the Fathers; so as they might tend
most to the Confirmation of Faith, and the Reformation of Manners. They
endeavored to work upon the Affections, not so much by the vehemence of
Figures and the force of Declamation, as by the weight and Importance of the
Truths they delivered, by the Authority of their Office, by the Sanctity of
their Lives and the Exemplariness of their good Works.

As for their Style, That they suited to the capacity of their hearers. The
Sermons of St. Austin are the plainest of all his Works; the Style of them is
much shorter and much easier than that of his Epistles; because he Preached in
a little City to Laborers, Traders, and Seamen; but in his Tracts of
Controversy, especially in his Books against Julian, one may see that he had
not forgot his Art of Rhetoric, which he was Professor of for so long a time:
On the contrary, St. Cyprian, St. Ambrose, and St. Leo, who preached in great
Cities, delivered themselves with more of pomp and Ornament. Yet their styles
vary according to the Particularity of their Genius, or the relish of the Ages
they lived in. But we must observe that the faults with which the modern
Humanists reproach the Fathers, are not to be attributed to the subject of
Religion. These Critics charge the Fathers with Impropriety of Language;
making use of feeble Arguments, poor Ornaments, farfetch'd Allegories, playing
with Words, and Chiming of Syllables. These were the faults of the Age, not of
the Men. Had they lived in the Age of Cicero or Terence, they had spoken as
Cicero and Terence.

The Greek Fathers come nearer to the Ancient Authors. Language had not
undergone so great a change in the East, nor had the Studies of Polite Learning
been there so much neglected. The works of these Fathers are for the most part
very Solid and very entertaining: And among the rest St. John Chrysostom is to
my thinking, the complete Pattern of a Preacher. His usual method was to begin
with explaining the Scripture, verse by verse as pronounced by the Reader,
keeping himself always to the most literel, Sense, and that which most tended
to Practice. He concluded with a general Exhortation, which has many times
little relation to the foregoing part of his Discourse, but was proportioned to
the present Exigencies of his Flock, and directly applied to his Auditors
themselves, as so prudent and vigilant a Pastor saw their Case required. We may
observe also that it was his way to encounter Vices Singly, one by one, and
when he began with any one, he never gave over the Pursuit till it was either
entirely Routed, or at least very much disabled.

These Holy Preachers did not propose either Fame or Profit to themselves by
Preaching, but the Conversion of their Hearers. That was the only thing they
aimed at, and that they pursued with all their Might, and never thought they
had done enough till they had effectually wrought the Change they desired. Thus
St. Austin, undertook to abolish the Practice Epist. xxix.
his People had taken up of making entertainments, on the Feasts of the
Martyrs, which were degenerated into Debauches; but notwithstanding the
strength and prevalence of the custom, he broke it off. He showed the People
the Evil of that Practice, from express Texts of Scripture condemning the
sinfulness of immoderate Eating and Drinking, and with Tears in his Eyes
exhorted and entreated for two Days together till he had effectually prevailed.
There was no danger then of having different Doctrines taught in one and the
same Church, for there was no other Preacher or Teacher, but the Bishop
himself, or some Priest chosen by him, who Preached there only by his
apointment, and generally in his presence.

In Sermon time the Church was open to all comers, even to the Infidels: Which
Meth. de^ Peers c. xii.
is the reason that the Fathers were so cautions in keeping the Mysteries
Secret to themselves, never speaking of them from the Pulpit, save only in an
Aenigmatical way. Hence also it is that we often find in their Sermons some
part of the Discourse directed to the Heathens to Constable. Ap. ii. c. lvii.
draw them to the Faith. During the time of the Lessons and Sermon the Audience
were regularly seated, the Men on one side of the Church and the Women on the
other; and to be separate and at a greater distance from the rest of the
Congregation, the Women went up into the Galeries where there were any. The
more elderly Persons sat in the uppermost Seats; their Fathers or Mothers held
the little Children before them; for they carried them to Church with them,
provided they were Baptized. When all the seats were filled, the younger People
continued standing on their Feet. There were Deacons appointed on purpose to
see this order observed, and to take care that every one heard with attention,
not to suffer any body to Sleep, Laugh, Whisper or make Signs; in a Word, to
keep every body silent, Regular and Well behaved. In Africa St. Austin takes
notice that the People Stood all Sermon time, but August. de Catechiz. rud. c.
xxiii.
he himself better approved the custom of the Transmarine Churches, as he calls
them, where they Heard, Sitting.

The Sermon being over, the Deacons Constable. Apost. viii. c. vi Conc. Laod. c.
xix.
obliged all those who were not to receive the Sacrament to depart. And in the
first place the Audientes and Infidels: Afterward they made their Prayers for
the Catechumens, and caused them to Dionys. Hier. Eccl. c. iii. Chrysostom. hom.
iii. in ep. ad Ephesians.
depart; then they Prayed for the Energumeni, or those that were Possessed with
Evil Spirits, and caused them to go out; after that they did the like for the
Competentes, and at last also for those under, Penance. Thus there remaining in
the Church only the Faithful without any mixture, they made their Prayers for
the whole state of Christ's Church; for all Orders and conditions of Men
whether Ecclesiastical or Civil; for all that were any ways Afflicted or
Distressed; for their Enemies, and for their Persecutors. The Deacon put them
in mind whom they were then to Pray for, and the Bishop pronounced the Words of
Prayer, after the same form and manner as is still observed in our Churches on
Good Friday. At other Masses we now supply these Prayers by those of the Prone.
Then the Bishop Saluted the People again, and the Deacon said with a loud
Voice, Has any one any thing to object against any Man? Is there here any one
not heartily Reconciled? Embrace one another. Then as a sign of their being all
in perfect Charity, they gave each other the Kiss of Peace; the Clergy, by
themselves, and amongst the Layety, the Men by themselves, and the Women by
themselves.

AFTER all these preparatorys began XXXII. The Sacrifice and Sacred Habits.
the Sacrifice. The Deacons assisted by the Subdeacons, spread the Cloth on
the Altar, and upon another Table, (now called the Credence, from that Italian
Word signifying a Cupboard) they set in order the Communion Plate, and amongst
the rest, the Patens and Calices, and for Decency and Cleanliness sake covered
them with a Cloth over them. Then, as the Author of the Apostolical
Constitutions Constable. Apost. viii. c. xii.
informs us, the Bishop came to the Altar in a rich Habit. Which shows that
they had even in those Days particular Habits for the Altar.

Not that those Habits had any thing singular in the make or Figure of them.
The Chasuble was a common wearing Habit in the time of St. Austin, and the
August. 22. Civit. c. viii. de Florentio Sartore Hippon. V. ff. devestim. leg.
like we find of the Dalmatick in the time of the Emperror Valerian. The Stole
was a kind of Cloak, and worn by Women as well as Men; we have now confounded
it with the Orarium, which was a kind of Linen Handkerchief, worn by V.
Thomass. Discipl. P. i. l. i. c. 31. and P. ii. l. i. c. xxiii.
those who affected Neatness, to wipe the Sweat off their Necks and Faces: And
the Maniple was only a Napkin hanging Mappula.
cross their Arms, for their more decent serving at the Holy Table. The Albe it
Surplice.
self, that is the White Robe of either Linen or Woollen, was not at the
beginning an Habit peculiar to Clerks, since the Emperor Aurelian gave the
People of Vopis. Aur.
Rome a largess of these kind of Tunicks, as well as of those large
Handkerchiefs which they called Oraria.

But as afterward when the Albe was the common Habit of the Clergy in which
they allways appeared, the Priests were enjoined to have by them one particular
Hom. Leon. P. iv. to viii. Conc. P. xxxiv. Constit. Riculfi. Suess. c. 7. an.
589. to ix. Conc.
Albe, never to be put on, but at the Altar, that they might then appear
unfullied. So it is probable that when they commoly wore the Chasuble and the
Dalmatick, they had particular ones for the use of the Altar, not differing in
Shape from the common sort, but of richer Stuffs and Livelyer Colors, Above
all the Canons require of the Priests and Deacons never to Conc. Brae. iv. c.
iii. an. 675. Conc. Laod. c. xii. 13.
perform the public Offices of the Church without having on their Orarium; the
use of which was at the same time forbidden to the Inferior Ministers.

They were willing that the Clergy even by their Figure and Appearance, should
give the People a great notion of their Character. That their Faces, their
Hands and their Clothes appearing clean and without spots might be a sign of an
inward Purity and Innocence; that the Modesty and Gravity of their Looks, their
Air and Motion might command Respect and excite Religion. The Prelates were so
Nice herein, that St. Ambrose turned out of the number of the Clergy two
Persons, Amb. ii. off. c. 19.
the one for an Indecent Mien, and the other for an unseemly way of Walking.
And the event justified the judgment he made both upon the one and the other.
But here it must still be remembered that those Fathers were Greeks and Romans,
who had the highest Ideas of true Decorum, and were polished to the greatest
exactness.

The Bishop standing at the Altar, took from the Hands of the Deacons the
Oblations they had received from the People; but in some Churches the Bishop
himself Ordo. Romans
went to receive the Offerings of the more honorable Persons, such as the
Senators and their Wives at Rome: For all Persons Great and Small, the
Magistrates and Princes themselves Communicated together. On the Altar was
placed only Can. Apost. iii, iv.
the Bread and Wine, which was to be the matter of the Sacrifice. As for all
other sorts of Oblations, the Luminary, the Money in Specie, and whatsoever
else the Faithful offered for the Occasions of the Church, the Deacons received
those and laid them up in Places appointed for that purpose: It Is true, they
laid upon the Altar the new Fruits to have a Benediction pronounced over them
at the end of the Sacrifice.

They used for the Eucharist no other Bread but what was offered by the People,
and blessed by the Bishop; and as a sign of Communion with those that were
Epist. deer. Inocenti. ad decentium.
absent, they sent to them some of the Bread blessed, but not Consecrated. All
the faithful were obliged to offer, at least all that were to Communicate; nor
was it thought reasonable that the Rich should Communicate of that which the
poor offered. The Bishop himself made his offering; and to that purpose there
was at Ordo. Romans
Rome the Bishops Oblationary Subdeacon. So that the Loaves of Bread came in
there in such vast Numbers, that the Altar was (as is expressed in some of the
ancient Prayers) Sacr. in nativ. S. Jo. and in vig. omn. S S. Ordo. Romans
as it were overloaded with them. The Corporal was a large Table Cloth
stretched out at length, and held by two Deacons at the two ends of the Altar,
to receive these Oblations. It belonged to the Componere altar.
Archdeacon to place these Loaves decently on the Altar, and to set the Calice
of Wine there, which was to be Consecrated; and to be better assured, there was
nothing in it, they strained it through a Silver Cullander.

The Pastor after the Oblation of the Bread and Wine, offered also the Incense
which was to represent the Prayers of the faithful; as St. John in the
Apocalypse, Apoc. viii. 3, 4, 5.
saw an Angel employed at the Altar in offering up to God these spiritual
Odors. They fumed with the Incense (as is still done) the Altar, the Oblations,
the Clergy, and the People; and to this use they applied none but right
Perfumes, the best Franckincence, and other Aromatic Gums, the richest then
known in the World; and that with such a Magnificence too, that the Church of
Rome had Lands in Syria and other Provinces of the East appropriated for
supplying the Altar with these Perfumes. During the Offertory, was sung a
Psalm; of which there is now left only a Versicle, which was with them the
Anthem.

AFTER the Offerings were performed, XXXIII, Consecration, Communion. Constable.
Apo. viii. xi.
the Doors of the Church were shut and carefully Guarded by some of the Deacons
or Ostiaries, placed there for that purpose, who might not open them even to
the Faithful themselves, till the Communion was over. Other Deacons therewere
walking softly about the Church to see that no body made the least noise; and
it was the peculiar business of one, or the least sign of them to keep an Eye
over the Children: They had a place assigned them near the Bishop's Chair; and
as for those that were very small, their Mothers were ordered to take them into
their Arms: Thus all the People were kept to a deep silence, and heard with a
profound Reverence and Attention, the Prayers of the Preface, and of that part
of the Service which we now call the Canon. The Bishop Pronounced the Words
with a loud Voice, and all the People said Amen, as they did at the end of all
other Prayers. These Prayers were much longer than they are now, as is still to
be seen in the Oriental Liturgies. The Church of Rome retained has Constable. Apo.
viii. 12.
nothing of this form but the Essentials; formerly this Canon was an Abridgment
of the History of Religion, Praising God for the Creation of the World, for
restoring it after the Deluge, for the call of Abraham; for the special Favors
vouchsafed to the Children of Israel; and lastly, for the Incarnation of his
Son, and the Redemption of Mankind.

After the Consecration, the Bishop Constable. Apo. viii. 13.
took the Communion himself first; then he gave it to the Priests, then to the
Deacons and other Clerks, after them to the Asceticks or Monks, to the
Deaconnesses, to the Virgins and other Religious Persons, to Children, and at
last to all the People. To shorten this Service, which was always very long;
many of the Priests assisted at the same time, in distributing the Body of our
Lord; and many of the Deacons in Administering of the Cup: And to avoid
Confusion, the Priest and Deacons carried the Communion walking through the
ranks of the People, in the same Order as they had before received the
Offerings; none of the Communicants stirring out of his place. The Men received
the Body of Jesus Christ in their Hands; and the Women in pieces of Linen made
on purpose for that use. The Crumbs and Fragments that were left of the
Eucharist, they gave to little Children; and the rest of the Bread offered, but
not Consecrated, was distributed among those who did not Communicate: Ord. Romans
And from hence came the Panis Benedictus or the Blessed Bread. During the
Communion they sung a Psalm; of which we have now nothing left but the Anthem.
In the Fourth Age the Communion began to be less frequented than Hom. iii. in
ep. ad Ephesians.
formerly. St. Chrysostom complains that many came to the sacred Mysteries and
did not Communicate; and that many others Hom. 17. in ep. ad Heb.
Communicated only on the Festivals, and others again that Communicated but
once or twice a Year.

From all this it follows, that their Liturgy must needs have been long: Nor
indeed did Christians then think they had any thing else to do on Sundays but
to serve God. St. Gregory to show how his Lib. viii. ep. xxxv.
Infirmities were increased upon him, complains that he was scarce able to
stand upon his Legs for those three Hours while he performed the Office of the
Church. And yet the Canon of the Mass was much the same then as it is now; and
those Sermons of his which are left us are very short.

ALL the Public Service of the Church XXXIV. The Chant and Magnificence of the
public Service.
was accompanied with Singing. The same has been observed of the former times;
but it is to be supposed this public Singing grew much more in use upon the
Churches being freed from Persecution: St. Austin ascribes to St. Ambrose the
having Auguct. ix. Confess. vii.
introduced into the West the use of Singing the Psalms in imitation of the
Churches of the East, and it is about the same time that we find St. Damasus
the Lib. Pontif in Damaso
Pope enjoining it. St. Basil tells us, that in his time the Psalms were sung
both in Private Houses and in public Places; and that the singing was so
agreeable, that the Basil. in Psalm. i.
pleasure helped to convey the Religion of the Hymn into the minds of the
People with more advantage: And this was the true design of Music.

The Ancient Music was not yet lost, which was diversifyed into several kinds
of Harmony, variously applied as the Nature of the Subject did require, Soft or
V. Platon. iii. de Repub.
Strong, Gay or Sad, Grave or Passionate. And we may conclude that in the
Services of the Church, they made choice of that which agreed best with the
Majesty and Purity of Religion; and that they carefully avoided to apply to the
sacred Mysteries, and the praising of God Soft and Estaeminate Airs, or such as
might tend to affect the Heart with too sensible a Tenderness, or put the
Spirits into any 1. Conf 33.
dangerous Commotion. However St. Austin thought the Singing in the West
somewhat too Soft and Secular; and judged the Practice of St. Athanasius more
Safe, who caused the Psalms to be pronounced by the Reader with so small an
alteration of Voice, that it was rather plain speaking then singing. I leave it
to those who understand this Science to inquire whether we have not some
remains of this Antiquity in our Plein Chant or Church Music brought in by St.
Gregory. For what we now call Music, is certainly a clearly Different thing
and altogether Modern. As for the Chanting of the Prayers and Lessons, that we
see consists but of very few Notes, only to help to keep up the Voice, and mark
the distinction of the Periods. I think I have said enough to show how well the
Bishops of these first times, understood to manage the objects of Sense, so as
to make them subservient to the end of Religion, and by their help to make
Impressions of Piety even upon the most heavy and Illiterate. For Instance let
us suppose the solemn manner of their Celebrating the Vigil of Easter at Rome,
under the Pope St. Leo. The Faithful V. Eusebius. vi. Hist. c. ix
on that Holy Night (with their reverend Bishop at the Head of them) Assembled
together in a Body in the Lateran Church. In the first place immediately upon
the Benediction of the new Fire, an incredible number of Lights made the Holy
Night look as glorious as a fine Day. We may imagine what a charming Sight it
must needs have been to see this August Magnificent Church filled with such a
Numerous Assembly and yet in so vast a Multitude of People nothing of Noise,
Tumult or Confusion; but every one Regularly disposed and Ranged according to
the Quality of their Age and Sex, and the station they held in the Church. And
especially distinguished from the rest were those who were to receive Baptism
that very Night, together with those who had accomplished their Penance and
had been but two Days before Readmitted into the Church. Their Eyes were
entertained on every side with the Marbles and Paintings, the glittering of the
Gold, Silver and Precious Stones that Sparkled upon the Consecrated Plate, and
especially near the Holy Altar. The silence of the Night admitted of no other
Interruption, but the Lessons out of the Prophets Pronounced with a clear
distinct and intelligible Voice, and intermixed with the Singing of the
Versicles; that so this Variety might make both of them more agreeable. So many
grand and delightful Objects presenting themselves at one and the same time,
could not but awaken the Soul and inspire her with Vigor both to attend to
those Holy Lessons and profit by them, especially being prepared for them
before hand, by continual exercises in the Word of God. What must the Gravity
and Modesty of the Deacons and other sacred Ministers have needs been, who were
made choice of, and bred by such a Prelate, and served in his presence, or
rather in the presence of God, whom their own thoughts represented to them
always before their Eyes? But above all, How Majestic must the Pope himself
appear, so venerable for his Learning, his Elocution, his Zeal, his Courage,
and all his other Virtues? With what an awefull Reverence, with how
Affectionate a Piety must he have pronounced over the Sacred Fonts, those
Prayers which he himself first Composed; and which his successors have found so
Pious, that they have still preserved the same for us the space of twelve
hundred Years? I can no longer Wonder that on these occasions and under such
helps of Devotion, the Christians of those Days should quite forget their Body;
and having Fasted all the Day before, should pass this Holy Night of the
Resurrection also in Watching and Prayer without eating a bitt till the Day
following.

BUT this great Day being come, and XXXV. The Solemnity of Feasts of the
Church. Pilgrimages.
the time of their Fasts expired, the greatest Saints did not only allow, but
also enjoin the refreshing of the Body. How profitable soever Fasting might be
to raise up the Soul to God, and Facilitate the Duty of Prayer, for which
exercise of Devotion the Feasts of the Church were chiefly designed; yet it was
forbidden to fast on Sundays, or on the Festival Days, or throughout the whole
Quinquagesima. So they called it, not as we do now, the fifty Days before
Easter, but the fifty Days between Easter and Whitsunday. It Is true the Monks
of Egypt used great precautions Cass. Collat xxi. de remiss quinq.
least they should by this little Relaxation lose the fruit of their past
Abstinence. But at last they observed the Church Distinction. St. Pacomus
according Vie de saint Pacome. c. viii.
to the direction of St. Palemon his Master on Easter Day Eat a Sallet of Herbs
and Oil instead of dry Bread only, which was their usual Diet at other times. A
certain Holy Priest, as God had put it into S. Greg. ii. Dial. c. i.
his mind, on an Easter Day carried to St. Benet a present of Provisions for
him to make better Cheer at that time than ordinary, and to express a more
sensible rejoicing on the same Occasion. St Anthony was wont on Easter and
Whitsunday to put on his Coat of Palmtree-leaves, which was left him by St.
Paul the first Hermit, and St. Athanasius at the same time appeared clad in
the Cloak St. Anthony had left to him. And from that time S. Leo. Sermon. iii. de
Quadrages.
forward, it was an established custom among Christians to apparel themselves
on the Festivals in their Richest Habits, and to make better Fare than ordinary
on those Days.

The Feasts of the Martyrs had proportionable honors paid to them, and were
Celebrated with a great Concourse of People. On Sundays and other Feasts,
common to the whole Church, every one was content to stay at home with his own
Bishop. But on these special Feasts, they ran from all parts to celebrate the
Memory of the Saints; so that upon these occasions many of the Bishops
themselves often met together at their Tombs. By one example, we may judge of
the rest. St. Paulinus reckons up more then twenty Natali. 3.
names, as well of Cities as Provinces in Italy, whose Inhabitants did every
Year assemble together in vast Troops with their Wives and Children to
Celebrate the Feast of St. Felix; notwithstanding the Rigor of the Season, it
being kept on the fourteenth of January: And all this only for one single
confessor in that single City of Nola. What then must have been done throughout
the. whole Christian World? What at Rome, upon Prud. Peristeph. ii. 11, 12.
Martyr. Jun. xxix. de S. Cassio.
the Feast of St. Hippolytus, of St. Laurence, of the Apostles, St. Peter and
St. Paul? They flocked to Rome from the most distant places, and at all times:
And that was the Rise of Pilgrimages. In the time of the Persecution under the
Emperor Claudius the second, St. Marius together with St. Martha his Wife and
Children, Martyrol. xix. Janu.
took a jorney to Rome on purpose to perform their Devotions there; and upon
that occasion they there suffered Martyrdom. The same happened not long after to
St. Maurus, who came out of Africa to visit Ibid. xxii. Novem.
the Sepulchers of the Apostles. And before St. Alexander was chosen Bishop of
Jerusalem and joined with Narcissus in the Administration of the same See, he
took a Pilgrimage from Cappadocia to Jerusalem on purpose to see the Holy City,
there and Eusebius. vi. hist. ii.
visit the Celebrated Places of Devotion thereabouts.

And indeed this was a proper means of assisting piety by Sense. The sight of
the Relics of a Saint; his Sepulcher, his Prison, his Chains and the
Inrstuments of his Martyrdom: All these made a quite different Impression upon
the Mind from the bare hearing of these things spoken of at a distance. To
which add the Miracles frequently wrought at their Tombs, which often made the
Infidels themselves glad to visit them, upon the pressing Interests of their
Lives and Healths. Every one knows that one of the first effects of the liberty
of Christianity was St. Helenas care to have due Honors done to the Holy
Places of the City of Jerusalem, and throughout all the Holy Land: And from
that time forward, the practice of going in Pilgrimage to those Places of
Devotion, became more common than before. And St. Jerome, an eye Witness,
assures us that there were always to be seen in the Holy City a vast Hier. ad
Marcell.
concourse of all sorts of Itinerant People flocking thither from all parts of
the World, even Doctors and Bishops themselves. Nor was it then so difficult a
thing to take such long Journeys through the vast extent of the Roman Empire,
by reason of the convenience of its situation all round the Mediterranean Sea,
and the great Roads they had laid out in all Quarters for the passage of their
Armies and public Carriages: So that it was no great adventure now to pass
from Spain or Gaul into Egypt, or Palestine or Asia.

This Honor could be paid to the Martyrs only in the places were they had
suffered, till they found the way of dividing and Translating their Relics.
The Greeks generally took to that method; but at Rome St. Gregory the Pope
declares Greg. iii. ep. 30. Brandea.
that to his time, for the Relics of the holy Apostles, they only sent abroad
some pieces of Linen that had touched their Sepulchers, or Golden Keys which
had locked up some of the fileings of St. Peter's S. Greg. ep. v. vi. vi. 23.
Chains. Every Nation was careful even to a Jealousy, to keep to themselves
their Relics, as Pledges of the Protection of V. Prud. Perist. pas. sim.
the Saints, and a Blessing sent from Heaven to the City or Province in whose
Custody they were lodged: Nor were the Temporal advantages they reaped from
them inconsiderable: The Inhabitants were enriched by the concourse of
Pilgrims; and the veneration for the Memory of the Saints often moved the
Princes to grant the right of Sanctuary, and exemption from Taxes to the places
where their Relics were deposited. Every one knows the extraordinary
Privileges of St. Greg. Turon. hist.
Martin of Tours in France.

It Is probable also, 'twas not till these Times of the Liberty of the Church
that the course of the Ecclesiastical Year was brought to an exact regulation.
The Question concerning the Day on which Easter* ought to be Celebrated, was
not entirely determined till the Council of Nice, as indeed there had not till
then been held any Ecumenical Council, because it was a thing impossible under
the Heathen Emperors to bring together so great an Assembly of Bishops. It was
in these times a received Rule not to Administer Baptism but on Easter or
Witsunday, as appears by the Pope St. Leo's condemning Leo. ep. iv.
the practice of the Bishops of Sicily who Baptized at Epiphany. In the same
Epistle he also gives us the Reasons of the Church for instituting her Feasts,
and Appropriating them to the different parts of the Ecclesiastical year, and
how all this was done for the more solemn Commemoration of the several
Mysteries of the Life of Jesus Christ.

Nor was it till these times of Liberty that the Solemn Fasts of the Church
were generally taken notice of; and more especially Basil orat. i^. de jejun.
Hier, Epi. ^ii. ad Laetam. 22. ad* Eustoch.
that of Lent Fast. No person whatsoever was dispensed with from keeping the
Fast; no Condition, no Age could plead an Exemption. All business was laid a
side: One might have seen the Chrysostom. in Genesis hom. i. init.
most populous Cities as still and quiet as Deserts. The faithful passed the
greatest part of the Day in the Churches, praying, Reading the Scriptures, and
hearing Sermons; whence it comes to pass, that the Office for the days of Lent
is always longer than the usual Service at other times. During all that Season,
there were Celebrated no Feasts of the Martyrs, nor any Persons allowed to
Marry. To the Ninth Age the Custom continued, forbearing Acts of Hostility all
the time of Lent, and neither Armies to March, nor People to Travel, unless
upon* Extraordinary Occasions.

ALL these Observations were but the XXXVI. The Ceremonies of Penance.
Consequences of Penance, to which those Days of Fasting were peculiarly
designed; and that is the reason why the Preparation of those who were to
receive Baptism was reserved to the time of Lent; as was also the satisfactions
which were to be made by those who were fallen after Baptism. The joyful Feasts
of Christmas and Epiphany being past, they entered upon a Course of Praying for
the Remission of Sins, and of exciting Sinners to Repentance; as we now do from
Septuagesima Sunday; for that is manifestly the design of all the Offices
proper to that Season. The Lessons out of Genesis represent to us the Power of
the Creator, his Justice and his Severity. Here we see Adam driven out of the
Terrestial Paradise, the guilty old World destroyed by the Deluge, and those
four infamous Cities consumed with Fire from Heaven. They whose Consciences
were awakened by these Examples, and by the powerful Exhortations of the
Prelates, applied themselves to them or to their Priests appointed to this
Ministry; and after having made sincere Confession of their Sins, received
thereupon necessary Instructions what they were to to do. For it belonged to
the Pastor to Judge whether he who accused himself, was fit to be admitted to
Pennane; what Penalty should be imposed, and for how long a time; whether his
Penance should be Orig. hom. ii. in ps. 38. Socr. v. hist. c. 19.
secret or open, and whether it were proper for the Edification of the Church,
that he should make the same Confession in public. Young Persons were not
readily admitted to Penance by reason of the Frailty of their Age, which made
them afraid their Conversion might not hold. Their Conversion was likewise
suspected Innoc. i. ad Exup. c. Augu. Ser. 57. detemp. Conc. Ara. i. c. iii.
Carth. iv. can. 76. 78.
who did not desire Penance till the Extremity of Sickness: These if they
recovered were obliged to go through their Course of Canonical Penance.

Many did public Penance without any ones knowing the Particular Sins for
Aug. Epist. 118. ad Jan. Prospe. contempl. ii. c. 7
which they did it, and many performed their Penance in private for great
Crimes, as Married Women for Adulteries committed unknown to their Husbands;
those S. Leo. Ep. 80. and 92. ad Rustic. c. ii.
whose being exposed to public Penance would have occasioned too much
Scandal, as Priests and others that would have lost their Lives if their Crimes
had been made Public. But to have seen Christians Fasting, Praying,
Prostrating themselves upon the Earth, even out of simple Devotion, was then so
common a sight, that none ever thought of enquiring into the particular
occasions of it. The times of Penance were either longer or shorter, according
to the different usages of Churches; and those Penitental Canons which are now
remaining, differ very much from one another; but the more ancient generally
the more severe. St. Basil allots two years for Theft, seven for Ep. iii. Can.
ad Amphiloch. c. 56. 58, 59. 61. 64. 73.
Fornication, eleven for Perjury, fifteen for Adultery, Twenty for Murder, and
the whole Life for Apostasy.

They who were enjoined to do public Pont. Romans v. Hier. epitaph. Fabiolae.
Penance, applied themselves to the Archpriest or the Priest Penitentiary,
who took down their names in writing; after that, on the first Day of Lent,
they presented Sozom. vii. hist. c. 16.
themselves at the Door of the Church in a poor and torn Habit; for such with
the The Manners of the Israelites. in English c. 17. and 19.
ancients were their Mourning Dresses: Being entered the Church, they received
from the hands of the Bishop ashes to strew on their Heads and Sackcloth to
cover their Bodies; thus they remained lying upon the Ground, while the Bishop
with the Clergy, and all the People kneeled down and prayed for them. The
Bishop made an Exhortation to let them Understand that he was going to drive
them out of the Church for a time, as God drove Adam out of Paradise for his
Transgression, bidding them at the same time be of good courage, and labor in
hope of the Mercy of God; then he actually put them out of the Church, and
immediately the Door was shut against them. The Penitents generally kept
themselves close Lib. sacrament. Amb. i. paen. c. 16. paenit Romans tit. i. c. 11.
shut up, passing their time in Praying and mourning, save on the Festival or
Station days, on which they presented themselves at the Door of the Church, and
this they continued to do for some time: Afterward they were admitted to enter
the Church and hear the reading of the Scriptures and the Sermon, but obliged
to depart before Prayers began. After that they were admitted to join in Prayer
with the faithful, but in a posture of Prostration. At last they were admitted
to pray standing S. Elig. hom viii.
as others though yet still they were distinguished from the rest of the
Congregation, Conc. Ancyr.
by being placed on the left side of the Church; from hence it appears there
were four Orders of Penitents, the Flentes, the Audientes, the Prostrati, and
the Consistentes; that is those that Prayed Consistentes.
standing: And the whole course of Penance was divided into these four States.

As for instance, he that had been guilty of willful Murder, was four years
among the Flentes; that is to say, he was to come S. Bas. can. 56.
to the Door of the Church at the Hours of Prayer, and to stand there, not so
much as in the Porch, but in a place exposed to Ep. S. Greg. Thaum. c. i.
the Weather. He was to be clothed with Sackcloth, to have Ashes on his Head,
and not to cut his Hair. Thus he stood beging of the Faithful as they entered
into the Church to take pity on him and to pray to God for him: And so indeed
Ambros. de paenit. i. c. vii. 15. 2. c. vii. 10.
they did; the whole Church in her public Service always remembering to pray
for the Penitents in particular, as she still does during the time of Lent. The
five following years he was in the rank of Auditors, He entered the Church to
hear the Instructions there delivered, but so as to remain in the Vestibulum or
Porch only, with the Catechumens; and to depart before the Prayers began: From
thence he passed to the third Rank, and was admitted to join in Prayers with
the Faithful, but in the same place as before, and Prostrate or lying down upon
the Floor, and he went out with the Catechumens. After having been seven years
in this State, he passed to the last, in which he remained four years, joining
in Prayer with the Faithful, and standing as they did; but was not permitted to
offer or Communicate with them. At last his twenty Years of Penance being thus
accomplished, he was again received into full Communion with the Church, and
admitted to the Participation of Holy things, that is the Eucharist.

The same Proportion was observed in the Fifteen Years Pennace of the
Adulterer. He was four Years among the Flentes, five among the Audientes, four
with the Prostrati, and two with the Consistentes. And by this one may judge of
the other sort of Offenders. Not that time alone did always S. Basil. ibid. 84,
85
determine the Penance. The Bishops carefully examined the Proficiency of the
Penitents, and from thence took their Measures either of using them with a
greater indulgence, or of deferring their Reconciliation. Their Fundamental
Rule was to labor all they could for the Salvation of their Neighbor; but not
so as to destroy themselves together with those who were incorrigible. The
Penitent therefore did not advance from one Ambr. ii. paenit, c. 9.
degree to another, but only by the apointment of the Bishop: But if he dyed
during the course of his Penance, before he Conc. Arel. ii. c. 23. Con. Carth.
iv. c. 59.
had accomplished it and received Absolution; they had yet good hopes of his
Salvation. They prayed for him, and offered for him the Holy Sacrifice. When
the Bishop judged it proper to put a final Period to his Penance, it was done
at the end of Lent, that the Pennitent might reenter upon his Participation of
the Holy Mysteries at the Feast of Easter.

On Holy Tursday the Penitents presented Pont. Romans
themselves at the Door of the Church. The Bishop having offered up many
Prayers to God on their behalf, caused them to enter, at the instances of the
Arch Deacon; representing to him that this was a time proper for Clemency, and
that 'twas but reasonable that as the Church increased the number of her Flock
at that time by the new Baptized, she should take also then into her fold again
the strayed Sheep. The Archpriest also interceded on behalf of the Penitents,
and gave them his Testimonial that they were worthy to be reconciled. For to
him it belonged to examine them during the time of their Penance. Then the
Bishop made an Exhortation to them, putting them in mind of the mercies of God,
and of that newness of life which they ought to live in for the time to come,
requiring them in token of their Confent S. Elig. hom. viii. and 11.
and promise thereunto to hold up their Hands. At length suffering himself to
be prevailed upon by the entreaties of the Church, and being persuaded of the
sincerity of their Conversion, he gave them Solemn Absolution. Then they shaved
and polled themselves, quitted their Penitential habits and began to live like
the other Faithful. There was without doubt great diversity in these outward
Ceremonies, according to the difference of times and places. But they all
tended to the same end, and had a powerful Effect to make the offender sensible
of the Enormity of sin, and of the difficulty of recovering out of it; and to
keep those still within bounds who as yet had preserved their Innocence. Should
a Man, says St. Austin, too easily return Sermon. xxiv. de diverse.
to the Happiness of his first Estate, he would look upon the falling into
Mortal sin as a mere Triffle.

NO. PERSON how great soever in XXXVII. Christian Princes.
the World was exempt from Penance. Princes were as Subject to it as private
Persons; and the Example of Theodosius will never be forgotten in the Church.
In the foregoing Ages none could have believed that the great ones would ever
have submitted themselves to the severity of the Churches Discipline. They
could not possibly conceive how the Humility and Mortification of a Christian
could have been reconciled with absolute power and vast possessions, 'Twas this
undoubtedly that made Tertullian say that Apol. c. xxi.
the Caesar's had become Christians long before, if they could have been at the
same time Caesar's and Christians; and Origin Cont. Cells. L. viii.
speaks of it much after the same manner. This strange work has God at last
brought to pass in the sight of the whole World. And this is that mighty Change
that gave Date to the Liberty of the Church, that period of time I am now
speaking of.

Presently upon the Conversion of Constantine the name of Jesus Christ was
written upon the Roman Ensigns, and his Cross displayed in the midst of their
Armies. That Instrument of the most Infamous Punishment was now turned into the
most glorious Ornament of the Imperial Diadem. The Emperor had an Oratory in
his Palace, where he shut himself up whole Days together to read the Holy
Scriptures: Observing the stated Eusebius. iv. vita Constable. c. xvii. xxi.
hours of Prayer, and more especially on Sundays, upon which he obliged the
Heathens themselves to rest from their Labors. He caused to be carried in his
Sozom. i. Hist. c. viii.
Army a Tent in the form of a Church, for singing Divine Service in and
Administering the Sacraments to the Faithful; and to that purpose he was always
attended by some Priests and Deacons. He Eusebius. iii. vita Constable. c. xlvii.
made Constantinople a City perfectly Christian. The Eve of Easter was
Celebrated there with a most magnificent Illumination, not only within the
Churches, but without. All over the City there were set up lighted Tapers, or
rather Pillars of Wax, which gloriously turned the Night into Day. In the
principal Squares of the City, one might have seen the Fountains adorned with
the Images of the good Shepherd or of Daniel in the Lion's Den. There were no
Idols or Temples of the false Gods to be found within her Walls. Who knows not
how Magnificenly Constantine treated the Fathers of the Nicence Council, and
the Honors he did them. He furnished them with carriages Eusebius. iii. Vita
Constable. c. vi. vii.
to bring them from the most Remote parts of that vast Empire; he defrayed
their Expenses all the time of their Session, and sent them home Loaded with
Presents. He burned the Bills of Accusation that had been preferred to him
against the Bishops; he Kissed the Scarrs of the Confessors, that still had
upon them the Socrat hist. i. c. v. viiii*
marks of the Persecution; he entered the Council without his Guards, appeared
there with a Modest and Respectful Air, and did not sit down till the Bishops
gave him a sign. At the Conclusion of the Council he made a great Feast for
them in his Palace, and sat at Table with them. Then it was that Jesus Christ
was manifestly seen Reigning over the Kings of the Earth*

Theodosius the Great, did yet more Honor to Religion, and that by the
practice of those virtues it requires: He was much in Prayer, applied himself
to God in his greatest Affairs, and ascribed to him the success of his Arms:
He had suffered himself to be transported into a Passion against Theod. hist.
Eccle. iv. c. 17.
the Inhabitants of Thessalonica. The Sin was great, but his Repentance was
Proportionable, and he valued none of the Bishops so highly as St. Ambrose;
because he found none that less flattered him. His Empress has also an high
Character given her in History for her Piety, and for her Charity toward the
Poor. The same Spirit run through the Family, but shined forth most brightly in
St. Pulcheria their Granddaughter; who at the Age of fifteen (together with
her two Sisters) Consecrated herself to God by a Vow of Virginity, and who
without quiting the Court, led a Life in it so retired, so full of Business, so
Religious, that the Writers of those times compared the Palace to a Monastery,
the Holiest thing they could think of.

In this School of virtue she caused to be brought up the young Emperor
Theodosius Socr. vii. c. 22.
her Brother, making him practice the same exercises of Religion with her self.
He rose constantly at the dawn of Sozom. ix. c. i. Theod. iv. c. 36.
the Day to join with his Sisters in singing the Praises of God, Prayed often,
frequented the Churches, and presented them largely: He fasted often,
principally on Wednesdays and Fridays: His Palace was furnished with a choice
Library of Ecclesiastical Writers. He had the Holy Scripture by Heart, and
discoursed of it with the Bishops as readily as if he had been one of them
himself. He gave a great respect to them, and had an honor for all good
Christians. He caused the Relics of many Saints to be translated with great
Pomp. He founded many Hospitals and many Monasteries.

His Sister did not only exercise him in the Practices of Religion, but caused
him to be taught with the greatest care all the Accomplishments proper for an
Emperor. He had the best Masters to instruct him in Learning, and others to
teach him the Exercises of Riding and Arms. He was used to the bearing of heat
and Cold, Hunger and Thirst. She her self Tutored him in all the Rules of
Decency, and Deportment, in his Habits, in his Gestures, in his Gate and
Posture of walking: She brake his practice of falling into loud and sudden
fits of Laughter; taught him how to appear (as occasion might require) either
Terrible or Pleasant, and to hearken with Patience to the matter before him. He
was a perfect Master of his Passion, obliging humane and tender to a Degree of
Compassion.

Such was Theodosius the younger, though born into an Empire in the Luxurious
East, and in a very corrupt Age. The Emperor Marcian, who after his great
services and long experience succeeded him in the Throne, discovered the same
Piety, and the same zeal for Religion; but joined with greater Force and
Capacity. There needs no other proof of his Worth than the choice St. Pulcheria
made of him, who Married him only to let him into a Partnership with her in the
Empire, but upon Condition of keeping her Vow of Virginity.

WHILE the Princes lived at this rate, XXXVIII. The Manners of the Clergy.
one may easily imagine how eminently holy the Lives of the Bishops and their
Clergy were. Yet in the outward Manner of their living, the Liberty of the
Church produced V. Thom. Disc. p. ii. l. i. c. 20, etc.
some change, which may deserve our Consideration: 'Twas now they began to wear
some Exterior Badges of their profession: Though to speak the Truth, the
difference of Habit was scarce perceivable till after the Reign of the
Barbarous Princes under whom the Clergy still kept to the Habit of the Romans,
as they did to their Laws and Language.

Many embraced the way of Living in common, as being the more perfect Life; and
taken from the first Church of Jerusalem: These as far as possibly they could
contrive it, Lodged all in the same House and eat in the same Hall; At least
they held nothing in Propriety, subsisting only on what the Church supplied
them with; so that they made one large Family, of which the Bishop was the
Father: Such were the Clergy under St. Eusebius Vercellensis under St. Martin,
and St. Austin; and these were called Canonical Clerks or Canons, V. Thom.
Disc. p. i. l. i. c. 56. and p. ii. l. i. c. 46. and p. iii. l. c. 28. and 51.
by way of distinction from those who did not live up so strictly to the Letter
of the Canons, whose service the Church nevertheless accepted of.

They who were not thus embodied, lived at least two or three of them together.
The Priests who were confined to Churches in the Country, had with them some
young Clerks whom they directed in their Studies, whose Manners they formed,
and whom they kept always by them as Witnesses of their own Conversation. Such
were those young Readers who suffered Martyrdom in Africa by the Martyrol. Jul.
iii.
Vandals. The Bishop had also some Priest or Deacon who never stired from him,
but lay always in the same Chamber with him: And this was he whom the Greeks
called the Syncellus, which afterward became an high Dignity. The Pope St.
Gregory had none but Clerks or Monks in his Palace, and this Custom is still
observed in the Court of Rome, where the Domestic Officers of the Pope are all
in Holy Orders.

But whether the Ecclesiastics lived in Common or separate, they were not
allowed to have Women lodging in the same Houses with them. Among the
Accusations against Paulus Samosatenus, this was Conc. Antioch. ii. an. 270.
Eusebius. vii. Hist. c. 10.
one, that he kept in the House with him two young handsome Women whom he
carried about with him where ever he went: And that he also permitted his
Priests and Deacons to entertain that sort of Women whom they called
Subintroductae. Subintroductae. Agae pttae.
This was an abuse grown common when the Church was unpersecuted; against which
there are extant many Treatises of the Fathers and Regulations of the Councils.
It was first Introduced upon the pretense of Charity: For these Persons who
lived in this manner with the Clerks were Virgins Consecrated to God, or such
others that made a particular profession of Devotion; to whom the Clergy
pretended to be instead of Fathers or Brothers, managing their Affairs, and
doing for them those services which they could not decently do themselves,
especially in places where Women rarely appeared in Public. And these devout
Women on their side, performed for their Brothers all those Domestic Offices
which were consistent with the Honor of their Profession: For notwithstanding
their Inhabiting together, they pretended nevertheless to In eos qui tenent
subintr.
keep their Vow of Continence; and St. Chrysostom encountering this abuse,
supposes that they effectually did so. He accuses them only of being pleased in
seeing and discoursing with each other, That the Pleasure of Conversation was
more affecting between Persons of different Sex, that by this means they were
carried on to Scandal and Indecency, and rashly exposed themselves to the
danger of a Crime. To rectify this disorder, the unmarried V. Thom. p. i. l. i.
c. 49. n. ix. V. Mend. in Conc. Elib. c. 27. Conc. Nic. cap. iii. Sev. Sulp. in
vita S. Martin. Hier. on ep. ad* Nepot.
Clerks were absolutely forbidden all habitation with Women that were
Strangers; that is to say, all that were not very nearly Related to them; which
the Council of Nice restrained to Sisters, Mothers, and Aunts. And besides the
point of Cohabitation, it was not thought convenient that Ecclesiastics should
have much Conversation with Women, though under the pretense of Piety; or that
they should receive from them their little presents of Habits, Ornaments,
Fruits or other such like Refreshments, serving rather for Delight than use,
which had any appearance of Voluptuousness and Decency.

But upon the main, the Sanctity of the Ecclesiastics was as yet very great;
and though there were always among them Persons who had their weakness, and
their Passions, the generality of them led Lives extremely Virtuous and
Exemplary. The World likewise did them Justice, and they were much respected.
Though the Bishops made no great figure in the World as to Temporal Authority,
and though they lived in a plain way as private Persons, without any thing of
Worldly Pomp or outside show of Grandeur; yet they were highly honored, not
only by the People, but also by the Magistrates, and even by the Princes
themselves. I have before taken notice of the Honors which Constantine paid to
the Fathers Assembled in Council at Nice. The Emperor Maximus made St. Martin
with one of his Priests eat at the same Table with him, and the Empress his
Wife served them with her own Hands.

As the Custom of the Romans then was to give to all Persons in place,
different Titles, as of Illustrious Glorious, Renowned, most Eminent.
Illustris, Gloriosus, spectabilis, V. Pan^ir. in Not. Imp.
Clarissimus, which were stated Appellations according to the Rank and Dignity
of the Persons to whom they were applied; so they gave to the Bishops that of
Holy or blessed, to which they added that of Pious, Religious, beloved of God,
and such like. These Titles were so Appropriated to Bishops, that they were not
omitted even in the Processes made against them; as in those against Nestorius
in the Council of Ephesus, and against Dioscorus in the Council of Calcedon.
They were given to Heretical Bishops; and in the Conference at Carthage, St.
Austin makes no scruple of saying, the most Holy Emeritus and the most Holy
Petiliam, though though they were Donatists. It had been an affront to them to
have denied them these Formalities of Respect.

The name of Papa or Pope, that signifies V. Bar. Not ad Martyr. x. Jan.
Father, which is more especially used when one would express the Endearments
of that Relation, was of a long time common to all Bishops of the Latin Church,
and in the Greek Church is still given to all Priests: They were treated as
Lords, and nothing is more common in the fourth and fifth Ages than such like
Superscriptions as these, To the most Holy, most Pious, and most venerable Lord
N. Bishop -- It was as I showed before a common practice for People to
prostrate themselves before them, and kiss their Feet: So that it is not a thing
so much to be wondered at, that these extraordinary Honors should be performed
to the Supreme Bishop, to whom the faithful have in all Ages paid a singular
deference, since the V. epist. Innoc. i. inter epist. August.
other Bishops treated the Pope as their Father, and he treated them again but
as Brethren; as is still done. For the Church of Rome has been of all others
the most constant in preserving her ancient usages.

The regard which the Temporal Powers had for the Bishops, gave them Authority
to take upon them the Protection of Widows, Orphans and all others whose case
rendered them Objects of Compassion: Particularly they made use of their
Interest to beg the Lives of Criminals. Not but that those Holy Persons had a
Zeal V. Epist. live. August. ad Maced.
for Justice; but they knew there would be always too many left to be made
examples of Severity, and they labored for the Salvation of Souls. Whether the
Condemned had been Christian or not before, the favor procured to them by
these hands could not but be a Powerful motive to draw them over both to
Repentance and Baptism. And this Delight in showing Mercy made even the
Heathens themselves in Love with the Church.

The Church interceded also in the behalf August. Epist 100. 133. 134. 139.
edit. Nov.
of her own Enemies. We have many Epistles of St. Austin where he begs the
favor of the Magistrate on the behalf of Donatists convicted of horrid
Violences and even of Murders committed on the Catholics. He pleaded that it
Epist. 134. n. iii. iv.
would dishonor the sufferings of the Murdered to put to Death the Authors of
them; and that if they could find no other penalties for them but Death, they
would thereby bring things to that pass that the Church, who delighted not in
the Blood of her Adversaries, would not dare to demand Justice against them.
This was a general Rule, that the Church was never to seek the Death of any
Man. August. Epist. lxxxxiii. ad Vincent.
They were content that Christian Princes should correct or overaw Heretics by
Banishment or pecuniary penalties, but they were to spare their Lives: And all
the Church declared their Abhorrence of the proceeding of the Bishop Ithacius
Sever. Sulp. lib. ii. Baron. an. 385.
who prosecuted the Arch-Heretick Priscillian to Death. But the Bishops could
not always obtain the Pardon they desired for these sort of Offenders, no more
than they could for others. The Princes to preserve the public Peace, Enacted
the Penalty of Death against Heretics, and their Laws were sometimes put in L.
v. L. xi. Cod. de Haeret.
Execution.

In the midst of all these honors and the high esteem the Bishops and Clergy
then had, it, was still required of them to observe the rule of Poverty. In
Africa Conc. iv. Carth. c. lii.
the Clergy how eminent soever they might be for their knowledge in the Word of
God, were enjoined to labor with their Hands, to Till the Ground or follow
some other honest Employment, whereby they might (without any prejudice to
their Function) get enough for their own Subsistence, that is to say, a
Competency for Food and Raiment. But this one would take to be understood
rather of the lesser Clerks than of the Priests and Deacons, who were
suffiiciently employed other ways. Though some of them also followed V.
Thomass. Disc. P. i- l. 9. c. ix. x. xi.
this Apostolical Counsel. But from what Fund soever the Clergy were supported,
they were obliged always to show themselves examples of a Christian Frugality
and Moderation. The Same Affrican Canons give it in Direction to the Bishops,
that they should content themselves with a moderate Table, and Ordinary
Furniture. This Rule St. Austin faithfully observed. One may guess what was his
ordinary way of living, since Posidius who has given us the History of his
Life, observes this particular of him: That besides Pulse and Herbs, he would
sometimes, when he had Strangers to entertain, have some Flesh-meat and Wine
brought to his Table. St. Paulinus in the Paul. ep. i. in fi.
same Age (he who had quitted so vast an Estate) had his Table served with
Earthern Dishes and Wooden Porringers. Of St. Martin it is observed, that in
visiting. Sulpit. de vita S. Mart.
his Diocese he commonly Rode upon an Ass, and was but very meanly Habited. St.
Lupus of Troy, St. German of Auxerne, St. Lupus of Troy, St. German of Auxerne,
St. Hilary of Arles were admired for their Abstinences and Fasting. Of St.
Epiphanius of Pavia, it is Recorded, that he never used the Bath, Eat no Supper,
and lived only on Herbs and Pulse. In the East St. Basil Eat only Bread with a
little Salt, Drank nothing but Water, and never wore above one Coat. St.
Gregory Nazianzen lived much after the same manner. The Enemies of St.
Chrysostom grounded one part of their Calumnies against him, that he Eat by
himself and lived very Reserved. And he himself Censures a certain Bishop for
wearing Hom. 9. in Epist. ad Philem.
Silks; riding on Horseback, and being attended with a large Retinue of
Servants; and that though he had a convenient Habitation, he could not yet
sorbear Building. Which were almost the same Accusations with those that had
been laid against Paulus Samasotenus in the Age Conc. Antioch. ii. an 270.
before. He was charged with living Voluptuously, Eating to Excess, being too
richly habited, and that he was attended, as he passed about the City, with a
numerous Train; more resembing the Pomp of a Magistrate than the Plainess of a
Bishop: And yet he was Bishop of Antioch; the Capital of the East, and the
third City in the World. They were so Accustomed to see their Bishops Modest
and Humble, that Malicious and Indiscreet People from thence took occasion to
pass harsh Censures upon such as were not altogether so reserved. St.
Chrysostom complains of too hard measure the Bishops met with upon this
account. There are some, says he, that think much a Bishop should go to the
Bath, that he should Eat or Hom. ii. ep. ad Tit. in fi.
Dress as other Men do, that he should have a Servant to Wait on him or a Mule
to Ride upon. So Ammianus Marcellinus, who Amm. Marc. lib. 27.
was a Heathen and strangly devoted to the Old Superstitions of the Pagan
Religion, forbears not to expose and aggravate the visible difference there was
at the end of the fourth Age in the manner of their Living, between the Pope of
Rome and the Provincial Bishops. As if it were so strange a thing and so much
to be wondered at, that the Bishop of the Capital City of the World should have
his Coach Voiture
to carry him from one Quarter to another of so large a City, that he should go
well Habited, and keep a good Table, to entertain the greatest Persons of the
Empire. It Is certain however there were at the same time in the Provinces,
Bishops who by the Frugallity of their Tables, the Poverty of their Habits, and
Modesty of their Looks rendered themselves amiable both in the sight of God and
Man. And thus much does this Heathen Author himself own and declare of them;
and that there were the like examples in the great Citys, is plain by the
Instances I have given besides many more that might have been added.

THAT which makes this moderation XXXIX. The Riches of the Church.
of the Bishops yet more remarkable, is the vast Riches of the Church, which
immediately followed the ceasing of the Persecutions. One would hardly believe
what I shall say on this Head, though the thing its self be never so certain
and well attested. All the Lives of the Popes from St. Silzvester and the
beginning of the fourth Age to the end of the Ninth are full of Presents made
to the Churches of Rome by the Popes, by the Emperors and by some Private
Persons. And these were not only gifts of Gold and Silver Plate, but Houses in
Rome, and Lands in the Country; and that not only in Italy, but in diverse
Provinces of the Empire. I shall relate no more than what was offered by
Constantine as Anastasius reports it from the Ancient Memoires that remained to
his time.

He tells us that the Emperor built and oarnamented many Churches, as first the
Constantinian (the same with the Lateran) where he bestowed these gifts; viz: A
Silver Tabernacle of two thousand twenty five pound Weight, having in the front
of it our Savior seated in a Chair, five foot in Height, weighing one hundred
and twenty pound; and the twelve Apostles each of them five foot high, and
weighing fourscore pound a piece, with Crowns of the purest Silver. On the back
side was another Image of our Savior five foot high weighing an hundred and
forty pound, and four Silver Angels of five foot each, and an hundred and
fifteen pound weight, set with with precious Stones. He gave also four Crowns
of the purest Gold, that is circles with Candlesticks in them, ornamented with
twenty Dolphins of fifteen pound each. Seven Altars of Silver of two hundred
pound weight, seven Patins of Gold of thirty pound each, forty Calices of Gold
of one pound each, five hundred Calices of Silver of two pound each: one
hundred sixty Silver Candlestick, forty of which weighed each of them thirty
pounds, the rest twenty pound apiece* And many other Vessels. In the Baptistery
the Cistern or Font was of Porphyry, overlaid with Silver to the weight of
three thousand and eight pounds. In it was placed a Golden Lamp of thirty pound
weight, in which were burning at once two hundred pounds of sweet Oil; a Golden
Lamb of thirty pound weight pouring out the Water; the Image of our Savior of
the purest Silver, five foot high, and of an hundred sixty two pound weight,
and on his left Hand a St. John Baptist in Silver of an hundred pound weight,
and seven Silver Hearts casting forth with Water, each of eight hundred pound,
set with two and forty rich Stones. All that he gave to the Church and to the
Baptistery amounted to six hundred seventy eight pound weight of Gold, nineteen
thousand six hundred seventy three of Silver: And there going but twelve ounces
to the Roman pound, the whole amounts to one thousand and seventeen Marks of
Gold, and twenty nine thousand five hundred Marks of Silver, which comes to
about twelve hundred thousand Livers, besides the Make or fashion; counting the
Mark of Gold at three hundred Livers, and the Mark of Silver at thirty Livers-
Besides all this Constantine gave to the same Church and Baptistery in Houses
and Lands to the Yearly value of thirteen thousand nine hundred thirty four
Sols of Gold which comes to more than fourscore thousand Livers per. annum.
Counting the Golden Sol but at six Livers. And all this was given to that one
Church, the Lateran.

He built seven others also at Rome, that of St. Peter, St. Paul, the Holy
Cross of Jerusalem, St. Agness, S. Laurence, St. Peter and St. Marcellinus. He
made also great presents to that of St. Silvester's founding. He caused to be
built also one Church at Ostium, another at Albanum, another at Capua, and
another at Naples What he gave to all the Churches in Gold and Silver Plate
amounted to one thousand three hundred fifty nine Marks, and four ounces of
Gold and twelve thousand four hundred thirty seven Marks of Silver, which comes
to near upon seven Hundred Fourscore Thousand Livers besides the Make, The
Yearly Revenues, with which he endowed them amounted to seventeen thousand
seven hundred and seven Solls of Gold, that is, to more than an hundred
thousand Livers, and to the value of above twenty thousand Livers in diverse
sorts of Perfumes which the Lands in Egypt were obliged to furnish in Specie,
and that counting them, but according to the price they now bear, which is
incomparably less than what it was then. The Church of St. Peter, at Rome for
example, had Houses in Antioch and the adjacent Country, it had Estates
belonging to it at Tarsus in Cilicia, at Alexandria and throughout all Egypt;
nay, it had them lying as far distant as in the Province of Euphrates, and part
of the Lands stood charged to supply the Church with a certain quantity of the
Oil of Nard, Balm, Storax, sweet Cane, Saffron, and other precious Drugs for
the use of the Censers and Lamps.

To these we may add the Churches V Eusebius. de vitae Constable. lib. iii. c. 34. 35,
etc. c. 50. lib. iv. c. 58, 59.
that Constantine and St. Helena his Mother caused to be built at Jerusalem, at
Bethlehem, and over all the Holy Land. That of the twelve Apostles, and the
others which he founded at Constantinople; for he was the Founder of all the
Churches there; that at Nicomedia, that at Antioch which was proportionable to
the Grandeur of the City: To these we may subjoin the Liberalities he bestowed
on the ibid. iv. 28.
Churches throughout the Empire. We may add further the Donations of the
following Emperors, the Gifts of the Governors of Provinces, and of all the
other great Lords who became Christians; the Benefactions of those Religious
Matrons who quitted great Estates to embrace Christian Poverty, as St. Paula at
Rome, and St. Melania; St. Olympias at Constantinople, and many others; to
these in the last place we may reckon the Gifts of the Bishops, between whom
there was a Pious Emulation of exceeding each other in adorning and enriching
their Churches. After all this one may judge how rich the Churches of the
Capital Cities were in those large Provinces which we now count for great
Kingdoms: Thus we may see that the Church of Alexandria was Prodigiously rich
in the time of St. John the Almoner, by the account we have of his Pious
management of those vast Revenues and the large Charities he bestowed out of
them. We may see in St. Gregory's Epistles what pains and trouble the
Patrimonies of the Church of Rome gave him, dispersed abroad in so many
Countries, in Sicily, in Spain, in France; the care he took that the Slaves who
were employed Vita Greg, per Jo. Diac. lib. ii. c. 55, etc.
in the Tillage of them should be well used, and the Revenues applied to the
Relief of the Poor of the Countries where they lay. Nothing of all this will
appear incredible to any one that is the least acquainted with the Grandeur and
Wealth of the Roman Empire, where it was a common thing for private Persons to
Bequeath to F. de instr. and instrum leg.
their Friends whole Towns Inhabitants and all; besides, there were great
Estates Appropriated to the Worship and Ornamenting of the Idols. There were
great sums yearly expended upon their Sacrifices, Plays and other Ceremonies of
the false Religion. It was easy for a Christian Government to enrich the Church
with what used to be flung away upon these Vanities. But one of the grand Funds
out of which the Churches were endowed, were the Christians Estates Eusebius. vita
Constable. ii. c. 35, etc.
which had been Confiscated during the Persecution.

These Goods and great Estates belonging Con. Antioch an. 341 can. ult.
to the Church, were entirely at the disposal of the Bishops: But the holy
Prelates of those times were so far from being over pleased with their
Possessions, that they complained of them, and would Thom. Dis. part i. l. iii.
c. xi.
have been glad to have seen those Days again in which the Church stood in need
of no more than the daily Offerings of the Faithful, for the supporting of
their Poor, their Clergy, and for all the other occasions of the Church. St.
Austin frequently offered to restore his Church Lands, but his People would not
accept of them. St. John Chrysostom upbraids the Christians of his Time, that
they had by their Covetousness and hard Heartedness forced the Bishops to
procure settled Revenues to their Churches, least their Virgins, Widows and
other Poor should Perish for want, if (as in the Primitive times) they had
nothing else to depend upon but casual Alms: From hence (says he) come
Chrysostom. in Mat. xxvii. 10. hom. 85.
two inconveniencys; You your selves live unprofitably, and the Priests of God
are busied in concerns Foreign to their-Function. And a little after. You make
Stewards, Farmers and Overseers of your Bishops; and instead of minding nothing
but the saving of your Souls, they are every Day disturbed with what ought to
be the business of Receivers and Treasurers: And again, Your uncharitableness
makes us Ridiculous, for we are obliged to leave our Prayers, instructing the
People and other Parts of our Holy Employment, to be always treating with
Vintners, Corn Merchants and those who sell other Provisions. So that People
have given us names which are fitter for Men of a Secular Character. Yet they
found out ways to disengage themselves from the trouble of managing their
temporal Affairs. They entrusted the care of them at first with Archdeacons,
and afterward with Stewards appointed for that very purpose. And to ease
themselves even in the works of Charity its self, they procured of their
Princes to have established Conc. Carthag.
in every City a defender of the Church and the Poor, whose Office it was to
protect the Church, and solicit for the Poor.

A CONSIDERABLE part of the Goods of the Church was employed in the founding
XL. Hospitals.
and maintaining of Hospitals: For now it was they began. The Government of the
Greeks and Romans went a great way in making Laws against Idleness, and keeping
their Countries clear of sturdy Beggars and Vagrants; but we find no pulick
Provision for such poor Creatures as were able to do nothing: They thought it
was better for them to dye than live unprofitably and wretched; and that if
they had any thing of Spirit or Courage in them, they would fairly dispatch
themselves. The Christians aiming principally at the saving Peoples Souls,
neglected none of them; and those who were most abandoned by others, they
thought best deserving of their Care. They provided not only for their own
Poor, but even for those also of the Heathen. This Julian the Apostate
testifies Julian. ep. ult. Asacio.
of them, (not without shame) commanding Hospitals to be erected, and
Contributions raised for the maintenance of the Poor, after the manner of the
Christians. There were two ways of relieving the Poor, the one by distributing
Alms among Baron. ad Marryrol. viii. Aug.
them, leaving it unto themselves to shift for their Lodgings. To this purpose
there was in every quarter of Rome a place called the Diaconium, which was a
sort of Office for the management of these Alms. A Deacon always resided there,
Greg. ix. epist. 24.
and received from time to time a certain sum of Money to be faithfully
distributed by him amongst the Poor, for which he was accountable. The other
way of relieving the Poor, and that far better too, was both to lodge and to
feed them together in Common: For this purpose as soon as the Church had its
Liberty, there were several Houses of Charity built, all which we call by the
common name of Hospitals, but in Greek they had different Appellations
according to the different Qualities of the Poor for whom they were appointed.

The House for Infants exposed, or otherwise wanting that Relief, was called V.
l. 19. l. 21. Cod. de Sacros. Ec. cl.
the Brephotrophium; that of Orphans, Orphanotrophium, the Nosocomium was an
Hospital for the Sick; Xenodochium Logings for Strangers or Passengers: And
this is that which in Latin is properly called Hospital, an House of
Entertainment for Strangers. The Gerontocomium was a retreat for Aged Persons.
Ptochotrophium was common to all sorts of Poor: But there were also such Houses
of Charity Aug. in Jo. tract. 97.
before they had these names given them; There were many of them quickly
erected in all great Cities. It was ordinarily some Priest that had the
Overseeing of them. As at Alexandria St. Is^dorus under the Patriarch
Theophilus. At Constantinople St. Baron. ad 31. Dec. and 27. Jun.
Zoticus, and after him St. Sampson: There were also some private Persons who
erected Hospitals at their own Expenses, as St. Pammachius at Porto, and St.
Gallicanus at Ostia. This St. Gallicanus was a Patrician, Martyr. 25 Jun.
and had been Consul; and 'twas a sight that drew Spectators from all parts to
see a Person of his Rank and Quality, one that had worn the Triumphal
Ornaments, and could have boasted of his Friendship with the Emperor
Constantine, to see I say such a Person washing the Feet and the Hands of the
Poor, waiting upon them at Table and giving the Sick all sort of assistance.
The holy Bishops thought no expenses too great that were bestowed upon so good
purposes: Besides, they took great care about the Burial of their Poor, and the
Redemption of Captives who had been taken by the Barbarians, as it often
happened in the Declension of the Roman Empire: For these two last sorts of
Charity they sold, even the communion Plate, notwithstanding the Privilege of
Appropriation. The instance of St. Exuperius Bishop Hiron. ad Rustic. and (...)
Sept.
of Tholose is very remarkable, who reduced himself upon this score to such a
degree of Poverty, that he carried the Body of our Savior in a little Basket,
and his Blood in a Calice of Glass. And St. Paulinus Bishop of Nola having sold
all, Gregor. iii. Dialog. c. i. ii.
made himself a Slave to ransom the Son of a certain Widow; so that those vast
Treasures of the Churches, the Gold and Silver with which they were Ornamented,
were deposited in the nature of a Trust till pressing Occasions, as a public
Calamity, a Petilence, a Famine, or the like, should require it; every thing
gave place to the providing for the living Temples Jo. Diac. vita S. Greg. lib.
iv. cap. xliii.
of the Holy Ghost. They redeemed also such as lived in Slavery at home, or
within the Empire, especially such as were Christian Slaves to Pagan or Jewish
Masters.

IN the last place, it was after the XLI. Monasteries.
Church had gained its Liberty, that they began to found Monasteries, Under the
Persecutions many Christians had retired into the Deserts: Principally those
adjoining to Egypt; and some passed the remainder Hier. vita. S. Pauli.
of their Lives in them, as St. Paul, who is reckoned the first Hermit. St.
Anthony having for some time lead the Ascetique life near the place of his
Nativity, withdrew himself afterward into the Desert, that he might with
greater freedom and security pursue his religious Exercises, upon being removed
out of the Reach of all Temptations which might be occasioned by Society. He
was the first that gathered Disciples together in the Wilderness, and there
obliged them to live in common. They were now no longer called simply
Asceticks, though in effect they led the same Life; but went by the name of
Monks, that is to say, Solitaries, or Hermits, to wit, those that inhabit the
Wilderness. Those who lived together were termed Caenobites; and those who
having lived a long time in common and there learned to conquer their Passions,
and afterward retired to a more absolute Solitude they called Anchoretes. And
yet the Caenobites themselves lived very Solitary, seeing no Soul but their own
Fraternity; being at the distance of many Days Journey from all inhabited
Places, in sandy Deserts, whither they were forced to carry all necessaries,
even their very Water. Nor did they so much as see one another save only in the
evening and in the Night at their stated hours of Prayer, spending all the Day
at work in their Cells either alone, or two and two together, and always in
profound Silence. Besides, as in those vast Solitudes, they were not
straightened for want of Room, so their Cells stood at a considerable distance
one from another.

St. Anthony, St. Hilarian, St. Pacomus, and the others that followed their
Examples did not pretend to introduce Novelties or outdoe all that ever went
before them. Their design was only to keep up the exact practice of the
Christian Religion which they saw every Day more and more declining. They
always proposed the Asceticks that went before them for their Examples. As in
Egypt, those Disciples of St. Mark, who (as Cassian relates) lived in the
Suburbs of Cass. ii. Jnst. v. 18, Coll. v.
Alexandria, close shut up in their Houses, Spending all their time in Praying
and Meditating upon the Holy Scriptures; laboring with their Hands all Day and
never eating but at Night. They proposed for their imitation the Primitive
Church of Jerusalem, the Apostles themselves and the Prophets. It Was not an
Hier. ad Paulin. item ad Rustic.
Affectation to make themselves admired for the extraordinariness of their
Methods, but an honest intention of leading the lives of good Christians. This
one may see through the whole Rule of St. Basil, which is indeed no more than
an Abridgement of the Duties of a Christian who would lead his Life according
to the Precepts of the Gospel, and which he lays down in general to all sorts
of Persons. He says, S. Basil reg. fas. n. xxii.
for example, as to Habits, that a Christian ought to content himself with such
Clothing as is sufficient for Decency, and to defend the Body against Cold and
the other injuries of the Air; but to be as little encumbered as possible: And
therefore to be content with one Garment both for Day and Night, a thing in the
Country where he lived not impracticable. There is very little in his Rule
which is perculiar to Monks separate from the rest of the World.

That which was singular in the Monks was their Renouncing of Marriage, and
Chrysostom. ad fidel. patr.
the Possession of Temporal goods, and their Separating themselves from conver
sation with the rest of the World, either of the Faithful themselves or their
nearest Relations. As to the rest they acted but the part of good Laics living
by their Cass. Instit. v. c. 12. 16. etc. and 6. c. 7.
Labors, in silence, and exercising themselves in getting the Mastery over
their Passions by degrees: So that having, as 1. Cor. ix. 25. 2 Timothy ii. 5.
(...). Matthew. v. viii.
St. Paul expresses it, like resolute Combatants Striven for the Mastery, and
Striven Lawfully, they might arrive to that Purity of Heart which might render
them fit to see God- Upon these Principles were all their Methods and Practices
founded. St. Chrysostom gives us a Memorable History of a Young Man, whose
Mother Ad fidel. patr.
was desirous that he should become a good Christian, and prevailed with a
Virtuous Monk to take him into his Tuition. This Holy Man to Instruct him more
perfectly in the Duties of Religion, causes him to practice in Private all the
exercises of the Monastic Life, without making any open Show or Profession of
it, and still leading in appearance the common Life. Their continued course of
Fastings tended in the first place to Cass. Jnstit. lib. v.
subdue the Sin of Gluttony; and then to prevent the Temptations of Impurity,
to render the Soul more free and Serene, and in a proper condition to apply
herself to Spiritual things. However they used Jdem. Coll. ii. c. 1. 7. etc.
discretion in the matter, and took care to keep the Body in sufficient Plight
to bear up with their continual Labors and short Sleeps, without prejudicing
their Health; so that they lived to a very great Age without any Sickness or
Diseases. In the Lives of the Fathers we meet with a great number of these
Monks that lived to fourscore or fourscore and ten Years; some to an hundred,
and others more. These examples we chiefly meet with among the Aegyptan Monks,
who were the most admired for their Wisdom; and who, after mature
Deliberations upon long Experience, came to this conclusion, that the Diet* of
the Monks should be Cass. Coll. ii. cap. xix.
limited to the eating of only two little Loaves a Day of six ounces a piece,
and that not till after three a Clock, and to the drinking of nothing but
Water. Solitude they used as a remedy against the Incitements of Impurity and
Avarice, endeavoring as much as was possible to loose the very Remembrance of
objects that might excite such Temptations. They also conquered Avarice by
their extreme Poverty and by sticking close to their Rule of having nothing of
their own and of distributing to the Poor out of the gains of every Days
Labor, all that remained over and above their own Subsistence. And so
considerable were De Mor. Eccl. i. c. lxvii.
these Alms (as St. Austin reports) that they Fraighted whole Vessels with
them. Lastly, they combated the passion of Anger by their Silence, and by
keeping such Company as obliged them to bear with one another; sloth they
encountered by continual Labors; Sadnefs, by Prayer and singing of Psalms;
Pride and V. Chrysostom. Hom. lxxii. in Matthew.
Vanity, by the practice of an absolute Obedience and severe Mortification.

There were also some Monks that wrought in Husbandry, and for hire in the
Harvest and Vintages, promiscuously with other Laborers: But the more perfect
of them found their Thoughts too much scattered by these Employments, and shut
Cass. Collat. xxiv. de Mortific. c. iii. iv, etc.
themselves up in their Cells making Rush-Mats, Wicker Baskets, and such like
things, which did not take them off from Meditating upon the Scriptures, and
keeping their Souls always intent upon God. There were none of them without
some Business or other, and the least was Transcribing Books: However the
greatest Part of them did not give themselves to Study, and many of them could
not so much as Read. This way of living being so poor, so laborious and mean to
outward appearance brought them under the contempt of Libertines, and even of
some Chrysos. advers. vitup.
Christians themselves. They made lewd Jests of them; they sometimes proceeded
to violence, even so far as to strike the Monks, to drag them out of their
Cells, and hawl them before the Magistrates: But all this served only to make
their Humility and Patience more remarkable. They were so much loved and
respected by all underderstanding People, and not only by the Vulgar, but even
by Persons of Quality; nor by the Laity only, but also by the Priests and
Bishops themselves; that those of the greatest Sanctity and Capacity among them
were often thought fit to be advanced to some Public Ministry in the Church,
or even to the Episcopal Dignity. Then they quitted their Monastry and returned
to the Commerce of the World; living the same Life with the rest of the V.
Cass. xvii. Collat. 21. ad fidel. patr.
Clergy. We see nothing of solemn Vows in these first times. St. Chrysostom
speaks of a Monk's returning to the World as a thing of Freedom: He advises a
Father to engage his Son in this Holy manner of Life, as soon as he should come
to be in a state of Sinning, at about ten Years of Age, and to let him continue
in it for the Space of Ten or twenty Years, till he was perfected and
established in goodness. He himself quitted the Monastic Life at the end of
five Years, for the recovery of his Health. But one may see by the Reprimand he
gives his Friend Theodorus, how much those were to blame, who through
lightness, disgust, or any other unwarantable motive took leave of their virtue
and a Monastic Life together. The Church put them under Penance, but as for
Civil Punishments they had none but the disgrace of their Inconstancy.

The Sanctity of the Monastic Life appeared with such a Luster, that within V.
Chrysostom. hom. in ep. ad Timoth. August. de Mor. Eccl. i. c. lxvii. Hier.
praef. in reg. S. Pacom. and epist. ad Eustoch.
a short time there spread all over the East many thousands of Monks and
Monasteries. The Rule of St. Pacomus alone had under it fifty thousand Monks,
distributed into several Houses under the Government of one Abbot, who all met
together at Easter to Celebrate the Christian Passover. The Founding of these
kind of Monasteries met with no difficulty; they had neither Lands nor
Possessions to make Chrysostom. ad fid. patr.
them envied: There wanted neither Permission, nor Assistance to those that had
a mind to forsake all and retire into uninhabited places, and build themselves
little Wooden Cells there, or of Reeds, or what the place afforded; to confine
themselves to Silence and Labor, and so to live not only not burdensome to
any, but to be very serviceable also to the public, by those good Works and
Charities before mentioned. These Monasteries did in time so Act. Conc. v. can.
53.
multiply, and spread themselves, that there were of them also in inhabited
places, and in the Neighborhood of great Gities. Thus it was not thought
reasonable that in plentiful Countries, as Italy, Sicily and Greece, they
should be debarred the Privilege. But in what public places soeve they were,
the Monks still kept to their solitary way, confined themselves to their
Cloisters, and punctually observed their Rule of Silence.

When they were near enough to the Cities, they came to the public Church to
hear the Instructions of the Bishop, and to participate of the Holy Mysteries.
They had their place allotted them separate from the rest of the Congregation,
as the Virgins and the Widows had theirs: But this Ambros. ad virg. laps. c. vi.
hindered them not to have in their own Houses Oratories, where at the stated
Hours they all met together and Prayed in common. They that lived farther from
Towns, had among them Priests to perform Divine Service and Administer the
Sacraments; and at last it was found convenient that every Monastery should
have in it one Priest at least, and one or two Deacons; and this Priest was
often their Abbot. Thus having no occasion to go abroad, they were shut up in
their Monasteries as the Dead in their Sepulchers: This was the pretense that
Arch-Heretick Eutiches made for his not appearing at the Con. Chalc. Act.
Council of Chalcedon.

There were also Monasteries for Women, or Nunneries in the Deserts, where they
abode within Convenient distance of the Monks to receive mutual assistance from
each other by their Neighborhood, and yet so far asunder as to avoid all
danger and Scandal. The Monks built the Nuns their Cells, and helped them in
their most laborious Works; the Nuns made the Monks Clothes, and did them other
suchlike Services. But all this Commerce of Charity was managed by some aged
Persons appointed for that purpose; none else being suffered to go near the
Nunneries. There were also many of these Nunneries founded in Cities, where all
the Virgins Consecrated to God, lived in Community, who before lived separate
in private Houses. The Nuns of Egypt and Syria Hier. epist. 48. ad Sabinian.
Baron. ad Martyr. 20 Sept.
cut off their Hair for cleanliness sake; in other places they kept it on: The
practice of Antiquity in these Cases being different.

The Bishops who made their Clergy live in common, took their Method of living
from the Monks; and as much as the active Life of the Clergy would permit, they
conformed themselves to it, so that these Communities were often called also by
the name of Monasteries, and in time they were quite confounded one with the
other. In the Fifth Age the greatest part Thom. Disc. ii. part. l. i. c. 34,
35, 36.
of the Bishops and Priests of Gaul, and of the West, practiced the Monastic
Life and wore the Habit. The Pope St. Gregory was taken out of a Monastery,
where upon quitting the grandeur of this World Jo. Diac. lib. ii. c. xi.
he had shut himelf up; but notwithstanding his Advancement, he still kept to
the Monastic Life, and filled his Palace with Pious Monks, out of whom he made
many of his great Bishops, and among the rest St. Austin the Monk, with the
other Apostles of England.

The true use of the Monastic Life was to improve and perfect such unspotted
Souls as had preserved the Innocence of their Baptism; or such Converted
Sinners as desired to Purify themselves by Repentance. 'Twas for this end they
received into their Monasteries Persons of all Ages and Conditions: Young
Children, whom their Parents were for placing early out of the danger of the
World; Old Persons, who desired to end their Lives Religiously; Married Men,
whose Wives also had consented to the same way of Living. In the Rule of St.
Fructuosus Cod. Regul.
Archbishop of Braga, we find Regulations for all these Persons. They who for
their Sins were obliged by the Canons to do Penances of many Years, found it
undoubtedly much more Commodious to pass them in a Monastery, where the example
of Living in Common, and the Consolations received from those more advanced in
Years, might somewhat ease their Sorrows; than to Live at large under them in
the wide World, where they could not avoid being singular and Pointed at. So
that the Monastery became a kind of Prison or Exile, with which great Persons
were often punished; of which we have examples in France under the two first
Lines of our Kings, and in the East from the sixth Age.

THE Monastic Life is a sensible XLII. The Monastic life compared with that
of the first Christians.
proof of the Providence of God, and of the care he has taken to preserve in
his Church to the end of all Ages, not only purity of Doctrine, but also
Holiness of Life. If we call to mind what has been said of the Christian Life
in the second part of this Treatise, and compare it with the Rule of St.
Bennet, and with the present usages of the well-regulated Monasteries, we shall
find that there is but little difference between them.

I have proved there that those Christians looked upon Religion as their main
Concern, making all the Affairs of this Life subservient to it: And thus it is
with the Monks who sequester themselves from the world that they may be at more
liberty to mind the most necessary Point. And for this Reason they are called
The Religious, a name common at first to all good Christians. The Monks,
Asceticks and Virgins had also the name of Devotes given them, from their being
entirely Devoted to God.

Those first Christians were very frequent both in Public and private Prayer,
coming as near as possibly they could to the Rule of Praying always: the
Psalmody is nowhere better Regulated, nor more exactly observed than in the
Monasteries, where it still continues the same as St. Benet set it above eleven
hundred Years ago. The Monks having nothing to divert them from the exercises
of Religion, have kept up the Practice more exactly than even the Clergy
themselves. It Is supposed they reduced the Office into the form, in which it
has stood now for a long time; at least they added the Prime and Complin,
which at first were only private Prayers for every Christian Family, or every
Monastery to make use 3 Instit. iv. vi.
of at their own Houses, to sanctify the beginning and ending of the Day.
Cassian declares that this Establishment was but new in his Days. In all this
the Canons are to be esteemed as a sort of Monks; and so indeed in the
beginning they were, being then all of them Regulars. The Primitive Christians
received the Communion very often; fo do the Monks for the most part. Ruffinus
tells us the Disciples of St. Apollonius Communicated S. Basil. ep. 289, ad
Caesar. Patr.
every Day. The Monks kept up for a long time the Ancient custom of having the
Eucharist always lying by them to Communicate themselves, when they should want
a Priest to Administer it. 'Twas perhaps for want of this Precaution, Chrysostom.
Hom. xvii. in Epist. ad Hebr.
that some continued for the space of two whole Years without receiving the
Sacrament.

Those Primitive Christians spent much of their time in Reading the Holy
Scriptures: The Rule of St. Benet prescribes Reg. S. Ben. c. xlviii.
the same to his Monks, and more particularly that all the time of Lent, and on
all Sundays, they should apply themselves wholly to this Exercise. For on other
Days, they spent much of their time in the labor of their Hands, of which
Practice some traces are still remaining; though it must be confessed, that of
all the Monastic customs this is the least continued. Silence was necessary
(as is said before) to avoid the common sins of the Tongue, so frequent amongst
Men, and yet so much condemned in the Scriptures; as Reviling, evil Reports,
indecent Rallery, foolish Jesting, vain, Impertinent and unprofitable
Discourses; and it is observable that the best-Regulated Monasteries are those
wherein the rule of Silence is most rigorously observed. The names of Father or
Brother according to the difference of Age or Quality, were of Old the common
Appellations among Christians. They were very Obedient to their Prelates and to
those that had an Authority over them; they were closely cemented in Union
among themselves; forward in exercising Hospitality toward their Brethren and
liberal in their Alms to the Poor of what sort soever. All this we see still
Practiced in the Monasteries.

BUT, may not it be said, If the Monks XLIII. The Reasons of the External
singularities in the Monks.
pretend to no more than to live like good Christians, Why do they affect such
singularities and distinctions from the rest of the World? Why do they so
distinguish themselves from their Neighbors in matters which are Indifferent?
What means this singularity in Habit and Figure? Those Peculiarities in their
way of Eating, their hours of Sleep, the manner of their Lodging, in a Word,
all that which makes them look as if they were a different Race of Men from the
rest of Mankind, another sort of Christians scattered among all other Christian
Nations? And why such Diversities amongst the different Orders of the
Religious? And all in matters neither commanded nor forbidden by the Word of
God. Does not all this look as if they had a mind by their Extraordinary
outside, to strike the imagination of the People, thereby the better to gain
Respect and Advantage? This is what many imagine within themselves, and some
speak out expressly. But these Rash Censures proceed from their want of knowledge
in Antiquity; for if one will be at the pains of examining into these Exterior
Distinctions of the Monks, and the other Religious, he will find that they are
only the remains of ancient Manners which have been throughout the course of
many Ages faithfully preserved by them, while in the rest of the World they
have undergone wonderful alterations.

To begin with their Habits. St. Benet Reg. S. Ben. c. lv.
says that the Monks ought to be content with a Tunique, a Cowl, and a
Scapulary Vilia vendentem tunicato Scruta popello, Hor. i. Epist. vii.
for them to work in. The Tunique without a Cloak had a long time been the
Habit of the meaner sort of People; and the Cowl was a kind of Hood worn by
Peasants and Poor Laborers. This Accoutrement Pullo Maevius alget in cucullo,
Mart.
for the Head being a good sense against the Cold, became afterward common to
all sorts of Persons, and so continued in these parts of Europe till about two
hundred Years ago. Not only the Clergy and Men of Letters, but also the
Nobility and Courtiers had their Capuches and Hoods of several sorts and
fashions. The Cucullus mentioned in the Rule of St. Benet served instead of a
Cloak. Thus what the Cistertian Monks call the Cowle, (the name importing as
much) and the Benedictines the Frok, they are of the same Original, being both
derived from the Old Cucullus. St. Benet gives them also a Scapulary to work
in: It was much wider and shorter than they wear it now, and served, as the
name implies, for the carrying burdens upon their shoulders, and to preserve
their Tunique. This Scapulary had its Capuche or Hood as well as the Cucullus.
And these two Habits were not worn both at the same time; the Scapulary, when
they were at Work in their own Monasteries; the Cucullus, or Cowle, at Church,
or when they went abroad. Afterward the Monks came to look upon their
Scapulary as the most Essential part of their Habit; so that they they never
left it off, but wore their Frock or Cowle over it.

It appears therefore that St. Benet gave his Monks no other Habits, but such
as were then commonly worn by the Poorer sort of People in his Country. They
were scarce any other way Distinguishable than by an entire uniformity among
themselves, being all of them clothed exactly alike; which was but necessary,
that so the same Suits might serve indifferently for all the Monks of the same
Convent. Now it is no wonder that in the Course of eleven hundred Years, there
should be some Diversity found, as to the color and shape of their Habits,
between the same order of Monks that follow the rule of St. Benet; considering
the different Countries into which they spread, and the several Reformations
made of them in several places. And as for the other Religious Orders that have
been founded within five hundred Years last past, they have kept to the same
Habits which they found in use in their Times. The greatest part wear no Linen
Shirts, which to us Nowadays seems a severe Prohibition. But the wearing of
Linen Shirts was not of common use till long after St. Benet. In Poland they
are not worn to this Day; and throughout all Turkey they use no Sheets, and but
half undress for Bed, lying in their Drawers; though even before the use of
Linnen-Sheets, 'twas the common custom to go into the Bed Stark naked, as is
still done in Italy. And therefore their Rule obliges the Monks to Sleep in
their Clothes, without putting off so much as their Girdle.

As for their Diet I have before observed, that it was an ordinary thing not
only for Christians, but also for the most rational Persons among the Heathens
themselves to live on Pulse and Fish, and that 'twas a common custom with them
to have some Book read to them as they sat at Meals. I have also observed that
Christians did keep many private Fasts, besides the more solemn ones of the
Church, and that they made long Graces both before and after Meat. So that
herein St. Benet has prescribed nothing singular or extraordinary; on the
contrary he was so indulgent as to permit his Monks two different Dishes of
Meat and a little Wine. The Reg. S. Ben. c. 39. and 40.
Hours of Eating and Drinking observed by the Monks were the same all the World
over, till this last Age. They Dined at Phil. Com.
nine or ten in the Morning, as the greatest part of laboring People still do;
and Sup't at six at Night. Those civil Regulations Conf. ord.
concerning the Couvrefeu, and the limited Hours of working at the Forge, show
that they reckoned the hours of rest and sleep from eight of the Clock at Night
to four in the Morning, which is the most equal Rule of taking the middle of
the Night for sleep, and losing as little as is possible of the Day.

That the Dormitory should be without Partitions of Cells, as is directed by
the Rule of St. Benet, is no more than what their Living-in-common in a strict
Sense properly requires; for this is properly to Live in common, to Sleep all
in the same Chamber and Dine all in the same Hall: Besides, by this means their
Poverty appeared more undisguised, and their Virtue was better guarded. It was
easy for their Superior with one Glance of his Eye, to observe whether any
thing passed there contrary to Modesty; besides, their Rule farther required,
that there should be Lights always in the Dormitory, and that every single Bed
which consisted only of a Mat and a Coverlet, should be placed in full view.
This fashion is still kept up in Hospitals, and it is certain was very ancient
among Christians; and the Cells likewise (or every one's having his little
Apartment to himself) are of very ancient usage. But with the first Monks of
the Deserts, these Cells were only little Hutts or Cottages where they dwelt
separately, such as those of the Carthusians and the Camaldoli, and though
there lodged two or three Monks together under the same Roof, yet they changed
not their name; and therefore we find that the lesser Monasteries, which we now
commonly call Priories, passed for a long time under the name of Cells; they
were also called Casae. Both the one and the other of these names seem to have
been taken up from the lodgings of Slaves: For the Monks in their way of
living, chose to imitate the condition of the poorest and most despicable of
Mankind.

Besides, methinks I can trace in our Monasteries the Model of the old Roman
ways of Building, as it is described in Vitruvius and Palladius. Their Church,
that it might be free and convenient for Seculars, was always in the front of
the Monastery, and seems to have succeeded in the stead of the first Hall,
which the Romans called the Atrium: From thence you pass into a Court
surrounded with covered Galleries, to which they ordinarily gave the Greek name
of Peristilium; and this is the proper Cloister it self, into which was a
passage from the Church, and out of which you are led into the other parts of
the House; as the Chapter House which was for Exedra of the ancients; the
Refectory or Triclinium, and the Garden which ordinarily stands behind all the
rest, which was the way of the ancients.

But let that be as it will, certain it is, that those Holy Persons, who formed
their Rules for the Monks, had no design of introducing Novelties, or of
distinguishing themselves by the singularities of their Methods. That which
makes the Monks appear now so strange and extraordinary, is the change of other
Men's Manners; as the most ancient buildings are become singular, because they
are the only Fabrics left us that have stood for so many Ages. And as the more
judicious any Architect is, so much the more curious is he in finding out the
imperfect remains of those old Buildings, as well knowing that that the Art of
Building has in these last Ages been recovered only by the imitation of these
excellent Models: So Christians ought exactly to observe the Practice of the
most regular Monasteries, to give them a view of the best examples of a life
truly Christian. I know there is scarce any thing which the length of time has
not somewhat impaired; so there is no old building which time has entirely
sparred, and of many-a-one there remains nothing but misshapen Ruins; and yet by
taking an exact view even of these Ruins, and examining the very least
Fragments of these precious Antiquities, and then by comparing them with their
Histories in the Books of the Ancients; we come at the same time both to
understand the true proportions of the whole Fabric, and the true sense of the
ancient Writings. After the same manner great use might be made of our
Enquiries into the Monastic practices, if together with them we also read the
Rules of the Founders of the several Orders, the old Canons, the writings of
the new Testament, and the lives of the Saints of all Ages. In the mean time it
cannot be denied but that the Monasteries have been the Repositories of all
sorts of Antiquities: The greatest part of those old Manuscripts were found in
them, by the help of which, Learning has been restored in these last Ages: In
them were preserved the Works of the Fathers, and the Canons of the Councils.
We discover every day in the Statutes and Customs of ancient Monasteries,
Ecclesiastical Antiquities of the greatest Curiosity: In a word, the
Evangelical Practice in the Cloisters has been all along kept up to its
primitive Purity, while in the World it has been every Day changing from worse
to worse; and it is this Declention of Religion I am now entering upon.

Part IV.
HAVING represented the Behavior of the ancient Christians, I think XLIV. The
decay of Christian Piety in the Fourth and following Ages, with the causes of
it.
my self obliged now to add the principal Causes of the prodigious difference
there is between Their way of living and Ours; and so great is that difference,
that to many (I doubt not) this Account will appear as strange as those
Relations our Travelers give us of the Indians and Chinese manner of living;
and the more Ignorant will scarce have Faith enough to give Credit to it,
because every particular is not proved home to them, and the Testimonies set
down at length: But the whole stands upon Authorities well known to Persons of
Learning and Reading. We will proceed therefore to take a general view of the
progress of this decay.

When Constantine had declared for Christianity, the Converts came into it, in
shoals; and what the Prophets had of old Predicted concerning the Church was
literally accomplished; that she should be established on the top of the
Mountains Is. ii. 3.
and that all Nations should flow in unto her, to learn from her the Law of
God, and the Rule of living. On the one side men with their own Eyes beheld the
extraordinary Miracles which were every day wrought at the Tombs of the
Martyrs; the holy Lives of the greatest part of Christians, and the invincible
force of this Religion, against which three hundred Years cruel Persecution had
prevailed no farther, than to give it the deeper rooting. On the other side,
Idolatry, and the Fabulous Theology of the Poets was long before so exposed by
the Philosophers, that almost all the Men of Wit and Sense among them believed
nothing of it, but kept up the Religion of the People only for their own
Interests; and therefore they readily quitted it, when it was no longer
supported by public Authority; and most of them turned Christians: Others out
of a Libertine Opinion or Practice even continued as they were without having
any Religion at all; either because they could not bring their understandings
to submit to the obedience of Faith, or that they would not quit their
Debauchery or forgo their ill gotten Goods, or the unjust methods of raising
their Fortunes.

There were scarce any Pagans left but of these two sorts; the gross ignorant
vulgar, who were governed by Custom only and who were not capable of any thing
higher than the impressions of Sense; and some affected Wits who to show their
parts and Learning, and out of a blind Veneration for Antiquity, were resolved
to maintain the cause of Paganism, and to that end underpropped it with the
Allegorical explications of some Philosophers Fables. These were the Platonicks
of those times, far from the good Sense and Solidity of Plato and the ancient
Academicks his Disciples: These fanciful Wits picking up what was most weak in
the Doctrine of Plato, and mixing it with that of Pythagoras, and with the
Mysteries of the Egyptians, patch't up a kind of Religion, which at the bottom
was founded upon Magic, and which under the pretense of Worshipping good or bad
Spirits authorized all sorts of Superstitions. Such was the Religion of Julian
the Apostate, and we see somewhat of it in the Maxims of Apuleius in Porphyry
and Jamblichus. But there were few that penetrated into these subtilties, and
Paganism sunk every day more and more into Contempt.

Among so great a multitude of new Christians it was impossible that some
should not pass in the Crowd, drawn in only by Temporal Considerations, upon
the hopes of making their Fortunes under Christian Princes, Complaisance to
their Friends and Relations, the fear of displeasing their Masters; and in a
word, upon August. in Jo. vi. 26. tract. ii.
all those Motives which now a Days make Hypocrites and false Zealots: But
these for the most part contented themselves with the bare Character of
Catechumens; and being loath to submit themselves to that strictness of Life
which Christianity requires; they were for deferring their Baptism as long as
they could, and often to the point of Death, that so they might to the last
continue the unhappy liberty of committing Sin, without Subjecting themselves
to the Discipline of Penance. Others proceeded even to Baptism, and were V.
Aug. de Catechiz. c. xvii. Cyr. Hier. Procatech.
not in their Hearts true Converts. Some light inquisitive People were drawn in
purely out of a curiosity to know the Mysteries which were revealed to none but
the Faithful. Their Superstition made them greedy after Religion, and ambitious
of being initiated into all sorts of Ceremonies, and to participate in every
thing which bore the name of Sacred, without distinguishing the true God, or
the true Religion. Among so many pretenders to Christianity, what caution
soever the Prelates could use; They were but Men, and it was impossible they
should not sometimes be mistaken.

Many even of those that were Christians in good earnest, grew every Day more
and more remiss. The fear of Martyrdom Leo. Sermon. 6. in Epiph c. iii. Cypr. de
Lapsis. Dionys. Alex. apud Eusebius. vi. Hist. 34. Eusebius. viii. Hist. c. ii.
was removed, and Death did not now appear to them so near at hand. Their
security from outward danger betrayed them into that great hazard of Laying
aside their Watchfulness. Even in the state of persecution, during the
Intervals of their Troubles, there was perceived a sensible abatement of
Christian fervor: Of this the Fathers very much complain; ascribing the
hottest Persecutions to this remisness of Zeal, when ever they enjoyed the
least Respite from their Enemies. How must it then have been with them in a
sure and settled Peace, when it was not only not dangerous to be a Christian, but
also Honorable and advantageous? The Princes and Magistrates being Converted
to the Faith, still maintained their Secular Grandeur; and were never the less
good Christians for looking after their temporal concerns, and exercising their
Charges: So the common sort of Believers seeing Religion and Worldly greatness
so fairly reconciled in these examples, began to think there was no such great
danger in Honors, Riches, and other enjoyments of this Life. Thus the Love of
pleasure, Covetousness and Ambition revived in them. The World was now become
Christian, yet still the World was the same. They began now to Distinguish
between Christians, and Saints, and Religious. We find St. John Chrysostom
frequently complaining of it, that Chrysostom ad fidel. patr. Idem Hom. i. in
Matthew. ^or. in fi.
his Hearers, to excuse their Earthly mindedness and too great Solicitude about
the affairs of this World, were wont to tell him; We are no Monks, we have
Wives and Children to provide for, and Families to look after: As if the
Christians of Rome, or of Corinth, whom St. Paul calls Saints, and to whom he
ascribes so high a Perfection, were not Married Persons, and led in the
concerns of this World, the same common life with other Men.

To this, add the Corruption of Nature that turns Food into Poison. The Church
had in her public Offices some kind of Observances more agreeable to outward
Sense. These were easily abused to the Flesh, and applied to wrong Ends,
contrary to the Iustitution of them. The Sunday Rejoycings, and those of the
other Grand Solemnyties exceeded sometimes the Bounds of Sobriety and Basil.
Orat. de Ebriet.
Christian Moderation. So that in the fourth Age they were obliged (as I have
Aug. ep. xxix. nov.
before observed) to abolish the custom of making Entertainments at the Feasts
of the Martyrs, and the Clergy were also Prohibited from being present at those
of Marryages. Origin has well observed Orig. cont. Cells.
how difficult a thing it is to reconcile sensible Pleasure with Spiritual joy.
The Body is a Slave, which if too much Humored and Pampered with Food, Sleep,
or other such like Indulgences, will presently become Insolent and grow upon
us; Usurp upon the better part, take off the mind from applying it self to
Spiritual things, and weaken its power of bearing up against Temptation. Nor
can the Spirit maintain its dominion over the Flesh, but by a severe Conduct
and continual Application. I speak here of the same times I have just now
described in the third part; and do rip up in them also the least Faults, that
so I may the better trace out the very first beginnings of the Declension of
Christian Piety, without designing in the least to invalidate what I there said
of the Manners of the Church in general, or of its Discipline, which was still
preserved in its full vigor: And above all the Sanctity of their Clergy was
extraordinary. However it must be granted there were some Prelates too sensible
of the great Honors that were paid them. And some also were accused of having
misemployed the great Estates of which they had the Disposal. One may see what
Complaints were preferred to the Council of Chalcedon against Dioscorus and
Ibas upon this account. I believe Conc. Chalc. Act. iii. and x.
there can scarce be found any of the Orthodox Bishops of those times justly
charged with the same Reproach. But as the Arrians and other Heretics had also
their Bishops and Priests; Their Passionate Conduct lessened in the eyes of the
World, the Honor of the order it self. 'Twas a great scandal to the Pagans and
weak Christians to see Persons that had such Venerable Titles, Masters of so
little Temper, and disputing with such heat against the other Bishops and
Priests, outraging them with Injuries and aspersions both in their Discourses
and Writings. Coming to the Court, Soliciting the favor of the Prince to
support their Party. For the Heretics omitted none of these Practices. One
might have seen the Monks, transported with a mistaken Zeal, leaving their
Solitudes, flocking to the Cities, raising Seditions, and committing unheard of
Insolences. These disorders Reigned pincipally in the East, where the Spirits
of Men being generally of a more hot and inflexible Temper, their Passions
presently took fire, and carried them to the highest Excesses. In the mean time
this mightily sunk in the eyes of the World, the respect due to Persons
Consecrated to Religion, and consequently the honor to Religion it self.

The outward appearance of virtue in the Heathens, was another Stumblingblock
to the Weak. For some there were that led lives Morally good: Were true to
their Word, Just in their Dealing, abhorred Fraud and Avarice; in a Word, Aug.
in Io. tract. xlv.
observed all the Laws and Rules of civil Society. Pretending that it was
sufficient for a Man to Live up to the light of Nature, and follow the Law of
right Reason, without troubling themselves with those disputes, which divided
the Christians. As if the Christians did not profess to follow the sovereign
Reason, that is, the Word Incarnate. These Wisemen of this World looked upon
Faith as an instance of weakness a prejudice of the Understanding; and reckoned
Mortification, a rigorous chastity, forbearing of Spectacles and Profane
Diversions, as a piece of Superstition. Now, though Christianity was the
Religion of the Prince, yet the number of Pagans was still so great that there
was no hindering V. Aug. Contra. advers. leg and proph.
of them from Writing, and Speaking, and Dogmatising publicly. This freedom
was a remainder of the Ancient Pretensions of the Philosophers; of which the
Heretics also well knew how to make their advantage. All that the Emperors
could do in these first times, was Cod. de Pagan.
to shut up the Temples, prohibit Sacrifices, and the other public ceremonies
of Idolatrous Worship. Nor could that be done without great Murmurings of the
Pagans. We know what Efforts the Senate made under Valentinian the Younger
Ambros. ad Valentin. de relat. Symmach. Epist. xxxi.
to have the Altar of Victory Restored. Some times they proceeded even to open
Violence against the Christians, who publicly opposed their Superstitions: And
Martyrol. i. Jan. xvii. Mart. xiv. Aug.
therefore we meet with some Martyrs, even under the most Christian Emperors.
The Emperors themselves retained some Formalities of Paganism, which in the
Baron. an. 312.
bottom were no more than empty Titles. As the Name and Habit of the Pontifex
Maximus, or High Priest, which gave them a great Authority over all the
Magistrates. So also they had the Title of Divinity Numen, domus divina, Sa^rum
aerarium Sacr patrim, etc.
continued to them, and every thing appertaining to it: As their Palace, their
Treasure, their Demesnes, their Letters, their Purple; to all which was
commonly added the Epithet of Sacred and Divine. This Style was necessary to
keep up the Veneration of the People, nor did any of the most Holy Christian
Bishops ever scruple the use of it. In the mean time the Pagans, as to the
generallity of them, grew every Day more and more Corrupt. All that has been
said before of the Vices that Reigned in the World when the Gospel made its
first appearance, was still the same; and excepting some few of extraordinaty
Force and Elevation, and the Philosophers I just mentioned, there was neither
among the Greeks nor the Romans, any remainder of Probity which could come up
to a Counter-Ballance. Thus matters stood when the Empire sunk in the West; and
though it continued longer in the East, yet it was only till it met with the
like violent Shock. There was neither Discipline in their Armies, nor Authority
in their Commanders, nor dispatch in their Councils, nor Conduct in their
management, nor Vigor in their Youth, nor Prudence in the Aged, nor Love for
their Country, nor any concern for the Common-good; every one minded himself
only, his own Pleasures and private Interests, and basely either Neglected or
Betrayed the Public. The V. Amm. Maroell. lib. 14. lib. 28.
Romans Effeminated by Sloth and Luxury, defended themselves against the
Barbarians by the help of Barbarians themselves, whom they hired for pay to
serve in their Armies: They were Drowned in Pleasures and Delights, and valued
themselves upon a false Gallantry, which had nothing solid at the bottom; so
that the measures of their Iniquities and Abominations being filled up, God in
his righteous Judgment executed upon them that exemplary punishment foretold by
St. John. Rome Apoc. 14. and. 18.
was often taken and Sacked by the Barbarians; the Blood of so many Martyrs
with which she had made her self Drunk was avenged; and the Empire of the West
fell a Prey into the Hands of the People of the North, who divided it into a
set of new Kingdoms.

The Christians living among a People so perverse and so extremely corrupt, I
V. Salvian. de gubern. Dei. lib. vi. and vii.
mean these later Romans; it was difficult to keep their Virtue from declining,
especially being no longer Strangers among the Infidels, as in the times of
Persecution, having nothing now to guard against but their Friendship and
Caresses: It Is no wonder therefore that we find the Fathers of the Fourth Age
upbraiding Christians with the grossest Vices. St. Austin dissembles August. de
Catech. c. v. vii. 17. 25.
not the Matter, but plainly lets the Heathens disposed to turn Christians,
know before hand how great Sinners they were like to meet with even among the
Christians themselves; that so they might be the less surprised at them, and
consequently the less Scandal'd. Among the Herd of them, (says he) that fill
our material Churches, you will find some Riotous, some Covetous, some
Fraudulent Persons; you will see there some Gamesters, Adulterers, Debauchees,
Play-haunters; others who apply themselves to Diabolical remedies, Enchanters,
Astrologers, Diviners of all sorts. And yet all these pass for Christians. He
frankly confesses to the Manichees that Aug. de Mor. Eccl. c. 34.
there were even among the professors of the true Religion some Persons
Sottishly Superstitions, others so addicted to their vicious Passions that they
never so much as thought of their Vows made to God. He often speaks to the same
purpose in many of his tracts against the Donatists, where he clearly proves to
them, That the Tares must continue together with the Wheat Aug. in ps. 99. c.
12 etc
till the time of Harvest; that is, the Day of Judgment: And elsewhere he
censures the Injustice of them who approve or condemn all Christians and all
Monks in gegeneral for the good or evil of some particular V. Chrysostom. in
Matthew. hom. 61. Idem de compunct. Idem ad fidel. patr.
Persons. We find the like instances of the corruption of Christians in St.
Chrysostom and the other Fathers of these times; to what purpose then (may it
be objected) served the public Pennances and Excommunications? To purge the
Church of a Aug. Enchirid. c. lxxx.
great many Vices though not of all. To the imposing of Penance it was
necessarily required that the Offender should desire it, or at least that he
should voluntarily submit to it, so that he was obliged to acknowledge his
Offense, either by a free Confession of it himself, or by acquiesing in the
Accusation of others. Excommunication was for those who would not accept of
Penance, though they were convict, either by their own Confession or by legal
Proofs, or by notoriety of Fact. And yet after all, the Prudent and Charitable
Bishops did not hastily proceed to this last extremity. They often admonished
the Convicted Offender, and put him in mind of the desperateness of his
Condition upon persisting in Impenitence; they earnestly exhorted him to get
out of that dangerous State; they spared neither Threats nor Entreaties to
overcome the hardness of his Heart; they lamented over him before God, and
obliged the Congregation to Pray for him; they waited in expectation a long
time, imitating the Patience and long Suffering of Constable. A^. ii. cap. 41.
the Father of Mercies; in a word, 'twas not till they had tried all the
Methods of Charity, that they proceeded to this sad Remedy; and that with the
grief of a Parent, who to save the Life of his Son is himself forced with his
own Hand to cut off his Arm.

But as for those whose Crimes were private and concealed, either known only to
God, or impossible to be proved, there was no remedy against them: They could
not deny them entrance into the Church, nor participiation of the Sacraments,
if they were so Sacrilegiously impious as to approach the holy Mysteries. In
former times the Persecutions were sufficient Trials to separate the Chaff from
the Wheat. But when they ceased, Hypocrisy was carried on to the last breath of
Men. In the mean time the Church was a great sufferer by these lukewarm and
corrupt Christians; their evil Discourses and evil Examples were a scandal to
Religion; and their loose Conduct had a pernicious effect, especially upon
their own Families. They did but ill instruct their Children, and yet brought
them to Baptism: And this defect of Family Education was of great Consequence
in these first Ages, where we cannot find that there was any Catechism
publicly appointed for the Instruction of Christian Children.

THE Ravages of the Barbarians who XLV. The Incursions of the Barbarians, and
their manners.
overturned the Roman Empire, had as pernicious an influence upon the Manners
of the Church as the Corruption of the later Romans. The Gospel which is the
highest Reason, rejects every vicious disposition, as being inconsistent with
it: Neither the affectedly Ignorant, the Knavish, the Savage nor the Slothful
can be good Christians; Barbarity and Cruelty are as incompatible with true
Religion as Luxury and Effeminacy; Wars and Hostilities are as contrary to
Piety, as they are to Justice and all good Order: So that Religion suffered
deeply under those horrid Confusions Hier. in. Iscap. v. in fi. and al. Idem
epist. de fun. Nepotiani in fi. and ad Gerontiam and ad Agenechiam.
brought upon the World by the Savage Nations of the North; who like a Flood
breaking in upon the Roman Empire over run it all. St. Jerome and the other
Fathers who lived in those times have left us a lamentable Description of them.
A Barba-Enemy destroying all before him, their Towns taken by Storm, and their
Countries lying at the Mercy of the rude Soldiery. It Is easy to imagine with
what distraction all Men's minds were filled; what would become of their Lives
and Fortunes, of themselves and their families; how to secure their Persons
from Captivity, and their Wives and Daughters from Violation. These were
pressing Considerations, and violent Temptations to them to neglect their
Spiritual concerns: A Man must have been endowed with a very Heroic Resolution
to maintain the Constancy of his Mind in the midst of the horrible Slaughters,
the dismal desolations, and all the other terrible Ravages of a Brutish
Conqueror. We have still extant the Letters of St Basil, and the more ancient
ones of St. Gregory Thaumaturgus, where we may see into what grievous Crimes
the Christians were betrayed by the Incursions of the Barbarians into
Cappadocia, and the Pennances thereunpo enjoined them.

When the Vandals wasted Africa, that which most sensibly affected St. Austin,
was as (Possidius relates it) the hazards and loss of Souls by it. He saw
(says that Author) the Churches for saken of their Priests and Ministers; the
sacred Virgins and the other Religious scattered abroad in the wide World; some
sinking under their Torments, others put to the Sword, others led into
Captivity; where having lost the honor of their Chastity, the Integrity of
their Conscience, and the Orthodoxy their Faith, they remained Slaves to their
Brutal and unmerciful Enemies. He saw the sacred Hymns and Praises of God given
over in the Churches, and the very Buildings themselves in many places levelled
with the ground. That the Sacrifices and Sacraments were no longer sought
after; and they that did desire them could not easily meet with any capable of
Administering them. That the Bishops and Clergy whom God had graciously
preserved from falling into the Hands of the Enemies or gave them the means of
an escape after they had been taken were spoild of all, and reduced to the last
degree of Beggary, without any ones being able to relieve them according to
their Necessities. By this Instance one may imagine how it was with them in the
other great Provinces in Spain, Gaul and V. Conc. i. Bracar. and 411.
Illyrium. What means were there left under these Confusions either for
instructing the People or breeding up Priests and Preachers? How could the
Bishops visit their Flocks, or meet in Councils to fill up the vacant Sees, and
maintain the regularity of Discipline? The Church has good reason in all her
Prayers to beg of God the blessing of Peace and Tranquillity, without which the
Public exercise of Religion must needs fall to the Ground.

It Is true the Barbarians were converted. The Francs turned Christians, the
Goths and the Lombards of Arians became good Catholics; but still they
remained Barbarians: I call Barbarism here, that disposition of Mind by which
Men govern themselves not by Reason, but by Passion or by Custom. We have
remarkable instances of the Power of Custom in the Iroques and the other People
of America, whom we call Savages. We have scarce ever heard of any Nation less
given to Women, or less Subject to the Passion of Anger; they are very Patient,
great admirers of Justice and Gratitude, Liberal and Hospitable: But to this
very Day it has been almost impossible to make Christians of them, except
those who have been brought up among the French, and from their Infancy
familiarized to our Customs; not that they want Reason or Understanding in
those things they are bred to, but they are incapable of receiving new
Impressions. They can form to themselves no notion of one God the Creator of
the Universe, and Governor over all Nations: They cannot apprehend the reason
why there should be but one only Religion in the whole World; they cannot be
affected with the hopes of a life to come; nor comprehend what we mean when we
tell them of an happiness purely Spiritual; and much less do they understand us
when we declare to them the more sublime Mysteries of Religion. They will
patiently hear what he have to say without contradicting us: but when we have
said all we can, one may plainly perceive they are nothing moved at it: If we
put them upon Baptism, it is an ordinary thing with them to desire it, if they
find it will be for their Interest, or if they can but get some little Toy by
it; but as soon as they have gained their ends they think no more of their
Vows; they return to their own People, follow their old trade of eating the
Flesh of Men again, and torturing their Enemies to Death. There are other
Barbarians absolutely stupid, as the Negroes and Cafres, in whom we find no
Sentiments of any Religion at all; such dull heavy Souls that nothing but what
is sensible and Palpable can enter into their understanding; all these poor
Creatures must first be made Men before they can be made Christians.

I will not say that the Franks and other People who Conquered the Romans were
Barbarous to this degree; but it is certain that they had nothing of Learning
among them, nor any use of Letters; that they applied themselves never to Arts
nor Agriculture; that they lived by Blood and Plunder, and were so fierce and
Savage in their Natures, that the Romans were even scared at the very sight of
such horrid Figures. We see a great deal of Inconstancy and Inequality in their
Conduct, which seems to be the proper Character of Barbarians: For the
principal effect of reason is Constancy and Consistency in a Man's Designs and
Actions; it is not to act like Men to be given up to diversity of Passions, as
objects shall present themselves. It must be owned there appears much
Irregularity and Self-contradiction viz french.
in the Lives of Our first Christian Kings; Clovis and his Sons after him
discover on the one side much respect and Zeal for Religion; but on the other,
they fell into many notorious Acts of Injustice and Cruelty. The good King
Gontram Mar. Romans 28 Mart.
whom the Church has placed in the number of her Saints, amongst many works of
Piety, was guilty of gross Faults, and Dagobert that famous Founder of
Monasteries, led a very vicious Life; not but that there were even in those
Days Bishops of an Apostolic Sanctity and Vigor; but they chose the lesser
evil, and showed a better inclination for Christian Princes though weak and
imperfect, than for Pagans and Persecutors of the Church. One sign that they
did not easily confide in the Barbarian Converts is, That for the space Two
hundred Years we scarce meet with any Clergy that were not of the Romans, as
appears by their Names. We find at Conc. Tolet. iii. an. 589. cap. xi. V.
Gregor. Pastor. iii. admon. 31. Isidor. sent. 16.
the same time great complaints against the too great easiness of some Priests
in admitting People to Penance more than once, which seems to have taken its
beginning from the Levity and Inconstancy of the Barbarians.

THESE two Nations, the Romans I XLVI. The mixture of the Romans and the
Barbarians.
mean and the Barbarians, incorporated by degrees; but as in the mixture of two
different Colors, each one loses its property, and there arises a third which
rubs out the former, so the Barbarians were softened and Cultivated by their
Commerce with the Romans; but the Romans themselves became more gross and
ignorant by Conversing with the Barbarians; so that in the sixth Age we may
sensibly perceive a vast change in the Manners of the West. The Historians,
Poets, and other profane Authors were now but little regarded by them, that
they might have more leifure to apply themselves only to Religion, which yet
may receive great service from these Foreign Studies, by supplying us with
Critical Learning, and the knowledge of Antiquity: 'Twas for want of these
helps that they were too ready to receive such Supposititious Writings as were
imposed upon the World under the specious Names of ancient Ecclesiastical
Authors; as also that they became too credulous in the beleiving Miracles. It
was a thing so certain that the Apostles and their Disciples had wrought many
Miracles, and that many true ones were daily performed too at the Tombs of the
Martyrs; that they were not now so curious in enquiring into them, as to
distinguish the true from the false. The more surprising Relations of this
nature any History contained, the more taking it was. Their Ignorance in
Philosophy and the little knowledge they had of Nature, made them take all
strange Appearances for Prodigies, and interpret them as the supernatural Sings
of God's Wrath. They believed vita. Lud. Pii.
there was something in Astrology, and dreaded Eclipses and Comets as dismal
Presages.

But what they wanted in knowledge and fineness of Parts, was largely made V.
Thomass Discp. ii. l. i c. 16. p. iii. l. i. c. 20.
amends for by their Piety and solid Virtues. All the Discipline which I have
before described in the Third Part continued to the Tenth Age. Christians even
to the Princes and Kings themselves, were never more constant in the Psalmody,
and all other exercises of Religion, than in those times I am now speaking of;
never more regular in observing the Fasts, and Solemnising the Festivals of the
Church. Nothing is more famous in History than the Chapel of Charlemain; as he
was for the most part travailing, he caused to he carried along with him
Relics, sacred Ornaments, and all other things necessary for the performance
of the divine Offices, with a numerous train of Clergy made up of selected
Persons. In his Travailling Chapel the service was performed with as much
magnificence as in any Cathedral Church: His example was followed by the
Princes that succeeded him; and herein as in every thing else these Princes
were imitated by the several great Lords who built their Fortunes upon the Ruin
of this Family: During all these times there were Prelates of a very exemplary
Life, constant in Prayer and Zealous for the Conversion of Souls, witness those
that planted the Faith in Gallia Belgica, Germany and the other remote Climates
of the North. The Bishops increased daily in their Authority. Besides the
dignity of their Office, and the Sanctity of their Lives, their capacity for
business, and their tender Affection for the People doubly recommended them
during the incursion of the Barbarians, they often interposed and put a stop to
the fury of the Conquerors, to save their Cities from Plunder at the peril of
their own Lives. Thus Attila was diverted from entering Rome by Pope St. Leo,
and from Troys by St. Lupus, from Orleans by St. Martyr. 23 May. 14. Dec.
Agnan, but St. Desiderius of Langres and St. Nicasius of Reims, lost their
Lives for their Flocks, having their Throats cut by the Vandals. When these
Barbarian Kings turned Christians, the Bishops made part of their Councils, and
were the most trusty of their Ministers: They did what they could to recommend
Gentleness and Clemency to them, often interceding for Criminals, and making
use of several methods to this purpose: 'Twas for this end they were so very
careful to have the rights of Sanctuary maintained; a Privilege which at first
the Veneration of Martyrs, and afterward of some illustrious Saints, had
procured to the places of their Sepulcher, as in France to that of St. Martin.
Hence also ('it is plain) came in the Custom of putting out Peoples Eyes who
ought to have suffered Death; they thought to put them out of a capacity of
doing more mischief in the World, and yet give them time to Repent; but
sometimes they shut them up in Monasteries.

The Bishops also made use of the credit they had with their Princes, to
restrain them from Acts of Injustice and Oppresison, to procure the Relief of
the Poor, and the common good. To these ends and purposes they frankly employed
the Riches of the Church. He that reads what V. Anastas.
good Works the Popes have done, from the time of St. Gregory to Charlemain;
both in repairing the Ruins of Rome, and Reedifying not only the Churches and
Hospitals there, but likewise the Streets and Aquaeducts; as also preserving
all Italy from the Violence of the Lombards, and the Avarice of the Greeks: He
that reads the Lives of St. Alnulphus, St. Eligius, (St, Audoenus) St.
Ligarius, and the other Prelates who had a great hand in the Management of the
public Affairs in those Days: He may see that Christianity is so far from
interfering with the Interests of the State, that it is indeed the surest
foundation of true Polity, as being the best means of Uniting Men together,
and making them serviceable to each other in Society.

This great Reputation of the Bishops and Abbots insensibly drew them in to
share in the Temporal Power. They were Lords, and had the same privileges with
Lay-Peers, but still with the same Encumbrances: As to furnish out Soldiers for
the Service of the State, and often to lead them in Person. The different
Nations were in time sufficiently intermixed to make the Clergy either of
Barbarians or Romans. But an entire alteration in their Behavior, was much more
difficult. 'Twas very hard to restrain them from Hunting, and the exercise of
Arms after their Ordination; especially when by the orders of their Prince,
they were obliged to appear in the Field. Nor indeed can it be denied, but that
those Temporal Seigneuries annexed to Spiritual Dignities were a great cause of
the decay of Discipline.

IN the East they never had any of XLVII. The Manners of the Christians in the
East from the fifth Age.
these Temporalties. But there were other causes there which produced as bad
effects. The great Heresys, which took their Rise and Course in those parts,
had set the Wits of many too busily on Work, and shaken the Foundation of their
Faith. Nestorius on the one side and Eutiches or rather Dioscorus, on the
other, had vast numbers of followers. Their disputes were endless, and from
disputing they often fell into Quarrels and Seditions. The Clergy and Monks,
who were the most Zealous, brake forth into the greatest Heats; and when these
last above all others, espoused the Quarrel, so far as to quit their Solitudes
and flock to the Citys to maintain the Cause of God, (as they thought) there
were no methods too Lawless or Violent for them. It Is well known what bloody
Tragedies were Acted in Egypt and Syria by the opposers of the Council of
Chalcedon.

The Emperors endeavoring by their secular authority to remedy the Evil, did
only increase it. For instead of applying themselves to see the Decisions of
the Church put in execution, by Chastising and Suppressing the Obstinate and
Seditious by force, they engaged themselves in the Controversy, and to end the
Dispute, made use of dangerous Accommodations, determining the Point by their
Imperial Edicts. And at length, encouraged by the servile compliances of the
Bishops, they undertook the regulation of the Church Discipline, that is to
say, they ruined it. For there was now no other rule left but the Emperor's
Will and Pleasure.

Though the Roman Empire in the East was yet in Being; yet they were no longer
Romans save only in Name, nor Greeks but in Language. 'Twas a mere Hotch Potch
of all sorts of Barbarians, Thracians, Illyrians, Isaurians, Armenians,
Persians, Scythians, Sarmatians, Bulgarians and Russians. So that in all
History we scarce meet with a People more corrupt then these later Greeks. They
had the Vices of the Ancients, but nothing of their Wit and Ingenuity, or of
their Arts and Sciences. And yet they were all Christians, and very careful to
keep up the outward show, the pomp and formalities of Religion.

When the Mahometans had made themselves Masters of the East, the Christians of
those parts could not avoid keeping great Commerce with them. Great numbers of
Greeks in Egypt and Syria lived under their Subjection. For the Conquest of
the Musulmans (as the followers of Mahomet call themselves) established their
false Religion, without abolishing the exercise of the Christian, in the places
where they found it. Their Religion was too absurd to be received by them who
had ever been enlightened with the true Faith, since it taught Men to Believe in
a Man that pretended himself to be sent from God, upon his own bare Word;
without any Prophecy foretelling his coming, without any Miracle to prove his
Mission, or Reason to Support his Doctrine. That which got him followers, was
his Addressiing himself to the Arabians, a sort of Barbarians as Ignorant as
himself, the happy success of his Arms, and fairly dividing the Spoils with
them. The Christians had him in Detestation, and were a long time subject to
the Mahometans before they could so much as think of being in the least
reconciled to their Religion.

But at last they came to it; and at the end of Two hundred Years, the Empire
of the Musulmans being now in its full Glory under Califs, their Religion began
to appear less frightful to the Christians, who were now grown miserably
Ignorant, and had their Spirits broken by a long Servitude. The Original of
Mohometism was now grown Old enough to be concealed and set off with the
Embelishments of a vast many fabulous Stories. The Pompous Gallimafrys of the
Alcoran, where the Name of God appearing in every page, enough to impose upon
the Ignorant. It every where Inculcates the Unity of God, and the Abhorrence of
Idolatry: It speaks with great vehemence concerning the last Judgment, Hell,
and Paradise; it make honorable mention of Moses and the Prophets, of the
Apostles and Martyrs, and gives high Encomiums to Jesus Christ himself. Besides
it imitates several of the External Parts of Christianity. The Christians
Prayed seven times a Day, the Musulmans Prayed five: The Christians had their
Annual Fast of forty Days, the Musulmans have theirs of twenty nine, keeping
always strict Fast till Night, as the Christians then did: The Christians keep
Sunday Holy; the Musulmans Friday: We assemble in our Churches to Pray to God,
hear the Reading of the Scriptures and the Instructions of the Priest; they
also Pray after their manner, in their Moschs, Read their Alcoran there, and
hear the Preachings of their Doctors. They make Pilgrimages to the Land which
they Esteem Holy, and visit the Tombs of their pretended Martyrs. 'They give
much Alms, and have Hospitals Founded among them in great numbers. They have
also some sorts of Religious Persons, who live in Common, and afflict the Body
after a Terrible manner. For there is no sort of Exterior Austerities which
Persons without Virtue may not Imitate, either out of Vain Glory or for
Interest. But they can never bring themselves to live in Silence and Labor
without being seen of Men. To do this, a Man must be a Christian.

Our Travelers Bred up in the midst of Christendom, are often affected with
this outside of Religion, and those Moral Virtues they meet with amongst the
Infidels; and sometimes return Home staggered in their Thoughts, and inclining
to believe that all things are indifferent in matters of Religion. Under how
great Temptations then must those poor Christians have layn, that were Born
under the power of those Insidels, and obliged to pass their whole Lives with
them; kept under Oppression by them, and having no other means of making their
condition Comfortable in this World, but by quitting the Faith of their
Ancestors. It Is a wonder they were not all Perverted: And the number of
Christians still remaining throughout all the Levant after a Thousand Years of
Temptation, is a manifest proof of the power of the Gospel, and of the weakness
of Mahometism.

The Christians also that were subjects to the Emperors of Constantinople might
be easily corrupted by their Commerce with the Mahometans, and the several
sorts of Heretics that Infected all the East. The Judgment of the Emperor Leo,
Author of the Sect of the Iconoclasts is supposed to have been corrupted by the
Jews, and Sarasins or the Arabian, Mahometans. The Emperor Michael Balbus
passed for no better than half-a- Jew. The Young Emperor Michael the third,
with the Lewd Companions of his Debauches, acted over in a most execrable
mockery the Holy Ceremonies of our Religion, even to the Tremendous Sacrifice
it self; and not long V. Baron. an. 853. Curopal.
after him, I meet with another Young Emperor, Alexander the Son of Leo the
Philosopher, openly Blaspheming against Christianity, and Regretting the
Suppression of Idolatry. This makes me suspect, that of all Christians, the
Greeks were the first Authors of Libertinism in matters of Religion. Not that I
would be thought to fix this suspicion on the whole Nation of them, but only
upon some of their great ones, and other particular Persons. For in these
times, generally speaking, Religion bore up nobly throughout the whole Greek
Empire. They had among them great Doctors, great Bishops, and eminent
Religious, besides many Martyrs too in defense of the Holy Images.

IN the West the Faith was hitherto XLVIII. The Manners of the West. The
disorders of the tenth Age.
kept Inviolate. It never entered into the thoughts of any Man to call the
principles of Religion in Question, nor was it here infected with Heresy. But
Ignorance and Barbarism increased upon it. Charlemain did all he could to
re-establish good Literature and Ecclesiastical Discipline: But the following
Princes did not pursue his great designs: So that after his Days both Church
and State fell into greater Disorders then ever. The Faith had been before
planted in Saxony, Bavaria, and all the rest of Germany. But to secure it among
those rugged Nations, Charlemain was obliged to back the Preaching of the
Gospel, with the Sword and Temporal Punishments; so that there were many
involuntary Conversion, which by the unhappines of the Times was not seconded
with that care, which was necessary to have given Religion sure rooting in a
new and unbroken Soil; so that one may easily imagine there remained at the
bottom, a Core of Ignorance and Spiritual Insensibility. And this perhaps is
one of the Causes why Schism and Heresy have since found so easy an Access, and
spread themselves all over the North. The Civil Wars which were carried on from
the Reign of Lewis the Debonnaire, turned all things back again, into a state
of Ignorance and Confusion; even in the soundest parts of the French Empire.
And to complete their misery, the Normans, as yet Pagans, ravaged and destroyed
it on every side. The Huagarian Pagans also, overran Italy; the Sarasins for a
long time hovered upon their Coasts, keeping them always upon the Allarm, and
at last effectually made themselves Masters of Apulia and Sicily, besides Spain
which they had now Possessed for more then an Age. So that what Remainders had
been hitherto left of the Old Roman Manners, and Polite Genius, were now
perfectly worn out.

The loss of Arts, Learning, and Civility had been the more Supportable, had
not the Interests of Religion been involved in their Fate, which cannot
subsist, without both Study and Preaching; the one to preserve in it the
Soundness of Doctrine, the other the purity of its Morals. Religion must
necessarily fall into Decay, unless the Holy Scriptures be diligently Read,
Taught and Explained to the People; unless the Apostolical Traditions be
preserved in their Purity, and Purged from time to time of those Spurious
Additions, which the Inventions of Men make without any just Authority. All
this was a thing hard to be done in the miserable times of which we are now
speaking. The greatest part of the Layety neither had Books, nor indeed could
so much as Read. And if some of the great Lords had amongst their Rarities some
Ancient Authors, yet they were not able to use them being Written in Latin. The
Latin was now no longer in common use; and in the French and the other Vulgar
Languages, which were as yet but in their beginning, and unformed, nothing was
Written (So that as they could not understand the one, they had nothing to Read
in the other.) But the public Offices of the Church, were performed in Latin;
and the Scriptures were Read to the People in the same Language, but seldom
Explained. The Lords, by reason of the little Wars, they continually had one
against another, kept themselves close shut up every one within the Walls of
his own Castle, so that they seldom came near the Episcopal City, especially if
they chanced to be (as it often happened) at War with the Bishop himself. They
were forced therefore to be content with the private Masses of their Chaplains,
or the Office of the Neighboring Monasteries. But the Monks were never
designed for the business of Preaching, nor could they, without their own
Walls, exercise any thing of Discipline or Correction. In the ninth Age we find
the Conc. Ticin. an. 855. c. iv. Agob. de priv. Sacerd. Theodulph. c. xlv. 46.
Hom. Leon. P. P. iv.
Bishops complaining, that all the People of Estate and Quality had forsaken
the Parish Churches, and earnesty pressing it upon them, that they would
vouchsase to show themselves there at least at the solemn seasons: So they
called those Feasts on which they thought all Christians obliged to
Communicate, which were these four viz. Christmas, Holy Thursday, Easter. and
Whitsontide. Nor were the common People better instructed than their Nobility,
except in some Citys where they had good Bishops. For most of the Bishops
themselves, Preached so very seldom, that we find there were many Canons made,
requiring them to explain to the People in the Vulgar Language the Creed and
the Lords Prayer, that is to say, the first Rudiments of Religion, or as we now
call it, the Catechism. In this gross darkness, who could have imagined how far
Ignorance and Credulity might improve, but that we have the Marks of it still
extant in the Old Legends of those times? The Priests and Clergy were in too
mean a Capacity themselves to be able to instruct others. Under those Universal
Hostilities with which the World was then Harassed, they were also forced to
take up Arms in their own Defense, and with Sword in Hand to secure the
temporalities of the Church by which they Subsisted. Many of them were by their
Poverty necessitated to betake themselves to sordid Employments; or else to
travel about from Province to Province, till they could meet with some Bishop
or Lord to entertain them. Being Reduced to such a Condition, how could they
pursue their Studies or lead Lives Conformable to their orders. 'Twas only in
some few Cathedrals and Monasteries, that a regular Course of Studying and the
exact Rules of a Religious Life were preserved and maintained. All this while
the Monks Conc. Aquisgran. an. 817.
and Canons were notoriously degenerated from their Primitive Constitution, as
one may see by those excellent Regulations which Lewis the Debonnaire made to
reestablish their Discipline. But the Confusions following put them into a
worse state than they were in before. The greatest part of the Monasteries were
Plundered, Burnt and Ruined, by the Normans; the Monks and Canons Massacred or
dispersed and forced to Live in the World again.

This Ignorance and Poverty to which the Clergy and Monks were reduced, so
debased their Spirits, that they soon became insensible of the Sufferings of
the Church in general, and little minded any thing else than how to secure
their own Stakes, and Live at Ease themselves. Thus Simony came to be a common
practice, Concubinage was so too, and often maintained with great Impudence;
especially in Germany, where Religion ever had a weak footing. These Ignorant
Clerks, who never looked upon their Ministry as any thing else than merely a
Trade to get a Livelihood; who Lived every one by themselves, without applying
to their Studies or their Prayers, but very much to their secular Affairs; did
not uuderstand the reasons of Celibacy, and looked upon the enjoining it as an
Insupportable Tyrany. This was the cause of the Rage they expressed against
Pope Gregory the Seventh and all others who were for taking away this occasion
of Offense.

Under these Public Calamities one may easily imagine ho wmiserably the Poor
were neglected. How could they be releived by the Clergy who had so much ado to
live themselves? or where could they receive Alms in the times of such dreadful
Famines as happened in these Ages, where we often read of Men's being reduced to
feed on human Flesh? Nor was Commerce in those Days sufficiently open to have
the wants of one Country supplied out of the abundance of Conc. Calchut. in
Ang. 787. Tribur. 89^ de consecr. did. i. c. 45.
another. The Church found it difficult to perserve its Consecrated Plate: It Is
in these times we see the Prohibition of the use of Calices of Horn, Glass,
Wood or Copper; and the permission of them of Tin: Not but that the Churches
had still vast Patrimonies; but that served only as a Bait to the Princes and
Lords the more greedily to invade them. The Bishoprics were often usurped by
Persons altogether unqualified, who seized them by violence: Many times a
Neighboring Lord would by main force of Arms place a Son of his under Age in
the Episcopal See, to Plunder the Church under his Name. Rome its self was not
secured from these disorders, the Petit Neighboring Tyrants insulted her most;
and during the tenth Age we meet with nothing but violent Intrusions and
Expulsions in this principal See, where till now Ecclesiastical Discipline had
been all along maintained in its Genuine Purity. Councils were very rarely held
by reason of the difficulty of their meeting, and the universal Commotions,
which were such that they could not safely pass from one City to another. Thus
not only the Diseases of the Church were desperate, but even the Remedies were
hard to come at. The Precedents and Rules of the former Ages were by little and
little lost and forgotten: by seeing Crimes pass unpunished, Men ventured more
boldly upon them; and thus they were at first accustomed to them, and at last
hardened in them: It was now no longer an ordinary Distemper but a plain loss of
Sense and a Spiritual Lethargy.

Every one was a Christian, but in such a manner as if they had thought it a
bare privilege of Nature, and the Christian and the Man had been the same
thing: There was now no longer a distinction. Christianity was little more than
a Custom of the Country, and scarce discovered it self in any thing else than
in some external Formalities. As for Virtues and Vices, there was hardly any
difference between Christians and Jews or Infidels, but only in Ceremonies,
which have not force sufficient for the reforming Men's Manners.

HAD not the Christian Religion been the work of God, it could never have XLIX.
The preservation of Religion. Ps. xlvi. 5.
weathered out so violent a Storm But he has plainly shown, That he is in the
midst of his Church, and that all the Revolutions of Affairs are not able to
overthrow her; on the contrary, the power of the Gospel in a most wonderful
manner shined forth in these miserable times. How much soever ignorance
prevailed, yet all the World acknowledged and adored the one only God, Creator
of the universe; and Jesus Christ the Savior of Mankind: All the World
believed a future Judgment and the Life to come; all the great principles of
Morality were every where received and acknowledged; whereas in the most
enlightened times of ancient Greece they were always doubted and disputed even
by the Philosophers themselves.

It Is true, these principles were but ill practiced; and though none called the
truth of them into Question, yet few pursued them to their necessary
Consequences, so as to lead their Lives in conformity to them: But the Morals
of Christianity failed not to produce some good effect, even upon those that
were no good Christians. It prevented a world of mischief; it softened the most
Barbarious People, and V. Eusebius. i. Prae. Evan. c. iii, etc.
made them more tractable and Humane If they did not avoid all Crimes, yet many
of them repented at least, and did Penance; or if they did not do that, yet in
their own Consciences they condemned and disapproved of them: In a Word,
Christianity in all places where it prevailed gave a general Tincture of
Humanity, Modesly, and Decency of Behavior, not to be met with any where else.

In these times of which I am now speaking, when the Face of the Church
appeared so disfigured in general, yet there were great Doctors and great
Saints of all Conditions in all parts of the West; in France the Monastic
discipline began to raise up its head by the Foundation of the famous Monastery
of Cluny, whose first Abbots, St. Odon and St. Majolus are renowned both for
their Life and Doctrine. In Italy St. Romualdus founded the Monastery of
Camaldoli with many others, and had many eminent Disciples: We see in the same
times many holy Bishops of an extraordinary Zeal for Religion, a St. Dunstan in
England, a St. Vdalric in Germany, a St. Adelbert in Bohemia, the Apostle of
the Sclavi and a Martyr: We see St. Boniface also a Martyr in Russia, St. Bruno
in Prussia, St. Gerard, a noble Venetian, Bishop and Martyr in Hungary; and
many others who by their Preachings, their Holiness, and their Miracles
continued down the Tradition of sound Doctrine and Ecclesiastical discipline.
In the same Age we have amongst the Laity many Saints, even of the greatest
Lords, as St. Gerald Count of Aurillac, St. Stephen King of Hungary, and St.
Emeric his Son, the Emperor St. Henry, King Robert.

In these Saints, particularly those of the Nations newly Converted, as St.
Henry and St. Stephen, we may see what dispositions toward Virtue were found
in those Nations whom the Romans called Barbarians. They were naturally great
observers of common Equity, generously Plain and Open-hearted, Chaste, Despisers
of Pleasure and sensual satisfaction; lovers of Justice, Hospitality and
Almsgiving. When these Serious, Sincere, and Courageous People had once made
trial of the Christian Religion, they Embraced it heartily. They never sought
after Niceties in the Interpretation of it, nor were they staggered at any of
the difficulties it contained: It Is true their Conduct was not always so
consistent and uniform as that of the ancient Greeks and Romans; but then they
were greater Strangers to Hypocrisy.

'Twas by the special Care and Authority of these Holy Persons, that the
Public Peace began to be re-established by making all the Lords swear to the
Truce Glab. li. v. c. i. an. 1041.
of God; so they called the Cessation of all acts of Hostility from Wednesday
Night to Monday Morning in every Week; and all that time the Clergy, Monks,
Pilgrims and Laborers in Husbandry were to be unmolested. This Truce was
established Cap. i. extr. de trev. and pa.
in many Councils under the pain of Excommunication; such force had Religion
upon the Minds of Men, when the very Foundations of civil Society were almost
overthrown. In these times also we meet with frequent mention of
Excommunication against those who should strike a Clergyman; this was a thing
never thought of in the First Ages. Their own Dignity was then thought a
sufficient Protection to them; but they were now every Day exposed to the
utmost Violences.

THE Normans had destroyed a great L. The restablishment of Piety and
discipline.
number of Churches, and others were suffered to run to Ruin upon the false
Opinion they had, That the end of the World would be precisely in the
Thousandth Year of our Lord; but when they Glab. lib.
saw that the World still stood after that fatal Year, they began every where
to build Churches again; and that after the most magnificent manner they were
capable of in that Age; always more stately than any dwelling Houses, not only
of private Persons but of the chiefest Nobility: They annexed to them large
Endowments, though for the most part they were no more than the Restitution of
Tithes, and the other Gods usurped in the late disorders. Great care was every
where used for the recovery of Relics, and great cost was spent in adorning
them with the most precious Jewels that could be got, as we may still see in
the Treasuries of the most ancient Churches. They applied themselves also at
the same time to the restoring of the use of singing in Churches, and the other
Solemnities of divine Service: 'Twas in the Eleventh Century that Guido Monk of
Arezzo in Tuscany invented the Notes, and introduced that Method which is the
Foundation of all modern Music. The Religious Princes I have before mentioned,
both by their Liberalities and by their Examples, favored all these good
designs. Part of the Responses which are now sung were composed by King Robert,
and he Helgand. vit. Rob.
thought it an honor to perform the Office of a Chanter publicly in the
Church.

I find no Age in which the long Psalmody was more in Vogue, as one may see by
the Rule of the Carthusians, and the other Orders Baron. ad Martyrol ii. Nov.
of those times. The Monks of Cluny brought into common use the Office for the
Dead, and soon after commenced the little Office of the Virgin. Many had
devotion enough to repeat over every Day the Petr. Dam. li. 6. ep. 32.
whole Book of Psalms. As the number of their Offices increased, so did also
their Masses and Altars. Domestic Chapels were exceeding numerous, every Lord
would have one to himself within the Walls of his own Castle; that so he might
not in the War-time be without the Mass and other Services of the Church; but
there was a mixture of Vanity in the Case, they loved to have Chaplians in
their Family, and disdained the public Churches where they were
undistinguished from the common People. In the mean time it was impossible that
this multitude of Offices Celebrated in so many different places should appear
with the same advantage as it would have done had there been but one Form or
Office performed and directed by the Bishop assisted by all his Clergy; as it
was the manner of the Ages foregoing. Besides, the Reason of a great many of
the Ceremonies was now forgotten, and yet the Forms were still kept up by
Tradition; and the notion of the ancient Politeness was quite lost; so that
from these times we see not the same care taken as was formerly, to erect their
Churches at a convenient distance from other common Buildings, and out of the
noise of public Places: That they thought in Cities would be to lose too much
Ground. We see no more of the Door-keepers, or of the other inferior Orders of
Clerks belonging to the Churches, whose business it was to keep every thing
Decent, Orderly and Quiet. These Offices were either turned over to Sextons or
Virgers, and other suchlike Servants purely Laics, or else wholly laid aside;
so that the Public Congregations in the Churches became confused and
Tumultuous. The Lords at first began the Custom, and from them the Magistrates
and other Laics of better Quality took it, to seat themselves in the Choire
with the Clergy; and the ancient respect being once lost, the whole crowd of
the People, Women and all pressed up to the Altar. V. Sup. page


But in the Eleventh Age there were abuses of far greater importance to be
Glab. lib. v. c. iv. V. Petr. Dam. opusc. vi. 17, 18.
corrected; Simony and Incontinence. Bishoprics and Benefices were commonly
bought and sold; and a great part of the Clergy publicly entertained
Concubines; nay some had the Impudence to insult the Law of the Church that
required the Celibacy of the Clergy, and declared against it as an Abuse. In
opposition to these disorderly Innovators, St. Peter Damianus vigorously
undertakes the Cause, and was supported therein by Patr. Dam opusc. 24. and 27.
the Authority of Leo the Ninth, and the other Popes of those times: And the
better to root out these evils, they established the Order of Canons Regular,
who might show to the Clergy the Example of living in Common, and observing the
Canonical Discipline; and it was out of this Order of Men that the Bishops and
Pastors were generally taken.

WITH respect to the Laics it was LI. Alterations in Penance.
attempted to re-establish Penances, and agreed upon what Penances should be
regularly imposed according to the Canons; but many of the greatest Offenders
proved refractory, and having the Sword in their Hands stood it out against the
Discipline of the Church. And many others who were content to submit to
Penance, Petr. Dam. opusc. vii. Gomor. cap. 10, 11, 12, etc.
would do it yet only after some Inauthentick Canons which very much mitigated
the Rigor of it. Many that had undergone their Penance were not a jot amended
by it: Nothing was to be seen but Greg. vii. lib. vii. ep. x.
Relapses and counterfeit Penances: It is true they reckoned for every Crime a
distinct Penance; so that a Man who had committed thirty Homicides, and as many
Perjuries or Adulteries, had so many Ages of Penance to run through. And from
hence came the indulgences of so many Years as we meet with in some Bulls.

As God demands not impossibilities, they who stood charged with Penances for
their whole Lives, or even beyond their lives, could do no more than to employ
in them the remainder of their days; and to that end for the greater security,
to shut themselves up in a Monastery: But sometimes they were relieved by the
Commutation of works of Satisfaction; and these were variously changed
according to the Abilities or Zeal of the Penitent. St Peter Damianus informs
us that those P. Dam. vita SS. Rod. and Domin. c. 8, 10, etc.
equivalent Penances were commonly received in his time, and gives us also an
estimate of them. Three thousand Stripes of Discipline could redeem one Year of
ordinary Penance; and the singing of ten Psalms, continuing all the while under
the Lash, made a Thousand Stripes; so that the whole Psaltery made up five
years of Penance; and as by virtue of the Communion of Saints, we know God
sometimes pardons Sinners out of regard to the Prayers and other good works of
their Brethren; there were some holy Persons in those time who devoted
themselves to the doing of Penance for the sake of others.

Of these the most famous was St. Dominicus Loricatus, so called because he
always Ib. c. 8
wore next to his Skin a coat of Mail, which he never put off but when he gave
himself the discipline of the Rod, and that he did so often and so roughly with
so many Fastings, Watchings, Genuflexions and all other sorts of Austerities
upon it, that we are almost frightened at the very reading of the account St.
Peter Damianus who was his Spiritual director gives us of them: But the
niceness and Effeminacy of our living way of finds it hard to comply with so
rigorous a Devotion, of which notwithstanding we see many instances in the
Saints of those times. But it is to be supposed that God inspired them with this
extraordinary conduct in compassion to the necessities of that Age: They had to
do with a Generation so perverse and refractory, that 'twas but necessary to
strike their Senses with the most affecting objects. Bare reasonings and persw
asions would have provedbut weak Arguments to such ignorant and brutish People,
bred up in Blood and Rapine; and moderate severities would have been looked
upon as nothing by them who had been from their youth inured to the hardships
of War, and always walked in Armor: But when they saw a St. Boniface the
Disciple of St. Romualdus going bare foot in the coldest Countries; a St.
Dominic Loricatus disciplining himfelf till he was all of a gore Blood; they
could not imagine but that these holy Saints did indeed love God and hate Sin;
They knew not what to make of mental Prayer, but they very well saw that he
prayed who repeated the Psaltery, and they could not doubt but that these holy
Persons loved their Neighbor when they saw them doing Penance, even for the
Sins of other Men: Convinced by these outward and visible Demonstrations of
their Zeal, they became more Docile and Tractable: They willingly hearkened to
the Preachings of these Priests and Monks, whose Lives they could not but
admire; and many of them were effectually converted: Though indeed these
Flagellations, going in Iron-Chains, and such like means of mortifying the
Flesh were not new Inventions. Theodoret gives us a number of like instances in
his Religiosa Historia, or the lives of the Religious and Asceticks; and St.
Simeon Stilites is alone sufficient to give Authority to all these almost
incredible Austerities. The Rule of St. Columbanus who lived about the end of
the Sixth Age, kept his Monks under the Discipline of the Rod, prescribing for
almost every fault a certain number of Stripes: And we see in the after Ages
many Saints giving themselves voluntary Castigations.

Amongst the Instances of discipline which served instead of Canonical
Penances, one of the most usual was, That, of taking a Pilgrimage to some of
the more Celebrated places of Devotion, as to Jerusalem, to Rome, to Tours, to
Compostella. In the ninth Age the many abuses which Conc. Cabil ii. an. 813.
had crept into this practice occasioned great Complaints. If a Priest or other
Clerk had been guilty of any notorious Crime, 'twas but taking a Pilgrimage;
and by that they pretended to wipe off all blots and requalifie themselves:
From hence also the Lords took occasion to lay severe Exactions upon their
Subjects, under the pretense of defraying their Traveling expenses; and many
that had nothing of their own to live on, under this color took the advantage
of leading Vagabond lives in Sloth and Beggary: Others there were that past all
their Days in roving Capitul. aquisgran. an. 787. c. 73.
about the World, naked and loaded with Chains of Iron, a dismal Spectacle to
all that beheld them. And it is true that for Murders and other suchlike horrid
Crimes, the Criminals were sometimes obliged by way of Penance to spend their
Lives in such a manner, to wander about the World, and carry along with them
the marks of their misfortune: But never were Pilgrimages so much in vogue as
after the end of the Eleventh Age; Wars and public distractions being now in a
great measure abated, and Pilgrims looked upon as Sacred Persons; every one was
for visiting the places of Devotion, even Princes and Kings themselves. King
Robert passed his Helgaud.
Lent in Pilgrimages, and took a Journey to Rome for that purpose. The Bishops
Epist. Bened. vii. ad opisc. burg.
themselves made no difficulty of being absent from their Churches upon this
account.

HENCE came the Croisades which LII. Croisades and Indulgences.
were no other than vast Bodies of Armed Pilgrims. These Enterprises were
necessary in those times. No one Christian Prince was then of himself Potent
enough to put a stop to the Progress of the Mahometans, the Declared Enemies of
all those who would not embrace their Religion. They had then for Two hundred
Years Ravaged Italy without Control; they had made themselves Masters of
Sicily and almost all Spain. By the help of these Croisades they were driven
out of all these parts of Europe, and had their Power very much broken in
Egypt and Syria. In the mean time among these Military Penitents, the
Discipline of the Church was but poorly Regarded, and these Enterprises how
Piously soever designed, proved (as far as I can guess) one of the principal
causes of breaking off the force of Penance. Then it was that first came in the
Plenary Indulgence, that is to say, a total Remission of all Canonical
Penalties to any Man, whatsoever that would undertake the Expedition, and list
himself into the Service of God, for so was this Villehard. lib. i.
War called. And this extraordinary Pardon drew together vast Numbers. Those of
the Nobless who understood nothing but Hunting and Fighting, were very well
pleased with the Commutation, of having their irksom Penances of Fastings and
Prayings, and above all the use of their Arms and Horses, which were debarred
them during their Penance, changed into the making of a Campeign. Their Penance
was a pleasure to them; nor was the Fatigue of the March considerable to them
who had been always used to the Field. New places and new objects were indeed a
diversion to them. There was scarce any thing of Trouble in all this, but
barely leaving their own Country and being long absent from their Families. In
the mean time great Journey and Company, was no very proper method for the
correcting of Sinners. The Spirit of Compunction could scarce subsist with such
a Dissipation of Thought as their circumstances necessarily inferred. During
these long Travaels, they could not but be for diverting and entertaining each
other with pleasant Discourses, as the best way they had to lessen the
tediousness of their March; and those that are least wife are every where the
greatest Talkers. Their thoughts must needs be always in a hurry about
Provisions, Lodgings, and the several Adventures they met with; they could not
easily deny themselves the Liberty of eating, and Sleeping too much, as
thinking such indulgencies in a manner necessary to refresh themselves after
their tedious Fatigues. 'Twas impossible under these Circumstances that their
Life should be regular or uniform; besides the different manners of so many
Countries they were to Travers in their march to the Holy Land: The occasions
of Quarrels by reason of the diversity of Humors, Customs and Languages; the
Temptations to Luxury and Intemperance in plentiful Countries, and by the
conversation of People extremely corrupt. So that it plainly appears in
History, That the Armies of the Croisades were not only not better than other
Armies, but much worse. That all sorts of Vices reigned there; both those which
Pilgrims brought from home with them, and those which they found in Strange
Countries: In a word, if these expeditions served for the punishment of any
Sins, it was not so much the Sins of the Latin Christians as of the Infidels
and Schismatic Christans, to whom they were indeed the terrible Scourges of
God.

In these Croisades there were always many Bishops, Priests, and Monks; some
were put upon by a true Zeal, but Libertinism was a Motive to the greatest
part. they thought they might be allowed to bear Arms, and to make use of them
against Infidels. It Is easy to imagine what decay in Discipline these lawless
courses joined with the ignorance which had then for so long a time prevailed
in the World must needs have produced. The Popes themselves, even those that
were the best meaning among them, found themselves under a necessity of
tolerating a great part of these Abuses. They were forced to connive at many
particular disorders to further the grand design in general. They were obliged
to bare a great regard to the Heads of the Croisades, since by the conduct of
their Arms they succesfully maintained the Cause of the Christian Religion,
though they themselves by their vicious Lives were a Scandal to it. The
Indulgence of the Holy-war was also extended to such as should take up Arms
against the Heretics, who rebelled not only against the Church but against
their own Princes, as the Albigenses in France. And in geneneral it was granted
in all Wars, wherein the Interest of Religion was thought to be concerned: And
they judged it hard measure to deny the same favor to Women, or such other
Persons whose Age or Condition put them out of a capacity of bearing Arms; and
therefore the indulgence was Communicated to them upon their giving Alms toward
defraying the expenses of the War; nor only so, but Alms also applied to other
pious Works were likewise judged proper to make satisfaction for Sins. They
gave either Plenary or limited Indulgences to those who contributed toward the
building of Churches: And this supplied the Bishops with the means of erecting
those stately Cathedrals so much admired at this Day. The same favor was
granted for building and endowing Hospitals, especially those two sorts of them
which were very frequent in those Days, viz. For Pilgrims and Lepers. There
were also in favor of the Poor, indulgences annexed to other works of Charity.
Thus Satisfactions became in a manner Arbitrary. The Penetintial Canons being
now no longer kept up in practice, the very knowledge of them was soon after
lost; and Penance was now made so gentle a thing, that Confession was the most
dreadful part of it.

IN the Thirteenth Century, the Ancient LIII. The great number of Doctors.
Discipline received this blow. The Authority of Tradition had carried it down
through the Ages foregoing, and it may be said the Church never was so great a
sufferer by simple Ignorance, as by new Speculations. They now began in their
Scholastic Disputes to depend too little upon pure Authority and were over
fond of working out every thing by their own Reasonings. Aristotle grew much in
fashion. And the Subtilties of Logic and Metaphysics which they borrowed from
the Arabians, were in mighty request. The scarcity of Ancient Books, and the
difficulty of understanding them by reason of the change of Language and
Customs, Tempted them so much the more to apply themselves to Speculations and
the Reading of the Moderns. Thus the Scholastic Divinity was more valued than
the Positive; Gratian and the Master of the Sentences were read more than the
Fathers; and in the Scriptures, they were more curious in hunting after a
Figurative Sense then careful to observe the Literal.

After the Twelvth Age the greatest part of the Bishops applied themselves but
little to Preaching, and the Instruction of their Clergy. They suffered
themselves to be encumbred with Temporal affairs. The Laiety, and especially
the Princes being Bred up in Ignorance, knew not how to Manage without the
assistanstance of the Clergy. 'Twas out of the Bishops and Abbots that they
chose their Chancellours and Ministers of State. They were made Judges in
almost all Causes. Without going any farther, their Temporal Lordships found
them work enough; the Wars in which they were often forced to engage, the
fortifying their Garrisons and assembling their Troops. They were obliged to
maintain grand Equipages, large Families, and all sort of Officers. In the
midst of so much business, the Spiritual part, which ought to have been the
chiesest, was too often neglected. Thus Studying, Preaching, and the
Administering the Sacraments fell to the Lot of the Doctors, of whom the
Universities were full, but chiefly into the Hands of the Religious Mendicants,
who came in very seasonably to the Relief of the Church in these unhappy Ages.

But these Religious, how holy and how Zealous soever they might be, were not
Proper Pastors over any certain people, nor had they any regular Jurisdiction.
They were rather a sort of Missionaries; who following the orders of their
Superiors, traveled throughout all the Dioceses, Laboring in the Conversion
of Heretics and Sinners. Nor were their Labors without Success. But the good
services they did the Church took not their full effect for want of power to
continue their farther Instructions to those whom they had converted, to
correct their Miscarriages, and complete their Work, by abiding with them and
watching over them till they had established them beyond relapse in the Right
way. All this they could do only to some particular Persons, who voluntarily
Resigned themselves to their Direction. So that the Fruits of their Labors
could not be of so general Effect, as when every Bishop closely applied himself
to the Edification of his own Flock.

The Case was much the same with them in respect of Studies. The Doctors
whether Seculars or Regulars that were in possession of the Chairs, had scarce
any thing of Authority, besides what their personal Merit procured them. It was
free for the Students to follow what Profession they liked best. And from hence
arose that Diversity of Sects and Opinions, concerning matters that were
allowed to be disputed. For as there were a great number of Doctors who were
not employed in the Cure of Souls, but spent their whole time in the Schools;
they had leisure to treat of many Questions more Thomass. discipl. iv. l. 1. c.
69. n. xi.
Curious then useful. The Laics also were left at their own Liberty to follow
what Preachers they most Affected, and to choose to themselves their own
Confessors, besides their proper Pastors. So that among such a mnltitude of
Priests, bad Christians could not fail of meeting with some or other who would
give them Absolution upon very easy Terms: And thus such as were willing to be
deceived themselves, or had a mind to Deceive others did not forbear, without
mending their Manners, to frequent the Churches and come to the Sacraments.

The greatest part of the Doctors themselves were born down by the Stream of
the Corruption of the People, and suffered many considerable Relaxations of
Discipline to plead Prescription. The little knowledge they had of the ancient
Manners of the Church, was the principal cause of this Mischief. The usages
introduced an Age or two before went down with them for immemorial Customs: It
is strange, for instance, that in the Days of St. Thomas Aquinas, they should
not remember how they kept their Fasts in the S. Bern. Sermon. in cap. Jejun.
Age preceding; For St. Bernard assures us that in his time all the World
without distinction, observed in Lent not to break their Fast till Evening.
Kings and Princes, Clergy, People, gentle and Simple, Rich and Poor, all of
them did so; and yet St. Thomas not only plainly tells us that in his S. Thom.
ii. ix. 147. art. 7. ad i.
time none Fasted beyond three of the Clock in the Afternoon, but also pretends
to prove, That Christians ought not to Fast after any other manner; and that
Fasting till the Evening was peculiar to the old Law: So easy a thing is it to
find arguments to justify all sorts of Practices when one is ignorant of Fact.
This Ignorance made them look upon Antiquity as Novelty, and the Authority of
the Moderns as a surer Ground to proceed upon than that of the Ancients, of
whom they had only a confused notion, that their Manners were altogether
different from ours, without sufficiently distinguishing whether this diversity
lay in any of the Essentials of Christianity, or only in such indifferent
matters as Habits and Language. And as they gave themselves the liberty of
starting every Day new Questions and inventing new Subtilies; there arose at
last a set of Casuists who founded their Morals rather upon human Reason, than
upon Scripture and Tradition, as if Jesus Christ had not taught us all Truth,
as well for Manners as for Faith; but had left us still to seek with the
ancient Philosophers.

I SHALL not pretend to give a particular LIVE. A succession of found Doctrine
and good examples in all times.
of the disorders that followed upon these loose Principles which they brought
into their new System of Morality; they are but too well known of themselves:
Nor is it my design to describe the manners of bad Christians, which are no
better than those of other Men; my business is only to represent the manners
which distinguish true Christians from the rest of the World. Now God has
never so forsaken his Church, but examples of this kind were always to be found
in it: After what manner soever the Church was governed whether immediately by
Bishops, or by Priests, either Commissionated by them, or sent abroad by the
Popes, whether by Seculars or Regulars, by ordinary Pastors or Foreign
Missionaries; it has always had the same Religion and the same Body of
Doctrine. The true Faith has always been preserved in purity, and the grand
principles of Morality have always stood firm. It has been always a thing
certain and granted that we ought to observe the Law of God explained according
to Tradition, and the Authority of the ancients; and that we ought to form our
Lives after the examples of those holy Persons whom the Church has publicly
Honored for Saints.

And such living Models there have always been; every Age has had its Apostles
Sermon. de S. Andr. vit. S. Mala.
that went to Preach the Faith to Infidels; every Age has had its Martyrs;
Virgins and true Penitents have always been in great numbers: It was (as St.
Bernard observes) the sincere desire of Penitence that after the Eleventh Age
introduced somany new Orders of Monks. God has always from time to time raised
up extraordinary Persons to maintain his holy Doctrine and revive decaying
Piety. What is there comparable to St. Bernard? Has he not shown in his own
Person the Zeal of the Prophets, the Learning and Eloquence of the greatest
Doctors of the Church, and the Mortification of the most perfect Recluses? We
are certainly much endebted to Innocent the Third, and the other great and
learned Popes of those times, to the Master of the Sentences and St. Thomas and
the rest of them who have reduced Divinity into a Method. St. Francis has
given us an eminent Example of the Christian Life, practiced according to the
Letter, of an Humility and Mortification worthy of the Apostolic Time: Thus
from Age to Age, from Generation to Generation, God has preserved in his
Church the succession of true Doctrine and Holy Life.

It is certain then, That Jesus Christ is Heb. xiii. 8.
to Day as well as Yesterday, and will be the same to all Ages. In vain
therefore do bad Christians now adays vilify the Veneration we justly have for
Antiquity, and for the Examples of the Saints; by supposing that in the First
Ages of Christianity Men were clear of another Nature then what we are now;
their Bodies robust and better able to bare those Fastings and other suchlike
Severities; their Spirits more Docile and pliable, and therefore all the
practices of Virtue more easy to them: If we tell them that St. Peter and St.
Paul lived in Poverty and Labor; V. Chrysostom de compunct.
they Answer, They were Apostles; St. Anthony and St. Martin underwent great
Mortifications; They were Saints: St. Austin made his Clergy live in Common;
and he himself (though a great Bishop) lived but very Ordinarily; This might be
in those Days: Do you think therefore that these Words, Saintship, Antiquity,
and the Primitive Church, are allowable exceptions? That the exercises of
Penance; the being continually occupied in the word of God; the renouncing the
Pleasures and Vanities of this wicked World; the Clergies keeping themselves
disengaged from Secular Affairs, and leading lives singularly Exemplary: That
all these things were the extraordinary seize of the Primitive Church,
whose excellencies we must not pretend to Rival^ That to exempt our selves from
the obligation of following so glorious Presidents, it is but to distinguish the
Times and the Work's done.

The Church (say they) was strong and vigorous in her Youth, and produced then
Heroic Virtues: She is now in her Old Age and Declension; she has had her
Spring and her Summer; and now she is in her Winter: But what mean these
Metaphors? Do they pretend that the duration of the Church does in reality
resemble the Changes of the Year, or the course of the Life of Man? will any
one dare to say, that she was imperfect in her beginnings, wanted time to give
her full Maturity, and must feel her decays; as other transitory things, or
like the Productions of Men. But I desire to know in what this change has
happened since the Publication of the Gospel; Is it in humane Nature?
Experience and the Faith of all History assures us the contrary: Is it in the
Law of God, or is it in his Grace? Herein there is still the same Power, the
same Goodness that ever there was. Jesus Christ has never told us that his
Church must be governed by different Rules according to the changes of Times.
The Abolition of the ancient Law and the Abrogation of Ceremonies was expressly
foretold: but as to the Gospel it must be Preached both to the utmost parts of
the Earth, and to the end of the World: Let us not therefore deceive our selves
with frivolous excuses, nor charge the present corruption of our Manners upon
any other fault then that of our Ignorance and Negligence. Apolog. decretor.
It is as dangerous (says Pope Gregory the Seventh) to undermine the Manners
and Discipline of the ancient Church as to attack its Faith, since both the one
and the other are derived to us from the same Tradition.

IT is true, the Church has sometimes borh with some Abuses which had taken
LV. Some abuses to lerated in the Church and how they came to be so.
too deep rooting, waiting a favorable Conjuncture to Reform them; and has
sometimes indulged her Children for the hardness of their Hearts in the
Relaxation of the ancient Discipline. The Rule of Communicating four times a
Year stood in force in the Ninth Age; but in the following it was only ill
observed. Petrus Blesensis informs us, that in his times in the Petr. Bles.
Sermon. 16.
Twelfth Age, the greatest part of Christians Communicated but once a Year: The
Church complied with this usage and put it in the Canons of the Lateran
Council. It was forbidden formerly to say Can. omn. utriusque, 1215. Conc. Rav.
iv. 1317. rubr. 12. ii. ii. 9. 147. a. vii.
the private Masses during the time of solemn Mass, to avoid disturbing that
Service; yet Custom carried it. In the time of St. Thomas; that is a bout Four
hundred Years ago, they kept their Fasts till three of the Clock in the
Afternoon; and we find no mention but of one eating; afterward it came to
Noon, and a Collation was allowed: Amongst these Mitigations I reckon Penance
left to the discretion of the Confessor, and the frequent granting of
Indulgencies; as likewise the dispensing with the Rigor of many of the Rules of
the Monasticks. They thought that the Religious, though falling short of the
utmost Perfection that their Rule required, would yet even under some
abatements arrive to an higher Perfection than if they continued in the World,
and that it was better somewhat to soften and qualify the Fast of Lent, than to
let it run wholly into disuse; but we are not from those Condescensions to
imagine that the way to Heaven is become more easy to Us, than it was to them
of Old; that we are more happy than our Forefathers; or that the Bishops and
Popes of these last Ages thought themselves wiser than their Predecessors.

We need only read the Constitutions and Canons which have Authorized the
several Relaxations, to see that the Church never did it without Regret. Many
Deviations came in only by common usage. In the mean time the Church has taken
special care in such cases, to retain certain Observances in remembrance of the
true Practice of Antiquity. Thus the Office for the Noon or Evening Service
said on Fast-days before Dinner; All the Formularies of Ordinations and other
public Acts, are as it were so many repeated Protestations to salve the
authority of the ancient Rules, and bar the pretense of Prescription against
them.

There are other Abuses which the Church has always condemned; as those absurd
Shows which they had the boldness to bring even into the Churches themselves,
and which were forbidden in the Council of Basil: And as the profane Conc.
Basil. Sess. xii. c. xi. V. Syn. Vigorn. an. 1240. c. iv.
Jollity on the Feasts of the Saints, the remains of which we see in that of
St. Martin's Day, of the Kings, and on those of their Patron Saints in the
Villages; or Country Wakes: And as the Debauches of the Carnival, which had no
other beginning than the Reluctance People had about the keeping of Lent,
resolving to take their Fill of Pleasure before they began their Fast. Little
did the Apostles and their Disciples imagine that this Holy Preparation for the
Passover, should one Day have proved an occasion of Dissolution and
Licentiousness.

The Saints and all true Christians have always openly declared against these
Abuses. We know with what Vigor St. Charles Borromeus suppressed them, and how
Zealously he Labored to bring back again into the Church the Spirit of
Antiquity, even to the lesser matters of Religion. The Council of Trent, and
those who were employed to see it put into Execution in the Provinces, aimed at
no other end than This. And so many Reformations that have been made in the
Religious Orders since the last Age, were only in order to reduce them to their
Primitive Constitution. St. Teresa could Vi. S. Ter^ c. 27. fin.
not endure that under the pretense of Discretion, and for the avoiding of
Scandal, there should be Restraints laid upon the fervor of those who
affected to imitate the Saints of the first Age. She complains that these
Discretions have spoiled the World, and maintains that in her Age, which is
very near ours, the Virtues of the Primitive Church were not Impracticable
Lessons. 'Twas upon this occasion she wrote the Life of St. Peter of Alcanta^a,
she herself being an eye Witness to it.

Proceeding upon so good Authorities, LVI. The use of this Work.
I thought I might do some service to the World in Representing the Manners of
the Ancients, which ought to be the Patterns now of all good Christians. I have
said nothing but what is well known to Persons of Learning, and taken out of
Books with which they are familiarly acquainted. And they will see that much
more might have been added to the same Purpose. There are many things here not
commonly known to every good Christian; and such things too as are fit for
their Edification. They will see that the Religion of a Christian consists not
altogether (as too many imagine) in some formal performances. To say over every
Morning and Night some short Prayers; to assist on Sundays at the Public
Service; to distinguish the Holy Time of Lent, only by abstaining from some
certain sort of Dyets, and to dispense with it upon trivial Occasions; to
approach the Sacraments so Seldom, and with so small affection, that they turn
Solemn Festivals into Melancholy Days. And as to the common Course of their
Lives, to be as much addicted to the Interests and Pleasures of this World as
Pagans themselves could be. These are not the Christians I have been Describing.

I hope also, that the Description I have here given of the Holy Manners of
those that were really Christians, may make some Impressions upon such Persons
who have no more sense of things, than to confound the true Religion with those
false ones which the Error of Ignorant, or Craft of disigning Men have
introduced. Let a Man but consider that vast change of Manners which the Gospel
has wrought in all Nations, and the Distinguishing Characters there have
always been between true Christians, and Infidels; and he will see that the
Christian Religion stands upon a surer Bottom then he thought for. He will be
forced to believe that it was at first established by the Power of Miracles,
for there can be nothing more Incredible than that such a Change should be
wrought without Miracles. These Miracles made so strong an Impression, that it
was not till very late any one did so much as think of calling them into
Question. To speak no more than what we know, it is scarce above Two hundred
Years since this Libertinism was introduced by some Italians, who though Men of
Wit, were very Ignorant of Religion, and disgusted with these Abuses; then they
were charmed with the Beauty of the Ancient Greek and Latin Authors, with the
Government of these People and their way of Living: And so much the more
because the maxims of those Heathens better agreed with the Corruption of human
Nature, and the general Practices of Mankind. In short these Modern Italians
relished nothing else.

This mischief was farther increased by the new Heresies that were broached in
these last Ages. The Disputes upon the very Fundamental Principles of Religion
shock't the Faith of many; who yet upon diverse Temporal Motives continued in
the outward profession of the Catholic Religion: And amongst the Heretics
themselves were great numbers who being no longer restrained by Authority, have
driven the Consequences of their ill principles to extremity, and are come to
that pass as to look upon Religion it self as no more than a piece of
State Policy. This unhappy notion got ground, and easily spread it self. Young
Persons hearing their Parents perhaps, or those whom they looked upon as Men of
Wit, making some lewd Jests upon Religion, or it may be venturing to say in
plain terms, that there was nothing in it at the bottom, presently took up with
that; and finding these notions agreeable to their Passions and Desires, never
troubled their thoughts any farther about inquiring into the Merit of the
matter. Vanity also came in for its share: They thought by this means to
distinguish themselves from the ignorant Vulgar, and appear more discerning
than the honest well meaning People of former Ages: besides sloth was another
Motive to make them either take matters upon trust, or determine at all
Adventures rather than to be at the trouble of examining the Truth; but let Men
say what they will, the matters I have here laid down will be always true; what
Origin in his Book against Celsus so often inculcates, that Jesus Christ has
reformed the World, and filled it with virtues unknown to former Ages.

And this is what I had to say concerning the Manners of the Israelites and of
LVII. The Conclusion.
the Christians; such was the outward appearance of the Lives of the faithful
of the Old and of the New Testament. In my Opinion the first Discourse shows us
The Manners of the Israelites, published also in English 1683. but without
taking any notice of the Author.
the best use of Temporal advantages, and the most accountable Methods of
living up to Innocence and Nature. In this latter I have endeavored to show
what was the life of those whose Conversation was in Heaven; and who while they
were in the Flesh lived yet by the Spirit. This Life perfectly Spiritual and
Supernatural was the peculiar effect of the Grace of Jesus Christ.

If what I have Written proves Instrumental to give a right notion of the Life
which is truly reasonable and Christian, and to make any one apply himself
seriously to the practice of it: If matters prove thus, I shall not at all be
disturbed at the different Censures of the Reader, or the Faults with which the
Work may be Charged.

THE END.
A TABLE OF THE HEADS.
Chap. I. THE Division of the Whole. Page. 1.

PART I.
II. The Church of Jerusalem. 2.
PART II.
III. The time of the Persecutions. The State of the Gentiles before their
Conversion. 33. IV. Preaching, Teaching, and Baptism. 40. V. The Christian
Life. Prayer. 44. VI. The Study of the Holy Scripture. 48. VII. Their
Employments, Occupations, and Professions. 55. VIII. Their Fasts. 58. IX. Their
Eating. 62. X. The Modesty, Gravity and Seriousness of Christians. 66. XI.
Marriages. 74. XII. The Union of Christians. 77. XIII. Their Church Assemblies,
Liturgy, and outward Form of Worship. 80. XIV. The secret of the Mysteries. 85.
XV. The Reasons of the general Odium against the Christians. 86. XVI. The
Persecutions. The manner of proceeding against the Christians. Their
Punishments. 101. XVII. Prisons. 112. XVIII. Their Care of Relics. 115. XIX.
The Confessors. 119. XX. Excommunication and Penance. 120. XXI. Asceticks,
Virgins, Widows, Deaconesses. 127. XXII. Their Care of the Poor. 132. XXIII.
Their Hospitality. 136. XXIV. Their care of the Sick, and Burial of their Dead.
140. XXV. Bishops, Priests, Clerks, Ordinations. 144. XXVI. The Discretion and
Patience of the Christians. 158.
PART III.
XXVII. The Church freed from Persecution. The Examination and Preparation for
Baptism. 166. XXVIII. The Form of their Churches, and their Ornaments. 171.
XXIX. Devotion assisted by Sense. 184. XXX. Their Liturgy and outward Form of
Worship. 188. XXXI. Their Sermons. 192. XXXII. The Sacrifice and Sacred Habits.
200. XXXIII. Consecration, Communion. 204. XXXIV. The Singing, and Magnificence
of the public Service. 207. XXXV. The Solemnity of the Feasts of the Church,
Pilgrimages. 211 XXXVI. The Ceremonies of Penance. 217. XXXVII. Christian
Princes. 224. XXXVIII. The Manners of the Clergy. 229. XXXIX. The Riches of the
Church. 240. XL. Hospitals. 248. XLI. Monasteries. 251. XLII. The Monastic
Life compared with that of the first Christians. 262. XLIII. The Reasons of the
External Singularities in the Monks. 265.
PART IV.
XLIV. The decay of Christian Piety in the Fourth and following Ages, with the
Causes thereof. 274. XLV. The Incursions of the Barbarians and their Manners.
288. XLVI. The mixture of the Romans and the Barbarians. 294. XLVII. The
Manners of the Christians in the East from the Fifth Age. 299. XLVIII. The
Manners of the West. The Disorders of the Tenth Age. 305. XLIX. The
Preservation of Religion. 313. L. The Re-establishment of Piety and Discipline.
316 LI. Alterations in Penance. 320. LII. Croisades and Indulgences. 325. LIII.
The Multitude and Variety of Doctors. 329. LIVE. A Succession of sound Doctrine
and good Examples in all times. 334 LV. Some Abuses Tolerated in the Church,
and how they came to be so. 339. LVI. The use of this Work. 342. LVII. The
Conclusion. 346.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Tho. Leigh at the Peacock in Fleet Street.
Folio.
THE Life of our Blessed Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. An Heroic Poem,
Dedicated to her most Sacred Majesty. In ten Books. Attempted by Samuel Wesley
M. A. Chaplain to the most Honorable John Lord Marqucss of Normanby, and
Rector of Epworth in the County of Lincoln. Each Book Illustrated by necessary
Notes, Explaining the more difficult matters in the whole History; Also a
Prefatory Discourse concerning Heroic Poetry. The Second Edition Revised by the
Author, and Improved with Addition of a large Map of the Holy Land, and a Table
of the principal Matters. With Sixty Copper Plates by the Celebrated Hand of W.
Faithorne.

Resolves Divine Moral, Political. With several new Additions both in Prose and
Verse, not extant in the former Impressions. In this Eleventh Edition,
References are made to the Poetical Citations, heretofore much wanted. By Owen
Feltham Esquire

Quarto.
Mechanic Powers: Or the Mystery of Nature and Art Unvailed, showing what
great things may be performed by Mechanic Engines, in removing and raising
Bodies of vast Weights with little Strength, or Force; and also the making of
Machines, or Engines, for raising of Water, Dreining of Grounds, and several
other Uses. Together with a Treatise of Circular Motion, Artificially fitted to
Machanick use, and the making of Clock-Work, and other Engines. A work pleasant
and Profitable for all sorts of Men, from the highest to the lowest Degree: And
never Treated of in English but once before, and that but Briefly. The whole
Comprised in 10 Books, and Illustrated with Copper Cuts By Ven. Mandey, and J.
Moxon Philomat;


