FOR THE KING And both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT. Being A SHORT RELATION OF THE Sad
Estate and Sufferings OF THE Innocent People of GOD, CALLED QUAKERS; FOR
Worshipping GOD, and Exercising a Good CONSCIENCE toward GOD and MAN.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1661.

For the KING And both HOUSES of PARLIAMENT.
FOR these many years some have been put to Death, and many have dyed in
Prisons, some have been beat with Clubs, and shot at with Pistols and Guns, and
cut with Swords, and knocked down into Pools, and not long after have dyed; and
many have been kept in Prison several days, without Straw or Meat, and almost
starved; And many have had their Goods spoiled and taken away from them, to the
Ruining of Them, their Wives and Families; and above Three Thousand suffered
Imprisonments, Stockings and Whippings in the days of the Commonwealth, and of
Oliver Cromwell; and above Five Thousand have suffered since the King came into
England very great Afflictions and Imprisonments; and about Seventy lie in
Prison, that were Committed in the days of Oliver, and the Commonwealth; and
above Five Hundred are at present Prisoners, some in Dungeons, and some lie
without Straw, and some are not suffered to have Meat brought to them; and
also, diverse are Committed every week. And besides, many other are their Cruel
Sufferings, some of which are here presented to your Consideration, who have
the Power to Remedy these things.

NOttinghamshire, Imprisoned Fifteen, six of whom were taken out of a Meeting
at Vpton, by Soldiers, with drawn Swords, who much abused them, punching and
beating of them; And when they were brought to the Sessions, the Justices said
they were not there that Committed them, and so slighted them; and some of them
they put in a Pit with Thieves, who picked their Pockets and took their Money
from them, and violently plucked off their Coats, and forced Drink upon them,
and swore, if they would not drink they would throw it in their faces, and
threatened to fire their Beds: and this was all tolerated by the Jailer, who (as
they said) bid them do it; and this they did night after night. And the other
Five are Imprisoned for Conscience sake, and not paying Tithes; where they all
remain Prisoners.

Warwickshire, Imprisoned Fourteen; five, because for Conscience sake they
could not pay Tithes, who own Christ come in the flesh, the Everlasting
Priesthood, who ends the first that takes Tithes: And Two are cast into Prison
for meeting together, waiting upon the Lord to worship him; and others suffered
for Conscience sake toward God: And one Friend being bound to appear at the
Assizes, did appear, and then was bid go back; and he demanded his Bond, so the
Judge bad him remember him to the rest of his Brethren, and said, The next
Assizes he should have his Bond, with a Halter about his Neck. And thus the
Innocent is made a Prey upon: and all is, because their minds and hearts are
turned toward God, and for fearing, loving, and obeying him; and through the
prejudice of the Magistrates they kept two Friends in Prison, though they were
freed by the King's Proclamation. And Four Friends were at a Meeting at
Stratford upon Avon, and being of another Town, the men (called Justices)
caused them to be Whipped, both men and women, and sent away; and caused Two
others that were at the same Meeting, that belonged to the Town, to be
Imprisoned.

Rent, Imprisoned Ten; some taken out of their peaceable Meetings, and some
from their Employments, and are cruelly used; And the Governor of Dover told
Friends, they should be kept close, and none should come at them, and that they
should take up their Provision at a Hole, and that was all the favor they
should have: And one Friend is put in a Hole where there is no Light nor Air,
but through three little holes in the Door; and has nothing to lie on, but a
little Straw, which has lain there several months; some of which Friends are
Tradesmen, on whom many Families depend to be set to work by.

Pembrookshire, Eighteen presented, for not going to the Steeple-house, and
committed Close Prisoners into a close, narrow, nasty, stinking, cold Place,
and the Jailer never once opened the Door for them since they were put in, to
have Conveniences, but what comes in through the hole of the Door. And the
Judge gave a strict Charge to the Grand Jury to present all Friends in this
County male and female, which accordingly was done, and gave Charge to all
Magistrates and Officers to break up their Meetings; and so it is like the
Prisons will be filled very soon in that County, with the Innocent and such as
fear God: and some of these Friends are Husbandmen, and were taken away just in
the time of their Harvest.

Carmarthen, One Committed on the same Account by the same Judge, and was much
abused in the Shire Hall.

Shropshire, One Committed for being at a Meeting, and though the Judge gave
the Jailer a Charge that he might have the Liberty of the Prison, and to let
his Friends Come to him, yet the Jailer has Cruelly beat him and suffered the
Prisoners to beat him, and stopped his Victuals that he has been glad to pluck
them up by a Cord at the Window; and there he remains a Prisoner.

Hampshire, In Portsmouth three are in Prison; and there Friends were Plucked
out of there Peaceable Meetings, and thrust out of the Town, and kicked and
beat by Soldiers with the great end of their Muskers, and are not suffered to
work in Prison, being Handycrafts men; Whereby they are like to be ruined for
want of outward; and often their Wives are denied to bring them food; and one
went to visit one in Prison and they beat him, and cast him into Prison also.
And when Friends laid these things before the Officers, one of them said he was
resolved to ruin Friends.

Oxfordshire, Four in Prison, because for Conscience sake, they could not Pay
Tithes; And at Banbury a peaceable Meeting was broken up by Soldiers under
Col. Frettwel, who drew their swords and struck and beat Friends, and run one
in the breast; and a Soldier with a leg of a Form beat and bruised several
Friends; and when they had pulled out Men Women and Children out of the
Meeting, they beat them, and threatened to Kill some of them.

Wilishire, Eighteen: several of them very poor Men, Ten of them were taken in
a Friends backside, after a Meeting, by Soldiers, of whom Friends asked to
see their Warrant, but they drew their sword, and said, This is our Warrant,
and haled them away to one Captain Sharp who sent them to Prison without a
Mittimus; where they remain Prisoners this Instant.

Cambridgeshire, Two Imprisoned for not paying Tithes, and Eleven for not going
to the Steeple Houses, where they remain.

Glamorganshire, Four Imprisoned, one of them haled out of a Meeting by
Soldiers with Swords and Pistols, and three of them because they could not
give Money to the Promooters; where they remain.

Merionethshire, Four imprisoned, and had Irons put on them for not Swearing,
and the rude people set upon them (when they were apprehended) with drawn
Swords, threatening to kill them; and one threatened to knock them on the head
with an Ax; the Jailer took their Meat from them, and beat them, and made them
go in a very tempestuous day 12 Miles with Irons upon them; and there being
two Fiddlers and a Piper Prisoners, in spite he set them a sidling and Piping
between every two that were Chained together with Irons.

Mountgomeryshire, Eight Imprisoned; sometimes they keep Water from them, and
often times keep their food from them, because they will not have it of the
Jailer, and they are in a Cold Room in the Common Goal, where they lay six
nights on the bare boards without straw, and then had a wadd of straw allowed
them; And sometimes are locked up and not suffered to go to ease themselves, but
are forced to do it where they lodge. Two of which were taken as they were
traveling on the high way.

Herefordshire. Friends being peaceably met together in Hereford, to wait upon
the Lord, the Mayor, Aldermen, and some Officers came into the Meeting-Room,
and said he would rouse them up. Some of them said, they were peaceably met
together in the Fear of the Lord. He said, he would have no more Meetings in
the Fear of the Lord; and so sent both men and women to Prison.

One Friend was taken at Lemster and carried to Hereford, and committed to
Prison by the Mayor of the City, where he had bars of Iron kept on his legs
(which were about half an hundred weight) two days and one night, and was
denied to send to his Friends; and a Letter that he wrote to his Friends, being
carried by a Friend to the Mayor, according to his Order; he kept the Letter,
and committed the Friend to Prison that brough it.

Radnorshire. Imprisoned Eight, being taken (as they were parting from a
Meeting) by men who came with Swords and Staves, and threatened to drag some
Friends at their Horse tails; and because they were asked to show their Orders,
one Price drew out his Sword, and said, there was his Order; and struck one
Friend upon his Head, and cut his Hat almost through: and several others they
beat very cruelly, without mercy; and being brought before a Justice, they were
committed to Prison, until they should take the Oath of Allegiance.

Suffolk. Twenty Imprisoned: many of them committed for not going to the
Public Worship.

Cornwel. Above Twenty Friends were taken (as they were going from a Meeting)
by Soldiers; and they put the men (being Eighteen) into a Dungeon, which was
so little that half of them could not sit at a time, and had no Straw nor any
thing to lie on: and the women were put into a little Room in Pendennis Castle,
and had not so much as Straw allowed them to lie on: And by a Warrant from two
Justices, as much Goods was taken from them as was worth 25 l. 18 s. for
driving them from Prison to Prison.

Here follows a Relation of some part of the Lamentable Sufferings and
Havoc, that is and has been made of the People of God, by the oppressing
Ministers of England.
ESsex.] John Adams of Hadstock renting a Farm of Twenty seven pounds a year,
the Priest of Hadstock demanded Tithes for the said Farm for the year, 1659.
and because John Adams could not for Conscience sake pay them, the Priest
caused to be taken away from him in Goods, Cattle, and Horses, to the value of
Thirty eight pounds, and returned nothing again: And this was testified under
the hands of several Witnesses.

In the same County, John Pollard of Steeple, renting a Farm of about 200 l. a
year Rent, according to former Custom, Tithes were paid but for three parts of
the same, One Armiger claimed Tithes for three years for the said Farm, which
amounted to 45 l. for three parts; which John Pollard for Conscience sake
denying to pay, the said Armiger caused to be taken away from him Cows,
Bullocks, and one Bull to the number of Eighty two in all; all which are valued
to be worth 322 l. and returned nothing again: and has kept the said John
Pollard and his Brother in Prison, in the Fleet and other Prisons, several
years, besides.

Sussex.] Nicholas Beard had taken from him by Robert Baker, Priest of
Rottingdean, for Fifty two pounds demanded for Tithes for two years, fourteen
Oxen, six Cows, and a Bull, worth 137 l. and nothing returned again: And in the
year, 1660. the said Baker came into Nicholas his Corn Fields, and took away
whole Loads of Wheat and Barley, without setting out either Ninths or Tenths,
and choosed as he went, and sometimes left none behind, but took all as if it
had been his own: And because Nicholas reproved him, he struck him over the
head with his Cane, in so much that his head was sore seven or eight weeks
after; and he kept the said Nicholas a close Prisoner in the year 1661, Twelve
weeks, and since removed him to the Kings Bench, and demands Two hundred Pounds
more for Tithes.

Rent.] Edward Noaks of Word, farmed Land at the rate of Eighty pounds a year,
for one years Tithe had Goods taken from him to the value of an hundred pounds,
and was kept two years and an half in Prison besides.

And for about 706 l. 08 s. 11 d. demanded for Tithes of several other Friends,
the Priest and others have taken Goods worth 3000 l. 03 s. 08 d. and have often
taken ten times more than their pretended due.

And there has suffered Imprisonments, Stockings, Whippings, Loss of Goods,
and other abuses; for keeping a good Conscience toward God and man, before the
King came into England -- 3170 Persons. And there remain yet Prisoners, that
were committed in the days of the Commonwealth, and of Oliver and Richard
Cromwell -- 0079 Persons. And there has dyed in Prison in their days, through
hard usage -- 0032 Persons. And there has suffered Imprisonments, for Refusing
to Swear, and for Meeting together, and Refusing to go to the Public Worship,
and keeping a good Conscience toward God and man, since the King came into
England 5400 Persons. And there has dyed in Prison (since the King came in)
through hard and cruel usage -- 0014 Persons.

In IRELAND.
For speaking the Truth in Steeple Houses and Markets, and for not Swearing,
and for keeping a good Conscience; there have been Whipped, Stockt, Imprisoned,
Fined, and suffered loss of their Goods -- 0200 Persons. And there is at
present in Prison in Ireland, being taken out of a peaceable Meeting in Cork,
and one other Meeting -- 0029 Persons.

In SCOTLAND.
For speaking the Truth, and denying the Priests practices, and for not
Swearing, have been Imprisoned, Stockt, Whipped, and some Banished, to the number
of -- 0091 Persons.

And there are many in Prison at present in Scotland, and Necessaries denied
them, and their Friends denied to visit them; but the certain number we know
not at present.

Here follows an Account of Five hundred and fifty two Persons at present
Prisoners in England, for good Conscience sake.
Wilsthire -- 21 Cornwel -- 04 Warwickshire -- 14 Somersetshire -- 26
Dorsetshire -- 07 Gloucestershire -- 23 Essex -- 15 Bedfordshire -- 18
Oxfordshire -- 02 Yorkshire -- 13 Northamptonshire -- 31 Lincoln -- 04
Merioneth-shire -- 04 Devonshire -- 03 Buckinghamshire -- 18 Shropshire -- 01
Lancashire -- 58 Leicestershire -- 05 Darbyshire -- 03 Cambridgeshire -- 13
Nottinghamshire -- 15 Suffolk -- 20 Cheshire -- 02 Norfolk -- 08 Sussex -- 02
Rent -- 12 Staffordshire -- 34 Worcestershire -- 07 Hertfordshire -- 50
Herefordshire -- 15 Hampshire -- 04 Middlesex -- 16 Radnorshire -- 08
Pembrookshire -- 18 Glamorganshire -- 16 Carmarthen -- 01 Mountgomery -- 08
Cumberland -- 08 Huntingdonshire -- 10 Isle of Man -- 20
Here follows a short Account of the sad Sufferings of the People of God in
the Foreign Plantations.
IN New England, Twenty six Friends have been banished on Pain of death. Four
have been Martyred. Three have had their Ears Cut. One has been burned in the
hand with the Letter H. Thirty one Persons have received six hundred and fifty
stripes. One was beat while his body was like a Jelly. Five Appeals made to
England, were denied by Boston Rulers. One thousand Forty five pounds worth of
Goods has been taken from them (being poor men) for Meeting together in the
fear of the Lord, and for keeping the Commands of Christ.
Late Sufferings in New England.
John Curryer, an Inhabitant in Boston, having a Wife and five Children, was
Whipped throw three Towns, having ten stripes in a Town, with a threefold
Cord-whip, with knots at the end of it; and for returning back to his Wife and
Children, was Whipped through three Towns again, and is now in Prison, and is
to be burned in the shoulder with the Letter R. And six Inhabitants are now
Prisoners in Boston. And one is to lie in Prison as long as he lives, by their
Law. Anne Needham, an Inhabitant, a woman of good report, a Mother of Children,
was whipped with ten stripes. Thomas Harris, was whipped in Boston with Ten
stripes. George Wilson was Whipped at a Carts tail through three Towns, Ten
stripes at a Town, with a Horse Whip. Anne Barker was Whipped in Boston Patent
with many stripes, and she and two more were put in the stocks. Peter Pearson,
and Judith Brown, Innocent People, had both of them Forty stripes, Twenty
stripes apiece. Twenty-Eight Forced out of their Jurisdiction; Some of them
Whipped and were not suffered Husband and Wives to go to their Families and
Children; and if they did they were to be whipped out again at the Carts tail.
And they drove Friends out of their Jurisdiction into Plymouth Jurisdiction,
and there they had a Law to whip them also, where George Wilson and John
Bristow were whipped soon after with rods, having Ten or a Eleven stripes a piece
in Plymouth Patent. Robert Hodgshon, was whipped also in the same Patent with
Nine stripes. Mary Parker was taken out of her own House, and where Friends
were met together, and six more, and put in the stocks, and they were much
abused, punched and halled; and they threw them in holes of water, in so much
that the very Indians Cried shame of them. And when Friends showed the
Governors, the Kings Proclamation Concerning setting Friends at liberty, the
Kings Subjects; he said in open Court to Robert Hodgshon, that we were None of
the Kings Subjects; which Robert said he would prove it by the Kings
Proclamation; and then Daniel Dennison, another Magistrate said, that if the
King sent over any thing that we should have our Liberty, he would Consider of
it, but he would die at the Point of the Sword, he said, before we should have
our Liberty. A cruel Marshal took out of a Friends house, Clothes worth Four
pound, and afterward he took a Man out of his field in a rage, and set him in
the stocks all night.
Goods taken for Fines, laid upon Friends for not going to the public Worship.
From John Small of Salem, a laboring man, when he was about to go to Plow,
being fined Five shillings a day, had Goods taken worth sixteen pound. Taken
from Robert Buffan on the same Account, 10 l. A Horse from George Gardner,
worth Ten pounds. From John Southwick, for his Wife, Thirteen pounds. And from
his Sister (Provided) in Clothes from her back, and one Cow, worth Eight
pounds: and would have sold her for a Bondslave, if any would have bought her.
Daniel Southwick they would have sold for a Bondslave, but no body would buy
him; so they attached his House and Land, and threatened to put in a Tenant of
their own. William Parker, for entertaining a Stranger, had a Cow taken from
him worth 5 l. John Rogers, his Son and his Daughter, being found in a
Neighbors house on the First Day, had a Cow took from them, worth 4 l. Henry
Holland, for having a Friend in his House, and a Meeting, was fined 7 l. and
for that he had three Cows taken from him worth 12 l. Arthur Howland, having a
Meeting in his House, had an Ox taken from him, worth 8 l. John Smith, for
entertaining some of his Neighbors, was fined and had taken from him 2 l. Taken
from Will. Newland, for entertaining of Peter Pearson, two Cows, worth about 10
l. Taken from Peter Gaunt, for receiving George Wilson only so long a time
while he did refresh himself, two Cows, worth 10 l. Taken from Ralph Allen one
Cow, worth 5 l. Taken from Edward Perry one Ox, worth 7 l. Taken from William
Gifford one Ox, worth 8 l.
Goods taken from Friends at Hampton in New England, for Fines.
From William Marst^^, for lodging of Winlock Christison and Joseph Allen, he
had taken in dry Ginger and green Ginger, 5 l. And from Eliakim Wardal, for
lodging Winlock Christison and Joseph Allen, taken away a Gelding, worth 17 l.
And they paid him part of the Overplus in the Ginger they stole from William
Marston, and promised to pay him the rest in Land somewhere in the Wilderness.
And afterward came again and took away that Ginger, and a Drying Pan besides.
Josiah Cockshall of Rhoad Island, for going into Plymouth Jurisdiction to visit
some Friends, had his Horse took from him, worth 13 l. Mary Dyar was put to
death, for speaking to the Rulers of Boston to repeal their unrighteous Laws.
BARBADO'S.

About Sixty were Imprisoned, and some Imprisoned in Cyrinan, and banished into
the Woods, among the Wild Beasts, to be devoured: but the Lord preserved them.

MARYLAND.

Two hundred ninety nine pounds twelve shillings and two pence worth of Goods
was taken from Friends, for worshipping of God, and Friends were cruelly
abused, and some whipped besides.

VIRGINIA.

One Thomas Owen was Imprisoned for having a Meeting of Friends in his House,
and was put in a close place, and not suffered to go forth to ease himself.

John Cox, a Factor for some Merchants in Bristol, and a Trader for himself,
for not putting off his Hat was imprisoned in the same place: and in his
Mittimus they called him A Lude Dissolute Person; and the Governor caused to
be taken from him for the cause aforesaid, Two thousand weight of Tobacco, all
that he had both of his own and others; and he, and the aforesaid Thomas Owen,
were kept in such a stinking Hole in the Winter season, and not suffered to go
forth to ease themselves, and their Friends denied to come at them to minister
to their Necessities; by which Cruelty their bodies were brought so low, that
John Cox was near death, and lay speechless for many hours; and when they
thought he was past recovery, they opened the Door: And this Cruelty they
inflicted on him, only for not putting off his Hat, as it was expressed by some
of them that persecuted him.

And Twelve other Friends were Imprisoned, for meeting together to worship God.

William Colburn, for having a Meeting in his house, was fined an hundred pound
Sterling.

David Cuffin, for the same cause, was taken, and four more with him, and
severely whipped and sent to Prison, and fined an hundred pounds.

And several others, that are not here mentioned, have greatly suffered in
Virginia for the worshipping of their God, and for serving of him in Spirit and
Truth.

These Friends following were Banished from the Island of Nevis, for Keeping
their Consciences void of offense toward the Lord, and had no Legal Trial.
Mary Fisher. Peter Head. John Rous. William Robinson. Christopher Holder.
Thomas Harris. Richard Clark, banished from his Wife, being an Inhabitant
there. Richard Pinder. Robert Malins. Josiah Coal. George Rofe. Thomas Clarke.
Jane Gore. Justinian Holliman, whipped and banished. Robert Hodgshon.
It was their constant course, that when they heard any Friends were come to
the Island, to never leave hunting after them till they had found them out, and
then to banish them off the Island, and force the Master of the ship to carry
them from the Island that brought them thither; and most of these Friends a
fore mentioned, were banished off the Island without any legal Trial,
Evidence brought against them, Crime or breach of Law laid to their charge,
which might occasion justly their Banishment; and few Friends were ever called
before the Governor or Magistrates, but being taken by the Marshall, were
forced off the Island by a verbal Order, only from the Governor.

Justinian Holliman, Banished off from Christophers.

Therefore in the Love, Patience, Wisdom and Meekness, we would have you to
Consider these things in Justice, true Judgment and Equity; for our Friends be
innocent, not lifting up a hand against any one, and own that which is just,
which Establishes a Kingdom. And the Lord Suffered Adam, though he disobeyed,
to have Liberty in the Earth, and Cain, and wild Ishmael, and Profane Esau,
whom God hated; And the true Christians in the Primitive times, did not Compel
nor force any about Maintenance nor Ministry; for we do not read that the
Christians did imprison any for not Swearing, for not Paying Tithes, or for not
going to their Public places of Worship. Therefore these things came up since
the Apostles days, for which they had no Example from them, nor Christ; which
Christians should be more Moderate then all people upon the Earth, in the
gentle and peaceable Wisdom, that is pure from above: but the Just always
suffered, and the Sufferings of the Just is by them that live not in the Power
of God; Therefore with the witness of God, Consider these things; And if there
be not liberty for Husbandmen and Tradesmen, it will be the Cause of ruining
many Families, and will not be for Gods Honor, nor your profit, to hinder
people from going about their Lawful occasions, and from Meeting together to
Worship God.

And we being Peaceable, and seeking the peace of all men, and not lifting up a
Hand against any one, to the revenging of our selves, though we have Suffered;
therefore it is but reasonable that we should have Our Meetings, and it is not
against the Apostles Doctrine, nor Christ's, for Christians to meet together to
Edify one another, and Build up one another in the holy Faith; and to Exhort
one another daily, and not to forsake the Assembling together one with another:
This was the Command and Example of the Apostles, who met together from house
to house; and Christ, who met on Hills, Mountains, and in the Wilderness, and
houses and Inns: And the Apostle Paul was Suffered to meet at Rome, where the
Seat of the Emperor was; and the Prophet said, They that feared the Lord met
often together, whom the Lord heard, which were as his Jewels; Therefore
Christians should not be straightened from the Practice of the Apostles; for, if
there was more Love among Christians, where there is a great deal of
Profession, there would be more Edification; And not to be against such as do
Edify one another according to the Practice of the Apostles: for Christ and
the Apostles Meetings, were looked upon to be Seditious and tumultuous as ours
are, but our Innocence and theirs has and does manifest it self; And this we
desire, that you all had the mind of Moses, who said, would all the Lords
people were Prophets; for there was some in Moses days that would have
limited the Spirit: and Christ said to the Jews, Is it not Written, you shall
all be taught of the Lord. And as Concerning Swearing, Christ has Commanded
not to Swear at all: And the Apostle James said, My Brethren, above all things
Swear not at all; but in all your Communications, let your yea be yea, and nay
nay: this is Christ's Doctrine, and the Apostles, who says, Swear not at all,
least you fall into Condemnation. Now these are the true Christians who obey
Christ and the Apostles Doctrine; of whose Doctrine and Commands we are tender,
and cannot Swear least we Commit sin and evil, and fall into Condemnation:
Christ and the Apostles has commanded us in all our Communication to keep to
yea and nay; And now, if our yea, be not yea, and nay nay, in all things, to
you and all Magistrates, and all people, then let us Suffer if we break that,
as them that break their Oaths. And let all the Prison Doors be Set Open for
the Innocent Men and Women, that many that have long lain in Prison in Straw
and Holes, and wanted Food, and where many have dyed; and this is that, we
would not have their Innocent Blood brought upon you.

And let Armed men with naked Swords and Pistols be stopped, who comes among
naked Men, and Women, and Children, that be innocent, when they are met
together to wait upon the Lord; which is a thing below the very Humanity of
Men, and contrary to the Kings Proclamation, which says, Soldiers should not
come into any house without a Civil Officer, and a VVarrant.

And all these Afflictions and Sufferings upon tender Consciences in matters of
Religion, are contrary to the Kings Declaration at Breda, and his Speeches and
Promises since.

And Friends, It Is a dishonor, and not an honor to Christian Religion, that
Boys, Girls, Fellows, and People, and Armed-men with Swords and Pistols,
should strike, beat, cut, and throw stones and dirt; and shout, and raise Heaps
and Tumults, against an Innocent People that lifts up a hand against no man,
that seeks the Righteousness, and Good, and Peace of all People: And for
Ministers and Teachers to have their People to do so, is not of good report,
but a reproach, and does not grace a Magistrate, which is to keep Peace, and to
lay the just Law upon Transgressors and Offenders, and to distinguish betwixt
the Peaceable and the Tumultuous, and Offenders, and Transgressors, and such as
the Law was made for, and it was not made for.

And again, All the Christian Magistrates and Ministers do know that Christ
says, Let the Wheat and the Tares grow together till the Harvest; and this was
Christ's Doctrine and Command to his Ministers: And the Apostles, which were
Ministers of Christ, said, Their weapons were Spiritual, and not Carnal, and
they did not wrestle with flesh and blood: therefore they that wrestle with
flesh and blood, with carnal weapons, Are they the Ministers of Christ? and do
these follow the Apostles Examples? Does not Christ rebuke such as take the
Brethren by the throat, whom he had forgiven in his Parable, and said, how that
all should forgive one another? And does not Christ rebuke them that did not
visit him in Prison; Therefore what will become of them that cast him in
Prison, where he is manifest? Therefore we would have you in the Wisdom of God
to consider these things, and in the feeling of Gods Spirit; for every one must
give an account at the day of Judgment to God for every idle word, and all
things done in the body. And does not Christ rebuke his Ministers, and his
Disciples, who would have had fire come down from Heaven to consume them, as
the Prophet did, that were contrary-minded to them, and told them that he came
to save men's lives, and not to destroy them: Therefore mind him, his Doctrine
and Practice, and let him be your Example in all things, by whom Grace came;
but the Law came by Moses (which Christ ended) which put men to death about
Religion: And this is my beloved Son, Hear ye Him, says God, who is the
Prophet raised like unto Moses; whom we do hear, and have done these many
years, who is our Way, Truth and Life.

And Friends, if you will not set our Friends at Liberty, which lie in Holes
and Dungeons, and some without Straw, and some hardly have Air, and many can
hardly get Meat, and many have died through the Cruel Sufferings and Abuses of
the Goalers and others; we offer unto you of our selves that be out of Prison,
as many as lie in Prison, to go into their Holes, Dungeons, stinking Vaults and
Places, where some of our Friends have lain, two, three, and some four or five
years, That they may go out of Prison, and not dye there, as many have done,
whose innocent blood we leave to the Lord: And this is but our Duty, in love to
God and our Brethren, and to such as do persecute and afflict us, to stop
innocent Blood from coming upon You and the People: And this is in Love to your
Souls, from the People of God called QUAKERS.

We subscribe in behalf of our selves and the rest of our Brethren.
Thomas Coveney. Ger. Roberts. Edward Brush. Char. Collins. William Gosnel.
Richard Pinder. Edward Brook. Gilbert Laty. Humphrey Bache. Ellis Hooks. John
Lawrence. John Rous.
We are such as do fear the God of Heaven, and delight to serve him with all
the heart; and we worship him in Spirit and Truth, and do walk in his Light and
Way, and are followers of Christ Jesus, and are taught by his Spirit so far,
as he has blessed us with the gifts of Grace and Knowledge; And we desire to
be found such as may serve the Lord God in uprightness of our hearts all our
days, keeping a good Conscience toward God and all men, That we may be to him
a People, and he our God; and that we may possess and inherit Eternal Life with
the Father, when this World shall be no more.

And we have always been a suffering People, under every Authority that has
been over us since we were a People; and the Rulers of these Kingdoms have
persecuted us, by cruel and hard Imprisonments, Scourgings, false Judgments,
and much evil dealing exercised toward us; And all this for and because only
of our Religion and good Conscience sake to God-wards, and not for any
Rebellion, Sedition, or wrong doing toward them, or our Neighbors; for it
has been our only care, how to walk justly and innocently in the sight of God
toward Rulers and People, and have been peaceable toward all; And herein we
have desired to approve our hearts in much Integrity and Sincerity, that we
might be found blameless before the Lord, as himself does bear us witness.

And we are at this very day the same toward you, innocent and peaceable, and
clear from all Rebellion, Plots, or Actions and Intentions of Evil; we desire
not your hurt, but your good, even that ye may walk in the Way of Peace, and
your souls may live and not perish; and that ye may fear the God of Heaven, and
may walk in his Wisdom and Counsel and not be destroyed: And such is our
Innocence of heart toward you, that we can say, Who is the man that can truly
accuse and detect us of the contrary? for such has been our peaceable
deportment ever since the King's arrival, that no guilt of Rebellion in action
or intention is found with us; But we are clear of all these things, however
otherwise falsely suspected or judged; And we desire nothing of you, but that we
may live a quiet and peaceable life, in all Godliness and Honesty, under the
King; and that we may be permitted to serve the Lord our God, and worship him
in the true exercise of a pure Conscience, according to the teachings of his
own Spirit in the matters of Faith and Worship, and Duty toward him. This we
only desire, That we may serve the Lord, and render all due Obedience to them
that have Rule over us.

And seeing ye have now our Case before you, If yet it be in your hearts and
purposes, to afflict us yet more, and to enact against us to our Imprisonment,
Banishment, or whatsoever, for and because of our Religion and good Conscience,
we are resolved in the Lord in much patience to bear it, and not rendering evil
for evil, but innocently to submit to whatsoever the Lord suffers to be done
unto us; And we shall leave it to the Just God of Heaven to plead our Cause,
and to determine the Controversy between You and Us in his day; We say, if
you yet cause us to suffer greater things than these, it is as we are
Christians, and Servants of Christ, for we are Innocent toward you; and we are
persuaded in the Lord to be faithful, and never to renounce our good
Consciences, nor to deny Christ before men, but to confess him, and profess
him, and follow him in the sight of all men, notwithstanding whatsoever
Sufferings may come upon us for the same; and if we perish in this World for so
doing, our Blood will be upon our Persecutors, and we shall have Peace with the
Lord our God; even while the Guilt of our Destruction rests with such as seek
our hurt. And therefore our desire is, That ye would truly weigh and consider
these things in the Fear and Wisdom of God, and how dangerous a thing it is,
both to Us and Your selves, to enact the Banishment of so many thousands of
Persons and Families, upon the account of difference in Religion: Oh! do not
put us upon such a sad Extremity, by making such a Law, by which we are
concluded, either to disobey Christ Jesus and his Law, and so to deny Christ,
and renounce our good Consciences, and so to expose us to the Wrath and Anger
of God perpetually; or to break your Law, and disobey your Authority, and so to
expose us to utter ruin in this World.

Consider of this, and let the Law of God teach you, To do to others as you
would be done unto in the like case.

THE END.

