THE Humorous Lieutenant, OR, Generous Enemies, A COMEDY: As it is now ACTED by
His Majesty's Servants, AT THE Theater Royal in Drury Lane.

LONDON, Printed for H. N. and Sold by William Chandler at the Peac(...) the
Poultry, and Ralph Smith, at the Bible under the P(...) the Royal Exchange in
Cornhill. 1697.

ACTORS NAMES.
MEN.
Mr. Harland, Mr. Cibber. KIng Antigonus, An Old Man with Young Desires.
Demetrius, Son to Antigonus, in Love with Celia. Mr. Simpson, Mr. Disney, Mr.
Rogers, Seleucus, Charinthus, Menippus, 3 Kings, Equal Sharers with Antigonus,
of what Alexander had, with United Powers opposing Antigonus. Mr. Mills,
Leontius, A brave Old Merry Soldier, Assistant to Demetrius. Mr. Fairbank, Mr.
Essex, Mr. Provost. Timon, Charinthus, Menippus, Servants to Antigonus, and his
Vices. Mr. Pinkeithman, The Humorous Lieutenant. Gentlemen, Friends and
Followers of Demetrius. 3 Ambassadors from the 3 Kings. Gentlemen Vshers.
Grooms. Musicians. Citt's. Soldiers. Physicians. Herald. Host.
WOMEN.
Mrs. Verbruggen. Celia, alias Evanthe, Daughter to Seleucus, Mistress to
Demetrius. Mrs. Bullock. Leucippe a Baud, Agent to the King's Lust. Ladys.
Citt's Wives. Mrs. Powell. Governess to Celia. A Country Woman. Phebe her
Daughter.
PLAYS Sold by William Chandler, and Ralph Smith.
VEry Good Wife.

Canterbury Guests.

Lost Lover.

Brutus of Alba

Sir Courtly Nice.

Lancashire Witches.

Pastor (...).

Country Wit.

Assignation, or Love in a Nunnery.

City Politics.

(...).

Villain.

Theodosius.

Sir Anthony Love, or the Rambling Lady.

Humerous Lady.

Disappointment.

Fond Husband.

Woman Captain.

Woman turned Bully.

Rival Ladies.

Wives Excuse.

Bury Fair.

Sacrifice.

Traitor.

Virtue (...).

Wild Galant.

Squire of (...).

(...) of a Wife.

Rovers, by Mrs. Behn.

Plain Dealer.

(...), or Moor's Revenge.

All for Love.

Fortune Hunters.

Don (...).

Venice Preserved.

(...).

Queen.

Tempest.

Virtuoso.

English Lawyer.

Miser.

Lucius Junius Brutus

Timon of Athens.

Marriage-hater Matched.

Hamlet Prince of Denmark.

Old Batchelour.

Regulus.

Volunteers, or Stockjobbers.

Intriegues of Versailles.

Friendship in Fashion.

Provoked Wife.

False Count.

World in the Moon.

Orphan.

Sophonisba.

Country Wife.

She Would if She Could.

Humourist.

Spanish Wives.

Royal Shephards.

Anthony and Cleopatra.

Rule a Wife and have (...) Wife.

City Lady.

(...) King of Pontus.

Titus Andronicus.

Titus and Berenice.

Empress of Morocco.

Widow Ranter.

Relapse.

Love's a (...).

Country Wake.

Love for Money.

Cyrus the Great.

Pyrrhus King of (...).

Agnes de Castro.

VVomans (...).

She (...).

Oedipus.

(...) the 13th, Emperor of the Turks.

THE HUMOROUS. LIEUTENANT.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter 2 Ushers, and Grooms with Perfumes. 1 Usher. ROund, round, perfume it
round, quick, look ye diligently the state be right; Are these the Richest
Cushions? Fie, fie, who waits in the Wardrobe?


2 Vsh. But pray tell me, do you think for certain these Ambassadors shall have
this morning Audience?


1 Vsh. They shall have it: Lord, that you live at Court and understand not? I
tell you they must have it.


2 Vsh. Upon what necessity?


1 Vsh. Still you are Ignorant of the Trick of Court, sell your Place.


Enter Ladies and Gentlemen. And Sow your Grounds, you are not for this
Tillage. Ladies, the best way is the upper Lodgings, there you may see at ease.

Ladies. We thank you, Sir.

Exeunt Ladies and Gentlemen.
1 Vsh. Would you have all these slighted? Who should report then the
Ambassadors were handsome Men? his Beard a neat one? the fire of his eyes
quicker then Lightning, and when it breaks, as blasting? his Legs, tho little
ones, yet movers of a Mass of Understanding? Who shall commend their Clothes:
who shall take notice of the most wise behavior of their Feathers? ye live a
raw Man here.


2 Vsh. I think I do so.


Enter 2 Citizens, and Wives. 1 Vsh. Why, whether would you all press?


1 Cit. Good Master Usher.


2 Cit. My Wife, and some few of my honest Neighbors here.


1 Vsh. Prithee be gone thou and thy honest Neighbors, thou look like an
Ass; why, Whether would you Fish-Face?


2 Cit. If I might have the honor to see you at my poor House, Sir, a Capon
bridled, and sadl'd I Will assure your Worship, a Shoulder of Mutton, and a
Bottle of Wine Sir; I know your Brother, he was as like ye, and shot the best
at Buts --


1 Vsh. A -- upon thee.


2 Cit. Some Music I Will assure you too, my Toy, Sir, can play of the Virginals.


1 Vsh. Prithee good Toy take away thy Shoulder of Mutton, it is Flieblown, and
Shoulder, take thy Flap along, here is no place for ye; nay then you had best
knocked.


Ex. Cit. Enter Celia. Cel. I would fain see him
The glory of this place, makes me remember,
But dye those thoughts, dye all but my desires,
Even those to death are sick too; he is not here,
Nor how my eyes may guide me --

1 Vsh. What Is your business? who keeps the outward door there? here is fine
shufling, you wastcoateer you must go back.


Cel. There is not,
There cannot be, six days and never see me?
There must not be desire; Sir, Do you think
That if you had a Mistress --

1 Vsh. Death, she is Mad.


Cel. And were your self an honest Man? it cannot --


1 Vsh. What a Devil have thou to do with me or my honesty? Will you be
jogging, good nimble Tongue? my fellow Doorkeeper?


2 Vsh. Prithee let her alone.


1 Vsh. The King is coming, and shall we have an Agent from the Suburbs come to
crave Audience too?


Cel. Before I thought ye
To have a little Breeding, some tang of Gentry;
But now I take ye plainly,
Without the help of any Perspectivo,
For that ye cannot alter.

1. Vsh. What Is that?


Cel. An Ass, Sir, you Bray as like one,
And by my Troth, methinks, as ye stand now,
Considering who to kick next, you appear to me
Just with that kind of Gravity, and Wisdom;
Your Place may bear the Name of Gentleman,
But if any of that Butter stick to your Bread --

2 Vsh. You must be modester.


Cel. Let him use me nobler,
And wear good Clothes to do good Ossices;
They hang upon a Fellow of his Virtue,
As tho they hung on Gibbets.

2 Vsh. A parlous Wench.


1 Vsh. Thrust her into a corner, I Will no more on her.


2 Vsh. You have enough, go pretty Maid, stand close, and use that little
Tongue with a little more temper.


Cel. I thank ye, Sir.


2 Vsh. When the Shows are past, I Will have ye into the Cellar, there we will
Dine, a very pretty (...), a witty Rogue, and there we will be as merry, Can ye
be Merry


Cel. O very merry.


2 Vsh. Only our selves; this churlish fellow shall not know.


Cel. By no means.


2. Vsh. And can you love a little?


Cel. Love exceedingly:

I have cause to love you dear sir.


2 Vsh. Then I Will carry ye, and show you all the Pictures, and the Hangings,
the Lodgings, Gardens, and the Walks: and then (sweet) you shall tell me where
you lie.


Cel. Yes marry will I.


2 Vsh. And't shall go hard but I Will send ye a Venison Pasty, and a Bottle of
Wine.


1 Vsh. Make room there.


2 Vsh. Room there before, stand close, the Train is coming.


Enter King Antigonous, Tymon, Charinthus, Menippus. Cel. Have I yet left a
Beauty to Catch Fools?
Yet, yet, I see him not, O what a misery
Is love, expected long, deluded longer!

Ant. Conduct in the Ambassadors.


1 Vsh. Make room there.


Ant. They shall not wait long Answer --


Cel. Yet he comes not.


Enter Three Ambassadors. Why are Eyes set on these, and Multitudes
Follow to make these Wonders? O good gods!
What would these look like if my Love were here?
But I am fond, forgetful.

Ant. Now your grievance,
Speak short, and have as short dispatch.

1 Em. Then thus, Sir:
In all our Royal Masters names, We tell you
Ye have done Injustice, broke the bonds of Concord,
And from their equal shares from Alexander
Parted, and so possessed, not like a Brother,
But as an open Enemy, Ye have hedged in
Whole Provinces, Manned and maintained these Injuries;
And daily with your Sword (though they still honor ye)
Make bloody Roades, take Towns, and ruin Castles,
And still their sufferance feels the weight.

2 Em. Think of that Love, Great Sir, that honored Friendship
Your self hold with our Masters, think of that strength
When you were all one Body, all one Mind;
When all your Swords struck one way, when your Angers,
Like so many brother billows rose together,
And curling up your foaming crests, defied
Even Mighty Kings, and in their falls, entombed 'em:
O think of these; and you that have been Conquerors,
That ever led your Fortunes open eyed,
Chained fast by considence; you that Fame courted,
Now ye want Enemies and Men to match ye;
Let not your own Swords seek your ends to shame ye.

Enter Demetrius with a Javelin, and Gentlemen. 3 Em. Choose which you will, or
Peace or War,
We come prepared for either.

1 Vsh. Room for the Prince there.


Cel. Was it the Prince they said! how my heart trembled!
It Is he indeed; What a sweet noble sierceness
Dwells in his eyes? young Meleager like,
When he returned from slaughter of the Boar,
Crowned with the loves and honors of the People,
With all the gallant youth of Greece, he looks now,
Who could deny him Love?

Them. Hail Royal Father.


Ant. Ye are welcome from your Sport; Sir, Do you see this,
You that bring Thunders in your mouths, and Earthquakes Gentlemen,
To shake and totter my Designs? Can you imagine
(You Men of poor and common apprehensions)
Whilst I admit this Man, my Son, this nature
That in one look carries more fire, and sierceness,
Then all your Masters in their lives: dare I admit him,
Admit him thus, even to my side, my Bosom,
When he is fit to rule, when all Men cry him,
And all hopes hang about his head; thus place him,
His Weapon hatched in blood, all these attending
When he shall make their fortunes, all as sudden
In any Expedition he shall point 'em,
As Arrows from a Tartar's Bow, and speeding,
Dare I do this, and fear an Enemy?
Fear your great Master? yours? or yours?

Them. O Hercules,
Who says you do Sir? Is there any thing
In these men's Faces, or their Masters actions
Able to work such wonders?

Cel. Now a' speaks:
O I could dwell upon that Tongue for ever.

Them. You call 'em Kings, they never wore those Royalties
Nor in the progress of their Lives ariv'd yet
At any thought of King: Emperial Dignities,
And powerful God-like actions sit for Princes,
They can no more put on, and make 'em sit right,
Then I can with this Mortal hand hold Heaven:
Poor petty Men, nor have I yet forgot
The chiefest honors time, and merit gave 'em:
Lysimachus your Master, at his best,
His highest, and his hopefull'st dignities
Was but Grand master of the Elephants;
Seleucus of the Treasure; and for Ptolomy,
A thing not thought on then, scarce heard of yet,
Some Master of Ammunition: and must these Men --

Cel. What a brave considence flows from his spirit?
O sweet young Man!

Them. Must these hold pace with us,
And on the same Field hang their Memories?
Must these examine what the Wills of Kings are?
Prescribe to their designs, and chain their Actions
To their Restraints? be Friends, and Foes when they please?
Send out their Thunders, and their Menaces,
As if the fate of Mortal things were theirs?
Go home, good Men, and tell your Masters from us,
We do 'em too much honor to force (...) 'em
Their barren Countries, ruin their vast Cities,
And tell 'em, out of Love, we mean to leave 'em
(Since they will needs be Kings) no more to tread on,
Then they have able Wits, and Powers to manage,
And so we shall befriend 'em: Ha? What does she there?

Emb. This is your Answer, King.

Ant. It Is like to prove so.

Them. Fie, Sweet, What make you here?

Cel. Pray ye do not Chide me.

Them. You do your self much wrong, and me.

Cel. Pray you pardon me,
I feel my fault, which only was committed.
Through my dear love to you: I have not seen ye,
And how can I live then? I have not spoken to ye --

Them. I know this Week ye have not; I will redeem all.
You are so tender now: think where you are, Sweet.

Cel. What other light have I left?

Them. Prithee Celia,
Indeed, I Will see ye presently.

Cel. I have done, Sir:
You will not miss?

Them. By this, and this, I will not.

Cel. It Is in your will: and I must be obedient.

Them. No more of these Assemblies.

Cel. I am commanded.

1 Vsh. Room for the Lady there: Madam, my Service --

1 Gent. My Coach and't please you, Lady.

2 Vsh. Room before there.

2 Gent. The honor, Madam, but to wait upon you --

Cel. My Servants, and my State:
Lord, how they flock now?
Before I was afraid they would have beat me;
How these flies play in the Sunshine? pray ye no services,
Or if ye needs must play the hobby horses,
Seek out some beauty that assects 'em: farewell,
Nay pray ye spare: Gentlemen I am old enough
To go alone at these years, without Crutches.
Exit.
2. Vsh. Well, I could curse now: but that will not help me, I made as sure
account of this Wench now, immediately, Do but consider how the devil has crossed
me, Meat for my Master she cries, well --


3. Em. Once more sir,
We ask your resolutions: peace or war yet?

Them. War, war, my noble father.

1 Em. Thus I fling it:
And fair eyed peace, farewell.

Ant. You have your answer;
Conduct out the Ambassadors, and give 'em convoies.

Them, Tell your high hearted Masters, they shall not seek us,
Nor cool in the sield in expectation of us,
We Will ease your men those marches: In their strengths,
And full abilities of mind and courage,
We Will find 'em out, and at their best trim buckle with 'em.

3 Em. You will find so hot a Soldiers welcome sir,
Your favor shall not freeze,

2 Em. A forward Gentleman,
Pity the wars should bruise such hopes --

Ant. Conduct 'em -- Ex- Em.
Now, For this preparation: where is Leontius?
Call him in presently: for I mean in person Gentlemen
My self, with my old fortune --

Them. Royal sir:
Thus low I beg this honor: fame already
Has every where raised trophies to your glory,
And conquest now grown old, and weak with following
The weary marches, and the bloody shockes
You daily set her in: it is now scarce honor
For you that never knew to sight, but conpuer,
To sparkle such poor people: the royal Eagle
When she has tried her young ones against the Sun,
And found 'em right; next teaches 'them to prey,
How to command on wing, and check below her
Even birds of noble plume; I am your own Sir,
You have found my spirit, try it now, and teach it,
To stoop whole kingdoms: leave a little for me;
Let not your glory be so greedy sir,
To eat up all my hopes; you gave me lise,
If to that life you add not what is more lasting,
A noble name, for man you have made a shadow;
Bless me this day: bid me go on, and lead,
Bid me go on, no less feared, then Antigonus,
And to my maiden sword, tie fast your fortune;
I know 'twill sight it self then: dear sir honor me:
Never fair virgin longed so.

Ant. Rise, and command then,
And be as fortunate as I expect ye:
I love that noble will; your young companions
Bred up and fostered with ye, I hope Demetrius, Enter Leon.
You will make soldiers too: they must not leave ye.

2 Gent. Never till life leave us sir.

Ant. O Leontius,
Here Is work for you in hand.

Leon. I am even right glad sir.
For by my troth, I am now grown old with idleness;
I hear we shall abroad Sir.

Ant. Yes, and presently,
But who thinks you commands now?

Leon. Who commands Sir?
Methinks my eye should guide me: can there be
(If you your self will spare him so much honor)
Any found out to lead before your armies,
So full of faith, and sire as brave Demetrius?
King Philips Son, at his years was an old Soldier,
It Is time his fortune be a wing, high time Sir,
So many idle hours, as here he loyters,
So many ever-dying names he loses,
I hope it is he.

Ant. It Is he indeed, and nobly
He shall set forward: draw you all those Garrisons
Upon the frontiers as you pass: to those
Join these in pay at home, our ancient soldiers,
And as you go press all the Provinces.

Leo. We shall not need;
Believe this hopeful Gentleman
Can want no swords, nor honest hearts to follow him,
We shall be full, no fear Sir.

Ant. You Leontius,
Because you are an old, and faithful servant,
And know the wars, with all its vantages,
Be near to his instructions, lest his youth
Lose valors best companion, staid discretion,
Show where to lead, to lodge, to charge with safety;
In execution not to break nor scatter,
But with a provdent anger, follow nobly:
Not covetous of blood, and death, but honor,
Be ever near his watches; cheer his labors,
And where his hope stands fair, provoke his valor;
Love him, and think it no dishonor (my Demetrius)
To wear this Jewel near thee; he is a tried one,
And one that even in spite of time, that sunk him,
And frosted up his strength, will yet stand by thee.
And with the proudest of thine enemies
Exchange for blood, and bravely: take his counsel.

Leo. Your grace has made me young again, and wanton.

Ant. She must be known and suddenly; when you have done
Come in and take your leave Sir, and some few
Prayers along.

Ant. Do ye know her?

Char. No, believe Sir.

Ant. Did you observe her Tymon?

Tym. I looked on her,
But what she is --

Ant. I must have that found.

Tym. Well Sir.

Them. I know my duty, Exit. Am.
You shall be half my father.

Leo. All your Servant:
Come Gentlemen, you are resolved I am sure
To see these wars.

1 Gent. We dare not leave his fortunes,
Though most assured death hung round about us.

Leo. That Bargain's yet to make;
Be not too hasty, when ye Face the Enemy,
Nor too ambitious to get honor instantly,
But Charge within your Bounds, and keep close Bodies,
And you shall see what sport we'll make these Mad-caps
You shall have Game enough, I warrant ye,
Every Man's Cock shall Fight.

Them. I must go see, Sir:
Brave Sir, as soon as I have taken leave,
I Will meet you in the Park;
Draw the Men thither,
Wait you upon Leonitus.

Gent. We'll attend Sir.

Lie. But I beseech your Grace, with speed; the sooner
We are in the Field --

Them. You could not please me better.

Exit. Leo. You never saw the wars yet?

Gent. Not yet Colonel.

Leo. These foolish Mistresses do so hang about ye,
So whimper, and so hug, I know it Gentlemen,
And so entice ye, now ye are in the bud;
And that sweet tilting war, with eyes and kisses,
The allarums of soft vows, and sighs, and fiddle faddles,
Spoils all our trade: You must forget these knick knacks,
A woman at some time of the year, I grant ye
She is necessary; but make no bussiness of her;
How now Lieutenant?
Enter Lientenant.
Lieu. Oh Sir, as ill as ever;
We shall have Wars they say; they are Mustering yonder:
Would we were at it once: (...), how it plagues me.

Le. Here Is one has served now under Captain Cupid,
And cracked a Pike in's youth: you see what is come on it.

Lieu. No, my Disease will never prove so honorable.

Le. Why sure thou have the best Pox.

Lieu. If I have 'em,
I am sure I got 'em in the best Company;
They are Pox of thirty Coats.

Le. Thou have mewed 'em finely:
Here Is a strange fellow now, and a brave Fellow,
If we may say so of a Pockie Fellow,
(Which I believe we may) this poor Lieutenant;
Whether he have the Scratches, or the Scabs,
Or what a Devil it be, I Will say this for him,
There sights no braver Soldier under Sun, Gentlemen;
Show him an Enemy, his Paine's forgot straight;
And where other Men, by Beds and Bathes have ease,
And easy Rules of Physic, set him in a danger,
A danger, that is a fearful one indeed,
Ye rock him, and he will so play about ye,
Let it be ten to one, he never comes off agaiu;
Ye have his heart: and then he works it bravely,
And thoroughly bravely: not a Pang remembered:
I have seen him do such things, belief would shrink at.

Gent. It Is strange he should do all this, and Diseased so.

Leo. I am sure it is true: Lieutenant, can thou drink well?

Lieu. Would I were drunk, Dog-drunk, I might not feel this.

Gent. I would take Physic.

Lieu. But I would know my Disease first.

Leon. Why? it may be the Colic: Can thou blow backward?

Lieu. There Is never a Bag-pipe in the Kingdom better.

Gent. Is It not a Pleurisy?

Lieu. It Is any thing
That has the Devil, and Death in it: Will ye March Gentlemen?
The Prince has taken leave.

Leo. How know ye that?

Lie. I saw him leave the Court, dispatch his Followers, and met him (...) in a
bye-street: I think he has some Wench, or such a Toy, to lick over before he
go: would I had such another to draw this foolish Pain down.


Leo. Let Us away Gentlemen,
The Prince will stay on us.

Gent. We Will attend, Sir.

Exeunt. Scaene 2.
Enter Demetrius, and Celia. Cel. Must ye needs go?

Them. Or stay with all dishonor.

Cel. Are there not Men enough to Fight?

Them. Fie Celia,
This ill becomes the noble love you bear me;
Would you have your Love a Coward?

Cel. No; believe Sir,
I would have him fight, but not so far off from me.

Them. Would have it thus? or thus?

Cel. If that be fighting --

Them. Ye Wanton Fool: when I come home again
I Will fight with thee, at thine own Weapon, Celia,
And conquer thee too.

Cel. That you have done already,
You need no other Arms to me, but these Sir;
But will you fight your self Sir?

Them. Thus deep in Blood Dear,
And through the thickest ranks of Pikes.

Cel. Spur bravely,
Your fiery Courser, beat the Troops before ye,
And cramb the mouth of Death with Executions.

Them. I would do more then these: But prithee tell me,
Tell me, my Fair, Where got'st thou this Male Spirit?
I wonder at thy Mind.

Cel. Were I a Man, you would wonder more.

Them. Sure thou would prove a Soldier, and some great Leader.

Cel. Sure I should do somewhat;
And the first thing I did, I should grow envious,
Extremely envious of your Youth, and Honor.

Them. And fight against me?

Cel. Ten to one, (...) should do it.

Them. Thou would not hurt me?

Cel. In this Mind I am in,
I think I should be hardly brought to strike ye,
Unless 'twere thus; but in my Man's mind --

Them. What?

Cel. I should be Friends with ye too, now I think better.

Them. Ye are a tall Soldier: Here, take these, and these; this Gold to furnish
ye, and keep this Bracelet; Why do you weep now? You a Masculine Spirit?


Cel. No, I confess, I am a Fool, a Woman:
And ever when I part with you --

Them. You shall not,
These tears are like prodigious signs, my sweet one,
I shall come back, laden with fame, to honor thee.

Cel. I hope you shall:
But then my dear Demetrius,
When you stand Conqueror, and at your Mercy
All People bow, and all things wait your sentence;
Say then your eye (surveying all your conquest)
Finds out a Beauty, even in sorrow excellent,
A constant face, that in the midst of ruin
With a forced smile, both scorns at Fate, and Fortune:
Say you find such a one, so nobly fortified,
And in her figure, all the sweets of Nature?

Them. Prithee, no more of this, I cannot find her.

Cel. That shows as far beyond my with er'd (...);
And will run Mad to love ye too.

Them. Do ye fear me,
And do you think, besides this Face, this Beauty,
This Heart, where all my hopes are locked --

Cel. I dare not:
No sure, I think ye honest; wondrous honest.
Pray do not Frown, I Swear ye are.

Them. Ye may choose.

Cel. But how long will ye be away?

Them. I know not.

Cel. I know you are angry now: pray look upon me
I Will ask no more such Questions.

Them. The Drum beats,
I can no longer stay.

Cel. They do but Call yet:
How fain you would leave my Company.

Them. I would not,
Unless a greater Power then Love Commanded,
Commands my Life, mine Honor.

Cel. But a little.

Them. Prithee farewell, and be not doubtful of me.

Cel. I would not have ye hurt: and ye are so (...)
But good sweet Prince preserve your self, Fight nobly,
But do not thrust his Body; it is not yours now,
It Is mine, it is only mine: do not seek wounds, Sir,
For every drop of Blood you bleed --

Them. I will, Celia, I will be careful.

Cel. My heart that loves ye dearly.

Them. Prithee no more, we must part:
Hark, they March now.
Drums a March.
Cel. Fie on (...) Bawling Drums: I am sure you will kiss me,
But one Kiss? What a Parting's this?

Them. Here, take me,
And do what thou will with me, smother me;
But still remember, if your Fooling with me,
Make me forget the trust --

Cel. I have done. farewell Sir,
Never look back, you shall not stay, not a minute.

Them. I must have one farewell more.

Cel. No, the Drums beat;
I dare not slack your Honor; not a hand more,
Only this Look; the gods preserve, and save ye.

ACT II. SCENE I.
Enter Antigonus, Carynthus, Tymon. Ant. WHat have ye found her out?

Char. We hawe hearkened after her.

Ant. What Is that to my desire?

Char. Your grace must give us time, and a little means.

Ty. She is sure a stranger, if she were bred or known here --

Ant. Your dull endeavors Enter Menippus.
Should never be employed. Welcome Menippus.

Men. I have found her Sir, I mean the place she is lodged in; her name is
Celia, And much a do I had to purchase that too.


Ant. Do think Demetrius loves her?

Men. Much I fear it,
(...) nothing that way yet can win for certain.
I Will tell your grace within this hour.

Ant. A stranger?

Men. Without all doubt.

Ant. But how should he come to her?

Men. There lies the (...) of the matter hid yet.

Ant. (...) thou been with thy wife?

(...). No Sir, I am going to her.

Ant. Go and dispatch, and meet me in the Garden,
And get all out ye can.
Exit.
Men. I Will do my best Sir.
Exit.
Tym. Blessed be thy wife, thou were an arrant Ass else.

Char. I, she is a stirring woman indeed: there is a brain, brother.

Tym. There Is not a handsome wench of any mettle within an hundred miles, but
her intelligence reaches her, and out-reaches her, and brings her as
considently to Court, as to a sanctuary: What had his moldy brains ever
arrived at, had not she beaten it out oth' Flint to fasten him? They say she
keeps an office of Concealements: there is no young wench, let her be a Saint,
Unless she live in the Center, but she finds her, and every way prepares
addresses to her: if my wife would have followed her course Charintbus, her
lucky course, I had the day before him: O what might I have been by this time,
Brother? But she (forsooth) when I put these things to her, these things of
honest thrift, groans, O my conscience, the load upon my conscience, when to
make us cuckolds, they have no more burden then a broodgoose, brother; but
let us do what we can, though this wench fail us, another of a now way will be
looked at: Come, let us abroad, and beat our brains, time may for all his
wisdom, yet give us a day.


Exit. Seaene. 2.
Drum within, Alarm. Enter Demetrius and Leoentius. Them. I will not see 'em
fall thus, give me way, Sir,
I shall forget you love me else.

Leo. Will ye lose all?
For me to be forgotten, to be hated,
Nay never to have been a Man, is nothing,
So you, and those we have preserved from slaughter
Come safely off.

Them. I have lost my self.

Leo. You are cozn'd.

Them. (...) am most miserable.

Leo. There Is no Man so, but he that makes himself so.

Them. I will go.

Leo. You must not: I shall tell you then,
And tell you true, that Man's unsit to govern,
That cannot guide himself: You lead an Army?
That have not so much Manly suff'rance left ye,
To bear a Loss?

Them. Charge but once more Leonitus,
My Friends and my Companions are engaged all.

Leo. Nay give 'em lost, I saw 'em off their Horses,
And the Enemy Master of their Arms; nor could then,
The policy, nor strenth of Man redeem 'em

Them. And shall I know this, and stand fooling?

Leo. By my dead Father's Soul you stir not, Sir,
Or if you do, you make your way through me first.

Them. Thou art a Coward.

Leo. To prevent a Madman.
None but your Father's Son, durst call me so,
'Death if he did -- Must I be scandal'd by ye,
That hedged in all the helps I had to save ye?
That, where there was a valiant weapon stirring,
Both searched it out, and singl'd it, unedg'd it,
For fear it should bite you, Am I a Coward?
Go, get ye up, and tell 'em ye are the King's Son;
Hang all your Ladies Favors on your Crest,
And let them fight their shares; spur to destruction,
You cannot miss the way: be bravely desperate,
And your young friends before ye, that lost this battle,
Your honorable friends, that knew no order,
Cry out, Antigonus, the old Antigonus,
The wise and fortunate Antigonus,
The great, the valiant, and the feared Antigonus,
Has sent a desperate son, without discretion
To bury in an hour his age of honor.

Them. I am ashamed.

Leo. It Is ten to one, I dye with ye:
The coward will not long be after ye;
I scorn to say I saw ye fall, sigh for ye,
And tell a whining tale, some ten years after
To boys and girls in an old chimney corner,
Of what a Prince we had, how bravely spirited;
How young and fair he fell: we will all go with ye,
And ye shall see us all, like sacrifices
In our best trim, (...) up the mouth of ruin?
Will this faith satisfy your folly? Can this show ye
It Is not to die we fear, but to die poorly,
To fall, forgotten, in a Multitude?
If you will needs tempt Fortune now she has held ye,
Held ye from sinking up.

Them. Pray do not kill me,
These words pierce deeper then the wounds I suffer,
The smarting wounds of loss.

Leo. Ye are too tender;
Fortune has hours of loss, and hours of honor,
And the most valiant feel them both: take comfort,
The next is ours, I have a Soul descries it:
The angry Bull never goes back for breath,
But when he means to arm his fury double.
Let this day set, but not the Memory,
And we shall find a time: How now Lieutenant?

Enter Lieutenant. Lieu. I know not: I am mall'd: we are bravely beaten,
All our young Gallants lost.

Leo. Thou art hurt.

Lieu. I am peppered, I was in the midst of all: and banged of all hands: They
made an Anvil of my Head, it rings yet; never so thresh'd: Do you call this
Fame? I have famed it; I have got Immortal fame, but I Will no more on it; I Will no
such scratching Saint to serve hereafter; OF my Conscience I was killed above
Twenty (...), and yet I know not what a Devil's in it, I crawled away, and lived
again still; I am hurt plaguily, but now I have nothing near so much pain
Colonel, they have sliced me for that Malady.


Them. All the young Men lost?

Lieu. I am glad you are here: but they are all in the pound Sir, they will never
ride o'r other Men's Corn again, I take it, such frisking, and such flaunting
with their Feathers, and such careering with their Mistress favors; and here
must he be pricking out for honor, and there got he a knock, and down goes
Pilgarlick, commends his Soul to his She Saint, and Exit. Another spurs in
there, cries, Make room Villains, I am a Lord, scarce spoken, but with
reverence a Rascal takes him o'r the Face, and fells him, there lies the Lord,
the Lord be with him.


Leo. Now Sir,
Do you find this truth?

Them. I would not.

Lieu. Pox upon it,
They have such tender Bodies too; such Cullisses,
That one good handsome blow breaks 'em in pieces.

Leo. How stands the Enemy?

Lieu. Even cool enough too: for to say truth, he has been shrewdly heated, the
Gentleman no doubt will fall to his Jewlips.


Leo. He Marches not i'th'-tail on's.

Lieu. No, plague take him, he will kiss our Tails as soon; he looks upon us, as
if he would say, If ye will turn again, Friends, we will belabour you a little
better, and beat a little more care into your Coxcombs. Now shall we have
damnable Ballads out against us, most wicked Madrigals: and ten to one,
Colonel, Sung to such lousy, lamentable Tunes.


Leo. Thou art Merry,
How e're the Game goes: good Sir be not troubled,
A better day will draw this back again.
Pray go, and cheer (...), and lead 'em (...),
They are hot, and (...).

(...). I Will do any thing.

Leo. (...), send one presently away To 'th' King, and let him know our state:
and (...) ye, be sure the messenger advise his Majesty to comfort up the
Prince: he is full of sadness.


Lieu. When shall I get a Surgeon? this hot weather,
Unless I be well peppered, I shall stink Colonel.

Leo. Go, I Will prepare thee one.

Lieu. If ye catch me then,
Fighting again, I Will eat hay with a horse.

Exit. Scaene 3.
Leucippe (reading) and two Maids at a Table writing. Leu. Have ye written to
Merione?

1. Ma. Yes, Madam.

Leu. And let her understand the hopes she has
If she come speedily --

1. Ma. All these are specified.

Leu. And of the chain is sent her,
And the rich stuff to make her show more handsome here?

1. Ma. All this is done, Madam.

Leu. What have you dispatched there?

2. Ma. A letter to the Country maid, and't please ye.

Leu. A pretty girl, but peevish, plaguey peevish:
Have ye bought the embordyered gloves, and that purse for her,
And the new Curle?

2. Ma. They are ready packt up Madam.

Leu. Her maidenhead will yield me, let me see now, She is not fifteen they
say: for her complexion -- Cloe, Cloe, Cloe, here, I have her, Cloe, the
Daughter of a Country gentleman; Her age upon fifteen: now her complexion, a
lovely brown; here it is; eyes black and rolling, The body neatly built: she
strikes a Lute well, sings most inticingly: these helps considered, Her
maidenhead will amount to some three hundred, or three hundred and fifty
crowns; 'twill bear it handsomely. Her father's poor, some little share
deducted, to buy him a hunting Nag: I, 'twill be pretty: Who takes care of the
Merchants wife.


1. Ma. I have wrought her.

Len. You know for whom she is?

1. Ma. Very well, Madam, though very much ado, I had to make her apprehend
that happiness.


Leu. These kind are subtle:
Did she not cry and blubber when ye urged her.

1. Ma. O most extremly, and swore she would rather perish.

Leu. Good signs, very good signs, symptoms of easy nature. Had she the plate?


1. Ma. She looked upon it, and left it, and turned again and viewed it.

Leu. Very well still.

1. Ma. At length she was content to let it lie there.
Till I called for it, or so.

Leu. She will come?

1. Ma. Do you take me
For such a fool, I would part without that promise?

Leu. The Chambers next the park.

2. Ma. The Window Madam, you bad me look upon.

Leu. Hang her, she is musty:
She is no Man's meat; besides, she is poor and sluttish:
Where lies old (...) now, you are so long now --

2 Ma. Thisbe, Thisbe, This. Agent Thisbe, O I have her,
She lies now in Nicopolis.

Leu. Dispatch a Packet, and tell her, her Superior here commands her, the
next Month not to fail, but see delivered here to our use, some Twenty young
and handsome, as also able Maids, for the Court service, as she will answer it:
we are out of beauty, Utterly out, and rub the time away here, With such blown
stuff, I am ashamed to send it. [Knock within.] Who Is that? look out, to your
business maid, there is nothing got by idleness: There is a Lady, Which if I can
but buckle with, Altea, A, A, A, A, Altea, young, and married, and a great
lover of her husband, well, not to be brought to Court: say ye so? I am sorry,
the Court shall be brought to you then: how now, who is it?


1. Maid. An ancient Woman, with a Maid attending, a pretty Girl, but out of
Clothes; for a little Money, it seems she would put her to your bringing up,
Madam,


Enter Woman and Phebe. Leu. Let her come in. Would ye ought with us, good
Woman? I pray be short, we are full of Business.


Wom. I have a tender Girl here, and please your Honor.

Leu. Very well.

Wom. That has a great desire to serve your Worship.

Leu. It may be so; I am full of Maids.

Wom. She is young, forsooth --
And for her Truth; and as they say her bearing.

Leu. Ye say well: come ye hither, Maid, let me feel your Pulse, it is somewhat
weak but Nature will grow stronger; let me see your Leg, she treads but low
in the Pasterns.


Wom. A Cork heel, Madam.

Leu. We know what will do it, without your aim, good Woman: What do you pitch
her at? she is but a slight Toy -- cannot hold out long.


Wom. Even what you think is meet.

Leu. Give her Ten Crowns, we are full of business, she is a poor Woman, let
her take a Cheese home: Enter the Wench in the Office.


Exit Woman and 1 Maid. 2. Maid. What Is your Name, Sister?

Phe. Phebe, for sooth.

Leu. A pretty Name; 'twill do well: Go in, and let the other Maid instruct ye
Phebe;

Exit Phebe. Let my old Velvet Skirt be made sit for her, I Will put her into
action for a Wastcoat, and when I have rigged her up once, this small Pinnace
shall sail for Gold, and good store too: Who Is there? [Knocks within.] Lord,
shall we never have any case in this World? still troubled? still molested?
What would you have? I cannot furnish ye faster then I am able. [ Enter
Menippe. And ye were my Husband a Thousand times, I cannot do it; at least a
dozen Poasts are gone this Morning for several parts of the Kingdom: I can do
no more but pay 'em, and instruct 'em.


(...). Prithee, good sweet heart, I come not to disturb thee, nor discourage
thee, I know thou labour'st truly: hark in thine ear.


Leu. Ha? What do you make so dainty on it? look there, I am an Ass, I can do
nothing.


Men. Celia? I, this is she; a stranger born.

Leu. What would you give for more now?

Men. Prithee, my best Leucippe, there is much hangs on it, lodged at the end of
Marse's street? that is true too; at the sack of such a Town, by such a Soldier
preserved a prisoner: and by Prince Demetrius bought from that man again,
maintained, and favored: How came you by this knowledge?


Leu. Poor weak man, I have a thousand eyes, when thou art sleeping, abroad,
and full of business.


Men. You never tried her;

Leu. No, she is beyond my level; so hedged in by the Princes insinite love,
and favor to her --


Men. She is a handsome wench.

Leu. A delicate, and knows it; and out of that proof arms her self.

Men. Come in then; I have a great design from the King to you, and you must
work like wax now.


Leu. On this Lady;

Men. On this, and all your wits call home.

Leu. I have done Toys in my time of some note; old as I am, I think my brains
will work without barme, take up the Books.


Exit. Scaene. 4.
Enter Antigonus, Tymon, Lords, and a Soldier. Ant. No face of sorrow for this
loss? 'twill choke him,
Nor no man miss a friend, I know his nature
So deep impressed with grief, for what he has suffered,
That the least adding to it, adds to his ruin;
His loss is not so insinite, I hope Soldier.

Soul. Faith neither great, nor out of discretion, the young men out of heat.
Enter Demetrius, (...), and Lieutenant.
Ant. I guess the manner.

(...) Men. The Prince and't like your Grace -- s.

Ant. You are welcome home Sir;
Come, no more sorrow, I have heard your fortune,
And I my self have trid the like: clear up man,
I will not have ye take it thus if I doubted.
Your fear had lost; and that you had turned your back to 'em,
Basely besought their mercies --

Leo. No, no, by this hand Sir,
We fought like honest and tall men.

Ant. I know it Leontius; or if I thought
Neglect of rule, having his counsel with ye,
Or too vainglorious appetite of fame,
Your men forgot, and scattered --

Leo. None of these Sir,
He showed himself a noble gentleman,
Every way apt to rule.

Ant. These being granted;
Why should you think you have done an act so heinous,
That naught but discontent dwells round about ye?
I have lost a Battle.

Leo. I, and fought it hard too.

Ant. With as much means as Man --

Leo. Or Devil could urge it.

Ant. Twenty to one of our side now.

Leo. Turn Tables,
Beaten like Dogs again, like Owls, you take it
To heart for flying but a Mile before 'em,
And to say truth, 'twas no flight neither Sir,
'Twas but a walk, a handsome walk,
I have tumbled with this old Body, beaten like a Stock Fish,
And stuck with Arrows, like an arming Quiver,
Blouded and banged, almost a day before 'em,
And glad I have got off then. Here Is a Mad Shaver,
He sights his share I am sure, when e're he comes to it;
Yet I have seen him trip it titely too,
And cry, the Devil take the hindmost.

Lieu. I learned it of my betters.

Leo. Budge at this?

Ant. Has Fortune but one Face;

Lieu. In her best Vizard, methinks she looks but Lowzily.

Ant. Chance, though she faint now,
And sink below our expectations,
Is there no hope left strong enough to buoy her?

Them. It Is not this day, I sled before the Enemy,
And lost my People, left mine honor murdered,
My Maiden honor, never to be ransomed,
(Which to a noble Soul is too too sensible)
Afflicts me with this sadness; most of these,
Time may turn straight again, experience perfect,
And new Swords, cut new ways to nobler Fortunes.
O have lost --

Ant. As you are mine forget it:
I do not think it loss.

Demet. O Sir, forgive me,
I have lost my Friends, those worthy Souls bred with me,
I have lost my self, they were the pieces of me;
I have lost all Arts, my Schools are taken from me,
Honor and Arms, no emulation left me:
I lived to see these Men lost, looked upon it:
These Men that twined their loves to mine, their (...),
O shame of shames, I saw, and could not save 'em,
This carries Sulphur in it, this burns and boyles me,
And like a fatal Tomb bestrides my Memory.

Antig. This was hard fortune, but if alive and taken,
They shall be ransomed; let it be at Millions.

Them. They are dead, they are dead.

Lieu. When would he weep for me thus? I may be dead, and Powdered.

Leo. Good Prince, grieve not: we are not certain of their Deaths: the Enemy,
though he be hot and keen, yet holds good Quarter. What Noise is this?


Great Shout within, Enter Gentlemen. Lieu. He does not follow us?
Give me a Steeple top.

Leo. They live, they live, Sir.

Ant. Hold up your Manly Face;
They live, they are here Son.

Them. These are the Men.

1 Gent. They are, and live to honor ye.

Them. How escaped ye, noble Friends? methought I saw ye
Even in the jaws of Death.

2 Gent. Thanks to our folly,
That spurred us on; we were indeed hedged round in it,
And even beyond the hand of succor beaten,
Unhors'd, disarmed: and what we looked for then Sir,
Let such poor weary Souls that hear the Bell Toll,
And see the Grave a digging, tell.

Them. For Heaven sake
Delude mine eyes no longer: How came ye off?

1 Gent. Against all expectation: the brave (...),
I think this day enamored on your Virtue,
When, through the Troops, he saw you shoot like Lightning;
And at your Manly Courage all took sire,
And after that, the Misery we fell too,
The never-certain fate of War considering,
As we stood all before him, Fortunes ruins,
Nothing but Death expecting, a short time
He made a stand upon our Youths and Fortunes,
Then with an eye of Mercy informed his judgment,
How yet unripe we were, unblown, unharden'd,
Unsitted for such fatal ends; he cried out to us,
Go, Gentlemen, commend me to your Master,
To the most high, and Powerful Prince (...),
Tell him, the (...) he showed against me
This day, the Virgin-valour, and true sire
Deserves, even from an Enemy, this Courtesy;
Your Lives and Arms freely I Will give 'em: than him,
And thus we are returned, Sir.

Leo. Faith 'twas well done;
'Twas bravely done; Was It not a noble part, Sir?

Lieu. Had I been there, up had I gone, I am sure on it;
These noble tricks, I never durst trust 'em yet.

Leo. Let me not live, and were not a famed honesty,
It takes me such a tickling way: now would I wish Heaven,
But even the happiness, even that poor Blessing,
For all the sharp (...) thou have sent me,
But even in the head of the Field to take Seleucus.
I should do somewhat memorable: (...), sad still.

1 Gent, Do you grieve we are come off?

Them. Unransom'd was it?

2 Gent. It was Sir.

Them. And with such a fame to me?
Said ye not so?

Leo. Ye have heard it.

Them. O Leonitus,
Better I had lost 'em all: my self had perished
And all my Father's hopes.

Leo. Mercy upon ye,
What ayle ye, Sir? 'Death, do not make sools (...),
Neither go to Chuech, nor tarry at home,
That Is a (...) Horn-pipe?

Ant. What Is now your Grief, Demetrius?

Them. Did he not beat us twice?

Leo. He beat a Pudding;
Beat us but once.

Them. 'Has beat me twice, and beat me to a Coward,
Beat me to nothing.

Lieu. Is not the Devil in him?

Leo. I pray it be not worse.

Them. Twice conquered me.

Leo. Bear Witness all the World, I am a (...) here.

Them. With valor (...) he struck me, then with honor:
That stroke Leontius, that stroke, do thou not feel it?

Leo. Where abouts was it? for I remember nothing yet.

Them. All these Gentlemen that were his Prisoners --

Leo. He set 'em free, Sir, with Arms and Honor.

Them. There, there, now thou have it
At mine own Weapon, Courtesy, h'as beaten me,
At that I was held a Master in, he has cowed me,
Hotter then all the dint oth' sight he has charged me:
Am I not now a wretched Fellow? think on it;
And when thou have examined all ways honorable,
And find'st no door left open to requite this,
Conclude I am a Wretch, and was twice beaten.

Ant. I have observed your way, and understand if,
And equal love it as (...),
My noble Child, thou shall not fall in Virtue,
I and my Power will sink first: you Leontius,
Wait for a new Commission, ye shall out again,
And instantly: you shall not lodge this night here,
Not see a friend, nor take a blessing with ye,
Before ye be in the field: the enemy is up still,
And still in full design: Charge him again, Son,
And either bring home that again thou have lost there,
Or leave thy body by him.

Them. Ye raise me,
And now I dare look up again, Leontius.

Leo. I, I, Sir, I am thinking who we shall take of 'em,
To make all straight; and who we shall give to the devil.
What say thou now Lieutenant?

Lieu. I say nothing.
Lord what aile I, that I have no mind to sight now?
I find my constitution mightily altered
Since I came home: I hate all noises too,
Especially the noise of Drums; I am now as well
As any living man; why not as valiant?
To fight now, is a kind of vomit to me,
It goes against my stomach.

Them. Good Sir, presently;
You cannot do your Son, so fair a favor.

Ant. It Is my intent: I Will see ye march away too;
Come, get your men together presently, Leontius,
And press where please you, as you march.

Leo. We go Sir.

Ant. Wait you on me, I Will bring ye to your command,
And then to fortune give you up.

Them. Ye love me.
Exit.
Leo. Go, get the drums, beat round, Lieutenant.

Lieu. Hark ye Sir,
I have a foolish business they call marriage.

Leo. After the wars are done.

Lieu. The party stays Sir,
I have given the Priest his money too: all my friends Sir,
My father and my mother.

Leo. Will you go forward?

Lieu. She brings a pretty matter with her.

Leo. Half a dozen Bastards.

Lieu. Some sorry Sir.

Leo. A goodly (...).

Lieu. I mean Sir, pounds a year; I Will dispatch the matter,
It Is but a night (...) two; I Will overtake ye Sir.

Leo. The 2 old legions, yes: where lies the horse-quarter?

Lieu. And if it be a boy, I Will even make bold Sir.

Leo. Away with your Whore,
A plague of your Whore, you damned rogue,
Now ye are cured and well; must ye be clicketing?

Lieu. I have broke my mind to my Ancient, in my absence,
He Is a sufficient gentleman.

Leo. Get forward.

Lieu. Only receive her portion.

Leo. Get ye forward;
Else I Will bang ye forward.

Lieu. Strange Sir,
A Gentleman and an officer cannot have the liberty
To do the office of a man.

Leo. Shame light on thee,
How came this Whore into thy head?

Lieu. This Whore Sir?
It Is strange, a poor whore.

Leo. Do not answer me:
Troop, Troop away: do not name this whore again,
Or think there is a whore.

Lieu. That Is very hard Sir.

Leo. For if thou do, look to it, I Will have thee guelded,
I Will walk ye out before me: not a word more.

Exit. Scaene. 5.
Enter Leucippe, and Governess. Leu. Ye are the Mistress of the house ye say,
Where this young Lady lies.

Gov. For want of a better.

Leu. You may be good enough for such a purpose:
When was the Prince with her? answer me directly.

Gov. Not since he went a warring.

Leu. Very well then:
What (...) copulation are you privy too
Between these two? be not afraid, we are women,
And may talk thus amongst our selves, no harm in it.

Gov. No sure, there is no harm in it, I conceive that;
But truly, that I ever knew the gentlewoman
Otherwise given, then a hopeful gentlewoman --

Leu. You Will grant me the Prince loves her?

Gov. There I am with ye.
And the Gods bless her, promises her mightily.

Leu. Stay there a while. And gives her gifts?

Gov. Extremely;
And truly makes a very Saint of her.

Leu. I should think now,
(Good woman let me have your judgment with me,
I see it is none of the worst: Come sit down by me)
That these two cannot love so tenderly --

Gov. Being (...) as they are too --

Leu. You say well --
But that methinks some further promises --

Gov. Yes, yes,
I have heard the Prince swear he would marry her.

Leu. Very well still: they do not use to fall out?

Gov. The tenderest Chickens to one another,
They cannot live an hour assunder.

Leu. I have done then;
And be you gone; you know your charge, and do it.
You know whose will it is; if you transgress it --
That is, if any have access, or see her,
Before the Kings will be fulfilled --

Gov. Not the Prince, Madam?

Leu. You Will be hanged if you do it, that I Will assure ye.

Gov. But never the less, I Will make bold to obey ye.

Leu. Away, and to your business then.

Gov. It Is done, Madam.

exeunt ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter Antigonus and Menippus. Ant. THou have taken wondrous pains; but yet
(...),
You understood not of what blood, and (...).

Men. I labored that, but cannot come to know it.
A Greek I am sure she is, she speaks this Language.

Ant. Is she so excellent handsome?

Men. Most enticing.

Ant. Sold for a prisoner?

Men. Yes Sir,
Some poor creature.

Ant. And he loves tenderly?

Men. They say extremely.

Ant. It Is well prevented then yes, I perceiy'd it:
When he took leave now, he made a hundred stops,
Desired an hour, but half an hour, a minute,
Which I with anger crossed; I knew his business,
I knew 'twas she he hunted on; this journey, man,
I beat out suddenly for her cause intended,
And would not give him time to breath. When comes she?

Men. This morning Sir.

Ant. Lodge her to all delight then: For I would have her tried toth'test: I
know she must be some cracked Coin, not sit his Traffic; which, when we have
found, the shame will make him leave her, or we shall work a nearer way, I Will
bury him, and with him all the hopes I have cast upon him, ere he shall dig his
own Grave in that Woman: you know which way to bring her: I Will stand close
there, to view her as she passes: And do you hear Menippus, observe her with
all sweetness: humor her, 'twill make her lie more careless to our purposes.
Away, and take what helps you please.


Men. I am gone Sir.

Exeunt. Seaene 2.
Enter Celia, and Governess. Cel. Governess, From whom was this Gown sent me;
Prithee be serious true; I will not wear't else: It Is a handsome one.


Gov. As though you know not?

Cel. No Faith: But I believe for certain too, yet I wonder, because it was his
caution, this poor way, still to preserve me from the curious searchings of
greedy eyes.


Gov. You have it: Does it please you?

Cel. It Is very rich methinks too, prithee tell me --

Gov. From one that likes you well, never look coy, Lady;
These are no gifts, to be put off with poutings.

Cel. Powtings, and Gifts? Is it from any stranger?

Gov. You are so curious, that there is no talking to ye. What if it be I pray
ye?

Cel. Unpin good Governess, Quick, quick.

Gov. Why what is the matter?

Cel. Quick, good Governess: Fie on it, How beastly it becomes me? poorly? A
trick put upon me? well said Governess: I vow I would not wear it -- out, it
smells musty. Are these your tricks? now I begin to smell it abominable musty;
Will ye help me? The Prince will come again --


Gov. You are not Mad sure?

Cel. As I live Ill' cut it off: a Pox upon it; for sure it was made for that
use; Do you bring me Livories? Stales to catch Kites? Do thou Laugh too, thou
base Woman?


Gov. I cannot choose, if I should be hanged.

Cel. Abuse me, and then Laugh at me too?

Gov. I do not abuse ye: Is it abuse to give him Drink that is Thirsty?
You want Clothes; Is it such a heinous sin I beseech ye, to see you stored?

Cel. There is no greater wickedness then this way.

Gov. What way?

Cel. I shall Curse thee fearfully, if thou provok'st me further: and take
heed, Woman; my (...) never miss.


Gov. Curse him that sent it.

Cel. Tell but his Name --

Gov. You dare not Curse him,

Cel. Dare not I? By this fair light --

Gov. You are so full of Passion --

Cel. Dare not be good? Be honest? Dare not Curse him?

Gov. I think you dare not: I believe so.

Cel. Speak him.

Gov. Up with your Valor then, up with it bravely, and take your full charge.

Cel. If I do not, hang me; tell but his Name.

Gov. 'T was Prince Demetrius sent it:
Now, now, give sire, kill him in the eye now Lady.

Cel. Is he come home?

Gov. It seems so; but your Curse now.

Cel. You do not lie, I hope.

Gov. You dare not Curse him.

Cel. Prithee do not abuse me: Is he come home indeed?
For I would now with all my heart believe thee.

Gov. Nay, you may choose: alas, I deal for Strangers, that send ye scurvy
Musty Gowns, stale Livories: I have my Tricks.

Cel. It Is a good Gown, a handsome one; I did but jest; Where is he?

Gov. He that sent it --

Cel. How? he that sent it? Is It come to that again? thou can not be so
foolish prithee speak out, I may mistake thee.


Gov. I said he that sent it.

Cel. Curse of my life: Why do thou vex me thus? I know thou meanst
Demetrius, do thou not? I charge thee speak truth: if it be any other, thou
know the charge he gave thee, and the justice his anger will inflict, if e're
he know this, as know he shall, he shall, thou spiteful Woman, thou beastly
Woman; and thou shall know to late too, and feel too sensible, I am no Ward, no
Sale-stuff for your Money-Merchants that sent it? Who dare send me, or how
durst thou, thou --


Gov. What you please: for this is ever the reward of service. The Prince will
bring the next himself.


Cel. It Is strange that you should deal so peevishly: beshrew ye, you have put
me in a heat.


Gov. I am sure ye have killed me: I never received such language: I can but
wait upon ye, and be your drudge; keep a poor life to serve ye.


Cel. You know my nature is too easy, Governess,
And you know now, I am sorry too: how does he?

Gov. O God, my head.

Cel. Prithee be well, and tell me, did he speak of me, since he came? nay, see
now, if thou will leave this tyranny? good sweet governess: did he but name his
Celia? look upon me, upon my faith I meant no harm: here, take this, and buy
thy self some trifles: did a good Girl?


Gov. He loves ye but too dearly.

Cel. That Is my good Governess.

Gov. There Is more clothes making for ye.

Cel. More clothes?

Gov. More: richer and braver; I can tell ye that news; And twenty glorious
things.


Cel. To what use?

Gov. Ye are too good for our house now: we poor wretches Shall lose the
comfort of ye.


Cel. No, I hope not.

Gov. For ever lose ye Lady.

Cel. Lose me? wherefore? I hear of no such thing.

Gov. It Is sure it must be so: you must shine now at Court: such preparation,
such hurry, and such hanging rooms --


Cel. Toth' Court wench? Was it toth' Court thou said?

Gov. You Will find it so.

Cel. Stay, stay, this cannot be.

Gov. I say it must be: I hope to find ye still the same good Lady.

Cel. Toth' Court? this stumbles me: art sure for me, wench, this preperation
is?


Gov. She is perilous crafty: I fear too honest for us all too. Am I sure I
live?


Cel. Toth' Court? this cannot down: what should I do there? why should he on a
sudden change his mind thus, and not make me acquainted? sure he loves me; his
vow was made against it, and mine with him: At least while this King lived: he
will come hither, and see me ere I go?


Gov. Would some wise woman had her in working: that I think he will not,
because he means with all joy there to meet ye. Ye shall hear more within this
hour?


Cel. A Courtier? what may the meaning be? sure he will see me if he be come,
he must: Hark ye Governess, what age is the King of?


Gov. He Is an old man, and full of business.

Cel. I fear too full indeed: what Ladies are there?
I would be loath to want good company.

Gov. Delicate young Ladies, as you would desire;
And when you are acquainted, the best company.

Cel. It Is very well: prithee go in, let us talk more.
For though I fear a trick, I Will bravely try it.
[Aside.]
Gov. I see he must be cunning, knoks this (...) down

Exeunt. Scaene 3.
Enter Lieutenant, and Leontius. Drums within. Leo. You shall not have your
will, sirrah, are ye running?
Have ye gotten a toy in your heels? Is this a season,
When honor pricks ye on, to prick your (...) up
After your Whore, your Hobbyhorse?

Lieu. Why look ye now: What a strange Man are you? Would you have a Man fight
at all hours all alike.


Leo. Do but fight something; but half a blow, and put thy Stomach to it: turn
but thy face, and do but make Mouths at 'em.


Lieu. And have my Teeth knocked out; I thank ye heartily, ye are my dear Friend.


Leo. What a Devil ails thee? Do long to be hanged?

Lieu. Faith, Sir, I make no suit for it: but rather then I would live thus out
of Charity, continually in brawling --


Leo. Art thou not he? I may be cozn'd --

Lieu. I shall be discovered.

Leo. That in the midst of thy most hellish pains, when thou were crawling
sick, did aim at wonders, when thou were mad with pain?


Lieu Ye have found the cause out; I had never been mad to sight else: I
confess, Sir, the daily torture of my side that vexed me, made me as daily
careless what became of me, till a kind Sword there wounded me, and eased me;
'twas nothing in my valor fought; I am well now, and take some pleasure in my
life: methinks now it shows as mad a thing to me to see you (...), and kill one
another foolishly for Honor, as 'twas to you, to see me play the Coxcombe.


Leo. And will thou never fight more?

Lieu. In The mind I am in.

Leo. Nor never be sick again?

Lieu. I hope I shall not.

Leo. Prithee be sick again; prithee, I beseech thee,
Be just so sick again.

Lieu. I Will just be hanged first.

Leo. If all the Arts that are can make a Colic, therefore look to it: or if
imposthumes, mark me, as big as foot-balls --


Lieu. Deliver me.

Leo. Or stones of ten pound weight in the kidneys through (...) and ugly dyets
may be gathered; I Will feed ye up my self Sir, I Will prepare ye, you cannot
sight, unless the devil tear ye, you shall not want provocations, I Will (...)
ye, I Will have thee have the toothache, and the headache.


Lieu. Good Colonel, I Will do any thing.

Leo. No, no, nothing -- then will I have thee blown with a pair of Smiths
bellows, because ye shall be sure to have a round gale with ye, sil'd full of
oil, of devil, and (...) fortis, and let these work, these may provok.


Lieu. Good Colonel.

Leo. A coward in full blood; (...) be plain with me,
Will Roasting do thee any good?

Lieu. Nor Basting neither, Sir.

Leo. Marry that goes hard.

Enter I Gent. I Gent. Where are you Colonel

The Prince expects ye Sir; has hedged the Enemy within a straight, where all
the hopes and valors of all Men living cannot force a passage, he has 'em now.


Leo. I knew all this before Sir,
I chalked him out his way: But do you see that thing there;

Lieu. Nay, good sweet Colonel (...) a little.

Leo. That thing?

1 Gent. What thing? I see the brave Lieutenant.

Leo. Rogue, What a Name have thou lost?

Lieu. You may help it; yet you may help it: I Will do ye any Courtesy: I know
you love a Wench well.


(...) 2 Gent. Leo. Look upon him; Do you look too.

2 Gent. What should I look on?
I come to tell ye, the Prince stays your Direction,
We have 'em now in the Coop, Sir.

Leo. Let 'em rest there,
And chew upon their Miseries: but look first --

Lieu. I cannot sight for all this.

Leo. Look on this Fellow.

2 Gent. I know him; it is the valiant brave Lieutenant.

Leo. Can thou hear this, and play the Rogue, steal off quickly,
Behind me quickly, neatly do it,
And rush into the thickest of the Enemy,
And if thou kill'st but two.

Lieu. You may excuse me, it is not my fault: I dare not sight.

Leo. Be ruled yet,
I Will beat thee on; go wink and sight: A plague upon your sheeps heart.

2. Gent. What Is all this matter?

1. Gent. Nay I cannot show ye.

Leo. Here Is Twenty pound, go but smell to 'em.

Lieu. Alas Sir, I have taken such a cold, I can smell nothing.

Leo. I can smell a Rascal, a rank Rascal:
Fie, how he stinks, stinks like a tired Jade.

2 Gent. What Sir?

Leo. Why, that Sir, Do not you smell him?

2 Gent. Smell him?

Lieu. I must endure.

Leo. Stinks like a dead Dog, Carrion -- There Is no such damnable smell under
Heaven, as the faint sweat of a Coward: Will ye sight yet?


Lieu. Nay, now I desie ye; ye have spoke the (...) ye can of me, and if (...)
Man should take what you say to the heart --


Leo. God a mercy, God a mercy with all my heart; here I forgive thee; and
fight, or fight not, do but go along with us, and keep my Dog.


(...) I love a good Dog naturally.

(...) Gent. What Is all this stir, Lieutenant?

Lieu. Nothing, Sir, but a slight matter of Argument.

Leo. 'Pox take thee. Sure I shall love this Rogue, he is so pretty a Coward:
Come, Gentlemen, let us up now, and if fortune dare play the Slut again, I Will
never more Saint her; Come, Play-fellow, come, prithee come up; come Chicken, I
have a way shall sit yet: A tame knave -- Come, look upon us.


Lieu. I Will tell ye who does best Boys.

[Exeunt. Scaene 4.
Enter Antigonus, and Menippus above. Men. I saw her coming out.

Ant. Who waits (...) her?

Men. Tymon, Charinthus, and some other Gentlemen
By me appointed.

Ant. Where Is your Wife;

Men. She Is ready to entertain her here Sir; and some Ladies fit for her
Lodgings.

Ant. How shows she in her trim now?

Men. Oh most divinely sweet.

Ant. Prithee speak softly, How does she take her coming?

Men. She bears it bravely; but what she thinks -- For Heaven's sake
Sir preserve me -- If the Prince chance to sind this.

Ant. Peace ye Old Fool; She thinks to meet him here.

Men. That Is all the Project.

Ant. Was she hard to bring;

(...). No, she believed it quickly, and quickly made her self sit, the Gown a
little, and those new things she has not been acquainted with, at least in this
place, where she lived a Prisoner, troubled and stirred her Mind: But believe
me, Sir, she has worn as good, they sit so apted to her; and she is so great a
Mistress of disposure: Here they come now: but take a full view of (...).


Enter Celia, Tymon, Charinthus, and Gent. Ant. How cheerfully she looks? How
she (...) all?
And how she views the place? she is very young sure:
That was an admirable Smile, a catching one,
The very twang of Cupids Bow Sung to it:
She has two-edged eyes, they kill o'both sides.

Men. She makes a stand, as though she would speak.

Ant. Be still then.

Cel. Good Gentlemen, trouble your selves no further,
I had thought sure to have met a noble Friend here.

Tym. Ye may meet many Lady.

Cel. Such as you are I covet few or none, Sir.

Char. Will you walk this way,
And take the sweets oth' Garden? cool and close, Lady.

Cel. Methinks this open Air's far better, tend ye that way.
Pray where is the Woman came along?

Char. What Woman?

Cel. The Woman of the House I lay at.

Tym. Woman; Here was none came along sure.

Cel. Sure I am (...) then: Pray where is the Prince?

Char. He will not be long from ye, we are his humble servants.

Cel. I could Laugh now, to see how finely I am cozn'd: yet I fear not, for
sure I know a way to escape all dangers.


Tym. Madam, your Lodgings lie this way.

Cel. My Lodgings? for (...) Sir, what office do I bear here?

Tym. The great commander of (...) hearts.

Cel. You have hit it. I thank your sweetheart for it. Who are these now?

Enter I (...) and Ladies. Char. Ladies that come to serve ye.

Cel. Well considered, are you my servants?

Lady. Servants to your pleasures.

Cel. I dare believe ye, but I dare not trust ye: caught with a trick? well, I
must bear it patiently: methinks this Court's a neat place: all the people of
such resin'd a size --


Tym. This is no poor rogue.

Leu. Were it a Paradise to please your fancy,
And entertain the sweetness you bring with ye;

Cel. Take breath; you are fat and many words may melt ye, this is three Bawds
beaten into one; bless me heaven, what shall become of me? I am (...) pitfal:
of my conscience, this is the old viper, and all these little ones creep every
night into her belly; do you hear plump servant, and my little sucking Ladies,
you must teach me, for I know you are excellent at carriage, how to behave my
self, for I am rude yet, but you say the Prince will come?


Lady. Will fly to see you.

Cel. For look you if a great man, say the King now should come and visit me?

Men. She names ye.

Ant. Peace fool.

Cel. And offer me a kindness, such a kindness.

Leu. I, such a kindness.

Cel. True Lady such a kindness, what shall that kindness be now?

Leu. A witty Lady, learn little ones, learn.

Cel. Say it be all his favor.

Leu. And a sweet saying it is

Cel. And I grow peevish?

Leu. You must not be neglectful.

Cel. There Is the matter, there is the main doctrine now, and I may miss it; Or a
kind hansome Gentleman?


Leu. You say well.

Cel. They Will count us basely bred.

Leu. Not freely nurtured.

Cel. I Will take thy counsel.

Leu. It Is an excellent woman.

Cel. I find a notable volume here, a learned one; which way? for I would fain
be in my chamber; in truth sweet Ladies, I grow weary; sie, how hot the air
beats on me?


Lady. This way Madam?

Cel. Now by mine honor, I grow wondrons faint too.

Leu. Your fans sweet Gentlewomen, your fans.

Cel. Since I am foold, [(...).]
I Will make my self some sport, though I pay dear for it,
Exit.
Men. You see now what a manner of woman she is Sir.

Ant. Thou art an ass.

Men. Is this a fit love for the Prince?

Ant. A coxcombe:
Now by my crown a dainty wench, a sharp wench,
And a matchless spirit: how she Jeered 'em?
How carelessly she scoffed 'em? use her nobly;
I would I had not seen her: wait anon,
And then you shall have more to trade upon.

Exeunt. Scaene 5.
Enter Leontius, and the 2 Gentlemen. Leo. We must keep a round, and a strong
watch to night, the Prince will not charge the Enemy till the morning: but for
the trick I told ye for this rascal, this rogue, that health and strong heart
makes a coward.


1 Gent. I, if it take.

Leo. Never fear it, the Prince has it, and if he let it fall, I must not know
it; he will suspect me presently: but you two may help the plough.


2 Gent. That he is sick again --

Leo. Extremely sick: his disease grown incurable.
Never yet found, nor touched at.
Enter Lieutenant.
2 Gent. Well, we have it
And here he comes.

Leo. The Prince has been upon him, what a flatten face he has now? It takes
believe it; how like an ass he looks?


(...). I feel no great pain, at least, I think I do not; yet I feel sensibly I
grow extremely faint: how cold I sweat now?


Leo. So, so, so.

Lieu. And now it is even too true, I feel a pricking, a pricking, a strange
pricking: how it tingles? and as it were a slitch too: the Prince told me, and
every one cried out I was a dead man; I had thought I had been as well --


Leo. Upon him now Boys, and do it most demurely.

1 Gent. How now Lieutenant?

Lieu. I thank ye Gentlemen.

1 Gent. 'Life, how looks this Man?
How do thou good Lieutenant?

2 Gent. I ever told ye, This Man was never Cured, I see it too plain now; How
do you feel your self? you look not perfect: How dull his eyes hangs?


1 Gent. That may be discontent.

2 Gent. Believe me Friend, I would not suffer now the tithe of those pains
this Man feels; mark his Forehead; What a cloud of cold dew hangs upon it?


Lieu. I have it, again I have it; How it grows upon me? a miserable Man I am.


Leo. Ha, ha, ha, A miserable Man thou shall be; this is the tamest Trout I
ever tickell'd.

[Aside.
Enter 2 Physicians. 1 Phi. This way he went.

2 Phi. Pray heaven we find him living,
He Is a brave Fellow, it is pity he should perish thus.

1 Phi. A strong hearted man, and of a notable sufferance.

Lieu. Oh, oh.

1 Gent. How now? how is it man?

Lieu. Oh Gentlemen,
Never so sull of pain.

2 Gent. Did I not tell ye?

Lieu. Never so full of pain Gentlemen.

1 Phi. He is here;
How do you Sir?

2 Phi. Be of good comfort Soldier,
The Prince has sent us to you.

Lieu. Do you think I may live?

2 Phi. He alters hourly, strangely.

1 Phi. Yes you (...) live: but --

Leo. Finely butted Doctor.

1 Gent. Do not discourage him.

1 Phi. He must be told truth,
It Is now too late to trifle.
Enter Them. and Gent.
2 Gent. Here the Prince comes.

Them. How now Gentlemen?

2 Gent. Bewailing Sir a Soldier,
And one I think, your Grace will grieve to part with,
But every living thing --

Them. It Is true, must perish,
Our lives are but our Martches to our Graves,
How do thou now Lieutenant?

Lieu. Faith it is true Sir, we are but spans, and candles ends.

Leo. He Is finely mortified.

Them. Thou art heart whole yet; I see he alters strangely, and that apace too;
I saw it this morning in him, when he poor Man I dare swear --


Lieu. No beleev't, Sir, I never felt it.

Them. Here lies the pain now: How he is swelled?

1 Phi. The Imposthume, fed with a new malignant Humor now, will grow to such
a bigness, it is incredible, the compass of a Bushel will not hold it, and with
such a Hell of torture it will rise too --


Them. Can you endure me touch it?

Lieu. Oh, I beseech you Sir:
I feel you sensibly e're you come near me.

Them. He is finely wrought, he must be cut, no cure else,
And suddenly, you see how fast he blows out.

Lieu. Good Master Doctor, let me be beholding to you, I feel I cannot last.


2 Phi. For what Lieutenant?

Lieu. But even for half a dozen Cans of good Wine,
That I may drink my Will out: I faint hideously.

Them. Fetch him some Wine; and since he must go Gentlemen.
Why let him take his journey Merrily.
Enter Servant with Wine.
Lieu. That Is even the nearest way.

Leo. I could Laugh dead now.

Them. Here, off with that.

Lieu. These two I give your Grace, a poor remembrance of a dying Man
Sir, and I beseech you wear 'em out,

Them. I will Soldier, these are fine Legacies.

Lieu. Among the Gentlemen, even all I have left; I am a poor Man, naked, yet
something for remembrance: four a piece, Gentlemen, and so my Body where you
please.


Leo. It will work.

Lieu. I make your Grace my Executor, and I beseech ye
See my poor Will fulfilled: sure I shall walk else.

Them. As full as they can be filled, here is my hand, Soldier.

1 Gent. The Wine will tickle him.

Lieu. I would hear a Drum beat, but to see how I could endure it.

Them. Beat a Drum there.
[Drum within.
Lieu. O Heavenly Music, I would hear one Sing to it,
I am very full of pain.

Them. Sing? it is impossible.

Lieu. Why, then I would drink a Drum full. Where lies the Enemy?

2 Gent. Why, here close by.

Leo. Now he begins to (...).

Lieu. And dare ye sight?
Dare ye fight Gentlemen?

1 Phi. You must not cut him: he is gone then in a moment; all the hope left, is
to work his weakness into sudden anger, and make him raise his passion above
his pain, and so dispose him on the Enemy; his body then, being stirred with
violence, will purge it self, and break the sore.


Them. It Is true, Sir,

1 Phi. And then my Life for his.

Lieu. I will not die thus.

Them. But he is too weak to do --

Lieu. Dye like a Dog?

2 Phi. I, he is weak, but yet he is heart-whole.

Lieu. Hem.

Them. An excellent sign.

Lieu. Hem.

Them. Stronger still, and better.

Lieu. Hem, hem; ran, tan, tan, tan.
Exit.
1 Phi. How he is in the way on it.

Them. Well go thy ways, thou will do something certain.

Leo. And some brave thing, or let mine Ears be cut off. He Is sinely wrought.


Them. Let Us after him.

Leo. I pray Sir; But how Rogue, when this Cloud's melted in him, and all
discovered --


Them. That Is for an after Mirth, away, away, away.

Exit. Scaene 6.
Enter Seleucus, Lysimachus, Ptolomy, Soldiers. Sell. Let no man fear to dye:
we love to sleep all,
And death is but the sounder sleep; all ages,
And all hours call us; it is so common, easy,
That little children tread those paths before us;
We are not sick, nor our souls pressed with sorrows,
Nor go we out like tedious tales, forgotten;
High high we come, and hearty to our funerals,
And as the Sun that sets, in blood let us fall.

Lis. It Is true, they have us fast, we cannot escape 'em,
Nor keeps the brow of fortune one smile for us,
Dishonorable ends we can escape though,
And (worse then those captivities) we can dye,
And dying nobly, though we leave behind us
These clods of flesh, that are too massy burdens,
Our living souls fly crowned with living conquests

Ptol. They have begun, fight bravely, and fall bravely;
And may that man that seeks to save his life now
By price, or promise, or by fear falls from us,
Never again be blessed with name of Soldier.

Enter a Soldier. Sell. How now? who charged first? I seek a brave hand to set
me off in death.


Soul. We are not charged Sir, the Prince lies still.

Sell. How comes this Larum up then?

Soul. There is one desperate fellow, with the devil in him
(He never durst do this else) has broke into us,
And here he bangs ye two or three before him,
There five or six; ventures upon whole companies.

Ptol. And is not seconded?

Soul. Not a man follows.

Sell. Nor cut a pieces?

Soul. Their wonder yet has staid 'em.

Sell. Let Us in, and see this miracle?

Ptol. I admire it.
Exit. Enter Leontius and Gentlemen.
Leon. Fetch him off, fetch him off, I am sure he is clouted;
Did I not tell you how 'twould take?

1 Gent. It Is admirable.
Enter Lieutenant with colors in his hand, pursuing 3 or 4 Soldiers.
Lieu. Follow that blow, my friend, there is at your coxcombs,
I fight to save me from the Surgeons miseries.

Leo. How the knave curries 'em

Lieu. You cannot rogues,
Till you have my diseases, fly my fury,
Ye bread and butter rogues, do ye run from me?
And my side would give me leave, I would so hunt ye,
Ye porredge-gutted slaves, ye veale-broth boobies.
Enter Demetrius, and Physicians, and Gent.
Leo. Enough, enough Lieutenant, thou have done bravely.

Them. Mirror of man.

Lieu. There Is a flag for ye Sir,
I took it out of the shop, and never paid for it,
I Will to 'em again, I am not come to the text yet.

Them. No more my soldier: beshrew my heart he is hurt sore.

Leo. Hang him, he will lick all those whole.

2 Phi. Now will we take him,
And cure him in a trice.

Them. Be careful of him.

Lieu. Let me live but two years,
And do what ye will with me;
I never had but two hours yet of happiness;
Pray ye give me nothing to provoke my valor,
For I am even as weary of this fighting --

2 Phi. Ye shall have nothing; come to the Princes Tent
And there the Surgeons presently shall search ye,
Then to your. rest.

Lieu. A little hansome litter
To lay me in, and I shall sleep.

Leo. Look to him.

Them. I do believe a Horse begot this Fellow,
He never knew his strength yet; they are our own.

Leo. I think so, I am cozened else; I would but see now
A way to fetch these off, and save their honors.

Them. Only their lives.

Leo. Pray ye take no way of Peace now,
Unless it be with infinite advantage.

Them. I shall be ruled; Enter Trumpet and Herold.
Let the Battles now move forward,
Our self will give the Signal:
Now Herold, What Is your Message?

Her. From my Masters
This honorable courtesy, a Parley
For half an hour, no more Sir.

Them. Let 'em come on,
They have my Princely word.
Enter Seleucus, Lysimachus, Ptolomy, Attendants, Soldiers.
Her. They are here to attend ye.

Them. Now Princes, your demands?

Sell. Peace, if it may be
Without the too much tainture of our honor:
Peace, and we will buy it too.

Them. At what price?

Ly. Tribute.

Ptol. At all the charge of this War.

Leo. That will not do.

Sell. Leontius, you and I have served together,
And run through many a Fortune with our Swords
Brothers in wounds, and health; one Meat has fed us,
One tent a thousand times from cold night covered us:
Our loves have been but one; and had we died then,
One Monument had held our Names, and Actions:
Why do you set upon your Friends such Prizes?
And Sacrifice to giddy chance such Trophies?
Have we forgot to dye? or are our Virtues
Less in Afflictions constant, than our Fortunes?
Ye are deceived old Soldier.

Leo. I know your worths,
And thus low bow in reverence to your Virtues:
Were these my Wars, or lead my power in chief here,
I knew then how to meet your Memories:
They are my Kings employments; this Man sights now
To whom I owe all duty, faith, and service;
This man that fled before ye; call back that,
That bloody day again, call that disgrace home,
And then an easiy peace, may sheath our swords up.
I am not greedy of your lives and fortunes,
Nor do I gape ungratefully to swallow ye,
Honor the spur of all illustrious natures,
That made you famous Soldiers, and next Kings,
And not ambitious envy strikes me forward,
Will ye unarm, and yield your selves his prisoners?

Sell. We never knew what that sound meant: no gives
Shall ever bind this body, but embraces;
Nor weight of sorrow here, till earth fall on me.

Leo. Expect our charge then.

Lys. It Is the nobler courtesy:
And so we leave the hand of heaven to bless us.

Them. Stay, have you any hope?

Cel. We have none left us,
But that one comfort of our deaths together;
Give us but room to fight.

Leo. Win it, and wear it.

Ptol. Call from the hills those companies hang ore us
Like bursting clouds; and then break in, and take us.

Them. Find such a Soldier will forsake advantage,
And we'll draw off, to show I dare be noble,
And hang a light out to ye in this darkness,
The light of peace; give up those Cities, forts,
And all those frontire Countries to our uses.

Sell. Is this the peace? traitors to those that feed us,
Our Gods and people? give our Countries from us?

Lys. Begin the knell, it sounds a great deal sweeter.

Ptol. Let loose your servant death.

Sell. Fall fate upon us,
Our memories shall never stink behind us.

Them. Seleucus, great Selcucus.

Ptol. The Prince calls Sir.

Them. Thou stock of nobleness, and courtesy,
Thou father of the War --

Leo. What means the Prince now?

Them. Give me my Standard here.

Lys. His angers melted.

Them. You Gentlemen that were his Prisoners,
And felt the bounty of that noble nature,
Lay all your hands, and bear these Colors to him,
The Standard of the Kingdom; take it Soldier.

Ptol. What will this mean?

Them. Thou have won it, bear it off,
And draw thy Men home whilst we wait upon thee.

Sell. You shall have all our Countries.

Lys. Ptol. All by Heaven Sir.

Them. I will not have a Stone, a Brush, a Bramble,
No, in the way of courtesy, I Will start ye;
Draw off, and make a Lane through all the Army,
That these that have subdued us, may March through us.

Sell. Sir, do not make me surset with such goodness,
I Will bear your Standard for ye; follow ye.

Them. I Swear it shall be so, March through me fairly,
And thine be this days honor, great Seleucus.

Ptol. Mirror of noble Minds.

Them. Nay then ye hate me.

Leo. I cannot speak now: Ex. with Drums and Shouts.
Well, go thy ways, at a sure piece of bravery
Thou art the best, these Men are won by the necks now:
I Will send a Post away.

ACT IV. SCENE I.
Ant. NO aptness in her?

Men. Not an immodest motion,
And yet she is as free, and when she is courted,
Makes as wild witty answers.

Ant. This more fires me, I must not have her thus.

Men. We cannot alter her.

Ant. Have you put the youths upon her?

Men. All that know any thing,
And have been studied how to catch a Beauty,
But like so many Whelps about an Elephant --
The Prince is coming home Sir.

Ant. I hear that too,
But that is no matter; Am I altered well?

Men. Not to be known I think Sir.

Ant. I must see her.
Enter 2 Gentlemen, or Lords.
1 Gent. I offered all I had, all I could think of,
(...) her through all the points of the Compass, I think.

2 Gent. She studies to undo the Court, to plant here
The enemy to our Age, Chastity?
She is the first, that e're bauked a close Arbor,
And the sweet contents within: She hates curled heads too,
And setting up of Beards she swears is Idolatry.

1. Gent. I never knew so fair a Face so froze;
Yet she would make one think --

2 Gent. True by her carriage, for she is as wanton as a kid to the out side, as
full of mocks and taunts: I kissed her hand too, walked with her half an hour.


1 Gent. She heard me sing,
And sung (...) self too; she sings admirably;
But still, when any hopes was, as it is her trick
To minister enough of those, then presently
With some new (...) or other, nothing to the matter,
And such a frown, as would sink all before her,
She takes her chamber; come we shall not be the last fools.

2 Gent. Not by a hundred I hope; it is a strange wench.

Ant. This (...) me up still higher.
Enter Celia, and Ladies behind her.
Men. Here she comes Sir.

Ant. Then be you gone: and take the women with ye,
And lay those Jewels in her way.

Cel. If I stay longer
I shall number as many lovers as (...) did;
How they flock after me? upon my conscience,
I have had a dozen horses given me this morning,
I Will even set up a troop, and turn she soldier,
A good discreet wench now, that were not hidebound
Might raise a fine estate here, and suddenly:
For these warm things will give their souls -- I can go no where
Without a world of offering to my excellence:
I am a Queen, a Goddess, I know not what --
And no constellation in all heaven, but I outshine it;
And they have found out now I have no eyes
Of mortal lights, but certain influences,
Strange virtuous lightnings, humane nature starts at,
And I can kill my twenty in a morning,
With as much ease now --
Ha? what are these; new projects?
Where are my honorable Ladies? Are you out too?
Nay then I must buy the Stock, send me good carding;
I hope the Princes hand, be not in this sport;
I have not seen him yet, cannot hear from him,
And that, that troubles me: all these were recreations,
Had I but his sweet company to Laugh with me:
What Fellow's that? Another Apparition?
This is the (...) Age: I should know that face,
Sure I have seen't before, not long since neither.

Ant. She sees me now: O (...), a most rare creature!

Cel. Yes, it is the same: I will take no notice of ye,
But if I do not sit ye, let me fry for it;
Is all this Cackling for your egg; they are fair ones,
Excellent rich no doubt too; and may stumble
A good staid mind, but I can go thus by 'em;
My honest friend, do you set off these Jewels?

Ant. Set 'em off, Lady?

Cel. I mean, sell 'em here, Sir?

Ant. She Is very quick: for sale they are not meant sure.

Cel. For sanctity I think much less: good even Sir.

Ant. Nay noble Lady, stay: it is you must wear 'em:
Never look strange, they are worthy your best beauty.

Cel. Did you speak to me?

Ant. To you or to none living:
To you they are sent, to you they are sacrificed.

Cel. I Will never look a Horse in the mouth that is given:
I thank ye, Sir: I Will send one to reward ye.

Ant. Do you never ask who sent 'em?

Cel. Never I:
Nor never care, if it be an honest end,
That end's the full reward, and thanks but slubber it;
If it be ill, I will not urge the acquaintance.

Ant. This has a soul indeed: pray let me tell ye --

Cel. I care not if ye do, so you do it hansomly,
And not stand picking of your words.

Ant. The King sent 'em.

Cel Away, away, thou art some foolish fellow, and now I think thou have stole
'em too; the King sent 'em? Alas good man, would thou make me believe he has
nothing to do with things of these worths, but wantonly to fling 'em? he is an
old man, a good old man, they say too: I dare swear full many a year ago he
left these gambols: here, take your trinkets.


Ant. Sure I do not lie, Lady.

Cel. I know thou lie extremely, damnably:
Thou have a lying face.

Ant. I was never thus ratled.
(Aside.
Cel. But say I should believe: why are these sent me?
And why art thou the Messenger? who art thou?

Ant. Lady, look on 'em wisely, and then consider who can send such as these,
but a King only? and, to what beauty can they be oblations, but only yours? For
me that am the carrier, it is only sit you know I am his servant, and have
fulfilled his will


Cel. You are short and pithy;
What must my beauty do for these?

Ant. Sweet Lady, you cannot be so hard of understanding, when a King's favor
shines upon ye gloriously, and speaks his love in these --


Cel. O then love's the matter; Sir reverence love: now I begin to feel ye: and
I should be the Kings Whore, a brave title: and go as glorious as the Sun, O
brave still: the chief Commandress of his Concubines, hurried from place to
place to meet his pleasures.


Ant. A deyilish subt il wench, but a rare spirit.
[Aside.
Cel. And when the good old sponge has sucked my youth dry, and left some of his
Royal aches in my bones: when time shall tell me I have plough'd my life up,
and cast long furrows in my face to (...) me.


Ant. You must not think so, Lady.

Cel. Then can these, Sir,
These precious things, the price of youth and beauty;
This shop here of sin offerings set me off again?
Can it restore me chaste, young, innocent?
Purge me to what I was? add to my memory
An honest and a noble fame? The Kings device?
The sin's as universal as the Sun is,
And lights an everlasting Torch to shame me.

Ant. Do you hold so slight account of a great Kings (...),
That all knees bow to purchase?

Cel. Prithee peace: If thou knewst how ill favouredly thy tale becomes thee,
and what ill root it takes --


Ant. You would be wiser.

Cel. Could the King sind no shape to shift his pander into,
But reverend Age? and one so like himself too?

Ant. She has found me out.

Cel. Cozen the world with gravity?
Prithee resolve me one thing, does the King love thee?

Ant. I think he does.

Cel. It seems so by thy Office: he loves thy use, and when that is ended, hates
thee: thou seem to me a Soldier.


Ant. Yes, I am one.

Cel. And have fought for thy Country?

Ant. Many a time.

Cel. May be, commanded too?

Ant. I have done, Lady.

Cel. O wretched man, below the state of pity!
Can thou forget thou were begot in honor?
A sree Companion for a King? a Soldier?
Whose Nobleness dare feel no want, but Enemies?
(...) thou forget this, and decline so wretchedly,
To eat the Bread of Bawdry, of base Bawdry?
(...) on the (...) of (...)? fling thy Sword from thee?
Dishonor to the noble name that nursed thee?
Go, beg diseases: let them be thy Armour's,
Thy sights, the flames of Lust, and their foul issues.

Ant. Why then I am a King, and mine own Speaker.

Cel. And I as free as you, mine own Disposer: There, take your Jewels; let
them give them lustres that have dark Lives and Souls; wear 'em your self, Sir,
you will seem a Devil else.


Ant. I command ye stay.

Cel. Be just, I am commanded.

Ant. I will not wrong ye.

Cel. Then thus low falls my duty.

Ant. Can ye love me? say I, and all I have --

Cel. I cannot love ye; without the (...) of faith I cannot hear ye; ye hand
upon my love, like frosts on Lilies: I can dye, but I cannot love: you are
answered.


Exit. Ant. I must find apter means, I love her truly.

Exit. Scaene 2.
Enter Demetr. Leon. Lieu. Gent. Sold. and Host. Them. Hither do you say she is
come?

Host. Yes Sir, I am sure on it: for whilst I waited 'on ye, putting my Wife in
trust, I know not by what means, but the King found her, and hither she was
brought; how, or to what end --


Them. My Father found her?

Host. So my Wife informs me.

Them. Leontius, pray draw off the Soldiers,
I would a while be private.

Leon. Fall off Gentlemen, the Prince would be alone.
Ex. Leo. and Soul.
Them. Is he so cunning? there is some trick in this, and you must know it, and
be an agent too: which if it prove so --


Host. Pull me to pieces, Sir.

Them. My Father found her?
My Father brought her hither? went she willingly?

Host. My Wife says full of doubts.

Them. I cannot blame her,
No more: there is no trust, no faith in mankind.
Enter Antigonus, Menippus, Leontius, and Soldiers.
Ant. Keep her up close, he must not come to see her:
You are welcome nobly now, welcome home Gentlemen;
You have done a courteour service on the Enemy
Has tied his Faith for ever; you shall find it;
Ye are not now in's debt Son: still your sad looks?
Leontius, what is the matter?

Leo. Truth Sir, I know not.
We have been merry since we went.

Lieu. I feel it.

Ant. Come, what is the matter now? do you want money?
Sure he has heard of the wench.

Them. Is that a want, Sir?
I would fain speak to your Grace.

Ant. You may do freely.

Them. And not deserve your anger?

Ant. That you may too.

Them. There was a Gentlewoman, and sometime my prisoner,
Which I thought well of Sir: your Grace conceives me.

Ant. I do indeed, and with much grief conceive ye; with full as much grief as
your Mother bare you. There was such a Woman: would I might as well say, there
was no such, Demetrius.


Them. She was virtuous, and therefore not unfit my youth to love her: she was
as fair --


Ant. Her beauty I Will proclaim too, to be as rich as ever reigned in Woman; but
how she made that good, the Devil knows.


Them. She was -- O Heaven!

Ant. The Hell to all thy glories,
Swallowed thy youth, made Shipwreck of thine honor: she was a Devil.

Them. Ye are my Father, Sir.

Ant. And since ye take a pride to show your follies,
I Will muster 'em, and all the World shall view 'em.

Leo. What heat is this? the Kings eyes speak his Anger.

Ant. Thou have abused thy youth, drawn to thy Fellowship, instead of Arts and
Arms, a Woman's kisses, the subtilties, and soft heats of a Harlot.


Them. Good Sir, mistake her not.

Ant. A Witch, a Sorceress:
I tell thee but the truth; and hear Demetrius,
Which has so dealt upon thy blood with charms,
Devilish and dark; so locked up all thy Virtues;
So plucked thee back from what thou sprungst from, glorious.

Them. O Heaven, that any tongue but his durst say this!
That any heart durst harbor it! Dread Father,
If for the innocent the gods allow us
To bend our knees --

Ant. Away, thou art bewitched still;
Though she be dead, her power still lives upon thee.

Them. Dead? O sacred Sir: Dead did you say?

Ant. She is dead, fool.

Them. It is not possible: be not so angry,
Say she is fallen under your sad displeasure,
Or any thing but dead, say she is banished,
Invent a crime, and I Will believe it, Sir.

Ant. Dead by the Law: we found her Hell, and her,
I mean her Charms and Spells, for which she perished,
And she confessed she drew thee to thy ruin,
And purposed it, purposed my Empires overthrow.

Them. But is she dead? Was there no pity Sir?
If her youth erred, Was there no mercy shown her?
Did (...) look on her Face, when ye Condemned her?

Ant. I looked into her heart, and there she was hideous.

Them. Can she be dead? Can virtue fall untimely?

Ant. She is dead, deservingly she died.

Them. I have done then. O matchless sweetness, whither art thou vanished? O
thou fair soul of all thy Sex, what Paradise have thou enriched and blessed? I am
your Son, Sir, and to all you shall command stand most obedient; only a little
time I must entreat you to study to forget her; 'twill not be long, Sir, nor I
long after it: Art thou dead Celia? Dead my poor Wench? my joy, plucked green
with violence: O fair sweet flower, farewell? Come thou destroyer Sorrow, thou
melter of the Soul, dwell with me; dwell with me solitary thoughts, tears,
cryings, nothing that loves the day, love me, or seek me, nothing that loves
its own life haunt about me: and Love, I charge thee, never charm mine eyes
more, nor never betray a Beauty to my curses: for I shall curse all now, hate
all, forswear all, and all the brood of fruitful nature yex at, for she is gone
that was all, and I nothing --

[Ex. and Gent.
Ant. This opinion must be maintained.

Men. It shall be, Sir.

Ant. Let him go; I can at mine own pleasure draw him to the right again: wait
your Instructions, and see the Soldier paid Leontius: once more ye are
welcome all.


All. Health to your Majesty.
[ Exit. Antig. etc.
Leo. Thou wentest along the journey, How can thou tell?

Host. I did, but I am sure it is so: had I (...) behind,
I think this had not proved.

Leo. A Wench the reason?

Lieu. Who Is that talks of a Wench there?

Leo. All this discontent
About a Wench?

Lieu. Where is this Wench; good Colonel?

Leo. Prithee hold thy Peace: Who calls thee to Counsel?

Lieu. Why, if there be a Wench --

Leo. It Is sit thou know her: Enter 2 Gentlemen.
That I Will say for thee, and as fit thou art for her,
Let her be mewed or stopped: How is it Gentlemen?

1. Gent. He Is wondrous discontent, he will speak to no Man.

2. Gent. H'has taken his Chamber close, admits no entrance;
Tears in his eyes, and cryings out.

Host. It Is so, Sir,
And now I wish my self half hanged e're I went this journey.

Leo. What is this Woman?

Lieu. I.

Host. I cannot tell ye,
But handsome as Heaven.

Lieu. She is not so high I hope, Sir.

Leo. Where is she?

Lieu. I, that would be known.

Leo. Why, Sirrah.

Host. I cannot show ye neither;
The King has now disposed of her.

Leo. There lies the matter:
Will he admit none to come to comfort him?

1 Gent. Not any near, nor, let 'em knock their hearts out,
Will never speak.

Lieu. It Is the best way if he have her;
For look you, a Man would be loath to be disturbed in's pastime;
It Is every good Man's case.

Leo. It Is all thy Living, we must not suffer this, we dare not suffer it: for
when these tender Souls meet deep (...), they are not strong enough to struggle
with 'em, but drop away as Snow does, from a Mountain, and in the torrent of
their own sighs sink themselves: I will, and must speak to him.


Lieu. So must I too:
He promised me a charge.

Leo. Of what? of Children
Upon my Conscience, thou have a double company,
And all of thy own (...).

Lieu. That Is all one, I Will raise 'em to a Regiment, und then command 'em, when
they turn disobedient, unbeget 'em: knock 'em of the head, and put in new.


Leo. A rare way; but for all this, thou art not valiant enough to dare to see
the Prince now?


Lieu. Do ye think he is angry?

1 Gent. Extremely vexed.

2 Gent. To the endangering of any Man (...) near him.

1. Gent. Yet, if thou could but win him out, what e're thy suit were,
believe it granted presently.


Leo. Yet thou must think though,
That in the doing he may break upon ye,
And --

Lieu. If he do not kill me.

Leo. There Is the question.

Lieu. For half a dozen hurts.

Leo. Art thou so valiant?

Lieu. Not absolutely so neither: no it cannot be, I want my Impostumes, and my
things about mt, yet I Will make danger, Colonel.


Leo. 'Till be rare sport, howe'r it take; give me thy hand; if thou do this,
I Will raise thee up a Horse Troop, take my word for it.


Lieu. What may be done by humane Man.

Leo. Let Us go then.

1 Gent. Away before he cool: he will relapse else.

[Exit. Scaene 3.
Enter Antigonus, Menippus, and (...). Ant. Will she not yield?

Leu. For all we can urge to her;
I swore you would Marry her, she laughed extremely,
And then she railed like Thunder.

Ant. Call in the Magician. Enter Magician with a Bowl.
I must, and will obtain her, I am ashes else.
Are all the Philters in? Charms, Powder, Roots?

Mag. They are all in; and now I only stay
The Invocation of some helping Spirits.

Ant. To your work then, and dispatch.

Mag. Sit still, and fear not.

Lieu. I shall never (...) these sights.

Ant. Away with the Woman: go wait without.

Leu. When the Devil's gone, pray call me.
(Exit.
Ant. Be sure you make it powerful enough.

Mag. Pray doubt not -- He Conjures.
A SONG.
RIse from the Shades below,
All you that prove
The helps of looser Love;
Rise and beslow
Upon this Cup, whatever may compel
By powerful Charm, and unresisted Spell.
A Heart un-warm'd to melt in Loves desires,
Distill into this Liquor all your fires:
Heats, longings, tears,
But keep back frozen fears;
That she may know, that has (...) power desy'd,
Art is a power that will not be denied.
The ANSWER.
I Obey, I Obey,
And am come to view the (...),
Brought along, all may (...),
All the Earth has, and our (...):
Here Is a little, little Flower,
This will make her sweat an hour,
Then unto such slames arise,
A thousand joys will not suffice.
Here Is the powder of the Moon,
With which she caught Endymion;
The powerful Tears that Venus cried,
When the Boy Adonis died
Here Is Medea's Charm, with which
Jason's heart she did bewitch,
Omphale this Spell put in,
When she made the Libyan spin.
This dull root plucked from Lethe (...),
Purges all pure thoughts, and good.
These I (...) thus, round, round, round,
Whilst our light feet beat the ground.

Mag. Now Sir, it is full, and whosoever drinks this
Shall violently (...) upon your Person,
And never (...) eat (...):
So (...) hours 'twill work, and work with Violence;
And those expired, it is done. You have my art, Sir.

Enter Leucippe. Ant. See him rewarded liberally -- Leucippe,
Here, take this Bowl, and when she calls for Wine next,
Be sure you give her this, and see her drink it;
Delay no time when she calls next.

Leu. I shall, Sir.

Ant. Let none else touch it on your life.

Leu. I am charged, Sir.

Ant. Now if she have an Antidote Art, let her 'scape me.
(Exeunt. Enter Leontius, Lieutenant, Gent.
1 Gent. There Is the Door, Lieutenant, if you dare do any thing.

Leo. Here Is no man waits.

1 Gent. H'as given a charge that none shall,
Nor none shall come within the hearing of him:
Dare ye go forward?

Lieu. Let me put on my Skull first.
My head's almost beaten into the pap of an Apple.
Are there no Guns in the door?

Leo. The Rogue will do it.
And yet I know he has no (...) to it.

Lieu. What (...) when I knock, for stones,
For those may pepper (...) none.

Leo. How he (...).

Lieu. ^
If I be ^

Leo. ^.

Lieu. Away, (...) that then? I Will knock softly.
Pray heaven he speaks in a low voice now to comfort me:
I feel I have no heart to it: -- Is It well, Gentlemen?
Colonel, my Troop --

Leo. A little (...).

Lieu. Stay, stay;
Here is a window, I will see, stand wide.
By -- he is charging of a Gun.

Leo. There Is no such matter.
There Is no body in this room.

Lieu. O'twas a fire-shovel:
Now I Will knock louder; if he say who is there?
As sure he has so much manners, then will I answer him
So finely and demurely; my Troop Colonel --
Knocks louder.
1 Gent. Knock louder, Fool, he hears not.

Lieu. You fool, do you.
Do and you dare now.

1 Gent. I do not undertake it.

Lieu. Then hold your peace, and mddle with your own matters.

Leo. Now he will knock.
(Knocks louder.
Lieu. Sir, Sir, will it please you hear Sir? your Grace, I Will look again,
what is that?


Leo. He Is there now. Lord! How he stares! I never yet saw him thus, altered:
Stand now, and take the Troop.


Lieu. Would I were in it, and a good horse under me: I must knock again, the
Devil's at my fingers ends: He comes now. Now Colonel, if I live --


Leo. The Troop's thine own Boy.
Enter Demetrius, a Pistol.
Them. What desperate fool, ambitious of his ruin?

Lieu. Your Father, would desire ye, Sir, to come to dinner.

Them. Thou art no more.

Lieu. Now, now, now, now.

Them. Poor Coxcomb: why do I aim at thee?
Exit.
Leo. His fear (...) killed him.
Enter Leucippe with a Bowl.
2 Gent. I protest he is almost stiff: bend him and rub him, hold his Nose
close, you if you be a woman, help us a little: here is a man near perished.


Leu. Alas alas, I have nothing here about me. Look to my Bowl; I Will run in
presently and fetch some waters: bend him, and set him upwards.

Exit.
Leo. A goodly man -- Here Is a brave heart: he is warm again: you shall not
leave us in the (...) so, Sirrah.


2 Gent. Now he breaths too.

Leo. If we had but any drink to raise his Spirits. What Is that in the Bowl?
upon my life, good Liquor, she would not own it else.


1 Gent. He sees.

Leo. Look up Boy. And take this Cup, and drink it off; I Will pledge thee. Guide
it to his mouth, he swallows heartily.


2 Gent. Oh! fear and sorrow's dry; it is off --

Leo. Stand up man.

Lieu. Am I not shot?

Leo. A way with him, and cheer him: thou have won thy Troop.

Lieu. I think I won it bravely.

Leo. Go, I must see the Prince, he must not live thus; and let me hear an hour
hence from ye. Well Sir --

Exeunt Gent. and Lieu. Enter Leucippe with water.
Leu. Here, here: where is the sick Gentleman?

Leo. He Is up, and gone, Lady.

Leu. Alas, that I came so late.

Leo. He must still thank ye; ye left that in a Cup here did him comfort.

Leu. That in the Bowl?

Leo. Yes truly, very much comfort, he drank it off, and after it spoke lustily.

Leu. Did he drink it all?

Leo. All off.

Leu. The Devil choke him; I am undone: h'as twenty Devils in him; undone for
ever, left he none?


Leo. I think not.

Leu. No, not a drop: what shall become of me now? had he no where else to
swound? a vengeance swound him: Undone, undone, undone: stay, I can lie yet and
swear too at a pinch, that is all my comfort. Look to him; I say look to him,
and but mark what follows.

Exit.
Enter Demetrius. Leo. What a Devil ails the Woman? here comes the Prince
again, with such a sadness on his sace, as sorrow, sorrow her self but poorly
imitates. Sorrow of Sorrows on that heart that caused it.


Them. Why might she not be false and treacherous to me? and found so by my
Father? she was a Woman, and many a one of that Sex, young and fair, as full of
faith as she, have fallen, and foully.


Leo. It is a Wench! O that I knew the circumstance.

Them. Why might not, to preserve me from this ruin, she having lost her
honor, and abused me, my father change the forms of the coins, and execute his
anger on a falt she never committed, only to keep me safe? why should I think
so? She never was to me, but all obedience, sweetness and love.


Leo. How heartily he weeps now? I have not wept this thirty years, and upward;
but now, if I should be hanged I cannot hold from't: It grieves me to the heart.


Them. Who Is that that mocks me?

(...). A plague of him that mocks ye: I grieve truly, truly, and heartily to
(...) you thus, Sir: and if it lay in my power, gods are my witness, who ever he
be that took your sweet peace from you; I am not so old yet, nor want I spirit
--


Them. No more of that, no more Leonitus, revenges are the gods: our part is
sufferance: farewell, I shall not see thee long.


Leo. Good Sir, tell me the cause, I know there is a woman in it; do you hold me
faithful? dare you trust your Soldier? sweet Prince, the cause?


Them. I must not, dare not tell it, and as thou art an honest man, enquire not.

Leo. Will ye be merry then?

Them. I am, wondrous (...)

Leo. It Is wondrous well: you think now this becomes ye. Shame on it, it does
not, Sir, it shows not handsomely; If I were thus; you would swear I were an
Ass straight; a wooden ass; whine for a Wench?


Them. Prithee leave me.

Leo. I will not leave ye for a tit.

Them. Leontius!

Leo. For that you may have any where for six pence, and a dear penny worth too.


Them. Nay, then you are troublesome.

Leo. Not half so troublesome as you are to your self, Sir; was that brave
(...) made to pant for a placket: and now in the dog days too, when nothing dare
love! That noble Mind to melt away and moulder for a hey nonny, nonny! Would I
had a Glass here, to show ye what a pretty toy ye are turned to.


Them. My wretched Fortune.

Leo. Will ye but let me know her? I Will once turn Bawd: go to, they are good
men's offices, and not so contemptible as we take 'em for: and if she be above
ground, and a Woman; I ask no more; I Will bring her of my back, Sir, By this
hand I will, and I had as lieve bring the Devil, I care not who she be, nor
where I have her; and in your arms, or the next Bed deliver her, which you
think fittest, and when you have danced your galliard.


Them. Away, and fool to them are so affected: O thou art gone, and all my
comfort with thee! Will thou do one thing for me?


Leo. All things in the World, Sir, of all dangers.

Them. Swear.

Leo. I will.

Them. Come near me no more then

Leo. How?

Them. Come no more near me: thou art a plague sore to me.
Exit.
Leo. Give you good even Sir; If you be suffered thus, we shall have (...)
sport. I will be sorry yet.

Enter 2 Gentlemen.
1 Gent. How now, how does he?

Leo. Nay, if I tell ye, hang me, or any man else that has his nineteen wits;
he has the bots I think, he groans, and roars, and kicks.


2 Gent. Will he speak yet?

Leo. Not willingly: shortly he will not see a man; if ever I looked upon a
Prince so metamorphos'd, so juggl'd into I know not what, shame take me; this
it is to be in love


1 Gent. Is that the cause on it?

Leo. What is it not the cause of but bear-baitings? And yet it stinks much
like it: out upon it; what giants, and what dwarffs what owls and apes, what
dogs, and cats it makes us? men that are possessed with it, live as if they had a
Legion of Devils in 'em, and every Devil of a several nature; nothing but
Hey-pass,, re-pass: where is the Lieutenant? Has he gathered up the end on's
wits again?


1 Gent. He is alive: but you that talk of wonders, show me but such a wonder
as he is now.


Leo. Why, he was ever at the worst a wonder.

2 Gent. He is now most wonderful; a Blazer now, Sir.

Leo. What ails the Fool? and what Star reigns now Gentlemen we have such
Prodigies?


2 Gent. 'Twill pose your heaven-hunters; he talks now of the King, no other
language, and with the King as he imagines, hourly. Courts the King, drinks to
the King, dies for the King, buys all the Pictures of the King, wears the Kings
colors.


Leo. Does he not lie in the King street too?

1 Gent. He Is going thither, makes prayers for the King in sundry languages,
turns all his Proclamations into meter; is really in love with the King, most
dotingly, and swears Adonis was a Devil to him: A sweet King, a most comely
King, and such a King --


2 Gent. Then down on's murrow-bones; O excellent King, thus he begins, Thou
Light, and Life of Creatures, Angel-ey'd King, vouchsafe at length thy favor;
and so proceeds to incision: what thinst ye of this sorrow?


1 Gent. Will as familiarly kiss the Kings horses as they pass by him: ready to
ravish his footmen.


Leo. Why, this is above Ela? but how comes this?

1 Gent. Nay that is to understand yet, but thus it is, and this part but the
poorest, 'twould make a man leap over the Moon to see him act these.


2 Gent. With sighs as though his heart would break: cry like a breech'd boy,
not eat a bit.


Leo. I must go see him presently, for this is such a gig, for certain
Gentlemen, the Fiend rides on a Fiddle-stick.


2 Gent. I think so.

Leo. Can ye guide me to him for half an hour? I am his to see the miracle.

1 Gent. We sure shall start him. Exeunt.

Scaene 5.
Enter Antigonus and Leucippe. Ant. Are you sure she drank it?

Leu. Now must I lie most considently. Yes Sir, she has drunk it off.

Ant. How works it with her?

Leu. I see no alteration yet.

Ant. There will be, for he is the greatest Artist living made it. Where is she
now?


Leu. She is ready to walk out, Sir.

Ant. Stark mad, I know she will be.

Leu. So I hope, Sir.

Ant. She knows not of the Prince?

Leu. Of no man living --

Ant. How do I look! how do my clothes become me? I am not very gray.

Leu. A very youth, Sir, upon my maidenhead as (...) as April: heaven bless
that sweet face, 'twill undo a thousand; many a soft heart must sob yet, (...)
that wither, your Grace can give content enough.

Enter Celia with a Book.
Ant. I think so.

Leu. Here she comes, Sir.

Ant. How shall I keep her off me? go, and perfume the room: make all things
ready.

Exit. Leu.
Cel. No hope yet of the Prince! no comfort of him! they keep me mewed up here,
as they mew mad folks, no company but my afflictions. This royal Devil again!
strange, how he hants me! how like a poisoned potion his eyes fright me! has
made himself handsome-too.


Ant. Do you look now, Lady? you will leap anon.
(Aside
Cel. Cnrl'd and Perfumed? I smell him; he looks on's Legs too, sure he will
cut a Caper; God a Mercy dear December.


Ant. O do you smile now; I knew it would work with you; come hither pretty one.


Cel. Sir.

Ant. I like those Court'sies well; come hither and kiss me.

Cel. I am reading, Sir, of a short Treatise here, that is called the Vanity of
(...): Has your Grace seen it? He says here, that an Old Man's loose desire,
(...) like the Glowworms light, the Apes so wondr'd at: which, when they
gathered Sticks, and laid upon it, and blew, and blew, turned Tail, and went out
presently: And in another place he calls their Loves, (...) smells of dying
Flowers, carry no comforts; they are doting, stinking Foggs, so thick and muddy,
(...) with all his beams cannot beat through 'em.


Ant. How Is this? (...) the (...)? you but fool still I know you love me.

Cel. As you are just and honest? I know I love and honor you: admire you.

Ant. This makes against me, fearfully against me.

Cel. But as you bring your power to (...) me, your Traps to catch mine (...)
to (...); as you (...) out your (...) to overwhelm me, Hell never haved good,
as I (...) you, Sir; and I dare tell it to your Face: What glory now, after all
your Conquests got, your Titles, the ever-living Memories raised to you; Can my
defeat be? my poor (...), What triumph? and when you crown your swelling Cups
to Fortune, What honorable Tongue can sing my Story? Be as your Emblem is, a
glorious Lamp set on the top of all, to light all perfectly: Be as your office
is, a god-like Justice, into all shedding equally your Virtues.


Ant. She has drencht me now; now I admire her goodness; so young, so nobly
strong, I never tasted: Can nothing in the power of Kings persuade ye?


Cel. No, nor that power command me.

Ant. Say I should force ye? I have it in my will.

Cel. Your Will's a poor one; and though it be a King's Will, a despised one.
Weaker than Infants legs, your Will's in Swadling-Clouts; a thousand ways my
will has found to (...) ye; a thousand doors to 'scape ye, I dare die, Sir; as
suddenly (...) die, as you can offer: Nay, say you had your Will, say you had
ravished me, performed your lust, What had you purchased by it? What Honor
won? Do you know who dwells above, Sir, And what they have prepared for Men
turned Devils? Did you never hear their Thunder? start and tremble, Death
sitting on your blood, when their sires visit us. Will nothing wring you then
do you think? sit hard here, and like a Snail curl round about (...)
Conscience, biting and stinging: Will you not roar too late then? then when
rou shake in horror of this Villainy, then will I rise a Star in Heaven, and
scorn ye.


Ant. Lust, how I hate thee now! and love this sweetness! Will you be my
Queen? Can that price purchase ye?


Cel. Not all the World, I am a Queen already, Crowned by his Love, I must not
lose for Fortune; I can give none away, sell none away, Sir, can lend no love,
am not mine own Exchequer; for in another heart my hope and peace lies.


Ant. Your fair hands, Lady? for yet I am not pure enough to touch these Lips,
in that sweet Peace ye spoke of. Live now for ever, and I to serve your Virtues
--


Cel. Why now you show a god! now I kneel to ye: This Sacrifice of Virgins Joy
send to ye: Thus I hold up my hands to Heaven that touched ye, and pray (...)
Blessings dwell about ye.


Ant. Virtue commands the Stars: rise more than Virtue; your present comfort
shall be now my business.


Cel. All my obedient service wait upon ye.

(Ex. severally. Scaene 6.
Enter Leontius, Gentlemen, and Lieutenant. Leo. Have thou clean forgot the
Wars?

Lieu. (...) hold thy peace.

1 Gent. His mind's much elevated now.

Leo. ^.

Lieu. I am (...) with this Fellow

Leo. He will call me (...) anon.

1 Gent. It Is ten to one else.

Lieu. O King that thou knew'st I loved thee, how I loved thee, and where, O
King, I barrel up thy beauty.


Leo. He cannot leave his Sutlers trade, he VVoo's in it.

Lieu. O never, King.

Leo. By this hand, when I consider --

Lieu. My honest friend, you are a little saucy.

1 Gent. I told you you would have it.

Lieu. When mine own worth --

Leo. Is flung into the balance, and found nothing.
[Aside.
Lieu. And yet a Soldier.

Leo. And yet a saucy one.
[Aside.
Lieu. One that has followed thee.

Leo. Fair and far off.
[Aside.
Lieu. Fought for thy Grace.

Leo. 'Twas for some (...), you lie Sir.
[Aside.
Lieu. He Is the Son of a Whore denies this: Will that satisfy ye?

Leo. Yes, very well.

Lieu. Shall then that thing that honors thee? How miserable a thing soever,
yet a thing still; And though a thing of nothing, thy thing ever.


Leo. Here Is a new thing.

2 Gent. He Is in a deep (...) now.

Leo. I Will (...) him our (...) VVhen's the King's Birthday?

Lieu. When e're it be, (...) day I Will dye with Ringing. And there is the
resolution of a Lover.

[Exit.
Leo. A goodly resolution sure I take it. He is (...), or moop'd, or his brains
(...), Could he find no body to fall in Love with but the King, the good old
(...), to dote upon him too? Stay, now I remember, what the Fat Woman warned
me, bad me remember, and look to him to: I Will hang if she have not a hand in
this: he is conjured, go after him, I pity the poor Rascal; In the mean time
I Will wait occasion to work upon the Prince.


2 Gent. Pray do that seriously.

(Exit severally. Scaene 7.
Enter Antigonus, Menippus, Lords. Lord. He Is very ill.

Ant. I am very sorry for it, and much ashamed I have wronged his Innocence;
Menippus, guide her to the Princes Lodgings, there leave her to his love again.


Men. I am glad, Sir.

Lord. He will speak to none.

Ant. O I shall break that silence; Be quick, take fair attendance.

Men. Yes Sir presently.
(Exit.
Ant. He will find his Tongue, I warrant ye; his health too; (Exit.
I send a Physic will not fail.

Lord. Fair work it.

Ant. We hear the Princes mean to visit us in way of truce.

Lord. It Is thought so.

Ant. Come; let us in then, and think upon the noblest ways to meet em.

(Exeunt. Scaene 8.
Enter Leontius. Leo. There Is no way now to get in: all the Light stopped too;
nor can I hear a sound of him, pray Heaven he use no violence: I think he has
more Soul, stronger, and I hope nobler: Would I could but see once this Beaty
he groans under, or come to know but any circumstance. What noise is that
there? I think I heard him groan: here are some coming; a Woman too, I Will
stand aloof, and view 'em.

Enter Menippus, Celia, Lords.
Cel. Well, some of you have been to blame in this point, but I forgive ye: The
King might have picked out too some sitter Woman to have tried his Valor.


Men. 'Twas all to the best meant, Lady.

Cel. I must think so, for how to mend it now: he is here you tell me.

Men. He Is Madam, and the joy to see you only will draw him out.

Leo. I know that VVomans Tongue, I think I have seen her Face too: I Will go
nearer: If this be she, he has some cause of Sorrow: It Is the same Face; the
same, most excellent Woman.


Cel. This should be Lord Leontius: I remember him.

Leo. Lady, I think ye know me.

Cel. Speak soft, good Soldier:
I do, and know ye worthy, know ye Noble;
Know not me yet openly, as you love me;
But let me see ye again, I Will satisfy ye:
I am wondrous glad to see those eyes.

Leo. You have charged me.

Cel. You shall know where I am.

Leo. I will not off yet: She goes to knock at's Door: This must be she the
(...) told me of: right glad I am on it, he will bolt now for certain.


(...) (...) Sir? I Will trouble ye no more: I thank your courtesy, (...).


(...) (...) humble Servants.
( Ex. Me. etc.
Cel. So now my (...) are off: Pray Heaven he be here! Master, my Royal Sir Do
(...) who calls ye! Love, my Demetrius.


Leo. (...) Quail-pipes, the Cock will Crow anon.

Cel. (...), when I call at your VVindow?

Leo. I (...) him stirring: now he comes wondering out.
Enter Demetrius
Them. (...) sound sure: the sweetness of that Tongue draws all (...) to it
(...) the shape too.


(...). How (...) upon her?

Them. (...) eyes abuse me? it is she, the living Celia: your hand Lady?


Cel. What (...) this mean?

Them. The very (...) same Celia.

Cel. How do ye Sir?

Them. Only turned brave. I heard you were dead my dear one, complete, She is
wondrous brave, a wondrous Gallant Courtier.


Cel. How he surveys me round? Here has been foul play.

Them. How came she thus?

Cel. It was a kind of Death, Sir, I suffered in your absence, mewed up here,
and kept concealed I know not how.


Them. It Is likely: How came you hither Celia? wondrous Gallant: Did my Father
send for ye?


Cel. So they told me, Sir, and on command too.

Them. I hope you were obedient?

Cel. I was so ever.

Them. And ye were bravely used?

Cel. I wanted nothing: My Maidenhead to a mote in the Sun, he is jealous: I
must now play the Knave with him, though I dye (...), (...) in my nature.


Them. Her very eyes are altered: Jewels, and rich ones too, I never saw yet --
And what were those came for ye?


Cel. Monstrous Jealous: Have I lived at the rate of these scorned questions?
they seemed of good sort, Gentlemen.


Them. Kind Men?

Cel. They were wondrous kind: I was much beholding to 'em; There was one (...)
Sir.


Them. Ha?

Cel. One (...), a notable merry Lord, and a good Companion.

Them. And one (...) too?

Cel. Yes, there was such a one.

Them. And Timon.

Cel. It Is most true.

Them. And thou most treacherous: my Fathers bawds by -- they never miss course;
and were these (...) with ye?


Cel. Every hour Sir.

Them. And was there not a Lady, a fat Lady?

Cel. O yes; a notable good wench.

Them. The Devil fetch her.

Cel. It Is even the merriest wench --

Them. Did she keep with ye too?

Cel. She was all in all; my bed fellow, eat with me, brought me acquainted.

Them. You are well known here then?

Cel. There is no living here a stranger I think.

Them. How came ye by this brave gown?

Cel. This is a poor one: alas, I have twenty richer: do you see these jewels?
why, they are the poorest things, to those are sent me, and sent me hourly too.


Them. Is there no modesty? on faith in this fair Sex?

Leo. What will this prove too? for yet with all my wits, I understand not.

Them. Come hither; thou art dead indeed, lost tainted; all that I left thee
fair, and innocent, sweet as thy youth, and carrying comfort in it; all that I
hoped for virtuous, is fled from thee, turned back, and bankrupt.


Leo. By'r Lady, this cuts shrewdly.

Them. Thou art dead, for ever dead; sins surfeit (...) thee; the ambition of
those wanton eyes betrayed thee; go from me, grave of honor; go thou foul one,
thou glory of thy sin; go thou despised one, and where there is no virtue, nor
no virgin; where Chastity was never known, nor heard of; where nothing reigns
but impious lust, and looser faces. Go thither, child of blood, and (...) my
doting.


Cel. You do not speak this seriously I hope Sir; I did but jest with you.

Them. Look not upon me, there is more hell in those eyes, than hell harbors;
and when they flame, more torments.


Cel. Dare ye trust me? you durst once even with all you had: your love Sir? by
this fair light I am honest.


Them. Thou subtle Circe, cast not upon the maiden light eclipses: curse not the
day.


Cel. Come, come, you shall not do this: how fain you would seem angry now, to
fright me; you are not in the field among your Enemies; come, I must cool this
courage.


Them. Out thou impudence, thou ulcer of thy Sex; when I first saw thee, I drew
into mine eyes mine own destruction, I pulled into my heart that sudden poison,
that now consumes my dear content to cinders: I am not now Demetrius, thou have
changed me; thou woman, with thy thousand wiles have changed me; thou Serpent
with thy angel-eyes have slain me; and where, before I touched on this fair
ruin, I was a man, and reason made, and moved me, now one great lump of grief,
I grow and wander.


Cel. And as you are noble, do you think I did this?

Them. Put all the Devils wings on, and fly from me.

Cel. I will go from ye, never more to see ye. I will fly from ye, as a plague
hangs over me; and through the progress of my life hereafter; where ever I
shall sind a fool, a false man, one that never knew the worth of polished
virtue; a base suspecter of a virgins honor, a child that flings away the
wealth he cried for, him will I call Demetrius: that fool Demetrius, that mad
man a Demetrius; and that false man, the Prince of broken faiths, even Prince
Demetrius. You think now, I should cry, and kneel down to ye, petition for my
peace; let those that feel here the weight of evil, wait for such a favor, I
am above your hate, as far above it, in all the actions of an innocent life, as
the pure Stars are from the muddy meteors, cry when you know your folly: howl
and curse then, beat that unmanly breast, that holds a false heart, when ye
shall come to know, whom ye have flung from ye.


Them. Pray ye stay a little.

Cel. Not your hopes can alter me. Then let a thousand black thoughts muster in
ye, and with those enter in a thousand doatings; those eyes be never shut, but
drop to nothing: my innocence for ever haunt and fright ye: those arms together
grow in folds; that tongue, that bold bad tongue that barks out these
disgraces. When you shall come to know how nobly virtuous I have preserved my
life, rot, rot within ye.


Them. What shall I do?

Cel. Live a lost man for ever. Go ask your Fathers conscience what I suffered,
and through what seas of hazards I sailed through: mine honor still advanced
in spite of tempests, then take your leave of love; and confess freely, you
were never worthy of this heart that served ye, and so farewell ungrateful --

Exit.
Them. Is she gone?

Leo. I Will follow her, and will sind out this matter. --

Exit.
Enter Antigonus, and Lords. Ant. Are ye pleased now? have you got your heart
again? have I restored ye that?


Them. Sir even for Heaven (...), and sacred truth (...), tell me how ye found
her.


Ant. I will, and in few words. Before I tried her, it is true, I thought her
most unfit her fellowship, and feared her too: which fear begot that story I
told ye first: but since, like gold I touched her.


Them. And how dear Sir?

Ant. Heavens holy light's not purer: the constancy and goodness of all women
that ever lived, to win the names of worthy, this noble Maid has doubled in
her: honor, all promises of wealth, all art to win her, and by all tongues
employed, wrought as much on her as one may do upon the Sun at noon day by
lighting Candles up: her shape is heavenly, and to that heavenly shape her
thoughts are angels.


Them. Why did you tell me Sir?

Ant. It Is true, I erred in it: but since I made a full proof of her virtue, I
find a King too poor a servant for her. Love her, and honor her; in all
observe her. She must be something more than time yet tells her: and certain I
believe him best, enjoyes her: I would not lose the hope of such a Daughter, to
add another Empire to my honor. --

Exit.
Them. O wretched state! to what end shall I turn me? and where begins my
penance? now, what service will win her love again? my death must do it: and if
that sacrifice can purge my follies, be pleased, O mighty Love, I dye thy
servant --

Exit.
ACT V. SCENE I.
Enter Leontius, and Celia. Leo. I Know he does not deserve ye; h'as used you
poorly: and to redeem himself --


Cel. Redeem?

Leo. I know it -- there is no way left.

Cel: For Heavens sake do not Name him, do not think on him, Sir, he is so far
from me in all my thoughts now, methinks I never knew him.


Leo. But yet I would see him again.

Cel. No, never, never.

Leo. I do not mean to lend him any comfort; but to asslict him, so to torture
him; that even his very Soul may shake within him; to make him know, though he
be great and powerful, it is not within his aim to deal dishonourably, and carry
it off, and with a Maid of your sort.


Cel. I must confess, I could most spightfully asslict him; now, now, I could
whet my anger at him; now, armed with bitterness, I could shoot through him; I
long to vex him.


Leo. And do it home, and bravely.

Cel. Were I a Man?

Leo. I Will help that weakness in ye: I honor ye, and serve ye.

Cel. Not only to disclaim me, when he had sealed his Vows in Heaven, sworn to
me, and poor believing I became his servant: but most maliciously to brand my
Credit, stain my poor Name.


Leo. I would not suffer it: see him I would again, and to his teeth too: Od's
precious, I would ring him such a Lesson --


Cel. I have done that already.

Leo. Nothing, nothing: It was too poor a purge; besides, by this time he has
found his fault, and feels the Hells that follow it. That, and your urged on
anger to the highest, why, 'twill be such a stroke --


Cel. Say he repent then, and seek with tears to soften, I am a Woman; a Woman
that have loved him, Sir, have honored him: I am no more.


Leo. Why, you may deal thereafter.

Cel. If I forgive him, I am lost.

Leo. Hold there then, the sport will be to what a poor submission -- but keep
you strong.


Cel. I would not see him.

Leo. Yes, you shall ring his Knell.

Cel. How if I kill him?

Leo. Kill him? why let him dye.

Cel. I know it is sit so. But why should I that loved him once, destroy him? O
had he escaped this sin, what a brave Gentleman --


Leo. I must confess, had this not fallen, a nobler, a handsomer, the whole
World had not showed ye: And to his making such a mind --


Cel. It Is certain: But all this I must now forget.

Leo. You shall not if I have any art: go up sweet Lady, and trust my truth.


Cel. But good Sir bring him not.

Leo. I would not for the honor ye are born to, but you shall see him, and
neglect him too, and scorn him.


Cel. You will be near me then.

Leo. I will be with ye; yet there is some hope to stop this gap, I Will work hard.

[Exit.
Scaene 2.
Enter Antigonus, Menip. two Gent. Lieutenant, and Lords. Ant. But is it
possible this Fellow took it?

2 Gent. It seems so by the violence it wrought with, yet now the fits even off.


Men. I beseech your Grace.

Ant. Nay, I forgive thy Wife with all my heart, and am right-glad she drank it
not her self, and more glad that the virtuous Maid escaped it, I would not for
the World 'thad hit: but that this Soldier, Lord how he looks, that he should
take this Vomit; Can he make Rimes too?


2 Gent. H'as made a thousand, Sir, and plays the burden to 'em on a
Jews-trump.


Ant. He looks as though he were Bepist: Do you love me Sir?

Lieu. Yes surely even with all my heart.

Ant. I thank ye; I am glad I have so good a subject: But pray ye tell me, How
much did ye love me, before ye drank this matter?


Lieu. Even as much as a sober Man might; and a Soldier that your Grace owes
just half a years pay to.


Ant. Well remembered; And did I seem so young and amiable to ye?

Lieu. Methought you were the sweetest youth --

Ant. That Is excellent.

Lieu. I truly Sir: and ever as I thought on ye, I wished, and wished --

Ant. What did thou wish prithee?

Lieu. Lv'n, that I had been a Wench of Fifteen for ye, a handsome Wench Sir.


Ant. Why? God a Mercy Soldier: I seem not so now to thee.

Lieu. Not all out: and yet I have a grudging to your Grace still.

Ant. Thou wast never in love before.

Lieu. Not with a King, and hope I shall never be again: Truly Sir, I have had
such plunges, and such bickrings, and as it were such runnings atilt within me,
for whatsoever it was provoked me toward ye.


Ant. God a-mercy still

Lieu. I had it with a vengeance, it played his prize.

Ant. I would not have been a wench then, though of this age.

Lieu. No sure, I should have spoiled ye.

Ant. Well, go thy ways, of all the lusty lovers that e're I saw -- wilt have
another potion?


Lieu. If you will be another thing, have at ye.

Ant. Ha, ha, ha: give me thy hand, from henceforth thou art my soldier, do
bravely, I Will love thee as much.


Lieu. I thank ye; but if you were mine enemy, I would not wish it ye: I
beseech your Grace, pay me my charge.


2 Gent. That Is certain Sir; h'as bought up all that e're he found was like ye,
or any thing you have loved, that he could purchase; old horses, that your
Grace has ridden blind, and foundr'd; dogs, rotten kawks, and which is more
than all this, has worn your Graces Gauntlet in his Bonnet.


Ant. Bring in your Bills: mine own love shall be satisfied; and sarrah, for
this potion you have taken, I Will point ye out a portion ye shall live on.


Men. 'Twas the best draught that e're ye drunk.

Lieu. I hope so.

Ant. Are the Princes come toth' Court?

Men. They are all, and lodged Sir.

Ant. Come then, make ready for their entertainment, which presently we will give:
wait you on me Sir.


Lieu. I shall love drink the better whilst I live boys.

Scaene 3.
Enter Demetrius, and Leontius. Them. Let me but see her, dear Leontius; let me
but dye before her.

Leo. Would that would do it: if I knew where she lay now, with what honesty,
you having flung so main a mischief on her, and on so innocent and sweet a
Beauty, dare I present your visit?


Them. I Will repent all: and with the greatest sacrifice of sorrow, that ever
Lover made.


Leo. 'Twill be too late Sir: I know not what will become of you.

Them. You can help me?

Leo. It may be to her sight: What are you nearer? She has Sworn she will not
speak to ye, look upon ye, and to Love ye again, O she cries out, and thunders,
she had rather love -- there is no hope --


Them. Yes (...), there is a hope, which though it draw no Love to it, at least
will draw her to lament my fortune, and that hope shall relieve me.


Leo. Hark ye Sir, hark ye: say I should bring ye --

Them. Do not trifle with me?

Leo. I will not trifle; both together bring ye, you know the wrongs ye' done.


Them. I do confess 'em.

Leo. And if you should then jump into your fury, and have another Querk in
your head.


Them. I Will dye first.

Leo. You must say nothing to her; for it is certain, the nature of your crime
will admit to excuse.


Them. I will not speak, mine eyes shall tell my Penance.

Leo. You must look wondrous sad too.

Them. I need not look so, I am truly sadness self.

Leo. That look will do it: stay here, I Will bring her to you instantly: but
take heed how you bear your self: sit down there, the more humble you are, the
more she will take compassion. Women are per'lous thing to deal upon.


[Exit. Them. What shall become of me? to curse my fortune were but to curse my
Father; that is too impious; but under whatsoever fate I suffer, bless I beseech
thee, Heaven, her harmless goodness.

Enter Leontius, and Celia.
Leo. Now arm your self.

Cel. You have not brought him?

Leo. Yes Faith, and there he is: you see in what poor plight too, now you may
do your will, kill him, or save him.


Cel. I will go back.

Leo. I will be hanged then Lady, Are ye a Coward now?

Cel. I cannot speak to him.

Them. O me.

Leo. There was a Sigh to blow a Church down; So, now their eyes are fixed, the
Small-shot plays, they will come toth' Battery anon.


Cel. He weeps extremely.

Leo. Rail at him now.

Cel. I dare not.

Leo. I am glad on it.

Cel. Nor dare believe his Tears.

Them. You may, blessed Beauty, for those thick streams that troubled my
Repentance, are crept out long ago.


Leo. You see how he looks.

Cel. What have I to do how he looks? How looked he then, when with a poisoned
Tooth he bit mine honor? It was your Counsel too, to scorn and slight him.


Leo. I, if ye saw sit cause; and you confessed too, except this sin, he was the
bravest Gentleman, the sweetest, noblest. I take nothing from ye, nor from your
anger; use him as you please: for to say truth, he has deserved your Justice;
but still consider what he has been to you.


Cel. Pray do not blind me thus.

Them. O Gentle Mistress, If there were any way to expiate a sin so great as
mine, by intercession, by prayers, by daily tears, by dying for ye: O what a
joy would close these eyes that love ye.


Leo. They say Women have tender hearts, I know not, I am sure mine melts.


Cel. Sir, I forgive ye heartily,
And all your wrong to me I cast behind me,
And wish ye a sit beauty to your Virtues:
Mine is too poor, in peace I thus part from you:
I must look back: gods keep your grace: he is here still.
[Exit.
Them. She has forgiven me.

Leo. She has directed ye: Up, up, and follow like a Man: away Sir, She looked
behind her twice: her heart dwells here Sir, ye drew tears from her too: she
cannot freeze thus; the Door's set open too, Are ye a Man? are ye alive? Do ye
understand her meaning? Have ye blood and spirit in ye?


Them. I dare not trouble her.

Leo. Nay, and you will be nipt in the head with nothing,
Walk whining up and down; I dare not, I cannot:
Strike now or never: faint heart, you know what Sir --
Be governed by your fear, and quench your fire out.
A Devil on it, stands this door open for nothing?
So get ye together, and be naught: now to secure all,
Will I go fetch out a more sovereign Plaster.

[Exeunt. Scaene 4.
Enter Antigonus, Seleucus, Lysimachus, Ptolomy, Lieutenant, Gentlemen, Lords.
Ant. This peace is fairly made.

Seleu. Would your Grace wish us to put in more: take what you please, we yield
it; the honor done us by your Son constrains it, your noble Son.


Ant. It is sufficient, Princes; and now we are one again, one mind, one body,
and one sword shall strike for us.


Lys. Let Prince Demetrius but lead us on: for we are his vowed servants;
against the strength of all the World we'll buckle.


Ptol. And even from all that strength we'll catch at Victory.

Sell. O had I now recovered but the fortune I lost in Antioch, when mine Uncle
perished; but that were but to surfeit me with blessings.


Lys. You lost a sweet Child there.

Sell. Name it no more Sir; this is no time to entertain such sorrows; Will your
Majesty do us the honor, we may see the Prince, and wait upon him?


Ant. I wonder he stays from us: [ Enter Leon.
How now Leonitus, Where Is my Son?

Sell. Brave Captain.

Lys. Old valiant Sir.

Leo. Your Graces are welcome: your son and't please you Sir, is new cashiered
yonder, cast from his Mistress favor: and such a coil there is; such fending,
and such proving; she stands off, and will by no means yield to composition: he
offers any price; his body to her.


Sell She is a hard Lady, denies that caution.

Leo. And now they whine, and now they rave: faith Princes, 'twere a good point
of charity to piece 'em; for less than such a power will do just nothing: and
if you mean to see him, there it must be, for there will he grow, till he be
transplanted.


Sell. Beseech your grace, let us wait upon you thither, that I may see that
beauty dares deny him, that scornful beauty.


Ptol. I should think it worse now; ill brought up beauty.

Ant. She has too much reason sor't; which with too great a grief, I shame to
think of, but we'll go see this game.


Lys. Rather this wonder.

Ant. Be you our guide Leontius, here is a new peace.

Exit. Scaene 5.
Enter Demetrius and Celia. Cel. Thus far you shall persuade me, still to
honor ye, still to live with ye, Sir, or near about ye; for not to lie, you
have my first and last love but since you have conceived an evil against me, an
evil that so much concerns your honor, that honor aimed by all at for a
pattern: and though there be a false thought, and confessed too, and much
repentance fallen in showrs to purge it; yet, whilst that great respect I ever
bore ye, dwells in my blood, and in my heart that duty; had it but been a
dream, I must not touch ye.


Them. O you will make some other happy?

Cel. Never, upon this hand I Will seal that faith.

Them. We may kiss, put not those out of the peace too.

Cel. Those I Will give ye, so there you will be pleased to pitch your (...)
ultra, I will be merry with ye; sing, discourse with ye, be your poor Mistress
still: in truth I love ye.

Enter Leontius, Antigonus, (...), Lysimachus, Ptolomie, Lieutenant, and
Gentleman.
Them. Stay, who are these?

Lys. A very handsome Lady.

Leo. As (...) you saw.

Sell. Pity her heart's so cruel.

Lys. How does your Grace? he stands still, will not hear us.

Ptol. We come to serve ye, Sir, in all our fortunes.

Lys. He bows a little now; he is strangely altered.

Sell. Ha? pray ye a word Leontius, pray a word with ye, Lysimachus? you both
knew mine Enanthe, I lost in Antioch, when the Town was taken, mine Uncle
slain, Antigonus had the sack on it?


Lys. Yes, I remember well the Girl.

Sell. Methinks now that face is wondrous like her: I have her picture, the
same, but more years on her; the very same.


Lys. A Cherry to a Cherry is not liker.

Sell. Sook on her eyes.

Leo. Most certain she is like her: many a time have I dandled her in these
arms, Sir, and I hope who will more.


Ant. What Is that ye look at, Princes?

Sell. This Picture, and that Lady, Sir.

Ant. Ha! they are near: they only err in time.

Lys. Did you mark that blush there? that came the nearest.

Sell. I must speak to her.

Leo. You Will quickly be resolved.

Sell. Your name sweet Lady?

Cel. Enanthe, Sir: and this to beg your blessing.

Sell. Do you know me?

Cel. If you be the King Seleucus, I know you are my Father.

Sell. Peace a little, where did I lose ye?

Cel. At the Sack of Antioch, where my good Uncle died, and I was taken, by a
mean Soldier taken: by this Prince, this noble Prince, redeemed from him
again, where ever since I have remained his Servant.


Sell. My joys are now too full: welcome Enanthe, mine own, my dearest, and my
best Enanthe.


Them. And mine too desperate.

Sell. You shall not think so, this is a peace indeed.

Ant. I hope it shall be, and ask it first.

Cel. Most Royal Sir, ye have it.

Them. I once more beg it thus.

Sell. You must not be denied, Sir.

Cel. By me, I am sure he must not: sure he shall not; kneeling I give it too;
kneeling I take it; and from this hour, no envious spite e're part us.


All. The gods give happy joys; all comforts to ye.

Them. My new Enanthe.

Ant. Come, beat all the Drumes up, and all the noble instruments of War: let
'em sill all the Kingdom with their sounds: and those the brazen Arch of Heaven
break through, while to the Temple we conduct these two.


Leo. May they be ever loving, ever young, and ever worthy of those lines they
sprung; may their fair issues walk with time along.


(...). And hang a Coward now; and there is my song.
Exeunt
FINIS.

