THE ISLAND PRINCESS: OR THE Generous Portugal.

A Comedy.

As it is Acted at the Theater Royal by His MAJESTY'S Servants.

With the Alterations and New Additional Scenes.

Licensed May 31. 1669.

Roger L'Estrange.

LONDON,^rinted for H. R. and A. M. and are to be sold by William Cademan at
the Popes Head in the Lower walk of the New Exchange, and Robert Pask at the
Stationers Arms and Ink-bottle under Pinners Hall in Winchesterstreet by
Gresham-Colledge. 1669.

THE PROLOGUE:
WIt is become an Antic, and puts on
As many shapes of variation,
To Court the times applause, as the times dare
Change several fashions, nothing is thought rare
Which is not new and followed, yet we know,
That which was worn some thirty years ago,
May come in grace again, and we pursue
That (...), by presenting to your view,
A Play in fashion then, not doubting now
But 'twill appear the same, if you allow
Worth to their Noble memory, whose names
Beyond all power of Death, live in their fames.
The Actors Names.
King Mr. Kenniston. Armusia Mr. Heart. Rudyas Mr. Moon. Christophero Mr. Bell.
Emanuel Mr. Beeston. Soza Mr. Burt. Pyniero Mr. Shotterel. Pedro Mr. Harris.
Governor Mr. Cartrite. Bakam Mr. Watson. Syana Mr. Grayden. Captain of the
Guard Mr. Lydall. Three Keepers.
Women
Quisara Mrs. Marshall. Quisana Mrs. Corey. Panura Mrs. Hughs.
Guards and Attendants.

THE Island Princess.
Actus primus. Scena prima.
A Bell Rings. Enter Pymero, Christophero, and Pedro. Pym. OPen the Ports, and
see the Watch relieved,
And let the Guard be careful of their business;
Their viligant eyes fixed on these Islanders,
They are false and desperate people, When they find
The least occasion open to encouragement,
Cruel and crafty Souls, believe me Gentlemen,
Their late attempt, which is too fresh amongst us,
In which against all Arms and Honesty,
The Governor of Ternata made surprise
Of our confederate, the King of Tedore,
As for his recreation, he was rowing
Between both Lands, bids us be wise and circumpect.

Chr. It was a mischief suddenly imagined,
And soon done; that Governor's a fierce Knave,
Unfaithful, as he is fierce too, there is no trusting;
But I wonder much how such poor and base pleasures,
As tugging at an oar, or skill in steerage
Should become Princes.

Pym. Base breeding love base pleasures;
They take as much delight in a Barratto,
A little scurvy boat to row her tightly,
And has the art to run and wind her nimbly,
Think it as noble too, though it be slavish,
And a dull labor that declines a Gentleman:
As we Portugals, or the Spaniards do in riding,
In managing a great Horse which is Princely:
The French in Courtship, or the dancing English,
In carrying a fair presence.

Ped. He was strangely taken;
But where no faith is, there is no trust; he has paid for it,
His Sister yet the fair and great Quisara,
Has showed a noble mind, and much love in it
To her afflicted Brother, and the nobler it appears,
And seasons of more tenderness, because his ruin styles her absolute,
And his imprisonment adds to her profit,
Feeling all this which makes men admire her,
The warm beams of this fortune that fall on her,
Yet has she made diverse and noble Treatises
And propositions for her Brothers freedom,
If wealth or honor --

Pym. Peace, peace, you are fooled, Sir;
She is a Princess, and she must be fair,
That Is the perogative of being Royal:
Why, all the neighbor Princes are mad of her.

Chr. Is she not fair then?

Pym. But her hopes are fairer,
And there is a haughty Master, the King of Bokam
That lofty Sir, that speaks far more, and louder
In his own commendations, than a Cannon:
He is stricken dumb with her.

Ped. Beshrew me, she is a sweet one,

Pym. And there is that hopeful man of Syana,
That spritely fellow, he that is wise and temperate,
He is a lover too.

Chr. Would I were worth her looking
For; by my life, I hold here a worthy Lady,
The very Sun, I think, affects her sweetness,
And dares not, as he does to all else, dye'it
Into its tauny Livery.

Pym. She dares not see him,
But keeps her self at distance,
But the main sport on it is, or rather wonder
The Governor of (...), her mortal enemy,
He that has caught her Brother King, is struck too,
And (...) arrived under (...) conduct also,
And hostage of worth delivered for him;
And he brought a Letter from his prisoner,
Whether compelled, or willingly delivered
From the poor Knight, or what else dare be in it.

Chr. So it be honorable, any thing, it is all one,
For I dare think, she will do the best.

Pym. It Is certain
He (...) admittance and solicits hourly
Now (...) (...) have the trick --

Ped. What trick?

Pym. (...) true one
To take her too,

I guess her stout and virtuous,
But where is your Uncle, Sir, our valiant Captain,
That brave Ruy Dias all this while?
Pym. I marry,
He is amongst them too.

Ped. A Lover.

Pym. Nay,
I know not that, but sure he stands in favor.

Chr. The voice says, in good favor, in the list too
Of the privy woers, how cunningly of late
I have observed him and how privately
He has stolen at hours from us, and how readily
He has fained a business to bid the Fort farewell
For five or six days, or a month together,
Sure there is some thing --

Pym. Yes, yes, there is a thing in it,
A thing, would make the best of us all dance after it,
A dainty thing; Lord, how this Uncle of mine
Has read to me and rated to me for wenching,
And told me in what desperate case 'twould leave me,
And how 'twould stew my bones.

Ped. You cared not for it,

Pym. I faith, not much, I ventured on still easily,
And took my chance, danger is a Soldiers honor.

Ped. Well, it is a noble Gentleman,
And if he be a suitor, may he speed in it.

Pym. Let him alone, our Family never failed yet.

Chr. Our mad Leivtenant still merry Pymero,
Thus would he do, if the Surgeon were searching of him.

Ped. Especially if a warm wench had shot him.

Pym. But hark, Christophero, come hither, Pedro;
When saw you our brave Countreyman Armusia?
He that is arrived here lately and his Gallants?
A goodly fellow, and a brave companion
Methinks he is, and no doubt truly valiant;
For he that dares come hither, dare fight any where.

Chr. I saw him not of late, a sober Gentleman
I am sure he is, and no doubt bravely sprung,
And promises much nobleness.

Pym. I love him,
And by my troth would fain be inward with him;
Pray lets go seek him.

Ped. We Will attend you, Sir.

Pym. By that time we shall hear the Burst of business.
[Ex.
Enter Ruy Dias, Quisara, Quisana, and Panura. Qui. Aunt, I must thank for your
courtesy,
And the fair liberty you still allow me,
Both of your house and service, though I be
A Princess, and by that Perogative stand free
From the poor malice of opinion,
And no ways bound to render up my actions,
Because no power above me can examine me;
Yet my dear Brother being still a prisoner,
And many wandering eyes upon my ways,
Being left alone, as a mark, it behooves me
To use a little caution, and be circumpect.

Quisan. You are wise and noble, Lady,

Quisar. Often, Aunt
I resort hither, and privately to see you,
It may be to converse with some I favor;
I would not have it known as often, nor consir'd,
It stands not with my care.

Quisan. You speak most fairly
For even our pure Devotions are examined.

Quisar. So mad are men's minds now.

Ruy. Or rather Monsterous;
They are thick dreams bred in fogs that know no fairness.

Quisan. Madam, the House is yours, I am yours, pray use them,
At your service, all I have lies prostrate,
My care shall ever be to yield ye honor,
And when your fame falls here, it is my fall, Lady;
A poor and simple banquet I have provided,
Which if you please to honor with your presence --

Quisar. I thank you, Aunt, I shall be with you instantly,
A few words with this Gentleman.

Quisan. I Will leave ye. [Exeunt Quis. and Pan.
And when you please, retire, I Will wait upon you.

Quisar. Why how now, Captain, what, afraid to speak to me?
A man of Arms, and daunted with a Lady?
Commanders have the power to parle with Princes.

Ruy. Madam, the favors you have still showered on me,
Which are so high above my means of merit,
So infinite that naught can value them
But their own goodness,
You are my royal Mistress,
And all my services that aim at honor,
Take life from you, the Saint of my Devotions;
I would I were of worth of some thing near you,
Of such a royal piece, a King I would be,
A mighty King that (...) (...) affection,
And bring a Youth upon me that might bewitch ye,
And you a sweet (...) Christian.

Quisar. Now you talk, Sir;
You Portugals, though you be rugged Soldiers,
Yet when you list to flatter, you are plain Courtiers;
And could you wish me Christian, brave Ruy Dias?

Ruy. At all the dangers of my life, great Lady, at all my hopes, at all --

Quisar. Pray stay a little,
To what end runs your wish?

Ruy. O Madam,
That I might -- but I dare not speak.

Quisar. I (...) then
(...) you might (...) to marry (...) (...) blush not,
An (...) end needs no excuse,
And (...) you love me then?

Ruy. My soul not dearer.

Quisar. Do some brave thing that may entice me that way,
Some thing of such a meritoriou, goodness,
Of such an unmatcht nobleness, that I may know
You have a power beyond yours, that preserves you,
It Is not the person, nor the Royal Title,
Nor wealth, nor glory, that I look upon,
That inward man I love, that is lined with virtue,
That well deserving Soul works out a favor;
I have many Princes suitors, many Great Ones,
Yet above these I love you, you are valiant,
An active man, able to build a fortune;
I do not say, I dote, nor mean to marry,
Only the hope is, something may be done,
That may compel my faith, and ask my freedom,
And leave opinion fair.

Ruy. Command, dear Lady,
And let the danger be as deep as Hell,
As dreadful to attempt --

Quisar. You Are too sudden,
I must be ruled by you, find out a fortune
Wisely, and handsomely, examine time,
And court occasion, that she may be ready;
A thousand uses for your forward (...)
Ye may find (...), be sure ye take a good one,
A brave and worthy one, that may advance ye
Forced smiles reward poor dangers; you are a Soldier;
I would not talk so else, and I love a Soldier,
And that, that speaks him true, and great, his valor;
Yet for all these, which are but woman's follies,
You may do what you please, I shall still know ye,
And though ye wear no Sword.

Ruy. Excellent Lady
When I grow so cold, and disgrace my Nation,
'Twere sit I wore a Tombstone; you have read to me
The story of your favor, if I mistake it
Or grow truant in the study of it,
A great correction, Lady. --

Quisar. Let Us to the banquet,
And have some merrier talk, and then to the Court
Where I give audience to my general suitors;
Pray Heaven, my woman's wits hold; there brave Captain,
You may perchance meet some thing that may startle ye;
I Will say no more, come be not sad --
I love ye.
[Exeunt.
Enter Pymero, Armusia, Soza, Christophero, and Emanuel. Pym. You are welcome
Gentlemen, most worthy welcome,
And know there is nothing in our power may serve you,
But you may freely challenge.

Arm. Sir, we thank ye,
And rest your Servants too.

Pym. Brave Armusia,
You never saw the Court before?

Arm. No certain,
But that I see a wonder too, all excellent,
The Government exact.

Chr. Ye shall see anon,
That that will make ye start indeed, such beauties,
Such riches and such form.

Enter Bakam, Syana, Governor. Soz. We are fire already,
The wealthy magazine of nature, sure
Inhabits here.

Arm. These sure are all Islanders.

Pym. Yes, and great Princes too, and lusty Lovers.

Arm. They are goodly persons, what might he be, Signior,
That bears so proud a state.

Pym. King of Bakam,
A fellow that farts terror.

Em. He looks highly,
Sure he was begot o'th top of a Steeple.

Pym. That is Syana,
A brave tempered fellow, and more valiant.

Soz. What rugged face is that?

Pym. That Is the great Governor,
The man surprised our friend, I told you of him.

Arm. 'Has dangerous eyes.

Pym. A perilous thief, and subtle.

Chr. And to that subtility, a heart of Iron.

Pym. Yet the young Lady makes it melt.

Arm. They start all
And thunder in the eyes.

Ba. Away you poor ones,
Am I in competition with such bubbles?
My virtue, and my name ranked with such trifles?

Sy. Ye speak loud.

Ba. Young man I will speak louder;
Can any man but I, deserve her favor,
You petty Princes?

Pym. He will put 'em all in his pocket.
[Princes fly at one another.
Sy. Thou proud mad thing, be not so full of glory.
So full of vanity.

Ba. How? I contemn thee,
And that Fort-keeping fellow.

Pym. How the dog looks,
The bandog Governor?

Gov. Ha? why.

Ba. Away thing
And keep your range with those that fit your royalty;
Call out the Princess.

Gov. Do thou know me, bladder,
Thou insolent imposthume?

Ba. I despise thee.

Gov. Art thou acquainted with my nature, Baby?
Am I so far behind thy file,
I cannot reach thee?
What can thou merit?

Ba. Merit? I am above it;
I am equal with all honors, with all achievements,
And what is great and worthy the best doer
I keep at my command, fortunes my Servant,
It Is in my power now to despise `those wretches,'
To look upon ye slightly, and neglect ye,
And people have bestowed some titles on ye,
I should forget your names --

Sy. Mercy of me;
What a blown fool has self-affection
Made of this fellow. Did not the Queen your Mother
Long for bellows and bag-pipes when she was great with ye,
She brought forth such a windy birth?

Gov. It Is ten to one,
She cat a Drum, and was delivered of Alarm,
Or else he was swadled in an old Sail, when he was young.

Sy. He swells too, mainly with his meditations;
Faith talk a little handsomer, ride softly
That we may be able to hold way with ye, we are Princes,
But those are but poor things to you; talk wiser, as
'Twill well become your mightiness; talk less,
That men may think you can do more.

Gov. Talk truth, that men may think you are honest, and believe ye,
Or talk your self asleep, for I am weary of you.

Ba. Why? I can talk and do.

Gov. That would do excellent.

Ba. And tell you, only I do deserve the Princess,
And make good only I, if you dare, you Sir,
Or your Syana's Prince.

Pym. Here Is a storm toward,
Methinks it sings already, to him, Governor.

Gov. Here lies my proof.

Sy. And mine.

Gov. I Will be short with ye,
For these long arguments
I was never good at.

Pym. How white the boaster looks!

Enter Ruy Dias, Quisara, Quisana, Panura. Arm. I see he lacks faith.

Ruy. For shame forbear great Princess, rule your angers,
You violate the freedom of this place,
The state and royalty --

Gov. He Is well contented it seems, and so I have done.

Arm. Is this she, Seignour?

Pym. This is the Princess, Sir.

Arm. She is sweet and goodly,
An admirable form, they have cause to justle.

Quisar. Ye wrong me and my Court, ye forward (...),
Comes your love wrapped in violence to seek us?
1s't fit, though you be great, my presence should be
Stained and polluted with your bloody rages?
My privacy's afrighted with your Swords?
He that loves me, loves my command; be tempered
Or be no more, what ye profess, my Servants.

Omnes. We are calm, as peace.

Arm. What command she carries?
And what a sparkling Majesty flies from her?

Quisar. Is it ye love to do? Ye shall find danger,
And danger that shall start your resolutions,
But not this way; it is not contention,
Who loves me to my face best, or who can flatter most
Can carry me, he that deserves my honor,
And will enjoy what I bring, love and Majesty,
Must win me with his worth; must travel for me,
Must put his hasty rage off, and put on
A well confirmed, temperate and true valor.

Omnes. But show the way.

Quisar. And will, and then show you
A will to tread the way, I Will say ye are worthy.

Pym. What task now
Will she turn them to? These hot youths
I fear will find a cooling card; I read in her eyes
Some thing that has some swing, must fly amongst'em,
By this hand, I love her a little now.

Quisar. It Is not unknown to you.
I had a royal brother, now miserable,
A prisoner to that man, if I were ambitious
Gaped for that glory was never born with me,
Their they should lie, as miseries upon him:
If (...) were covetous and my heart set
On riches, and those base effects that follow
On pleasures, uncontrolled, or safe revenges,
There he should die, his death would give me all these,
For then stood I up absolute, to do all;
Yet all these flattering shows of Dignity,
These golden dreams of greatness cannot force
To forget nature and my fair affections,
Therefore that man that would be known my lover,
Must be known his redeemer, and must bring him
Either alive or dead to my embraces,
For even his bones I scorn should feel such slavery,
Or seek another mistress, 'twill be hard
To do this, wondrous hard, a great adventure,
Fit for a Spirit of an equal greatness;
But being done, the reward is worthy of it.

Chr. How they stand gaping all.

Quisar. Ruy Dias could
Not fly like fire into it? May be you doubt me,
He that shall do this, is my Husband, Prince,
By the bright Heavens, he is, by whose Justice
I openly proclaim it; if I lie
Or seek to set you on with subtility,
Let that meet with me and reward my falsehood.
No stirring yet, no start into a bravery?

Ruy. Madam, it may be, but being a main danger,
Your Grace must give me leave to look about me,
And take a little time, the cause will ask it,
Great Acts require great Counsels.

Quisar. Take your pleasure,
I fear the Portugal.

Ba. I Will raise an Army,
That shall bring back his Island, Fort and all,
And fix it here.

Gov. How long will this be doing?
You should have begun in your Grandfathers days.

Sy. What may be,
And what my power can promise, noblest Lady,
My will I am sure stands fair.

Quisar. Fair be you fortune,
Few promises are best, and fair performances.

Gov. These cannot do,
Their power and Arts are weak ones,
It Is in my will I have this King your Brother,
He is my prisoner, I accept your prisoner,
And bless the fair occasion that achieved him:
I love ye, and I honor ye, but speak
Whether alive or dead, he shall be rendered,
And see how ready, how in an instant,
Quick as you wish, Lady.

Quisar. No, I scorn ye,
You, and your Country, I hate your love, Sir;
And ere I would so basely win his Liberty,
I would study to forget he was my Brother;
By force he was taken, he that shall enjoy me,
Shall fetch him back by force, or never know me.

Pym. As I live, a rare wench.

Arm. She has a noble Spirit.

Gov. By force?

Quisar. Yes Sir, by force; and make you glad
To let him go.

Gov. How? You may look nobler on me,
And think me no such boy; by force he must not,
For your love much may be.

Quisar. Put up your passion,
And pack ye home, I say by force and suddenly,
He lies there till he rots else, although I love him
Most tenderly and dearly, as a Brother,
And out of these respects would joy to see him;
Yet to receive him as thy courtesy,
With all the honor thou can add unto him,
From his hands that most hate him, I had rather
Though no condition were propounded for him,
See him (...) sunk in the earth and there forget him.

Pym. Your hopes are gelt good Governor.

Arm. A rare woman.

Gov. Lady,
I Will pull this pride, I Will quench this bravery,
And turn your glorious scorn to tears and howling;
I will, proud Princess; thy neglect of me
Shall make thy brother King most miserable;
Shall turn him into curse against thy cruelty:
For where before I used him like a King,
And did those royal Offices unto him,
Now he shall ye a sad lump in a Dungeon
Laden with Chains and Fetters, cold and hunger,
Darkness and lingering Death for his Companions;
And let me see, who dare attempt his rescue,
What desperate fool looks toward it? farewell,
And when thou know him thus lament thy follies,
Nay, I will make thee kneel to take my offers:
Once more, farewell, and put thy trust in Puppits.

Quisar. If none dare undertake it, l'le live a mourner.
[Ex.
Ba. You cannot want.

Sy. You must not.

Ruy. It Is most dangerous,
And wise men would proceed with care and counsel,
Yet some way would I know --
Walk with me, Gentlemen --
[(...) Manent, Arm. and his Camp.
Arm. How do you like her Spirit?

Soz. It is a clear one,
Clad with no dirty stuff, she is all pure honor.

Em. The bravest (...) (...) looked upon,
And of the strongest parts, she is most fair,
Yet her mind such a mirror --

Arm. What an action
Would this be to put forward one, what a glory,
And what an everlasting (...) to end it?
Methinks my soul is strangely raised.

Soz. To step into it (...) (...)
Just while they think, and ever they have determined
To bring the King off.

Arm. Things have been done as dangerous.

Em. And prosper'd best, when they were least considered.

Arm. Bless me, my hopes,
And you my friends assist me,
None but our Companions?

Soz. You deal wisely,
And if we shrink, the name of slaves die with us.

Em. Stay not for second thoughts.

Arm. I am determined,
And though I lose, it shall be sung, I was (...),
And my brave offer shall be turned to Story,
(...) the Princess tongue about that is all,
And that is unprovided and habit like to Merchants,
The rest we will counsel as we go.

Soz. Away then,
Fortune looks fair on those make have to win her.

Armus. A private Person to Redeem a King,
Will to thy Name, and Nation honor bring;
The Danger's great, but such a Noble prize,
Who hopes to win, all Danger must despise.
Exeunt.
Actus secundus. Scena prima.
Enter Keeper and two or three Moors. Keep. I have kept many a man, and many a
great one,
Yet I confess, I never saw before
A man of such a sufferance; he lies now
Where I would not lay my dog, for sure 'twou'd kill him,
Where neither light nor comfort can come near him;
Nor air, nor earth that is wholesome; it grieves me
To see a mighty King with all his glory,
Sunk (...) sudden to the bottom of a Dungeon.
Whether should we descend that are poor rascals
If we had our deserts?

1 Mo. It Is a strange wonder,
Load him with Irons, oppress him with contempts,
Which are the Governors command, give him nothing,
Or so little to sustain life, it is next to nothing,
They stir not him, he smiles upon his miseries,
And bears 'em with such strength, as if his nature
Had been nursed up and fostered with calamities.

2. He gives no ill word, curses, nor repines not,
Blames nothing, hopes in nothing we can hear of;
And in the midst of all these frights, fears nothing.

Keep. I Will be sworn
He fears not, for when I even shake for him,
As many times my pity will compel me,
When other souls that bear not half his burden
Shrink in their powers, and burst with their oppressions,
Then will he sing, woo his afflictions,
And court 'em in sad airs, as if he would wed'em.

1. That Is more than we have heard yet, we are only
Appointed for his Guard, but not so near him,
If we could hear that wonder --

Keep. Many times
I fear the Governor, should come to know it;
For his voice so affects me, so delights me,
That when I find his house, I have music ready,
And it stirs me infinitely.

King appears laden with Chains, his Head, Arms, only above. 2. This is a
sudden change, but who dares blame it.
What (...) weight of Chains,

1. Yet he looks temperately.

2. His eyes not sunk, and his complexion firm still
No Wilderness, no distempered touch upon him,
How constantly he smiles, and how undaunted?
With what a Majesty he heaves his head up.
[Musick.
Keep. Do not disturb him.
Your allowance from the Governor, would it were more, Sir,
Or in my power to make it handsomer.

King. Do not transgress thy charge, I take his bounty,
And fortune whilst I bear a mind contented,
Not leavened with the glory I am fallen from,
Nor hang upon vain hopes that may corrupt me.

Enter Governor. Gov. Thou art my slave, and I appear above thee.

Keep. The Governor himself.

Gov. What at your Banquet?
And in such State, and with such change of Service?

King. Nature's no Glutton, Sir, a little serves her.

Gov. This diet's wholesome then.

King. I beg no better.

Gov. A calm contented mind; give him less next;
These full meals will oppress his health, his Grace
Is of a tender and pure constitution.

King. Mock, mock, it moves not me, Sir,
Thy mirths, as do thy mischiefs fly behind me.

Gov. Ye carry it handsomely, but tell me Patience,
Do you not curse the brave and royal Lady,
Your gracious Sister? do not you damn her pity,
Damn twenty times a day, and damn it seriously?
Could not thou wish her
A Bastard, or a Whore,
Or that thou had had no Sister,
Spitting the general name out, and the nature,
(...) Heaven for making such a mischief;
For giving power to Pride, and Will to Woman?

King. No, Tyrant, no, I bless and love her for it;
And though her scorn of thee, had laid up for me
As many plagues, as the corrupted Air breeds,
As many mischiefs, as the hours have minutes,
As many forms of Death, as doubt can figure;
Yet I should love her more still, and more honor her;
All thou can lay upon me, cannot bend me,
No not the stroke of Death; that I despise too:
For if fear could possess me, thou had won me;
And if she be not Mistress of this nature,
She is none of mine, no kin, and I contemn her.

Gov. Are you valiant, Sir?

King. Yes, and so fortunate;
For he that holds my constancy, still conquers;
Had thou preserved me, as a noble Enemy,
And as at first, made my restraint seem to me
But only as the shadow of captivity,
I had still spoke thee noble, still declared thee
A valiant, great, and worthy man, still loved thee,
And still preferred thy fair love to my Sister;
But to compel this from me with a misery,
A most inhumane and unhandsome slavery.

Gov. You will relent for all this talk, I fear not,
And put your wits a work again.

King. You are cozened,
Or if I were so weak to be wrought to it,
So fearful to give way to so much poverty,
How I should curse her heart, if she consented.

Gov. You shall write and entreat, or --

King. Do thy utmost,
And e'ne in all thy tortures I Will laugh at thee,
I Will think thee, no more valiant, but a Villain,
Nothing thou have done brave, but like a thief,
Achieved by craft, and kept by cruelty.

Gov. Down with him low enough, there let him murmr,
And see his diet be so light and little,
He grow not thus high hearted on it, I will cool ye,
Give him no Liberty,
But let his Bands be doubled, his (...) (...);
Nothing his heart desires, but vex and torture him,
Let him not sleep, nothing that is dear to nature
Let him enjoy; yet take heed that he dies not;
Keep him, as near death, and as willing to embrace it,
But see he arrive not at it; I will humble him,
And her stout heart that stands on such defiance;
And let me see her Champions that (...) venture,
Her high and mighty wooers, keep your Guards close,
And as you love your lives, be diligent,
And what I charge, observe.

Omnes. We shall be dutiful.
[Exeunt.
Enter Armusia, Soza, Emanuel, like Merchants, Armed underneath. Arm. Our
prosperous passage was an Omen to us,
A lucky and a fair Omen.

Omnes. We believe it.

Arm. The Sea and Wind strove, who should most defend us,
And as they favored our design, and loved us,
So led us forth -- where lies the boat that brought's.

Soz. Safe lodged within the Reeds, close by the Castle,
That no eye can suspect, nor thoughts come near it.

Em. But where have you been, brave Sir?

Ar. I have begun the game, fair fortune guide it,
Suspectless have I traveled all the Town through,
And in this Merchants shape won much acquaintance,
Surveyed each strength and place that may befriend us,
Viewed all his magazins, got perfect knowledge
Of the prison, yes, and what power guards it.

Soz. These will be strange attempts.

Arm. Courage is strong:
What we began with policy, my dear friends,
Let Us end with manly force; there is no retiring,
Unless it be with shame.

Em. Shame is that hopes it.

Arm. Better a few, and clearer fame will follow us,
However, lose or win: Things done thus,
And of this noble weight will style us worthyes.

Soz. Direct, and we have done, bring us to execute,
And if we flinch or fail --

Arm. I am sure ye dare not,
Then further know, and let no ear be near us
That may be false.

Em. Speak boldly on, we are honest;
Our lives and fortunes yours.

Arm. Hard by the place then
Where all his treasure lies, his Arms, his Women,
Close by the Prison too, where he keeps the King,
I have hired a Lodging, as a trading Merchant,
A Cellar to that too, to Stow my wares in,
The very wall of which joins to his Storehouse.

Soz. What of all this?

Arm. Ye are dull, if ye apprehend not:
Into that Cellar, elected friends, I have conveyed,
And unsuspected too, that will do it,
That that will make all shake and smoke too.

Em. Ha?

Arm. My thoughts have not been idle, nor my practice:
The fire I brought here with me, shall do something,
Shall break into material flames, and bright ones,
That all the Island shall stand wondering at,
As if they had been struck with a Comet:
Powder is ready, and enough to work it,
No man suspecting what I am, but Merchant:
An hour hence, brave friends, look for the fury,
The fire to light us to our honored purpose,
For by that time 'twill take.

Soz. What are our duties?

Arm. When all are full of fear and fright, the Governor
Out of his wits, then to see flames so imperious,
Ready to turn to ashes, all his Worships,
And all the people there, to stop these ruins,
No man regarding any private Office;
Then fly we to the Prison suddenly,
Here Is one has found the way, and dare direct us.

Em. Then to our Swords and good hearts; I long for it.

Arm. Certain we shall not find much opposition,
But what is, must be forced.

Soz. It Is bravely cast, Sir,
And surely too, I hope.

Arm. If the fire fail not,
And powder hold his nature, some must presently
Upon the first cry of the amazed people
(For nothing will be Marked then, but the miseries)
Be ready with the Boat upon an instant,
And then all is right and fair.

Em. Bless us, dear fortune.

Arm. Let us be worthy of it in our courage,
And fortune must befriend us, come all is sure,
But keep still within sight, when the flames rise,
Let Us meet, and either do, or dye.

Soz. So be it.
[Exeunt.
Enter Governor and Captain. Gov. No Captain for those Troops, we need them
not,
The Town is strong enough to stand their furies;
I would see 'em come and offer to do something,
They are high in words.

Cap. It Is safer, Sir, than doing.

Gov. Do thou think they dare attempt.

Cap. May be, by treaty,
But sure, by force, they will not prove so forward.

Gov. No faith, I warrant thee, they know me well enough,
And know they have no child in hand to play with:
They know my nature too, I have bit some of them,
And to the bones, they have reason to remember me,
It makes me laugh to think how glorious
The fools are in their promise, and how pregnant
Their wits and power are to bring things to pass;
Am not I grown lean with loss of sleep, and care
To prevent these threatenings, Captain?

Cap. You look well, Sir:
Upon my Conscience, you are not like to sicken
Upon any such conceit.

Gov. I hope I shall not:
Well, would I had this wench, for I must have her,
She must be mine; and there is another charge, Captain,
What betwixt love and brawling, I got nothing,
All goes in maintenance --
Hark, what is that, [The train takes.
That noise there, it went with a violence.

Cap. Some old wall, belike Sir,
That has no neighbour-help to hold it up,
Is fallen suddenly.

Gov. I must discard these rascals,
That are not able to maintain their buildings,
They blur the beauty of the Town.
Within
Fire, fire.

Gov. I hear another tune, good Captain,
It comes on fresher still, it is loud and fearful,
Look up into the Town, how bright the air shows;
Upon my life some sudden fire. [ Ex. Capt.
The Bell too? [Bell Rings.
I hear the noise more clear.

Enter Citizen. Cit. Fire, fire.

Gov. Where? where.

Cit. Suddenly taken in a Merchants house, Sir,
Fearful and high it blazes; help good people.

Gov. Pox o'their paper houses, how they smother,
They light, like Candles, how the roar still rises?

Enter Captain. Cap. Your magazins'a fire, Sir, help, help suddenly,
All will be lost, get the people presently;
And all that are your Guard, and all help, all hands, Sir,
Your wealth, your strength is burnt else, the Town perished,
The Castle now begins to flame.

Gov. My soul shakes.

Cap. A Merchant's house next joining? Shame light on him.
That ever such a Neighbor, such a Villain --

Gov. Go raise all the Garrison, and bring them up.

Enter other Citizens. And beat the people forward -- Oh I have lost all
In one house, all my hopes, good worthy Citizens
Follow me all, and all your powers give to me,
I will reward you all, oh cursed fortune --
The flames more: arise still, help, help, Citizens,
Freedom and wealth to him that helps; follow, oh follow,
Fling Wine, or any thing, I Will see it recompensed.
Buckets, more buckets, fire, fire, fire.
[Ex. Omnes. Enter Armusia and his Company. Arm. Let it flame on, a comely
light it gives up
To our discovery.

Soz. Hark, what a merry cry
These Hounds make? forward fairly,
We are not seen in the mist, we are not noted. Away,
Away, now if we lose our fortune --
[Exit.
Enter Captain and Citizens. Cap. Up Soldiers, and deal like men.

Cit. More water, more water, all is consumed else.

Cap. All is gone unless you undertake it straight, your
Wealth too, that must preserve and pay your labor bravely,
Up, up, away.
[ Ex. Cap. and Cit.
Then Enter Armusia and his Company breaking open a Door. Arm. So, thou art
open, keep the way clear
Behind still, now for the place.

Sold. It Is here, Sir.

Arm. Sure, this is it,
Force open the door -- A miserable Creature,
Yet, by his manly face --

[The King discovered. King. Why stare ye on me?
You cannot put on faces to fright me:
In Death, I am a King still, and contemn ye:
Where is that Governor? Methinks his manhood
Should be well pleased to see my Tragedy,
And come to Bath his stern eyes in my sorrows;
I dare him to the sight, bring his scorn with him,
And all his rugged threats, here is a throat, Soldiers,
Come see, who can strike deepest.

Em. Break the Chain there.

King. What does this mean?

Arm. Come, talk of no more Governors,
He has other business, Sir, put your legs forward,
And gather up your courage, like a man,
We Will carry off your head else, we are friends,
And come to give your sorrows (...),

Soz. On bravely;
Delays may lose all again.

Enter Guard. Arm. The Guard.

Soz. Upon 'em.

Arm. Make speedy and sure work:

Em. They fly.

Arm. Up with them, and to the Boat, stand fast, now be speedy,
When this heat's past, we'll sing our History,
Away, like thoughts, sudden as desired friends;
Now sacred change be ours.

Soz. Pray, when we have done, Sir.
[Exeunt.
The Scene is a Town in the second Act. Enter four Townsmen. First. What, is
the fire allaid?


Second. It Is out, it is out, or past the worst, I never wrought so stoutly,
Neighbors, since I was a Man, I have been burnt at both ends, like a Squib: I
lived two long hours in the fire, and at last it got into my Mouth, and broke
out in a great flame at my Northdoor; that had they not clapped in a dozen
Buckets of water upon me, as they did, I had flamed up, and been one of the
seven Stars by this time.


Third. It had been worth sight to have seen the flame break out at his nether
end, he would have made a brave Flambeau.


Second. Well said, Wax-Chandler, thou art in thy own Element.


Fourth. Now you talk of Elements, pray Neighbors, how many Elements are there?


First. Why, there is but one Element, Fool, and that is where the Sun and Moon
dwells, and all their little Prentices.


Second. Well said Shopkeeper, thou art in thy Element too. Do thou call
them Prentices, I have known 'em these threescore years, and sure they are out
of their time by this; or they do not serve by our Charter. Why, there are four
Elements; Water and Malt are two of 'em, and Fire and Brimston the other two.
They have past through me a little too lately, I thank 'em; my Wife, when I was
in the fire, took her leave of me a hundred times, yet I bore up still, and tossed
the Buckets, Boys.


First. We were all mere Martins.

I heard a voice at the latter end of the hurry, or else I dreamed I heard it,
that said Treason.


Second. It might have said Murder too, for many a limb was lost with the fall
of Timber, but still as a House was falling upon me, I stepped into a Chimney,
and there was I safe, quarrelling with the Swallows for Place.


Fourth. I Neighbor, if every man had wrought, as you did, there (...) been
less mischief done.


Second. I remember, you were of those that looked on, and hindered those that
would have wrought.


Fourth. But I stole nothing, Neighbor.


Se. I, those were (...) Rogues, how many thousands' were there, that pretended
to help people to remove their goods, and ran quite away with 'em. If I had but
(...) to search for those Rogues, and to hang 'em when I had done, I should
make the Gallows groan more, than forty Sessions would do.


Third. Neighbor, there were Country Rogues that came in with their Carts, but
were as bad Rogues, as the others.


Second. I, for they pretended to come in Charity, but for all that, would not
carry a load of Goods under five or ten pound. Damned Rogues, the more distress
people were in, the more they exacted, and the higher they set their price.


First. A pox on 'em, there is no Rogue, like the Country Rogue that goes upon
wheels.


Fourth. Yes, your Suburb Rogue, that runs away with the goods of the (...)
without wheels.


Se. If I had my will, I would not leave a Carter unhang'd within twenty miles
of the Town, no, nor any Brother of the wheel for their sakes.


Third. You Will except a Sister of the wheel, I hope, that is Madam Fortune.


Second. No faith, I would (...) her in the first place: First, for making me
poor, and then for making me (...), to (...) my Poverty.


Fourth. By my troth, Neighbor, (...) of them is a sufficient Judgment.


Second. So I (...) it, else I might have been rich with other peoples Goods,
as well as my Neighbors.


First. (...) Neighbor, why should you quarrel with Fortune so?


Second. Why, I will tell you, she dropped a hundred pound (...) the selling,
broke my pate with it, (...) then it fell down into the open street, and
another man ran away with it; there was a Judas trick on her; a pox upon her,
had she no body to put to their shifts, but me; she might have left me a little
wit, that I might have shark't the better for my living, had I not reason to
rail at her, Neighbor, I am not a kin to one foot of Land in the Island.


Fourth. Troth Neighbor, your case is very hard.


Second. I could have been content with my poverty, if she had not made me
honest; or I could have been content with honesty, if she had not made me poor.
But both together, the Devil himself is is not able to live on it.


Third. Why Neighbor, I am poor and yet I make a shift to live.


Second. Why Neighbor, that is because you have no occasion for honesty, what
strange power has this honesty? My Conscience, Neighbors, would give me leave
to plunder, but my honesty will not suffer it.


Third. This honesty, I find, is but a cross-grained thing.


Second. Faith, show me but one man that e're thrived on it and I Will be content
with my share on it. O get me some drink, Neighbors, get me a (...) Tun of
drink, whole Cisterns, for I have four dozen of firebrarnds in my belly, I have
more smoke in my mouth, than would bloat a hundred Herrings.


Third. Come, Neighbor, we will lay you under a Tap, then pull out the Spiggot
and put your mouth to it, and so let the Barrel run through you.


Second. And you shall lie ready at the end of one another to receive it at
second hand, that so it may run through us (...) new River-water through the
wooden Pipes. But come, let us go look after the rest of the Elements, for we
have had enough of Fire and Water.


First. Let us go home and fright our Wives and Children, for we look like
Devils.

Agreed, and since we can get no plunder our selves, lets go into the open
street and rail at them that have.


Enter Governor, Captain, Soldiers and Guard. Gov. The fire's quenched,
Captain, but the mischief hangs still;
The King's redeemed, and gone too, a trick, a damned one:
Oh I am overtaken poorly, tamely.

Cap. Where were the Guard that waited on the prison?

Soul. Most of them slain, yet some escaped, Sir, and they deliver,
They saw a little boat ready to receive him,
And those redeemed him, making such have and fighting,
Fighting beyond the force of men.

Gov. I am lost, Captain,
And all the World will laugh at this; and scorn me:
Count me a heavy sleepy fool, a Coward,
One without courage or common sense.

Soul. He Is gone, Sir,
And put to Sea amain, past our recovery,
Not a Boat ready to pursue; if there were any,
The people stand amazed so at their valor,
And the sudden fright of fire, none knows to execute.

Gov. Oh, I could tear my limbs, and knock my boyish brains out
Against every post I meet; fooled with a fire?

Cap. It was a crasty trick,

Gov. No, I was lazy,
Confident, sluggish lazy, had I but met 'em,
And changed a dozen blows, I had forgiven 'em;
By both these hands held up, and by that brightness
That gilds the World with light; by all your worships,
The hidden ebbs and flows of the blew Ocean,
I will not rest; no mirth shall dwell upon me,
Till I be wholly quit of this dishonor:
Make ready my Barrato's presently,
And what I shall intend --

Cap. We are your Servants.
[Exeunt.
Enter Quisara, Ruy Dias. Quisar. Never tell me, you never cared to win me,
Never for my sake to attempt a deed,
Might draw me to a thought, you sought my favor:
If not, for love of me, for love of Arms, Sir,
For that cause you profess, for love of honor,
Of which you style your self the mighty Master,
You might have stepped out nobly, and made an offer,
As if you had intended some thing excellent,
Put on a forward face.

Ruy. Dear Lady, hold me --

Quisar. I hold ye, as I find ye, a faint Servant.

Ruy. By -- I dare do --

Quisar. I thought you Portugals had been rare wonders,
Men of those haughty courage and credits,
That all things were confined in your promises,
The Lord of Fate and Fortune I believed ye,
But well, I see, I am deceived, Ruy Dias,
And blame too late, my much belief.

Ruy. I am ashamed, Lady,
I was so dull, so stupid to your offer;
Now you have once more schooled me, I am right,
And something shall be thought on suddenly,
And put in Act as soon, some preparation --

Quisar. Give it out?

Ruy. Yes, Lady, and so great too;
In which the noise of all my Contrymen --

Quisar. Those will do well, for they are all approved ones.

Ruy. Good Madam, give me leave to turn my fancies.

Quisar. Do, and make all things fit, and then (...) visit you.
[Exit.
Ruy. My self, my Cozen and the Garrison,
The Neighbors of the out-Isles of our Nation,
Syana's strength, for I can humor him:
And proud Bakamus, I shall deceive his glory,
May be, the Princes are in sport.

[A shout. Enter Pymero and Christophero. Pym. Where are ye?

Ruy. Now Pymero, what is the have, you seek me?

Pym. Do you know this sign, Sir?

Ruy. Ha?

Pym. Do you know this Emblem?
Your nose is boar'd.

Ruy. Boar'd? What Is that?

Pym. Ye are topt, Sir:
The King's come home again, the King.

Ruy. The Devil?

Pym. Nay, sure he came a Gods name home:
He Is returned, Sir.

Chr. All this joy you hear --

Ruy. Who durst attempt him?
The Princes are all here.

Chr. They are worthy Princes,
They are special Princes all, they love by Ounces,
Believe it, Sir, it is done, and done most bravely and easily,
What fortune have ye lost, Sir?
What Justice have ye now unto this Lady?

Pym. How stands (...) claim?
That ever man should be fooled so,
When he should do and prosper, stands protesting,
Kissing the hand, and farting for a favor,
When he should be about his business, sweating;
She bid you, and picked you out a purpose,
To make your self a fortune by a Lady, a Lady, and a (...) one,
Knowing you were a man of worth and merit,
And bid you fly, you made a fair flight (...),
You have caught a Goose.

Ruy How dare you thus molest me?
It cannot be.

[A shout. Chr. Hark, how the general joy rings:

Pym. Have you hearing left? Is not that drunk too?
For if you had been sober, you had been wise, sure.

Ruy. Done! who dares do it?

Pym. It seems an honest fellow,
That has ended his market before you were up.

Chr. The shame on't's, a stranger, too.

Pym. It Is no shame,
He took her at her word, and tied the bargain;
(...) like a man, indeed, stood not demurring,
But (...) close to the cause, as he will do to the Lady,
'Is a fellow of that speed and handsomness,
He will get her with Child too, ere you shall come to know him,
Scarce eating of the air here, not acquainted,
No circumstance of Love depending on him,
Nor no command to show him, must start forth,
At first sight to --

Ruy. I am undone.

Pym. Like an Oyster:
She neither taking view nor value of him
Unto such deeds as these -- Pox of these,
These wise delayings --
They make men cowards.
You are undone as a man would undo an Egg,
A hundred shames about you.

Enter Quisara, Panura, and Train. Quisar. Can it be possible,
A stranger that I have not known, nor seen yet,
A man that I never graced, O Captain, Captain,
What shall I do, I am betrayed by Fortune,
It cannot be, it (...) not be.

Pym. It is so, Lady,
And by my faith, a handsome Gentleman,
It Is his poor Scholar's prize.

Quisar. Must I be given
Unto a man I never saw, never spoke with,
I know not of what Nation?

Pym. Is a Portugal,
And of as good a pitch, he will be given to you, Lady,
For he is given much to handsome flesh.

Quisar. Oh, Ruy Dias,
This way, your sloth, your sloth, your sloth, Ruy Dias.

Pym. You love sloth, Uncle, do you find it now,
You should have done at first? and faithfully: [A shout.
And then the the other had lain ready for you;
Madam, the general joy comes.

Quisar. We must meet it -- But with what comfort?

Enter Citizens carrying boughs, Boys singing after 'em; Then King, Armusia,
Soza, Emanuel; the Princes and Train following. Quisar. Oh, my dear Brother
what joy runs through me,
To see you safe again, your self and mighty,
What a blessed day is this?

King. Rise up, fair Sister,
I am not welcome, till you have embraced me.

Ruy. A general gladness, Sir, lies through the City,
And mirth possesses all to see your Grace arrived,
Thus happily arrived again, and (...)
'Twas a brave venture, who so e're (...) it,
A high and noble one, worthy much honor;
And had it failed, we had not failed, great Sir,
In short time too, to have forced the Governor,
In spite of all his threats.

King. I thank you, Gentlemen.

Ruy. And all his subtilities to see you free,
With all his heart and will too.

King. I know ye love me.

Pym. This had been good with something done before it,
Something set off to beautify it, now it sounds empty, like
Like a Barbers basin, pox, their's no metal in it, no noble marrow.

Ba. I have an Army, Sir, but that the Governor
The foolish fellow was a little provident,
And wise in letting slip no time, became him too,
That would have scorned him else, and all his confines,
That would have rung him such a peal --

Pym. Yes, backward,
To make Dogs howl, I know thee to a farthing,
Thy Army's good for Hawks, there is
Nothing but Sheeps heads in it.

Sy. I have done nothing, Sir, therefore
I think it convenient, I say little, what I purposed,
And what my love intended.

King. I like your modesty,
And thank ye royal friend, I know it grieved ye
To know my m sery, but this man, Princes,
I must thank (...) indeed, and truly,
For (...) man saw me in it, and redeemed me:
He looked upon me sinking, and then caught me,
This (...), this, (...), all (...), this all Valor,
This pious Man,
This, this Man from the bowels of my sorrows,
(...) now begotten my (...), (...) once more made me:
(...) (...), if there may be thank for this,
Or any thing near (...) invented.

Arm. You are too (...), Sir, there is reward
(...) my action too by (...),
A recompense so rich and glorious,
I durst not dream it mine, but that it was promised,
But that it was propounded, sworn, and sealed,
(...) the face of Heaven, I durst not hope it,
For nothing, the life of man, or merit,
It is so (...) (...), can else (...) it.

King. O (...) (...), speak it, (...) mine ear to hear it,
Make me a (...) man to (...) may be,
For still methinks I am a prisoner,
And feel no Liberty, till I find it.

Arm. Then know, (...) your Sister, she is mine, Sir,
I claim her by her own word, and her honor,
It was her open promise to that man
That durst redeem you; Beauty set me on,
And Fortune crowns me fair, if she receives me.

King. Receive you, Sir -- why Sister -- ha -- so backward,
Stand, as you knew me not, nor what he has ventured,
My dearest Sister.

Arm. Good Sir, pardon me,
There is a blushing modesty becomes her,
That holds her back; women are nice to woo, Sir,
I would not have her forced, give her fair Liberty,
For things compelled and frighted of soft Natures,
Turn into fears, and fly from their own wishes.

King. Look on him Quisara, such another,
Oh all ye powers, so excellent in nature,
In honor so abundant.

Quisar. I confess, Sir,
Confess my word is past too, he has purchased:
Yet good Sir, give me leave to think, but time
To be acquainted with his worth and Person,
To make me fit to know it; we are both strangers.
And how should we believe so suddenly,
Or come to fasten our affections --
Alas, Love has his Complements.

King. Be sudden
And certain in your way, no women's doubles,
Nor coy delays, you are his, and so assure it,
Or be cast from me, and my remembrance ever;
Respect your Word, I know you will; come, Sister,
Let Us see what welcome you can give a prisoner,
And what fair looks a friend -- Oh my most noble
Princes, no discontents, but all be lusty,
He that frowns this day, is an open Enemy:
Thus in my arms, my dear.

Arm. You make me blush, Sir.

King. And now lead on --
Our whole Court crowned with pleasure.

Ruy. Madam, despair not, something shall be done yet,
And suddenly, and wisely,

Quisar. O Ruy Dias.
[Ex.
Pym. Well he is a brave fellow, and has deserved her richly,
And you have had your hands full, I dare swear Gentlemen.

Soz. We have done something, Sir, if it (...) right.

Chr. The woman has no eyes else, or no honesty,
So much I think.

Pym. Come, let us go bounce against 'em,
To the Kings health, and my brave Countryman,
My Uncle looks as though he were sick of the
Worms, friends.
[Exeunt.
Actus tertius Scena prima.
Enter Pymero. MY Uncle haunts me up and down, looks me lancholy
Wondrous proof-melancholy, sometimes swears,
Then whilstles, starts, cries, groans, as if he had the Bots,
As to say truth, I think he has little better,
And would fain speak, bids me good morrow at midnight,
And good night when it is Noon, has something hovers
About his brains, that would fain find an issue,
But cannot out, or dares not, still he follows; [ Enter Ruy Dias.
How he looks still, and how he beats about
Like an old Dog at a dead sent? I marry,
There Is a sight would have set a Ship a Sailing:
These Winds of Love and Honor, blow at all ends,
Now speak, and it be thy will: good morrow, Uncle.
Ruy. Good morrow, Sir.

Pym. This is a new Salute:
Sure h'as forgot me: this is pur-blind Cupid.

Ruy. My Nephew?

Pym. Yes, Sir, if I be not changed.

Ruy. I would fain speak with you,

Pym. I would fain have you, Sir,
For to that end I stay.

Ruy. You know I love you,
And I have loved you long, my dear Pymero,
Bred and supplied you.

Pym. Whither walks this preamble?

Ruy. You may remember, though I am but your Uncle,
I sure had a Fathers care, a Fathers tenderness.

Pym. Sure, he would wrap me into something now suddenly,
He douls my nature in, for mine is honest,
He winds about me so.

Ruy. A Fathers diligence,
My private benefits I have forgot, Sir,
But those you might lay claim to, as my follower;
Yet some me would remember --

Pym. I do (...).

Ruy. The place which I put you in, which is no weak one;
Next to my self, you stand in all employments,
Your counsels, cares, assignments with me equal,
So is my study still to (...) your Person;
These are small testimonies, I have not forgot you,
Nor would not be forgotten.

Pym. Sure you cannot.

Ruy. O Pymero --

Pym. Sir, what hangs upon you,
What heavy weight oppresses ye, ye have lost,
(I must confess in those that understand ye)
Some little of your credit, but time will cure that,
The Best may slip sometimes.

Ruy. O my best Nephew --

Pym. It may be, ye fear her too, that disturbs ye,
That she may fall her self, or be forced from ye.

Ruy. She is ever true, but I undone for ever,
Oh that Armusia, that new thing, that stranger,
That flag stuck up to rob me of mine honor
That murdering chain, shot at me from my Country;
That goodly plague, that I must court, to kill me.

Pym. Now it comes flowing from him, I feared this:
Knew, he that durst be idle, durst be ill too,
Has he not done a brave thing?

Ruy. I must confess, Nephew, must allow it,
But that brave thing has undone me, has sunk me,
Has trodden me like a name in Sand, to nothing,
Hangs betwixt hope and me, and threatens my ruin:
And if he rise and blaze, farewell my fortune;
And when that is ser, where is that advancement, Cousin?
That were a friend, that were a noble Kinsman,
That would consider these; that man were grateful;
He that (...) do something, he durst love me.

Pym. You say true, it is worth consideration,
Your reasons are of weight, and mark me, Uncle,
For (...) be (...), and to the purpose with you,
Say this, (...), then we are taken off,
As it may (...) be done,
How stands the Woman?

Ruy. She is mine for ever;
For the contemns his deed and him.

Pym. Pox on him,
Or if the single pox be not sufficient,
The Hogs, the (...), the Devils pox posses him;
Faith this Armusia stumbles me, he is a brave fellow;
And if he could be spared, Uncle --

Ruy. I must perish,
Had he set up at any rest, but this,
Done any thing, but what concerned my credit,
The everlasting losing of my worth --

Pym. I understand you now,
I had reasonable good opinion of the Devil
This, this hour.
Well, Uncle, what will become of this,
And what dishonor
Follow this fatal shaft, if shot, let time tell,
I can only fear, and cross to cross it.
[Exit.
Enter Armusia, Emanuel, Soza. Em. Why are you thus sad? What can grieve or vex
you,
That have pleasutes of the World; the profits,
The honor, and the loves at your dispose?
Why should a man that wants nothing, want his quiet?
I want what beggars are above men, in content:
I want the grace I have merited,
The favor, the due respect.

Soz. Does not the King allow it?

Arm. Yes, and all honors else, all that I can ask,
That he has power to give; but from his Sister,
The scornful cruelty; forgive me Beauty,
That I trangress from her that should look on me,
That should a little smile on my Service,
And foster my deserts, for her own faith's sake;
That should at least acknowledge me, speak to me.

Soz. And you go whining up and down for this, Sir,
Lamenting and disputing of your grievances;
Sighing and sobbing, like a sullen schoolboy,
And cursing good-wife Fortune for this favor.

Arm. What would have me do?

Soz. Do, what you should do,
What a man would do in this case, a wise man,
An understanding man, that knows a Woman,
Knows her, and her tricks, her scorns, and all her trifles:
Go to her.

Em. That Is the way.

Soz. And tell her, and boldly,
And do not mince the matter, nor mock your self,
With being too indulgent to her pride:
Let her hear roundly from you. what you are,
And what you have deserved, and what she must be.

Em. And be not put off, like a common fellow,
With the Princess would be private,
Or that she has taken Physic, and admits none,
I would talk to her any where.

Arm. It makes me smile.

Em. Now you look handsomely:
Had I a wench to win, I would so flatter her.

Soz. Pray take our counsel, Sir.

Arm. I shall do something,
But not your way, it seems too boisterous,
For my affections are as fair and gentle
As her they serve.

Enter King. Soz. The King.

King. Why how now, friends,
Why do ye rob me of my company,
I love you dearly, Sir, I have been seeking you;
I must not see the face I love, thus shadowed.

Em. And't please your Grace, methinks it ill becomes him,
A Soldier should be Jovial, high, and lusty.

King. He shall be so, come, come, I know your reason,
It shall be none to cross you, ye shall have her,
Take my word (it is a King's word) ye shall have her,
She shall be yours, or nothing, I pray be merry.

Arm. Your Grace has given me cause, I shall be, Sir,
And ever your poor Servant:

King. Me my self, Sir,
My better self, I shall find time, and suddenly,
To gratify your loves too, Gentlemen;
And make you know, I much stand bound to you:
Will ye go with me, friend?

Arm. I beseech your Grace,
Spare me an hour or two, I shall wait on you,
Some little private business with my self, Sir,
For such a time.

King. I Will hinder no Devotion,
For I know you are regular, I Will take you, Gentlemen,
Because he shall have nothing to disturb,
I shall look for you, friend.
[Exeunt, Manet Armusia.
[ Enter Panura. Arm. I dare not fail, Sir,
What shall I do to make her know my misery?
To make her sensible? This is her woman,
I have a toy come to me, suddenly,
It may work for the best, she can but scorn me,
And lower I cannot tumble,
I Will try, what ere my fate be -- good even, fair one.

Pan. It Is the brave stranger -- a good Night to you, Sir.
Now by my Ladies hand, a goodly Gentleman,
How happy shall she be, in such a Husband?
Would I were so provided, too.

Arm. Good pretty one,
Shall I keep you company for an hour or two?
I want employment for this evening,
I am an honest man.

Pan. I dare believe you,
Or if you were not, that is no great matter,
We take (...) promises, would you stay with me, Sir?

Arm. So, if it please you, pray let us be better acquainted,
I know you are the Princess's Gentlewoman,
And wait upon her near.

Pan. I understand ye.

Arm. So kind an office, that you may bind a Gentleman
Here after to be yours, and your way too,
And ye may (...) the hour (...) ye did this benefit,
Sweet (...) faces should have (...) (...),
And ready faculties.

Pan. Tell me your business,
Yet (...) I think it be to her, (...) (...), (...),
For I know what you (...), and what we (...) ye,
And in what grace (...) and (...) a second,
For that but darkens, you would do it better,
The Princes must be pleased with your accesses,
I Am sure I should.

Arm. I want boldness,
And am yet but a stranger, would fain speak with her.

Pan. It Is very late, and (...) her hours of sleep, Sir.

Arm. Pray ye (...), and believe my meanings, civil, [(...).
My business of that (...) respect and carriag:

Pan. I must (...) and I were to be hanged now, and I will do it,
For ten such more, (...) (...) High (...).

Arm. I would be private with her.

Pan. So you shall,
It Is (...) worth thanks else, you must dispatch quickly.

Arm. Suddenly.

Pan. And I must leave you in my Chamber, Sir,
Where you must lock your self, that none may see you,
It Is close to her, you cannot miss the entrance,
When she comes down to bed.

Arm. I understand ye, and once more thank ye, Lady.
[Exit.
Pan. Thank me, but thus.

Enter Quisara and Quisana. Quisar. It Is late good Aunt, to bed, I am e'ne
unready,
My woman will not be long away.

Quisan. I would have you a little merrier first,
Let me sit by you, and read or discourse
Something that ye may fancy, or take my instrument.

Quisar. No, I thank you,
I shall sleep without these, I wrong your age, Aunt,
To make you wait thus, pray let me entreat ye,
To morrow I Will see you, I know ye sleepy,
And rest shall be a welcome guest, you shall not, [ Enter Panura.
Indeed you shall not stay; oh here is my woman,
Good night, good night; and good rest Aunt, attend ye.

Quisan. Sleep dwell upon your eyes, and fair dreams court ye.

Quisar. Come, where have you been, Wench? make me unready;
I (...) but ill, last night.

Pan. You Will sleep the better,
I hope, to night, Madam.

Quisar. A little rest contents me;
Prithee fetch my Book.

Pan. I am glad of that.

Quisar. I Will read a while before I sleep.

Pan. I will, Madam.

Quisar. And if Ruy Dias meet you, and be importunate,
He may come in.

Pan. I have a better far, for you,
Now least in sight Play, I.
[Exit:
Enter Armusia, locks the Door. Quisar. Why should I love him?
Why should I dote upon a man deserves not,
Nor has no will to work it? Who Is there, Wench?
What are you? or whence come you?

Arm. Ye may know me,
I bring not such (...) noble Lady.

Quisar. Who let you in?

Arm. My restless love, that serves you.

Quisar. This is an impudence I have not heard of,
A rudeness that becomes a thief (...) a ruffin;
Nor shall my Brothers love protect this boldness,
You build so strong on, my Rooms are Sanctuaries,
And with that reverence, they that seek my favor,
And humble fears shall render their approaches.

Arm. Mine are no less.

Quisa. I am Mistress of my self, Sir,
And will be so, I will not be thus visited;
These fears and dangers thrust into my privacy,
Stand further off, I Will cry out, else.

Arm. Oh dear Lady.

Quisar. I see dishonor in your eyes.

Arm. There is none:
By all that beauty, they are innocent;
Pray ye tremble not, ye have no cause.

Quisar. I Will dye first;
Before you have your will, be torn in pieces,
The little strength left me, to resist you,
The Gods will give me more, before I am forced
To that I hate, or suffer --

Arm. You wrong my duty.

Quisar. So base a violation of my Liberty?
I know you are bent unnobly; I Will take to me,
The Spirit of a man, borrow his boldness,
And force my Woman's fears into a madness,
And e're you arrive at what you aim at --

Arm. Lady,
If there be in you any Woman's pity,
And if your fears have not proclaimed me monstrous,
Look on me, and believe me; Is this violence?
Is it? to sall thus prostrate to your beauty,
A Ruffins boldness, is humility a rudeness?
The griefs and sorrows that grow here, an impudence?
Far be it from my heart to fright your Quiet;
A heavy curse light on it when I intend it.

Quisar. Now (...) dare hear you.

Arm. If I had been mischievous,
As then I must be mad, or were a Monster,
If any such base thoughts had harbored here,
Or violence that became not man,
You have a thousand Bul-warks to assure you,
The holy powers bear Shield to (...) chastity;
If you misdoubt still,
And (...) a fear, I am not honest,
(...) with (...) (...) to (...) place;
(...) (...) and (...) it here; be (...) own safety;
(...) wise, and (...) your fears, and (...) (...) (...);
How willing shall I sleep to (...) fie you.

(...) No, I (...) now you speak worthily;
What came you then for?

Arm. To comp (...), my beauty,
But modestly.

Quisar. Of what?

Arm. Of your fierce cruelty,
For though I dye, I will not blame the Doer:
What I have done to have deserved you,
If any thing that love command may reach ye,
To have remembered ye, but I am unworthy,
And to that misery falls all my so tune,
To have told ye, and by my life ye may believe me,
That I am honest, and will only marry
You, or your (...) pray be not angry.

Quisar. I thank you, Sir, and let me tell you seriously,
You have taken now the right way to befriend ye,
And to beget a fair and clear opinion,
Yet to try your obedience --

Arm. I stand ready, Lady,
Without presuming to ask any thing.

Quisar Or at this time to hope for further favor,
Or to remember services, or smiles,
Dangers you have past through, and rewards due to 'em,
Loves or despairs, but leaving all to me,
Quit this place presently.

Arm. I shall obey ye.

Enter Ruy Dias. Ruy. Ha?

Arm. Who Is this?
Who art thou?

Ruy. A Gentleman.

Arm. Thou art no more, I am sure: Oh it is Ruy Dias;
How high he looks, and harsh!

Ruy. Is there not door enough,
You take such elbow-room?

Arm. If I take it, I Will carry it.

Ruy. Does this become you, Princess?

Arm. The Captain's jealous,
Jealous of that he durst never deserve yet;
Go freely, go, I Will give thee leave.

Ruy. Your leave, Sir?

Arm. Yes, my leave, Sir, I Will not be troubled neither,
Nor shall my heart ache, or my head be jealous,
Nor strange supitious thoughts reign in my memory,
Go on, and do thy worst, (...) smile at thee,
I Will kiss your fair hand first, then farewell Captain.
[Ex
Quisar. What a pure soul inherits here? what innocence?
Sure I was blind when I first loved this sellow,
And long to live in that fog still, how he blusters!

Ruy. Am I your property; or those your flatterers,
The banquets you bid me to, the trust
I build my goodly hopes on?

Quisar. Be more temperate.

Ruy. Are these the shows of your respect and favor?
What did he here? what language had he with you?
Did ye invite?
Is he so gracious in your eyes?

Quisar. You are too forward.

Ruy. Why are these private hours?

Quisar. You are too (...),
Too impudent to tax me with those errors:
Do you know what I am, and my prerogative?
I never taught you to dispose my (...);
How durst you touch mine (...) blot my meanings?
And name an act on, (...) (...) mine, but noble,
Thou poor unworthy (...), how have I graced thee?
How have I (...) thee, and raised thee hourly?
Are these the gratitudes you bring, Ruy Dias?
The thanks? the services? I am fairly paid;
Was It not enough, I saw thou were a Coward,
And shadowed thee? no noble spark in thee?
Daily provoked thee and still found thee Coward?
Raised noble causes for thee, strangers started at;
Yet still, still, still, a Coward, ever a Coward,
And with those (...), do thou upbraid my virtues?

Ruy. I was to blame, Lady.

Quisar. So blindly bold to touch at my behavior?
Durst thou but look amiss at my allowance?
If thon had been a brave fellow, thou had some license,
Some Liberty (...) have then allowed thee
For thy good face, some scope to have argued with thee;
But being nothing but a sound, but a shape,
The mere sign of a Soldier, -- of a Lover?
The dregs and draffy part, disgrace and jealousy,
I scorn thee and contemn thee.

Ruy. Dear Lady,
If I have been too free --

Quisar. Thou have been too foolish,
And go on still, I Will study to forget thee,
I would I could, and yet I pity thee.
[Exit.
Ruy. My former glory's vanished into Air,
All my great hopes turn'dinto just despair;
And I by her a Coward understood,
This stain I Will wipe off with my Rival's blood,
For when I shall ore' come him in the field,
His ruined glories mine will fairer build.

Actus quartus. Scena prima.
Enter King, Governor like a Moor Priest. King. SO far and truly you have
discovered to me,
The former currents of my (...) and fortunes,
That I am bold to acknow edge you (...),
And certainly to credit your prediction,
Of (...) at are (...) to come.

Gov. I am no (...),
It Is strange I should, and (...) so near a Neighbor;
But these are not my ends.

King. I pray you sit, good Father,
(...) a (...) Man, and most Religious.

Gov I; that (...) well now, and let (...) work then,
(...) (...) (...) Religion before I leave ye;
I have (...) a long (...), Son, a mewed up Man,
(...) by the (...) al hand of Heaven,
From the (...) vanity, all to find out knowledge,
Which I (...) now attained too, thanks to Heaven,
All for my Countries good too, and many a Vision,
Many a Mystic Vision, have I seen, Son,
And many a sight from Heaven, which has been terrible,
(...) in the goods and evils of these Islands,
Were lively shadowed; many a charge have I had too,
Still as the time grew ripe, to reveal these,
To travel and discover, now I am come, Son,
The hour is now appointed,
And now I speak.

King. Do holy man, I Will hear ye.

Gov. Beware these Portugals, I say, beware'em,
These smooth-faced strangers, have an eye on'em,
The cause is now the Gods; hear and believe, King.

King. I do hear, but before I give rash credit,
Or hang too light on belief, which is a sin, Father;
Know I have found 'em gentle, faithful, valiant,
And am in my particular bound to 'em,
I mean to some for my most strange deliverance.

Gov. O (...), the future aims of men! observe me,
Above their present actions, and their glory,
Are to be looked at, the Stars show many turnings
If you could see, mark but with my eye, Pupil;
These men came hither, as my Vision tells me,
Poor, weather-beaten, almost starved, feebled,
Their (...) like themselves, most miserable,
Made along suit for trafigue, and for comfort,
To vend their childrens toys, cure their diseases:
They had their suit, they landed and to the rate,
Grew rich and powerful, sucked the fat and freedom
Of thy most noble Isle, taught her to tremble,
Witness the Castle here, the Citadel,
They have clapped up the neek of your Tidore,
This happy Town, till that she knew these strangers
To check her, when she is Jolly.

King. They have so, indeed Pather.

Gov. Take heed, take heed, I find your fair delivery,
Though you be pleased to glorify that fortune,
And think these strangers Goods, take heed, I say,
I find (...) but a handsome preparation,
Afair (...) prologue to future mischief:
Mark but the end, good King, the pin he shoots at,
That was the man delivered ye; the mirror,
Your Sister is his due, what is she, your heir, Sir?
And what is he a kin then to the Kingdom?
But heirs are not ambitious, who then suffers?
What reverence shall the Gods have? and what Justice?
The misera ble people, what shall they do?

King. He points at truth directly.

Gov. Think of these, Son:
The person, nor the manner I dislike not
Of your preserver, nor the whole man together,
Were he but seasoned in the faith we are,
Or our Devotions learned.

King. You say right, Father.

Gov. To change our worships now, and our Religion;
To be Traitor to our God?

King. You have well advised me,
And I will seriously consider, Father,
In the mean time you shall have your fair access
Unto my Sister, advise her to your purpose,
And let me still know how the God (...).

Gov. I will, but my main end is to advise
The destruction of you all, a general ruin,
And then I am revenged, let the Gods whistle.
[Exeunt.
Enter Ruy Dias and Pymero. Ruy. Indeed I am right glad you were not greedy
And sudden in performing what I willed you,
Upon the person of (...);
I am afraid, for I well knew your valor
And love to me.

Pym. 'Twas not a fair thing, Uncle,
It showed not handsome, carried no Man in it.

Ruy. I must confess, 'twas ill and Labhor it,
Only this good has (...) from this evil;
I have tried your honesty, and find proof,
A constancy that will not be corrupted,
And I much honor it.

Pym. This Bell sounds better.

Ruy. My anger now, and that disgrace I have suffered,
Shall be more manly vented and wiped off;
My Sword's in my hand, now Nephew, my cause upon it,
And Man to Man, one valor to another,
My hope to his.

Pym. Why? this is like Ruy Dias.
There carries something of some substance in it;
Some Metal, and some Man, this sounds a Gentleman;
And now methinks ye utter what becomes ye,
To kill men (...), it is such a Dog trick,
Such a Rat-catchers occupation --

Ruy. It is no better,
But (...), now --

Pym. Now you do bravely.

Ruy. The difference of our state flung by, forgotten,
The full opinion I have won in service,
Laid handsomely aside, only our fortunes,
And single manhoods --

Pym. In a Service, Sir,
Of this most noble nature, all I am,
If I had ten lives more, those and my fortunes
Are ready for ye, I had thought ye had for sworn fighting,
Or banished those brave thoughts were wont to wait upon you,
I am glad to see 'em called home again.

Ruy. They are, Nephew, [Shews a Challenge.
And thou shall see what fire they carry in them;
Here, you guess what this means.

Pym. Yes, very well, Sir,
A portion of Scripture, that puzels many an Interpreter.

Ruy. As soon as you can find him --

Pym. That will not be long, Uncle,
And of my conscience, he will be ready as quickly.

Ruy. I make no doubt, good Nephew, carry it so,
If you can possible that we may fight.

Pym. Nay, you shall fight, assure your self.
I pray ye hear me,
In some such place where it may be possible
The Princess may behold us.

Pym. I conceive ye,
Upon the Sands, behind the Castle, (...),
A place remote enough, and there be windows
Out of her Lodging too, or I am mistaken.

Ruy. Ye are in the right, if you can work that handsomely --

Pym. Let me alone, I pray be you prepared,
Some three hours hence.

Ruy. I will not fail.

Pym. Get ye home,
And if ye have any thing to dispose of,
Or a few light prayers,
That may befriend you, run them over quickly,
I warrant I Will bring him on.

Ruy. Farewell, Nephew,
And when we meet again --
[Exit.
Pym. I, I, fight handsomely,
Take a good draught or two of Wine, to settle ye,
It Is an excellent Armor for an ill conscience, Uncle;
I am glad to see this man's conversion,
I have seen him
Curry a fellows carcass handsomely:
And in the Head of a Troop, stand as if he had been rooted there,
Dealing large doles of Death, what a Rascal was I,
I did not see his Will drawn?
[Exit.
Enter Governor, Quisana, and Panura. Gov. Bless ye, my royal Daughter,
And in you bless this Island heaven.

Quisar. Good Aunt,
What think ye of this man?

Quisan. Sure is a wise man,
And a Religious, he tells us things have happened
So many years ago, almost forgotten,
As readily as if they were come this hour.

Quisar. Does he not meet with your sharp tongue?

Pan. He tells me, Madam,
Marriage and moldy Cheese will make me tamer.

Gov. A stubborn Keeper, a worse fare,
An open Stable, and cold care --
Will rame a Jade, may be your share.

Pan. Bir-Lady a sharp Prophet, when his proves good,
I Will bequeath you a skin to make you a Hood,

Gov. Lady, I would talk with you.

Quisar. Do reverend Sir.

Gov. And for your good, for that, that must concern you,
And give ear wisely to me.

Quisar. I shall, Father.

Gov. You are a Princess of that excellence,
Sweetness and grace, that Angel-like fair feature,
Nay, do not blush, I do not flatter you,
Nor do I dote in telling this, I am amazed, Lady,
And as I think the Gods bestowed these on ye,
The Gods that love ye.

Quisar. I confess their bounty.

Gov. Apply it then to their use, to their honor,
To them and to their service give this sweetness,
They have an instant great use of your goodness;
You are a Saint esteemed here for your beauty;
And many a longing heart. --

Quisar. I seek no featly,
Nor will I blemish that, Heaven has sealed on me,
I know my worth, indeed the Portugals
I have at those commands, and their last Services,
Nay, even their lives, so much I think my handsomness,
That what I shall enjoin --

Gov. Use it discreetly,
For I perceive ye understand me rightly.
For here the Gods regard your help, and suddenly;
The Portugals, like sharp thorns (mark me, Lady)
Stick in our sides like Razors, wound Religion,
Draw deep, they wound till the lifeblood follows,
Our Gods they spurn at, and their worships scorn,
A mighty hand they bear upon our Government,
These are the men your miracle must work on,
Your heavenly form either to root them out,
Which as you may endeavor, will be easy,
Remember whose great cause you have to execute,
To nip their memory, that may not spring more,
Or fairly bring 'em home to our Devotions,
Which will be blessed, and for which you Sainted,
But cannot be, and they go, let me buzzle.

Quisar. Go up with me,
Where we will converse more privately;
I Will show you shortly how I hold their Temper,
And in what chain their Souls.

Gov. Keep fast that, hold still,
And either bring that chain, and those bound in it,
And link it to our Gods, and their fair Worships,
Or Daughter, pinch their hearts a pieces with it,
I Will wait upon your Grace.

Quisar. Come reverend Father,
Wait you below.
[Ex. Quisar. and Gov.
Pan. If this Prophet were a young thing,
I should suspect him now, he cleaves so close to her,
These holy Coats are long, and hide iniquities.

Quisan. Away, away fool, a poor wretch.

Pan. These poor ones,
Warm but their stomach once --

Quisan. Come in, thou art foolish.
[Ex. Quisan. Pan.
Enter Armusia, Emanuel, and Pymero. Arm. I am sorry, Sir, my fortune is so
stubborn,
To court my Sword against my Countryman;
I love my Nation well, and where I find
A Portugal of noble name and virtue,
I am his humble Servant, (...) Pymero,
Your person, nor your Uncle, am I angry with,
You are both fair Gentlemen, in my opinion,
And I protest I had rather use my Sword
In your defenses, than against your safeties;
It Is methinks, a strange dearth of Enemies,
When we seek foes amongst our selves.

Em. You are injured,
And ye must make the best on it now, and readiest --

Arm. You see I am ready in the place, and Armed
To his desire that called me.

Pym. Ye speak worthily,
And I could wish ye had met on terms more friendly,
But it cannot now be so.

[Enter Ruy Dias. Em. Turn, Sir, and (...).

Pym. I have kept my word with ye, Uncle,
The Gentleman's ready.

Enter Governor and Quisara above. Arm. Ye are welcome.

Ruy. Bid those fools welcome that affect your courtesy,
I come not to use complements, ye have wronged me,
And ye shall feel, proud man, e're I part from ye,
The (...) of that, if fortune do not fool me,
Thy life is mine, and no hope shall redeem it.

Arm. That's a proud word,
More than your faith can justify.

Quisar. Sure they will fight.

Ruy. She Is there, I am happy.

Gov. Let 'em alone, let 'em kill one another,
These are the main posts, if they fall, the buildings
will tumble quickly.

Quisar. How temperate, Armusia?
No more, be quiet yet.

[ Gov. Offers to speak. Arm. I am not bloody,
Nor do feel such mortal malice in me,
But since we cannot both enjoy the Princess,
I am resolved to fight.

Ruy. Fight home, Armusia,
For if thou faint'st or fail'st --

Arm. Do you make all advantages?

Ruy. Always unto thy life, I will not spare thee,
Nor look not for thy mercy.

Arm. I am armed then.

Ruy. Stand still, I charge ye, Nephew, as ye honor me.

Arm. And good Emanuel -- not --

Pym. Ye speak fitly,
For we had not stood idle else.

Gov. I am sorry for it.

Em. But since you will have it so --

Ruy. Come, Sir.

Arm. I wait ye.

Pym. I marry, this looks handsomely,
This is warm work.

Gov. Both fall, an't be thy will.

[Ruy. falls. Pym. My Uncle dead?

Em. Stand still, my Sword in --

Arm. Now brave Ruy Dias,
Now where is your confidence, your prayers? quickly,
Your own spite has condemned ye.

Quisar. Hold! Armusia.

Arm. Most happy Lady.

Quisar. Hold, and let him rise,
Spare him for me,

Arm. A long life may he enjoy, Lady.

Gov. What have you done? it is better they had all perished.

Quisar. Peace Father, I work for the best; Armusia,
Be in the Garden an hour hence.

[Ex. Quis. and Gov. Arm. I shall, Madam.

Pym. Now as I live, a Gentleman, at all Inches,
So brave a mingled temper, saw I never.

Arm. Why are you sad, Sir? how would this have grieved ye.
If you had fallen under a professed Enemy?
Under one had taken vantage of your shame too?
Pray you be at peace, I am so far from wronging,
Or glorifying in the pride of such a victory,
That I desire to serve ye, pray look cheerfully, Gentlemen.

Pym. Do you (...) this, Sir, this love, Sir? do you see this,
How he courts ye? why do you hold your head down?
It Is no high Treason, I take it to be equaled,
To have a slip in the field? no sin that is mortal;
Come, come, thank fortune and your friend.

Arm. It may be,
You think my tongue may prove your Enemy;
And though restrained sometimes, out of a bravery,
May take alliance to disable ye.
Believe me, Sir, so much I hate that Liberty,
That in a strangers tongue 'twould prove an injury,
And I shall right (...) in it.

Pym. Can you have more, Uncle?

Ruy. Sir, you have beat me both ways, yet so nobly,
That I shall ever love the hand that did it:
Fortune may make me worthy of some title
That may be near your friend.

Arm. Sir, I must leave you,
But with so hearty love, and pray be confident,
I carry nothing from this place shall wrong you.
[Ex. Ar. and Em.
Pym. Come, come ye are right again, Sir, love your honor,
And love your friend, take heed of bloody purposes;
And unjust ends, good Heaven is angry with them;
Make your fair virtues, and your fame, Mistress,
And let these Trinkets go.

Ruy. You teach well, Nephew,
Now to be honorable even with this Gentleman,
Shall be my only business, and my end,
To make me worthy of so brave a friend.

Enter Governor and King. Gov. Sir, Sir, you must do something suddenly,
To stop his pride, so great and high he is shot up,
Upon his person too, your State is sunk else:
You must not (...) now upon (...) of gratitude,
And let a simple tenderness besot ye,
I Will bring you suddenly where you shall see him,
Attempting your brave Sister, privately;
Mark but his high behavior then.

King. I will, Father.

Gov. And with scorn, I fear contempt too.

King. I hope not.

Gov. I will not name lust;
It may be that also,
A little force must be applied upon him,
Now, now, apply a little force to humble him,
These sweet entreaties do but make him wanton.

King. Take heed you wrong him not.

Gov. Take heed to your safety,
I but forewarn ye, King; if you mistrust me,
Or think I come unsent --

King. No, I Will go with you.

[Exeum. Enter Armusia and Quisara. Arm. Madam, you see there is nothing I can
reach at,
Either in my obedience, or my service,
That may deserve your love,
But I pursue it seriously,
Take Pleasure in your wills, even in your anger,
Which other men would grudge at, and grow stormy;
I study new humility to please you,
And take a kind of joy in my afflictions,
Because they come from ye, I love my sorrows,
Pray Madam, but consider --

Quisar. Yes, I do, Sir,
And to that honest end, I drew you hither,
I know ye have deserved as much, as man can,
And know it is a Justice to requite ye,
I know ye love.

Arm. If ever love was mortal,
And dwelt in man, and for that love command me,
So strong I find it, and so true, here Lady,
Something of such a greatness to allow me
Those things I have done already, may seem foyls too:
It Is equity that man aspires to Heaven,
Should win it by his worth, and not sleep to it.

Enter King and Governor. Gov. Now stand close, Sir, and hear, and as you find
him,
Believe me right, or let Religion suffer.

Quisar. I dare believe your worth without Additions;
But since you are so liberal of your love, Sir,
And would be farther tried, I do intend it,
Because you (...) not, or you would not win me
At such an easy rate.

Arm. I am prepared still,
And if I shrink --

Quisar. I know you are no Coward,
This is the utmost trial of your constancy,
And if you (...) fast now, I am yours, your wife, Sir,
You hold there is nothing dear that may atchieve me?
Doubted, or dangerous.

Arm. There Is nothing, nothing:
Let me but know, that I may straight fly to it.

Quisar. I Will (...) you then, change your Religion,
And be of one belief with me.

Arm. How?

Quisar. Mark,
Worship our Gods, renounce that faith you were bred in,
It Is easiy done, I Will teach you suddenly;
And humbly on your knees --

Arm. Ha? I Will die first.

Quisar. Offer as we do.

Arm. To the Devil, Lady?
Offer to him I hate? I know the Devil,
To Dogs and Cats you make offer to them,
To every Bird that flies, and every worm,
Is this the virtue?
The trial that you talk of?

Quisar. Come, come, I know you love me.

Arm. Love you this way?
This most destroying way? Sure you but jest, Lady.

Quisar. Are not our powers eternal, so their comforts?
As great and full of hopes as yours?

Arm. They are Puppits.

Gov. Now mark him, Sir, and but observe him nearly.

Arm. Their comforts like themselves, cold senseless outsides,
You make 'em sick as we are, peevish, mad,
Subject to age; and how can they cure us,
That are not able to refine themselves?

Quisar. The Sun and Moon we worship, those are heavenly,
And their bright influence we believe.

Arm. I adore the Maker of that Sun and Moon,
That gives those Bodies light and influence,
That pointed out their paths, and taught their motions;
You should have said, make me a Christian,
Work that great cure, for it is a great one, woman;
I looked you should have brought
Me, your chief God you worship,
He that you offer humane blood and life to,
And made a Sacrifice of him to memory,
Beat down his Altars, and ruin his false Temples.

Gov. Now you may see.

Quisar. Take heed, you go too far, Sir,
And yet I love to hear him, I must have ye,
And to that end I let you storm a little,
I know there must be some strife in your bosom
To cool and quiet ye, e're you can come back:
I know old friends cannot part suddenly,
There will be some let still, yet I must have ye,
Have ye of my faith too, and so enjoy ye.

Arm. My Life and Love shall be for ever yours,
But my Religion must be my own:
And know, Madam,
That for all this trap you have laid to catch my life in,
To catch my immortal life, I hate and curse,
Contemn your Dieties,
Nay, I will out of vengeance search your Temples,
And with those that serve my God, demolish
Your Shambles of wild worship.

Gov. Now, now, you hear, Sir.

King. Enter, and take him;
I am sorry, friend, that I am forced to do this.

Gov. Be sure you bind him fast.

Quisar. But use him nobly.

King. Had it to me been done, to me, I had forgiven it,
And still preserved you fair, but to our Gods --

Quisar. Methinks I hate 'em now.

King. To our Religion,
To those to be thus stubborn, thus rebellious,
To threaten them.

Arm. Use all your violence,
I ask no mercy, nor repent my words;
I spit at your best powers; I serve one
Will give me strength to scorn your Gods.

Gov. Away with him.

Arm. To grind 'em into base dust, and disperse 'em,
That never more their bloody memories --

Gov. Clap him close up.

King. Good friend be cooler.

Arm. Never, your false Prophet I despise too.

King. Softly.

Arm. And all his divilish arts, laugh and scorn at,
Mock his blind purposes.

King. Ye must be temperate;
Offer him no violence, I command you strictly.

Gov. Now thou art up, I shall have time to speak too.

Quisar. Oh, how I love this man.
[Exeunt.
Actus quintus. Scena prima.
Enter Christophero and Pedro ( at one door) Emanuel and Soza ( at another.)
Chr. DO you know the news, Gentlemen?

Em. Would we knew as well, Sir,
How to prevent it.

Soz. Is this the love they bear us,
For our late benefit? taken so maliciously,
And clapped up close? Is that the thanks they render?

Chr. It must not be put up, thus smothered slightly,
It Is such a base unnatural wrong.

Ped. I know
They may think to do wonders, aim at all,
And to blow us with a vengeance, out of the Island:
But if we be our selves honest and resolute,
And continue but Masters of our ancient courage,
Stick close and give no vantages to their villainies --

Soz. Nay, if we faint, or fall a pieces now,
We are fools and worthy to be marked for miseries;
Begin to strike at him, they are all bound too?
To cancel his deserts; what must we look for,
If they can carry this?

Em. I Will carry coals then;
I have but one life and one fortune, Gentlemen,
But I Will so Husband it to vex these Rascals,
These barbarous slaves.

Chr. Shall we go charge 'em presently?

Soz. No, that will be too weak, and too foolhardy,
We must have grounds that promises safety friends,
And sure offense, we lose our anger else,
And worse then that, venture our lives too lightly.

Enter Pyniero. Pym. Did you see my Uncle? plague on these Barbarians,
How the Rogues stick in my teeth, I know ye are angry,
So am I too, monstrous angry, Gentlemen,
You hear Armusia's up, honest Armusia:
Clapped up in prison, friends, the brave Armusia:
Here are fine boys.

Em. We hope he shall not stay there.

Pym. Stay? no, he must not stay, no, talk of staying,
These are no times to stay, are not these Rascals?
Speak I beseech you, speak, are they not Rogues?
Think some abominable names -- are they not Devils?
But the Devils a great deal too good for 'em -- fusty Villains.

Chr. They are a kind of Hounds.

Pym. Hounds were their Fathers,
Old blear eyed bob-tayl'd Hounds -- Lord, where is my Uncle?

Soz. But what shall be done, Sir?

Pym. Done?

Soz. Yes, to relieve him;
If it be not sudden, they may take his life too.

Pym. They dare as soon take fire and swallow it,
His life, why it is a thing worth all the Islands,
And they know will be rated at that value,
His very imprisonment will make the Town stink,
And shake and stink, I have physic in my hand for 'em,
Shall give the goblins such a purge --

Enter Ruy Dias Ped. Your Uncle.

Ruy. I hear strange news, and have been seeking you,
They say, Armusin's Prisoner.

Pym. It Is most certain.

Ruy. Upon what cause?

Pym. He has deserved too much, Sir;
The old Heathen policy has li't upon him,
And paid him home.

Ruy. A most unnoble dealing.

Pym. You are the next, if you can carry it tamely,
He has deserved of all.

Ruy. I must confess it,
Of me so nobly too.

Pym. I am glad to hear it,
You have a time now to make good your confession,
If you live Ages, Sir, and lose this hour,
Not now redeem and vindicate your honor,
Your life will be a murmur, and no man, in it.

Ruy. I thank you, Nephew, come all along with me, Gentlemen,
We'll make 'em dancing sport immediately,
We are Masters of the Fort yet, we shall see
What that can do.

Pym. Let it spit fire finely,
And play their tuprets, and their painted Palaces,
A frisking round or two; that they may trip it,
And caper in the Air.

Ruy. Come, we will do something
Shall make 'em look about, we will send 'em plumbs
If they be not too hard for their teeth.

Pym. And fine Potatoes,
Roasted in Gunpowder, such a Banquet, Sir,
Will prepare their unmannerly stomachs.

Ruy. They shall see
There Is no safe retreat in villainy:
Come, be high hearted all.

Omnes. We are all on fire, Sir.
[Exeunt.
Enter King and Governor. King. I am ungrateful, and a wretch, persuade me not,
Forgetful of the mercy he showed me,
The timely noble pity -- why should I,
Why should I see him fast bound and fettered, whose true courtesy,
Whose manhood, and whose mighty hand set me free?
Why should it come from me? Why, I command this?
Shall not all tongues and (...) call me ungrateful?

Gov. Had the offense been thrown on you, it is certain
It had been in your power, and your descretion
To have turned it into mercy, and forgiven it,
And then it had showed a virtuous point of gratitude,
Timely and nobly taken; but since the cause
Concerns the honor of our Gods, and their Title,
It Is in their wills, their mercies, or Revenges,
And those revolts in you show mere rebellious.

King. They are mild and pityful.

Gov. To those repent.

King. Their nature's soft and tender.

Gov. To true hearts,
That feel compunction for their trespasses:
That man defies 'em still, threatens destruction,
And demolition of their Arms and worship,
Spits at their powers; take heed ye be not found, Sir,
And marked a favourer of their dishonor;
They use no common Justice.

King. What shall I do
To deserve of this Man --

Gov. If ye more bemoan him,
Or mitigate your power to preserve him,
L'le curse from the Gods, call up their vengeance,

Enter Quisara, with her hands bound, Quisana and Panura. And fling on your
Land and you; I have a charge for it;
I hope to wrack you all.
King. What ails my Sister?
Why is she bound? Why looks she so (...)?
Who durst do this?

Quisan. We did it, pardon, Sir,
And for her preservation -- she is grown wild,
And raving on the strangers love and honor,
Sometimes crying out, help, help, they will torture him,
They will take his life, they will murder him presently,
If we had not prevented, violently
She had laid hands on her own life.

Gov. These are tokens
The God's displeasure is gone out, be quick,
And e're it fall, do something to appease 'em,
You know the (...) -- I am glad it works thus.

Quisar. How low and base thou look now, that were noble?
No figure of a King methinks shows on you,
No face of Majesty, foul (...),
Has taken off thy sweetness, base forgetfulness
Of mighty benefits has turned thee a (...),
Thou have persecuted goodness, (...),
And laid a (...) and violent hand on virtue,
On that fair (...) at should teach and guide us;
Thus have thou (...) (...) preserver, (...) least merit
Poised with thy (...), (...) (...) not (...),
Nay, put thy lise into it, would be (...) still:
What have thou done?

Gov. Go for him presently,
And once more we will try if we can win him (...):
If not, let nothing she says hinder ye, (...) (...);
She speaks distractedly -- do that the Gods command ye:
Do you know what ye say, Lady?

Quisar. I curse thee too,
Religion and (...) has sheel'd thee,
Has (...) thy heart to stone, thou have made the Gods hard too,
Against their sweet and patient natures, cruel:
None of ye feel what bravery ye tread on?
What innocence? what beauty?

King. Pray be patient.

Quisar. What honorable thing ye cast behind ye?
What monuments of (...)

Enter Armusia and Guard. King. Once more, Armusia,
Because I love you tenderly and dearly,
And would be glad to win ye mine, I wish ye,
Even from my heart, I wish and woe ye --

Arm. What, Sir?
Take heed how ye persuade me falsely, then ye hate me;
Take heed how ye entrap me.

King. I advise ye,
And tenderly and truly I advise ye,
Both for your Souls health and your safety.

Arm. Stay,
And name my Soul no more, she is too precious,
Too'glorious for your flatteries, too secure too.

Gov. Consider the reward, and the honor
That is prepared, the glory you shall grow (...).

Arm. They are not to be considered in these cases,
Not to be named when Souls are questioned;
They are vain and flying vapors -- touch my life,
It Is ready for ye, put it to what Test
It shall please ye, I am patient; but for the rest.

Gov. We must use (...) then.

Arm. Your worst and painfull'st,
I am joyful to accept.

Gov. You must the sharpest,
For such has been your hate against our Deities,
Delivered openly, your threats and scornings,
And either your repentance must be mighty,
Which is your free conversion to our customs,
Or equal punishment, which is your life, Sir.

Arm. I am glad I have it for ye, take it Priest,
And all the misery that shall attend it,
Let the Gods glut themselves with Christian blood,
It will be asked again, and so far followed,
So far revenged, and with such holy Justice,
Your Gods of Gold shall melt and sink before it;
Your Altars and your Temples shake to nothing,
And you false Worshipper, blind fools of Ceremonies,
Shall seek for holes to hide your heads and fears in,
For Seas to swallow you from this destruction,
Darkness to dwell about ye, and conceal ye.

Gov. Make the fires ready,
And bring the several (...) out.

Quisar. Stand fast, Sir,
And fear 'em not, you that have stepped so nobly
Into this pious trial, start not now,
Keep on your way, a Virgin will assist ye,
A Virgin won by your fair constancy,
And glorying that she is won so, will die by ye,
I have touched ye every way, tried you most honest,
Perfect, good and chaste, blushing chaste, and temperate,
Valiant without vain glory, (...), stayed,
No rage nor light (...) rulling in you:
Indeed the perfect school of worth, I find ye,
The Temple of true honor.

Arm. Whither will she?
What do you (...) by this (...) argument, Lady?

Quisar. Your faith and your Religion must be like ye,
They that can show you these, must be pure mirrours,
When the streams flow pure and fair, what are the fountains?
I do embrace your faith, Sir, and your fortune;
Go on, I Will assist ye, I feel a spark here,
A lively spark that (...) my affections,
And tells me it will rise to flames of glory:
Let 'em put on their angers, suffer nobly,
Show me the way, and when I faint, instruct me;
And if I follow not --

Arm. O blessed Lady,
Since thou art won, let me begin my triumph,
Come, clap your terrors on.

Quisar. All your Hell tortures,
For there is nothing he shall suffer, Brother,
I swear by my new faith, which is most sacred,
And I will keep it so, but I will follow in,
And follow to a scruple of affliction,
In spite of all your Gods without prevention,

Gov. Death, she amazes me.

King. What shall be done now?

Gov. They must dye both,
And suddenly, they will corrupt all else,
This Woman makes me (...) of my mischief,
She shakes me, and she staggers me, go in Sir,
I Will see the Execution.

King. Not so sudden,
If they go, all my friends and Sisters perish.

Gov. Would I were (...) at home again.

Enter Messenger. Mess. Arms, Arms, Sir,
(...) for defense, the Castle plays and thunders,
The Town rock's, and the houses fly in the Air,
The people (...) for fear -- Captain Ruy Dias
Has made an Oath, he will not leave a (...) here;
No, not the memory, here has stood a City,
Unless Armusia be delivered fairly.

King. I have my fears; what can our Gods do now for us?

Gov. Be patient, but keep him still, he is a (...), Sir,
Against both rage and (...): go and fortify,
Call in the Princess, make the Palace sure,
And let 'em know you are a King, look nobly,
And take your courage to ye: keep close the Prisoner,
And under command, we are betrayed else.

Arm. How joyfully I go?

Quisar. Take my heart with thee.

Gov. I hold a Wolf by the ear now.
[Exeunt.
Enter four Townfinen. First. Bless us, what a thundering is here, what fire
spitting. We cannot drink but our Cans are mauled out of our hands.


Second. I, would they would maul our scores too, a shame on their Guns, how
divelishly they bounce, and how the Bullets borrow a side of a House here, and
there another, and mends those up again with another Parish.


Third. I had the Roof of my House taken off with a Chain shot, and half an
hour after, I found another standing in the room on it.


Fourth. We shall make a wonderful siege on it, if we talk at this rate.


Second. You think he lies now, why, I have seen a Steeple taken off, and
another clapped in the place, with twenty men ringing the Bells in it.


Fourth. Thou Boy.


First. Why then we shall not know our own Parish Churches again.


Second. Nor where to pay our Parish Duties, I hope.

I should love Chain shot the better as long as I live, for that good turn,
'ifaith: I know not, it may fall out so, for these Guns make strange work, here
flies a powdring Tub, and there the Soldiers go together by the Ears for the
(...), there flies the Roast (...), Spit and all, here a Barrel pisses Vinegar.


Fourth. A vengeance fire 'em all.


First. They fire fast enough, they need no help.


Fourth. Are these the Portugal Bulls, how loud they bellow?


Second. Their Horns are wonderful strong, they push down Palaces, they toss
our little habitations like Whelps, like trundle (...) with their heels
upwards, all the windows in the Town dance Trenchmore, it is like to prove a
blessed age for the Glasiers; I met a hand and a Letter in it in great have, and
by and by a Leg running after it, as if the hand had forgot part of his Errand.


Fourth. Heads fly like Footballs, every where what shall we do?


Second. I care not, my Shop's Cancelled, and all the Pots and Pipkins vanished,
there was a single Bullet, and they together by (...) Ears, you would a thought
Tom Tumbler and all his Troop of (...) had been there,


Third. But do the Canon Bullets think there is no Law.


Second. No, nor Gospel neither; a Canon Bullet makes no more of a Christian,
than Mounsieur Montbrun does of a Turk, then for Law, prithee run to a Granado,
when it comes piping hot out of a mortar piece into the Town, and tell it,
there is Law, 'twill scratch thy face for thee, worse than e're thy Wife did.
Law, I do but think what Lanes a Chain shot would make in the Law, And how like
an Ass a Judge would sit upon the Bench with his Head shot off.


Third. Let Us to the King, and get this Gentleman delivered handsomely, by this
Hand, there is no walking above ground else.


Second. By this Leg, let me swear nimbly by it, for I know not how long I
shall own it, if I were out of the Town, if I came in again to fetch my
Breakfast, I Would give 'em leave to cram me with a Portugal pudding. But come
Neighbors, our best way will be to go to the assurance Office and compound, I
am a Fencer, I Will give 'em one Arm to secure the other. Thou art a Dancing
Master, thou shall give thy Head to secure thy Heels.


Third. Why my Head?


Second. Because that is of least use to thee, of any thing about thee; so every
man shall give away the rest of his Body to insure the Limbs that are of most
use in his Calling.


Enter Pyniero and Panura. Pyn. Art sure it was the blind Priest?

Pan. Yes, most certain,
He has provoked all this; the King is merciful,
And wondrous loving, but he fires him on still,
And when he cools, inrages him, I know it:
Threatens new vengeance, and the Gods fair Justice,
When he but looks with fair eyes on Armusia,
Will lend him no time to relent; my Royal Mistress,
She has entertained a Christian hope.

Pyn. Speak truly.

Pan. Nay, it is most true, but Lord, how he lies at her,
And threatens her, and flatters her, and damns her
And I fear, if not speedily prevented,
If she continue stout, both shall be executed.

Pyn. I Will kiss thee for this news: nay, poor Panura,
If thou will give me leave, I Will get thee with Christian,
The best way to convert thee.

Pan. Make me believe so.

Pyn. I will, In Faith, but which way (...) thee hither?
The Palace is close guarded and barricado'd.

Pan. I came through a private Vault, which few there know of,
It rises in a Temple not far hence,
Gloss by the (...) here.

Pyn. How -- to what end?

Pan. A good one,
To give you knowledge of my newborn Mistress,
(...) in what doubt Armusia stands,
Think any (...) (...) or hope to stop 'em
From their fell ends: the Princes are come in too,
And they are hardened also.

Pyn. The damned Priest --

Pan. Sure he is a cruel man, (...) thinks Religion
(...) teach (...) temperate Lessons.

Pyn. (...), the fire brand?
He dare to touch at such fair lives as their's are?
Well Prophet, I shall (...), I shall catch ye,
When all your Prophesies will not redeem (...)?
Will thou do one thing bravely?

Pan. Any good I am able.

Pyn. And by (...) own white hand, swear thou art virtuous,
(...) a brave Wench, durst thou but guide me presently,
(...) the same Vault (thou came) into the Palace,
(...) these I shall appoint, such as I think fit.

Pan. Yes, I will do it, and suddenly, and truly.

Pyn. I would (...) behold this Prophet.

Pan. Now I have ye,
And I (...) bring ye where ye shall behold him,
Alone too, and unfurnished of Defenses:
That shall be my care but you must not betray me.

Pyn. Do thou think we are so base? such slavish, rogues.

Pan. I do not,
And you shall see how fairly I Will work for ye.

Pyn. I must needs steal that Priest,
Steal him, and hang him.

Pan. Do any thing to remove his mischiefs, strangle him.

Pyn. Come, prithee.

Pan. You Will offer me no foul play,
The Vault is dark.

Pyn. 'Twas well remembered.

Pan. And ye may --
But I hold ye honest.

Pyn. Honest enough, I Will warrant thee.

Pan. I am but a poor weak (...); and what with the place,
And your (...), Sir -- But I hope you will not?
You know we are often couzened.

Pyn. If thou do fear me,
Why do thou put me in mind?

Pan. To let you know, Sir,
Though it be in your power, and things sitting to it,
Yet a true Gentleman --

Pyn. I know what he will do:
Come, and remember me, and I Will answer thee,
I Will answer thee to the full, we will call at the Castle,
And then my good guide do thy will, shall find me
A very tractable man.

Pan. I hope I shall Sir.
[Exeunt.
Enter Bakam, Syana, and Soldiers. Bak. Let my men guard the Gates.

Sya. (...) the Temple,
For fear the honor of our Gods should suffer,
And on your lives be watchful.

Bak. And be valiant;
And let us see if these Portugals dare enter;
What their high hearts (...) do, let us see how readily
The great Ruy Dias will redeem his Countryman,
He speaks proud words, and threatens.

Sy. He is approved, Sir,
And will put fair for what he promises;
I could wish friendlier terms,
Yet for our Liberties, and for our Gods,
We are bound in our best Service,
Even in the hazard of our lives.

Enter the King above. King. Come up, Princes,
And give your Counsels and your helps, the Fort still
Plays fearfully upon us, beats our buildings,
And turns our people wild with fears.

Ba. Send for the prisoner,
And give us leave to argue.
[Ex. Ba. and Sy.
Then Enter Ruy Dias, Emanuel, Chpistophero, Pedro, with Soldiers. Ruy. Come
on nobly,
And let the fort play still, we are
Strong enough to look upon 'em,
And return at pleasure; it may
Be on our view, they will return him.

Em. How the people stare,
And some cry, some pray, and some curse heartily,
But it is the King --

Enter Syana, Bakam, Quisara, Armusia, with Soldiers above. Ruy. I cannot
blame their wisdom.
They are all above, Armusia chained and bound (...)
O these are thankful Squires.

Ba. Hear us, Ruy Dias,
Be wise, and hear us, and give speedy answer,
Command thy Canon presently to cease,
No more to trouble the afflicted people,
Or suddenly Armusia's Head goes off
As Suddenly as --

Em. Stay, Sir, be moderate.

Arm. Do nothing that is dishonorable, Ruy Dias,
Let not the fear of me master thy Valor;
Pursue 'em still, they are base malicious people,

King. Friend, be not desperate.

Arm. I scorn your courtesies;
Strike when you dare. A fair Arm guide the Gunner,
And may he let fly still with fortune, friend,
Do me the honor of a Soldiers Funeral,
The last fair Christians right, see me in the ground,
And let the Palace burn first, then the Temples,
And on their scorned Gods Erect my Monument.
Touchnot the Princess, as you are a Soldier.

Quisar. Which way you go, Sir,
I must follow necessarily,
One Life and one Death.

King. Will you take a truce yet?

Enter Pyniero, Soza and Soldiers, with the Governor. Pyn. No, no, go on:
Look here, your God, your Prophet.

King. How came he taken?

Pyn. I conjured for him, King,
I am sure, ever, at an old blind Prophet,
I Will haunt ye such a false Knave, admirably,
A terrier like, I eathed him, and then snapt him.

Soz. Saving the Reverence of your Grace, we stole him,
E'ne out of the next Chamber to ye.

Pyn. Come, come, begin, King,
Begin this bloody matter when you dare;
And yet I scorn my Sword should touch the Rascal,
(...) tear him thus before ye, ha?
What (...) thou?

[Pulls his Beard and Hair off. King. How Is this!
Art thou a Prophet?

Ruy. Come down, Princes.

King. We are abused --
Oh my most dear Armusia --
Off with his (...), and now my noble Sister
Rejoice with me, I know ye are pleased as I am.

Pyn. This is a precious Prophet, why Don Governor,
What make you here? how long have ye taken orders?

Ruy. Why, what a wretch
Art thou to work this mischief?
To assume this Holy shape, to ruin honor,
Honor and Chastity?

Enter King, and all from above. Gov. I had paid you all,
But Fortune played the slut, come,
Give me my doom.

King. I cannot speak for wonder.

Gov. Nay, it is I, Sir,
And here I stay your sentence.

King. Take her, friend,
You have half persuaded me to be a Christian,
And with her, all the (...) and all the blessings,
Why, what Dreams have we (...) (...)?

Ruy. All peace to ye,
And (...) the happiness of heart dwell with ye,
Children as sweet and as Noble as (...) (...).

Pyn. And King at (...).

Arm. Good Sir, forget my (...)
And noble Princes, for (...)
And out of that might utter (...)
Think not it is my Nature.

Sya. Your joy is ours, Sir,
And nothing we find in ye, but most noble.

King. To prison with the Dog, there let him howl,
And (if he can Repent,) sigh out his Villainies,
His Island we shall seize into our hands,
His Father and himself have both usurped it,
And kept it by oppression, the Town and Castle,
In which I lay my self most miserably,
Till my most honorable friend Redeemed me,
Signiour Piniero, I bestow on you,
The rest of next command upon these Gentlemen,
Upon ye all my Love.

Arm. O Brave, Ruy Dias,
You have started now beyond me.

Ruy. I am glad I had her for you, Sir.

King. Come, Princes,
Come, Friends and Lovers all, come, Noble Gentlemen,
No more Guns now, nor hates, but Joys and Triumphs,
An universal gladness fly about us,
And know however subtle men dare taste,
And promise wrack, the Gods give peace at last.

EPILOGUE.
WHy there should be an Epilogue to a Play,
I know no cause, the old and usual way,
For which they were made, was to entreat the Grace
Of such as were Spectators in this place;
But now, it is to no purpose; for I know
What you resolve already to bestow,
Will not be altered, whatsoever I say
In the behalf of us, and of the Play:
Though w'ave done our best for your contents to (...)
With new pains, this old Monument of wit;
Only to quit our doubts, if you think meet,
You may, or cry it up, or silence it.
FINIS.

