For Information to all People where to Deliver their LETTERS By the Penny
Post. The following LIST is an Account of the several Houses within the City
and Liberty of WESTMINSTER to TEMPLE BAR Without, And some other Adjacent
Parts, appointed by the Undertakers for Receiving Letters and Pacquets under a
Pound Weight, to be Conveyed to all or any part of the said City: As also of
LONDON, and all the Parishes within the Weekly Bills of Mortality.
Streets and Places
Albemarle house Edward Smith at the Poet 's Head Victualler. Bloomsbury
William Laithwait at the Half Moon near the Market Grocer. Gray 's Coffee-house
in Silver-street Bowling-Alley John Gravenor at the Sugar Loaf and Tobacco
Role. Bow-street. John Haynes a Tynnman over against Will's Coffee-house.
Burleigh Street Prestons Coffee-house. Charing Cross Royal Highness
Coffee-house. St. Clem. Backside John Dyer at the 3 Crowns Hosier Compton
Street Henry Golding at the Scotch Arms Bricklayer. Drewry Lane Nathaniel
Chandler at White-hart Corner Cheesmonger. Drewry Lane by Russel Street End
Duke Street Samuel Spike at the Bell Oylman. Durham Yard John Mooring at the
Three Blackymoors Heads Cane-shop. Essex Buildings Thomas Orrell Bookseller.
Exeter Change Hunts Coffee-house. Exeter Street Richard Atkins a Barber against
the Red Cow. Horse Ferry Westminster John Thompson at White Heart Inn. James 's
Street Patrick Cox, Corner of Long-Acre Strong Water-shop. St. Jameses Stroud
's Coffee-house. St. James 's Market Daniel Elliot Scrivenor. King Street
Andrew Forester near the Miter Tavern, Bookseller. Nath. Knowles at the Three
Squirrels Salesman. King Street Covent Garden The Christian Coffee-House by
Bedford-bury. Kings-Gate Holbourn Lambeth William Smith at the Crown by the
Bridge Victualler. St. Martins Lane William Billingsley at the Bull Head Pattin
Maker. Middle Change Rowland Reynolds Stationer. St. Giles Middle Row. William
Fernhead Cheesmonger at the Milkmaid. New Chapel in Pettit France Robert Dance
at the Star and Crown. Newport Street John Harding at the Anchor and Bible
Stationer. Old Gate horse Pall Mall William Not at the King and Queens Arms
Stationer. Panton Street Stephen Pearse Barber by Leicester Fields. Peter
Street John Googe at the Two Brewers Chandler. Pickadilly, Richard Tomkins
Salesman at the Blew Ball. Pickadilly, by Secret. Coventrey's Elizabeth Barnes
at the Three Stills a Distiller. Prince Street by Drewry Lane John Coppinger
Distiller. Great Queen Street Thomas Bourn near Drewry-Lane Barber. Round Court
John Allison Shoemaker. Shandois Street Tho. Barter Bodies-maker near St.
Martins Lane. Strand Charles Ledsam against Northumberland-house Stationer.
Duke 's Coffee-house near Hungerford House. Charles Blunt in York Buildings,
Bookseller. Strand Bridge Thomas Aylway at the Crown and Unicorn Stationer.
Suffolk Street By Almshouses Thomas Bant Distiller. Thieving Lane by St.
Margar. Chapter Thomas Weakly at the Pestle and Mortar Grocer. Vere Street William
Halsted at the Long Bow Coffee-house. Whitehall Arch Hercules Rookes Milliner.
Westminster Elizabeth Naylor at the Hall Gate Stationer. William Hensman in the
Hall Bookseller. Wiche Street Anthony Dewey a Joyner. Windmill-Street in So Ho
John Jennings against the Butchers Arms Chandler.
For as much as that advantageous Design of the Penny Post Letters is not
thoroughly understood, it is thought convenient to give this following Account.
THe Undertakers will receive all Letters at their several Receiving Houses
from 7 in the morning till 9 at night; but not after, unless the next morning
will serve turn for their delivery.

That Letters to most of the remote parts within their undertaking, shall be
delivered within three hours after the receipt, and in less than half the time
to places nearer at hand.

And for the better Information to all Persons willing to receive the great
benefit of this Undertaking, there are Alphabetical Tables printing, which they
intend to disperse, containing all the Receiving Houses, within the Bills of
Mortality; and they hope all Ingenuous Persons will duly consider that
beginnings are difficult, and therefore will for the present favorably
interpret small failures in the delay of some Messengers, who are not yet so
well versed, as a short time may demonstrate, by this Design being brought to
perfection; all persons whom they employ, being to give the Undertakers
security to answer defaults: And no Letters but have come safe to hand, except
three or four, that are directed to persons that cannot be found.

There is also other Lists of Receiving Houses, printed for most parts of the
City of London and Suburbs, etc. and dispersed in their proper places, for
Direction to all Persons where to leave their Letters with

One Penny.


