TWO SERMONS, The First, Preached in Christ-Church, Dublin: Feb. 19. 1681. AT
THE CONSECRATION Of the Right Reverend Fathers in God WILLIAM Lord Bishop of
Kildare, WILLIAM Lord Bishop of Kilmore, AND RICHARD Lord Bishop of Kilalla.
The Other, Preached in The Cathedral Church of St. Patrick: At the Primary
Visitation of the Most Reverend Father in God, FRANCIS Lord Archbishop of
Dublin, Apr. 24. 1682.

By S. FOLEY, A.M. Fellow of Trinity College near Dublin: and Chaplain to His
Grace.

LONDON: Printed for Moses Pitt^ at the Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1683.

To the Right Reverend Fathers in God, WILLIAM, Lord Bishop of Kildare,
WILLIAM, Lord Bishop of Kilmore, AND RICHARD, Lord Bishop of Kilalla.
My Lords,
THE Sermon which I had the Honor to Preach at the Consecration of Your
Lordships, I do now Publish, in hopes that it may give a little Satisfaction to
some mistaken People, who may happen to read it; and I dedicate it to Your
Lordships, in hopes that Your Lordships will demonstrate, that that is feasible
which I say will be expected from, and that that Respect is deserved by, which
I say is due to, those of Your Lordships Order.

I am my Lords, Your most dutiful and humble Servant, SAMVEL FOLEY.

A Consecration SERMON PREACHED In Christ-Church, Dublin: Feb. 19. 1681.
The beginning of the Epistle appointed by the Church for this Service, being
1. Timothy, iii. 1. This is a true Saying, if a man desire the Office of a
Bishop, he desires a good work.


ST. Paul having in the preceding Chapters given Timothy some general Account
of the true Faith, and suitable Worship of God; as a necessary means for the
continuing and extending of the one, and for the becoming performance of the
other, proceeds in this, to treat of the Government of the Church. And by way
of Introduction to what relates to the particular Offices, of those persons who
were to be respectively concerned in it, He makes a Declaration to this
purpose: That whosoever desires to be invested with that Power and Authority
which of Right belong to the highest and most eminent of them, he desires an
Employment worthy and honorable, an Office by which he may be enabled to do
some Service to his great Creator, be a public Blessing to the Age he lives
in, a Dispenser of God's Favors to men, and as it were an Agent to maintain
and keep up a Correspondence between Earth and Heaven. For this I judge a
Paraphrase not strained on the Apostles words, This is a true Saying, etc.

Being to speak before this great and honorable Audience, upon this Occasion
and Subject, I shall humbly beg leave to make a modest Enquiry into these
following particulars.

First, Whence our present Bishops have their Authority?

Secondly, Whether Episcopacy has any Advantages above other Forms of
Church Government?

Thirdly, What may be justly and reasonably expected from Persons entrusted
with that Sacred Authority?

Fourthly, What Honor and Respect is due from us to them?

By what I shall say in resolution hereunto, 'twill I hope be plain enough,
That he desires a good Work, who desires the Office of a Bishop.

I begin with the

First Enquiry, Whence our present Bishops have their Authority?

That ever since these Nations have pretended to Adore Jesus Christ as their
Lord and Redeemer, They have, in Obedience to him, Worshipped God, after a way
not known before, is denied by none. That all who have agreed in this belief
and way of Worship, have reputed themselves in that respect, a Community
different from Civil Bodies Politic, is as evident; from their Exercising and
Submitting to, an Authority distinct from all Civil Power. That Bishops have
been the Chief merely Spiritual Governors of this Society, from the very first
Constitution of it here, and that those Venerable Persons whom we now call
Bishops, have received the Spiritual Authority they claim from others of that
Order and Title, who received the same from their Predecessors, and so in a
continued series, from the first entertainment of that Religion in these
Islands (were it necessary) might with much ease be clearly made out. So that
the Question will be reduced to very narrow Terms, What Authority, and from
whom, the first planters of Christianity among us, were entrusted with to
Communicate to others? For more full Satisfaction in this matter, it being
liable to many mistakes of evil consequence, I shall lay down what I have to
say concerning it, in these distinct and plain Propositions.

1. That Our Blessed Savior had Power and Authority to Institute, and Form a
Society over the whole World, to be governed by such Laws and such Officers as
he should appoint.

This is evident both from the Prophecies concerning the Isaiah, ix. 6.
Messiah in the Old Testament; That the Government should be upon his
Shoulders, and the like; and also from what is said of Jesus Christ, in the
New. That Acts x. 38. Hebr. iii. 1. 1 Pet. ii. 25. Mat. xxviii. 18. Proprie
Episcopus Dominus Jesus est. Origin on Mat. xxiv.
God Anointed him with the Holy Ghost, and as it were Consecrated him to be
Universal Pastor, and the great Apostle and High Priest of our Profession, and
Bishop of our Souls, and that he had all Power both in Heaven and in Earth: and
that he did in his own Person Rule and Govern, make Laws and constitute
Governors, and not only did he declare Gods Will to Mankind, but did also take
order that such Persons should be admitted into that his Society by Baptism, as
were willing to submit to the Rules and Constitutions of it.

2. That Our Savior committed the Government of this Society, to those who in
the Evangelists are called Apostles. This appears from the tenor of the
Commission which he gave them, when he breathed on them the John xx. 21, 22.
Holy Ghost. As my Father sent me, so send I you. Whosesoever sins ye remit
they are remitted unto them, and whosesoever Sins ye retain, they are retained.

3. The same Authority which was given to the Apostles to Govern this Society
(excepting those attendants of Gifts, as of Tongues, doing Miracles, and the
like Extraordinary Helps and Supplies, which the Necessity of the Primitive
Church required, till it came in the Unity of the Faith unto a perfect Man,
unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, as St. Paul expresses
it) was for ever to continue to their Successors.

This appears from the very Nature and Design of that Government which Christ
appointed; it being so absolutely necessary to the preservation Ephesians. iv.
of his Society, and consequently of his Religion, that such a Society could
not subsist without it; and therefore as necessary to continue that Society, as
first to form it. Some will think more necessary in succeding Ages, than at
that time, when our Savior's Miracles were so fresh in their remembrance;
their Devotion so new, and their Zeal so warm and vigorous. We likewise find
this plainly intimated in the Commission which Christ gave his Apostles. Mat.
xxviii. 18, 20.
Go and teach; or make Disciples in all Nations, and lo I am with you always
even unto the end of the World. Now they themselves were not to live so long,
and therefore this special Presence and Assistance, must be understood to have
been promised to their Successors also.

Farther, Christ sent them as his Father sent him; that is, with such Authority
to Ordain others, and to Institute Ecclesiastical Discipline, and so to make
Successors, and to communicate to them of that Spirit, which he breathed on
them, as Moses did to Joshua, Deuteronomy. xxxiv. 9.
the Spirit of Wisdom, by laying their hands upon them. And hence it was that
St. Paul told the Bishops of Asia, upon whom he had laid his hands, when upon
his Summons They met him at Miletus, Acts xx. 28.
That the Holy Ghost had made them Overseers, or Bishops, over the Church of
God. I may add, that all Disputers in this Cause, and all Pretenders to
different Forms of Church Government, do Acknowledge some Form to be always
necessary, and consequently Authority to Rule and Govern, for ever to reside in
some Persons or other.

4. That Bishops, be the true extent of their Authority what it will, are
declared to be in Scripture, and were looked upon in the first Ages (h) of the
Church, as Successors to the Apostles; and so Authorized by Christ to Govern
this Society.

Thus far we have but little Controversy with the main Opposers of Episcopacy.
For they cannot deny but that our Bishops are Presbyters, and therefore if, (as
they will have it) Presbyters were the Ancient Bishops, and are Successors to
the Apostles, our Bishops upon that account are so. If therefore we be
satisfied that Our Savior gave some Power and Authority to his Apostles, with
a design that They should leave it to others, to be transmitted through all
Ages St. Cyprian, Epist. 75. p. 225. Edit. Oxon. Potestas peccatorum
remittendorum Apostolis data est, and Ecclesiis quas illi a Christo missi
Constituerunt, and Episcopis qui eis Ordinatione Vicaria successerunt.
successively, to some fit persons, for the Exigencies of the Church; and that
our Bishops are Successors to those Apostles (which one Party of our Churches
Adversaries are obliged to own, by virtue of their being Presbyters; and which
the other have no pretense to deny here in Ireland, whatever Fables For
Confutation of which, See Mason's Vindiciae Ecclesiae Anglicanae, Primate
Bramhali's Works, and the Second Part of Dr. Burnet's History of the
Reformation.
they have invented, to disparage the English Consecrations; we being able to
prove, That our present Bishops of Ireland were Consecrated by For Instance.
His Grace the Most-Reverend Father in God, Michael Boil, the present Lord
Archbishop of Armagh, and Primate of all Ireland; together with Dr. Margetson,
the Late Primate of Ireland: the truly Learned and Pious Dr. John Parker, late
Lord Archbishop of Dublin, Dr. Pullen, then Archbishop of Tuam, and the
present Lord Archbishop of Cashell, and Seven other Bishops who died since,
were Consecrated Jan. 27. 1660. By Dr. John Bramhall, Archbishop of Armagh,
who was Consecrated May, 26. 1634. by Primate Usher, who was Consecrated Anno
1621. by Primate Hampton, who was Consecrated May, 5. 1613. by Dr. Thomas
Jones, who was Consecrated, by Adam Lostus, Archbishop of Dublin, 12. May,
1584. who was Consecrated by Hugh Curwin, Anno 1562. who was Consecrated
Archbishop of Dublin, September. 8. 1555. being the Third Year of Queen Mary,
together with James Turberville Bishop of Exceter, and William Glin, Bishop of
Bangor: This appears out of our Records, and by this may any of the present
Lords Bishops of Ireland, Justify their Consecration.
such Bishops, as received their Consecration from other Consecrated Bishops;
and so on to before the Reformation; from Records never in the least questioned
or suspected) we must Acknowledge that what Authority our present Bishops have,
They have from Christ Jesus.

The way being thus far cleared, before I proceed to the main thing behind, to
wit; To demonstrate, that Bishops are a distinct Order from and above
Presbyters, by that Authority They have received from Christ, I shall deduce
some few Corollaries from what has been said, such as:

1. It Is evident from hence, That when the Apostles Ordained Bishops, they did
it by Authority given them by our Savior; and not only in pursuance of a
Jewish Custom of creating Elders, which the famous Mr. Seldom so much contends
Seldom de Synedriis, Lib. 1. Cap. 14.
for. Had they not done it upon an Account peculiar to Christianity, St. Paul
when a Jew, and a most violent Persecutor of Christ's Church, had had as full
Authority to make Bishops as when a Apostle, and must have derived it not from
the Holy Ghost, (as he constantly Affirms) but from his Master Gamaliel.

2. Hence it follows, That Bishops have not their Authority from the Civil
Magistrate. There is a great difference between the designation of a Person to
an Office, and the giving him Authority in it. Thus a Mayor of a Corporation is
Chosen by the Burgesses of it, but receives his Authority from the King alone;
and so in many other instances. And therefore this Assertion of ours, cannot be
suspected as any way prejudicial to our Princes Ancient Right of Electing
Bishops. The Church is a Society, and Body Politic distinct from that of the
Commonwealth; which appears from hence, That it did subsist when separated
from, and persecuted by all Civil-Powers; it is founded upon Principles
different from the Law of Nature, and common Notions of Mankind, and settled by
Divine Positive Laws; and consequently the Government of it must be
proportionable. And they who resolve to hold the contrary Opinion, may take its
Foundation along with it, and believe the Gospel it self to be no Law, but as
Enacted by the Civil Magistrate.

3. We may hence infer, that all other Bishops are not merely Substitutes of
the Bishop of Rome, and that he in the Right of St. Peter, is not the Only
Bishop, who has his Authority from Christ, so that all must receive theirs
from him. This was with much Vehemence and equal Applause, defended in the
Hist. Council of Trent, Lib. 7. page 574. of the last Edition. Engl.
Council of Trent, by Father Laynez, General of the Jesuits: and Friar Simon a
Florentine, did there likewise maintain, That the Institution of Bishops in the
Apostles, was only Personal, and ended with them. But this (as the good Bishop
of Paris then said) is a Novel Doctrine; first invented by Cajetane to gain a
Cardinalship; and as such was Censured by the Doctors of the Sorbonne, and
Richerius a Richerius. Cap. 10. Sect. 11.
Sorbonne Doctor, in his History of General Councills, lately Printed; has made
it out, That in Ancient Times the very Italian Bishops themselves, did
subscribe Bishops, Dei Gratia, without any mention of the Pope, or Apostolic
See.

4. We may likewise hence conclude, That Bishops have not, nor ought to have
their Authority from the People. That they had, in the Apostles days, was held
by Mr. Hobbes; Leviathan. Cap. 22.
and he says, It Is so declared in Scripture. But it is plain, that he makes it
the same thing, to Elect and to Ordain, which the Acts vi. 5. The whole
Multitude Chose Stephen and Philip, etc. Verse. 6. Whom they set before the
Apostles, who, when they had Prayed, laid their Hands on them.
Scriptures make very different. As to what relates to the People, it does
indeed appear from Antiquity; that They were somewhat concerned in the Election
of Bishops; Of this matter see a full and satisfactory Account, in the History
of the present Separation, by the Worthy and most Learned Dr. Stillingfleet,
Part 3. Sect. 24.25.
but 'twas only by way of Approbation, and that St. Paul's Rule might be the
better observed, That a Bishop be Blameless, and of Good Report. And that they
were of Good Report the People could best testify. But this occasioned many
disturbances, so that Christian Magistrates were forced sometimes to interpose,
and at last upon prudent Considerations 'twas quite dis-used.

Having settled these matters, I come now to prove, that Bishops by virtue of
this Authority which they have from Christ, are above Presbyters. I must desire
to be excused that I do not make the Enquiry, Whether Bishops be of a distinct
Order from that of Presbyters, Jure Divino or not. Which by the Advantage of
Ambiguous expressions, made use of by some unwarily, by others on purpose, and
by the motives of Interest and Envy, has been made the subject of much dispute,
and of many Books in this last Age. This I have designedly declined meddling
with. For unless we be willing Eternally to wrangle and dispute, and to make
the Controversy to last as long as the Order it self, even to the end of the
World; We must state the Question plainly, and after some sort, that we may
find a clear decision of it some way or other. And I know none more fair than
this: Whether the Apostles before their Martyrdoms committed the Authority,
which Christ gave them of Governing his Church, and the inferior Officers of
it, and of Ordaining others in every Church to single Persons, or to several in
Conjunction.

To determine this, Let us first consult the Holy Scriptures.

We find that the first Successor to any of the Apostles, who was made by them,
was Matthias; who when Judas- had fallen away, though he was a Disciple, by the
direction of the Holy Ghost, Acts i.
was assm'd to a higher degree, to the dignity of an Apostle. The Apostles were
above the 70 Disciples. Philip did Preach, Baptize, did Miracles, and Converted
the Samaritans, but his Converts did not receive the Holy Ghost, till that St.
Peter and St. John, came down from Jerusalem, and laid their hands upon them.
Acts. viii. 14.15. And that Matthias before he was made Successor to Judas, was
one of the 70. Disciples. Vid. Eusebii Hist. Eccl. Lib. 1. Cap. 12.
St. Peter says, To take Judas his Bishopric.

We find St. James (who was not That James the Brother of our Lord was not one
of the Twelve, Valesius shows at large, in his Notes on the same Chapter. Not.
Page 20.
of the Twelve, and whom all Ecclesiastical Histonias reckon) Bishop of
Jerusalem, that he resided constantly there, and that any matter of importance
which happened, was communicated unto him. That the Presbyters attended on him:
that when St. Peter was delivered out of Prison by an Angel, he bade them whom
he first met, Acts xii. 17.
to go and show those things unto James, and unto the Brethren; and that St.
Paul, as soon Acts xxi. 18.
as he came to Jerusalem, after his Fourteen Years Preaching to the Gentiles,
went in unto James, and all the Elders were present. Though the Presbyters were
all there, he made his Application in a particular manner to St. James. And in
the First Council held there upon occasion of a Controversy about keeping the
Law of Moses, St. James determined as one in Authority, in these words: Acts.
xv. 19.
Wherefore my Sentence is. St. Paul committed his Authority at Ephesus to
Timothy; we find him give him in Charge, That he should not receive an
Accusation against a Presbyters, but confirmed by two or three witnesses, 1 Timothy v. 19, 20.
and him that sinned, to Rebuke before all, that others also might fear. So by
his Place we see that he might receive an Accusation, and summon Witnesses
before him, and Examine them, and give Sentence against Presbyters, which he
could not have done, had they been his Equals. Besides, he was charged with a
solemn adjuration Verse. 21.
before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Elect Angels, to do these things
without Partiality; which shows that by his Authority he was able to show
favors to some Presbyters above others, and that his Partiality would have
been of great Consequence. The same St. Paul made Titus Metropolitan of Creet,
gave him Authority 1 Titus, v.
To Ordain Elders in every City. And as to what cencerns the rest of the
Apostles, we may believe They endeavored that there should be Uniformity in
all Churches, which it is plain 1 Cor. vii. 17. 1 Cor. xiv. 33.
St. Paul labored much after: and Uniformity could not be, had they instituted
different Forms of Government in them.

But no considering Person will think it strange, that the particular Form of
Government is not more expressly described in the Relation we have in those
Sacred Books, of what was done by the Apostles immediately after our Saviors
Ascension. They could not of a sudden settle all matters; nor was it necessary
that They should appoint Successors long before they were to leave them.
Besides, the Account which we have of what they did, is very short. St. Luke
was the only Person who Composed and left to Posterity, Commentaries o their
Acts. In them we find little of St. Peter; but what was transacted within a
Year or two after his Masters Ascension; little of St. Paul, but his
Conversion, and what St. Luke saw him do in his several journeys; less of any
other of the Apostles. And as to St. Paul's Epistles, they do rather suppose
the then Establishment (whatever it was) sufficiently known, than undertake to
describe it. And after all those Books were finished, we have reason to
believe, that the Church being so very much enlarged by the Accession of New
Converts, that they made their form of Government more exact than before
Comported with the Circumstances of Affairs.

However, One thing, we find in the Revelations, which seems plain enough in
this matter. Our Savior Commanded St. John to write to the Angels of the Seven
Churches of Asia: That it was not to the Seven Churches themselves, is evident
from his Saving, That the seven Churches were the Seven Candlesticks, but the
Seven Stars Rev. i. 20. St. Austin says, by the Angel is meant Praepositus
Ecclesiae. St. Hierom, Angeli Ecclesiis Praesidentes. This Sense is allowed by
Bullinger and Beza.
were the seven Angels, which did shine in them. That the Angel of each of
those Churches was not a Synod of Presbyters, but a Single Person, appears from
this, that the Reproofs and Charges given there, are Personal. We cannot say,
for instance, that all the Elders of the Acts xx. 17, 18.
Church of Ephesus, (where St. Paul settled many) could agree in all those
Qualifications and Defects mentioned by St. John: from whence it follows, that
each of those Churches in St. John's days was Governed by Single Persons.

But though there be some who will have nothing esteemed of momen in this
Concern, but what is found in Scripture, or in some System of Divinity; yet I
hope we may be allowed to make recourse to Ecclesiastical History. For we are
not to seek in the Scriptures for what was done after that they were written;
and the Fathers who were the Successors of the Apostles, can best tell what
they who were next before them, did, To show the unreasonableness of the
contrary Opinion, I shall propose a like Case. If a Question were now made, how
Alexander the Great his Empire was disposed of after his Death, and any one
would take upon him to dictate with great Confidence, That we ought not to
consult Diodorus Siculus, Plutarch and others, who wrote of those Transactions,
but to apply our selves wholly to Aristotle's Politics, (or which is indeed
much nearer to the prudent Advice of some of our Anti-Episcopal writers) to
take the words of some now alive; and to send for certain Sober, Good, Able
Men; to whom they can recommend us, who perhaps have never much troubled
themselves with that useless Study of History; but yet having profoundly
studied Politics, can from their own Models and Principles best inform us, how
those matters went then; we should, I presume, beg their Pardon, and upon the
very same grounds we must so now, and address our selves to Antiquity for a
Resolution.

Now we cannot find one word in Ecclesiastical History, (of which it is not
improbable that they are well aware) that from the days of the very Apostles,
any Church was otherwise Governed than by a Single Person, till after the
beginning of the Sixteenth Century. But it would not be proper here to
prosecute this matter largely, and therefore I shall only propose a few
instances out of the most early Christian Writers.

The eldest of the Fathers we have is Clemens Romanus; and he in his excellent
Epistle to the Corinthians, shows plainly that he was of Opinion; that, as it
was actually in his Time, the Apostles themselves did by Divine Inspiration
continue a Government, in which Bishops and Presbyters were no less
distinguished than they are now. I cannot stay to consider what is weakly
Objected out of him, but must refer to others, particularly to the two Learned
Annotators upon him; and to the Worthy and Learned Defender Dr. Beveridge,
Codex Can. Vindic. Cap. 11.
of the Codex Canonum.

St. Ignatius the Martyr, who Lived with the Apostles, and was afterward
Bishop of Antioch himself, in many places of his Epistles, shows that the
Church was Governed by Bishops, and that he means by a Bishop That St. Ignatius
does not term the Order of Bishops(...) as Rivet and Salmasius will have it.
See Dr. Hammond's Dissert. Page 77.
the same that we do. And indeed his Testimony in this Controversy, is so full
and positive, that they who desire that what he Affirms should not be true, and
yet pretend some Respect for so Apostolic a man, have no shift, but to deny
that these Epistles are Genuine. But that they are, has been as fully
demonstrated, as any thing of that nature can possibly be, formerly by several
other worthy Persons, particularly by that Prodigy of Learning and Piety, the
most Excellent Primate Usher, a Person one would think, sufficient to reconcile
Men, who were Lovers of either, to that Order; and since by a Reverend and
Learned Prelate The Reverend Bishop of Chester.
now Living, in England.

That Bishops were above Presbyters in the Second Century, is expressly Asserted
by Clemens Alexandr. (...). Lib. 3. cap. 12. page 264.(...), etc.(...). More
clearly, Stromat. Lib. 6. Page 667.
Clemens Alexandrinus, by Orig. in Hieremiam Homil. 11. (...) (for he was then
himself a Presbyter) (...). By whom undoubredly is meant the Bishop, and it
plainly shows, That he was above the Presbyters. Edit. Huet. Rothomag. Anno
1668. Page 114. Huetius guesses that Origin understands either Theoctistus
Bishop of Caesarea, or Babylas Patriarch of Antioch. Observat. Page 14. Origin
likewise on Mat. Chapter xix. Page 363. (...). On Cap. 21. page 442. (...).
Origin, and Tertullian de Baptismo. cap. 17. Dandi quidem habet jus Summus
Sacerdos, qui est Episcopus; dehinc Presbyteri and Diaconi, non tamen sine
Episcopi Auctoritate, propter Ecclesiae Honorem, quo salvo, salva pax est.
Tertullian. Of Heraclas, who was afterward Bishop of Alexandria, Origin Apud
Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. Lib. 6. Cap. 19. Page 180. Edit. Paris. Anno 1678.
testifies, That he was first a Presbyter of the same Church. That Irenaeus was
first a Presbyter, afterward Bishop of Lions, appears from Eusebius, Eusebius.
Hist. Lib. 5. Cap. 4. and 5. Hi ron. in Catal. Scriptor. Eccl. ad Script. 64.
speaking of Origin. (...).
and St. Hierom: Dionysius Alexandrinus, in an Epistle to Dionysius Romanus,
shows that he was then a Presbyter; afterward Eusebius and St. Hierom inform
us, Eusebius. Lib. 7. Cap. 7. and Hieron, in Gatal. Script. 45.(...), etc.(...).
That he was a Bishop. Irenaeus, and Eusebius, Socrates, and Theodoret, do
furnish us with Catalogues of the Bishops in their respective Sees, from the
very Time of the Apostles, to their days. And St. Hierom says, Hieron. in
Epist. ad Evagrium quae incrpit, Legimus in Isaiah. It Is his Eighty Fifth
Epistle. Nam and Alexandriae a Marco Evangelista usque ad Heraclam and
Dionysium Episcopos, Presbyteri semper unum ex se electum in excelsiori gradu
collocatum, Episcopum nominabant.
That from the time of St. Mark there was a Bishop always above Presbyters, in
the Church of Alexandria. And all this is so very clear, that none were they
not most perversely biased by Prejudice or Interest, if they be acquainted
with Antiquity, would question it.

The first Man that ever we can hear of, who did oppose the Superiority of
Bishops above Presbyters, was Aerius, almost 330 Years after our Savior, a
very Proud, Humorsome Man, who because he could not obtain a Bishopric which
he aimed at, as Epiphanius informs us, Epiphanii, Haeress. 56. seu utalii, 75.
Speaking of Aerius.(...). Afterward Eustathius made him a Presbyter, and
Master in the Hospital in P^ntus; but for all this (...). And he after much
show of discontent, quitted the Place, and led many poor people after him,
telling them that a Presbyters was as good as a Bishop. (...).
he resolved that a Bishop was not above a Presbyter; and for his he was by the
good Men of those days, condemned of Heresy, and therefore we cannot but
suspect that there is a little too much assurance in the Men of our Times, who
desire to be thought most Pure and Orthodox, and yet will undertake against the
whole Church of God, for many hundreds of Years, to defend a Notorious,
Infamous Heretic; a Heretic who had no Sober Man in those Ages to Countenance
him. For as for Medina, who says, That St. Hierome, Sedulius and others, were
of his Heresy, the Most Learned Archbishop of Spalato, does prove him In his
Second Book De Republ. Eceles. cap. 3. Of the difference between the Opinions
of St. Hierons and Aerius, See the Learned John Forbes, his Irenicum. Lib. 2.
cap. 11.
to be very impudent for saying so.

But all this and much more of this nature makes but little with some, in this
Cause. For when by Learned Men it was demonstrated, That Bishops were above
Presbyters, in the very First and Purest Ages of the Church; They whose
Passions or Interests had rendered them Enemies to that Order, made this Reply.
That Diotrephes sought the Pre-eminence in the Apostles times, and the Mystery
of Iniquity did then begin to work. Among others, this is the Answer of a
Presbyter of great Fame and Repute among his Followers, who were deeply Engaged
in the Late Troubles, Alezander Henderson, Henderson 's First Paper. Page 157.
Of the Edit. Anno 1649. and his Second Paper, Page 170. I wind together
Diotrephes and the Mystery of Iniquity, the one as an Old Example of
Church-Ambition, which was also too palpable in the Apostle themselves, and the
other as a Cover of Ambition, afterward discovered; which two brought forth
the great Mystery of the Papacy at last.
in a Letter to the Late King of Blessed Memory; and in his First Paper, he had
the modesty to call our Bishops, The His First Paper. Page 154. It is too well
known, That the Reformation of Hen. VIII. was most imperfect in the Essentials
of Doctrine, Worship and Government; and although it proceeded by some degrees
afterward, yet the Government was never Reformed, the Head was Changed,
Dominus non Dominium; and the whole Limbs of the Antichristian Hierarchy
retained, upon what Snares and Temptations of Avarice and Ambition, the great
Enchanters of the Clergy, I need not express.
Limbs of the Antichristian Hierarchy. I shall not positively Charge him with
what a Reverend Divine, who had been a Member of the Synod of Dort, tells us
Bishop Hall; Of Episcopacy. Page 52.
was Reported of him, That when he was Moderator of that famous Assembly at
Glasgow, See the Large Declaration about the Troubles in Scotland. Page 237.
he said, That St. Paul himself, by Appointing Bishops, was a Worker in that
Mystery of Iniquity. But 'twas not long after that this Answer was Applauded,
That the Socinians, Independents, and Anabaptists, took confidence from he
Example, and termed the Mystery of the Holy Trinity, the Power of inflicting
Ecclesiastical Censures, and the Baptizing of Infants, The Mystery o Iniquity.
And truly some Learned Men think that there cannot be more said for the
Baptizing of Infants, nay for the Cannon of the Scripture, and for the
Observation of the Lord's Day it self, than for Episcopacy.

However, shall we think that our Savior would be so unkind to his Church, as
to deliver it up wholly to the Management of Antichrist for fifteen hundred
years together? Nay, if Bishops because Bishops, must be Antichrists, how can
we avoid reckoning St. James himself, the Brother of our Lord, the Antichrist
of Jerusalem, Timothy the Antichrist of Ephesus, and Titus of Creet? And St.
John should not have directed his Epistles to the Seven Angels, but in our [
New Stile] to the Seven Antichrists of the Churches of Asia. Shall we think
that Christ's Apostles themselves, who Lived to See, and to Establish
Episcopacy, as to the Essential Parts of it, as it now stands, would betray his
Church into the hands of Antichrist; and help to exalt the Man of Sin? and that
many of the most Godly and Faithful Servants of Jesus Christ, the Blessed
Martyrs of the Primitive Church, would be themselves Limbs of Antichrist, and
rejoice in him? far be it from us to entertain such horrid Imaginations.

But to take no farther Notice of odious Terms and ill Language. Did Christ's
Apostles behave themselves Unfaithfully in their Charge, and when they had
Converted Persons enough to make a Church, did they Establish any other Form of
Government than what they had received Commission from their Master to
Establish, and which was to Endure to the End of the World? all which Time, we
see he has promised his special Presence and Assistance, to their Legal
Successors.

And as to those who succeeded the Apostles, shall we suspect that such good
Men, that Men who died for the Gospel, durst presume to set up a Government
contrary to it; and so unanimously agree in so wicked a Contrivance? They were
doubtless, Holy, Conscientious, and Mortified Persons, very Humble and Devout;
and therefore we cannot honestly say, (as some would have the first devisers of
Episcopacy to have been) That they were Covetous, Proud, Ambitious, Tyrannical,
and Usurpers. Was it Honor, Riches, State and Grandeur, that those Humble,
Patient Men, who were always under Persecution, could be Corrupted and Allured
with, in those Days when, (as the famous Petrus de Marca, upon occasion Pet. de
Marc. de Concord. Tom. 2. Page 81. Sect. 4.
of Pope Leo his Letter to Anastasius Bishop of Thessalonica, truly observes)
That Episcopatus erat veluti gradus quidam ad crudelissima supplicia, a
Bishopric entitled the Possessour only to the Privilege of being more
Barbarously Tormented than oaths? Nay, after that Age, the Bishops themselves
were so good Men, so excellent, Calvin's Instit. Printed at Geneva; 1550. cap.
8. Sect. 53.
that Calvin says (and we may venture to take his word when he speaks well of
any of that Order) that a bad Bishop would have been esteemed instar portenti,
as a strange, prodigious thing! shall we suppose that these Men would be so
abominably ungrateful to their Lord and Savior, as most Sacrilegiously to
violate his own Institution, and so injurious to their Brethren, as to rob them
of the Authority given them by their Master? and yet if we hold either
Presbytery, or any other way than what they then used, to be of Christ's
Institution; we must conclude these Martyrs, these Holy, Devout, Self-denying
Men, to have been so Covetous, so False, so Ambitious, such Tyrants, such
Usurpers. One might tremble to think that to maintain a New Conceit, and the
Credit of some Popular Men among us in a wicked degenerate Age, we should
labor to prove those Worthies, the Basest, Falsest Villains, that ever lived
among Men.

But if they were so, could they have Agreed all the World over in this
Knavery, (for it admits not of a softer expression) were all the rest so tame
as to submit to it? And why did not the Presbyters then, as some of ours did of
late, rise up against them and say they were Antichristian?

Upon the whole, we see that for a Bishop to be above the Presbyters is not
late Usurpation, but Practiced in the Purest, in all the Ages of the Christian
Church; not invented by Antichrist, nor part of the Mystery of Iniquity, but an
Apostolic Constitution, conformable to our Savior's own. And who can show a
better Title to any Privileges or Estates upon Earth, than a Possession of
above Sixteen Hundred Years, without the least Fraud or Violence at the
beginning? This therefore being manifest, that in the Ages immediately
following the Apostles, the Churches were Governed by Single Persons, who
pretended to derive their Authority from them; and that we have all the reason
imaginable to believe, that they would not, nay that they could not, have
pretended so, had it been false: we may safely conclude, That they had, and
consequently that they who are their Legal Successors, now have their Authority
from the Apostles, and so from Christ.

I shall just mention a few inferences which we may make from what has been
said, and then proceed.

1. Hence we see upon what Foundation that part of the Established Doctrine of
the Churches of England and Ireland is built, which asserts that Episcopal
Power, in the Sense in which we understand it, was exercised by the Apostles,
and by their Successors made by them, by virtue of the Commission which they
received from Christ. This we find in the Book of Consecration, which is
Approved of by the Articles of our Churches, Art. 36. Confirmed by Act of
Parliament, and Subscribed to by all who have taken Holy Orders.

2. We see what reason the Reformed Churches abroad had to speak so honorably
of our English Episcopacy, as they have frequently done: for which at large I
may refer to Dr. Durell's View of the Government of those Churches, and to his
later Defense of the Church of England, in Latin. As to their own Practice, To
urge their having no Bishops, which their Superiors who are of another
persuasion will not allow of, as an Argument against our Bishops, is as
unreasonable as it would be to persuade us now to Assemble for the Public
Worship of God, in Caves and Dens; because the good Old Christians being not
permitted by their Persecutors to have Churches, were forced to do so. And we
may say to them, what a most Reverend Prelate of ours did write to one of their
Ablest Divines, Non culpa vestra, sed injuria temporum, abesse Episcopatum.
Bishop Andrew's Letter to Du Moulin, inter Opera Posth.
You have no Bishops, not because you would not, but because ye When at the
Synod of Dort, the Bishop of Landaff had intimated That the want of Episcopacy
had occasioned those divisions in the Netherlands, Bogerman the President of
the Synod stood up, and in good allowance of what had been spoken said, Domine,
nos. non sumus adeo felices. So Bishop Hall.
cannot have them.

3. Hence we see how little foundation there is in Scripture, or in Antiquity,
for any other Forms of Church Government. For to say that the Classical, or
that the Congregational way (which some think Socinus invented) was used by the
Apostles, and by their immediate Successors, and yet not the least appearance
of them in the Acts or Epistles, and that they should never be heard of for
Fifteen Hundred Years together, is an Assertion so very strange, that one might
with as much modesty and reason go about to persuade us, that the Caesar's (whom
we have hitherto taken for other kind of Officers) were but Masters of the
Corporations of Rome, or Chairmen of their Committees.

Fourthly and Lastly, From hence we may conclude, how highly insolent and
presumptuous it would be in us to prefer any new fangled Scheme of Government,
before that which was founded by Christ, and exercised by his Apostles, and by
the whole Church, to our days. And certainly Generations to come will look upon
this last as a very wild Age, in which so many People The Solemn League and
Covenant. Art. 2. That without Respect of Persons, They would endeavor to
Extirpate Papacy, Prelacy, that is, the Government Ecclesiastical by
Archbishops, Bishops, etc.
bound themselves by an Oath to Extirpate such a Government.

But yet, allowing a great part of what has been discoursed, Two things are
supposed by some to make a great difference between ours and the Primitive
Episcopacy. Their Temporal Jurisdictions, and their Titles and Estates. To
which I shall only say that our Bishops do Claim no Temporal Jurisdiction by an
inherent Right, as Bishops, and Exercise it only by the Favor and Authority of
the King. And to suppose that a Princes giving great Titles, and Honors, and
Estates to Bishops, does render them not Christian and Apostolical Bishops, is
very like supposing, that the fairly Binding up and Guilding, and Enamelling a
Bible, does make it cease it to be the Word of God.

Having discoursed thus largely in order to a Resolution of the First Enquiry,
Time will not allow that I speak so fully to those that are behind; and
therefore I shall contract what I conceive necessary, into as little compass as
I can.

The Second Enquiry was, concerning the Advantages of this sort of Government
above others.

And here two very considerable Advantages are obvious to us both from Reason
and Experience.

First, In reference to the Peace of the Church. St. Hierom, of all the Fathers
least favorable to Episcopacy, having (as he thought) been unkindly dealt with
by the Bishop of Jerusalem; does plainly profess That the Peace of Particular
Churches cannot be preserved without this Government. His words are, In his
Dialogue adversus Luciferianos.
Ecclesiae salus in summi Sacerdotis dignitate pendet, cui si non exors quaedam
and ab omnibus eminens detur potestas, tot in Ecclesiis efficientur schismata,
quot Sacerdotes. Take away the Dignity of the Bishop and you ruin the Church,
and if you will not allow him a Power above all, and in which they have no
share, you shall have as many Schisms made as there be Presbyters. It Is St.
Cyprian's Observation Neque enim aliunde Haereses abortae sunt, aut nata sunt
Schismata, quam inde quod Sacerdoti Dei non obtemperatur, nec unus in Ecclesia
ad tempus Sacerdos, and ad tempus Judex vice Christi cogitatur. It Is the 59th.
Epist. in the New Edition. Page 121.
in his 55th. Epistle, That most of the Schisms which have harassed and
disgraced the Church, have proceeded from disobedience to the Bishop. And
Epist. 69. Inde Schismata and haereses obortae sunt and oriuntur, dum Episcopus
qui unus est and Ecclesiae praeest, Superba. quorundam praesumptione
contemnitur, and homo dignatione Dei honoratus indignus ab Hominibus judicatur.
He says, That the Contempt of the Bishop will naturally end in Schism and
Heresy. And Calvin, Calvin Inst. Cap. 8. Sect. 53.
as he supposes Episcopacy to be of human institution, so he says it was
Established, Ne ex aequalitate, ut fieri solet dissidia nascerentur. To prevent
those Contentions which are commonly occasioned by Equality. And our late
Experience tells us how the Church was divided and subdivided, among us in the
Late Unhappy Times, when the Bishops were by the prevailing Party, by force
driven from their Charges; the evil effects of which we are yet too sensible
of. In short, a Bishop cannot have any design in disturbing the Peace of the
Church, and in occasioning Separations; he can have no Advantage by it, and
consequently no Temptation to it, which I need not say, Others may have.

Secondly, In reference to the Civil Government, happiness of the State, and
ease of the Subject. When other Forms of Church Government were in the
Ascendant in England, it cannot yet be forgotten what Diminution and Prejudice
to the Royal Honor and Prosperity attended them. I need not put your in mind,
how Seditious, Insolent, Turbulent and Ungovernable, See the Character the King
gives of them in his Basilicon Doron.
King James to his great Grief, found the Presbyteries in Scotland for many
Years together; and what usage his Son, since Martyred, did many Years after
receive from them. It may be demonstrated that They who speak severely against
the Bishops, for being (as they pretend) Enemies to the Civil Magistrate, in
claiming their Authority from God, do the same themselves, only with far less
reason, and with much greater injury to their Prince. Thus the Presbyterian
Model and Discipline, though never heard of the World till within these last
Two Hundred Years, is declared by them to be the very Scepter of Christ's
Kingdom, to which all must submit, even Princes, their Thrones and Scepters.
The Independents pretend the Holy Scripture for theirs, that any Society of men
Combining together by common consent, in a Church Way and Membership, is by
Divine Right, Free and Absolute within it self, to Govern its self by such
Rules, as it shall judge agreeable to Gods Word; without dependence or
subjection in Spiritual Concerns, to any Human Person, or Society whatsoever.
It Is notorious, that the Presbyters do Claim to their Consistories, Full and
Absolute Spiritual Power and Jurisdiction over Princes themselves, with Power
to Excommunicate them when they see Cause. And the Independents do exempt their
Congregations from all Spiritual Subjection to the Civil Powers. But our
Bishops do neither pretend to Jurisdiction over our King, nor do withdraw their
due Subjection from him whom God has made Supreme upon Earth, over all Persons,
in all Causes, Spiritual as well as Temporal within his Dominions.

And as to the good of the Subject. It Is not so long since Presbytery was
Established, and found Intolerable in England, and we are not Ignorant how all
Parties did contribute to throw it down, 'twas so very uneasy. As for
Independency, few now know what it is, Dr. A. Stuart a Presbyterian, said, He
verily believed that Independency cannot but prove the root of all Schisms and
Heresies; and by consequence much worse than Popery. Duply to M. S. Page 53.
See the Papers for Accommodation.
and fewer do desire it. And as for other Sects, they are not yet agreed what
Government they would have, nor is it likely that ever they will be. Some
indeed do fancy Independency to be a pretty, easy, sweet, gentle thing. But
certainly, for men to cry out against the Yoke of Bishops as intolerable, and
yet to make every Parish-Minister a Bishop; an Absolute, Sovereign Independent
Bishop, owning no Superior under Heaven to whom Appeal may be made, is as
Ridiculous, as 'twould be to Cry out against Monarchy as unsupportable, and to
desire in lieu of it, that every Constable be made a King.

To conclude this point. Many and great Advantages has the Church of God in
all Ages enjoyed, and we do now enjoy by this Government, and of many of them,
like one of the greatest Blessings of this Life, the Health of our Bodies,
whilst we are constantly well, we are almost insensible. But still they are not
the less for it, though we understand them more by their absence, and can then
put the truest value on them, when we see others in Fevers and Frenzies, and
it may be for their Comfort, in the hands of Empericks too. And so I come to the

Third Enquiry, What may be reasonably expected from Persons entrusted with
that Sacred Power and Authority,

It was not only St. Paul's Charge to Titus, after he had made him a Bishop, To
show himself in all things a Pattern of good works, but he also makes it a
necessary qualification to every Bishop, that he be Blameless. And with great
reason. For we know that for one in that Dignity to be wicked, is the boldest
Affront and Dishonor to God himself, and one of the most fatal mischiefs to
his Church imaginable, so dreadful, that a vicious Bishop would not be looked
on so much as a Governor, as a public Judgment; over our heads. Besides Vice
has this property, that it renders all men contemptible, most of all
Clergymen, because it is their business and profession to make men good, and
among them, They who are of the highest Rank shall be the more signally
despised, and thereby made clearly unserviceable. It will therefore be justly
expected that they do not contradict their Divine and Holy Doctrines, and make
useless their Authority, by their loose and unsanctified Lives.

Farther, 'Twas St. Paul's Charge, That they should speak the things that
become sound Doctrine, exhort and convince Gainsayers, and rebuke with all
Authority. And indeed men will suppose that Power was committed to them to the
intent that they should make some use of it; and that we are made subject to
them, that they may compel us if there be occasion, to do our duties. And now
that there is so miserable a decay of all Devotion and Piety, that men are so
loose in there Principles, and so corrupt in their Lives, that the Church is so
despised, and Religion it self so commonly supposed a Cheat, or made one: it
may be humbly supposed; that these Reverend Persons, will labor to reduce
Offenders by the Censures of the Church, and make some use of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, so long, by the misfortunes of the times, disused, that we are just
upon the point of forgetting that ever there was such a thing; and that they
will do this with Vigor and Resolution, though they know 'twill prove, as of
necessity it must, very ungrateful to many; and though they thereby procure
ever so much ill will, and gain for, it among us only Curses from the Profane,
and graver Reproaches from the Hypocritical. This is a Time to show their Zeal
for the House of God, a Time to show their Christian Fortitude and Constancy;
and seeing they are so well furnished with Power by their Lord and Master, and
so much Countenanced by an Excellent Prince, we may expect that they will not,
like those Children of Ephraim, Psalm. lxxviii.
of whom King David tells us, being harnassed and carrying Bows, turn
themselves back in the day of Battle. And 'twill be thought but reasonable,
that as they engage themselves in it, so they will protect those persons who
are Active and Zealous in the Churches Service, from the unworthy and vile
entertainments of those who hate the Church. All this men will make bold, and
think they may be justly allowed, to expect from them. In fine, They stand in
view of many critical and malicious Observers, and therefore must Walk
Circumspectly, because the days are so very Evil. Above all considering, that
from them, as St. Paul, Hebr. xiii. 17. Canon. Apost. 40. C^^. Council. Antioch.
the Canons of the Apostles, and of the Council of Antioch, teach us, God will
exact an Account of all the Souls committed unto them. And may they imitate the
Holiness and Integrity, the Justice, Charity, Temperance, Humility and Zeal of
their worthy Predecessors, in the Primitive Times; that so having been thus
Wise, Dan. xii. 3.
and such Teachers, they may hereafter shine as the brightness of the
Firmament, and having turned many unto Righteousness, as the Stars for ever and
ever.

And so I come in the Fourth and Last place, briefly to consider, What Honor
and Respect is due to them from us.

As these Reverend Persons are of God's own Appointment, so their Labors are
for our great and unspeakable Advantage, and therefore we cannot but believe
that they ought to be Loved and Honored by us. Nature dictates to us, that God
is to be Worshipped, and therefore they who are immediately instrumental and
assistant to us in holy Services, are to have proportionable respect, it being
one of the principal ways we have of showing how much we honor God. Some call
the universal Practice of mankind, the Voice of Nature; and therefore would
time allow, I might here take occasion to tell you out of Ancient Historians;
Strabo. Geog. Lib. 2. Page 346. and Page 384. and Lib. 17. Page 566.
That among the Albans the Priests had the Honor next to the King; Of the
great Dignity of the Priests among the Comani, and in Meroe, and of the Respect
paid to the Druids. That the King of Sparta was Priest of Jupiter. That
Plutarch tells us, that among the Grecians, the Priesthood was of equal Dignity
with the Kingdom. Quaest. Romans 110.
That Aristotle testifies the same in many places of his Politics. That the
Roman Pontifex Maximus, had his Sella Curulis and Lictors, as the Consuls had,
and that the Emperous were often Ambitious of that Office.

To proceed. That Melchisedec was a King and a Priest, that the Princes of On
and Midian, were Priests, that great was the Dignity of the High Priest, and of
the (...) or Ruler of the Synagogue among the Jews. That in the New Testament
our Bishops are often peculiarly Entitled Gods Servants, and therefore we must
Acknowledge that 'twill not be for his Honor that they who are his Domestics
and immediate Attendants, be trampled on, be in want, in meanness and disgrace.
St. Paul speaking of his own being Slandered, uses the Word (...), which in
Scripture peculiarly signifies, Speaking Unworthily of God, which we call
Blasphemy: as Observed by the Reverend Bishop Sanderson, on Romans iii. 8.
They are represented to be God's Heralds, Ambassadors, and as it were his
Residents among men, and such have ever been held honorable, and their Persons
inviolable, among even the most Barbarous People. That the good Old Christians
Vid. Pet. de Marc. Tom. 2. Page 53. and Page 397.
paid their Bishops the greatest Veneration, even the Emperor Lib. 3. de Vita
Constantini. and Theod. Hist. Eccl.
Constantine himself, so great honor, that this Age will not bear the very
mentioning of it. That in the Fourth and Fifth Centuries, the Learned Fathers
both of the Greek and Latin Churches, gave to the Bishops the Titles of
Principes. So St. Hilary in the beginning of his Eighth Book De Trinitate,
calls them Principes Ecclesiae. And Gregory Nazianzen, who was so Humble and
Pious, that rather than that the Peace of the Church should be disturbed, he
did in the first Constantinopolitan Council, resign the great Patriarchate of
that City and retire, does challenge these Titles. That the good People Greg.
Nazianzen. Orat. 17. To the Bishop are ascribed (...).
gave the greatst Expressions of concern for St. Chrysostom when Banished, for
Nazianzen's Father when Sick, Chrysostom. Tom. 4. p. 763. Edit. Paris.
and for Basil Bishop of Caesarea, Nazian. Orat. 19. page 304. Edit. Paris.
1609.
when he lay a Dying. Instances of this sort are infinite. I might show at
large, how great Respect the Foreign Reformed Divines of most Note, have paid
to our Bishops, particularly that Calvin, Beza, Sadeel, nay the whole
Consistory of Pastors at Geneva, that Danaeus, Peter Martyr, Gualierus,
Spanhemius and others, do in their Works call our Bishops, Lords, and Most
Reverend Fathers in God; enough one would think to secure the Title from being
Antichristian; and I might mention what ours, and all the Wisest Princes of
Europe have thought due to them. In short, we are not to learn our duties from
the corrupt practice of a Profane, Atheistical Generation, nor of some men of
late years, famous only for being Ill-natured, and Troublesome.

We know the evil Consequences of making the Clergy and way Contemptible, and
may believe King Solomon, Eccles. ix. 16.
at least our own Experience, that the Poor, the despised Man's Wisdom is
despised, and his words are not heard. We find that Moses knowing that he was
soon to be gathered to his People, besought God that he would please to Appoint
one to succeed him, and thereupon God commanded him to take Joshua, and lay his
hand upon him, and to give him a Charge before all the Congregation, and adds
Numbers, xxvii. 20. Insignia potestatis gester, frequenti famulitio cingatur.
So Tostat. Tirin. Bonfrer. Serrar, and
And thou shall put some of thine Honor upon him, that all the Congregation of
the Children of Israel may he Obedient. Some of thine Honor. This many Learned
Commentators suppose to be Ensigns of Authority, Attendants extraordinary, and
other Circumstances that usually procure Respect; which we see God himself
thought necessary, in order to gain their Obedience. So that it cannot be
Religion which labors to make those Persons Low and Sordid, and Mean and
Contemptible, and Useless, whose Contempt and Meanness renders Religion it self
so.

Besides, were not Religion, were not the public good so much concerned in
their Usage, to deal ingenuously, and to speak it out plainly, it cannot but be
thought a hard Case, that Men who came into the World with perhaps as good
Parts, and as fit for Honor and for great Actions as their Neighbors, after
they have had an Education Liberal and Ingenuous, and all the Improvements of
Wit and Judgment, Reason and Eloquence; after many Years exhausting their
Spirits, and wasting their Vigor in public Services (as our Blessed Savior,
after going about and doing good, was arrayed in Purple that he might be set
naught by Herod and his Men of War) should be condemned to a Sacred Station of
pretended Dignity and Authority, only that they may be the more exposed to Envy
and Malice, Hatred and Contempt, be the more eminently despised, and more
augustly ridiculous.

And has this Order deserved such usages at our hands? How many of it have we
had even in this last Century in these Kingdoms, who have been of Primitive
Piety and True Learning, an Honor to their Country, and Examples for future
Ages, Able and Courageous Defenders of the Truth, Zealous Opposers of Romish
Superstition, (that I say not the very Bulwarks of Protestancie) most admirable
Writers, and incomparable Preachers? And, (by which one may judge of the
unreasonableness of our present Clamours against them) I may add, That no
Anti-Episcopal man, of what denomination soever has in the judgment of
unprejudiced Persons, written so Learnedly and Solidly, against the Romanists,
though Aspersed themselves with Popish Inclinations and Designs, as the Late
Murdered Primate of England, in his Book against Fisher, the Late Primate of
Ireland in several of his Treatises, and the Late Bishop of Durham, concerning
the Canon of the Scripture, and Transubstantiation; to name no others.

But we have a sort of men among us, from whose Scorn and Reproaches, no
Innocence, no Virtue, no Learning, no Prudence or Caution, can Protect either
the Fathers, or the Sons of the Church. Be they what they will, they are all
become abominable and gone out of the way, there is none that does good, no not
one. As if a man must of necessity, be forsaken of God, and of all Goodness, as
soon as he is engaged in his more immediate Service; and lose his Wits, at
least, part with all sense of Piety and Religion, as soon as he enters upon any
Spiritual Office, so it be by Law Established. I wish there were no reason for
this Complaint. But the Injury extends farther than to the present Clergy.

A Leading-Man among the Dissenters, has lately added to his great number of
Books, with which he had favored the World, One which he calls a
Church History, or History of Bishops; which the Learned Answerer justly
Styles, An Account of all the faults which Bishops have committed in the
several Ages of the Church; and I may add, a great many of their Virtues made
Faults. And what can be the design of such a Work as this, but to supply what
is wanting in the Prelates now Living, to make the Order odious, by relating
all the defects of those in former Ages? But alas! this is a Melancholy
Consideration, and must needs make a sad impression on any Pious Soul. For
though we cannot think it strange, that Men who are professed Enemies of God,
and of all Religion, and would feign laugh them both out of the World, do
endeavor to expose, and to make ridiculous and odious those persons whose work
and study it is to keep up a sense of Religion upon men's hearts; yet that men,
who pretend to be Piously disposed, and heartily concerned for the Honor of
God and of the Gospel, should take much pains to disgrace, and to render such
vile and abominable; this, this is a lamentable indication of a degenerate Age,
of an Age ready to be overrun with Profaneness and Impiety, and industrious to
force God to take away the Light of the Gospel from among them.

It must be Acknowledged that the best of men are still but men, and therefore
liable to some mistakes and defects. So that it does not appear fair and
equitable, that they who, it may take no Notice of Great and Extravagant Faults
among their own Party, should most severely Censure and Aggravate the least
Miscarriage in a Prelate; as if they disliked the Cause and the Persons, and
not the Crimes, or thought that they stricter Piety of the Bishops, like the
Offering of the High Priest among the Jews; were to make Atonement for the
Sins of the People. I come not here to flatter any man, or to make Apologies
for their Vices, and think I have not as far as became me, spoken too
favorably of Vicious Prelates, if any happen to be so. But it is absolutely
necessary, (though it will not please all) that the People be told their duty
plainly in this point, and I know not a more proper occasion, and therefore
omitting to speak of the Zeal and Diligence of some, and of the Hastiness,
Credulity and Uncharitableness of others, I shall in a word or two show how
easy a thing it is to slur a false color on then most innocent Actions of the
best men, and consequently how little Notice Sober Persons should take of the
Invectives we daily hear against our Spiritual Governors. How easy a thing is
it if they will not by servile compliances Fawn upon, and vilely Court those
whom they should Command, to call them Proud? If they will not let their Honor
lie in the dust, and allow that their Office is as Contemptible as their
Enemies would have it be, to represent them as Ambitious? and how natural is it
for those who pretend that making them poor would make them humble, to make
them look as if they were proud, that it may be thought necessary to humble
them? Be they ever so Charitable to the Poor, ever so Just and Generous in
their dealings, if they will not part with the Churches Right to any litigious
Person, can they forbear calling them Covetous? And, which is a very
fashionable Calumny now, and almost in the mouth of every one of one sort, if
they do but persuade the People to Obey Magistrates as Christianity obliges
them, and will not join with the discontented in their unreasonable jealousies
of their Prince, how easy is it to say, that They are for Tyranny and
Arbitrary Government? As if they had not as true a Property in their Estates,
and as good a Title in Law as any Freeholder in the Kingdom; which all must
Acknowledge, unless they will have Property, so highly magnified, to be a word
that signifies nothing, but in the concerns of a Layman; and they who stand up
for it so warmly, mean only their own. If they be for a grave and regular
devotion, is it difficult to say. They are Popish? and if they would have men
reverent in Divine Offices, to revile them as Superstitious? and if any one
venture to say these dealings are not fair and honest, to vote him Ambitious,
and a Flatterer? But if these be the Crimes of our Bishops, may they ever be
guilty of them; and if they be, under the most invidious Character, and with
ever so much dis-ingenuity, represented to the World upon these Accounts, and
be ever so much hated and contemned for them, They have this Comfort, that God,
from whom they expect their Reward, sees not as man sees, and that whilst we
regard only the outward appearance, he views the heart.

To make an End of all. May I not be allowed to beseech you with some
earnestness, that if you have any Love for the Truth, any Zeal for the Gospel,
and any Concern for the Peace and Prosperity of the Church: That you will not
suffer your selves to be prejudiced by the heat and importunities of none of
the most knowing and peaceable men, against a Government built upon a
foundation of Christ's own Institution, Exercised by the Holy Apostles, and
continued from them to us? the only Government used in all Ages by the whole
Christian Worlds; honored and reverenced by all, and administered by many of
the Holy Fathers, Martyrs and Confessors; acknowledged by all Councils,
honored by all the worthy English, and Learnedest nf the Foreign Reformers,
and highly Respected and Advanced by all Christian Kings and Princes; and never
opposed in the Ancient Church by any, but by one desperate man, immediately
branded for a Heretic upon that Attempt? And let us not be drawn unaccountably
into a Kindness for any Novel, Uncertain and Arbitrary Form, one thing to day,
and we know not what to morrow, to the disturbance of our quiet, and for ought
as we can tell, to the Ruin and Desolation of these three Flourishing Kingdoms;
to the Eternal Shame and Disgrace of the Protestant, nay of the Christian
Religion, and the great Joy and Triumph of the Enemies of all Religion, and of
God himself.

Consider what has been said, and the Lord give You understanding in all
things. Amen.

THE END.

