The VIRTUES Of that Well-known and Often Experienced MEDICINE Fletcher's
Powder.
THis Noble and Excellent Panacaea, is so wonderful a Friend unto Decaying
Nature, that whatever Unnatural, Destructive, and Health-opposing Matter it
shall meet within the Body of Man, be it from what Cause, Source, or Fountain
it will, or in what parts soever (for it purifieth from Center to
Circumference) it Or the Spirit being assisted by it.
does by its renovating quality (in time) radically extirpate and drive out,
and in its place constitutes a Healthful Body (as has been proved by Thousands
in the City of London) having cured Headaches, Vertigoes, Appoplexies,
Lethargies, Epilepsies, Convulsions, with all other Distempers that usually
afflict the Head: as Difficulty of Hearing, Noise in the Head and Ears,
Diseases of the Eyes, Teeth, etc. Its also effectual in Opening all
Obstructions of the Stomach, Liver, Spleen, and all the Noble Bowels; expelling
Venoms offending the same: by which it cures Agues, and Fevers of all sorts.
It powerfully cures that loathsome Disease Ala mode d' Englettere, with all its
Symptoms. It cures the Scurvey, Leprosy, Gout, Dropsy, Stone. It resists the
Pestilence, Smallpox, and Measles. It expels Poison, and has done wonders
upon those Bodies which have been spoiled by Mercurial Medicines, too too often
used (supposing therewith) to cure all foul and stubborn Diseases.

For this New and Now Reigning Putrid Fever, attended with Aguish Shiverings,
Griping in the Guts, Vomitings, Giddiness, Violent Pains in the Head and Limbs,
etc. (the which Disease may in all probability terminate in a Plague, unless
repentance pacify the awakened Wrath.) This Medicine is excellent both for
cure and prevention; and I dare and may boldly affirm, That no Man or Medicine
has cured so many of the aforesaid Disease as this Powder; as Thousands can
witness.

A safer or powerfuller Medicine cannot be given for Women, it being an
Universal Remedy for those many Distempers that usually attend their Weak,
Unhealthy, Cold, and Moist Bodies; all which I shall not name, but commend it
as a Wonder-working Powder to prevent Miscariages in Women with-child; and when
time of separation is near, to cause speedy and easy Delivery, and to ease the
After-pains: And did all Women know what this Medicine has performed in these
Cases, there is none but would make use of it at such times, viz. both before
the time of Travel, and after Delivery. In Virgins it speedily takes away the
Cause of the Green Sickness, and those ill Habits of Body effects of
Obstructions, and causes in them a Lively, Fresh, and Cheerful Countenance,
etc. To Children it is a most Potent Preservative, and cures them of
Convulsions, Falling Sickness, Worms, Smallpox, Measles, Rickets, etc.

It wonderfully dispos^th Wounds (both Internal and External) to Healing, and
in short time perfects the Cure; and for all Outward Wounds, taking this
Medicine, you need only wash the Sore Night and Morning with your Urine Warm,
and bind it up to defend it from the Air. It cures all Swellings, Inflammations,
and Pains of the Limbs. I have (without the use of any Outward Application)
cured Cancerated Breasts of long continuance; Gangrenous Tumors, King's Evil,
and Fistula's to a wonder. In short, this Medicine is so great a Friend to
Nature, that no Disease (the appointed time for Dissolution being not yet come)
is able to withstand its power; for against all Diseases there is a Remedy, but
against Death none; but to this and all other (Good) Medicines, time must be
given to manifest their Effects: For many rash and inconsiderate People,
hearing of a Good Medicine, will without doubt be desirous to make a trial of
it, and will also imagine, that as soon as they have taken it into their Bodies
(or at farthest within two or three days) that their Infirmity or Disease, of
what kind or degree soever, must of necessity presently vanish and be gone,
without any the least Sign or Relict of it remaining; which no ingenious person
must or will expect: but according to the Nature, Radication, Habit, and
Continuance of the Distemper; with the Age, Strength, and Constitution of Body,
Nature co-acting with the Medicine, expect the desired Effects in the
Restoration of Health; which (by Gods Blessing and an orderly use of this
Medicine in due time) will be found. Now this Powder at some times, and in some
Bodies, may work by Vomit, Stool, Sweat, and Urine, especially at the first
taking of it; let not any therefore presently imagine this to be a common
Medicine, and such Operations to be constant in all Bodies and at all times: No
(rather) let them conclude (as justly and truly they may) such Operations to
proceed from great quantity of Diseasie Matter Nature was filled and obstructed
with, which would not easily be evacuated, without such Operations well to be
tolerated or born with, in respect of the great benefit they will reap by it,
viz.) the preventing some greater mischief, etc. to the truth of which I have
had large experience; having known many on which it had such Operations at the
first, but by a continued and moderately repeated taking of it for (some time)
by which their Bodies became emptied and freed rom that stubborn gross Matter,
they afterward felt not the least trouble or manifest Operations, but if
Nature makes a separation by Vomit, Stool, Sweat or Urine (how forcible soever
they seem to be at present) she is never weakened but strengthened, etc. all
which proves the Medicine to be friendly.

But often does this Excellent Medicine both prevent and cure a Disease without
any of the beforementioned Operations (as Experience testifies) by keeping in
Vigor, and pacifying (when enraged) the Vital Spirit in Man.

Therefore the highest and noblest way of Cure, is by such Medicines as are
exalted by Art to such a degree of Purity as makes them fit to (pacify or)
bring to quiet the Natural Spirit.

For Preserving or Restoring of Health, consists not in taking of Poisonous
Purges, Vomits, Fluxing with Mercury, or Torturing the Sick with Blisters,
Cuppings, Issues, Bleedings, etc. to the end the Spirit being more enraged by
such eminent dangers immediately threatening the Life, in hopes (by that means)
it may throw out what was offending before; but in keeping it from fury, if not
already provoked, or otherwise pacifying, if enraged, as aforesaid. And I
appeal to all Ingenious Men, which of the two is the better Method; for
whatsoever is not friendly to the Life, either engendered within, or assumed
from without, brings sooner or later, the whole or part, into an inquietude.

Consider, What is it that gives eminency to any one thing we esteem as
Excellent, and we shall find that it is the Purity of it; if we consider then
what we are speaking of, viz. A Medicine to help Nature, we must also conclude
its efficacy and excellency to proceed from its purity or purified Nature; then
consider what it is for. It is to help and restore Decaying Nature, or the
Languishing Spirit in Man. Now this Spirit is the most subtle part of Man,
therefore no way to be assisted, but by that which is of purity and likeness
with it ( viz.) Medicine of a Solar (or Gold-like) Nature, made by Art subtle,
penetrable, and capable by its splendent Beam to dispel those Mists in the Air
which clouds and darkens the Sun of the Little World Man; and he that has such
a Medicine as this (which every Physician ought to have) needs not so much mind
the uncertain Indications, Diagnosticks, and the like Verbal Impertinences,
etc. which serves only for ostentation.

Now Courteous Reader, Consider whether this Solar Powder (which is so amicable
to Nature, and cures Radicated Diseases by enlightening and enlivening the
Natur^l Spirit, be the fitter Medicine to be used, or those common gross
pretended Medicines which acts or works upon the Sound as well as the Sick, to
the great injury of Mankind, etc. judge ye.

DIRECTIONS for the USE Of that Excellent MEDICINE FLETCHER'S POWDER.
1. Direct FOr Madness, Inflammations of the Brain, and all Violent Pains in the
Head; take a paper of Powder Morning and Night in a spoonful of Wine, Ale,
Beer, Sider, or Mead.

2. For Convulsions, Falling Sickness, Palsies, Tremblings, and Weakness of the
Sinews; Take half a paper Morning, Noon, and Night, in any of the aforesaid
Liquors.

3. For Stoppage of the Stomach, Difficulty of Breathing, Inflammations and
Ulcers in the Stomach, Spitting of Blood or Matter, Consumptions, Coughs,
Distillations of Rheums, Weakness of Stomach, or Want of Appetite; Take a Paper
of Powder every Morning fasting in a spoonful of Beer, Ale, Wine, or Sider, and
drink a little more of the same Liquor to wash it down; and then fast two hours
after, and then eat or drink what your Stomach craves, or best agrees with it;
you may go about your business, etc.

4. For the Colic or Stone in the Reins or Bladder, Bloody Urine, Stoppage of
Urine, or Ulcers in the Reins or Bladder, Inward Wounds or Bruises, Fluxes of
the Belly, Griping of the Guts: Take a paper every Morning fasting in a little
Ale, Wine, etc. and half a paper Noon and Night.

5. For the Dropsy take a paper Morning, Noon, and Night.

6. For Agues or Feavors at the first take a full paper, and afterward half a
paper every three hours; and in so doing no Ague or Feavor can long abide.

7. For the Scurvey, Pox, and Running of the Reins, take a paper every Morning
and Night.

8. For Women with-child, to prevent Miscarriages, take half a paper Morning
and Night; but when time of Travel is come take a paper, and if Delivery be not
presently, the next hour take another, etc. and when Delivered, take half a
paper every two hours, to ease After-pains.

9. For Obstruction or Overflowing of the Flowers, take half a paper Morning,
Noon, and Night.

10. In the Smallpox or Plague, take a paper every eight hours.

11. For Children you must give them a Dose every Morning according to their
Age; a Child newborn may take an eighth or tenth part of a paper, a Child of a
year old a quarter of a paper or a sixth part, 2, 3, or 4 years old a third 5,
6, 7, half a paper, etc. for you cannot hurt if you over or under dose it a
little; the Medicine being safe.

12. For Curing of Sores, as Cancers, Gangrenes, Ulcers, Fistula's, Kings Evil,
or any other Old Sores, wash them twice a day with your Urine warm (to keep
them clean) and if there be any deep wounds (as often in Fistula's there are)
make Roles or Tents with Lint or Flax, and dip them in your Water (and sprinkle
a little Powder upon it) and tent your Wound with it, then bind it up to keep
it from the Air: Take a paper of Powder every Morning fasting.

13. F^^ the curing o^ Stabs, Cuts, Bruises, dip Lint or Flax in Water, and
then dip it in Powder, and apply it to the place, and let it lie on 48 hours at
the first Dressing, afterward but 24, etc.

14. In all Old or Cold Swellings, Strains, Numb, Lame, or Weak Limbs; take a
paper every Morning fasting, and every Night bathe the parts affected with a
little Brandy warm.

15 For Burns, Scalds, Scabs, Itch, Tetters, Ringworms, Shingles, Inflammations,
Hot Swellings, Piles, or Hemorrhoids* take a paper every Morning fasting, and
anoint or bathe the parts affected every Night with a little Sallet Oil,
Vinegar, and the Powder beaten together.

16. For the Gout take a paper every Morning and Night, and often bath the
parts pained with hot Vinegar.

Those that are troubled with any other Diseases than those aforementioned,
either Internal or External, within the reach of Medicine, of what nature or
kind soever, may be cured by this Medicine; and I do advise all who love their
health, to take a paper of this Powder for three or four Mornings every Month;
thereby you may root out the Scurvey, the seed of which secretly lodges in the
Blood, in most seeming healthy persons; of which (root) most Diseases are but
branches.

For Seamen that go long Voyages, or others, that Travel by Land, this Medicine
is of great use, and may save life, where at Sea the Doctors Chest (or in other
places the Shop Medicine) may fail: For at Sea in Calentures, Feavors and
Flux, many Seamen are lost, for want of a g^od Medicine, powerfully to resist
Diseases. Now for the cure of these, let the Sick take a paper of Powder
Morning, Noon, and Night, and none of these violent Diseases can long abide.

They are also in use in Foreign Plantations, where many that escape Death,
are for ever deprived of the former use of their Limbs, and all for want of
good Medicine.

Note, That this Medicine will keep its Virtues many years, being separated
from those Impurities which cause Corruption; and may as well be taken in
extreme weather as at Spring or Fall, the only suposed fl^^mes to take
Medicines, etc.

The half Packet, marked with the figure 4, is two shillings; the whole Packet
marked with the figure 8, is four shillings, each Packet sealed with Helmont' s
Head to prevent Counterfeits,

All Persons that live remote from London, either ^^^tland, Ireland, or any of
the English Plantations, ^^d have a desire to sell (or be furnished for their
own ^^e with) this excellent Powder, let them repair to my worthy and trusty
Friend, Mr. Dorman Newman Bookseller at the Kings Arms in the Poultrey London,
for I have solely entrusted him to dispose of it into all Countries, and no
other but him or such as he shall appoint.

It is to be sold at these places following, with a Printed Paper of Directions
for its use.
MRs. Whites Coffee house in Pope's Head Alley, and Mr. Rotheram at the Golden
Ball in Sweetings Alley, both in Cornhill* Mr. James Printer at the
Printing-press in Mincing lane, Capt. Newman at his Coffee-house in Talbot
Court in Grace Church Street, Mr. Dangerfield at his Coffee-house near
Temple Bar, Mr. Bateman at the Bible over against Furnivals ^nne in Ho^^ourn;
Mr. Sam. Herricks Shop at Greys-Inne-Gate next Holbourn, Mr. Blount at the
Black Raven over against Bedford House, and Mr. Cademan in the New Exchange,
both in the Strand, Mr. Simon Neal at the (...) in Bedford-street, and Mr.
Rowland Reynolds in Henrietta street both in Covent Garden; Mr. Wh(...) at the
Three Bibles in the (...); Mr. Gilliflower at his Shop, and Mr. Newman at the
Golden Key, both in Westminster Hall, all being Booksellers, Mr. Jer. Howes
Scrivener near the Spittle in Bishopsgate-street.

And, at my House at the Sun in Guter-lane near Cheapside.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. James for the Author 1679. With Allowance.


