THE Penitent Prisoner, HIS CHARACTER, Carriage upon his Commitment, LETANY,
Proper Prayers, Serious Meditations, SIGHS, Occasional Ejaculations, Devotion
going to Execution, and at the place of Execution.

By a Friend to the Souls in Prison.

LONDON, Printed for John Williams, at the Crown, in Cross Keys Court in Little
Britain, 1675.

The Penitent Prisoner. HIS Character.
HE is one, who although he confess himself to have been seduc't by his Lusts,
and intic't by evil Company, yet being under restraint (according to the merit
of his Crime) he makes a Pulpit of his Prison to Preach to him Repentance; a
Sermon of his shackles to teach him his Service; He turns his Jail into a Shop
to traffic for Heaven; and into an Exchange of all Devotions that may gain him
Salvation. For being entered into Prison (after he has sometime looked about
him, and sees nothing but thick walls, strong bars, a dark room, and no way to
escape;) he begins thus to word it, For conviction he knows must go before
Conversion. Lord! where am I? What have I done? How has the iniquity of my
hands and heels hampered me? How have I drunk down iniquity like water, drawn
sin as with a Cart rope! How like a wretch have I night and day tug'd at the
Devils oar, grinded at his Mill, dig'd in his Mine, run on his errands, not
only acted sin, but contrived it, sinned with a high hand, and haughty heart!
Oh the bitter fruit of those things whereof I am now ashamed! What gravel in my
stomach do I find that stolen bread to be now, which once went down so
sweetly! Into what a Labyrinth of misery has the following of the motions of
my vile Lusts led me! How have I by my many and grievous sins, dishonored my
God, sadded the Holy Angels, shamed my Christian profession, damaged my
neighbor, wounded my own conscience, troubled my spirit, and given large
earnest for my everlasting ruin! Methinks I hear it said in my ears, as if
spoken from the battlements of Heaven, Let no man oppress, or defraud his
Brother, for the Lord is the avenger of all such, 1 These. 4. 6. So Romans 1. 18.
The wrath of God is revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness, and
unrighteousness of men; where then shall I appear, being in so sad, so
miserable a Condition? of whom may I seek for succor but of thee, O Lord, who
for my sins art justly displeased? yet O God most Holy, O Lord most mighty, O
Holy and merciful Savior, deliver me not into the bitter pains of eternal
death; Thou know, Lord, the secrets of my heart, shut not up thy merciful
ears to my prayers, but spare me Lord, most Holy, O God most mighty, O Holy
and merciful Savior, thou most worthy judge eternal, suffer me not for any
pains of death to fall from thee. Look upon the wounds in thy hands, and have
mercy upon me the work of thy hands.

O give me a praying, that thou may afford me a pitying heart.

His Letany.
O God, the Father of Heaven have mercy upon me, Keep, and defend me from that
roaring Lion, that goes about seeking whom he may devour.

O God the Son, Redeemer of the World, have mercy upon me, Save, and deliver me
from the wrath to come.

O God the Holy Ghost, proceeding from the Father and the Son, have mercy upon
me, strengthen and comfort me in this my present calamitous condition.

O Holy, Blessed, and Glorious Trinity, three Persons, and one God, have mercy
upon, me.

Remember not, Lord, the sins of my youth, nor of my maturer growth, but spare
me, Good Lord, spare thy poor creature (not worthy to be called thy Servant)
and be not angry with me for ever.

From sin, from the crafts and assaults of the Devil, and from thy wrath, and
from everlasting damnation,

Good Lord deliver me.

From mispending the few moments I have to live, from hardness of heart, and
contempt of good counsel, that shall be given me,

Good Lord deliver me.

In the time of this my present distress and Tribulation, in the hour of my
approaching death, and in the day of Judgment,

Good Lord deliver me.

I a poor Prisoner, and sorrowful sinner, do beseech thee to hear me, O Lord,
That it may please thee to give me thy Grace to condemn my self, that I may not
be condemned, and to judge my self, that I may not be judged.

That I may bring forth fruits worthy of Repentance.

That I may take a Holy revenge on my self, judging my self not worthy of a
mouthful of fresh air, or a morsel of meat, who have abused thy good creatures
as I have done.

That I may not give sleep to my eyes, nor slumber to my eye lids, nor suffer
the Temples of my head to take any rest, until I have unfeignedly endeavored
to make my peace with thee.

That thou would give me true Repentance, which may appear by my making
restitution (as much as in me lies) to those whom I have wronged.

That thou would forgive all my sins, of what nature and quality soever, and
endow me with the grace of thy Holy spirit, to make a sanctified use of this
sad Dispensation of thy providence.

Son of God I beseech thee to hear me.

O thou Lamb of God that take away the sins of the World, have mercy upon me.

O thou Lamb of God that take away the sins of the World,

Grant me thy peace.

Lord have mercy upon me.

Christ have mercy upon me.

Lord have mercy upon me.

Our Father which art in Heaven, etc.

O Lord deal not with me after my sins.

Neither reward me after my iniquities.

O God, merciful Father, who despisest not the sighing of a contrite heart, nor
the desire of such as be sorrowful, mercifully assist me in these my Prayers
that I make unto thee in this my present trouble and adversity, and grant that
I whose conscience by sin is accused, by thy merciful pardon may be absolved,
through Jesus Christ my Lord and only Savior. Amen.

O God whose Nature and property is ever to have mercy, and to forgive, receive
my humble petitions, and though I be tied, and bound with the chains of my sins
(Fetters worse than those of Iron that are upon me) Yet let the pittifulness of
thy great mercy loose me, for the honor of Jesus Christ his sake my Mediator
and Advocate.

Amen.
His Sighs.
O that my head were waters, and my eyes a Fountain of tears, that I might
lament day and night, the sins that I have committed against so good, and so
great a God, so often, and so hainously as I have done!

Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death!

I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee, O thou preserver of men?

O that as the Heart pants after the water Brooks, so my soul might pant after
thee O God!

O that I could be ten thousand times more contrite, and humble in heart than I
am!

His Serious Meditation.
Is any Gaol like the Dungeon of Hell? Are any Keepers like Fiends? Is there
any burning like that fire? Any biting like that Worm? Any shame of face like
to the confusion of face before men and Angels? Can any loss on Earth equal the
loss of Heaven? Or Banishment from Friends, a Banishment from God and his Holy
Angels? To dwell in utter darkness where there is no light, amidst infinite
torture, where there is no ease, and that to all eternity. Lord, this will be
my portion without thy mercy. O Lord, have mercy upon me according to thy
loving kindness, according to the multitude of thy tender Compassions blot out
all my transgressions. Draw a red streak with the blood of my Redeemer over all
the foul Characters of my sins: Especially, forgive (here he mentions with
utmost aggravation the sin or sins that most trouble his conscience.) One deep
calls upon another, the deep of my misery on the deep of thy mercy. O Lord,
hear, and consider O Lord, and do it, for my spirit waxes faint.

His Occasional Ejaculations.
When arraigned at the Bar he thus piously ejaculates; O the time when we
shall all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ!

Upon the sight of a fire or flame of a Candle he thus words it:

O who amongst us can dwell with devouring fire, who amongst us can dwell with
everlasting burnings!

Upon the Iaylors Locking him in.
He thinks on the dismalness of being shut out of Heaven, and into Hell.

Upon hearing his lewd Companions to Swear and Curse.
Woe is me that I am constrained to dwell in this Hell upon Earth, and to have
my Habitation among such vile persons.

Upon the sight of that pittance of meat and drink allotted him.
Lord, I am not worthy of the least crumb that falls from the table of thy
bounty, being so great a rebel, as I have been to thee.

Upon his being bound in the Cart.
He thinks upon that evil Servant to whom it was said, Bind him hand and foot,
and cast him into utter darkness.

When he hears the passing Bell go for him.
He thinks he hears the sound of the last Trump summoning him to arise and come
to Judgment.

His Devotion as he is going to Execution.
O Savior of the World save me, who by thy cross and precious blood have
redeemed me, help me I beseech thee, O God.

O let the sorrowful sighing of me a poor Prisoner come before thee, and by the
greatness of thy power preserve thou me, who am going to die a shameful
temporal death, Lord, preserve me from that death which is eternal.

O show some token upon me for good, that the Devil, who watches for my soul,
may see it, and be ashamed, because thou Lord have helped and comforted me.

O thou that did save the penitent Thief on the cross, have mercy upon me a
miserable malefactor.

O deliver me for I am helpless, and poor, and my heart is wounded within me.

Though my flesh and my heart fail, yet be thou the strength of my heart, and
my portion for ever.

His Devotion at the Place of Execution.
Lord be not far from me, now trouble is near at hand.

Now, now Lord Jesus, save from eternal death my poor sinful soul which thou
did purchase with thy blood.

O God make speed to save me.
O Lord make haste to help me.
Save me, dear Jesus, by thy merits, and take my trembling departing soul to
thy mercy.

Lord Jesus receive my Spirit.

The Prayer of one committed to Prison for destroying her Child.
O Almighty God, Father of mercy and God of all Consolation: have mercy upon me
a grievous sinner; who having not the fear of thee my God before my eyes, have
made away with my Child; O blessed Savior, who when thou took'st upon thee to
deliver man, did not abhor the Virgins womb, compassionate me, who have
cruelly destroyed the fruit of my womb: although for this I am afflicted on
every side, yet suffer me not to be distressed, though in want of some of thy
comforts, yet not of all; though chastened, yet not forsaken; though cast down,
yet suffer me not utterly to perish. Sprinkle me with Hysop dip't in the blood
of that immaculate Lamb Christ Jesus, and I shall be clean, wash me, and I
shall be whiter than Snow. O let the blood of Jesus be heard above the cry of
my crying sin, spare me good Lord, spare me a sorrowful sinner and be not angry
with me for ever.

Amen.
The Prayer of one committed to Prison for Murder, and under the Sentence of
Condemnation.
ALmighty God, the aid of all that need, the helper of all that flee to thee
for succor; I the vilest of sinners, and the worst of men, for such have I
made my self by my sins, do here passionately beseech thee to have mercy upon
me a bloody sinner. O deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God, thou God of my
Salvation, so shall my Tongue sing aloud of thy Righteousness. The remembrance
of this my sin is grievous unto me, the burden of it is intolerable: Have
mercy upon me O Lord, have mercy upon me, who repent with as lowly a Spirit, as
ever I sinned with a high hand, Lord help my unrepentance. And when Justice
shall lay my blood upon my own head, let the blood of Jesus Christ be on it
too. Into thy hands I now commend my soul, into thy hands do thou then receive
it, O blessed Jesus, be thou then a Jesus to me.

Amen.
FINIS.

