A TRVE COPY OF TWO LETTERS BROUGHT By Mr. Peter's, this October 11. from my L.
FORBES from Ireland.

The one to the House of Peers, the other to the House of Commons.

I. Declaring the woeful misery of that Kingdom in all corners and quarters.

II. His very happy and successful endeavors against the Rebels what they
have been.

III. How (through Gods blessing) with five or six thousand men presently sent,
he may regaine that Kingdom yet, before December be past.

LONDON, Printed by L. N. for HENRY OVERTON, in Pope's Head Alley. MDCXLII.

A TRVE COPY OF TWO LETTERS, brought by Mr. Peter's, this October 11. from my LORD
FORBES from Ireland.
My Lords,
THe miseries of the distracted Ireland, are so many in all the corners of it,
that it would require a just volume, rather then a Letter to rerpesent them,
the combination is so strong, and the Rebellion universal, the British
inhabitants for the most part ruined, and the small Armies in Munster and
Connaght, (for lack of necessaries and timely supplies) more like to be a prey
to the Rebels, or thorough mutinies to turn Rebels themselves, than any ways
likely to reduce the Rebels to their due obedience: there is two things by the
policy of their Priests, which adds strength to the Rebellion: the first of
which is worse then the Rebellion it self: which in all places they are so
impudently bold, as to father their Rebellion upon his sacred Majesty, as if
all they did, were in obedience to his Majesty's commands, which by way of
implicit faith: although they never saw any such warrants, they are bound to
believ, because their Priests and prime Commanders do inform them; the
second, their Priests endeavor to persuade them there is no destruction nor
hope of pardon; thereby to drive all to such desperate courses, as they will
be rather killed then taken, and encourage one another to enter into a bond,
for killing all his majesty's British subjects, and protestunt professors. An
happy agreement between his Majesty and the Parliament would quickly take of
the masque, and so weaken the power, that the greater part of the seduced
Gentry and Commons would leave them, and a discreet liberty given to
Governors of Counties, and Provinces, to pardon some special Persons, and
Corporations upon honorable terms, would untye their bond, and make every one
of them, cut another throats to secure their own pardon: the Town of Galway
has by the Earl of Clanricard and Saint Albons means made a pacification
with the Fort, but upon such dishonorable terms, that it has rather been a
subtle strengthening of their rebellion, then a truly intended pacification.
Although in every Province where I come, I desire the assistance of, and to be
assistant to the chief Governors thereof: and have accordingly in that
Province of Conaght, finding his Majesty's Fort, and the Town of Galway at odds
again, being called thither for the relief and assistance of his Majesty's
Fort, advertise the Earl of Clanricard Governor of the Town and County of
Galway, and my Lord Rannelagh President of Connaght, who did concur in their
opinions, that the loyalty of the Town of Galway could never be secured
without a garrison, if they knew how to obtain it, my Lord Clanricard
complaining that his friends had left him, and the rest would leave him, if
the pacification were broke: and my Lord Rannelagh complaining that his
Soldiers lacked all necessary provisions, money, food and clothing, and but
small proportions of Ammunition, my small force not being in any probable way
sufficient to compel them to receive a garrison: I silently suffered the Earl
of Clanricard, and the Captain of the Fort, to patch up their broken
Pacification, by which the Fort is sufficiently relieved; leaving the Fort of
Galway in these terms of peace and plenty, I sent to the Isles of Arran, and
did great spoil in burning the Rebels cabines, and corn, and brought from
thence two hundred cowes, and some sheep. But the Rebels (except twenty that
were killed, fled in boats from the other side of the Island, some eight miles
distant, the storms being so great, that in eight days time I could scarce
gain the mouth of the River of Limerick: where I am still doing all the harm
I can to the Rebels: but seeing the wars are not like to be soon ended as
was first supposed: if your Lordships will take a course for the strengthening
of these forces at present under my command to the full proportion contained in
the ordinances of Parliament. I am confident they will be as useful here if
not more, as in any part of the Kingdom: it will likewise be expedient that
ships of good strength be appointed to wait this winter in the special
harbors between this and Kinsale: this I thought it my duty humbly to
represent to your Lordships wise consideration, remitting the more full
relation of all things to Master Peter's, and the rest rest of the Committee of
Adventurers of the additionall forces by sea and land, for the reducing of
Ireland, not doubting of your Lordships wonted care and providence to do every
thing that may advance his Majesty's service, and honor, and encourage those
that are ready and willing to lay down their lives for the good of the State,
as shall be signified unto them by your Lord, ships, or any having power from
you, amongst whichas I esteem my self one of the meanest, so it is my humble
desire, I may do your Lordships some acceptable service, which may honor me
with the title of

Your Lordships most affectionate humble service, FORBES.
Castle of Glin. 27 r Sept. 1642.
Mr. Speaker,
I Had a purpose to have sent you a full relation of all our proceedings here
in Ireland: but this bearer Mr. Peter's, who has been an eyewitness, can out
of his Diurnall give you more full satisfaction and acquaint you with these
things, that are most requisite for the subduing of Ireland, which will be an
easy work, if it be yet taken in time, and rightly prosecuted; for I dare say
five or six thousand men well commanded and well provided for, could take both
Limrick and Galloway, and so end the War before Christmas, for the strength
of the Rebellion lies here, and there would be no difficulty in subduing the
rest, Mr. Peter's will acquaint you what was my purpose; but I dare not go
beyond my limits, the Country diseases as Fluxes and Feavours have mightily
weakened these few men I have; yet blessed be God we have done good service as
could be done with so many men, as you will perceive by Mr. Peter's Diurnall; to
the which, and his own Relation, and the Copies of the Letters I have sent, I
remit all further.

Your Nephew is in good health, and will prove a very good Soldier; and if
speedy supplies be sent or provisiios and Warrants to make them, I shall have
care of his further advancement!, Mr. Maurice Thomson will acquaint you with
what is necessary to be proposed to the House in the behalf of poor
distressed Ireland: and as I neither doubt of his sufficiency in proposing,
your willingness to do that good that is respected from you: so at this time I
will trouble you with no longer Letter; but shall be much rejoiced to hear
from you, of the happy and long wished for agreement betwixt his Majesty and
the Parliament: for which I shall never cease to pray, and shall ever remain,

Your affectionate Friend to serve you. FORBES.
Castle of Glin. 28. Sept. 1642.

