Forced Divinity, OR Two Sermons Preached by the Compulsion of Two sorts of
Sinners, Viz. Drunkards and Theives

The first By Certain Ale-Bibbers who having heard A Minister teach much
against Drinking, Afterward met with him, And Compelled him to make a Sermon
upon one Word.

The Second By A Crew of Theives, who after they had Robbed A Minister, fors't
him to make A Sermon in Praise of Their Profession; And when he had done,
Returned his Money, and Six Shillings Eight pence for his SERMON.

LONDON, Printed for F. C. And are to be sold in the Old Bailey.

A Malt Lecture.
^^rtaine Townsmen of the Town of Frizall Returning from A certain
Alehouse, met in the Fields A Preacher, who had made a bitter Sermon against
Drunkards, and amongst other opprobious speeches had called them Maltwormes;
Wherefore they agreed to take him, and by violence compel him to make A
Sermon, And his Text should be MALT. The Preacher thinking rather to yield,
then to Contend with them, began his Text as follows.

THis Text cannot be divided into many words, because it is but one, Nor into
many Syllables, because it is but one, We must therefore devide it into
Letters, which we find to be four, which we Divines use thus. M. morrall, A.
allegorical, L. litterall, T. tropologicall.

1. The Morrall sense is well, but first to teach you boisterous men some good
Manners, at least-in procuring your attentions to the Sermon, I say: M. masters
A. all.

2. L. listen, T. to the Text, An Allegory is when one thing is spoken, and an
another thing is meant. The thing spoken of is MALT, the thing meant is the Oil
of Malt, commonly called Ale, which to you Drunkards is so Precious, that ye
account it M. meat, A. ale, L. liberty, T. treasure.

3. The Litterall sense is true, and according to my Text; M. much, A. ale, L.
little, T. thirst.

4. The Tropologicall sense implies that which now is to some, And that which
follows hereaf(...)er in the World to come.

The effect which this MALT works in you, is M. murder, in others, A.
adultery, in all, L. loose Living, in many, T. treason. And that which
follows hereafter either in this World, or in the world to come, is M.
misery, A. anguish, L. lamentation, T. trouble; therefore my Masters look to
it, For, As our Savior was Reviled, so shall ye be, As he Rose the third day,
so shall ye Rise at the latter day: But it is to be feared, he did one thing
which ye shall never do; he assended into Heaven, where ye shall never come.

I should now come to A Conclusion, and with all persuade you Boisterous men to
amend your lives, that so ye may avoid the Dangers ye are like to fall into;
But I see plainly, and my Text tells me it is, M. to A. that is A thousand
pounds to a Pot of Ale, ye will never M. mend, because, A. all Drunkards are,
L. lewd, T. thieves.

But now discharging my duty, first toward God, Secondly toward you my
Neighbors, I say once, more again, concluding with my Text: M. masters, A.
all, L. leave, T. tippling: orherwise M. Masters, A. all, L. look for, T.
Terror and Torment.

The End of the first Sermon.
Parson Hobart being Robbed by the Highway, was Compelled by the Thieves to make
a short sermon. in praise of their Profession, who after Restored his Money,
and 6. s. 8. d for the sermon.

Right Worshipful,
ANd well beloved amongst your selves only, and much more feared among all good
men, I am here at this time to stand before you not well prepared, and in a
place very strange, as my studiary is unexpected, yet since it is required of
you, I will speak to you with fear and and trembling, and at this time being
solitary, In my secredetall benefice, and now in your jurisdiction, I will
briefly deliver to you In a patheticall form, and in a plain broad way. In
which you delight, your Customs and resolutions with scornd Reformations. And
first for your Calling and profession It may challenge great Antiquity, as
witnesses that which happened between Heierusalem, and Jericho, it seemed
they were neither ashamed nor afraid, but despising all fear, love and
Justice, did take to themselves a peculiar liberty, In so much [if it were
possible] that they would be all Kings, and maintain a Sovereignty, Such is
the greatness of your minds and lordly spirits, for I see honor in your eyes,
and liberality shine in your sweet faces, besides to your resolution you have a
constancy and daily perseverance in your secret mystery. And in this I commend
you, that like Gentlewomen for modesty sake, or for shame you hide your faces,
and I may say to you as it was said to Simeon and Levi, they were brethren
together, and of good Parents, and so may you be Gentlemen, and younger
brethren, And as wise men put no confidence in their Legs, so you do trust to
your swift running horses to run into the bounds of liberty Time himself
restraines me, no is fear a garment so loosely shaken off, when just cause
hangs hi^ on, from which if you can scap with running it is well. Now Beloved,
there is diverse kinds of running, and every running takes a start at the first,
and stops at the end of the Gole, So do you from little Children, you begin
with a Pin, and run to a point, from a point to a penny, so mount in
Arethmatick, till the race end, but a little patience. And I shall end as I
begun with fear and trembling this your calling so warranted by your selves,
proceeds from love and desire, the one being still pursuer of the other, till
Law steps in, and with her Hue and Cry oretake you, but let that pass without
love or desire, and proceed to the former, which is love, now love is himself
a theife, and through the cunning picklock of the eye steals hearts and
affections, now beloved affection being seated on the heart enflames the
desire, which makes you go on with a good heart, and your loving society, for
love is good in society. For you may read of Didimus, whose belief in his
sufferings, Altered his bad to the title of good, he was called the good Theife,
which good will change that name of arrant, and you shall be called good
Thieves, for it is al good you desire, good Jewels, good Rings, good Plate,
good Gold, good Silver, from which good does proceed, good Garments, good
Meat, good Drink, good Lodging, and withal good Horses to bear you from that
bad ill that might pursue you, all you possess to your selves is good, save
your Names, which names, (Inhabiting other persons) cannot but be good to them,
though ill to you, but still with fear and trembling I speak beloved, yet in
this is to be understood, that fear Inhabits in the best of Courage, and so
descends to beast as well as men, for as the Lion fears the crowing of the
Cock, you fear the rumor and threatening out of Warrants, and as the
Nightingale composed of fear sleeps with a pricle against her breast, so you
stand upon thorns, and would be ever moving your society is Encompassed into
small Clusters, which every shadow separates, and asthe Jews whose Tribe of
Gad you sprung from, gives a dispersion till your whistle calls, but I perceive
by your Motions and turning you expect a conclusion, to which I will incline in
making your faces hour glasses, as you have made this placcmy pulpit for I
perceive you stand in some fear as well as I, you may expect great fortunes,
for Fortune favors great spirits, as for breaking of Laws, for violating of
sacred rights, for profaning of Sabaths, let not these things trouble you,
these be for weak and feeble Souls, do you go on in your broad way, for the
narrow way is verry rough and troublesome, there is a Ladder spoken of in the
Scripture which reachd up to Heaven, now if you have any mind to stay by the
way and kiss the Cross, which Cross has a virtue to open your Eyes, and
though you go up by degrees, you shall slide down very gently by such a
strong stay that shall never deceive you, but let me again speak to you with
fear and trembling, for in many respects you come nere our Lord, who had
neither House nor Home, and yet was ever at Home, as you are never out of your
way, and it is with you as it was in Elder times, all things were in Common (as
you have it or would have it) andit was spoken of the slothful man, that he
should be clothed in rags, which you scorn, for you are up early and late,
as men indulgent in their Calling, waiting all opportunities; and as I said of
our Lord, he had no resting place in this life, no more have you, he was more
feared then beloved, so are you: He was laid wait for in many places, so are
you, Where He came He was desired to be gone, so are you, He was at length
taken and apprehended, and so shall you be, he was despised and forsaken of all
men, so shall you be, he was unjustly Condemned to death, so shall not you be,
he was buried and rose again the third day in Glory, and shall come to be our
Judge, and give every man his due.

To which End, the Lord prepare you all,

Amen.
FINIS.

