MOSAICALL PHILOSOPHY: Grounded upon the ESSENTIAL TRUTH OR ETERNAL SAPIENCE.

Written first in Latin, and afterward thus rendered into English.

By ROBERT FLUDD, Esquire and Doctor of Physic.

The Lord gives Wisdom, and out of his Mouth comes Knowledge and
Understanding,

Prove. 2.6. The Wisdom of the world is foolishness with God: The Lord knows
that the thoughts of the wise be vain,

1 Cor. 3.19, 20. Psalm. 94.11. Beware lest there be any man that spoil you, by
Philosophy, or vain fallacy, through the Traditions of men, according unto the
rudiments of the world, and not after Christ: For in him dwells the fullness
of the Godhead bodily,

Colos. 2.8, 9.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1659.

To the Judicious and Discreet READER.
MY desire is (Judicious and Learned Reader) that it may not prove offensive
unto any, if (in the imitation of my Physical and Theo-philosophicall Patron
St. Luke) I mention and cite the testimony of Holy-Writ, to prove and maintain
the true and essential Philosophy, with the virtuous properties of that
eternal Wisdom, which is the Foundation and Cornerstone, whereon it is
grounded. Was not this the radical Subject of my foresaid Patron, who was as
well a Divine Philosopher, as a Physician? If the office of of Jacob's Ladder,
was for Souls and Angels, to ascend from the Earth unto Heaven, and to descend
from Heaven unto Earth, and that by many steps or degrees, corresponding-to
both the Elementary and ethereall or Heavenly nature: Or (as the Poet, speaking
mystically), If the chain of Nature has its highest and last linck, fastened
unto the foot of Jupiter's chair in Heaven, as the lower is fixed on Earth: how
is it possible for us earthly creatures, or rather divine Images, howsed and
obscured in clayie tabernacles, to wade, of our selves, through the confused
Labyrinth of the creature, unto the bright Essence of the Creator; that is, to
search out the mysteries of the true Wisdom in this world, and the creatures
thereof; but by penetrating with a mental speculation and operative perfection
into the earthly Circumference or mansion thereof, and so to dive, or attain by
little and little unto the heavenly Palace; I mean, the middle point or Center
thereof, where only her abiding place is to be found, who is the Center of all
things; whose Circumference is no where, rationally, to be imagined or thought
of? If God therefore in and by his Eternal Word or Divine Wisdom, has first
made the creatures, and sustained the same unto this present; How can a real
Philosopher enucleate the mysteries of the Creator in the creature, or
judiciously behold or express the creature in the Creator (for in him are all
things); but by such rules or directions as the only storehouse of Wisdom,
namely the holy Scriptures have registered, and the finger of that sacred Spirit
indicted for our instructions? Shall we with the Agarens, and those which were
of Theman, forsake the Fountain of Virtue, to search after true Wisdom, where
it is not to be found? And yet nevertheless, lest mine intention should by the
misprision of any, be ill interpreted or misunderstood, I think it convenient,
to certify you, that my p^^^pose, in the progress of this Sacred or Mosaicall
Philosophy, is far from any presumption, to trench upon, or derogate from the
deep and mystical Laws of Theology in her pure and simple essence, or to
oppose the current of her Argument against those usual Tenants and Authentic
rules in Divinity, which have been long since decreed and ordained by the
Ancient Fathers of the Church. But as it is certain, that one and the self-same
place in Scriptures has a twofold meaning, to wit, an internal or
spiritual, and an external or literal; and either of these two senses are
true and certain, though they seem to vary or differ by a diverse respect: no
otherwise than under the name of one and the same man a double nature, namely a
spiritual Soul, and a material Body, are really to be understood: So also
besides such mystical interpretations, as the Texts of Scripture do internally
contain; it may also express and delineate externally such created realities,
as belong unto the true Subject of the most essential Philosophy. And again,
we ought co consider, that the Subject or method in proceeding or handling of
both these progressions, are in some sort different, being that the one (I mean
Theology) points directly at the sincere and simple nature, with the virtuous
extentions and powerful operations of the Divine Essence, making her
demonstration a Priori, as if for the proof of a Circle's existence, one should
begin his inquisition from the formal Center or middlepoint, and so proceed
unto the Circumference. The other (to wit, Philosophy) moves by a clean
opposite action or method, from the external of the creature, or organ, quasi
demonstratione a posteriori, to dive and search into its internal Center, that
it might there find out, or attain unto the knowledge of the eternal Actor; to
wit, of that all-working Wisdom, which does manifestly act or operate in it;
being warranted in this her manner of research by the wise Physiologist
Solomon, Wisd. 13.1.
who teaches us to search after, and to discover the unknown Workman, by his
known or visible works; that is, to apprehend the Divine or eternal cause, by
the created or temporal effect. Romans 1.20.
Or (as the sacred Philosopher St. Paul has it) to see and consider the
visible things of God, that is, his eternal Power and Godhead, by his works; No
otherwise than the hidden centrall Monady, or punctual Unity of a Globe is,
after diligent inquiry found out by moveing first from the Circumference by the
semidiameters, and then, attaining by degrees unto the middle and secret point,
which serves as a formal prop or essential Cornerstone, to sustain the
whole Spherical Fabric. Which being so, and seeing that the holy Bible does
fully handle and set down the Subject of both these Sciences, by the way of the
two foresaid Demonstrations, namely as well after a Physical as Metaphysicall
manner: My hope is, that this my Philosophical Discourse, will not be
therefore sinisterly judged of, by the truly wise and unpartiall Reader;
because it chiefly relieth on the axioms or testimonies of Scriptures. Now,
That the sacred Text does every where specify the manner of these two
proceedings, it is made apparent, in that it does certify the mystical acts or
operations, as well of the aeviall and temporal, as of the eternal world. But
it is clear, that the eternal world, which has neither beginning nor end,
being only replenished with the glorious Majesty of God, is the main
Foundation on which Theology is grounded; as on the other side, the temporal
or lowest world, having both beginning and end, and being divided into a
visible heaven and earth, with the creatures thereof, is the main platform of
the true Philosophy. As for the aeviall world, which has a beginning but no
end, and was ordained by God, to be a receptacle for the Angelical Spirits and
blessed Souls, as it has its position betwixt both the extreme worlds, namely
that of Eternity, and the other of Temporality; for it has an immediate
relation or commerce with them both: For first, it receives its immediate
light, life, or formal existence, from Eternity; and then it pours it out,
or communicates it with the temporal or inferior mansion, to create and
vivify it with the creatures thereof: insomuch, that as the formal act of the
temporal world is Angelical; so the vivifying soul or spirit of the aeviall,
is divine or eternal. Wherefore it follows, that the nature and property of
Angels, is neither to be excluded from the Subject of Theology; forasmuch as
they participate with the Divine Light or bright presence of Eternity; neither
can they be exempted from the body of Philosophy, being that the Angelical
light is the soul and life of the Temporal nature, and consequently the true
Philosopher must acknowledge his essential science or Philosophical grounds,
to proceed radically from the Eternal God by his aeviall or Angelical
Spirits, into his temporal creatures, I mean the Stars, Winds, Elements,
Meteors, and perfect mixed bodies; and therefore in respect that the
Philosophical Subject is animated by Angelical influences, it must needs
pierce with a mental regard into the eternal Light, which does centrally
vivifie both the aeviall and temporal creatures; beyond the which there is
nothing to be found or imagined.

This therefore is the perfect tri-partite measure of that Ladder which Jacob
dreamed of, Genesis 28.12.
when he laid his head upon the stone, which in its longitude, latitude, and
profundity, contained the images or characters of these three worlds; and for
that reason it was termed by the Patriarch himself, Domus Dei, The tabernacle
of God: Whereupon, as that stone had his external and internal; so in his
divine dream, he observed Angels to ascend by it, namely from earth, which is
the Creator's soot-stool, unto the Eternal world, where his Throne is, by the
aeviall mansion; and also to descend again, by the same degrees. Thus may the
sacred Philosopher, with the Prophet, Ezekiel. 1.16.
not only perceive, by a more external spiritual vision Rotam in Rota, or
the aeviall essence in the temporal being; but also by a most internal or
mental aspect, he may contemplate Rotam in medio Rotarum, to wit, a centrall
mover and Eternal Spirit in the aeviall, by the which the temporal or
corporeal creature, is immediately vivified and agitated: whereby we may boldly
infer, with the Scriptures, that, God is essentially one and all. And therefore
I may lawfully conclude, with these axioms of the divine Theo-Philosophists,
which appertain as well unto the formal act in the Creature, which is the true
life of Philosophy, as the essential virtue of Divinity, 1 Cor. 12.11. 1 Timothy
6.13. Ephesians. 4.10. Wisd. 12.1. Joh. 1. Acts 17.25. Ephesians. 4.6. Romans 11.36.
Judith 16.17. Isa. 42.5.
that, God operateth all in all. He vivifieth all things. He fills all
things. His incorruptible Spirit is in all things. By the Word all things were
made. In the Word was life, and that life was the light of men. He gives life,
and inspiration, and all things. In him we live, move, and have our being. He
is the Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in all of us. From
him, by him, and in him, are all things. He sent his Spirit and created all
things. He gives breath unto the people, and spirit unto the creatures that
tread on the earth. Psalm. 104.25
O Lord, how manifold are thy works; in Wisdom thou have made them all: the
earth is full of thy riches, etc. If thou hidest thy face, the creatures are
troubled, if thou take a way their breath they die, if thou sendest forth thy
Spirit they are re-created or revived. Colos. 1.16.
By him were all things created, which are in heaven, and which are in earth,
things visible and invisible; whether they be Thrones, or Dominations, or
Principalities, or Powers; all things were created by him, and for him, and he
is before all things, and in him all things consist. Note here, how the Apostle
does livelily set forth in these words, the foresaid three worlds. Again,
Christ is all and in all things. Colos. 3.11. Heb. 1.3. Colos. 2.3. Job 28.25.
Psalm. 17 18. Job 38.1. Psalm. 147.4.
He sustaineth all things by the word of his Virtue. In him, are all the
treasures of Wisom hid. God by his Wisdom gives or proportioneth a weight unto
the air, and hangs the waters or clouds in measure, and makes a decree for
the rain, and orders a way for the lightnings of the Thunders. He speaks in
Thunder, and answers Job out of a Whirlwind. He by his Word gives Snow like
wool, and scatters the hoary Frost like ashes; he casts forth his Ice like
morsels: who can resist against his cold? He sends out his Word and melts
them; so soon as he sends forth his breath, Job 37.10.
the waters do flow again. By his breath the Frost is engendered, and the
breadth of the waters is made narrow. I could produce an infinity of other
places out of Scriptures, to manifest the universal acts and virtuous
operations, which are effected in the Elementary creatures, by that most
essential and eternal Wisdom, which is the main ground and true Cornerstone,
whereon the purest Mosaicall Philosophy does rely; but I esteem it needless,
being that they are copiously expressed already by me in this my Philosophical
Discourse, and therefore I imagine, that these which are already produced, will
be sufficient to content and satisfy all such as are unpartially judicious;
unto whose better wisdom and favorable constructions, I recommend these mine
endeavors; and finally, both them and my self, unto God's blessed protection.

Your Friend Robert Fludd.

MOSAICALL PHILOSOPHY. The First Book. Section 1.
The Argument of the First Book.
THis first Book shows, that, whereas the minds of worldly men, are at this
very day, erected and soared up, even unto the highest pitch of infidelity,
insomuch as they require and demand after signs, and ocular demonstrations,
(as the Jews did, For it is said, The Greeks hunt after wisdom, the Jews
demand for signs, etc.) or else they will in no case be drawn to believe; 1
Cor. 1.22.
our Author did esteem it the greatest means of conquest, in this
Herculean-combat, which is to be effected betwixt the two deadly enemies, and
strong champions, Truth and Falsehood, (that is to say) the wisdom of God, and
that of the World, if he could find out some vulgar, and well known Experiment,
or practical Ins^rument, which might serve our celestial Champion Truth,
instead of an Herculean-Club, to tame and exanimate that foul monster,
Infidelity, who stands so stiffly in the maintenance and defense of his Lord
and Master, I mean, the Prince of darkness and error, his privileges: being
that such persons as will not be conducted, and directed unto the center of
Verity, by real practice, and ocular demonstration, may rightly be adjudged
more irregular, and extravagant, from the square and polished rules of reason,
than the brute beast, who warned by experience, (which in that respect, may
rightly be esteemed for the mistress of fools) does make his choice of that,
which it has proved good, and escheweth that, which it has found naught and
dissonant to his nature.

For this cause therefore, and to this effect, he made election of an
Invention, or spiritall conclusion, commonly termed by the name of the
Weather-, or Calender-glasse, that by the ocular and practical experiments
thereof, be might evidently demonstrate unto the world's eye, the falsehood of
the transitory^ and fading wisdom or Philosophy of the Ethnicks; and confirm or
maintain the truth of that, which is grounded upon the eternal Spirit of
Sapience.

CHAP. I.
Here the Author expresses his Reason, why in the very entrance into this
Philosophical Discourse he propounds the making, properties, and usage of
this Weather-glasse, and wherefore he styleth it by name of his Experimental
Instrument.

I Must confess that it is a thing worthy of commendations to prove and
maintain a Philosophical Proposition, by such acute and peircing shafts of
Auguments, as are selected out of the quiver of natural reason: but because
those kind of subtle inquisitions or objections (though they seem at the first
sight probable, and may carry with them a show of Truth, and yet nevertheless
in the conclusion, may fall out amiss and be found erroneous;) Therefore such
as are zealously devoted unto the inviolable Truth of the holy Bible, will be
better established in their belief, if that the testimony thereof do concur
and agree with the rest. And although these two witnesses may appear unto
wisemen to take away all Scruple or doubt from the confirmation of the Truth,
yet is the incredulity of this world so exalted and grown up to such a height
of obstinacy, and that especially among the common sort of men; yea verily, it
has so subtly crept also into the spirits of some of no small learning,
which are guided more by the practice of sense then any spiritual reason, that
except, with St. Thomas, they see or feel, or, with the Jews, they may behold
a sign, they will in no case be brought to believe. For this reason therefore,
since I only am to enter the lists against the Ethnic Philosophers, who by
their inventions have framed out the wisdom of this world, it behooves me to
look to my self, and to gird my loins with a belt of courage, and to indorse
an Herculean Armor of proof, being that, as the Apostle did fight with beasts
at Ephesus, in the likeness of men, so am I sure to have to do, like another
Alcides, with a second Lernaean Monster, of many heads, I mean, the Protean
Philosophy of men, the doctrine whereof, as the Apostle teaches us, is founded
upon vain fallacy, on the traditions of Ethnicks, and according unto the
elements of this world, and not according to Christ, in whom is the plenitude
of Divinity. Col. 2.8. I purpose therefore with my self, to make and forge me
out an Armor, of solid natural reason, and to temper it with the warrant of
sacred authority. And lastly, I will make choice of ocular demonstration, to
serve me in this combat, instead of an unresistable weapon, or Herculean club,
to tame and subdue that unreasonable monster, Incredulity; than which, there is
no greater enemy unto mankind. And that I may the better accomplish and bring
to pass this design of mine, it is requisite, I should have in a readiness
each necessary material, for this conflict; and above all, I ought to have an
especial care, to provide me an experimental Instrument, or spiritual
weapon, which may carve out a ready way to the truth, by a manifest and
infallible demonstration, objected even unto the eyes of such, as are infected
with extreme infidelity, that they may thereby turn from their vain and
sophisticating Philosophy, with the wisdom of the world, on which it is
erected; and become unfeigned and faithful scholars and proficients, in the
true and sacred Philosophy, or wisdom of God. I will make therefore election of
such demonstrative Machins for my purpose as is vulgarly known amongst us,
whereby my intentions may be more easily understood of every man; and this
Instrument is commonly styled by some, the Calendar-Glasse, and by others, the
Weather-glasse: whose composition or fabric, with the properties and uses
thereof, I purpose to express unto you briefly, in the Chapters following.

CHAP. II.
How the Instrument commonly termed the Weather-glasse, is falsely arrogated by
some Men of our age unto themselves, as being averred to be an invention of
their own.

MAn is so greedy of glory, and so desirous of fame and reputation, that if he
can acquire or purchase it any way unto himself, be it directly or indirectly,
he cares not much: I was the reason that the Ethnic Philosophers did
surreptitiously assume and ascribe unto themselves those principles of their
Philosophy, which of right did appertain unto the wise and divine Philosopher
Moses, and did mask or gild over their theft, with new names or titles, which
they imposed on them, the better to make a show, that they were established by
their own inventions, and shall be showed hereafter. In like manner, the
Instrument, commonly termed the Calender, or Weather-Glasse, has many
counterfeit Masters or Patrons, in this our age, who, because that they have a
little altered the shape of the model, do vainly glory and give out, that it
is a Masterpiece of their own finding out. As for myself, I must acknowledge,
and willingly ascribe unto each man his due, and therefore will not blush or be
ashamed, to attribute justly my Philosophical principles unto my Master Moses,
who also received them, figured or framed out by the finger of God; neither can
I rightly arrogate, or assume unto my self, the primary fabric of this
Instrument, although I have made use of it in my Natural History of the great
World, and elsewhere (but in another form), to demonstrate the verity of my
Philosophical Argument; for I confess, that I found it Graphically specified,
and Geometrically delineated, in a Manuscript of five hundred years antiquity
at the least. I will therefore set down unto you first, the shape, in which I
found it in that ancient Monument, and afterward made use of it for
demonstration's cause: And secondly, I will describe the figure and position
of, as it is commonly known and used among us.



Where you see, that there is no difference betwixt them, but only in their
forms or shapes; for the Sunbeams operating by their heat, upon the hollow
ball of the head A. makes the rarefied air, included in the said ball, to
pass out by the pipe AB. into the pot of water, and so it vanishes out
through the superficies of the water, in the form of bubbles; but when the Sun
goes down, the cold night approaching through the absence of the Sun, does
coagulate, contract, and condense again that included air* which was the day
before rarefied, by the presence and hot action of the Sun. But because there
is not air enough in the leaden ball and pipe, to effect this kind of
condensation in a due proportion, by reason of a part thereof which was exhaled
the day before; therefore to hinder all vacuity in the operation, there is
sucked up out of the pot of water C. into the leaden pipe, just as much water
as there wanted air, or as did correspond unto the air exhaled. Again, when
the Sun rises the next day, the air in the ball and pipe will be rarefied,
and then by dilating it self, will repel the water to his former place, the
which was mounted into the pipe. And so this alteration in condensation and
rarefaction, will ever hold in the same manner, more or less, according as the
Sun is nearer or farther off from us; or according unto the coldness or heat
of the Wind, that blows in the element.

The self same also will happen to the air, included in the second glass; for
the globe or ball in the top of the glass, which is the bowl of the Matras or
bolts head, is full of air, and is exactly, in every respect, referred unto the
ball of lead, as the straight Pipe which ascends out of the water, and is
joined to the head, is exactly compared unto the crooked pipe of the first; so
that if the leaden ball be erected upwards, and the crooked pipe be made
straight, to ascend perpendicularly out of the pot of water, unto the leaden
sphere, then will there be no difference betwixt the shape or figure, of the
first and second Machin or Instrument; so that each man may discern, that the
condition and usage of them both, are all one in effect.

CHAP. III.
Here the fabric of this Organ or Instrument, properly termed the
Weather-glasse, with the preparation of the Matras or Glass, commonly called a
Bolts-head, and the adaption of the Orifiace or Nose thereof, into a small
vessel of water, is expressed. Where also, their opinions are confuted, which
deem and affirm, that the water is sucked up into the neck of the Matras by
heat.

FIrst, we must observe, that this our experimental Instrument is composed of
three parts, where of two of them are more essential, and proper unto the
nature of the Engine or Machin; namely, the Matras, or Bolts-head, and the small
vessel of water, into the which the nose or orifice of the Matras, after it is
prepared, ought to enter: and the other is more accidental, as being only
ordained to sustain the glass firmly, in his perpendicular position, and to
adorn and set forth the Machin. Touching the Matras or Bolts-head, it is a
round or ovall glass, with a long and narrow neck, whose orifice, or mouth and
nose, ought to be proportionable un^o the rest of the neck, and it must be
prepared after a twofold manner; for first of all, the long neck of it being
put perpendicularly into the small vessel, being full of water, so that it do
touch the bottom of the vessel, we ought to measure from the superficies, or
top of the water, and begin our division into degrees, still ascending upwards,
till we come unto the very ball, be it round or ovall. And whereas the common
sort of this kind of Weather-glasses, has his first degree beginning downward,
marked with the figne of 1. and so ascends upward to the round ball,
according unto the natural Arithmeticall progression, thus: 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
10 11 12 13 14 15. I for a better method's cause, do alter the order in
numeration, and dividing of the neck or pipe of the Matras in the middle,
between the head of it, and the superficies of the water. I mark the place of
the division with the figure 1. and so count my degrees downward and upward
unto 7. after this manner: 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 2 3 4 5 6 7. which I affect, for
reasons that I will express unto you hereafter. So that the matter will be
ordered thus.



As for the small vessel of water, you see it here also described, with the
proportion of the pipe of the Matras, that descends into the bottom of it;
which is so far from division as it enters into the water.

Now when you have thus divided the neck of your Matras into parts, you must
prepare, and order it after this manner to make it magneticall and attractive
by cold, and expulsive or dilatative by heat; you must therefore take the
orifice of the Bolts head in your hand, and hold forth the head thereof, or the
round which is above it against the fire, till it be very hot; for the heat of
the fire will rarifie and dilate the Air in the glass, and cause by that
means a good portion of it to fly out of the glasse's orifice, and so it will
remain in that estate, so long as the glass is in the degree of heat: at
which time, if you suddenly put the nose of the pipe into the water, you shall
perceive that as the bolts head does keel or wax cold, so also will the water
by little and little mount upwards into the neck of the glass: And we must,
note the hotter the glass is made, and the colder the external air will be
found as that present, the higher and by so many more degrees will the water
ascend into the neck. And the reason hereof is, because that as heat does
rarifie the air, so the greater the heat is, the more excellent will the
degree of rarifaction be. Contrariwise, as cold does condense and thicken, so
the greater the cold is, the stronger will the condensation be: and therefore,
after that the included air is much rarefied, by an intense external heat, It
follows, that as the heat does by little and little fade, so the cold will by
little and little prevail, and have dominion; and consequently, the included
rarefied air must needs by little and little be condensed; but because there
wants sufficient matter or corpulency in the air, for the cold to work on,
being that a part of it was spent and evaporated by rarifaction, It follows,
that as the succeeding cold does condense and contract the air, so the air by
contraction of it self, must also attract and suck up into it, so much water
out of the vessel, as there wants air to satisfy the contractive appetite
of the cold; for the interposition of the water between the external air, and
the internal or included air, will not permit the internal, to suck or draw
into it the external to supply her want, for the satisfaction of the external
cold's lust, and therefore the water is forced to asscend, in lieu of the
external air. And this is the mystery of the Instrument, and the manner of
his fabricle, whereby it plainly appears, that they have been deceived which
have deemed, that the heat was the occasion of the attraction of the water
upwards, being that each man may be an eyewitness, that it is heat that
drives it downwards; and contrariwise, that cold is the cause of his mounting.

And whereas some Sophisticators, to make the matter the more strange, have
given out, that it is a secret peculiar included spirit, which works the
feat; and to make men to give credit to their tales, they have dyed the common
water in the vessel with Vardegrease, or such like stuff; I must give you to
understand, that all their prattle is but deceit, and that plain dealing is a
jewel.

As for the accidental part of this Machin, being it is framed and composed in
a diverse fashion, I will not graphically delineate, or draw it out unto your
view, being that the pictures will be chargeable; and the matter being done,
will serve you but to little purpose.

CHAP. IV.
Wherein are Expressed the sundry properties, with the usage of this
demonstrative Instrument.

I Divide as well the property as the use of this Instrument, into two kinds,
whereof I call the one general, and I make the other more peculiar. As for the
general property of it, by the one it contracteth and condenseth, namely, when
the included air is animated by the external cold; and by the other, it
dilateth and rarifieth, to wit, if the included spirit be excited by any
external heat. And therefore, through his constrictive nature or action, which
is made evident by the contraction of the air; we may easily discern the
universal reason, of the inspissation and condensation of things that were
thin. And again, by his dilatation, we may scan or decipher the cause of
rarifaction of such things, as were thick. For by the speculation we shall
find, that there is nothing in the whole Empire of Nature, which can be
rarefied and made subtle, except it be by the action of light or fire, whether
it be visible or invisible; and the essential effect of that action is light.
And on the contrary part, nothing can be condensed or inspissared, where
darkness has not dominion; forasmuch as darkness is the essential root of
cold, which is the immoderate act or in condensation. The particular
properties, with the uses thereof, are manifold; for first, The nature of it,
is to discover the temper of the external air, or catholic element, in heat
and cold; for the higher that the water does climb in the neck or pipe of the
Matras, it argues, that the firmer and stronger is the dominion of cold in the
air; so that by this means we may daily judge, of the increase or decrease of
cold in the air; and by consequence, we may guess at the proportion of heat,
in the sublunary spirit of the world, by the descent of the water.

Ce^tain Experiments worthy of observa^ion, and approved by many of this City,
touching this Experimental Glass.
If the water in the pipe of the glass, which before was highly mounted, does
fall on the sudden by some degrees, it will be an undoubted sign that rain
will immediately ensue.

If the water in the space of one night does descend, it is also a sign that
rain will come not long after.

If the South or East wind do blow, immediately after a North or Westerlie
wind, the water will fall by certain degrees: but if the North wind or cold
Westerlie wind do blow, after a Southern or Easterlie wind, then will the
water be forth with exalted.

If the water does attain unto the figure. 1. it argues that the Air is in a
moderation between heat and cold, as when the Sun is in the vernall
Equinoctial, or as the natural temper of the Spring uses to be.

But if the water mount higher, then it argues that the disposition of the
Air is by so many degrees more of Northen or Boreall nature, as the water is
mounted toward the bolts head; for you must conceive that the degrees from 1.
unto the uppermost 7. are belonging unto the winter Hemisphere, and therefore
are the degrees which note the augmentation of cold. So that if the water do
mount up unto. 2. in the Northern or higher part, it is an argument that cold
has dominion over heat in the external Air only by one degree. If it mount
unto the 3. of the same Hemisphere, it does foretell a slight frost: but if it
ascend unto. 4. or. 5. it pretends a hard and solid frost: if it come unto 6.
and 7. it argues great ice; but if it mount yet higher, it shows that a hard
Ice is likely to surprise and cover the whole river of Thames.

On the other side, if the water descend from. 1. unto. 2. of the lower rank
of degrees which imports the Summer or hot Hemisphere, then it argues heat
has gotten dominion over cold by one degree. But if it descend unto 3. or 4.
it imports a greater distemper of the Air in heat: if it descends unto 5.
or 6. it demonstrateth the air to be exceeding hot, but if the water be beaten
down unto the lower figure of 7. it shows that extreme and Sultry heat,
causing Coruscations and lightnings, has dominion in the Air.

So that we may discern how great a reference or relation there is between the
external air or universal sublunary Element, and the Air included in the
instrument. But I will in better terms express the Consanguinity and
Sympatheticall relation which is between the one and the other in this
subsequent Chapter.

CHAP. V.
Here it is proved evidently, notwithstanding any objection which may be made
to the contrary, that not only this experimental Organ has a relation unto
the great world, but also the spirit included in this little model does
resemble and imitate the action of that which is included in the great or
macrocosmicall Machin.

BUt before I will proceed in any further comparison, between the spirit
contained in the small model, with the properties of the agents and patients
in it, and this of the great world; I do think it to be necessary, first, to
answer unto a certain doubt or objection that may be made, the which, unless
it be resolved and taken away, such a relation or comparison may appear unto
the ignorant, either improper, or altogether impossible. I know therefore, that
not a few will object and say, that no convenient comparison can be made,
between this our small artificial Machin, and that natural fabric or organ
of the world; forasmuch as the spirit in our Glass is every where enclosed,
and strictly included in his vessel, and therefore may easily be incited by
force, to move according unto the regular figure, or fashion of the glass: But
the case is far otherwise in the spirit, which is contained in the vast cavity
of the world; for in it, the air or spirit does use at every impulsion, to
move freely this way and that way, as we are instructed by daily experience, in
the blowing of the winds from each quarter of the world. Unto this I answer,
That it is the self same reason of motion and relation, from a thicker or
denser nature, unto a thinner; and in like manner, from a thinner or rarer,
unto a thicker or denser, in a small subject, that is in a greater; so that the
like respects be had, and that by an equal weight, and proportionate measure,
in cold and heat. Yea verily, and I aver boldly, that the whole World, or
worldly Round, is as well and completely stuffed or filled with spirit or air,
as is this our artificial vessel, or experimental Machin; which if it should
not be, it would consequently follow, that vacuity would be admitted into the
nature of things, the which would be but an absurd thing in a Philosopher to
credit. Wherefore we may boldly conclude, that the spirit is in the like
quantity, weight, and proportion, in the concavity of this instrument,
considering his magnitude, as it is in the great or little world. But
experience teaches us, that the self same nature, be it hot or cold, which
uses to reign and have dominion every quarter of the year, in the cosmicall
or worldly spirit, does produce the self same effects in rarifaction and
condensation of the air, included in our artificial vessel, as it uses to
procreate in the air of the world; all which is fully demonstrated before. For
by how much the more the state of the air does abound in heat or cold, by so
much will the water contained in the neck of the glass be depressed, by reason
of the included aire's subtilation. And again, by how much the more the
inclemency of cold does vegetate and abound in the air, by so many degrees
higher will the water be exalted. And this is the reason (as it is already told
you) that by the observation of this Weather-glasse, the temper of the air in
the great world is so exactly discovered unto us. And therefore by this it is
evident, that the foresaid doubt or scruple is abolished and taken away.

I would in this regard have each discreet Reader to understand, that, when he
beholds this Instrument's nature, he contemplateth the action (as it were) of
a little world; and that it has, after the manner of the great world, his
Northern and his Southern Hemisphear, plainly to be discerned in it, the which
two are divided exactly by an Aequinoctiall line in effect, which cutteth the
Degree, signed with the character 1. Also it has his two Tropicks, with their
Poles; only we take the Southern Pole and Hemisphear to be hot, in regard of
us, because the breath which comes from it is from the Sun, which in our
respect is Southernly disposed; and therefore we term that Pole, the
Summer-Pole or Hemisphear, and the other, the winter-Pole or Hemisphear. And we
have demonstrated, that the degree in the neck of the Glass 1. does correspond
exactly unto the place of the Equator, because that if the Northern or Winter
Tropic be imagined to be the Basis of one Triangle, whose Cone shall end in
the center of the Northern Tropic, then it must follow, that where the
intersection is made by these two imaginary Triangles, the Equator must of
necessity pass. As for example.

Vide Med. Cathol. 26.


And we term the place of the Aequinoctiall, the Sphere of equality, because
when as the Sun is in Aries or Libra, which are the vernall and autumnall
intersection of the Aequinoctiall, the days and nights are equal; so also,
the temper of each Hemisphear in heat and cold, is naturally observed to tend
unto a mediocrity or equality. Even such also will the temper of the
micro-cosmicall air, or catholic spiritual element, be unto the earth, when
the water in the Glass is drawn up half way.

I have sufficiently described unto you as well the fabric as the nature of
this Instrument, and therefore since I have prepared it to serve me for ocular
demonstration instead of an Herculean Club, in this combat which I undergo
against our insulting Peripatetick Adversary; and that I am provided of
sufficient natural reasons instead of a trusty armor; and that this armor is
well tempered and made as it were musket-proof, at the least by Authority drawn
out of the whole Harmony of the sacred Bible, Why should I fear the number of
mine enemies when it is T^u^h's own cause which I undergo? If God be with me I
care not who is against me, being that verity, which conquereth all things,
will (I am well assured) fight for me, and defend me, though but only one
against a multitude. Why should I expect any favor from them, in telling the
truth, and condemning their errors, since that they do Satyrically censure,
and deride my honest endeavors, when I hold my peace, and say nothing unto
them? It is an easier matter for malicious carpers and back-biters, like
temerarious and rash Cynicks, to find fault with a thing; than with moderate
and judicious spirits, to judge, amend, and correct it with equity. In the
first, namely, to condemn before the case is heard or understood, it is an
argument of envy, cloked with wilful ignorance. In the latter, namely, to
teach a man his errors, a token of learned zeal, and Christian charity.

The Second Book of this Treatise, touching Philosophy in general.
The Argument of this Second Book of the First Section.
THis second Book imports, That the Philosophy of the Ethnicks is false and
erroneous, 1 Cor. 3.19.
both in regard it is founded upon the wisdom of this world, which, as St. Paul
teaches us, is but mere foolishness in the eyes of God; and then because it
contradicts the truth, and consequently is not issuing from the Father of
Light, which is in Heaven, but from the Prince of darkness, who reigns
beneath. Wherefore this kind of wisdom, or (...), is termed by the Apostle
James, James 3.15.
Terrence, animal, and diabolical. And for this reason St. Paul, that most
excellent and sacred Philosopher, or lover of wisdom, does warn us, that we be
not deceived by this kind of Philosophy, which he terms, Vainfallacy, built
and framed out according unto the traditions of men, Colos. 2.8.9.
and after the elements of this world; and not having its foundation upon the
true corner stone, Jesus Christ, in whom dwells all the plenitude of Divinity
corporally.

BEfore we dive into the bottomless abyss of the essential Philosophy, whose
main foundation is the true wisdom, (the which is a thing so difficil to be put
in execution, that nothing but the swift and nimble-winged soul, or spirit of
man, is able to bring to effect) it will but concur with reason, that we should
in the first place consider and observe, the Etymology of the name or word,
whose naked essence we hunt after, that thereby we may in the second rank
descend more securely, and with a better understanding, unto the definition or
description thereof, and so proceed with a surer confidence, unto the division
or differences of the main subject we have in hand, to the intent we may
directly point at the truth, and distinguish it from falsehood. Seeing therefore
that Philosophia or Philosophy, is the main scope or business of this our
Treatise, it is meant commonly, and understood in a generality, for Sapientia,
or Wisdom; but by a more proper and peculiar signification, it is interpreted
Amor, or, Amicus sapientiae, The love, or friend, of wisdom: For the word is
composed of (...), that is, Amicus, or a Friend; and (...), that is, Sapientia,
or Wisdom. And it is so termed of the Greeks, because that in the word at
large is contained, the love of wisdom; or because that by teaching of wisdom,
men are incited or stirred up to love it. In antique Ages it was called (...),
or Sapientia only, and at last (...) was added unto it by the notable
Philosopher Pythagoras, who would rather be called Philosophus, that is,
Sapientiae-amator, a lover of wisdom, then arrogantly to assume unto himself
the name or title of (...), sapiens, or a wise man. From the Etymology of this
word, Philosophia, or Philosophy, we may derive his definition, and describe it
to be, An earnest study of wisdom, or, a fervent application of our minds unto
it; being that the word imports, that it is the affectionate love of
sapience. It appears therefore, that the main subject of Philosophy is
Wisdom, the perfect knowledge whereof is that summum bonum, or highest
goodness of this mortal life, which was the mark whereat the wise men of all
ages did ever level and aim. But as from all beginnings, there was a
distinction, or opposite difference, between light and darkness, good and
evil, righteousness and unrighteousness; and, to conclude, between the real
things of God, and the prestigious and imaginary inventions of man: So also is
there a main contrariety to be observed, between the true wisdom which is of
God, and that false and onely-seeming one, which is of this world; and
consequently, there must be an endless jar and antipathy, betwixt the
essential and true-bred Philosophy, and that which is bastard and spurious.
All which we find to be sufficiently warranted, by the testimony of holy Writ,
for the Apostle says in one place, 2 Cor. 1.12.
Non in sapientia carnali, sed in gratia Dei versati sumus in hoc mundo; We are
conversant in this world, not in carnal wisdom, but in the grace of God. And
again, Prudentia carnis mors est, quoniam sapientia carnis est inimica Dei:
prudentia Spiritus, Romans 8.6.
est vita and pax: The prudency of the flesh is death, because the wisdom of
the flesh is destruction; but the prudency of the Spirit is life and peace.
Again, in another place, thus more plainly, Praedicatio mea non est in
persuasionibus et humanae sapientiae v^rbis, sed in ostensione spiritus et
veritatis. Sapientiam loquimur inter perfectos, sapientiam autem non hujus
mundi, 1 Cor. 2.4.
sed loquimur Dei sapientiam in mysterio, quae abscondita est, quam Deus
revelavit electis per Spiritum suum. My preaching (says he) is not in the
persuasions and words of human wisdom, but in the showing forth of the Spirit
and verity. We speak and utter forth wisdom among the perfect, not the wisdom
of this world, but the wisdom of God in a mystery, which is hidden and secret,
the which God has revealed unto the Elect by his Spirit. In these words we are
taught, first, that the smooth persuasions of the wise-appearing Orators, or
lip-learned Sophisters, and selfconceited Philosophers of this world, are vain;
being they bring along with them nothing else, but an empty wind, without any
material or substantial fruit, and are in effect but a mere shadow, in regard
of a real matter or subject, forasmuch as they prestigiously appear something,
but are indeed nothing; when contrariwise, the words of the true and perfect
Philosopher, are essential, and therefore accompanied with virtue and power.

Secondly, that what the true and powerful Philosopher utters, is the
flourishing and fruitful wisdom, even the eternal sapience of the Almighty,
and not the sterill wisdom of this world, which when it is brought unto the
touchstone, will be found counterfeit, as being unable to endure the trial.

Thirdly, that this heavenly wisdom is only mystically revealed unto mankind,
as being reserved in the power of God, and solely discovered or opened unto the
Saints, and elect, and therefore unknown unto the Pagans; or Ethnic wisemen
who are the composers of our Christian Philosophers wisdom, and therefore it
is a vain fallacy or sophisticate philosophy; forasmuch as it is framed (as
the Apostle says), Colos. 2.8.
through the traditions of men; according unto the Elements of this world, and
not after Christ, who is the true wisdom, for in him dwells all the
plenitude of divinity, bodily. And for this reason, the same Apostle says in
another place, Nos non spiritum hujus mundi accepimus sed spiritum qui ex Deo
est, et quae a Deo donata sunt nobis loquimur, non in doctis humanae Sapientiae
verbis, 1 Cor. 2.12.
sed in doctrina spiritus, spiritualibus spiritualia comparantes. Animalis enim
homo non percipit ea quae sunt spiritus Dei; stultitia enim est illi and non
potest intelligere. We have not received the spirit of this world, but the
spirit which is of God; and we speak those things which are given us from God,
not in the learned words of humane wisdom, but in the doctrine of the Spirit,
comparing spiritual things with spiritual things. For the animal man does not
perceive the things which are of the spirit of God; unto him it is foolishness,
and he cannot understand it; 1 Cor. 3.19.
Again he says, Sap^entia hujus mund^ stuititia est apud Deum, Deus enim novit
cogitationes sapienium quod stultae sunt. The wisdom of the world is
foolishness with God, for God knows that the cogitations of the worldly wise
are foolish. Whereby we may also discern that there is a wisdom falsely so
called, which is clean contrary in effect, unto the true sapience, and
therefore it is termed of the Apostle foolishness, and consequently the
conceits of such wisemen as are the Ethnic philosophers and their adherents,
(though they think passing well of themselves,) are indeed foolish and sottish
before God. Isay. 5.20.
Of the which kind of philosophers, the prophet utters these words, Woe unto
them that speak good of evil and evil of good which put darkness for light and
light for darkness, woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes and prudent in
their own sight. Does not St. James also, and that in open and plain terms,
assign a most palpable difference, betwixt these two kinds of wisdoms where
he says, Sapientia contradicens veritati non est de sursum descendens a patre
luminum, sed terrena, James 3.15.
animalis, diabolica: sapientia vero de sursum, est a Deo, That wisdom which
contradicts the truth, is not from above, descending down from the father of
lights, but is earthly, animal, diabolical: contrariewise the wisdom which
descends from above is of God. By this therefore it is made evident that as
by the whole harmony of holy Writ, sapience or wisdom is taken after a
twofold manner, namely for a worldly and counterfeit one which is earthly,
mundane, and humane, that is to say which is of man's invention being framed out
after the rudiments or elements of this world, so also there is a true
essential, and perfect wisdom which has his root or beginning in Christ,
Eccl. 1.5.
who is God according to that of the wiseman, Verbum dei altissimi est
sapientiae sons, The word of God most high is the fountain of wisdom. Which
being so, we ought not to embrace with such fervency that false and bastard
philosophy which has her original from pagan men's inventions, and neglect
that which is true and essential, even that (I say) which is from God the main
foundation whereof, is the corner stone Jesus Christ, which, as St. Paul
tells us, does fill and vivify all things; for in so doing we shall imitate
the besotted Israelites, of whom the prophet Baruch says, Baruch. 3.12
Sapientiae fontem Israel reliquit, Israel has forsaken the fountain of
wisdom. And this he said, because they forsook or neglected the true wisdom,
and did search after Arts, sciences and understanding in foreign and gentile
nations; as did the Agarens, and they that were in Theman* which never attained
unto the knowledge or perfection of the true wisdom, because they did not
acknowledge the fountain or giver thereof, which is God only; Shall we not (I
say) in so doing transgress the precept of the wise prophet, Jer. 10.2.
who says Vias gentium nolite discere, quia leges populorum vanae sunt,
Learn not after the manner of the heathen, for their ways are vain, The
Apostle does in another place sufficiently and that in these few words,
signify unto us the variety and dissonancy of these two several sorts of
wisdom, and withal seems to express a kind of by-forkedness or two fold
difference, 1 Cor. 1.22.
in that which is the worldly branch; Sapientiam Graeci quaerebant, Judaei
signa, no^ Christum crucifixum praedicamus, The Greeks (says he) seek wisdom,
the Jews desire signs, but we preach Christ crucified, whereby he argues the
humane contemplative philosophy of the Graecians, such as that of the
Peripateticks, Stoics, and Epicures were, the practical philosophy and the
ocular demonstrations which the Jews did affect: and lastly he seems to
express the true and essential philosophy or study of wisdom which
consists in Jesus Christ crucified, which philosophy is only therefore of
God, because the essential wisdom thereof did issue from the mouth of the
Almighty, being that the fountain thereof is the word of God, Ab ore Altissimi
prodii (says wisdom) I came out of the mouth of the most highest, Eccles.
24.5:
and therefore the Apostle showing a difference between the Greekish
philosophy, which was spurious, and this which was truly essential, gives
this caveat unto the elect, Ut cons^lentur corda ipsorum, instructi in
charitate et in omnes divitias plenitudinis intellectus in a gnition^ mysterii
dei patris Jesu Christi, in quo sunt omnes The sauri sapientiae et scientiae
absconditi Hoc dico ut nemo vos decipiat in sublimitate sermonum: Coloss. 2.92.
sicut ergo accepistis Jesum Christum dominum nostrum in ipso ambulate,
radicati and abundantes in gratiarum action. Videte ne quis vos decipiat per
Philosophiam and inanem fallaciam secundum traditionem hominum, secundum
elementa mundi, and non secundum Christum; quia in ipso inhabitat omnis
plenitudo divinitatis corporaliter. Et estis in illo repleti, qui est caput
omnis principatus and potestatis. That their hearts might be comforted, being
instructed or guided through charity, into all the riches of fullness of
understanding, in the acknowledgment of the mystery of God the Father, and of
Jesus Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and science. This I
speak unto you, that none may deceive you by subtlety, or persuasive speeches.
As therefore you have received our Lord Jesus Christ, so walk in him
radicatedly, abounding in thanksgiving. See that no man deceive you by
Philosophy; and vain fallaci^s or sophistications, framed through the tradition
of men, according unto the elements of this world, and not by Christ, forasmuch
as in him dwells the plenitude or fullness of the Godhead corporally. And ye
are full in him, who is the head of all principalities and potestates, etc. Out
of which words, there are these notable things to be selected or gathered.

First, That all the plenitude of understanding, consists in the revelation
and knowledge of the mystery of God, Coloss. 2.3.
and his Son Jesus Christ; because in Christ only, is all the treasure of
wisdom and science hid. And therefore it is but a folly to seek true and
essential science, understanding, and wisdom, from them who had them not.

Secondly, That the smooth-tongu'd Orators, deceitful Sophisters, and vain
Philosophers of this world, are to be eschewed, and no way for the most part to
be believed; forasmuch as they are but only superficial, and scarce probable,
being that, in essence and verity, they are nothing else, in regard of their
groundwork, but fiction, or mere imagination.

Thirdly, That there is a Philosophy, and by consequence a Wisdom, which is
derived from the invention and tradition of men, and according unto the
elements of this world, and not according unto Christ: which spurious wisdom
ought therefore to be forsaken, or at leastwise not so exactly to be observed,
by such as are followers of Christ.

Closs. 2.8.9.
Fourthly, That there is a true Philosophy, and therefore a wisdom, which is
according unto Christ, forasmuch as in him one^y consists all the treasures
of perfect science, knowledge, understanding, and wisdom, which is framed out,
not according unto the traditions of men, and the elements of this world, which
is terrene, animal, diabolical, and contradicts the verity; James 3.15.
but according to that which descends from God the Father of lights, as St.
James tells us. Upon the foundation therefore of this human or mundan wisdom,
was the Philosophy of the Grecians erected; and it appears, first, because
that the Apostle denies it to be the true Philosophy, being that it is not
grounded on the cornerstone Jesus Christ, as it appears by his behavior and
speech, which he made unto the Philosophers of Athens; for when the sect of the
Epicures and Stoics did discourse with him, after that by the reasons of
divine Philosophy, he had exhorted them from their idolatry, and worshipping of
false and unknown gods, and had preached unto them the true wisdom, which was
Jesus Christ, and the resurrection of the dead, and consequently instructed
them in the foundation of the true and real Philosophy; Some of them replied,
What will this verbal babbler say? Acts. 17.18.
and others exclaiming against him, did aver, that he was a proclaimer of new
demons or devils. The said divine Philosopher and holy Apostle, replied thus,
Ye men of Athens, I perceive that in all things ye are too superstitious: for I
found an altar, Acts. 17.22.
wherein was written, Unto the unknown God; whom ye then ignorantly worship,
him show I unto you, etc. Note by the way, that he argues by this speech, that
they knew not the true grounds of Philosophy, being ignorant of the true God,
which is the fountain of the essential wisdom. Then he proceeds thus, God
that made the world, Acts. 1^. ver. 24.
and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwells
not in Temples made with hands, neither is worshipped with men's hands* as
though he needed any thing, seeing he gives to all life, and breath, and all
things, etc, I would have you to mark the excellency of the true wise man,
namely, how he speaks unto the mundan Philosophers of Athens, the divine
wisdom, and therefore the solid and essential Philosophy; for he expresses in
the foresaid Text, that the Spirit of God or Christ, which is God, dwells not
in artificial Temples, but makes every natural thing his Sanctuary, and
above all creatures, and by super-excellency, he points at Man, (as you shall
see hereafter). And therefore he affirms, that the same divine spirit of
wisdom gives to every creature (for his words are, He gives to all) life,
breath, and all things; and therefore if to all things, then there is not any
thing that is naturated by it, but lives and breaths, or has his existence
from, and in, this wisdom; the which is therefore rightly termed the
Cornerstone, forasmuch as on him all creatures rely and exist. And therefore
it is he only, John. 1.2.9.
who is that light of the world, in whom is that life which does vivifie all
things, 1 Timothy 6.13. 1 Cor. 15.28. Coloss. 1.18. 1 Cor. 12.6.
as in another place the Apostle does teach us; and who is all, and in all, as
we have it in another place; where also it is said, that in him is all things,
and he in every thing, as well visible as invisible. And in conclusion, He
fills all things, and works all, and in all. Does not Solomon seem to
assent unto all this, where he says, that Gods Spirit is in all things. Sap.
12.1. Act. 17. ver. 26.
Then the said Apostle proceeds thus, And he made of one blood all mankind,
to dwell on the face of the earth, and has assigned the seasons which were
ordained before, and the bounds of their habitations, that they should seek the
Lord, if so be they might have groped after him, and found him, though
doubtless he be not far from every one of us; for in him we live, we move, and
have our being. For we are also his generation, etc.

Lo here the infinite and admirable virtue of this divine Cornerstone which is
Jesus Christ, who is the essential subject and ground work of the true
philosophy I mean, that sacred wisdom which is so extolled and magnified by
the old and new Testament. Coloss. 2.3.
And therefore the same Apostle said rightly in the foresaid place, In Christo
sunt omnes The sauri scientiaeet sapientiae absconditi, In Christ are all the
Treasures of Knowledge and Sapience hidden, whereby in the first place it is
made evident, that there is no true philosophy which has not this spiritual
foundation, namely Christ Jesus, Coloss. 2.9.
in whom is the plenitude of all divinity corporally, and who is the head as
well of the Angelical nature, as of all inferior things else of what soever
condition, all which being so, we may see how far the Greekish philosophy
does differ from the truth, and therefore me thinks it should not be so
seriously followed, being that the Scriptures have delineated unto us a more
complete and perfect path way unto wisdom.

Again it appears evidently that the Greekish philosophers and consequently
that kind of humane or mundane wisdom whereon it is built or established
is-terrene, James. 3.15.
animal, and diabolical, because it contradicts the true wisdom or
philosophy, and therefore it is proved to be false, as shall more at large be
expressed unto you in the chapters following.

CHAP. II.
Wherein the original, or beginning of the true wisdom, and consequently of
the essential Philosophy, is opened; and then the nature and power of it, is
really described.

WE purpose now in in the first place, to search out the original fountain of
the true wisdom, and therefore of the essential Philosophy. And then in the
second rank, I will express the definition of it; after that, I will show you,
that it is the foundation, not only of the true external Philosophy, with the
sciences which depend thereon, but also the discoverer of all mysteries, and
hidden secrets, yea, and the only revealer of things, as well past, as those
which are to come.

Concerning the original or beginning of this sacred wisdom, I will prove by
the consent and harmony of the whole Bible, Baruck 1. Dan. 2.21.
that it is in God, the Father of light; and therefore it must be clean
contrary in nature unto the wisdom of this world, which is terrene and animal,
as the Apostle has it. Sapient^ae daetor and inventor, Deus est: The giver and
inventor of wisdom is God, as the Prophets do intimate unto us. Sapientia and
fortitudo Domini sint, Dan. 2.20.
says Daniel; Sapience and fortitude be the Lord's. Sapientia in antiquis est
and in multo tempore prudentia, Job. 12. and 12. Pro. 2.6.
says Job; Wisdom is of antiquity, and prudency of a long standing. Again,
Sapientiam dat Dominus, ex ore ejus prudentia and scientia, says Solomon; The
Lord gives wisdom, prudency and science issue from his mouth. And again,
Sapientiam possidet Deus in principio viarum suarum, antequam quicquam faceret
a principio, Prove. 8.22.
ab aeterno ordinata est; concepta erat cum nondum erant abyssi. God did
possess wisdom in the beginning of his ways, before he made any thing, from
the beginning, even from eternity was she ordained; Eccl. 1.4.
she was conceived when there was no abyss. Sapientia a Deo profecta est and
prior omnium creata, says the son of Syrach, Wisdom came from God, and was the
first created of all things. And again, Ex ore Altissimi prodivi primogenita
ante omnem creaturam, Ecclus 24.5.
says she in her own person; I came or issued out from the mouth of the most
High, Wisd. 9.10.
being born before any creature. Sapientia caelitus mittatur de sanctis coelis,
ut mecum sit and mecum laboret, says Solomon in another place: Let wisdom be
sent from thy holy heavens to assist me, and to labor with me.

And again he expresses the time of her election, the manner of her
exaltation and way to separate her truth from falsehood in these few words
which are golden ones, Sap. 6.24.
Sapientiam dei ab initio nativitatis investigabo and ponam in lucem, nec
praeteribo veritatem, I will find out the wisdom of God even from the
beginning of her nativity, and I will put her into light, neither will I pass
over, or omit the truth. By all these places and many more which I could
produce, it is made manifest that this excellent spirit of which we intend to
treat in this place is the true wisdom, and withal it must needs follow that
the philosophy which depends on it, is the essential, perfect and only real
one, forasmuch as it is from the father of lights, acccording unto the Tenent
of the forementioned Apostle and divine philosopher. Now we proceed to show you
briefly what this wisdom is, and how it was produced, and that according unto
the mind of the wise Solomon, Wisd. 7.25.26.
Sapientia (says he) est vapor virtutis Dei and emana^io quaedam claritatis
omnipotentis dei sincera, et candor lucis aeternae, et speculum sine macula Dei
ma^estatis, et imago bonitatis illius. Wisdom is the vapor of the virtue of
God, and a certain sincere emanation of the brightness of the omnipotent God,
and the beauty of the eternal light, and the immaculated or unspotted mirror
of the majesty of God, Hebr. 1.3.
and the image of his goodness. And the Apostle, Christ is the brightness of
the glory and the ingraved form of his person which bears up all things by
his mighty word. Whereby it is an easy thing for wisemen to discern, what a
main difference there is between the false Ethnic and mundane wisdom which is
terrene, and that true and essential one which is from above, and has his
original from the Father of light, forasmuch as the fountain thereof is the
Word, or voice of the Lord. Sapientiae fons (says the Text) verbum Dei in
excelsis, and ingressus illius mandata aeterna: The fountain or beginning of
wisdom is the word of God from above, and her entrance the eternal
Commandments. Eccl. 1.5.
Having then expressed unto you, what this only true wisdom is, I will
endeavor to open and discover also her catholic virtues, in the which she
acts and operateth, as well in general, as in particular, over all the
world: Nay verily, what can she not do and effect, when she is all in all, and
operateth all in everything, as the Apostle teaches us. For this reason also
is Christ, the true wisdom, 1 Cor. 12.6.
said, in the forementioned Text, to sustain and bear up all things by the word
of his virtue. This omnipotent power of hers, in and over all things in this
world, Heb. 1.3.
is most excellently explained and set down thus, by the divine Philosopher
Paul: Christus est imago Dei invisibilis, pr^mogenitus omnis creaturae, quoniam
in ipso condita sunt universa in coelis and terra, visibilia and invisibilia,
sive thront, sive dominationes, sive principatus, Coloss. 1.15.
sive potestates, omnia per ipsum and in ipso creat a sunt, and ipse est ante
omnes, and omnia in ipso constant. Christ is the image of the invisible God,
the first begotten of every creature, because that in him, all things visible
and invisible, in the heavens and in the earth, were made, whether they be
thrones, or dominions, or principalities, or potestates, all were created by
him and in him; and he is before all creatures, and all things consist in him.
This may seem very strange doctrine unto such Academick persons, as are too
confident in the Ethnic Philosophy, forasmuch as it does acknowledge no such
wisdom from above, no such a Christ, or sacred Word, which was the Creator of
heaven and earth, and who made the Angelical Intelligences, and in whom, and
by whom, all things were, and do yet exist. But it tells us of subalternat
efficient natures, namely, of Intelligences, of Stars, of Elements, and such
like things, which operate or effect, of themselves, all things above and
beneath, and will have the world to be eternal, and without all beginning;
when contrariwise this true Philosophy tells us, that God created all things
in and by his word and wisdom; that he operateth all in all, and, that he is
all, and in all. For the plain words of the precedent Text is, Omnia in ipso
constant, All consist in him. But to the purpose. The foresaid Text seems to
confirm this of the wise Solomon: Sapientiam possidebat in principio viae suae:
ante opera sua, ante ullum tempus, ante seculum, cum nullae essent abyssi,
edita erat ipsa, cum nulli essent fontes abundantes aquis, ante montes fundati
essent, Prove. 8.22.
cum nondum fecerat terram, cum aptaret coelos ibi erat, cum slatueret ambitum
in superficie abyssi, cum fortificaret superiores nubes superne, quando
roborabat fontes abyssi, quando ponebat mari statutum suum, cum statueret
fundamenta terrae, erat sapientia apud ipsum cuncta componens. Jehovah did
possess wisdom in the beginning of his ways, before any of his works, and
before there was any time, before the world was made; she was brought forth
before there was any abyss, and before there was any fountains that did abound
with water, before the mountains had their foundations, when as yet he had made
no earth. When he did adapt and make fit the heavens, she was there; when he
did ordain a compass, or appoint margins for the surface of the abyss. When
he did fortify the highest clouds above, when he did corroborate the fountains
of the deep, when he did set bounds unto the sea, when he did establish the
foundations of the earth, then was wisdom with him, composing or making all
things. Whereby he argues, first, the antiquity of the eternal wisdom; and
then he proves, that she was the composer and maker of Heaven and Earth, and
consequently of every thing, as well invisible, as visible therein. And this
agrees in all things with that of our sacred and essential Philosopher Moses,
where he acknowledges first an abyss without form; then that the informed
matter of the abyss was by the presence of Gods emanating Spirit, universally
informed and called waters. Then how by the acting of the divine or essential
voice or word, Genesis 1.
Fiat, which was uttered by the mouth of the Omnipotent, the light or created
form was produced in the waters, and afterward by the will of the Creator, the
word was pronounced the second time, and the waters above were divided from the
waters beneath by the firmament, and so the heavens were made by the second
fiat; as by the third, the division of the lower waters into elements, was
effected by the assistance of this one and the self-same word, or the Spagerick
operation of this divine and catholic Spirit, Elohim, but in a various
property. Psalm. 32.6.
Does not David in few words affirm so much, saying, Verbo Domini firmati sunt
coeli and Spiritu ab ore ejus omnis virtus eorum: By the word of the Lord the
heavens were made, Psalm. 103.24.
and by the spirit of his mouth each virtue thereof. Again, In sapientia omnia
secisti; Thou have created all things in wisdom. And St. Peter, Coeli erant
prius and terra de aqua, 2 Pet. 3.5.
and per aquam existentes verbo Dei: The heavens were first, and the earth of
water, John. 1.
and by water, consisting by the word of God. And does not St. John say, By it
all things were made, and without it nothing was made. The world was fashioned
by this word or essential spirit, Prove. 3.19.
which was pure light, but the world did not know it. And Solomon, Sapientia
Deus fundavit coelos, stabilivit terram in prudentia: By wisdom God made the
heavens, and by his prudency he laid the foundations of the earth. In
conclusion, the whole harmony of holy Writ, which is too long for me punctually
in this place to rehearse, does testify thus much, that all things, of what
nature or condition soever, were made, disposed, and effected, in, by, and
through this divine virtue or emanation, which is God himself, forasmuch as it
is the divine act, whose root is the word. Ex ipso (says St. Paul) per ipsum,
and in ipso sunt omnia: Of him, by him, and in him, are all things. But because
some of the learned of this world may reply, that though it is true, that God
by his divine Spirit or Word, did create all things; yet it follows not, that
he does act immediately, and exist essentially in every thing. But after that
this eternal Spirit of wisdom, had bestowed on each creature a peculiar virtue
in its creation, then the creature can act of it self by a free will, which is
absolutely; and distinguished, and divided from the immediate act of God. I
answer, that by our founded rules in Divinity, the true essence of the Deity
is individual, and therefore God does impart no essential act or virtue unto
any creature which can be discontinued or separated from Himself. And for this
reason, Christ who is the eternal spirit of wisdom is said to fill all, I
marry (will our learned say) that is vertually, but not substantially or
essentially. I would fain know (laying all such school distinctions apart, 1 Timothy 6.4.
of which St. Paul bids Timothy to beware) if the virtue of God be not his
essence, or whether the one can be divided from the other? If they reply and
say, that this virtue of God is no essence but an accident: Verily they must
needs err in saying so, being that it is most certainly known unto the very
Jews and Gentiles themselves that God has not any accidents in him, seeing
that he is absolutely essential, and real of himself, for where his divine
act is, there is also his virtue, and, where his virtue is, there is he truly
said to be essential: for else the word or divine act which does vivifie and
quicken every creature, should seem to be but an Accident, and that divided
from the divine essence: which, how absurd it is, the immortality and root of
it does argue: For David in his forsaid text says, spiritu ab ore ejus omnis
virtus eorum, from the spirit of his mouth does issue every virtue of the
heavens. Psalm. 32.6.
I imagine that there is no man of an upright sense that will esteem this
virtue to be an Accident; which being so, then must it needs be essential, and
consequently in God, and of God, and therefore not divisible from his spirit:
But what needs more words when Scriptures do confirm this every where? Colos.
1.16.
St. Paul says, in the text before mentioned, Quoniam in ipso cond^ta sunt
universa in coelis et in terra tam visibilia quam invisibilia, omnia in ipso et
per ipsum creata sunt; et omnia in ipso constant. Because all things in heaven
and earth are made in him, as well visible as invisible, all things are created
in him and by him all consist in him; John. 1.4.
Ergo, nothing without him. Again, St. John says, In verbo erat vita; Life was
in the Word. And therefore the creature is annexed unto him by a continuated
tie of one and the self-same spirit of life which is in the creature, without
the which it cannot exist one minute. Psalm. 104.24.
And for this cause the Psalmist says, O Lord, how manifold are thy works, in
wisdom thou have made them all. The earth is full of thy riches; and 29.30.31.
so is the wide sea, and the innumerable creeping things therein both great and
small. Thou give unto them, and they gather it, thou openest thine hand and
they are filled with good things, but if thou hide thy face, they are troubled,
if thou take away their breath they die, and return unto dust. Again, if thou
sendest out thy Spirit, they are re-created and revive, and thou renewest the
face of the earth. Whereby we see, that it is the immediate act of the Spirit
of wisdom, that works these things, by which God is said to vivifie all
things, and that by him we breathe, and live, and have our being. And not only
we, but also all other flesh whatsoever, as it appears by the foresaid Text;
Job. 34.14.
as also by this testimony of Job, Si Deus apponens ad hominem animum suum,
spiritum seu flatum ejus ad se reciperet, deficeret and exspiraret omnis caro
simul, and homo in c^nerem reverteretur: If God setting his heart or mind upon
man, should receive or draw unto himself his spirit or breath of life, all
flesh would die together, and man would return unto dust. Isay. 42.5.
And the Prophet, Deus dat flatum populo qui est super terram and spiritum
calcantibus eam. God gives breath unto the people which is on the earth, and a
spirit unto the creatures which tread on it. Now I beseech you, How is it
possible, that this spirit of life should be present with, and in, all things,
and therefore essentially in every thing, and yet it should cease to act
immediately, that is, in persona sua, when it is the most swift and mobil' in
his active nature and agility, of all things, as the wise man tells us. That
he is present in all things, it is apparent, because all things do act and live
in him, and by him; for St. Paul's Text before mentioned says, Omnia in ipso
constant, All consist in him. And again, Ipse operatur omnia in omnibus, 2
Peter. 3.5.
He works all in all. And St. Peter, The heavens and the earth which were of
water, Wisd. 12.1. Wisd. 1.7. Psalm. 139.7.8.9.10.11.12.
exist by the word. And Solomon, Incorruptibilis Dei spiritus inest omni rei,
The incorruptible Spirit of God is in all things. And again, Spiritus
disciplinae sanctus implet orbem terrarum, The spirit of wisdom fills the
earth. And the Prophet David, Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or whither
shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend into heaven, thou art there; if I
lie down in hell, thou art there. Let me take the wings of the morning, and
dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea, yet thither shall thine hand lead me,
and thy right hand hold me. If I say, yet the darkness shall hide me, even the
night shall be light about me, yea the darkness hides not from thee; but the
night shines as the day, the darkness and night are both alike. Therefore it
is his real Spirit that fills all things, and not any accidental virtue, as
is falsely imagined by some. Isay. 66.1.
And the Prophet Isaias, Coelum est seeds mea, and terra scabellum pedum
meorum, says the Lord, The heavens are my seat, and the earth my foot stool.
And Jeremy, Coelum and terram nunquid impleo, Jerem. 23.24.
Do not I fill the heaven and the earth? Now that you may know more
particularly how this is done, hearken unto David, In sapientia (says he)
omnia fecisti, Psalm. 104.24.
repleta est terra possessione tua; Thou made all things in wisdom, and the
earth is full of thy possession or riches; he means with his Spirit, which
replenisheth, inacteth, and informs all things. And therefore says the son
of Syrach, Eccl. 1.10.
Sapientiam effudit Deus super omnia opera sua, and super omnem carnem secundum
datum suum: God powered out his wisdom upon all his creatures, and upon all
flesh, according unto the measure that he bestows it: That is to say, The
Spirit of wisdom is more or less in all things, according as it pleased God to
impart it unto this or that creature. Wisd. 8.5.
And for this reason, Solomon in another place. Sapientia operatur omnia,
Wisdom works or acts all things. Which agrees with this Text of the
Apostle, Deus operatur omnia in omnibus. ^ Corinth. 12.6.
Why should we not infer then, that this spirit is essentially, and
presentially in every thing? To conclude therefore this general discourse of
the true Philosophy, Moses teaches us, that after the foundation of the
Heavens and Elements, every creature that was framed or composed of them, and
lived and moved in them, did exist and was preserved by the self-same spirit;
namely, the Sun, Moon, and other Stars in heaven, the seeds, trees, herbs, and
such like vegetables, and the creeping and four-footed beasts of the earth, and
fishes of the seas. And lastly, Man was created, by one and the self-same
spirit; but God imparted unto him a greater proportion of his Spirit* that
thereby he might excel in perfection all other creatures. It were too infinite
to express and set down the main scope of this business in writing, as
Scriptures do at large recite it; for look into the works of Moses, the books
of Joshua and Judges, the history of Kings or Chronicles, the reports of Job,
the Psalms of David, the Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Cantiques, and Wisdom of
Solomon, the monuments of the Prophets, the subject of Ecclesiasticus and
Maccabees; and lastly, the relations or stories of Christ and his Apostles, and
we shall find, that this sacred wisdom, with her essential virtues and acts,
in the vast cavity of this world, both above and beneath, is the ground and
firm foundation of all their doctrine and science, as well concerning natural,
as supernatural businesses; or rather touching the acts of God in his natural
Tabernacles, or watery and humid mantles, which he assumeth or puts off at
his pleasure, as Scriptures do testify. And yet I would have no man so far to
mistake me, as not to think, that as God is not excluded from the creatures, so
he is not included by any of them. I will now descend unto particularities, and
show you how this eternal wisdom is the fountain or cornerstone, first, of
the higher Arts, namely, of Theology, Physic, or the art of Curing, Astronomy,
Music, Arithmetic, Geometry, Rhetoric; and after that, how the
Meteoro-logicall Science only depends on his act; then how true Moral
learning, and Politic government is derived from the instructions and
directions of this only wise Spirit. And lastly, how all mystical and
miraculous Arts and discoveries, are effected and brought to light by it,
confirming that place in Scripture, where it is said, Caeterae sunt ancillae
hujus, All sciences are but the handmaids unto this wisdom. Of each of these
therefore, in order.

CHAP. III.
In this Chapter it is proved, that the true Sophia or wisdom, is the ground of
all Arts: and therefore it being revealed or discovered unto man, he may be
taught and instructed by it, as by the only wise and essential
School-mistress, in all science and knowledge.

IN Christo (says the Apostle) sunt omnes the sauri sapientiae and scientiae
absconditi, Colos. 2.3. Prove. 2.6.
All the treasures of wisdom and science are hid in Christ. And Solomon,
Sapientiam dat Dominus, ex ore ejus prudentia and scientia: The Lord gives
wisdom, and from his mouth is prudency and knowledge. Ecclus. 4.21.
And Ecclesiasticus, Thesaurabit super virum scientiam and intellectum
justitiae: Wisdom will treasure up in man science, and the understanding of
justice. Ecclus. 24.46.
And again, Ego doctrinam quasi prophetiam effundam and relinquam illam
quaerentibus sapientiam: I will power forth doctrine or learning as prophecy,
and I will leav it upon such as seek wisdom. And the incarnated Word, or Christ
Jesus, said, Spiritus sanctus vos docebit omnia; Jo. 14.26 John. 16.13.
The holy Spirit will teach you all things. And again, Cum venerit ille
Spiritus veritatis docebit vos omnem veritatem: When that Spirit of truth shall
come, it will teach you all truth. Esdras tasted of that material wisdom, in
the form of a fiery drink; 4 Esdr. 14.39.
and he was so full of sapience, that he indicted books of science and wisdom,
for the space of forty days together, which his Scribes did register, as he
uttered it by word of mouth. Wisd. 7.7.
And Solomon says, Sapientiam optavi, and data est mihi, invocavi and venit in
me spiritus sapientis: I wished for wisdom, and understanding was given me; I
invocated, and the spirit of wisdom came into me. But lest the captious of this
world should say, that these words of Solomon were meant in another sense, than
in the conceiving of such sciences, as are comprehended under Philosophy,
called Natural; I wish them for their better direction, to listen unto
Solomon, who does in this case sufficiently interpret himself, and that to the
simplest man's capacity in this sense; Spiritus sapientis mihi datus est, ut
cognoscerem constitutionem mundi and vim elementorum, Wisd. 7.17.
principium, finem, mediumque temporum, solstitiorum mutationes, and varietates
temporum seu tempestaium, anni circuitus, and stellarum situs, naturas
animantium, and animos seu iras bestiarum, ventorum seu spirituum vim, and
cogitationes hominum, differentias plantarum and radicum facultates, etiam
cognovi quaecunque sunt occulta and manifesta; omnium enim artifex me docuit
Sapientia: By the spirit of wisdom I came to know certainly, how the world was
made, and the power of the elements, and the beginning, end, and middle of
times, the changing of the Solstices, the variety of times and tempests, the
compass or revolution of the year, the situation of the Stars, the natures
of living creatures, the dispositions and angry conditions of beasts the
strength of the winds or spirits, the cogitations of men, the differences of
plants, and the faculties of roots. Also I knew both what was hid and manifest,
for wisdom, the work-mistresse of all things, did teach me. Out of which words
we gather, that by the revelation of this divine spirit, he attained to the
knowledge of all things. For since wisdom is the center, root, or cornerstone
of all things, how should the center be known, and not the circumference? being
the circumference of all things is nothing else, but what it pleases the
center to make it. And for this reason, this divine spirit is termed rightly of
the wise Philosopher Hermes, The center of every thing, whose circumference is
no where, but yet it comprehends all circumferences that are. We may
therefore collect out of the foresaid speech of Solomon, that wisdom discovered
unto him; First, all the abstruse mysteries, which do concern the making of the
world, as she did unto Moses. Secondly, the nature and power of the Elements,
with the hidden act, and miraculous generation of the Meteors, framed out of an
elementary stuff, and of their wondrous properties. Thirdly, the reason and
manner how the winds are produced, with the Astronomicall division of the year,
the situation of the stars in heaven, and their Astrologicall natures.
Fourthly, the necessaries belonging unto the art of Physic; for he says, that
wisdom taught him the nature of all living creatures, the conditions of beasts,
the differences of plants, and the faculties of roots, etc. Fifthly, the
secrets of all things occult, and therefore of the Angels, yea, and of God
himself, by consequence; and in this is the mystery of Theology comprehended.
Touching the deity or eternal world. or Theology.
But I will prove this progression more particularly, beginning with Theology.

Touching Theology, which is derived of (...), Deus, or God; and (...), that
is, sermo, or speech; quasi sermo de Deo, the speech or teaching of God:
Solomon says, that Spiritus sapientiae transsert se ipsum in animas sanctas,
Wisd. 7.27.
and amicos Dei, and prophetas constituit. Neminem enim diligit Deus nisi eum
qui cum sapientia habitat: The spirit of wisdom does transfer it self into holy
men's spirits, and makes them friends of God, and prophets. For God loves no
man that dwel^eth not with wisdom. And again, Sapientiam suis emittit Deus e
sanctis coe^is, Wisd. 9.10.
a throno (inquam) gloriae suae mittit illam homini, ut praesens versetur secum
in labor ut cognoscat quid gratum sit apud ipsum; illa enim novit omnia. G^d
sends wisdom out of his holy heavens, from the throne (I say) of his glory
does he send her unto man, that it may be conversant and present with him in
his labor, that he may know what is acceptable unto him; for she understands
all things. And in another place, Wisd. 9.17.
Except God had given wisdom, and had sent his holy Spirit from the highest
places, what man could have known the counsel of God? After this manner were
the ways of such as lived on the earth corrected, and men were taught the
things which were pleasing unto God. For this reason therefore Wisdom says,
Ego illuminabo omnes sperantes in Domino, Eccl. 24.45.
I will illuminate all that trust in the Lord. Ego sum liber vitae, testamentum
alt^ssimi, and agnitio veritatis: I am the book of life, the testament of the
most high, and the acknowledgment of the truth. Eccles. 24.32. Wisd. 6.21.
Wisd. 8.4.
And Solomon, Sapientiae concupiscentia conducit ad regnum perpetuum: The
desire of wisdom does conduct unto the eternal Kingdom. And again, Sapientia
doctrix est disciplinae Dei, and electrix operum illius: Wisdom is the misiress
of the discipline of God, and she that makes choice of his works. And in
another place he says, Wisd. 8.13.
Per sapientiam habebo immortalitatem, I shall obtain immortality by wisdom. It
would be tedious to reckon up the confirmation of the Theological doctrine,
which is declared and made manifest by this Spirit; for verily, it was this
very Spirit in the fleshly Christ and his Apostles, which made their corporal
or bodily organs, I mean their tongues, to speak, and their hands and pens to
indite, all that Theological wisdom and doctrine which the new Testment has
registered. And it was this Spirit that spoke in the old Testament, by the
mouths of the Patriarks and Prophets, the essential marrow of Divinity; and
therefore let us look back upon them, as being the literal fountain of
Theology, under whose typical or graphicall instruction, the hidden spirit
does lurk, and may by the mystical Theology easily be extracted. I will
proceed unto the next, which belongs unto the Aeviall world.

The Angelical or Eviall world
In ipso (says the forementioned place of St. Paul) condita sunt universa in
coelis, sive Throni, sive Dominationes, sive principatus, sive potestates: In
him are all things in heaven made, whether they be Thrones, Dominations, or
Principalities, or Potestates. And again elsewhere, Colos. 1.16. Coll. 2.9.
In Christo inhabitat omnis plenitudo divinitatis corporaliter, qui est caput
omnis Principatus and Potestatis: In Christ does inhabit all the plenitude of
the divinity co^porally, who is the head of all Principalities and Potestates,
and in another place, Ch^istus constituitur ad dextram Dei in coelestibus and
supra omnem Principatum and Potestatem and Virtutem and Dominationem, Ephesians. 1.20.
etc. Christ is placed at the right hand of God, in heaven; above all
Principality, Potestates, Virtues, and Dominations, etc. By which places, and
many other authorities out of holy Writ, (which for brevity sake we omit at
this time,) it is proved that there is no secret mystery comprehended among the
Society of Angels, either touching their creation, essence, properties or
denominations, but will be lively expressed by this superexcellent Spirit,
which only is able to disclose all in all, because he is all in all, and that
in every thing, I descend unto the next Step, which is Astronomy.

Touching the essential nature of Astronomy, In the temporal starry world.

Astronomy.


it seems to consist on the Basis or Foundation of this eternal Spirit, and
therefore the wise son of Syrach said: Sapientia in coelis fecit ut oriretur
lumen indeficiens; Eccles. 24.6.
Wisdom made a never-failing light to arise in the heavens: And it should
appear, according unto this Kingly Prophet's phrase, that this Spirit did put
his Tabernacle in the Sun: howsoever some men are pleased by the corruption of
the Text, to interpret that place in another sense, and that little to the
purpose; for the said Spirit speaking in her own person says: Ego sapientia
gyrum coeli circuivi sola: Eccles. 24.8. Psalm. 147.4.
I wisdom did compass about the heavens alone, that is, in her
sunny-Tabernacle; and again David says, God in his wisdom does number and
count the stars, and calls them by their names, whose wisdom is innumerable.
Whereby it is apparent, that if in his wisdom or by this Spirit, the stars
were numbered and had their proper names: it follows that their virtues,
courses and properties, must be best known unto him, who has created, ordained
and does maintain them in the estate they are in: For David affirms, that
every virtue of heaven does proceed from the Spirit of the Lord: Psalm. 32.6.
and Esdras, Stellae fundatae sunt in Verbo Dei, 4 Esd. 16.57. Baruch 3.34.
qui and novit numerum stellarum: The stars have their foundation in the Word
of God, who knows the number of them: In this respect also, the Prophet
Baruch has it, Stellae dederunt lumen in custodiis suis, and laetatae sunt ad
jussum Dei: The stars gave light in their watches, and d^d rejoice at the
Commandment of God: Jos. 10.13. Matthew. 27.45. Jud. 5.20.
Hereupon it came to pass, that when this Spirit did fight for Josuah, he made
the Sun stand still at his pleasure: He turned the Sun from light unto darkness
at the passion of Christ: By it the stars in troops were stirred up to fight in
their order by the^r influences against Sisera: So that it is easy to discern,
that as the heavens and stars were first framed, and animated by this Spirit to
serve as Organs, to administer unto the natural Fabric of this world, so also
beyond the common course of the macrocosmicall nature, they may by the
self-same Spirit that commands them, and acts in them as the soul does
within the body, operate, what, when, and how it lists; and be diverted from
the usual order to effect his will, as well by altering the motion of his body,
as action of his light and influentiall Spirit. Again touching the fixed stars,
Job 38.31.
Job speaks thus in the person of this Spirit, Can thou restrain the sweet
influences of the Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion? Can thou bring forth
Mazaroth in their time? Can thou guide Arcturus with his Sons? Know thou
the course of the heavens, or can thou set the rule thereof upon the Earth?
etc. As who should say, that no man is able to know the courses of the stars,
or to discern the powers or virtue of their influences, save only this divine
Spirit, and that man unto whom it shall reveal the true Art and rules of
Astronomy or Astrology: And therefore Solomon does glory, in that he knew the
course of the year, and dispositions of the stars, Wisd. 7.19.
and the change of the Solstices by wisdom. Per Sapientiam, (says he) novi
Solstitiorum mutationes, and anni cursum, and dispositiones stellarum, etc. If
therefore the Astronomer wants this true Astrologicall foundation, all will
be faulty and fabulous, as by the vulgar Astronomy, which is for the most part
erroneous and uncertain it appears: I proceed now downwards unto the
Meteorologicall region, to see how this Omnipotent Spirit works in the
catholic sublunary Element, for the producing of Meteors in diverse shapes and
natures.

As for the Act of this Eternal Actor or Operator in the air, In the temporal
Elementary world.

Meteorology.


water, and earth, for the production of Meteors, it is most evidently
expressed in plain terms by holy Writ. Says Job: Deus sapientia sua aptat
pondus aeri and appendit aquas in mensura, facit pluviae statuta, Job. 28.25.
and viam fulgetro tonitruum: God by his Wisdom does adapt a weight or pondero
sity unto the air, and hangs up the waters in measure, and gives bounds or
makes a Law for the rain, and prepares a way for the lightings of the
Thunders: In which words, he shows that this one Spirit of Wisdom, in whom
is the power as well of contraction or condensation, as of dilatation or
ratifaction, can, at his pleasure, make the air more thick and ponderous, by
condensation, and so reduce it into a cloud; or by rarifying it into a more
thin and subtle consistence, render it in the form of lightning; and evermore
the air so altered, receives his shape or figure from the Alterer, according
to the will of him who ordains all things. And thus the clouds, the
lightenings, the thunder, the comets, the frost, hayl, snow, and ice are
created daily by this operating Spirit: But we have all this confirmed and
acknowledged by many places of Scriptures: Prove. 3.20.
Sapientia Dei eruperunt abyssi and nubes rore concrescunt, says Solomon: By
the Wisdom of God, the Abyss was broke open, and the clouds were turned into
dew or rain: Again, Ego sapientia sicut nebula texi omnem terram: Eccles. 24.6.
I Wisdom like a mist did cover the whose earth, says the son of Syrach, in
the person of this Spirit, And again: Ego in altissimis habitavi and Thronus
meus est columna nubis: Eccles. 24.7.
I (says Wisdom) did dwell in the highest places, and my throne was a pillar
of clouds. Deus nubes effecit sapientia, says Job: Job 28.25.
God made the clouds by his Wisdom. This Spirit makes the clouds to asscend,
it causes the lightnings with the ra^n, and it brings forth the wind out of
his Treasury, Psalm. 135.7.
says David: And again: Verbo suo quam celerrime excurrente, and sermon suo
in terra emisso, edit Deus nivem sicut lanam, and pruinam sicut cineres
dispergit: coram frigore ejus quis consistat? Psalm. 147.15.
God by his Word passing most swiftly, and by his Voice, being sent out upon
the Earth, does bring forth snow like wool, and spreads abroad the frost like
ashes: Who is able to consist before his cold? There are many thousands of
other places, which I can produce out of the book of Verity, to prove that all
Meteorology is founded on this Spirit. But because I will speak of this point
more at large in my last Book of this present Treatise, where I do express the
true History of the Meteors, and open the errors and falsities of the
Aristotelian Meteorology, I will only conclude with this confession, of the
wisest Philosopher Solomon: Novi (says he) virtutes elementorum, and
varietates temporum sive tempestatum, and ventorum, seu spirituum vires, nam
omnium artifex me docuit sapientia. I know the power of the Elements, Wisd.
7.17. and 20.
and the varieties of times and tempests, and strength of the winds, for
Wisdom the work-mistress, of all things taught them me. Whereby it is evident,
that she who was the maker of the Meteors, and was by Consequence the most
skillful and best acquainted with their natures, did instruct him in them. I
will now speak a word or two of Physic.

Physic
Concerning the excellent Art of Phy^^ck, or Medecin, the Wiseman says: A Deo
est omnis medela, From God comes every kind of healing or curing, which being
so, Eccles. 38.2.
it is certain that the only Actor in healing and curing, is immediately from
this all-working Spirit, Psalm. 107.20.
and therefore the Kingly Prophet has it, He sends his Word and heals
them, and delivers them from their graves. And Solomon: But the teeth of the
venomous dragons could not overcome thy children, Wisd. 16.10.
for thy Word came to help them, and healed them, even thy Word, O Lord, which
heals all things: for thou have the power of life and death, etc. Mark well,
Even thy Word (says the Text) which heals all things: Now this divine Word,
is the root and fountain of this eternal Spirit of Wisdom: and therefore the
Basis or foundation of healing is in him, and consequently from him all the
mystery of healing does proceed, which also agrees with this of the Apostle, 1
Cor. 12.4.9.
There are diverse gifts, but one and the same Spirit; there are diverse
operations, but God is the same, which works all in all: but unto one is
given by the Spirit the word of Wisdom, and unto an other the gift of healing:
Now that this Omnipotent and all-operating Spirit is that Wisdom which gives
life and health to every creature, it is made manifest by many places of the
book of Verity, Prove. 2.7.
says the Wiseman: Sapientia custodiet salutem: Wisdom will preserve health:
In Sapientiae dextra est longitudo dierum: In the right hand of wisdom is the
length of days: Prove. 3.16.18. Prove. 9.35.
Est lignum vitae omnibus qui apprehenderunt eam: She is the tree of Life,
unto all them which can possess^ her: where it is meant as well of body as of
soul, as it did appear, by those cures which Christ and the Apostles did
effect, by the means of this Spirit, upon the earth: Sapientiam qui invenerit,
inveniet vitam and hauriet salutem a D^mino: Wisd. 10.9.
He that has found wisdom, shall find life, and shall draw or attract health
from the Lord. Wisd. 9.19.
And in another place, Ipsa hos qui se observant a doloribus liberavit: wisdom
preserved such from dolours as observed her. And again, Sapientia sanati sunt
quicunque placuerint tibi, o Domine, a principio: They were healed, O Lord
whosoever have pleased thee, from the beginning: Yea verily, each prudent
Reader ought seriously to understand that there is not an animal, vegetable, or
mineral, but has and receives immediately his curative act from this Spirit.
And therefore the foresaid Son Syrach says: Eccles. 38.4.
Altissimus de terra creavit medecinam, and vir prudens non abhorrebit illam:
The most high has created medicine of the earth, and the W^se man will not
despise it; whereby we may discern, first that the trees, herbs, roots and
mineralls, being of springs of the earth, were ordained by God to be the means
of curing and healing of men, and then that the gift or act which is imparted
unto them, is from this Spirit of wisdom, forasmuch as it is said, to be in
all things, and to operate all in all in them, though after a diverse manner, as
the Apostle does affirm, confirming in this the Wisemans saying, before
recited: Verbum tuum sanans omnia: Wisd. 16.12.
Thy word which heals all things: And therefore he inferred, Non herba nec
ma^egma^e, sed verbo tuo sanante omnia: not by herb or plaster, but by thy
word which heals all things: If the Word therefore heal all things then
nothing can cure but the Word or the spirit of wisdom, whose Fountain is the
Word, Wisd. 12.1. Wisd. 7.24.
as is proved before: But seeing this incorruptible Spirit of God is in all
things, and since it is the most active and movable thing in this world, and
since by his purity he penetrateth through all, and acts in all, What should
hinder me or any good Christian else to say, that he acts all in all, in and
by this word of himself, and by himself, and that immediately; and therefore not
any Creature of it self, or by it self, as the Peripatetick doctrine does most
erroniously, and, to the seducing of true Christian hearts from their Creator,
publish unto the World, alluring them thereby to derogate from God who is all
in all, by arrogating ab^olute authority unto the Creature, in making and
ordaining so many essential distinct subalternate agents, which must
(forsooth) operate per se: as the Sun, the Stars, the winds, the Elements, and
the compounded creatures, as well imperfectly as perfectly mixed? Verily in so
doing, they make the world believe, that the Organ does act per se,
essentially, and not this hidden and centrall word, or incorruptible Spirit,
existing in every thing, which is the fountain or foundation of the true (...)
or wisdom, and the main mark or Summum bonum, which the true Philosopher or
Lover of wisdom does aim at: Therefore does Solomon, the Prophets and Christ,
with his sanctified followers, exhort all men to be Amatores verae Sapientiae,
Lovers of this wisdom; in whom is all Act, as well intellectual
condescending unto the sublimation of man's knowledge, as more material, namely
operating to vivification, vegetation, and multiplication. But of this more at
large in another place. I will return unto my purpose, and conclude this brief
discourse upon the true Physic, with Salomons confession, who says: Per
sapientiam novi na turas animalium, Wisd. 7.20.
and was bestiarum, and differentias virgultorum, and virtutesradicum; imo quae
sunt occulta et manifesta, mihi patefecit omnium artifex Sapientia: By wisdom
I knew the natures of living creatures, the raging conditions of Beasts, the
d^fferences of plants, and the virtues of roots; yea, all the mysteries of
creatures, as well occult as manifest, were revealed unto me by wisdom, which
is the worker of all things: Whereby he argues that wisdom, even that
heavenly Spirit, which did bestow on herbs, animals, and minerals, their
virtues as well hidden and secret, as apparent and evident, even that eternal
Word which is all in all, and operateth or acts all in all, and therefore can
only teach and instruct by an external revelation, what he internally does,
and by what virtue he operateth in each creature; and although Ethnic
Philosophers and Physicians, have by practical effects, or sensual
observations, and demonstrations a posteriori, found out the occult properties
in plants, as for example, of the Piony to cure the falling sickness, of
Herniaria to respect the rupture, of Tussilago to be proper for the Lungs, of
Euphragia to be good for the eie-sight, of Thecilea and Viscus quercinus to
prevail against the falling sickness, etc. In animals, of the Toad to stanch
blood; of the Alsaeus hoof, and also the Frog, to cure the falling sickness; of
the Scorpion, chiefly to cure the bitings of the Scorpion, etc. yet because
they are ignorant of the centrall grounds of Sympathy and Antipathy, which
consists in the Volunty or Nolunty of one and the same Spirit, they can give
no other reason for such hidden things, but only that they are ab occulta
proprietate, of a hidden property. And in fine, can say no more but that they
are talia, quia talia: and so we receive from these learned Doctors, nothing
else but Ignotum per ignotius, A thing unknown by a more unknown: To conclude,
it is certain that Solomon learned so much of the nature of Planets and other
creatures, by the discovery of this Spirit, that it was said of him, that he
was instructed by this his Schoolmistriss, in the virtues of all vegetables*
beginning even from the lowly Hysop, and so mounting unto the lofty Cedars of
Libanus. Having then in few words expressed unto you the power of this Spirit,
in her documents of Physic or Medicine, and proved that she is the Basis or
ground of every sanative property in the world, I will show you in the next
rank, her act and virtue in the essential Music.

Touching the harmony of this world, Music.
and how every sublunary element, and superlunary sphere, are disposed by an
essential kind of symphoniacall accord, the whole file of Scripture does
confirm, that it is effected by this wisdom. Again, the wiseman expresses the
wondrous effects of this Spirit, in these words, In se elementa dum
convertuntur, Wisd. 19.17.
sicut in organo qualitatis sonus immutatur and omnia suum sonum custodiunt,
etc. Whilst the elements are converted in themselves, as the sonnd is converted
in an Organ of quality, and all do keep and observe their proper sound, etc.
But the Apostle does more excellently express this, Colos. 1.17.18.19.20.
in these words, In Christo condita sunt universa in coelis and in terra, and
omnia visibilia and invisibilia per ipsum and in ipso creata sunt. Ipse est
ante omnes and omnia in ipso constant. In ipso complacuit omnem plenitudinem
divinitatis inhabitare, and per eum reconciliare omnia in ipso, pacificans per
san guinem crucis ejus sive quae in coelis sive quae in terris sunt: All things
are made in Christ, in heaven and in earth, and all are created by him, and in
him, as well visible as invisible, he is before all, and all ^o consist in him,
and it pleased all the plenitude of divinity to dwell in him, and to reconcile
by him in himself, pacifying by the blood of his cross, all things both in
heaven and earth. Lo here the perfect and catholic fountain of all harmony,
the taker away of discord both from heaven and earth, and the pure essential,
and formal love and sympathy of this world; and therefore by the wisest and
most mystical Philosophers he is said to be, Vinculum seu ligamentum
elementorum, the band or tie, whereby the discording elements are compelled
unto an harmonious accord: After the imitation of whose melodious tunes and
concords, all the accords of our external music, as well vocal, as
isntrumental, are typically framed, which are in respect of the true and
essential symphony of this spirit, even as a shadow is unto a true subject, or
an image unto a reality. I come now unto Arithmetic and Geometry.

As for these two Arts, the wiseman does include them in these few words,
Omnia mensura numeroque and pondere disposuisti seu temperasti; Arithmetic.
Geometry.
Thou have disposed or proportioned all things in measure, number, and weight.
In which words, by measure is meant, the progress into longitude, latitude,
and profundity, which this Spirit made in his emanation, from the point unto
the line, and from the line or root unto the square, and from the square unto
the cube. By number is meant, those Arithmeticall dimensions in progression,
whereby this Spirit issued out of unity into multitude, as from 1 unto 10, and
from 10 unto a 100, and from a hundred unto a 1000; namely, from God, who is
the eternal point or unity, unto the first articulated number, which is 10,
and it represents the aeviall or angelical world, which is the first degree of
composition* and from 10 unto a 100, which argues the composition of the
temporal world; and from a 100 to a 1000, which points at the compound
creature of the Elements. So that hereby each Christian may see, how God is
all, and in all, and yet without all; and, as the Text has it, in heaven, in
the seas, in the abyss, and in hell. And for this reason, the Pythagoreans did
include all things under these three principles, 1, 2, 3. whereby they
attributed 1 unto God, in his abstruse being; 2 unto matter; and 3 unto form,
under which, all are contained.

But of this I will declare my mind more copiously, when I speak of the
essential principles, of Sympathy and Antipathy; namely, in the first Book of
the second Section of this present Treatise. And therefore the patient man, in
the person of JEHOVAH, Job. 38.4.
says thus, Ubinam eras quando fundebam terram? A^nuntia, si nosti
intelligentiam. Quis disposuit mensuras ejus, aut quis extendit super eam
lineam? super quo bases ejus defixae sunt? aut quis jecit lapidem ejus
angularem: Where wast thou when I did lay the foundat^ons of the earth? tell
me, if thou have understanding, Who disposed of the measures thereof? or who
did stretch forth upon it a line? upon what were her foundations fastened? or
who laid her cornerstone? Whereby he argues, that by this Spirit, which is
the cornerstone, or foundation of everything, (for without it, nothing is
made, or can exist, as St. John does testify) not only the earth had his
Geometrical dimension, Joh. 1.2.
situation, and position; but also the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, and each
thing else, both in heaven and in earth, have assigned them their weight,
proportion, magnitude, and limited seat in the world: Yea verily, by it, the
air, by proportion and weight, is carried and framed out into the shapes of
Meteors; for the sacred Text has it, Deus sapientia aptat pondus aeri and
appendit aquas in mensura: God by his wisdom does adapt a weight unto the air,
and imparts a mensurable proportion unto the waters or clouds. Job. 28.25.
I will show now her power in the science of Rhetoric and Oratory, and prove
in few words, how she is also the exactest Mistress in those Arts, as also the
only essential mover in the spirits of men, to make them truly eloquent and
persuasive; and withal, she is the essential Magnet in the Orators voice,
which can draw and attract the auditors minds to listen and affect the organ,
by whom she is intended to plead by.

Exodus 4.10. (...).
Says Moses in his conference with this divine Spirit, Non sum vir facundus,
neque unquam anteafui, ne quidem ex quo locutus es cum servo tuo; sed impedito
ore, and impedita lingua sum. Tunc dixit Jehovah ad illum, Quis statuit os
hominum, aut qui^ statuere potest surdum aut mutum? Nonne Ego qui sum Jehovah?
Nunc itaque ito and ego adero ori ^uo and docebo te quae te loqui convenit. I
am not an eloquent man, neither have ever been so, no verily, not from the time
that thou have spoke with thy servant: But I have an impediment in my mouth,
and am defective in my tongue. Then said Jehovah unto him, Who has made the
mouth of man? or who can make deaf or dumb? Is it not I who am Jehovah? Now
therefore go thy way, and I will be with thy mouth, and I will teach thee what
is fit for thee to say, etc. In which file of speech, God teaches us, that
eloquence, and apt disposition of words, sentences, and speech, both in the
Rhetorician and Orator are from God; who can give it or take it away at his
pleasure. And therefore the Evangelist says in another place, John 6.45.
Erunt omnes docibiles Dei; or docti a Deo; Isai. 54.13.
All shall be taught of God. And the Prophet has it Universi filii tui sunt
docti a Jehovah; All thy sons are instructed by Jehovah. But Christ expresses
this in fuller terms thus; John. 14.26.
Spiritus sanctus quem mittet Pater, ille vos docebit omnia and suggeret vobis
omnia quaecunque dixero vobis: The holy Spirit which my Father sends, even he
shall teach you all things, whatsoever I shall say unto you. Now that this
spirit is that eternal wisdom which effects and exciteth this Rhetorical
and Oratoricall function, Wisd. 10.21.
the scriptures testify in other places, Sapientia (says Solomon) aperuit os
mutorum, and linguas infantum fecit diserias; Wisdom has opened the mouth of
the dumb, and has made the tongues of children eloquent: And the Son of
Syrach, Eccl. 39.7.
Sapiens aperiet os suum in oratione, The wiseman will open his mouth in an
oration, And again, Tanquam imbres mittet eloquia Sapientia Sapientis, et in
oratione confitebitur Domino. The wisdom of the wiseman will send forth her
eloquence like a shower, and in his oration or speech will confess to the
Lord. I could express many other examples out of holy Writ, to confirm this
more amply; namely that all Rhetorical eloquence is from this good spirit of
wisdom: but for brevities cause I will pass them over that I may proceed unto
the Mechanic Arts, and prove unto you that their inventions did originally
proceed from the doctrine of this good Spirit, though foully commaculated by the
succession of time through the scarrs of Envy and Ignorance.

As concerning Mechanic arts, Mechanic Arts.
we find that the invention and shaping forth or making of Garments was derived
from the instruction of this spirit. Loqueris cunctis Sapientibus cord (says
Jehovah to Moses) quos replevi spiritu Sapientiae: Exodus 28.3.
ut faciant vestes Aaron, in quibus Sanctificatus ministret mihi, Thou shall
speak unto all the wise in heart, whom I have filled with the spirit of
wisdom, to make habilements for Aaron, in the which he being sanctified may
minister unto me: Also all the inventions of Goldsmiths works, and of the
Jewellers artifice, and Carpenters with the Sculpters of wood, did proceed from
this fountain of knowledge; and therefore Jehova says unto Moses, Ecce vocavi
Beseleel and implevi eum cum spiritu Dei, sapientia, intelligentia et Scientia
in omni opere, Exodus 31.1.
ad excogitandum quicquid fabrefieri potest ex auro and argento and aere,
marmore et Gemmis and diversitate Lignorum: Dedique e^ socium Ooliab and in
cord omnis eruditi posui Sapientiam ut faciant cuncta quae praecepi tibi.
Behold I have called Beseleel, and I have filled him with the spirit of God,
with wisdom understanding and Science in every work, to invent and find out
every thing that may be fashioned out of Gold, Silver, and Brass, of Marble,
precious stones, and variety of woods, and I have given him for a companion
Ooliab: and in the heart of every wiseman, I have infused wisdom, that they
may effect, what I have commanded them. By which words it is evident that the
beginning of every true Mechanic Art, is this spirit of God, in whose only
power it is to teach a man all things: but this is confirmed else where more
plainly. Moses said unto the children of Israel, Ecce vocaverit dominus
Beseleel, implevitque eum spiritu Dei, Sapientia, et intelligentia, et
Scientia, et omni Doctrina, ad excogitandum and faciendum opus in auro and
argento, Exodus 35.
and aere, and ferro, sculpendisque lapidibus and opere carpentario: Quicquid
fabre adinveniri potest, dedit in cord ejus; Ooliab quoque Ambos erudivit
sapientia ut facian opera Abietarii Polymitarii, ac Plumarii de hyacintho and
purpura, coccoque bis tincto and bysso and texant omnia, etc. Behold the Lord
has called Beseleel, and has filled him with the Spirit of God, with wisdom,
with understanding, and with science or knowledge, and with all manner of
doctrine or skill, to invent and make work in gold, in silver, in brass, and
iron, and in graving of stones, and in the carpenters work of carving.
Whatsoever can be invented in workmanship, has he put into his heart, and into
that of Ooliab his companion. He has instructed both of them by wisdom, to do
the works belonging unto the Carpent^^s art, and unto embroidery, and weaving,
and needle work in blew silk and in purple, and in scarlet, and in fine linnex,
even to do all manner of works, and subtle inventions, etc. Moreover by wisdom
Noa fuit in Arcae structura instructus: Noah was instructed in the building of
the Arc: And therefore the text has it: Wisd. 10.4.
Sanavit Sapientia terram, per contemptibile lignum justum gubernans: Wisdom
restored the earth, guiding the just man by a contemptible piece of word. By it
the Art of Music was revealed unto Juball: For the words are, Jubal fuit Pater
Canentium Cithara and Organo. Genesis 21.
He was the Father or beginner of playing on the Harp, and Organ: And
Jubal-Cain was the Inventor of iron and brass works: For it is said, Ipse fuit
malleator and faber, in cuncta opera aeris and ferri: He was a Smith or
hammerman, being cunning in all works of brass and Iron. Again, Ada Jubal was
Father of them who dwelled in Tents, and Prince of Shepherds. To conclude,
there is no true Mechanic work, but had its original from this Spirit, in
whom only, and in nothing else, is the gift of teaching all things. I come now
to the moral and politic Arts, which do arise from this radical Spirit.

Moral Philosophy.
All Moral Discipline also, has her root and beginning from this holy Spirit
of Discipline, as by the whole file of Scriptures we are taught. And it was the
essential voice of this Spirit, which did teach the Christian world, by the
mouth of Christ Jesus, to embrace and follow goodness, and to eschew evil. I
will not say much therefore touching this point, but will only in few words
speak unto our purpose, Prove. 2.7.
with the Wisemans mouth: Sapientia servat semitas justitiae, vias sanctorum
custodiens: Wisdom does observe the paths of Justice; keeping the ways of the
Saints. Prove. 2.9.
Per eam intelliges justitiam, and judicium, aequitatem, and omnem semitam
bonam; si intraverit cor tuum, consilium custodiet te, Prudentia servabit te.
Per eam erueris a viamala: Te custodiet a muliere ex tranea. By wisdom (Says
Solomon,) thou shall understand justice and judgment, Prove. 7.5.
equity, and every good and straight way. If she shall enter into thy heart,
she will save and preserve thee with prudency: By her thou shall be drawn from
the evil way, she will preserve thee from the strange woman. Also, Sapientiae
docet temperantiam, prudentiam, justitiam, and fortitudinem, quibus utilius
nihil in vita hominibus: Wisd. 8.7.
Wisdom teaches temperance, prudence, justice, fortitude, than the which
nothing is more profitable unto the life of man. In another place, Sapientiae
est, Prove. 8.14.
consilium, aequitas, prudentia, and fortitudo: Counsel, justice, prudence,
and fortidtue, is of wisdom. Where is expressed the four Cardinall-vertues,
which are the pillars of Moral Philosophy; For in Counsel, Temperance is
considered, and then there is Justice, Wisdom, and Fortitude. Again, the Son
of Syrach: In Sapientia, Ecclus. 6.31.
est Decor vitae, and qui operantur in ea non peccabunt: In wisdom is the
comeliness of life, and who so operateth in her, will not sin. Now you know that
sin is the breach of the Law, and the Mosaicall Law is grounded as well upon
the Moral rules of behavior, between man and man, as in man's duty unto God.
And Solomon, Wisd. 7.11.
in another place, Cum Sapientia venerunt mihi omnia bona, and innumerabilis
honestas per manus illius: With wisdom came unto me all good things, and
innumerab^e honesty from her hands. To conclude, this is expressed unto us more
really and to the quick, in the Text above mentioned, Sapientiae labores magnas
habent virtutes; Wisd. 8.7.
sobrietatem enim and sapientiam, justitiam and virtutem docet, quibus in vita
hominibus nihil est utilius: The labors or works of wisdom have great
virtues: For she teaches sobriety and wisdom, justice and virtue, than the
which there is nothing more profitable or commodious in this life. By which
places, and many more, which I could produce, it is plain, that the Instructrix
and foundation of all Moral or Ethicall doctrine, is the Spirit of true
wisdom, which descends from the Father of Light.

Policy.
As for the true and sincere Politic Government, which belongs unto Kings,
Princes, and Magistrates of this earth, we find it warranted by Scriptures,
that wisdom is the root from whence it springs, if it be good: For we find
in one place, 2 Chronicles. 1.10.
that Sapientia facit Regem, ut digne regnet in populum: Wisdom makes a King
to govern or reign over his people worthily. And Solomon, Sapienti^ Reges
regnant and Legum-conditores justa decernunt: Prove. 8.15.
By wisdom Kings do reign, and the Lawmakers do discern just things. Again,
Sapienti^ Principes imperant, and Potentes decernunt justitiam: By wisdom
Princes do govern or command, and powerful men do decern justice. Ecclus.
9.18. Ecclus. 4.16.
And elsewhere, Sapientia melior est quam arma bellica: Wisdom is better then
armor of war. And Ecclesiasticus: Sapientiam qui audit, judicabit Gentes: He
which bears wisdom hall judge Nations. Sapientia ministrabit in medio
magnatorum and in conspectu Praesudis apparebit: Wisdom shall administer in
the middle of the Nobility, Wisd. 8.10.
and shall appear in the sight of the President or Judge. And Solomon, after
the manner of a confession, says: Ob Sapientiam habebam claritatem apud
turbas, and honorem apud seniores: juvenis acutus inveniar judicio, in
conspectu potentium admirabilis ero. For my wisdom I did shine among the
people, and was honored among the Elders, being but a young man I shall be
found sharp in judgment, and in the eyes of the potent I shall appear
admirable. Wisd. 8.14. Wisd. 8.15. Wisd. 9.12.
Again, Per sapientiam disponam populus, and nationes mihi erunt subditae: By
wisdom I will order the people, and nations will be subject unto me. Sapientem
timebunt audientes reges horrendi. Ob sapientiam multitudini videbitur bonus,
and in bello fortis: sapientia deducit me ut disponam populum tuum just.
Fearful and dreadful potentates hearing a wise man, will be afraid. He will
appear, by reason of his wisdom, good in the eyes of the multitude, and valiant
in war. Wisdom directs me to dispose of the people justly, etc. By which, and
many other places, it appears, that the divine wisdom is the only guide of
true government in every Commonwealth; and where her rules are not respected
or followed, that government must needs proceed of wordly wisdom, which is
terrene, animal, and diabolical.

Lastly, Miraculous or supernatural effects.
I will conclude and finish this Chapter, with the miraculous and supernatural
effects it produces, and the admirable acts which it brings to pass, beyond
the capacity of man's imagination; so that the man which is partaker of this
divine Agent, and can firmly unite it unto his own spirit, may do wonders:
Sapientia intravit in animam servi Dei Mosis; Wisd. 10.16.
and stetit coram reges horrendos in portentis and signis: Transtulit Israelem
per mare rubrum and inimicos dimersit. Wisdom entered into the soul of Moses,
the servant of God; and he stood before mighty Kings in prodigies and signs.
He carried Israel through the red sea, and drowned their enemies. Sapientia
mu^tiplicem experientiam docet, Wisd. 8.8.
nam scit illa praeterita, de futuris aestimat, scit versutias sermonum, and
solutiones aenigmatum, signa and monstra antequam fiant praesagit, evenius
quoque temporum and seculorum. Wisdom teaches manifold experience, she is
acquainted with things that are past, and judges of things that are to come.
She understands the wiliness of speech, the solutions of aenigma's or
riddles, and knows signs and prodigies before they appea^e, 1 Cor. 2.10.
she is also familiar with the Events of times and ages; And the Apostle,
Spiritus omnia scrutatur, etiam profunda Dei: The spirit searches out all
things, even the profund and inscrutable things of God; John. 2.8.9. Jo. 6.10.
Math. 14.25. John. 9.1. John. 11.43. John. 20.19. Joh. 21.9. Luc. 8.24. Luc.
8.27. Romans 15.18.19. Wisd. 10.2. Wisd. 7.20.
It was that by the power of which, wine was made of water, five thousand
persons were sustained by five ^oaves of bread, by it Christ did wa^k safely
upon the waters, did cure one that was blind from his nativity: did raise
Lazarus from the dead, did enter into the Chamber where his disciples were
(etiam clausis januis,) he doors being shut; did cause an infinity of fishes
to be taken; compelled the wind and storm at sea to cease, and be obedient
unto his command, did cast out devils from such as we^e possessed, So also it
was said, signa and prodigia in virtute spiritus sancti effecit Christus per
Paulum, Christ did effect signs and prodigies by the virtue of the holy spirit
by Paul. By this Spirit, Adam had virtutem continendi omnia, the virtue to
comprehend all things: And Solomon did by it understand the thoughts of men,
and knew all things which were occult and hidden. To conclude, Moses, Joshuah,
Gideon, Samuel, Daniel, Elias, Eli^ha, with the other Prophets; Judas
Maccabaeus, Christ and his Apostles, which were all the observant disciples
unto the true wisdom, did by her secret art and operation, bring to pass all
those miracles, which are mentioned in the holy Testament, both New and Old, as
each man may find to be true, if he will be pleased to make a due enquiry into
that holy story. Dan. 2.22.
But all this is most aptly expressed by the Prophet Daniel, in these words;
Ipse revelat profun^a and abscondita, and novit in tenebris constituta, and lux
cum eo est: He is the revealer of things that are profound and hidden, an
understands the things which lurk in darkness, for light dwells with him.
All which being so, it is most apparent, that there is no art or science,
whether it be abstruse and mystical, or manifestly known, be it speculative or
practical, but had his root and beginning from this true wisdom, without the
act and virtue whereof, no true and essential learning and knowledge can be
gotten in this world, but all will prove bastardly or spuriously begotten,
having their foundation not upon Christ, the true ground, firm rock, and stable
cornerstone, on which all verity is erected, forasmuch as only in him is the
plenitude of divinity; but placing the basis or foundation of their knowledge,
upon the prestigious sands of imagination; namely, after the inventions or
traditions of men, and according unto the elements of this world, from whence
they gather the fruits of their worldly or human wisdom, that is quite opposite
in effect unto the true wisdom; namely, the eternal one, which has his root
and original from God, and not from man. And therefore touching this kind of
worldly wise men, or Ethnic Philosophers, Romans 1.21.
we may say with the Apostle, Evanuerunt in imaginationibus suis, They vanished
and came to naught in their imaginations.

CHAP. IV.
Of the false wisdom, spurious Philosophy and Philisopher; with their marks or
characters.

NOw that I have sufficiently expressed and discovered unto you, the nature and
essence of the true wisdom, and consequently of the essential Philosophy, and
Philosopher: it will be most convenient and necessary, that I describe unto you
the false wisdom of this world, with the frail Philosophy which is grounded
upon it; and withal I will delineate the characters and marks, not only of
this kind of wisdom, but also of the Philosopher, which is hatched and
nourished from that spurious brood, or misbegotten offspring. The Apostle St.
James says That as the true wisdom which is from above, is first pu^e, then
peaceful, gentle, swasible, full of mercy and good fruit, James. 3.17.
not judging, and without emulation or hypocrisy: So contrariwise, That wisdom
which is not from above, Jam. 3.14.15.
is earthly, animal, or sensual, diabolical, and contrad^cteth the truth, and
consequently is litigious, immodest, unswasible, void of fruit, full of
emulation and dispute. Now as the foundation of the first is Jesus Christ,
forasmuch as he is the true wisdom; so that of the other, the traditions or
inventions of man, animated and introduced by the devil, which made the divine
Philosopher say, in putting a difference between these two opposites, In
Christo sunt omnes thesau^i sapientiae and scientiae absconditi. Colos. 2.7.8.
Hoc dico, ut nemo vos decipiat in subtititate seu suasibil^tate se^monum etc.
Videte ne quis vos decipiat per Philosophiam and inanem fallaciam secundum
traditionem hominum secundum elementa mundi, and non secundum Christum, q^ia in
ipso habitat omnis plenitudo divinitatis c^rporaliter. All the treasures of
wisdom and science are hid in Christ. This I say unto you, that no man deceive
you by philosophy, and vain sophistication or fallacy, after the traditions of
men, according unto the elements of this world, and not according unto Christ,
because that in him dwells the plenitude of the Divinity corporally. In which
speech, he seems to justify, that all wisdom and knowledge, and consequently
the true Philosophy, and all the sciences comprehended under it, do abide and
are to be sought for in Christ, that eternal wisdom, and only angular stone,
which fills, informs, and animateth all things; and are no way to be found
in the false Philosophy, which is full of sophistication, and bears scarcely
a face or shape of probability with it, seeing that it is masked over with
worldly human inventions, framed out according unto the rules and orders, of
this obscure and erroneous world, and not according unto the precepts of
Christ, the eternal wisdom, who (as the Scriptures do tell us) is, omnium
mirabilium operator, the worker of all mavelous conclusions, as well natural
as supernatural. And for this cause, the Apostle condemns Philosophy in
general terms, not but that the love of the true wisdom is good, and
consequently the lover of it is no less to be honored and esteemed; but he
means, the love of the worldly and human wisdom is vain: and he terms it
so, because that the Ethnic Philosophers added (...) unto their false (...);
so that the word Philosophy being a term after the Ethnicks invention, is, in
regard of the erroneous and jarring rules thereof, to be rejected, being that
it is only framed and made after pagan men's traditions; forasmuch as it
leads even Christians themselves, much more the Gentiles, rather to errors,
and seduceth them more from the knowledge of God, than it does induce or direct
them, into the true path of finding him out; and for that reason, it became the
occasion of a manifold idolatry in this world, in that it persuaded the
ignorant worldling unto the worshipping of the creatures, instead of the
Creator. For this cause therefore (I say) it was forbidden to be embraced of
Christians, and hereupon the Apostle admonishes us, to beware of philosophy,
and vain fallacy, etc. Of such kind of Philosophers therefore, which do not
build upon the truth, he speaks elsewhere thus, Revelatur ir a Dei de coelo
super omnem impietatem and injustitiam homin^m eorum qui veritatem Dei in
injustitia detinent, Romans 1.18.
quia quod notum est Dei manifestum est in illis; Deus enim illis revelavit.
Invisibilia enim ipsius a creatura mundi per ea quae facta sunt, intellecta,
conspiciuntur. Sempiterna quoque ejus veritas and divinitas, ita ut sint
inexcusabiles. Quia cum cognovissent Deum, non sicut Deum glorificaverunt aut
gratias egerunt, sed evanuerunt in cogitationibus suis, and obscuratum est
insipiens cor eorum: dicentes enim se esse sapientes, stu^ti facti sunt; and
mutaverunt glo^iam incorruptibilis Dei, in similitudinem corruptibilis hominis,
and volucrum, and quadrupedum, and serpentum, etc. The anger of God is revealed
from heaven, upon all the impiety and unjustnesse of those men, which do detain
the verity of God in unrighteousness, because that what is known of God, is
made manifest unto them, for God has revealed it unto them. For the invisible
things of him, and also his everlasting virtue and divinity, being understood
by such creatures as were made from the worlds creation, are beheld or made
manifest. So that they are inexcusable, because that when they knew God, they
did not glorify him, or give him thanks, but did fade away, or vanish in their
own imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened. And therefore in saying
that they were wise, they became fools, and changed the glory of the
incorruptible God, into the similitude of corruptible man, and of birds, and
four-footed beasts, and of serpents, etc. Again, Solomon speaks unto the
self-same sense, in these words: Wisd. 13.1.
Vani sunt homines omnes natura, in quibus inest ignorantia Dei, and qui ex
i^s, quae spectantur, bonis, eum, qui est, intelligere non potuerunt, neque ex
operibus consideratis, ipsum opificem agnoverunt: All men are vain by nature,
who are ignorant of God, and cannot understand him, that truly is, by such good
creatures of his which they behold, nor yet can acknowledge the workman by the
consideration of his works. It well behooves therefore each Christian, to be
wary in his reading the Ethnic Philosophy, and to consider seriously before he
wade too far in it, or give too much credit unto it, the sayings of the two
foresaid Sacred Philosophers, which followed the rules of the true Wisdom. And
again, let him call to mind the precepts, which the first of them (I mean St.
Paul) did impart unto the worldy Philosophers of Athens, when he espied that
they did adore and worship strange and unknown Gods, and how he taught them a
new Philosophy, and new Wisdom, namely Jesus Christ, which was strange
doctrine unto them. And therefore they said, Let us hear what this babbler will
say, that brings in this strange doctrine of Christ. Whereby it appears
that the true Wisdom never sounded into their ears, or dived into their
hearts: Let him (I say) observe that it was at this kind of bastard
Philosophers, with their Philosophy, that the Apostle points, where he says
in the place above cited: Let no man deceive you in subtility and swasibility
of speech: Beware of Philosophy and vain F^llacy, which are according unto the
traditions of men, and according unto the Elements or rudiments of this world,
and not after Christ, etc. In which words he distinguishes the false
Philosophy or wisdom, from the true Sapience, and he seems to intimate that
the false Philosophy is but vain Fallacy, framed after the manner of men of
this world, namely as at Athens it was taught; that is to say, with vain
Fallacy, subtilties and seeming more in appearance and probability, then it
was indeed. And for that reason it filled men fuller of doubts, by inquiries
made through misty and foggy passages, then if they had gone the plain and
simple way of teaching, to wit, after the true image of the real and
essential Philosophy or rather Sophia or Wisdom, which as the Wiseman tells
us, is, Spiritus intelligentiae Sanctus, unicus, simplex, modestus, d^sertus,
suavis, perspicuus, amans bonum, humanus, benignus, stabilis, certus, omnem
habens virtutem, amicos Dei constituens, and in animas sanctas se transferens:
The holy spirit of Wisdom, is unique and simple in his essence, modest,
eloquent, sweet, Wisd. 7.22.
plain, and open without amb^guity: Loving that which is good, humane,
benign, stable, sure, comprehending in it self all virtue, and an introductor
of man unto the friendship of God, by transferring it self into the souls of
pious and godly men. Lo here we see, that, in condition, this description of
the good and true Wisdom, does exactly agree with that Wisdom, whose
character is described by St. James, as is said before: For he terms it,
modest, benign, peaceful, James 3.
suasible, without envy, or emulation. Again, (as St. James says,) that it is
from above, Wisd. 7.25.
namely, from the Father of Light. So also does Solomon express her pedigree
thus, Sapientia (says he) est vapor virtutis Dei and emanatio quaedam seu
fluxus claritatis omnipotentis Dei sinceri, and candor seu splendour lucis
aeternae, and speculum sine macula Majestatis Dei, and imago bonitatis illius:
Wisdom is the vapor of the virtue of God, and a certain emanation, or flux of
the sincere shining forth of the Omnipotent God, and the brightness of the
eternal light, and a mirror without spot of the Majesty of God, and the image
of his goodness, By the which definition it is evidently discerned: First, that
it is that Wisdom which is from above; next that it is not the vain wisdom
of this world, which is nothing else but a plain fiction or empty shadow, in
regard of this which is only truth: lastly, this wisdom brings good fruit
with it; for it imparteth unto men, essential virtue and power, to act as well
naturally as miraculously: and therefore the Apostle says, Signa Apostolatus
mei facta sunt super vos in omni potentia, in signis prodigiis and virtutibus:
2 Cor. 12.12.
The signs of mine Apostleship are upon you in all patience, in signs,
prodigies, and virtues. And again, Qui tribuit vobis Spiritum and operatur
virtutes, Galat. 3.5.
seu miracula, in vobis: Who bestows upon you the Spirit, who works also
virtues, or miracles among you. Lo here our Christian Philosophers may see, how
this Wisdom brings forth power and virtue, which St. James, in the
beforecited place does call good fruits: for he says, that Wisdom which is
from above, is full of good fruits: But Paul seems to call the Ethnic
Philosophy vain fallacy, and therefore if it be vain, then it is void of good
fruit, and consequently there is no true fructifying Philosophy, nor truly
fructifyed Philosopher, but that which is grounded on that true and eternal
Wisdom, Jesus. Besides all this, the true Wisdom is peaceable, not ambiguous,
nor apt to be cavilled with, or contentiously to be disputed of, neither
needs it an infinity of distinctions and quiddities, framed out of man's
brain, which rather leads the disciple by the multiplicity thereof into
ignorance, then it does elucidate the brightness of naked truth: But the false
Philosophy, is so full of distinctions, subtle and sophistical evasions, so
subject to cavills and disputations, and so contentiously composed, and, in
fine, so difficill, and in effect so fruitless, that, instead of the true and
essential grain, we find but chaff; instead of truth, we gather but words;
instead of essential reality, we collect scarce a type or shadow of Verity; in
lieu of sincerity we find but vanity; and, in conclusion, is more in appearance
overmasked over, for the most part, with a seeming probability, then indeed
really to be discerned; 1 Cor. 2.4.
and for this cause, the Apostle says, Praedicatio mea non est in persuasivis
humanae sapientiae verbis, sed in ostensione spiritus and virtutis: My
preaching is not in the persuasive words of humane wisdom, but by the
manifestation of the Spirit and of power. For this reason therefore we find, in
the one of the two kinds of wisdom, the fruits of power, virtue, and miracles,
such as the true and divine Philosophers did produce by the Omnipotent
Cornerstone, (I mean the true Wisdom) in times past, and made them manifest
unto the world: Whereas the other can do nothing indeed, but produce
cavillings, dispute, contentions, and fallacies, the fruits whereof, in the
conclusion, is naught else but vanity: It is not I, but the Spirit of truth,
that assures you thus much. And yet now, even in this later age of the world,
in which Satan, the prince of this world which is darkness, has the upper
hand; this terrene wisdom or vain Philosophy, which is dawbed over with dark
ignorance, has the dominion or upper hand, and so by that means Christ, which
is the true Wisdom, is daily crucified among some Christian Philosophers, and
buried in darkness, through the mysty and ambiguous clouds of that cavilling,
brabling, heathenish Philosophy, which they so adore and follow, with their
Master Aristotle, as if he were another Jesus rained down from heaven, to open
unto mankind the treasures of the true wisdom: But ma^k a while (I beseech
you) how the Apostle does describe these wrangling Philosophers, with their
Sophistical Philosophy, and with what characters and colors he does justly
describe them: Si quis aliter docet, and non acquiescit sanis sermonibus Domini
nostri Jesu Christi (says he) and ei quae secundum pietatem est Doctrinae,
superbus est, nihil sciens, sed languens circa quaestiones, and pugnas
verborum; ex quibus oriuntur iuvidiae, contentiones, blasphemiae, suspiciones
mala, conflictationes hominum mente corruptorum, 1 Timothy 6.3.
and qui veritate privati sunt, existimantium quaestum esse pietatem: If any
man teach otherwise, and consents not unto the wholesome words of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and unto the doctrine which is according unto Godliness, he is
puffed up and knows nothing, but doteth about questions, and contention of
words; whereof comes envy, strife, railing, evil surmises, froward
disputations of men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth, which think
that gain is Godliness: From such, (says St. Paul unto Timothy) Separate thy
self. I could heartily wish, that each Christian Peripatetick, who spends his
time in disputes and cavills, after the Aristotelian manner, and attempteth to
draw out the endless bottom of truth, or dive into the bowels or labyrinths
of verity, by subtle evasions, I mean by an infinity of distinctions, which
do rather distract then attract man unto the true wisdom, (which is but
plain and simple unity); I could wish them (I say) to ponder this with
patience, and seriously to call to mind, that in the Church of God, and
habitations or kingdoms of the true Sophia, or, if they please, 1 Cor. 2.
Philosophia, there is no such custom as the Apostle teaches us: for this
mixtion of multiform humane wisdom, with the wisdom of God, has been the
occasion of so many dissentions and discords, as have sprung up among the
Philosophers of this world, whereupon every kind of this false Philosophy,
has, by stiff cavillations, and disputations, maintained her Sect. This also
has been the occasion of errors in the Church of God, as well among
Christians, as Turks, and Jews: For amongst us Christians it has been the
root of many Schisms and Heresies, which have risen up in the re-search of one
only true God, which is the eternal Unity. And hereupon, Convenientibus vobis
in Ecclesia, 1 Cor. 11.16.
(says St. Paul) si quis videtur esse contentiosus, nos talem consuetudinem in
Ecclesia non habemus: If any man seem to be contentious, we have no such
custom in the Church of God. To conclude, there are so many ways of deception
in this our Christian world, by reason of these Aristotelicall evasions, and
Protean Peripateticall distinctions, and sophistications, that the self-same
thing, may by them, like a nose of wax, be turned, and changed, or altered, in
outward appearance, which way a man list; and so plain simple truth is abused,
and the silly man seduced. The Apostle does notably decypher or paint forth,
this kind of Aenigmaticall Philosophers of our Age, (which, like glorious
Thrasoes, are puffed up in their own conceits, and think very well of
themselves, though they approach not near the mark or Summum bonum, which wise
men do aim at) in these colors, In novissinis diebus (says he) instabunt
tempora periculosa, 2 Timothy 3.1.
etc. Erunt homines seipsos amantes, cupidi, elati, superb^, etc. Semper
d^scentes and nunquam ad scientiam veritatis pervenientes, quemadmodum autem
Jamnes, and Mambres restiterunt Moysi, ita and hi resistuunt veritati, homines
corrupti mente, and reprobi circa fidem, and ultra non proficient; insipientia
enim eorum erit manifesta omnibus, sicut and illorum fuit. Tu autem assequuntus
es meam Doctrinam. In the last days, shall come perilous times: for men shall
be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, high-minded, and proud, etc.
always learning, and never attaining unto the knowledge of the truth. And as
Jamnes and Mambres did resist Moses, so do these withstand the truth, being men
corrupt in mind, and reprobate concerning the faith. But these shall prevail
no longer, for their foolishness shall be made manifest unto all men, as
theirs also was. But thou have fully known my doctrine, etc.

Now his doctrine was concerning the true Philosophy, whose foundation was
Jesus Christ, or the true wisdom and cornerstone, which sustaineth all, and is
all in all, and fills all, and acts or operateth all in all; which is
contrary unto the tenor of the Ethnic doctrine, seeing that it makes an
infinity of essential Agents in this world, as Demons, Stars, Elements,
Meteors, Fire, Water, Cold, Heat, Man, Beast, Plant, Mineral, and such like;
the which they will have as subalternate essential Agents, to act and operate
of themselves, not understanding, that there is but one catholic and
indivisible Agent in many mansions, which does operate by, and in, an infinity
of organicall vehicles, all in all, and over all. And this doctrine of theirs
has so infected our Christian Philosophers, which are of their sect, that they
distinguish of Gods Being, saying, That he is present vertualiter, and not
substantialiter, or essentialiter. As who should say, that Gods virtue can be
without his essence, or divided from his divinity, which is indivisible; and so
they dream of some accidents to be in God, which are distinguished from his
essence. Or else they distinguish and say, that he operateth all principaliter
and mediate, as he is the first cause. But, say they, there are an infinity of
secundary causes, which act and operate of themselves. But I wonder, if that
were true, how God can be said to fill all things, and operate all in all; if
he be only the first efficient cause, and not the general cause of all action
in this world, by his blessed Spirit, which he sent out into the world, to do
the will of him that sent it, as well in heaven as in earth. What needs more
words, when the Apostle in plain terms decideth this controversy in the Text
before mentioned? Etsi sunt (says he) qui dicuntur Dij sive in coelo, sive in
terra, 1 Cor. 8.5.
(siquidem sunt dij multi and domini multi) nobis tamen est unus Deus Pater, ex
quo omnia, and nos in ^llo; and unus Dominus Jesus Christus, per quem omnia,
and nos per ipsum. Sed non in omnibus est haec scientia. Though there be that
are called Gods, as well in heaven as on earth, (as there are many gods, and
many lords) yet unto us there is but one God, which is the Father, of whom are
all things, and we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things,
and we by him. But every man has not that knowledge. By which words each
Christian may discern, how adverse the divine Philosopher Paul is, unto the
imaginary virtue, and immediate act, of either the Peripatetick's Demons and
Intelligences, or of the starry bodies and influences, or of the quali^ies of
his four Elements, or of the Winds and other Meteors, mentioned by their Master
Aristotle.

And although they appear in outward show, that they act or work of themselves
in this world; yet our true Philosopher Paul teaches us, that by his
Philosophy, (whose basis or ground is the true wisdom Jesus Christ) he can
discern no other Agent but one primary, of whom are all things; and the other
secundary, by whom are all things, both which he acknowledges to be but one in
essence; for the one being an emanation out of the other, does only, and of
himself operate all in all. This is the perfect tenent of the essential
Philosophy: And therefore whatsoever the mundan and Ethnic Philosophy does
tell, and by insinuating subtlety persuade us unto, which is apparently
contrary unto the true Philosophy, we ought not in any case to believe. And
unto this, the said divine Philosopher seems to consent, Gala. 1.8.
in these words, Though an angel from heaven does preach unto you otherwise
then that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. If any man
preach otherwise then that ye have received, let him be accursed. And therefore
seeing that the Aristotelian learning, is contradictory in diverse main points,
unto the positions of the essential wisdom or philosophy, a true Christian
ought not in the main points to believe it, seeing that as St. James has it)
the grounds and tenor of it are opposite unto the holy Bible, which is the
only cabinet of truth; and therefore is pronounced by him to be terrene,
animal, and diabolical. Hereupon St. Paul writes unto his scholar Timothy,
in this style, Timothy, keep that which is committed unto thee, 1 Timothy 6.20.
and avoid profane and vain bablings, and oppositions of sciences falsely so
called, which while some profess, they have erred concerning the faith. In
which words, he seems to forewarn his Disciples, that they be not entangled
with the sophistical allurements of the wo^ldly Philosophy, which
contradicts the truth, and is not pacifick, but troublesome, and full of vain
disputes and opposition, pronouncing such kind of Philosophy, to be not truly
but falsely called a science; as also all those sciences which depend on it: And
moreover insinuates unto his disciples, that such Christians as profess it,
with too too vehement a devotion and confidence have by the means of it been
subtly induced into errors concerning the faith, which is grounded upon the
Anchor-hold of this invisible wisdom, which is the spiritual Christ Jesus;
Again, in this sense he gives this Caveat before specified unto his Colossian
disciples. Beware that no man do deceive you by Philosophy and vain fallacy
according unto their adition of men, Colos. 2.8.
according unto the Elements of this world, and not according to Christ, etc.
Whereby he admonishes us Christians, to eschew the false philosophy of the
Ethnicks, and to stick firmly unto the rules and doctrine of the true wisdom,
and therefore he says in the same Text, In Christo ambulate radicati et
aedificati in ipso etc. walk ye firmly rooted in Christ, etc. whereby he
intends that Christ is the only cornerstone and ground work of the true
Philosophy, being that all creatures, yea and the whole world is founded on it;
and consequently that the foundation of Paganish philosophy is sandy and of no
validity; whereupon the Apostle says, Fundamentum aliud nemo potest ponere
praeter id quod positum est, quod est Christus Jesus, 1 Corin. 3.10.
No man can lay any other true foundation, but that which is laid, which is
Jesus Christ. Now that this is clean contrary unto the false grounds of the
Ethnicks, the said Apostle seems to intimate in these words, Ephesians. 4.17.18.
Hoc dico ut non ambuletis, sicut et gentes ambulant in vanitate sensus sui,
tenebris obscuratum habentes intellectum, alienati in vita Dei per ignorantiam
quae est in illis propter caecitatem cordis eorum etc. I say this, that you
should not walk as the gentiles do, in the vanity of their senses, having their
understandings obscured with darkness, being alienated from the life of God by
ignorance which is in them by reason of their blindness of heart. I must now
come to particularize upon the erroneous and false doctrine of the Peripatetick
or Aristotelian philosophy, that thereby I may the better lay it open unto the
world, by comparing the vanity thereof with the goodness and perfection of the
divine and sacred Sophia or wisdom.

CHAP. V.
Here the erroneous doctrine of the Gentiles Philosophy is set down, being
proved for certain reasons herein expressed to be founded upon the wisdom of
this world, and not upon that which descends from God.

NOw me thinks, I hear some sharp-witted Aristotelian reply and say, How can
he prove that the peripatetick Philosophy is not descended from above? And why
should not the foundation thereof be the true wisdom, which came from God?

But before I come to the answering of this objection, I beseech thee (gentle
Reader) give me liberty, first to apologize a little for my self; Be thou
therefore pleased in the first place to understand from my just and upright
spirit, that I acknowledge and confess this Prince of the Peripatetick
Philosophy to be a personage of a profound speculation; and that he had as deep
an insight into the light of nature as any of the common rank of Philosophers
in his time: Yea verily, he had so sharp an ingeny, and so subtle and refined
a spirit, that he not only allured by his worldly craft and humane invention,
the Gentilish Greeks (whereupon he was termed by them, Cacodaemon, or a
deceitful spirit, or seducing from the truth,) but also Christians themselves
of every sect, even unto this present: Insomuch that they are so wedded unto
his worldly wisdom, that they admire each new proficient in Philosophy, of
their Universities to maintain his actions, and not to decline from his
doctrine. As for my self, though I may be rancked in that number, yet now I
have collected my spirits, and have by Gods grace attained unto that light of
holy Scriptures, whereby I am made able to distinguish and discern their
essential colors, from this praestigious one of Pagans; I must say with
Cicero, that Quaedam promissa sunt servanda nimirum licita, and on the other
side, Quaedam promissa non sunt servanda, nempe quae sunt illicita; Lawful
promises are to be observed, but such as are unconscionable are to be violated:
Now God forbid, good Christians should imagine that any oath which is made to
derogate from the verity of the holy Bible, should be perpetually confirmed;
for that were to rebel against the truth. Wherefore my essential Motto, in
this my old age (notwithstanding any allegiance which I have by a ceremonial
rite vowed unto Aristotle in my youth) shall be, Amicus Plato, amicus
Aristoteles, sed magis amica veritas; though Plato, and Aristotle, be my
friends; yet truth is more my friend, and therefore ought most to prevail with
me.

And now to answer directly unto the foresaid objection, we must compare
together, the two wisdoms propounded by the foresaid Apostles, 1 Cor. 1.20.
First St. Paul says, that God has made the wisdom of this world
fo^lishness: And again, Sapientia hujus mundi stuliitia est apud Deum, 1 Cor.
3.19.
Deus en^m novit cogitationes sapientum quod stultae sunt. The wisdom of this
world is foolishness before God, for God knows that the cogitations of the
wisemen or Philosophers of this world are foolish: And for this cause, the same
Apostle in another place, Nos non spiritum hujus mundi accepimus, sed spiritum
qui ex Deo est, 1 Cor. 2.12.
and quae a Deo donata sunt nobis loquimur, non in doctis humanae sapientiae
verbis sed in doctrina Spiritus, spiritualia spiritualibus comparantes:
Animalis enim homo non percipitea quae sunt spiritus Dei, stultitia enim est
illi and non potest intelligere. We have not received the spirit of this world
but the spirit which is from God, and we speak those things which are given
unto us of God, not in the learned words of humane w^sdome, but in the doctrine
of the spirit, comparing spiritual things with spiritual things: For the
Animal man perceives not the things which are of the Spirit of God, for it is
foolishness unto him, and he cannot understand i^. By which words we ought
first to examine, whether A^istotle were an Animal man or no; if so, then what
should we expect from him, but mundan wisdom and Philosophy, which St. James
terms animal and terrene, which indeed is nothing in it self but meet
foolishness, as St. Paul tells us, being that the animal man perceives not
the things which are of God, because he esteems them foolishness. Of this
kind of philosophy and wisdom, the same Apostle bids us to beware, Colos.
2.8 9.
being (says he) it is grounded upon the traditions of men, and the elements
of the world, and not upon Christ. But he points at this Graecanicall wisdom
more directly in these words, in which he distinguishes both it and the Jewish
wisdom, from that of God, whose foundation is Jesus Christ; Sapientiam
Graeciquaerunt, Judaei signa, nos Christum crucifixum praedicamus: The Greeks
seek wisdom, 1 Cor. 1.22.
the Jews signs, we preach Christ Crucified, arguing by these words that the
Greeks search after the wisdom of the world, which consists chiefly in
speculation or contemplation, as the wisdom of the Jews is more conversant in
signs and ocular demonstrations; for without it they will not believe. Lastly,
the third wisdom which is that true sapience, which both the Greeks and Jews
did reject and scoff at, Colos. 2 9.
was Jesus Christ, in whom was the plenitude of divinity Corporally: and this
is that real and essential wisdom which Christians ought to search after, and
whereon they ought to ground their Philosophy which is divine and not humane.
But if they reply that perchance Aristotle had an insight into the Christian
doctrine, or did apprehend Christ in some manner, or at least had an eye into
the wisdom of Moses and the Prophets. First, I answer, That as Aristotle was
before the incarnated Word, so also is it evident, that he knew little of the
Mosaic learning, which consists upon the Creation, effected by the spagerick
act of the divine Word, when he would have the world to be eternal. I
confess, that his Master Plato was more essentially grounded on the true
wisdom; but Aristotle being puffed up with self-conceit, would, in derogation
from the Stoicall doctrine of his Master, arrogate all wisdom unto himself, by
framing out or fashioning a new worldly wisdom or philosophy, which was
afterward termed Peripateticall; and so by his vain glory, he added unto some
truths many of his own inventions, making as it were a Gallimofry of good and
bad, of true and false, of wisdom and folly together, which is far from the
nature of the perfect Christian wisdom, which must needs be therefore wholly
truth it self, because it is described by the Spirit of God, in the which there
is nothing but truth. Again, if the Peripatetick, Stoic, or Epicureall
doctrine, had been perfect, and according unto the true wisdom Jesus Christ,
why should the Athenian Philosophers so persecute the right and exact
Philosopher Paul, for reaching the true wisdom Jesus Christ, in whom only is
the plenitude of divinity, as the same Apostle teaches in diverse places? By
this therefore we may perceive most plainly, what the wisdom is, on which
Aristotle has built his Philosophy. But I will come a little nearer unto the
point, or main mark, and compare the double wisdom expressed by St. James, an
other true Christian Philosopher, or Apostle of Christ, James 3.15.
who tells us in the place above mentioned, that the wisdom which
contrad^cteth the truth is not from above, that is to say, from the father of
light, neither is it pacifica^l and modest, but terrene, animal, and
diabolical. Now that this philosophy or wisdom of the Peripateticks is such,
it appears, first, because it is litigious, full of disputes, fallacies,
brables, and controversies, which is contrary unto the rules of the true
Wisdom, and therefore the Apostle Paul advises Timothy, to separate himself
from such as teach other doctrine, 1 Timothy 6.4.
than that of the true Wisdom, saying, that they which do so are puffed up and
know nothing, but dote about questions and strife of words, that is to say,
about verbal distinctions, wresting each word unto a multiplicity of senses,
whereof comes envy, strife, and railing, evil surmizes, from disputations of
men of corrupt minds, and destitute of the truth. And again, 2 Timothy 2.23.
Stu^tas and sine disciplina quaestiones devi^a (says he); sciens quia
generant lites: Eschew questions that are foolish and without discipline, for
as much as they beget strife, And such is the Philosophy of our Christian
Aristotelians; Forasmuch as their order and fashion is, to be ever conversant
about questions and cavilling disputations in their Schools, and that is the
occasion of equivocations, and of the infinity of distinctions, which give way
unto the maintenance of falsehood as well as of truth, and is the foundation of
so many opposite Sects as well in the common Philosophy as religion, whereupon
arises disputations, strife, contention, and malice, not only in the Schools,
between contrary factions, but also among the common sort of people, that are
of sundry religions; whereas if their Philosophy or wisdom were founded on the
true Sophia, which is Christ Jesus (which as he is all in all, so is he but one
simple essence) they would all agree in the unity of him, who is but one and
the same in us all; for in him and by him, we are all made brethren, and
coheirs with him, of eternity. And again, Acts 17.
seeing that in him we live, move, and have our being, (as Paul says) we
should by consequence, (and that without all question, dispute, or
brabling-quarrels,) know, and understand in our selves, that summum bonum,
which truly-wise men seek after, and, with Tantalus his appetite, do so
fervently affect. Does not the Philosophy of Christ teach us, that Regnum Dei
sit intra nos: The Kingdom of God is within us. Luc. 17.21. 1 Cor. 6.19. 1
Cor. 6.15.
Et quod sit in nobis omnium mirab^lium operator: And that the worker of all
marvails is within us. Et quod sumus Temp^a Dei, and Spiritus Sancti: And that
we are the Temples of God and the Holy Ghost, and that we are the members of
Christ, etc. Which being so, why should we be at strife, disputes, and brables,
about difficulties, or ambiguities of questions? or, why should our riper
senses be battered in pieces by foolish distinctions in which are the
inventions of humane or diabolical wisdom, on set purpose to immerge and
drown us deeper in the abyss of multitude, or profundity of ignorance, when
the only endeavor of truth is, to conduct us through those clouds of errors,
(in which the foolish wisdom of this world, has involved our understandings)
unto the fountain of Unity and Concord, which is the eternal Wisdom, the
spiritual, Christ Jesus? Thus we see how contrary the Greekish wisdom is,
unto that of the Apostle's; for as much as the Greekish Philosophy is
contentious, litigious, full of disputes, brables, and emulations; for which
reason it is pronounced by St. James, to be terrene, animal, diabolical,
James 5.
and not from above; whereas contrariwise, that Philosophy which is grounded on
the true wisdom, which is from above, must be first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without judging,
envy or hypocrisy. For this cause therefore, our Christian Philosopher Paul,
admonishes his Scholar Timothy to eschew all profane, 1 Timothy 6.20.
and vain babbling, and opposition of Sciences, falsely so called, which whilst
some profess, they have erred concerning the Faith. All such Christians, as
have their Anchor-hold too firmly fastened on Aristotle's Philosophy, should
seriously ponder this, that our eminent Master St. Paul seems to advertise
them with such fervency, that the observation of this Ethnic Philosophy, which
consists in contentions, questions, vain bablings, and opposition of
Sciences, which seem such, but are not so indeed, though they are called so
falsely, is the occasion, that well-intending Christians have been deceived,
and have erred concerning the Faith in the true Wisdom, and only verity Jesus
Christ. Again, says the Apostle James, The wisdom which contradicts the
Truth, James 3.
is not from above, but terrene, animal, diabolical. Now I am assured, that
all good Christians will maintain, that the fountain of Truth, and Verity, is
the holy Bible. What will our Christian followers of Aristotle say, if I will
prove evidently, that Aristotle's doctrine does err from the maine grounds of
holy Writ, which is the treasure of Verity, and consequently from that wisdom
which is the Father of Light? It is a common phrase among our lip-learned
Sophisters, to say, when any contradiction is found between some axioms of
Greekish Philosophy, and the sacred Assertion, Oh, this is true in Philosophy,
but in Scripture it is found otherwise: I say, to these, that if there be found
any contradiction between the points of the one, and that of the other, there
is a foul error, and falsehood, or contradiction in the one or other, and
therefore the one of the two, must needs issue from a terrene, and diabolical,
or mundan and human wisdom. Now judge, each good Christian, whether we should
rather stick unto Gods Word, which is the only Truth, or the affirmation of
Aristotle, which deriveth his wisdom, from the father of lies, I mean the
mundan wisdom, which is for that reason termed of the Apostle diabolical or
devilish. Others say, that men are so deeply conversant in the secrets of
nature, or natural Philolosophy, that they are become Athiests, and will
acknowledge no God: They must needs understand of the Ethnic Philosophy, and
not point at that of Jesus Christ; for that leads and directs the
understanding spirit of man, even unto the Throne and Majesty of the true God:
and persuades him to forsake the multitude of this naughty world, to betake and
contract it self unto that blessed union, from whence his bright Spirit was
originally derived. A third sort of men seem to repine and storm, that any man
should presume to mingle natural Philosophy with Divinity, or should dare or
attempt to draw any axioms or Authorities out of Scriptures, to prove or
maintain the Principles or causes of Philosophy: averring boldly but
erroniously, that the Bible does only teach unto man, what belongs unto
Salvation, that is to say, how we should fear God, and behave our selves unto
our neighbors: As who should say, that the holy Scriptures had indicted any
thing in vain. Colos. 2. John 14.26.
And yet it is plainly found in them, that all the treasure of wisdom and
science does lie hid in Christ. And it is said in another place, A me discetis
omnia: Ye shall learn all things of me. And again, Spiritus Sanctus vos docebit
omnia: Wisd. 13.1.
The holy Spirit will teach you all things. Are we not likewise taught, Romans 1.
that all men are vain, that do not know the Creator by the creatures which he
has made: and the invisible God by the visible things, which he has created.
Besides all this, man shall find therein most lively described, the three
principles whereby God made all things, namely the dark Abyss or Chaos, which
they call first-matter, the second matter which they term water, and the first
Act or light which they call their form: Also the true manner of generation of
Meteors, of condensation and rarefaction, of generation and corruption, of
action and passion, and of all things else, which can be imagined in that kind
of learning, which the Aristotelians call natural, is rightly, and not
Sophistically, expressed in this true Philosophy: as also every other kind
either Moral or Politic, with all other Sciences, both liberal and
Mechanic, as is already prooved: What? was all this (I say) vainly set down,
and expressed by the Saints of God, which were, in their inditings or writings,
guided by the Holy Spirit of Truth? No verily, but rather we may excuse these
zealous accusers without true understanding, and say, that they meant of
intermingling the false Aristotelian wisdom, with that of the Spirit of God,
which is only truth; for, would these persons but rightly understand, that
Philosophia, in his original sense, imports sophiam, or wisdom, they would
acknowledge and confess, that the true and essential philosophy, or sophia,
is nothing else, but the sacred wisdom, or holy spirit of discipline, which is
the ground of not only that, which animal men of this world term Natural
Philosophy: but also of the whole subject of Theology. So that if we consider
the case rightly, we shall plainly perceive, that sacred Philosophy is nothing
else, but the groundwork of Divinity, or an expression of God and his acts in
his creatures; or, if you will have it so, in things as well supernatural, as
natural. Neither can any man find, that God was ever mentioned or specified
in Scriptures, but as he was considered in this world which he framed, and the
creatures thereof: So is he said, Psalm. 103.2. Deuteronomy. 9.3. Heb. 12.22. Isay.
66.1. Ephesians. 4.8. Psalm. 18.5. Job. 22.15. Psalm. 103.7. 2 Reg. 22.8. Job. 28. Job.
38.1. Psalm. 147.16. Psalm. 139.7. Act. 2.3. Sap. 1.7. 1 Cor. 3.16. Sap. 12.1.
Romans 1.
to be endued with light as with a vestment. To be a consuming fire. To fill
the heavens, and to make the earth his footstool. To put his tabernacle in the
sun. To make the dark clouds his dwelling or tabernacle. To speak in thunder
from heaven. To parley with Job out of the whirlwind. To blow out of the
north and south. To be everywhere. Also his Spirit is said to descend from
heaven like a dove, and in the form of cloven tongues of fire, and to fill the
earth, and to make man his temple, and to be in all things. To conclude, all
Scriptures are full of nothing else, but of his essential operation in all
created things, by his infinite organs. Wherefore I may justly say, that true
Philosophy, (forasmuch as the foundation thereof is the Spirit of wisdom, which
descends from the Father of light) is nothing else in effect but Theology;
only we may for fashions-sake make this distinction, that essential
Philosophy passes or makes his enquiry after the summum bonum, moving from
the creatures circumference or external, unto his center or internal, for the
finding out or describing of that eternal essence, who is only good, and is
the sole actour in all things, and so proceeds (as it were) demonstra^^^ne a
posteriori, that is, from the visible creature unto the invisible Creator,
according unto St. Paul's rules, and Solomon's precepts, in the places above
cited. Wisd. 13.1.
And the Theologian or Divine, seems to move another way, to wit, from the
radical center, or invisibility of God, and so proceeds quasi demonstratione
a priori, that is, moving from the divine internal act, or center unto the
visible circumference, or external creature: whereby we may perceive, in the
conclusion, that both Sciences do attain unto one point in the end, that is to
say, unto one and the self-same thing, or highest goodness in effect. And yet
it so falls out, that many an Academist in this world, is so extracted beyond
the limits of the creature in their researches, that they, forsooth, seek him
out beyond the Moon, nay, beyond the margins of the vaulted world, and so
divide him absolutely from his creatures; in which proceedings, they do but
attempt or presume to clamber up a ladder, without steps or degrees. They will
(I say) soar up unto the highest pitch, without any consideration had unto the
lower degrees, in that they attempt to find out God, without any respect had
unto his creatures, when as the Scriptures warrant us, that he is not far off
from any of us. And therefore it will be but needless to seek or expect him,
Act. 17.
beyond the sphere of the fire, or above the starry heavens, when he is nearer
unto us, than we are aware of.

But it is no marvel; for some of them, being altogether addicted, for the
first seven years, unto the Peripatetick philosophy, are so corrupted thereby,
and understand by that doctrine so little news of Gods being in his creatures,
that when they come unto their higher function, they are flat enemies to such
as shall tell them any such thing; and though they find Scriptures in plain
terms to verify, that the Word and Spirit is in all, and over all, yet by
those sophistical School-distinctions, which they have learned, or gathered
out of their Ethnick-master's documents, or his obsequious Commentators, they
do so involve and bewrap the plainly-meaning places of Scriptures, in the
equivocating clouds of obscurity, that they make them ambiguous, or of little
or no effect: As when it is said, and by the whole harmony of the sacred Text
affirmed that God is in all, and over all, and that the holy Spirit is in all
things, they streight-waies distinguish and say, It is true, that he is
virtualiter, or vertually; but not substantialiter, or essentially over all; as
who should say, his virtue can be divided or separated from his essence. And
again, when the Text says, that God operateth all in all: Verum est (say they)
quatenus est causa principalis, as he is the prime or principal cause; but
there are many secondary, or subalternate Agents, say they, which do act in
Nature by themselves, as the Intelligences, the Stars, the Elements, the
Meteors, the compounded creatures, as well animal, as vegetable, and mineral;
and so they would by these Aristotelicall sophistications, disgrace the truth
of him, who says in plain terms, Deus operatur omnia in omnibus, God works
all ^n all. For if we look rightly into the matter, we shall find, that as God
fills all by his essential Spirit of wisdom, so that Spirit works all in
every thing which it fills, and that without any helper: For how can the
created organ, by any act of his own, Isay. 44.24. 1 Cor. 15.25.
help the Creator, which fills it, to operate? when, what it has, it
receives from that eternal Act which bestows it: Ego (says Jehovah) sum
Dominus faciens omnia solus, and nullus mecum. I am the Lord who make and do
all things alone, and not any one with me. Neither should it seem strange,
being that the Scriptures do verify, Wisd. 12.1.
that he is all in all. And again, The incorruptible Spirit of God is in all
things. And again, the Apostle, as is said before, In Christo omnia sunt
condita, Colos. 1.16.
per Christum and in Christo omnia sunt creata, omnia in ipso constant, ipse
est in omnibus primatum tenens. In Christ all things are made, by Christ and in
Christ all things are created, all things consist in him, and he is in all
things, bearing in them the principality. Which being so, it follows, that
the distinction must needs be false, which is, that Deus does agere mediate,
and not immediate; and consequently that the creature can act per se sine actu
immediato De^. As who should say, that the divine essence or virtue is
divisible, or that Gods essence must therefore be partible or separable,
because it is in diverse organs.

I may therefore boldly conclude and say, that if Christian Scholars would
bestow that seven years, which they employ in their Aristotelian study, in the
true, essential, and sacred Philosophy, they would not so err after the
manner of the Gentiles, but embrace without any rebellion or contradiction, the
precepts of the true wisdom, so firmly, that they would at the end of the said
time, be complete in that essential doctrine, and made fit members to proceed
in the straight way of enquiry into, and acquiry of, the mystical wisdom,
which God has ordained to be revealed unto his Elect: and so after the example
of the Apostles, they might as well become potent in virtue and power, as they
appear now only puissant in words, being hindered from the good fruit which
accompanies true wisdom, by the erroneous doctrine of their seducing Master. I
know, that this good persuasion of mine, will make the followers of worldly
wisdom to storm, and to say of me, as the Stoicall and Epicureall Philosophers
did to Paul in Athens, What will this babbler have, or what does he tell us of a
new way of learning? I answer, That it is not I, but the word which they
follow, that teaches them, if they will be pleased to mark it well, and
sequester themselves, in the mean time, from the rules or documents of their
Ethnic Master..

But I will come unto my nearer proofs, whereby I will most evidently show,
that the doctrine of Aristotle is a manifest enemy, and opposite or
contradictory unto the truth; which being so, it is by the Apostle James
condemned, for a branch of that wisdom or philosophy, James. 3.
which is terrene, animal, and diabolical.

It appears, and shall be hereafter proved out of the Book of verity, that
the virtue whereby God does manifestly operate in this world, is expressed
either by attraction, from the circumference unto the center; or expulsion,
from the center unto the circumference; namely, Contraction, or Dilatation. For
after this manner is produced Condensation and Ratification, whereby the
heavens, and the earth, and elements, with compound creatures, as well
Meteorologicall, or unperfectly mixed, as such as are complete in their
composition, were created and made. And again, by it he operateth in this
world, either sympathetically, that is, by a concupiscible attraction, or
antipathetically, that is, by an odible expulsion. Since therefore that all
things are effected in this world, by attraction or expulsion, let us see what
is Aristotle's opinion touching the cause of attraction, and then afterward
examine, whether it accords with the tenor of truth.

The Petipatericks being persuaded thereunto by their Master Aristotle, do
accord in this, namely, That the Winds, the Thunder, the Comets, the Clouds,
and other such like Meteors, are made and caused by the attractive heat of the
Sun, and other Stars, which draw up vapors and exhalation out of the water and
earth, and elevateth them into the regions of the air. And therefore, Prout
(says Velcury, according unto the mind of Aristotle) magis minusve calidi sunt
vapores, ita altius, aut humilius elevantur sursum a solis calore aliorumque
astrorum: Velcur. com. Phys. 3. lib. C. 5.
sicut videmus in sole b^bente and attrahente aquam. As vapors are more or
less hot, so are they elevated higher or lower by the heat of the Sun, and
other Stars: as we see that the Sun does drink up, and attract water unto it.
Hence therefore has that palpable error been introduced into this world,
namely, that fire and heat do suck and draw unto it vapors and fumes, when it
may be made most palpable and evident unto the simplest, so that he have but
human sense about him, that the heat of the Sun and fire does rather discuss
and expel from it, by dilatation, than allure unto it by the way of
attraction: As for example, if the fire did draw vapors unto it, then would it
not permit any smoke to go from it, but the contrary is seen, viz. that it
discusseth by dissolution, and expels and seperateth by rarefaction the
subtle from the gross, not with a desire to draw or attract the vapors, made
by rarefaction unto it; but to expel and disjoynt it from the whole gross
body it works upon, for which cause we see the fumes and smoaks to fly away,
and to be enforced to avoid the action of the fire, without any inclination of
the fire to retain them; also if we apply a wet handkercher unto the fire, we
shall see that the watery substance in it will be subtiliated by the heat into a
reaking vapor: but as for the fire it is so far from attracting of it, that
the reaking smoke will be seen to rise up in the house at random without any
evident attraction of the fire. In like case it happens with the Sun's
operative faculty, for it subtiliates or ratifieth the water or humid
substances by his heat, and consequently it draws nothing at all unto it: but
discusseth rather that which was thick, into thinner portions. Now the reason
that water or gross humid substances, being rarefied, do ascend upward, is not
any attractive faculty in the Sun or Stars, but a natural inclination in the
thing it self: for it is a common axiom that omne leve et sub^ile, does by a
natural sympathy or appetite, tendere sursum; and therefore it is, of his own
inclination, being so subtiliated, that it soareth upward toward his natural
and destinated region, or place, as we see in Fumes, Smokes, and such like:
Contrariwise, omne grave, does in like manner, tendere deorsum, all that is
ponderous does descend by a natural desire toward the Center. But that I may
more exactly and assuredly display this error of the peripateticall
attraction, of exhalations and vapors by the Sun, Stars, and fire; I pray you
that you will but observe our Weather-glasse, or experimental Machine, and we
shall there find by practice, that all attraction from the circumference unto
the center, is caused of cold, and not of heat; for by cold, the water is drawn
or attracted up into the neck of the Glass, and that is effected by the
inspissation of the air, and reduction of it into a straiter room: when
contrariwise we note, that if the Sun do heat the head or boul of the Mattras,
or if the warmth of the hand do but touch it, the included air dilateth it
self, and forthwith flies away from the heat, and is so far from being
attracted by it, that it precipitateth and depresseth the water downwards.
Which being thus, as ocular experience, the mother of fools, has taught us,
let our Christian Peripateticks but duly observe, the subtle wisdom of their
Master, whom they have hitherto followed, and let them see and consider how
grossly he has erred, in the main argument, pillar, or prop of his Meteorology;
which being so, what can be more expected, then that the whole fabric of the
same should fall before the eyes of each wise contemplator. To be brief, these
and such like errors of his, have forced diverse of his discreetest disciples
and naturalists, to dissent and start from his doctrine, as well touching his
opinion of the Winds and the Thunder, as of the original of Fountains, being
persuaded and allured unto this their relinquency by a t^uer spirit: For
Johannes Fregi^s, a very learned Naturalist, and a man who has taken great
pains in searching out the truth of natural mysteries, Freg. Lib. 25. In causa
ventorum.
according unto the documents of Aristotle, (as it well appears by that his
large volume, entitled, Quaest ones Physicae) has this, Qua^quam tota
d^sputatio de Ventis sicut de aliis me coris, plena est admi ab^^^m operum Dei,
quorum mill firmae and sufficientes in natura causae proferri p^ssi^t, tamen
prodest videre quousque humanaratio progredi p^ssit. Sacrae quidem literae
dicut Deum ventos producere de thesauris suis, un^^ ipsorum ^latus and (...),
sed unde ven^um aut quo vadunt nescimus: Although the whole disputation
concerning the Winds, as also touching the other (...), be full of the marvells
of God, of the cause whereof there can be rend^ed no sufficient reason in
nature; yet it will be necessary to enquire into the cause of them, so far as
(...) reason will perm^t. The holy Scriptures say, that God does produce the
winds out of his treasury, from whence we hear the noise of their breath, but
a^e ignorant of the place from whence they come, and whither they will. Again,
on the other side, Margarita Philosophia, (a work, I say, that has been highly
esteemed of the Peripateticks themselves, ^
by reason of the Aristotelicall suck or sap that it contains, besides an
epitomy of many other Arts) after a strict search made into the nature of
Thunder, in the Physics of her Master Aristotle, and being put as it were to a
nonplus, through the want of skill which it observed in her Master, to reveal
such a secret, which none is able really to effect but by the true wisdom,
Wisd. 7. Job. 28.
(for by it Solomon confessed, That he knew the force or power of the winds,
and mutations of the elements. And Job, That it is the divine wisdom which
gives weight unto the air, and ordaine^h statutes unto the rain, and makes
way unto the lightnings of the thunders. That Philosophy (I say) so much
respected of the Peripateticks, is found in conclusion to utter these words,
Marg. Phil. Lib. 9. cap. 20. de Fulmine.
Quidam philosophorum (says it) considerantes mirabilem fulminis operationem,
ipsum non opus naturae, sed sum* Dei effectum immediatum arbitrati sunt: Some
of the philosophers consider^ng the mavelous operation of the lightning and
thunder, did imagine it to be no work of nature, but the immediate effect of
the highest God. Again, touching the beginning and original of Fountains,
Johannes Velcurius, who has spent much time and labor in the Peripatetick
doctrine, and writ a Commentary upon Aristotle's physics, grows somewhat cold
in his confidence, which he had in his Master's doctrine, concerning the true
cause of fountains which issue out of the earth, Com. Phys. Lib. 3. cap. 6.
Non consentiunt plane (says he) Sacrae literae cum Physicis de ortu fontium
et fluminum quae ex mari per varios alveos meatusque fluere, ac ad suos fontes
restuere, Ecclesiastes, 1. testatu^, dicens, Omnia flumina intrant in mare and
mare non redundat, ad locum unde exeunt flumina revertuntur, ut iterum fluant.
Coeterum Aristoteles et Physici Peripatetici dicunt materiam istorum esse
pariter vaporem resolutum in aquam and liquefactum a frigore and calore simul,
intra terram: The holy scriptures do not consent with the Naturalists,
concerning the original of fountains and rivers which do come out of the Sea,
through diverse Channells or passages, and flow or run again into their
fountains as Ecclesiastes, 1. does testify, saying, all Rivers do go into the
Sea, and the Sea is not the fuller: And they return again unto the place from
whence they came, that they might flow from thence again. But Aristotle and his
Peripatetick Scholars affirm, that the matter or substance of them is a
vapor, resolved into water, and melted or liquified by cold and heat together,
w^thin the earth.

Thus (judicious Reader) you may discern, out of the confession of Aristotle's
own pupills, how contradictory and opposite is the mind of their Master, in his
philosophy, unto the wisdom of holy Writ; and therefore mark the sentence that
the Apostle pronounces against it, Jam. 3. Gal. 1.9.
The wisdom (says he) which contrad^cteth the truth is not from above, name^y,
from the Father of light, but terrene, animal, and diabolical. And the other
Apostle speaks thus, If any man preach otherwise then that ye have received,
let him be accursed. Now that this Prince of Peripateticks is most erroneous
and averse unto the opinion of the holy Scriptures, touching the generation, or
primary cause of Meteors, I will most lively and at large demonstrate unto you,
in the last Book of this present Treatise, where I will prove him a deceiver of
the Christian world, by such prestigious things as seem probable, but in
verity, and by effect, will prove nothing else, in respect of the fruits which
the true wisdom does bring forth, but deceit, vain fallacy, and an apparent
kind of juggling, which being rightly pondered, it may seem very strange to such
judicious persons as are unpartiall, that the Christian world should be deluded
thus long, yea, and in these latter days, with such Peripateticall figments
and fables, and be so addicted unto Aristotle's idle shadows, since that in
conclusion they appear without true substance and reality. Nay, it may seem
strange indeed, unto every wise or understanding man, that such as are devoted
unto Christian zeal, should all this while forsake the main fountain of wisdom
and verity, to seek of Pagans and Gentiles, Baruch. 3.
arts, science, and understanding, as did the Agarens, (of whom the Prophet
makes mention) and those which were in Theman, who for that error of theirs,
never attained unto the knowledge of true wisdom. Of this main folly of
Christians in future ages, and of these our latter ages, methinks the Apostle
does seem to prophesy, 2 Timothy 4.3.
in these words, Erit tempus cum sanam doctrinam non sustinebunt, sed ad sua
desideria coacervaebunt sibi magistros, prurientes auribus, and a veritate
quidem auditum averient, ad fabulas autem convertentur. The time will come,
that they will not endure wholesome doctrine, but having their ears itching
after their own lusts, get them a company of teachers or masters, and shall
turn their ears from the truth, and shall be given unto fables. Where he
understands by a company of masters, all erroneous teachers, and especially
the sputious Philosophers, namely, of the Epicureall, Stoicall, and
Peripateticall doctrine, which as they are framed out after the imaginations,
traditions, and inventions of men, and according unto the elements of this
world, and not after the true wisdom, which is Christ Jesus, are esteemed as
foolishness, vanity, and fabulous before God and his Saints: And therefore the
Apostle in the foresaid speech, does point at such Christians in future ages,
as will leave the true wisdom or doctrine of Christ, the Prophets, and the
Apostles, and betake themselves to false Masters, and such Philosophy which
contradicts the truth.

Again, the said excellent and sacred Philosopher foretells, that there will
be many in future ages so puffed up in their own conceits, that they will
contemn and scorn all counsel, be it never so good, if it be any way dissonant
from their grounded opinion. His words are these, In nov^ssimis diebus (says
he) instabunt tempora periculosa, and erunt homines seipsos amantes, cupidi,
elati, superbi, etc. semper discentes and nunquam ad verita^em pervenientes.
Quemadmodum autem Jamnes and Mambres restiterunt M^y^^, 2 Timothy 3.1.
ita and hi resistunt veritati; homines corrupti mente and reprobi circa fidem,
and ultra non proficient. In the last days shall come perilous times, for men
will be lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, etc. ever
learning, and never attaining unto the truth. And as IJamnes and Mamb^es
withsto^d Moses, so do these resist the verity, men of a corrupt mind, and
reprobates concerning the faith. Out of which words we gather, first, That some
men in these latter days will be so wedded unto their own learning, and
conceipted in the worldly philosophy or science which they have been brought up
in, that whatsoeve^ truth it self shall proffer unto them, that is opposite
unto their intentions, it will be scornfully rejected. Secondly, he seems to
express the insufficiency of that learning or philosophy, which they embrace,
in saying, that they are semper discente^, sed nunquam ad veritatem vel
perfectionem pervenientes; Ever learning, but never attain^^g unto that high
virtue and power, at which the truly wise have aimed, by Ethnic philosophy.
Thirdly, it appears, that he means the mundane philosophists, by the
example which he makes of Jamnes and Mambres, who being worldly Sages, or bred
up in the human wisdom, did resist that truth which Moses, being instructed in
the divine Philosophy, did so stoutly maintain. And lastly, he seems to
intimate, that such as adhere so much unto the spurious wisdom, are thereby
corrupted in their imaginations, and allured to err concerning the faith, and
profit nothing. And therefore it will be no marvel, though I shall find this
mine admonition rejected, and repined at by many, though perchance more
acceptable unto such as are virtuously inclined unto the truth, and are apt,
yea, and sufficient in their purer discretions, to distinguish and separate the
errors of Aristotle, from the infallible verity of sacred Writ, and to carry
their judgments so justly and sincerely, that the All-hallowed honor of the
one do not suffer any detriment or indignity, by the paganish and unsanctified
axioms or assertions of the other.

CHAP. VI.
Here, One great God JEHOVAH seems to call the false wisdom, or Wisemen and
Philosophers of this world unto an Account for their erroneous Doctrine,
touching the causes and manner of the Creation of the world, and the Generation
of the Meteors thereof.

I Have expressed unto you in the precedent Chapter, that the great Master of
the Peripatetick doctrine, is not for naught termed by the Greeks themselves
Cacodaemon, or an evil spirit, being that by his inventions he has deceived
the world, and seduced it from the right path of Wisdom, and directed it unto
that way which leads and guides unto assured error and ignorance, and that
by the painted mask of sophisticated reasons, besmeared over with a false and
outward show of probability only, faining those things to be accidental, and
caused at hap-hazzard, which in verity are from above, that is to say,
essentially produced by the increated Spirit's power, which operateth all in
all: For according unto his doctrine, the Earth, the Stats, the Elements were
eternal and not created: and he covers this his false assertion, with
appearing natural inventions, framed out of his own brain, saying, ex (...),
nihil fit: Of nothing, nothing is made. He gives also a humane reason of life,
motion, and limits or borders the Seas; and faineth causes after his fancy of
the generation and corruption of things: And speaks of a first matter, and a
form, after his manner; though he knows not essentially what they are: He
tells us unreasonably the reason of the snow, frost, and ice, hail, rain,
clouds, and mists saying that they are adventitiously caused of vapors which
are drawn up by the heat of the Sun and Stars, out of the earth and waters,
into the middle region of the Air, and are there condensed into those
substances, by the accidental coldness of the place. He inventeth and brings
forth some slight proofs to maintain his imaginations, averring, that the wind
is made or caused by chance, namely through the exalting or subliming of hot
and dry exhalations out of the earth, by virtue of the forementioned Agents;
the which exhalations, after they approach the middle region of the Air, are
repercussed and beaten down again. And then in their motions downward, they
meeting with other exhalations which ascend, are forced to move collaterally.
He presumes to know the hidden causes of the Lightnings and Thunders, making
them to proceed also accidentally, namely from a concourse of vapors mixed
with exhalations; and an infinite of such like frivolous inventions he has
erected. All which he has veiled over with his smooth words and subtle shows,
of external or superficial probabilities only, instead of the real and
centrall visage of Truth. But the God of Heaven and Earth, which is the Author
of all these things, and does mystically fashion them by his eternal power,
and calls them out of his Treasury, when and where he list, seems to deride
this inventor of lies, with his obsequious followers in these very words, Job
38.2.3.
which he spoke unto Job. Who is this (says JEHOVA out of the whirlwind, unto
this bold abuser of his Works) that darkneth the counsel of my Words without
knowledge, Gird up now thy loins like a man, I will demand of thee, 4.5.6.
and declare thou unto me: Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the
Earth? declare if thou have understanding: Who has laid the measures thereof,
or who has stretched the line over it, whereupon are the foundations of them
set, or who laid the cornerstone thereof? (What? were they eternal and
without all beginning as thou vainly surmisest? 8.17.
) Who shut up the Sea with doors, when it issued and came forth as out of a
womb? Have the gates of death been opened unto thee? And have thou seen the
gates of the shadow of death? (that thou assignest a reason so confidently of
corruption and generation, according unto thine imagination:) Have thou entered
into the Treasury of the Snow? 22.
or have thou seen the Treasuries of the Hail which I have hid against the time
of trouble? (that thou after thy fancy dare to forge, fain, or assign unto
them such accidental principles?) By what way is the Light parted, 24.
which scatters the East wind upon the Earth? (what? is it by a hot and dry
exhalation attracted on high by the Son and Stars, and afterward repelled
downward laterally, 25.28.
as thou have published?) Who has divided the spouts of the rain? or the way
for the lightnings of the Thunders? And who is the father of the rain? or who
has begotten the drops of dew? (must the created Sun and Stars be the Actors
and Authors in this business, as thou do erroniously imagine?) Out of whose
womb came the Ice? 29.
who has engendered the frost of the heaven? (Is it the coldness of the middle
region of the Air, as thou seem to aver?) Can thou restrain the sweet
influences of the Pleiades, 31.32.33.
or loose the bands of Orion? Can thou bring forth Mazzaroth in his time,
can thou also guide Arcturus with his sons? Know thou the course of
heaven? or can thou set the rule thereof upon the earth? (And why not,? For
thou professest by thy Peripatetick Philosophy to understand the causes of
everything: and he that truly knows the mysteries of things can do wonders:
For by that means my servant Josuah made the Sun to stand still. Josua 10.12.
Isai. 38.8 Joh. 38.34.35.
And for the religious Hezekias his sake, my Spirit did cause the Sun to move
backward. Can thou lift up thy voice to the clouds, that the abundance of
water may cover thee? Can thou send the Lightnings, that they may walk and
say unto thee, Lo here we are? If the grounds and principles which thou have
invented be essential and substantial, all this and more may thou effect:
For such of the Elect, into whom my Spirit of Wisdom (who has assigned true
principles unto the essentially wise) has inspired this knowledge, Exodus 9.2t.
2 King. 18.45.
are able to effect all these things: as my servant Elias, after a long
drought, caused the clouds to moisten the dry earth: and my Prophets, Moses and
Samuel, d^d, by the power which I did assign them, produce Thunder and
Lightnings, unto the terror of their enemies. Job 38.36.
Do thou know who has put w^sdome in the reins? or who has given the heart
understanding? And dare thou, being led by the frivolous effects of thy
inventions, which are grounded on the Elements of this world, and not upon my
Spirit, which is the true Wisdom, ascribe my works, who am the sole Creator of
all things, Job 39.35.
unto the creatures? Is this to learn? to strive with the Almighty: he that
reproves God, let him answer unto it. Thus seems our great God to speak unto
Aristotle, and such like Philosophers of this world, who being too much elated
in their own conceits, presume thus over-boldly on their terrene and animal
wisdom, and would check and contradict the virtuous actions of God by their
fantastical surmises. I could wish therefore, that these mundane Philosophers
would turn from this their worldly wisdom, and humiliate themselves before the
only Creator of heaven and earth, Job. 39.37. and 42.
and answer with the patient Job in this manner, Behold, I am vile, what shall
I answer thee? I will lay my hand upon my mouth. 2.3.5.6.
I know that thou can do all things. I have spoken the things I understood
not, even things too wonderful for me. I have heard of thee by report, but now
mine eyes behold thee in thy creatures. And for this cause I abhor my self, and
repent in dust and ashes, acknowledging that there is no true wisdom, but that
which is from thee, who art the Father of light, 2 Cor. 3.19.
by the virtue whereof, thou workest all these wonders. And therefore we
confess, that the wis^om of this world is mere foolishness, and such as
wholly addict themselves unto it are deceived, forasmuch as they do neglect the
divine wisdom Christ Jesus, Colos. 2.3.
in whom all the treasures of science and sapience are hid. Thus have you
briefly understood the duplicity of wisdom, and by consequence, the bi-forked,
or contrary nature of philosophy, that is in this world; and how all good
Christians (contrary unto the custom of this our age) ought to leave and
forsake the one, and with fervency and zeal, to love and embrace the other. And
now in this Book following, I purpose to set down those Mosaicall principles,
on which our sacred Philosophy has erected the whole bulk or substance of her
fabric.

The third Book of the first Section, touching the essential Principles of the
Mosaicall Philosophy.
The Argument of this third Book.
IN this present Book, the Author teaches in a generality, the true and
essential principles of the divine Philosophy: and in particular he
expresses, how various and differing the Ethnic Philosophers have been in
their opinions, concerning the beginnings of all things; where he proves, that
the wisest amongst those Pagan Naturalists, did steal and derive their main
grounds or principles, from the true and sacred Philosopher Moses, whose
Philosophy was originally delineated by the finger of God, forasmuch as the
fiery characters thereof, were stamped out or engraven in the dark Hyle, by the
eternal Wisdom, or divine Word. And shows, that although the foresaid pagan
philosophers, did usurp the Mosaicall principles un^o themselves, and, the
better to mask their theft, did assign unto them new Titles; yet because they
were not able to dive into the centrall understanding of them, nor conceive or
apprehend rightly, the mystery of the everlasting Word, they erected upon their
principles or foundations but a vain and worldly wisdom, carved out, not from
the essential Rock of truth, nor relying on Christ, the only cornerstone,
but framed after a human invention, and shaped out according unto the elements
of this world; much like a Castle of straw or stubble, which though it be
planted on a Rock, yet it is subject to mutation, and is easily shaken, and
tottered at every blast of wind. In conclusion, here our Author does set down,
what the true Mosaicall principles are, namely, Darkness, Water, and Light:
Then, that all plenitude and vacuity in the world, does consist in the presence
or absence of the formal principle, which is Light. And lastly, he shows how
the two apparent active properties, namely, Cold and Heat, do issue from the
two foresaid fountains of Darkness and Light, as the two passive natures,
Moisture and Drought, do challenge their original from the said active.

CHAP. I.
Wherein is set down the uncertainty of the ancient Grecian and Arabian
Philosophers, in their opinions, touching the principles or beginnings of all
things.

IT is an evident Argument that the Ethnic philosophers were not well settled
upon the grounds of their philosophy but did waver in their imaginations
touching the true principles of nature, being that among each sect of them
there was maintained and upheld a variety, yea and sometimes a plain
contrariety, of opinions concerning them: as for example, Thales Milesius, who
was inrowled amongst the number of the wise men of Greece, had his opinion that
Water was the beginning of all things. But Anaximenes and his disciples
affirmed, that an infinite air was the first cause or original of every
existence. And for this reason also, Anaximander did esteem this catholic air
to be God. Again, on the other side, Zoroaster will have all things to take
their beginning from Fire and light; as also the Pythagoreans say, that there
is one universal Fire in and over all things in this world. And verily, each
of these opinions, if they be duly considered, will be found to approach, and
have a near relation unto the Mosaicall truth; for a divine fire or light
issuing forth of darkness, or the dark abyss, did suddenly by its bright
presence reveal and make manifest, the hidden and invisible waters, the
subtiler part whereof is the vast spirit of the air; and for this reason, both
Thales and Anaximenes, do seem in some sort to agree in one subject: And yet,
if we penetrate more profoundly into the business, we shall perceive, that
these two did insist but upon the material or passive principle, forasmuch as
from it, the substance of heaven and earth, and every thing therein, has his
existence or material being. On the other side, Zoroaster did not without
reason make choice of fire, for the primary beginning of all things, in that it
did proceed and appear in act, before the waters or humid nature were made
manifest, no otherwise then action goes before passion, or the cause precedeth
the effect. And yet nevertheless, he erred in this his assertion, because the
active principle can in no wise rightly be considered, but as it has his
relation unto a passive original. The Stoic Zeno, therefore, being more wary
than the rest, establishes his opinion concerning the first Principle, by a
firmer tie or obligation, saying, That the substance of the fire being by the
air converted into water, is the beginning of all things. But Empedoc^es would
be sure to lay his grounds more surely (as he vainly imagined) than Zeno; and
for that cause did ordain the four Elements, to be the radical principles of
all things, whereof two of them are agents, and two patients.

Now the main error of these philosophers in their judgments concerning the
principles, was, that they did not mark or consider, that the divine puissance
or sacred word, was more ancient, and of a greater Antiquity, then were any of
their foresaid principles; the which, if by a riper contemplation they had
understood they would have confessed, being instructed and directed by reasons
produced from the eternal unity, or essential point and beginning of all
things, that the divine light, or sacred emanation (which Scriptures entitle by
the name of the holy Spirit of wisdom) was the actual beginning of all things,
as nevertheless before it, there was another property in one and the same
sacred essence, which was termed the divine puissance, or potentia divina,
which did precede his act or emanation, no otherwise than the Father in time,
order, and being, is justly said to exist before the Son, Ecclesiasticus 1.4.
or the Creator before the creature: And thereupon the wise man has it, Omnium
prior creata est sapientia, Wisdom was created before all things. And yet it is
most apparent, that some of the Greekish and Egyptian Philosophers, namely,
Plato, Pythagoras, Socrates, Hermes, etc. did so instruct their understandings,
partly by the observation of their predecessors doctrine, and partly through
the experience, which in their long travails and peregrinations they had
gathered, among the Aethiopians, Egyptians, Hebrews, Armenians, Arabians,
Babylonians, and Indians, (for, over all or most of these Countries did Plato,
Pythagoras, Hippocrates, and others of them travel, for the augmentation and
increase of their knowledge, as Historiographers, that are worthy of credit,
have related) that without doubt they did discern, though afar often, and as it
were in a cloud, the true light in the humid nature. And among the rest it is
reported, as also it appears by his works, that Plato had the knowledge of
the Word, and had read the Books of Moses; and for that reason he was called,
Divinus Plato, the divine Plato. In like manner, the excellent Philosopher
Hermes, otherwise termed Mercurius Trismegistus, expresses plainly, that he
was not only acquainted with Moses his books, but also was made partaker of
his mystical and secret practice, as by his Sermons, which he calls
Pymander, a man may plainly discern, where he does mention the three Persons in
Trinity, and shows the manner of the worlds creation, with the elements
thereof, by the Word. And therefore of all other ancient Philosophers, I may
justly ascribe divinity unto these two: But in this I cannot much commend them,
viz. in that they having had a view of Moses his labors, which were indicted by
the Spirit of God, did gather out, and confess the truth of his doctrine,
touching the principles of all things, and yet would not in open terms
acknowledge their Master, but altered the names of them; but as Plato served
his Master Moses, even so was he dealt with by his scholar Aristotle, who
knowing that his Masters three Mosaicall Principles of all things, masked under
strange titles, were but truth, would nevertheless arrogate his doctrine unto
himself, and for that cause did alter the assumed names of Plato's principles,
gilding them over with new denominations, and did afterward rear up upon them,
a spurious philosophical structure, carved and framed out after his own
inventions, which may be therefore rightly compared unto a house of straw or
stubble, which though it be erected upon a firm rock or foundation, yet because
their stuff is Heterogeniall unto the truth, and evilly compacted, it will not
endure a storm, no, not the least blast of truth, but will easily be destroyed
and cast down. Thus may every good Christian discern, how each of the Ethnic
Philosophers have stolen their principles from Moses his grounds, stolen I say,
because they express them under covert names, without any acknowledgment of
their Master, which did arrogate his doctrine and learning unto the Spirit of
God which did teach him it, and did practically express the grounds thereof, in
the apparition which God made upon the Mount Sina: For upon the grounds of
these three Principles, the true mystical Philosophers or Theosophers did
pronounce, that as well the external Law of Moses, as the internal of Jesus
Christ was erected; which was not discovered or discerned by Aristotle, how
cunning soever he makes himself, which if it had been so, he would not
(without all doubt) have founded or built, upon the true Cornerstone, I mean
the eternal Wisdom, a bastard Philosophy which did differ in shape and
essence from the true Foundation. And although he was taught in some sort by
his diviner Master, yet was he, as it does, appear, all together ignorant of
the centrall truth thereof: wherefore it was but a folly in him, who is so
vainly magnified for the Prince of Philosophers, to make a privation where
there was no precedent position, or information, being there was a Chaos before
any thing else was created. But it was no marvel, being that he surmised, the
world, and all things or Species thereof, to be eternal that is to say,
without beginning and end; which if it had been true indeed, he then had said
but rightly, that the dark Abyss or Chaos, in respect of its being without
form, was a Privation of some Act or form in an actual pre-existent matter.
But that this is false, the whole concurrent of the Scriptures do confirm,
Wisd. 11.18.
being that it is said, that God created the world of matter without form, and
that the heavens and the earth were first of waters, and by waters, 2 Pet. 3.5.
and consisting by the word of God. And that the Original or primary womb,
from whence the waters were extracted (which were the material stuff, whereof
all things were framed) was this dark and deformed Abyss or Chaos, Genesis 1
and therefore had the beginning of their formal being, from the Father of
all-informing and vivifying light and essence. But that we may directly show
unto you the egregious theft of the foresaid Philosophers from Moses his
Principles; That Principle which Moses termed darkness, the dark Abyss or
potentiall Principle, Aristotle does call his Materia prima, or first matter,
which he averreth to be something in puissance or potentially only, because it
is not as yet reduced into act. Again, he seems to term it privation, but
falsely, being that no position did precede it. On the other side Plato calls
it Hyle, which is esteemed to be nothing, forasmuch as it is invisible and
without form. Also he compares it to a dark body, in respect of the soul and
spirit. As for Hermes, he intitleth it by the name of umbra horrenda, or
fearful shadow. Pythagoras makes it his Symbolicall Unity: From in this its
estate, it has relation unto nothing else but it self, which is mere Unity,
and consequently it acquireth not so much as the name of a Father, because it
does not by an emanation respect or attempt the production of a Son.
Hippocrates will have it named a deformed Chaos, or an universally troubled
mass, without form or shape. Again, as touching the first inacted passive
Principle, or the primary passive matter, out of which all things were carved.
That which Moses called waters, Aristotle does entitle by the name of Second
matter; forasmuch as it was begotten and derived out of the bowels of the
first-matter, or Chaos, or dark abyss: which also Plato terms the Spirit,
and Hermes the humid nature. Hippocrates with Anaximenes the vast and
universal air of this world. Pythagoras points at it Symbolically, by the
number of duality, which is the mark of imperfection; for it argues thereby,
the imperfect estate of matter being destitute of the formal character of
Unity, which makes three, and therefore the ternary number is esteemed amongst
the wisest Philosophers, for the root of all perfect numbers. To conclude; that
vivifying and animating Principle, which Moses called light, proceeding from
the Spirit of the Lord, Aristotle makes his formal beginning; Plato, the act
or soul of the world; Pythagoras delineates it by the number of three, and
Hippocrates calls it that immortal heat, the which when all things were
troubled in the beginning by contention, did sore up unto that upper region,
which the Ancients do call the Ether or Heaven. Is not this therefore a
notable kind of Robbery amongst the choicest Ethnic Philophers, thus fasly to
ascribe and attribute the Principles and Doctrine unto themselves, which were
revealed by God's Spirit, unto the wise Prophet Moses, and that of pupose to
make themselves great and eminent, not only in the eyes of the Gentiles, but
also by subtle allurements, or false and fading suggestions, laid on those
foundations, to distract Christian men from the Truth? And yet as for Plato and
Hermes, I must excuse them, being that they do both of them acknowledge in
express terms with Moses, that the matter or substance whereof the heavens and
the earth were made, was a humid nature, and the internal form or act, which
did dispose of it into diversity of figures or forms, was the divine Word, as
you may find most plainly expressed in Plato's works, and in the Pimander of
Hermes or Mercurius Trismegistus. Piman. 1.3.
But amongst all the rest, Aristotle has sored highest upon the wings of his
own conceited imaginations, and built the structure of his worldly wisdom upon
the typical form of the Mosaicall grounds, thinking thereby to assume and
purchase unto himself, in the regard of this world, the name of an absolutely
wiseman, though in the conclusion he appears far otherwise in the eyes of
God, for as much as he does assign particular essential actions, which
appertain really unto God, unto the creatures, with more obstinacy then the
rest, affirming that they operate essentially of and by themselves, when in
Verity it is only God that operateth all and in all, and that immediately, (as
the Apostle Paul does intimate unto us) And this is the reason that they give
not unto God the only Creator, the glory of every action in this world, (as
they ought to do) but rather to a created nature, and unto Angels, and Stars,
and Elements, and compounded creatures, which were made, and are still
sustained and maintained by the all-creating Spirit or word of the Almighty.
And this is the original occasion of the multiplicity of Idolatry, which has
and does hitherto reign in this world, namely, of the worshipping of the Sun,
Moon and stars, of sacrifices offered unto Idols or false Gods, and deceiving
Devils, of the Veneration of Isis and Osiris, of the adoration of Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, of the immolations or offerings unto Caelum,
Vesta, Ceres, Proserpina, Vulcan, Pluto, and Neptune, with many other errors
and absurdities, whereby ignorant men are rather seduced from the knowledge of
the true God, than any way induced unto the understanding of him rightly. And
this very same Doctrine relying on the invention of man, has been the occasion
that the world has erred concerning the divine Word, and through blindness
have not perceived the operations and properties of the holy Spirit, in the
creatures; yea verily, it has been the occasion, why some of our Christian
Philosophers themselves, have neglected the research of Gods Actions in his
creatures, as well visible as invisible: they are (I say) so wedded unto the
Aristotelian Philosophy, that they do voluntarily avert their eyes from the
true and certain Science of the Meteorologicall Science, revealed by the
Scriptures, which are the fountains of Wisdom; to follow the uncertain, and
scarce-probable doctrine of their Ethnick-Master, touching that admirable
subject. And this is the reason that they will not acknowledge any true
Meteorologicall Philosophy to be taught by the Spirit of Wisdom, in the said
holy Book, but only matters belonging to the health and salvation of man, when
indeed it is most evident, that whole pages or leaves as well of the books of
Moses, Job, Psalms, and the Prophets, as many places of the New Testament, are
full of that subject. All which is expressed in the book of the true Wisdom,
that thereby we may admire the wondrous works which the Creator has from the
beginning effected, and daily does produce in this lower world, to witness his
eternal power in his creatures. But leaving all allaterall discourses, I will
proceed now unto our main Subject, which concerns the true Mosaicall
Principles, with their effect.

CHAP. II.
What were the Mosaicall Principles or beginnings in general: How they were
produced and extracted out of Nothing. Then what is meant by that word Nothing.
And lastly, the first Principle, which is the dark Abyss or Chaos without
form, is particulaerly described.

THe Mosaicall Principles are very plain and evident, unto all such as do
wisely contemplate, and observe the words of the most excellent Philosopher
Moses, in his first Chapter of Genesis: For before there is made any mention of
that Spagiricall separation, which by the Word of God, or divine Spirit Elohim
was effected in the six days work of the Creation, mentioned and expressed
there, It is said that darkness was upon the face of the Abyss; Genesis 1.
and that Terra erat inanis and vacua: the Earth was without shape and form.
Where it appears, that the Heavens and the Earth, were not as yet inacted or
informed, but were one deformed, rude, and indigested mass, and consequently
all were complicitly comprehended in one dark Abyss, but explicitly they were
as yet nothing: as for example, we see that a great tree, with his body,
branches, bark, leaves, and fruit, is complicitly comprehended, in a grain or
kernel; but explicitly it is no such thing, but only somewhat in imaginatione.
St. Augustine compares this Nothing unto Speech, which whilst it is in the mind
of the speaker, is as nothing unto him that it is spoken unto, that is to say,
somewhat in puissance, and nothing in essence; but when it is uttered or
spoken, then is that which was before complicitly, in animo loquentis, now
explicitly apprehended by the hearer. Plato compares it in this estate of its
Nullity, unto a vision in a dream, which when a man awaketh. proves nothing
saving a mere imagination: But because this speech, to wit (God created all
things of nothing) has pusled the minds of many understanding persons, being
it could not be perceived really, what should be intended, by this word Nihil,
I purpose in few words to discourse upon it, and to express mine opinion, what
is meant thereby.

Says the Prince of Peripateticks, Ex Nihilo nihil fit: A learned Sentence,
and infallible axiom, of so learned a Personage, if the sense of the word were
always to be construed one and the same way: But I say, being founded on good
grounds, that if there be any, who either upon presumption, or through
ignorance, are of an opinion, that in these words (God created all things Ex
nihilo, Of nothing,) this word Nihilum or nothing, ought not to be taken or
interpreted for Nihilum negativum, or such a negative nothing, which falls
not under the capacity or understanding of man's reason or intellect: Such a
kind of Nihilum or Nothing was never meant or taken for the first-matter of the
Creation: For it appears as well by the infallible sense of holy Scriptures,
as the sacred Light in nature: that the first essence and matter of all things
was from all eternity in God, and with God, one and the same thing; and this we
prove out of Scriptures, after this manner. Genesis 1.1.
Says Moses: In Principio creavit Deus coelum and terram: In the beginning God
created the heavens and the earth. In which speech, this word Principium is not
to be taken for a negative nothing: For the Scripture tells us, in plain
terms, Romans 11.36.
that ex ipso, and per ipsum, and in ipso sunt omnia: Of him, by him, and in
him are all things. And therefore if all things proceed from God the Creator,
who is the highest of Entities, it follows, that it proceeds not from a
negative nothing. And again, Scriptures say, Omnipotens Dom^ne, manus tua
creavit orbem te^rarum says, Wisd. 11.18
St. Jerome: or mundum, according unto Tremellius, ex mateteria invisa, as St.
Jerome interprets it, but Tremellius has it, Ex materia informi, Almighty
Lord, thine hand has created the earth or world, of an invisible or informed
matter. And therefore, if of an invisible matter or substance, without shape;
it follows, that it is not of a negative or absolute Nothing. Also the
Scriptures say in another place, Fide intelligimus aptata esse secula verbo
Dei, ut ex invisibilibus visibilia fierent; Heb. 11.3.
We understand by faith, that the world was so made or adapted by the word of
God, that of invisible things, such things as are visible were made; and
consequently not of an absolute or negative Nothing. Moreover, if God had not
produced and created all things essentially out of himself, but of a vain
negative nothing, then creation would not appertain unto God, neither could it
rightly be referred unto him, that is to say, if all things were not
essentially of him, nor did take their beginning from him; then verily it must
needs follow, that all were not made by him, but would have their existence
from Nothing; neither would they consist in him, but in Nothing. But it is
evident, that the case is otherwise; for the Creation is the work of God, and
not the work and subject of Nothing; he is the entity of all entities, the life
of all the living, the beginning of all beginnings, and the fountain of all
waters, of which heaven and earth were framed. To conclude, nothing ever came
into being, or had its existence from any other, but only from him, and by
him, neither can any thing exist but only in him. And therefore we may
conclude, that God did beget, produce, make, and create nothing, but that which
was eternally in himself; which also the Apostle seems to verify in these
words, In Christo sunt omnia condita sive visibilia sive invisibilia, Colos.
1.15.
ipse ante omnes and omnia in ipso constant, angeli, throni, potestates,
dominationes, per eum and in eo sunt creata qui est principium. In Christ are
all things made and created. He is before all, and all, as well visible as
invisible, consist in him. The angels, thrones, potestates, dominations, were
by him and in him created, who is the beginning. But because this is more fully
discussed in the first Book of my sympatheticall and antipatheticall History, I
will say no more of it in this place, but proceed directly unto my purpose. As
therefore darkness is rightly termed potentia divina, so also is light called
actus divinus, which the Cabalists express by Alephtenebrosum, and lucidum, as
elsewhere it is declared. And therefore the Scriptures aver in another place,
1 Cor. 15.28. Colos. 3.11.
that God is omnia in omnibus, God is all in all. And again, Christus est omnia
in omnibus, Christ is all in all, etc.

I say therefore, that the very same which is meant by Moses his dark abyss,
and terra inanis, Job terms umbra lethalis, because it is void of form and
life; and for that cause he says also, Aquilonem extendit Deus supra inane and
vacuum. and suspendit terram supra nihilum: Job. 26.7.
God spread or extended the north upon the void or inanity, and did hang the
earth upon nothing. Whereby also it appears, that it was not the negative
Nihil, but a matter that was in potentia ad actum, in the way to be inactuated,
being destitute nevertheless as yet, both of any form or act. But, Forma dat
nomen and esse, Form does give unto each thing its name and being. And
therefore it consequently follows, that because this first matter was without
form, it was justly termed Nothing, as having neither name or essential
being, seeing it was only something in puissance, Pimander. 3.
and nothing in act. Therefore Hermes terms it, potentia divina, the divine
puissance. And again he says, that in the instance of the apparition of light,
it seemed unto him to be a fearful shadow, saying, Umbra horrenda obliqua
revolutione subterlabebatur; Pim. 1.
A horrible or fearful shadow did glide downwards, by an oblique revolution,
Pim. 3.
etc. Again, in another place, as Moses said, Darkn^sse was upon the face of
the abyss, Hermes has it, Infinita in abysso, aqua in super and spiritus
tenuis intellectualis per divinam potentiam in chaos inerant; There was (says
he) an infinite shadow upon the abyss, also water, and a thin intellectual
spirit were in the chaos by the divine puissance. In which words he exactly
agrees with Moses, who said, that darkness was upon the face of the abyss.
Now that there was contained water and a fiery spirit complicitely, within the
dark chaos or abyss, it appears by the revolution of the waters, upon the
which Elohim, or the Spirit of the Lord was carried, as shall be showed you
hereafter. So that by these authorities you may discern, Genesis 1.2.
what the first principle, or potentiall being or beginning was, namely, the
dark abyss, Job. 12.22. Wisd. 11.18.
or terra vacua* and inanis of Moses; the nihilum, inane, vacuum, and umbra
lethalis, of Job; the materia informis, or invisa, of Solomon; the potentia
divina (of Esdras) ante omnia creata quae erat fons and initium omnium, the
divine puissance which was created before all things; 4 Esdr. 6.
for such was the eternal wisdom, before it did act in this world. The umbra
horrenda, and infinita in abysso, and potentia divina, in the chaos of He^mes.
Piman. 3.
And to conclude, it was the mystical and complicite number, which is said to
be principale in animo conditoris condendorum exemplar, Odo ^bbas, com. Lib. de
Christo. 3.
the principal pattern in the mind of the builder or creator of things, which
were to be created. So that all things were complicitely in the divine
puissance, before that by the emission of his inacting Spirit, they were
reduced into an explicit Being. And for this reason, Hermes most properly
says in another place, P^m. 5.
Cantabone lauds tuas in iis quae in lucem e tenebris eru isti; an in iis quae
latent adhuc arcano sinu recondita? Shall I sing thy praises in those things
which thou have made to appear out of darkness; or in those things which do
lie hid as yet in thy secret bosom? Whereby he argues, that as well the
things that are hid in darkness, and appear not, as those which are made
manifest, are all one, in the sight of the abstruse unity, who is the God as
well of those things which are not, in respect of our capacity, as of those
which are or appear unto our sense: And therefore the kingly Prophet says,
Tenebrae sunt ei sicut ipsa lux, Darkness is to God as light; as if he had
said, All things are but one thing before God, who is one and the same, Psalm.
138.11.
in whom are all things, arcano quasi sinu recondita, as Hermes says in the
Text before mentioned* which is also most excellently described thus by him in
another place, Ex uno princip^o cuncta dependent, principium ex uno solo. Et
principium movetur ut rursus extet principium, Pim. 10.
ipsum tamen unum praestat, nec recedit ab imitate. Of one beginning all things
do depend, this principle or beginning is from only one. And again, this
principle is moved, that it may again become a principle; and notwithstanding
only one does perform this, and yet it recedeth not from the nature of an
unity. I will say no more touching this principle, because I have uttered my
mind more fully concerning it, in the first Book of my sympatheticall Treatise
or History: I will now therefore proceed unto the description of the second,
namely, unto the revealed matter which is mentioned and expressed by the
Prophet Moses, and the Apostle Peter, to be the subject or material mass, out
of which the heavens and the earth, and consequently the whole world, was
framed or made.

CHAP. III.
Of the mate^iall fruit or principle, which issued and was revealed by the
Spirit of God out of the dark Abyss, and how the substantial Machine of the
world was framed of it.

ALL things were complicitely contained or comprehended in the divine
puissances, (as is already showed) which, in the regard of human capacity, was
without form, forasmuch as it was contained within one deformed or invisible
water, which was therefore called, the Mother of the Elements, and Seed of all
things; for as the whole plant or tree is contained in a small kernel, or
little misshapen seed, and is no way subject unto man's apprehension, before it
sprouteth forth, even so all things were in the beginning in the water
potentially, as also the water was an invisible thing, without form or shape,
veiled over with deformity; for darkness was upon the face of the abyss,
which was termed the first matter, that had no formal act that man could
imagine, and therefore was said to be only in puissance. A wise Philosopher
therefore, and deeply seen in the mystical works of the Creation, speaks in
this manner: The first matter out of which the water did issue, was nihil, or
nothing, and out of it was created the matter of the waters; and this ought not
to be understood after an human manner, namely, that God did create the waters
of Nothing; and yet it was spoken rightly, because that in the beginning,
nothing was visible. But if wise men would elevate their thoughts above the
vulgar capacities, to find out by speculation the original of the waters, then
would they not deny, but that before the creation of the waters, there was a
certain matter in the highest mystery, that is to say, in the divine puissance,
or dark and informed abyss, which was the catholic treasury or storehouse, as
we may say, out of which the waters did flow in the creation: and this is
partly confirmed by Scripture in diverse places, for the Apostle Paul teaches
us in the place before mentioned, Heb. 11.3.
saying, Fide intelligimus aptata esse secula verbo Dei, ut ex invisibilibus
visibilia fierent; We understand by faith, that the world was made or ordained
by the word, so that things which are visible were made of things which were
invisible. Whereby it is evident, that the things which fall under man's sense
and kenning, were not at the first subject unto man's sense, and therefore were
esteemed as if they were not. 1 Cor. 28.
St. Paul also in like manner says, Deus eligit ea quae non sunt, ut ea quae
sunt destrueret; God makes election of the things which are not, (...) destroy
the things which are extant. For this reason also, Renclin speaks of the
beginning, by the mouth of the mystical and learned Rabbis, in these words;
It is written in the book of ^ahir, Nihil est principium nisi sapientia; and
haec est infinitudo ipsa trium summarum cabalisticae arboris numerationum,
Reuclin. lib. 3. de Art. Cab.
quas vos tres in divinis personas appellare consuevistis quae est
absolutissima essentia, quae cum sit in abysso tenebrarum retracta and
immanens, ociosaque, vel, ut aiunt, ad nihil respiciens, idcirco dicitur (...),
id est, Nihil, sive non ens, ac non finis, quia nos tam tenui erga res divinas
ingenii paupertate mulctati, de iis quae non apparent haud secus atque de iis
quae non sunt, judicamus. At ubi se ita ostenderit ut sit aliquid and revera
subsistat, tum Aleph tenebrosum in Aleph lucidum convertitur: scriptum enim
est, Sicut tenebrae ejus, ita and lux ejus. Nothing is the beginning but
wisdom or sapience, and it is the infinity of the three highest numerations of
the Cabalisticall tree, which ye are accustomed to call the three persons in
divinity, the which is an absolute essence, which whilst it is retracted in
the abyss of darkness, and rests still and quiet, or, as they say, having
respect unto nothing, is for that cause termed of the Hebrews, Ain, that is to
say, Nihi^, or nothing, or no entity: Because that we being affected with
extreme shallowness or poverty of wit and capacity in the conception or
apprehension of divine things, do judge of those things which do not appear,
as we are accustomed to do of such things, as are not at all. But when it has
showed forth it self to be somewhat indeed, and that it does really in human
apprehension exist somewhat, then is dark Aleph converted into light Aleph:
Psalm. 139.12.
for it is written, As his darkness, such is his light, or the express words
of the Prophet are, Tenebrae sunt ei sicut ipsa lux, darkness is unto him as
Light. Whereby it is Evident, that though darkness or invisibility, do appear
unto our sense to be nothing in regard of that which is made manifest in light,
yet in verity all are real and essential before God, and therefore that
nothing, or deformity in regard of our weak capacity, (out of which the waters,
which is the material principle of all things, were originally extracted) seem
unto him, in whose divine puissance they remain, a material existence. For as
much as nothing is in God, but what is essential reality, or a something in
being, but of him, by him, and in him are all things, Romans 11.22.
as we are taught by holy-Text: wherefore as well the dark matrix or womb of
the waters, as the watery infant or humid nature which sprung out of the belly
of the gloomy abyss or Chaos; were really in God, before they appeared to
sight, that is to say, they remained in the Almighties puissance or volunty,
and were to be disposed of by him as he pleased, no otherwise then the number
of things to be builded, was first in the mind of the builder: But that this is
so, namely that the world was framed and made of such a matter which was said
therefore to be without form, because it was invisible; we find it proved and
maintained by this Authority of Scripture before mentioned, Wisd. 11.18*
which Tremellius interprets thus, Omnipotens, manus tua creav^t mundum ex
informi materia, which Jerome translateth, ex invisa materia: o Omnipotent, thy
hand has Created the world of a matter without form, or as Jerome speaks,
of an invisible matter: Now that this general matter was waters which the
presence of the all-informing spirit of the Lord did vigorate and inact in a
generality, and termed them by the name Shamaim, and that the waters were the
first material principle, of which the world was made, no otherwise then out
of a rude mass of Clay a great palace is fashioned or framed, the Text of
Moses does seem evidently to confirm: first for that it does mention the
waters on which the spirit of the Lord was carried, and that immediately after
he had nominated the confused Chaos, under the Title of the dark abyss, and
Terra inanis and vacua, or the void and deformed earth, and that immediately,
before the first day's separation. Whereby it is plainly argued that waters
were the material principle being created or inacted by the spirit of the
Lord, or Elohim Ruach: Forasmuch as they were nominated before the first days
work. Secondly, that it was the said eternal wisdom, or spirit Elohim, who
acting as it were the part of a midwife, did deliver, and bring forth this
birth; and gave it act and form. Again we may learn out of the same Chapter of
Moses, that the waters were the Subject of that separation, which was effected
by the Spagirick or fiery-vertue of the said Spirit, or divine word. Thirdly
that the heavens above were made of the purer brighter and more worthy waters;
and the Elementary world beneath, of the grosser darker and viler sort of
waters, Genesis 1.
and that there was a middle kind of them, which participating of both extremes
was termed the firmament, whose main office was to devide and separate the
water from the waters. Then out of the lower waters by the same word or spirit,
were the Elements proportioned and placed, their several regions, namely the
Air, the Seas, and the dry Land. So that we see how the spirit of the Lord did
fabric the whole world, and every member thereof, out of this humid spirit or
aquatick nature, which also is most plainly verified by this Text of the
Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 3.5.
Coeli (says he) erant prius et terra, de aqua, et per aquam existens verbo
Dei, The heavens were First and the earth, of waters, and by waters existing in
and by the word of God. But the world is composed only of heaven and earth, and
therefore it follows that the whole world is made and existeth of the waters,
and by the waters, consisting by the word of God; Now therefore since the
Stars of heaven are esteemed nothing else but the thicker portion of their
Orbs, and again every Creature which is below, is said to be compacted of the
Elements, it must also follow that both the Stars in the higher heaven and the
compound-Creatures, beneath in the Elementary world; be they meteorologicall,
or of a more perfect mixtion, namely Animal vegetable or mineral, must in
respect of their material part or existence proceed from waters, the which, as
they were brought unto light by the divine word; So also do they eternally
consist, and are in their being sustained in and by the same Spirit, as shall
be plainly manifested unto you in this Chapter following.

Thus therefore I have sufficiently expressed unto you, and evidently proved by
holy Authority, that the original Catholic matter of all things was Water: I
come now unto my description of that universal principle, which gives life
and being unto all the waters and every thing which is framed of the waters and
consequently of the whole world.

CHAP. IV.
How the catholic formal Principle, by which the waters in general, and
consequently the heavens and elements, and every thing else in particular, were
fashioned, informed, and reduced into a specific act, or essential being, and
are hitherto preserved in that estate, did proceed, and was immediately derived
from God.

I Told you, that, according unto the Rabbis, or Cabalisticall Doctors
opinion, the eternal Sapience, which is the radical beginning, or unity of
all things, (when it remained, as it were, quiet and at rest, as being
retracted in the dark abyss) was in regard of our weak capacities esteemed as
Ain, that is to say, nihi^, or nothing, or non ens and non finis; and yet out
of this nihil was revealed unto us infinity; forasmuch as the emanation which
issued from it, is all in all, and yet without all, as it is that fountain out
of which the universal waters are drawn, which is the existence of all things,
(as I said before) and that catholic and bright-shining-forth, or fiery and
formal virtue, is sent out, which does impart an essence unto every thing;
and, in conclusion, both the external, or passive, and internal, or active,
of all creatures in the world, do issue out of this eternal, which is nihil in
regard of us, but omnia in omnibus, and extra omnia, in respect of it self, in
whose eyes darkness and light, invisibility and visibility, and therefore all
potentiall Nothing, or first matter, and actual Something, are one and the
same thing in essence, without any difference. For this cause, this eternal
infinitude, this all in all, and without all, is rightly described, first by
the Apostle, and then by the divine Philosopher Hermes, Ephesians. 4.6.
after this manner; Unus Deus Pater omnium (says Paul) qui super omnes and per
omnia, and in omnibus; One God is the Father of all, who is above all, and over
all, and in all. Romans 11.36.
Ex ipso, per ipsum, and in ipso, sunt omnia; Of him, by him, and in him are
all things. And Hermes, Deus est circulus intellectualis, cujus centrum est
omne illud quod est, circumferentia vero extra omnia; God is an intellectual
circle, whose center is all that which existeth, Asclep. 7.
and whose circumference is without and beyond all things. Hereupon in another
place he calls him, Locum in quo mundus continetur, The place in which the
world is contained; inferring thereby, according unto that of the Scriptures,
that he fills all the world, and yet remains in himself without all, in the
very self-same nature of a unity as he was. For as he seemed in the eyes of
man's weak and fragil capacity to be Ain or Nihil, before he would create any
thing, yet was he both unity and infinity unto himself, and therefore was
complicite all in all in himself, namely, as he to our blinded fancy appears,
Aleph tenebrosum, or dark and deformed Aleph. Also, though he shined forth of
darkness, and by the revelation of his hidden wisdom or essence, made all
things, as well visible as invisible, to exist formally, and so made dark Aleph
to be changed into light Aleph; yet nevertheless, he remains all one in
himself, and passes not beyond the limits of his uniformity: for, (as it is
already said) His darkness unto him is as his light: Even no otherwise, than
we see in the mind or divine mental beam of man, that it is all one without
alteration, when it wills, and when it nilleth, namely, when it grants or
gives, and when it denies. In like manner, whether the divine infinity does
shine forth from its center toward its circumference, or centrally contracteth
his acting beams within it self, yet it is all one and the same in its self,
without any alteration of the essential identity. I come to the purpose. The
Apostle, speaking of the eternal Christ, 1 Cor. 1.24. Sap. 7.25.
says, Christus est Dei virtus, and sapientia Dei; Christ is the virtue of
God, and the wisdom of God. Now I will tell you here, as I have done before by
the mouth of Solomon, what this divine wisdom is: Sapientia (says Solomon) est
spiritus intelligentiae sanctus, qui est vapor vi^tutis seu potentiae Dei, and
fluxus seu emanatio quaedam claritatis omnipotentis Dei sincera, candor seu
splendour lucis aeternae and speculum sive macula Dei majestatis and imago
bonitatis illius. Wisdom is the holy spirit of discipline, which is the vapor
of the virtue or power of God, and a certain flowing forth or emanation of the
brightness of the Almighty, the beauty or clearness of his eternal light,
and an immaculate mirror of the majesty of God. So that we may discern by this
description of the wiseman, what is the spiritual Christ, who is the wisdom,
virtue, and word of God, and how by his apparition out of darkness, that is, by
the mutation or change of the first principle, (which was in darkness, quasi
^^rbum in principio) from dark Aleph to light Aleph, the waters which were
contained in the profound bowels of the abyss were revealed, and were
animated, that is to say, by the emanation or emission of this self-same spirit
of eternal fire or light, and afterward by his admirable activity, and
restless motion and penetration, (for by Solomon it is said to be, Sap. 7.24.
omnibus mobilibus mobilior, and attingere ubique propter suam munditiam: The
swiftest and most agile of all movable things, and to attain and pierce every
where, by reason of its pureness and subtlety) it first distinguishes and
separateth the darkness from the light, the obscure and gross waters from the
subtle or pure, and then it disposes the heavens into spears; lastly, it
divides the grosser waters into sublunary elements, as by the words of the
first Chapter of Genesis, each man may plainly discern. But that I may
particularize more at large on this point, to express unto you the glorious and
immortal works, which this spirit did first by creation, Sap. 11.18. Dan.
2.22. Job. 12.22. Job. 26.7. Eccl. 24.5. Psalm. 104.25. Pro. 8.27. Pro. 3.19.
Job. 28.25. Isai. 42.5. Pro. 3.19. Eccles. 24.6. Sap. 7.19. Baruch. 3.33.
Eccles. 1.10. Wisd. 8.5. 1 Cor. 12.6. 1 Timothy 6.13. Psalm. 104.25.
and still does by preservation, effect and operate in this world; Mark well
these places in Scriptures: Mundum ex materia informi creavit. Revelat
fundamenta and abscondita novit in tenebris constituta, and lux est cum eo.
Revelavit fundamenta e tenebris and educit in lucem umbram lethal^m. Aquilonem
extendit super inane and vacuum, and suspendit terram super Nihilum: nam
sapientia ab ore ejus prodeunte rotunditatem caelorum circumeunte so^a, and in
profundo abyssi ambulante, omnia fec^t Deus. Aderat ipsa quando praeparavit
coelum, quando certa lege and gyro velavit abyssos, quando aethera firmabat
sursum, erat ipsa cum eo cuncta componens: Ipsa fundavit terram, stabilivit
coelos, erupit abyssos, nubes rore concrescere facit. Aptat pondus aeri,
appendit aquas in mensura, facit pluviae statuta and viam fulgetro tonitruum:
Coelos creabat and extendebat eos, firmabat terram and quae germinant ex ea:
sapientia creavit Deus terram, and stabilivit coelos prudentia, facit ut
oriatur lumen in coelis indeficiens, and sicut nebula tegit omnem terram. Facit
anni cursus and constituit dispositiones stellarum, fecit Arcturum and O^ionem.
Convertit in mane tenebras, diem in noctem mutat, vocat aquas maris, and
effundit eas super faciem terrae. Praeparavit terram in aeterno tempore, and
replevit eam biped^bus and quadrupedibus: ipsam effudit Deus super omnia opera
ejus, and super omnem carnem secundum datum. Ipsa denique operatur omnia, and
Deus per ipsam operatur omnia in omnibus, and ipse vivificat and animat omnia,
ut Apostolus. Quare Propheta recte; In sapientia omnia fecisti, repleta est
terra possessione tua, etc. Wisdom created the world of a matter without form.
She reveals the foundations of the deep, and discovers the things that are
hid in darkness, and light is with her. She makes the foundations appear out
of darkness, and converteth the deadly shadow into light. She spreads forth
the North upon the void or empty face of the abyss, and hangs the earth upon
nothing. For God made all things by the wisdom which came out of his mouth, and
compassed about the circuit of the heavens, and walked in the profundity of the
abyss. She was present when he prepared the heavens, when he covered, by a
certain law or compass, the abyss. When he established the heavens, or
etheriall region above, then was she with him as the composer of all those
things. She laid the foundations of the earth, and fastened the heavens, and
broke up the Abyss, and made the clouds to gather in a dew. She gives weight
unto the Air. She hangs or ballanceth the waters or clouds by measure. She
gives unto the rain its laws, and ordains a way unto the Lightning of the
Thunder. She created the heavens, and did spread them abroad. She fastened the
earth, and made the things which grow upon it. God created the earth by her,
and established the heavens by his Providence, and she causes an indeficient
Light to rise and appear in the heavens, and she covers as it were with a
cloud the whole earth. She makes the courses of the year, and instituteth the
dispositions or natures of the Stars. She made the Pole Star and Orion, and
turned the darkness into the morning, and changed the day into night. She
calls the waters of the Sea, and pours them upon the face of the Earth. She
has prepared the Earth from eterni^y, and filled it with two-footed and
four-footed Creatures: God effused or poured her forth upon all his Works, and
upon all flesh in a diverse measure. To conclude, ^^e operateth all things, as
Solomon says, and therefore God by her does operate all and in all things. And
again, she vivifieth, and animateth all things, as the Apostle tells us:
whereupon the Royal Prophet David does rightly conclude in these words, Psalm.
140.25.
Oh Lord how glorious are thy works, in Wisdom thou have made them all, the
Earth is full of thy riches: So is the wide Seas, and innumerable creeping
things therein, both great and small. Thou give unto them, and they gather
it, thou openest thy hand and they are filled with good things: But if thou
hide thy face they are troubled, if thou do take away their breath they die,
and return unto dust. A^ain, if thou do send out thy Spirit, they are
re-created or re-vive, and thou renewest the face of the Earth, etc. In which
Speech the Prophet confirms, that it is the Spirit of the Lord, who by his
presence reviveth; that it creates and generateth, and by his absence or
vacancy mortifieth or corrupts it. And lastly, by his returning, or restoring
of it again, causes both revivification and resurrection from the dead. The
which three mystical operations of one Spirit in this world, the whole
Scriptures do handle at full, and therefore we will conclude the last Chapter
of this Book, namely, that which succedeth, with this very Subject: which shall
truly correspond unto that defective treatise, which Aristotle makes of
generation and corruption. But before we come to speak of it, we must proceed a
little further, in the opening of this present Principle. By this therefore
that is already said, we may easily perceive, that the Catholic Act, or
formal Principle, with his infinity of dilatations, or emanations, are in the
hands and volunty of the Creator; who for that cause is said to operate by his
Wisdom all in all, as is already declared. And therefore the School
distinction, de operatione mediata, and immediata; principali seu primaria, and
minus principali seu secundaria, with many other such like evasions, forged out
by the Ethnic Philosophers (being necessary instruments of the Prince of this
world, forasmuch as they by their worldly discipline, do distract even
Christians themselves, from Truth and Unity, by a multiplicity of confused
distinctions) ought to be quite abolished, being that the only act and
Catholic agent in all things is immediately from God, and is all one in essence
with God, and is essentially in all things: Eccles. 1.10. Wisd. 12.1. Wisd.
1.7. Wisd. 7.24.
For the text says that God has poured out his Spirit on all his works, and
the incorruptible Spirit of God is in a^l things, and the heavens and earth are
full of it. Again, this Spirit is the most active and mobil of all things)
which being so, what (I beseech you) should hinder it to work immediately and
absolutely in all things? Being that it is the immediate virtue and vivifying
emanation from God, and consequently there can be no difference between the
immediate act of God and the act of this Spirit, which must needs be immediate
in the creature, because, as it is present in it, so also it is most mobil and
all-sufficient in it self to operate. Now therefore seeing it is evident, that
this Spirit is God, and that the essence divine is indivisible, it must needs
follow, that where it acts immediately, there God also must act and operate
immediately, and therefore all distinctions framed out after the inventions of
men being laid aside, these words of the Apostle and Solomon, God works all
in all, does generally hold over all, and every particular, and consequently we
ought to acknowledge no subalternate acting or efficient cause in this world,
but only one identity or divine essence, and that is he who works all in
all, and vivifieth, informs, and animateth, immediately, all things alone,
without any assistance, as Scripture tells us in diverse places, Ego JEHOVAH
(says the Text) faciens omnia solus, Isai. 44.24.
and nullus mecum, I am JEHOVAH, who work all things alone, and have none to
help or aid me. Ego Sapientiaci^cumivi rotundita^em coelorum sola: Ecclus. 24.8.
I wisdom compassed the heaven alone, etc. For this cause St. Paul says, in
excluding all other essential acts or operations out of this world, saving
only this which is from God. Dii sunt qui dicuntur in coelo and in terra, nos
tamen agnoscimus unum Deum Patrem, a quo omnia; and unum Dom^num Jesum Christum
per quem omn^a: Though there are which are termed Gods in heaven and earth, yet
we acknow^edg but one God the Father, of whom are all things; and one Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom are all things. As if he had said, however the world
speaks of the actions of the Angels, Stars, Elements, Winds, Meteors, Waters,
Animals, Vegetables or Mineralls, we do not acknowledge them to act essentially
and by themselves, but by the Spirit of God, who only acts and operateth in
the creatures, and by the creatures what he pleases* To conclude, of this
spiritual Cornerstone, or sacred Wisdom and Virtue of God, as is said
before, the Scripture speaks thus, Ephesians. 4.10. Colos. 1.16. Heb. 1.10. John
1. 2 Pet. 3. Heb. 1.3.
Christus implet omnia: Christ fills all things. In ipso condita sunt
universa in coelis and in terra, visibilia and invisib^lia, omnia in ipso and
per ipsum sunt creata, Ipse est ante omnes, and omnia in ipso constant, Ipse in
omnibus primatum tenens, nam in ^pso omnis plenitudo divinitatis inhabitat: In
principio terram fundavit, and opera manuum ejus sunt coeli: Nam ipse est
verbum: De aqua, and per aquam, mediante hoc verbo coe^i e^ant prius and terra
creata: Denique est splen^or g^oriae, and figura substantiae Dei portans omnia
verbo virtutis suae: In Christ all things in heaven and earth are mad^, as well
visible as invisible: By him and in him are all things created. He is before
all, and a^l consist in him: He holds the Principal^ty in a^l things; for in
him all the p^enit^de of divinity dwe^leth: In the beginning he established the
earth, and the heavens were the works of his hands, for he is the word: But the
heavens were made first, and the earth of the w^ters, and by the waters, by the
activity of the Word. To conclude, this divine Spirit is the splendour of Gods
glory, and the figure of his s^bstance, which bears up, and susta^neth all
things by the word of his virtue. By which it appears, that it is this Spirit
of Wisdom which operateth, wo^keth, guides, informs, vi^^teth, maintains,
sustaineth, feeds and illuminateth all things with life and being. And again,
by his absence darkneth, dep^iveth, and causes death and ^orruption to all
things in this world, as shall be delivered more at large in the sixth Chapter
of the Book which follows.

CHAP. V.
Of Plen^tude and Vacuity, and what true fullness and voidness or inanity is.

NOw that we have in few lines discussed, and set down the nature both of the
two constituting or compo^ing Principles, and also of the privative, and
decomposing nature, It is necessary for us to know the property and sense of
P^enitude and Vacuiy, according unto the true Wisdom or Christian Philosophy.
And first, I will speak a word or two of that Vacuity or Emptiness, which is so
detestable and odious in the works which the Creator has made: As well the
Fathers of the Philosophers, as such as have been expert in Theology, have
termed it by the name of Nihil or Nothing: Moses does call it a deformed
darkness, or a dark abyss. Hermes, a fearful or horrible shadow, void of
shape or form. The Cabalists, a potentiall being, which is as yet nothing in
act. Plato makes it a thing scarcely credible, and therefore hardly to be
imagined, and likneth it to a mere dream, which when a man is awake, proves
nothing. St. Augustine says, Cum aliquid inform concip^o, prius nihil
intelligo quam intelligebam, quemadmodum n^hil videndo videntur teneb^ae, nihil
audiendo auditur silentium: When I conceive any deformed thing, I do first
understand nothing else, then I understood before, as, when I behold nothing
Darkness is seen, when I hear nothing S^lence is heard. Whereby it appears
that he compares this Nothing unto darkness and silence* Job therefore says:
Aquilonem Deus extendit super mane and vacuum, and suspendit terram super
Nihilum: God did extend the North upon Inanity and Vacuity, and he hanged the
Earth upon Nothing. Job. 26.7.
And again, elsewhere, Revelat fundamenta^e tenebris, and educit in lucem
umbram L^thalem: Job. 12.22.
God reveals the Foundations out of Darkness, and makes the deadly shadow
to appear into Light. By all which, he argues that Vacuity, Inanity, Nothing,
and Darkness, are one and the same thing: to wit, Vanity, Inanity, or Voidness,
because that all fullness and plenitude is from God in his actual property. But
God did not as yet shine forth unto the world, and therefore as the first
deformed matter of the world was void and destitute of all inacting grace, and
formal goodness, it was said to be Vain, Empty, and Darkness: For this reason
Moses said, before the act of Creation, Terra erat inanis and vacua: The earth
was void and empty, because it was not as yet endued with the beams of Light,
Life, and Form. Tenebrae fuerunt super faciem Abyssi: Darkness was upon the
face of the Abyss, before the all-informing, and creating Spirit of the Lord
was carried on the waters: but after the Spirits apparition, it is said that God
calls that which appeared dry out of the water, Earth; and God saw that it
was good, and it produced the tender herbs, and seeds of every kind, etc.
Wherefore the Earth that was before the revelation of Gods Spirit inane and
void, is now become full of divine Light, and multiplying Grace. Whereupon it
was no more void and empty, that is to say, destitute of essential being, but
became fertile and fruitful, being now replenished with divine fire, and the
incorruptible Spirit of God, according unto that of Solomon, Spiritus
Disciplinae sanctus implet orbem terrarum: The spirit of Wisdom fills the
Earth. And again, Incorruptibilis Spiritus inest omni rei: Wisd. 1.
The incorruptible Spirit of God is in every thing. Per hanc lucem (says St.
John) mundus est factus: Wisd. 12.1. John 1. Ephesians. 4.10.
By this light the world was made. And the Apostle, Christus implet omnia:
Christ fills all things. Whereby we may perceive, that all plenitude is from
the divine Act, as contrariwise Vacuity is, when that formal life is absent
from the waters, and this is the reason that Vacuum or Inane is held so
horrible a thing in Nature: Forasmuch as the utter absence of the eternal
emanation, is intolerable to the creature, because that every thing desires
fervently to be informed, and that by a natural appetite, and affection, and
therefore it is abominable unto each natural thing, to be utterly deprived of
being: For this reason it follows, that unless God had filled all things in
this world with his Spirit, Vacuity and empty deformity would have possessed
the world, but because he by his presence did create all things of Naught,
through the illuminating presence of his ematating Spirit, and by this his
Spiritual Word he does maintain, and sustain them all. Therefore it follows,
that there is nothing in this world which is Inane, in vain, or void and empty.
This is maintained by this assertion of the Wiseman mentioned before: Wisd.
11.18.
Manus Omnipotentis (says he) mundum ex informi materia creavit: The hand of
the Almighty created the world of a matter without form: that is of an inane
and void matter, and consequently of Nothing or Nihil: Forasmuch as it had no
denomination, being it is form that gives the name and essence. By this
therefore it may appear, how vain the Vacuum or Vacuity of the Peripatetick is,
in regard of that which by the true Wiseman, is held Inane and Vacuum: For they
esteem their Vacuum to be a mere imaginary place in the air, not filled by any
bodily existence, no not by air it self. But although it be apt to receive
some watery existence, namely air, water, or earth in it. And so they dream of
an imaginary Chimera, which in verity is of it self absolute Nothing, being
that it is impossible that any place should be formed in the Universe, which
can be after that manner void, and consequently not worth the dreaming after.
But our Vacuum and Inane, is a potentiall matter, or earth, or Abyss without
form, namely that which is only in potentia ad actum; In puissance to be
reduced into Act, by the presence of Divine Light. It is no marvail though
Aristotle did not think of this kind of Inanity, and Plenitude, being that in
one place he says, Ex nihilo nihil fit: Of nothing nothing is made, and in
another place he affirms Light to be an Accident, and therefore it appeared
not unto his sense, that such an accident could take away Inanity or Vacuity,
and fill all things essentially by his presence: But I will combat our
Christian Peripateticks at their own weapons, who hold it for a Maxim, that
accidentis esse sit inesse. I will therefore assail them with this Syllogism.
If Light be an Accident, then the existence of it is to adhere, or to be in
some Subject; but the existence of true Light is to exist without any adhesion
unto matter or Subject, therefore it is no accident. The Major is proved by
Aristotle's own Axiom: which is, Accidentis esse est inesse, aut adhaerere
subjecto alicui: The existence of an Accident is to be in, or to adhere unto,
some material Subject, or else it cannot be. The Minor is maintained by the
words of Moses: Light was created the first day before any creature, and
therefore it had not any precedent actual matter or Subject, to be in or
adhere unto: Besides it is beyond imagination that God should create Accidents
before any Essential or Substantial creature. Again, God who is the Fountain
of Light, is said to be Light in whom is no darkness. 1 John 1.5. Joh. 1. Wisd.
7.
And again, the word is defined in another place to be Light, and the Spirit of
Wisdom is said to be the bright splendour and shining forth of the Almighty:
And therefore it was most absurd in Aristotle, yea and in some of his
disciples, as Damascen, and others, to con^lude that eternal light to be an
accident, which did emane from the essential fountain of light, to vivifie and
illuminate the whole water. Wherefore it is evident, that the true mystery of
plenitude and vacuity, was utterly unknown unto the sect of the Peripateticks,
because they were altogether ignorant of the true wisdom, which did (as the
Apostle James says) descend from the Father of light; and this does evidently
appear, when he will have the essential light, and formal act and splendour of
all things, to be an Accidental quality.

CHAP. VI.
How first the two essential, but opposite, active properties, and afterward
so many passive natures, did spring and issue from the foresaid principles, by
the virtue whereof, all mutations and alterations were, and are effected in
this sublunary world.

I Will in this place relate unto you the births and beginnings, first, of the
two opposite active natures, or essential virtues, which proceed from the two
radical or main principles aforesaid; and then I will express unto you the
conditions of those two passive ones, which are derived from the effects of
those two mutual actions. You must know therefore, that as the potentiall or
dark principle, is contrary and opposite in his essential property, unto the
actual emanation of light beginning, so also have each of them manifested, or
brought forth into this world, two offsprings, or essential properties, which
are oppugnant in condition, and flat adversaries in their nature unto one
another; and these two active virtues are Cold and Heat: Of the manner of
production, and the several conditions of each, I purpose to speak in this
present Chapter; and first touching the Cold.

It is evident by that which is already said, and shall be more amply exp^essed
in the first Book of my sympatheticall History, that darkness is the immediate
effect of the divine Nolunty, or latent Divinity, and consequently of Gods
privative property, or the divine puissance, and by consequence it is the
mother of privation, death, vacuity, inanity, deformation, and so forth. For
the property of the dark Nothing, or deformed abyss, is naturally to rest, and
not to act or operate; and the reason is, because that all its appetite is to
be conversant in, and about the center, beyond the which there is no motion or
action, and not to dilate it self toward the circumference, as the Spirit of
light, or God in his volunty, or patent nature, is accustomed to do. For this
reason, the dark principle does challenge unto it self, by a natural instinct,
rest and quietness; and this property begets or produces one essential
virtue of its own condition, namely, Cold, the which, as it is elected for a
champion to resist the assaults of her opposite, namely, of Heat, whose
companions are motion or action, (for the restless antagonist and provoker of
Cold is Heat); So unless it be roused or stirred up by the assaults of Heat, it
moves not, but seems to wait upon its drousie mother, Darkness and
privation, whose children are fixation and rest, which sleep in, and cleave
fast unto, the center, and therefore are unwilling to look forth toward the
circumferen^e. And in verity, cold is an essential act, p^oceeding from, and
attending on the divine puissance, which in this property does contract its
beams from the circumference into its self, Pim.
according unto that of the Philosopher Hermes, Monas genera^ monadem and in se
reflexit ardorem, One begets one, and reflected his beam or heat into it
self; that is to say, It would not shine forth, but retained its activity
centrally in it self, and so did seem to rest in it self; which was all one
with that of the Cabalist Bahir, Sapeut^acum esset in abysso tenebrarum
retracta, Revel. lib. 3. De art. Cab.
immanens ociosaque and ad nihil respiciens (...), i. e. Nihil, dicitur; in quo
statu Aleph tenebrosum dictitatur: When the divine sapience was retracted in
the abyss of darkness, resting still and quiet, and respecting nothing, it
was esteemed as nothing, and in that e^tate it was called dark Aleph. In this
contracted, or rather sequestered or private estate therefore of the divine
unity, it operateth according unto this its negative p^operty or condition, by
his essential agent Cold, which is proved therefore not to be an accident, as
the vain doctrine of the Peripateticks would persuade us, being it is apparent
unto each wiseman, that no accidental qualities are in or can be from God,
being that the divine Nature is merely a simple, essential, and formal
purity, existing in himself, and of himself, and therefore he being but one
essence, is able to produce out of himself what essential property he
pleases. And for this reason, the divine wisdom is said to be, Wisd. 7.22.
spiritus unicus multiplex, one simple spirit in essence, but manifold in
respect of his essential properties. Now that this essential property, or
nature of Cold, is the formal instrument, or isntrumental virtue, whereby God
does operate in his hidden and potentiall estate, for the resistance of heat,
and action or motion, and for the deformity and destroying of that, which he in
his patent nature did effect by his Heat or active property, it is made evident
by effect; for what the spirit of wisdom in its patent nature did operate, by
its hot spirit or blast from the south or easterly wind, (namely, in
subtiliating and ra^ifying of the waters into thin air, making that which was
gross, subtle; and making that which was opake and dark, diaphan and invisible)
the self-same spirit again enduing his latent and cold property, does deform
and undo. For in blowing or breathing from the North, the same thin and
ratified air is made thick, dense, and visible, which was through ra^ifaction
made invisible, and that which by dissipating of parts was made transparent
light and diaphan, is now by the Northern properties contractive virtue,
reduced into an opake or dark substance, and no way perspicuous. That which was
active, movable, and lively, by an addition of heat, is now become stupid,
still, and deadly, by the invasion of cold. That which was light, and of no
sensible weight, is framed into an heavy and ponderous body or consistence, as
we see, when the air by the northern blast is turned into snow, hail, ice,
frost, etc. Now that it is but one and the same spirit in essence, which
blows from the four winds, Ezekiel. 37.9.
the Prophet Ezekiel does testify, when he said, Veni spiritus a quatuor
veniis and insuffla interfectos istos; Come, O Spirit, from the four winds, and
breathe upon these slain persons, etc. Whereby he argues, that it is but one
spirit, though it endueth at his pleasure a fourfold property. And now to
confirm all this which is said to be true, Psalm. 147.4.
do but mark the words of the royal Psalmist, Jehovah emittit nives sicut
lanam, pruinam sicut cineres dispergit, de^icit gelu tanquam frusta; coram
frigore ejus quis con^istat? Emittens verbum liquefacit ista, simul ac efflat
ventum suum, effluunt aquae. God sends forth the snow as wool, and
scatters the frost like ashes, casts out the ice like as gobbits; who is
able to withstand his cold? He sending forth his word liquefieth all these
northern effects. So soon as he blows or breaths forth his wind, the waters
do flow again; that is, the snow, frost, and ice do melt, and are turned into
water. Out of which words we may observe many notable things, namely, first,
that God in his hidden or latent property, does by his essential action of
cold, contract unto the center those things, which were before dilated toward
the circumference. Secondly, that the property of cold is attributed or
ascribed unto God, in his northern action, and therefore it is said, Who is
able to resist his cold? For which reason it is evident, that it is an
essential virtue in the divine puissance. Thirdly, That it must be the act of
unity in his dark, hidden, and privative property, both because it darkeneth
things that are diaphan, transparent, and light; and then because it depriveth
of life and motion, that which did act, move, and live, through essential
heat. And lastly, because it is an utter enemy unto the action of heat, which
at tends on the revealed, emanating, and vivifying divinity. Fourthly, that
the effects of cold are undone by the act of the revealed nature of God, which
is the word; for the Text says, He sends out his word, and resolves or
melts all these, namely, the snow frost, and ice. Fifthly, that all this is
effected by one and the same spirit in essence, but of diverse and opposite
conditions, to perform the will of the Father which sends it forth. Again,
that the cold property of the wind, is the essential depriving virtue, or
stupifying and contracting act of God, it appears by this of Job. Job. 37.9
10.
Deus fortis edit glac^em flatu suo, flante Deo concrescit gelu: The strong God
brings forth the ice by his breath; God blowing, the ice is ingendered. I
conclude therefore, that cold is the essential act of the divine puissance, or
eternal sapience, shrowding it self in its mantle of darkness, and therefore
does manifest the divine volunty in that estate of his, by the effects, namely,
in that it draws from the circumference unto the center, and therefore is the
occasion of congregating of things, as well hetero-as homo-geniall, and by
consequence, the only essential agent or efficient cause of inspissation,
contraction, constriction, fixation, immobility, ponderosity, rest,
obteneration or darkness, of mortification, privation, stupefaction, and such
like.

In the contrary divine property, namely, in this spirit's patent, manifest,
and positive nature, or, as he is termed, light Aleph, wherein he moves or
sends out his emanation from the center toward the circumference, and
revealing himself upon the dark face of the Abyss, makes the invisible non
Ens or potentiall Nihil, to appear in Act, being first animated by his bright
presence in the form of waters. He is said by the Wiseman to be omnibus
mobilibus mobilior, ubique penetrans seu attingens propter munditiam ejus: The
most agile and movable of all movable things, Sap. 7.24.
piercing through all things, by reason of his purity. So that as the other
privative or Northern property, did produce rest and vacancy from operation, by
attraction or contraction from the circumference unto the center; so in this
his positive or Southern and Orient property, by dilating himself* or sending
out his active beam, brightness or emanation, from the center toward the
circumference, he does beget and procreate motion, being accompanied by the
essential Act of Heat or calidity, which operateth continually upon the
effects of cold, in resisting, dissolving, and destroying of them. So that this
formal Champion of Light, namely Heat, warreth perpetually against the cold
guardian of Darkness: For the one can have no dominion in the Air, until the
other by little and little be exiled. And therefore as the Light principle,
with all his branches, is said to be the Father of posi^ion, act, information,
plenitude, motion, life, health, and Heat: So also does Heat operate according
unto the nature of his restless and ever operating Father, which is Light, to
destroy the effects of darkness and cold, as we see in the nature of the hot
winds, namely that of the South, and East or Orient: For as the Northern cold
wind does congregate, contract, harden, thicken or condense, make ponderous,
fix, immovable and opake, the air; changing it by inspissation into the nature
of more ponderous Elements: So contrariwise, the said hot winds or spirits, do
dissipate, dilate, mollify, rarify, and make thin and light, volatile, movable,
and transparent, what the cold winds did so change and alter, and all this is
effected by the Act spagerick or separative Act of God's Spirit or Word. And
therefore the Prophet said in the Text, mentioned before: Emittens verbum suum
liquefacit ista, Psalm. 147.4.
simul ac effla^ ventum suum effluunt aquae: God sending forth his Word, that
is, causing his bright virtue to shine forth, he did undo or melt the Snow,
Frost, and Ice, which God in his hidden or contractive property had caused, and
that under the form of an Angelical wind: And therefore it is said, So soon as
he blows forth his breath or wind, the waters flow: that is to say, the Snow
is melted, and of a fix and opake substance, becomes movable, lively, fluent
and diaphan or transparent. So also the heat of the Easterly wind destroys
and dissipateth the watery effects of the Westerly wind, and therefore the
Prophet says, Postquam veniente Euro, Hos. 13.15.
vento IEHOVAE e deserto, exaruerit scaturigo ejus and siccatus fuerit fons
ejus: Afterward by the Easterly wind of the Lord, coming from the desert, his
spring withered, and his Fountain was dried up. As if he had said, the water
was changed by the heat of that wind into Air by rarefaction or subtiliation.
Thus have you understood how these two opposite Virtues, namely Cold and Heat do
spring from one and the same Spirit in radical essence, by which it operateth
actually and essentially by a double property: Forasmuch as they produce in the
Catholic Element of the sublunary world, opposite effects, to effect the will
of the Creator in the Air, and upon the Earth and Seas. Now I will speak a
word or two of the Procreation or Generation of such passive Natures, as are
brought forth by the mutual action and opposition of the two foresaid
essential Virtues, which do spring and have their root or beginning, either in
the Divine Nature's Nolunty and privative existence, or Volunty and positive
emanation.

These passive qualities do essentially depend upon the former, and do no
otherwise belong unto them, then the female or passive do unto the male or
active. And first I will tell you my mind touching the birth of Humidity, and
afterward I will come to speak of Siccity. We must imagine, that when there was
no formal Light to inact the deformed Abyss or Chaos, and consequently no
Heat to act and make a division of Light from Darkness; then all the dark Chaos
was inclining unto drouth and wet, congealed with cold: For cold has an
infinite power and dominion, where Heat is absent, as we see about the Northen
Pole, all the waters are frozen into a dry and cold clod or heap, by reason of
the absence of the Sun's heat. In like manner where the Sun, or burning
Easterly wind, does send forth directly their spiracles of Heat, there Cold is
banished, and the Earth is turned into a dry, thirsty, and spongy mass. Even
so and after the like pattern, are those; or rather these after those patterns:
For the Chaos was a confused, a cold and a dry heap, until the Light did
appear, and began to operate. Also the Light of it self, as it was considered
without any action upon the passive mass, was of a fiery condition, that is to
say, heat and drouth did only appear in it: it follows therefore; that, as
cold in effect is nothing else but the act of the divine puissance made potent
and evident by the absence of Heat: So also is drouth or dryness nothing else
but an apparent passive nature, evermore accompanying the two foresaid active
powers in their absolute intention, where moisture is totally absent. Now
moisture is as it were a mongrell, begotten between the two opposite actives,
which is proved thus. The North wind by his dominion turns the Air into
Snow, Hail, Ice or Frost, that is, into a cold and dry Substance. But when the
Southerly or Easterly wind, does begin to have dominion, then their blasts do
penetrate, by little and little, the said dry masses or substances, and undoeth
them, and coverteth them into a moist or humid nature, according unto the tenor
of those forementioned words of David: So soon (says he) as he blows forth
his wind, the waters flow. So soon as he sends forth his Word, they are
liquefied. So that moisture is nothing else but a mixtion of heat and cold, in
one solid Substance, which is fluxible in potentia, and then by little and
little does the cold and drouth depart, and become faint, according as the
power of the wind is more or less vigorous in Heat. For thus much we must
observe, that as cold does make immobil and fix; So it is an evident sign,
that the Southern or Eastern Heat has taken possession of the Mass, when by
their action it begins to moysten, to revive and move again: forasmuch as
nothing does effect that function but Heat. In the very same manner also, the
increated and all-creating Spirit of Light, moving upon the face of the dark
abyss, did operate in it, and made the congealed Mass to relent, and then it
was called by Moses, waters; and by Hermes, humida natura, or the humid nature.
And so they continue unto this day, being altered from one nature unto another,
according unto the will of God, which he effects by his Ministers, the
Angelical winds, causing the Spiritual waters to change, and wheel about from
one nature into another. And we must observe in these changes, that even the
visible waters, were first made and derived from the invisible waters,
according unto St. Paul's doctrine before mentioned: For Heaven was before the
Sea and Earth, which were as it were the feces, dregs, or grosser part of the
catholic Sublunary Element.

An ocular Demonstration, confirming the Divine properties or Virtues
abovementioned.
Before we proceed unto our ocular demonstration, which shall be made in and by
our Experimental instrument, we must consider in the first place, that the
Catholic Air or Sublunary Heaven, is the subtiler and more spiritual portion
of those waters, which are under the Firmament, of which division Moses makes
mention, and therefore every particular thereof does correspond unto the whole,
and consequently the air included in the glass of the Instrument, is of the
same nature, as is that of the whole Catholic Air; and therefore by reason of
their continuity, as the excluded whole fares, so also does the included part.
Again, as the Spirit which walked upon the waters did animate, vivify, inform,
and dilate them giving them motion: So also by his absence, or by hiding its
act or contracting its emanating beams into it self, the waters are also
contracted, condensed and darkened, as it appears by the Northern wind's
property, which proceeds from the privative or contractive action of this
Spirit. But as the waters do by their existence fill the vaulted cavity of the
world: So also does the all-informing Spirit fill every corner of them,
insomuch as being it operateth all in all, but in a diversity of property, (and
therefore it is termed multiformis Sapientia); so sometimes it operateth in its
privative property in these lower waters, as is already told you, namely when
it blows from the North and West, and sometimes in his positive nature; as
when it breaths from the South or East. In the first, by his cold action he
contracteth from the circumference unto the center, as is said; by the last,
namely by his hot property, he dilateth from the center to the circumference.
Seeing then that it is water, that is the Catholic passive, out of the which,
as being the common Subject of all things, the shape of the whole world, and
every thing therein, was and is carved out and fashioned, as St. Peter tells
us and that the eternal creating and all-inacting Spirit of the Lord, is the
universal acto^, which moves all in all, in the waters, as Moses does
intimate unto us, and that in and by an infinity of Organs, as Angels, Sun,
Moon, Stars, Winds, fire, etc. as in many places of Scripture we find it, it
must needs follow, that he is the agent, as well in the contraction and
dilatation generally, without the Glass, as particularly within the Glass.
Wherefore as the Sun, the hot winds, the fire, or natural heat of man's body,
have their dilative property from his emanating and inacting virtue, and do
alter by it the cold air, the winds, and water from his privative disposition:
So it follows, that as well the dilatation of the air in the Glass, as
contraction, is the immediate act of this Spirit's positive or privative
property; for when this Spirit blows from the North or West, the air is
contracted more or less into a narrower room within the Glass, and that is
proved thus, namely, because the water is drawn up higher into the neck of the
Glass, lest a corporal vacuity should be admitted in nature. And again, it is
most apparent, that the air in the Glass is by so much the more contracted,
by how much the Northern cold has dominion in the outward air, because it is
gathered into a more strait place o^ passage, then it was before the water was
elevated up. On the other side, if the hot winds, or Summer Sun, do inflame the
external air, then the included air will also dilate it self, and in its
dilation require a larger space. That the air is so dilated by heat, it is
plainly demonstrated, in that the water is struck down by so many degrees lower
than it was. Again, if one put his hand on the top of the ball of the Glass,
the water will sink, for the air will forthwith be dilated. Now that the
spirit of life, which gives this heat unto Man or Beast, is from this eternal
Spirit, which (as the Apostle says) does vivifie all things, Scriptures do in
many places, above and hereafter mentioned, confirm. Again, the Prophet calls
this one Spirit from the four winds, to breathe into the dead carcases that
they might live again. Ezekiel. 37.9.
Thus you see it evidently confirmed by an ocular demonstration, that cold does
contract, inspissate, and make gross the included air, which is argued by the
drawing up of the water, and straitning the air. And again, that heat does
dilate and dissipate, by the enlargement of the air in hot weather, or by
laying of the hand on the bolts head, which is made evident by the beating down
of the waters.

Note (I beseech you), ye that will not be over-partiall on the Peripateticks
behalfes, the two notable errors of the Aristotelians: whereof the first is
manifested, in that they hold for a Maxim, that calidum does congregare
homogenea, heat does congregate and gather together things of one nature. Now
you see it here ocularly demonstrated, that heat does operate the contrary; for
it dissipateth and disperseth the air, which is of homogeneall parts, and
therefore it does not congregate it: But it is cold that does congregate,
compact, and gather homogeneall things together, as well as heterogeneall. For
you see, in our Instrument, that it contracts and gathers together the air,
yea, and water, in a straiter and narrower place. And therefore their assertion
also is not ^ound, when they say, that frigidum does only congregare
heterogenea.

The other of their palpable errors is also described by this ocular
experiment, for whereas they say, that the Sun, stars, and Fire, yea, and all
heat whatsoever, does attract and draw unto it the vapors and humidity of the
earth, waters, etc. we find the contrary by this our experimental Glass; for
in only laying the warm hand upon the Glass, the air dilates it self
immediately, and is so far from being attracted by the heat, that contrariwise
it flies away from the hand: And that this is so, it appears by the striking
down or precipitation of the water, as is said. Thus have we sufficiently
mentioned, in this present Book, the estate of the first and second Principles
of all things, and that but in brief terms; because my purpose is, to touch
them with a more large and copious style, in the first Book of my
Sympatheticall and Antipatheticall History.

I will now proceed unto the next Book, wherein I purpose to handle the mystery
of Rarefaction and Condensation, with the manner of the variety in the heavenly
Fabric, and the rotation of one catholic sublunary Element into a fourfold
nature or existence. And in the last place, I will conclude with the radical
efficient cause of Creation, Generation, Corruption, and Resurrection.

The fourth BOOK.
The Argument of this Book.
Herein is expressed the universal mystery of Rarefaction and Condensation;
where also it is proved, that by them the World was made, the Heavens
established in due order, and the catholic Element altered and changed after a
quadruple manner and condition.

CHAP. I.
Herein first, the common or catholic subject of Condensation and Rarefaction
is once again recited or repeated, as also the two essential opposite
properties or virtues, which are derived from the eternal Principle, in his
privative and positive nature, are proved to be the immediate causes of both
those alterations, in the general Element of Waters.

I Have made it (as I imagine) most plain and evident unto your understandings,
as well by the testimony of the antique Philosophy, and infallible wisdom of
holy Writ, as by ocular demonstration, that the common, or universal matter
and subject of all things, was the Waters, which were inacted and created by
the bright Spirit of the Lord, before all things: Which being so, and for that
all Condensation and Rarefaction do regard a subject or material substance,
wherein it should be performed or effected, it follows therefore, that the
only matter which does endure or suffer the act of either of them, must be
water, or a humid and moist nature, being it is the only substantial stuff,
which fills all the vast cavity of the world, and consequently the material
existence, of which both Heaven and Earth, and all things therein, are framed,
and were originally shaped out. This is therefore that main subject of
Condensation and Rarefaction, by the means whereof, all things in this world
are made to differ from one another, and are disposed and ordered by God,
according to weight, number, and measure, in their proper rancks and places;
that is, they are placed in a higher or lower region, according unto that
dignity, which the catholic or eternal Actor has bestowed upon them in their
creation. The common matter therefore of incrassation and subtiliation being
thus made manifest, we are to find out the universal actor or operator in
this work. And I did signify unto you before, that it was the sacred emanation
of that divine splendor, which did operate from all beginnings, and does at
this present operate, and shall hereafter work all that which hereafter shall
be effected, in the heavens above, and the earth beneath; which assertion of
mine accords well with this axiom of the Apostle, oftentimes, and that not
without a just occasion, 1 Cor. 12.6. Psalm. 104.25. Wisd. 8.5. Heb. 1.3. 2 Pet.
3.5. Ephesians. 4.10. Col. 3.11. Wisd. 7.24.
repeated by me, Deus operatur omnia in omnibus, God works all in all. And
David, In sapientia omnia fecisti, Thou have made all things in thy wisdom. And
Solomon, Sapientia operatur omnia, Wisdom works all things. And the Apostle
in another place, Christus portat omnia verbo virtutis suae, Christ bears all
things by the word of his virtue. And St. Peter, The heavens were of old, and
the earth of waters and by waters, consisting by the word. Again, St. Paul
says, that Christ is in all, and fills all. And in another place, Christus
omnia est, and in omnibus; Christ is all, and in all. Now this holy spirit of
wisdom is said to be, omnibus mobilibus mobilior, more swift and movable than
any movable thing. And therefore he must needs act all in all, according unto
his will and pleasure. Again, when he is pleased to withdraw his actual beams
within himself, he seems to rest, and the act of the creature does cease, and
then death does ensue, namely, cessation from the activity of life. Now being
he is the most agil and moovable of all things, the virtue of heat does
evermore accompany the motions of his light, yea, and are essentially united
unto the actor: even as we see in the Sun, (which Sydrach the wiseman
compares with Divinity, saying, that the body is likened unto the Father, the
the beams or emanation unto the Sun, and the active heat which issues from
them both unto the Spirit) that the beam is continuate unto the body of the
Sun, as the emanation from the divine fountain, is one individual essence with
the fountain of eternal light; and the virtue issuing from the Sun and his
beams, is in like manner unseparable in essence from the other two; even as we
find, that the holy Spirit which is emitted from Father and Son, is one in
essence with them both. For this reason therefore, the divine Philosopher
Hermes says, Men's ab essentia Dei nequaquam divisa, Pim. 12.
sed illi potius eo modo connexa, quo solis corpori lumen; The mental beam is
not at all divided from the essence of God, but rather joined and knit unto him
after the same manner, that the light is continuated unto the Sun. Whereupon it
is evident, that the virtue of heat is essential unto light, as the act of
motion is never absent from the emanating brightness. I conclude therefore,
that Rarefaction is nothing else, but the dilating of water by heat, which was
first contracted by cold; and Condensation, on the other side, is a
contraction, or sucking and drawing together of those watery parts, which were
dilated or dispersed by heat: So that the subject of both these actions is
water, and the fountain, as well of the privative as positive agent, is the
Nolunty or Volunty, that is to say, the negative or affirmative will of that
one eternal Unity, who is that all-informing and operating Spirit, which
acts and accomplisheth his pleasure in all and over all, by his diverse
organs, as well angelical as celestial and elementary: which, according unto
their diversity in disposition, are moved by this internal act, to operate in
this world the will of the Creator, both positively and privatively, as shall
be told you in the Chapter following.

CHAP. II.
How this Divine spirit or Ruach Elohim being but one in Essence, works both
by his Angelical, and Astrall organs in this sublunary world, after a
fourfold manner.

THe Eternal spirit of wisdom, who is the initiall principle of all things;
and in whom and by whom, Colos. 1.16.
(as the Apostle teaches us) the Angels, Thrones, potestates and dominations
were Created, does operate by his Angelical Organs of a contrary fortitude, in
the Catholic Element of the lower waters; both the effect of Condensation, and
that of Rarefaction. And to verify this out of the holy Bible's, testimony, we
read first, that this one spirit is the arch- Lord and Prince of the 4. winds,
or else the Prophet by the commandment of God would not have said; Come O
spirit from the 4. winds and make these dead Carcasses to live again. Ezekiel.
37.9.
Now that this one spirit works in, and by spiritual and Angelical Organs,
in the execution which is effected by the property of the 4. winds, it is
proved out of the Apocalypse, where we find these words: I saw 4. Angels stand
on the 4. Corners of the Earth holding the 4. winds of the Earth, Apoc. 7.1.
that they should not blow on the Earth neither on the Sea, etc. By which it is
evident that these Angelical Presidents over the 4. winds were the Ministers
and Organs by and in the which the spirits or blasts of the winds were emitted
or retained according unto the will of that eternal spirit, which guides them
when and where he list: But we find by daily observation that the essential
virtue in the Northern spirit is cold, and therefore contractive or attractive
from the circumference unto the center, and by consequence a causer of
congelation and condensation. By this kind of Angelical virtue, the divine
spirit does work his privative effects, and acts of Inspissation and fixation
in the sublunary Element, causing terrestrial and earthly effects. But
contrariwise, we find that by and in the Southern and Easterly Angelical
spirits, the all-Creating and operating power does cause Rarefaction and
Subtiliation in the said inferior waters, through their essential action
which is heat. And for this cause the said hot winds do undo by rarefaction
all that which the cold Northern winds did effect by congelation. Hence
therefore it comes, that of this potent Angel (who is said by the wise
Cabalists to be the President and Governor of the Celestial Sun, which some
term Michael quasi Quis sicut Deus, of whom we will speak hereafter, also
touching his Angelical organs in the 4. Corners of the earth, Mat. 24.
by which he uses to do his will) it is said, The son of man will send out
his Angels from the four winds of heaven: and moreover, we shall find in the
place before mentioned, that this imperial Angel did rise from the Easterly
angle of the world, and did command the foresaid fowr Angels which had dominion
over the four winds, as vassals unto his will. For the Text has it; Apoc. 7.2.
And I saw another Angel come up from the East, and cried with a loud voice
unto the 4. Angels unto whom power was given, etc. Hurt not the earth, neither
the seas, nor the trees till I have sealed, etc. Whereby it is apparent that
the 4. Governors of the winds are subject unto that great Angel, who is the
powerful and potent Intelligence which moves and rules not only the Sun but
sustaineth all things by virtue of this word; and this Almighty Angel is
esteemed by some to be the same mentioned in the first Chapter of the Apocal.
Who said, I am Alpha and Omega. Apoc. 1.
Now that the Sun by virtue of this omnipotent Spirit, whose immediate
angelical organ or instrument the Angel Michael is, does govern the airy
spirit, both of the lower and upper world, the wise Solomon does seem to
acknowledge, where he says, Ecclus. 1.3.
Sol lustrans cuncta, in circuitu pergit spiritus; The sun illustrating all
things, the air or spirit moves about. For this reason also, the Philosophers
have called the winds Titanei filii, the sons of Titan, or of the celestial
Sun. It appears therefore, that the increated spirit, which supereminently
moves in the angelical creature, Michael, (and therefore El, or Deus fortis
is annexed unto it) is that selfsame Princely Spirit specified by the Prophet
Ezekiel, (as is already proved) who dwells in the great Angel, who rising up
from the East, commanded the 4. governors of the winds, with their legions:
whereby it is manifest, that they have all their act and power from it, and are
ordained to be employed only at his will, either to effect privation or
position, and consequently to produce condensation or rarefaction in the world,
at his pleasure; namely, position and information by his light; and heat, and
privation or deformation by his dark and cold property. And hereupon the kingly
Prophet speaks thus, Psalm. 103.20.
Angeli Dei validissimi robore, efficientes verbum ejus, auscultantes voci
ejus, ministri ejus facientes placitum. The strong Angels of God which do
execute his word, and hearken unto his voice, are his m^nisters to perform his
will. And again, Qui facis angelos tuos ventos, et ministros tuos ignem
urentem; Who make thy angels winds or spirits, (for (...) Ruach signifies,
Ventus, Spiritus, Flatus) and thy ministers flames of fire. Whereby it is
evident, that the eternal Breath is that which animateth the Angels; the
Angels give life and vigor, first, unto the stars, and then unto the winds;
the winds first inform the elements, or rather alter the catholic sublunary
element into diverse natures, which are termed Elements; and then by the
mixtion of diverse windy forms in that one element, they do produce
meteorologicall compositions, of diverse natures, according unto the diversity
of the windy forms which alter it. But that I may the more pertinently
discourse upon these businesses, and withal discuss many difficulties and
scruples, which have not a little troubled the Philosophers and Theosophers of
our age, touching the principle tabernacle of this all-acting and creating
Spirit in the world; Before I pass any further in this my story of
Condensation and Rarefaction, I will express mine opinion touching that point
at large: because the enucleation of it will be very pertinent and necessary,
for the opening of this main business, forasmuch as in it, not only the
world's creation, but also the imperial government of the worlds Spirit, and
the formal manner of production of Meteors, does consist.

CHAP. III.
What the cavills of this our age has been, touching the seat of the
all-creating and universal inacting Spirit in this world. And herein also it
is proved, that Jerome's translation upon this Text of David, [Posuit
tabernaculum suum in sole, God put his tabernacle in the sun] is according unto
the true sense of Scriptures. And lastly, the reason of the error in our
latter Translations, is herein, according unto the Author's capacity, expressed.

I Confess, there has been a great controversy, whether Jerome, or
Tremellius, or Pagn^ne, and some others, have erred in their translation of the
forementioned Hebrew Text; for Jerome being of greater antiquity, howsoever he
found the nature of the Hebrew which he translated, Psalm. 18.5.
interprets the first verse of the nineteenth Psalm of David, Posuit Deus
tabernaculum suum in sole, God has put his tabernacle in the sun; Pagnine
making use of the same Text, but perchance corrupted and altered from the
Original copy, and therefore construeth the Hebrew thus: In coelis posuit Soli
tabernaculum: He made for the Sun a tabernacle in the heavens. And Tremellius
expounds it: Soli disposuit tentorium in iis: He made the heavens a pavillion
for the Sun. Verily if we consider all things rightly, we must imagine that
either the Text must be altered and corrupted from that Original copy, which
St. Jerome had, or else the reverend Jerome's worth must of necessity be called
into question, for so gross a mistaking. Touching the petson; surely the whole
Christian Church in his days, would not have made election of a man of mean
skill in the Hebrew language, to undergo a task of such importancy, being for
the main good of the whole Christian Church, as was the translation of the
Bible out of Hebrew into Latin. It would not (I say) have relied upon a man of
small cunning, either in the Hebrew language or mysteries of divinity, to judge
of the likelihood or coherence of the Scripture's Harmony; and therefore the
ability of the person, unto whose charge so great a business was committed, and
consequently the fruits of his labors could no way be undervalued, being
compared unto either Pagnine or Tremellius. Again, that he was held for a
person of holy conversation, the title of Saint, which is attributed unto him,
does confirm and argue. Besides all this, that he had by many degrees a deeper
insight into the mystery of the Bible, and a profounder reach into the nature
of the divine wisdom, then any Interpretour of the Bible, which ever was, and
much more then those of later days; John Reucline, in his third Book of the
Cabalistcall Art seems to verify in these words, Cum Hieronymias librum
Jetzira multum, Reucl. lib. 3. de Art Cabal.
and saepe, nocturna versaret manu atque diurna, venisse ad eum filia vocis
dicitur, qua juberet illum tribus annis volumini eidem insudare, etc. Quo
facto, se ab ipso Deo virtutes and potestates Alphabetorum et Elementariarum
commutationum asserebat reperisse: Nam dispositionem conjugationis de libro
creationis ante noverat. Inde ad posteros Alphabeticaria haec cabula, id est
receptio, transmigravit, per quam Arcana divinorum maxima panduntur: When Jerome
had often turned over the Book of Jetzira or of the Creation with a nocturnall
and diurnall hand; It is reported that the daughter of the voice came unto him,
which commanded him to take pains in the said Volume for three years space;
which when he had effected, he said that he was taught by God, the virtues and
powers of the Alphabets, and Elementary commutations: For he had known the
disposition of the conjugation out of the book of Creation before. And hereupon
did this Alphabetary caball or reception spring, by the which he did bewray or
disclose the great mystery of divine things, etc. Which if he meant of this
Jerome, as by many of the learned it is imagined; you will not deny but he was
deeply seen in the profound and arcane meaning of the Scriptures, and therefore
he was a man who should not lightly be so deceived or deluded in his
Interpretation. Again, no man can deny but that the Pope and whole Christian
Clergy did assist him in this business, with all the antique books or
manuscripts, which might direct him into the true way or sense of
interpretation; so that he wanted not the consent of antique Authority, but
could discern between the true and corrupt Text in his interpretation, and
therefore that we may neither accuse the later interpreters for their
exposition, nor derogate from St. Jerome's labors, which deserve an everlasting
monument, we must rather impute the error unto the corruption or alteration of
the Hebrew Text, being that the whole harmony of the Scriptures, and main
subject of the Psalm in which it is recited, do tend and incline rather unto
the construction of St. Jerome, as I will particularly prove and express unto
you by these Arguments following. Whereof the first is taken from the main
Subject of the Chapter, wherein these words Posuit tabernaculum suum in sole
are mentioned, as also from other Testimonies of holy Scriptures. Next from the
mystical and cabalisticall exposition of the Hebrew word of the Sun. Then from
the resolution of the ancient Theologians with other circumstances belonging
unto them. Fourthly, from an Astonomicall observation, and the dignity and
excellency of the solar creature. Fifthly, from an Arithmeticall consideration.
Sixthly, from the point and circle in Geometry. Seventhly, from the consonant of
the greatest perfection in Music or harmony. Eighthly from a Physical or
natural regard. And lastly, by the asseverations of the wisest and divinest
Philosophers, which accord exactly with the Symphony of Scriptures. Of each of
those therefore in their order.

As for the first Argument, it is evident that the main Subject of this Psalm,
does touch the revelation of Divinity or God in his celestial creatures, and
therefore it must as well be in this Psalm intended, that the divine Spirit
does plentifully, and that essentially inhabit this illustrious palace of the
heavenly Sun, as there it is related that the heavens are full of his presence.
But the same Psalm begins thus, Psalm. 19.1.
The heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament the works of his
hands, etc. Where he expresses that the glory of the Creator which is in the
creature does reveal the Creator in the creature; but where the glory is
present, the essence is not absent: And thereupon it follows justly, that
this Creator which has filled the Sun of Heaven, with his glory and beauteous
influence of essential virtue and light, has revealed himself unto all the
world, out of his Sunny tabernacle egregiously and perspicuously, as by the
Physical and natural effects it shall be declared hereafter in the eighth
rank. Again, the Son of Syrach confirms this more plainly where he says:
Ecclus. 42.16.
Sol illuminans per omnia respexit; and gloria Domini plenum est opus ejus: The
Sun shining forth looks over all, and it is a work that is full of the glory
of the Lord: that is to say, of essential Divinity, not that it is included in
it, but that also it is exclusively in and over all, no otherwise then the
Spirit of man's blood is said to have his principal tabernacle in the Heart,
and yet is in all and every part of the Spirit and body. Again, it appears by
these words, that the Eternal Spirit of Wisdom did elect the celestial Sun,
as a pure vessel or Subject, to operate and act in, for the vivification and
animation of every creature. Ecclus. 24.5.
And therefore she, in her own person, says, Ex ore Altissimi prodii
primogenita; in coelis feci ut oriretur lumen indeficiens: I came out of the
mouth of the Almighty, being the first b^gotten; I made or caused a
never-fading light to rise in the heavens. Whereby this catholic Agent does
show that the Sun does move in and by it, Ecclus. 43.5.
The great Lord (says the text in another place) made the Sun, and by his
Commandments he causes it to run hastily, etc. As if he had said by the
Divine Word the Sun did move. But this will be better proved hereafter.

Touching the second, which depends on the cabalisticall enucleation of the
Hebrew word, for the Latin word Sol or the Sun in English, is written thus in
Hebrew (...) where we have two (...) or Shins, which the Cabalists do make the
Symbolicall character of fire and light, and (...) Mem in the middle, which
imports a watery corpulency, for Mem is the SYmbolicall expression of the
waters; as if we should say, that the humid nature of the heavens being
contracted in their center, is illuminated with a double proportion of the
divine emanation streaming down, or flowing from the Sephiroth or Cabalisticall
numeration, called Tiphereth or pulchritude and beauty. Whereby it is argued,
that this heavenly mass is made a Tabernacle for the Spiritual Sun or
beauteous and divine Spirit of Light, not that it includes it, as is said
before, but, as the Scriptures say, that the holy Spirit was in the carnal
Christ abundantly, and yet it was not denied for all that to fill the earth and
heavens.

Sap. 1. Resol. Theolog. Tract. 2. Pars 2. Port. 2. q.
Concerning the third: The Theologians do affirm, that the Light which was
expansed over all the heavens, and did operate in place of the Sun, for the
first three days space, was at the fourth day congregated into the body of the
Sun. But this Light which was so dispersed, was the immediate act of that
Eternal Spirit which was carried on the waters; and therefore that Light which
is in the Sun, does participate with divinity, as shall be more evidently
expressed in the eighth and last Argument.

By the fourth, which is proved out of the Celestial or Astronomicall dignity
(which the Sun represents) it is most evident that it comprehends in his
mansion divinity, being that by how much the more perfection any thing has in
it self, and excels the rest in glory, by so much the more it approaches
unto divinity. For as much as Hermes does rightly tell us, (not disagreeing in
that from our Savior Christ his doctrine) that Bonum and perfectum is only
God. Now the Macrocosmicall Sun's dignity and perfection is easily to be
discerned, in that this Royal Phoebus does sit in his chariot, even in the
center or middle of the heavens, glittering with his golden hair, as the sole
visible Emperor, holding the royal Scepter and government of the world, in
whom all the virtue of the celestial bodies do consist, as Jamblicus, and many
other learned personages have confirmed. And Proclus averreth, that all the
powers of the stars are congregated and collected into one at the aspect of
the Sun, the which are afterward disseminated by the fiery spiracle of the said
Sun upon the Earth. Does not the Wiseman also by reason of the glory of this
heavenly vessel or organ, compare the brightness of the in-created Spirit or
fiery emanation of divinity with it, by reason of his excellency in brightness?
Wisd. 7.24. Ecclus. 42.16.
And again, is it not proved before, by the Son of Syrach, that the Fabric of
the Sun is full of the glory of the Lord? But I will say more unto this point,
in the eighth and last Argument.

The fifth shows, how by an Arithmeticall regard, Divinity must needs dwell
in the Sun; namely, as it is only one unity, from which all the multitude of
the stars in heaven do derive and draw their formal essence, no otherwise
than from the Arithmeticall unity, all numbers whatsoever are produced; for the
number two has but the form of one and the same unity, twice conceived, and
then one unity more makes three, and so in infinitum. In the very like manner
as one candle lights another, and a third, and so proceeds in infinitum.
Even so, this one heavenly Candle informs with light and beauty, all the
starry candles in heaven, and yet it reserveth still, without any detriment,
his wonted unity in perfection, power, and glory.

By the sixth Argument (which is Geometrical) in regard that the Sun is a most
bright circular body, it must needs be, that it has a centrall point unto his
circumference, in the which all his illuminating power does consist, being that
the circumference is nothing else, but a semi-diametrall dilatation of a
punctual and essential virtue, from the center unto the circumference. And
this is the meaning of that Axiom in Philosophy, In medio consistit virtus and
veritas. Now if that wonderful beauty, and clear brightness which is in the
Sun, were not extended from the center, it would not proceed a principio
interno, and then it must, like as the Moon does, require some other external
corporal illuminator; but that is proved to be otherwise, being that there is
not any body found in the world, that is equal in brightness unto it. And
this is an argument, that it has a centrall divinity, or divine virtue in it,
which like unto the soul in the center of the creature, vivifieth or acts
from the center unto the circumference thereof, and so making the superficies
of the body a fiery and bright coloratum, causes it, according unto the
infinity of its centrall agent, to extend his beamy emanation to all the limits
of the vast world. Hence is it, that God is said to be the center of all, whose
circumference is no where; that is to say, in and over all, and beyond or
without all. Neither let it seem strange unto any, that I say, the in-created
light is visible, in regard of his tabernacle which it endueth, being that
Scriptures do testify, that he is a consuming fire. And again, that the spirit
of wisdom excels the sun and stars in brightness. And again it is said, He
is attired with light as with a vestment. To conclude, he is fons and pater
luminis, and therefore there can be no light, either visible or invisible in
this world, which is not from it. Does not St. Paul seem to aver, that all
visible things were first from things that were not visible; whereby is argued,
that all visible light was first from the invisible, whose fountain is God, the
which invisible light is continued in essence unto his like in the creatures,
as shall be showed anon.

The seventh is confirmed by an observation in Music, namely, that the divine
Spirit has elected the Sun for his tabernacle, to wit, by reason of his
position in heaven. For if we consider, that God, as he is said to exist in
himself, is reputed by Scripture to be seated in the heaven of heavens; and in
another place, in the highest heavens, and yet he respects and looks down
unto the earth; In that regard we may compare him ( si sacra cum mundanis
componere fas sit) unto an unison in Harmony; for if a string of a musical
Instrument be struck open, it sounds a unity from the bridge of the
Instrument unto the nut or head: So we imagine, that a chord may be extended
from the worlds circumference, or highest heavens, unto the center or earth.
Again, if we press the chord of the Instrument just in the middle, then each
half chord being struck, will sound in a diapason unto the whole, and will
prove the center or perfection unto each end of the chord, which will then
point out, as it were, the circumference.

Now the consonant diapason is the most perfect accord of all others, and
therefore notes, that the middle betwixt the light or heaven, and the earth,
is the seat of the greatest perfection, which does correspond unto the unison
as 1 does to 2, which is in proportione dupla, in a double proportion. It
follows therefore, and by effect it appears, that the Sun is placed in this
centrall seat, which correspondeth unto the whole, as 2 does unto 1. because it
is the opinion of all Astronomers, that the Sun is placed in the middle, or
center of the heaven. Now how this perfect accord was mystically shaped out of
the divine and radical unity, or unison, which said, Fiat, and it was done, I
beseech you observe: Unity said, Fiat, and so this unison caused a divine
emanation, which made 2. and had the self-same regard unto unity, as the
diapason or perfection has unto an unison. Now this bright emanation, by the
which all things were created and framed in true harmony, elected in this world
the perfect seat of its royal regard unto all creatures, in the point of
diapason, which is ever in the middle of the unison, and therefore in the
center of the heavens. But it appears unto the eyes, that the Sun is ranked
in the middle of the seven Planets; and again, it appears by the divine glory
which shines from it, that it is a seat of divine perfection: and therefore
the Platonists have imagined, that the Solar orb or sphere is the seat of
their anima mundi, or soul of the world. Now as this royal and most consonant
Diapason, does comprehend in his capacity the other two inferior accords in
Music, namely, Diapente, and Diatessaron, (for of these two united is the
Diapason composed) it is likely, that the whole harmony of the heavens, and
consequently of the world, are put in practice in this created organ, the actor
or player whereon is the eternal Spirit, which sounds out every minute from
this his glorious Instrument, strains of life, vivification, multiplication,
pacification or preservation, unto the creatures; for this is the office of the
eternal Christ in this world, I mean, the divine Word, in the which, as the
Evangelist John testifies, is life. But of this, in the next.

Eighthly, it is proved by a physical or natural regard: For we observe, and
not we only, but the beasts themselves; nay, the very herbs and vegetable
plants of the earth, do feel, and as it were confess, that the Sun is the
chiefest treasury of vivification and multiplication in this world. Whereupon
it is apparent, that when the Sun approaches near us, the herbs and trees
which seemed as dead before, do now revive, put on their green coats, and
flourish with their blossoms and flowers: But contrariwise, when it departs on
the other side of the Aequinoctiall, they put off their flowers and green
apparel, and begin to mourn, as it were, for his departure. But, says St.
Paul, Deus vivificat omnia, God does vivifie all things. And therefore if the
Sun by his presence brings unto the world the virtue of vivification, it is
apparent, that it has this gift from the Spirit of God, which is the Spirit of
life, and being abundantly poured on it by God into this heavenly vessel, it
does effect these vivifying acts in the world, no otherwise, than the same
spirit being affluently infused on Christ, Moses, Elijah, and other Saints upon
earth, did effect wonders upon the earth, in healing, reviving from death, etc.
Does not the sacred Text also aver, that Sapientiam Deus effudit supra omnia
opera sua secundum datum suum, Eccles. 1.
God has poured out his spirit upon all his works, more or less. Why then
should any man make any scruple or question, touching the Spirit's habitation
in the Sun in abundance. This therefore is the chief subject of this Psalm of
David, to express, that the glory of God does palpably appear, out of the
creatures of heaven, yea, out of every creature the eternal Spirit does shine,
or express his glory more or less, and is, according to the gift which is
given unto him, to be discerned out of it: And thereupon Job says, Coelos
ornavit Deus Spiritu suo, Job. 26.13.
God has adorned or beautified the heavens with his Spirit. By which words it
is manifest that it is the essential spirit of God, which gives by the
abundance of his presence the luster and glory unto the Sun, which for that
reason is termed, and that not erroneously, by the Platonists, (who therein
have imitated the divine Poet Orpheus,) Oculus mundi, because that in and by it
as in a certain clear and smooth looking glass or mirror, all things are seen
and discovered: And again the philosopher Heraclitus, Si solemn e mundo
sustuleris, quid est nostrum Corpusculum, s^ desit anima? Nulla ibi
contractatur vena pulsatilis, sentiendum nullum inest judiciuns, Nullus in eo
vitalis halitus aut respiratio: If thou take away the Son out of the world,
what is our little body, if the soul be wanting; There is no beating vein or
pulse to be discerned in it, there is no judgment to be perceived in it, there
is neither breath nor respiration in it. For this reason also it is termed, Co^
caeli, the heart of heaven, because that as in the heart does exist the lively
fountain of blood which does water and humect the other members of the body.
So also it appears by effect that the virtue, vegetation, and conservation of
all things both inferior and superior, does issue and spring from the Sun,
forasmuch as it imparteth and inspireth by his light, life, and heat unto
inferior things and bestows formal light unto the superior. Now this light
is a certain simple act, which converteth unto it self all things, by a
vivificall or lively heat, which penetrateth all things, Joh. 1.4. 1 Timothy 6.13.
Act 17.25. Judeth. 16.17. Sap. 7.22. 1 Cor. 12. Sap. 7.24.
and conducteth their virtues over all, and withal disperseth and expels
away all darkness and obscurity. Whereby it is apparent, that if the life in
general be in the word, as St. John says; and if this catholic spirit of
life vivifieth all things, as St. Paul and Judith affirm; and if the spirit of
wisdom be brighter than the sun, and a simple and pure spirit, which is more
movable and active than all things, and therefore operateth all in all; and if
it penetrateth all things by reason of his purity, as Solomon says, and all
these properties are found in the solar virtue; What should dissuade man from
thinking, that the Hebrew Text was not rightly understood of Jerome, when he
interpreted it, Posuit tabernaculum suum in sole, He put his tabernacle in the
sun? Verily this was necessary for man to understand, being that unto this very
hour, there are but few that will acknowledge, that the Spirit of God does
immediately operate and work in his organ the Sun, and by the Sun; but being
rather seduced by the Ethnic learning, they will admit many subalternate
agents, or efficient causes, per se, that is, of themselves, distinguished from
the essential act of God, which is the reason of Idolatry, and worshipping of
the creature for the Creator, and neglect or ignorance of the Creator in the
creature. For although it be said by Solomon, Wisd. 16.28.
Quod solemn praevenire oportet ad benedictionem Dei, We ought to prevent the
sunrising to give thanks unto thee. And again we read, that when we pray, we
should conver our faces unto the east, or rising sun. Yet ought we to imagine,
that he teaches this doctrine for the Creator's cause, which dwells in that
bright tabernacle, and not for the tabernacle's or creature's sake. For it was
into this error that the Egyptians fell, who adoring this illuminated
creature in lieu of the Illuminator, Isai. 19.18.
did build a temple and city in the honor of the Sun. Wherefore the chariot
and horses of the sun, which the ignorant Jews had set up before th^^ gate of
Gods temple, were justly pu^led down, which distinguished not the Creator from
the creature. This error, which to this hour cleaves it self unto the
Aristotelically learned of this world, is delineated in its true characters by
that Evangelist, who did assure us, Joh. 1.4. ver. 10.
that all life is in the Word. This word or ligh^, says he, is in the world,
and the world was made by it, and the world did not know him. But as many as
did receive or acknowledge him (namely, that he made all, and was all, and in
all) were numbered among the children of God. Wherefore all true Christians
ought to understand, that he fills all, vivifieth all, sustaineth all,
operateth all in all; for without it, they cannot be esteemed the legitimate
children of God; they ought not to be so ignorant of the Creator in the
creature, being that his glory shines forth of them, and may be perceived by
them more of less, thinking that he is absent even from the most beautiful
creature of the world, who is present with all; for it is said, Ephesians. 4.10.
that he fills all, and that not virtually or accidentally, as some worldly
wisemen, by their Ethnic distinction, (distorting by that means the truth of
the Scripture) will have it but in essence, being in plain terms it is said in
one place, Christ is in all, Colos. 1.3. Wisd. 7.25. Wisd. 12.1.
and over all; in him are all things: But Christ, which is the true wisdom, is
the virtuous, or essential emanation from the Father, and therefore no
accident. In another place, The incorruptible Spirit of God is in all things;
but that Spirit which has no corruption in it, and preserves from corruption,
and gives really life, Romans 11.36.
is no accident, but a perfect essence. In another place, Of him, by him, and
in him are all things; therefore this is meant essentially, and not
accidentally. In another place, 1 Cor. 8.3.
God is all in all. And again the Apostle, Of God the Father are all things by
our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things. All which cannot be meant
otherwise, than by Gods essence, which is in and over all, because that in
himself he is only essential, and therefore no accidents can be attributed
unto him: and consequently we may conclude, that Gods Spirit is essentially in
the creatures, and for that reason we ought simply to consider him, and
acknowledge him in his works. For that person which professes himself a
Christian, and does not know this, is but a Christian in name, and consequently
vain and miserable. And this is partly confirmed by the words of St. Paul, and
partly out of those of Solomon before mentioned: The anger of God (says St.
Paul) is revealed from heaven, upon the impiety and injustice of those men,
which do deta^n the verity of God in unrighteousness; because what is known of
God is made m^nifest unto them, Romans 11.16.
for God has revealed it unto them. For the invisible things of him are
discerned of the creature of this world, by those things which are understood
by creation, as also his everlasting virtue and divinity. So that they are
inexcusable, because that when they knew God, they did not glorify him, or
give him thanks, but did fade away or vanish in their own imaginations, and
their foolish heart was darkened; and therefore in saying that they were wise,
they became fools, and changed the glory of the incorruptible God, into the
similitude of a corruptible man, and of birds, and of four-footed beasts, and
of serpents, etc. Whereby he argues, first, that God ought to be pondered and
known in his creatures, and that we ought to acknowledge and ascribe all the
glory and virtue of them unto his Spirit, or divinity in them, and not to
mistake the Creator for the creature. For he seems expressly to argue and
signify, that his everlasting virtue and divinity is in the creatures, and
that it appears out of them. For his words import that the invisible things
of him, are discerned by the things that are created, as also his everlasting
virtue and divinity. And why not? being that in the Word is and was from the
beginning life, or the vivifying Spirit, but life is in the creatures, Ergo the
Word, and by consequence the incorruptible Spirit. But Solomon confirms the
above mentioned place in this: Wisd. 13.1.
All men are vain by nature who are ignorant of God, and cannot understand him
that truly is, by such good creatures of his which they behold, nor acknowledge
the workman by the consideration of his works. Whereby he argues, that divinity
in the creature may be perceived, in and by the aspect of the creature.
Wherefore it is evident that the Prophet said rightly, when he did affirm that
the heavens did declare the Glory and Majesty of God, by the beauteous
apparition of that glorious Spirit, which did inact them, and adorn their
beauteous Eye, I mean the Sun, with such divine vivifying and illuminating
virtue, which in abundance does possess and inhabit it. And therefore I
conclude, that the Prophet said rightly, and instructingly unto the ignorant
world; that the bright Spirit of God did dwell in the Sun of heaven, as in a
Tabernacle, and did impart and distribute his gifts of form, life, vegetation,
and multiplication, unto every creature out of it. And yet I will not
acknowledge with Aristotle that Sol and homo generant hominem: That the Sun and
man do bege^^ man: but rather that the vivifying Spirit, which is potent in the
Sun, and not weak in every specific creature is only he that vivifieth all
things, sending his spiracle of natural Heat and life, by an ordinary course
out of the Sun, to help and assist the creatures to live and multiply, and yet
he is not inclusively in the Sun, but works also all in all, as well within
as without it, being that it fills all things. And this is good doctrine
which arrogateth all vivifying actions, as well immediate as mediate soly unto
him, who wholly acts, and effects all things, and consequently not unto the
created organ, in which and by which he operateth: for in doing the contrary we
shall derogate from the Creator, to ascribe that which indeed is not unto the
creature. As for the later interpretation which says: Soli posuit tentorium in
coelis: He made the Sun a pavillion or tabernacle in the heavens. What profit
(I beseech you) can that doctrine bring unto man? The first Interpretation
teaches man, that the Spirit of God is in this bright creature of heaven, and
therefore teaches us to adore the Lord, and not the palace, being that the
ignorance of the divine Spirit's being, in the beauteous creatures, has been
the occasion of infinite errors in the world. And therefore it is an
interpretation of especial moment and instruction.

The Second is a thing so trivial, that it needed no such curiosity of
expression to signify that the Sun has his seat or place in heaven. Alas,
what child knows not this by an ocular direction, without any such precept of
the Prophet? And what is this pertinent unto the Text going before, The heavens
declare the glory of God, etc. Why should he mention the Sun immediately
afterward? What? To tell us that the Sun was in heaven? A thing known unto
every man. No, but that the heaven's beauty was derived from that glorious
Spirit of God which had chiefly his abiding or dwelling in the sunny
Tabernacle, that thereby blind worldly men, might discern that it was God, in
that beauteous creature, and not the creature, which sent down so affluently
those virtuous influences and lights, which were effused out of the vessel of
the Sun; being that by the mistaking of that knowledge, so many of Gods
creatures, which he framed out after his own Image, have been seduced into
error, and allured ignorantly to adore the Sun, and other Stars, for Gods.
Which in verity are nothing of themselves. Spiritu suo ornavit coelos (says
Job), He does not say Sole, but Spiritu suo, which made the Sun its Tabernacle.
And now to our last Argument, Jo^. 26.13.
wherein I will show you, how by the assertion of certain wise Philosophers,
that exposition of Jerome seems to be confirmed. Says one, (unto whose
opinion also St. Austin does adhere,) Quaelibet res tantum sibi Dei vindicat,
quantum capax est luminis: Every thing does challenge unto it self so much of
divinity as it is capable of Light. But the Sun is the brightest creature in
the world: Ergo, it possesses abundantly the Spirit of divinity. Many
Philosophers therefore consent in this, not erring from the tenent of
Scriptures, namely that In lumine numen, in numine lumen: In Light is divinity,
and in divinity is Light. 1 John 1^. Psalm. 103.2. Deuteronomy. 9.3.
And Plato: Ne loquaris de Deo sine Lumine: Speak not of God without Light,
Does not Scriptures confirm all this, in saying that God is Light, and that
vestitur seu ^mi^tu^ est Lumine quasi vestimento: He is clothed with Light as
with a garment. Yea verily, he is said to be a consuming fire. I conclude
therefore, that Jerome has translated that place according unto the true sense,
and consequently we may gather the reason of Rarefaction and Condensation from
the presence or absence of the the Sun, and confess, after the due examination
of the case, that the only Agent of these two operations in the waters or
catholic Element, is the Eternal Spirit's presence, action and emanation, or
his absence and rest. And this is easily demonstrated by our experimental
glass: for the nearer the Sun is unto us, and the deeper we are in Summer, the
more will the air in the glass be dilated, which is manifested therefore,
because that in summertime the water is beaten down, and precipitated lowest.
Again, the further the Sun is from us, and the deeper we are in winter, the
more is the air condensed in the glass; and that is made evident by the
elevation or exaltation of water in the neck of the mattrass or glass. Neither
do we say that the whole reason of Condensation and Rarefaction does proceed
from the Spirit in the Sun only, being that the same Spirit is as well present
in this Elementary region as aethereall, and has the power and life of the
winds in his rule, by which both in the winter and summer, he exalts or
depresseth the waters in the glass, and consequently causes Condensation and
Rarefaction of the air, as well included in the Instrument as excluded; and by
that means causes a diuturnall change in the general Sublunary Waters, or
catholic Element of air, after a fourfold nature, from one condition unto
another. Which mutation or alteration of the inferior humid nature, out of one
form into an other, is commonly called Elements, as shall be expressed
hereafter. But first we will come unto the Fabric of the heavens, and show how
they were framed out by Condensation and Rarefaction: Effected by this one
Eternal Ruach Elohim, or Spirit of God.

CHAP. IV.
After what manner this Eternal Spirit or Ruach Elohim did frame out the
Heavens, and shaped or made the Stars thereof, by his Act of Condensation and
Rarefaction.

IT is the Apostle Peter's assertion that the Heavens and the Earth were of the
Wate^ and by the Waters, 2 Pet. 3.4.
by the Word of God. So that the Word, we see, is the Agent as w^ll in the
Condensation of the invisible waters, into waters that are visible, and then of
these visible waters into a visible earth. Thus was the world in general
distinguished into thicker and thinner regions, by that divine Spirit Ruach
Elohim, which was carried on the waters. And this is well argued by Hermes, in
these words, Rimand. 3.
Distinctis libratisque rebus, quae igneo Spiritu vehebantur, emicuit coelum,
septem in circulos: Things being distinguished and balanced, the which were
sustained by a fiery Spirit, the heaven did shine forth into seven circles.
Where he signifies that it was a fiery Spirit, and a little before he calls
it Splendorem Sanctum, the holy Splendour, Sap. 11.20.
which sustained and bore up every circle or Sphere of the heavens in his due
place. And hereupon the Wiseman: Omnia mensura, numeroque, and pondere,
disposuisti seu temperasti: Thou have disposed all things in measure, and
number, and weight, that is to say, in a distinct measure and proportion, in
ponderosity and levity, and in a due and convenient number, namely into seven
distinct Spheres, and an infinity of condensed bodies: For although all the
heavens be composed of air and fire, and therefore it is called Ether
quasigneus aer; yet by the rule of St. Paul, Heb. 11.3.
who teaches us, that things visible were first of things invisible, we are
instructed that both the visible bodies in heaven, and also all visible lights
were first of invisible waters, and invisible formal Light, which has its
root in God, the bright eternal Unity of all created numbers; and therefore,
as Aristotle says, that Stellae are densiores parts sui orbis. So I say, that
as the Substance of the heavens is invisible by reason of its rarity; in like
manner are the stars visible by reason of their density: For it was
Condensation that caused visibility; and Rarefafaction, which is the occasion
of invisibility. And yet for all this, it is not concluded with Aristotle, that
the stars are the denser parts of their orbs, but rather Lights which were
included in the spirit of the dark shadow of the abyss; which spirit in
separating of Light from Darkness, sored upward by virtue of the included
Light, and so according unto the proportion of that eternal formal fire,
which it retains unto this day, as his cornerstone; it is sustained and
elevated in its proper place, no otherwise then we see that the artificial
squib according unto the proportion of its artificial and fading fire, with
the ponderosity of its body, is, during the time of the gunpowders force,
raised in the air to a certain height, moving neither lower nor higher, then
the form all vigor affords it virtue, and there remains until the force of
the corruptible and wasting fire be spent; and then it falls down again: But
the Light of the star carries and raises up the spiritual body, according
unto the proportion of the mounting Light, which soreth as high as its power
and the ponderosity of the body will permit, and so it hangs perpetually at a
certain distance from the center; because the fire is of an eternal and
incorruptible nature, and will not fade as that artificial fire of the squib
does. Now as all the illuminating vigors, and animating forces or flames that
are imparted unto the universal waters, was bestowed on them by that b^ight
catholic Spirit or emanation, which was sent forth by God to be carried on the
waters, Wi^d. 7.
which (as Scripture does aver) is brighter then the Sun or Stars. So there
is none of all those Lights which are separated or divided in essence from that
glorious and glittering Spirit, whose beams were dispersed over all the waters
in the abyss, in giving of them life and being. For this reason therefore
(because each Light had a diversity in proportion of formal brightness and
measure of corpulency) it is, that one celestial body does vary in his manner
of virtue, motion, and influence from another; but because the extracted
quintessence or purer material essence of all the Chaos, with the purity of
Light, that issued from the creating Spirit, were united into an Angelical
alterity, both of those natures in the figure of one mass, sored up out of the
dark abyss into the heaven's center, where they challenged the Royal
Phoebaean Throne, and that Sphaericall mass is to this hour termed the Sun of
Heaven, which as from the created Fountain of Light enflameth and formally
enlightneth all the rest of the Stars in the heavens above, and the Element
and elementated creatures below. So that after the universal contracted Light
was effected the fourth day of the Creation, it was ordained to be that
capital Organ of life and vegetation in the starry world, which did send and
shower down his influences and fiery spiracles of life, conservation,
vegetation, and multiplication upon the sublunary earth and waters.

Thus therefore in few words, you have the reason of that Condensation and
Rarefaction, whereby both the invisible heavenly Substance, and visible
celestial bodies were made. And it seems not to disagree from the opinions
of the learned Theologians, Basil and Damascene, touching the causes of the
divine Spirit's action in Condensation and Rarefaction, before the apparition
of the Sun in the heavens: Forasmuch as they will have the daie's Rarefaction,
or clear heaven to be occasioned by an emission of Light, ordained by the
divine will or act of this Omnipotent Spirit: But they think that the night's
Condensation, and the opake or condensed body in the heavens are effected by a
contraction of Light, which was also caused by the sacred Spirit's volunty.
Thus therefore we see out of the confession of certain of the prime Fathers of
the Church, Resol. Theolog. Tract. 2. Part. 2. Port. 2. q. de oper. primi. Diei.
what was the cause of the cold condensing Night, and the hot rarifying Day,
before the Spirit was congregated into the Tabernacle or quintessentiall
substance of the Sun, which was extracted by the Spage^ick or separative action
of the divine Spirit, out of the huge deformed waters of the abyss. And
therefore this also must be the reason of Condensation and Rarefaction unto
this day: For as the Spirit in the Sun being far from us, and as it were
contracting his beams in regard of us, unto himself, or absenting himself from
our Hemisphere, so that the cold waters do incline unto the nature of their
mother Chaos, by reason whereof the night and darkness are long, and the light
and day but short and faint in heat: So also in that season the common
sublunary Element is subject to Condensation and Incr^ssation, and therefore is
constrained or contracted, into the consistence of Frosts, Snows, Hail, Ice,
and Cold showers, etc. Again, when it is near unto us, it dilateth it self,
and by his heat and presence, the cold waters become hot, and the days are
augmented and fortified or made strong in heat; and then the common sublunary
Element is apt for dilatation and subtiliation, being easy to be inflamed and
set on fire with Lightnings, coruscations, and such like. But I leave the
history of the Condensation and Subtiliation of the aethereall Spirit, to
descend unto the like acts or conditions in the sublunary Element.

CHAP. V.
How the lower waters, or catholic sublunary element, were distinguished,
ordered, and shaped out into sundry distinct spears, which are called
particular Elements, and that by the foresaid all-working Spirit, or divine
Word.

SInce that it is most certainly proved already, Look Pim. 3. pro Natura humida
ex qu^ elementa, etc.
that the universal substance of the world's machin, was made but of one only
thing, namely, of a matter that was produced out of the potentiall bowels of
the dark chaos or abyss, by the spagerick virtue of the divine Word; the which
matter Moses termed Waters, and Hermes the humid nature, Pim. 1. Genesis 1. 2
Pet. 3.6.
of the which in general (as both Moses and St. Peter aver) the heavens and
the earth were made of old, it must needs follow, that out of this catholic
mass of waters, the universal sublunary element was derived, which is
commonly termed by the name of Aer, as all that humid substance in the
celestial orb is called Ether. Now this general element is by the breath of
the divine Spirit R^ach Elohim, altered and changed from one shape unto
another; for that which is the visible waters, was made first of the air,
which is an invisible water, as again the visible water by condensation is made
earth. And this is proved, first, by the words of St. Paul, Heb. 11.3.
who says, Per fidem agnovimus quod semper ita actum sit cum mundo per Verbum,
ut ex iis quae videri non poterant fierent ea quae possunt videri: We know by
faith, that it has been ever acted with the world by the word, that those
things which can be seen, were effected or made of those things which could not
be seen. And again, Solomon says, Wisd. 11.18.
that the world was made of a matter that was not seen. But besides these
proofs, we are taught by chymicall experience, that earth is nothing else but
coagulated water; nor visible water any thing else, but invisible air, reduced
by condensation to a visibility; nor fire any thing else, but ratified air.
And, in conclusion, all the sublunary waters were in the beginning, but an
invisible, humid, or watery spirit, which we call by a common name, Air; and
consequently the catholic sublunary element was in its original, nothing else
but one air, being that heaven was made before the seas or the earth, as Moses
teaches us. And therefore by faith we must believe, according unto St. Paul's
doctrine, that all visible things, and therefore the seas and the earth, were
first made or produced out of things not visible; that is to say, aeriall or
heavenly: For it is one universal air, that fills the vast cavity or vault
of the world, which by reason of its levity, tenuity, or invisibility, is
called Heaven; as contrariwise the earth and seas are so termed, because of
their gravity, density, and visibility. Since therefore it is evident, that the
catholic sublunary air, is the main material ground and substance of that,
which the world calls elements; and that it is altered and changed from one
estate into another, by the Word or divine Spirit Ruach Elohim, I mean, by the
eternal wisdom; let us consider with our selves, how this potent Spirit does
effect in that one and the same homogeneall invisible, thin water or air, such
Protean trans-mutations, whereby there is an evident rotation made in it, out
of one nature into another, which are therefore termed distinct elements. We
must therefore consider in the first place, that this was that vivifying
Spirit, which the Prophet called from the four winds, Ezekiel. 37.9.
saying, Veni, Spiritus, a quatuor ventis and insuffla interfectos istos ut
reviviscant. And therefore this one Spirit, Ruach Elohim, was the royal
commander of the four winds, and by consequence, could contract the air by his
windy organs, and again dilate it at his pleasure; and therefore it was he, and
no other, that does animate the four winds, and agitate the Angels, that are
his under-governours of them, to alter and change the invisible air into
visible shapes, when and how be lists: Jerem. 51.16. Job. 37.21. Job. 26.8.
Job. 28.25.
And first touching his general act, in ordering the air into diverse shapes;
it is said, Deus ventos depromite thesauris. And again, Aer subito cogetur in
nubes and ventus transiens fugavit eos. Sapientia aptat pondus aeri, appendit
aquas in mensura, ligat densas nubes ut non findantur, facit pluviae statuta,
and viam fulge^ro tonitruum. God draws the winds out of his treasury. The air
is thickened into clouds, and the wind that passeth-by does drive them. By
wisdom he gives weight unto the air, hangs or ballaenceth the waters in it
by proportion and measure, binds fast the thick clouds, so that they cleave
not, gives laws unto the rain, and makes a way unto the lightnings of the
thunders. By which words we may conceive, that the invisible air is the main
subject on which the all-operating Spirit of God works, and brings forth
the forenamed visible effects, and that only by Condensation or Rarefaction,
which is insinuated, by giving weight unto the air. For by Condensation, he
converteth the invisible air into visible clouds, and then by a profounder
degree of thickening, those vaporous clouds are condensed into rain, and the
thicker and more unctuous part of the cloud is concreted into a hard stone or
earth: So that out of the invisible air, we see evidently by condensation
produced three degrees of visible substance, namely, a vaporous air, a thick
visible water, which is rain, and a dense and ponderous earth, which is the
stone called Lapis cerauneus, or Thunderbolt, engendered by the Spirit of God
in that fight which is made in the conflict, between the liquifying nature of
the fire, and congealing disposition of the cold water. Again, on the other
side, by rarefaction, the air is converted into fire, namely, into lightning;
and all these receive their several forms and changes, from the catholic
nature of the invisible air, into those shapes, in which after the alteration
they abide. So that you may by this perceive, that all that which the antique
Philosophers have termed Elements, are nothing else but a fourfold changing,
and mutation of one and the same catholic element, or humid nature, unto the
which, according as they in their changes do appear various, have diverse and
sundry names, namely, of fire, water, and earth, imposed upon them. Now the
principal organs, by the which, and in the which, this Spirit moves and
acts, by a diversity of property, in turning and changing this catholic
aeriall subject into a fourfold nature, that is to say, out of one thing into
another, are the angelical winds, which he has ordained to blow from the four
quatrers or angles of the earth, in a diverse property: For as before I told
you out of Solomon's doctrine, Wisd. 7.
that this wise spirit was one simple thing in essence, but man fold in
property or operation; so does he, being but one Spirit (for it is said, Veni
spiritus a quatuor venus) act after a fourfold manner by his fourfold
angelical winds, Ezekiel. 37.9.
in the catholic element of air; for when he blows or breaths from the
North, he contracteth the common element into an earthly body, namely, into
frost, snow, Psalm. 147.4.
hail, and ice: And therefore David says, Deo emittente sermonem suum in
terram, quam celerr^me excurrit verbum ejus qui edit nivem sicut lanam, pruinam
sicut cineres dispergit; dejicit gelu suum tanquam frusta; coram frigore eius
quis consistat? Emittens verbum suum liquefacit ista, simulac efflat ventum
s^um, effluunt aquae. God sending forth his word upon the earth, it runs
swiftly; who brings forth the snow like wool, and disperseth the frost like
ashes, and casts down his ice like lumps; who is able to resist against his
cold? Sending forth his word, he liquefieth or melts all these, so soon as he
blows forth his wind, the waters do flow forth, etc. Out of which speech we
may gather, first, that it is but one word or Spirit of God, which both by a
northern contraction does change the sublunary element into an earthly
condition, and hard and visible consistence, namely, when he blows from the
North, (and therefore says Ab Arcturo egreditur frigus, Job. 37 9.
flatu suo edit Deus fortis glaciem, and latitudinem aquarum coarctat. From the
North comes the cold, the mighty God does bring forth ice by his breath, and
coarcteth or straightneth the latitude of the waters) and also by a southern
blast, does melt and undo those terrestrial effects, which by his northern
spirit it did produce and cause.

Secondly, that the subject in which, and on the which it did operate, was the
air, which it did metamorphose and change from a soft, tender, light, volatile,
transparent, thin, and invisible substance, into a hard, rough, heavy, fix,
opake, thick, and visible mass.

Thirdly, that the word there is taken for the essential spirit of the wind in
general, and therefore it is used as well to contract the air into snow ice,
or frost, as to dilate it. Again, the Psalmist says, Angeli Dei faciunt
verbum, etc. Again, when he breaths from the south, then this general
element becomes vaporous, airy, humid, and hot, and will easily by the
concourse of the northern fortitude, though in never so small a measure, be
changed into clouds; for the southern blast is ever apt to undo the effects of
the north, and so by their mutual action, a middle nature of a westerly
condition will be produced, namely, water, which is between air and earth, as
the western position is betwixt the south and north. But the southern blast of
its own nature is hot and moist, as is the disposition of the catholic element
of air, or else the word being sent from that qua^ter, would not have melted
and undone the cold and dry effects of the north, as is said. Again, that the
breath of the Lord which comes out of the South, affects the catholic
element of air diversely, Abakkuk. 3.3.
but spiritually, this Text of Abakkuk does testify; God coming from the
south, his glory covered the heavens, and the pestilence went before his face,
etc. whereby he argues the invisible effects, namely, the corruption and
infection of the air, which this divine Spirit in his displeasure breaths
forth from the southern quarter of the world.

But when he works or operateth in his windy organs of the East, then they
imprint upon the general element a fiery character, and dilateth his substance
into the nature and disposition of the fire, and then may it pass under the
title of the Element of fire; as we have it confirmed out of many places of the
holy Text, Praecepit Dominus (says Jerome) vento calido and urenti; or, as
Tremellius has it, Jonas. 4.8.
Paravit Eurum silentem ut percuteret sol caput Jonae, adeo ut aestuaret, and
petiit animae suae ut moreretur. The Lord commanded a hot and burning wind, or
a still easterly wind, to go out, that the sun might strike upon Jonas his
head, that he might be enflamed with heat, insomuch as he did desire in his
heart to die. And again, Ventus urens seu Eurus desiccabit fructus ejus, Ezekiel.
16. Genesis 41. Amos. 4.9.
and rami ejus erant marcore contracti. A burning or Easterly wind shall dry up
his fruits, and his boughs shall be consumed and wasted. And again, Ventus
Eurus aduret spicas. And JEHOVAH says in his anger, Percussi vos in vento
urenti and in aurigine multitudinem hortorum vestrorum. Misi in vos pestem pro
ratione Aegypti. I have struck you with a burning wind, and have blasted the
multitude of your gardens. Hos. 2.18.
I have sent among you the pestilence, after the manner of that of Egypt.
Again, Postquam veniente Euro, vento IEHOV Ae a deserto ascendente exaruerit
scaturigo ejus, and siccatus fuerit fons ejus. After that by Eurus, the wind of
JEHOVAH coming and arising out of the desert, his spring and fountain was
dried up. Haga. 2.18.
And Haggaj, Percussi vos vento urente and grandine, omniae opera manuum
vestrarum. I have struck you with a burning wind, and with hail, even all the
works of your hands, etc. Whereby it appears, that at the blast of these
easterly winds, the air or catholic element becomes burning and fiery, so
that it heateth and enflameth the bodies of the creatures. On the other side,
the occidentall winds are found by experience to be opposite in nature and
condition unto these; for they convert the hot air or general element into
cold and natural visible water, being that they are the procurers of cold
raines: So that we may see by this, that the formal act in each Angel of the
four corners of the earth, Apoc. 7.1.
(of which the Apocalypse does make mention) has an essential virtue imparted
unto it from God, according unto his volunty, at the instant of the Angels
information; and therefore in that very property, does the angelical creature
act in the common element, or lower waters, in the which the creating Spirit
properly was, when he made it, so that the common element is daily informed
anew, and altered, by the formal or essential act of the angelical wind,
which blows with dominion; insomuch as if the easterly angelical wind
informs it, then it becomes a fiery element, for it heateth and dries by
super-excellency: If a southerly, it is changed into that element's nature,
which is called air; and if a westerly spirit has dominion, it is converted
into the temper and proportion of water: Lastly, the Northern blast transmuteth
it unto the consistence and disposition of earth.

By this therefore that maine doubt, which has so long troubled the
Peripateticks and hammered in their brains, and yet has never been rightly
resolved by them unto this day, may easily be undone and taken away; namely to
find out the essential form of the Elements. For by this true Philosophy we
find it to be an Angelical Spiracle, or essential blast of wind infused by
the Spirit of God diversely, into the aerie or spiritual vessel, to alter and
change, according unto his will, the humid passive nature out of one condition
into an other: Moreover the Catholic air being diversely so animated, brings
forth and informs a new, after the condition of his variety of animations, a
multiplicity, and multiformity of Meteors: As for example the Easterly element
brings forth children like it self. As are the fiery, and light Meteors, namely
Coruscations, Lightnings, Comets, and such like, according unto the nature of
such Seminary influences, as shall descend from heaven at that instant. The
Southerly, Vapors, Clouds, Lightning, with Thunders, The Westerly, Cold
raines, and as it were Snowy resolutions. The Northenly, Frost, Snow, Ice, and
Hail.

But I know that this will be objected against me, What then will you make of
the Earth, and Seas? Are not these distinct Elements which have been from the
beginning? I answer, that if they listen unto St Peter's doctrine, he teaches
that the Earth was of waters, and therefore the waters were before the Earth;
and again the heavens were made before the Earth, as Moses shows, and
therefore the Earth appears to be the Foeces or the grosser part of the lower
waters, and the visible water the grosser part of the Air. For does not the
Apostle Paul tell us in the Text before mentioned, Heb. 11.
that things visible were first of things invisib^e? The change therefore of
all things visible or invisible, are effected by the Condensing or contracting
faculty, and property in the all-acting spirit: And the reducing of them again
from a visible estate unto an invisible, is caused by the Rarifying or dilating
act of the self same Spirit in essence, but differing in property: And
therefore as air was changed into water, and water into Earth, by the degrees
of Cold; so also is Earth changed insensibly into water, and water into Air,
by the several degrees of heat: for if this were not, how is it possible that
so many waters falling from the Clouds, should not more and more augment the
Seas, and diminish the Air? or why should so much Earthen Coals, and whole
mountains of wood, that are burnt not make the earth less in Consistence, if
there were not an hourly supply, and transmutation of Air into water, and from
water into Earth; which though this divine nature does effect, secretly and
insensibly, yet by effect it is proved true. For when the the wood and Coal is
consumed, we shall find that their terrestrial Corpulency or bodily mass, is
almost resolved by fire and heat; into watery smoke and fumish air. But the
Philosophical axiom is, that every thing is resolved into his first matter or
principle; therefore it is apparent that both the water and aerie smoke, which
make up the Earthly bulk of a great Oak, or mountain of pit-Coal, was first
of the invisible Air: Again, if these were not so, the brimstone, Stones, and
dust, which, authority of the Bible and common experience teaches to descend
from heaven, being that they fall in one place or another daily, would increase
the Earth more and more. But leaving these speculative proofs, I will descend
unto such ocular demonstrations, as I have learned out of mine Experimental
glass.

The Demonstration.
We find, that from the lower region of the Calender- or Weather-glasse, unto
the summity or top of the head, there is nothing but a portion of the common
invisible element, namely, the Air within it: But we shall find even in this
little model of air, strange mutations or alterations effected, by virtue of
the four winds which blow in the open element; for when the hot Easterly wind
does blow, it dilateth and extends it self all along the neck of the Glass,
and beats down the water unto the lowest degree, by reason of its extension,
so that it approaches unto the nature of fire; for fire is said to be nothing
else, but air extremely dilated, though indeed it is the abundant presence of
the bright form which dilateth it so; but if the South Wind blows, then it
will not be so extremely dilated, but it will endue the mean nature of air,
and therefore it will draw up the water by certain degrees. But if it happen,
that the westerly wind have the sole domininion in the sublunary element, then
will the air in the Glass grow thicker, and for that reason it draws or
attracteth the water higher. For cold has a great power in the said air, whose
nature is to condense and thicken.

Lastly, if the cold northern winds do govern or dispose of this universal
sublunary element, then will the included air be contracted or coarcted into a
very strait room, which is argued in this, namely, because the colder the wind
is, the higher will the water be elevated in the Glass; and therefore it is
made manifest, that by how much the more the air is contracted, by so much the
more it is thickened, and consequently it must be made ponderous, considering
the proportion of place in which it is; for all the air which weighed thus
much in half a yard of Place, does weigh at the least even so much in 2 inches
of Space, after Contraction.

Thus you see, that in verity there is radically but one catholic sublunary
Element, though by the angelical spirit that blows from the four corners of
the heavens, it is four-foldly informed and altered, which made the Ancients to
imagine in their fantasies, four distinct elements of an equal birth and
being from all beginnings. But you see apparently by this that is said, that
this position of the Peripateticks, and other sects, is false, though that it
has gotten an universal name and dominion in this world, among men as well of
learning, as of the ignorant, who ground their sayings on the doctrine of the
learned of this world, who are corrupted and seduced from the truth, by the
Ethnic discipline. I will now express unto you in the last place of this
book, how all generation and corruption in this world is made; and that the
lowest profundity, or terminus ad quem, the motion of corruption tends, is
but unto the simple element of nature; and then begins a new generation from
that principle, being four-foldly altered, according unto the nature of the
four winds, and therefore when the dead carcasses should live again, Ezekiel. 37.9.
the Prophet said, Come from the four winds, O Spirit, and blow on these dead
bones, that is inform and vivifie their Spirit with thy breath: for bones were
made after a hard Northern and fixed manner, the humors after their proportion;
the Westerly and Southerly property, namely phlegm and blood; and lastly, the
Spirit of life came from that all-vivifying fire, which Hermes calls
Splendorem Sanctum: The holy Splendour.

To conclude, I will demonstrate the mystery of the worlds Creation, by way of
an Arithmeticall progression, after this manner.



Here we have the progression in the worlds Creation: where 1. signifies the
Unity which was before all things, which whilst it was in it self, and did not
shine forth, contained its inacting property within its potential Nolunty or
Darkness, and therefore was esteemed as nothing, in regard of man's weak
capacity, although that in it self, it is all in all. Then the rank 2. shows
the actual emanation of the in-created Light, out of the potentiall Unity, at
the presence whereof the humid nature did appear out of the dark abyss 1. 0.
in the shape of waters, so that the light and waters as active and passive, are
ranked next after Unity thus, 0. Light. 0. Water. 2.
then by the fiery Spirit of eternal love and union, those two opposite
natures, are joined together, into the nature of heaven, by a spiritual union,
or composition: the which is termed by the Platonicks, the soul of the world,
which the Philosophers have styled by the name of Quinta essentia, the
quintessence. For we must understand, that as the 4. Elements were made after
the Heavens, so also are the Heavens said to animate the Elements, no otherwise
then the soul does the body: So that this degree of Progression in the Creation
stands thus, 0. Light. 0. Air. 0. Water. 3.
The last scale in the Progression of the worlds Creation is thus, 0. Fire. 0.
Air. 0. Water. 0. Earth.
which imports the fourfold alteration of the catholic Element by the four
Winds, which was and is effected by the Word the third day of the Creation, and
this was nothing else but the general sublunary or lower waters.

This therefore was the estate of the world in the Creation, and in this very
state does continue hitherto, and will do till it be refined by the fiery
Trial. All this the wise Hermes, has, according unto the Tenor of Moses,
described unto us exactly in these words: Piman. 3.
Erat umbra infinita in abysso, aqua insuper and spiritus tenuis intellectualis
per divinam potentiam in chaos inerant: floruit autem splendour sanctus, qui sub
arena and humidanatur a elementa deduxit; cumque indistincta fuissent, levia
postmodum in excelsam regionem provolarunt, gravia sub arena humida resederunt:
distinctis libratisque rebus, quae igneo Spiritu vehebantur, emicuit coelum
septem in circulos, etc. An infinite shadow or darkness was in the abyss,
moreover water and a subtle intellectual spirit, was by the divine puissance
in the Chaos: And a holy brightness or splendour did flourish, the which did
reduce the Elements under the heaven, and humid nature, and as they were
undistinguished, afterward that portion which was light, did fly and sore up
unto the highest region; the weightier part did reside and take its place under
the moist heaven. These things being thus distinguished and balanced, which
were sustained by a fiery spirit, the heavens did shine forth in seven
circles, etc. This I say, is the manner of the world's Fabric, as also of the
rotation of one Elementary nature into another; caused partly, by the absence
or presence of the Spirit, riding in his chariot or Tabernacle, which is the
Sun. Hence therefore proceeds that alteration by Condensation or Rarefaction,
which is observed annually in the world, but especially by the four windy
Organs, or Angelical instruments of this aeriall region, and is effected
assidually by changes all the year long, as is justified by the
weather-glasse's observation. And we must with diligence-observe, that these
members of the worlds Fabric do endure with incorruptibility always, and
shall never alter until the last PEREAT. But the creatures which are
compounded of this general Element, and are diversely altered or informed,
shall pass or begin their generation from the simple Elementary estate, which
is in four, quasi a Termino a quo, unto the complement of generation, or
complete composition, namely 8. tanquam ad Terminum ad quem. And again, the
corruption or resolution of that generated compound shall have its Terminum a
quo, or beginning from the degree of complete composition 8. and his Terminus
ad quem; that is, the complement of resolution shall be in the common or
catholic Element, which is air, four-foldly altered in his simple nature, as
shall appear in this which follows.

CHAP. VI.
The true Mystery of Generation and Corruption (also a touch of Re-generation
or Resurrection) is, afer the doctrine of holy Scripture, herein Expressed.

AS we have plainly, though in few words, expressed unto you a dark privative
Principle, namely that which seemed before all beginnings to be without form,
and therefore mortifieth and depriveth of life, and is as it were out of all
existence, in regard of our capacity; by reason that the active vivifying light
does not shine forth, but is hidden in the center. So also have we manifested
unto you another Spiritual Principle, which is Light, now shining forth of
Darkness, and this is that only which informs, vivifieth and animateth all
things with life. I told you that all was but one essential Unity: For the
three Divine Person was but one and the same in essence, and therefore that
Light was unto him as Darkness, and consequently that he was the beginning of
all beginnings; that is to say, he is as well the principle of Privation and
Corruption, as of Position and Generation, whereof the one is the Act unto
life, namely the in-created Light; and the other is the passive of life or
death, and that is the waters; forasmuch as they were derived out of Darkness,
and therefore by reason of their Darkness they participate in their passion, as
well of the privative, as of the positive principle; and for that reason the
Actor in both extremes is God, which is Unity, who by the withdrawing of his
vivifying Spirit from the creature causes death and privation, and
consequently leaves nothing in it but the characters of corruption and ruin:
Contrariwise by continuing his incorruptible Spirit in the creature, it
remains by the presence thereof without corruption. Also after that God does
withdraw his Spirit from the creature, then the creature dies; if he sends
again his Spirit of life into the creature, it reviveth and rises again. This
was the reason in one sense of the Resurrection of our Savior, who for that
cause was termed Primaevus resurrectionis a mortuis: The first that risse again
from death unto eternal life. And in another sense it was the cause, that
Elias raised from the dead the child of the widow; and that the bones of
Elizeus caused the murdered Amalikite to rise again; as also that Christ
caused Lazarus to revive when he was dead, as shall be showed hereafter. I will
therefore express unto you out of Scriptures, first that God (to whom the act
of privation is as familiar as that of position, if we only consider the watery
or passive composition, forasmuch as it participateth of both extremes) is the
only Actor as well unto death and corruption, as to life and generation. And
then secondly, I will briefly prove unto you, the manner how the self-same
Unity in essence operateth thus contrarily in the watery or bodily Subject of
all things.

Job 5.18. Deuteronomy. 32.39. Sap. 16.13. Eccl. 11.14.
Touching the first: Scriptures say, It is God that wounds and strikes, and
it is he that cures. And again, they say in the Person of God, I kill and I
make alive again. In another place, Thou have power of life and death in thine
hand. Thou bring unto the grave, and reducest back again. And the Son of
Syrath, Vita and Mors, bonum and malum a Deo sunt, Life and death, good and
evil^, a e from God. Now for the second, namely, to show how the Lord operateth
by one and the same Spirit, to life, death, and resurrection, we may easily
gather it, if we will consider with our selves, that it was the all-ina^ting
Spirit of wisdom, which first did inform the world with life and being, and did
give life unto each creature, and does preserve it from death and corruption,
so long as it abides and operateth vivifyingly in the said creatures: Judeth
16.17
And therefore it is said, Deo serviat omnis creatura, quia d^xisti and ja^^ae
sunt, m^^sti spiritum and creatae sunt: Let every creature serve God, for thou
spakest and they were made, thou did send thy Spirit, and they were created.
Again, Deus non a^quo indigens that ^mnibus vi^am and inspirationem and omnia:
Acts. 7.25.
God, not wanting the aid of any, gives or bestows on al creatures, life,
and inspiration or breath, and all things. Isai. 42.5. Psalm. 30.6. Psalm. 41.3.
Psalm. 87.7. Psalm. 90.17.
In another place, Deus dat flatum populo q^i est super terram, and spiritum
calcan^bus eam. And it was for this reason that the Psalmist says, Vita adest
benevolenti IEHOVAE, Life is present through the benignity of God. Vitae
restaurator est IEHOVA, God is the restorer of life. Vitae meae fontes omnes a
Deo, All the fountains of my life are from God. Vitae pro^ongat^o est
benignitas IEHOVAE, The prolonging of lif^ ^s through the benignity of IEHOVA.
Whereupon it is apparent, that the presence of the vivifying Spirit of God, is
the cause of life multiplication, and preservation. Job. 10.12.
And therefore Job said, Vi^tatio tua conserva^ spiritum meum, ^hy visitation
p^^serveth my spirit. As contrariwise, the absence of the same spirit less or
more, is the occasion of sickness, death, destruction or corruption: And
therefore it is said, Deuteronomy. 31.17.
De^s malos reli^quit, and abscondit faciem suam ab impiis, ut obveniant iis
mala mu^^^ and angustiae: God for saketh the wicked, and hides his face from
such as are impious, tha^ evil and necessity may encumber them. But the
special causes of life, death, and resurrection are expressed in these words
of the Prophet David before mentioned, O Lord, how glorious are thy works? in
wisdom thou have made them all, the earth is full of thy riches; Psalm. 104.20.
so is the wide sea, and innumerable creeping things therein. Thou giv^st unto
them and they gather it, thou openest thine hand, and they are filled with good
things; but if thou hide thy face they are troubled, if thou take away their
breath they die, and return unto dust. Again, if thou sendest out thy Spirit
they are re-created, and revive, and thou renewest the face of the earth, etc.
Psa. 104.20. Lo here the essential reason and centrall manner of Generation
and Corruption, is exactly described and set forth by the Psalmise, namely,
that by the presence and benign action of the incorruptible Spirit of the
Lord, life is continued; and contrariwise, by the absence, or departing, or by
taking of it away from the creature, it dies and corrupts; for so long as
the incorruptible Spirit of the Lord acts and works in the creature, it is
not possible it should die or corrupt; but when it departs, death and
corruption must needs follow: also when it abides in the body, but rests
from his action, or, as it were, withdraws his active beams from the
circumference unto the center, (which the Prophet terms, The hiding of God's
face) then is the creature troubled, which is as much to say, as it is sick;
but if it be totally taken away, then the creature is forced for want of it to
expire and die. To conclude, if it return and shines forth again unto the
creature, then it reviveth again, as it did unto Lazar^s, and unto the Widow's
child which the Prophet raised. Whereby it is apparent, how death is nothing
else, but the absence of the essential form; and consequently it is made
evident, that the vivificating form is immediately from God, and not that
imaginary one which the Peripateticks have groped after; and I prove it
evidently out of these places, though the precedent Text does express it
plainly enough, Genesis 6.3.
Non permanebit (says the Lord) Spiritus meus in homine in aeternum quia caro
est, eruntque Dies ejus centum viginti annorum: My Spirit shall not remain
perpetually in man, because he is flesh, and his days shall be a hundred years
and twenty: Whereby is argued, that it is the Spirit of God which makes man to
live, and that by the absence thereof death must needs ensue. But because the
curious will scarce approve of this translation of Jerome, saying, that the
nature of the Hebrew Text is otherwise taken, I will maintain and confirm it by
the like, and of the same condition in Job, Job. 24.3.
Si Deus apponens ad hominem animam suam, Spiritum aut flatum ejus ad se
reciperet vel traheret, deficeret and expiraret omnis care, simul and homo in
cinerem r^verteretur: If God, setting his mind upon man, should receive or
draw unto himself his spirit or breath of lif^, all flesh would fail and die,
and man also together with him would return unto ashes. So that we see, it is
the Spirit of God which gives life, not only unto man, but also to every
other creature: And that it is meant by the real vivifying Spirit of God,
which gives life unto man expressly, we have it confirmed thus by Job in
another place. Job. 33.4.
Spiritus Dei (says Job) fecit me and inspiratio Omnipotentis vivificavit me;
The Spirit of God made me, and the inspiration of the Almighty has vivified
me, or given me life. And therefore it follows, that if the presence of this
Spirit does cause generation, life, and preservation, of necessity the absence
of it must cause corruption, death, and destruction; for when the Spirit of the
Lord is removed from the bodily mass of the creature, it leaves it deformed,
and, as it were, another chaos, or terra inanis and vacua, being that it is
destitute of the Spirit of life, which did make it to act and exist in its
specific nature. And forasmuch as this incorruptible Spirit does preserve the
corporeal mass from corruption, by his incorruptible virtue and power, it
follows therefore, that when the Spirit is departed, or absolutely contracted
in it self, without any external act, the mass must of necessity forthwith
die, and return unto a privative nothing.

Now the difference between the resurrection from death, or rather deadly
sleep, unto a temporal life, (for the words of Christ were touching Lazarus,
that he was not dead but slept) and that which is an eternal life, is this;
for as there is nothing that hinders death more, than the presence of the
incorruptible Spirit, so also is there nothing which hinders the perpetuity
of living more, then a corruptible body, or a body subject unto death or
corruption; and therefore that body must die, that it may put off corruption,
and endue incorruption, namely, by purification and separation of the
corruptible additaments, 1 Cor. 15.36.
which is effected by a loosning of the tie of the alterable elements, and a
freeing of the spiritual part of the corporal composition from its long
captivity, that it may become pure and clean; which being done, then by the
union of the incorruptible Spirit with it, all will be made spiritual; so that
according unto the doctrine of St. Paul, That which is sowed, 1 Cor.
15.37.38.39.
will not be quickened except it die. And that which thou sowest is not the
body that shall be, but God gives it a body at his pleasure. And therefore as
the body is sown in corruption, so it rises in incorruption; as it is sown a
natural or elementary body, so it is raised a heavenly and spiritual body. So
that the body must die, that it may put off corruption, that is, the
corruptible portion of the impure element, that it being made spiritual, may
abide with the Spirit of life for evermore. For this reason he affirms, 1
Cor. 15.50.
that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, because in their
elementary nature they are subject unto corruption, and therefore cannot
inherit the land of incorruption; but it is the pure spirit of the blood and
flesh which rise (after they have deposed their gross tabernacle) unto
incorruption, being animated by the incorruptible Spirit of the Lord, which
only causes a temporal life in the natural or compacted elementary mass,
and an eternal one unto the spiritual and refined body, which is contrary in
condition unto the natural body, as the Apostle does justify; 1 Cor. 15.44.
for by purification, it is changed from an elementary body unto a heavenly and
spiritual one. Do we not see after the same example, how the very grain of
wheat is so exalted in virtue, after it has endured corruption, and has been
freed from the gross elementary tie, that it would mount and soar upward
toward the heaven, were it not that the spirit so set at liberty is detained
by the elementary stuff, which hinders it in its ascent; and yet nevertheless
it is so dignified after its corruption, that its virtue is augmented by many
degrees, as it appears in the abundant multiplication which its dilated
spirit does produce, through the abundance of that incorruptible spirit which
it endueth.

As touching the other resurrection, which is unto a temporal life, it is by
reason that the body is not corrupted, neither is there a loosning of
elementary ligaments by dissolution, whereby the spiritual body may be
purified, and clean separated from, and have no commerce with, the elementary
dreggs, which do issue out of the lower waters; so that the occult spiritual
body, cannot be at liberty to embrace the spirit of life with eternal ties. Of
this kind of resurrection was that which Christ effected on the widow's son,
which was carried to be buried, when he said, Luke. 7.14.
Young man, I say to thee, Arise; and he that was dead sat up. Also he caused
resurrection in the like manner, to the dead daughter of one of the Rulers of
the Synagogues, crying and saying, Maid, arise; and her spirit came again, and
she rose up straightway. Unto such a temporal life also, Lazarus was raised
up. Again, by the prayer of Elijah, the widow's son was raised again: for the
Text says, that at the voice of Elijah, 1 Kings. 17.22.
the soul of the child came into him again, and he revived. Whereby we ought to
note two things, first, that these bodies were not wholly corrupted, I mean the
Elements of the composition, were not divided by resolution, and therefore
though the Spirit returned into them, yet it brought their bodies but to a
temporal life. And although it might be alleged, that Christ's body was not
corrupted, and yet it had Resurrection from death unto eternal life. I answer,
that the Text says, that he would not suffer his Holy one to see corruption,
and by that reason he had Resurrection the third day after he died, Psalm. 16.10.
being that his body was without sin, and therefore void of corruption. But I
leave this mystical doctrine to the research of the learned Theosophists.
Secondly, we are to note that it is the presence of the vivifying Spirit of
God, which causes Generation and Resurrection from the death. And again, it is
the absence thereof which induces death and corruption: For the Scriptures
say, that it was the soul of the child which came again into the child, to make
it alive again. And the other Text says, her spirit came again, and she
revived. Job 24.3. Psalm. 104.29.
And therefore Job said, in the place above mentioned: If God should draw his
Spirit or Spiracle of life from the creature, all flesh would expire. And
David: If thou take away their breath, they die: If thou sendest forth thy
Spirit, they revive or are re-created.

Now if we shall compare this our principle of Generation and Corruption, with
that of the Peripateticks, we shall find as great a confusion in the one, as
there is a plain explication of the other: for they define Generation, to be
mutatio materiae a forma substantiali pristina in aliam formam substantialem: A
change or mutation of matter from its wonted substantial form into another
form. Also they will have Corruption to be, 1. Velcur. lib. 2. c. 13 Com. Phys.
1. Velcur. lib. 3. c 4. Com. Phys.
mutatio and amissio formae substantialis quae prius inerat materiae, sed nunc
non inest eidem: The mutation or loss of a substantial form which was first in
the matter, but now has forsaken it. Thus you see how they nominate a
substantial form but what it is, and how it comes into the body to cause
Generation, or after what manner it departs from it again, to cause death and
corruption they relate not, and therefore we have ignotum per ignotius: when in
verity it is the Spirit of God, which informs and vivifieth all things,
causing by its presence as well Generation (which Aristotle observed) and
Resurrection (which he never knew or could discern by his worldly Philosophy,)
as corruption, privation, and death, by its absence. So that in this change or
passage of the creature from one estate unto another, we shall find that as it
was made, and all things else out of one dark and deformed potentiall
principle, by the shining forth of actual Light, which informed, and by
information created all things of Nothing, making them to live and exist, so
also by the absence of that all-informing Light, each thing becomes dark,
dead, and destitute of their essential form, until a new Light do manifest it
self after a manner, which does alienate the watery Subject from the form and
shape it had at the first. So the body or carcass of a dead man, is in the
state of a deformed chaos, in regard it has lost its wonted human substantial
form or act; no otherwise then if the Lord did take away his Spirit from the
world, all things would return again to Nothing, or a deformed chaos or dark
abyss, as it was at first: But when the effectual act of a new form does
break forth out of the dead carcass, causing the whole Mass thereof to become
verminous, or full of worms, then may we say that the Corruption of the one is
the Generation of the other, which evermore holds good, when the Elementary
stuff is still present. So that Privation is the mean between them both, and as
it were a vacuity, a Nih^l or non entity, between two formalities. But I will
demonstrate the mystery of Generation and Corruption after this Manner.

Now therefore that the progression or ranks of the worlds Creation, and his
simple Members is showed you, which consists of four ranks, in which estate
the world must (as I said) endure till it be refined with fire, I will make my
progression from these simple members of the world's existence, and proceed
unto the order of degrees in composition, which have their beginning and
foundation from them, namely from the first degree or rank in Generation or
Composition, unto the Complement thereof. And as between the beginning of
mixtion* and the perfection thereof, there must intercede a medium or mean,
which must be imperfecte mixtum, or an imperfect mixtion: so betwixt a simple
Element and a perfect body, an imperfect composition must needs intercede,
namely such a one as is that of a Meteorologick nature. As for example, in the
generation of a man, the beginning, which is founded on the catholic watery
Element, and takes his place in the first rank, is Sperm; for it is a watery
or fluid Substance, but little altered: and as in the water the whole Fabric
of the world, and seeds of all things was complicitly contained, and yet
nothing did appear externally but water. So in the seed or Sperm, though
nothing do appear in the first degree explicitly but Sperm, yet the whole man,
namely the bones, flesh, blood, sinews, and such like, are complicitly
contained, and will by degrees appear out explicitly, namely in the sixth rank:
for it will be altered from humor to solidity, with a certain distinction of
the three principal Members: in the seventh, to an Embrionall shape: and in
the eighth which will make up a cube unto the material root 2. or the Square
4. (which is characterized in the catholic Element by the impressions of the
four winds) into a perfect creature. In like manner, in the great world we see
that the simple Element, namely the general air, appears externally plain
simplicity, and an invisible Nothing explicitly, and yet it contains
complicitly, a clowd, water, or rain, Fire or Lightning, and a ponderous stone,
with Salt and such like: which by degrees do explicitly appear through the
virtue of the four Winds. So that a vapor possesses the first rank, the cloud
the sixth, the Lightning and clowd the seventh, and the earthly Stone argues an
exact rotation of all the four ventous forms into one mixtion, which
represents the eighth's place in Composition or Generation. But when the man
comes to Corruption, then his parts proceed in resolution backwards, namely
from 8. to 7. from 7. to 6. and from 6. to 5. until it return unto the point
of the simple Spermatick Element from whence it began, and there it begins a
new Generation in another form: For the all-acting nature is never idle. So
also the Stone is resolved into water, and water into a vaporous clowd, and the
clowd into air from when^e it came, which is the simple catholic Element,
which admits no farther or pro^ounder resolution by corruption.

Now the only Operator in both these works is the Spirit of God: for in
Generation it shines forth of the catholic Elements center or SpermS
internal unto perfection and persevereth in his action, till a perfect man be
produced, which Job confirms thus, Job 10.10.
Nonne sicut Lac fudistime? and sicut caseum coag^^asti me? cute and carne
texisti me, ossibusque and nervis induisti me: cum vita benignitatem exercuisti
erga me. Et visitatio tua conservavit spiritum meum: Did thou not po^^e me
forth like milk, and like cheese did crudle me? Did thou not cover me with
sk^n a^^ flesh? Thou did indue me with bones and sinews, thou did show
forth unto me thy benignity in my life, and thy visitation does preserve my
spirit. Contrariwise, when the Spirit of God, with-draweth his beams from the
circumference of Generation and Composition unto the center of simplicity, he
leaves to visit the Spirit of the creature, and so it must fade, ad
decayingly return unto the principle from whence it came; and from thence
again, if the same spirit is pleased to shine forth, a new Generation
begins, where the Corruption or Resolution ended.

The Demonstration is such.
The Simple Square of the world's Composition, where 2. (that is to say) Light
and Water, is the root.

The progression from the said Elementary Square unto the cube of Composition.



The root of Generation which is from the 4. Elements or the catholic Element
four-foldly altered.



Or, the manner of generation and corruption is more plainly expressed thus:

Where the four elements remain in their simplicity, as they were created
complicitely in one watery nature, or rather catholic element, called Air,
which is the root from whence generation arises unto the period of perfect
composition, by four degrees or steps of alteration, namely, from the 4 to the
8. and whither tends retrogradely corruption, namely, from 8 to 4.

CHAP. VII.
That God (contrary unto Aristotle's assertion, with the opinion of diverse
other Ethnic Philosophers) does not operate of necessity, for the creation and
continuation of his creatures; but of his proper will, and benign inclination.

WE term that properly Necessary, I. Velcur. lib. 1. c. 5. Com. Phys.
that can be no otherwise: again, we esteem that as well voluntary as fortuit,
or happening by chance, which may be otherwise. Now there has risen and sprung
up a great dispute among the Ethnic Philosophers, whether God operateth in
this world voluntarily, or of necessity, or as it were by compulsion: the
greater part therefore of them are flatly of an opinion, that God acts in
this world, as well in the generation and conservation of things, as corruption
of them, by necessity, and not by any voluntary motion; whereby it must follow,
that he was enforced to do or effect what he does from all eternity, by some
other nature, which was either coeternall with him, or pre-existent; or else
that he was excited or pushed forward against his will, to effect this or that,
by some creature which he did make. All which, how erroneous and extravagant it
is from the rules and center of truth, I will in few words express unto you:
For first of all, What (I beseech you) is of greater antiquity than God, being
that he was before any thing? What is in Geometry before, or in measure less
then a point? or which among all the numbers of Arithmetic is of so ancient a
standing as is the unity? Wherefore it must needs follow, that God is free and
voluntary in his actions, being that he was of himself, and did exist without
any respect had unto any other, either precedent or coeternall principle from
all beginning, and therefore was sufficient in himself, and of himself, to work
and operate by himself from all eternity.

But the principal reasons of the foresaid Ethnic opinion, are twofold;
first, because God does act and operate by his proper essence, and not by any
acquired virtue; then, forasmuch as the effects in the world seem to be
necessary, and hereupon they conclude, that they cannot come or proceed from
any contingent, that is to say, fortuit or voluntary occasion of another. Unto
the first, methinks they seem to argue against themselves; for as he acts by
his proper essence or substance, it is evident, that he is moved of his own
accord, and consequently not by any external compulsion, or internal
necessity. Moreover, in the latitude of unity, there can be no compulsion or
coaction, because that Unity cannot suffer. Again, it is not possible that he
should be urged to work by any external or alien efficient cause, because that
he remaining primarily fixed, and steadfast in himself, and of himself, works
as the original fountain of all things by himself, emitting his formal and
vivifying beams of life at his pleasure, and withdrawing them again when and
where he pleases. Unto the second I say, that necessary effects do no way
include any necessity in the first efficient cause, because that secundary
causes (which Plato and other wisemen called Handmaids or She-slaves) do act
at the command and inciting of him, which is the unity of all multitude, and
therefore all in all, or by a necessary order; so that a necessity in worldly
created things, depends upon the volunty and command of him who made them,
the which order he accomplisheth and finisheth at his pleasure: And therefore
we find this written by the wiseman, Wisd. 16.22.
Ignem mitescit ne combureret, modo ignem ille facit ardere inter aquas, etc.
He makes the fire mild and gentle, lest it should burn; and now again he
makes it to burn between the waters, yea, and in the clouds of hail and snow,
without melting of them. Again, He makes the fire to forget his destroying
property, that the righteous may be nourished by it. It was also an evident
argument, that God works not of necessity in or upon this creature of fire,
when the three servants of the living Lord were untouched by the fire of the
Chaldean furnace, although it was heated three times. This also is confirmed by
that History, where it is said, that in the time of Joshua the Sun stood still
for a whole days space; as also that in the days of Hezekiah, the Sun was
made to go backward fifteen degrees, in the Horologe or Dial, without any
evident reason in nature. Moreover it is proved and verified in that wonderful
Eclipse of the Sun, which happened at the death and passion of our Savior,
wherein the Sun of heaven was totally obscured, which also chanced beyond the
expectation or capacity of the Astrologians and Naturalists of this world;
forasmuch as at the instant of that Eclipse or passion of the Sun, the Moon was
neither in the head or tail of the Dragon, as Firmicus, that great artist in
Astronomy, does witness; and therefore it was effected against the common
course of nature: all which events could never have fallen out, if God had
acted of necessity in this world. It follows therefore plainly, that God does
operate in this world of his own free will, not of necessity, to effect the
ordinary or annual course of things, according to the laws and necessities of
nature, all which also he effects voluntarily, and of his own free will,
namely, as well for their creation and preservation, as final corruption.

But come hither and hearken, O ye vain Philosophers, who would have God, which
is the actor and ordinator of all things, to be bound up by the laws of
necessity; What honor and glory can any man justly attribute to God, for his
wisdom justice, and clemency, if he were constrained of necessity, not only to
create all things after this or that manner, but also to nourish and sustain
them, and afterward to bring them to corruption? What thanks, or service, or
adoration should we owe him, if what he did for us were of necessity?
Wherefore, O Aristotle, is it according unto thine assertion, that we should
offer sacrifice unto the roots of nature? or what availed it for us mortal
men, to pray and pour forth our supplications unto God, (the which duty
nevertheless Plato, Porphyry, Jambl^cus, and Proclus do teach us to be most
necessary) if that he could not be propitiated or appeased by praying, since
that he works of necessity? Or wherefore did Socrates and Pythagoras (the
which, by the testimony of the Oracle, were esteemed the most sage persons of
their time) use accustomarily to pour out their prayers unto God, if God were
only constrained to act and operate whatsoever he did in the world? Or why
does the Prophet proclaim it, Quod Deus sit solus inclamandus and deprecandus,
Psalm. 30.8.
That God was only to be called upon, and prayed unto, if there were any
necessity in God to act in the generation and conservation of things? Yea
verily, it is evidently to be demonstrated by this which is already said, that
God, by the means of prayer, is accustomarily inclined to misericord and pity,
and that it is in his freewill to deal either in severity or clemency with the
world, and the creatures thereof, and consequently that he is not urged of
necessity, to operate or bring forth effects, as certain vain Ethnic
Philosophers have averred; amongst the which, I must nominate a remarkable
personage, and a follower of Aristotle's doctrine, namely, Ga^en, that Prince of
the Ethnic Physicians, who speaks Atheistically in these words, Moses
arbitratur omnia Deum posse facere, etiamsi ex cineribus equum aut bovem facere
velit. De vsu partium. Lib. 2. c. 14.
Nos autem non ita sentimus, sed confirmamus quaedam naturam facere non posse,
eaque Deum ne aggredi omnino; sed ex his quae facere potest, quod melius est
eligere. Jam vero cum pilos in palpebris satius esset equales semper esse
ma^nitudine and unme o, non ipsum quidem hoc voluisse affirmamus, illos mox
factos fuisse, neque enim id facere potuisset, affirmamusque si eos etiam
millies volu^sset, nunquam tamen tales futur^s, si ex cute molli producti
fuissent: Moses did imagine, that God can do all things, yea, although he would
make a Horse or an Ox of ashes. But I am of another opinion: For I say, that
Nature cannot do some things, and that God does not attempt those things at
all, but does elect and make choice of the best of such things as he is able to
effect. Now since that it would be better, that the hair in the eie-brows
should be always equal in magnitude and numbers I affirm that it is not he
that would have it so, and they were forthwith made, neither could he do it;
and I say, that if he would a thousand times have them so, yet would they never
be such, if they had been produced out of the soft skin. Lo how Atheistically
he speaks, and how he would restrain the Omnipotency of God, and limit his
actions with the main clog of necessity, yea, and impotency in Power!

But there are certain other Philosophers, which do behave themselves more
modestly in the beforesaid doubt. For Avicenna affirms, that these actions
are neither of necessity, nor violent, but do consist in a mediocrity betwixt
them both, and thereupon he concludes, that it is in the volunty or will of
the Agent. In the which resolution he seems not much to vary from Scriptures,
which say, Deus castigavit nos propter iniquitates nostras, Tob. 13.5.
ipse salvabit nos propter misericordiam suam. God has chastised us for our
iniquities, he will save us for his mercy's sake. By which, this elected
vessel does intimate, that there is a free volunty in God to punish and to
have mercy. But this is expressed in plain words, after this manner, Deus juxta
voluntatem suam facit, tam in coeli virtutibus, quam in habitatoribus terrae:
God operateth according to his Will, Dan. 4.
as well with the virtues of heaven, as with the Inhabitants of the earth. In
which words, the Prophet does evidently show, that every operation in this
world is effected by the Will, and in or by the Word or Spirit of the Almighty,
and therefore not of Necessity, as Aristotle, Galen, and many other of the
Ethnic Philosophers have averred, to the derogation from God, and blemishing
of his Omnipotency. But that there is an undoubted necessity in the Organicall
causes, and in the effects which issue from God's Acts in them, it appears
most evidently: Wherefore the Prophet Baruch says, Deo obediunt per omnia,
Sol, Luna, Sydera, Fulgur, Ventus, Nubes, etc. The Sun, Moon, Stars,
Lightnings, Winds, Clouds, etc. do obey the Will and Command of God, that is,
they are incited by his Word, and of necessity provoked to effect his pleasure:
It follows not therefore, that he that commands, must be constrained to do
or act in that imperious manner, being that he does it as a first mover, who
has not any other actor before it, or co-eternall with it, and consequently
does operate of a free will, which is radically grounded in himself. And
hereupon the Apostle: Romans 9.
Voluntati Dei quis resistat? Who is able to resist the will of God? And the
Prophet: Isai. 16.10.
Consilium meum stabit, and omnis voluntas mea fiet: My counsel shall stand,
and my will shall be accomplished, And Job: Deus quodcunque voluit hoc facit:
Job 23.
What God would have done, that he effects. And therefore he does not act
involuntarily or of necessity, but voluntarily, and according unto his free
Will.

We conclude therefore, that seeing what is Necessarium or necessary, is that
which cannot happen otherwise, but must of necessity be so. So that which is
contingent, may happen or be effected otherwise, as is that thing which is
either fortuit or voluntary. Now that the Acts of God in this world are
voluntary, and therefore cannot be tied up with the bands of Necessity, it is
proved in this, namely because it may happen otherwise, then it is accustomed
to be by the laws or rules of nature. As when the will of God was that the Sun
should stand still, or move retrogradingly, or that it should be eclipsed, when
the Moon was in none of the points of the animal intersection; that is,
neither in the head or tail of the Dragon, etc.

The fifth BOOK of this present Section.
The Argument of this Book.
AFter that the Author had expressed the Original nature of the two essential
properties, namely of Heat and Cold, and had proved the main effects thereof to
be Rarefaction and Condensation, whereby the Heavens and Elements were framed:
He proceeds now in this Book unto the mystery of Meteorologicall impressions,
being the first degree of Composition, showing that their Fabric is the act of
the Divine Spirit, effected in the catholic Element of the world's lower
region, and consequently do not proceed from such accidental and external
grounds or beginnings, as the Peripateticks do fasly surmise. For this reason
therefore he has compared the Meteorologicall doctrine of Aristotle, with that
of the holy Scripture. And finally by producing the Pagan Philosophy touching
these aerie impressions unto the Lidian trial, or touchstone of Truth, he
finds them to prove false spurious metal, yea and mere dross, in respect of
the golden Truth.

CHAP. I.
Herein you shall find, in few words, a Repetition of the precedent Discourse:
Also an Exposition upon the word Meteoron or Meteor. And lastly the Method,
which the Author intends to observe in this Book, is expressed.

IN my precedent discourse, I have briefly pointed at, first the Principles of
things, namely the Root of every thing that was, viz. the Dark or potentiall
unity, from which sprung forth the Light or actual unity. And I told you, that
both of them were but one thing in essence, forasmuch as Light was unto the
eternal unity all one with darkness, though unto our weak capacities they are
opposite in property. Then I signified, that out of the first obscure unity, by
his other manifest property waters did appear, arguing thereby that of or from
this unity, by this unity, and in this unity, are all things. After that, I
showed how waters were the material or passive Principle of all things, as the
illuminating and formal Spirit, was the actual and informing beginning of
every being; both which issued, (as I said before) out of one Root, which for
that cause is rightly said to be all in all. Then I expressed unto you how that
Cold was an essential adherent unto privative rest, and the stout offspring
and Champion unto darkness. As contrariwise, Heat was the immediate issue and
companion, unto essential action or motion, and the inseparable Champion or
Assistant of Light. And then I told you how Humidity and Siccity, had their
Original from the mutual presence or absence of the foresaid two active
virtues or essential properties, Cold and Heat. Lastly, I declared unto you
the reason and manner of Condensation and Rarefaction, and that the main matter
or Subject thereof, was the waters, but the catholic Actor was and is the Word
or Spirit of God, who acts first in his Angelical Organs, by the Stars, and
especially the Sun in Heaven above, and winds beneath, upon the general
sublunary Waters or Elements, according unto his volunty, altering of it after
a fourfold manner, through the formal properties of the four Winds, and that
either by Condensation or Subtiliation, into diverse shapes and dispositions.
Now in this Book I will open unto you, after a true and infallible manner,
(forasmuch as it shall in all points agree with the contents of the holy
History:) how the blessed Word or sacred Spirit of the Lord does by
Condensation and Rarefaction produce and bring forth, in this our catholic
sublunary Element, all Meteorologicall bodies. But before I enter into this my
discourse, it is fit for me to tell you what the Ancients do mean by this word
Meteor. Those Apparitions which are seen in the air, are by the Greeks called
Meteora, not in regard of their natural essences, but by reason of their
sublimity in position. Others term them more naturally, Impressions; forasmuch
as they are shaped and imprinted above in the catholic element, called Air.

But in respect of their essential consistence, they are properly called
Corpora imperfecte mixta aut composita, Bodies that are imperfectly mixed or
compounded; and that either because of their unexpected generation, being that
they are procreated and appear suddenly, and at a short warning, or else
because their composition appears not to be according unto the mutation or
change of substance, or alteration of quality; or else in regard they are not
so exactly composed, as other animated bodies which are perfectly mixed. Or
lastly, these impressions are so called, forasmuch as they have not attained
unto any perfect form; neither seems there to be in this kind of composition
any great alteration of parts; seeing that the members of the element so
altered, are confused with one another. Howsoever, it appears, that such
names are assigned unto this kind of impression, after the fancy or conceit of
this or that Philosopher, when in verity they are magnalia Dei; a mystical
body, I say, framed and fashioned by the finger of God, out of the bowels of
the catholic sublunary element, to effect his will upon the earth, either to
judgment or mercy, as shall be more at large expressed hereafter. So that in
this sense they may rightly be termed, the characters or signs of Gods
benignity and misericord, or vengeance and severity upon the earth. My purpose
therefore in this Meteorologicall relation, is, to direct you into the path of
true wisdom, for the better scanning and decyphring-out of so great a mystery,
as is the meteorologicall act of the Spirit of God, and to lead you by that
means out of the mire and puddle of Ethnic or pagan Philosophy, in which we
Christians, even unto our immortal shame, do stick fast, and like brutish
swine do willingly wallow. The which that I may the better effect, I will
compare the absurdities of the false Peripateticall Philosophy, with the
infallible verity of the holy Text, that thereby each Christian, pondering in
the balance of justice, the contradiction which shall be expressed between the
one and the other, may open his intellectual eyes, and follow sincerely that
which is good, and forsake the bad, betaking himself unto the truth, and flying
from that which is prestigious and false, and may by that means at the last
discern with open eyes, that main difference which is between the wisdom and
Philosophy of this world, which in verity (for the Spirit of God has
pronounced it so) is mere foolishness, and that of God, which is the real and
essential truth. Thus therefore you may discern, and that in few words, the
manner or order of my method in this Book, not determining with my self to be
over-tedious unto you in it, but to finish briefly that Meteorologicall wisdom,
which in regard of its own worth, deserves to be enrolled in the everlasting
monument of a far greater volume; and to be polished or burnished over with the
luster of a more elegant style, and refined manner of speech.

CHAP. II.
In this Chapter the true mystery of the Winds is discovered and set down,
according unto the intention of the divine Spirit's testimony; and withal, the
false and prestigious spirit of Aristotle, and his Peripateticall adherents,
touching that subject, is unmasked and made manifest.

THat I may the better express that difference, which is between the false
wisdom and philosophy of this world, and that which, because it is of God, must
be true indeed, nay, verity and truth it self, my mind and purpose is in the
first place, to set down the opinion of the Peripateticall faction, and then
afterward to compare and examine it with the touchstone of the divine Word or
Scripture, thereby to make a trial, whether it be right and sound or not; that
is, whether it will bear water, or shrinck in the wetting. Now because (as I
said) the four cardinal and collateral winds of the heavens, with their
angelical Presidents, are the actors in the transformation of the catholic
Mercuriall element, or Protean sublunary waters, from one shape into another, I
think it most necessary to begin this my story or discourse with the profound
mystery of the winds in general, forasmuch as they are noted to be the
principles of all the other Meteors. And first I will express what the pagan
Peripateticks, and their Christian followers, have and do determine concerning
them.

The Peripateticall Philosophers are of opinion, that the wind is a hot and dry
exhalation, being difficultly enflamed, which arises out of the earth, and
soareth up unto the middle region of the air, from whence it being forthwith
repelled downwards, by reason of the coldness of that region; and again it
re-indeavouring upwards, does partly in regard of its levity, and partly by
other ascending exhalations, which it meets in his violent and coacted
descent; move laterally in the lower region of the air, the which air it does
ventilate and agitate, lest that for want of motion or stirring, it should
putrify. This is the sum of their opinion concerning the generation of the
winds. I will therefore insist upon this Peripateticall or Aristotelian
definition, or rather description of the winds.

First, because that the spurious Christian Philosophers, as if they were
incited thereunto by a kind of unbridled madness, do not stick to defend, and
by their best endeavors uphold this his opinion, as well in their public
Schools, and private negotiations or studies, as by their writings; and that
with such an assured obstinacy, as if it had been divinely published unto
worldlings, or uttered and pronounced by the sacred Oracle of truth it self.

Secondly, because the place wherein this imaginary exhalation is said to be
ingendered, and from whence it is derived, is by it esteemed to be the earth;
and the seat unto which it coveteth to ascend, is (according unto their
doctrine) the middle region of the air, into the which, by reason of the cold
temper thereof, it is not permitted to enter or penetrate, but the medium or
mean (forsooth) in the which it moves naturally upward, and by compulsion, or
against nature, downwards; and lastly, by justling or struggling together, of
other ascending exhalations, and the forcible descending fumes laterally, that
is to say, toward the right or left hand, is the lower region of the air.

Thirdly, for that they seem to averr, as it appears by this definition, that
the agent, mover, or efficient causer of this exhalation, as well downwards as
laterally, is double or twofold, namely, the cold of the middle region of the
air, which forces and presses downward toward the earth, that scarce
imaginable fume, and the other is the troop of other ascending exhalations, or
subtle smoaks, which successivly do rise out of the earth, which in their
motion upwards, meeting with that fume which is forced to descend, do strive,
and, as it were, wrestle with it, and consequently by that means do make a
noise in the air, which is called the Wind.

And this is the Peripateticall Philosopher's windy fiction, which in the
conclusion, after a due examination, will prove to be but a bubble, or vain
puff of wind; that is to say, merely words, without any substance. Now the
final end or cause why their nature has ordained these windy motions in the
air, is, (as their definition does testify) that by this manner of
ventilation, the air may be preserved, cleared, and purged from all
putrefaction, and corrupt disposition. But whosoever will give credit unto this
Ethnic definition, especially if he be a true lover of wisdom, I counsel him,
first, to examine every particular member of it, and having made a diligent
enquiry therein, let him see and discern, whether they agree with the laws of
true reason and wisdom.

In the first rank and order therefore, let us mark or observe, whether in the
former member of his description, there be any probability of verity to be
found: By it we are told and taught, that the material substance of the wind
is a hot and dry exhalation, arising and surging out of the earth: But by holy
Scripture (which all true Christians ought to credit before all things) we are
taught, that the wind has his original or beginning from the Spirit or
breath of JEHOVAH: A flatu narium tuorum (says Moses) coacervatae sunt aquae,
Exodus 15.8.
flavisti vento tuo and operuit eos mare: By the breath of thy nostrills the
waters were gathered together; thou d^dst blow with thy wind, and the sea
covered them. And Job, Glaciem edit Deus vento suo, flante Deo concrescit gelu:
Job. 27.9.28.25.
God does bring forth the ice with his breath; when he does blow, the frost and
ice ice is ingendered. Deus facit pondus vento, God gives proportion unto the
air or wind. Psalm. 104.4.
And the Prophet David, Qui facit angelos ventos, and min^stros suos ignem
uren^em: Who makes his angels winds, and his ministers flames of fire. And
hereupon such learned personages and Doctors, as are profoundly seen and dived
into the mysteries of the true nature, do aver, that the external of the
Angels is air, or the subtle humid nature of the world; and that their
internal or formal portion, is a hidden divine fire. And for this cause, St.
Denis does term the Angels, Algamatha, that is to say, clear Mirrours, or
looking-Glasses, which do receive the splendor or light of God, and do
represent his image. And therefore the Prophet, in the place above mentioned,
does describe both the hidden and invisible wind, and that which is fiery, and
does manifestly appear in the form of lightning, to be an angelical spirit,
animated by the divine fire, or bright emanation from God. All which being
rightly considered, we must either confess, that the Spirit of the nostrills
or mouth of IEHOVA, is a hot and dry exhalation, subject unto preternaturall
passions, and arising out of the earth, (which would appear too profanely
uttered out of a Christian's mouth) or that this member of the Peripateticall
definition is most false and erroneous. But this shall be discovered more
plainly in my enquiry, and laying open of the other members.

The second member of this definition does intimate unto us, that the place
wherein that exhalation, which is the material cause of the wind, is
engendered, and from the which it is derived, is the earth; but the place or
seat unto the which it tends (says it) is the middle region of the air; and
the medium and space in which that moves, as well upward and downward, as
laterally, is the lower region of the air. In the which assertion of this
Ethnic Philosopher, I will make plain, and prove evidently, that there will be
found diverse gross errors, and palpable absurdities. But that we may the
better effect our enquiry, and hunt after the truth of the business, that is
to say, for the exacter examinations cause, it will be necessary for us, to
divide this member or clause into three parts; in the first whereof we ought
seriously to consider, whether the matter of the winds be extracted out of the
earth or no. In the second, if that substance do only soar up, and make his
way unto the concave superficies of the middle region of the air only. In the
third, whether the place in which the wind moves, be only the lower region of
the air. To the former question or doubt we say, That either the sacred Bible
(which is the fountain of truth) is false, or this particle of the second
member must be most erroneous; John 3.8.
for, says St. John, Spiritus ubi vult spirat, and vocem ejus audis, sed
nescis unde veniat, aut quo vadat: The wind or spirit blows where it will,
and thou hear his voice, but thou know not from whence it comes, or
whither it goes. Which being rightly pondered by wisemen, they must conclude,
that either Aristotle saw further into the mysteries of God and nature, than
the Evangelist, who was a true and sincere Christian Philosopher and
Theosopher, and then St. John must be proved a liar in his doctrine, which were
a great impiety in any Christian to imagine; or else the assertion of Aristotle
must clearly be found false, and in all things contradictory unto the truth.
Aristotle says, that the matter of the wind does move from the earth, and
ascends into the middle region of the air, and from thence is repelled
downward. But St. John says, that the wind moves not constrainedly, that is
to say, by coaction, nor any accidental compulsion, but voluntarily, and
according unto its own pleasure and appetite; for his words are, Spiritus
spirat ubi vult, It blows where it will; and that although the voice and
noise of it be familiar unto the ears, yet nevertheless it is not known from
whence it comes, or whither it will. This doctrine of the Evangelist, which
so mainly differs from that of Aristotle, is maintained out of diverse places
of holy Writ: for the royal Psalmist, with the Prophet Jeremy, says, Depromit
ventos e the sauris suis, Psalm. 135.7. Jerem. 51.15.
He draws forth the winds out of his treasuries. But the Scriptures prove,
that the earth is not the seat or place of Gods treasure, where it speaks
thus, Aperiet tibi JEHOVAH thesaurum suum optimum, coelos, dando pluviam terrae
suo tempore: Deuteronomy. 28.32.
IEHOVA will open unto thee his best treasure, the heavens, giving rain unto
the earth in his due time. He does not say the earth, but the heavens; so that
between these two there is a great difference, as between night and day.
Wherefore it is evident, that the heaven or catholic element of air, is the
secret cabinet of these meteorologica Dei magnalia, or meteorologick wonders.
Hereupon it is said in another place, Januas coelorum aperuit pluens Manna,
etc. He opened the gates of heaven, Psalm. 78.25.
raining down Manna. Again, it is so hard a thing for a mortal man, that is
not illuminated with the spirit of wisdom, to find out or discover this arcane
treasury of God, that JEHOVAH himself speaks unto Job, though he were a just
man, and one that feated God, much more he points at the wiseman or
Philosopher of this world, who never was acquainted with the divine Word, in
this manner, Job. 38.22.
Pervenisti ne in the sauros nivis, et in the sauros grandinis inspectionem
habes? Came thou ever into the treasury of the snow, or have thou any insight
into the treasury of the hail? Arguing, that without his Spirit had showed or
revealed his treasury, it was impossible to know it. And for this cause Solomon
says, Corpus infectum corruptione aggravat animam, and vix conjicimus ea quae
in terra sunt: quae autem in coelis sunt quis investigavit, Wisd. 9.15.
nisi tu dederis sapientiam? The body which is subject unto corruption, does
aggravate and depress the soul; and we scarcely conjecture or guess at those
things which are upon the earth: Wisd. 7.17.
Who has found out or discovered the things which are in heaven, unless thou
give and bestow upon him wisdom? Now So^omon confesses, that he knew the force
of the elements, and power of the winds, and consequently of their real
original or beginning; for, Sapientia (says he) omnium artifex me docuit,
Wisdom the worker of all things taught him. Now Aristotle's false Philosophy,
and his Ethnic and worldly wisdom shows, that he never attained unto the
wisdom which descends from above, even from the Father of light. But to
proceed unto the doubt, which is, Whether according unto Aristotle's intention,
the original matter of the wind be of the earth, and his first motion from the
earth into heaven? A man more learned and wise by far in the mysteries of
nature, than Aristotle ever was, Eccl. 11.5.
answers in this manner, Venti viam (says he) ignorant homo, ignorant homo
opus ipsius Dei, qua via faciat haec omnia: Man knows not the way or path of
the winds, man knows not the work of God, namely, by what means he effects
these things. But Aristotle was a man, yea, and an Ethnic man, and therefore
could so much the less judge rightly of such abstruse things, as are these;
wherefore JEHOVAH seeming to deride the boldness of such a worldling, and as
it were in reprehending of him, Job 38.24.
speaks in these words, Nosti ne ubinam sit via, in qua dividitur exhalatio
quae spargit ventum super terram? Know thou where is the way wherein the
exhalation is divided, which spreads the wind upon the earth? Arguing
hereupon, the impossibility for a worldly man's capacity, to conceive or
understand these things, unless he be taught and instructed by the Spirit of
wisdom, who teaches all things; the which Spirit is bestowed by God on whom he
pleases. And yet Aristot^e seems impudently to answer God, and say, I know
it well, for the way of this exhalation is from the earth upward, unto the
middle region of the air, where partly by an Antiperistasis caused of cold,
driving it downward again, and partly by other exhalations, which are
successivly ascending, the exhalation is compelled to move laterally upon the
face of the earth, etc. But I will show the impossibility of this reason, by
that which follows immediately hereafter.

To the second and third part of this clause, I say, that the medium by the
which the winds are carried or moved, is, by far, more vast and large, then
that which Aristotle assigns unto it; for the wind does not blow and act
only in the lower; but also in the middle, yea, and in the upper region of the
air. If therefore the wind do blow in the middle region of the air, then
will the vigor of Aristotle's definition be taken away, forasmuch as the
efficacy thereof does chiefly consist in this, namely, that such a hot and dry
exhalation, as is the cause of the wind, is not permitted to penetrate the
middle region of the air, but is reverberated, precipitated, and beaten down
again, by the virtue of the middle region's cold, which resists the heat of
the sublimed exhalation. Now if there be any wind in the middle region of the
air, this cause of the wind will be taken away, forasmuch as then the
exhalation will not be repelled downwards into the lower region, where it
should meet other ascending exhalations to make a noise, and to be dispersed
laterally on the earth; for the exhalation which causes a wind in the middle
region, will not be driven down by the cold, but is observed to blow, and to
move the clouds and thunders in the middle of that sphere; yea, it is made
manifest by daily experience, that as well the upper or higher clouds, which
are white and yellow, and therefore more light and subtle, by reason of their
fiery brightness, as the lower, which are grosser and more obscure, are driven
and pushed by the winds, from any quarter of the world unto the opposite; for
except the winds were also present in that region, they could never move as on
the wings of the winds in that manner. Do we not also observe, that the
south wind blows from the southern horizon, and another from the next, which
is northern, so that both winds have dominion in either of the horizons, at all
one and the same time, whereupon it often happens, that great and dark
clouds, moving from each opposite quarter, by four of those contrary angelical
spirits, do meet in the point of each Horizon, and cause one mass or huge sea
of clouds, serving as a Tabernacle unto the great spirit of wonders, which
works or causes these things: whereupon there follows great lightnings and
thunders, by the concourse of opposite angelical natures, being the
messengers, ministers, and voice of the Almighty, which never could have been
effected, unless the winds by the will of the Almighty, had moved impetuously
the one against the other in the middle-region of the air. And this we have
also confirmed out of Scripture, where it is said: Ascendit fumus e naribus
IEHOVAE, carbones accensi sunt ab eo, inclinavit coelos, and descendit, and
caligo sub pedibus ejus, 2. Reg. 22.8.
and ascendit super Cherubin, and volavit and lapsus est super pennas venti,
Posuit tenebras in circuitu suo latibulum, cribrans aquas de nubibus coelorum;
prae fulgore in conspectu ejus nubes succensae sunt, tonabat de coelo Dominus,
etc. Smoke ascended out of the nostrils of IEHOVA, coals are kindled by him.
He inclined or bowed down the heavens and descended, and darkness was under his
feet, and he ascended upon the Cherubin, and did fly, and glide upon the wings
of the wind. He put the darkness round about him, to serve for to hide him,
sisting out waters from the clouds of heaven, before his face; for at his
presence the clouds were set on fire, and the Lord did thunder from heaven,
etc. Out of which speech we gather, that not only the Clouds, and Thunder, and
Lightnings, are moved by the windy ministers or Angels of the Lord: but also
that Divinity it self, being compassed about with dark clouds in the middle
region of the air, is carried upon the airy Cherubin, and uses the wings of
the winds as organs to move on: Whereby each wise man may easily perceive, that
the worldly wisdom or Peripateticall Philosophy is plain foolishness: being
that it would falsely persuade the world, that such essential Acts, as are the
Angelical winds, (whose inward essence is the bright Spirit of the Lord) are
caused accidentally, and are moved and stirred up by external violence: when
by the doctrine of the true wisdom, it is evident that they are endued with
most essential internal Agents, and therefore do move where and when they
list, according unto that beforementioned of St. John: For (says he) Spiritus
spirat ubi vult: The Spirit blows where it lists. Which being so, as is
apparent, that the wind has actum, formam, and principium internum: An
essential and inward act, form, and Principle, at the motion whereof it is
moved or caused which way the invard mover pleases, and therefore the Text
says, Spirat ubi vult: It blows where it will, and consequently it is endued
with a volunty or will: whereby each man may see how extravagant from the Truth
is the Peripateticks reason touching this point, who admit no essential and
internal form unto the Winds, but make it a thing merely accidental: As for
example, the Stars by their heat stir or draw up a smoke out of the Earth,
this smoke soring on high, is by the coldness of the place pushed down again,
then by other ascending fumes it is forced to move side-long. I beseech you
(that are wise and unpartiall) teach me which of all these external accidents
in the procreation of the winds, can be esteemed for that internal or
essential principle, which can cause a volunty or voluntary motion in the
winds, or can produce any Angelical act in the air? For the Text says,
Spiritus spirat ubi vult. If there be no such essential volunty, or internal
or centrall agent to be found or really imagined in Aristotle's fiction or
fained wind; then let his breath that teaches unto Christians such falsehood,
be as vainly esteemed, as his Doctrine is prestigious in it self. Was not the
unlikelyhood of Aristoteticall assertion, the reason that has made some of the
wisest of his Physical disciples to start and doubt, yea, and plainly to avert
their opinions from this vain doctrine of their Master, touching the winds?
Among the which John Freg^us, a man well seen in the Philosophy of Aristotle,
after he had made mention of the causes of the Meteors, does forthwith start
from the mind of his Master, touching the winds, and breaks forth into these
terms: Quanquam tota disputatio de ventis, sicut de aliis Meteoris plena sit
admirabilium operum Dei, quorum nullae firmae and sufficientes in nature causae
proferri possunt, tamen prodest videre quousque humana ratio pro gredi possit.
Sacr^ quidem literae dicunt Deum ventos producere. de the sauris suis unde
ipsius flatus audimus, sed unde veniant aut quo vadant nescimus. Haec Freg.
lib. 25. in causa Ventorum: Although the whole dispute of the winds, as also of
the rest of the Meteors, be full of the admirable works of God, of the which
there can be produced no firm, or certain causes in nature: yet it is
commodious and fit to try and look into this mystery, as far as man's reason is
able to see or penetrate. The holy Scripture does say, that God produces the
winds out of his treasury, whereupon we hear their blasts, but know not from
whence they come or whither they will. Thus far Fregius, in his 25. Book, upon
the cause of the Winds.

But I will proceed a little further in this my inquiry. Aristotle and his
Peripateticall Disciples aver, that the stormy and tempestuous wind, called
Ecnephia, as also the Whirlwind, are certain repentine or sudden winds, which
are forcibly expelled out of the clouds, and yet forsooth he will not admit,
that a hot and dry exhalation can penetrate into the middle region, by reason
of the coldness thereof: but that we may dive a little deeper into the abyss
of his absurdities, he confesses that the cause of all fiery Meteors and
Comets, is a hot and dry exhalation, which is terrestiall, crasse, fat, and
unctuous, and therefore apt to be inflamed or set on fire: now he assigns the
place of Generation of comets, to be the higher region of the air, and yet he
denies passage unto the exhalation, which causes the winds, into the middle
region, which is not inflamable, but thin and light. Can any man be so ignorant
in natural effects, as not to judge and imagine that cold will more suddenly
resist, and withstand that which is inflamable and of an actual fiery nature,
as is the exhalation, which causes the Comets, then that which is neither
actually inflamable or fiery of it self, namely the fumes, which is said to be
the Original of the winds? Again, it appears by his description of Comets,
that their material substance is heavier, more terrestiall, crass, thick or
compacted, then that of the winds, and therefore it must needs be less apt to
ascend and penetrate (for as much as all ponderous things, by a natural
inclination, tend downward); then that of the winds, which is more light,
subtle and thin, and consequently more apt to clime upward: wherefore it were
impossible that the grosser fumes, which cause the Comets should ascend and
penetrate into the upper region, as well by reason of their inflamable heat, as
compact and ponderous nature, and yet the fumes of the winds, whose heat is not
actually inflamable but light and penetrative, by reason of their subtility,
should be debarred from passing higher.

But I come unto the examination of the third member, and although I have
already spoken somewhat concerning it, yet it is fit, that touching this point
I utter my mind a little more at large in this place, because it is most
pertinent unto our detection of this worldly wisdome's folly and error. He
describes therefore in this member a double act of the wind, both which he but
makes accidents, as if a man should say, that they do not move from an
internal and essential principle, but rather by external accidents, namely
by the heat of the Sun or Stars, by the cold of the middle region of the air,
and the justling or encounter of other ascendent fumes: whereby he concludes,
that it moves the air allaterally and by consequence it happens by chance,
and through external means. What a glittering and golden lie is this, much
like one of those fabulous figments of the ancient Poets: a thing, I say, which
makes a fair show, but is, in verity, without substance: For by this
assertion he makes the winds nothing else but quid per accidens, when
contrarily the mouth of Truth flatly contradicts such a falsehood, affirming
that the wind proceeds primordially, from the Divine Spirit or breath of God:
yea, and it is termed by it an Angel, which is dilated and sent forth every
where to effect the will of him that animateth it. Qui facit Angelos ventos:
says David, Psalm. 104.4.
Who makes his Angels winds; that is, he animateth them essentially with his
breath, and sends them forth as his messengers to do his will. And therefore
the same Prophet says in another place: Baruch 5.60.
Angeli Dei efficient verbum ejus: The Angels of God effect his word. Psalm. 103.
And the Prophet Baruch: Ventus facit mandatum Dei: The wind accomplisheth the
Commandment of God. And in another, Ventus procellosus efficie^s verbum Dei:
In Cantic.
The stormy or Tempestuous wind does effect the Word of God. And the three
Children in the fiery furnace: O venti benedicite Domino and exaltate eum super
omnia in per petuum: O ye winds bless the Lord and exalt him above all things
everlastingly. What say our Christian Peripateticks unto this? What? do they
think that if the winds were such accidental things, as their great Master
does make them, that God would employ them to effect his words, or if they had
no internal principle in them could they laud the Lord, or move at pleasure to
perform the will of him that sends them out? Nay verily, we will prove that
the internal mover in the winds, is the essential inspiration or breath
proceeding immediately from God: Exodus 15.
Afflatu narium tuarum coacervatae sunt aquae, flavisti vento tuo, and operuit
eos mare. The waters were gathered together in a heap by the breath of thy
nostrils. Thou did blow with thy wind, and the Sea did cover them. And Job,
Flante Deo concrescit gelu: Job. Apoc. 7. Ez^k. 3.
When God blows from the North the ice is made. Also that the winds are
Divinely animated with a perfect life and intelligence, it is made evident by
the four Angels, which are president over the four winds, and that universal
Spirit which was called from the four winds, to breathe life into the dead
carcasses, of which we will speak forthwith. And yet for all this the Ethnic
Prince of our Philosophers will not blush (forsooth) to say, that the wind is
a something merely accidental, and that it has his motion only from
external principles, and not from that centrall and internal agent, which is
the actor and operator of, and in all things, and consequently it could not
blow or breathe where it lists, nor yet to hear the voice of the Lord, when
it was commanded to come from the four winds. He, according unto his fancy,
says, that this his figment is extracted out of the earth, when Scriptures
say, that it is the most lively and agil creature of God, which he brings out
of the heavens, (that are his treasure-house) for in this, both the Prophets,
Jeremy and David, do consent. But in this member of his definition, he
concludes, that the laterall motion of the wind is caused through that
resistance and impediment, which is made by such exhalations as ascend. O poor
argument of so mighty a Philosopher! as if such a ventall motion as that is,
from the north unto the south, and so forth, could be so certain and direct in
his course, being guided by so uncertain an agent, as is an accidental
striving and contention made between ascending and descending fumes?

I beseech you tell me (my quaint Peripateticks) what manner of exhalation did
rise out of the earth, and shoulder or shove and resist one another, in that
emission of Spirit, which happened when the Prophet said, A quatuor ventis
adveni, Spiritus, Come from the four winds, Ezekiel. 37.
O spirit, methinks that I see the Christian pages or disciples of Aristotle,
to be clean mute, and destitute of tongues to answer; and if they should say,
that it was a miraculous wind, and not a natural, I answer, that I know no
more efficient causes in nature, or out of nature, but only one; and therefore
it is said in the production of Meteors, namely, in the common course of this
world nature, God blows from the north. God produces by his breath frost,
snow, ice. God thundereth from heaven. God melts the thick clouds into rain.
God sends lightning from his throne, and coals of fire out of his mouth. God
makes the dark clouds his hiding place. God comes from the south in thunder.
The voice of the Lord makes the cedars of mount Libanus to stoop, and the
hinds to miscarry of their young ones. God is a consuming fire. Who can stand
or resist the cold of God? and so forth, in many places more, as well of the
new as old Testament. And, to conclude, that God operateth all in all, and that
he vivifieth all, etc. But our Peripateticall Philosophers come with their
School-tricks, and idle distinctions, and say, It Is true indeed, that he is
causa efficiens principalls; but there are many secondary and subalternate
causes in nature, which do act of themselves. I say, Plain dealing is a jewel,
and truth being one simple essence, hates double dealing; let us imitate her
in plainness and simplicity in understanding; which we cannot attain unto,
unless we abstract our minds from the subtle multiplicity of worldly
Philosophy, and vain fallacy, (of which St. Paul bids us to beware) for in
multitude lurketh an infinity of errors, but in unity consists that unique
verity, which is true wisdom. Why then should we distract men's thoughts from
the simple sense of Scripture, by a multiplicity of distinctions, which seem to
wrest it, like a nose of wax, a hundred ways. Scriptures say, Of him, by him,
and in him are all things. The holy spirit of wisdom fills the world. Romans
11. Wisd. 1. Wisd. 12.1. Ephesians. 4. 1 Timothy 6. 1 Cor. 12. Acts 17. 1 Cor. 8. Col.
1.13. Heb. 1. Ephesians. 4.
The incorruptible Spirit is in all things. Christ fills every thing. He
vivifieth all things. He operateth all in all. He gives life and inspiration,
and all things. All things are from the Father by our Lord Jesus Christ. All
things are in Christ, and by Christ, as well visible as invisible, and he in
all things. He bears and sustaineth all things by the word of his virtue. God
is the Father of all, who is above all, and in all. And an infinite of other
testimonies of Scriptures, which confirm the divine essence to be all in all,
and to act all things universally without exception. And yet our Peripateticks
will persuade us, that the creatures actions are divided from the act of God,
so that they do and can act of themselves, through an active virtue given unto
them by God, but not now of God; which assertion of theirs, were it true
indeed, I will show you how great an absurdity will follow, namely, that there
must consequently be a division made in the divine essence, which axiom, true
divinity will never admit, for Athanasius his Creed does teach us, that it is
sancta and individua Trinitas, the holy and undivided Trinity; and therefore
what act the creature has received, is not divided from the Giver, neither is
there any such need, being the Giver of that formal virtue is by reason of
that gift ever present, and not divided from the gift, and consequently acts
all in all, and that immediately. And for that cause it is rightly said by the
divine Philosopher Hermes, to be the center of all things, whose circumference
is every where; so that it is in all, but not as a part of any thing, but as a
composer of all parts, and a container of them. Wherefore let it suffice our
Peripateticks, that the creatures are only organicall causes, in which one
only catholic Spirit works and operateth, according unto the variety of his
property, which is annexed unto his will; and therefore he only works in
them, and by them, according unto his will, and that immediately and
absolutely; and this is that which the Apostle intends, when he says, Deus
operatur omnia in omnibus, God works all in all. But to return unto my
purpose. How deaf and surd had this invocation of the wise Solomon been, if the
essence and life of the winds had been no other, then that which is set forth
by Aristotle: Evigila (says he) Aquilo, and veni Auster, and perflahortum
meum; Awake northwind, and come thou, O south wind, and blow upon my garden. To
conclude, if the winds had been procreated after Aristotle's invention or
imagination, whence comes it, that each wind is endued with a various and
diverse condition or property, insomuch as the one is hot and moist, the other
cold and dry, the third hot and dry, and the last cold and moist? It were
impossible that this difference and variety should happen, if all winds were
framed and fashioned only after one fashion, that is, if they did move
laterally by compulsion, as Aristotle tells the tale.

I come now unto the last clause or member of the Peripateticall definition,
which does touch the final end or reason of the production or creation of the
winds. His opinion is, that his nature does produce this manner of ventilation,
for the purging and purifying of the air, and for the preservation thereof.
But we are taught by experience, that this is not true, being that we with
Galen and Hippocrates do discern, that the southerly winds are contagious and
pestiferous, forasmuch as they render the air thick, and make it putrid and
rotten by their malignant heat, and lax humidity: And this also we have
confirmed by the sacred Text, Ne timeto (says David) a lue seu daemonio vast
ante in meridie, Psalm. 91.
Fear not the pestilence o^ corrupt demon which comes from the south. Abak.
3.
And Habacuck, Deo a meridio veniente praecessit (vel ante-ivit) eum pestis and
antrax ad pedes ipsius. God coming from the south, the pestilence went before
him, and at his feet went the boch or carbuncle. Yea verily, and all winds in a
generality, as also the other meteors of heaven, are ordained by the Creator,
as well for a whip and scourge, as to assist, preserve and save the creature,
as by many places of Scripture we are certified, and Job in express terms
has taught us. Job 37.14.
And therefore Aristotle has erred in his judgment, concerning the final
cause of the winds, as well as in the rest.

We may justly hereupon conclude, that this definition of our pagan
Peripatetick, whom we Christians do adore, and follow with such devotion and
reverence, is altogether false and of no validity, because the winds are
creatures of a nature more essentially eminent and divine, than either
Aristotle, or any of his factious sect did ever understand; forasmuch as they
are not things without internal lights and essences, and do not consist only
of external and adventitious motions, that is to say, are not made of fumes or
exhalations, arising by accident or chance out of the earth. Zach. 6.1.
But, as Zacharias does teach us, they are created and animated by an
angelical spirit, and stand before the Lord of all the earth, and are hid in
the power or treasury of their Lord, out of the which he calls them at his
pleasure, to do and accomplish his will and pleasure upon the earth, and upon
the seas, either ad vin^ictam seu punitionem, to revenge and punish: or else,
ad misericordiam and benignitatem creaturis praebendam, to show unto the
creatures his mercy and benignity.

CHAP. III.
The true and essential definition of the wind is diverse ways, and that
according unto the sense and assertion of the holy Scr^ptures, expressed in
this Chapter.

NOw methinks I hear some of the Peripateticall faction to murmur against me,
and reply, If this definition of Aristotle be not good, as by your proof it
appears, assign us a better if you can. Tell us therefore essentially what
is the wind, or how you define or describe it rightly, by the warrant of holy
Writ? To this I answer, that it may be effected many ways, under one and the
self-same essence: And first of all we may describe it, and that not
impertinently, after this manner:

The wind is an airy spirit, of a mean consistence, inspired and animated by
the breath or inspiration of JEHOVA, the which he draws forth of his
treasury, to execute his will and pleasure, either by the way of malediction
and vengeance, or of benediction and misericord.

Every particle of this definition is proved out of convenient places of holy
Scriptures; and first, that his external is air, of a mean consistence, it is
made manifest, in that the words [aire, wind, and spirit] are expressed in
many places of Scriptures, by all one Hebrew word, namely, by Ruach. Again,
that his internal or moving soul, and centrall act, is the divine Spirit or
inspiration, it is proved and confirmed by the places which are cited before: A
flatu narium tuarum (says Moses) coacervatae sunt aquae, Exodus 15.8.
flavisti vento tuo, and operuit eos mare: By the breath of thy nostrills the
waters were gathered in a heap, thou did blow with thy wind, and the sea did
cover them. And again, Glaciem Deus fortis edit flatu suo, The mighty God
brings forth ice with his breath, etc. as if they had said, God inspired the
air with his Spirit. Job.
So that there appears no difference between an angelical creature, and the
air, so divinely inspired; for the air is said to be the external, or
manifest of an Angel, as well good as bad, animated by God, for the effecting
of his will, either to punish, or to extend and show forth his benign mercy or
clemency; as his internal and occult portion is the immediate breath of God;
and therefore (as I said before) they are by St. Denis termed Algamatha, that
is to say, clear mirrours or looking-glasses, which receive the light of God.
Is it not in plain words expressed by David, Quod angelos suos fecerit ventos,
that he made his angels winds? where by his angels is meant, the emissions from
his throne, and they being incorporated with the air, are termed angelical
natures. Again, JEHOVA said of the Angel that went before the Israelites, to
conduct them in the wilderness, Nolite exacerbare eum, Exodus
nam non feret defectiones vestras, quoniam nom^n meum est in eo: Do not anger
him, for he will not bear your errors, because that my name is in him: that is
to say, The bright impression of my word. For the son of Syrach said, that
wisdom went before them in a pillar of cloud, Eccles. 9.
and was a light unto them in the night, and a shadow or cloud in the day, to
keep them from the extreme heat. For this reason therefore, the same Angel is
called in many places of that book, sometimes Jehovah, in regard of his inward
and increated essential act; and sometimes Angelus, in regard of his alterity,
or composition of two, or as he was a creature; and therefore as God is
identity, namely, an absolute, simple, pure, and increated essence, so an
Angel is by the wiser Rabbis termed Alteritas, to wit, as he is compacted of
the uniform inspiration of God, and the humid or aerie nature of the world, that
is, of a created spirit, or a created air, which made the Psalmist say, that
which is above cited, Qui facit angelos ventos, Psalm. 104.
and ministros suos ignem urentem. For in this saying, he seems to include
both the occult and manifest nature.

As concerning the next clause of this definition, which is, that God does draw
or call his angelical winds out of his treasury, to effect his will, we have
it confirmed from the pens of the Prophets, Psa. 135. Jerem. 51.
David and Jeremy; Depromit (say they) ventos e the sauris suis.

Lastly, touching the use of the winds, or the final cause why they were
created, or sent forth, Baruch 5.60. Psa. 148.8. Psa. 103. Psalm. 104. Job.
38.35.
Scriptures do largely inform us: Ventus facit mandatum Dei, says Baruch, The
wind does the commandment of God. And the Psalmist, Spiritus procellarum facit
verbum ejus, The spirit of the storms effect his word. And again, Angeli Dei
valid ssimi robore efficientes verbum and placitum suum; The angels of the Lord
which are strong in power, do effect his word and will. And again, He makes
the angels lightnings, or coruscations his ministers. And Job says, Fulgura
nunquid mittes and ibunt and revertentia tibi dicent, Adsumus. Will thou not
send forth thy lightnings, and they will go their ways, and returning back
again they will say, We are here. Where he means of those Angels, which
reveal their occult beauty; for in this regard, God is also termed a consuming
fire. Moreover, he affirms in another place, that the wind, the whirlwind,
Job 38.8.
the ice, frost, clouds, and the lightnings, are ready at his command,
whatsoever the will of the Creator is that they shall do, they are prepared to
perform, either upon the superficies of the earth, or for to punish and afflict
the wicked, or to show mercy unto the righteous.

To conclude, I have expressed in the precedent definition, first, what is the
material cause of the wind: namely, an airy substance of a mean consistency.
Then I told you, that the eternal form, or essential act thereof, was the
bright aspiration or spiracle of the Almighty, which did by his presence
animate, agitate, and move the material air. Thirdly, that the place wherein
the winds are kept and reserved until it pleases the Creator of them to
employ and make use of them, was the heavens or air, which is the cabinet of
his treasures. And lastly, that the use and end of them was to accomplish the
will of their Creator, when he did command them: and that either in their
outward and airly estate, without revealing their centrall and formal fire,
namely when the winds do blow, but are invisible; or else by emitting of their
internal and essential light, as when they appear and move in the form of
Lightnings or coruscations: and this is proved evidently by the abovementioned
place, of the royal David.

For these reasons therefore, and upon these grounds, we have framed out these
Definitions of the wind which follow.

The Wind is an invisible air or spirit, which is vivified and animated by the
divine Light, which issues from the face of JEHOVA, as a breath out of his
nostrills, to perform and accomplish his will and pleasure as well in Heaven
above, as on the earth and waters beneath.

Or after this manner,

The Wind is a certain Angelical Spirit, or subtle air, which is inspired or
animated by the fiery Spirit of JEHOVA, appearing sometimes visibly in the form
of Lightning, and sometimes being invisible and occult, as when it is only
heard and not seen, and is ordained and sent forth by him from some corner of
the earth, to effect and accomplish his will, either in his positive and benign
property, or privative and destructive disposition.

Or thus,

The Wind is an invisible or occult Spirit, endued with a siery soul or form
from above, and inspired by God in an Angelical manner, the which is carried
this way and that way, according unto the pleasure of him which inspired it,
being moved or wafted on invisible wings, and carrying sometime their Creator
on their airy plumes, to effect his will and pleasure.

2 King. 22.8.
For it is said, IEHOVA ascendit super Cherubin and volavit seu lapsus est super
pennas venti: God ascended upon the Cherubin, and did fly or glide upon the
wings of the wind. Now the Cherubin is an airy Angel, as the Seraphin is a
fiery Spirit or Intelligence.

Or else in this form,

The Wind is a certain Angelical creature, being made and produced by JEHOVA,
of air, as being his matter agitated, and Light being his internal and
essential form, the which being derived or extracted out of his heavenly
Treasury, is sent out this way or that way, either to plague and punish, or to
solace and recreate the creature.

Or thus,

The Wind is an Angelical Spirit clothed with air, which moves occultly,
and invisibly this way and that way, according unto the secret will of him that
created it, whose voice although it be heard, yet is the place from whence it
came, or the mark whither it tends, unknown of mortal men.

John 3.8.
Spiritus (says St. John) ubi vult spirat, and vocemejus audit homo; sed
nescit unde veniat aut quo vadat: The Spirit or wind blows where it will, and
man hears the voice of it, but knows not from whence it comes or whither
it will. Again, Scriptures do affirm elsewhere that the way of God, and the
place whither he intends, is unknown unto mortal men.

Or after this manner more briefly, and that according unto the mind of our
Saviou^.

The Wind is a Spirit that blows where it will, whose voice although it be
heard, yet is the mark at which it aims unknown, and the place uncertain from
whence it comes.

Or thus, according unto the words of David above mentioned, the Angelical
winds as well apparent as occult, are described after this manner.

The Winds are the Angels of the Lord, strong in power, which effect the Word
of God, and listen unto his voice, and his flaming Ministers which accomplish
his pleasure.

Angeli Dei validissimi robore (says David) efficientes Verbum ejus,
auscul^antes vociejus, Psalm. 103.20.
efficientes placitum ejus: The Angels of the Lord, strong in power, effecting
his word; listening unto his voice; accomplishing of his pleasure. And in the
Psalm following: Psalm. 104.5.
Qui facis Angelos tuos ventos, and ministros tuos flammam uren^em: Who do
make thy Angels winds, and thy Ministers flaming fires.

By this therefore, each wise man may observe, how opposite the false Ethnic
Philosophy and doctrine, which is grounded upon the wisdom of this world, is
unto this true Philosophy or wisdom which is extracted out from the Fountain
of Truth. Hereupon therefore it may appear unto wise men, how impossible it is
for a Christian Philosopher, who does firmly adhere unto Aristotle's documents
to be radica^ly conversant in the true Catholic Faith: ye cannot (says our
Saviviour) faithfully serve two Masters. And for this reason, St. Paul, (as is
showed before) does admonish us to beware of Philosophy and vain Fallacy,
which is grounded upon the traditions of men, and Elements of this world, and
not upon Christ, in whom is all the plenitude of Divinity corporally, who is
the head of dominations and potestates, and consequently the life and animator
of all Angelical Spirits.

Wherefore we may conclude, that this false Aristoteticall Philosophy, is the
chiefest organ of the Devil, to distract worldly men from the true knowledge of
God: Forasmuch as partly by the sophisticated craft thereof, and partly by
other vain temptations, he seeks to withdraw the good intentions of Christian
men, from the true Symphony and Sympathy, which ought to be between God and his
creatures, and to allure him unto his own false, discordant, and
antipatheticall Harmony. For it is proved, that this Spurious and mundane
Philosophy, is opposite and contradictory in all things unto the true wisdom,
which descends from the Father of Light, (as St. James teaches us) and
therefore it is terrene, animal, and diabolical: For which cause it should be
eschewed rather of all wise Christians, then any way followed and observed with
such fervency, and supe^stitious devotion: Being it is the main cause, that men
even of this our Age, howsoever partakers of the divine mental beam, being
altogether forgetful of his excellent and thrice noble beginning and divine
race, (forasmuch as they are masked or gilded over with the prestigiously
appearing light of privative ignorance,) become so rude and unskilful, not
only in the true Arts, but also lame in the Rudiments of Theosophy; insomuch
that they neither understand God truly, by and in his Works, as he ought to be
known, nor yet can conceive rightly the mystery of his creatures, whose
Cornerstone is the brightness of the all-animating and informing Word.

But I will make use of my Experimental instrument, to prove a great deal of
this which I have uttered by an ocular demonstration or eyewitness.

CHAP. IV.
Here the Author does ocularly demonstrate the reason of the Animal South
wind's beginning.

NOw because all this which is said, may by some seeming Aristotelian
Christians appear fabulous, (as either not believing, or else imagining, that
things are not understood rightly, which are spoken in Scriptures, for some
such there are, (and that learned appearing Christians of this Nation) I thing
it necessary to prove all this which is related unto you, by an ocular
demonstration, produced from our Experimental Instrument, commonly termed the
Weather or Calender-Glass. Into the which practical discourse, before we
enter, I would wish each Reader to remember diligently, what has hitherto been
said, and to give an attentive ear unto this Preamble which I will set before
it.

You ought seriously to remember, and consider, that the catholic informing
Light, by which the Spirit of the Lord, that was carried upon the universal
waters imparting unto them the Spirit of life, did inform, illuminate, and
animate the catholic matter of the world, was by the consent of most of the
ancient Fathers, in Theology, said to be, the fourth day, contracted into the
body of the Sun, Ecclus. 42.
and for that reason it is said, Gloriae Domini plenum est opus Solis omnia
illustrantis: The work of the Sun which inlightneth all things is full of the
glory of the Lord. Hereupon also it may be understood: quod Deus induitur
lumine quasi vestimento: God is clothed with Light as with a vestiment. And in
another place (the which interpretation we have maintained to be good, in the
precedent Book of this discourse) Posuit Deus tabernaculum suum in sole, Psalm.
19.
He put his tabernacle in the sun: Whereby it is evident, that it was the
pleasure of God, the Creator of all things, that this vessel should be rich
and abundant in his Spirit, that from it, being placed in the center, heart,
diapason, or perfect point of the world, it might by its virtuous harmony and
life, order and govern the animal course, and temporal disposition, of
generable and corruptible things on the earth, in the seas, and catholic
sublunary element, namely, the universal air, which as it is the vehicle of
life in every sublunary thing, so also it is necessary to consider, that the
air is animated and inspired by it, as the higher angelical natures receive
their light and being from the Creator, before whose face they are always
present. I do not say, that the Sun gives life, but the increated virtue in
the Sun, which has elected the palace of the Sun for his treasure-house, or
cabinet of his virtue. And therefore it is said, that Sol est gloriae Domini,
seu virtutis and essentiae divinae, plenus; The sun is full of the glory, and
divine virtue of the Lord. And again it is termed, Vas admirabile, Eccles. 43.
opus Exce^si, An admirable vessel, the work of the most High. Now that this
divine virtue in the Sun does guide the air, and make it a general angelical
spirit, or wind, that is an air animated by divinity, which is apt to move
according to the motion of the mover, Eccles. 6.
we are taught by these words of Solomon, Sol lustrans universa in ci^cuitu,
pergit Spiritus and in circulos su^s revertitur: The Sun illuminating all the
world, the spirit or air wheeleth about with it, and returns his circuit.
Arguing thereby, that the Sun by his presence, does animate, make mobil and
agil by subtiliation and quickening of spirits, that air which was quiet and
still. Now I would not that any man should mistake me, and think that I mean,
that the whole Spirit of the Lord is included in the Sun; for, as I said,
Christ was by Scripture reported to be rich and full of the Spirit. So God
imparted unto the Sun abundance of his illuminating, positive, generative, and
vivifying virtue; and yet nevertheless he fills all things, but not after
one manner, neither in one and the same property or proportion; for according
unto that common course which he has ordained, for the disposition or ordering
of the annual or yearly temper, where the Sun or his actual tabernacle is
more or less absent or far removed; there is the potentia divina, or the cold
privative Spirit of God, more or less in operation, for there it acts
universally. As for example, When the Sun is absent, and under the earth, it
causes darkness, coldness, dullness of air, and a gross spissitude to be
present. As for example, When the Sun is beyond the Aequinoctiall, in moving
toward the Tropic of Capr^corn, cold, frost, snow, ice, short days, thick,
clowdy, and rainy air is present, and southerly winds are most frequent; for
then the privative property of God has dominion over the northern hemisphear;
whereupon the plants, herbs, and trees are naked, and having their spirits and
humors congealed, appear as dead, the earth forsakes his viridity, and like a
steril and barren widow begins to mourn. But as soon as the sunny Chariot,
with his Princely Lord, does approach unto our hemisphear, and enter into this
northern world, by the fiery and iron or martial gate of Aries, which is in
the Springtime, then these almost dead creatures, being before, as it were,
mortified, by the cruel cold of northern privation, begin to revive, the
nights grow short, the cold diminishes, the congealed and fix^d spirits in the
plants, relent, liquifie, and become animated and fluent; the birds rejoice and
are quickened, and the dull and senseless air is by little and little
refreshed, and takes flight into the southern regions, for reasons I will show
you in my demonstrative positions, immediately following. And yet for all the
absence of the bright and inacting Spirit in the Sun, it follows, but that
one and the self-same Spirit which fills all, may alter his privative
property when and where he list; for we see oftentimes, quite contrary unto the
common constitution of the year, that by it, thunders and lightnings are
effected in the midst and hardest of the winters; and the winds which are most
active, namely, the east and south, blow beyond expectation; all which is
effected by him at his pleasure, who operateth all in all, how, and by what
means, and where and when he list. This therefore being well pondered, I enter
into the state of this my demonstration.

The demonstration or proof, how the annual winds are moved, by the vivifying
spirit which is in the Sun.
I have told you, that the whole effect of the divine action in the humid
nature of this inferior world, did consist in Congelation and Rarefaction, and
that the first was caused by the privative and northern act of Gods Spirit,
which does operate by cold; and the other by his positive operation, which is
guided by heat. Now as these two have their dominion or depression by the
presence or absence of the Sun, so also is the universal air more cold,
spisse, opake, and sluggish or stupid, when the Sun is farthest off; and again,
more hot, subtle, bright, transparent, agil, and active, when the Sun is
nearest. Mark therefore the properties of the air included in the glazen
vessel of the Calender-Instrument, and remember, that it is but one and the
same Spirit in essence, that works as well privativly as positivly; for it
was one and the same Spirit which was called by the Prophet from the north and
south, for the Text says, Veni spiritus a quatuor ventis, etc. wherefore this
Spirit is it, that governs the universal sublunary air, as well privatively
as positively. And although this Spirit be most plentifully in the Sun, yet it
being nevertheless every where, is able at all times, and in every place, to
express himself in both properties. I come therefore unto the point or mark.

In the first Chapter of the first Book of this present Section, I have most
clearly demonstrated unto you, that the air included in the Weather-glasse,
has in every respect a relation unto the air, or catholic element of the
great world; where also it is proved, that the aeriall humid nature does as
exactly fill every place of the vaulted world, where the earth or water are
not, lest any vacuity should be found in the cavity thereof, no otherwise than
the dilated air in the head and neck of the Weather-glasse does fill the
cavity thereof; and therefore as the air included in the glass does work by
dilatation at the presence of the Sun, namely, in the Summer-season, when the
external air is hea^ed; so also, and after the self-same manner, will the
air of this northern hemisphear be dilated, when the Sun is present, yea, and
the nearer the Sun is, and the more perpendicular his beams are, the greater
will the general aire's rarefaction be, and consequently of that particular
air which is in the glass. On the other side, when the Sun is absent from the
Boreall hemisphear, namely, when it moves beyond the Aequinoctiall, then will
the common air in that hemisphear wax cold, and be contracted and condensed,
and consequently the particular air in the glass will be contracted after the
same proportion, which may easily be measured or conceived, by the degrees of
ascent of the water in the glass, as the rarefaction may be collected by the
descent thereof. This therefore being well conceived or understood, and that
the cause of this rarefaction is the presence of this divine act, in the sunny
tabernacle, and that the reason of the condensation, is the absence or
remoteness of the said act, or operating and emanating Spirit, and
consequently the presence of the divine puissance, which is darkness; for (as
we said) the absence of heat is the presence of cold, which is the essential
worker in the divine puissance; and again, the presence of heat is the absence
of cold. So also the absence of positive light conceives privative darkness,
and the absence of privative darkness imparteth the presence of positive light.

We may easily hereupon collect the reason of the annual winds, and perceive
what their external is; and how that air is animated by the vivifying Spirit,
which is sent out from the Sun. Consider therefore, that when the Sun is
present with us, the Summer is created by his presence, the air is calefacted
by the bright beams of his Spirit, and by calefaction is rarefied, and by
reason of rarefaction of parts, requires a larger place for his existency. As
for example, We put two pound of Vitreol into a Retort, and fasten the nose
thereof unto a huge Recipient or Receiver, stopping the joints fast, that the
spirits do no way expire. We force out the Spirit from the Retort into the
Receiver, and we find it tried by experience, that part of the Vitreol being
dilated into spirits, those spirits finding the ample Receiver not sufficient
to contain them, do violently break the Receiver into an infinity of pieces.
Whereby it is made plain, that a thing which is condensed, will occupy but a
small place: but when it is dilated, it will require a very large continent for
his existence. All this is argued plainly by our experimental Instrument; for
when the Sun is present, the air included is forthwith dilated more or less,
according unto the vigor of the solar spirits, and winds that blow; but when
it is dilated, it requires by so much the more a larger place to be contained
in, by how much the more it is dilated or ^arified; and that is proved thus,
namely, because the water is thrust down by so many degrees lower, by how many
the air excels in rarity. So that it is evident, that the only reason why
the water is precipitated more and more downwards, is, because being by degrees
subtiliated, it makes it self a larger room to abide in.

Now that I have showed you thus much, mark, that when the Sun comes newly
into an hemisphear, where winter did reign, or had dominion, and therefore the
cold did incrass and thicken the air, as for example, when it passes from us
into the southern hemisphear, to convert the winter estate of that part into
summer; it does forthwith begin to attenuate the air of that part of the
world, and that air so rarefied being animated, and, as it were, revived, by
the operating beams of the Suns bright spirit, becomes light-winged or
feathered, wherefore it flies away from the south, and seeks a larger place
for his abode or entertainment, being that the australl hemisphear is not
sufficient to receive his dilated body: For this reason, it is forced to pass
a-traverse the Aequinoctiall, and to visit by a successive motion the northern
hemisphear, and at its entrance therein, to make a windy noise, by reason of
the thickness and coldness of the air, which resists the hot vaporous, and
lately dissolved or rarefied air, which is animated with the southern light,
from whence it receives his agility. And this air thus animated and forced by
the divine act, in the Sunny tabernacle, to fly from the south unto the north,
is that which we call the southern wind, which for this reason happens so
frequently among us in the beginning of winter, namely, immediately after the
Sun has passed the Aequinoctiall, that is to say, through Libra into Scorpio:
This is the reason, that the southern winds (I say) are so plentiful among us
in October, November, and December; and consequently, that we are saluted with
such southern showers, by reason that the northern coldness does condense the
fugitive southern air into clouds, as shall be told you in the description of
the clouds.

All this is demonstrated out of the Weather-glass; for at the heat of only a
man's hand, being placed on the head of the Weather-glass, the included air is
rarefied, and so dilateth it self, and flies to an opposite Pole, namely, unto
the heat of the cold water, the which it bears down before it.

On the other side, the northern winds, and the ice and snow which are more
frequent in winter, are caused by that breath or spirit, which is sent forth
from God in his potentiall and privative nature, the which he does exercise or
put in execution in this world, when the treasure house of his actual power is
farthest; and therefore he has ordained the Magazin or storehouse of his
cold, in the poles of the world, being farthest off from the Aequinoctiall. For
this reason, it is said in Scriptures, Job 37.
that cold comes from the north, and that before the cola of God who can
consist? and that the breath of God makes ice and frost. And again, Have thou
come into the treasure-house of the snowes, Job 38.
or have thou any knowledge in the treasury of the hail? Neither is Gods
actual light severed or distinguished from him, though he breathe at his
pleasure from the north, in his potentiall or privative property; for darkness
unto him is as light. And for this reason also when he is displeased, he
breaths from the north as well in lightning and thunder, Ezekiel. 1.
as in snow and hail. Whereupon Ezekiel said, Behold, a whirl-winde came out of
the north, and a great cloud involved with fire, etc. And yet both the cold,
snow, hail, and frost, and the lightnings and melting heats, proceed but from
one and the same spirit, though diverse in properties, Ezekiel. 36.
which (as I said) was by the same Prophet called from the four winds, that is
to say, one and the same word in essence, but multi-form in property; Of which
the Psalmist, God sending forth his word upon the earth, by it he pours down
snow on the earth like wool, and disperseth the frost like ashes, who can
resist against his cold? So soon as he sends out his word, it does liquifie
them; so soon as he blows forth his wind, Psalm. 147.
the waters begin to flow, and the snow, frost, and ice to melt. Whereby it is
evident, that God is ever one in himself, wheresoever he be, namely, be he in
the north, where he operateth privation; or in the Sun, in which he does
express his actual glory. Yet does his Volunty as well as his Nolunty, that
is, his positive property as well as his privative, accompany the unity of his
essence. As for example, His negative property in his positive was discerned,
when he made the Sun to stand still at Joshuah's prayer, and to go backwards,
or become retrograde, for the confirmation of Hezekia's belief. And his
absolute privative; when at the death of our Savior he contracted his
manifested bright glory into the center: So that the Sun became as black as
pitch. I conclude therefore, that when this potentiall property of the Divine
Spirit does move or act in the air, the air is sucked toward the pole or
center, and so is made Frost, Snow, etc. In which space our experimental
Instrument shows a nature qui^e contrary from the precedent: For after the
imitation of the air in the great world, it is contracted and sucked up into
the bolts-head, as to the cold pole, and this then demonstrateth, that the
catholic external air, does also work after the same fashion. It appears
therefore, that the reason of this emitted Spirit is occult, and not known unto
any of us that are drowned in the abyss of Ignorance, but only is made known
unto him, who has been so happy as to be instructed by the true Wisdom of
God, which Solomon confesses to be the worker of all things, and therefore the
most faithful Schoole-mistress to teach all mysteries.

But I will proceed further in the search and inquiry of this Ethnic
Peripatetick man's skill in the Science and knowledge of Meteorology. And first,
I will see what he can say, touching the Generation of the clouds and the rain.

CHAP. V.
How Aristotle's Doctrine touching the Generation of the Clouds, and production
of the Drops of Rain, is found to be altogether contradictory unto the true
Wisdome's Institutions.

WE will now come unto our inquiry and examination of Aristotle's skill, in the
watery Meteors: and because that the causes of mists, called Nebulae, and
thinner clouds termed Nubeculae, are comprehended under the title of Nubes or
Clouds, I will only insist upon the Mystery of the clowdy impression: For I
purpose not to make any great Volume of words, to weary your eyes with reading
them over, but only to touch with brevity such kinds of principal Meteors, as
may in their generality include by their descriptions, every speciality that
may be comprehended under them. I will therefore briefly begin with Aristotle's
opinion, and then compare it with the Testimony of holy Writ, that thereby the
essence of it may be examined with the fire of verity, to see whether it will
endure the Test, or withstand the trials of Truth's touchstone or no.

His opinion therefore with that of his Christian followers, Aristotle 's
Definition of a Clowd.
is, that, A clowd is produced of a vapor, which is elevated from the earth
and water, into the middle region of the air, by the attractive power of the
Sun or Stars, where it is contracted, and as it were congealed into the
consistence of a visible clowd, by virtue of the extreme coldness of the
place; the which clowd is afterward partly by the heat of the Sun, and partly
by the force of the winds, carried or forced this way and that way, through the
middle region of the air. Lo this is the Substance of the Peripateticall
definition of a clowd!

Now that we may the better gather and understand the truth of this business,
and find out whether Aristotle be a true or a false Prophet in this his
description; Let us here consider, what the Book or Bible of verity shall teach
us concerning the Generation of a cloud, and how the members or clauses of this
our definition do agree with the intention of it: which that we may more
distinctly, and with the exacter method effect, we purpose in this place to
compare their minds and senses together, that each person, though but meanly
literated, may easily judge and determine of the case, as truly it stands.

In the precedent Definition, he makes the efficient and procreating cause,
the heat or act of the Sun, saying, that by the attractive virtue thereof, the
vapor which is the matter or substance of the clowd, is drawn out of the earth
and water, and sublimed into the middle region of the air; averring also, that
partly by the motion of the Sun, and partly by the winds it is moved this way
and that way. Again, he surmiseth that the cause of the contraction, or
condensation of the vapor into the consistence of a cloud, is the coldness of
the middle region of the air. So that unto the consistence of the clowd, he
faineth that two Agents quite contrary in nature and condition unto one
another, do concur and meet together, namely the heat of the Sun, and coldness
of the middle region of the air: but he assigns no internal cause of motion
unto the clowd, esteeming it as a thing dead, and without an active spirit.

For this cause therefore, there do offer themselves unto each wise-man's
consideration, sundry doubts in this Definition to be thoroughly resolved and
determined of, before he will be able rightly to judge the verity thereof,
namely, first whether the heat of the Sun do draw and attract vapors out of
the earth and waters, into the middle region of the air, for the composing and
shaping out of a clowdy Meteor. Secondly, whether the coldness of the middle
region of the air, be the occasion of the condensation, or thickning of a thin
vaporous substance, into the consistence of a well compacted clowd. Thirdly,
whether the clouds be only moved by external efficient Agents, namely by the
winds and Sun, as being destitute of any internal active principle or centrall
Agent, or else if it be moved and animated by an internal Spirit. Unto either
of these three questions or doubts, I purpose here to answer, in order as they
are proposed.

Unto the first Objection therefore I say: That it is a most false and
erroneous Tenent of the Peripateticks, that the Sun, Stars, or fire, do draw
unto them any vapors or exhalations: For it is proved by experience, that they
rather expel and dissipate from them such things as are rarefied by them, than
draw and allure them unto them: neither is it true as most men falsely dream and
surmise, that the Sun draws fumes upward, or that the fire sucketh the
vaporous substance of the attenuated water unto it; but their office is to
rarify and subtiliate the waters and to reduce the moister part of the earth
into vapor: And then it is naturally incident unto those light Substances, of
their own inclinations, to ascend and mount upwards, without any other
external agent. But all this we have plainly demonstrated by our experimental
Instrument: For if you set your hand upon the bolts head or round glass, on
the top the air will dilate it self, and presently fly away from the rarifying
agent that dilateth it, and therefore much less will that agent suck or draw it
unto it self. By which it is evident, that whereas it seemed in the eyes of
worldly wisemen, that because a vapor or fume ascends upwards, therefore
that motion from the Earth must needs proceed from the attractive virtue of the
Summer heat; now in the conclusion, it is proved to be stark false and
erroneous, being that the nature of Heat and Light are clean contrary unto the
attraction: forasmuch as they expel by dilatation, and do dissipate, and
enlarge, which is contrary unto the condition of attraction, gathering
together, and condensation, which are the properties of cold, as is mainfested
by our experimental Machin.

But now to prove that Aristotle's grounds are most extravagant unto the Truth,
who affirms that the clouds are made of a vapor drawn or elevated up into
the middle region of the air, we must understand, that the Opinion of the holy
Scriptures is flatly adverse and contrary unto this clause or member of his
definition, or description, being that first it is easily to be gathered by
this Text of St. Paul, That we ought to believe by Faith, that things visible
were first made of such things which were not seen: Heb. 1.
and therefore it is neither the visible earth nor water, that can be the
Original of the clouds, but rather the invisible air. And this is also
maintained by diverse plain Testimonies of Scriptures: Job 28.24. Job 26.9.
Deus sapienti^ su^ aptat pondus aeri, and appendit aquas in mensura: Ligat eas
in densis nubibus, facit pluviae statuta, and viam fulgetro tonitruum: God by
his Spirit of Wisdom, does give a weight and proportion unto the air; and
hangs or ballanceth the waters by measure; tieth them in the thick clouds;
gives laws unto the rain, and assigns a way unto the Lightning of the
Thunder. In which speech the wise and patient Job does seem to confirm. First,
that God is the Father and Head, from whence this work, and all other, does
radically proceed; and the eternal efficient instrument, by which he acts,
is his Spirit of Wisdom: which also accords with this of the Apostle: Nobis
est unus Deus Pater a quo omnia, 1 Cor. 8.
and unus Dominus Jesus Christus per quem omnia: To us there is but one God the
Father, of whom are all things; and one only Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are
all things. Secondly, That the air is the main Subject as well of the watery
as fiery Meteors, for by thickning or condensing of it, it gives a consistence
unto the clouds, and suchlike Meteors, which are easily afterward resolved
into water and rain, and then by attenuating it extremely, it becomes
lightning: Not that I say, that the act of Lightning is of the Substance of the
air, but is rather an admirable Light, clothed with the air as with a
vestiment. And in the very same sense the Text says, Indutus lumine quasi
vestimento: He is endued with light as with a vestiment. And again, the wise
Philosopher, In lumine numen, in numine lumen. So that the thinner the air is,
the hotter it is, and consequently the richer in celestial fire, whose
centrall act is divinity. Now that the air is the substance or material
subject of the watery Meteors, the precedent Text bears it in these words, God
by his Wisdom assigns, or sets by proportion, a weight unto the air; that
is, he thickeneth it into clouds, for the words following imports so much,
which are, Appendit aquas seu nubes in mensura, He hangs or ballanceth the
waters or clouds by measure, or attenuateth it into lightnings, as the words
following do witness. So that he seems to aver, that the invisible air is
altered according to weight and measure, into the bodies or substances of the
visible clouds, which afterward are resolved into rain, and fiery lightnings,
which by compression do appear. Again, that it is neither the earth nor waters
from which the existence or substance of a clowd is made, but only the air,
we plainly do gather out of these words in Deuteronomy, Deuteronomy. 28.11.
Aperiet tibi IEHOVA the saurum suum optimum, ^oelos, dando pluviam terrae tuae
suo tempore: IEHOVA will open his best treasury, the heavens, giving rain unto
thy earth in due season. Out of which words observe, first, that by the heavens
is meant the Air, for in the air the clouds are procreated; and again, the
air is called heaven in many places of Scripture, as volatilia coeli, the
fouls or birds of heaven. And therefore this is the sacrarium divinum, the
divine treasury or treasure-house, out of the which God at his pleasure
produces and fashioneth the clouds. Secondly, that the air is called his best
treasury, and therefore it is out of it, that not only he does extract his
meteorologicall creatures, but also that wisemen do enquire after their
mystical summum bonum, and Christian Philosophers that are well grounded, the
character of the divine wisdom. Again, Eccles. 43.17.
it is said in another place, Propterea aperti sunt thesauri, and evolarunt
nubes and nebulae, sicut aves: Therefore his treasuries are opened, and the
clouds did fly out like birds. Job 37.21.
But this is made yet more evident, by these plain words of Job, Subito aer
condensabitur in nubes, and ventus transiens fugabit eas: The air will
suddenly be condensed or thickened into clouds, and the moving wind will drive
them before it. By which words it is apparent, that the air is the subject out
of the which the clouds are compacted and framed, and that the heavens are the
only treasury, out of the which they are collected, and therefore neither the
earth nor the water, as Aristotle would have it; which if it were true indeed,
mark what an absurd impossibility must follow. For then whereas the Sun does
attenuate the air in the summer-season, it would contrary unto reason condense
it, by the continual raising of vapors; and then a greater absurdity would
follow on the neck of this, to destroy Aristotle's tenent, touching the
generation of the clouds, for then we should have more clouds and rain in the
summer, than winter, being that there are made more vapors at that season, by
the Suns heat and emptying of ponds and rivers, then in the winter, which
experience proves false. And lastly, it is neither the heat of the Sun nor
Stars, but the eternal Spirit of JEHOVA, whose dominion is over the angelical
winds, by which he moves and operateth all these alterations in the air, and
by the air, as shall be told you hereafter. And therefore it was said, By his
wisdom he gives weight unto the air, and hangs the clouds in measure, and
assigns rules unto the rain, and proportioneth a way or passage unto the
lightnings and thunders, etc. But I come unto the second Doubt.

To the resolution of the second doubt, I say, that there is another manner of
reason, for the incrassation and condensation of an invisible vapor, or the
air, into a cloud, than that which Aristotle and his followers have assigned,
and set down; for whereas he says, that this feat is performed, by the
contractive cold of the middle region of the air, it may be wondered at, why
this effect is not wrought as well at other times, as when the winds do blow
from their certain quarters of the earth; for when the southerly winds have
dominion, then do we see clouds to multiply, and the rain to pour down in the
greatest abundance. I would fain know of these Peripateticks, why the vapors
should be raised so thick, just at that time when the wind blows from the
south, to make a greater abundance of clouds in the air, then at another
season, namely, when they have no dominion? Or why should the cold of the
middle region of the air, be apter to coagulate or curdle vapors at that
time, than at other times, being that the warm clouds, or dense air, which is
driven from the Aequinoctiall, do moderate the middle region's cold, through
which they glide by reason of their hot temper? Verily I know, that they are
ignorant what to answer touching this point, and therefore I will press them
no further. But I will tell you of an experiment of mine own, whereby I was
induced unto the truth, concerning the generation of the mists and clouds: When
in my travells I went or journeyed from Venice unto Augusta, or Ausburg, in
Germany, as I traveled between the high mountains and rocks of the Alps, upon
a certain day when the heavens were passing clear, and without any cloud to be
seen in the Horizon, the Sun also (as in these times it must needs) being
passing bright; I espied on the top of a steepy mountain, on the which the
Sunbeams did strongly beat, a certain fogg or mist by little and little to
arise, and ever it thickened more and more, until it grew from a slight vapor
unto a mist, and from a foggy mist at the last unto a thick cloud, and all this
while the air was every where clear, except only on that side the hill, from
the top unto the bottom, which we beheld. It made me a little to marvel, and
therefore alighting from our Coach, I took some grass and flung it into the
air, to try which way the wind did blow, and I found it to be full upon or
against that eminent hlll, which was advanced toward the heavens above his
fellows. Whereupon I did streight-way gather, that the degrees of progression
from a vapor unto a mist, and from a mist unto a fogg, and so forward unto the
consistence of a clowd, was by compression of the common air, which was chased
before the wind by little and little, against the lofty rock or mountain,
which hindering of it in its passage or flight, was the cause that the
consequent-aire was added unto the precedent, and so by adding and compressing
of parts of the air unto other parts, a perfect clowd, only conformable unto
that part of the mountain, was made, which forthwith, when it became ponderous,
and apt to endure the reflection of the Sun, did resolve it self for four miles
space on this side the rock into rain, all the rest of the air remaining still
clear, and without any clowd. Whereby I did forthwith conceive, that clouds
were not ingendered after the manner described by the Peripateticks, that is,
by the vapors rising out of the earth and waters, but by the inspissation or
incrassation of the thin and invisible air, into a thick, dense, and visible
clowd, according unto the beforementioned place of Job, Subito aer
condensabitur in nubes and transiens ventus fugabit eas. But then I was a
little troubled, when I remembered, that mountains and high rocks cannot by
their resistance, and stopping of the fugitive air, be always the cause of
the clouds; being that we find, that clouds do every where appear, yea, in the
plain deserts, and open seas, where no hills are. Whereupon after that I had a
little while considered, and well pondered this objection with my self, I did
quickly conceive an infallible answer and resolution of this doubt,
considering, that there is not a wind that blows in the heavens with
dominion, but has some opposite or transversall wind which blows with it,
though it be not discerned by reason that the mightier wind does darken or
obscure the action of the weaker, even as in the open Sun a candle is scarcely
to be discerned. Now that at one and the same time two or more winds do blow, I
will prove it by common experience; for being often on the seas, I have
observed, that when the predominant wind has fallen a little in his force by
fits, and has urged the sail of the Ship but weakly, an opposite wind has
immediately bewrayed it self, and moved the sail the contrary way, until the
other rising again, did replenish and fill up the sail toward our determined
mark, which made for our purpose. But we have also Scriptures to testify, that
opposite winds do often blow at one and the same instant, for first, the self
same Spirit was evoked from the quarters of the four winds, Ezekiel 37. Dan 7.
by Ezekiel and Daniel, Ecce quatuor venti caeli pugnabant in mari magno,
Behold, the four winds did fight together in a great sea. And Zacharias, Isti
quatuor equi sunt quatuor venti coeli qui egrediuntur and stant coram
Dominatore omnis carnis: Zach. 6.1
These four horses are the four winds of the heaven, which go forth and stand
before the Lord of all flesh. Whereby it is evident, that not one or two winds,
but many winds may blow in the heavens at once; for by their opposite blasts,
clouds, whirl-winds, tempests, lightning, and thunders, are commonly effected.
All which the profound Poet Homer seems to include in a few Verses,
translated thus into Latin:

Tantus coelesti rumor percrebuit Aula,
Cum saeva alterni ruerent in praelia Divi
Neptunum contra bellabat Phoebus Apollo,
Adversus Martem certabat Pallas Athenae.
Great noise was raised in the Elisian hall,
When gods with gods did enter cruel wars:
Phoebus Apollo there with Neptune jars,
Pallas of Athens foul with Mars does fall.
Where he understands by the gods the opposite angelical spirits, which
issue from the winds, who at their meeting in the open aeriall sea, do fight,
and tempestuously strive with one another, according unto the sense of the
precedent text of Daniel: For by Neptune he means, the president of the
occidentall winds, which are cold, moist, and waterish; and by Phoebus he
intends the oriental president, whose blasts are hot, dry, and fiery; but by
Mars is signified the thunder and lightning. Also Ovid does most notably
express the combat which is effected amongst the winds, in these verses,
speaking in the person of Boreas, or the north-winde.

Idem ego quum fratres coelo sum nactus aperto
Nam mihi campus is est, tanto molimine luctor
Ut medius nostris concussibus insonet Ether
Exiliantque cavis elisi nubibus ignes.
When as I meet my brethren in the air,
(Which is my field) I wrestle with such ire,
That middle heavens do Echo at our fare,
And hollow clouds do vent forth flashing fire.
Where by Fratres, Boreas, or the North Wind, understands the Southern blast,
and the other cardinal winds, the which when Boreas meets in the air, do
produce by their contentious struglings and wrastlings, thunder, whirl-winds,
and such like tempestuous storms. And therefore we ought not to make any doubt,
but that two or more winds do blow at one and the same time, either oppositely,
or transversally in the open air, whereby the intermediate invisible air is
by compression thickened, or condensed from the existence of a mean air, into
a scarce visible vaporous substance, and so unto a more visible misty
corpulency; and lastly, into a most apparent and visible clowd, the which clowd
nevertheless is pushed and driven forward by that wind in the heaven, which
has the greatest dominion and denomination; for his power confirming in every
point that which is spoken by Job, Job 37.21.
and cited before, Subito aer condensabitur in nubes and ventus transiens
fugabit eas: The air will suddenly be thickened into clouds, and the wind
which moves in the air will drive them before it. So that it is easily to be
gathered, that a clowd is framed of the air after this fashion; The air
filling the whole vaulty heaven, and therefore the sublunary world is violently
forced to move before the breath of one wind, and being encountered in its
flight by an opposite wind unto the first, though of a weaker force, it
resists the chased air in its motion, and by that resistance, air being
joined unto air, does thicken by degrees, even as I told you the steep
mountain or rock denying passage unto the air, which flyed and eschewed the
persecuting wind, was the cause of his condensation.

This therefore being rightly considered, it is apparent, that the
Peripateticall assertion is unjust and erroneous, forasmuch as it averreth,
that a vapor raised out out of the earth and water, up to the middle region of
the air, is by the coldness of the place metamorphosed or changed into the
form and substance of a clowd; the which also (as is already proved) is most
improbable, because the southerly winds, which are the chiefest parents of the
clouds, and rain in abundance, seeing that they are hot, by reason of the
places temper from whence they are sent, would rather qualify (as is already
said) by their warmth, the coldness of the region, through which they march or
pass, and therefore would either disannull the effect of that property of
cold, or else so weaken and dull the power of it, that if it produced any
clouds, they would prove more thin and small ones, then any other of the cold
winds; as also the wind Eurus would effect the same, by reason of his great
heat. And yet we find all this quite contrary by experience, for the southerly
winds do incrassate and produce clouds, that are in general more moist and
thick, then any of the other are accustomed to do; yea verily, the south wind
does so condense the air by his presence, that (as Isidorus does affirm) it
makes objects appear greater unto the sight then indeed they are. I come now
unto the Resolution of the third Doubt.

Touching the third and last doubt, which is, Whether the clouds be only
Superficially moved by external winds, and the heat of the Sun, as Aristotle's
imagination is, and not by any centrall agent, which rules it, as it pleases,
and at whose Command the winds themselves are obedient. Verily I answer, that,
contrary unto the intention of the Peripateticks, the clouds have their inward
agen^, the which calls the winds to effect his will, and push and move
forward hi^ clowdy vehicle or Chariot, when, where, and which way he pleases:
For as this Agent is catholic, so is he not absent from the Spirit of the
winds, though centrally present in the cloud: For he being present with, and in
the spirit of, the winds, does in and by the Angelical Spirits of the winds,
operate centrally in the air, and by the contracting act in himself, gathering
the air together into a clowd, which he makes his vehicle or Chariot.
Therefore it is said in one place: Nubibus densis obtegit Deus coelos, Psa.
147.8.
quae comparent terrae pluviam; qui facit ut proferant montes foenum, and dent
jumentis cibum: God fills the heavens with clouds, that they might bring
forth rain unto the earth, that thereby hay or grass may spring forth, for the
nourishment of Cattle. Out of which speech we may gather: First, that God by
his windy Ministers does condense and shape out the air into clouds (For the
stormy winds are said to effect the Will and Word of God). Psalm. 148.
Then, that this was no miraculous work, but a common work in nature, being
that it is daily effected to produce grass, herbs, and plants, for the
sustenance of living creatures. And Job: Densae nubes tugurium ejus: Job 22.15.
The thick clouds are his dwelling place. And David: Nubem expandit Deus pro
tegumento: God spreads abroad the clowd for a covering. And Moses: Psalm.
105.39.
Descendit Dominus in nube, and loquutus est ad eum: The Lord descended in a
clowd and spoke unto him. But all this which is said touching this point, is
notably expressed in these words of Samuel: Numb. 11.35.
Inclinavit IEHOVA coelos and descendit, and caligo sub pedibus ejus, and
ascendit super Cherubin, and volavit, and lapsus est super pens venti: Posuit
tenebras in circuitu suo la^ibulum, cribrans aquas de nubibus coelorum, prae
fulgore in conspectu ejus nubes accensae sunt: IEHOVA did bow down or incline
the heavens and ascended, 2 King. 21.8.
and darkness was under his feet, and he ascended upon a Cherubin, and did fly
and glide upon the wings of the wind: He made darkness his hiding place,
sifting out waters from the clouds of heaven, and the clouds are set on fire at
the sight of him, etc. In which relation of holy Writ, what I have spoken
before is notably set forth. For first it is said, that God ascended or mounted
on the Cherubin, which is an airy Angel; then that he did glide upon the wings
of the wind: arguing thereby that the air being animated by the Angelical
Spirit was made a wind, in the which the Word or Spirit of God did move: and
then after this, he in and by the wind did shape out his dark Tabernacle: For
it is said: He made darkness his hiding place; that is, he made the dark clouds
his Chariot: For David has it thus, Psalm. 104.3.
Nubes densae vehiculum, seu currus Dei, qui itat super alas venti: The thick
clouds are a vehicle or Chariot of God, Psalm. 67.17.
who rides or walks upon the wings of the winds. In another place it is
called Mons Dei coagulatus, in quo been placitum est Deo inhabitare: The
condensed, curdled, or coagulated Mountain of God, in which it is pleasing unto
him to dwell. So that it is evident, that the Spirit of God moves the
Angelical Spirit, the Angelical Spirit exciteth and informs the air with a
windy nature: Forasmuch as by his moving in it, the air is made a windy
spirit, and therefore the Prophet said, Qui facis Angelos ventos; then, that
animated air by opposite Angelical Spirits, incited by one and the same
Divinity, does reduce the common air into clouds, which are the Chariots of
him, who essentially does act and operate all these things, by diverse Organs
one within another, which vary in dignity from one another: For by how much the
more internal a thing is, the more worthy, and noble, or veruous it is
esteemed, because they approach nearest unto that essence in Divinity, which
acts and operateth centrally all in all. That God does move in the Thunders,
speaks out of the whirlwind and clouds, and is at his pleasure a consuming
fire; and that he operateth centrally in the winds, clouds, Snow, and Tempests,
and that all these are effected by his Spirit of Wisdom; the Scriptures do
here and there in most places express. And therefore it is vainly said that the
clouds only move by the Sunbeams, or the external pushing winds, caused of so
vain impossible Principles as Aristotle tells us, when it is the Tabernacle
in which that Eternal Spirit is pleased to abide, or a Chariot in which he is
delighted to ride, whose horses (as Zachary says) are the winds, or rather the
Cherubinicall Spirits, which he does animate. So that the volunty or centrall
principle of the motion is in the clowd, but the Angels and winds are the
Ministers or organicall Agents, which move according unto the willer, wherefore
though we proved before that the air was thickened into clouds, and that the
following wind did drive them before it, yet the willer and commander of this
Generation of clouds by the winds, was the only and essential internal
principle or centrall mover in the clouds, which by his will made his Ministers
to move him, Prove. 30.20.
where or to what purpose he pleased. And, therefore Solomon: Sapientia ejus
abyssi ruperunt sese, and coeli distillant rorem: By his Wisdom the abyss
brake forth, Job 37. Job 28.
and did rain down the dew. And, Flante Deo concrescit gelu: God blowing, the
Ice is gathered together. Again, Sapientia aptat pondus ae^i, and appendit
aquas in mensura: Wisdom does proportion the weight of the air, and hangs
the waters in measure, etc.

We may therefore boldy conclude against both Aristotle, and all other doctrine
of the Ethnicks, that neither the earth nor the water are the immediate
fountains of the clouds, but the heavens or air which is the Treasure-house of
God; neither is it the cold of the middle region of the air, which condenseth
any imaginary surging or ascending vapors arising from beneath; but that
centrall animating Spirit born or gliding on the wings of the wind, residing
but not inclusively in the cloud, who according unto his pleasure, by the means
of his organicall Ministers, the Angelical winds, fashioneth forth the clouds,
to serve as a cover or tabernacle unto it. And therefore the cloud acts not
by the heat of the Sun, but by the Divine Light that is centrally in it, which,
as an Emperor, sits upon the Cherubins, which are airy and windy Angels, as
the Seraphins are fiery Spirits, and so moves upon the wings of the wind or
air, which his Angelical Cherubin does animate. So that in and by the windy
Organ, he is said to blow when and where he list. Wisd. 7.
It is (I say) the Eternal Spirit of Wisdom, which is in brightness and
virtue more noble then the Sun of Heaven, as Solomon testifies: For as much as
it also gives life and splendour unto the Sun. And therefore it is said to
excel the Sun in brightness, which is the only efficient cause, or formal
and essential Agent in this business, and consequently neither the Sun, or any
other of the created host of Heaven. It is (I say again) the all-creating
Spirit, and not the created, which is the general act, and only formal mover
in the Meteors, whom his Angelical Ministers (which do ever stand before this
Lord of all the earth, that I may speak with the Prophet Zachary) are ready to
assist as Organs or isntrumental causes to execute his will. It is (I say) the
essential wind or Spirit, which blows from the center of the cloud, and
moves or inciteth his spiritual created Organs, according unto his will: For
by it his Spirit also moves in the Angels and winds, causing them to effect
his Command; according unto David's assertion: Wherefore we may see by this
which is said, how incongruous is this opinion of the Ethnic Peripatetick,
unto the Truth, and how far it derogateth from the right of God's Word, and
consequently what an error it is in our Christian Philosophers, to follow and
imitate his learning, with such a devotion and fervency, as if they were
Theodidacti, taught by God himself: when in verity his doctrine does rather
dissuade Christians from the knowledge of him in his works, then instruct them
therein, being it persuades them, that things are effected both in heaven
above, and in the earth, and in the waters beneath, by vain ways and
accidentally; that is to say, merely by natural causes only, and so would
blemish the honor and reputation of Him, who in verity is all in all, and
operateth all in all; and that not by constraint, as the vain Peripatetick
imagines, but according unto his Will, as it is proved before.

CHAP. VI.
The true and essential Definition, or rather description of a Cloud is set
forth in this Chapter.

WEll then, will they reply, Let us understand how you can better define, or
describe the nature of a clowd, according unto that holy Philosophy, and true
Wisdom which you seem to profess. To the which I answer: that I am willing, and
that after a diverse manner, though agreeing in one unity of Essence.

A clowd is the revealing and making manifest of the invisible mundan spirit,
which is hidden in the treasury of God, namely, the heavens, by the centrall
operation of the divine wisdom, and his windy ministers, being incited
thereunto by the will of God, into a vaporous heap or clowdy substance, which
the said spirit of wisdom erecteth for his secret place or vehicle, to move in;
and for the effecting of his will, as well in heaven above, as in the earth and
waters beneath.

Or, after this manner;

A clowd is the reducing of the invisible air, into a visible, thick, and
gloomy consistence, which is by the will of God effected, through the
concurrence or meeting together of opposite or transversall winds, for the
accomplishment of his secret will and pleasure.

Or else, thus;

A clowd is a certain visible condensed heap of air, the which the Spirit of
wisdom being expansed every where, does make and compose as it were of nothing,
that is to say, of an airy invisible somewhat, which it extracteth out of his
mystical treasury, to do and effect the will of God, as well in heaven as in
earth.

In which definitions, or rather descriptions, the material substance seems
to be a coagulated mist, or condensed mass or heap of air, the formal cause
is set out in the shape and form of the clowd; the efficient cause, or centrall
agent, is the essential act of the divine wisdom, who employeth and exciteth
his windy ministers, to work externally by the way of compression. We have also
the magazine or treasury, out of which the substance of the winds is produced,
namely, the heavens or air, which is termed, Arca Dei thesauraria, The chist
or cabinet of Gods treasures. To conclude, the final cause is manifested in
this, that the clowd is ordained to bring forth the effects, as well of Gods
clemency and benignity, as of his severity and anger.

Now for the defense of the first part of these descriptions, we find it thus
written, Deus sapientia sua apt at pondus aeri and appendit aquas in mensura,
facit pluviae statuta and viam fulgetro tonitruum, etc. God does by his wisdom
proportionate the weight of the air, Job 28.25.
and hangs the waters or clouds in measure, assigns laws unto the rain,
and makes a way unto the lightnings of the thunder. That is to say, according
unto the will and ordination of the divine Spirit, the air or substance of
heaven is changed from a lighter or thinner estate or weight, unto a heavier or
thicker, the degrees of which mutation are expressed in the words following;
for first it was air, then clouds, then rain, or vulgar water. Also the Text
does seem to make the lightnings internal or formal light of the clowd, which
is not revealed, but by the violation or ruption of the compound, and ablation
of darkness. Again, it is said by Job, (as is already related) Aer
condensabitur in nubes, Ecclus. 43.
and ventus transiens fugabit eas; The air will be thickened into clouds. And
touching the clouds of snow, Congregatio spiritus aspergit nivem, The air
being gathered together, does scatter the snow on the earth.

Touching the efficient cause, it appears to be God, or the eternal Wisdom;
and therefore in the precedent Text it is said, Deus sapientia sua aptat pondus
aeri, and appendit aquas vel nubes in mensura: God by his wisdom hangs or
ballanceth the waters or clouds in measure. And again, Nubibus densis obtegit
Deus coelos, God covers the heavens with thick clouds. Psalm. 147.8.
But all this is sufficiently expressed before. As for the final cause, set
down in the foresaid definitions, it is confirmed by Scriptures in this
fashion, Pro irrigatione fatigat Deus den sam nubem, and dispergit lucem nubis
suae, Job 37.40.
quodcunque praecipit illis faciendum in terra sive ad flagellum, sive ad
faciendam beneficentiam efficiet ut presio sit. God wearieth the thick clowd
for the watering of the earth, and he disperseth every where the light of his
clowd, whatsoever he commands them to be done upon the earth, whether it be
for a scourge, or else in favor and benignity, Baruch 6.60.
he makes them to be ready to accomplish it. And Baruch says, When God
commands the clouds that they pass over the whole earth, they perform what
is commanded them. So that we see, these creatures are drawn out of their
secret dwellings, to do the will of him that created them.

CHAP. VII.
How by our experimental Instrument, the reas^n of the composition of clouds
is ocularly demonstrated. A so in this, the Snow is defined falsely and truly.

NOw I think it most fit to demonstrate unto you, how the clouds are
procreated, by the opposite blast of two winds of a contrary nature, namely, of
the Southerly wind in eminency and dominion, and a Northerly spirit which also
blows, but insensibly. I told you in the Chapter, where I did demonstrate by
our experimental Instrument, the reason of the Southerly winds which happen in
winter, that as the air included in the Weather-glasse, did by the only touch
of a warm hand dilate it self, and in dilatation fly from the hand of the
toucher, unto the cold region of the water, which was evidently proved and
maintained, because the water did suddenly thereupon move downward: So also
the gross winter air in the southern hemisphear, did at the approach of the
Sun unto the parts beyond the Line, dilate it self, by virtue of that
ever-acting and subtiliating spirit, which put his tabernacle in the Sun; so
that the southern dilated air posted apace, or flew hastily away, to seek a
larger place; but coming into the northern hemisphear, (which by reason of the
Sun's absence, became brumall or wintry) the constant air of that region being
now contracted by the northern cold, and the north wind, by reason of the colds
dominion, blowing more or less, though insensibly, it meeting with the warm
southerly spirit, condenseth it with the rest into clouds; and this is the
reason, that always almost, (and that is, where no northern blasts are
discerned) that the southerly winds do bring abundance of clouds and rain with
them, for that the hot southerly virtue of the divine agent, does more and more
subtiliate and rarifie the winter air which it found there, till it had by
rarefaction purified it, and reduced it unto the nature of a true Summer air;
so that the superfluous parts of the air after rarefaction, were chased away
(as is said) into the northern region, where it is condensed again, partly by
the privative act of the divine puissance, and partly by the spissitude of the
northern air, which denies it free passage into the form of clouds: For the
cold spisse air of the northern hemisphear, agitated and animated by the
northern blast or property, resists the hot vaporous air, and so it
condenseth by little and little.

To conclude, I could here set down the Aristotelian definitions of the snow,
frost, hail, ice, and such like other meteors; and then check and contradict
them mainly, by other true descriptions of them, proved by the testimony of
holy writ. As for example, Aristotle seems to aver, that the snow is a clowd,
congealed by the great cold, which before it be perfectly dissolved into water
by a vaporous disposition, it is changed into a snowy substance. In which
definition, because he is ignorant, as has been proved already, in the fabric
of a clowd, we ought in no case believe him. Again, he digresseth from the
tenor of Scriptures, according unto the mind whereof, we have defined the snow
thus.

The Snow is a meteor which God draws forth of his hidden treasury, in the
form of wool, to effect his will upon the earth, either by way of punishment or
clemency.

Or thus.

The Snow is a creature produced out of the air, or heavenly treasury of God,
by the cold breath or blast of the divine spirit, in the form of wool, to
perform his will on the earth.

Where the fountain of his original substance is made the air, or the matter
of the heavens; and therefore the Text has it, Congregatio speritus aspergit
nivem, The gathering together or condensation of the spirit, ^^clus. 43.
ingendereth and sprinkleth the snow upon the earth. Job 38. Psalm. 143.16.
And Job, Pervenistine in the sauris nivis? Came thou into the treasury of
the snow? Also the form and efficient cause is expressed thus, Deus verbo suo
nives emittit sicut lanam, coram frigore ejus quis consistat? God by his word
sends out the snow like wool, who is able to resist his cold? So that God by
his Word, which does operate in his privative property by his cold, is the
essential, efficient, and omnipotent actor, in the production of the snow.

I could (I say) effect all this at large, but because my mind is not to dwell
upon on these particulars, forasmuch as in the description of the clowd, I have
sufficiently pointed at the rest, I will proceed unto my enquiry touching
Aristotle's opinion, concerning the beginning of fountains, that we may
perceive thereby, whether he have erred as far in that mystery, as he has done
in the rest.

CHAP. VIII.
What Aristotle's opinion is, touching the generation of Fountains and Rivers,
and whether he in his opinion does jump with the verity of the true wisdom.

SInce therefore it is apparent, that Aristotle's doctrine is erroneous and
deceiptfull, touching the generation and essence of the winds and clouds, we
purpose in the third place to bring his judgment and opinion, concerning the
beginning and original of fountains and rivers, unto the touchstone of
truth, that thereby we may perceive, whether it will endure the trial, and not
shrink (as the proverb is) in the wetting.

The Peripateticks, as well Christians as Gentiles, are as much deceived in
their meteorologicall grounds, concerning the generation of fountains and
rivers, as in the rest, of which we have spoken before; and therefore their
Master Aristotle (all things being well pondered in the balance of justice)
ought to be accounted of all true Christians, for a seducer and deceiver of the
world; and consequently his doctrine touching this point, ought of right to be
repudiated and rejected.

Aristotle, with his peripateticall sect or faction, are of opinion, that being
the belly or bowels of the earth is full of cavities, and hollow passages;
vapors, to avoid vacuity, must needs ascend from the center or bottom of it,
the which cleaving in their ascent unto the sides of the hollow vaults, and
streighter passages or veins of the earth, do resolve into water, which
distilling down by drops, do engender fountains and rivers.

In the which opinion of theirs they conclude, that the matter of fountains is
nothing else, but a vapor arising from the bottom of the earth, and resolved,
liquefied, or condensed into water, through cold and heat together within the
earth; no otherwise then after their saying, the clowd, rain, snow, and hail do
arise, and are generated in the air of a vapor, first condensed, and
afterward liquefied.

But if we shall duly examine every member of this their description, we shall
perceive, that they require as well a double matter, as formal agent in this
generation of fountains; for they faign, that the remote matter is a vapor,
and then the near and immediate matter they imagine to be drops of water, which
are caused by the concretion or condensation of that vapor. Also they make
their two efficient causes, cold and heat; for, say they, it is the office of
cold to condense and congeal the included vapor into water, and that it is the
heat and cold together, which makes the water fluxible and moovable. Let it
therefore be lawful for me ( judicious Reader) to answer these Peripatetick
Philosophers, with an over-worn axiom of their own, and consequently to fight
with them at their own weapons. Their axiom is, Erustra fit per plura quod
fieri potest per pauciora. That is vainly done or effected by many, which may
be effected by less. Now if that this original work in the producing of
fountains, may be performed most conveniently by one and the self-same subject
of water, without the altering of it, first, into vapor by subtiliation, and
afterward by condensing again that subtle vapor into water; Then I make no
doubt but you will conclude with me, that this Peripatetick definition is vain,
imaginary, and sophistical, by their own rules. But I will make it apparent
hereafter, by an ocular demonstration, that it is possible by a course in
nature only, that water without any alteration of his consistence, may by the
secret veins, and close passages or conduits of the earth, be drawn or sucked
up out of the huge seas, unto the top or summity of the mountains, after by his
soaking through the sands, and pory substance of the earth, it has left his
salt nature behind it; which appearing evidently to every man's sense, the
vanity of Aristotle's invention will soon be discovered unto wise men. Besides
all this, the sterility of his reason or invention, which would faign, that
these vapors cleaving unto the sides of the caverns or hollow places, and that
there (forsooth) they must be converted into drops of water, which from thence
must issue forth into rivers, will be palpable and manifest, if we consider,
that these drops so made, are apter to circulate, and readier to fall down
again into the bowels of the earth, from whence they came, by those self-same
vaulty passages or hollow veins, through which they ascended, than to issue
forth of the ground allaterally, because that every heavy thing is more prone
to descend, then to move sidelong. And therefore it is likely, that either all
the waters so made, or the greater part must needs return downward by the way
it came or ascended in the form of vapor. But omitting these reasons for a
while, we must see if the Text, which is contained in the Book of Verity, do
consent in this Opinion with Aristotle and his faction, yea or no.

We find in the first place, that it is not an accidental and imaginary heat
or cold, that acts in this Meteor's Generation, but God who operateth by his
Angelical Spirits, and solar act in the accomplishment of this business. And
although that in his action, as well privative as positive, cold and heat do
express themselves as his Ministers: For the Text says, Coram frigore ejus
quis consistat: Who can stand against his cold? Yet it is his catholic
positive act, which he extends out of his sunny Tabernacle, and hotter winds,
and privative virtue, which he manifests in the longinquity and absence of
his bright Tabernacle, from the region pointed at, and the propinquity of the
polar seat of the colder winds, to alter annually the created Element. And
therefore it is God which by his Spiritual Organs, as well in Heaven above, as
Earth and Water beneath, that operateth all things, and amongst the rest,
produces the Fountains of which the rivers are made. Wisd. 1.
And consequently we ought to esteem it the Act of God's Spirit which fills
the earth, (as Solomon says) and operateth all the natural effects therein.
Psalm. 104.10.
Which also David does testify in these words: Qui emittis fontes per valles,
ut inter montes ambulent and potum praebeant omnibus animantibus agri, frangant
onagri sitim suam: Qui irrig at montes e caenaculis suis, faciens ut germinet
foenum adjumenti, and herbam ad hominis usum: Who sends forth the fountains
through the valleys, that they may run between the mountains, and give drink
unto every living creature of the field, that the Ass may quench his thirst,
and that they may water the mountains from their cells, causing the grass to
grow for the use of the Ox, and the herb for the benefit of man, etc. So that
here we have the sole catholic Agent, and therefore the Operator of fountains
as is proved by this Text. Again, here we have the final cause set down, for
the which they were created and continued in succession by God, namely to water
the earth; for the giving drink unto all cattle, and living creatures, and for
the multiplying of grass, herbs, trees, and fruit, for the use as well of man
as beast. But will our Peripateticks say, we hear no news out of Scripture, for
the contradicting of our matter assigned for the composition, or consistence of
Fountains, which we say to be a vapor, and not water, in its natural
substance: Nevertheless, to qualify this their imagination, and to make them
behold the Truth without Spectacles, I counsel them to give ear unto this
assertion of Solomon: Omnia flumina (says he) intrant in mare, and mare non
redundat, ad locum unde exeunt revertuntur ut iterum fluant: All rivers enter
into the Sea, and it is never the bigger, they return unto the place from
whence they came, Eccles. 1.
that they might flow again. By the which Speech of the wiseman, expressing
the material cause of Fountains, the foresaid definition of Aristotle is
utterly othrown, for this does evidently prove, that it is one and the
self-same water, and that in the plain form of water, without any transmutation
of it out of water into vapor, and then from vapor into water again, as he
does erroneously allege, which moves from the Sea unto the Mountains, and
from the Mountains unto the Sea again: Insomuch that for this only error,
some of his earnest disciples have become Apostates, or renegado's unto his
doctrine: For Joannes Velcurius, (a learned man in the worldly Philosophy, and
one who has sweat and taken great pains in the Aristotelian doctrine: insomuch
that he wrote a Comment on his Physics) when he comes to speak of the
Generation of Fountains, Lib. 3. Com. Phys. cap. 6.
he seems to confess and publish his Master's folly in these words: Non
convenient plane Sacrae Scripturae cum Physicis de ortu fluminum and fontium;
quae ex mari per varios alveos meatusque fluere ac ad suos fontes refluere
(Eccles. 1.) testatur dicens. Omnia flumina intrant in mare, and mare non
redundat; a^ locum unde exeunt flumina reve^tuntur ut iterum fluant. Caeterum
Physici dicunt materiam esse vaporem resolutum in aquam, and liquefactum a
frigore et calore simul intra terram: The holy Scriptures do not agree with the
Naturalists, concerning the Original of Rivers and Fountains, which
(Ecclesiastes 1.) says to flow by diverse channels or passages out of the Sea,
and to flow again unto their Fountains, saying, All rivers enter into the Sea,
and the Sea is not the greater, they return again unto the place from whence
they came, etc. Whereby it is plain, that he must accuse his Master of false
doctrine, or else he must condemn Solomon in his Judgment. For if the one be
contradictory unto the other, it ought of all wisemen to be chased away, or
expelled from Christian men's remembrance: Now it were a foolish thing for any
religious person to say, that the divinely-wise Solomon lied, to save the
reputation of the Ethnic of diabolically wise Aristotle. But if they would,
yet will I teach them in the next Chapter, by an evident ocular demonstration,
that Solomon's assertion is most true, and that of Aristotle's most erroneous
and fantastical.

I conclude therefore, that I gather out of the aforesaid places of the Bible,
that this following Definition does best agree with the nature of a Fountain.

A Fountain is a continuated Flux of water, issuing from the Sea, as from his
beginning, and flowing into bowels of the earth* and after that from the
bowels of the earth, as from the mean by which it passes, unto the upper or
higher Superficies of it, by virtue of the divine act, in the mundan Spirit, as
well positive or dilative, as privative and contractive; for the benefit and
sustenance both of man and beast. In which definition, plain water without any
alteration of his shape, is expressed for the material cause, and is said to
have its beginning from the Sea, from whence it moves unto the Mountain's
tops. The efficient cause of this work, we find to be the act of the Divine
Word, in a double property, as shall be more at large demonstrated in the next
Chapter. And, hereupon Solomon said, Sapientia erat apu^ IEHOVAM in principio
viae suae cuncta componens, qua^do roborabat fontes abyssi, and ponebat mari
statum: Wisdom was with JEHOVAH in the beginning of his ways, as a composer
of all things, when he did establish the Fountains of the abyss, and set the
Sea within his limits or bounds. And lastly, The final cause is to give drink
and food unto both man and beast, as we may gather out of the forementioned
Text of the royal Prophet. We come now unto the demonstration.

CHAP. IX.
Wherein Solomon's assertion touching the Fountains and Rivers, is maintained;
partly by an ocular demonstration, and partly by true Philosophical reasons,
which are founded thereon.

I Did advertise you (Learned Reader) in my precedent discourse, that Gods
Spirit does operate annually in the common Element of the Sublunary world, by a
double virtue, whereof the one is dilative, which is effected in his positive,
and manifest property, namely in his light, active, and warm disposition, the
principal Treasury and storehouse whereof he has made the Sun: Forasmuch as
his bright emanating Spirit of Wisdom, did elect that pure vessel for his
Tabernacle. The other is contractive, which is effected in his privative, and
secret condition, namely in his dark fixing and cooling disposition, whose
principal treasury is about the poles: Forasmuch as it being contrary in
effect with the first, is seated in the farthest quarters or points of the
world from the Sun. So that as the vivifying Spirit which is seated in the Sun,
does by his presence, operate only by dilatation in the common sublunary
Element, in banishing of the Northern cold, and undoing the actions thereof, by
the way of Rarefaction: In like manner by the absence of the Sun, the spirits
of the Polar property, does take possession of that portion of the Element, and
undoeth by the way of congelation, all the subtle actions of the Spiritual
and active solar virtue. As for example; all that in the winter time among the
nations of the Southern world, that is to say, beyond the line, the Sun being
then in the Northern Hemisphere, causing by his virtuous Spirit our Summer
season, the Antartick pole's cold property does effect, namely in thickning the
air; raising the Fountains or Springs, and multiplying the waters, producing
the Snows, Frost, Ice, and Hail: mortifying the herbs, fruits, and plants, and
such like, the Sun at his next visitation of those quarters, which will be in
our Northern winter, by the vetue of that dilating and vivifying Spirit, from
the Fountain and Father of Light, which abounds in it, will undo; converting
the thick air to thin, striking down the Fountains more toward the bowels of
the Earth, which were raised in the winter: dissolving the Snow, Frost, ice,
and hail, and of fix and opake bodies, making them movable and transparent
waters, reviving the spirit of the trees, plants, and herbs, which were almost
livelesse through congelation, and renewing their mourning bodies with new
green garments, blossoms, and flowers, and lastly, with wholesome fruit. To
con^lude, there is nothing that the polar cold prevails over in the one
hemisphear, but the solar heat operateth contrarily by the same p^oportion in
the oppo^ite region of the world; for else the world must endure an
augmentation, or a diminution in its substance, that is, sometimes it would be
bigger, and sometimes lesser: But, as S^lomon averred, that the seas, for all
the coming in of rivers, are never the greater, so also, though fountains rise
in one part of the world, and sink in another; and although also the air by
attenuation, made by the active spirit of the Lord, moves from the warm or
summer hemisphear, unto the cold and winter hemisphear, yet is the world no
bigger or lesser in its existency, for all that. What therefore the winter
properly does operate in one hemisphear of the world, the summer-hemisphear
must needs act in the same proportion in the contrary; for if beyond the Line
are made great raines in their winter, we must needs have great drought in the
summer on this side the Line. When it is hottest with us, it will be coldest
with them; if it prove temperate with us, it will be so with them; as the Sun
being in the Aequinoctiall, makes days and nights equally long, and the
season temperate to both hemispheares. These things therefore being considered
maturely in the first place, I proceed unto my practical conclusion: and my
natural observation thereupon is, that the air included in the Weather-glasse
is made Hybernall, or of the nature of winter, by the dominion of cold; for as
soon as the head of it feels the external cold, the contained air will
immediately shrinck up, and contract it self into a little space, and
consequently the air is made more dense and thick: and that this is so, it
appears by the mounting or attracting up of the water, for there is such a
natural tie betwixt the one and the other, that if the one contracteth it self
in a narrower place, namely the air, then the water will immediately mount up
with it, and to it, because it is contiguous unto the air. By this therefore
it is apparent, that the contracting and attracting virtue of the northern
spirit, or rather divine puissance, which is made manifest in cold, does first
attract, contract, and condense the dilated air, and then the air so
contracted by the northern spirit, does draw or attract the water from beneath
upwards, and that without altering of that water which was beneath, in any
thing from that which is above; so that in conclusion, it is but one and the
self-same water. Lo here therefore it is by this demonstration proved feazible
and possible, that water may be sucked and drawn from the caverns of the earth,
which is fostered and maintained by the sea, even unto the top of the high
mountains, and that by a natural means or operation, without any necessity of
altering the form of the water into vapor, as Aristotle does vainly surmize,
and that contrary unto his axiom, Frustra fit per plura quod fieri potest per
pauciora, That is vainly done by many, which may be effected by a fewer.
Contrariwise we see and observe in the Weather-glasse, that if the dilative
virtue of the present Sun or hot winds, does heat the head of the
Weather-glasse, or inflame the outward air, then the air within the glass
will also dilate it self, and by its dilatation will strike down or precipitate
the water, that the air contracted by cold had sucked or drawn up; and again,
the visible sinking of the water does point at, and prove, the invisible
dilatation of the air.

CHAP. X.
That the actions of contraction and dilatation, and consequently of attraction
and expulsion of air in the Weather-glasse, with the effects of the elevation
and depression of the water which are caused thereby, are most conveniently
applied unto the air and water in the world.

WE must consider, (as I have said before) that the catholic air and water in
the world, fills the whole vaulty cavity thereof no otherwise, then the air
in the Weather-glasse fills the hollowness thereof; so that the fountains of
all the world issuing from one sea, do seem to penetrate into the bowels of
the earth, and fill the general veins thereof, being sucked and drawn up unto
them by that self-same reason, by the which the water is exalted into the
uppermost part of the neck of the glass; and by this reason there is an
evident relation between the fountains of the northern hemisphear, and those
of the southern, forasmuch as it is expressed before, that the southerly air,
which is on that side the Aequinoctiall line, is continued in his homogeneall
nature with that on this side the line: So that the flying dilated air passes
from the south, and is condensed into clouds in the north. Wherefore it is
apparent, that the matter which feeds the fountains in the north, are more or
less continuated unto those of the south, as the waters that are raised up
into the highest degree of the glass are continued with them in the lower all
which is fed and maintained with the pot of water, which we compare unto the
sea.

We conclude therefore thus, when the hot spirit of the Sun in the depth of
Summer, does marvellously rarifie the air in our northern hemisphear, then
that air seeking every where to make place for her enlarged spirits, (as we
see in the extracting of the spirit of Vitriol, it breaks the Receiver, to
seek a larger place to abide in) does no otherwise depresse and beat down the
northern fountains, by dilating it self, than the air included in the glass
does the water that is therein. And again, the cold which at that season does
domineer in the southern part, by reason of the absence of the Sun, does as
fast suck, attract, or draw up the fountains of that part, by the contracting
of that air, no otherwise, then the external cold does contract the air in
the Weather-glass, and by contraction attracteth and sucketh or draws up the
water therein. So that here we have two means of raising and depressing of
fountains, for as the spirits calefying act does strike them down over all the
northern hemisphear in the Summer; so the spirits cold act does raise them up
in the southern hemisphear, in which winter has his dominion. So that there
are two agents to pull it down, or to depress it in the northern parts, namely,
the present northern Sun, or divine positive act, and the absent southern cold,
or divine privative act. Again, when the Sun is removed from the northern
regions into the southern, having passed the Aequinoctiall bar, the self-same
effects will happen, but in contrary parts, namely, then the cold of the north
will help to raise them in the north, and pull them down in the south; and
again, the southern heat will depresse them in the south, and consequently help
to raise them up in the north. This is demonstrated thus:

In which figure, EFG is the northern hemisphear, where the Sun is absent, and
therefore winter inhabiteth there, and cold has his dominion. EHG is the
southern hemisphear, where the Sun is present, and therefore summer dwells
there* and heat has dominion. EG is the Aequinoctiall line, which is as it
were the bar, that divides the northern region from the southern. A and B is
the hollow vein in the earth, which continues from the northern region to the
southern, that there might be a relation between, or continuation in some
measure, of the northern and southern waters, as well as of the northern and
southern air of heaven; for being the wide sea D. which stretches from north
to south, is the head, from whence all springs and rivers do originally arise,
I see no reason that it should seem strange to any man, that I say, the
northern fountains have relation by a continuity of substance unto the
southern, and therefore the southern unto the northern. Wherefore I conclude,
that when the catholic northern air of the hemisphear EFG is cold, it sucketh
or contracteth unto it the air in the vein of the earth A, the which air
being contracted, elevateth of the water out of the wide sea D, as is evidently
demonstrated by the Weather-glasse; for when the cold external air has
contracted by congelation the air in the head and neck of the glass, (which
head and neck I compare unto the vein in the earth; for the vein of the earth
is close, and expireth no way) then the water is drawn up by the contraction of
the air, out of the vast water in the pot or basin, which I compare unto the
sea. On the other side, in the summer or southern hemisphear EHG, where the Sun
is present, the catholic air is subtiliated or rarefied; and dilating of the
air about the fountain* and in the cavity of the vein, beats down and
abaseth the water in the southern mouth of the vein in the earth B, toward C:
so that oftimes in the summer, the springs are found either dried altogether,
or at the leastwise much depressed. Now therefore I say, that by reason of the
depression of the waters in the summerly south, by way of subtiliation of the
air, and exhausting or drawing them up in the winterly north by the cold, the
water is the apter to be raised in the cold north. Again, the elevation of the
waters in the north, which were the summer before depressed, is effected by the
empty aire's contraction, which possesses the place in the summer time in the
vein of earth where the water was, as we see in the Weather-glasse, and by the
dilation of the air in the south, the water is easily there hid in the earth.
So that it appears, that it is partly driven and pressed down in the south by
heat, and consequently with the greater ease drawn up at the north, and partly
elevated in the north by the cold winter: as if a chord were put into a hole of
a great piece of timber, downward at one end, and did ascend upward at the
other, thus:

If from the north A the chord be strongly pulled up; and again from the south
B it be as strongly pushed or depressed down, it will the easier sink by the
south B, and mount in the north A.

The self-same will happen, but in contrary order, when the Sun, and
consequently summer is in the northern hemisphear EFG, for then the springs
will be there depressed, and in the southerly parts exalted. The seas draining
or soaking into the bowels of the earth D, being the commune medium, or
cistern of both extremes, as well to receive the water pressed down, and
distributing upward of that superfluity unto the surging, increasing, or winter
fountains.

Thus therefore do you see evidently, Eccles. 1.
how Solomon's saying is proved true, All rivers run into the sea, and the sea
is not the greater; they return into the place from whence they came, that they
may run or flow again.

But let us examine Aristotle's opinion a little better, that we may the more
plainly express the absurdity thereof: If that it were a vapor which was sent
up out of the bowels of the earth, it must proceed from some mighty heat which
must alter that great mass of cold water, which is in the bowels of the earth,
into that vapor; but admit that this were so, then mark what absurdities would
follow: First, he confesses, that the fountains are colder in the summer than
in the winter, because the external heat does per Ant peristasin, or by a
contrary act preserve and keep in, and therefore multiply the inward cold of
the earth; which being so, as it appears by the coldness of fountains in the
summer, then by that self-same reason, this fortified cold of the earth in the
summer season, must needs also keep in, preserve, and fortify in the center of
the earth, that inward heat which causes those vapors, which are the
original of fountains. Mark the conclusion, for if that be so, namely, that
the centrall heat in the summer should be greater, then would the vapors be in
greater abundance in summer, for the greater the fire is, the more will be the
smoke. And again, by reason of the great cold in the caverns of the earth,
those vapors would be more suddenly condensed into watery drops, and
consequently by that means, we should have higher Fountains, greater Floods,
and more swelling Rivers in the Summer time then in the Winter; all which
experience teaches us to be erroneous; and, to conclude, Aristotle's assertion
in this must needs be false. But it will be (I know) objected, that it is
manifested unto the eye, that standing ponds, and such like humid places, are
dried by the Summer heat, and how can that be, but because the Sun does attract
the moisture and consumes it by converting it into vapors? I answer: For the
first, that the Sun does not draw but only rarify, and then the thing rarefied
does tend upward. But that the Sun should spend all those moistures of Lakes
and Ponds that way, namely by converting in into air; If that were possible, I
will tell you what absurdity would follow, namely that the Sun by reducing all
the waters into vapors, should thicken the air, when contrariwise our
Weatherglass teaches us by that model of air, which is contained in it, that
it does attenuate and rarify the air and not thicken it. Again, a greater
error would fall foul on the neck of Aristotle's Doctrine concerning the
Generation of clouds, if this were so. For whereas his Opinion is, that a clowd
is generated from vapors extracted out of the earth and water, by the
attractive force of the Sun and Stars; it would follow then, that in the
Summertime we should have more clouds and more rain then in the winter: But
this is as false as the rest. But I say rather, that because the air is more
rare and thin in the Summer, by reason of the presence of the divine act in the
Sun, which rarifieth and attenuateth the air by his assidual action, and
therefore we have fewer clouds in the Summer* For (as I proved before) the
clouds are made by the compression of air, and the air again is by a circular
course renewed, by the resolution of those Meteors it produced into their first
invisible matter which was but air. I must confess that some part of the
waters are subtiliated and by dilatation thrust into the winter Hemisphere, but
the greatest part does sink down by the insensible pores of the dry and thirsty
earth, which drinks it up, and keeps it in her bowels, till it be sucked
out by the contraction of the air, which fills the pores and cracks thereof:
which contraction happens by the cold of the winter following. For we see
that if there be but a Hogshead full of water, it will endure a long time
before the hot Sun will exhale it by subtiliation. Moreover, it is certain that
what the Sun does rarify in the day time, so that it rises in a vaporous form
upon the earth; in the night time, it falls commonly again in foggy mists and
dew. So that it is removed out of a contracted place, and dilated and
besprinkled in mist and dew over the wide and spacious fields. Now that this is
so, it is made evident, because we shall ever observe, that the Summer mists
and dew is most frequent about Lakes and Rivers. I will for a conclusion of
this Book and whole Section, only examine our princely Peripateticks Opinion,
touching the Lightnings and the Thunders, that we may perceive therein also the
validity of his Physical Doctrine.

CHAP. XI.
The Lightnings and Thunders are described in this Chapter, according unto
Aristotle's Sentence: which is a^terward confuted by Testimony of Holy-Writ.

HAving thus made a general inquiry into the Philosophy of Aristotle, touching
the Original of the Winds, the Clouds, and Fountains, I cannot now but enter
into his thoughts, concerning the wonderful beginning or primary causes and
admirable effects of the Lightnings and Thunders, being in verity they are
Meteors of so great marvel, that they require the profoundest speculation to
consider them justly and as they ought to be, and therefore I doubt not but
that if a due examination be made of Aristotle's validity concerning the
research and discovery of so great a mystey, it will be more faulty then all
the rest. Let us then observe in the first place, what his mind is touching the
essence of the Lightnings. Aristotle's Opinion is, that the material cause of
the Lightning, is, a hot and dry exhalation, drawn out of the earth, and
elevated into the middle region of the air, by the virtue of the Stars: where
partly by reason of a strong collision or concussion of clouds, and partly
because of that antiperistasis which is had between the heat of the exhalation
and coldness of the region, that inflamable matter so coarcted into the belly
of the clowd is set on fire, and breaking out of his prison does tend downward,
by reason of his terrestiall and compacted disposition: and he concludes that
the violence of this eruption, Lib. 2. Meteo.
is, that noise which men do commonly call by the name of Thunder. This I say,
is the summary of Aristotle's mind touching the Lightning. And verily,
Aristotle seems in some sort to be excused, if he err in this inquiry, being
that it is a doubt not easily to be resolved, and therefore not only he, but
also all other Philosophers almost have been in^onstant in their resolutions,
touching this point: Forasmuch as therein they have so staggered, and varied in
this research, and have groped as it were by dark, for the finding out of the
true light thereof. For Empedocles judged the Lightning to be caused by the
interception, or stopping of the descent of the Sunbeames. But Anaxagoras would
have it to be a portion of the aethereall or heavenly fire, which descended
from above, into the concavity of the clowd, within the which afterward it was
enclosed; and says, that this light skipping and gliding out of the clouds, is
called the Lightning, the effect of whose breaking forth, is, the Thunder.
Others will have these flashes of fire to proceed from the dry winds; which
being compassed about, compressed or coarctated within the clouds, these clouds
are by them are set on fire, and thereupon comes that noise which follows,
that turmoile in the clouds. And again, many others have otherwise determined
of it. So that we may justly say, touching this point, and that rightly: Quot
homines, tot sententiae. And now concerning the Opinion of Aristotle, it is in
it self so contrary and contradictory unto the authority of the true Wisdom,
that some of his learned Christian Disciples, have in the plain field of the
Peripateticall Combat against the Truth turned tail (as the comm^n phrase is)
and become Apostats or Renegado's or relinquishers of their Faith, which they
had in their Master's sincerity, touching this Doctrine. For we find it thus
written by Margarita Philosophiae (as is before said) Qu dam Philosophorum
considerantes mirabilem fulminis operationem, Murg. Phil. in cap. de fulmine.
ipsum non opus Naturae sed summi Dei effectum immediatum arbitrati sunt: Some
of the Philosophers considering the admirable operation of the Lightnings, have
assuredly held or thought it, not to be a work of nature, but the immediate
effect of the most high God.

But to ^ome unto the particulars of his Definition: He says, that the
material cause of the Lightning is taken from the Earth; the Agent in ^he
elevation is the Astrall virtue, the external, accidental, or adventitious
efficient is the collision, concussion or knocking together of opposite clouds,
by reason of the antiperistasis that is made between the heat of the
Exhalation, and the cold of the aire's middle region; whereby the accension, or
setting on fire the Exhalation, is made* And lastly, He shows the reason,
that the Lightning moves downwards, namely because the Substance or matter
thereof, is terrestiall and of an earthly compaction. I will therefore confute
every one of these particles in order, and that first by Philosophical or
natural reasons, and lastly, by the Authority of the holy Scripture.

As concerning the material Substance of the Lightnings, which he says is a
hot and dry exhalation, and terrestially-compacted Substance, which is derived
from the earth: First, it seems to be but a figment, because it is proved,
that the Stars have no attractive virtue or force, as is proved before. Then,
for that if the windy exhalation, which is light and more apt to arise and
penetrate, by reason of its subtility, be denied passage into the middle region
of the air, much more must this kind of exhalation have his passage barred or
hindered into that cold place, being it is (as he confesses) grosser, more
terrestiall and apter to be inflamed: But this impossibility will also be
demonstrated by the authority of holy Writ, Apoc. 4. Job 36. Psalm. 17.9.
Fulgura procedunt a Throno: Lightning p^oceedeth from the Throne of God.
Again, he is said Fulgur are lumine suo desuper, cardinesque maris operire: To
enlighten with his light from above, and to cover with it the compass of the
Sea. And again, ignis ab ore ejus evolavit: Fire came from his mouth. And
again, Flamma ex ore ejus prodiit: A flame came from his mouth. Job 41.18.
Psalm. 17.
Again, Illuxerunt coruscationes tuae orbi terrae: Thy coruscations or
Lightnings did shine over the earth. Again, Fumus in ira ejus, and ignis a
facie ejus exarsit: Smoke issued from him in his anger, and fire did flame
forth from his face. What? Shall we imagine that this flaming matter was, as
Aristotle faineth, drawn or elected from the earth by the Stars, which God so
familiarly sends forth? or dare any true Christian imagine, that so base and
trivial an excrement of the earth would by the Patriarchs, Prophets, and
Apostles, with such a boldness, be ascribed unto God's essential power, and to
be derived from his presence? Nay, had it not been an impudency in them to say,
in regard of the divineness of the thing, that God is a consuming fire, as we
find it written both in the old and new Testament? or would the Prophet
testify, that he made his angels winds, and his ministers flaming fires? How
basely might a true speculator into the divine mysteries judge, of the
beginning of the Angels and spiritual lights, if their material substance
were accidental exhalation? Again, we are taught, that the heaven or air is
the treasure-house, from out whose bowels the winds, the clouds, the snow, the
hail, and lightnings, and rainbow is extracted, and proportioned by the Spirit
of God to do his will. And therefore, as before, Deus sapientia sua aptat
pondus aeri, and appendit nubes in mensura, Job 28.25.
facit pluviae statuta and viam fulgetro tonitruum: God by his wisdom does
proportionate the weight of the air, and hangs the clouds or waters in
measure, makes laws unto the rain, and a way unto the lightnings of the
thunders. So that it is evident, that the matter of all meteors, be they watery
or fiery, is hewn by the word or wisdom of God out of the catholic air, and
consequently not out of the earth, neither is there any such need of the stars
attraction or elevation in the business, being the pure matter of the
lightnings is evermore in the divine puissance, and reserved in his secret
treasure-house, to be called or chosen out at his will, who has created all
things to work how and which way he pleases; for were it not (I beseech you) a
wondrous thing, that at an instant so great a quantity of exhalations could be
drawn out of the earth, and elevated by the stars, as did suddenly and
unlooked for, rain down fire and brimstone on Sodom and Gomorrah? But our
Aristotelians will say, according unto custom, that it was miraculous. I
answer, that for all that, the meteor was material, for it was fire and
brimstone. Now I would fain know of them, out of what magazine or storehouse
it came, and whether the stars drew it up from the earth, and whether God did
not collect it immediately out of his own aerie or invisible treasury or
storehouse? For St. Paul says, that all visible things were first of things
that were not seen. Secondly, touching the agent, he is more deceived in it
then in the matter; for first, he makes the agent which draws up the
exhalation, the attractive virtue of the stars; then he surmiseth, that the
efficient cause which enlighteneth it, must be partly the dashing together of
two clouds, and partly the contrariety which is between the heat of the
exhalation, and coldness of the place, which meeting together, do cause the
accension of the exhalation. Good God, what a Gallimofry he would make, and
what a confusion of external actions, or efficient causes does he fain? when
there is but only one indeed, which is most internal or essential, that
moves which way it lift, and operateth all in all. Are these superficial,
accidental, and external formal agents, the primary movers and animators of
the bright lightnings? And yet it is said, that God does animate and vivifie
them with his presence. What can we Christians imagine of the Aristotelian
doctrine, when it would faign the immediate act of God in his prime angelical
creatures, to be so poor and mean, as are the adventitious elevations of fumes
by the starry creature, and the concussion of clouds happening by chance, and a
conflict betwixt heat and cold? Verily it was no marvel, if when his invention
did fail in the research of so high a mystery, he was put to such weak shifts,
as in the eyes of wise men are scarce probable: For when we behold the
admirable effects of the lightning, how it pierces the scabbard without any
hurt unto it, and melts the sword, enters the purse, and liquifieth the
money, nay, pierces the barrel or hogshead, and drinks or consumes the
wine, the vessel not altered; yea, and what is more, that it has
understanding and reason to punish wicked contemners of this wondrous work of
God, as having an angelical reason to correct the presumptuous; We cannot but
say of Aristotle, that he is only embued with the wisdom of this world, and
not with that which is from God, seeing that he does foolishly imagine, that
the lightnings have not an internal principle, and most essential agent,
which makes them to work and move at will where they please, even as the wind
is said, spirare ubi vult, to blow where it list. The lightnings, I say) are
agitated and carried when they will, and have consequently a volunty, being
that their internal and centrall agent is that eternal Spirit of wisdom,
which, as Solomon says est omnibus rebus mobilior and sole atque stellis
praestantior, (...). 7.
atque omni re penetrabilior; More movable then all things in this world, and
more worthy in light than the sun and stars, and more piercing than any thing.
Psalm.
And therefore it was rightly said, Amictus lumine quasi vestimento, He is
attired with light as with a garment. And, In lumine numen, in Numine lumen; In
light is divinity, and in divinity is light. And this is the reason of the
brightness in the Lightning, and of his infinite swiftness, and subtle
penetration. And therefore it was but foolishly done of Aristotle, to assign
unto the composition and animation of the lightnings, only external and
adventitious efficient causes, and no internal and essential causes. But I
will tell you two famous stories of certain cases, which happened in our time,
to manifest unto you, that there is a divine volunty in the lightnings.

In Ireland, there were two wenches which came from the market, whereof the one
had bought her a pair of new shoes; these two traveling on foot homeward, and
passing through a field not far from a wood, it chanced in the mean time that
they were overtaken by a tempest of thunder and lightning; The one of the
wenches seeing the thunder to approach, ran fast and called to the other wench,
to hasten and shelter her self under the trees. But she laughed at her, lagged
behind, and scorning, like a gallant, the thunder, said, Let the thunder kiss
my backside (clapping her buttock with her hand); so as it hurt not my new
shoes, I care not. Which when she had uttered, the lightning struck off only
her posterior parts, and spared her shoes, which were not touched; and so the
contemner of Gods wondrous and fearful works died (according as she had said)
miserably. Lo here, you Christian Peripateticks, and see, whether there be not
an intellectual mover, and divine volunty, in the lightnings, clean of another
nature than your master Aristotle has taught you. There was also a young
towardly scholar, a great follower of Aristotle, and a disputer in the
Schools, a man (as it should seem) more confident in Aristotle's doctrine, than
in the documents of holy Writ: This man being born at Salisbury, and having
been commended for his industry and learning, was elected Master of the
Free School there. Upon a time he having been at the Act at Oxford, did return
home-ward in the company of some Merchants, or other travelers, being on
horseback. It happened, that as they traveled over Salisbury-plain, a great
tempest of thunder and lightning did arise; and whereas the company which were
with this scholar was very much dismayed, he encouraged them, bidding them not
to fear; For, said he, it is nothing but a natural thing, caused of a hot and
dry exhalation, which being drawn up by the Sun, and being included in the cold
clowd, is there kindled, and so breaks forth, and this is the cause of the
noise you hear. Which when he had said, he only of all the company was by the
lightning struck dead, and some of the rest somewhat astonished. Lo here, the
loss of a miserable man, through his so confident an observation of the
Heathenish doctrine! For if he had rejected that kind of learning, which is
founded on the terrene and diabolical wisdom, and hearkened unto the
instruction of the true sapience, he would, in lieu of that profane speech,
have worshipped him that speaks in thunder, and joined with his companions in
prayer, beseeching him to divert his wrath from them, and to hinder his fiery
ministers from harming them, and then no doubt, both he and they had passed
free from damage: Then would he, by rejecting the forgery of Aristotle, have
known the power of God, by these authorities of holy Writ: Nubes spargunt lumen
suum quae cuncta lustrant per circuitum, Job 28.25.
quocunque eas movet voluntas Creantis, agit omne quod praeceperat illi super
faciem terrae, sive sit ad flagellum, sive in beneficentiam: The clouds do
spread ab^oad their light, which enlighten all peripherically, or circularly,
whither soever the volunty of the Creator moves; it pe^formeth whatsoever the
Creator commands, be it to pu^ish, or to affect with goodness. And again,
Job 36.
Fulgura nunquid mittis, and revertentia dicent tibi, Adsumus: Do thou not
send out the lightnings? and when they return, they will say, Lo we are here.
Again, Ibunt direct emissiones fulgurum and tanquam a been curvato arcu ad
metam: Wisd. 3.22.
The lightnings being emitted, will go directly unto the mark, as if they were
shot out of a well-b^nt bow. But, Lev. 10.2.
to come nearer, it is said in another place, Ignis exiens a conspectu IEHOVAE
exanimavit filios Aaronis: Fire or lightning issuing from the aspect or face of
IEHOVA did kill the sons of Aaron. Numb. 16.3.
And again, Ignis egressus a IEHOVA consumebat centum quinquaginta qui
admoverunt thus: Fire or lightning proceeding from the face of IEHOVA did
consume the hundred and fifty men which did offer francincense. And (as
before), Apoc. 4.
Fulgura procedebant a throno, Lightnings did go out from the throne. But in
another place, Psalm. 17.9.
all this is more lively expressed thus: Ascendit fumus in ira ejus, and ignis
a facie ejus exarsit, carbones accensi sunt abeo, etc. Prae fulgore in
conspectu ejus, nubes transierunt, grando and carbones ignis, and intonuit de
coelo Dominus and altissimus dedit vocem suam. A smoke did ascend in his anger,
and fire did flame out from his face, coals of fire were kindled by him, etc.
By the Lightning in his sight the clouds did move, hail and coals of fire, the
Lord did thunder from heaven, the most High did utter forth his voice. By the
which speech it appears evidently, that it is only God, which does
essentially effect all these things, and although we say in our common phrase
of speech, that the Lightnings do cause the Thunder, or, in speaking more
mystically, that the Angels inflame the air by their fiery presence, yet, in
verity, it is God in his fiery Angels or flaming Ministers, as also in the
thick clouds, and watery spirits, who produces all these things to accomplish
his will and pleasure. And therefore the Apostle: Deus operatur omnia in
omnibus, God operateth all in all. And elsewhere: 1 Cor. 12. 1 Cor. 8. Romans 11.
Deus omnium Pater, a quo omnia: God is the Father of all, from whom are all
things. And again, Ex eo, per eum, and in eo sunt omnia: Of him, by him, and in
him are all things. But all this in our Meteorologicall business is more
plainly expressed in the precedent words continued thus at large, in another
place: Ascendit fumus de naribus IEHOVAE, 2 King. 22.8.
and ignis de ore ejus v^ravit, carbones s^ccensi sunt ab eo, and inclinavit
coelos and descendit, and caligo sub pedibus ejus, and ascendit super Cherubin,
and volavit seu lapsus est super alas venti, posuit tenebras in ci^cu^tu suo
latibulum cribrans aquas de nubibus coelorum: prae fulgore in conspectu ejus
nubes succensi sunt, carbones ignis volabant, tonabat de coelo Dominus, and
excelsus dabat vocem suam, misit sagittas suas, and disparuit eos fulgur: Smoke
ascended out of the nostrils of IEHOVA, and fire flew out of his mouth, coals
of fire were kindled from him, and he inclined or bowed down the heavens and
did descend, and darkness was under his feet, and he mounted upon a Cherubin,
and flew or glided upon the wings of the wind, made darkness round about him
his hiding place, sifting forth rain from the clouds of heaven. The clouds were
kindled at the brightness of his face, coals of fire did fly, the Lord did
thunder from heaven, and the most high did utter forth his voice, he sent forth
his arrows, and the Lightning did disperse them. By all which it is made
evident, that there is no essential efficient cause which is natural, but
only God in nature and beyond nature operateth all in all. For in the
precedent description it is not said, that the clouds or winds sent out
coruscations, or that fire came from the Sun, or other heavenly bodies, but
smoke went out of the nostrills of JEHOVA, and fire out of his mouth; neither
that vapors and Exhalations did gather clouds in the middle region of the
air, but JEHOVA bowed down the heavens or air, and collected them at his
pleasure; neither the coldness of the middle region did accumulate them into a
dark mass or heap by condensation: But JEHOVA collected and gathered together
by his privative and condensing property, that dark chaos or confused abyss;
neither was it any Angelical efficient, but JEHOVA mounting upon the Cherubin,
did animate it to move according to his pleasure. Nor was it the winds, that
moved of themselves, but the spiritual Cherubin being first animated by
JEHOVA, did excite the winds to move: neither was that exceeding darkness made
for a secret Tabernacle unto JEHOVA, merely by the act of the Angelical wind:
But JEHOVA moving on the Cherubin, incited the Cherubin to cause the winds to
collect, and gather together the clouds; neither was it the resolutive faculty
of the Sun, that melted the clouds into rain but JEHOVA that did sift or
cribrate forth water or rain out of them; neither was it the collision or
dashing together of the clouds, or antiperistasis, which was between the hot
exhalation and the coldness of the place, which caused the actual Lightnings
or inflammation of the clouds, but the brightness and inexplicable light of
his presence did set the clouds on fire; neither was it the contentious
strivings which was made between the fire and water, in the cleaving of the
clowd, which makes the fearful sound from heaven, but it was JEHOVA that did
thunder from heaven; it was the most high (I say) that did utter his voice from
heaven, and sent forth his Lightning as arrows to destroy the wicked. Which
being so, what have we Christians to do to look after any natural efficient
cause, with the acute eyes of Aristotle, which (forsooth) must act and operate
per se of themselves, without any consideration; when by the precedent Text it
appears that St. Paul was no liar, when he said that God operateth all in
all. And as for that Peripateticall distinction of causa principalis and
secundaria, or subalterna, you see here that it is utterly disannulled by the
Text before mentioned: For the only efficient cause as well in the first,
second, third, and fourth Organ or Instrument, was God: For it was he that
inspired the Cherubin; it was he in and upon the Cherubin, which did animate
the winds; it was he in and upon the Cherubin by the winds, that gathered the
clouds together; it was he that in and upon the Cherubin, by the winds, did
sift out water and rain out of the clouds, and did set them on fire, by sending
forth Lightnings from his Throne. And, in conclusion, though he use many
Organs, yet the essential act which operateth in and by them all, does issue
forth from one simple and sincere identity, which comprehends no otherwise
all things in himself, then unity in Arithmetic is assuredly reckoned for the
father of multitude. Thus we see that the foresaid young man was lost, by his
too too much presuming on the vain and prestigious doctrine of his
Peripateticall Master: For whereas he taught unto the honest Christians which
were his Companions, the false doctrine of his Ethnic Master, in their
greatest need, namely when the angry hand of the Almighty was in the heavens
ready to menace them, if they called not out for grace, from him who spoke out
of the clouds in time, and did wish them to abolish all fear, making them
believe that the Lightnings were contingent things in nature, and made as it
were by hap-hazard, and not endued with sense or reason, as being framed and
shaped out, yea, and informed by external and superficial Principles; he with
his companions should have remembered that saying, so often repeated by the
Wiseman, Timor Domini est principium Sapientiae: The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of Wisdom. If then both he and they had acknowledged that it was God
that spoke in Thunder, being environed about with his potent Angels, they
would then not have been so careless, but have prayed unto him heartily, have
utterly forgotten this absolute acting-nature of Aristotle, considering that
God is the only Naturating Nature of Natures. I could tell you of many other
wonderful stories to my knowledge, but I will only insist upon these two.
About some five or six years since, there was one Piper's daughter of
Colebrook, who being a gleaning of Corn after the harvest was carried, in the
company of her mother, and another young woman newly married unto a Glover in
Colebrook who had been my servant: and also there was another daughter of the
said goodwife Piper. The tempest approached when they were in the field, the
elder daughter who had been, by their report, very disobedient unto her
Parents, and would fearfully curse her mother oft-times, seeing the Lightning
to flash about her, cried out, Fie upon these Lightnings, I cannot endure them,
I will go home: and when she was wished by the company to call on God, she
would not; but they hastened unto an high Oak, which stood not far from a
Park-pale, against the body whereof she placed her back, and laughing she said,
she feared not now: For (said she) I am as safe as in my mother's parlor. The
new married wife that had been my maid, leaned her elbow upon her knee, being
also sat down, and the sister sat a little nearer the Park-pale, the mother
stood under another tree hard by, and, in a dry ditch under the Oak, another
wench did shelter her self: But ^o for all their imaginary safety, they could
not fly the wrath of God: For the Lightning fell on the very top of that Oak,
and the bolt plowed or made a furrow all along down the Oak, continually
without intermission, and came directly upon the eldest daughter, that thought
her self so sure, and struck her stark dead; and took away, for a time, the
use of the new married wive's arm, that leaned on her knee that was slain, the
wench in the ditch was struck in an amazement as if she were dead, the sister
that sat more near the pale saw a globe of fire as it did descend the tree, and
found her self so hot as if she had been in a furnace, but had no other harm;
the mother under the next tree, having her foot set out toward the tree, where
her daughter sat, was struck lame on that foot; the new married wife was struck
in such sort, that in a kind of distraction she ran up the lane, crying out
still as she ran, Lord open thy holy heavens, Lord open thy holy heavens: At
last they were all convayed with the dead maid in a cart from the Village unto
the Town of Colebrook, where the rest did recover within a few days. I saw the
place immediately upon this, and spoke unto the new married wife, that was my
servant, and had all these things confirmed unto me at her own house, where
also her husband did relate unto me a wondrous case befell him in the interim:
For being very careful of his new married wife, he perceiving the Tempest, did
put on his new cloak, and took his old under his arm, and so went out into the
tempest to meet his wife, and as he went through a field, great flakes of fire
passed by him, whose fore-parts were blont, and their hinder-parts shaped like
fire-drakes, and on the sudden, as if it were by a great gust of wind, they
blow off his hat from his head; which when he followed and stooped to reach up,
he found a piece of his new cloak which he wore, so artificially cut out, and
in so neat a Triangular form, that he did admire at it; and there he showed me
the place of his cloak, out of which it was cut, which was so neatly done, as
if it had, after an exact geometrical triangular form, been cut out by a pair
of shee^s.

The second story is this. In the great sickness time, I came out of Wa^es, and
remaining for a while with my noble friend, the Lord Bishop of Worcester at
Ha^tlebury-Castle, there I was advertised of a strange mischance which happened
by lightening and thunder, about five weeks before my coming thither, some
three or four miles from the Castle. I would needs go see the place, and in the
company of my worthy friends Mr. Finch, and Sr. Thomas Thornborow; I took a
view of the place, which was under a tall and well-spread Elm, upon a little
hill, where it was related by the inhabitants which dwelled close by it, that
two yeomens sons of good wealth, passed along with a load of hay, drawn with
four oxen and two horses, which one of their fathers servants did drive: The
tempest of thunder overtaking them, he drew up the hill, and placed his load
and cattle under the Elm, and himself stooped under his load of hay, and the
two youths got upon a bench or seat of ^urf made round about the tree: at last
there came a fearful stroke of thunder, at which the husbandman, who stooped
under the cart, said, Good Lord, what a crack was that! At which words, the
boys laughed out aloud, and mocking of him, said, A crack! But immediately a
noise was heard on the upper boughs of the tree, and a solid matter all on
fire came down directly between the boys, and struck the hair of one of them
into the tree, and set the other so on fire, that the man under the cart, with
others, were forced to run down the hill to fetch water to quench it; and when
it was quenched, his skin was as hard as roasted pork. Thus they paid full
dearly for their scoffs, and contempt of Gods judgments, when as indeed they
ought to have prayed God, to have preserved them from the ministers of his
wrath. It is a dangerous thing to sport with, and laugh at the Saints. There is
the thunderer from above, who has messengers, able to revenge his cause, if he
but nod unto them, in the twinkling of an eye.

I know that some Peripateti^k will reply, that it is but metaphorically meant,
when Scriptures say, that God speaks in thunder, and not really to be
understood as it is spoken; which if it were true, then is the plainest phrase
in Scripture to be so also understood, namely, clouds, snow, hail, etc. so that
either it was a real speech, or not real; and if not real, it would rather
draw me to error than truth. But Scripture is full of this kind of speech,
and therefore the whole harmony of holy Writ does take and construe it for
real. Again, others do acknowledge the speech to be real but, say they, where
God speaks in thunder, that act is miraculous, and not natural. To which I
answer with the mouth of the patient Job, saying, Pro irrigatione fatigat Deus
densam nubem, and dispergit lucem nubis suae; God does weary the thick clouds,
Job 37.40.
and disperseth abroad the light of his clouds, for the watering of the earth.
Whereby it appears, that God does ordinarily gather together the clouds, and
makes them his organicall instruments, to utter his voice unto mortal men,
for the prospering of the annual fruits upon the earth. And therefore thus in
another place, Job 36.
Si consideraret homo extensiones densarum nubium, fragores in tugurio illius
exte^d^t super illud lucem suam, cum his judicaturus est populum and daturus
cibum abunde. Also in another place all this is more plainly expressed, where
it is said, Vide arcum and benedic eum qui fecit illum, valde specio sus est in
splendore suo; gyravit coelum in circui^u gloriae ejus, Ecclus. 43.14.
manus Excelsi aptaverunt illum: imperio suo accelerat nivem and accelerat
coruscationes emittere judicii sui. Propterea aperti sunt thesauri and
evolarunt nebulae sicut aves, in magnitudine sua posuit nubes, and confracti
sunt lapides grandinis, in conspectu ejus movebantur montes and in voluntate
sua spiravit Notus. Vox tonitruum ejus reverberavit terram, tempestas Aquilonis
and congregatio spiritus aspergit nivem, etc. Behold the rainbow, and bless
him that made it; it is wondrous beautiful in his brightness, it did compass
the heaven in the circle of his glory, the hands of him that is on high made
it. By his command he hastens the snow, and makes speed to send fo^th the
lightnings of his judgment. Therefore are the treasur^es opened, and the clouds
fly forth like birds. He placed the clouds in his greatness, and the stones of
the hail are broken. In his sight the mountains did move, and according to his
will the south-winde has blown, and the voice of his thunder have reverberated
the earth. The tempest of the north, and the congregation of spirits, does
spread abroad, or besprinkle the snow, etc.

In this speech of the son of Syrach, the Lord of lords is proved to be the
sole essential and efficient cause of all meteors, namely, of the rainbow, the
snow, the lightnings, the clouds, the hail, the thunder, the winds and
tempests; as also it shows, that the matter of them is the air. Wherefore he
says in the conclusion, The congregation of spirit does spread abroad the
snow. Lastly, it tells us, that the hands or Spirit of God are not idle, in
the effecting of such works, as Aristotle terms natural, and therefore
operateth not only primarily, but also secundarily, yea, and catholically, in
and over all things, as well in their generation, as preservation and
corruption.

To the last clause of his definition, wherein he seems to aver, that the
lightnings move downward, because the stuff of it is of a terrestrial
compacted nature. I answer, that this reason is over weak, considering the
Gigantean author that alleged it; for it may in the self-same manner be
inferred, that the Gunpowder, which is of a far grosser stuff then is that of
the lightnings, must therefore strike downwards; and yet we see by experience,
it rises in spite of a mean resistance, by its natural inclination upward,
as we may perceive by places that are undermined, and squibs, which are
violently carried upward. I come therefore unto such true definitions of
lightning and thunder, as are maintained and allowed by the Book of Verity.

CHAP. XII.
How the lightning and the thunder oughtrightly to be described by the true
Philosopher, and that seriously, according unto the tenor of holy Writ.

SInce therefore it has been made manifest in the precedent Chapter, that
Aristotle has utterly erred in his conceit, touching as well the material, as
essential and formal cause of the lightnings, let me gather, as near as my
weak capacity will give me leave, what should be the true nature, and original
essential cause of the lightnings, according unto the harmonicall consent of
holy Scriptures.

Lightning is a certain fiery air or spirit, animated by the brightness of
JEHOVA, and extracted out of his treasury, which is the heavens, or catholic
air, to do and execute his will, for the good or detriment of the creature.

Or else in this manner.

Lightning is a shining brightness, proceeding out of the clouds, being the
pavilion of JEHOVA, and is sent from the throne of God, even down unto the
earth, covering the surface of the seas.

But if we would describe the lightning with all his accidents, and
consequently express the whole essence of the thunder, which is a mixed
nature, we may effect it thus, out of the testimony of the holy Bible.

Lightning is a fire burning from the face or presence of JEHOVA, at the sight
or contact of whose brightness the clouds do pass away, and the Almighty does
thunder and utter his voice from heaven, and sends forth his arrows for the
destruction of the wicked.

Or thus.

Lightning is a fire proceeding from JEHOVA, being sent out of his dark
tabernacle from above, at the sight whereof, the waters or clouds, as being
terrified, and the abyss as it were troubled, do haste away; in which turmoil,
the voice of his thunder moves circularly, and the fiery or kindled coals are
sent forth, as arrows sent out from a well bent bow, to effect his will, as
well for benediction, as for vengeance, both in heaven and earth.

Or in this sort.

Lightning or coruscation is a clear and pure light in the clouds above, the
which the wind that passes by does purify, etc.

By the first of these descriptions, the manifest material cause of the
lightning is expressed to be a fiery air; the place out of which it is drawn
is the treasure-house of God, or the heavens. Also the formal cause is
expressed, in that it is set down to be a fiery spirit or air; the efficient
cause (I said) according unto the truths testimony, to be the will or word of
God, on which depends that spirit of wisdom, by which God operateth all
things. Lastly, the final cause is also noted, forasmuch as it is said, That
it was created to do the will of him that ordained it, either for the pain or
pleasure of mortal men. All which is evidently confirmed out of the places of
Scripture mentioned before.

The second definition is confirmed out of the Revelation, Apoc. 4.
which says, Fulgura procedunt a throno: Job 36.
Lightnings proceed from the throne. Again, he is said Fulgurare lumine suo
desuper, card^n^sque ma^is operire: To lighten with his brightness from above,
and to cover with it the corners of the Sea. Psalm. 17.9.
And again, prae fulgore in conspectu ejus nubes transierunt: The clouds did
move by reason of the Lightning, and brightness which was in his sight or
presence. Job 41.18.
And again, ignis ab ore ejus evolavit: Fire flew out of his mouth. And again,
Ab ore ejus velut taedae praeeuntes, and quasi halitus ejus carbones
accenderent, Psalm. 76.17.
and flamma ^x ore ejus prodicret: From his mouth passed as it were torches,
and as it were his breath did kindle coals, Job 36.
and flame came out of his mouth. Also the effect of this description is
verified by these words, Illuxerunt coruscationes tuae orbi terrae: Thy
Lightning shined over the earth. Again, Exten^it nubes quasi tentorium suum ut
fulguret lumine suo desuper.

The members of the third description (out of the which also the whole nature
of the Thunders is enucleated) are confirmed by the page of verity. For first,
the material cause of the Thunder is pointed out in these words: That it is a
burning fire or fiery air: also in the description of it, his formal cause is
selected: the efficient cause is noted to be JEHOVA in his wrath; the immediate
effect thereof is the exagitation of the clouds, and the loud noise or voice of
the thunders. Lastly, it concludes, that the end or final cause, is to
exercise God's vengeance on the wicked.

The fourth and fifth description, in this: Jam non recipient homines lucem,
cum nitida est in superioribus nub^bus, quas ventus transiens purgavit: Now men
do not respect the Light, when it is pure and neat in the higher clouds, the
which the wind that passes by does depurate.

As for the Thunder, I gather out of the Holy Scriptures; that it is to be
defined thus;

The Thunder is a noise, which is made in the clowdy tent or pavillion of
JEHOVA, over the which extending the beams of his Light, he covers the
superficies of the Sea, and illuminateth the earth, that thereby he may judge
the people thereof, and give them meat abundantly.

To prove this by sacred authority: job says, Si consideraret homo extensiones
densarum nubium, Job. 36.
fragores in tugurio illius, extendit super illud lucem suam, cum his
judicaturus est populum, and da^urus cibum abunde: If man does consider the
extention of the thick clowd, the noise and Thunders in his tent or pavillion,
he extends his light upon it; with these he does judge the people, and give
them meat in abundance. In which words it is apparent, that fragor, or the
noise and bruit is the formal cause, and the light from JEHOVA the efficient:
The Organs of the voice are the thick clouds, which are called the cottage or
dwelling place of JEHOVA: and therefore in another place: Psalm. 17.
Posu^t tenebras latibulum suum in circuitu: Prae fulgore in conspectu ejus
nubes transierunt, and intonuit de coelo D^minus: He put darkness about his
secret place: The clouds did pass away at the sight of his brightness, and the
Lord did thunder from heaven. To conclude, the final cause of the Thunder and
Lightning is explained in this, namely that it is as well to judge the people,
as to give them meat in abundance. And threfore it is manifest by this, that
God appears in Thunder, as well to the effecting of things which are natural
and necessary, both for the punishment and nourishment of his creatures, as
miraculously.

Or else it may be defined thus;

Thunder is the vioce of the most High, which is uttered out of a clowd, and
accompanied with flame and Lightning, being ordained by God for the affliction
of the wicked.

In the which definition, the material is the Organicall cloud, the formal
cause is the voice with Lightning, the efficient is JEHOVA, and the final,
that it is effected for the punishment or scourge of the wicked. All which is
confirmed out of the precedent Texts: Psalm. 17.
Intonuit (says David) Dominus de coelo, alt^ssimus d^dit vocem suam,
grandinem and carbones ignis, and misit sagittas suas and dispa^uit eos,
fulgura multiplicavit and conturbavit eos: The Lord thundered from heaven, the
most High did utter forth his voice, hail and coals of fire, and he sent his
arrows and did sever or disperse them; he multiplied his Lightnings and
troubled them.

Or after this manner;

Thunder is a voice or sound* proceeding from the Lightning, which issues from
the Throne of God, and is sent by the divine power out of the cavity of the
clouds into the open air, to execute his will, either to the creatures good or
harm.

Where, the material or Organicall cause of the voice is the clowd, the
formal is the voice and sound; the efficient is the Lightning from God, and
the final is either for benediction or malediction. Apoc. 4.
And this is confirmed out of St. John: De Throno procedunt fu gura: The
Lightnings proceed from the Throne. And Job: Numquid mittis fulgura, Job 38.
Psalm. 17.
and ibunt, and revertentia dicent, Adsumus? Do thou not send forth the
Lightnings, and they go forth, and returning again they will say, We are
present. And the Psalmist: Ascendit fumus in ira ejus, and ignis a facie ejus
exarsit: A smoke ascended in his wrath, and fire did flame forth from his face.
Again, Nubes and caligo in circuitu ejus, Psalm. 97.2.
ignis ante ipsum procedit, and inflammabit in circuitu ejus, illuxerunt
fulgura ejus orbi terrae, Clouds and darkness were about him; fire goes out
before him, Psalm. 76.
and will burn round about him: his Lightnings gave light unto the earth.
Again, Vocem dederunt nubes, etenim sagittae tuae transierunt: The clouds made
a noise, for thine arrows went out, etc. Where by arrows is meant the
Lightnings, as if he had said, because thy Lightnings broke out of the clouds,
therefore they made a noise, or uttered a loud voice. Wisd. 5.22.
And Solomon: Ibunt direct emissiones fulgurum, and taxquam a been curvato
arcu nubium: Thy emissions or sending forth of Lightnings will go directly to
the mark, as if they were sent out of a well bent bow. Whereby he seems to
argue, that the clouds do utter their voice, by reason that the Lightnings do
pierce them.

Or in this sort;

Thunder is the voice of God, compassed about by the waters or clouds, before
whom the fire goes forth, and does inflame and set them on fire circularly
round about him.

Hereupon Job: Job 38.34.
Numquid elevabis in nube vocem tuam, and impetus aquarum operiet te? Wilt not
thou elevate thy voice in the clowd, and the abyss or power of the waters will
cover thee? Psalm. 97.2.
And again, as before: Nubes and caligo ejus in circuitu ejus, ignis ante ipsum
procedit, and inflammabit in circu^tu ejus: Clouds and darkness are about him,
fire goes before him, and will inflame or burn circularly round about him.

Or thus;

Thunder is the the voice of God, at the noise whereof he causes a multitude
of waters in the heavens or air, and effects Lightnings and rain.

For Jeremy says, Jerem. 10.13.
Ad vocem suam dat multitudinem aquarum in coelo, and elevat nebulas ab
extremitate terrae, fulgura in pluviam facit, educit ventum e thesauris suis:
At his voice he causes a multitude of waters in heaven, and does elevate
clouds from the extremity of the earth, and turns his Lightnings into rain,
and brings the wind out of his Treasury.

Or in this manner;

Thunder is the multitude of the sound of waters, or the voice of the clouds,
being effected by the coruscations and Lightnings of the Almighty.

Or thus;

Thunder is a sound of the multitude of waters being troubled, fearing and
b^aying at the bright aspect or presence of JEHOVA.

In which description the material Organ of the voice is the clouds or waters,
being as it were afraid and troubled at the emission of the Lightnings,
whereupon they give a loud voice or sound, by reason of that penetrative power,
which the bright and shining, or fiery presence of JEHOVAH, (who is the worker
of wonders) does effect: Whereupon the royal David (as is said) prae fulgore
in conspectu ejus nubes transierunt, Psalm. 17.
grando and carbones ignis, intonuit de coelo Dominus: At the brightness of
his presence, the clouds did move or pass their way; hail and coals of fire;
the Lord did thunder from heaven. Psalm. 96.17.
And again, Viderunt te aquae, Deus, and timu^runt, and turbatae sunt abyssi,
multitudo sonitus aquarum, vocem dede^unt nubes, vix tonitrui tui in rota: The
waters have seen thee, O God, and were afraid, and the abyss was troubled, a
multitude of the sound of the waters, the clouds ecchoed forth a voice, the
noise of the thunders wheeled about, etc. Also the formal cause is explicated
in that it was made by a great noise and Lightnings. The efficient cause
seems to be the Lightnings from God, or rather the fiery aspect of God,
animating the Lightnings, and directing them unto a determinated mark. So that
it appears, that the Lightnings are as it were the Instruments of God in his
Wrath; no otherwise then a sword is the instrument of the man that strikes;
when we say that it is this or that man which did strike and not the sword: And
for this cause, I say with the Apostle, that as it is only God who is the sole
Actour in things; So also is he the Father of the Thunders, who sends out his
Lightnings as arrows from his throne. Lastly, I say, that the final cause
expressed in them is, to accomplish the divine will of the Creator.

To conclude, it may be defined thus:

Thunder is the voice, speech, or eloquence of the Almighty, or a sound going
out of the mouth of JEHOVA, which is directed under the whole heavens, with
light, dispersed over the face of the earth; after the which, there follows a
loud noise or rumbling, or God thundereth with the voice of his excellency; the
which when it is heard, is not found.

Job 37.
Audite (says Job) cum tremore vocem seu loquelam, vel eloq ^um abore ejus
egrediens, quod sub ^oto-coelo dirigit and lucem super terminos vel ora^
terrae. Post eum rugit sonitus, tonat voce excellentiae suae, and non
investigatur cum audita fuerit vox ejus. Hear with trembling; he directs the
voice, speech, or eloquence, proceeding from his mouth, under the whole
heavens, and his light over the ends of the earth. After him roareth a sound,
he thundereth with the voice of his excellency, the which when it is heard is
not found.

To conclude, it is most apparent by this which is already said, that the
opinion of the Peripateticks, as well Christian as Ethnic, is most
inconsiderate and erroneous, in averring, that the lightnings are hot and dry
exhalations, extracted out of the earth, and elevated on high, even unto the
middle region of the air, by the attractive virtue of the Sun, and that they
being included into a clowd, and kindled, partly by the collision or knocking
together of other clouds, and partly by the coldness of the place, do by the
eruption of their flames cause the thunders. I would have every wise Christian
to observe duly, by what has already been said, whether the mystery of a
tempest and whirlwind do consist and stand upon a thing of so small moment,
and poor esteem, as Aristotle would make us believe; or if it arise not out of
a far more profound and inscrutable abyss or profundity, seeing that the
lightnings are reported by truth it self, to be such fiery lights of God, as
issue or proceed from his throne, and the thunders are justly termed, the
voice, word, and eloquence of JEHOVA. And for this reason, JEHOVA reprehending
the boldness of these kind of worldly Philosophers which presume so far to
censure his inscrutable actions, or to dive into the depth of his mysteries,
touching the essential causes of these meteors, without the warrant and
assistance of Gods Spirit, and falsely to make the world believe, that his
hidden and abstruse secrets are effected after their vain imaginations, (which
vanish in the conclusion, and become as nothing, because indeed they are
grounded on nothing else, but foolish and self-conceited fantasies and
vanities) seems to utter unto them these speeches: Auribus percipite, and
considerate mirabilia Dei fortis. Nosti cum disponat Deus de illis, Job 38.
cum splendeat lux nubis suae? Nosti-ne de libramentis densae nubis mirabilia
Dei perfecti scientiis? Quaenam est via, qua in parts dissilit lux? Cujus
utero egressa est glacies? Aut pruinam coeli quis genuit? Quanam via itur ubi
habitat lux, and tenebrarum ubi est locus? Perceive with your ears, and
consider the mavelous works of the strong God. Do thou know when God
disposes of them, when the light of his clowd does shine forth? Do thou
understand the marvails of God, who is perfect in sciences, touching the
ballancing and pondering of the thick clouds? Which is the way in which the
lightnings do skip forth, being divided into parts? Out of whose womb does the
ice proceed, or who has begotten the frost of heaven? Which is the way that
directs o^ leads unto the habitation of l^ght, and which is the seat of
darkness? This says JEHOVA, (I say) the strong God, in checking of the
vainglorious wisemen of this world, for their presumption; and especially he
points at the bold Peripateticks, who presumptuously profess, that they of
themselves (without the teaching of the true wisdom) do know all these things:
And yet the wisest amongst men speaks thus, Animadverti totum opus Dei, non
posse hominem ass qui illud opus quod sit sub sole, quam laboriose homo
quaerat, Ecclus 9.^2.
non tamen assecutum esse; quinetiam si cogitet sapientissimus cognoscere, non
tamen posse ass^qui. I observed every work of God, that man is not able to
attain unto that work which is under the sun, how laboriously soever he
seeks. Yea verily, if the wisest man thinks to know it, he will not be able
to attain unto it. By which words, Solomon points at the insufficiency of man
in himself, that is to say, without the conduct of the spirit of wisdom, to
attain unto the knowledge of Gods mysteries, which also he does seem to
intimate in these words; Quis hominum cognoscit consilium Dei? Wisd. 9.
nam ratiocinationes mortalium sunt timidae, and instabiles cogitationes eorum.
Infestum enim corruptioni corpus aggravat animam, and deprimit terrena
habitatio mentem plenam curis multis; and vix conjicimus ea quae in terra sunt;
quae autem in coelis sunt quis investigavit? and consilium tuum quis noverit,
nisi tu dederis sapientiam, and miseris sanctum Spiritum tuum e locis
altissimis, sie enim correctae sunt eorum quae in terris sunt semitae; itaque
sapientia fuerint salvati. What man does know the counsel of God, for the
reasonings of mortal men are doubtful, and unstable are their cogitations.
For the body being subject unto corruption, does aggravate the soul, and an
earthly habitation does depresse the mind, which is full of cares. And we do
scarcely guess at the things which are upon the earth, who is then able to
find out the things which are in heaven? Or who can know thy counsel unless
thou shall give wisdom, and send thy holy Spirit from above; for by that means
were the ways of such men as were upon the earth corrected and amended, and
therefore were they saved or preserved by wisdom, etc. Out of which golden
words, I gather, first, That the heathen men were ignorant in the mysteries and
abstruse operations of God, because they wanted the true spirit of wisdom,
which God reveals unto his Elect, by the virtuous infusion and influxion. of
his holy Spirit. Next, that for this reason, the subject of true Philosophy is
not to be found in Aristotle's works, but in the Book of truth and wisdom,
forasmuch as it is a copy of the revealed Word. Thirdly, that it is a great
folly for Christians to seek for the truth, where it is not to be found; I
mean, in the works of the pagan Philosophers, and that is made manifest,
forasmuch as it contradicts altogether the verity of Scriptures; and
therefore it is pronounced by St. James, to be terrene, animal, and
diabolical. Verbum saepienti.

CHAP. XIII.
A conclusion of this work, including an admonition unto all good Christians,
to beware of the Ethnic Philosophy, and to stick and cleave fast unto that
which is taught us by the Scriptures, and that for reasons herein set down.

LEt it now be lawful for me, in the concluding of this Section, (O ye
Europaeans, who seem so seriously and zealously to spend your days in the
Christian Religion) to turn the sharp edge of my pen, and the rougher file of
my speech unto you, who being too too much seduced by the false doctrine of
Aristotle, do think and imagine the meteors, but especially lightning and
thunder, to be a common natural thing, of little or no estimation at all, as
being only produced of nature, by reason of a hot distemper of the air. I
would request you, as a true Christian ought unto his brethren, to observe
well, and attend with diligence, this admonition which I will for a Farewell
bestow upon you, beseeching you not to scorn or reject my precedent assertion,
whith has told and sufficiently proved unto you, that the lightnings and
thunders, yea, and all other meteors, are the immediate works of Gods hand,
being that by this endeavor of mine, you may not only bring a comfort and
consolation unto your souls, when you hear the terrible voice of the Lord, and
make you to call to mind your passed sins and iniquities, and to pray him
heartily to pardon you, Job 37.
and not to call your offenses unto an account in his anger; but also give the
honor and glory unto him, who thundering from above, works marvellously.

I would have you therefore to know, that the worldly wisemen of this our
Christian world, who are, as it were, pages or followers of the Ethnic
Philosophers, have hitherto blindly, or after the manner of lunatic persons,
erred in their imaginations, forasmuch as they being instructed in the blind
wisdom of this world, by their Ethnic tutors and doctors, will not be brought
to believe, that God does work immediately all things in heaven and in earth,
only by his word; but mediately, namely, by other necessary natural or
supernatural means, as essential efficient causes; when as the holy Text does
in plain terms instruct us, that it is one and the self-same essence, which
does act and operate all in all by his word, using each creature only as his
organ or instrument, wherein and by the which he moves, and works his will.
Is not this their tenet or assertion (I beseech you) altogether opposite and
contradictory unto the divine authority, which says, Though there be that are
called gods, 1 Cor. 8.5.
whether in heaven or in earth, (as there be many gods and many lords) yet unto
us there is but one God, which is that Father, of whom are all things, and we
in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him. But
every man has not that knowledge, etc? Out of which words we may gather, that
though we worldlings attribute this or that work unto angels, or stars, or
winds, or a created nature, according unto the doctrine of the Ethnic wisdom;
yet such true Christian Philosophers as St. Paul was, d^d acknowledge but one
God, of whom proceed all actions in this world; and one Word, by which only,
and not by any creature in the world, each thing is immediately effected in
this world. All which, although unto real Christians it seems verity and
truth, yet unto the Philosophers and wise men of this world, this kind of
doctrine, issuing from the heavenly wisdom, is rejected and derided; And why?
Forsooth because (as the Text does teach us) every man has not this knowledge;
and the reason is, because they respect more the wisdom of this world, which is
terrene and animal, and, as St. Paul says, mere foolishness before God, then
that which is from above, namely, from the Father of light, Et sic evanuerunt
in imaginationibus suis, And so they did vanish in their imaginations. I
heartily wish you therefore, which are brought up and made familiar in the holy
Bible, and nourished spiritually, and guided by the law of our Lord Jesus
Christ, to conceive seriously, and perpetually to revolve with your selves,
that God created the first consistence of things, namely, the humid and fluid
waters, by his word, and they remain in the word, and by the word, in the
self-same humid or moist estate as they did, even unto this very day. Also he
framed out of this catholic water the heaven and the earth by his word, (as
St. Peter says). Again, he did produce by his said word the light in heaven, 2
Pet. 3.
the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the day, the night, and all other creatures,
and did ordain them to serve for diverse Organs, by the which he might variously
act or operate his volunty, as well in heaven above, as in the earth and waters
beneath. All which do move and work in and by the Word. And, in conclusion, God
by his Word does exactly and soly operate all in all, as the Apostle says:
which being so, I would fain know where is this Physical nature of the
Peripateticks, unto the which they assign an essential form of action of it
self and by it self? Verily, it is most apparent, that there is no such
catholic actor, Joh. 1. Ephesians. Wisd. 1. Wisd. 12.1.
as the Peripateticks do fain: But it is one only Word of God; one catholic
Christ, which fills all things; one eternal Sapience which replenisheth the
world; one incorruptible Wisdom which is in all things, that only works and
effects immediately all in all. And therefore it is apparent, that without it
nothing can exist and act.

Forasmuch therefore as the air is a part of the celestial consistence, it
follows that it was made by the Word, and that it does as it were swim in the
Word: Forasmuch as it comprehends all things (as in many places of Scripture
it is expressly set down,) and it is moved and guided by the Word; yea verily,
and in the air, (being it is the universal Treasury of God) there are many
peculiar cabinets, out of the which, by his Word, (which is effected by his
strong and powerful Angels, as David tells us) he does produce diverse kinds
of Meteors, (as is proved before,) which are committed unto the government and
presidentship of diverse Angels or Spirits, the which also are created of air,
and exist in the air, by the Word, and therefore move and act in the Word, or
in and by one and the same divine Spirit, Ezekiel. 37.
which the Prophet Ezekiel called from the four winds, to make the dead to live
again) by whose administration (the Word moving them, and operating in them)
all Meteorologick species or kinds are brought forth and procreated in the
air; yea, and all those wonderful tempests, which happen in the world are
effected or produced. And hereupon it is said, that he made his Angels winds,
and his Ministers flames of fire. Again. Dei curruum duae sunt myriades, multa
millia Angelorum, Psalm. 68.19
Dominus cum illis est, Dominus Sinai in Sanctuario habitans: There are two
myrad^, even many thousands of Angels, the Lord is with them, the Lord of
Sinai inhabiting in his Sanctuary. Where he means in his apparition in a
tempest, as he did upon the Mount Sinai. These spirits therefore (which in
regard of their external were made or created of air, and with the air) do
exercise their office or Ministry in the air, and are by Gods Ordination
conversant about the directions of Tempests, Clouds, Rain, Snow, Hail, Frost,
Lightning, Thunder, Comets, Chasmus, Floods, or Inundations, Heat, Cold,
Moisture, Drowth, and all other Accidents which do appear in the air. And
hereupon it is insisted by the Revelatour, Apoc. 7.
that by the Ordination of God, four Angels were appointed as Presidents over
the four winds, of the four corners of the earth, unto whom it was assigned to
hurt the earth and waters, and trees, and fruits. But there it is said; that
they had not any power to execute their harmfull or tempestuous violence, on
the earth and waters, till the imperious Angel had excited or moved them unto
it. But as all th^s was unknown unto the Ethnic Philosophers, so has it been
altogether neglected, or rather rejected by their Christian disciples, because
that in their mouths and writings, the lying and false spirit of Aristotle,
has taken too deep a root or possession, and challenged unto it self the prime
and superior place. Although therefore that this my admonition, may seem unto
such as are wedded unto their will, and hood-winked with Aristotle's subtle
documents, to be but wild, ridiculous, and of little or no esteem: yet I would
have them know that it is a thing of great importance and high consequence,
being that it concerns and touches the honor of God: For by it true
Christians may fundamentally know, and understand the real and essential
causes of tempests, and other acts and operations, which do thereunto belong,
and thereby perceive that they happen not by case fortuit, neither operate by
any act of their own, as the fantastic Ethnicks have devised or fained in
their writings, but are traduced out of the holy Treasuries by the Divine
Providence, and are sent down here below, by the operation of the Word, and
execution of his Angelical Ministers; either to afflict and scourge the wicked
for their offenses, or by putting them in remembrance of their sins, that they
may, by the fear thereof, be driven to repent: So that when they unto their
terror, shall hear the voice of the Lord in Thunder from above, and behold the
fiery flashes of his wrath and indignation, or shall see the dreadful
inundations caused by abundance of Snow or Rain, they might be induced to
repentance, and be humbled, and incited to invoke their Creator unto their
aid, and to pray him heartily to avert all dangers from them, and to mitigate
his Tempests, and to pacify the fury of his fiery or watery Ministers, and to
grant them them milder and more benign weather, with gentle and fertile rains,
and to bless and save the fruit of their lands, and to preserve their cattle,
which feed upon them; as also their houses, and other such like necessary
additaments, from the violence of his tempestuous Angels or Spiritual
instruments: contrariwise, who neglects this doctrine, which is founded on
the true Wisdom, and wallowing as it were with the Sow in the mire, betaketh
himself unto the rules of that Wisdom, which is but mere foolishness before
God, and consequently will imagine all these Meteorologicall marvels, to
proceed by chance, and accidentally, and without the act of any internal
principle, and for that cause will neglect them, as esteeming them only things
natural; and therefore will neither dread them, as indeed they ought to do,
nor yet acknowledge him, who is the true Author of them, and immediate Actor in
them; is justly to be numbered among those men, at which the Wiseman aims in
this speech, Wisd. 15.
All men (says Solomon) are vain by nature, in whom is the ignorance of God,
and who cannot understand him who is by such things as are made, nor yet
conceive the workman by the consideration of his works.

The Epilogue unto this Section.
THus (Judicious and Christian Reader) have you understood the main difference
that is between the wisdom of this world, which the Apostle affirms to be but
mere foolishness before God, and that which descends from above, and issues
from the Father of Light, which is the essential and true Spirit of Sapience
or Discipline: And consequently, you may easily discern, how the Ethnic
Philosophy, that is grounded upon the worldly wisdom, forasmuch as it relyeth
only on the Traditions of men, and Elements of this world, is but a vain
^allacy, or Prestigious Figment; and therefore only that of the Patriarcks,
Prophets, and Apostles, which is founded upon the Catholic Christ, or Eternal
Spirit of God, in whom is the plenitude of Divinity, is only true, real, and
essential. And therefore I may boldly conclude, and speak unto you, with other
Christians, in Moses his language, saying, Contestor hodie contra vos Coelum
and Terram, Deuteronomy. 30.19.
me vitam and mortem, bonum and malum, benedictionem and maledictionem,
praepossuisse tibi. Quare elige vitam, ut tu cum semine tuo vivas. I call
Heaven and Earth to record this day against you, that I have set before you
life and death, good and evil, benediction and malediction. Therefore choose
life, that you with your seed may live, and increase in the knowledge and
understanding of God, being that in the true Wisdom consists all true
Philosophy, certain Science, and complete Discipline.

FINIS.
THE SECOND SECTION OF THIS TREATISE WHEREIN The real History and fundamental
grounds of Sympathy, or concupiscible Attraction and Coition, and consequently
of all Magneticall sorts of curing: As also of Antipathy or odible expulsion,
and therefore of each malady or annoyance, are proved by infallible reasons,
maintained by the assertions of the wisest Philosophers and Cabalists,
justified by the inviolable Testimonies of Holy Scriptures.

And lastly, verified and confirmed by sundry Magneticall Experiments.

Gemina fecit Deus omnia, quorum alterum contrarium est alteri; nec quicquam
factum est quod mancum est,

Syrach. 42.25. Omnia duplicia, unum contra unum, and non fecit quicquam deesse,

Eccles. 42. verse. 25.

LONDON, Printed for Humphrey Moseley, at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1659.

The Second Section of this TREATISE. The First Book.
The Argument of the First Book.
AFter that the Author had by diligent enquiry understood, that all Sympathy
and Antipathy did spring immediately from certain different passions of the
Soul, or vivifying Spirit, whereof the one is Concupiscible, and the other is
Irascible; and yet perceived them by effect to be in Creatures, as well
Vegetable and Mineral, as Animal; he was surprised with an especial desire,
to find out the radical occasion or beginning thereof. And when he had well
pondered and considered that eternal Unity, (which is the head and root of all
things) in its simple and absolute nature, he could discern no such diversity
in its essence, seeing that it existeth for evermore, but only one and the
same Identity. For, according unto holy Writ, Sicut tenebrae ejus, Psalm. 138.11.
ita and lux ejus; As his darkness, so is his light. Wherefore he gathered,
that a twofold aeviall effect or principle, clean opposite unto one another in
condition and disposition, must needs spring and arise from these two several
properties, in that one entire essence; namely, Nolunty and Volunty, whereof
the first was expressed by darkness, and the other by light: For when this
mental Eternity, and infinite Light, in whom in verity there is no darkness,
wills not, it reserveth it self within it self, that is, it reflecteth his
beams into it self, and so informs nothing by his presence, but leaves the
universal Abyss or Chaos (which is said in this estate to dwell and exist in
the divine puissance) dark, deformed, quite void, and destitute of its
vivifying act, or resplendent brightness; and this his negative action is the
perfect character of his Nolunty, the general effects whereof are darkness
and privation. But when this abstruse unity does send out the benign and
salutary brightness of its essence, (which is the expression of his Volunty or
will) into the deformed Chaos, then deformity, or darkness and privation, are
forced to give place unto their opposite corrivalls, Conformity, or Light and
Position, which are the affirmative acts of life and essential existence. By
this object therefore of his contemplation, he did gather, that the act of
Volunty, and that of Nolunty, were in one essential Unity, which was all
goodness, and consequently that Nolunty in it, is nothing else but its
Volunty, being that as it is one and all, so also is its Volunty but one
Identity in it, and yet all and over all with it, for thereby it acts or
works its pleasure, Dan. 4.
both privativly and positivly, as well in the heavenly vertu^s, as the
inhabitants of the earth. And therefore darkness and light are all one in this
Archetypicall Unity, because that all in it is good, forasmuch as if is only
and absolutely good indeed in it self. As for the contrary effects, namely, the
deformed and privative darkness of the rude chaos, or undigested abyss, and
the informing act or positive emanation of light, they indeed appear such unto
the creatures, and seem to produce unto this world an infinity of
contrarieties, which are esteemed by mortals to be either good or evil,
according as by effect they find them. Howsoever, it seems most apparent unto
the Author, that these two contrary effluxions, or extensions, proceeding in
effect from one essential eternity, were the principles of all things, being
that the dark Chaos did afford and produce out of her womb the waters, which
was the only matter whereof the world, 2 Pet. 3.
and consequently the heavens and earth were made. And the vivifying emanation
or irraciation of the eternal light, did bestow on it form, shape, virtue and
motion. All which, when the Author had discovered, and seriously pondered with
himself, his reason did clearly thereupon inform him, that the world was
compacted and framed of contrary stuff; for how is it possible, but that
opposite and discordant parents, should bring forth children disagreeing in
condition from their kind? And yet such was the will of the Creator, that these
two dissonant accords should, in the beginning and shaping forth of an Image
like unto himself, be united into one Unison or unity, by the inviolable tie of
his never-dying Spirit of love and concord, that thereby the matter (which is
the substance of the dark waters) might serve as a female unto the formal and
masculine eradiation, or illuminating spirit, which issued from him, and so
make of that duality, or confusion of unities, a typical Trinity in Unity,
figured after the similitude of the Archetype, which being merely spiritual,
was the eternal life and formal being of the world, (it self remaining
without any beginning) and for that cause, the world being its image, must also
have a catholic life or soul, by which it may act and live, according unto the
pattern from whence, as well the form of its essence, as the matter of its
existence, did flow, and must for that reason be endued with the opposite
properties of willing and nilling, or Volunty and Nolunty, and, by consequence,
of amiable attraction, or odible expulsion. Hereupon therefore he did observe,
that both the internal and external type, or typical world, must needs be
subject to contrary passions and alterations, proceeding from the like
properties, namely, being sometimes apt to incline unto the disposition of
darkness, following therein by a natural instinct, the condition and
inclination of matter or water, which was the offspring of the dark Abyss or
Chaos, over which the divine puissance has dominion; and therefore in this
condition, it endueth the character of unitie's Nolunty, and sometimes
affecting and imitating the action and property of light, which flows from
the eternal and all-acting fountain of unity. And this is the virtuous effect
of the sacred Volunty. For it seemed unto the Author, that by reason that the
whole world was composed of these two contrary properties, namely, of formal
light, and the humid dark matter, it must needs follow, that the catholic
soul, or general vivifying spirit thereof, and consequently every particular
essence, or formal existence, which is derived from that catholic soul, no
otherwise than beams from the Sun, must be obnoxious, subject unto opposite
passions and alterations. From hence therefore springs that original love or
hatred, which is known to be between the good Angels, and the evil Spirits;
from hence do issue all those assiduall mutations and alterations, which happen
in the aetheriall and sublunary heavens, namely, by reason of the cross variety
of the starry influence. From hence proceed those oppositions, and contrary
effects, which are expired, or breathed forth from the winds: From hence are
derived the discord and concord of the Elements, with the diversity of natures
in the meteorologicall Impressions: From hence do flow the multiplicity of
affections, the opposition of dispositions, the passion of spirits; and, in a
word, the sympathy and antipathy which is observed to be between all creatures,
as well simple as compound, be they animal, vegetable, or mineral.

The Author therefore concludes upon these grounds, that it is but just and
reasonable, to consent unto the opinions of the two notable and famous
Philosophers, Heraclitus and Empedocles, touching this point, whereof the first
has exposed it as an infallible Maxim, Quod omnia fiant per litem and
amicitiam; That all things are made and composed of strife and friendship, that
is to say, Of hatred and love. The last has pronounced it for an oracle of
truth, Quod ex quatuor elementis, Ecclus. 42.25.
and ex amicitia and lite composita sit anima; That the soul is composed of
four elements, and of peace or concord, and contention or discord, signifying
thereby, that contrary disposition which is between the watery spirit, and the
bright mental beam, in regard of their original: For by litem, or strife, he
argues as well the spiritual contention as the corporal, in respect of that
contrary puissance and hability, which is between the formal light and dark
matter, both in regard of the body, in the act of corruption, when the soul
would part from it; and in the antipatheticall or irascible passion, in respect
of the soul, in which the spirit labors and suffers unnaturally. In these
opinions of the foresaid Philosophers, they seem not to vary from that of the
son of Syrach, speaking thus; Gemina sunt omnia, quorum alterum est contrarium
alteri, nec quicquam factum est quod mancum sit: All things are of a double
nature, the one of them contrary to the other, and yet there is nothing made
which is defective.

CHAP. I.
In this Chapter it is demonstrated, that God is that pure and catholic Unity,
the which includes and comprehends in it self all multiplicity.

AS there is no man, be he never so highly exalted in the sphere of
Mathematical perfection, or profoundly dived into the mystical bowels of the
abstrusest Arithmetic, that can with the quick eyesight of his ripest
understanding, observe or discry any thing, either by order or antiquity, to
challenge justly unto its self a place or ran^k before Unity, (and for this
reason, the wisest Philosophers do ingenuously confess, that it is the only
principle or root of all number and multitude) so also ought each person of
judgment to acknowledge, that this radical Identity, as it is considered in
its pure and absolute nature and condition, cannot be limited by any
quantitative dimension, nor yet included or comprehended by any member, nor
divided into distinct portions, nor yet defined by any substantial quiddity or
entity. And hereupon it has been judiciously concluded by wise men, that Unity
is the most antique and radical principle of all others, forasmuch as it
comprehends in it self all substances, quantities, and qualities, no
otherwise than the Geometrical prick or point, being considered in its naked
simplicity, is observed to be indivisible, and scarcely to be perceived; yea
verily, and as it were nothing to be determined: and yet nevertheless, the
prick or point is evidently known to be the infallible beginning not only of
every Geometrical line, but also of all other continuated Mathematical
dimensions whatsoever, seeing that it comprehends all magnitudes, and is not
comprehended of any.

These two principles of all dimensions whatsoever, since that they in order,
rank, and antiquity, do precede and excel all others, did the expert
Mathematicians invent, after the typical imitation or image of the most
internal, centrall, and abstruse point of Divinity, or divinest and brightest
Unity, remaining in that very estate in which it stood before the creation of
the world, namely, when it reserved it self within it self, and remained occult
and hidden from all potentiall creatures, which it was pleased afterward, by
the revealing of it self, or emission of its vivifying light, to inact and make
manifest for its abode in its simple and absolute nature of unity, without
having any respect or consideration to things which it would create: So that in
this manner of this Unitie's being and existence, it could not be esteemed for
God: forasmuch as hitherto it had not produced any creature, by the which it
might be adored or acknowledged for God; neither could it rightly be styled or
termed a Father: For it did not appear to have thought on any Son or issue,
either Archetypicall and ideall, or typical and mundane; neither could it be
reputed for the Summum bonum, or highe^t goodness; being that the defo^med
matter or dark Chaos, or rather Hyle did not as yet taste of that his bright
and all-inacting blessing, which was concealed and hidden in its potentiall
darkness and obscurity, which was therefore void of all form; neither could it
be entitled fair, forasmuch as it did not hitherto impart his beauty, for the
decoration or inacting of any creature; no^ could it rightly be said to be
eternity, being that in this manner of his occultation within its self, it
seemed unto humane capacity not to exist at all, and consequently not to have
any reference or commerce with either eternity, or aeviality, or temporality:
moreover it could not assume or challenge unto it self the name of principle,
because it had no relation as yet unto any thing that did spring or issue from
any beginning. To conclude, the nature of this simple Monadicall existence, was
before all created, so occult and obs^ure, unto mortals apprehension, and in
its order and antiquity so unknown; yea and so inscrutable, and
incomprehensible in its essence, that it could not any way be con^luded to be
either substance, or quantity, or quality, but rather was conceived to be a
certain transcendent entity or existence, reserved only in its self, and
consisting of it self; not having any principle root or beginning to spring
from, and exist by, but only from, and of it self, in whose Divine Puissance
as in a place without end or limits, all things which are now explicitly
apparent, were then complicitly contained, although in regard of our capacity,
they were esteemed nothing. And for this cause, such persons as were conversant
in the Laws of the true Wisdom, have inacted in their never dying Registers,
that this mystical infinity, when it was thus bewrapped in the gloomy clew, or
profound abyss of darkness, and remained as it were vacant, or resting in its
self, without any action, or (as they say) having regard or respect unto
nothing, was therefore termed in Hebrew (...): that is to say, Roulkin. lib. 3.
de Art. Cab.
Nihil, Non finis, Non Ens, and, in plain English, Nothing at all in our
imagination, because the tenuity and poverty of man's capacity and ingeny in
the regard of Divine things is such, that it is accustomed to judge and imagine
that not to be or exist at all, which appears not manifestly unto the sight:
For this reason therefore the wisest persons in the abstruse and hidden Caball,
have termed this original Unity in his secret disposition Aleph tenebrosum, or
the obscure and dark Aleph, the which Hebrew letter is received among the Jews
and Cabalisticall Rabbi's for the figure of one in Arithmetic, and by
consequence it is Hieroglyphically taken for God, as he is understood to be
that absolute Monady or Unity, which only was in it self, and did abide and
rest in it self, without any action of emanation, which afterward he did use
when he was pleased to operate in Creation; and therefore the wise Philosopher
Hermes (not disagreeing in this from the Holy Scripture) says, Monas ante
mundi exordium sibi ipsi and non aliis reluxit. Unity or Identity d^d shine
only to it self, Pimand. 12. Pimand. 3.
and in it self, and not to any thing else. And in another place: Erat umbra
infinita in abysso, agua insuper, and Spiritus tenuis intellectualis per
divinam potentiam in Chaos inerant: There was an infinite shadow upon the face
of the abyss, and moreover, water and a thin intellectual spirit were in the
Chaos through the divine puissance. And Moses to confirm this saying of that
wise Philosopher: T^nebrae erant super faciem abyssi. By this therefore may
wise men discern and contemplate, 1 John 1.
though a far off, what the Potentia, or puissance div^ne was, before any
creature did explicitly appear out of darkness; as also they may easily
gather, what is the true principle and foundation of Darkness, namely the
enclosing or retaining of the actual beams or light of immortal life, and
being in this bright fundamental unity, in the which is no darkness; so that
the Original darkness can be reputed for nothing else, but the absence of the
radical Unitie's bright emanation, which is the fountain of all action;
neither can that Divine vivifying and creating Light be present, Gene^. 1.
when the will of that simple and absolute essence in Unity is not minded to
send forth unto deformity, the treasure of its informing beams. And hereupon it
follows of necessity, that darkness was upon the face of the abyss, and that
the earth was void and without form, before the Divine Essence did shine forth;
and that darkness was made the tabernacle of rest, and repose, because where
the Divine act or sacred emanation is absent, all things are only potentiall,
and consequently without actual verity, being as it were stark dead, and
without life or motion; and that the property of coldness and stupidity had
dominion during that privative estate, because that heat is engendered by motion
only, and motion has its beginning from Light, and all brightness does flow
from this Unity, which is termed the Father and Fountain of all Light:
wherefore it follows, that if this Divine Essence retain it self in it self,
then the dark Chaos reserved only in the Divine Puissance, or Potentia Divina,
must be deprived of motion: and that it is inclined to inspissation and
condensation, by reason of his congealing and cold property, which does thicken
and make gross, by contraction: and that it is the fountain of all privation,
and an enemy unto the creatures life and being, because it is contrary to act,
motion, and heat, which are the handmaids of the Divine emanation, and
consequently it is the fountain of death, deformity, and nonentity. To
conclude, as Light is the original of life, position, act, motion, and, in a
word, of the Volunty of God in his revealed Nature: so also is this primordiall
darkness, the head and wellspring of death, privation, rest, or vacancy; and
in brief, of the Divine essence's Nolunty. And hereupon the Scriptures do
justify, that when God does send forth his salutiferous beams, and manifest
unto his creatures the light of his countenance, they are refreshed with
goodness and life; Psalm. 104.29.
when he in part does hide his face, and withdraws his lively and vivifying
beams from them, they grow sick and their spirits are troubled: but if he
totally withdraw his aspect of life from them, they do immediately expire and
breath their last. Whereupon also Moses: Deus malos relinquit, and abscondit
faciem suam ab iis ut obveniant iis mala multa: Deuteronomy. 31.17.
God forsakes the wicked, an ^hideth his face from them that much mischief may
befall them. Psalm. 13.1.
And David, Quousque abscondis vultum tuum a me? Exhilara me vultu tuo:
visitatio tua conservat Spiritum meum: How long will thou hide thy face from
me? make me glad with thy countenance: thy visitation does conserve my spirit,
etc. Whereby it appears that this Divine Essence, observes as well after his
creation of the world, as before it, both the action of his Nolunty, and his
Volunty: in the first whereof, he withdraws or withholdeth that virtue of
life from the creature, which is the act of privation, in the last he gives
life and preservation to it: For by this his dilatative property he created the
world, and all things therein.

CHAP. II.
Wherein it is proved, that all things were complicitly and ideally in God, and
of God, before they were made.

THus have I expressed and made manifest, according unto the small validity of
mine understanding, the estate and being of this radical and eternal Unity,
before any thing was by it created, with the effects that it did produce in the
potentiall and deformed Mass, or material subject of all things, which was
complicitly or hiddenly detained and comprehended, in that Omnipotent and
incomprehensible point of Divine perfection, in which increated condition it
remained as Nothing, quoad nos; forasmuch as it was without form, unto the
which it appertains only to give a name and essence, and therefore in the
estate of its nonactuall being, Romans 11.36. 1 Cor. 11.12. Ephesians. 4.6. Colos.
1.14. Colos. 3.11.
wise men have termed it, Poten^iam Divinam, or the Divine Puissance. To
confirm and verify all this, we find these axioms of the Scriptures: Ex ipso,
per ipsum, and in ipso sunt omnia: Of him, by him, and in him are all things.
Omnia sunt ex Deo: All things are of God. Uuns Pater omnium, qui super omnes,
and per omnia, and in omnibus nobis: There is one Father of all, who is above
all, and through all, and in all of us. Omniaper ipsum and in ipso creata sunt,
and ipse est anteom^es, and omnia in ipso constant: All things are created by
him and in him, and he is before all, and all consist in him. Ipse est omnia in
omnibus: He is all and in all things. And the Son of Syrach: Diximus multa nec
tamenea assequu^i sumus: Summa dictorum est, Ipsum esse omnia: We have said
many things, without attaining unto them: the Sum of all our words is, that he
is all t^ings. By the which axioms we may easily gather, that God did beget,
bring forth, make, and create nothing, which was not eternally of himself and
in himself; so that from him all things did flow and spring, namely out of a
secret and hidden nature to a revealed and manifest condition, from an unknown
estate unto an evident and known existence; from a pure Archetypicall
simplicity into a real type or similittude; from a radical fountain into a
Sea, and from a mere point into a circle or circumference; verifying that
saying of the wise Philosopher: Mercurius ad Asclep.
God is the center of every thing, whose circumference is no where to be found;
that is, in all and beyond all. To confirm all this, we may boldly and without
offense infer thus much, namely that every thing that is begotten,
principiated, created, produced, or separated, does radically proceed from one
that is unbegotten, infinite, not made or created, no^ separated, but only one
Unity, individual in his essence: For it is an easy matter to consider, that
every inferior thing does issue from a superior; every corporal thing from a
spiritual; every visible thing from an invisible; every temporal thing,
namely which has both a beginning and an end, from a thing that is aeviall,
that is to say, which has a beginning but no end; and every aeviall thing from
an eternal thing, to wit, that which has neither beginning nor end, and
therefore that eternal point or brightest Unity which has no beginning, and
consequently no end, is the fountain from the which all aeviall and temporal
things do essentially proceed, no otherwise then all numbers do flow from
Unity, and are comprehended in Unity: For how far soever the number does extend
it self, evermore it has an unity to begin it, and an unity to conclude it,
and in verity it has nothing bendes an unity to create and compose it within.
But for your better instruction, you may observe by a diligent insight into the
cossicall numbers, how the Divine and Centrally formal Unity does comprehend
all creatures, as well before they were made, as since their creation in its
self: For we must note, that there is nothing in the world, but it is either a
root, or a square, or a cube, or some other such like figure, which is framed
and composed of these. The root does represent the beginning of all cossicall
proportions or magnitudes: the Square does decipher the simple and spiritual
principiated figure, which is created or made by the multipli^ation of that
root: the cube is composed through the augmenting of that square or
principiated shape in its root; so that we may discern that the whole cubick
body, and consequently the square is contained in the root, and in conclusion,
is nothing else then the root multiplied in it self or from it self. But that
my demonstrations may yet approach a little nearer unto our purpose, let us I
pray you with diligence consider the nature and property of this Divine Monady
or Unity, as it is in its simple and sincere existence, and then we shall find
it, and that without any egression from his own punctual or centrall
profundity, to comprehend complicitly within it self the three foresaid
cossicall Dimensions, and consequently all other things which it has now by
Creation explicitly made evident, in this typical world, and that is proved
easily by this Arithmeticall demonstration: For if we shall multiply an unity
as a root, in it self, it will produce but it self, namely an unity for a
square, the which being again remultiplicated in its self, will bring forth a
cube, which is all one with the root or square; to wit, a simple unity: Whereby
it is evident, that though we have here three various branches, which seem to
differ in their formal progression, I mean a Root, a Square, and Cube, yet in
the essential verity and reality, there is but this one Unity or Indentity, in
the which all things remain potentially, and that after a most abstruse
manner. And for this reason the Wiseman says: Deo omnia sunt cogni^a antequam
crearentur: All things were known unto God, Ecclus. 23.
before they were created. And Esdr^s: Dei potentia, ante omnia creata, finis
and initium omnium est: The Puissance of God which was before all creatures,
was the beginning and end of all things. Esdras 4.6.
And unto this purpose Herm^s says, Ex uno principio cun^ta dependent,
principium ex uno solo, and principium movetur ut rursus extet principium,
Pimand. 10.
ipsum tamen unum pr^stat, nec recedit ab unitate: All things depend of one
principle or beginning, that is on one sole Unity, and this principle or
beginning is moved, that it may again become a principle, and yet nevertheless
it is but one thing only, that does effect it, not departing from the nature
of Unity. And to this sense says St. John: In principio ^rat verbum: In the
beginning was the word: The which word affirms thus much: Joh. 13.10.
Ego and Pater unum sumus, Pater in me and ego in Patre, and Pater in me
man^us, ipse facit omnia: I and my Father am one, my Father in me and I in my
Father; and my Father in me, is he that makes all things. Even unto this very
purpose seems the wise Hermes to concur with the Scriptures, in the shaping
out of the Archetypicall world, after whose Image this our typical world is
created (and therefore he terms it elsewhere, the visible Son of God:) Monas
(says he) generat Monadem, Pimand.
and in seipsum reflexit ardorem: One b^gat one, and reflected the Ardor and
virtue of his emanation into it self; that is, it shined into it self, to the
shaping out of an Ideal world, and was not as yet conversant about the framing
out of any typical one. Whereby it is evident, that nothing is really figured
in this world, which was not ideally fashioned out in the archetype or eternal
one. But lest some captious person should except against these places in
Scripture, and elsewhere cited by me, touching this very point, and allege,
(as some of them have already done) that these mine opinions are flatly
dissonant unto that of the ancient Fathers, and School men, I will in few words
express some of their minds touching this point. lib. octoginta quoq 40.
St. Austin's opinion is, Quod ideae sunt formae aeternae and incommutabi^es in
men^e divina; That the id^a's of things are eternal forms, and incommutable
shapes in God. And Sonus will have them to be, Res ob octivae, c^gnitae ab
intellectu divino, lib. 1. dict. 3.
Certain objects, which are known unto the divine in^ellect. But there is
nothing in God but that which is God, because the Godhead is one and the same
Spirit: Whereupon it follows, that the Idea's in God, although they be many,
(for man was made after one fashion, and a horse after another, etc.) yet all
are one in God, as St. Austin seems to prove and confirm elsewhere, in these
words, Primus and summus intellectus est ars quaedam omnipotentis atque
sapientis Dei, de Trinitat. lib. 6. cap. ult.
plena omnium rationum viventium incommutabilium; and omnes unum inea, sicut
ipsa unum de uno cum quo unum. The supreme and highest intellect is a certain
act of the omnipotent and wise God, full of all the unchangeab^e reasons of
living things, and all of them are one in it, as it is one of one with whom is
one. And in another place he says, Tu es Deus meus, Soliloquiorum c. 31.
and Dominus omnium quae creasti; and apud te omnium stabilium sunt causae, and
omnium mutabilium, apud te, immutabiles manent origines, and omnium
rationabilium and irrationabilium atque temporalium semper vivunt rations.
Thou art my God, and the Lord of all that thou have created; with thee all
originalls remain immutable, and the reasons or causes of all reasonable, lib.
3. de consul. Mat. 9.
and unreasonable, and temporal things, do always live. And Boethius has it
thus.

Tu cuncta superno
Ducis ab exemplo, pulchrum pulcherrimus ipse
Mundum merte gerens, similique in imagine formas.
Thou framest all things after a high and super-celestia^l example, and being
most beautiful, bearing the fair world in thy mind, do fashion it according
unto the like image. To conclude, Anselm does learnedly express the manner and
progression of every exemplary thing, from the ideall fountain of all verity,
thus, Forma rei (says he) arteficis est archetypa and veritas, Anselm.
and dum a potentia in actum ducitur motus est; in ma^eria vero jam producta,
est similitudo and imago: The form of a thing is the archetype and verify of
the workman; and whilst it is produced from puissance into act, it is motion;
In tract. de Number. ternar.
being specified in matter, it is a similitude or image. And for this reason
Odo, that learned Abbot, averreth, Quod numerus ternarius sit principale in
animo conditoris exemp^um condendorum; That the te^nary number (meaning the
divine and formal kind of numeration) is the principal image in the Creator's
mind, of such things as are created. Pim. 12.
In the very self-same sense speaks the divine Philosopher He^mes, in the
place before mentioned, saying, Quod m^na^ generat monadem and in se ^psum
reflexit ardorem; That one began one, and did reflect his beams into it self.
Whereby he argues, that unity in the framing of the Ideall or Archetypicall
world, did emit or send forth his word, as an essence begot of it self; and
afterward did reflect that spirit of wisdom, which issued from them both into
it self. For the son of Syrach says, Fons sapientiae verbum Dei in excelsis,
Ecclus. 1.5.
and ingressus illius mandata aeterna; The fountain of wisdom is the word of
God most high, and the everlasting commandments are the entrance unto her.
Thus therefore was the Archetypicall world framed, in, and of all one unity,
but in a threefold or triple manner, namely, by the egression of one out of
one, and by the regression of that one unity so emitted, by emanation into it
self; whereby the three divine properties in one infinite essence, may easily
be scanned. We conclude therefore, that according to this ideall Image, in
triplicity of variety, this our world was afterward fashioned and
proportioned, as a true type and example of the divine Pattern, after the which
it was drawn; (for out of unity in his abstruse existence, namely, as it was
hid in the dark chaos, or potentiall mass, the bright flame of all formal
being, did shine forth, and the spirit of wisdom proceeding from them both,
did conjoyne the formal emanation with the potentiall matter, so that by the
union of these two, namely, of the divine emanation of light, and of the
substantial matter of darkness* which was water, the heavens were made of
old, and the earth, and consequently the whole world, as it shall hereafter be
evidently demonstrated in our Divine Philosophy, and is well proved by the
warrant of the Apostle Peter. 2 Pet. 3.
We may therefore boldly conclude, that if the unities or members of the ideall
world, be all extracted out of one radical unity, as children out of one
father, and are included by the self-same unity, which is in^^ni^e in it self,
it must then follow of necessity, that the triple member of this created world,
must also be from, and in that self-same unity, being that the whole typical
world with his parts, are shaped after the image or representation of the
Archetype, which is that eternal monady or unity in which are all things; and
therefore he is rightly termed of the Apostle, to b^ all, and in all. And
again, Col. 3.11. Col. 1.16. etc. Romans 11.
All things are created by him, and in him, and he is before all, and al^
consist in him. And in another place, Of him, by him, and in him, are all
things, etc. And hereupon it is rightly termed of the Philosopher Hermes, The
center of all things, whose circumference is no where; that is to say,
including all, not being included by any. And Rabbi Z^ar, All things are one in
respect of God, but many in regard of us. And Plato, Not only all things are
in God, but also all things that exist, forasmuch as they are in God, and do
proceed from him, they are b^t one Entity. Moreover Hermes in his Smaragdine
Table, As all things were by the me^iati^n of one, so also are all things
sprung from this one thing by adaptation. And Proclus, in his Theological
Problems, As all things are sprung from one only, in like manner do they
hasten by a continual course to return unto that unity, with whom the greater
the concord is, by the which they meet together, by so much the more they
participate of him. Again Plato, All things part from the high God, and do
strive to return unto him again, forasmuch as in him c^nsisteth their small
repose, and the sust^nance of their exist^nce. For this cause therefore did the
Philosopher Leucippus, make this essential unity the summum bonum, or the
sovereign good and felic^ty. Thus therefore you see, that the antique
Philosophy does not jar or dissent in this, from the foresaid harmony of holy
Writ. There are some well seen in this mystical kind of progression, which do
express it in this manner: In D^o omn^o eran^ nihil nisi mere De^s. Ex Deo
omnia veniebant in principium, In Veteri manuscripto.
and tum omnia nihil erant nisi mere principium, man^^te tamen Deo. Ex
principio omni procedebant in verbum, and tum omnia nihil erant nisi mere
Verbum, manente tamen principio. Ex verbo omnia procedebant in spiritum D^mini,
and tum nihil erant nisi Spiritus Domini, manente tamen verbo. Ex spiritu
Domini omnia procedebant in aquas scilicet s^periores, and tum omnia nihil
erant nisi mere aquae superiores, manente tamen Spiritu Domini. Ex aquis
superioribus omnia descenderunt in aquas inferiores, and tum omnia nihil erant
nisi mere aquae inferiores, manentibus tamen superioribus. Ex aquis
inferioribus, hoc est, ex elementis and astris invisibilibus omnia proced^bant
in corpora visibilia, and tunc omnia erant nihil nisi mere corpora visibilia,
manentibus tamen elementis and astris invisibi^ibus, etc. In God all things
were nothing but merely God. Of God all things were made a beginning, and then
all things were n^thing else but a m^^r beginning, God remaining nevertheless
in his entire existence. Of the beginning all became the Word, and then were
all things nothing else but the word merely, and that not without the
permanency of the beginning. From the word all did proceed into the Spirit of
the Lord, and then they were nothing but the Spirit of the Lord, and that
without any diminution of the Words existence. From the Spirit of the Lord all
became wa^ers, namely, the upper waters, and then all things were nothing else
but the upper waters merely, and that without any diminution of the Spirit of
the Lords existence. From the upper waters all did descend into the lower
waters, or elementary region, and then all were nothing else but merely the
lower waters, and yet the upper waters lost not their permanency. Of the lower
waters, that is, of the elements, and invisible stars, or starry influences,
all became visible bodies, and then all things were nothing else but visible
bodies, without any derogation nevertheless unto any existency of the
elements, and starry influences, etc. All which I could also prove to be true,
as well by the Scriptures, as expert Cabalists, and divinest Philosophers
assertions: Isa. 45.6.
For by Scriptures we are taught, That God, the fountain of all being, did
first create darkness; and that this darkness was that deformed principle, Sap.
11.8. Joh. 1.1. Genes. 1.
or primary matter, without shape, which did complicitely contain all things.
And that the Word was in that beginning or principle. And again, that this word
issued out of darkness. And that the spirit was carried on these waters, which
appeared out of the bowel^s of the dark abyss. And that all were waters at the
first, the bright Spirit of the Lord being not in any thing extinguished. And
that these waters were divided unto the higher and lower, namely, heaven and
earth. As also St. Peter teaches us, 2 Pet. 3. Genesis 1. Job 23.25.
that of the lower waters the elements were framed by the distinguishing Spirit
of the Lord. Which Job says, does aptare pondus aeri, and appendere aquas in
mensura, facere pluviae statuta and viam fulgetro tonitruum; that is, gives a
portion unto the weight of ^he air, and hangs the waters or clouds in
measure, and makes statutes, or gives laws unto the rain, and a passage unto
the lightning of the thunder, etc. And Racanat, that excellent Master in Cabal,
upon the beginning of Genesis, says, as is already told you, Reuel^n.
Et ^orte quaeres, Cum sap entia sit numeratio secunda, q^are dicatur
principium? Scriptum est in libro Bahir, Nihil est princ^pium nisi sapientia.
Cui equidem ^ecte mihi videar respondere, quod infinitudo ipsa trium sammarum
Cabalisticae arboris numerationum (quas vos ^res in divi^^s perso^as appellare
consuevistis, absol^t^ssima essent^a) quum sit in aby^sso ten^brarum retracta
and immane^s ociosa, vel (ut a^unt) ad nihil respiciens, idcirco dicitur (...),
i. e. N^hil sive non-ens ac non-sints, qu^a nos tam tenui erga res div^nas
ingen^i paupertate (...) de ^is quae non apparent haud secus atque de iis quae
non sunt judicamus. At ubi se ostend^rit ut sit a iquid and revera subsistat,
tunc Aleph tenebrosum in Aleph lucidum convertitur. Scriptum est enim, Sicut
tenebrae ejus ita and lux ejus: and appella^ur (...) Aleph magnum quando exire
cupit and apparere omnium rerum causa per Beth proxime sequentem literam,
nominaturque (...), i. e. pater omnis gene^ationis and p^oductionis, fac^t enim
res omnes, etc. And per chance you will demand, Since sapience is the second
Cabalisticall numeration, wherefore it is called Principium, or the beginning?
It is written in the book of Bahir, that nothing is principium, or the
beginning, but Wisdom. Unto whom, methinks, I may rightly answer, That the
infinity it self of the three highest numerations of the Cabalisticall tree,
(which ye are accustomed to call the three Persons in Divinity, of one absolute
essence) when it is retracted in the abyss of darkness, and remaining idle or
vacant, and, as it were, having respect unto nothing, is therefore called
(...), that is to say, Nothing, or nonentity; because that we being endued
with such poverty of understanding in divine matters, do judge of such things
which appear not, no otherwise than of those which are not at all; but when it
does so reveal it self, that it existeth in our senses somewhat indeed, then is
dark Aleph converted into light Aleph. For it is writ, As his darkness is, so
is his light, namely, when it desires to issue out of darkness, and to appear
to be the cause of all things, by Beth, which is the next ensuing letter; and
it is termed (...) Ab, that is to say, the father of all generation and
production of things; for it effects all things. Moreover, Mercury
Trismegist, whom others term Hermes, does more expressly seem to mention this
progression, from unity in darkness, down to the creation of the elements, in
this very form of speech, Pimander men's divinae potentiae mutavi^ formam and
universa sub^to revelavit; cernebam enim omnia in ^umen conversa, Pimand 1.
suave nimium atque jucundum, quod intuentem me mirifice ob^ectabat. Paulo
post, umbra quaedam horrenda obliqua revolutione subterlabebatur, in hum damque
naturam migrabat, ineffabili tum vu tu exagitabam, inde fumus magnus in sonitum
erumpebat, ex sonitu vox eg^ed^ebatur, quam ego luminis vocem existimabam, ex
luminis voce verbum factum prodiit; verum hoc naturae humidae astans, eam
fovebat, ex hum^dae autem naturae viscer^bus sincerus ac levis ignis protinus
evolans, alta petit, Aer quoque levis spiritu parens mediam regionem inter
ignem and aquam sortiebatur, ^erra vero and aqua s^c invicem commixta ^acebant
ut terrae facies aquis obrut^ nusquam pateret. Tunc Pimander ait, Lumen illud
ego sum, men's Deus tuus, antiqu^or quan^ humida natura quae ex umbra effulsit:
mentis vero ge^men lucens, Dei F^lius, etc. Pimander being the mental
exce^lency of the divine pu^ssance, did change his form or shape, and on the
sudden revealed the universe; for I did discern, that all things were
converted into a pleasant and delectable light, which did rejoice me to behold.
A little after, a fea^full shadow or darkness did glide downwards by an
oblique revolution, and was converted into a humid or moist nature, which was
exagitated or stirred up by an unspeakable aspect; thereupon a great fume or
smoke made a noise, out ^f that no^se proceeded a voice, which I did imagine to
be the voice of the light, out of this voice of the light the word which was
made was utte^ed; but this word joining it self with the hum^d na^u^e, did
nourish and anima^e it. Out of the bowels of this humid nature, the light
element of fire does f^y, and soareth on high, also the thin air possesses
the middle region, between the fire and water; b^t the earth and the water were
intermingled after such a fashion, that the face of the earth was no where
over-flowed by the waters. Then Pimander said, I am that light, the mental
spirit, that is thy God, of a greater antiquity then is the humid nature, which
did shine out of the dark shadow: but the brightsome germe of the mental
spirit is the Son of God, etc. Whereby it is evident, that by the mental unity
is meant the absolute divine Monady in it self, without any respect had unto
creation. By the Divine Puissance, is understood the dark principle, beginning,
or Chaos, out of the which light or the divine emanation did spring. At the
issuing of Light, the word was made manifest out of the dark and deformed
Chaos; from which also the humid nature or the Abyss of waters did spring, or
proceed into action by the creating emanation: this humid Mass was nourished
and vivified by the word, and framed in the Elements, as is said before. And
therefore it is apparent, that the darkness, the light, the word, the waters,
and Elements were complicitly contained all in the mental puissance and
abstruce reservation of the sincere Identity of Pimander, or God in himself,
before they were created. But I will yet pass a little further, and confirm all
this more rationally and demonstratively, by the authority of Holy-Writ: Job
says: Revelat Deus fundamenta e tenebris, and educit in lucem umbram lethalem:
God reveals the foundations of the world out of darkness, and he discovers
or brings forth into light the deadly shadow, etc. Where, by the foundations
he understands the waters, which were secretly contained in the dark and
misshapen abyss, of the which afterward the heavens, and the earth, and
consequently the whole world was framed by the Word, according unto the
Archetypicall pattern: So that we here perceive, that two principles of a clean
contrary nature, do issue or proceed from, and out of one and the same Identity
or Unity in Essence, namely a deadly darkness, and as it were the shadow of
death, and an admirable vivifying light, whereof the one was the matrix or
receptacle of form: And the deformed bowels of the other, contained that
matter without form, whereof afterward the world was framed, and therefore the
wiseman says: Manus omnipotentis mundum ex informi materia effecit: The hand
of the Almighty has made the world of a matter without form. And according
unto this tenent also, Job in an other place: Aquilonem extendit Deus super
inane and vacuum, and suspendit terram super nihilum: Sap. 11.18. Job 26.7.
God stretches forth or spreads the North upon emtpyness, and inanity; that
is to say, on a thing that was void and destitute of shape, and hanged the
earth upon nothing. In which speech by inane or vacuum and nihilum, he means
misshapen darkness, and deadly shadow, of which he spoke in the
before-specified place, or that matter without form, mentioned by Solomon: the
which whilst it was in Potemia D^vina, Job 12.
or the Divine Puissance, was merely nothing in man's weak capacity, being that
it was not as yet actually created or informed; for it is form only that
gives name and essence, as all Philosophers do confess.

By this therefore we may discern, how all things are essentially comprehended
in this eternal and radical Unity: Forasmuch as being one, he is infinite,
and being infinite as well in his dimension and essence as power; he must of
necessity comprehend in himself all finite things whatsoever. He is in all and
fills all, and yet he is beyond all, as he that surpassing and compassing
all, is only in himse^f, and yet neither absent from his creatures which he
has framed out by his Word, according to his Will. For first, from his Volunty
did proceed his Word, Fiat, and it was done. Now that we have the privative
principle, namely deadly darkness and deformity, drawn from the infinite
center of all things; whose circumference is no where to be found; We will dive
into the nature of that formal and lively Light, which did also issue from the
self-same Original Root and most antique beginning of all things, that thereby
we may with the best colors of our understanding, paint out and describe that
excellent formal Essence which redeemed the humid matter, or watery substance
out of the captivity of the deadly and misshapen darkness or shadow of death
(that I may speak in Job's language) by which all things have their being, and
beauteous existence.

CHAP. III.
How that amiable and bright emanation of vivifying Love, shone forth from the
Fountain of all goodness, and displaced Litigious and odious darkness from the
Throne of the obscure Chaos or dark Abyss: that thereby a World might be made
of nothing that was actual, and beautified by the formal presence thereof.

IT is a wondrous thing, and passing all humane understanding, that out of one
Unity in essence and nature, two branches of such an opposite nature should
arise and sprout forth, as are Darkness (which is the seat of error,
deformity, contention, privation, or death) and Light, which is the vehicle of
truth, beauty, love, position, and life. It is not for naught, that the Sect of
the Manichaeans did so stiffly hold that there were two coeternall principles;
whereof they made one to be God whom they termed the Prince of Light, and the
beginner and Author of life, health, and all goodness: the other they
attributed unto the Devil, whom thy entitled the Prince of Darkness, and the
original and principle of opposition, death, sickness, and all evil. And
they esteemed the Devil or Prince of Darkness therefore coeternall in being
with God, because there can be no goodness which has not relation unto his
contrary, namely badnesse: For this reason they will have, forsooth, the God of
evil and naughtiness, to be of a coeternall existence with the God of
goodness. By which means they would not only exclude the Devil out of the
list of creatures, but also banish Unity out of the bounds of nature and justle
Diady or duality (which in verity is nothing else but a confusion of Unities)
in its place. And verily this point did seem so ticklish and diffi^ult to be
scanned and resolved, that there were some of the wiser sort of Poetical
Philosophers that did incline unto their part, as it appears by such
mystical and allegorical expressions as they did aenigmatically roll up or
bewrap in their fabulous discourses. Amongst the rest, we find that the Poet
Pronapis in his Pro o-cosmus, averreth that Demogorgon, (by which is meant the
greatest of the Gods) was guarded or incircled about with Eternity and Chaos.
And that on a time whilst he was in his majesty, he did perceive a great tumult
and troublesome motion to be stirred up in the bowels of the Chaos: Whereupon
to help her in this her travels and ease her of her trouble, he put forth his
hand, and performing the office of a Midwife, did suddenly deliver her of the
foul and deformed Monster Litigium, or strife, the which after such time as it
had moved great storms and troubles, and had ambitiously attempted to sore or
fly upward, was forthwith by Demogorgon cast down into the deep. But when he
yet perceived her to travel and be oppressed miserably with fervent sighs and
dropping sweats, Demogorgon would not in these her agonies remove his hand from
her, until she was delivered of Pan, with his three Sisters, which were called
the Parcae or Des^inyes, and when Demogorgon was much affected and taken with
the beauty and excellent form of Pan, he made him the Ruler of all his familiar
businesses in the world, and commanded his three Sisters, as his Handmaids and
Ministers, to obey his behests and will. It follows, that Chaos being over
burdened and oppressed, with the weight of so great a heap or Mass as she
traveled with, and now being delivered and freed from it, did, at the
persuasion of Demogorgon, place her Son Pan upon her Throne. This is the
Parabolicall fable of Demogorgon, and Chaos, familiarly told by the Poets.
Their Allegory imports, that the generation and procreation of all things,
did spring from the highest God or Creator, which they signify by the name of
Demogorgon, unto whom Eternity is joined, by an inviolable link in one
essential society, because that he only is truly to be called Eternal, who
is, and ever was the beginning or primary cause of all things. And they fain
also that Chaos made a third in that endless Society: forasmuch as she is, by
Ovid's relation, the common mixed and confused matter or stuff of all things in
the world, and therefore the Ancients did affirm her to be eternal with God,
as being a rude Mass or dark abyss, out of which Demogorgon, as an universal
Father and Work-master, did according unto his will procreate and fashion out
all things, and therefore they esteem this catholic Substance or matter of all
things, to be the general Mother, on which, and out of which, the universal
Father did beget and frame out every thing; for the which cause they concluded,
that there were two general Parents of things, from endless antiquity; whereof
the one was the Father and the other the Mother: But they consented that God
was their chiefest cause, and they would have the Chaos serve only as his
passive companion to engender on. And although it may appear, that the wise and
divine Plato does seem in some sort to verify that the Chaos was God's
companion from all antiquity; yet he does intimate to us well, as many other of
the like profundity; that though she be termed a companion with God in the
Creation, yet did she issue from him by a certain eternal generation or
production, and that God did afterward frame all things out of Chaos: For which
cause they conclude, that it did spring from God and is never divided from him;
as also it serves God as a female companion, for procreation and generation,
no otherwise then Eve, being framed out of Adam, was called a companion unto
Adam. This is the opinion of both the Heathen Philosophers and mystical
Cabalists. But to proceed in this Allegorie's exposition. The hand of
Demogorgon imports the Divine Puissance. The firstborn of Chaos, namely
Litigium, with a foul shape, signifies the true Prince of Darkness, the Author
of opposition, the Father of discord; and therefore for his presumptuous
attempt, against the Prince of Light, and the Lord of Life, he was cast down
into the abyss. By the Second birth of Chaos, namely Pan, they point at the
universal nature of the world, and the peaceablenesse and accord of contrary
Elements, arguing thereby, that after that great discord which was in the first
opening of Chaos her womb, concord did follow in the second place, which was as
beautiful and acceptable unto God in the later birth, as deformed discord was
foul and odious in his sight in the first. Thus you see how in the first
beginning of the world, all the Elements were at strife in the bowels of the
Chaos: The three Parcae or Sisters of Destiny, Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos,
which were born with Pan, do signify the three orders of time, namely the time
present, the time past, and the time to come. Clotho has the care of the
present time, and her office is to twist the thread of life: Lachesis is the
superintendrix of the time to come, and looks to the flax or hemp which is
not yet spunne nor twisted: And Atropos does import the time past, which is
irrevocable, and therefore she does finish and cut off the thread now spun. I
infer upon this parabolicall relation, that though the Chaos or dark abyss be
with God before the world's creation, yet did the infinite and sole eternal
Unity or radical Essence create it, and produce it out of its self: For that
Eternal Unity says: Ego Dominus and non est alter, Isai. 45.7.
sormans lucem, and creans tenebras, faciens pacem, and creans malum: I am the
Lord, and there is no other, who do inform light, and create darkness, making
peace and creating evil: As if he had said, I am the Father of Light or of the
bright Spirit of Wisdom, and I created the dark Chaos, out of which I framed
the world, and out of her I produced as well the concord and discord of the
Elements in the world; that is to say, Litigium and Pan; so that we may discern
still, that there is but one Eternal Unity, which in it self is male and
female, and all that can be imagined, which of himself, and in himself
produces all things, no otherwise then Adam contained in himself Eve, which
was the Mother of the little world, or man after Adam: and therefore Hermes
says, Men's autem Deus utriusque sexus foecunditate plenissimus, Pimand.
vita and lux cum verbo sic alteram mentem peperit: God being full of the
fertility of both sexes, and being life and light, brought forth another Divine
Spirit by his Word. And Scriptures seem to intimate thus much in this sense:
Qui caeteris generationem tribuo, an sterilis ero?

It is evident therefore, that out of one and the same radical Unity, existing
before all antiquity, both the matter and form of all things do proceed, and
that they appear in regard of their being or births but aeviall, that is,
having a beginning but no end, though in their essential Root, they are
Eternal in God, the abstruse Monady or Unity of all things: So that as the
dark Chaos, and the bright informing Spirit, are two principles opposite and
contrary to one another, in nature and property, (for from the dark principle,
discord, evil, cold, congelation, rest, death, privation, negation or Nolunty,
do proceed; but from the other which is the type of beauty, and grace, namely
the bright beginning, light, concord, goodness, heat, resolution, motion, life,
and position, or Volunty, are poured out into the nature of the world, to cause
it to exist and live:) so also both these are but main branches, arising from
one and the same essential Unity, which when they cannnot pass or exceed the
limits of their infinite fountain, are in him light and darkness, and no way
differing in essence from their Root, which is all in all, Psalm. 13^.12.
because that as the Psalmist does say, Tenebrae sunt ei, sicut ipsa lux:
Darkness is unto him as ligh^: For all is one in him, who is only one and the
same in himself, Romans 11.36.
In whom, by whom, and therefore from whom are all things: For his Volunty and
Nolunty, is but all one in him that is one simple Identity, and what is his
Volunty, that is as well his affirmation as his negation, which is all but one
good in him that is all goodness. And yet in regard of the creature, when his
negation has the supremacy, he hides the light of his loving countenance, and
all is dark, and then he operateth in regard of his privation. For where he
hides his face, all is deformed, and, as it were, void of essence and
goodness. Lo here is his Volunty, negative or privative, which may rightly be
termed his Nolunty. If his affirmation has dominion, he emitteth the beauty of
his benignity, and the creatures expecting spirit is enlightened by his
presence, and consequently replenished with goodnes^. Lo here is also his
Volunty affirmative or positive, called his Volunty in the right sense. But
least any man should think this strange, let him but observe the mental beam,
which is assigned by God unto man, to inform him with reason, and adorn him
with understanding. We know that man has but one Divine nature, which gives
him intellect: Job 9.
Spiritus est in homine (says Job) sed inspiratio omnipotentis facit eum
intelligere: And yet this Unity in essence, which is the Image of God,
operateth in general by two contrary properties: Whereof the one is apt to
affirm, give, and grant a petition by an affable emanation, (Lo here is the Act
of position, scored out in man's spiritual Unity;) or else to deny, take away,
or be against the demand of him that craveth by a privative ablation of the
wished rewards, (Lo here is the effect of negation deciphered, for the mental
beam shines not out unto the Petitioner, but is reserved or contracted in it
self.) In these two actions, we may observe but only one effect which is
laudable, in this one simple and absolute unity unto the petitioner; for though
I grant, by the friendly and pitiful emanation or emission of my mental beam,
so that it is according unto the petitioners wish; or though I deny his demand,
contrary unto his desire, and so it appears to be a great evil or mischief
unto the demander; yet unto my mental spirit, both the affirmation or negation
appears good, and are founded upon good reason, and therefore are indeed but
one thing, though they seem diverse to the demander. In like manner, in the
eternal and archetypicall mental unity, whose type or similitude, the beam of
our understanding is, as well the act of Volunty as Nolunty, is all one, and
that is goodness; for he that is all goodness, has in it self no
contrariety, although in the creature, which is subject unto the effects,
either of his privative or positive will; his privative or dark action is
esteemed for evil, as contrariwise his positive and light emanation, that is
full of love and benignity, is received for good, and therefore embraced with
joy. For, does not the holy Text tell us, Eccles. 11.14.
Bonum and malum, vita and mors, a Deo sunt? Good and evil, life and death,
are from God? And does it not tell us in another place, Quod Deo abscondente
faciem suam a creaturis conturbantur, Psalm. 104.
recipiente spiritum eorum exspirant, emittente spiritum suum recreantur bono?
God hiding his face from the creatures, they are troubled and sick; taking his
bright vivifying Spirit from them they dye, and sending it forth again they are
recreated with goodness, health, and life. And again, Visitatio tua (says
David) praeservat spiritum meum, Job 10.12. Psalm. 4.7. Psalm. 18.29.
Thy visitation does preserve my spirit. Attol^e faciem tuam and emitte lucem
supra nos, and efficiet ut videamus lucem, and splendentes efficiat tenebras
nostras: Send out the light of thy countenance, and it will cause us to see
light, Isa. 42. Job. Joh. 12.
and it will make our darkness bright and shining. And again, Tenebras ponam
iis in lucem, I will put darkness in them in stead of light. Tenebras in diem
incurrent astuti and quasi in nocte sic palpabunt in meridie. Crafty men shall
in the daytime run into darkness, 1 John 1.
and they shall grope at noonday as if it were in the night. In tenebris est,
and in tenebris ambulat, qui odit fratrem: He is in darkness, and walks in
darkness, that hates his brother. Nahum 1. Deuteronomy. 31.17.
And the Prophet says, Tenebrae persequentur inimicos Dei, Darkness shall
persecute the enemies of God. Abscondit faciem suam ab iis ut obtingant iis
multa mala and angustiae: He hides his face from them, that evil and misery
may befall them. And yet there is neither of these two properties in this one
essential unity, but is good absolutely, though the latte be privative,
passive, odious, disturbing, and deadly unto the creature that end ^reth the
effect. Is it not written, that he has the power of life and death, Sap.
16.13. Psalm. 9.6.
and does ^^ad down unto the mouth of the grave, and can bring back again to
life when he pleases. And yet all this is but according to his double property
of Volunty and Nolunty, that is, of his granting or positive emanation, and
privative or negative condition, which are (as I have said) both good in him,
who is nothing but pure goodness in his simple and absolute nature, and
therefore are one in him, who is sincere unity in himself. Whereupon the wise
Philosopher, Pimand. 14.
not disagreeing in this from Scriptures, says, Non est ^n monade divina nisi
unum and bonum, ab ipso enim factore nihil malum nihilque turpe: In the divine
essence there is not any thing but unity and goodness, for from the Creator
there is neither evil nor filthiness. And for this cause, when Job saw that
God did strike him, as it seemed to him, without a cause, forasmuch as he was a
just man, and (as the Text says) according unto Gods heart; he being egged
forward, notwithstanding all his pains, with a pious zeal toward his Creator,
though he knew that his affliction proceeded from the hiding of his Maker's
countenance from him, did break forth into these terms, Job 14.
Et tamen absit a Deo impietas, and ab Omnipotente iniquitas: And yet for all
that, far be it from me, that I should deem any impiety to be in God, or that
iniquity should proceed from the Almighty. It is most apparent unto the
sleightest Philosopher, that God is conversant in the created nature, as well
about corruption and privation, as generation and position; and yet no good
Christian can be ignorant, but that either of these opposite properties, so
familiar in one sincere essence, is absolutely good, in that it is completely
excellent in goodness in it self, although nothing is more terrible, fearful,
abominable, and wicked to the creature, than is his own death and corruption.
If we Christians deny the property in the Ideal unity, namely, as well to
deprive the creature of his life, by withdrawing his act of life from it into
it self, we may justly imagine our selves to be inferiou^ in judgment, unto the
Infidel Poets and Philosophers, who do verify this forementioned axiom of
the wiseman, Eccles. 11.
Bonum and malum, vita and mors, honestas and paupertas* a Deo sunt: Good and
evi^l, life and death, riches and poverty, are all from God. Whereby he
intimates, that this one essential divinity operateth oppositely in the
created world, by a twofold differing property. Their Allegorical story is
this, Proclus foll^wing the ancient Theology of Orpheus, Ilesiode, Euripides,
and Eschylus, (which personages have inveloped in their fabulous Counts or
Stories, such hidden secrets as they had learned of divine persons, and such as
were profoundly seen in the mysteries of God) does decipher the properties of
the supreme and archetypicall Son, under the shadow of the visible and typical
Sun, in this manner, expressing thereby, that one and the same eternal essence
does operate all in all, as well privati^ly as po^^tivly. These Poets term it
by the name of Apollo in the daytime, because they pretend* that in his
position and benign nature, which is manifested by the vivifying property of
the Sun, he composeth the creature of seven parts, for (...) ^he quaternary
number, the Pythagoreans did signify matter which is ^^amed of the Elements;
for it is the square o^ 2, which is an unperfect number and therefore does
de^ipher matter: and by the ternary, which is the number of perfection, they
express the form of things; so that these two numbers united, do make up the
septenary number, which does in^lude the perfect complement of the creature.
Again, they entitle it Dionysius in the night time, namely, in his dark and
privative disposition, saying, that under this name he uses to tear and divide
that creature into seven pieces, which under the title of Apollo, or in his
positive property, or solar and divine nature, it had composed. So that they
seem to argue, that the self-same unity in essence is the author, as well of
destruction and corruption, as of the generation and vivification of the
creature; but they therefore term it according unto the variety of his
property by a differing name, no otherwise than the Cabalist calls it in his
hidden and privative property, Aleph tenebrosum, or dar^ Aleph, namely, when he
keeps in his beams of life in himself, or withdraws his face from the
creature; and Aleph lucidum, or light Aleph, when he shines forth unto it, and
extends his beams of life upon it. By this therefore we Christian; may see,
that the very Pagans did grant or acknowledge, that which the Scriptures do
testify, though it be by an allegorical way, concluding with them, that it is
only in the power of one and the same radical unity, to save or destroy, to
give life or take it away, to will or to nill, and, in conclusion, to operate
all, and in all, and that according unto its pleasure. Thus have we confirmed,
that the two members of an opposite condition or disposition do spring out of
one eternal root, and that they operate in this world by clean contrary
effects, and consequently, that since the mass of waters, whereof (as St Peter
does testify) the heavens and the earth were made of old, did come out of the
dark chaos, 2 Pet. 3.
and was, as it were, her second birth, which the Poets feign to be Pan, or
the universal nature, it is easy to be considered by the wise Philosopher,
that this passive portion of the world is by a natural instinct inclined to
darkness, and unto all the privative conditions thereof; so that if it were not
for the formal portion of the world, which proceeded from that bright spirit
of wisdom, (which Solomon calls, Sap. 7.24.
The vapor of the virtue of God, and the sincere emanation of the brightness
of the omnipotent, and the splendor of the divine li^ht, and the mirror,
without all spot, Job 26.7. ^ob 28.25.
of his goodness; that divided the waters into distinct orbs or spears, and
gave a proportional weight unto the air, and tied or hanged up the waters in
the thick clouds by measure, and gave orders unto the rain, and made a passage
for the lightnings of the thunders) if it were not (I say) for the act of this
Spirit, all things would be alike. It is this Spirit that said, Ab ore
altissimi prodij and retunditatem coelorum circumivi solus in profundo ab^ssi
ambulavi: Eccles. 3.
I came out from the mouth of IEHOVA, and compassed about the heavens, I walked
in the profundity of the abyss, etc. It was the bright wisdom which IEHOVA did
possess in the beginning of his ways, before his works, Prove. 8.
before all time, before the world was made, when there was not any abyss,
before there was any fountain, before the mountains were raised, or the earth
created. When he made the heavens it was there, when he did fortify the
superior waters it was there, Joh. 1.
when the limits of the sea were framed, lest the waters should pass their
bounds. When he gave the earth her foundation it was there with him, as a
helper to compose all things. To conclude, by it all was formally made, and
without it was nothing made and preserved. So that if it were not for the
present action of this formal spirit, the watery matter of the world would
return unto the deformed estate of her mother Chaos; for being in this world,
it is inclined unto the disposition of her mother, being that it is passive,
feminine, and serves in place of the mother of all things; and in another
respect, the vivifying and bright emanation of the eternal Unity, is become the
masculine actor or father of all things, being that it does vivify every thing
in this world, as the Apostle teaches us, and as the before-said Poets do seem
to intimate unto us, under the name of Apollo, or the father of light.

This therefore being well observed, we may by the detection of these two
abstruce and mystical principles, I mean, of Light and Darkness, attain unto
the radical knowledge and original of the true sympathy and antipathy, being
that it is evident, that the first proceeds from that concording and
vivifying love, which arises from the benign emanation of the Creator, which
desires to be joined with his like, and seeks to preserve his like by union;
and the other issues from that discording, privative, and hateful affection,
which darkness and deformity does afford unto the children of light and life,
and to all the beauteous offsprings thereof. By this therefore it appears,
that as before the separation of these different properties, or effects of one
unity, namely, of light from darkness, which was brought to pass by the
divine word, all things were one and the same without distinction and
difference, and that unity or one was no way to be numbered among those things
which were created, so that light was darkness, and darkness light, and
neither of these discernable; nothing was really distinguished, but all were
one in the first matter of all things, which was in the eternal unity: So that
then there was neither light nor darkness, nor day nor night, nor heaven nor
earth, nor spirit nor body, nor good nor evil, nor pure nor impure, nor
generable nor corruptible, nor this nor that; and yet nevertheless all these,
as well spiritual as corporal, proceeded from that potentiall subject, which
remained complicitely in that infinite Unity, which both was, and is, and ever
shall be, all in all, and over or without all. O admirable wisdom of God in all
his works! All things (I say) proceeded from one matter, the which nevertheless
was nothing of these things which were made. All things were abstrucely hidden
and in secret, but, according unto our Saviors words, nothing was so occult
and obscure, but was to be revealed, and made to appear unto sighr, by the
penetrating operation of the admirable word Fiat, by whose divine spagericall
action or virtue, that one thing was divided into two contraries; upon the
which, names, well befitting their natures, were imposed; for the one, as I
have told you, was called Light, and the other Darkness; the first also was
termed Day, the last Night; and thus was the pure separated from the impure.
Hence therefore it comes, that all the world was originally divided into two
contrary Kingdoms, that correspond unto these two radical branches of one
unity, by the which relation it is easy to express, what in verity is light
and darkness, what day and night, what goodness and what badness, what is
heaven and what is hell, what is truth and what is falsehood, what is humility
and what is pride, what justice and what injustice, what is gladness and what
is sorrow, what is sweet and what is bitter, what is action and what passion,
what is life and what is death, what is generation and what corruption, what is
pure, and what impure, what is wholesome and what pernicious, what is a medicine
and what a poison, and, to conclude, what is amiable and what is odious, what
is concord and what is discord, and, by consequence, what is sympathy and what
antipathy, in an infinity of creatures in this world.

That the whole world, and every creature thereof, is composed of these two
contrarieties, or opposite natures, we find it justified as well by the sacred
authority, as testimony of Ethnic Philosophy; for the son of Syrach says, in
the place before specified, Ecclus. 42.
Gemina sunt omnia quorum alterum contrarium est alteri, nec quicquam factum
est quod mancum est: All things are of a twofold nature, whereof the one is
contrary unto the other, and yet there is not any thing which is defective. And
thereupon the Philosopher Heraclitus concludes, that all things in the world
are made by strife and concord; and Empedocles will have the soul to be
composed of the elements, and of friendship and enmity. To conclude, lest some
scrupulous Reader should condemn me for making so long a discourse upon these
two contrary principles, proceeding from one Root, I thought it most fit to
certify each judicious person, that the true knowledge thereof is of an
especial importance, because that the two foresaid principles are observed to
be the real and only foundation, both of universal Philosophy and Theology.
For that the root and bases of them both, does consist on the true
understanding of these two contrarieties: And therefore if they be not first of
all well opened and conceived, how is it possible afterward that they should
be rightly handled either in true Philosophy or understood in those places of
Holy-Writ, wherein they are so often mentioned? Touching the explication of
this most profound Sphyngian Ridd^e or abstruse question, namely Why God in his
secret sense or mental intent did raise up and ordain out of the informed
matter or Ideally delineated in himself, these two contrarieties, to cause
thereby that all things in the world, should be put into a mutual dissonance,
or fight and conflict with one another, so that there is found nothing which
participateth of goodness, which has not his contrary; that is to say, which
does not communicate with badness (insomuch that God himself is not without an
adversary) verily it is too occult a Caball to be explained by mortal
capacity, being that it may well be esteemed the profoundest secret of all the
divine mysteries: wherefore there is required a mental aspect, well purged and
mundified from each misty cloud of ignorance and error, to search into the
bowels of this question, and therefore it is impossible to be revealed unto
any, but to such as God does immediately bestow his grace and holy Spirit, which
is the searcher out of all mysteries, the which Spirit is in us, and breaths
and blows, when and where it lists, and it is called in Scriptures the Spirit
of Truth, the Spirit of Sanctification, the Spirit of Illumination, the Spirit
of Revelation, which is the best interpreter of the Divine Secrets, mentioned
in holy-Writ: neither verily does it become us of our selves to enquire why God
made this or that, or thus or after this fashion. But it behooves the zealous
to refer all this unto the time when these secrets shall be discovered, which
will come to pass, when the seventh Seal shall be opened: for then that high
mystery, which is the final cause, why and for what end Gods Providence will
by these two opposits reveal it self, and clean extinguish all enmity out of
the world, shall be discovered. As touching nevertheless the end of this
dissonancy, the Apostle says, that it will be, when the Son has delivered the
Kingdom unto God the Father, and when he has evacuated every Principality and
Potentate, and Virtue, he must reign until he has made his enemies his
footstool, and the last enemy that shall be destroyed is Death. So that as two
contrarieties or discords, proceeded from one Unity or unison, namely Light and
Darkness from one Divine Essence; So also these two dissonant branches or
confusion of Unities, will at the last be reduced or return again into one
harmonious Unity, in which there will be found no dissonancy, namely when these
words of the Revelation are accomplished: Ecce omnia nova facio: Rev. 21.
vetera enim transurunt: Behold I make all things new: for the old heaven and
earth have passed away. But leaving this allaterall discourse, we will proceed
directly in our Sympatheticall and Antipatheticall Argument or inqui^ition:
into the which that we may penetrate with the greater celerity and facility,
and dive the deeper into the research of their actions; it will be fit that we
should describe in the first place, the manner how the world does live, by the
participation of these two, namely of the Light and Darkness, and that I will
express unto you in few words, what the Ancient Philosophers have determined
about the soul of the world; and lastly I will show that their Opinions do not
err or vary much from the Testimony of the sacred Bible.

CHAP. IV.
Wherein it is evidently proved, as well by the ancien^ Ethnic Philosophers,
as by the authority of Holy Scriptures, that there is a soul of the world:
Herein also is expressed what this catholic Soul is, and whereof it is
composed or made.

I Purpose in the first rank of my discourse, touching the soul of the world,
to express what the opinions as well of the ancient Cabalists and mystical
Rabbi's, as Ethnic Philosophers are, concerning this Subject, so much
condemned by some self-conceited and little skillfull persons, in so profound a
mystery, and so highly prised and esteemed by others, who have with the Lyncean
eyesight of their understanding, dived and penetrated into the secret bowels
of Nature, and with due reverence contemplated her Centrall and eternal Agent.
And afterward my meaning is, to set down the concordance which is observed
betwixt them and Holy-Writ. The Cabalist's tenent is, that the great Angel
whom they term Mitattron, (which by interpretation is Donum Dei, the gift of
God) is that very same catholic Spirit, which does animate the whole world,
and thereupon Rabbi Moses does aver it to be Intellectus a ens, or the
general intellectual agent, from which all particular forms do flow. Reuclin.
de Art cab. lib^.
And they say, that from this universal angelical Spirit, all singular
virtues as well animal, as vital and natural, do proceed, which also they
call Angels, whereof there are an infinite number in respect of our capacity.
And the Philosopher Democritus, Orpheus, with diverse of the Pythagoreans, do
not much differ from this opinion of these Rabbi's, but in variety of name
only: for they imagine that all things are full of gods, and therefore they
offered divine Honors, Prayers, and Sacrifices unto them in the creatures, and
did worship each of them with a diverse fashion of ceremony. But they had
evermore that regard unto JEHOVA, the eternal Unity and Father of all things,
that they referred all these gods unto one Jupiter. This point nevertheless
being ill understood by the ignorant, was an especial cause of Idolatry, being
that hereupon, the simple fell unto the worshipping of the creature, in stead
of the Divinity which was in the creature. Sap. 15.
And for this reason, Solomon: Vani sunt homines omnes natura in quibus est
ignorantia Dei, and qui ex iis quae spectantur bonis, eum qui est, intellig ere
non potuerunt, neque ex operibus consideratis, ipsum opificem agnoverunt: All
men are naturally vain, in whom is the want of the knowledge of God, and cannot
conceive him that truly is, by such good creatures as they sensibly do discern,
nor yet have scanned and discovered the Workman by the consideration of his
works. In like manner the Platonists did call the general virtue, which did
engender and preserve all things the Animam mundi, or the soul of the world.
And to this their opinions, the Arabic Astrologians do seem to adhere:
forasmuch as they did maintain, that every particular thing in the world has
his distinct and peculiar soul from this vivifying Spirit. To this opinion also
Mercurius Trismegistus, Theophrastus, Avicenna, Algazel, and as well all the
Stoics and Peripateticks, do seem wholly to consent or agree. Again, Zoroaster
and Heraclitus, the Ephesian, conclude that the soul of the world is that
catholic invisible fire, of which and by the action whereof, all things are
generated and brought forth from puissance unto act. Virgil, that excellent
Latin Poet, calls it that mental Spirit, which is infused through every
joint and member of the world, whereby the whole Mass of it, namely the heaven
and the earth, or spirit and body, are after an abstruse manner agitated and
moved: His words are these;

Spiritus intus alit totamque infusa per ar^us
Men's agitat molem, Aened. lib. ^.
etc.
A Spirit (says he) does nourish within, and being infused over all the joints
or members of the world, it does move the whole substance of the same. Marcus
Man^ius, as also Boethius and Augurel, being later Poets, are of Virgil's
opinion. For Manlius says;

Hoc opus immensi constructum corpore mundi In Astronomicis ad August.

Vis animae divina regit.
The divine power of the ^oul does govern this work, which is erected in the
body of the vast world. And Boethius

Tu triplicis mediam naturae, cuncta moventem,
Connectis animam.
Thou do frame or tie together a mean soul of a triple nature, which mov^th
all things. And Augurel says;

Nonnulli quicquid diffunditur undique coeli,
Aeraque and terras and lati marmoris aequor, lib. 1 Chr^

Intus agi referunt anima qua vivere mundi
Cuncta putant, ipsumque hae mundum ducere vitam.
Ast animae quoniam nil non est corporis expers,
Mundus at and mundi parts quoque corpore constant;
Spiritus hic intermedius fit, quem neque corpus
Aut animum dicunt sed eum qui solus utroque
Participans in idem simul haec ex^rema red^cat.
Some say, that whatsoever fills the Heaven, the Air, the Earth, and wide
Seas, is stirred up by a soul, through the virtue whereof all things in the
world do live; and also that the world it self does exist by it. But because
there is not any bodily substance that is viod of a soul, and that the world
and every part thereof does consist of a body* therefore there is an
intermediate spirit betwixt this soul and body, which they neither call a soul
or a body, but a mean substance, participating of them both, to reduce both
extremes together into one. The wiser sort of Alchymists, do make the Soul a
certain infinite nature, Art chym. c. 4.
or power in all things, which does procreate like things of their like: for
this nature does engender all things, yea, and multiplieth, and nourishes, or
sustaineth them: and they also style it, the Ligament, or bond of the elements,
since by it they are fastened together with the Symphoniacal accords of
peaceable harmony, although of themselves, that is in regard of their matter,
they are dissonant. Also it is termed the true virtue, that mingleth and
proportionateth every thing in this sublunary world, allotting unto each
specific creature a convenient and well agreeing form, that thereby one thing
might be distinguished and made to vary from another: and, in conclusion, the
mystical Rabbis do aver, that this occult fire is that Spirit of the Lord,
or fiery love, which when it moved upon the waters, did impart unto them, a
certain harmonious and hidden fiery virtue, without whose lovely assistance and
favorable heat, nothing could be generated of them, or multiplied in them.

Thus you may discern the manifold opinions, as well of Christian as Heathen
Philosophers touching this Anima mundi, or soul of the world, which will appear
to vary little or nothing at all from the tenent of Holy Scripture in sense,
but in words only; Neither are these their opinions so heinous or abominable,
as some more superstitiously zealous than truly understanding Christians of
this our Age will make them, if they will scan the matter wisely and with
moderation: for then they shall really perceive, that it does concur with the
Bible of Truth: And to confirm what I now say; my purpose is in the first
place, to express unto each learned and well minded Reader, the harmony of the
Scriptures touching this point, and then I will compare every one of the
foresaid opinions, with the sense and grounds of the said harmony, that each
wise man may thereby the better conjecture and guess at the truth of the
business, before he shall rashly enter into the censuring of that deep and
profound mystery, which concerns the Divine action in natural effects.

I told you, in my precedent discourse, that the Eternal Unity, which is the
God of gods, and Beginning of beginnings, did cause by a double property in one
essence, two diverse principles to issue out of himself, whereof the one was
potentiall, and no way as yet inacted by the brightness of his emanation, and
in that respect is termed Darkness, privation, Nolunty, opposite to Light, and a
friend unto death and rest: The other was actual, and nothing else but a pure
catholic form and brightness, which is termed Light, Position, Volunty, and
in nature opposite to Darkness, and a friend unto life and action, or motion.
And then I signified unto you, that by the bright appearance of Eternity, or
the Eternal Spirit of Wisdom, (which I termed with the Scriptures, the radiant
emanation, or effluxion from the Almighty, which is all one with him in
essence) the deformed waters were inacted and made manifest, out of this dark
Principle or Chaos, that is, reduced from Potentia Divina, or the Divine
Puissance, without form, in which they abode, into Actum Divinum, the Divine
Act: and because all the humid and passive catholic nature, Genesis 1.
of which both the heavens and the earth were framed, did issue from this Mass
of watery matter, which the Poets call Pana, or the second birth of Chaos, we
must imagine it to be that spiritual matter of the world, which was made
fertile and multiplicable, by reason of that hidden active and formal Light or
invisible fire, which this increated emanation imparted unto it, immediately
before the creation of the heavens and the earth. Whereupon the holy Text has
it: Spiritus Domini serebatur super aquas: The Spirit of the Lord moved or was
carried upon the waters. And as St. A^gustin adds to it, igneum illis vigorem
imp^r^ie^s: Bestow^ng upon them a fiery vigor or formal and act^ve virtue, Now
as we see that Man, which is called the little-world, is composed of soul and
body, (whereof the soul is his heaven or spiritual part, or, as we may say,
the superior and higher waters, and the body with the humors thereof, as it
were the lower waters, is the earth and g^osser humou^s) and each of these two
are informed, united, and vivified by the Spirit of life, which God inspired
into it* even so we may observe, that the heaven or spiritual humid nature of
the great world, is animated by the eternal emanation or spirit of the
supernatural wisdom of God, to give life and figure unto the world. And
forasmu^h as it is ea^ie to discern, that the macro cosmicall heavens are of
two sorts, namely composed of upper spiritual waters, which are called Ae^her,
or heavenly; and of the lower spiritual waters, which are called Aer, or
elementary, no otherwise than in the lesser world or man, the receptacle of the
heavenly spirit is known to be Aer, so that Physicians distinguish by reason of
this difference between the vital or aetheriall spirits, and the natural or
elementary body: So we ought to consider, that this material humid spirit of
the heavens, in both worlds, which are the subtlety of the waters, are in
themselves dead, but in respect of the super-celestiall emanation into them,
which informs and vivifieth them, they live, move, and are thinner or
thicker, according unto that more or less formal grace, which the
all-informing Spirit does allot them; for the more the sacred Spirit of life
does abound, or really act, in this or that region of the universal air, the
more that sphere is thin, subtle, active, worthy, and noble. Does not Scripture
seem to verify, that Deus sapientia sua aptet pondus aeri, Job 28. Psalm. 147.
Prove. 3.
and appendat aquas in mensura, fecerit terram in fortitudine sua and
preparaverit orbem in sapientia sua and prudentia sua extenderit coelos,
appenderit aquilonem super inane and suspenderit terram super nihilum. In
coelorum structura and cum Deus stabiliret fund^menta terrae, ipsa aderat
cuncta componens. And again Wisdom says, Ex ore altissimi prodii primogenita
ante omnem creaturam, in initio ante seculum creata sum, usque ad futurum
seculum non desinam, and habitatione sancta coram ipsum ministravi.In coelis
^eci ut oriretur lumeninde ficiens, and sicut nebula tex^ omnem terram. Ecclus.
24. Amos 1. Ester 4. Jer. 51. Job 26.
In altissimis habitavi, and thronus meus in columna nubis, coeli gyrum
circuivi sola, profundum abyssi penetravi in fluctibus maris ambulavi and in
omni terra s^eti. Feci Arcturum and Orionem, converti in mane tenebras, diem in
noctem mutavi, vocavi aquas maris, effudi eas super terrae faciem. Coelos den
que, mediante Spiritu meo, ornavit Deus; converti coelum in gyro in locum suum
uno die: omniaque numero, pond^re, and me^sura disposuit and temperavit. God by
his wisdom gives proportion of weight unto the air, hangs the waters in
measure; He made the earth in his strength, prepared the world in his wisdom,
and extended the heavens by his prudency. He hanged the North upon emptiness
and in^nity, and balanced the earth upon nothing. For she was present at the
building of the heaven^, and it was ^he that did compass and fashion out all
things. When God did establish the foundations of the earth, she was present,
and composed all things. And in another pla^e, this Spirit of wisdom says, I
came out of the mouth of the most high, being firstborn or brought forth
before any creature. I was created in the beginning before all ages, neither
shall my being cease in the latter age of the world: and I do administer
before him in his holy habitation. I caused a never failing light to rise in
the heavens, and I covered the earth after the manner of a mist. I dwelled in
the highest places, and my throne was in a c^owdy pillar. I alone did compass
round about the heavens, and did penetrate into the profund^^ of the abyss;
and I walked in the waves of the seas, and I stood upon every earth. I made the
North, or pole star, and Orion, and I turned the darkness into day, and the
day unto night. I called the waters of the seas, and poured them out upon the
face of the earth. I turned the heavens about unto his place in one days
space. To conclude, God adorned the heavens by my spirit, and did proportionate
and temper all things in number, weight, and measure, etc. By which testimonies
it is most apparent, that all changes, alterations, actions, ornaments of
beauty, motions, numbers, weights, measures, and consequently all diversities
that are made, in the general homogeniall mass of the waters, are effected by
this vivifying emanation of the benign and bright spirit of the eternal
Unity, whose root is the Word; for in verity, according unto St. Paul, it is
only this Spirit that does operate all in all. 1 Cor. 1.2. Psalm. 103.24.
And therefore I must needs conclude with the kingly Prophet, and say, Opera
Dei mirabilia and ampla sunt; quae omnia fecisti in sapientia: The works of God
are mavelous and ample, which thou have effected in thy wisdom. Psalm. 33.6.
And again, Verbo Domini firmati sunt coeli and Spiritu oris ejus omnis virtus
eorum. By the word of the Lord the heavens were fashioned and fastened, and by
the Spirit of his mouth each virtue thereof. Which words do seem to infer, not
only the material substance of the world, which is intimated by that word
Heavens, but also the inacting form, that is, the vivifying beginning of all
things, which has no beginning, and this is signified by the Word, and his
offspring, the Spirit from the which the waters first received their being;
and then of these catholic waters were the heavens, the earth, and elements
made, in number, weight, and measure, that is to say, were effected by a
subdivision, through the spagerick act of the self-same word or spirit: 2 Pet.
3.
And therefore St. Peter has it, Coeli erunt prius and terra de aquis and per
aquas consistentes verbo Dei: The heavens and the earth were of old of waters,
and by waters, consisting by the word of God. As who should say, after the
Spirit of the Lord had issued out of the dark abyss, (for it is said, Verbum
erat in principio, The Word was in the beginning) and had given act and form,
and consequently a name unto the waters, (for it was said, that the Spirit of
the Lord was carried upon the waters) the same Spirit did operate to reveal
explicitly and particularly, that which the Chaos did at the first contain in
it self complicitely and confusedly, and that in a generality; wherefore when
it had revealed the universal matter of all things, which was water, it did by
little and little anatomise it, and open the secret closets thereof, to show
forth and make manifest that which from all eternity lay hid in it, and was
without form or being, and therefore esteemed rightly for Nothing. And first,
the substance of the world was made of it in general, as it appears by this
Text, Sap. 11.18.
Manus omnipotentis mundunt ex informi materia effecit. The hand of the
Omnipotent did make the world of a matter without form or shape. And as St.
Jerome interprets it, Ex materia invisa, Of an unseen or invisible thing. Then
that watery and humid substance was divided into the heaven and earth, in
distinguishing the waters from the waters by the same Spirit, which is the
ministering hand of the Almighty; for the Text has it, Ecclus. 24. Prove. 9.
In habitatione sancta coram ipso ministravi, I did administer before him in
the holy habitacle. And again, Sapientia apud ipsum fuit cuncta componens,
Wisdom was she that composed all things with God. And this was the second days
work. Then the lower waters were divided into elements, namely, earth, water,
air, etc. and that was the third days separation, as Moses does methodically
demonstrate. All which, Hermes expresses thus, (as is said before) Ex luminis
voce verbum factum prodit, Pimand. 1.
verum hoc naturae humidae astans, eam fovebat. Ex humidae autem naturae
visceribus sincerus ac levis ignis protenus evolans alta petit, aer quoque
levis spiritus parens in mediam regionem inter aquam and ignem sortiebatur;
terra vero, and aqua sic invicem commixta jacebant, ut terrae facies obruta
nusquam pateret. The word which was made did issue out of the Light's voice,
and this Word being present and assistant unto the humid nature, did foster and
preserve it. Then the light fire, proceeding out of the bowels of the humid
nature, soared or mounted aloft. The thin air a^s^, which is the father of the
spirit, did elect the middle region which is between the fire and the water,
for his abode. The earth and water did lie so intermingled together, that the
face of the earth was no where overflowed or drowned by the waters. Whereby it
is evidently proved, that this thin spiritual water, or humid nature, in it
self is no more than man's spirit, without the vivifying act of life; for as in
the soul of every creature that lives, there are two things chiefly to be
required, namely, an Agent and a Patient; so where the one of these are
wanting, there can be no created soul: for if that the world's life was only
the essential breath of God, without the vehicle of the created humid spirit,
which is the matter of heaven; then that life would be simple identity, and of
one and the same property, and consequently there would be neither variety of
action, neither any contraction or dilatation of systole and diastole in
things, and therefore no action or passion in the soul; for without a passive
nature there can be no action, and also without an active nature there can be
no passion. Now matter which proceeds from water is the subject of all
passion, as here, mother Chaos was the female or passive, unto the action of
Demogorgon, or God. Also act or form, which proceeds from light, is the
subject of all action, as its father Eternity, or the bright emanation of the
spirit of wisdom from the fountain of light, was the male or agent. From hence
therefore it is an easy thing to gather, first, what the soul of the world is,
and therefore of what parts it does consist; for we must consider, that as
every creature has his interior and exterior, so also we must exquisitely
search after an internal and an external, in the soul, being it is a
creature; and again, that it is a creature, it is most certain, because it is
not Identity, but Alterity; for if it were Identity, it would be the divine
unity or essence, and consequently it would not be created. Now that it is
Alteritas it is plain, because it is compounded of two, after the consistence
of Angels, forasmuch as his internal is a vivifying flame, issuing or
proceeding from the eternal emanation of life; and his external is an aeviall
spirit, which is created, inacted, and animated by this eternal emanation from
God. And forasmuch as the nature of that most essential and never-dying fire,
is said to be all, and in every part of the world, Ephesians. 4. Coloss. 3.11.
Psalm. 139.7.
(and therefore Scriptures say, Christus adimplet omnia, Christ fills all
things. Christus est omnia in omnibus, Christ is all, and in all. Dei Spiritus
est in coelo, in inferno, in extremis maris, in nocte and in tenebris, etc. The
Spirit of God is in heaven, in hell, in the extremest parts of the seas, in
the night, and in darkness. Sapientiam effudit Deus super omnia opera sua,
Eccles. 1.
God has powered out the spirit of wisdom upon all his works.Spiritus Dei
incorruptibilis inest omni rei, The incorruptible Spirit of God is in every
thing. Sap. 12.1. Isai. Sap. 1.
Coelum est ei seeds, terra autem scabellum pedum ejus; The heaven is his seat,
and the earth is his footstool. Spiritus sapientiae implet orbem, The spirit of
wisdom fills all the world, etc. Forasmuch (I say) as it is in every particle
of this humid spirit, the which by his presence is now full of dignity, that
before was vile and deformed; it is certain, that it makes this catholic
spirit to live. And therefore this angelical spirit thus composed of alterity,
or of two, is called Anima mundi, because it is that catholic or general
spirit, divinely animated from the beginning, which does vivifie afterward
each particular creature of the world, proceeding from the generality to the
speciality, and from the speciality unto the individuality. So that the mighty
question, so often revolved by the Peripatetick Philosophers, and so slenderly
by them resolved, may hereby be fully determined, and enucleated, if it please
the wise and impartial Reader rightly to consider things, as indeed they do
stand; for by this, it is easy to express and distinguish mentem divinam, or
the divine emanation, from anima, or the soul; and again, the anima from
spiritus, or the spirit; being that it is evident, that the mental radication,
is the eternal and formal emanation, which is given or sent out by the
Creator in her positive property, to create the world, and consequently the
earthly body and heavenly spirit thereof, of nothing, or non-actuall existence.
The spirit is that inward created spirit of the world, or subtle substance of
the waters, or humid nature, simply considered in its self, which is animated
and illuminated by that Archetypicall emanation; and the soul, or anima, is
that union, which is made between this humid created spirit, and the increated
formal emanation, which does inform or create. So that by this we may discern,
first, what the forma informans, or natura naturans, is; then what the forma
informata, or the natura naturata is. The forma formans, or natura naturans is
God, or the divine emanation, which created all things; the forma informata, or
natura naturata is the created light, or the spirit informed or illuminated, by
the presence of the bright increased Spirit; and the increated Spirit clothed
with, or enduing that created spirit, is said to be vestitus, or amictus lumine
quasi vestimento, Psalm. 142.
clothed with light, that is, with an illuminated spirit, as with a garment.
We shall find also in Exodus, that in the same Chapter, the spiritual creature
in which the divine Spirit acts and resideth, Exodus 3.
is termed an Angel, in regard of his external spirit in composition; but
again, in the same Chapter it is termed JEHOVA, in regard of the eternal form
that acts in it. Also the Angel is said to go before the Israelites in a
pillar of clowd by day, and a pillar of fire by night. And again it is said in
the same history, that JEHOVA went before them in the said order. Sap. 10.17.
And the wise man said, Fuit sapientia iis tegumentum interdiu, and lux
stellaris noctu, Wisdom was a cover to them in the day time, and a starry-light
in the night. And the reason of all this is expressed elsewhere thus, Exodus
23.20.
Noli exacerbare eum, quia non feret defectionem vestram, quoniam nomen meum
est in eo; Do not anger this my angel; for he will not endure your defections,
because my name is in him, etc. Where, by his name he signifies his word,
which is God; as if he had said, I do essentially animate him, and I am within
him, etc. That the soul of the world, or Men's divina in mundo, simply taken, is
the divine mental emanation absolutely in it self, being distinguished from
the created spirit, this Text in Scriptures does warrant: Animam and Spiritum
dividit and discernit sermo Dei vivus: The Word of God does devide the soul and
the spirit, etc. Where, by the word is meant the mental beam; by the Spirit,
the humid nature that existeth by the presence of the mental beam, which God
by his Word can withdraw unto himself, or emit according unto his will and
pleasure. Whereupon David said: Deo recipiente Spiritum suum a creatu^is, e^spi
a^t, ^mi^ erte spiritum recreantur bono. God receiving or withdrawing his
Spirit from (...) they exspire, but sending out his Spirit they are recreated
with life and goodness. And ^ow I will prove all this out of such definitions
or descriptions, which as well the Fa^he^s of the Church as the Philosophers,
both Christian and Gentile, have made upon the soul in general, both as it
has a relation unto a body, and also as it is in its simple and separated
estate: Damascene seems to define it thus: Anima est sub^tantia spiritualis a
divinis fontibus emana^s, simplex, indissolubilis, immo^^al^s, libe^a,
incorporea, and indivisibilis; quantitate, figura, pondere, and color carens.
The s^^l is a spiritual s^bstance, flowing from the divine fountains, simple,
ind^ssolvable, immortal, free, incorporeal^, indivisible; wanting quantity,
figure, weight, and color. Unto this also Bernard seems to consent. And
Augustine defines it thus: Est men's div^na omnia intelligens omnibusque se
assimilans: August.
It is a divine Spirit, that understands all things, and does c^nform it self
unto the shape or l^kenes^ of all things. And for this reason, certain
Philosophers say, that it is made after the likeness of the Spirit of Wisdom,
which is known to be the Image of God: For it bears the likeness of every
thing in it self. Wherefore it is defined by them, to be the similitude of all
things. And verily it has in it self this power, to apprehend, and find out
all things. Again, it is like unto all things, being that it is one in all.
There are some of the ^^viner sort of Mystical Philosophers, that seem to
conclude man's soul more fully in this definition; Anima est lux quaedam divina
ad imaginem Verbi, Agnip. lib. ^3. cap. 37.
causae causarum, primi exemplaris, creata; s^bstantia Dei, sigilioque
figurata, cu^us character est verbum ae^^num: The soul is a certain divine
Light, created after the Image of the Word, the ca^se of caus^s, and the first
exempla^ or image, etc. Another defines it thus: Est res incorporea omni decore
adornata, Sanctae Trinitati ^ssimi^ata, (...) nae gloriae coaquata: It is an
incorporeall thing, which is adorned with all virtue, likned to or resemb^^ng
the Holy Trinity, and co^equated unto eternal glory. Some do describe it thus:
Est Spiritus intellectualis semper vivens, semper in m^t^, and s^cundum sui
operis effic^^m variis nuncupatur nominibus. Dicitur vita dum vegetat, spiritus
dum contemplatur, sensus dum sentit, animus dum sapit, men's dum intelligit,
ratio dum d^scernit, mem ria dum recordatur, dum vuli voluntas; at isla omnia
non sunt n^si una essentia se^ proprietate diversa: It is an intellectual
Spirit always living, always in motion, and in respect of its diverse
operations in the body, it has diverse appellations assigned unto it: For it is
called life, in regard of its v^ vificative and vegetative property. It is
called a Spirit, as it is conversant about contemplation, and, is a spiritual
substance: and breaths in the body; it is called sense, as it is employed
about the Act of sensation; it is termed Animus, when it operateth in Knowledge
and Wisdom; and it is named Men's, in regard of its Divine Understanding: and
Memory, as it does remember; again, as it is affected to will any thing, it is
called Voluntas: and all these names decipher but only one Anima or Soul in
essence, but diverse and sundry properties or faculties, etc. And these later
descriptions are assigned unto this vivifying Spirit, as it is conversant with
the body. Now if we shall duly examine all these delineations, of the essence
and properties of this Anima, as well in her freedom from the body, as when it
is included in it; we shall find it not to vary one jot from the tenor of my
precedent assertion. For first, we shall observe it to be in its essential
virtue, the offspring of the eternal emanation, which came immediately from
God, for the inacting of all things, and then that it has for its substantial
Vehicle, the thin subtle created spirit of the world, which makes it
alteritatem, or a composition of two, namely of the bright emanation from the
eternal Fountain, and therefore in the foresaid definitions, it is termed in
regard of this its interior, in the first, a Spiritual Substance, flowing from
the divine Fountain: in the second men's divina; in the third, the Image of
similitude of the divine Wisdom; in the fourth, a divine Light, after the
Image of the Word, the substance of God whose character is the Word; in the
fifth, the similitude of the Holy Trinity, coaequated unto the divine Glory.
Secondly, it participates of the mundane spirit, and therefore it is by the
sixth and seventh termed (in regard of its substance) a spirit that breaths
in the body, and it is the Vehicle of the formal act, which is in truth the
divine mental beam: being considered in it self, as the substantial and
material spirit, in its simple nature, it is that which participateth with the
created spirit of the world. The union of these two, is called anima, so that
anima includes mentem and spiritum, or the divine and created nature in one,
which fills all, and animateth and vivifieth all things, according to the
assertion of such Gentile and Ethnic Philosophers, as I have cited before,
which I will prove no way to dissent or vary from the testimony of the holy
Text. And to make this the plainer, I will compare them in order. And first, I
will begin my relation, with the Cabalists great Angel, whom they call
Mitaitron: which by interpretation, is Donum Dei, the Gift of God, which (as
they say) is the catholic intellectual Agent, from the which all peculiar
forms do descend. The Apostle says, that the Lord does vivifie all things. And
Solomon says, 1 Timothy 6.13.
that the Spirit of Wisdom is the tree of life and the fountai^, or beginning
of life: and if this Spirit be the fountain of life, then the Son of Syrach:
effudit Deus illam supra omnia opera sua, Prove. 3.
and supra omnem carnem secundum datum suum: God poured it out upon all his
works, and upon all flesh in his measure. And this was that catholic
angelical Spirit, which God sent out as a Spiritual Messenger from himself,
and out of himself, Genesis 1.
in the form of an emanation, to move upon the waters, and to inform and vivify
them, and give life and being, not only to the great world, but also to every
particular thereof, Joh. 1. Ephesians. 4. Collos. 3.
and the emanation was this Word of God, by whom all things were made, and
vivified, forasmuch as in it was life: I mean that Christ which fills all
things, who is all in all, as the Apostle says, who in the beginning made the
earth, Heb. 1.
and the heavens were the work of his hands; and after his creation of all
things, he does (as St. Paul tells us) portare omnia verbo virtutis suae:
bear up, suffer and sustain all things, by the vivifying virtue of this Word.
Which also David confirms in this: Verbo Domini firmati sunt coeli, and
Spiritu ab ore ejus omnis virtus eorum: Psalm. 33.6.
By the Word of the Lord the heavens were framed and settled, and by the breath
of his mouth, all the virtues thereof, namely, the life, preservation, and
being. The Apostle therefore seems to conclude thus: Deus non aliquo indigens
dat vitam and inspirationem and omnia: God needing not the assistance of any,
gives life and breath, Act. 17.
and all things unto every creature. But each Philosopher cannot but
acknowledge, that Anima is nothing else, but that which does animate or vivifie
a body or spirit: 1 Cor. 12.
why then should not the catholic divine Spirit which fills all, and
operateth all, and in all, be termed the fountain of the worlds life; by which
it lives, moves, and has its being, and consequently the essential life,
and Centrall or mental soul of the world, Wisd. Wisd. 12.1. Ecclus. 1.
moving the created humid spirit thereof, no otherwise, then the spirit which
God breathed into Adam, did move and operate, in and by the Organ of the
created air? What shall the eternal and vivifying Spirit of Wisdom, which is
said to fill all, and to be in every thing, which has the nature of the
universal catholic and first created Angel: Sap. 7.22.
(For Ecclesiasticus has it: prior omnium creata est Sapientia: Wisdom was
created before all things,) shall it (being that it is as it were the catholic
soul of the world, or life of all things; forasmuch as it is the emanation of
the brightness of the Omnipotent, and the splendour of the eternal Light, and
the pure mirror of the Majesty of God, and the Image of his goodness, being
one, simple, subtle, permanent in it self, and the most piercing or movable of
all things. All which are the properties assigned by St. Dionys, unto an
Angel, and by the learned Fathers before mentioned, unto a separated soul:)
shall it (I say) be in all things, and fill the heavenly spirit of each world,
I mean of the great world, and the little one, called Man? and shall it not
operate and act the vivifying and multiplying effect of his nature, but be
idle, and vacant in the creature? Did God send forth his operative Spirit to be
still, and not to act? Yea verily, the Father operates in it by his Vo^unty,
and he effects the Volunty of his Father in the creatu^es spirit, which it
possesses, animateth, and guides, Judith. 16.
which way it pleases. And for this reason Judith says: Deo serviat omnis
creatura, quia dixisti, and facta sunt; misisti spiritum tuum, and creatae
sunt. Act. 17.
So that the great world may say, and confess, as well as man, that it was
made after the Image of the Archetype or God, and that in him it lives,
moves, and existeth. According to that of the Apostle unto man, which is the
little world. Thus you see that the Cabalist's Mitatiron or Donum Dei, whom
they make the catholic intellectual Agent, is nothing else but that
universal Spirit of Wisdom which God sent out from this Throne (or as the
Text has it) even out of his own mouth, as the greatest gift and token of his
benignity unto each world, and the members thereof: to reduce them from
deformity, and nonexistence, into act and formal being, and to endue them
with lively feature, and to tender life, and being unto them explicitly, which
before was but complicitly included, and comprehended, in the dark and gloomy
shadow of death, I mean out of the deformed Chaos, into a beautiful shape; out
of deadly sleep and dark rest, into a lively action, and motion; out of
obscurity into Light: And this therefore was termed rightly in the eyes of
wise men Mitattron or Donum Dei catholicum, which reduces the universal
Nothing into an universal Something.

But that I may the better express unto you by a Philosophical Demonstration,
the Angelical nature of this supreme intelligence, called Mitattron, and
consequently of the soul of the world; I would have you in the first place, to
know the true manner how the Philosophers do demonstrate the harmony of the
world, and his spirit. The Platonick's Heptachord, the which he did invent, and
adapt for the demonstrating of the soul of the world, did consist of seven
strings, or proportions, partly even, and partly odd, namely 1, 2, 3, 4, 8,
9.27. The which proportions, although Porphyrie and Proclus have drawn forth in
one line; nevertheless it appears unto me, that Adrastus and Calcidius have
more fitly expressed, and adapted it unto the sides of a Pyramid, or Triangle
in this manner.



In the summity or top whereof, namely where both lines meet in one point, the
figure of 1. is expressed with Unity, because it participates both on the side
with the material existence, and on the other it has a commerce with the
formal emanation, it is apparent that this point or Unity from whence both
these different lines, or streams do issue, in the fountain as well of matter
as form, and therefore it is as well Synesius's as other Theosophers opinion,
(not disagreeing in this point from Holy Scripture) That Deus sit omne quod
est; quippe a quo, per quem, and in quo sunt omnia. Quod sit mas and faemina,
vel, ut Mercurius Trismegistus ait, utriusquae sexus faecund^ssimus; quod sit
potentia, and actus, quod sit forma and quod sit materia. Imo vere nihil est
quod ipse non existit: God (say they) is every thing that existeth; being that,
from him, by him, and in him are all things. He is male and female, (as
Synesius says) or, as Mercurius Trismegistus will have it, He is most abundant
in each sex: He is puissance and act, and finally, he is form and he is matter.
And verily they conclude, that there is nothing which he is not. All which seem
not to differ from Holy Testimony, which is, that God is all, and in all, and
above all: and that in him are all things, and in his Spirit and Word all
things consist, etc. The six other figures which do correspond unto one
another, from the material side unto the formal, namely the even numbers,
that regard directly the odd, namely the material number 2. regards the
formal 3; the 4. the 9; and the 8. the 27. do most lively express the
general kinds of all creatures, with their harmony. And in the first place, it
deciphereth the Symphoniacall Degrees of the Soul of the world, as shall be
told hereafter: For first, after the example of the Archetype from 1. issued 2.
which is termed by the Pythagoreans, the confusion of Unities, and therefore it
is the radical or incipient imperfect number, which is in respect of his
confusedness and imperfection in the same relation unto Unity, from whence it
sprung, as the bright eternal Unity is unto the dark Chaos, which is, rudis
indi gestaque moles, a rude or confused and indigested heap: And it is rightly
termed Imperfect, because that the eternal emanation which is all perfection,
had not as yet made it perfect: and for this reason also, the watery matter
that issued out of it, is of it self imperfect, no otherwise then the number of
2. is esteemed in regard of that of 3. because all perfection consists of 3.
terms, namely a beginning, a middle, and an end. So that if you take one of
the Unities of 2. for the beginning, and another for the middle, then there
wants an end. If you put an Unity for the beginning and an other for the end,
then you have two extremes, but no mean or middle, and therefore it is this way
also imperfect: Or if you place one Unity for a mean and the other for an end,
here also you have imperfection, because there wants a beginning. In like
manner, if Unity had not emitted his actual emanatiom as a bright Unity of
life, the 2. or deformed matter of the Chaos had stood in his duall, confused,
or imperfect estate; that is, without the form, or shape of any perfect thing,
I mean a plain Nihil or Aliquid in potentia and non actu: Something in
puissance and not in act. So that matter (I say) before it was informed by the
Unity of Light (which makes the third Unity) was Vacuum and inane, Vacuity and
inanity, because it wanted the presence of the informing Unity, or actual
emanation, to endue it with the title of goodness: for after the bright
emanation was made, then vacuity was changed into plenitude; puissance into
act; darkness into light; and a deformed matter, into well formed, and vivified
waters, and, in a word, imperfection into perfection. And thereupon it was
said, that God saw that it was good, that is, it was replenished with his
virtuous Essence, who was all good and only goodness. By this reason
therefore, namely by the addition of the formal Unity, the manner of confusion
and of imperfection, which is the material duality, that does Symbolize with
the Chaos, which is the mother of matter, perfection is brought into the world,
which by animating the purest and subtiler waters, does unite the mental Light
with the heavenly Spirit, in an Angelical essence, which does afterward
animate and inform all things. And this formal Union is Symbolically
expressed, by the figure 3. which for this cause is termed, the first number of
perfection, and the number of the Soul or the radical number of form in the
course of nature: henceforth therefore it comes, that the Platonists and
Pythagoreans do express matter, which is imperfect in it self, by eaven or
imperfect numbers, and according as in the Achetypicall world, defigned by 1,
2, 3. in form of the sacred Trinity, there appears to be three Ideall
dimensions in one divine nature, or eternal essence, which present in their
manner of progression a Root, a Square, and a Cube, which import a supreme
soul, a spirit and body of the world, Ideally painted out in the Archetype and
that these three seem to be raised out of one 1. or Unity (for multiplying 1.
by the root 1. does produce 1. and its self which makes 2. or a simple Ideal
square, and multiplying it again by 1. there rises but 2. and 1. which make 3.
or a Cube, which argues the perfection of the Ideal world, which was in God,
if we take the two radical compounded numbers for roots, we shall produce after
this pattern the created or exemplar world, namely we shall find out three
dimensions; to wit, longitude, latitude, and profundity of the matter, by the
inquiry or searching out of the Root, Square, and Cube of matter, the root of
matter therefore was 2. for though the supreme unity had multiplied or dilated
it self in 2. arguing its firstborn issue, yet because the holy Spirit of
Illumination shined not forth, all was dark quoad nos: wherefore we must
imagine, that the multiplication of matter in the world, is nothing but variety
of penetration of formal light into the watery abyss, or material multitude:
For the thicker matter is, the nearer she appears unto her root 2. or the
dark Chaos. Again, the thinner it is made by the opulency of the formal
emanation's bright presence, the nearer it appears unto the root of formal
Unity This mystery (I say) being rightly understood, all science even in the
abstrusest Philosophy, may easily be decyphered. The root of matter therefore
which is 2. imports the dark Chaos, the root of form which is 3. imports that
the root 2. or the dark waters, is animated by the formal or bright emanation
of Unity or 1. and so the first 2. was accomplished, and the soul of the world
created, namely by the Angelical emanation. And thus was the Cabalists
M^tu^tron o^ An^ma mundi first produced, which, according unto their
traditions, is said to be the first creature that was created, agreeing with
that of Ecclesiasticus: Prior omnium creata est Sap entia. Eccles. 1.
D^us (...) Sanc^o: Wisdom was created before all things. God created her in
the Holy Spirit, etc. And in and by this Angelical creation, all other Angels
were also made, and therefore it is said: Christus est Imago Dei invisibilis,
Coloss. 1.13.
Primogenitus emnis ^^ca^^rae, in quo ed^ta sunt un^v^ sa^ coelis and in ^^^ra
visibilia, and invi^^bilia, sive Th^^ni, sive Dominat ones, sive Potesta^es,
omnia per ipsum, and in ipso ^mnia sunt, and ipse ante omnes, and omnia in ipso
constant. Christ is the Image of the invisible God; being b^ough^ (...) before
any creature, in whom all things, as well visible, as invisible are ma^e, both
in heaven and earth, whether they be Thrones, or Dominations, or Potestats, all
are made by him, and in him, and he was before any thing, and all consist in
him. Lo here is evidently described the true vivifying Spirit, which not only
made all, and is all that he made, being that all are in him, doing the will of
his Father in all that he has made, whom the Hebrew Rabbis call Mitattro^, or
Donum Dei, and the Prophet, Magniconcilii Angelum, the Angel of the great
council: Et vocabitur n^m^n ejus (says the Prophet) magni concilii Ange^us:
And his name shall be called, Isai. 6.
The Angel of the great council, etc. Thus by the multiplying of 3 in it self,
we have the created formal square, which imports the nine Orders of the
Angels, which vary according to the multiplicity of properties: by which the
effluxion or emanation, that is sent out from this infinite fountain of light,
does operate diversely in the world, according unto the will of the Father of
lights, which sent it forth. And the formal square 9, being joined with the
material square 4, does animate the heavens, which by inspissation or
multiplication are made corporal or cubicall; so that all bodies are made of
those thin substances, by multiplying of each square in his root, whereupon the
cubicall form will be 27, and that of matter 8, which argue every elementated or
compound matter: and as the more the matter is multiplied in it self, the
darker and thicker will it be; so the more that light is multiplied in it, the
lighter, thinner, and more spiritual will the creature be. Insomuch that the
formal root, and square, and cube import the essence and souls of creatures,
as well super-celestiall, as celestial and elementall, which are more or less
dignified with form; for according unto these multiplications in form, the more
will the creatures be exalted in excellency. You see now how far, and by what
proportions, as well spiritual as material, the Platonic harmony of the
world extends it self, and may observe, that where this harmonious proportion
between form and matter is not, there must needs be as well spiritual as
corporal dissension, or discord, and consequently antipathy. We see also, that
the root of life is fixed in the angelical composition, which is of simple,
light, and pure spiritual matter, so that the eternal sapience, or essential
soul, is the act of the Angels; the aevial angelical spirit is the act or
essential life of the stars, or heavenly influence; and the starry influence
is the soul and life of the winds, the spiritual emanation from the winds do
fourfoldly inform the catholic sublunary element, or lower waters; the element
does animate the meteorologicall impressions, and of these are the compound
creatures compacted, which draw from the divine fountain of them all, being one
spirit in essence, but multiform in regard of the variety of organs, by which
it works variously in the world. So that it appears, that God animated
immediately the Imperial heaven, or the intellectual spirit, which is the
seat of Angels, and this we compare to the root; the imperial heaven animates
the stars, or aethe^iall region, which we refer to the square; and the starry
heaven is, as it were, the male, or multiplyer and vivifier of the elementary
region, and his creatures, which we compare unto the cube. Verily, not only
the abstruse Cabalists, but also the profoundest Philosophers, have made an
everlasting memory of this perfect and formal root, or ternary number, with
his triple dimension; I mean not that which is taken for a mercatory number, or
such an one as the vulgar Arithmeticians do use in their Algorism, but as it is
a spiritual and essential character of numeration, proceeding from a certain
circular revolution and square, and cubick multiplication: And therefore the
Learned have founded on this subject their formal and mystical Arithmet^ck
and Geometry, which are not exercised about common and vulgar subjects, but
wholly employed about the profound meditations of the true Cab^le, natural
Magic, and essential Alchimy, which because the ignorant vulgar people do
rashly condemn under those titles, are otherwise termed by the mystical, with
the name of the science, Elementary, Celestial, and Supermundane, as well
because it entreats of separated Intelligences and substances, (as some do
style them) as also because it is the worthiest of all others to be understood,
as being conversant about the knowledge of the Creator; for the greatest
perfection in which man may most glory, is, to artain unto the true knowledge
of God, which also the Prophet does testify in these words, Let not the wise
glory in his wisdom, Jerem. 9.
no^ the strong man in his strength, nor the rich man in his riches; but let
him that will glory, vaunt and glory, in that he knows and understands me.
And verily these are the three mystical sciences, which are by wise men
appropriated unto the knowledge of the three worlds; I mean, the Intelligible,
the Celestial, and Elementary, represented, according unto the Cabalists by
these three Letters of the name (...) Adam. Also the three parts of man, termed
the little world, to wit, the Intellect, the Soul, and Body, which is subject
to alteration and corruption, as also the elementary part. Upon this foundation
also, the Rabbi Zoar said, That there are three things which correspond unto
one another in this ternary dimension, forasmuch as they are framed or formed
after the pattern of the Archetype, and radical Idea, namely, the Tabernacle
of God which Moses erected, the Temple of Solomon, and man's Body, according
unto the three manner of numbers which were applied unto them, namely, the
vocal or operative, which is the extract of the measure unto the elementary
world; the formal, which is extract from the vocal unto the celestial; and
the rational or divine, which is extracted out of the formal unto the
intellectual. I will make all this plain by the real description of the
Tabernacle: This Tabernacle did symbolize with the three worlds in his parts,
for the former of them was uncovered, and was exposed unto the wind, rain,
hail, snow, and all other impressions, which are ingendered in the sublunary
world, with perpetual alterations and changes; and unto this part, the common
sort of people, as also the beasts, in an assiduall vicissitude of life and
death, did resort, by reason of the continual sacrifices which were slain and
offered in this place. And therefore this region importing the cube of matter,
is rightly referred unto the elementary world, which is composed of the grosser
waters, as of a substance fluid and unstable; and for this reason it is
properly called, the world of darkness, wherefore the Evangelist in one place
styleth the devil, the Prince of darkness; and in another place, the Prince
of this world. This region also has his relation unto the body of man.

The second part of the Tabernacle, which was burnished over with gold, and
illuminated with a Candlestick of seven lights, does decypher out the starry
heaven, and his seven erratick lights of Planets; and this heaven, as it is in
the middle betwixt two extremes, namely, between the bright fountain of the
formal or imperial heaven, and the obscure and dark abyss of matter, or
elementary world; so also it does participate of the two extremes, namely, of
water and fire: And for this reason the heaven is called of the Hebrews (...),
A^^amaiim, of (...) esch, fire, and (...) maym, water; in Greek Ether, quasi
igneus aer. But the warry body or matter of it is therefore incorruptible,
because her appetite is so fulfilled by the affluence of the formal nectar
from above, that it desires not any alteration; and touching her activity and
motion, it has it from that eternal emanation, which is said by Solomon to be
the most movab^e of all things; Wisd. 7.
and, in verity, it is the first catholic mover, who is said to be the
President of the primum mobile, at whose act, all the inferior intelligences
do move about their rouling and twinkling fires, no otherwise than at the
motion of a centrall wheel, many external wheels do move and have their life.
Thus we may see, first, why this region of the world is termed Heaven, or
sphere of equality, namely, by reason of his mixtion in equal proportions, of
form and matter; also, why it is called the sphere of the soul of the world, by
reason that it is composed of the pure spirit of the waters, which is female
and passive, and the bright fire or act of eternity; for the mental divinity
does by and through this humid nature, which is his vehicle, act and show forth
his vivifying and emanating property, in and by this spiritual organ; and
therefore does all life consist, ex cali^o essentiali, and humido radicali; of
essential heat, as the masculine or active; and radical moisture, as the
female or passive. This region therefore is referred unto the vital soul in
man, and has relation unto the square, as well of form as matter, which is in
the midst between the cube and the root.

The third part of the Tabernacle was the Sanctum sanctorum, and does represent
the super-celestiall, or intelligible soul, or imperial spirit, forasmuch as
his substance is almost light and fire and it is thought to be the seat of the
Angels, which are the ministers of their great Prince the Lord of light: And
this is argued by the presence of the two Cherubins, or fiery Angels, which
with their wings do shadow the propitiatory. This heaven has his relation unto
the intellect in man, which the Hebrews call Nessaniah, and the Greeks (...),
the Latins Men's, or the mental beam, which has the dominion in man's soul. So
that we may discern, that in the great world, the angelical heaven being most
formal and fiery, is as it were the soul of the aetheriall heaven, for by it,
and from it, this region receives his life's motion and being; as also by the
like proportion the celestial or aetheriall heaven is the soul or agent of the
elementary region. For by means of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, which dart down
their beams and influences upon the earth, as arrows against a butt, the
earth, and water, and all things therein, do act, and live, and generate, and
multiply; so that the heavens are esteemed by all Philosophers to be the Male,
and the earth and other elements the Females, between the which, all
generations are made in and upon the earth, and in the sea; for the earthly
body cannot operate without a heavenly touch, yea, even man himself requires
for his generation the heavenly act and aid: and therefore Aristotle
concludes, that sol and homo generat hominem, the sun and man does engender a
man. Again, all Philosophers in general agree in this, namely, that superiora
agunt in inferiora, more maris in foeminam; the superior bodies do operate upon
the inferiors, as the man upon the woman. And the Maxim of all such Cabalists,
as are conversant in the mystical Theology, Reucl. lib. 3. De art Cab.
averr, that omnes res inferiores sunt representativae superiorum; and sicut
fit inferius, sic agitur superius; All inferior things are representours or
images of the superiors; and such as the inferiors are, such also are the
superiors. And in verity, a notable person, and well seen in this abstruce
learning, does aver, that the aeviall or angelical heaven, is framed after the
pattern of the eternal and ideall world, and the temporal elementary heaven
or region, is the image of the celestial or aetheriall; so that the images and
the actions of the darker world, have their ideall shapes in and from the
lighter and starry world; and the starry world's shapes and actions were first
delineated in the intellectual or angelical one, and they again proceed
originally from the radical pattern without beginning in the Archetype.

I conclude therefore, that both Theology and the mystical Philosophy do
consent, that God is well pleased with the holy ternary, which is the first odd
number in the Arithmeticall progression; for we Christians honor a Trinity of
Persons in one Deity; and Aristotle says, That we are instructed by a natural
kind of instinct or habit, to honor God after the number of three; and he
speaks in this but reason, being that in the ideall world there was three
properties extracted out of one unity, after whose example the real world was
afterward made; so that the Trinity in Divinity was the root of all the worlds
formal composition. For by the root 3, the intellectual or angelical world
was deciphered; by the square 9, the celestial world; and by the cube 27, the
elementary, as by the Platonic learning we may gather. But as for the
Cabalisticall Rabbis, they consider the quantitative proportions of this
Ternary after another manner; for as the cube of three consists of three 9, so
they take these three 9, and order them in this ternary position, 999, which
makes nine hundred ninety and nine. So that after the rule of Algorism, the
first 9 toward the right hand is a simple digital number, which because of its
simplicity, formality, and essentiality, is attributed by them unto the nine
orders of Angels, which belong unto the intelligible world. The middle 9,
importing so many Tens, does seem to partake one way of form or simplicity, and
on the other hand of matter, and therefore they allot it unto the nine orbs or
spears of the starry heaven. The third 9, which is the place of Hundreds,
imports a deeper and more material composition, belonging unto the
elementary world, all which do at the last terminate in Man, who is as it were
a passage after the figure of unity from them unto celestial things, and from
thence unto intellectual. To conclude, unity, in whom the Philosophers
Leucippe did place the sovereign good and happiness, being added unto the
three novenaries, will make a complete thousand, which is the cube often, and
the end of all numbers, according to the Hebraick calculation. Also the square
of 3, which is 9, by addition of Aleph, which is 1, produces a Denary, or the
number of 10, beyond the which, as Aristotle averreth, no man has ever found
any number. After the foresaid type therefore or image, the ancient Law did
make a partition of the fruits and goods proceeding from the earth, ordaining
the centenary number, as being more material and gross, unto the Laics and
pro^ane persons; the tenths it ordained and allotted to the Churchmen, Priests
or Levites; but the unity or denary it reserved for Gods portion, who (as is
proved before) being all, is nevertheless but one; even as from the trunck of a
Tree do issue many branches, and from those branches again many sprigs, and yet
are all continuated and undevided from that one trunck, from which they have
their life and being; or as from one body of the Sun, an infinity of beams do
spring, not separated from the essence of that Sun. But to return unto our
purpose. The said Cabalists have adapted and fitted the name of their great
Angel, which they take for the soul of the world, unto this very triple
ternary, or formal proportion, namely, 999. arguing thereby his radical, his
square, and his cubicall extention, or emission of his divine form unto the
profundity of matter, and consequently that he is A^pha and Omega, the vivifier
of all, and present in all, and through all: For the Letters of the name
Mitattron sar hapanim, which signifies the Prince of Faces, which is taken for
the soul of the world, after the calculation of the Hebrews amount unto 999.
and therefore this name, with Letters befitting, do import this number, and yet
nevertheless with this consideration, that the etymology of the word by
interpretation may import donum Dei, or the gift of God; for what greater gift
could God impart unto his potentiall creatures, and in general unto the great
world, then his eternal Spirit of wisdom, or his only Begotten, to make them
of somewhat nothing, and to take away all deformity and nullity from the water,
and to shape out of them a Heaven and an Earth, and to figure out in them all
the creatures thereof, and to preserve them in existence, essence, and lively
being? This was therefore indeed the true catholic donum Dei, Wisd. 12.1.
Wisd. 7.
or gift of God, whose incorruptible nature is in all things, and fills all
things; and as it is the most movable of all things, so it operateth all in
all, according to the will of him that sent him. And therefore in regard of the
office, and as he was an emissive Spirit, so was he not unworthily named by
them, the great or catholic Angel, had not Scriptures in plain terms seemed
to intimate so much.

I could also demonstrate, that the world, and his soul, or life, was shaped
after the image of the Archetype in this manner: From 1, which was all light,
in whom is no darkness, did 2 issue, which was quoad nos, darkness, or the
dark Chaos, so called, because unity did not as yet shine forth to inform them.
Betwixt these two extremes is 3 interposed, as a peaceable or charitable unity,
between mere light and darkness, or the Spirit of divine love, who resting in
the midst between these two principles, uniteth the divine formal fire with
the humid material nature, or spirit of darkness, making a union of two
opposite natures, so that both natures do remain in one sympatheticall
concordance; and therefore this formal ternary is called* Ligamentum
elementorum litem and amicitiam conco^diae vinculis connect^ns; The ligament of
the elements, tying together hatred and love with the bands of concord. I
express them thus.

Deus 1 Lux. Coelum 3 Sphaera aequalitatis. Terra 2 Tenebrae.

This excellent harmony of the soul of the world, is elsewhere most fitly
expressed by me, by two equal Piramidicall shapes, whereof the one is formal,
the other material; the basis of the formal is the immediate act of God, or
the infinite and only bright Unity, and it imports the emanation of the
creating and informing Spirit, so that his Cone does penetrate unto the very
center of the dark earth or abyss: And contrariwise, the basis of the
material or watery Pyramid, is in the earth or center of darkness, and the
Cone ascends unto the center of the basis of the formal Pyramid, in this
manner.



Now where the intersection is made between the two principal concurrences, I
have framed a piece of a circle, which circle, because the portions of the
formal Pyramid, and material, are there equal, we therefore with the
Platonists do call Sphaeram aequalitatis, or the Sphere of equality; or, as
they in another respect term it, the orb or sphere of the soul of the world,
which is just in the midst of the starry heaven, called for that reason Ether,
quasi igneus aer, a fiery air, as who should say, an equal portion of the
spirit of the waters, and of the formal fire descending from God or Unity, (as
I have expressed before). And therefore as we placed in the precedent
demonstration the 3 in the center or middle of the line, between the divine
illuminating unity 1, and the dark Chaos, or deformed duality 2; so in the
world was the spiritual body of the visible Sun of this typical world placed,
in which the invisible and increated Sun of the Archetypicall world did put his
Tabernacle: and for this cause it is rightly termed of the Platonists, the
sphere of the soul. And verily by effect we find, that all vivification does
potently spring from the solar or Sunny influence: and as for the excellent
beauty of the creature, as also in respect of the vivifying act thereof, it is
an evident argument, that it abounds with the blessed sparks or vivifying
beams of divinity. Again, that it is the bright organ, by which he that
vivifieth all things, does impart and pour forth the shower of his benignity,
or divine Nectar of life, continual experience teaches, even the meanest
plowman. Now that this most excellent and perfect concord of life does remain
principally in the midst of the line, drawn from unity, or the fountain of
form, to the earth or duality, which is the fountain of matter, I prove it thus
by the accords of Music: The perfectest consonance in Music is Diapason, and
of all the other symphoniacall accords, it approaches nearest unto the sacred
Unity in Divinity, for it is half unison, and therefore it is rightly compared
unto the blessed emanation of life which came from unity; and for that reason
it is rightly termed the Idea or image of a unison: And as the unison like one
essence in Divinity, does comprehend three Persons, importing the three accords
in the Archetypicall harmony. So also the Diapason comprehends in it the two
other accords besides it self, namely, Diapente, and D^atessaron. Now that this
most perfect consonant of Diapason is planted in the midst of a unison, and
does, as it were, beget in it self two perfect chords, or Diapasons, which be
contained within it self, I prove it thus: Take a Lute or Bandora, and strike
any of the strings open, and then stop that same string exactly in the middle
of it, and each half will sound a Diapason unto that open unison; so that the
unison which is made by the striking of the whole string open, will be divided
into two Diapasons or most perfect consonants unto the whole; which is an
evident argument, that the perfection of the Diapason is in the seat of the
Sun, and consequently, that the formal and lively accord of all the world, is
no otherwise in that centrall or middle place, then the heart, which is the
seat of life, is in man: And yet by the beams of the Sun, this life of the
world is made catholic, and fills all, no otherwise than the vital blood
does universally expanse it self in the Microcosm, by the channells of the
arteries. But I fear I have followed this point too far, to prove and maintain
the soul of this world; wherefore I leave it, to come directly unto the point,
being that in my Mosaicall Philosophy, to wit, in the fourth book thereof, I
have fully proved and maintained that Translation of Jerome to be right, namely,
Posuit tabernaculum suum in sole, he put his tabernacle in the Sun. I will
proceed therefore unto the second opinion of the Philosophers.

The ancient Philosopher Democritus, Orpheus, with the Pythagoreans, do judge
that all things are full of gods; and again, all these gods they refer unto
one Jupiter: where, by gods, they ^ntend the divine virtues, infused into
things, which Zoroaster called divinos illices; Synesius the Bishop, Symbolicas
illecebras; others term them lines; others sorts, on which the virtue of
things do depend. They err not much in this saying, only in appearing to
divide the Godhead into diversities of gods: but they seem to excuse themselves
of that error, in saying, that all those gods had relation unto one Jupiter,
and so by that word [relation] they preserve the continuity and indivisibility
in the Soul. They agree therefore with Scriptures, in that their meaning is,
that this divine essence is in all things: For as Scriptures acknowledge, that
the catholic Spirit of Wisdom is one simple Spirit; and yet it is termed by
Solomon, Sap. 7.
multiplex or manifold in respect of his multiplicity of action, or property in
creatures which it animateth: for it is said to fill the universe. Wisd. 1.
Wisd. 12. Wisd. 7.
And the incorruptible Spirit of God to be in all things, and to give life and
motion unto all: forasmuch as it is omni re mobilior, more movab^e and
sprightfull then any thing, and being but one thing, it is able to do all
things, it being permanent in it felf, and therefore does animate all, being
that it is in all and every where. For this reason also the Poets say: Omnia
Jovis plena, that all are full of Jupiter. That is to say, the essential beams
of this Eternal Jupiter or JEHOVA are in every particular place of the world,
making things to live and exist, by a different property. And for this reason,
they conclude that omnia diis plena (as is said) all things are full of gods. I
come unto the third.

The Platonists, and all those Philosophers which partake with them, differ in
nothing from Orpheus, Democritus, and the rest, saving, that those call that
the Soul of the world, which the other term Jupiter* and the Gods which
possess all things, they nominate peculiar souls or mental beams, which
depend and have a continuated relation unto the Anima mundi: Wisd. 12.1.
as the incorruptible Spirit of the Lord, that fills each particular is not
discontinued from that humid fountain which fills the universe.

It is evident therefore, by this which is already said, that all the
subsequent opinions of the Philosophers, touching the Anima mund^, may be fully
confirmed and maintained by the self same reasons, and therefore I will say no
more touching this point, at this instant.

I conclude therefore thus, that seeing the Soul of the world has for his
internal act* the bright emanation of the eternal Unity, and the subtle
catholic created Spirit for its humid Vehicle or material Organ, which is its
external, in which, and by which, it operareth in all, and over all. We must
acknowledge that there is a kind of contrariety in the very catholic Soul; for
else, would not action and passion be in the created Soul (which is so called,
because it is made of alterity, that is of two, namely of a creared passive,
which is an offspring of the dark Chaos, and therefore apt to move unto
darkness, by a natural inclination; and of an increated active which seeks
to Deify this Spirit, if it do adhere or incline unto it, and to exalt its
light. Hence comes it, that, by reason of this Spirit's diverse inclination,
there are good or bad passions engendered, not only in the heavens and earth of
the great world, and their creatures, as well celestial and elementary, as
animal, vegetable, and mineral; but also in the little world, which is man,
as shall be expressed in the first Chapter of the next Book. But first, I deem
it most fit, to open unto you the true mystery, how the peculiar Soul of the
little world, and then how all other Souls, as well animal, vegetable, and
mineral, do proceed and spring from, and afterward are preserved and
multiplied by, this catholic Soul of the world: which is a doubt, not fully
decided by the best Philosophers, even unto this very day. And therefore ought
this discourse of ours, not to be slighted, or lightly regarded, even of the
learnedest of this our Age.

CHAP. V.
How all particular Souls are said to spring forth or proceed, and then
afterward to have their preservation and multiplication, from this general
Anima mundi, or Soul of the world: and first to begin with that of the mo^^
noble, which is of the little world or Man.

HErmes (called also for another reason Mercurius Trismegistus) said rightly,
that the world was made after the similitude or Type of God, Pimand. 1.
and therefore as the one is termed Archetypus, so also the other is said to
be Typus: For this reason therefore in another place he says: Pimand. 8.
Scio mundum a Deo, atque in Deo, hominem vero a mundo and in mundo consistere,
principium autem comprehensioque omnium Deus: I know (says he) that the world
is from God, and in God, and that man is of the world, and in the world:
Pimand. 9.
But God is the beginning and the comprehension of all things. And again, he
speaks thus else where, in a generality: Deus est Cosmi Pater, cosmus vero
eorum, quae in Cosmo; and cosmus quidem Dei filius, and jure Cosmus appellatus
est, quia omnia veritate generationis exornat, necnon indesinenti vitae
operatione, perpetua necessitatis celeritate elementorum commistione ordine
genitorum. Cosmus quaecunque ab ipsa origin suscepit, a Deo perpetuo servat:
God is the Father of the world, the world is the father of them that are in the
world, and the world is the offspring of God, and it is rightly called Cosmus,
because it adorneth with verity every kind of generation, and also with a never
ceasing operation of life, and a perpetual celerity of necessity in the
commixtion of the Elements, which by order are brought forth, etc. In all this
he varieth not from Scriptures: For that in the beginning, God is said to have
made the world of a matter without a form, and to have adorned his humid nature
or the heavens with his vivifying Spirit, which fills and operateth all in
all, (as I have told you before) and that from the breath of the self-same
Spirit of life, all the creatures of the world are animated, and from the
substantial Elements in the world they receive their matter. So that as God by
the pouring forth of his bright vivifying and all-acting Spirit, did make the
humid and passive nature of the world to operate, and that so animated Spirit
which is mixed, secundum totum and in qualibet ejus part, in all and every
part, with his increated Animatour, is rightly called the Soul of all the
Universe; So we ought to make no question at all, but that every particular
Soul in this vaulted machin of the world, does depend and is procreated,
preserved, and multiplied from that catholic Soul, because it is an axiom
infallible among Philosophers, that the whole does comprehend each part, and
again, each particular has his existence and being from the whole. But the
world's catholic material Spirit is inacted and preserved by the catholic
Eternal Spirit, sent out from the Fountain of life, to inact and vivify all
things* Which increated Spirit of life is indivisible in essence, and therefore
as it does actually from his immense fountain of life, send down or breathe
forth the influences of life, after the manner of an infinity of beams, from
one Sun, unto an infinite sort of creatures, to inform them and make them live:
So are those beams of life, thus sent out, no less continuated and indivisible,
from that fountain or spiritual and indivisible Son of life, then the visible
beams can be divided from the visible Sun: Neither was it sufficient for Adam
to have endued a Microcosmicall body, namely a mass of earth for his
material, had not this exalted formal essence, sent by God into the world, as
not divided from divinity, added a lively force and activity, by breathing his
Spirit of life into him. And therefore Hermes spoke not amiss, when he said
that the world was the Image of God, and man the image of the world: being that
as God created and vivifyed the watery Spirit of the world, by adding unto it
his creating Spirit of life, so that Spirit of life (which is all one in
essence with the Father) being sent into the world, and filling the Spirit of
the world does vivify, multiply, and preserve, not only man, but also every
other animal, vegetable, and mineral, that is in the world. This being
therefore in the first place to be considered, I proceed thus.

The variety of the Species upon the earth, did radically proceed from the very
act of creation, when the word Fiat was spoken, and immediately the will of the
speaker was accomplished by his Son, which, by the way of emanation, was sent
into the world to do the will of his Father. And there are some that will not
shrink to say, that all the Species or kinds of creatures, were expressed in
and by the 22. Hebrew letters, not those external ones which are vulgarly
painted out with Ink or Art, which are but shadows; but the fiery formal and
bright spiritual letters which were engraven on the face or superficies of the
dark hyles, by the fiery word of the eternal Speaker in the beginning, and
therefore they are termed originally Elementa quasi Hylementa, or Elements; as
engraven in the forehead of the dark abyss or Hyle, and by reason of the
essence of that divine Word, which received the mystery of the Typical
creation, and did trace it out after the Archetypicall pattern, and delineated
it in characters of formal fire the language which was framed out of it was
called Lingua Sancta, a language (I say) much spoken of by the learned Rabbis
of our age, but little known or understood by them, and yet of an infinite
importance, for the true enucleation as well of sacred Mysteries, as of all
true Cabalisticall abstrusities. But to proceed: According to the tenor of the
divine Word, and his formal characters, the effects whereof passed unalterable
into the world, each species or kind was framed; and again, every individual
of each kind was made diverse, and distinct from others as well in shape and
proportion, as condition and and property. Now, as I said, that this Spirit of
the Lord did effect the will of his Father, in creating every thing thus
differently, being in it self but one and the same essence; So also did it, and
does still continue and keep every one of these Species or kinds by
multiplication or generation, in their successive estates, and preserves every
individual, during the time of his being, as well by an elementary as
aethereall kind of nutriment, which according to his spirituality does descend,
as it were from heaven, to nourish the spirits of each individual, according
unto his kind. For you must understand, that as the catholic soul of the world
is general unto all; So is the air made the chest or closet of his golden
treasury or spiritual food, which while it swimmeth occultly like a golden
vapor, showred down from heaven in the air, filling and replenishing all: So,
whilst it is yet in the open air, it is as apt to sustain and multiply the
life of a serpent, a sheep, a fish, or a foul, an oak, a herb, or such like,
as of a man: For so soon as the magnetic power or virtue of the creature,
which causes every minute a refection from this heavanly Nectar, has drawn in
a portion of this catholic Spirit or nature, it leaves his catholic or
general nature, and works specifically; that is to say, according unto the
individual nature of that kind which receives it; that is to say, it
converteth it self, being in a dog into his nature; in a whale into his nature;
in a man into his* in an oak or myrtill into his; in wheat into the proper
nature of wheat, and so in all other kinds, and consequently it is the cause
that every creatures spirit is nourished and sustained it it self: For this was
the Creator's Ordinance, that by what spirit the creature was first created in
his kind, by the same it should be maintained, preserved, and multiplied. Hence
it was, that the Philosopher breaks forth into this speech: In novo lumine
chym.
Est in aere occulius vitae cibus: The hidden aliment of life is in the air.
Whereby he means, that quint essential food, which we receive from the
general Spirit of life in the world, which by the appointment of God, hangs
ready, and in every part of the air, to strive for the spiritual food of life
unto every elementary creature, the main virtue whereof consists in the
eternal vivifying Word and Spirit of all things: Acts 17 25. Joh, 10.12. Psalm.
30.6.
and therefore the Text says: Deus dat vitam and inspirationem and omnia: God
gives life and inspiration and all things. And again, Visitatio tua conservat
spiritum meum: Thy visitation does preserve my spirit. Vita adest benevolentia
IEHOVAE, Psalm. 36.10. Psalm. 81.7. Psalm. 36.17.
Life is present by the benevolence of IEHOVA. Vitae fons penes Deum est, The
fountain of life is with God* Vitae prolongatio benignitas ejus, The prolonging
of life is the benignity of God. Quem visitavit Deus salute sua, fruetur bono,
Whom God does visit with his salutiserous nature, he shall be partaker of
goodness. Deo dante creaturis, colligunt; aperiente manum suam sa^iantur bono,
abscondente faciem suam conturbantur, recipiente spiritum corrum exspirant,
emittente spiritum suum recreantur. Psalm. 104.28.
God giving unto the creatures food, they receive it; when he opens his hand,
they are filled with all goodness. If he hide away his face, or abstain from
giving them their daily spiritual bread, they are troubled, and will be sick;
if he take away from them their spirit, they exspire and die; but if he send
forth again his Spirit, they are recreated and refreshed again. We are taught
also by Christ in our Paternoster, to pray for our daily bread, and it is
called there, Panem super-substantialem, the super-substantiall bread, as Jerome
interprets it. And our Savior, meaning of this spiritual bread, says,
Pater noster dat nobis de coelo panem verum, panis enim verus est, qui de coelo
descend^t, and dat vitam mundo. Our father gives us true bread from heaven;
for it is the true bread which descends from heaven, and gives life unto the
world. But I know it will be alleged against me, that the bread here mentioned
is meant of spiritual bread, and not that which nourishes corporally. I grant,
that, in a true sort, they speak not amiss, for this bread or food is
spiritual, and therefore it is reserved in the heart and arteries of the
creature, and is nothing in it self but pure life. Does not our Savior say,
Non solo pane vivit homo, sed omni verbo quod procedit ab ore Dei; Man lives
not only by bread, Matthew. 4. Deuteronomy. 8.3.
but by every word that comes from the mouth of God. And these words were
understood by Moses of that Manna, by which the Israelites were nourished in
the desert: And the Apostle calls the food wherewith they were nourished, The
spiritual Rock, 2 Cor. 11. Joh. 8. Joh. 1.
which was Christ. And therefore that spiritual Rock said, Ego sum panis
vitae, etc. I am the bread of life which descend from heaven. In this word
therefore is life only, and in no food else; and it is this in the aliment
which nourishes, and not the creature alone; for in the word only was life.
And for this reason it was said, Et vidit quod omnia quae creavit essent bona;
that is to say, not vacua aut inania, void and empty; but full of Gods
essential being, which is only God; for it was he who by his presence made
the creature good participative, or by participation. I will tell you what some
of the Ethnic Philosophers say touching this point, who, in verity, (and the
more is the pity) had a greater insight into the divine mysteries of God in
nature, then some of this our age, who entitle themselves Christians, and yet
indeed are steril in the true grounds of a true Christian, being apter to judge
and condemn the old Philosophers, and adiudge them for reprobates, and reserved
(as they say) for damnation, and that only for not bearing the name of a
Christian, then to observe the beam which is in their own eye, which makes
them so blind as to judge rashly of their brethren, when indeed the judgment
concerning that point belongs unto God only: They forget the Apostles
saying, which averreth, that all men are of Gods generation. Act. 17.
But to the purpose. This is the reason that the Philosopher Zeno did call the
vital soul in a man, Ignem naturalem; and Prometheus terms it, Ignem
coelestem homines vita ditantem, The celestial fire that enricheth man with
life. And because this Prometheus did obtain the full possession of it, the
Poets feign, that he is punished by Jupiter's command, for stealing of this
celestial fire. And Hermes calls it, The fire of the word, which adhereth
unto the humid nature of the world. And Zoroaster and Heraclitus do say, that
it is that invisible fire, of which all generation and multiplication is made.
Being therefore that the never-dying fire of life is in the animal creature,
it is necessary, that for the conservation and multiplication thereof, it be
nourished by its like in the air every moment, or by the vehicle of the air,
lest it should vanish, and the creature should perish. And this is that the
Philosopher Pa^menides seems to intimate, Parmenides.
where he says, Natura sua natura l^etat^^, Nature is rejoiced in his like
nature. For this very cause, the fiery virtue of the life having her position
in the center of the heart of the creature, does with comfort and delight draw
and suck into it, by a certain magneticall power and faculty, his like out of
the air by inspiration; for (as I told you) this hidden food, or aliment of
life, is in the air. This is the reason therefore, that a certain Author, who
was very profoundly seen in the mysteries of nature, breaks out into this
speech, O Natura co^es^is veritatis, natur^s Dei multiplicans! O thou heavenly
Nature of truth, which do multiply the natures of God! And again, O natura
fortis, natura vincens and superans, du^sque naturas gaude^e faciens; O stout
nature, nature that do conquer and overcome, and make her natures to
rejoice. By which he does intimate, that by the help and visitation of this
celestial nature, the vital spirits, and flames included in them, do increase
and multiply; for by the virtue hereof, not only the life, but the fruits of
generation, are produced infinitely. We infer by this which is already said,
that the elementary air is full of the influences of life, vegetation, and of
the formal seeds of multiplication, forasmuch as it is a treasure-house, which
abounds with divine beams, and heavenly gifts. Neither does this our
assertion only touch the animal Kingdom of composition, but also that of the
vegetables; for by this spirit they do vegetate, by this they do multiply into
infinity, and, in conclusion, by this they exist and have their being: For in
mine own ocular experience I am witness, and, if need be, I can quickly
demonstrate, that in the vegetable is a pure volatile salt, which is nothing but
the essential air of the specific, which is wheat or bread; this volatile
salt is an unctuous liquor, as white and clear as crystal; this is inwardly
nevertheless full of vegetating fire, by which the species is multiplied in
infinitum: for it is a magneticall virtue, by which it draws and sucketh
abundantly his life from the air, and sun beams, which is the principal
treasure-house of life, forasmuch as in it the eternal emanation of life did
plant his Tabernacle, (as in the fourth Book of my Mosaicall Philosophy I have
plainly demonstrated). I have seen this volatile saltpeter of this vegetable,
being freed from his elementary bands, and being in his unctuous nature in form
of a liquor, I perceived him so desirous of the beams of life, which lurked in
the air, and were darted from the sun, that in the space of three hours, it
became from a white crystaline color unto a bloody ruby: whereby I was easily
taught the reason of formal multiplication, as well in animals as in
vegetables; for by this reason, a grain of Wheat is multiplied unto a million.
Again, no true Philosopher can be ignorant, that the saltpeter of every thing,
which is but air, by virtue of that mystical spirit which dwells in it,
does attract air as well as the celestial form, unto it, being the form
cannot be inspired but by the means of his airy vehicle; and by this very means
also, the quantity of the airy substance, as well as the formal quality, is
augmented, which makes as well vegetation as multiplication. By the strong
magneticall attraction of the celestial tincture, which hovereth in the air,
or volatile salt, which is of the substance and nature of blood in the animals,
it is easy to know, how blood in the animals body is transmuted from a white
chylous substance into a rubicund and ruddy blood. By reason of his vegetation
and multiplication in substance, it is an easy matter to guess the manner of
augmentation and vegetation, and also of the quantitative multiplication, by
way of generation, of the animal: For verily, I have observed so worthy an
experiment in this vegetative salt in the Wheat, of which the blood of man by
eating of bread is full, that we need not to make any doubt, but that it is the
only substance of vegetation, as well in the animal as vegetable: For on a
day, when I had cast away the faeces, or superfluous part of the substauce, out
of which I did draw the salt liquor, into a large Pipkin, and covered it with a
thin plate of iron, within three weeks or a months space, I found it to have
struck up out of the pot quite through the plate of iron, and to make above a
thousand blades like an iron-coloured saffron to grow up out of the superficies
of it, which argues the admirable vegetative property that it has in it. But
letting this suffice to express the occult puissance of this secret fire of
God in nature, in all vegetables, mineralls, and other animals, I will now
convert the file of my speech only unto that wondrous act and operation, which
this admirable Spirit effects in the little world or man.

The spirit of life was by God so inspired into man, that he was made a living
creature, no otherwise then when Elohim Ruach was breathed on the waters, they
were animated and vivified, and became a great world, which the Platonists for
that reason called, Magnum animal, A great living creature. But as the world
was made after the image of God, before man was made, and afterward man by the
same Spirit in the world, was framed by the Word, after the pattern of that
Spirit of life, and the substance of the waters, which were in the great world.
Therefore we must conceive, that man has the vivifying means of his
sustentation, preservation, and multiplication, by generation from the soul of
the world, and his elements. Wherefore Hermes does not unadvisedly express the
descent and ingression of the worlds vivifying spirit into man, Pimand. 10.
after this manner, A er est in corpore, anima in aere, m^ns in an^ma, in mente
verbum; Verbum vero est eorum pater. The air is in the body, the soul or life
is in the air, the mental Spirit is in the soul, the Word is in the mental
Spirit; and the Word is the Father of them all. And he concludes in that
place: Quod Verbum sit imago Dei, men's verbi, anima mentis, aer animae, and
corpus aeris: That the Word is the Image of God, the mental beam the image of
the word, the vital Soul the image of the mental beam, the air of the vital
Soul, and the body of the air. Whereby we may discern, the admirabletie, which
every portion of each dignity in the great world has unto other, in the
composition of the little world; and therefore it is made evident, that the
purest portion of elementary matter is air, the purest sublimity of the air
is the vital form, in which is the mental beam, and in it is the Word which
is God; and we must observe that by mentem, or the mental Spirit, is meant the
vivifying Spirit of Wisdom, which fills all things, whose fountain, Ecclus. 1.
as Ecclesiasticus does teach us, is the Word of God: as if I with Hermes
should say, the bright and eternal Spirit of life in the quintessentiall
Spirit, makes the Soul, the Soul in the air is conducted into the body, where
it operateth the effects of vivification, and internal multiplication of the
Species, and therefore he says in another place: Anima hominis in hunc vehitur
modum: Men's in ratione, Pimand. 10.
ratio in anima, anima in spiritu, and spiritus in corpore: Spiritus per venas
arteriasque sanguinemque diffusus, animal undique ciet. The Soul of man is
carried into his body after this manner. The mental beam is the reasonable
spirit, the reasonable spirit is in the Soul or ethereall spirit, the Soul or
ethereall spirit is in the airy spirit, and the airy spirit is in the body,
which moves through the veins and arteries, and being dispersed over all the
blood, does agitate and move the body on every side. We must therefore imagine,
that the air which is drawn into our heart by inspiration, is full of that
divine treasure of life, the which residing in the heart of man, sucketh and
draws his life into it, by a magnetic force and virtue: For nature coveteth
and rejoices at the presence of its like, as is said. And again, that the
heart is the precious storehouse of the active treasure of life, we may
collect out of this speech of Solomon: Cor tuum custodi supra on^nem
observationem, quia ab eo procedunt actiones vitae: Prove. 4.23.
Guard with the best diligence and keep charily thy heart, seeing that from it
proceed all the actions of life. The nature and instruments by which the Spirit
attracteth magnetically, and expels after attraction, that of the humid
vehicle of air, which is inutil and superfluous, in this:

Being that without the sparks of life, and generation, which swim in the
air, no creature (amongst the which we esteem Man to be the chiefest) can live
scarsly a moment of time, it is most necessary that they should be drawn and
sucked in by the creature every minute; for without this necessary act, with
the salutary effect thereof, the animal will forthwith be suffocated or
strangled: for by the deprivation of the air, the soul will soon cease his
vivifying operation; forasmuch as it is nothing else, but a portion of eternal
light in the soul of the world, which is composed (as I proved before) of the
divine emanating virtue, and the subtle humid nature of the world, whereof the
first affords the Calidum innatum or natural heat of life; and the last the
humidum radicale, or radical moisture, unto the creatures existence, and
therefore by the inspiration of air, this double virtue is every moment
renewed and refreshed in the creature. This Spirit therefore, the Animal (and
by consequence man) inspireth or sucketh into the left chamber, ventricle, or
region of the heart, by the contraction of the straight fibers of the heart,
when the transverse and oblique fibers will be relaxed, whereby the heart will
be dilated or opened, and this action is called of the Physicians Diastole. In
the time thereof or interval of this motion, the heart does draw into his left
vessel by the Arteria venosa, or veiny artery out of the lungs, whither it
first was conveyed by inspiration, through the aspera arteria, or weesell-pipe,
a portion of the airy storehouse of nature, with his vital treasury contained
in it, being (as is said) ordained by God for vivification and spiritual and
seminal generation's cause; that is to say, for the nutrition of the vital and
internal generative Spirits; no otherwise then the liver is accustomed to suck
and draw the chylous juice of the gross nutriment, for the engendring and
fos^ering of the natural spirits, which are ordained for vegetation or
increasing of the bodily parts. Again, after that nature has received and
drawn-in into her well-adorned, and subtly adapted still-house or laboratory,
I mean the heart, this aereal Spirit, with his concealed or occult treasure,
she begins in it to anatomise, and sift or search the bowels of of this
attracted air; and separating the celestial nature, or true vital treasure,
of the invisible fire of life, from the grosser and most inutil portion of the
air, it reserveth only the purest, which is nothing but a subtle volatile
salt, adapted to serve as a vehicle for the divine fire of life, or true
vivifying Spirit, in the ethereal and quintessentiall nature, and then, as for
the selected Spirits of life, she encloseth them in her large arteriall
storehouse, called Aorta or Arteria magna, the great Artery, sending
immediately the more superfluous fuligions and inutil part of the air back
again the way it came, by exspiration. And this expulsive action is effected by
the contraction of the transverse fibers of the heart, and the relaxation of
the straight: for by this means, the heart is also contracted or compressed;
which action of motion, is called by Physicians Systole. And we must
understand, that for the better preservation of this golden treasure of life,
within his arterial treasure*house God in nature has so ordered, that there is
a triple valve or gate like three half-moons, to close it in, and to keep it
securely for the bodies necessity, lest it should fly away by the passage it
came in, and therefore this three-leaved gate is fashioned after such a manner,
that it does open within, and is closed without; so that what gets into the
great Artery cannot return back again: as in like manner, at the mouth of the
venal artery, there is a double gate compacted of two valves, and they do open
without, and shut within; so that fresh air may easily enter, but the treasure
included, after the expulsion of the fuliginous vehicle or superfluous air,
may be retained.

Now will I Am few words, express unto you the action of this heavenly Spirit.
After it is thus included in the arteriall trunk, it is certain, that it does
dilate it self, through the branches or divided channells thereof, over all the
body: For by those branches called Charotides, a refined portion of it does
ascend unto the brain, by those small conduicts; (I say) the super-celestiall
part of this Chymicall extraction, (forasmuch as it is in dignity the most
super-excellent of all the fountain of life,) does challenge unto his seat and
possession, the noblest and loftiest region of this micro-cosmicall palace, and
as it were his Imperial heaven; for hither soareth the mental beam in his
rational vehicle, electing this place for its chief tabernacle or coelum
coelorum yet so, that the beams of his power, are reflected unto every branch
of his divided Arterial cabinet: For this reason therefore, all Physicians as
well Ethnic as Christian, have concluded, that the voluntary humane action,
has his seat in the brain* being the region of the animal virtue or faculty;
whereas the other two actions of man, namely the vital in the heart, and
natural in the liver, seem to be subject unto this, being that they are
actiones involuntariae, unvoluntary actions, and this is the reason, that the
Brain is the seat of reason and understanding. Then, in the second rank, that
portion of the introducted Spirit, which in the forge of man's nature, is
framed out and found fit for the action of life, is convayed into those
branches of the great Artery, which are called Cervicales, Humerariae, and
those which assign life unto the region of the Chest or breast, where it does
indue and take on it that impression of spiritual vivacity, which belongs
unto those parts; as also the Coronariae do assume unto them the internal or
ideal shape of spirits belonging unto the heart, and so forward touching the
other Arteriall branches, and their contained heavenly treasure: So that this
invisible spirit lurking, and (as it were) swimming in the thin substance of
the airy spirit, does not only expanse and dilate it self, to the vivifying of
each member in the body, but also by a contraction of it self into a spermatick
cloud, (the which happens in the act of copulation, through a certain
magnetic virtue, animated by divine love) this spirit is miraculously convayed
into two preparing arteriall spermatick vessels, from every member, but
especially from the three principalls: and there this celestial Spirit full of
divine fire, after the Image of the radical Archetype, in whom all things were
first spiritually and ideally delineated before they were, in the regard of man
(even as the Prophet David did glory in that he had wholly received the image
of the Temple, described by the hand of God, which afterward was put in act)
contains the invisible of that humane body, which shortly was to be inacted,
and really to be delineated, and brought forth unto man's sight; that is to
say, it did ideally possess the shape of the inward or spiritual man; as also
the image of the external or corporal man, being compacted of the four
Elements, proceeds from the visible sperm, which issued from the two venall
spermatick vessels. But that this is so, we have it plainly (as I imagine)
confirmed by these words of Holy-Writ: Psalm. 139.13.
Tu possides renes meos ex quo obtegebar in utero matris meae: non celata est
vis mea tibi ex quo factus sum in abdito, artificiose, confectus velut in imis
partibus terrae. Massam meam vident oculi tui, and in libro tuo omnia membra
mea sunt scripta ex quibus diebus for mabantur, cum nullum ex iis extaret: Thou
do possess my reins, from the time that I was covered in my mothers womb.
My strength is not hid unto thee, from the time that I was made, and was
artificially shaped, as it were, in the lower parts of the earth. Thine eyes do
behold the mass whereof I was made, and all my members were described and
delineated in the days that they were shaped or informed, when none of them
did visibly exist. And to this purpose it is said elsewhere, Job 33.4.
Spiritus Dei fecit me, and spiraculum omnipotentis vivificavit me: The Spirit
of the Lord made me, and the breath of the Omnipotent did vivifie me: That is,
First he reduced me into a mass of seed, and afterward did make it alive by
his breathing into it. Eccles.
And the wiseman, Ut ignoras quae sit via spiritus, and quomodo ossa
pinganturin ventre praegnantis; sic nescis opera Die quia est fabricator
omnium. As thou know not which is the way that the spirit moves, and how
the bones are shaped and made in the mothers womb; so art thou ignorant in the
works of the Lord, who has made and framed all things, etc. Whereby it is
manifest, that the Spirit of God operateth in the sperm, as well before the
emission of the seed into the womb, as afterward. This also is plainly
expressed by these words of Job, Nonne sicut lac fudisti me, and tanquam caseum
coagulasti me: Job 10.9.
cu^e and carne indu^sti me, ossibus and nervis compegisti me, cum vita
benignitatem exercu^stiergame, at visitatio tua praeservavit spiritum meum, at
ista recondisti in animo tuo. Novi haec apud te esse. Did thou not pour me
out like milk, and did thou not curdle me like a cheese? Thou did indue me
with skin and flesh, and compacted or joined me together with bones and sinews.
Thou did exercise thy benignity toward me, in giving me life, and thy
visitation has preserved my spirit. And yet have thou kept this secret in thy
heart. I know well that this is so with thee. In all which, this difficult
point appears to be fully deciphered and opened, as well touching the act of
generation, as in regard of the foresaid mystery, in the preservation and
continuation of the life of the Infant, as well in his mothers womb, as after
the birth thereof: For in this member, Sicut lac fudisti me, he seems to
argue, that the spermatick mass was well disposed and composed by the spirit
of life, of the which a man was afterward explicitly delineated and framed.
Then goes he forwards to the second degree in generation, Tanquam caseum
coagulastime, by which it appears, that the divine Spirit did thicken the
seed into a more solid substance like cheese, according unto that other saying
of Job, Memento quaeso quod sicut argillam fecisti me, etc. Job 10.9.
Remember that thou may me as clay, etc. Then he proceeds thus, Cute and
carne induisti me, ossibusque and nervis compegisti me, etc. And now in this
degree he comes, after the coagulation of the spermatick mass, unto the
complement of the particular human parts or members, of the which the external
man is made in the womb, as the spiritual image of the son was in the
arteriall seed of the father, before it was cast into the womb. By all which it
appears, that the divine Spirit did operate all this outward man in his own
person, and then to the vivification of that external man, so shaped out of
the elementary seed, he proceeds, thus* Cum vita benignitatem exercuisti erga
me; showing by this, that the corporal work being effected, and made fit to
lodge so noble and emperial a guest, as is the divine mental beam, namely, of
the builder of it, riding in a mundane vehicle, the lordly guest does
immediately possess it, and make it live, and move, and feel, according unto
that of the Apostle, Act. 17.
In him we live, move, and have our being* To conclude, after that Adam was by
God shaped out of a lump of earth, he breathed into it the spiracle of life,
and that mass was made a living creature, agreeing with the forementioned
place of Job, saying, The Spirit of the Lord made me, and the breath of the
Almighty did vivifie me; that is, the Spirit of God made both the external and
internal. Neither was that spiracle of life destitute of understanding, that
is to say, without the real beam of eternity; for it is said elsewhere, In
homine est spiritus, Job 9.
sed in spiratio Omnipotentis facit eum intelligere: In man is a spirit, but it
is the inspiration of the Almighty which makes him to understand. And for this
reason also is man-rightly said in Scripture to be framed after the image of
God. Was not the excellent artifice of this eternal Spirit well expressed by
Ezekiel, after it came from the four winds, and breathed upon the slain; Ecc^,
(says the Lord unto the dead bones) ego intromittam in vos spiritum ut
vivatis; Ezekiel. 13.
and dabo super vos nervos and succrescere faciam supra vos carnes, and
extendam in vos cutem, and dabo vobis spiritum and vivetis. Et dixit propheta
ex man^a^o Dei, A quatuor ventis veni, spiritus, and insuffla super interfectos
istos ut reviviscant, and ingressus est in eos spiritus and revixerunt. Behold,
I will put into you a spirit, and you shall live, and I will put on you
sinews, and I will make slesh to grow on you, and I will cover and extend on
you a skin, and I will give you a spirit, and you shall live. And the prophet
said according as God commanded him, Come, O spirit, from the four winds, and
breath upon these slain persons, that they may live again. And the spirit
entered into them, and hey lived again, etc. By the which file of speech we may
gather, first, That it was the divine virtue which fashioned out the external
man, before it had a living spirit; and then afterward, that the spirit of life
was breathed into the external man, from the catholic spirit of life in the
great world; for he said, Come O spirit from the four winds. And again, that
the world has a catholic spirit, by which it lives; for the four winds had
their breath and life from this one spirit, by the which the universal
sublunary element seems to live, and is changed from one complexion unto
another, and does most lively operate diversity of effects, in the compound
creatures of this lower region of the world; for experience does teach us, that
the common air is of an earthly nature when the North winds blows, and of a
choleric, when the East wind has dominion, etc.

Now touching the manner of the shaping out of the specific individual, it
may be demanded, why this catholic vivifying spirit of the world, being but
one, does bring forth every fruit or birth according unto his kind, and not
all one. I told you before, that each specific creature was radically created
in his kind, distinct and different from one another, according to the will of
the Creator, and was by the same spirit maintained and multiplied, evermore
reserving the shape of the species or kinds which was allotted him in his
creation; and it should seem, that God appointed, as it were, a certain secret
mold to fashion out the potentiall creature, before it came to act. And for the
better understanding hereof, we must know, that there are four spermatick
preparing vessels, namely, two and two on a side, whereof the one is a venall
vessel, and it issues out of the vena cava, and from hence comes the bodily
sperm, made of the refined subject of the four elements of the body, and is
therefore the principle or root of the Infants external or body, and it is
visible, and is called Sperma. And the other is an arteriall vessel, and this
is the wellspring of the inward man, for it is the invisible fire of life, and
it is called Semen, which when the mixtion of both is made, does dwell no
otherwise centrally in the visible sperm, then man's soul does in the body. We
must observe therefore, that as there are two vessels on a side, the one
spiritual, the other elementall, so these two in their descent toward the
resticles, do make by their subtle implication of the one with the other, that
admirable and pleasant web or plex to behold, which the Greeks do call
Ana^tomosis; the which embracing and secret weaving together of insensible
parts, is effected by the artifice of that great builder, not only (as the
Anatomists do think) because that the red and bloody seed may be made white,
but first, that it might divide the spermatick substance in the venall
vessels, and seminall substance in the arteriall, from the bloody mass as;
well natural, which ^loweth from the liver, as vital, which springs from
the heart: And then that by this Dedalian labyrinth, the seminall form, being
the microcosmicall heaven, may aptly, and according unto the specific
creatures true similitude, be mingled together, no otherwise then we observe
the form of a thing to be, by a natural mixtion perfused, and spread over all
his elementary substance. And without all doubt, the fabric of this Plexus or
Anastomosis is such, as is the impression of some notable Seal, the which in a
Man is Manlike, in a Lion is like a Lion, in an Eagle is after the shape of an
Eagle, and so according unto this impression, which is occult, and scar^ely
discerned by imagination, the sperm is formed after the manner of clay, and is
moistened with this seminary nature as with water; and by the virtue of that
divine spirit which dwells secretly in it, is made a living creature in the
womb. These two natures therefore are so tempe^ed together, according un^o the
law of this vivifying nature, and the semen or invisible spirit of the air, is
so agitated and moved by the divine nature, which moves in that spirit, no
otherwise then the air is with the spirit of the blower, that the bodily
visible sperm is shaped out, after the image of his created species or kind;
even as we see a Mole to make and frame out it self a house or dwelling place
under the earth. And this is the work of the secret spirit, after that this
compounded and well mixed substance is cast into the womb.

To conclude, all that we have spoken touching this animal subject, may easily
also be averred, and that without any offense of the vegetable kingdom; for the
whole plant or tree did yet lie hid complicitely in the seed or kernel, and by
the same reason is explicitly brought to lig^t, by the operation of the hid
and secret spirit of light and life which is in it. But I have ranged too far
from my mark, and that in a subject (I fear) which will prove offensive unto
such, as will not radically consider these things as they are indeed, but after
their sense and the wisdom of the world. I will therefore now approach unto the
main point of our Discourse, since that I have thus largely expressed unto you,
the two principal and radical pillars of Sympathy and Antipathy, namely, light
and darkness, or form and matter, being that all love, and therefore Sympathy,
proceeds from light; as contrariwise, all hatred, and consequently Antipathy,
must needs spring and arise from darkness, whose firstborn child was Litigium,
or Discord.

The Second BOOK.
Wherein those mystical Irradiations which spring occultly from the two
foresaid opposite Principles, Light and Darkness, with their Sympatheticall
and Antipatheticall effects; as also, the reason of each living, or
concupiscible Attraction of like natures, and odious and irascible Expulsion in
things of a contrary spirit, are detected and opened.
The Argument of this Second Book.
THe Author having by diligent enquiry, found out the essential root of
Sympathy and Antipathy, as is already expressed in the first Book, where he
proves it to be but one catholic or universal simplicity in essence, though
of a twofold property, quite opposite unto one or other in nature and
condition, no otherwise than Volunty is unto Nolunty: He thought it not
sufficient to gather by circumstances, and conclude, (...), namely, that it is
so. And therefore in this present Book he attempteth, with the tightest and
highest stretched nerves of his understanding, to enquire and search out the
(...), to wit, why, wherefore, and by what means, this double act is
disseminated in the Universe. Indeed he finds this last branch so difficult to
be found out by mortal capacities, that he esteems it no small masterpiece
in this his research; and for this reason is contented, to be directed or
guided into this difficult path of so profound a speculation, by the light or
Polestar of such sublime and rectified, both Theological and Cabalisticall
spirits, as have received the enucleation of so great a doubt, from that
highest spiritual emanation, who is the only revealer of deep and arca^e
mysteries, (as the Prophet Daniel and the wise Solomon does assure us) who,
forasmuch as (...), ^ssentiall Actor, both in Sympathy and Antipathy, is most
able to describ^ (...) ^orth this doubt, which men so earnestly hunt after, in
her liveliest colo^rs. By the observation therefore of the rules and axioms, as
well of the holy Scriptures, as learned Hebrew and Egyptian Rabbis, he has
gathered, That the eternal or divine and archetypicall world, which has
neither beginning nor end, does radically spring from one simple and catholic
fountain of Light, and does effuse a decuple emanation, endued with a ten-fold
property, into the Aeviall or Angelical world, which has its beginning from
the eternal one, but no end. And the aeviall world does in like manner pour
out these divine effluxions, or emanations of light, by angelical vehicles,
into the temporal world, which has both a beginning and an end. So that the
etheriall or celestial region of the temperall world, is made the store house
or treasury of the divine influences, from whence they are more or less,
according unto the will of him who sends them out, distilled down into the
elementary world, to effect his command or pleasure, either for the good or
welfare, or harm and damage, of the elementary creature. By this degradation
therefore he perceived, that God sent out one essential emanation by his word,
of a multiform and sundry condition, that things might vary and differ in this
world from one another, and that the variety of properties in the manifold
emanation, or flowing forth of the divine virtue, establishes an angelical
creature, or spiritual organ, of a differing act, whereby and in the which it
does operate centrally, by a diverse nature. And consequently he finds it
evident, that, being in the divine emanations there are properties of a
contrary fortitude, it must needs follow, that there are differing Angelical
spirits, which correspond in nature and condition unto each divine property,
under which they do administer in this world; so that by these spiritual
organs, or angelical instruments, the beams and brightness of the eternal
influence do descend, first, into the starry region of the temporal world, and
afterward are shoured down into the elementary spears, and penetrate even
into the bowels of the earth and dark abyss, to operate the will of that
eternal and radical essence which sent them forth; by which means, the spirit
of sapience is rightly said to be in the heavens above, and in the abyss
beneath, and to fill or replenish all, and lastly to operate all in all. And
lastly takes into his consideration some special particular object, well known
unto the world, that by the experimental enquiry, or searching out of his
hidden nature, he might practically maintain and ocularly prove that unto the
incredulous world, concerning the mystery of Sympathy and Antipathy, which
before he had only expressed and verified Theorically, or by speculation. The
Loadstone or mineral calamite therefore, is the mark at which he aims, or
subject which he electeth for this purpose, being that the effects of its
secret and occult properties, do most aptly correspond unto those of the
animal, vegetable, and mineral. Wherefore he prepares in this Book a way, by
the anatomization and ripping up the fardell of this mavelous stone's occult
nature, that thereby he might with the better speed make his entry unto such
experimental conclusions and comparisons, between the one and the other, as
shall be at large described and set forth in the third Book of this History,
that thereby the nature and condition of the animal may be discovered, and
demonstrated by that of the mineral. And lastly, for a conclusion unto this
Book, he shows the folly of such persons, as being masked or overlaid with
ignorance, do imagine, that any magneticall action can be effected essentially,
by the devils artifice or power; averring confidently, that the devil is able
to effect nothing, but by natural means, which also is rather ordained for the
use of man, then of the devil; and consequently, that man which uses the
natural creatures, which the devil has practiced on to work wickedness, is
no way culpable of Cacomagy, as vain men would have it, being that the
righteous use of the creature, for which God did ordain it, is not therefore to
be rejected, because the devil with his adherents do unrighteously abuse them
by converting them to mischief.

CHAP. I.
That Sympathy is the offspring of Light, as Antipathy has its beginning from
Darkness: The Etymology or true signification of both words; as also the
natures of them both, are herein described.

SInce the radical and essential Unity, with its two opposite branches or
properties, which are the characters of his Nolunty and Volunty, have in
general terms been thus evidently described unto you, with the two catholic
effects thereof, namely love and hatred, and all those passions as well
spiritual as corporal, which are derived from them, whether they be good or
bad, in respect of the creature that suffers: I think it now most fit, to
enter into our main discourse, and to anatomise the secret bowels of that
Sympathy and Antipathy, which is not only seen and made manifest in natural
but also supernatural creatures by effect. For no man of learning can be so
ignorant and blind, being instructed by daily experience, (which is the mother
even of very fools) as not to discern the hidden miracles both of heavenly and
earthly things, daily shining forth in Sympathy and Antipathy, that is, in
concords and discords, which are caused, by reason of a secret league or
friendship, which is betwixt them, even from their very mixtion in their first
creation? But before we presume to enter into this profound discovery, it will
be requisite to lay open the signification or Etymology of them both, that
thereby we may the better conceive their distinct natures and essences.

Sympathia is a Greek word, namely (...), and is derived from (...), id est,
una cum, or one with, and (...) that is, passio or passion, which p^oceedeth
from the Verb (...) i. e. patior, or I suffer, as Antipathia is composed of
(...) i. e. contra or against, and (...): So that the first imports a passion,
bred of unity, concord, and love, termed more properly compassion; and the
other an odible passion, moved by two resisting and fighting natures, of a
contrary fortitude: I may therefore rightly define Sympathy to be a consent,
union, or concord, between two spirits, shining forth, or having their radical
emanation from the selfsame or the like divine property. As for example: All
creatures that participate of those benign emanations or beams, which are sent
out from God, by his Angelical Organs into the orb of Jupiter, are from
thence emitted down to the earth, and are conferred upon a multitude of
creatures, that were created under this property; which, for that reason, do
shine forth and emit their beams unto one another here upon earth, lovingly and
joyfully, namely because they proceed all from one root, which descends unto
Jupiter: also such as are friends to Jupiter, or like unto him in condition,
send down influences in creatures, which are acceptable unto such as live, from
their nativities, and are sustained and have their complexionary faculties from
Jupiter, and therefore they send forth beams of friendship or benignity unto
one another, as are also Venus, etc. But contrariwise, where the influences
which are adverse in property, or of an opposite divine emanation, are sent down
unto the Planet Mars, which is enemy to Jupiter, and from thence are poured out
on creatures beneath, there will be ill and unwelcome encounters made between
the secret emissions of those creatures beams: So that one by a natural
instinct does seek to fly and escape the encounters of the other, or to resist
and fight against the other, as shall more largely and plainly be expressed
unto you hereafter. But because the general cause of all Sympathy and
Antipathy, is a hidden and secret emanation, or shining forth by emission of
beams from one creature unto another, it will be most requisite for us, to
unloose the fardle of this profound business, that we may the plainlier behold
and contemplate the fountain and root of all beams and eradiations in
general, and thereby unfold and lay open the mystical reason of their
difference, and follow their extensions, even from the root, unto the trun^k,
and from it unto the boughs and branches, and from those branches, to descend
even unto the individual twigs, which nourish and foster an infinity of
leaves, and bring forth fruit in abundance.

CHAP. II.
How and by what Attributes or properties the Hebrew Rabbis, and profoundest
Cabalists do prove, tha^ contrariety of natures does proceed from one eternal
Essence, as from the root of al things.

IT is most certain, that as there are an infinity of creatures of diverse
natures, in the universal machin; So also every one of them was variously
first created, and then generated and maintained after generation, even until
the day of their corruption, by sundry celestial influences, or many thousand
of varieties of beams, descending from above. And therefore the wisest amongst
the Cabalisticall Rabbis affirm: Quod non sit ulla planta aut herba inferius,
cui non sit stella in firmamento, quae percutiat eam and dicat ei, Reuchlin. de
Art. cab. lib. 3.
Cresce: That there is not any plant or herb here beneath, which has not a
Star in the firmament, to beat on it with his influence, and as it were to say
unto it, Increase or muliply. Neither do the Scriptures appear to be repugnant
unto this their opinion, as hereafter shall plainly, in his convenient place,
be expressed. But because the radical indication of this matter, requires a
more profound speculation, it will be most necessary, for the Reader's better
edification or instruction, to make a diligent inquisition after the depth of
this Mystery, namely, first to discover how all Creation was effected, by the
sending forth of the beams of God's eternal Light, and whether that Emanation
be of one or diverse and manifold, in property. I told you and prooved
manifestly before, that all things were in the beginning created by one
eternal Spirit of Wisdom, which was sent forth from the infinite Fountain of
Light, in the shape of an emanation, eradiation or effluxion, to inform and
inact all things explicitly, which before were contained complicitly in the
divine puissance of that everlasting Unity, which in it self is all in all.
Sap. 7.
I prooved it by these express places in Scripture: Solomon calls this holy
Spirit of discipline the vapor of God's Virtue, and the sincere emanation and
effluxion of his brightness, and the splendour or beams of his Divine Light, and
the mirror without all spot of his goodness. Joh. 1.8. Joh. 1. Eccles. 1.24.
Prove. 8.
And St. John says that in the Word is the life of all things, and that this
Spirit was Light in which was no darkness, and that by it all things were made,
and without it nothing was made. And the son of Syrach: That it came forth of
the mouth of the Most High. And Solomon, That it was with IEHOVA in the
beginning of all his ways, in the creation; and was that holy Spirit whereby
be composed or made all things in the Creation: and therefore it is apparent,
that it was by the emanation or sending forth of the catholic or universal
beam of divine Light, that all particular things were diversely framed, shaped,
and animated, and that by a many of streamings forth of more particular beams
of light, proceeding by multiplication from the root unto the trunck or body,
namely from the Unity, fountain or head, unto the general emanation, which may
rightly be compared unto the body of a tree, forasmuch as from it all boughs,
twigs, leaves and fruit do spring: and as in this progression the trunck of the
tree does immediately issue from the root, Reuchlin. lib. 3. de Art. cabal.
and yet is continued with the root, which is the beginning; so the divine
emanation in like manner proceeds directly from Ensoph or the fountain or
root of infinity, by the way of emanation not divided or separated from his
eternal Original: and by reason of this his emanation, the Spirit is said, to
be the first created before all things, as the trunck before the boughs, twigs,
leaves or fruit. So that in respect of his essential existence he is eternal;
but in regard of his emanation into the world, he is, said to be aeviall, that
is, to have a beginning without end, and therefore becomes the head and Prince
of all the aeviall world, I mean the Angelical crea^ures. We proceed therefore
in the progression and multiplication of this universal emanation, thus: From
the trunck of the tree issues the general, special, and individual
branches, whereof the most strongest (after the trunck) are all arms of the
body, the next boughs, then twigs, and lastly the leaves, etc. To this we
compare, in our Angelical or aeviall world, the diverse stations of the Angels,
assigned unto them according unto their dignity and riches, in the divine
influences, which they receive from the root or fountain of Light, by the
mediation of their body Christ Jesus. And for this reason it is said, that, He
is the Image of the inv^sible God, Colos. 1.13.
the first begotten of all creatures: for in him are ma^e all things, both in
heaven and earth, as well visible as invisible, whether they are Thrones, or
Dominations, or Potestates, all by him and in him are made, and he is before
all, and all consist in him. So that all Angels do no otherwise proceed
immediately from him, and are continuate with him, than the branches of a Tree
proceed from the body thereof; but as we see, that the greater arms of the
Tree are nearer in distance unto the trunck, and therefore are more
substantial, and strong, and beautiful, than the rest; so are these Angels of
the Imperial or supercelestiall heaven nearer to the body, to wit, the
eve^lasting stream of light, and therefore more rich and abundant in divine
light, and that by degrees and order, according as they are nearer the face of
the divine essential in^^uence, that bestows that most excellent light and
glory on them, to deck and adorn them with so perfect a formal beauty and
existence. And as we see, that each main arm of the tree has a dimension in
longitude, in the which as it depa^teth from the body of the tree, it waxes
lesser and lesser; so each of the nine Orders of Angels are of a less
proportion of light than other, and their pre-eminence in light is ever more
diminished by little, as it is remote from the body that gives it that light
and life. Then as we see the lesser boughs, which by a subdivision do proceed
from those arms of the tree, do immediately spring out of them, but have a
place di^^inguished from them, although they are continued, and no way
disjoynted or separated from them, either in substance or essence: So also the
Olympic or Aetheriall Angels, have their lights and souls poured out from the
Imperial diversely, and that according unto several measures; and again^, they
send forth their beams or b^ight efflu^nces from the starry Orbs, which they
possess and illuminate, unto the elementary spirits, which have dominion over
the winds, with their legion^, which we compare unto the many twigs which
spring out of the said boughs: for as the twigs are small in substance in
regard of the bough, and yet are continuate unto the bough, and have all one
natural life; so those Angels are not so illuminated as the Olympic Spirits,
as also the Olympic Spirits are not so bright and affluent in divine riches,
as those angelical Intelligences which approach the excellently-bright throne
of Eternity. All this in effect we may collect from the Fathers of the Church,
(for St. Dionys. says) That an Angel is the image of God, Dionys. de Divines
Nom. lib. 6.
and the shining forth of his hidden light, a mirror pure and most bright,
without spot, without wemm, and without defiling. And for this cause he calls
the Angels, Algamatha, that is, m^st clear Mirr^rs, rece^ving the light of God;
arguing the^eby, that they are the images of the catholic Emanation, Wisd. 7.
from whence they spring. For Scriptures say, that the Spirit of wisdom is the
brigh^nesse of the eternal light, a glass or m^rro^ of the majesty of God,
without ^pot, and the image of his Goodness. And Barthol^m^w says, That an
Angel takes his hidden light from God by influence, Barthol. lib. 6.
and sends it forth unto those Angels which are of a lower order or
condition. And Austin and Damascens say, that Ange^ls are intellectual lights,
receiving their light from the first light. Again, Ba^thol^m^w says, that they
are called Gold, by reason of the beams which they send forth. Also they are
called Fiery Rivers, by reason of the bright influences which they receive, and
send forth to those of a lower region. Also St. Dennis says, that the higher
Orde^s receive most plentiously the light of God, which afterward they impart
by influence unto such Spirits as are lower. And this Law is observed in the
O^der of Angels, namely, that some be the first, and some the second, and some
the last. For this cause therefore the SERAPHINS are Angels, so called, because
they are said to burn and be set on fire, by reason of their immediate presence
before the face of God. But letting all these testimonies pass, we are
instructed by many places of Scripture, that Angels are bright ^^ning lights;
that they are above in the third heaven, attending on the Throne; that there
are seven which are Presidents in heaven, as there are seven Candlesticks which
import the seven Planets; and that there is one great Ange^ that is head or
master over them all, which held the seven stars in his hand. And that there
are four Angels which have dominion over the four winds, Apoc. 4.
who have power to hurt the earth and the seas: And that they are commanded and
overruled by one great Angel, who bears the sovera^gn seal of preservation.
And that there is a Prince of da^knesse, who is that great opposite spirit
which has dominion in the air. Ephesians. 6.
And that there are as well deadly, as hurtful Principalities, Potestates, and
Governors in this world, which are adverse unto Gods creatures, as good
Angels, or Angels of light, which are friends unto them. To conclude, the
multiplicable fruit or seeds we compare unto the stars of heaven, and the
leaves unto the creatures below, which have their natures and mutations, from
those internal or spiritual organicall agents. So that we may see, that
Eternity gives life unto eviality, and eviality unto temp^rality. And as we
see that in the eternal world, the First Person adds a being unto the
Second, and the Third proceeds from them both; so the aeviall or Imperial
Angels, pour down the influences of life into the Olympicall or heavenly
ones; and the Olympicall or starry spirits do send them down on the Elementary.
In the same manner, the Imperial Spirits are the soul or life unto the Starry
or Aetheriall heaven, which animateth by his influences the Elementary, and the
earth is animated by them all.

Thus therefore we see, that God operateth by his divine organs variously, all
in all, which being well understood in the first place, we may boldly conclude,
that also all the peculiar angelical lights, do proceed from one and the
self-same catholic Emanation; and consequently we find, that the diversity and
opposition of their natures, proceed from the multiplicity of properties, which
is in that general emanation, proceeding from the throne o^ God or Unity
before all beginnings. And this is the reason, that this eternal creating
Spirit of wisdom is termed by Solomon, Wisd. 7
Unicus and mult^plex, One and manifold; One (I say) in regard of his essence,
and manifold, in regard of the multiplicity of its properties, by which it
works variously, and sometimes by opposition in the world. But all this is
excellently expressed by the learned Cabalisticall Rabbis, in the description
of their Numericall or Sephiroticall Tree. You must therefore understand, that
as the mystical Theologians did observe but ten special names or attributes,
which were ascribed unto God in the Hebrew Bible, a proprietate; so they did
perceive, that each of these did import a diverse operation to be effected; so
that the Hebrews did call upon this or that Name of God, mentioned in the holy
Text, according unto the nature of the several necessity they had of Gods
assistance. And though they collected by the word of God, that as the Divinity
or Godhead is but one internal immutable essence, and therefore has but one
only essential title to be expressed by, namely, Tetragrammaton, or Jehova,
which is his unseparable name, forasmuch as it is appropriated unto him only,
for it includes (as Rabbi Moses the Egyptian has it) and argues by a pure
signification, the substance of the Creator, without any respect or
participation that it has unto the creature; yet nevertheless they found,
that the other names ascribed unto him in Scripture, do note or signify God, as
he participateth with his creatures, or as he has relation unto things that
are created, and consequently are known by the effect of his works. As touching
his essential name, it was had amongst the Hebrews or Jews in that high
esteem and reverence, that it was never uttered but in the Sanctuary, and that
by such Priests, as were consecrated and made holy only unto the Lord; and
then it was pronounced in that Benediction which the High Priest uttered in the
day of fasting. For this reason that name was had in that honorable regard,
that it was never rashly spoken or uttered, because (as the said Rabbi Moses
says) denotat Deum esse and fuisse super omnem essentiam quatenus, antequam
ullares esset, existeret: I^ imports, that God is and was above any essence,
forasmuch as he did exist before that any thing was existent in the world. And
this was that precious Name of God* which Moses was so desirous of him to hear
and know, when he received from him this answer, (...), Hoc est nomen meum in
aeternum, IEHOVA is my everlasting name; Which name is so pure and simple, that
it cannot be articulated, or compounded, or truly expressed by man's voice. As
for the other denominations appropriated unto God, they do not express him
according unto his Essence, but only in respect of his works, (as is said
namely, as he appears all in all, and existeth in all things. We must
understand therefore, for our better instruction, that seeing the Divine Nature
is and operateth in all created things, as also without them, (for he is the
center of all his creatures, whose circumference is not to be found) in this
regard his essential name Tetragrammaton is the common agent in every bough or
branch, of the Sephiroticall or Cabalisticall Tree, and has the dominion or
pre-eminence over all the trunck or body of that Tree; and consequently all the
other ten names are assigned unto it, as having relation unto the properties or
the effects of his multiplicity of virtues or actions, in one individual
essence, and therefore all the rest are subject unto it, and are wholly
comprehended within it, for it contains the property as well of Nolunty as
Volunty, of privation as position, of death as life, of cursing as blessing, of
evil, in regard of the creatures, as good, (though nothing is ideally bad in
him) of hatred and discord, of love and concord, and consequently of Sympathy
and Antipathy. All these opposite effects are testified by Scriptures to spring
from one essential fountain, S^p. 16.13.
forasmuch as it comprehends the power of life and death, and induces unto
the brinck of the grave, and reduces or brings back again unto life. It is
IEHOVA that is light, life, and heal^h, and it is he that ^fflicte^h with
darkness, Psalm. 27.1. 1 Samuel 2.6. Psalm. 145* Psalm. 9.6. Isai. 45. Job 5.
death, and sickness. It is IEHOVA that is gracious, full of misericord, and
that extends his benignity and mercy unto all his creatures. And it ^s he
that is angry and severe against nations, and does destroy the wicked. It is he
that reprehendeth in his anger, and chastises in his displeasure. And it is he
that is gracious and the only Savior. It is he that wounds and heals
again. It was IEHOVA that ^^rea^ne^ to send vengeance, vexation, and death on
the dis^b^dient. It is he that causes the plague, the consumption, the burning
feavour, the leprosy, s^abs and bo^ches, ^me^od^, and u^cers of Egypt. It is
IEHOVA, that strikes with madness and blindness. It is he which ca^seth fear
and a trembling heart, Deuteronomy. 27.
yea, showereth down sorrow, vexation, timidity and sad melancho^ly as in
Deuteronomy we read of, and consequently produces antipathy and discord. And
contrariwise, Exodus 23.25.
It is IEHOVA that bestows bened^ctions or b^^ssings on his creatures. He
blesses the bread and drink that the creature tastes, for refections cause;
so that they preserve, and do not destroy. And it is he that removes and
takes away all diseases, banisheth sterility from the earth, and multiplies
the days of his creatures, and by consequence is the cause of loving Sympathy
and concord. Isai. 45.6.
To conclude, it is IEHOVA, the great God of gods, that formed light, and
created darkness, made peace or love and concord, and produced evil^ and
contention or trouble, as the Prophet teaches us. Now forasmuch as this
essential Unity did bring to light these contrary effects, by opposite
properties, therefore did the secret Theologians ascribe unto him diverse
general names, which they gather out of the holy Writ, and are approp^iated
unto him* according unto the effects which follow them, whereof some incline to
darkness and privation, others to light and position; some to severity, and
others argue the fruits of his benignity. Some by a deprivation of his act,
which happens by a reflection of his beams in himself, produce the effects of
darkness, namely, an essential frigidity, and stupidity, immobility,
congelation, contraction, and^. Others by an actual emanation from the center
unto the circumference, do generate the effects of light, as are motion, heat,
dilatation, subtiliation, etc. I will therefore rehearse or reckon up unto you,
those divine Attributes which are ascribed unto the sacred Essence, in order as
they are numbered in the Cabalisticall Tree, from the which the divine beams of
different natures do descend, to accomplish the various will or volunty of him,
that sends them forth into the world, to act and produce a multiplicity of
effects.

The first name therefore of the Divine Attribute is Ehieh, and this Attribute
imports the fountain or original of all creatures, and the foundation of
misericord and clemency, because the effluxion or eradiation that springs
from this head, is full of grace, and spares all; for it argues the Father of
pity and misericord, and the God of all consolation, unto whom our Savior
bids us pray in this form, Our Father which art in heaven, etc. And hereupon it
is elsewhere said, that the Father ^udgeth no man. Again, it is the part of a
Father to deal favorably and mercifully with his children; so God under this
Attribute is esteemed to be the Father of all, and is therefore benign and
merciful unto his creatures, according to that of Solomon, Thy creatures might
fall and perish by the persecution of thy justice, and be ventilated or blasted
by the spirit of ^hy puissance. But thou have disposed all in number, Sap. 11.
weight, and measure; for that thou can do much was ever present with thee.
But thou have therefore pity on all, because thou can do all things. And
thou dissemblest the sins of men, that they might wax wise and amend; for thou
lov^st all things that are, and thou do abhor nothing that thou have made,
neither d^dst thou ordain any thing to hate it. Could any thing exist which
thou would not have to be? or could it be preserved, if thou did not send
it the means of its being? But thou sparest all things because they are thine,
O God, which art the lover of souls. Lo this is the fruit of the name Ehieh,
namely, to create and beget all things as a Father, and to have a care of their
preservation in his paternall affection. For this reason therefore, it is the
President of the Capital or radical bright port, gate, branch, or numeration,
called Cheter or Corona, which is the root of the whole Tree, by which, and
through which, the clear beams, or lucid and sacred emanation of JEHOVA, in his
creating effability, or positive volunty, does descend unto the creation of all
things. For Ehieh signifies the father and root of all creation.

The second cognomination of JEHOVA in the divine numeration, or sphericall
Tree, is IAH, which imports the blessed and gracious emanation of the world,
and extraction of the humid or created nature, namely the waters out of the
womb or bowels of the dark and deformed Chaos: and therefore the Cabalisticall
port, by which these active and all-operating beams do descend into the world,
is called Hochma in Hebrew, Sapientia in Latin, Wisdom in English. And Solomon,
meaning of this Divine Emanation, Prove. 8.
speaks thus: When JEHOVA did frame and fashion the heavens, when he did
establish the fountains of the Abyss, when he gave limits unto the Sea, and did
appoint a foundation unto the Earth, I Wisdom was with him as a helper to
compass all things. And we must note that this name Jah, whose influence or
emanation is Sapientia or Wisdom, appears sometime to be conversant as well
about the effects of severity, as clemency, although it happen but seldom. And
therefore JEHOVA said of the Angel, which was appointed for the conducting of
the Israelites through the Desert. Exodus 25.
Ne exacerbes eum; quia non feret defectionem vestram, quoniam nomen meum est
in eo: Do not displease him; for he will not endure your defections or errors:
Eccles.
for my name is in him. Whereby it is evident, that this princely Angel, which
is taken for this Emanation from Jah elsewhere, has a double property; but his
greatest inclination is to preserve the creature which it made.

The third cognomination is Elohim: and the bright port through which the
reflecting beams of his property do stream forth, is called in Hebrew Binah,
in Latin Prudentia, in English Prudency. And this name Elohim, according to
the Cabalisticall interpretation, does signify fear, and terror, because they
have observed that by this property or attribute of God, Archang. cabal. de
dog. cab.
there happens unto each world, punishments, and stratagems: for under this
denomination JEHOVA does exercise his power, as well for the sudden alteration
of the world, as unto the punishment of the wicked. And therefore the Spirits
which do receive this divine influence, are called Been Elohim the sons of
Elohim, which are his instruments in the Elementary world, for the effecting of
his will in this property. By virtue whereof, also the commotions of the waters
were made in the first creation, and the production of them out of the dark
Chaos: which was not effected, but by the extreme contradiction and oppugnancy
which happened between the fire and the water, and consequently not without the
dreadful dissension and war of the Elements, causing terror and many
thundering commotions in the dark abyss or deformed waters, when each word
Fiat was divinely uttered: For it was by the Spagericall or high Chymicall
virtue of the word, and working of the Spirit, that the separation of one
region from another, and of the distinction of one formal virtue from another,
was effected or made: of the which business the Psalmist means where he
says: Psalm. 36.6.
By the Word of the Lord the heavens were made, and by the Spirit from his
mouth each virtue thereof.

Ye may therefore perceive, that the whole power of the Cabalisticall Tree, is
comprehended in these three first branches, no otherwise then the typical
world is comprehended in the Archetype, which consists in a triple property,
most aptly referred unto the Trinity of Persons: For therein the intelligible
world does import, that which seven does in this material and watery world:
For 2 is the root of Matter, as 3 is the root of Form. As therefore 1 is the
formal root unto three, and the material root unto 2: So verily is 2 the
material root unto 4; and therefore 4, which is the Symbol or character of
matter, and 3, the figure of form, being added together, produce the universal
substance of the world, consisting of form and matter: we must therefore with
diligence observe, that those three first denominations, do belong unto these
properties, whereby JEHOVA did create the three first days work, wherein the
whole world, with his heavens and elements were cr^^^ed, and received their due
positions.

The seven following branches of the Sephiroticall Tree, do appertain unto
those various alterations or mutations, as well propitious as unfortunate, unto
the creatures, which do befall them in this world, being thus completed and
finished by the virtuous properties of the three precedent emanations or
streamings forth of the divine beams. Wherefore the fourth branch of this
Tree, has for his President the gentle and merciful attribute of God or
JEHOVA, called EL; whose bright port, numeration, or channel, by which it
pours forth its beams into the world, is for that cause styled Chesed in
Hebrew, which in Latin is Clementia, in English Clemency, because the divine
influence which shines out of it is full of grace, benignity, life and
goodness, as by the consequence it shall appear. For it is the fountain, from
the which the good and fortunate Planet Jupiter receives his benevolent
Emanantion or beams of life: this name therefore Moses used, for the healing of
Miriam, when she was made leprous for her disobedience, saying: El na rapha na
la: Deus gratiae, quaeso sana illam.

The fifth name, which is assigned unto the first branch of the Cabalisticall
Tree, is called Elohim Gibbor, and it is an attribute which sends malevolent
and unwholesome influence down unto the creatures, making disturbances and
troubles in the world, by Thunders, Lightnings, Comets, Wars, Contentions,
Anger, Pestilence, and hot diseases, etc. And the celestial magazine of this
influence is the Planet Mars: for this reason therefore the port or channel,
through which this fiery influx does immediately stream forth, is called in
Hebrew Gehurah, which imports power, force, violence.

The next branch or numeration being the sixth, has for its Lord, the name
Eloach, whose influxion or emanations are full of life and golden beauty, and
therefore the trunck or port by which it passes, is termed Tiphereth in
Hebrew, which notes, Grace, ornament, beauty, and delight. By the golden
emanation which flows from this channel, the visible Sun of this world
receives his bright beauty, and is adorned with that admirable vivifying
virtue, which by effect does manifest and testify it self unto the whole
world. And this is that Grace and ornament of which Job means, when he says:
Spiritu suo ornavit coelos: He adorneth the heavens with the beauty of his
Spirit.

The seventh divine cognomination or attribute is JEHOVA Seboath, which is as
much as to say, the God of Armies, the God of jubilation, rest, and perfection;
and therefore the port or channel, by which his beams or irradiations do
pass, is called Netzeth, which signifies triumph and victory: as also Justice,
Charity, and Love: and therefore the influence of generation, and
multiplication, and delight issues from this emanation, which makes the
rolling Globe of the celestial Venus his storehouse.

The eighth name is Elohim Saboth or Deus exercituum, the God of Armies, and
his port or channel by the which he sends forth the influxes or beams of
this his property into his celestial treasury, which is the Globe of Mercury,
is called by them Hod, or praise, honor and formosity; by which afterward he
operateth in this property, by his will on the earth by changeable and mutable
effects.

The ninth, Elohai, that is the Living God, or Sadal, that is, the Omnipotent
God: and his numeration, or the gate or channel by which he sends down his
bright influences, is called Jesod, that is to say, the basis or foundation,
Redemption or rest; and these are received by the Sphere of the Moon, which is
as were the celestial earth: unto the which all the influences in general do
fall, and this is the reason that it is subject to so many and diverse
mutations. The effects whereof, as well to generation as corruption, is
observed on the Earth and in the Sea.

The last name or attribute is Adonai, or Dominus; and his port or gate by
which he sends forth his illuminations or the active beams of his nature, is
termed by the Hebrews Mulchut, that is, Regnum or Imperium. And this
numeration imports severity and servility unto the creatures, through Gods
anger and wrath; and his influxion is directly into the Elementary world.

By which collections and observations of the wisest Rabbis, we find that in
these Ten general properties of God, signified by the ten attributes unto the
Divine Essence, all things in the world, be they esteemed good or evil; or
positive and primitive; or concordant, and aimeable, or discordant, or odious;
or in a word either occultly or manifestly opposite, or else concurring in
nature or quality unto an other, do originally descend from this fount^^^ of
Unity: which though it be one in essence, is nevertheless manifold in property,
and that property is therefore diverse and altering, according to the
multiplicity of Volunty in the Father, or fountain that sent it out, according
unto whose mind all things as well concordant as disagreeing, are ordained both
in heaven and in earth, and that by a multiplicity of special emanations of
different qualities, from that eternal general catholic effluxion, and every
of those specific emanations do branch themselves again into an infinity of
individuals, even as ten may be multiplied, in infinitum; So that every one of
those specific properties, do shine forth from the Star in heaven, as well fix
as erratick, which is their receptacle or storehouse, unto an infinity of
earthly and watery creatures, which are generated or do grow upon the earth,
and under the earth, according unto the influences of those Planets and fixed
Stars over creatures, be they animal, vegetable, or mineral. And the reason
why the Divinity, created or sent forth one specific eradiation, so contrary
unto another, was, as well for the preservation as destruction of the
creatures: For as the last effect of each of these contrary emanations or
radious e^fluences, is the Creation, or generation, and preservation of
creatures of their own nature and condition: So also are they to be applied,
either for the preservation or restoration of the decaying creatures, namely
when we apply any venomouse simple, either animal, vegetable, or mineral, to
expel a dangerous disease, or to poison a nature, which is sound; as, in the
animal kingdom, is the venomouse Viver, Scorpion, Toad, Spider, or blistering
Cantharides; and, in the vegetable Kingdom, the Somniferous and stupifying
Poppy or Opium; the searching and inflaming or burning Flammula and Euphorbium;
the fretting Scamony; the vomiting Groundsell, D^ffod^ll, Assera Bacca,
Bears-foot, Titimall, and the venomouse Aconite. In the mineral rank, the
corroding Asnick; the quick, peircing, and infecting Quicksilver and
Sub^imary; the destroying Resalgar; the vomiting Antimony, and such like, which
have all as well the property, to take away dangerous diseases, as to bring
them: For in some cases they take away dolorous maladies, and in other some,
they bring them quickly, and hasten on destruction upon the creature: So that
all things, in some cases, both wound and destroy, and in othersome they heal
and cure; yet unto him, that sent them the beams and irradiations of their form
from some of his particular properties, they appeared all good, being they were
ordained not only to heal in his benignity, but also to destroy in his
severity; and to conclude, to effect his will one way or another, even as it
pleases him, Sap. 11*
who only works essentially all in all. And therefore Solomon says: Could
any thing exist which thou would not have to be? So that all is good unto
God, although unto wicked men which suffer them, they may appear bad. Oper a
Domini universa, Ecclus. 29.21. Ecclus. 39.30.
(says the Wiseman) bona valde: All the works of God are very good. Bona bonis
crea a sunt ab i^itio, sic nequissimis bona and mala: Good things were created
originally for good men, but to evil men they were in effect good and evil.
There are Spirits created for vengeance, and in their fury they execute their
torments: in the time appointed they pour out their virtue, and effect his
fury that made them, namely water, hail, the teeth of beasts, as of the
Scorpion and Serpent, etc. All these rejoice to execute his Commandments upon
the Earth, etc. Even for this cause therefore, namely for the secret opposition
of natures in the world, originally proceeding from the streams of those
variable properties, which radically do spring from that one incomprehensible
Fountain; Love and Hatred, and consequently Sympathy and Antipathy were created
to justle, and as it were shoulder one another in this world, as well generally
under the titles of Light and Dark, as particularly in that friendship and
hatred, which is observed and testified in Scriptures, to be first between the
very Angels themselves; then amongst the Stars which receive these opposite
natures from the Angels; and thirdly, amongst the winds and Elements, which
have their spirit of contention from the Stars: and lastly, amongst those
compound creatures, which are composed of those Elements, by the active spirits
of the winds. But because amongst all other opposite qualities in the world,
this Sympathy and Antipathy are most occult and hidden; (For whereas we can
produce the reason of contrariety of Elements, from their manifest qualities,
namely cold, heat, moisture, or drought; in and for this occult opposition, we
find not distinctly any such elementary ground) we will dive so far as our
steril capacity will give us leave, into the bowels of this Mystery.

CHAP. III.
Here it is demonstrated, that the occult action as well of Sympathy as
Antipathy in creatures, proceeds from Angelical irradi^tions or shinings
forth; that is, by the emission or ejaculation of their secret beams, the one
against the other, out of such creatures as are created or generated under
their Dominions.

SUch as are well seen in the Mystical Theology, Reuchlin. lib. 3. de Art.
cabal.
affirm, that Angels are all of one kind, in respect of their own creation,
though the one is more or less illuminated, according to the importance of the
office, whereunto they are called, or the Creator's will and mind is to employ
them. For we must consider, that the Angels are the immediate organs, by which
and through which, the Eternity effects his will, and pronounces his word
Fiat, after that his will is decreed in himself. Psalm. 104.4.
For that very reason David says, Angeli Dei validissimi robore, efficientes
verbum ejus, a scultantes voci ejus, ministri ejus facientes p^acitum ej^s. The
angels of God are most strong in power, and do or effect his word, and l^s^en
unto his voice; they are his min^sters, to perform his will and leisure. So
that it is evident, that nothing is effected in the world, be it in heaven or
in earth, but it is performed by one of these organicall spirits. And therefore
Reuc^^ne says, That all bodies, as well celestial as terrene, Reuclin:
have by the ordinance of God allotted them certain spiritual directors, and
rulers of their virtues, and presidents of their operations, namely, as well
they which are reasonable, namely, Man; as unreasonable, to wit, the Stars of
heaven, and earthly creatures, both animals, vegetables, and minerals. And
therefore Archangelus the Cabalist, In com. in cab. Dag.
makes many degrees in the offices of Angels; For some (says he) do stand
before the divine tribunal of God, still praising him; some administer unto
him, and unto us also; some have the custody of the watches of the night, of
which CHRIST makes mention, If he came in the second or th^^d watch of the
n^ght, etc. Some have the government of the four quarters of the year, and
these are Presidents over the four stations of the Sun; others are ordained
rulers over the seven Planets; and some do dispose of the influences and
virtues of the fixed Stars, and twelve Signs, of which St. Jo^^ does seem to
make mention, saying, That in the twelve gates, that is, the twelve Signs,
which (as Plato says) are the ports of heaven, are the twelve Angels: Some are
tu^elar Angels, and are ordained for the creatures safeguard; some have the
custody of beasts, others of plants, others of precious stones and mineralls.
All these, the secret Theologians and wisemen do affirm; averring withal, that
God works all in this inferiou^ world, by the administration of Angels. And
therefore St. Paul says, That all are administering spi^^ts, sent to effect
that office. Thus far Archangelus. And again, Reuclin argues, That the
influxion of angelical beams from the stars, must be diverse and of sundry
natures, because that the Angels do not by their voluntary action, move the
celestial Orb always after one manner, though by reason of the violent
motion, it does move daily by a diurnall motion from East to West.

But what needs many words, when the progression of the foresaid Cabalisticall
work, does open and discover all the my^ticall operation, and variety of
action, in the Angels. For if once the ten names of God, which produce ten
diverse emanations, of different conditions, which are sent by the ten foresaid
numerations, or sephiroticall ports or channells, do breed contrary effects,
both in heaven above, and in earth beneath, it follows by the foresaid
testimony of the Prophet David, that there must be so many angelical vehicles,
to conduct them into the lower world, as there are Cabalisticall ports and
channells; and consequently as many diversities of the divine properties,
proceeding from the variety of his will, as also varieties of vehicles to
conduct them. For I would have each judicious Reader to conceive, that the
Hebrew Doctors did judge of the nature and property of each Name or attribute
ascribed unto God in holy Writ, by that self-same effect which it produced,
after the uttering or expressing of it therein, no otherwise than the
Philosopher uses to judge of the nature and property of the complexion by the
aspect of the Physiognomy; or as by the signs which he beholds in the
heavens, he determines of their effects, to wit, of rain, winds thunder, etc.
namely, because such presages in the heavens, do use to bring forth such and
such effects. Now (as I have proved before) if it be the divine influence of
light, which animateth and informs each angelical spirit, it must needs
follow, that every one of these angelical conductions, or vehicles of these
influences must have also a diverse property; because the formal influences
which do animate these intelligences which carry them, are different* and
therefore they will be naturally prone and inclined to operate the will of the
Creator, according unto the nature of emanation, or beams of that property,
which it receives from his proper port.

As concerning therefore those angelical receptacles, or organs, which are
ordained to receive the diverse kinds of divine influences, or irradiations, I
purpose briefly to express them in the first place, for the better
understanding of the Reader, with the channel they do belong unto; and then
the order of Angels which does first receive them. After this I will set down
the celestial Orbs or Stars, into the which, as unto their particular
storehouses, they are conveyed. And lastly, I will speak somewhat of the
effects that these influences, which are conveyed down from their starry
treasury, into the elementary world, do effect, both in the air, seas, or
water and earth. Touching therefore the Names or attributes of God, as also
their emanations, or streaming forth of beams, with their peculiar properties,
I have in few words written them, in the precedent Chapter; as for the rest, I
would have the Reader to know, that those ten several divine emissions of ten
several lights, out of so many Sephiroticall or Cabalisticall spouts or
channells, into the vast cavity of the world, to accomplish the will of the
Creator, have their particular angelical waggoners or conductors; for in this,
the best Theosophers agree, that as the upper Order of the Angels, do receive
their light and bright emanations immediately from God, so do they emit them
and manifest them unto the inferior Orders; and for this reason they are
called Mirrours, because they receive their light from the face of God, or his
eternal catholic emanation, which (as I have proved before) is the head and
fountain of all these Angelical lights. And again, as the secret Theologians
have, by their serious observation of the holy Bible, espied ten distinct
properties, as also ten diverse cognominations, or Names of God, appropriated
unto them; so they perceived, that there was a singular Angel appointed to
receive each of these emissions of beams, endued with the selfsame property or
condition, as the lights which they receive do possess, forasmuch as these
Spirits do live, and are animated by them, being that as the external of the
Angel is a spiritual air, so the internal of it is the formal irradiation
or emanation, which is according unto Gods will emitted into it. And this is a
general note amongst all the secret Theologians, unto whom Bartholomaeus and
St. Dennis do adhere, touching this point, that no Angel can intermeddle with
another business, or take upon him the work that belongs unto another,
except it be such inferior Angels, as are destinated to serve under their
Archangels in the same function or property, as shall be said more at large.

We must therefore understand, that the office of the great and catholic
Angel Mitattron, was so universal, that it was employed first about the
information of the whole world, and the division of light from darkness* as
also, for the vivifying of the watery spirit of the world, and the diurnall
rouling about of the heavens: And therefore it is said, and not without a good
cause, That it was the divine and general Emanation, that is the eternal
Sapience, which for this reason is said to be created before all things, by
whom afterward all things were made or created. And for this reason it is said,
That this Angel does contain in it all the angelical perfection, no otherwise
than the universal beams of the Sun are comprehended in the body of the Sun.
Wherefore we do with the Hebrew Rabbis justly apply the essence of the first
emanation unto Mitattron, which emanation is said to enter by the royal port
or gate Cheter or Corona. For know, that this catholic Angel is said to be
the first creature, because it imports the spirit of the world, which did
first receive the firstborn son, or the Imperial emanation, from the
Attribute of God called EHIAH, which is a name of eternity, for that it
contains and does respect the time past, the time present, and the time to
come. For this cause therefore does this great Angel style it self, Alpha and
Omega, the beginning and the end. The first influence therefore which was of
universal life and essence, is received by the Angel Mitattron, which is for
this reason called Donum Dei, after it was shouted down from the port Cheter,
into the highest order of the Angels, called Seraphin, which by reason of
their propinquity unto the throne of God, are said to burn, or be set on fire
with divine love. And hereupon these have their excellent beauty and
clearness, by reason of this sacred influence, which is so full of the loving
benignity of the Father of light. From thence this potent angelical nature
conducts the beams of this light into the convexity of the aetheriall heaven,
and there bestows it as in a general magazin or storehouse; which place it
afterward informs or vivifieth, insomuch that by the admirable action and
motion thereof, it is called Primum mobile, or that sphere which moves first
in the heavens, and by his motion it turns the natural or temporal world
round about, from the East unto the West, in twenty four hours. The mover is
this catholic Angel of the world, full of this eternal emanation, by which it
animates the world. Therefore also is Sapientia said to be omnium rerum prius
creata, the first of all creatures; and, Fluxus virtutis Dei, and emana^io
claritatis ejus, omni re mobilior, penetrans ubique propter suam munditiam and
permanens in se, omnia innovans. It is an influence of the virtue of God, and
the shining forth of his brightness, which is the most movable of all things,
penetrating all things by his pureness, and being one in essence, renews all
things, that is, it reviveth every thing. By which it is plain, that this
catholic emanation is the soul of the world, having endued, or put on, the
universal angelical spirit, and therefore is called by the holy Text, a
Creature; so that the catholic created spirit of the world is the Primum
mobile, for by this firstborn emanation from God, it is animated and moved, as
by the swiftest mover in the world; and the mover is termed Primus motor, both
together; or called Mundi anima, which therefore is defined to be, in respect
of the created spirit thus animated, Primum mobile, spo^te, and per se mobile;
The first thing moved, which is moved voluntarily and by it self. And for this
reason also, the animal faculty in man, which is seeds animae intellectulis, is
said to move voluntarily, when the action ^f the vital and natural faculty,
compared unto the etheriall and elementary heaven, do move unvoluntarily, that
is, at the will of the first mover. And this work is therefore assigned unto
this sphere, with the legions of intelligences, that are derived from, and
created there by their catholic head, which is the said grand Arch-angell, as
beams from one Sun, partly to hinder the starry lights, which were after
created, from burning the elementary world, or working by their long continued
impression, too violent and unnatural alterations; as also to make a
proportionable day and night unto the earth. To conclude, by this angelical
act, the whole spirit of the world was generally inacted.

The divine emanation, which issued from the second Sephiret or port, called
Hochma, which is sent out by the Attribute IAH, passes into the order of the
Cherubins, (which signifies the plenitude of Science, and abundance of the
gifts of Wisdom) and is received of the Archangel Zophiel, which, by the
etymology of his name, argues pulchritude, as being replenished with an
infinity of particular beams of life: But another calls this keeper, and
conductor of these beams, Ruziel, who immediately does direct them into the
firmament or heaven of the fixed stars, and principally into the broad girdle
of the starry heaven, which is called the Zodiac, arguing by the etymology of
his name, that the beams of this emanation do chiefly work, and fashion out
ideally, the liniments of an infinity of particularities in the elementary
world, as shall be demonstrated hereafter.

The third effluxion, which is made from the port Binah, under the protection
of the name ELOHIM, descends immediately into the order of the Thrones,
(arguing thereby Gods severe property, full of ^udgment) and is received by the
Archangel Zabkiel, or, as others will have it, of Kaspiel, which is as much to
say as Genius Cholerae magnae; and this effluxion is conducted down into the
next sphere below the firmament, which it informs, according unto the
natural property of the divine influx, and it procreateth the globe of Saturn,
which it replenisheth with spirits, or inferior intelligences, called by the
name of Saturnine Intelligences, which send down these influences into the
elementary world, to produce effects according unto their nature, as well in
the air and water, as in and upon the earth.

The fourth emanation, which is derived from the conduit-pipe of Chesed, over
which the word EL has dominion, is received of the angelical order of
Dominations, which import power against evil spirits, and the benefit of life
and breath* and then is committed unto the Archangel Zadkiel, which is by
interpretation Genius justitiae; and this Angel, according unto the nature of
the influence which it carries, is a friend unto the true Justice, in the
proportion of the elements, and a friend unto the creature's life; wherefore it
conducteth the beams of this property into the next or be below, Saturn, which
they make a dwelling place for an infinity of spirits, that are created out of
the same informing influence, and therefore are of its property. This Terra
Angelica Olympi, is termed the Star of Jupiter, and these kinds of Olympic
spirits are termed Jovial Intelligences, which do pour forth the streams of
their influence into the elementary regions, and animateth the spirits of its
nature, which work effects appropriated unto the property of this influence.

The fifth eradiation, or emission of divine beams, is out of the Sephiroticall
numeration or port, called Geburah, whose President is the divine Attribute
ELOHIM GIBBOR; and these beams are said to pass directly into the order of
Potestats: and the Arch-angell unto the which these beams are committed is
called Sama^l, or, as others will, Hamael; and it is a Genius which imports
horror: and this Intelligence does conduct the beams of its Emanation into the
Sphere, which is below that of Jupiter, and informs the spirits thereof with
the burning fire of this nature or property, making the starry Globe of Mars
their residence, from whence they pour out their influences unto the
Elementary spirits, which are of that nature.

The next emission of divine beams, is out of the gate or channel Tipherith,
over which the Divine Attribute ELOAH has dominion, and these are infused
immediately into the Angelical order of the Virtues, so called, because the
divine Virtue does shine forth of it: For, as Isidorus says, The Angels of
this order, do receive illumination, purgation, and perfection from God. And
this order does send them down by the Archangell Michael: which signifies Quis
tanquam Deus, into the next region below the Sphere of Mars; and there these
golden and vivifying beams do inform and animate such bright intelligences,
with their like property, as do dwell-in and Illuminate the visible Sun in
heaven, and therefore are termed Solar spirits, from whence this mighty
Archangell, which is called C^stos animarum, the keeper or preserver of living
souls, does order that they be hourly poured out into the Elementary region, to
vivify and refresh those spirits, which are formed out after their own image
and nature.

The seventh effluxion or irradiation, is out of the Sephiroticall port of
Netzeth, over which the Attribute of God JEHOVA ZEBAOTH is Lord, and they pass
immediately into the Angelical order of Principalities. And this influence is
committed to the Archangell Anaol's custody, who conducteth them down into the
next Sphere below the Sun, where it animates, according unto his good property,
all such Olympic spirits, which do inhabit the Globe and Sphere of Venus,
which are therefore termed Venerian Spirits, from whence the like vigor and
force is sent out unto the Creation of Elementary spirits, of the nature of
these formal influences which are radically sent down from the divine influence.

The next flux of divine beams, issue from the spout or channel called HOD:
over which the Attribute Elohim Zebaoth is Pre^ident, and descends immediately
down unto the order of Archangells, and from thence is conducted downward by
the Archangell Raphael, into the next Sphere below Venus; and there it
creates, and continually vivifieth those Olympic spirits, which possess and
adorn the Orb or Globe of Mercury, and are therefore termed Mercuriall
spirits, which send down such mutable and changeable influences, to animate
those Elementary spirits, which were created first by this Attribute, and
therefore do Sympathise with the nature of such beams, as are sent down from
this Sephiroticall gate.

The ninth effluxion or irradiation, springs out from the eternal fountain,
by the bright port Jesod, whose Rector or President is the Attribute Sadai, and
passes down unto the order of Angels, and is committed unto the custody and
conveyance of the Archangell Gabriel, who directs it downward unto the lowest
ethereal or starry Orb, where it animateth those spirits, which inhabit the
Globe of the Moon, and are thereupon styled Lunary spirits; from whence they
rain down showers of these influences, upon such spirits or demons in the
Elementary world, as have received their Creation from the influences of this
Property in God.

The last effluxion or flowing and streaming forth of the Divine beams, is
effected by the channel or gate Malchut, whose President is the divine
Attribute Adonai, and this descends immediately (according unto the Cabalists
opinion, into the order of the blessed Souls, from whence they deem them to be
conducted directly into the Elementary world.

By the continuity therefore of thse several and opposite irradiations, or
emanations of beams, from God unto the Imperial Angels, and from them unto
the Olympic spirits, and so continuated from these unto the Elementary
spiritual shapes or demons, we may gather thus much, namely first, that God
does only operate essentially all in all, in and over all: next, that
according unto the variety of his Volunty, he works diversely in this world,
and therefore we must know, that his Volunty is manifold in property, because
that thing are effected, as well in heaven as in earth, after a manifold
operation; wherefore if God operateth all, Asclep. 4.
and in all, the diversity of his work must proceed from the multiplicity of
his Volunty. And for this reason Hermes says, Voluntas Dei summa est rerum
perfectio, quam necessitas sequitur; necessitatem vero concom: tatur effectus:
The Volunty of God is the highest perfection of things, which necessity does
follow, and the effect does accompany the necessity: So that what God does will
must be perfect, and consequently the effect must follow of ne^essity. And
therefore he concludes, that God accomplisheth at an instant of time, both his
will and the effect thereof. But what he would not have that cannot be, and
therefore what existeth in rerum natura, of what property soever it be, it is
effected according unto the will or Volunty of one of these Divine Attributes.
Neque (says he) credib^le est, Deo displic ^urum esse quod placuit, Asclep.
cap. 4.
cum and futurum id and plac^turum mulio ante sciverit: Neither is it credible,
that that should displease God, which did please him, b^ing that he did know
long before, both the thing that was to come, and what should be pleasant unto
him. And therefore Solomon: Could any thing exist which thou would^st not have
to be? Thirdly, Sap. 11.
That according unto the variety of his divine Volunty, things were created,
the one either Sympathising spiritually in affection with another, or
Antipathysing among themselves, by reason of beams of a contrary disposition,
according unto the concordant or opposite nature of the Angelical irradiation
or shining out of the beams of one spiritual creature another: which
contrariety of conditions, did proceed from the varieties of properties, which
is in the Volunty or will of one and the same radical and eternal Essence.
Thus therefore were all creatures in the world, as well spiritual as
corporal, composed; and thus were they vivified and animated by beams, the one
either contrary unto the other, or else by reason of their concordance, and
likeness of nature, rejoicing greatly when they meet together, by irradiation
of all one influence. And we must know and understand, that although each
creature had his radical information by these Emanations, yet in their
generations and multiplications, they may vary from the condition of their
created or generated Parents, by the uniting together of two different
irradiations at the hour of their birth; So therefore comes it to pass, that a
man both in shape and condition, may be unlike unto his Parents; a horse more
fierce or sluggish then his sire; a plant or fruit more lax, waterish, or
unwholesome then the stock from whence the seed or sap came, and consequently by
the application of Angelical beams of an opposite nature, in the birth of a
man, it may happen, that the radiation of a plant, or flower, or beast, or such
like thing, may for ever Antipathise with this man, which did aptly agree and
Sympathise with another. And whereas the opposition which is made between the
contrary Elements, is apparent and manifest, namely in respect of the fight or
discord, which is made betwixt dissonant qualities or natures, as are cold, and
heat; moisture, and drouth; So that in this case the Sympathy and Antipathy of
Elements are well known to every one, namely betwixt the water and fire; and
betwixt the earth and the air; We must know that there is yet a more latent,
and internal cause of Sympathy, and Antipathy in things, which by some is
ascribed unto the occult natures of the Stars; but in verity it proceeds
from those Angelical influences, which do invisibly and after a most occult
manner, stream out of creatures that are born under a discordant Emanation,
which Reuchlin does passingly well describe in these words: Reuchlin. de Art.
cab. lib. 3.
Pholosophis Peripateticis id probatur, quod c^lum quod^ bet Sphaericum praeter
formam suam essent^alem, habet assisten^em inte ligentiam orbis sui m^^ric^m,
quae vocatur Angelus, eo q^od ad hoc officium missa, intelligens and volens
comple^ jussa Creatoris, tanquam inter Deum and Naturam, virtus media; a qua
fiunt operationes in rebus, quas natura earum vel ^on faceret, vel non sic
faceret, quas alii provenire dicunt a proprietate occulta, and ali^ quia tale:
It is approved of the Peripatetick Philosophers, that every Spherick heaven,
has besides his essential form, an assistent Intelligence, which is the mover
of his O be; the which Intelligence, is called an Angel, because i^ being sent
to pe^f^rm that Office, does understandingly and willingly accomplish the
Command of the Creator, as a middle Virtue between God and nature, by the which
are effected operations in things, which their nature either would not effect
or would not do ^t after that fa^hion; the which are said by others, to proceed
from an occult property, and others because it is so. Whereby it appears,
that the hidden Sympathy and Antipathy in things, as well celestial as
terrestiall, proceed from the mystical and arcane actions of Angelical
spirits or Intelligences, who first receive that hidden property from a
peculiar influence or irradiation, which descends from some of the Divine
influences, which do inform and indue that Angelical spirit with that Virtue.
But because it is not the Office of an Astrologian, to penetrate thus
p^ofoundly into these hidden Mysteries, which belong unto the aeviall world;
forasmuch as his custom is, to make the visible Stars the fountains of all
those effects, which by way of influence and irradiation, do descend to
operate, as well by sympathy as antipathy, in things below. I will here, after
the Astrologicians manner, make the wellspring of all sympathy and antipathy,
to arise from the manifold influence of the stars, as shall more at large
appear in the next Chapter.

CHAP. IV.
The Astrologicall reason of Sympathy and Antipathy is herein expressed, where
also it is proved, that being all inferior spirits receive the influence of
their nature from above, and being that the elementall creatures are b^t the
images of the celestial; so also it must consequently follow that as there are
both Sympatheticall and Antipatheticall aspects or irradiations, between two or
more of the heavenly bodies, and therefore there must of necessity happen, that
there is an emission of essential beams, from one earthly body unto another,
which according unto the nature of the creature, is either Sympatheticall or
Antipatheticall.

I Will leave now a while to speak radically, with the mystical Hebrew, and
Cabalisticall Theologians, and will open this mystery of occult radiation, or
streaming forth of hidden beams betwixt two creatures, whether they be
celestial or terrestrial, of a like and sympathising nature, or un-like and
antipathising condition, after the manner of an Astrologian; namely, taking the
visible organ for the invisible agent, the external creature for the internal
angelical virtue, the starry influence for the hidden supercelestiall
emanation, which is poured out into the spirits or intelligences, which inhabit
and illuminate the stars, and send it down again from them into the elementary
world, to animate the winds, and by them the catholic element, altered after a
fourfold manner, and by the element so altered, to inform the meteorologick
bodies diversely, and by them the several compounded creatures, both in the sea
and land. We ought therefore to know, speaking like the Astrologian) that there
is a manifest opposition and agreement, not only in respect of the manifest
qualities of the elements, which are observed to be as well in the fixed, as
erratick stars, (for the watery signs of the Zodiac are contrary unto the
fiery, the nocturn unto the diurn, the oriental unto the occidentall, the male
unto the female) but also in a more hidden regard. For the best Astrologians
have noted, that as Jupiter, Sol, and Luna are friends unto Saturn; so Mercury,
Mars, and Venus are his enemies. Again^ all the Planets, but Mars, are friends
unto Jupiter. Moreover, there is not any of the Planets that is Mars his
friend, but Venus only, and especially Sol and Mercury are his greatest foes.
Also Jupiter and Venus are friends unto the Sun, as contrariwise his enemies
are Mars, Mercury, and Luna. All the Planets are said to love and favor Venus,
but Saturn. Mercury's friends are Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn; his enemies are
Sol, Luna, and Mars. The friends of the Moon are Venus, Jupiter, and Saturn;
her enemies are Mars and Mercury. The friends unto the head of the Dragon are
Jupiter and Venus, the enemies are Saturn and Mars. Lastly, the enemies of the
Tail of the Dragon are Jupiter, Luna, and Venus; as contrariwise his friends
are Saturn and Mars.

Besides all this, we ought to note, that there is another kind of friendship
or enmity between the Planets, namely, when the one of them has his exaltation
or dignity in another's House. In this case therefore, the things subject unto
the influence of the one, will lovingly embrace the aspect of the other; and
contrariwise, the depression or detriment of the one, in the House of another,
makes the spirit of the one creature, (who is born under that Planet which
has the detriment, and is oppressed by a bad aspect of the other, that is in
his own house where the detriment is) to aspect antipathetically, a thing that
is under the other; by this means, I say, the presence of the thing born, or
springing forth, under the Planet of that House, will be ungrateful and odious
unto the other person or thing, whose detriment is in the said House.
Contrariwise, we must note, that two creatures will well sympathise, and
joyfully agree with one another, where their Planets do consent together, in
nature, quality, essence, and strength, as are Mars and Venus, for these
sympathise by a natural instinct: So also Venus, Jupiter, Mercury, and the
Moon agree together; and so likewise the unfortunate Planets do agree, in the
multiplying of misfortunes.

We ought also in like manner to know, that the Sign which has most dignity
of a Planet, as House, Triplicity, Face, exaltation, Term, or such like, does
best sympathise with the Geniture of that Planet; whereas contrariwise, the
Signs, or fixed impression of the firmament, which is opposite in nature, or
full of misfortunes, (as is the fall or detriment, etc.) does by his beams
cause a secret hatred and abhorring, when the things ap^^rtaining unto one
another, do occultly by their beams aspect one another. Also the manner of
casting out of their beams, do make a wondrous alteration in the two subjects;
for as the beams of the stars were unto one another, in the nativity of the
animal, or sprouting forth of the plant, so shall the true character of them
abide, and be expressed in the thing born or produced. I will therefore
express the nature of these beams, or secret irradiations, which accompany the
influence of the stars, in a more ample manner, because therein consists the
secret Astrologicall mystery, of the Sympathy or Antipathy which happen between
such things as are here below.

Alkindus de Radiis.
First, I must have you know, that the most internal and profound Astronomers
are of opinion, that every star of heaven has a nature or condition
appropriated unto it self, in which the projection of his beams with others is
contained: and as every one of them has a proper nature, which is not totally
found in any other, wherein the emission of beams is comprehended, so these
beams are observed to be of a diverse condition, even as the stars themselves
are diverse in nature; for every star has his situation in the heavens, clean
distinct and different from another. And therefore it follows necessarily,
that each of them has a respect different from one another, and unto all other
things or places contained in this world. Now it is certain, that the variety
of the aspect does vary the effect of the beams, as also diverse other
properties of the stars perform the same* Where upon it comes to pass, that
each star does operate otherwise, and effects another thing in diverse places
and subjects, how little soever, or how smally different, being that the whole
operation of the stars does proceed of the beams, which do vary in every
diverse aspect in themselves. For the beams which issue from the center of the
star, unto the center of the earth, are found, and by experience are justified,
to be the strongest in the manner or kind of their operation; but the beam
which is ejaculated or emitted obliquely, is debilitated and weakened in
effect, according unto the proportion of his oblique motion, unless it be
strengthened and comforted by the concurring beams of other stars, in the same
place or point: for each particular star casts his beams to every place. And
therefore the diversity of beams being collected or gathered together, does
alter the content of each place or subject, being there is a diverse manner of
beams in every diverse place and thing, which is derived from the general or
total harmony of the stars. Hereupon it happens, that in every place, and at
every time, diversity of individual creatures are produced in this world; all
which, the celestial harmony is said to effect, by the projection of beams
into this lower elementary region, which do continually vary and diversifie
themselves. By this therefore it is evident, that the eradiations of all the
stars, have diverse operations in the things of this world, according unto the
diverse properties of the things; forasmu^h as every thing does rise or spring
and exist, by these emanations, or streaming forth of beams. Moreover we ought
to note, that the condition of the heavenly* harmony is such, that since all
the stars are of diverse natures, and by reason hereof, all their beams are of
diverse effects in the elementary world, it happens, that the beamy operations
are assisted or aided about the same matter or subject; and again, in another
matter, are hindered of one another. Moreover we must observe, that over every
thing in this world, there is ordained a predominant star. And again, there is
some celestial Sign, that in the work and government of the same thing,
bears the rule above all other. Out of this condition therefore of the starry
beams between themselves, there arises so great a difference and diversity in
things of this world, that there can be hardly found two thing or more, which
are alike in all respects unto one another, although human sense be not in some
cases sufficient, to apprehend the difference.

To conclude, the celestial harmony works so differently in diverse places
and times, that now it generateth or produces like of like, and at other times
it brings forth things that are unlike. Also it produces like things at this
time by a like motion, and at another time unlike by an unlike motion: now by a
slow motion, and then by a swift motion. Thus therefore we see, that by
innumerable kinds of other ways, the things of this world, and their motions,
are observed to vary, according unto places and times.

This being well pondered by every wiseman, and seeing it is evident, that the
Elementary world is made after the example of the heavenly; so that every
thing, that is comprehended in it, does contain his image, we ought not to make
any scruple in affirming that all things in this world, whether they be
substances or essential accidents, do emit beams unto one another, after their
manner, by the imitation of the stars, from whence they are derived: For else*
it were not possible that they should contain in them fully the figure of the
starry world. But this is manifestly and sen^^bly confirmed by certain things:
For the fire does send forth heat unto the neighboring parts: and contrariwise
the earth does expire or bring forth the beams of its coldness. Also Medicines
taken inwardly, or applied outwardly, do send forth the beams of their virtue
into the body. We observe also that the collision or dashing together of two
hard bodies, make a sound or noise, pouring out or dispersing it self by beams
after its fashion. Again, all colored things do send out their beams, by the
which they are seen: which being so, we may boldly aver, that every thing which
has actual existence in this Elementary world, sends forth beams on every
side, which fills all the cavity thereof after its fashion. Alkind de R^di^s
stellarum.
And therefore Alkindus averreth, that every place of this world, contains
the beams of all the things which do actually exist in it. And as each thing
does differ from another, so do the beams of every Subject, differ in nature
and effect, from the beams of all other things. Whereby it happens, that the
operation of beams in all diverse things, is varying or different. Thus far I
have expressed the opinions of the learned Astronomers, touching the celestial
radiations, and thereby also it is manifested unto us, that each creature in
the Elementary world, is not only informed by these celestial beams, which
have been poured out upon them, but are preserved by assi^ual succession of
their beamy influence, and consequently all things that are so made by the
celestial influxion, is the type or image of those celestial spirits, whose
beams did make them; wherefore it must needs follow by Alkindus his rule, that
if they are the types or images of the celestial shapes which did fashion
them, they must in like manner emit their beams, though invisibly, no otherwise
then the stars do, from which they draw the influence of their being. For we
must know, (as I proved in my Radical Inquisition) that the essential beams
descending from God to the Angels, and from the Angels unto the Stars, and
from the Stars unto the creatures, are continual because indivisible: For
there is no formed Virtue issuing from God, that can be separated from its
Fountain; which being so, it must needs follow, that they shine forth out of
the body in which they are, unto other lights, which are sent out from other
creatures, no otherwise then one star of heaven, does behold another, in this
or that aspect: Wherefore mark me well, what I now say: I told you that each
star in heaven, has his friend, and he ^hath his enemy; I told you that the
reason of this opposition, as well among the Angels, as stars of heaven, was
the diversity of the Volunty of God, which was the cause of such opposite
Attributes, as are by the Hebrew Text (which the Cabalisticall Rabbis do
approve of) expressed and avouched; I proceed therefore thus, and say, That if
in the heavenly harmony it happens, that there is a potent aspect or
streaming forth of beams, which concurreth with the irradiation of the
aethereall or starry Lord of life, of the thing generated or produced, being
animal, vegetable, or minarell; And that if by Emanation the star so partaking
with the Lord of Life, be an utter enemy unto the Lord of Life, then will the
spirit of that creature so generated or made, be subject to discordant
passions, as fear, anger, sadness, and suspicion; and that especially when the
enemy unto the Lord of Life, being more potent in the celestial Scheme or
Horoscop, does apply unto the Lord of Life, being any way debilitated by an
evil aspect; So that this way happens a kind of insensible antipatheticall
perturbation unto the spirit of the thing so generated or produced. Also if the
thing produced or generated, do begin his nativity, when the enemy was most
potent in heaven, then when his proper Lord, and he be joined with the first
Lord, in any bad aspect, if at that time that creature be brought into the
presence of that other creature, which was first mentioned, there must needs be
an antipatheticall distaste in the spirit of the first, because the Genius of
the last is timorous and afraid of the Genius of the first, which is his
enemy, being more powerful; and therefore the two earthly subjects of these
different stars being present, and emitting the beams of their nature, those
beams must of necessity work antipathetically with one another, and the
strongest must prevail no otherwise, than the two stars of heaven, which made
the mixtion of beams were enemies. But you must note and observe, that though
the stronger beams be antipatheticall unto the weaker, it follows not that
the weaker beams be antipatheticall unto the stronger, being always that the
stronger passion is in the weaker, as the action remains in the stronger. But
if the Subject of a star in heaven be brought in on earth unto the subject of
his enemy in heaven, if there was not in the nativity any aspect between them,
they operate not antipathetically with their beams being present, and yet their
natures or beams will be by so much the more inclined to actual opposition, if
at the time of their meeting, the enemies aspect on one another with an evil
aspect in heaven. As for example; If that Jupiter be Lord of the nativity, or
production of the thing, and Mars do aspect him in a quadrat or opposite aspect;
and this creature, suppose it be a Man, does meet with a Cat, the Lord of whose
nativity is Mars, most powerful in heaven, aspecting Jupiter with a malevolent
irradiation, then will the sight of this Cat be unpleasant unto that Man. But
the truth is, that there may be some fixed star, which is the assigned
original, or protector of the cat or animal of what nature soever, which may
be antipatheticall unto the fixed star with the Planet in it, that have dominion
over the cat. But contrariwise, if the beams of two Planets or signs, or more,
do meet, or concur in one, and the same generation or production of a thing,
where the star which has most dominion is Lord of the thing, be it animal or
vegetable, or mineral, and these Planets are friends to one another, then if
any other Subject present it self, which is fashioned by the beams of the other
Planet, these two Subjects emitting their beams upon the earth, will love each
other, and sympathetically agree with one another, and so much the greater will
their Sympathy be unto one another, by how much they accord unto one another in
nature, property, and benevolence of aspect, in the instant of their nativities
or beginnings. As for example: If Jupiter be Lord of a man's nativity, and
aspect Venus, and Venus him, in a Sextil or Trine aspect; and again, Venus is
the most powerful in the nativity of a cat or dog; and has a relation by his
beams unto Jupiter in a good aspect: then I say, that there will be a
reciprocal affection in Sympathy betwixt both creatures, Also, if the like
friendship be made in heaven, at the bringing forth of any vegetable, the man
or beast will be well pleased at the presence, view, and taste of that
vegetable; and if he eat of it, it will well agree with his nature. And all
this is to be understood in things, which from their Creation were not ordained
quite opposite and antipatheticall unto the creature, as are vermin and such
like; the which nevertheless are made by these concordant irradiations of
heaven, more amiable and less harmfull; yea, and more convenient for the use of
man's or beasts bodies. Also there is since the fall of Adam, enmity set between
the Serpent and Man; and yet by the like confluence in heaven, some affect
Serpents or Snakes; some by the concurrence of contrary beams, do loath and fly
from them, with an exceeding detestation, and do abhor them beyond all
measure. But to return again unto the root of this business, the evident cause
of Sympathy and Antipathy of things, proceeds from the radical Mystery of the
opposite Attributes or properties in God, which have the original of their
Emanation, from the secret and hidden Volunty of Eternity, as I have told you
here before. And yet these Astrologians have such reasons from their starry
experiences, that they all take their Original of Sympathy or Antipathy from
them. And hereupon did the Philosohers in general conclude that Inferiora a
superioribus reguntur, and that Mundus inferior, sit corporibus superioribus
contiguus: Inferior things a^e governed and directed by the superior, and the
inferior world is contiguous unto the superior bodies. And Ptolomy: Ptol. Sermon.
9. Centiloq.
Vultus hujus saeculi subjecti s^nt vultibus coeli: The effigiesses or shapes
of this world, are subject unto the images of heaven. And Aristotle: Est mundus
iste supernis lationibus fere continuus, ut inde vis ejus universa regatur:
This world is almost continual with the supernall lations, lib. 1. Meteo.
that thereby his universal power may be governed. And Hippocrates: De
coelestibus autem rebus, and sublimibus mihi nihil d^cendum videtur, nisi
quatenus homines, animaliaque caetera quae in terris degunt, and gignuntur
nataque sunt, c. 2. Hip. de Carnibus.
principia and originem inde habere demonstrabo, and quod anima de coelo est,
quod dolere, languere, mori, and denique quicquid boni malive est in homine de
coelo proficiscitur: Touching celestial and Divine matters, it seems to me,
that there is nothing to be said, save only, that I will demonstrate, that men
and beasts which live upon the earth, and are begotten and born, have their
beginning and Original from thence, and that the Soul is from heaven, and to
be dolorous, to languish, and to die, And finally, Haly in praelud. ante
quoddam opus Hipp.
whatsoever is good or bad in man, does proceed from above. And for this cause
Haly says, Medicus qui Astronomiam ignorant, est tanquaem caecus viam baculo
examinans, huc atque illuc miserabiliter cespitans, pro qualibet boni
malive-apparentia: The Physician which is ignorant in Astronomy, is like a
blind man, which examineth and searches out his way with a staff, miserably
reeling this way and that way, according to every appearance of good or evil.
But to come nearer the point, Cichus Eschulamus says, That every one of the
twelve Signs receives his particular and special name from the nature or
property of some beast, Escul. in lib. de 12 Sign.
because the nature of the one does seem to symbolize with that of the other.
And Moses Arabicus says, That every animated thing has a peculiar star, which
sends down his influence to defend and preserve his like upon earth, and that
by the divine will and command.

As for example, The Stars which are in Aries, govern and send down their
influence upon the terrestrial Ram, and on sheep; and the celestial Scorpion
upon the terrestrial one. And Reuclin says, Non est tibi ulla planta aut
herba inferius, cui non est stella in firmamento quae non percutiat eam: Lib.
3. de Caball
There is not a herb or plant here below, which has not a star in the
firmament to beat on it by his influence. To conclude, you may discern by this
the Astronomers and Philosophers intention, namely, to take the visible bodies
action for that angelical spirit or virtue, which rules and vivifieth all
things that are beneath, and breaths forth influences out of the starry
organs, and not the starry sphere, as the worldly Ethnicks did imagine, who
went no deeper into the mysteries of God, and his nature, than their corporal
eyes, and ocular experience did guide them. But they which have dived more
profoundly into these secrets, have evidently discerned a more hidden principle
in these occult influences. Pim. 3.
Hereupon Hermes says, Dii in astrorum ideis cum signis ecrum conspiciebantur;
dinumeratae sunt stellae secundum eos, qui inhabitant illas, Deos: The gods
were discerned in the idea's of the stars, with their signs; and the stars are
numbered according unto those gods which do inhabit them. Where, by the gods he
means, the variety of angelical emanations, which proceed from one unity; or
he may take the Archangels, which are the conductors of those several
emanations, for gods, 1 Cor. 8.
at which the Apostle does rightly except, when he says, Dii quidem sunt qui
dicuntur in coelo and in terra, nobis tamen unus Deus Pater ex quo omnia, and
unus Dominus Jesus Christus per quem omnia. There are such creatures as are
called gods, in heaven and in earth; but unto us there is but one God the
Father, from whom are all things; and one Lord Jesus Christ by whom are all
things. As if he had said, God the Father, or the radical Unity, is the
fountain from whence all things spring; and his catholic emanation the
immediate act; by which all virtues, actions, and vivifications, are diversely
effected, according unto his will which sent it out, both in heaven and earth:
So that it is not the Angel, but God in the Angel. Wherefore Picus
Mirandulanu^, Ad coelum non est referendum si quid a nobis sit, Lib. 4. de
Astrol. c. 4.
quod nostras vires videtur excedere, sed potius vel ad angelosvel ad Deum. If
there be any thing from us that exceeds our power, it is not to be referred
unto the heavens, but rather either to the Angels, or to God. For this reason
therefore Rabbi Moses: Rabbi M^^.
Angeli non movent semper orbs coelestes eodem modo, quo fit ut non semper
eodem modo fiant mutationes horum inferiorum; maximam namque vim atque
potestatem angelica exercet conditio in res corporeas: quapropter intellectus
agens, a quo influunt formae, nominatur Angelus, and appellatur praefectus
universitati, ut dixerunt Sapientes nostri, vocaturque Mitattron, a quo quidem
gubernantur omnes Virtutes singulares quae pariter Angeli dicuntur, quorum est
multitudo quoad nos infinita, sed quo ad Creatorem determinata and finita. The
Angels do not always move the celestial orbs after one manner. And thereupon
it comes to pass, that the mutations of inferior things are not made after
one fashion; for the Angelical condition has a great force and power over
corporal things, and therefore the intellectual agent, from which the forms
of things do issue or stream forth, is termed that Angel, which is the
President of all the world, as our wise men have testified; and it is called
Mitattron, of whom all singular virtues are governed, the which are likewise
called Angels, of which kind there is an infinite multitude in regard of us,
though unto the Creator they are limited and finite. And Rabbi Bresitts does
seem to confirm thus much, in these words, Creator quotidie creat coetum
Angelorum, quos alii vocant For mas, quod sint substantiae formales; quibus
tota sphaera generabilium and corruptibilium absque numero plena est. The
Creator does daily create a company of Angels, which other men do call Forms,
because they are formal substances; of the which kind, the whole sphere of
generable and corruptible things are replenished without number..

Now by this Intellectus agens, or Mitattron, forasmuch as it is the President
over the whole world, which I said before to be that Anima mundi of the
Platonists, which did animate every particular thing, by sending out of an
infinity of his formal beams; we may perceive, that these mystical Hebraick
Theosophers did understand that very power, 1 Cor. 8.
which the Apostle does in the place before mentioned assign unto our Lord
Jesus Christ. Being that as they made this: Mitattron the catholic Angel, or
Praefectum universitati, the ruler of the world, proceeding by emanation from
Ensoph or Infinity; so the Apostle says, that all forms, and what else,
proceeds from God the Father, and have their being from our Lord Jesus Christ.

To our purpose therefore. As God ordained from his infinite fountain of Unity,
two principles of a clean contrary nature, namely, Light and Darkness; so the
firstborn of Darkness was Litigium, or the Prince of darkness, which was
termed Satan, and his rule is in darkness, and over all dark things, or
privative properties; and he has his fourfold Angels or Demons of a different
nature, which have their dominions over the winds and elements, and are ready
to effect their Prince his behests, in a business of darkness, and therefore
of discord and privation, be it of the property of what wind that blows,
according unto that of the Apocalypse, I saw four angels standing upon the four
angles of the earth, Apoc. 7.
being presidents over the four winds of the earth, unto whom it was granted to
hurt the earth and the seas, etc. Now each of these Angels have many
divisions, and subdivisions of legions under them, who do then act at their
volunty, when they have dominion to blow and trouble the air. All these are
animated by the influences which are sent down from the Olympic spirits, as
they likewise have their animation and times of dominion appointed them, by the
Imperial Arch-angell: And these are the immediate dispensators of the will of
their eternal head and wellspring. For this reason therefore, as we ocularly
behold that the Sunbeams do illuminate wholly what object soever the same
looks upon, being enlightened, by reason of an infinity of beams which are
united in and upon it: So also all emanations which are carried down unto the
stars, do fill them with an infinity of beams, which are instead of subdivided
Angels, having the nature of all that whole emanation which did animate the
stars. And therefore all the Olympic spirits of each star are alike in
property. The self-same reason also there is, from the angelical beams which
issue from each wind, and fill the whole air, and water, and earth, with an
innumerable number of hurtful spirits, of their nature. And yet it is sure,
that as God made all things to exist and be, (as Solomon says) he had a care
to appoint over the winds as many good Angels, Sap. 1.
with their inferior spirits, which arise from their good beams, to overruled
the malice of the bad spirits, with their subjects, which also have their
abidings in the air. And, that each of these hurting or harmfull angelical
Presidents of the winds have a master to curb his malice, it appears by the
consequence of the foresaid Text, Apoc. 7.
Et vidi angelum ascendentem ab ortu solis habentem signum Dei vivi, and
clamavit voce magna quatuor angelis, quibus datum est nocere terrae and mari,
dicens, Noli^e nocere terrae, and mari, neque arboribus, etc. And I saw another
angel ascend from the east, having the seal of the living God, and he cried
with a great voice unto the four angels, in whose power it was to hurt the
earth, and the seas, and the trees, etc. So that we see here, that there is an
Imperial Angel, which is a spirit or Intelligence of goodness and
preservation, who has power over the Angels of the world, as well bad as
good, and consequently is a Lord and commander over the harmfull Angels, not
only of that Easterly quarter, but also over all the other three* and that was
Michael, unto whom the government of the Sun and East is ascribed. And this
great and sovereign Angel by others is said to be Mitattron, of which we have
spoke before, whom others esteem to be the image of the eternal Sapience, by
which all things were made. Howsoever, it was that imperial Angel that had
victory over the Dragon and his Angels, and therefore has them his vassalls.
So that as Satan is the Prince of darkness, and an enemy unto light, and
therefore unto Christ and his creatures; so this great Angel, in whom is
JEHOVA's Name, (as the Scripture affirms) in which is life, and in whom is
light without darkness, is the Prince of light, and has power over light,
position, and life, and therefore an utter enemy unto darkness, with the
Prince thereof. And for that cause, as Satan has his armies scattered in the
air, by the four winds; so also has the imperial and victorious Prince of
light, his conducting Angels, dispersed over the face of the earth and waters,
and in every place over the catholic element of the air, to resist the
violent and subtle or invisible assaults of the army or spirits of darkness;
which good spirits also are under the conduct of four good Captains, of the
nature of the four winds; which Captains are full of goodness, and grace.
Therefore the Mystical Theologians and Cabalists do aver: Quod ut in exercitu
Dei quatuor sunt Ante signani, Lev. M. Rac. lib. 1.
nempe, Michael, Gabriel, Uriel, and Raphael: Sic in exercitu pariter Satanae
latissima gerunt signiferi ultores vela, Samael, Azaeel, Azael, Mahazael: as
Mnahem Racanat affirms. Whereof the first of each kind, do war in the East,
the second in the North, the third in the South, and the fourth in the West:
For these four spiritual Captains of Satan, are thought to be the four
harmfuls Angel, which are said to cause the four winds to blow: and as for the
other four of God's Captains, that they are also Presidents of the four winds:
we find it confirmed by Rabbi Tedacus. Levi in this sense: Tadac. Lev. lib. de
10. Numer.
Deus quatuor ventis creavit quatuor Angelos, qui praefecti sunt super eos in
die and in nocte: Michael, qui est ex part clementiae and miserationis
constituitur Mamona i. e. praefectus super ventum orientalem usque ad dimidium
diei, and usque ad noctem, regit que ventum Occidentalem: Raphael, qui
similiter est de part clementiae: Tum Gabriel in virtute judicii, and
severitatis, praefectus est cum vento boreali, super dimidium noctis, and duas
mensuras mundi: Noriel vero vel Uriel praesidet Austro: God created for the
four winds four Angels, which are Rulers or Presidents over them, in the
daytime, and in the night: Michael, which is of the part of clemency and
commiseration, is made the Lord and Ruler over the East wind, until midday,
and until night: And Raphael, which is also of the part of misericord, does
govern the West: Then Gabriel in the power of judgment and severity, is
constituted Lord over the North wind: And Noriel or Uriel, is made Overseer of
the South: So that we see, that as well there are good beams or benign
spirits, which by a secret and hidden Emanation, do stream forth from the
fountain of the winds, namely those which are poured out by JEHOVA's benign
Attributes, as are El by Jupiter: Eloach by the Sun: Sadai by Venus, and then
Michael, Raphael, Gabriel, etc. do by their Legions execute God's Will. And
there are bad and corrupt or privative emission of spirits, of a contrary
fortitude from the winds, which have their Original from Elohim, Elohim
Gibbor, and Adonaia, which make Saturn, Mars, and the Moon, their storehouse;
neither would I have any one to wonder, that I should derive the multiplicity
of the good and the bad properties, which are effected by the winds, from one
Divine essence, which imparteth his Will by the diversity of his lively
properties unto the 4 Archangells; since the Prophet says, Ezekiel. 37.
Vem spiritus a quatuor ventis, and insuffla interfectos istos ut revivi scant:
Come (O Spirit) from the four winds, and breathe on these slain persons, that
they may live again. Here the Prophet acknowledges, that it is but one
essential vivifying Spirit that effects all this, and consequently that the
four opposite properties in the four Angels, which are the Governors of the
winds, are the influences or essential beams, of one and the same Spirit of
life in essence.

By reason of these spirits of a contrary fortitude in the air, sometimes good
and propitious events befall the creatures of this lower world, namely when the
good spirits reign, and wholesome winds do blow, which happen, when the benign
stars and Planets have dominion in heaven, and consequently their influences
below; and again, sometimes bad and dysastrous accidents, armed with privative
and destructive effects, befall the creatures of this Elementary region, by
reason of severe emissions of beams from the winds, which animate those evil
spirits, that in infinite multitudes do hover, though invisible, in the air;
who are rejoiced and revived at the blasts which issue from the stations of
their cruel Princes, and are as it were summons and all-arms to stir and
excite them unto wrath, and to blow the coals of their sleeping malice. All
this we may gather from this speech, extracted out of Joseph Castaliensis:
Joseph. Castaleonsis Porta Lucis.
A terra usque ad firmamentum, non est locus vacuus, sed omne plenum formis, ex
illis purae, ex illis capaces gratiae, ac m^serationum: and sunt infernis
multae effigies foedae, noxiae, tentatrices; and omnes commorantes, and
volantes in ae^e. Et non a terra usque in coelum locus vacuus, quin totum sunt
species; ex iis ad pacem, ex iis ad bellum; ex iis ad bonum, ex iis ad malum;
ex iis ad vitam, ex iis ad mortem, and omne id in habitatione inferiori in qua
nos sumus: From the earth unto the firmament, there is not a void place, but
all is full of forms: Of the which some are pure, and some are capable of grace
and mercy: and there are beneath many foul, hurtful, and tempting shapes; and
of all these do abide, and fly up and down, in the air. And from the earth
unto the heaven, there is not one spar^ place; but all is full of forms;
whereof some are inclined to peace, some to war; some of them are given to
goodness, some to naughtiness; and some of them are Agents to life, and some
unto death; and all this chances in the lower habitation, in the which we are,
etc. Whereby he signifies, that the whole air is replenished as well with
spirits of darkness, as with spirits of light. And therefore there is a
continual conflict made here below, betwixt these spirits of opposite
conditions: Whereof the one do attend upon their Prince of darkness, being
always ready to accomplish his behests, and consequently are very familiar
unto the humid nature or matter of the world, which is the child of the dark
Chaos, and for that cause have naturally a great dominion and power over it,
which by reason of its inclination unto darkness, is easy to be tempted and
allured from the Society of formal Light. And hereupon the material world, the
flesh, and the Devil, are joined together; as also Satan is termed by the
Apostle the Prince of the air, Ephesians. 2.
which is the offspring of the waters, from whence the material substance of
the world was taken: The other do wait on the Prince of Light, their Master,
who is the eternal Wisdom, which springs from the bright word of eternity.
And these two dignify the world with life, and do employ their greatest care,
to animate, vivify, and preserve it, with such salutary beams, as they receive
immediately from the eternal Emanation or fiery Word, in which is the essence
of life and being. By this means therefore, namely from the opposition of these
two spirits of a contrary fortitude, all the passions in the spirit, and
consequently of the Soul, yea and body (as well of the great world, and all the
creatures therein, as of the little world) have their immediate beginning,
namely the good passions as are, joy, charity, hope, confidence, misericord,
humanity, in the little world, which are caused by dilatation of the heart, and
concord, appetite, Sympathy, desire, or concupiscence, delight, auda^ity,
jucundity, caused by dilatation from the Center unto the circumference: and by
consequence An^ipathy in the great world. And again, the bad passions, in the
little world's spirit, as are sadness, hatred, desperatness, timidity, anger,
furor, and bashfulness, which arise from the contraction of the heart; and in
the great world and his creatures, as are stupidity or congelation, discord,
hatred, irascibility, fear, etc. and in conclusion Antipathy, which comes by
contracting from the circumference unto the Center. All which are certain
passions, either well affecting, and reviving the vital spirits with comfort by
dilatation of those spirits with the beams of a kind of joy and delight, or
else choking or suffocating them, with the gloomy fog of darkness, by
contracting of those spirits, with the mist of grief or privative sadness.

CHAP. V.
What Actions in the Spirit or Soul in general, do produce Sympathy, and what
Antipathy: How Sympathy or Compassion proceeds from a certain dilatation of
spirits in two or more particulars, or an emitting of their internal beams of
life or essence, positively and benignly, from the Center unto the
Circumference, attempting thereby to make a concord or union, betwe^^ ^wo or
more like or homogenial natures; and contrariwise Antipathy, by contracting the
said beams from the Circumference unto the Center, moves after an opposite
manner, namely by division or discord; that is, quite contrary unto the beams
of the other which are emitted.

I Have signified unto you first, in my precedent discourse, that two
properties were Archetypically, or Ideally, and after a complicite manner
comprehended in one radical Unity, or Essence, namely the one effected by its
Nolunty, the other by its Volunty Lo here the root and original foundation, or
point, from the which all Antipathy and Sympathy do spring, namely the first
from the privative property or its Nolunty; the second from its positive or
Volunty. I told you next, that from this one root, or Unity in essence, a
two-sold branch or member did spring forth, expressing typically, and
explicitly, the effects and conditions of these two contrary properties, or
dispositions, which were contained complicitely in the Ideall root, namely
darkness, (which is the privative fruit of his Nolunty,) and light, the true
character or badge of his Volunty. And then I proved unto you, that these two
were the beginnings of all things. Lo here the two Principles of Antipathy and
Sympathy, extracted out of one root. Thirdly, I demonstrated unto you, that by
the separation of the pure from the impure, from the dark Chaos, (which act was
effected by the spagerick virtue of the bright emanation, or word of the
eternal Unity) the humid or watery nature of the world was created; that is to
say, essentially informed, by the lively presence of the said all-informing
Spirit; so that through that union of two contrary natures in one, namely, the
informing essence, or naturating nature; and the informed substance, or the
nature naturated; the spirit of the world was animated, and afterward by the
wisest Philosophers termed the Anima mundi, which is that angelical
composition of two, called therefore by the Sages Alteritas, as God in his
simple nature is called Identitas. Now the passive portion, of which alterity
was made, is said to be the humid created nature, o^ naturated matter of the
world, whose active essence is the ever-living emanation from eternity, which
(as the Apostle teaches us) does vivifie all things, and fills all things,
and is all in all. The union of these two makes the catholic soul of the
world, called in respect of the simple, creating, and vivifying emanation,
Men's; in regard only of the spirit informed, Spiritus; and, as these two are
united in one, Anima. Lo here the third degree of the sympatheticall and
antipatheticall progression, from the simple root of eternity, namely, the
created matter or spirit in the soul of the world, being the child or
offspring of darkness, or the dark Chaos, which is therefore naturally prone
unto the negative or privative effects of darkness, and consequently apt in
its own condition, to receive any discordant and antipatheticall impression,
which the angelical spirits of darkness shall imprint upon it. For as the
sacred light, which animates the humid spirit of the world, and consequently
the whole mass of the waters, whereof the heaven and the earth was made, (as
St. Peter does justify) is the most movable, agill, and active of all things;
so on the contrary party, the matter that is informed, and therefore the
created body and spirit, is most degenerate from it, in that it is no way
inclined of its own nature unto motion or life. For the Philosophers words are,
Materia est per se ad motum inefficax, and ab ipsa anima seu luce degenerans.
Wherefore of its self it endueth its mother Chaos, or Hyles her condition, and
is inclined to rest, immobility, darkness, cold, spissitude, and congelation:
For this cause therefore it suffers the impressions and characters of both
oppositions, to wit, sometimes it enclineth unto darkness, and then it grows
spisse, opak, cold, immobil, thick, and ponderous, and tends in that his
property downwards to the cold center, or the seat of darkness, which is its
mother; and then it is in rebellion and opposition with light, motion, and
heat, and so it is antipatheticall unto the actions of light and life; as we
see the airy spirit of the world, which is clear, light, diaphan, thin,
movable, and soaring upward, by the operating power of the descending light,
becomes by the Northern cold congealed, opak, spisse, and immobil, or fixed
into snow, hail, ice, frost, and such like. So that by this antipatheticall
accession of the cold characters of the dark abyss, it is discordant from the
loving union, and symphoniacall access, which it had unto the region of light.
Contrariwise, the bright form of the soul, which is the essence of that
eternal emanation, does give the matter or spirit of the soul's life, action,
motion, hear, tenuity, and diaphanity, and that more or less, according as it
has power and dominion over it. And we must note, that the more the spirit
approaches unto the nature of light, the firmer are the bonds of its
sympatheticall accords. For as sympathy does consist of things of a like
nature, so the nearer the spirit approaches unto form, the greater is the
sympathy and accord, the surer the tie, and the more virtuous the effect; for
the more that the created spirit is illuminated, the less it remembers that
natural inclination and love, that it had unto its dark original; insomuch
that by such an extreme purified exaltation it becomes as it were deified:
And therefore Plato's opinion is, that if the middle spirit, which is between
the mental beam, and the dark bodily substance, does more adhere unto the
divine or mental beam, than the dark body, then it will become a good Demon or
Angel; but if it respect the body more than the divine beam, it will descend
unto the nature of a Cacodemon, or spirit of darkness. Also by Scripture we
are taught, that by adhering unto this divine light, namely, unto Christ, we
shall be transformed into the same image, to wit, if we forsake this dark
world, and the lusts of the obscure body or flesh. But to return unto the soul
of the great world. If the airy spirit be given over unto the power of
darkness, it becomes bodily, and turns into the same image, namely, frost,
snow, hail, etc. but if the hot effect, or the formal act of light, prevail a
degree over the stupid cold of darkness, it leaves his opake quality, and
becomes diaphan, and returns from an earthly, fixed, and obscure nature,
unto a clear, transparent, and fluxible substance; and by another degree of the
divine act, it is made more subtle, more dilated, more invisible and pure, and
it is called Air; by a third it is purified unto fire; by a fourth unto
ether, when it loses all the appetite of mutation, and forgets the
privative stock from whence it came: by a fifth it becomes angelical or
imperial; and so it is exalted more and more in dignity, according as it is
more and more obedient unto the actions of the eternal and catholic influence
of form, which shines forth from the fountain of infinity. For we must
understand, that the whole inclination of the eternal emanation, is to reduce
this child of darkness unto eternal light, unity, and life; as contrariwise,
the endeavors of the potentiall darkness, which is the stamp of Gods Nolunty,
or privative nature, are clean contrary. So that all the end of the creating
light's action, is to unite all by the symphoniacall band of love and unity,
and consequently of sympathy, namely, by making the catholic child of
darkness like it self, and therefore to make two to compassionate each other.
But contrariwise, that of darkness is evermore inclined to make duality of
unity, and to breed discord, by violating the bands of concord, and so to
procreate a new antipathy and hatred, thereby to destroy the fruits of love. So
that the spirit which light has redeemed out of the dark Chaos, is the
intermediate subject betwixt both the extremes, that is to say, between light
and darkness: and therefore is the passive subject ordained by the Creator, to
endure the impressions of each opposite extreme, whereupon it becomes
sometimes the subject of sympathy, namely, when it is obedient unto union and
light; and sometimes of antipathy, to wit, when it rebelleth against that
light. Thus do we see the true subject of all passion in the soul of the world,
and this was the only reason, why the Philosopher Heraclitus avowed with such
confidence, That all things were composed of strife and friendship; and
Empedocles, That the soul was made of amity and enmity. I will now therefore
express unto you that concordant order, which that eternal love, who shined
out from the Father of light and love, has put and placed in each region of
this world, to distinguish the two different natures from one another, by
placing between them an intermediate subject, which does agree with each
extreme. And first I will speak of the orders in the universal spirit of the
world, and lastly, of every particular vivified, and inacted spirit, as well in
the intellectual or imperial, as vital or aetheriall, and natural or
elementary heaven, and that in order.

We must place the two opposite principles in this world, in the two extremes
of the semidiameter thereof; and first, we imagine the seat of the God of
light, or of the divine act, to consist in the convexity of the higher and
purer Orb of the Angels, or Imperial Heaven, (I speak unto the vulgars
understanding) that is in the circumference of the vawted world; and then we
deem the throne of darkness, or the divine puissance, to be in the center
thereof, as the furthest place from its opposite in nature, which is light.
Here you may see the two principles of concord and discord, of love and hatred,
and consequently of sympathy and antipathy, of the effects whereof all the
Scripture and each member of Philosophy, is full. The catholic matter which
was originally extracted out of darkness, namely, the waters, which was made
the material substance, (of which the heavens and the earth were framed by the
divine word, does occupy all that space which the world contains) was by the
celestial Al^himy, or spagerick virtue of the divine illuminating emanation,
divided according unto the contrary and discordant natures of the said two
principles, into the upper waters, and the lower waters: whereof the first or
higher waters were good, and obedient unto the bright Divinity, and were
converted into a fiery nature, being thereupon termed the Imperial nature,
for their obedience unto the bright emanation, and were full of intellectual
fire, and angelical light. And therefore this portion of the waters was
ordained for the seat of the good Angels. The lower waters contrariwise, as
being fecall, gross, impure, and therefore more rebellious unto light, and
obedient by participation unto darkness, were placed next unto their dark
beginning, namely, the earth* and did possess all that space between the starry
heaven and the earth, which is called Elementary, and for this cause is subject
to all changes of generation and corruption: And this was ordained to be the
seat of Satan and his angels, which is for that cause called the Prince of this
world, Ephesians. 2. Ephesians. 6.
the Prince of the air; and his prime subjects are called Principalities,
Potentates, and Governors of this world. Lo here the two extremes in the
created nature! from the upper whereof, a general sympathy and love, or a
Symphoniacall consent of things, is made and effected in this world: by the
other, namely the lower, an universal Antipatheticall jar, is by turns
effected, and intruded into the Symphoniacall accord of things in the lower
world, namely when the severe Attributes of God* do rain down into the starry
world, influences of a contrary nature, which afterward by their emissions unto
the lower world, give liberty and power unto the bad Angels, to work their
destructive and Antipatheticall effects, on certain creatures thereof.

As for example, the attribute ELOHIM, does send down into the star, or
Planet of Saturn, the fruits of his chill and frozen effects, whereby the
spirits of that Sphere are corroborated; the which again do pour down their
Boreall or Northern nature, unto the spirits which are their Substitutes in the
Elementary world, to wit, those which have power to harm by the Northern winds.
Hereupon Archangelus Cabalista: Com. in c^^. Dogm.
Hoc nomen EL, quod nos Deum habemus interpretatu, omnia fovet, and omnibus
succurrit, summa pietate, and clementia, id quod est illi proprium, and ideo
illi gratia attribuitur: At per ipsum nomen ELOHIM veniunt severa punitiones
and strages, and Angeli ei inservientes dicuntur BEN-ELOHIM i. e. filii ELOHIM:
ELOHIM ergo terrorem significat, and pavorem: Hinc locus Aquilonaris ei
assignatur, a quo procedit omne malum: This name or attribute EL, which is by
interpretation God, does foster or nourish all things, and assisteth every
creature by his piety and clemency, which is appropriated unto him: But by the
name or Attribute ELOHIM, come severe punishments and Stra^agems, and the
Angels which are his Ministers to effect his will are called BEN-ELOHIM, that
is to say, the sons of ELOHIM: ELOHIM therefore signifies terror and fear: And
for this cause the Northern quarter of the world, from whence comes all evil,
is assigned unto this property, etc. By this therefore we may discern, how the
spirits, which are dispensatours as well of salutary as malevolent and
destructive influences, are in the mass of the lower Elementary waters: whereby
man and the other creatures of God, may be either preserved or destroyed. To
conclude, that middle spirit in the world, called the Firmament, which divides
both the extreamly-differing waters from one another, and is that intermediate
spirit of the world, which does equally participate, and behold each extreme,
is the Centrall mansion of that eternal Spirit, which emitteth his beams from
his stately Solar, or sunny palace, even unto the Center of darkness, and
extends his emanation even unto the seat of Light, which is his root: for his
brightness is emitted from the attribute ELOAH, by the beautiful or glorious
port, or gate TIPHERETH: which imports, grace, beauty, and pulchritude, by
the Angelical order of the Virtues, into that purified palace of the Sun: So
that by his emanating presence, he penetrateth every where, and fills all
things by his presence, and vivifieth all things by his Virtue, and is the
Father of life, vegetation, multiplication, and preservation, and has made his
seat in the Center of the heavens, that by one most perfect Consonant, namely a
spiritual Diapason, he might illuminate the Angels above, and the stars round
about him, and that by a more material Diapason, he might penetrate into the
Center of the elementary world, to communicate his perfection to each creature
thereof, that they might be beautified by his bright presence, and vivified by
the penetrating beams of his essence, and consequently that the imps or spirits
of darkness may be debilitated by the appearance of his Glory; as if one chord
were extended betwixt the Fountain of Light and the abyss of darkness, which
being struck, made an unison, but being pressed down and divided directly in
the middle of it, each part will render, being struck, a double diapason, unto
that unison, importing a double perfection, proceeding from the bright
catholic Emanation; whereof the one respects the adorning of the lower
waters, with life and virtue, and the other makes an accord of friendship
among the higher. Now as the body of the Sun, and substance of the Ether is of
a middle or mean spiritual matter, or consistence of the waters, it is
evident, that it also is subject to be altered by passion, as well
Antipatheticall, as Sympatheticall: For else it would not be the immediate
receptacle of those opposite and contrary Emanations, which descend from the
differing Attributes: But by effect we find the contrar^ For some stars are
friends, and Sympathise in nature, with some creatures below: Some again, do
hate one another deadly, and consequently send down into this lower world,
contrary influences, which move contrary passions or impressions, in the vital
spirits, or souls of certain Elementary creatures. Again, we find that the life
of the Animal, does consist of opposite actions, namely of Systole and Diastole;
that is, of contraction by the property of matter, and dilatation by the Act of
the formal Light; So that the nature of matter, is to draw by contraction from
the Circumference unto the Center: but the condition of the formal essence is
quite contrary unto it: For it does dilate or emit his beams from the Center to
^he Circumference. Also the Philosophers testify, that in sleep and rest the
spirits are contracted from the Circumference to the Center, after the manner
of the dark Chaos, or cold North wind, which brings by that contraction, the
agill and volatile spirit or air of the lower world to rest, and fixation by
condensation: But contrariwise, in wachfulness, or waking, they conclude, that
there is an emission or emanation of spirits from the Center unto the
Circumferentce, which is an Argument of two contrary effects, of the firmaments
vivifying operation, in the souls or spirits of the creatures below, and yet by
reason of the equality of each action and passion, they have a
compound-disposition, according and agreeing in the natural operation of life,
which descends from above. Thus therefore you see, that even from the starry
heaven there descends Sympathy and Antipathy.

As for the Elementary world, it abounds manifestly with the effects of these
two contrarieties, and therefore lest there should follow any continual
unnatural perturbation, which may deprave this great formal workman of his
expectation, which was to put concord and peace in the machine which he had
ordered and framed; he divided each region in this lower world, that there
might be interposed an indifferent friend between two extreme enemies, which he
effected by weight, number, and measure; So that unto the weightiest portion of
the lower waters is imparted the least proportion of form, that by its
grossnesse and weight it might fall unto the Center, and remain fixed in it, and
it was called earth; then, unto another portion he bestowed a double measure of
Light, to make it reside in a higher region; and thereby the matter which was
next the earth, became more thin, light, and movable. And therefore this
augmentation of Light, melted the frozen waters a little, and did make them
fluxible and transparent: So that he partly by reason of the continuity of his
matter, with that of the earth, and partly because of its cold nature, it is a
temperate friend of the earth, and takes his place next unto him; So that it
is not so cold as the earth, nor so moist as the air: For it is not enough
subtiliated, till the bright Agent of the world bestows on the dark watery
abyss, above the water, three portions of his Light; So that it converted part
of the gross lower waters, into a thinner and more light shape, than was the
watery Element; and it was the air which by reason of the triple proportion of
formal light was hotter, and more dilated, then was the water; wherefore as
the water was cold, (but not so cold as the earth,) and moist, (but not so
moist as the air;) So the air is hot, but not so hot as the fire; and moister
then the water. By reason therefore of his moisture, this portion of the
catholic Element is friendly to the water on the one side, and on the other
side unto the fire, because of his heat. Lastly, that in-created Spirit of life
did yet multiply a part of those waters, by an other or higher degree, of
subtility and purity; So that it became the most subtle and highest portion of
the general Elements, and is consequently hot and dry; wherefore by reason of
its drouth, it agrees on the one side with the earth which in circulation is
next unto him, and on the other side with the air, in respect of his heat; but
it is hotter then the air, and not so dry as the earth. Lo here you see the
effect of that Sympathy, which the Peace and Love of God, did put among the
discordant enemies of this world: For thereby the water, as a friend to both
the air and earth, becomes a stickler, and mediator of peace between them.
The air, as a friend unto the two enemies fire and water, is made an
indifferent judge betwixt them both; So that the one contrary is kept from
struggling and tugging with the other, by the super-celestiall and golden tie of
peace. Heb. 1.
Thus you see, that this Spiritual Christ does (as the Apostle says) bear and
sustain all things by the word of his Virtue. And as Hermes said, the humid
nature by the assistance of the world, Pimand. 1.
is ordered and disposed harmoniously into Elements; So that by this Virtue,
all Sympatheticall action was effected in the Sublunary world, Sap. 19.
of which the Wiseman speaks thus: In se Elementa dum convertebantur, sicut
in organo qualita is sonus immutatur, and omnia suum locum custodiunt. But when
this harmonicall rank and Symphoniacall proportion is violated, then the
enemies come together and rage against one another, unto the disturbance of the
whole Sublunary fabric: For air and earth do struggle against one another; as
also the water does cruelly invade the limits of the fire, and all will be out
of order, and in a destructive war with one another, were it not for the
presence of this Lord of misrule. Thus, as you see, will Dyscracy and Antipathy
reign by their turns, in the nether region of the world, when the tie of the
elements are loose. Thus will friendship be quickly changed into hatred, when
JEHOVA is pleased to send forth his altering winds, and to corroborate and
animate by his influence from above, the ministers of his wrath here below,
against the sublunary creature.

Now come I to prove, that all sympatheticall and antipatheticall effects, do
proceed from the secret and occult actions of the ministering spirits of this
world. That there is a mighty difference amongst the Angels, no man of wisdom
can deny; for though all Angels were at the first united unto the divine Unity,
yet by reason of the rebellion and ambition of Lucifer, that knot of union was
broke; and then the waters were divided from the waters, that the good Angels
might be separated and distinguished from the bad, by the interposition of the
firmament, as a Diaphragma or middle bar, between each of their habitations: So
that the dark Angels were enclosed in the lower, or dark, fecall, and dreggy
waters; and the light Angels were lodged in the higher waters, which were
illuminated and dignified by a super-celestiall light and glory.

Thus you may see, that the very Angels of heaven, forasmuch as they are
created of air, or the humid spirit of the world, (which is their external)
and the bright emanation from Unity, (which is their internal) are subject, by
reason of their material sub^tance, which participates of both extremes, unto
affections or passions, as well sympatheticall as antipatheticall; and
consequently they a^e able by reason of their contrary p^operties, to produce
both sympatheticall and antipatheticall accidents, in the spirits of the
elementary creatures: As for examples sake, we will compare the catholic
sympathy and antipathy, which is in the soul of the great world, unto that
peculiar soul or spirit which is in man, being that every particular was framed
out of the universal. We ought therefore to understand, that the whole essen^e
of the soul or spirit of man, though it be invisible, extends and manifests
it self by her virtues and faculties; for by her irascibility it contemns and
hates, and by her concupiscibility it does covet and desire, and by her
rationability she distinguishes and discerns between them both. And verily,
the whole effect of the souls essence consists in these three powers, whereof
the first is compared to the action of the lower waters, which is apt to jar
and disagree, and is the region of L^tig^um, or the Prince of darkness. The
second is referred unto the nature of the firmament, which is the region of
life and salutary love; and the last unto the angelical and intellectual
heaven, which does discern between things that belong unto the lower heavens,
or regions of the world. Whereupon it appears, that from her rational
property, every sense belonging unto the soul of man does proceed; as, from the
other two, every affection, motion, or passion of the mind, does arise and
spring. Now there are known to be four affections of the soul, whereof two do
proceed from her concupiscible power, namely, Joy and Hope, (for at that which
we love, we rejoice and are glad; or, we hope for and expect, that which shall
rejoice us or make us glad) and the two other issue from her irascible faculty
or virtue, namely, Grief or Dolor, and Fear; for now we grieve at that which
we hate, or we fear that which would make us grieve, or be dolorously affected.
And verily, we shall, after a due inquisition, find, that these four affections
of the Microcosmicall soul, are not only the beginnings, and common matter or
subject of all moral vices or virtues, but also the originalls of
Metaphysicall or occult, and Physical or elementary, and apparent sympathy and
antipathy, as well in the little as in the great world, and every creature
thereof. For I would not have you ignorant, that being the soul in man is
derived from the vivifying emanation, dwelling in the words spiritual vehicle,
it must follow, that that soul in the great world must needs have in it the
faculties, which the little worlds soul has; for, Quod facit tale, est magis
tale. But these faculties in the soul of man were derived from the great world,
and the eternal soul that vivified it. Wherefore it follows, that there is a
rationability, a concupiscibility, and an irascibility in the soul of the great
world, though not made manifest unto us: First, because that it has attributes
of irascibility and displeasure; for from his Attribute ELOHIM Gibbor, he
sends down by the port Geburah, the fiery beams of his displeasure, by his
Archangell Samael, into the globe or sphere of Mars, who is for that cause
President of the irascible faculty of the greater world; wherefore his
influences do cause wrath and angry effects in the air and earth, as thunder,
lightnings, comets, and other wrangling accidents, which (as Scriptures tell
us) are the arguments of Gods wrath and vengeance; also war, famine, and
pestilence; and augmenteth the angry nature and spirit of men and beasts. And
again, Gods Attribute IEHOVA Sabbath pours down the beams of
concupiscibility, by the Arch-angell Anael, upon the globe of Venus, according
to Philosophers and Astronomers, who for that reason, being moved thereto by
experience and observation, have made this star the president and rectrix of
the concupiscible faculty: As the Attribute EL does pour out the beams of
reason, justice, and religion, yea, and natural vegetation and life, into the
sphere of Jupiter. But principally this natural faculty is rained into the
soul of the world, by the Attribute IAH, through his port Sapientia or Wisdom.
The second reason is, because the great world has an intellectual or
rational heaven, and a concupiscible property manifested in every creature;
and an irascible, which is apparent also by reason of hatred and horror, which
appears between one thing and another. Also, that there is an irascible
quality in the elements, that deadly hatred which is betwixt the fire and
water, and the air and earth, does manifest. That also there is a love and
concupiscence between things, it is evident, because one nature rejoices in
his like; and therefore by a natural inclination, every thing does move and
convert it self unto his like, by all possibility; but especially it is most
inclinable unto it self. So we see, that fire does naturally affect and move
unto fire, water unto water, and earth unto earth. But above all, the vivifying
spirit of every living thing, which is celestial, and therefore exceeds the
place of the elements, does with fervency affect and thirst after his like, and
is rejoiced at the presence and concurrency thereof. And for this cause, this
passion of what creature soever, will be the more truly sympatheticall; and the
sympathy between things will be so much the greater, and of more force, by how
much the nearer the spirits of the things, either present or dispersed, are in
nature and consanguinity to one another. As for example, If that both be of one
minier or thing, in number; also like specific individualls, though they
differ in number, as the Uznea, fat, or blood of one man do sympathise with
another, ad distans; the Lodestone of one Mine may affect harmonically the
Iron of another, ad distans: And I told you before the true reason thereof, as
well radical as immediate, namely, because both the natures belong unto one
divine influence, or proceed from angelical beams or an emanation, sent forth
from one and the same star, as well fixed, namely, of the firmament, or eighth
sphere, as erratick and planetary. For I told you, that there is not one
animal, or vegetable, or mineral upon the earth, or in the seas, which has not
a peculiar star, that pours out upon him his proper influence, as well to
produce and generate its like, and to continue it in succession, as to preserve
and maintain it in essence. Now each angelical nature has his appropriated
beams, from the radical emanation of some divine Attribute, which conveyeth it
to his destinated or starry storehouse; and from the Olympic spirits of that
star, it is sent down unto such spirits in the elements, as are their inferior
ministers, which operate according unto the self-same nature in each specific,
and every individual there. As for example, The stars in the Ram or Aries of
the Zodiac, have chiefest influence over such like cattle on the earth; and
the Scorpion over the like creeping things thereof: the Crab, over such like
creatures of the sea; for we find by experience, that if the Crab be taken
when the Sun and Moon do join together, according unto the Longitude or degree
of the Aequinoctiall, in which the great star of the celestial Crab's claw is
found, it is of mighty virtue and power against poison; and if it be collected
or taken at another time, it will have but small effect. Again, we must note,
that each fixed star, or constellation of the Zodiac, has his proper Planet,
whose peculiar House he is, which concurreth in the fortification and
alteration of that influence. For the diversity of application of other Planets
unto it, does cause a variety of operation, even in the same animals sperm, or
plants, seed, and mettles secret spirit. And yet howsoever, they do more or
less agree and sympathize in nature, as the beams of each Planet, so applying
unto one another, will give them leave; for if the concurrence be between
friendly Planets, and of one and the same triplicity, namely, where their
Houses are of friendly elements, then the sympathy will be the stronger. And
thus much Agrippa does seem to intimate in these words, Agrip. occult. Philos.
lib. 1.
In rebus proprietates occultas non ab elementali natura, sed caelitus in
sitas, sensibus nostris occultas, rationi vix denique notas, quae quidem a vita
spirituque mundi, per ipsos stellarum radios proficiscuntur, quae a nobis non
aliter quam experientia, and conjecturis indagar^ possun^. Scire ergo debes
quod unaquaeq^e res movet ad suum simile and inc^inat aa seipsum secundum totum
posse suum: The occult properties in things, which are not grafted in them by
an Elementary nature, but descend from heaven, are hidden from our s^nses, and
scarcely known unto our reason: Forasmuch as they are derived from the life and
spirit of the world, by the beams of ^he stars, the which cannot be otherwise
scanned and found out by us, than by experience, and that conjecturally or by
guess. You must therefore know, that every thing does move unto his like, and
by all the means possible does inc^ine unto it self, etc. Whereby he argues
that the catholic Angelical spirit, which vivifieth the world, in whose
Diviner part cosisteth the Sephiroticall power or Virtue of all the Divine
Attributes, in which also (as Ezekiel testifies,) is contained the virtues of
the four wind, is the main actor, who by his several subdivided emissions, of
diversely conditioned beams, does operate in and by his starry Organs, all these
occult and hidden effects below, which cannot fall into the Sphere or capacity
of a common man's understanding, though by effect we find it to be thus and
thus; So that there is not a particular beam, that is emitted from it, which
has not a secret disposed act, no otherwise varying from one another than, by
ocular experience, we find the effects of them to differ: For whatsoever was
originally decreed in the secret Counsel of the Archetype, is effected from a
generality unto many Specialities, and from each Speciality unto an infinite
number of individual particularities; So that the aeviall or Angelical
effect, is the image of the eternal Idea, and the temporal world, is the
similitude of the aeviall; and again, in the temporal or typical world, every
stellar shape is the likeness or pattern of the Angelical Idea; and again,
the Elementary things are the shadows of the spiritual shapes or Images in
heaven: Wherefore as God sends out his Emanation, which is his Image, unto
the Angelical world, in a diversity of fashions, and multiplicity of respects;
So the Angelical spirits do send out their several different Lights unto each
other, namely every order unto his inferior, and every upper Sphere unto the
Spheres which are below them, and so from the stars, which also apply their
lights unto one another by several aspects, infusing them in and upon the
creatures by degrees downward, even unto the very Center of the earth: which
creatures after the manner of their pattern do also shine forth unto one
another by beams, which are either Sympathetical and harmonious or
Antipathetical and discordant to each other; neither ought we to doubt, that
there are such agreeing and disagreeing beams here below, seeing that in the
fountain of Unity from whence all things do flow, we observe an opposition of
properties, namely a privative Nolunty, and a positive Volunty; Nor yet ought
we to deem otherwise, then that the passive spiritual matter of the world's
soul, is the substject by which the Divine Virtue works, and in which it
stirs up as well loving and positive, or good and Sympatheticall passions,
by pouring out plentifully his positive and vivifying beams of life, adding
delight and joys with a completion of the spiritual created matter's
appetite; So that it forgets the rooted nature which its dark Parents or
Mother Chaos, and the Divine Puissance did in her nativity bestow upon it, and
is converted into a child of Light, by adoption; and therefore in this case, it
does Sympathize with those golden showers of charitable and vivifying Light,
which are sent down from the benign attributes of God, and begins to hate, and
dread, and loathe or eschew, all such privative influences, as are poured down
from the severe, insalutary and destructive attributes; no otherwise then Light
flies from darkness, and being delighted at the presence of more light, and
life, avoideth and hates the presence of his contrary, namely of death, and
evil. Hence therefore it comes, that the children of Light, which are grafted
unto this catholic illuminated spirit, do fly, as from a pestilence the
children of darkness and their works. And the reason is, because this humid
created spirit, finding now the pleasure, volunty, and felicity of its
illuminated estate, is afraid least the privative beams of darkness, or the
dismal Emanations of God's wrath, should dimm their light, and obscure the
brightness of life; that is to say, lest they should turn their Sympathizing
passions of joy and gladness, into the Antipathizing storms of sadness and
mourning, by sucking or contracting the beauteous Emanations of joy, love, and
gladness, from the Circumference into the Center of the Spirit, and so deprive
it of that salutary and sprightfull irradiation of love and life, by hiding of
God's face, which he did emit from the Center to the Circumference of the
creature, to recreate and rejoice it. According unto that of Moses: God
forsakes the wicked and hides his face from them, Deuteronomy. 31.17. Psalm. 104.
that much evil may befall them: Or unto that of David: God hiding his face
from the wicked they are troub^ed, receiving their spirit they expire: That is,
vexation and privative passions befall them: which may also be understood of
the catholic Microcosmicall wordl's spirit, as of the Microcosmicall and other
creatures, all which have their being from the Macrocosmicall Spirit: For when
the Divine nature, which animateth the Sun of heaven, was displeased at the
Passion of our Savior, it did Centrally withdraw his beam^s from it, and it
lost its beauty, and became dark, against the common course of nature; So that
the pleasant Sympathy which it produced by its presence unto the creatures
beneath, and in the heavens above, was quite changed into Antipathy for a
while. This therefore was a privative passion in the heart of the great world,
or as a man may say, a Syncope or swooning of the world, when ELOAH did abstain
for that season, to pour forth his influence of beauty by the port of
TIPHERETH: Also that palpable darkness which happened in Egypt, was a privative
passion, caused by the hiding away of God's face, or by the contracting the
beams of light within himself. Such privative passions also are menaced unto
the Sun, Moon, and Stars, toward the latter end of the world: For if the
world was made by the sending forth of God's bright Emanation (for by the
Spirit of the Lord the heavens were adorned, as Job tells us) it follows,
that by taking it away, all will return again unto darkness, and plain nothing
or deformity, even as it was before. But this producing of good and
Sympatheticall passions, by emitting of light from the Center to the
Circumference; and again, the effects of Antipatheticall passions, which do
oppose the concord and Sympathy of life, is excellently described and painted
forth, by the due examination of the vital action in man: For as there are
noted to be in general, two several active Virtues in man's spirit; whereof
the one is voluntary, which is the Prince over the other, and commands and
moves the inferior actions, even as the Divine Angel Mitattron does in the
Primum mobile of the great world, which is referred unto the Volunty, and
moves by it the celestial orbs, and Elementary world; so in the
Microcosmicall Fabric, the first mover is that Divine mental beam which is
the head of man's soul; and the other kind is involuntary, because it is
commanded and rules after the will of the intellectual or rational beam, no
otherwise then all the lower Orbs are constrained to move, after the will of
the mover in the Primum mobile; So the vital action in man, is one of those
branches, which is involuntary, and no otherwise subject unto the Volunty of
the mental beam, then the starry heaven; (which is the seat of life, forasmuch
as the Sun which is the heart of the world, has his residence there) is
commanded by the Emperyall Spirit.

Now as we find, that according unto the will of the Divine essence poured out
into the heavens, and consequently here below, as well joyful and
compassionate effects do spring from the positive and dilative property of
Unity, to recreate and stir up volupty and pleasure in the creature; as also
trist and sad effluxions, proceeding from the contractive Virtue, whereby God
hides the face of his benignity from the creatures, and thereupon as well
concupiscible as odible or irascible passions are caused in the world: Even so
we find it manifested, as well by experience, as by the observation of the
learnedest in Physic and Philosophy; that the vital action, which is
overruled according unto the mind of the superior Volunty, either is opened or
enlarged by the dilative property of the first movers will, and thereby opens
the cabinet of the heart, to produce in the vital spirit those good passions,
which Sympathize with life and light, namely gladness, hope, confidence, love,
miserecord, and affability; or it is contracted, and thereby gathers together
also the spirits in the heart, whereby is engendered in the vital spirit such
bad privative passions, as do antipathise with those good ones, which rejoice
and comfort the life, and these passions are termed Antipatheticall, because
they are wholly contrary unto the nature of those which are good; of which
number, proceeding from the hearts contraction, are sadness, care, despair,
fear, hatred, anger, furor, bashfullness, and so forth; So that as by the
former, the spirit by dilatation did look up unto the Fountain of Light, and
did rejoice to see the volupties and pleasure thereof; So by the later, the
spirit was forced by contraction, to be deprived from the vision of light, and
to look p^onely downward into the abyss of darkness, and to participate with
the dark passions thereof. And by this decifering and opening therefore of the
two opposite passions, in the little world, we may easily collect the reason and
manner of them in the great world, being that as eadem sit ratio parcis and
totius; so also the passions of the great world, may easily be considered by
those of the little world. As for example, The Lodestone is in comparison of
its mother earth, even as man is to the whole world; wherefore Man is called
the Son of the world by He^mes, as Cardanus, Bap. Porta, D. Gilbert, and
others, have made the Lodestone the child or son of the earth. We find, I say,
in the Lodestone, all the passions, as well sympatheticall as antipatheticall,
which do affect his mother earth; for it has his Poles with the earth, and it
escheweth all in conformity with the earth, it flies from that which is
contrary unto its nature. And again, does sympathise with that which is its
like, it has its Aequinoctialls, Colures, Meridians, and Tropi^ks, as the
earth has; and, in conclusion, it argues not only a sense in motion, but a
kind of reason in its action, namely, its refusing that which is contrary unto
it, or embracing and desiring that, which is agreeing and conformable unto its
harmony, as shall be more at large expressed, as well in the second part of
this present Book, as in the magneticall experiences, which shall be set down
in the third or last Book of this Treatise.

To conclude, how this mental beam receives the behests or influxions, of
benignity or severity from above, is expressed in my precedent discourse,
namely, by permitting of bad spirits of darkness to reign and have dominion,
or helping the good spirits to execute their offices of joy and delight. Lo,
here is contained the sum of all mystical and hidden sympathy or antipathy in
the world, which some do therefore, by reason of the profundity and difficulty
in the inquisition thereof, justly attribute unto the secret act and operation
of an angelical power, which is a middle virtue betwixt God and the creature.
And for this reason (as is said before) an Angel is defined to be, Tanquam
inter Deum and Naturam virtus media, a qua fiunt operationes in rebus quas vel
natura eoram non faceret, non vel sic faceret: quas ali^ provenire dicunt a
proprietate occulta, and alii quia tale; As it were a mean virtue between God
and nature, by the which certain operations are effected in things, which their
nature (that is, their elementary form) would not produce, at the leastwise
would not so effect, as that which is said to happen or come to pass by an
occult property, and, as others will, Quiatale, Because it is so.

How this is demonstrated by Harmony, what Sympathy and Antipathy is.
IT is a diverse proportion or disproportion of matter, or mundane spirit,
guided by one and the same eternal soul. Veni spiritus a quatuor ventis.
Demonstrated by a Pipe, whose notes vary according unto proportion, in spirit
or air, moved by one and the self-same blast, whose proportions, when they
disproportionably meet, do jar; but when they proportionably meet, accord and
agree. All spirits in creatures are proportioned by more or less air, all in
spirit of life, moving and acting; and according unto the proportions in
concord or discord, they agree or disagree: as the weights of Pythagoras his
hammer, in bodies proportionate or disproportionate. Also two strings being as
one stretched up, give concording or discording sounds, according to their
greatness or shortness. As for example, in this case of air in a pipe.



The creatures quality does good or evil, not the devil, but the devil by
it: Ergo, Diabolical, and to be abhorred.

The Second Member of this Second Book. Wherein the Magneticall Nature is truly
anatomised, and the reasons of Sympatheticall and Antipatheticall actions
ripped up.
CHAP. I
The Author makes a preamble in this Chapter unto this his Magnetic
Discourse, and then proceeds unto the Chaos of opinions, touching the
original and attractive virtue of Magnetic Bodies.

I Did manifest unto you in the precedent Member of this Book, the principles
and originalls of Sympathy and Antipathy; but because it is not every ones gift
to soar so high at the first, as to be capable of a Theory or speculation,
which penetrateth into Gods storehouse or treasury, contained in the abstruse
bowels or center of his created nature: I will stoop a little, for your better
instruction, and more clear information, and elucidate or make more plain the
abstruse subject we have in hand, by some vulgar or ocular demonstrations,
which may guide them and persuade them to believe that, which may otherwise
seem uncredible. That I may therefore proceed more methodically, I will only
in this member lay down the chief platform, on which I purpose to build such
experimental conclusions, as shall direct the misbelievers, yea, and such as
by their ignorance do remain hitherto obstinate in their misbelieving error,
(being that, Experienti a est etiam stultorum magistra, Experience is the
mother of foo^s) into the more assured haven of faith, and solid belief. And
because the exploits of sympathy, and also those of antipathy in every thing,
are effected by a magneticall power, which is both to expel by an irascible or
odible expulsion, and allure and draw unto it by a concupiscible attraction,
(as shall be showed you hereafter) I think it most fit to search out
diligently, and that with the Argos eyes of my brightest senses, or to
penetrate deeply with the Lyncean optic of my sharpest understanding, unto the
dark mystery of the Load-stone's or Magnet's nature, that we may with the more
assurance make our ingression into the practical demonstration, of so arcane
and occult a contemplation. For seeing that the secret operation, as well of
the Weapon-salve, so exclaimed on by the ignorant, as the extraction of the
Mummy, ^both corporal and spiritual, out of men or beasts; as also the
transplantation of the animal's vitalls, infirm or wholesome nature, into any
vegetable or animal; with the manner of the stealing of the virtue and strength
from one animal, and infusing of it into another; the secret alligation of the
plants spirit, with that of man, or any other animal; so that what befalls
the one, namely, either wet or dry, or cold and heat, the other also shall
partake of. Seeing (I say) that these operations are termed magneticall,
because they imitate the active virtues of the magnet or Lodestone, I will
bend all mine endeavor to make an open passage, unto the anatomising of all
those mysteries, by the unripping and undoing the spiritual fardell of the
Lodestone, thereby to p^y and look into the fountain of its formal,
interior, or centrall and essential actions; and to espy the grounds, as well
of his irascible as concupiscible passions: For if once we shall be able to
find out, by the subtillest aspect of our reason, the invisible passages and
lurking places thereof, and can after that observe the point, or punctual root
of their essences, and discover the internal cause of each action, we shall
with ease conquer and surpass all the rest, being that what things appear
alike in external effect, must needs p^ove homogeniall and all one, in their
internal and hidden natures, as shall be proved more at large unto you.

But alas, why should I, being ( minimus Apostolorum) the least of a thousand,
presume to make so dangerous a voyage unto that unknown Island, where this
occult magne^ick Nature does dwell, among, or in the middle of such dangerous
and inaccessible Rocks, when so many wise Philosophers have ^ailed and wandered
on the variable and tempestuous seas of opinion, and have at the last returned
home, only with the tidings of what others have related of her being, her
essence, and her active virtues; and so know nothing of their own, but what
they have attained to by hearsay, or perceived by external operation? Good
God* how many such ships of fools are there in this world? who when they have
traveled in their studies and learning many years, floating through the wide
seas of vain and scarce probable imaginations, have returned home now in their
old age unto the port of their infancy, having their wit or understanding only
laded and charged, with the poor fragments or merchandise of Ipse dixit, or
other men's opinions, but are able to say nothing centrally upon their own
knowledge. So that we Christians, after we have traveled, and made our
peregrination of life and studies in the world, think it sufficient in the end
to say, Aristotle, Plato, Galen, Hippocrates, and, in conclusion, this man, or
that man, said so; Ergo, it is so: When Scriptures do teach us a truer
Philosophy, which is quite contrary unto theirs. This kind of students
therefore are rightly pointed at by the Apostle, and numbered amongst those
which are, 2 Timothy 3.
semper discentes, sed ad scientiam veritatis nunquam pervenientes; ever
learning, but never attaining unto the truth. For how is it possible, that the
blind should rightly lead or conduct the blind? Others having long steered the
Helm of their Bark this way, or that way, for to find out the abstruse seat or
habitation of this Stones virtues, have scarce dashed their vessel against her
rocky Island, but have thereupon returned with wondrous relations, of what they
have by that means collected, and, in fine, have proved their new imaginations
but as superficial, as the effects of their search have been; and, in
conclusion, all have proved but conjecturall. Others have so far been guided
and directed in their search, by the Pole Star allurements, that they have
stuck fast in the frozen seas, and have gone no further; but, at the resolution
of the ice, they have returned with imaginary wonders, conceived of magneticall
Mountains, and iron Castles, even by eight degrees above the Moon, that is, in
the eighth Sphere; yea, and others soar above that place also. Whereby we may
conceive, how every man according unto his chimerian-fancy, imagines variety of
Castles in the air, yea, and above the stars also, for the magneticall soul's
habitation. Some b^gle not a jot from the continent of the earth, but imagine
it to be numbered amongst those stars, which have the Sun for their fixed
center, about the which they move perpetually; so that they feign the earth to
have the form of a star, which is far different from the Peripateticall form.
In conclusion, every one has his opinion somewhat differing from another; and
that you may know all this to be true, I will express and recite some of their
news, touching this enquiry, which after their long voyage they have made in
the suddy seas of their serious contemplations, and registered them in their
written monuments, as in the Chronicles or Histories of their studious
adventures, or speculative and spiritual travells. Amongst the which, some
foar upwards, and call the heavens for witness, to confirm their assertions;
some sail unto the hyperboreall mountains, others unto strange northern
Islands, to find out the grounds of this miracle; others send their spirits of
enquiry down unto the bowels of the earth, and find it to be the universal
starry form thereof; some will make the original to spring atomically out of
the stone and subject to be attracted. But amongst all these rational persons,
I dare scarce rank one of another kind; forasmuch as this man surely is to be
numbered among those Elders, which have traveled in the ship of fools, being
that he, much like an other Gryllus, or as the eighth wise Master of Greece,
will have this virtue to be Cacomagical, or the act of the devil.

Now amongst such as have traveled in their spirits unto heaven, to find out
this mystery, one will have the reason, for the direction of the Lodestone, to
be sought for out of the Tail of the celestial Bear-star, affirming, that the
virtue of this starry Bear does prevail, and has dominion over this Stone, and
is transferred from it into the Iron; and that is Marsilius Fic nus. But I
reply, That this is not so, because experience teaches us, that Iron of it
self has his Poles, as well as the Lodestone, and will by a due adaption seek
out, and by its own natural instinct turn and direct it self, unto the station
of his proper Poles. Of this opinion also is Petrus Peregrinus, who following
the rules of Friar Bacon, have sought the arguments of the magneticall
directions out from the Poles of the heaven. Also Cardanus will have the
immediate cause of the variation of this Stones virtue, to spring from the
rising of the star in the Bear's Tail; Lucas Gauricus is also of their opinion,
but he joyneth also the virtue of Saturn and Mars in this negotiation,
confessing withal, that the main constellation in the Zodiac unto which this
Stone is subject, is Virgo: Albertus Magnus says, that the Lodestone and Iron
are directed unto the Northern stars, and follows them no otherwise, then a
Plant called the Heli^ropion follows the Sun. Bessardus will have his opinion
apart, and makes the pole of the Zodiac the fountain of the Load-stone's
Virtue. Again, the Conimbricensian College, derive the cause hereof from a
part of the heaven, not far from the Pole. But Martin Cor^esius will have this
attractive Virtue, to descend from a place beyond the Poles or movable heavens.
On the other side, Gaudentius Merula tells us, that the Lodestone does draw
Iron, with an intent to direct it unto the North, because it is an order
superior unto the Iron, with the constellation of the Bear. I must confess,
that beams which are dilated are prompt to deliver their brethten, which are
imp^isoned, and to direct them to their native home: But I cannot understand
Me^ula's mind, in this sense. Others make the heavens in general, the fountain
of this Stone's virtue: For Paracelsus says, that it is the stars, which
being full of the Load-stone's power, draws the Iron unto them, etc. And this
should seem probable, because the Iron moves to it poles, even in the absence
of the Lodestone. Fernelius staggers: for sometimes he confesses the cause of
this Action to be abstruse; and in another place, he makes the heavens to be
the Author. Scaliger, soring nearer unto the point of verity, assigns to it
also a celestial cause unknown to himself, averring, that the terrestiall
Load-stones are derived not from the Globes, or mountains of the stars; but
from that essential power or essence, which was their Fabricator, which
reigns in that part of heaven, which hangs over the Septentrionall point.
And unto this opini^n does P^ato seem to adhere, where he confesses the
Magneticall essence to be a Divine power. And verily, they speak well, but in
so large a sense, that this their assertion appears unto their disciples,
being rightly scanned, (as I said^ igno^^m per igno^ius: For so in the general
terms we may say, that all things are from God: We will come down from our
celestial speculations, and look on the humility of such, as being too wary,
and listening overmuch unto the Proverb, Noli alium s^per^; C^imbe not too
(...), have their regard more pronely, namely upon the earth, and her effects
only; and of this rank is Fracastorius, who searching after the reason, and
beginning of this attracting faculty, does imagine that the Hyperboreall
mountains, which abound with rocks of this nature, do draw these Iron-natured
sub^^cts unto them. And this his figment seems so plausible, unto diverse
persons of learning, that they follow it as well in their Astronomicall
writings as Geographicall tables, or descriptions of the world, and Sea-cards
or maps; which if it were true, they would easily draw unto them all such Ships
as pass in the Northern Seas: Olaus Magnus, and some other that follow his
traditions, say, that the att^active force comes from some northern Islands,
which abound in that Magnetic subject. But leaving their fancy unto the empty
wind, I p^oceed unto others. Lucretius Ca^us, a poet of the Epicurean Sect,
dreameth that the attraction of Iron, is caused of an effluxion of atoms: For,
says he, according unto the Epicures opinions, as most subtle atoms do
emanate and ^^ow out from every thing; even so do atoms ^lie out of the Iron,
as Magneticall seeds, by a certain coition of it with the Load stone, into the
interposed place, or space that is between them, and that by the union or
complication of both bodies, the iron is drawn, etc. Unto this sense also do
Aphrodiseus, Joannes Cost^us, Plutarch, yea, and Thomas Aquinas incline; when
indeed they ought to know, that no attraction is made by emission from the
Center unto the Circumference, that is, by dilatation; but rather by sucking
in, and contracting from the Circumference unto the Center, and therefore the
emission of atomicall seeds, out of the Iron, can be no reason of its Union
with or moving to the stone. But it must be the Lodestone, that must draw the
beams or spirits out of the Iron: For it appears that the Iron does not draw
it self unto the Lodestone, but is drawn unto it: Thales and Anaxagoras think
that the Lodestone has life in it, because it attracteth a substance like it
self, as lively creatures do: Luc^etiu^ and Orpheus think there is that
Sympathy between the Magnet and the Iron, which is between the male and female;
and in this they err not much. Averroes, Scaliger, and the Cardinal Cusanus,
would have Iron to move unto the Lodestone, as unto his original Mattix.
Galen thinks that it draws by his substantial form.

And now I must come unto the opinion of my renowned Fellow or Colleague, D.
William Gilbert, for his Magnetic skill, and deep search as well contemplative
as experimental touching this Subject: His mind is, that this attractive
virtue in the Lodestone, does spring from formal actions, or original and
primary Virtues or vigours: For he concludes, that the Magnetic force
proceeds from a particular or singular form, differing from that formal and
specific cause in mixed bodies, mentioned by the Peripateticks, but (says he)
it is a certain form, which is the proper entity and existence of the starry
Globes, and their homogeniall incorrupted parts, which he calls the Primarie,
radical, and astreall Form, namely such a one as is in the Sun, the Moon, and
other celestial Stars. And he averreth, that after a like manner, there is one
in the earth, which is that true Magneticall Puissance, which is called the
first act or vigor. And this he says, is not derived from the whole heaven,
affirming, that it is procreated by Sympathy, through influence, or occult
qualities; neither is it from any peculiar star: For it has its Magneticall
virtue from the earth, etc. This is my learned quondam Fellow-Collegue his
opinion, whose pains and industry in the research of this Subject's practical
conclusions, as I cannot but commend and extol; So on the contrary side, reason
will not permit me, to consent unto this his speculative foundation or root of
the Load-stone's virtue in all: For who can believe, that the earth it self,
much less the particulars thereof, can have any Virtue radically from it self;
when it is evident, that as well the earth as the heavens, came radically out
of the waters? And therefore as the heaven was before the earth, it must needs
follow, that the formal Virtue of the earth, did totally descend from heaven,
and consequently the earth had no such property from it self. But of this
hereafter more at large. Among the Ethnic Philosophers Plato, and of the
Christians Scaliger and Fernelius, do think, that the cause of this Attraction
is Divine and from above; but how, and after what manner they express not. And
therefore though in a generality they have spoken the truth, yet in these
common words they seem to express, they know not what. In particular, I will
conclude with the last opinion, which is the most idle and insufficient of all
the rest, and therefore is worthy to be made the last and most unworthy part,
namely the tail, or excrement of them. Franciscus Rucus, makes a great doubt,
concerning the wonderful property in the Lodestone, and because (forsooth)
the pitch of his capacity can attain no higher then unto Superficial things,
and such as are subject unto sense; therefore he judges all effects beyond his
reach, to be Cacomagicall, and consequently he makes a doubt, whether the
cause of these actions in the Lodestone be not an impostury or subtle slight
of the Cacodemons or evil spirits. And yet this man is more to be born
withal, then such as do boldly aver, that the act and wonderful effects of
the Weapon Salve is cacomagicall: For he speaks not absolutely as they do;
who without any farther doubting, do seem to attribute all hidden effects unto
the Devil, and so deprive God of his due; but only this man makes a doubt,
whether it be so or no.

CHAP. II.
In this Chapter, the Author's Opinion touching the original, intermediate,
and immediate Action or Virtue of the Lodestone is enucleated and set down at
large.

I Am sure you do remember how in my precedent discourse, I have demonstrated,
that God in a generality does operate all, and in all, and then after what
manner the self-same Unity in the Divine essence, is manifested in its
property, according unto the multiplicity of his sacred Volunty, which is
therefore proved to be manifold, because the particular effects of his actions,
which are not put in execution but by his Volunty, are infinite in Variety. And
for this cause I showed unto you, that there are attributed unto one and the
same sacred essence, Ten several denominations or Attributes, whereof some
send out emanations of dilatation and extension, by the which the waters were
expansed and spread abroad by subtiliation, and shaped into bright, clear, and
transparent heavens: and of such kind of influences, are those which are
emitted and infused into the world by HOCHMA through JAH, or by the Spirit of
Wisdom; and those which spring forth from ELOAH, by the Port of TIPHERETH
(which imports beauty and brightness) into the Sun, who by dilatation does
clarify and subtiliate the spirit of the world, and expels darkness; and
this action does proceed from the center to the circumference. And
contrariwise, there are other emanations, which pour out beams of attraction or
contraction, as does ELOHIM by the port Binah or Prudentia, into the globe of
Saturn. By this therefore, the Spirit of God in his prudency did tie and hang
the heavens, as it were lincks in a chain of gold together, and did bear up the
elements in their places, and sucked or contracted the grosser part of the
waters, from the circumference unto the center, and there did confirm and fix
them in a dark and gross manner. So that the fountain of this attractive and
contractive property, is in the divine Attribute ELOHIM, which for reasons that
I have told you before, is the head of the northern property, namely, of cold,
drought, opacity, congelation, incrassation, and rest, which is caused in the
center, because it is the terminus ad quem, the point unto the which the
contraction or attraction is chiefly made, beyond the which, there can be no
further penetration. And for this reason, the centrall virtue which is in the
bowels of the earth, does draw and allu^e all weighty things unto this point,
which when they attain unto the center, can pass no further; for it is at that
centrall butt that the property of ELOHIM does aim, and the Divinity which
dwells in the earth's center, is the divine essence under the name and
property of ELOHIM* the seat of whose immediate emanation, is the angelical
order of Thrones, which belongs unto the earth or grosser waters; his magazin
or treasure-house in the starry heaven, is the globe of Satu^n, whose property
for this reason is cold and dry, astrictive, contractive, attractive, and
retentive; for his beams contract unto the center, and he is the Lord over the
North-winds, which are cold and dry, contractive, attractive, sad, and
melancholy; and it is the Planet which does administer unto the Pole Star,
called by the Egyptians Alruckaba, forasmuch as it has the nature and
property of Saturn and Venus, and therefore it is the principal helper and
assistant in performing, not only the attractive effects of ELOHIM, and for
that reason does endue the nature of Saturn, which abounds in the Northern
effects of ELOHIM, but also it participates with the condition of Venus, which
is the Planet that commands the concupiscible faculty; and for this reason it
makes a natural coition, namely, it draws with a voluptuous delight his
like, even as feminine matter is eagerly affected, to draw or suck masculine
form unto it. This therefore is the reason, that the earth does attract unto it
the formal shapes, which descend down from above, and burieth them within its
womb with delight. For heaven is affirmed by all true Philosophers and
Cabalists, to be the masculine, and the earth the feminine. Neither can I but
consent with Lucas Gauricus, the Astrologians opinion, where he says, (as is
recited before) That the star in the Tail of Ursamajor, or the great Bear, is
President of the Lodestone; as also, that Saturn is the Planet which is
allotted unto him; and lastly, that it has an special relation unto the
Constellation of Virgo, and the rather, because Virgo is that Sign of the
Zodiac, which possesses the very self-same Longitude that the said star does,
and for that it is of an earthly, stiptick, and attractive nature, as also of
the condition of Saturn and Venus. All these reasons have been strong motives
to persuade me, that these are principal celestial agents, in the Northern
disposition and property of this lower world, and consequently in the
attractive motion of the terrestrial northern Pole, and every particular
thereof.

I p^oceed therefore in this my descent from above to the earth, in this
manner: The Planet Saturn does send down the influences of ELOHIM; as also the
Polestar and Virgo, for the better and stronger fortifying of the
septentrionall attraction or contraction, does assist him there in his office;
and by them, the spirits of the northern wind wax vigorous, and contract by
congelation the catholic element of the air, insomuch that by sucking
together the dispersed element of air, they contract it into the solid and
dense mass of snow, frost, hail, and ice. Whereby we may learn, that the earth
was a thin water first, but by the breath of ELOHIM it was turned into an
earthly substance, by contraction; and therefore as long as it is earth, it
has the property of that spirit, which by congelation made it earth. For by
virtue of this ELOHIM Ruach, the dry land did appear out of the waters, as
Moses tells us; and every member of the world, I mean, each heaven, and each
element, were tied and fastened together; so that as by the property of IAH,
(which argues the immense benignity of Ehieth, the Father of all things)
namely, the emission of beams by the port Hochma, the catholic created spirit
of wisdom did illuminate and create the waters in general; but the division of
them, which was also made by the word IAH, were fastened in formal ties by the
properties of ELOHIM, or the vivifying Spirit of the Lord. And therefore David
said, Verbo Domini firmati sunt coeli, Psalm. 33.6.
and spiritu ab ore ejus omnis virtus eorum: By the word of the Lord the
heavens were made, and by his Spirit each formal virtue thereof. For this
reason, in all the separating creation and formation, not only of the simple
heavens and elements, but also of the creatures composed of them, both in
heaven and in earth, evermore ELOHIM, is named by Moses, namely, when the
darkness was sucked and drawn apart from the clear waters, when the gross or
inferior waters were contracted from the superior, when the thinner heavens
were distinguished by inspissation from the thicker elements, when the dry land
was by the colds coagulation gathered together in the center, when the thinner
air was coagulated into starry bodies, (wherefore Aristotle says rightly,
that Stella sit den sior pars sui orbis, The star is the thicker part of his
orb) when the elements were compacted by congelation, into the compound
creatures of the sea and land; for all this was the work of ELOHIM, who, after
the heaven and the earth were made, did ordain and fashion by incrassation, the
erratick globe of Saturn, and the fixed constellation of Virgo, whose total
attractive and retentive nature is contracted in the Pole Star, as it were the
whole basis of a Pyramid, into the point of the Cone; and therefore by
contraction of the dilative privative virtue, the power is the stronger; as we
see, that a broad River gathered into a strait betwixt two Rocks, is the more
swift and violent; or as the Bugle-maker, by blowing the whole flame into a
point, makes that point of such power, that it is able to melt glass. And
these two fixed Constellations are assigned, as principal ministers unto Saturn,
being ordained for the distribution of his stiptick influxions, joined with a
concupiscible desire unto the nether world; and therefore the Astronomians
have assigned them both all one nature, because they perform all one act,
namely, that of Saturn and Venus, as is said. Wherefore as superiora dicuntur
regere inferiora, adeo ut sicut fit inferius ita prius factum esset superius:
As, I say, the superior heavenly bodies are reported to govern the inferiors;
and that as things are acted here below, in like manner were they first
effected above. So of necessity is the Pole of the North in the air, or
sublunary element, pointed at and marked out by the wind Boreas; and that same
Pole in the water, whose character is the frozen sea, and that in the earth
deciphered and manifested by the Load-stones northern point, are animated from
these contractive, or retentive, and cold, and dry celestial natures, as they
again have their power in the earth and waters successivly from the Orders of
the Cherubins and Thrones, who receive radically their attractive and retentive
power from the Attribute ELOHIM Ruach, which does coagulate and inspissate, by
contracting and drawing of the effects of IEHOVA's dilating property, from a
dilated transparent clear form and light, unto a thick, opake, and ponderous
nature, as it appears and is made manifest in the creation of frost, snow,
ice, and hail, by the northern act and property of God, which made the Psalmist
say, Emittit nives sicut la^^am, and pruinas quasi cineres dispergit, dejicit
gelu tanquam frusta, coram frigore ejus quis consistat? Psalm. 147
He sends out snow like wool, and disperseth the frost as ashes, he casts
down his ice as gobbets, who is ab^e to endure before his cold? Whereby it
appears, that it is the contractive act of JEHOVA, in his property of ELOHIM,
which immediately effects these things, by means of his Boreall organs, which
are first angelical, next stellar or starry bodies, being animated by the
angelical; and lastly, windy and elementall, which are animated by the starry
influences, the essence whereof is in God, and from God, or JEHOVA, being one
God in essence, which is expressed by the name of JEHOVA, but in property
distributed into many branches, and accordingly, every branch has its peculiar
illuminating boughs, and each illuminating bough dilateth it self, by a
subdivision of formal twigs, or vivifying beams, into an infinity of actions,
not varying from the capital emanation in essence, but in property only. As
for example, The influence falling from ELOHIM by the spirit Binah, descends
into the sphere of Saturn, under whose dominion are an infinity of creatures,
namely, those which participate with the nature of Saturn, as are all things
that are of a terrestrial ^ondition, to wit, cold, dry, stiptick, attractive,
and contractive. But leaving his Cabalisticall and Astrologicall way of
proving, I will descend unto such testimonies, as sacred Philosophy does afford
me.

I told you before, that the eternal Unity, everlastingly One in essence,
dividing or transforming it self by property into Trinity, did shape out or
describe ideally, the archetypicall or internal world, according unto whose
example he did afterward delineate or frame out the typical or external.
Wherefore it must follow, that if the typical or natural world was framed
after the idea in the intellectual or mental world, then what parts or
properties are made evident unto our capacity in this world, were also the same
in the archetype; for, Quod facit tale est magis tale. There was no house that
the Carpenter or Brick-layer builded, but it was first delineated in the idea
of his intellect, and then drawn forth superficially in paper, and so afterward
put into a solid execution; so also David confessed, that he had the Temple,
which Solomon erected, first drawn forth ideally by Gods finger. Now when that
God had in his divine counsel, thus ordered and shaped out an ideal world in
himself, to put it in execution, and, as it were, to make it to appear unto
man's sense, he emitted himself out of himself in the form of an eternal
emanation, called his Image, which was his wisdom, by which the general world,
and every particular thereof, was produced according unto the ideall pattern,
which was in it self. This therefore being so, and being that the divine
essence can no way be divided, howsoever it varieth in property, it follows,
that every particular beam which shines out diversely from that catholic
emanation, to create differing things, is one indivisible essence with the
whole emanation; and therefore he is said to fill all, and to be all in all.
And that the incorruptible spirit is in all things, Wisd. 12.1. Wisd. 1.
and that he fills the whole earth. I proceed therefore thus: If the created
world have his shape, his members, and every particular property assigned unto
it, by that formal and vivifying world, which is described and imprinted in
this divine and all-sufficient and creating emanation; then consequently, all
the members, properties, and natures in this world, are graphically or
curiously painted out in the supernatural one, it remaining nevertheless one
and the same in essence. And therefore as in him, the catholic image of the
outward world is contained, so every beam or emanation that issues from him,
but is not divided from him, contains the shape of the world. And for this
reason, the wise Philosophers have said, That each creature enjoys a
proportion of the great world, by which it is shaped and made in it self a
little world, as shall be demonstrated by the Lodestone more plainly
hereafter. And again, man is called, Omnis creatura, as he does participate of
all; so that his soul is said to be, Ad imaginemtotius sapientiae facta, omnium
in se gerens similitudinem: Made after the similitude of all wisdom, bearing in
it self the likeness of all things. And therefore it is termed of another,
Omnium similitudo, The likeness of all things. And the reason is, because it is
one Unity. Hereupon also it is reported, to be a certain divine and individual
substance; Alkindus in his Book, de Radiis, speaking after an Astrologicall
manner, seems to aver so much in these words, Alkind cap. de Radiis.
Si al^cu, datum esset totam conditionem coelestis harmoniae comprehendere,
mundum elementorum cum suis singulis contentis in quocunque loco and quocunque
tempore plene cognosceret tanquam causatum per causas; si et^am aliquam rem
hujus mundi in tota sua condition cognosceret, coelestis harmoniae conditio
ipsum non lateret, sed etiam causam tanquam per effectum suum comprehenderet:
omnis en^m^res, quan^umcunque modica, in mundo elementorum agens, totius
coelestis harmoniae est effectus. Whosoever does comprehend the whole condition
of the celestial harmony, he may fully know the whole elementary world, with
every content of the same, in every place, and at all times, as the effect by
the cause. Also if he understand any thing of this world in his total nature
and condition, the celestial disposition and condition will not be hidden from
him, but will be discovered unto him, as the cause is by the effect. For every
thing in this world, how little soever it be, that acts, is the effect of the
whole harmony of the heaven. By which words, Alkindus being deeply seen in the
mystery of nature, seems to aver, that as there is a descent from unity unto
multitude, so all that multitude is in that unity as also that unity fills
all the multitude; so is 1 in 2, and 2 in 3, and 3 in 4, and 4 in 5, etc. and
yet that unity which is the beginning, is the end, and all in all. So light
enforms the angelical creature, the angelical the starry creature, the starry
creature the elements, and the elements the compound creature: Wherefore open
the compound creature, and look upon the elements, divide the Elements, and you
shall find the starry and quintessentiall nature; open these and you shall
conceive the subtle alterity of the Angelical spirit, in which is the Divine
act or immediate beam from God. In this work therefore there concurreth in the
separation of the first a sensible aspect; in the other, we must behold with
intellectual eyes; So that you may observe, how all is in every thing, and
every thing in all. Hereupon it was also that Hermes said, (speaking mystically
and not after the common sense) Qui fornacem cum vase nostro construit, novum
mundum conflat: He which makes our furnace with the glass to it, he makes a
new world. But what needs more words, when we find all this confirmed by
demonstration? For we know that the Lodestone is but a part of the Earth, and
yet it has all his Circles, and both his Poles, yea, and that very nature in
all respects, between each Pole, and Circle, that the whole Earth has, and
thereupon it is termed Terrella, or a little Earth; and so may the whole earth
be termed parvus mundus, being it contains the Poles, circles, and astrall,
yea, and Elementall natures of the great world; no otherwise then the great
world does in all those respects, represent the Archetype, which is carved out
intellectually in the all-working Spirit of Wisdom, or sacred Emanation; yea,
and we go yet deeper into our diminutives: For if a piece of Iron rod, which
naturally aspecteth the North and South, be brok off, that small piece will
have also as exactly his North and South Pole, and consequently his circles as
the whole rod, and nevertheless the rod keeps still his North and South point
as before. The like in the Lodestone will happen, as experience shall
hereafter make it appear more plainly.

That we may come a little nearer to the explication of this Mystery, ye must
understand that this eternal catholic Emanation, is the essential and
spiritual rock, out of which, first the great world in general, and then all
particular things therein, were carved or framed by generalities: first,
according unto the Ten general Emanations and their properties, which the
Ethnicks in some sort referred unto their Ten general Predicaments; and this
again had their specialities or subalternate degrees of many ranks and orders
of dignities, all which were at last made apparent by the infinity of
individualls, which they did in their kinds produce according unto those diverse
beams of the multiplicite Will or Volunty of God, which this eternal Emanation
poured out into them. All which particular beams, more or less, being not
divided in essence from the universal Emanation, or the Spirit of Wisdom,
which made all things, are the spiritual Cornerstone, on which every creature
as well particular as universal, does formally or essentially consist; and
this Cornerstone, is that internal essence in every thing, which as it gives
life; so also it is all and over all the things that it inacteth with life, and
therefore also the soul, whose Center this Cornerstone is, is said to be in
all and every part. I will leave to speak of its action in other creatures, and
will only insist on our main Subject in hand, which is the earth and her
offspring or progeny, amongst the which the feminine Lodestone, and his
ferruginous mass, are chiefly reckoned. Divine Philosophy teaches us, that the
Globe of the Earth is sustained by this Cornerstone, and consequently has her
manifold Virtues from it, Job. 38.
Ubinam eras, (says JEHOVAH) quando fundebam terram? quis disposuit mensuras
ejus, aut quis extendit super eam lineam? Super quo bases ejus defixae sunt?
Aut quis jecit lapidem ejus Angularem? Where wast thou when I laid the
foundation of the earth? Who disposed of the measures thereof? and who did
extend over it a line? upon what basis or foundation was it sustained? or who
laid the cornerstone thereof?

Lo here an axiom of Divine Philosophy, proposed by the Creator himself, how
unworthy are the Aristotelicall rules concerning the structure of the earth, in
respect of this Divine Oracle's rudiments and doctrine, which is founded on the
true Cornerstone Jesus Christ: Colos. 2.8.
For this cause the Apostle justly bids us not to be deceived by Philosophy,
and vain fallacies, according unto the tradition of man, and after the Elements
of this world, and not according unto Christ, in whom dwells all the
plenitude of Divinity corporally; who is the head of all Principalities and
Powers. And elsewhere he gives a reason, Heb. 1*
namely quia ipse omnia est in omnibus, port atque omnia verbo virtutis suae,
ipse fundavit terram, and opera manuum ejus sunt coeli: Because he is all in
all, and bears up all things by the word of his Virtue; he did lay the earth
on his foundations, and the heavens were the work of his hands. It was
therefore this Spirit of Wisdom, which was that spiritual Cornerstone, on
which the earth, and every particle thereof has his assigned place or station,
residing on it, as upon the surest Foundation, and which indueth every particle
thereof more or less, with a several distinct Virtue, as a gift bestowed on it
for its self: For the Wiseman does testify, Sap. 1.
that this essential spirit fi^leth the whole earth. Wherefore as no essential
virtue, which issues from it, can be divided from it; So each particle of the
earth must be endued more or less, with the property of the whole, being that
it moves all upon one spiritual line or axil-tree, (as Job seems to
aver,) which by a twofold property, differs according unto the two
principles proceeding from the Divine Unity, namely his Nolunty or privative
and contracting nature (for it operateth by a privative, contractive, cold,
congealing disposition, which is effected less or more, according as it
approaches unto each Pole; that is to say, unto the North or South): and his
Volunty or positive, dilative, and dissolving nature; forasmuch as this
spiritual centrall Sun, does in the middle point of the axis, emit his beams
from it to the circumference, no otherwise than the celestial Sun, and his
eternal Agent does dart forth his beams from the Aequinoctial, which is the
circumference of the middle point in the axil-tree toward the Poles thereof;
but approaches no nearer the Poles, then the limited Tropic of each
Hemisphere. And this is the reason of that Antipathy, which is noted to be as
well in the Iron as the Lodestone: For if you devide the Lodestone in the
middle betwixt both his Poles, namely in his Aequinoctiall; and then
afterward, if you put the part of the middle of one Hemisphere, namely of the
Northern C, unto the South Pole Look for this experiment 1. Book of Dr.
Gilbert. c. 5.
B thus, it will abhor and fly from it, as being clean contrary in condition
unto it. For the one is the seat of the dilative property, and the other is the
natural place of the contractive; the one hot, the other cold; the one
attractive, by sucking from the Circumference unto the Center; the other
expulsive by dilating of its beams from the Center to the Circumference:
contrariwise the Sympathy in the Lodestone is there, where like is fitly
applied unto its like, as well in order as condition: For if you offer to join
the Aequinoctiall of the one Hemisphere, unto that of the other, they will
forthwith close and unite one with another: For, by the continuation of the
spiritual Axil-tree, one Pole sucketh the Hemisphere which is next unto it,
namely B draws the North Hemisphere C, A; and the North Pole C, sucketh
reciprocally unto it the South Hemisphere B, A; and they both join in A. Also
the two Poles do agree together in harmony: For the reasons above mentioned; So
that if you put the North Pole unto the South, they suck and draw also one
another, and make a Union: Whereby each wise Speculator may discern the reason
of Sympathy and Antipathy, in all things; as also the manner of attraction and
dilatation in every creature; and how each nature enclineth properly unto its
nature, but flies or inclines naturally from its contrary; and all proceeds
from the opposite properties in one radical essence, as I will prove here
immediately, by a more familiar experience.

In the Weather-glass, which I have described in my precedent Philosophical
discourse, you may discern two points, corresponding unto the two Poles,
namely the mattras head above, resembling the Northern Pole; and the water
below, compared to the Southern Pole; the air interposed betwixt them, unto
the spacious heaven, or sublunary spirit, which is betwixt these two Poles, the
middle of which in the figure 1. the Aequinoctiall does ^ut, as being in the
midway betwixt the two Poles. We find evermore, that when the air, included
in the top of the Mattras, or bolts-head, is cold, namely, when the northern
blasts are sent forth, it will be contracted, and consequently will suck or
draw up the water, and thereupon we are taught the reason of the attractive
nature, not only in the northern or septentrionall winds, but also in the
Lodestone, and all other things, which by contraction of the air do draw and
suck unto them, namely, that they have that property from the power of Gods
Spirit, which, by his angelical organs does blow from the north. By this also
it is made evident, why one Pole does suck and attract from the other, in the
Load stone, namely, by the continuity of the spiritual axle-tree, which is
made and animated by one cornerstone, or essential and centrall spirit, as is
said, though of two opposite conditions, in which also it works after many
diversities of degrees: and therefore Solomon terms it simplex or unicus,
simple, or one, in regard of his divine nature; and multiplex, in respect that
it works and operateth after a manifold manner: for as it works about the
poles of the axle-tree, by attracting and sucking unto it by cold and drought;
so about the Aequinoctiall, and that more and more approaching from the poles
toward the Aequinoctiall, it varieth in ten thousand proportions more or less
in dilatation, by reason of the manifold degrees of heat, which this centrall
Sun of life imparteth unto the air: And this is not only manifested in the
foresaid Weather-glass, forasmuch as we find, that by how much the more the
heavenly Sun, with his divine centrall agent, approaches unto us, by so much
the more the external air, being dilated by his heat, does also dilate the
air, contained in the neck of the mattras, or bolts-head, and drives down the
water, that is, it repelleth back the cold of winter, which came in by showers
of rain, sent from the south unto his proper pole. So that we see, as the
nature of the cold pole is to draw or suck unto it by condensation, which is
effected by contraction, or made by a Saturnine faculty, so the nature of the
hot Aequinoctiall, and his adjacent parts, is to expel his opposite by
dilatation, which is effected by a subtiliating heat. And this is the reason,
as is already demonstrated, that the Aequinoctiall of the Lodestone detesteth
to be joined unto the pole; as on the contrary side, the pole abhors
reciprocally the Aequinoctiall. Also this is the reason, that in the pole of
the said stone, there is so great power of attraction, and that it sucketh the
iron unto it, ad angulos rectos, that is, after a perpendicular manner; and
then the nearer the needle, or piece of steel, or iron-wier, approaches unto
the Aequinoctiall of the stone, the more will his obliquity in coition or
conjunction be with the stone. So that when it comes directly unto the
Aequinoctiall, it will lose all angular contact, and lie flat, as it were, on
its belly, as you may see by this true observation following.

Gilber de Magnet. lib. 2. cap. 8.


But because these demonstrations may seem unto the vulgar somewhat intricate,
as being ignorant of the centrall sun of the earth, which the Philosophers call
Archaeum naturae, or, The master-workman of nature. As also it will be
difficult for them to conceive, what an axiltree of the earth may be, and what
his poles. And again, the right use of the Lodestone, or practice in the
Weather-glass, is unknown unto many a man. I will proceed unto a kind of proof
and explication of this matter, which is familiar unto each person of what
degree soever. It cannot be gainsaid, but that Man, and all other creatures, as
well vegetable as animal, are composed of a living soul, which is internal,
and a body, being his external: The self-same also we ought to judge of the
earth, for it has an inward spirit, whereby it operateth diversely; And again,
as there is no animal nor vegetable, that can exist without the air, forasmuch
as by it each thing lives and existeth, by inspiration, (for by that means
they suck in the celestial influence) so also the aerie element does feed the
inward spirit of the earth, and conveyeth from above all the heavenly
influences into her body, and makes her the mother of all mineralls and
vegetables. I told you before, that all inferior things, with their
operations, are the types or similitudes of things above; and that God did
animate the Angels, the Angels did inform the stars, and the starry demons, or
olympic spirits, send down influences unto the winds, and the winds do inform
the catholic element of the air four-foldly, that is to say, according unto
the nature of the four winds; which fourfold information does give or assign
a name unto the four elements. And although in the catholic air, there is but
one only substance in essence, yet it varieth in nature after a fourfold
condition, according unto the will and property of that one Spirit, which only
is the efficient actor or agent in this metamorphosis, or Protean
transmutation, from one nature or form unto another, although he uses as well
angelical as starry organs; and is said, to ride upon the cherubins, and to
glide upon the wings of the winds. For this reason therefore the Prophet says,
Ezekiel. 36.
Come, O spirit, from the four winds, and breathe upon these slain bodies that
they may live. He said not, Come, O spirits; but, Come, O spirit; whereby he
argued, that it is but one Spirit which blows essentially from the four
winds, and consequently, that this one spirit in essence, is but only one
thing, though fourfold in regard of his property; and that as in this
archetypicall spirit, the whole world was ideally divided into poles and
portions, distinguished by spiritual circles; so also in all the regions of
the world, he observes constantly the self-same character of position, namely,
in the starry world, as in the airy; and in the airy as in the water and earth.
For in the heavens, the northern pole is pointed at, and marked out with the
starry character, which is found in the Tail of the great Bear: in the air it
is manifested in that very point, from whence Boreas or the north wind blows,
which does exactly correspond unto the pole star. Again, that the earth
observes the very same order in the direction of her pole, is confirmed, by
the conversion of the Lodestone and Iron, unto the north-star. Thus you see,
that it is one only spirit in essence, that works all in all. I proceed
therefore thus to my demonstration, which is so familiar to each person, that
not any one who is in his senses can deny it; for I am sure, no man can be
ignorant, that when the north wind blows, the air is of nature cold and dry,
and therefore is converted into the condition and consistence of earth, namely,
from a clear transparent light, subtle, dissolved, and dilated consistence of
air, into a troubled, opake or dark, gross, ponderous, and contracted
substance; for experience does teach us, that it is transmuted into snow, hail,
frost, and ice; that is, from an aerie spirit, unto an earthly and sol^d body;
from an invisible and mobile estate, unto a visible and fixed disposition. And,
in conclusion, the whole air is changed into a spiritual and corporal earth;
and this transmutation it has from that cold, dry, and attractive form, which
it borrowed from the northern wind, or septentrionall property of the divine
spirit, which orders all things, and alters them from one form unto
another, by the breath of his nostrills, (as Scriptures allegoriously speak) or
by those windy emissions, or angelical emanations, which it sends from the
four corners of the earth. So that by his breath from the north, he exercises
that property in the lower world, by the which he draws or attracteth from
the circumference unto the center, and so congealeth, inspissateth, and
hardens soft spirits, by contraction and coarctation of those parts, which
before were porous and dilated. But some will perchance reply, and say, How is
it likely, that the emanation or emission of spirits, from the port of Binah,
under the Attribute of ELOHIM, or the streaming forth of the breath or blasts
from Boreas, and his two collateralls, can harden by contraction, or suck and
draw in spirits, from the circumference unto the center, when their emissions
are straight from the north southward, and make no reflection, whereby any such
motion, a circumferentia ad centrum, should be made? I answer, That this is
effected after a wonderful fashion, and worthy to be pondered by the choicest
wits. We must consider therefore in the first place, that the property of the
Attribute ELOHIM, was before all beginning ordained, to indue the negative or
contractive nature of the eternal Unity's Nolunty, namely, of darkness; for
when God will not show the light of his countenance, he reflecteth his light in
himself, that is, he withdraws it from the circumference to the center, and
leaves only darkness unto the creatures. This property of God is
antipatheticall unto such parts of the world, as also unto all such creatures,
as have their life from a natural heat, which heat had its beginning from Gods
benevolent emanation, that is, from the act of unity, by an emission or
dilatation from the center unto the circumference, I mean, from unity into
multitude. It follows therefore, that though the emission of winds from the
north be straight, yet their essential property, proceeding immediately from
Gods angelical organ, is contractive and attracting from the circumference
unto the center, seeing that it is an emission, which, by the divine Spirits
emanation and action in the nature of ELOHIM, is cold, dry, coagulative, or
congealing, and apt to rest, and is therefore antipatheticall and oppugnant
unto the disposition of the air, forasmuch as it is hot and moist, and
consequently is animated by the dilative action, which the catholic spirit
sends or breaths out of the celestial Sun, and other vivifying stars, as
are Jupiter and Venus. And for this cause it follows, that when the Boreall
spirits are sent forth into the air, it must needs succeed, that, at the
antipatheticall contract of these cold spirits, the natural heat or life of
the air flies, or with-draweth it self from its circumference unto its
center, and so partly by that contractive motion in it self, caused per
antiperistasin, or by reason of the antipatheticall occurrence, or meeting of
his contrary, and partly by mingling of a new terrestrial form, it is
congealed, and falls to the earth as if it were dead, because unmovable, in
the form of snow, hail, frost, and ice. In like manner we see, that the aerie
life in other creatures, whose formal being consists of Gods dilating
property, is forced to fly from the circumference unto the center, leaving the
external parts chil, cold, and apt to a deadly congelation, or lethall repose,
which we observe not only in animal creatures, but also in vegetables, seeing
that their blood, (as I may term it) or vital suck, is congealed, by the
winter and northern cold, and is, as it were, liveless, until by the vivifying
and dilative sorce of the ensuing Vernall, or Springly and Australl virtue, it
is resolved and melted again, and the severe tie or icy knot of the northern
nature undone. For this reason therefore you may discern, that there is but one
catholic element, which is partly subject and obnoxious unto the privative and
dark contracting, and consequently attracting property of Gods Spirit, and
partly capable to endue his positive and light dilating disposition; and that
this common subject is the spirit or air of the sublunary world, which by
less inspissation or contraction, caused by the west winds, is made water; and
by more compression and constriction, caused by the northern and winter blasts,
becomes snowy or icy earth: And contrariwise, by less dilatation and
subtiliation, is made aerie or vaporous, caused by the spring season, and south
wind, and by a greater rarefaction and exaltation it is made fire, by the
dominion of such spirits as are sent out from the east, and summers heat; and
both these main, twofold, divided properties, belong unto one and the same
Spirit, as is before related. Verily, this common demonstration can deceive no
man, being that the very unreasonable creatures are moved by a natural
inclination, either to sympathize and rejoice with the clemency and comfort of
the one property, or to fly from or eschew the severer assaults of the other,
which do antipathize with their nature. But to our main business. It is
manifest by that which is already said, that the northern breath is
contractive, attractive, inspissative, and apt to darkness, immobility, and
rest; and that the south-winde, or rather the wind from the Aequinoctiall, is
contrary in nature unto it, as being ready to undo all that the north wind did
effect, namely, to dissolve the congealed air, which was made snow, frost,
hail, ice, into water, and water into air, to make transparent that which was
dark, and render thin that which was before thick: And therefore between these
properties there is no more sympathy, then I have showed you to be between the
Load-stones Aequinoctiall, and the Pole. And again, that both these opposite
natures proceed, and spring from one and the same divine and catholic spirit,
which operateth all in all, every where, and consequently as well in earth as
in heaven, this testimony of the true Philosophy does manifestly confirm and
import: Psalm. 147.
Deo emittente sermonem suum in terram quam celerrime excurrit, qui nives
emittit sicut lanam, and pru^nam quasi cineres dispergit, dejicit gelu tanquam
frusta, coram frigore ejus quis consistat? Emittit verbum suum and liquefacit
ista, simul ac efflat ventum suum, effluunt aquae. God sends forth his word,
it runs forth most swiftly upon the earth, who produces snow like wool, and
spreads abroad the frost like ashes, and casts down the ice as it were
pieces, Who is able to resist against his cold? He sends forth his word and
melts or dissolveth all these; so soon as he breaths forth his wind or
Spirit, the congealed waters begin to flow and move. Whereby it appears, that
the Word or Spirit of God congealeth by one property, and dissolveth by
another: and consequently as God is all one in essence; so it is one and the
same Spirit that effects these fourfold alterations, in one catholic spirit
of the world, which are by the Ancients called distinct Elements; because they
cuold never as yet thoroughly determine, what was the essential form of the
Elements. But if they had well considered the four Elements, of the which they
spoke so much, and, as it should seem, understood essentially but little, or
had they well conceived that heaven and earth were made of water, 2 Pet. 3.
and by water by the Word, as Sacred Philosophy teaches us, then they would
have known also, that the common substantial Subject of them all, was but one
created watery spirit; also that this spirits fourfold information, was
effected by one increating formal essence or Divine Word, acting and informing
that universal Element by a fourfold emanation; so that the will of one
creating Spirit, effected by, and working in, four Angels of an opposite
nature, makes disposes, or changes every day this one spiritual watery
Subject into this or that Element, according unto the Will of the Creator. All
which is evidently demonstrated by the wether-glass: For the air therein
enclosed, does by contraction or dilatation, convert it self into the form of
any of the Elements, and is altered therein, according as the nature of the
Macrocosmicall blast or wind that blows. Now whereas it may be objectively
demanded, From whence then came the earth and waters, that are resident
perpetually here beneath? I answer, That they are the effects, which the winds
by the Will of God or ELOHIM RUACH did originally produce, and these were
framed first out of the air, namely by thickning it by one degree into water,
and engrossing it by another into solid and fixed earth, as it appeared by the
third days Creation, where it was said, that Aridum apparuerit ex aquis:
Dry-land did appear out of the waters. But the Divine Philosopher St. Paul does
confirm all this, where he affirms, that we ought to believe by Faith, that
those things which are visible, were first of things invisible and unseen. And
again, if that the two lower bodies did not resolve themselves by little and
little, though insensibly into air, it would not be possible that the earth or
the water could hold that abundance of Water, Stones, Brimstone, caused of
Lightnings, and such like, which falls from the air; and yet we see that
neither the air, nor water, nor earth, are at any time found bigger then their
natural accustomed proportions. By this therefore I have sufficiently
expressed unto you, the attractive and contractive property of the Northern
Pole in the air; which infers thus much, that as the Northern blasts are
enemies unto life, because they contract from the circumference to the Center,
which is contrary unto the act of man's life, therefore all things that are
reduced into a chill, cold, and Northern property, be they airy, watery, or
earthy, they draw strongly unto them, as it is proved by the weather-glass: For
the included air being animated, by the effects of a strong and obstinate
Northern wind, sucketh and draws the waters on high, namely from the
Aequinoctiall point of the glass, unto the Center of the North Pole, which is
assigned by the head of the mattras; and also by the same reason congealed
spirits in any earthly substance, do suck or draw from the exterior to the
interior; as we observe that Bole Armoniack sucketh moisture unto it; and also
all other earth when it is thoroughly dry, and that in his own natural
condition, namely because it being of the quality of the North, it sucketh and
draws strongly a watery moisture; but this is by reason of his drought; the
attraction therefore in the Lodestone is otherwise. For it having the
essential nature of its mother Earth, and the virtue of the North in his Pole,
draws the masculine Sulphurous spirits out of Iron greedily, and that with a
feminine appetite by reason of the propinquity, and likeness of one nature unto
another. The like regard also has the Pole star unto the Lodestone, as the
Lodestone has unto the Iron, which is his like: For Natura Natura sua gaudet
and laetatur: Nature is glad and rejoices in her like nature: as Empedocles
does truly testify. But both the Iron and the Lodestone are of one mine, one
vein, and one nature, seeing that both of them are of an earthly and boreall
disposition, and therefore the Lodestone and his formal included spirits,
being more encombred with superfluities, then the refined Iron, does as it were
(either for their assistance, namely to be delivered from that incombrance)
draw unto them their like, out of the purified Iron or Steel, by a wonderful
appetite, and in this action suck unto it the Iron, who (as unwilling to leave
its formal spirit) does follow by a natural continuity, the motion of its
formal beams, or else for comfort and consolation, yea, and formal refection's
cause; no otherwise then the cold material female does the more formal male,
to be refreshed by the masculine seed or sulphurous Form, which they both
received from that general Agent's ideal Northern nature, that sustaineth and
animateth the earth. I will prove it by a similitude, but in a vegetable
substance. We observe, that the grain of wheat, not participating with the
nature of the earth, that is, so long as it is above ground and not sown,
attracteth not his like from heaven; but when it is committed unto the earth,
and the earth by corruption has unloosed his bands, his spirits suck down from
above the Sunbeams, and celestial influences of his fixed constellation and
erratick Planet in quantity; that thereby it may be delivered, and rise again
by the celestial beams of his own nature, that descend from heaven, and
principally from the Sun; so that like being added to his like, becomes the
stronger in ascension: For experience teaches us, that the celestial included
form or vital beam creeps out of the earth upwards, tending by all his
appetite unto its ethereal native home, from whence it came; but because the
Element of fire is contiguous unto the ethereal spirit, therefore it will not
permit these aethereall or sunny-beams, to ascend without it, and because the
air is a near-cleaving and continued neighbor unto the fire, therefore it
will not permit the fire to ascend without his presence: and again, the water
challenges the self-same privilege, namely to ascend with the air: and
lastly, the earth will not let the water move upwards without her company, as
being next of her race, and therefore will have the self-same prerogative with
the other three. But because the earth is ponderous and cannot ascend, she
holds it fast below, and will not permit the spirit to sore higher; and so
those beamy spirits which seemed to descend, for the freedom of their brethren,
are by these Elementary ties, or rather the fourfold disposition of one
Element detained, and made to hover, and hang in the air; where instead of
flying upwards to heaven, they do multiply into many grains. And I have noted
by mine own experience, namely by anatomising of corn, with the fiery knife of
distillation, that the female in corn, which sucketh down the celestial
influences of the like nature, is a pure volatile Salt, of a refined or aereall
terrestrial condition; but rich in celelestiall fire, and therefore made
volatile and airy by the union of both extremes; so that it is this female,
which allureth and draws down magnetickly, beams from above, and holds them
fast to multiply its own nature; even like the fowler, that makes use of a
captived bird, to allure others of the same kind unto his netts. But as for the
female mineral nature, because the body of it is more compacted, and not
corruptible; it sucketh unto it for the self-same reason, namely by the
attractive virtue of his stiptick and attractive salt, the essential beams of
Iron, as from a star of his own nature, to solace and redeem his spirits, and
consequently with the spirit it sucketh also the masculine body; forasmuch as
the one cannot be well divided from the other, and when it has them it
retains them; partly for a consolation and corroboration; and partly for a
multiplication of his essence. And therefore those Philosophers are deceived,
which aver, that the Lodestone does not secretly feed upon the formal
spirits of Iron, because though its force was preserved by immersing or burying
of it in a bag of filings or scales of Iron; yet because neither the Lodestone
was augmented, nor the Iron diminished in weight, they conclude that it does
not nourish. But they ought to know, that the formal beams in the air, does
add no more weight unto it, then the light of a candle does to the glass, or
water in which it shines; and yet it nourishes formally, that is, it
multiplieth in formal essence, though not in material substance or quantity.
To conclude, as the external cold, causes the formal heat in the air to
contract it self, in flying and retiring it self, from the circumference unto
the Center, to eschew the assaults of his adversary; so also the external
cold, does compact it into a more solid space by an antiperistaticall
reverberation, and contraction, caused by the Northern cold's penetration. But
in the Lodestone the spirit is Saturnine, and does not otherwise suck in his
like, by the assistance also of a Saturnine body, animated by the drouth of a
Martial nature, which also is by some ascribed unto the North: But moreover, it
affects his like in the Iron, and therefore by a sympatheticall desire is the
more animated unto that business of Attraction. And it should appear, besides
all this, that there is an attractive property also in the body of the Iron,
which sucketh unto it the spirits of the Loadstone, no otherwise than the male
or Mars does in his nature covet and affect Venus; but because the female, by
reason of her coldness, does most affect and desire the company of the male,
the spiritual beams of her affection does with the most fervency desire and
covet, and therefore draw and allu^e the beams of the male, (which is of a
hotter, and for that reason of a more perfect nature) unto her; and this is
observed in the Iron, which I take for the male, for though it, of it self,
without the Load-stones assistance, does convert his poles, by a natural
inclination, unto the poles of the world, yet we observe, that it is more
slowly, and with the lesser appetite, and therefore more formal than material.

I collect therefore, upon that which is already said, that two like things,
which are of the nature of the Aequinoctiall and temperate Zone, do affect and
embrace one another, by a sympatheticall emission of beams, from the center
unto the circumference; and such is the love of those creatures, which live by
the property of a positive emanation, as are animals, which are of a hot
disposition, be they dry or moist; and therefore they do not sensibly draw one
spirit unto another, but work by the union which is made by a conjunction, or
concurrency together of lights, after an emission of their formal beams. And
these have a reference unto the spirits property, which issues from the east
and south winds, whose natures are to dilate from the center, and therefore not
to contract from the circumference. Contrariwise, two like natures, which
embrace the property of the Poles, and cold Zones, do affect and hug one
another by contraction, namely, by sucking and drawing of each nature from the
circumference unto their center, even as we see one Lodestone divided in the
middle, will draw and suck another unto it self, till both parts of it be fitly
joined together, in the very place or equinoctial of their division; and after
this fashion also is that attractive affection made, which is between the iron
and the Loadstone, which are creatures subject unto Saturn, V^rgo, and the
Pole Star.

From these Physical and Astronomicall assertions of ours, the Chimycall
contemplation varieth not much; for if in that kind of speculation, we do
observe the nature of the Lodestone, we shall find it not to spring from any
natural, but rather from a monstrous birth or generation, forasmuch as it is
noted to proceed from unequal and unlike parents, as the Mule does; for if we
observe well the manner of its composition, we shall find, that his mother, or
passive corporeal mass, is a common, stony, and earthly Mercury; and that his
father, or active form, is a metallic, or sulphurous Martial spirit: And, in
conclusion, we shall perceive, that their mixtion is effected in this manner:
The Mercuriall liquor of a stony, earthly, or Saturnine nature, being as yet in
its first matter or shell, as it were, and being a near neighbor unto the
Mercury of Mars, (for these two natures are most commonly found near, and in
company one of another) did hereupon, and for this cause, acquire unto it self,
a light transmutation, and so do appear to be joined together by a straight,
contiguous, and almost continued union; so that the composition does obtain a
mean existence, between the nature of a Martial mettle, and a Saturnine stone,
and may well be termed a Mercury, metamorphosed by halves, or a kind of a
Hermophroditicall Saturnine- Mercury; into the which, when the Sulphurous
Martial spirits, as the metallic form, do enter, it receives those Martial
spirits, and conserveth them in its womb, as their proper passive and mother;
and by that means, the mass is coagulated into a stony body.

Now since every spirit, and consequently this of the Lodestone, desires to
be nourished by that which is nearest and likest unto his own nature, the which
nature or spirit is only found in Iron, it happens for this reason, that the
inward martial spirit of the Lodestone, does draw the body of Iron unto it,
and after an occult manner, does seem to suck his nourishment out of it; I
conceive therefore, that the fixed salt in the Iron or Lodestone, is partly of
a hot and dry Martial nature, and consequently of a fiery earthly condition;
and partly of a cold and dry, stiptick, and Saturnine faculty, which also it
receives from its earth; and therefore there concurreth two testimonies of
strange attraction in the Lodestone. And because Venus is said to be the
female friend, and companion unto Mars, she does add a strong concupiscible
desire unto the attraction, and bridleth the irascible and odible property in
Mars, by her feminine embraces. If we look seriously into the inward nature of
Iron, or steel, we shall find all this to be manifested by effect, for I have
with a certain familiar Menstruum, reduced all the body of Steel into a kind of
Copperis or Vitriol, which nature of mineral salt is familiar with, as well to
Copper as Iron; for Vitriol is by the same reason extracted out of Copper. Now
we shall find in Vitriol or Copperis, a hot burning corrosive nature, and an
earthy attracting sulphur, which sucketh unto it as Bole Armoniack, or Terra
Sigillata does moisture: whereby it is evident, that as well a Martial and
Saturnine, as Venerian condition, concur in the magneticall or ferruginous
salt. Again, we shall find, that the influxions of Mars do mingle themselves
naturally with the northern wind, and agree well with the nature of the earth,
by reason that in the circulation of elements, the earth does, in regard of her
siccity, consent and sympathize with the fire. Again, Ptolomy does ascribe
those Aquilonary winds, which are violent, unto Mars his influences; moreover,
that Mars his spirit is the cause of the attractive virtue, in each corrosive
salt, and gum that is subject unto it, it is well manifested in Euphorbium,
Scamony, Laureola, Flammula, and hot corrosive Venomes; for these (as Hermes
tells us) are subject unto Mars his Constellation. Hereupon we find, that
Vitriol is cold, acid, and stiptick in his external; and yet hot, caustic,
and corrosive in his interior. And again, Iron (which is called Mars, because
it is subject unto Mars his influences) is Vitriol or Copperis in his
interior; as also Copper, (which is a mineral subject unto the Constellation
of Venus and therefore is called Venus.)

CHAP. III.
Of the excellency of Man in the Animal Kingdom, and of the admirable nature of
the Lodestone in the Mineral.

I May well presume to compare the Lodestone in disposition with Man,
considering the admirable virtues and dignity of the one in the Animal kingdom;
and the miraculous operations, and mystical properties of the other, in the
Mineral region. As for Man, (for dignities cause I will speak of him in the
first place) there is such a super-eminent and wonderful treasure hidden in
him, that wisemen have esteemed, that the perfect wisdom of this world,
consists in the knowledge of a man's self, namely, to find out that secret
mystery, which does lurk within him. For man is said to be the center of every
creature, and for that cause he is called Microcosmus, or the little world:
Centrum and miraculum mundi, The center or miracle of the world, containing in
himself the properties of all creatures, as well celestial as terrestrial,
and consequently of the Lodestone. He is Templum Dei, the Temple of God;
Corpus Christi, the Body of Christ; Habitaculum Spiritus sancti, the Habitacle
of the holy Ghost, (as the Apostle has taught us). Neither verily may it be
imagined, that God would make choice of an unworthy dwelling place. And
therefore in the consideration thereof, and our enquiry after so great a
mystery, we had need to proceed with our exactest discretion and judgment, from
the visible things of man unto the invisible, that is, to penetrate with the
sharpest edge of our wit by demonstration, a posteriori; or from the external
man, into the bowels of his secret, mystical, and internal being; wherefore
we proceed thus: Seeing that Man is rightly reported by Hermes to be the Son of
the world, as the world is the Son of God, being that it is framed after the
image of the Archetype, (for which cause he is termed the little world) It
will be requisite to understand, that he is in like manner divided into a
heaven and earth, as the great world was, and consequently contains in it
self no otherwise his heavens, circles, poles, and stars, than the great world
does. And also as we find, that the spiritual image of the heavens, with their
circles and poles, are delineated also in the earth, and every particular
thereof, (as it appears in the Loadstone and Iron) so the character of the
inward man is deciphered and pourtrayed out in the outward man, no otherwise,
than we may judge of the fashion of the sword by the scabbard, or the kernel
by the shell. Concerning the re-search or enquiry after the worlds poles in
man, there has risen no small difference amongst the Philosophers;
Pythagoraes, Plato, and Aristotle have ordained the east part of the world to
be his right hand, and their reason is, because the diurnall motion of the
heavens, which proceeds from the Primum mobile, is effected from east to
west; and consequently the west must be his left hand, or sinister portion: and
in placing man according unto this position, his face must look unto the north,
and his posteriors unto the south. But Empedocles opposes this opinion,
affirming, that the Aestivall Solstice, o^ the Tropic of Cancer, is the right
hand of the world; it follows therefore, that the Hyemall station of the Sun,
or the Tropic of Capricorn, must be the left; and according unto this
direction, man's face must behold the west. As for mine own part, mine opinion
is adverse unto both their minds, forasmuch as I, being moved thereto for
reasons, as well Theological as Natural, would rather adapt man's face unto
the Orient, or eastern quarter, and then his posteriors shall respect the west,
and so the north pole will correspond unto his left hand, and the south unto
his right. That this position is not only naturally, but also divinely,
befitting the Microcosm, we prove it thus: The Patriarcks, Prophets, and
Apostles, in their devoutest prayers, did use to convert their faces unto the
east, which is an argument, that this quarter of the world was by the Creator
alloted unto man's anteriour part. And in Matthew we read, Matthew. 14. Numb. 3^.
that lightning shall come out of the east, and shall pass unto the west. And
in another place it is said, Metimin^ quamque ad plagam orientalem, and ad
plagam australem, and ad plagam occidentalem, and ad plagam septentrionalem.
Measure forth unto the east, and the south, and the west, and toward the
north. As if he had said, Measure out plots of ground before you, and at your
right hand, and behind you, Job 23.
and at your left hand. And Job says, Behold, I go into the east, and he will
not be there; and unto the west, and I shall not find him there; or unto the
north, where he works, and I shall not discern him; he hides himself in the
south, and I shall not behold him. But St. Jerome interprets this place thus, If
I shall go unto the east, he appears not; if unto the west, I shall not
understand him; if unto the left hand, what shall I do? I shall not overtake
him; if on the right hand, I shall not see him. And Tremellius thus: If I shall
go forward, he will not be there; if backward, I shall not find him; when he
operateth on the left hand, yet shall I not see him; he will cover the right
quarter of the world, and yet shall I not behold him. So that what Pagn^n^
makes the orient angle of the world, Tremellius makes the face or forepart
of the world, and so-forth. Whence it appears, (and that, as I think, without
further controversy) that the direct disposition of man, according unto the
situation of the great world, is, when his face is disposed unto the orient, or
east angle of the earth. And for this reason are the two eyes of man disposed
in the frontispice of his fabric, as also of all other creatures, that they
might after a long nocturnall darkness, behold with delight the oriental Sun,
that by the presence thereof, they might adore the Creator thereof, in whose
power it is, by his golden aspect, to banish the presence of the gloomy night,
and consequently to salute it, as being the visible type of the eternal Sun's
invisible beauty; who also (as Scriptures has taught us) will appear at the
last day from that easterly point, to renovate and purify by fire the corrupt
world. If follows therefore, that man's right hand, or right part, must
respect the south, as his left hand the north. All which are by so much the
more apparent, by how much they agree and concord with Philosophical reason:
For the Liver being on the right side of man, does most conveniently sympathise
with the southern nature, being that it engendereth by its virtue warm aerie
blood, and sends it forth by the channells of the veins, every where, over
the microcosmicall earth, to make it to vegetate, even as the southern wind
produces tepid or madid showers, to water the microcosmicall earth, that
thereby the plants and he^bage which grows on it, may increase and multiply
by vegetation. The left side, or left hand, is rightly compared unto the worlds
Boreal quarter, or the Arctick p^le: for as in that angle, the air, water, or
earth, is cold and dry, apt to congelation, and of a contractive and stiptick,
or restrictive nature; so also we find, that the spleen which lies in the left
part of man's body, is the receptacle of melancholy, or congealed, cold, black,
sour, and earthly humors; and as the northern blasts of the macro^osmicall or
great world, do obscure and mask, or eclipse oft-times the fair sunshine of
the east, and by that means do procure an obscure darkness over all the
hemisphear; even so in the little world, the flatuous fumes sent forth from
this northern spleen, contracteth the heart, and instead of wholesome and bright
passion^, namely, of joy, mirth, and gladness, which the beauteous sunshine of
life procures unto man, it brings forth dark passions, as are, sadness,
fear, despair, and such like; yea, and causes the heart to suffer the effects
of syncopes, and palpitations. Thus therefore you see the two opposite poles of
the little world* to concur in effect, and that in all respects, with that of
the great world, counting the southern pole from the Aequinoctiall. For if we
divide the Lodestone in the middle, that part in the Aequinoctiall which is
next the north pole, will serve and stand in place of the South Pole; and if
again, that half be divided in the Tropic of Cancer, the division about the
Tropic of Cancer, will be his South Pole. But to look more internally yet into
the little world, we find that it consists on that spiritual Cornerstone,
by which the world was made and the earth sustained, and consequently in which
the world, and every point thereof, was ideally delineated from the beginning,
before it was made after the manner of the earth, which is said to be full of
the Spirit of Wisdom. Hereupon it is termed the Temple of God, the body and
members of Christ, and the habitacle of the Holy Spirit, (as is said before).
For this cause therefore we must think, that there are secret Poles, circles,
and stars, assigned unto man, as well spiritual as corporal, no otherwise
then there is unto the earth, and every Magneticall portion thereof; So that in
man is the properties of the Macrocosmicall winds, and consequently in it may
passions be bred, and produced, which are as well Antipatheticall as
Sympatheticall.

Now verily, if in the second place, we shall duly observe the nature of the
Lodestone, we shall not a little admire at the rare and singular properties
thereof; yea truly, we shall find it almost to pass man's reason and
understanding, that a hard mineral stone, unmovable, and stupid, should
nevertheless be possessor of such spirits, which are able insensibly to
display and transmit their occult faculties and virtues, quite through or a
travers the hardest stones, the most solid and closest grained wood; the thick
and intranspirable plates of metal; yea, the impenetrable glass it self, and
other such compacted stuff, which have not any sensible Spiracle or porosity,
and that it should work on it self, and on Iron; and that it should behold the
Pole Arctick at so long a distance, as there cannot be a greater in our regard,
namely from the earth unto the highest heavens, or the eighth Shpere, the which
is almost incommensurable, I mean unto the Pole Star. I dare boldly say, that
all the School of the Peripateticks, who made profession to give a reason of
all things, and to be ignorant of nothing, that touches the most occult and
intimate secrets of nature, would find themselves much troubled and puzzeled,
and as it were enclosed in a confused Labyrinth of fantastical imaginations
and Chimerian surmises, before they could discuss and unvaile this misty
business, or unrip the fardill of so profound a riddle; that is to say, ere
they could hit the mark, or attain unto the wished end of this inquiry, which
is only pointed at and demonstrated by the finger of a far truer, and diviner
Philosophy, whose main Subject of all actions and power, is the spiritual
Cornerstone Jesus Christ, in whom is the plenitude of Divinity, as St. Paul
teaches us. Is it not wonderful, that this spirit can pass like that
celestial one in Man, where the air is not able to penetrate? Is it not an
evident Argument, that it is of an aethereall race, which is able to operate
these effects quite through such solid bodies? Wherefore let not Plutarch make
his brags as he has done, where he striveth to undo this intricate Gordian
knot or tie, reputing it a shame and defect in such learned men, as have meddled
herein, and have not dived into the depth thereof, being that at last he
himself shows palpably herein his error, after he had made so strict an
inquisition: For he concludes, that the insensible emanations or emissions or
effluxions which issue out of the Lodestone, and produce his attractive
effects, are gross and flatuous; whereas, if he had a little better considered
the business, he would have found that the subtilest, and most rarefied air,
is not able to find any porosity or spiracle to breathe through thick compacted
boards, or smoothed and polished stones, or plates of silver and gold; much
less can any passage be admitted unto gross and flatuous spirits, to breathe or
expire through. But to return again unto the straight line of our History.

CHAP. IV.
Of a double attractive disposition in Man; and how the one agrees with the
nature of the Lodestone; and the other is different from it. Herein also the
Reason, why the dead carcass of a Man is endued with a Magnetic power or
attractive nature, is discovered.

AS in the dimension of the Lodestone, there is observed to be a multiplicity
in kinds or manners of attraction, (for the attraction of it is otherwise
effected at his Poles, namely perpendicularly, than it is on the Aequinoctial,
which is flatling; so also there is a great difference between the attraction,
which is made in man: For the Spleen being of the property of the North Pole,
sucketh unto it by the Ramus Splenicus his like, namely Melancholy or
terrestrial juices, directly by a Saturnine virtue, and the Gall attracteth,
by a Martial Sulphurous or fiery terrestriety, choler unto it; and the Liver
by a Southern or Aequinoctial dilatation, disperseth the blood which it has
rubified, by veiny channells through the whole Microcosmicall earth. But first,
it attracteth by his porous Organs the like unto it from the guts. All which
manner of attraction it would never effect, were it not by the incitation of
natural heat, which though in it self it rather dissipateth by dilatation,
then attracteth by contraction; yet it inciteth and animateth certain
corporeal instruments, ordained by nature for attraction's cause, namely to
draw and suck by contraction, and to dilate again by relaxing or dilating of
themselves. And for this reason is the Heart, the Stomach, the Intestines, or
Guts, the Veins, etc. made or compacted of fibers direct for attraction,
transverse for retention, and oblique for expulsion. Again, the attraction of
the air by the Aspera Arteria and nostrills, could not be effected, but by the
aid of the Pulmones or Lungs, the which would not move or work but by the
animation of a dilating and vivifying heat; so that, in this case, all
attraction of external air, which is made by the Pores, into the fleshy
parts, and by the Lungs into the Heart, and by the nostrils into the brain,
proceeds from the dilatated action of heat, and is effected by instruments,
and that properly by the lungs and heart: Even as we see that the Syringe or
Squirt being pulled out, attracteth or draws air; but being thrust in, it
emitteth or expels it again; and yet both these opposite actions in one Organ
or instrument, proceed from one dilated humane spirit which acts. We must
understand therefore, (as I have expressed before) that man is composed of
Matter which is his Patient, and Form which is his Agent; and as matter did
first proceed of the watery Subject, which did issue out of the dark Chaos, and
therefore is of it self inclinable unto a Northern and privative disposition,
namely to rest, cold, mortification, and immobility; so it is this Matter, that
makes contraction, as well in the heart, and consequently in the Pulse's
motion, as in the other parts of the body; that is to say, the natural
inclination of Matter in man, is apt to contract spirits from the Circumference
unto the Center; when contrariwise Form being derived from Light, is busy in
dilatation, and therefore in animation, and exagitation of Matter, which would
otherwise be sopified, and as it were mortified, by her mother's Northern cold.
And this is the reason of Systole and Diastole, in the hearts motion, which
comes of that action and passion, or operation and resistance, which is made
between the Light, heat, or Aequinoctial form, and the dark and cold, or polar
matter in man's composition; whereby it is apparent, that as the great world is
said to be composed ex lite et am^citia, of hatred and friendship; so also the
little world, is rightly averred to be compacted of contraries, namely of the
children of Light and Darkness. Now in this therefore, a live-man's attractive
power, differs from that of the Lodestone, because the Lodestone is not so
appearing lively as man is; but may in some sort be esteemed dead, because it
is divided from his ferruginous vein in the earth; and again, he attracteth not
by any dilatation, made of a vivifying heat, through any organicall Substance
or assistance, but by an earthly and Centrall, contracting disposition. And for
that reason, his greatest power of attraction consists in the Pole. The live
man's attraction proceeds therefore from a dilatation of lively heat, from
the Center unto the circumference, which causes material instruments ordained
as well for attraction as retention or expulsion to effect their office; and
yet sometimes it operateth chiefly to contraction, that is in motion from the
circumfere^ne unto the Center, when it receives by the permission of God the
beams of a privative Emanation, as when the heart is contracted: whereupon bad
passions, as sadness, melancholy, despair, envy, fear, and such like do follow,
as we have told you before. Sometimes the natural heat reflecteth, for the
Senses repose and rest, his beams inwardly, as in the action of sleep, which is
a type of death and darkness: but contrariwise, it dilateth its self from the
Center unto the circumference, when it will have the animal spirits to watch
and operate in their functions.

By this therefore we may imagine, that the Load-stone's attractive nature is
from the circumference unto the Center, being as it were to man's external
view half dead, and by that manner of attraction it draws unto it his like,
namely spirits out of the Iron or steel, which by reason of its refination and
homogeniety in nature, as being cleared from all his stony Mercury, which was
heterogenious unto it, we may compare unto a live man, which is replenished
with lively emanating or dilating spirits: For I would have every man to know,
that there is not a creature on the earth, which has not his Astrological or
starry influence, which (though we cannot discern it) does shine forth, and
makes his aspect unto the like of his kind, namely unto such creatures, as are
of condition with the stars of heaven, from whence the creature's influence
does descend: But if the two creatures be dissonant in nature, then the one
does Antipathetically divert or reflect his beams from the other. The Iron
therefore like a vivified mass, meeting with the Lodestone, does easily emit
his beams of love unto the Lodestone, who does as greedily suck or draw them,
by means of his inward earthly Martial Spirits, even unto her Center, and by
the attraction of the Iron's formal beams, draws with it all the Iron body,
that possesses the starry or Martial influence. In like manner a strong
Magnet, is as it were a female unto a weaker. No otherwise is it with a live
man, and the dead carcass of another; For though that many bodies appear to be
dead, yet shall the natural Magician know, that in his flesh and bones there
abides admirable spirits, which operate no less wonders, yea, and far greater
then those of the Lodestone. And therefore I would have each self-conceited
person, that are so apt to envy against the Mysteries of God in nature, to
learn more discretion and experience, before they so vain-gloriously do judge
the strange, and mavelous effects of man's royal nature, and pronounce so
boldly without hesitation, or sticking, that there are no spirits in any
amputated members or portion in man, no nor in the dead carcass, as Casman and
Foster aver: Nay that the Devil himself can not confer any into them or it:
For I would have both them and other temerarious and bold Judges to know, that
as the Lodestone, though appearing a dead mass, is observed to suck and draw
Centrally unto it, with a lively appetite the beams and body of the Lodestone;
and that all and every member divided from the Load stone, will do the like in
its proportion: Even so I can prove it, and confirm it by an ocular
demonstration, that by a right application of the fleshy parts of a dead man's
carcass unto a live man, (if the application be long) it will make the live man
faint and feeble, the which nevertheless a while after the material or
corporal Magneticall Mummy be removed, will receive again his wonted strength:
Moreover, lest this relation may seem to Mr. Foster and the rest of his
Cabalisticall Sect, a figment or Chimerious fancy: forasmuch as he may
allege, that the application of the thing may work in the live man's
imagination, and cause him to persuade himself that he is faint, and that
without any true ground, and that there can be no external effect to prove it.
I answer: That it will suck or draw forth of the live man the spiritual Mummy
in a visible manner: For by the coldness of the part, the spiritual Mummy so
extracted, will condense it self on the superficies of the corporal Magnet,
even as air into a cloud, or a cloud into Manna; so that it may be gathered
and converted into a very precious and wholesome Panacaea or general medicine
(if the party out of which it is extracted, be sound, and of a wholesome
complexion)* as contrariwise, it may prove as corrupt and Antipatheticall a
medicine, where the body out of which it is drawn is infected with any venomous
or contagious disease, namely French Pox, Plague, Leprosy, and such like, as
shall be more at large expressed in the next book. Now the reason of this act
and operation in the dead man's Magnetic parts, is, that as when the body was
alive, it was animated by light, and enjoyed all the properties of light, to
wit, it was hot, active, moveable, dilative, and, in conclusion, of an
Aequinoctiall or Southern condition; so that natural fire being extinguished,
it indueth the properties of darkness; for it is mortified by cold, and is
congealed, potentiall, fix or immobil, contractive, and, in fine, of the rigid
zone's, and frozen Pole's nature; So that whereas before whilst it lived, it
did emit his beams from the Center to the Circumference, and did enjoy the
blessings of God's vivifying and positive Emanation, now it indueth the
condition of his contracting, privative and mortifying Emanation. And yet I
would not that wisemen should think, that because the lively body is turned
into a dead carcass, therefore it is void of all spirits of life, being that
Scriptures confirm, that the incorruptible spirit is in all things, and
consequently as well in those that are dead, as in those that are alive: For
this incorruptible spirit according unto the variety of his property in the
four winds, is sometime in motion from the center of the thing in which it is,
unto the circumference, for so he vivifyeth, and causes the creature to act
and live, by a southern or aequinoctiall faculty; so (I say) it operateth from
the center of the celestial sun, to the animation of inferior creatures,
namely, by evocation of their incorruptible spirits, (which were repelled by
the winter or Boreal cold into their center) from their center unto their
circumference, as it appears by such vegetables, which seem, for that reason,
as it were dead all the winter season, because the spirit of life leaves and
forsakes the circumference of the plant, and betaketh it self unto the center,
to retire from the assaults of cold, which is its opposite, as far as it can.
But when it perceives its fountain of light to approach, and to send them
forth succors, they begin by little and little to spring again, from their
center unto their circumference; and being united unto the external beams
which are come unto their aid, they expel dark privation, and congealing cold,
from out their tabernacles, and do proceed to operate and act unto vegetation
and multiplication; as also we see in the corn which is buried in the earth.
Even so, (I say) and no otherwise, the Load-stone's Martial nature being
originally, by a Saturnine spirit, contracted into his center, is exagitated
and stirred up, and with like joy does suck unto it the formal beams of the
Iron, from whose Martial sulphurous spirit they did originally spring. And
even so also, the spirits of the dead body being by mortifying cold driven from
the circumference unto the center, and resting there at repose without any
action, makes the body and every part thereof fixed and unmovable; but when
they are applied unto the lively circumference of their species or kind, they
spring forthwith and in their watery spirits toward the circumference, (as if
they were almost famished in the center) and rejoice to meet with their like in
the live man, which does, as it were, dilate it self, and issue forth of the
pores in a streaming manner, for their assistance; and they being partly
congealed in the center of the dead member, do with a greedy appetite suck them
in with the spiritual Mummy, which is their vehicle, toward their centrall
abiding, to endue it with life as it was before, and to recreate it with their
presence; but the unctuous spiritual Mummy, being full of bright spirits,
resting upon the superficies of the live man, inspissated with the cold and
mortifying contact of the dead flesh, or part of the carcass, is forthwith
congealed, and may be reserved for a private use. But can we (I pray you)
better confirm this, than with the contractive, restrictive, or congelative
virtue of the fumous excrescence, issuing from the salt contained in the dead
man's bones? for by applying it, I mean, the Uznea or mass, which grows on
the dead man's bones, unto the irruptions of blood or haemorrhoigy in a living
man, the warm blood, as it were, moved by an antipatheticall affection,
returns back again, and is denied passage by the congealing and binding
operation, of these northern effected excrescences.

But leaving these conclusions, touching the dead man's magnet and its virtues,
for a while, what will you say, and there may be a microcosmicall Magnes or
Lodestone, which may be selected and gathered out of the living man, without
any detriment or prejudice unto his life, whose virtues, both in regard of its
monstrous and unnatural generation, being composed of unlike parents, and
being compacted of two substances different in kind, as the Mule is, namely,
of an earthly Mercury, and choleric sulphurous human spirits; as also in his
manner of attraction of the spiritual Mummy out of the living man; yea, and
what is far more admirable, by the transplantation of it, either to the animal
or vegetable kinds, it works after a strange fashion, either sympathetically
or antipathetically. I know, that these news will straight way be esteemed by
some, who are apter to judge amiss, than rightly to scan, to be diabolical:
And why? Marry because they pass the sphere of their capacities. And yet I
know this to be true, and know them which have put it in execution, not without
the wonderment of many; yea, I know this Microcosmicall Magnet, and the use
thereof, the which when it is tried by wisemen, and well pondered by them,
will appear as natural, as the effects thereof will seem strange, and the
reason abstruse. But if that which I have said before be well understood, and
seriously pondered, the cause hereof will not seem so hidden, as that it should
exceed the limits of nature. Of this kind of magneticall action, as well
sympatheticall as antipatheticall, I purpose, by Gods grace, to discourse more
at large, in the third or last Book of this Treatise or History.

CHAP. V.
In this Chapter is expressed the secret cause why, and manner how, as well the
Microcosmicall, as Macrocosmicall Lodestone, does operate ad distans, and th^^
unto an unknown dimension, or unlimited intervall.

MR. Foster has sufficiently expressed the shallowness of his Philosophy,
where he averreth, That because the light of the Sun and Stars cannot penetrate
the thick clouds, and opake bodies; Ergo, the formal essence of a man is not
able to pierce and penetrate directly in his course, without being stopped or
hindered by Castles, Hills, Woods, and such like. But had he been a little more
profoundly seen, or immersed in the bowels of true Philosophy, he would have
known, that the Etheriall sperm, or Astralicall influences, are of a far
subtiler condition, than is the vehicle of visible light: Yea verily, they are
so thin, so mobile, so penetrating, and so lively, that they are able, and also
do continually penetrate, and that without any manifest obstacle or resistance,
even unto the center or inward bosom of the earth, where they generate metals
of sundry kinds, according unto the condition of the influence, as the ancient
Philosophers do justify. The subtlety therefore of this spirit, Plotinus,
according unto Plato's mind, does fully express in these words, Tanta est
Aetheris tenuitas ut omnia corpora penetret universi tam supera quam infera,
and cum ipsis conjunctus aut implicitus, ea major a minime reddat, quia
spiritus iste interior cuncta opera eorum mole minima nullum prorsus augmentum
recipiente, alit atque conservat. The tenuity of the Ether is such, that it
does penetrate all the bodies of the world, as well above in heaven, as below
on earth; and this heavenly substance being joined and mixed with them, it
makes them not a jot the bigger for all that, because this inward spirit does
nourish and preserve all bodies, without adding any thing unto their weight, or
increasing of their substance. And by reason of this heavenly natures purity or
subtlety, the heaven, or coelum, is called by the wiser Philosophers, and
mystical Poets, the Husband unto the earth, which they term Vesta; yea, and
the very stars of heaven, among the which the Copernicans rank the earth, are
likened unto his wife, being that they are extracted out of the aetheriall
substance, no otherwise than Eve was out of the side of Adam; for they are
defined to be the thickest portions of their orbs, by reason whereof, they are
accounted as the members of heaven, and consequently there is nothing so thin,
subtle, and piercing, as is that spirit from whence by condensation they are
derived. This is the cause, that the true Alchymists do tell such wonders of
their Coelum, which they call their Quintessence, arguing, that by reason of
its purity and subtlety, it is able to penetrate all things. And the
Philosophers say, that it is their nature, which they define to be, De Art
Chimie.
Vis quaedam rebus infinita, omnia permeans entia, cunctas generans res, easque
augens alensque and ex similibus similia procreans. A certain infinite power in
things, which penetrateth and passes through all things, ingendring every
thing, and augmenting and nourishing them, and procreating like things of their
like. And verily, if you will be pleased to consider really what I have spoken
before, you will remember how I told you, that the angelical virtue proceeded
from the archetypicall emanations, and are the types of the divine Idea. Again,
that the aetheriall spirit was filled with the angelical influences, which had
their essential root from God. So that in verity, it is not the starry light
which penetrateth so deeply, or operateth so universally, but that eternal
centrall spirit, with which his divine and unresistable essence, penetrateth
all things, both in heaven above, and in the earth and waters beneath. And all
this the mystical Philosophers seemed to verify, though darkly, when they
called Saturn, which was the father also of Jupiter, or the head of the
catholic emanation, the father of Coelum, or Heaven, arguing thereby, that in
the emission of the spirit of wisdom, he produced created, or informed the
heavens, according to that of Job, Coelum ornasti Spiritu tuo, Thou did adorn
the heavens by thy Spirit. Job. Psalm.
And David, Verbo Domini fimati sunt coeli and Spiritu ab ore ejus omnis virtus
eorum: By the word of the Lord the heavens were made, and by his Spirit each
virtue thereof. 2 Pet. 3.
And St. Peter, Coeli erant prius and terra ex aquis, and per aquas existentes
verbo Dei: The heavens were first, and the earth of water, and by the waters,
existing by the word of God. It is certain therefore, that the whole essential
act of the aetheriall spirit, is the divine emanation, or the bright
incorruptible Spirit of the Lord; and therefore of necessity that spirit, which
is worthy to be the immediate vehicle of so unresistible and emanating
influence must be conformable to it in purity and subtility which is the
informer, who is said by the wise Solomon to be Omni re mobilior and subtilior
and attingere ubique propter suam munditiam, Wisd. 7.
and innovare omnia and implere orbem terrarum: To be the most active and
moveable and subtle of all things, and to penetrate and pass everywhere, by
reason of his purity in essence, and to renew and refresh all things, and to
fill the earth with his presence. This therefore was it that made some, Wisd. 1.
even of our Christian Philosophers, to break forth into these speeches: Deus
est Natura, and Natura Deus: God is Nature, and Nature is God. Whereby they
meant, that the naturating or radical informing nature, was the eternal
emanation, which made and informed the humid nature of the world; which for
that reason was called Natura naturata, or the Nature which was made natural,
namely by the presence of the Naturating nature or Spirit of the Lord, which
moved upon the waters, and imparted unto them of his fiery informing Vigor or
Essence, as we may find partly by Sacred Testimony, and partly by the
confirmation of St. Austin.

We must therefore after a due consideration of this which is said, infer, that
if the influence be completely animated by the incorruptible Spirit of the
Lord, then must it be endued with the properties of that Spirit or Divine
Nature, and consequently it must be the most subtle, quick, movable and
penetrating of all spirits, and in that respect will be able to pass through
all solid bodies without resistance, and also to engender, augment, and nourish
all things; and being incorporated or specificated, it procreateth like
individualities of their like; and again, it has in regard of our capacity, an
infinite extension, and therefore cannot be limited. All which I purpose by
experience or ocular demonstration, to demonstrate in this manner. We find in
practice, that the Lodestone by virtue of his subtle spirit, which does
internally animate it, is made so potent through it, in his attractive virtue,
that it is able without resistance to display and transmit the beams of his
active virtue quite atravers the hardest stones, the most solid and finest
grained wood, through thick plates, copper, tin, silver, or gold: yea, and to
penetrate quite through the impenetrable glass it self, and other such like
compacted stuff, which have no sensible porosity or spiracle, which is an
evident Argument, that this spirit is of a far more peircing and subtle
nature, than the sublunary air: forasmuch as it is denied passage through the
slightest paper-skin or bladder. In the like manner man's inward or celestial
spirit, which is the vehicle of this vivifying beam, is so subtle in it self,
that nothing is able to resist it, when the inward mental beam does aim at
any mark, how far or how inaccessible soever it may be esteemed in the fleshly
man's conceit. For being this celestial or aethereall spirit in man, is made
after the pattern of the Divine Image which it bears, it must also resemble
it in its actions. Now the subtilty of the Divine act in man's spirit, Pimand.
4.
is expressed by Hermes, in these words: Quicunque hac Dei Natura fulti sunt,
intelligentia sua cuncta complectuntur quae in terra sunt, and in mari, and
siquid est praeter ea supra coelum, atque adeo scipsos erigunt ut ipsum quoque
bonum intueantur: Whosoever do rely on this Divine Nature, may comprehend by
their understanding all things, which are upon the earth, and in the seas; yea,
and besides all this, any thing that is in heaven above; and also they may
elevate themselves in such a manner, that they may behold the face of goodness
it self, etc. Whereby he signifies the all-sufficient act of penetration,
which is in the mental beam, by whose unresistable action the celestial
influence does penetrate and operate without any intermediate resistance in and
through all things, By which it is evident, that as every inferior specific
creature is endued with this essential spirit, and does consist, and is as it
were founded and edificated on it, as on an essential Cornerstone or
Foundation; so the emission of his beams is not to be limited by any settled
Sphere of activity, as the unadvised and more sensual then intellectual
Philosophers have defined it to be, being that it is Vis in rebus infinita, An
infinite virtue or nature in things, and therefore not finite or determinable:
For look how far it shines or emitteth his active spirit out of the Center of
the celestial star; even so far is this Centrall terrestrial bright Spirit
able to make his Semid^ameter of extension; So that as the heavenly starr's
beamy influence does penetrate downward unto the Center of the earth; even
after the very like manner does each terrestrial star pierce unto the Center
of the celestial star from whence it was derived; and the more rich and
exalted is the starry form in the creature, the nearer it approaches unto the
nature of the most exalted star in heaven, and makes his extension the more
forcible. Now as we see that every Astrall influence in the creature does by a
natural inclination, and that Sympathetically, aspect the star or celestial
Fountain from which it did spring; and likewise that star in heaven, by a
paternall respect, does send down his influences to feed and nourish his like
filial fire or form in the creature here below, and both of them by a mutual
relation do rejoice together at the spiritual presence of each other,
(whereupon it is said: Natura natura laetatur and naturam continet; O natura
coelestis veritatis, naturas Dei nutu multiplicans: Nature is rejoiced in
nature, and contains nature; O celestial nature which by the Will of God
does mul^ply natures,) so likewise each kind or species which is endued with
all one influence, does, because of his likness to another, send forth by a
sympatheticall consent, beams of one nature, making an harmonious Symphony in
the concourse of their beams, by which they do agree in union of love. And for
this reason the axiom of the Philosophers before mentioned runs in this
strain, Natura ex similibus similia procreare solet: Nature does use to
procreate like of like. And this is the cause why each specific Form does
rejoice in its like, and is ready to produce his kind, and does not use to
pass the limits of his kind, as for example: A Man's nature produces a Man, a
Horse a Horse, a fenel-seed fenel, a bean a bean, wheat produces wheat, etc.
And also the nature of each thing so created is most amiable unto the nature of
his like, and sends forth the amiable and Sympatheticall beams of his
affection, to concur with the like beams, which are emitted from his like; so
that both of them do easily consent and rejoice at each other, and by
contraction of beams, they endeavor to cause a union: For this reason
therefore the Lodestone rejoices at the aspect of its like; for if one
Lodestone meets with another, each will aspect the other by their Saturnine
Sulphurous spirits, and embrace each other: For by their applications, they
will Centrally suck and draw the one to the other, with a Sympatheticall
embracing. Also because that the Iron is subject unto the self-same
constellation, and has his Centrall star in all points correspondent unto the
Lodestone, (for which essential consanguinity, they are both found in the
self-same ^errestriall vein, therefore they both are observed so lovingly to
entertain and hug one another: For experience tells us, that the feminine
Lodestone above all measure embraces as a luxurious harlot the masculine
Iron, and not the Iron the Lodestone, as Averroes, Scaliger, and Cusanus the
Cardinal, have erroneously surmised; affirming that the Iron moves unto the
Lodestone, as unto his beginning and matrix from whence it came: for, by that
reason, the North Pole in the Iron should move of it self more swiftly unto the
Pole-starr, which is the fountain of both their Centrall influences, than the
Magnet: all which is by experience proved quite contrary.

Now to confirm the infinity of the extension of these Centrall beams in two
like bodies unto one another, let us first be capable of some Theory, that we
may afterward the better descend unto Practice. Radius (says Alkindus) quia
centro stellae ad centrum terrae procedit fortissimus esse probatur in
operationis suae specie: Alkind. de Rad. Stel.
The beam which proceeds from the Center of the star unto the Center of the
earth, i^ proved to be most strong in the kind of his operation. Whereby he
signifies at what an incommensurable distance the occult starry beam, or beamy
influence, works with and in his image on the earth; for he says elsewhere
Liquet quod Radii stellares diversa constituunt individua in hoc mundo: It is
manifest, that the starry beams do make and engender d^vers individual
creatures in this world. Again, for the Centrall stars, or starry influences
of the lower bodies, and their beam's extension he speaks thus: Mundus
Elementarius est exemplum mundi Syderei, ita ut quaelibet res in eo contentia
ipsius speciem contineat. Manifestum est quod omnis res hujus mundi radios
faciat suo more ad instar Syde^um; alioq^i figuram mundi Syderei ad plenum non
haberet: sed and hoc in aliqu^bus sensu manifestatur: ignis enim radios caloris
ad loca proxima transmittit, and terra radios algoris. Hoc igitur pro vero
assumentes, dicimus quod omne quod actualem habet existentiam in mundo
elementorum radios emittit in omnem partem, qui totum mundum elementarem
replent suo modo. Praeterea distantia unius rei ab alia fac^^ d^fferentiam in
effectu radiorum in rebus hujus mundi: The Elementary world is the image or
pattern of the starry world; so that every thing that this world contains in
it, does comprehend the form or likness of the starry world. It is evident that
every thing in this world, does ^mit his beams after his manner, even as the
stars of heaven do* for else it would not fully assume the figure of the
starry world; but this is made manifest in some things unto sense: For the fire
does send forth the beams of his heat unto the bordering places, and also the
earth the Emanations of his cold. We affirm therefore for a certainty, that
every thing which has an actual existence in this elementary world, does emit
or send forth his beams unto every part, the which do fill the elementary world
after their fashion. Moreover, the distance of one thing from an other, makes
a difference in the effect of the beams, in things of this world. Whereby he
makes it plain, first, That there is nothing in the lower world, but has his
like in the starry world, whose beams and influences it receives. And again,
that as the said star in heaven does dart forth his beams even unto the very
center of the earth, and therefore has so large a sphere of activity, that it
searches every place of the vawted world: Even so, and after the same manner,
those starry ^^intills, or beamy sparks, which it sends down into his subject
creature, being that it is all one in essence with its fountain, and therefore
continued with it, and indivisible; searches in like manner each angle or
corner of the sublunary region, yea, it penetrateth even unto the very
celestial fountain, from whence it is derived, as shall be more clearly
demonstrated hereafter, being that every portion or small part of a large
Lodestone, has his poles and circles, as well as the whole. It is made
therefore apparent by this, that the action of each elementary thing is
effected, as well by disjunction of their bodies, that is to say, ad distans,
as when they are joined together by a mutual contact of one another; but the
action of elementary things, when they are separated from one another, is
performed by a fit application, and infusion of their beamy influences unto
each other, which would hardly be believed, by reason of the occultness of the
action, did not experience guide us, by the observation of the Load-stones
attraction of Iron unto it at a distance. Also we observe, that the images of
things are seen afar off in Mirrors, or Opticall glasses; and it was no small
artifice of the Pythagoreans, and some other of our Christian Philosophers, to
express their minds unto f^iends, being in far countries, by reflection, made
through prepared Ma^hemati^^^ glasses, in the circle or compass of the Moon.
But forsooth, our external Philosophers, which will only be guided by their
sense, do dream of a certain limited sphere of activity, and do ascribe bounds
unto the action of this mystical nature, as they please, or according unto
their exterior sense's observation: As for example, Because the Lodestone
draws the Iron but at half the distance of a table, Ergo, they think and
conclude, that the vivifying act of his virtue penetrateth or extends it self
no farther, than at that distance in the air, and consequently being led by
their corporal eyesight, they limit, after this external and visible action,
the Load stones spiritual extension. But if they would duly close their
corporal eyes in this inquisition, and look, as true Philosophers ought, in
the re-search of so abstruse an action, with the aspect of their mental
intellect, they would find, that the extension of the beamy spirit in the
Lodestone, does equalize that of his proper celestial star, being that they
are both of one essence; as also is the like spirit in the Iron, and every
scintill or spark of fire has the properties of the whole, as is said of the
Lodestone. But there are many things, which may hinder the evident effect in
the Lodestone, namely, the ponderosity of the body of the Iron, and therefore
it will not draw it beyond the circle of his sensible emanation; and another
thing is the dispersing and dilating of the union of beams in the Lodestone:
for the beams, after they are emitted, are the more dispersed the farther they
pass, as it appears by this demonst^ation.



A, the Lodestone, B D, the basis of his emitted beams, which does aptly
terminate and adapt it self unto the Iron B D, so that nothing is lost, but all
the force is upon the Iron, for which cause it attracteth its spirits forcibly,
because, vis unita est fortior. But when the Iron is planted at a further
distance, namely, in C, the greatest portion of the basis of the spiritual
triangular-emission, passes by the Iron, without any straight encounter, and
so his effect or virtue is made too weak, to draw so ponderous a thing at so
far a distance. But because his celestial star does meet and embrace his
emissions, and does fortify them, therefore it is evident, that the pole star
does act in the Lodestone, to stir up and animate his like vigor in it; and
the Lodestone being so vivified, does correspond unto the action of the star,
penetrating, by all one sympatheticall and symphoniacall consent, even to the
center of his fountain, which is easily effected, being they are all of one
essence. Do we not perceive this by an external apprehension to be true, when
we observe the northern pole of the Lodestone, in a kind of natural duty, to
regard and behold with a steadfast constancy the pole star, which is so far off
from the body of the Lodestone, though near and conjoined in the beamy
affection of one essential spirit? That this is so, we may perceive by the
needle touched. Do we not gather by Astronomicall practice, that the distance
of these two bodies, I mean, the celestial star, and the terrestrial stone,
is so great, as there cannot be esteemed a greater extension in our regard?
namely, seeing that the space is between the starry heaven, or eighth sphere,
in which the pole star is; and the earth: And yet we find them to concur and
meet in aspect, and to operate and sympathize with each other. What! and must
this abstruse spirits action be limited by any fantastical and imaginary
sphere of activity, figured out by persons little skilled, and too too
superficial in the occult treasure, and arcane or centrall actions of God in
nature? In like manner there must needs be a sympatheticall concurrence of
occult beamy light, betwixt the Iron and the Lodestone, because they have both
centrall stars, or beamy influences of one nature, and from one and the same
fountain, whose occult emanations pass, God knows, at how far a distance,
although the effects do accidentally appear unto our sense, no more than the
celestial influences which descend from heaven, upon the Minerals, Vegetables,
and Animals. Nevertheless, if we will believe the relations of History, we are
told by Serapio, O aus Magnus, and the Moors, that as well in the Indies, as
toward the northern pole, there are Rocks of this Stone, which suck and draw
ships unto them at a far distance, and pull the iron nails out of them, which
is a cause, as they say, that they fasten together the plancks and boards of
their boats and ships with wooden pins. And again, what shall we say unto the
opinion of Fracasto^ius, a learned Physician, and a well grounded Philosopher,
who blusheth not, after a tedious enquiry made by him in the Load-stones secret
disposition, to conclude, that the reason why the Lodestone directs his pole
unto the north, is, because that in that angle of the terrestrial world, there
are mountains of Lodestone, which do draw Iron unto it. Verily, it is a great
distance, that this magnetic Rock is able to operate upon the Iron, if that
were true, namely, from the Aequinoctiall unto the frozen point of the
North Pole; for unto the Aequinoctiall line, the Mariners make use of the
Needle, to find out what altitude they are in. And although some do think this
strange, yet for all that, many learned men, seen as well in Geography and
composing of Sea-Maps, as delineating the description of the world, do firmly
adhere unto this opinion. Whereby we see, that wise and learned men do confirm,
that the limited sphere of activity, ascribed unto the Lodestone by the
Peripatetick Philosophers, and Christian Schoolmen of his sect is vain and
frivolous.

But to come and ascend from the Mineral, unto the Vegetable and Animal
Kingdoms, we observe, that there is an admirable relation between the fixed
stars and the planets, and by the same reason also between plant and plant,
yea, and between the plant and the mineral, and between the animal and the
plant: As for example, Mizald. Arca. lib. 1.
Touching the sympatheticall relation, we find in the first place, that the
beams of the herb and flower Heliotropium, and that of Succory, do
sympathetically meet, and join themselves, and embrace lovingly the beams and
influences of the Sun, for they are observed to turn and wind about, even in
the most clowdy day, at the diurnall motion of him. And contrariwise, in the
night time, by reason of his absence, they contract their flowers, as being
enemies unto the dark and cold night, as Mizaldus affirms. Also the Oynion,
as Plutarch does testify, waxes green, Plutarch.
and grows, when the Moon decreaseth, and again it withers when she
increases. There is also a great sympatheticall reference between the Crab,
and Oyster, and the Moon, for when the Moon increases, they increase in their
succe or juice; again, when she decreaseth, they also do decrease in their
substance.

Munster Geograph. l. 19. c. 8.
Moreover, touching the eradiation of one plant unto another, it is noted, that
the Rue, otherwise termed Herb^g^ace, does entertain with exceeding great
friendship the Fig Tree, insomuch that it never grows or prospers better,
than under that tree; and, that there is a notable sympathy betwixt their
natures, it is evident, because they smell and taste much alike. Also if the
Myrtle be planted near the Pomgranat-tree, it makes him more fertile and
fruitful, and it self more odoriferous, and each of them rejoice at one
another presence and society; and indeed, both of them agree in a nature,
being cold, dry, and astringent.

Moreover, to express the exceeding sympatheticall relation, which is between
the Vegetable nature and the Mineral, let us but mark diligently the occult
property of the Hazel-tree. For if at certain times there be forked twigs cut
from it, and each twig of the forked branch be held in each hand, so that the
forked place where they join stand directly upward, and, as it were,
perpendicularly: And with this kind of posture of the stick, the party that
holds it pass over a mountain, that has in its bowels some ri^h mineral,
or mettalline vein, when as the man walks right over the place of the mine,
the perpendicular twist will forcibly, and that whether the bearer will or no,
bow downward toward the earth; but if there be no mine or vein, it will not
move. That this is true, my self can witness, and more than a thousand, which
have seen the effect, and will justify thus much; for even among us, certain
Germans performed the like fear in the Silver-mines at Wales; and in Germany
it is a thing commonly exercsied, in those mountains of Saxony and Hungary,
where there are mines of Silver and Gold. Agric. lib. de Fost. vel. Munster in
Geog.
Besides, lest my assertion should be of little faith among the incredulous, I
would have them know, that George Agricola and Munster, do avow the same to be
true. Lord, what a stir would the enemy of the weapon-salve make, to behold
such a sight! What! an unsensible branch of a tree, consisting of two twigs
only, to discover hidden metal, and to penetrate with his invisible beams
above six hundred fathom in the solid earth, and that quite through craggy
rocks, and stony veins! What, will they say) is it possible that a vegetable,
which is less active, movable, and hot, then is the animal, should perform this
act, when it is impossible (as they say) that the animal's beamy influence or
emanation, should pass or cooperate at any far distance with his like, by
reason of castles, rocks, woods, hills, fogs, and such like? Surely they will
conclude, that this wonder must be done by the act of the devil, or not at
all. For, being an animal spirit cannot effect such an union in aspect, at so
far a distance, how should the senseless vegetable move, and incline of it self,
etc? Such will their censures be, I know, who are apt to judge before the case
be known, when in verity it is that proportioned harmony in all these lower
creatures, by which they do correspond unto the celestial bodies, or rather to
the divine influences in them, which spring from one capital, catholic, and
eternal emanation, who infuseth immediately his virtuous beams, as well of
sympathy as antipathy, into each starry globe, and they again do pour them down
into this elementary world, causing a harmonious and symphoniacall consent
betwixt both regions. Alkind de ^ad. Stell.
And therefore Alkindus says, Omnia quae fiunt in hoc mund^, and contingunt in
mun^o elementorum, a coelesti harmonia sunt translata: All things that are
effected in this world, and do happen in the elementary world, proceed from the
celestial harmony. It is therefore certain, that the metallic beams
concurring in their ascent with the beamy influences of the forked rood, do
cause that portion in the hazel roods twist, to move downwards, no otherwise
than the Loadstone is noted to draw Iron, or another Lodestone, most strongly
by the pole. I know, it will seem strange unto these kind of men, to hear, that
metallic substances in their veins should send forth beams; but if they were
as well conversant with the lively natures of the mineralls as the mineral men
of Tiroll, in Germany, and in Hungary are, they would be assured by ocular
experience, that at times they send forth thunder and lightning in the earth,
which appears most dangerous unto the workmen, so that except they get out of
the mine when they observe the signs they suffer.

But to proceed. There is also noted and marked to be a kind of antipatheticall
aspect, between the creatures here below, as well as between some special
stars, both erratick, and fixed, above; and also one creatures beamy aspect is
known to abhor the other; So that in their applications of beams, the one is
observed to eschew and decline or reflex from the other, with a kind of
irascible, formidable or odible and hateful aversion. Miraldus tells us,
that the Cowcumber being as it were terrified at the noise of the Thunder,
Mirald. lib. 1.
is often changed. The Onion was refused by the Egyptians to be eaten, because
it was noted by them, to vary from all other growing things: for as all herbs,
saving it, did increase as the Moon did; So, only the Onion did contrariwise,
receive all his detriment and dimmution, when that star did increase in his
Light. There is an Antipathy between the Lightning and the Fig Tree, and the
hide of the Sea-calf, and therefore these are never struck by it. Plin. lib. 8.
Also there is known to be exceeding hatred between the reed and the fern or
brake, insomuch that if either of the roots bruised be laid on the stalks or
branches of the other, it casts it off from it with a scornful hatred. Of
all beasts also the Elephant hates and detesteth the little Mouse; Plin. lib.
8. cap. 10.
so that if any of the food which is administered unto them, be eaten or touched
by Mice, they will abhor and loath it forthwith. The like Antipathy is noted
to be between the natures of the Catablepa and the Weasell: for the Weasells
are as poison unto them. Ib. 12.
The Cock does Antipathetically abhor the Fox. All Snakes and Adders do fear
and fly from the Ashen-tree, Plin. lib. 16. cap. 13.
insomuch that they are careful to keep themselves as well out of the forenoon
as afternoon shadow of it. Again, Diascorides reports that the ^axus or
Ewe-tree is so venomous, that if any one do but sit under it, Diascorid.
he is hurt thereby, and often times it costs him his life. And Coelius
Rodiginus says, that the Adder is afraid of a naked man. It is well known and
confirmed by many Authors, Cael. Rodig. lib. 15. cap. 25.
that the Catablepa being but a very small Animal, kills with the beam of his
aspect a thousand paces off from him. Also one blear-eyed person is able to
infect another afar off by the secret emission of his contagious beams. We see
that Onions draw tears from a person ad distans, by the emission of its b^ams.
Again, we observe, that as like being wholesome and sound, does commonly, by a
Sympatheticall affection embrace his like; So also like being corrupted, does
Antipathetically, and that ad d^stans poison and infect his like; as we see
that a blear-eyed or Ophthaliniacall person, infecteth no member of another
person but his eye, and one of P^ysicall ulcered and consumed Lungs wounds
only the Lungs of another, and that ad distans, and by the application or
concurrency of the two beams of one nature, being Antipathetically affected and
impoysoned. But to return again unto our Magnetic Scope, which is as well
spiritual as corporal; I say, there is such a spiritual respect of Sympathy
betwixt creature and creature, that the beloved does allure and draw unto it
after an admirable manner of attraction, the spirit of the Lover, as I my self
have seen marvellously effectd by a water-Spannell of mine own in France: For
as I rode post to Lions, and by the way had lost my vallise or male, in which
my Letters of Exchange were, and seeking to return back again, I found my
post-horse of that quality, that he would by no means recoile and go back
again. Then I was forced to send my dog back to look out, and after he had been
absent half an hour, he brought the bouget in his mouth, which is strange,
considering that I was on horseback, and that he could not discern any footing
of mine; and ye^ nevertheless he came to the bouget which I desired, and
finding by it a sent of me he brought it again. But that I may come more
pertinently to the business. A friend of mine being in my company lost his dog
in the nightime, we came into a private house where he never was before; and
being in a chamber, the door being fastened, about half an hour after the dog
came, and did violently scrape and bounce at the door, to find out his beloved:
whereby it is evident, that the beams of his affection, did in the absence of
his Master not forsake his Master's beams, which guided him unto the unknown
place so directly, that he found him out. Is it not also a wonderful
Sympatheticall Emanation, that the Pigeon called the Carrier, does make unto
the place or dove-coat wherein he was bred and fostered? Which for that reason,
it does so dearly affect and love, that though he be conveied 500 miles from
his noursery in an enclosed basket, yet he will fly directly back again with a
letter about his neck? Which is an evident Argument, that it is justly and
straightly guided by the emitted beam of his affection, which is contiued,
after a spiritual manner, with the place it does most delight in. What shall
we say in two persons; whereof the one does love and affect without all reason,
and therefore prosecureth with the beam of his affection his beloved, though
she or he altogether either abhorring or neglecting, and not corresponding with
the like beams of affection, does not reciprocally embrace, but rather refuse
and avert the beams of his or her Love. But where two do jointly affect by a
Sympatheticall Union, there the action will spiritually be furthered at a far
greater distance; as when two stars of heaven send out their beams
semidiametrally, and concur in one harmonious point of affections. Nay verily,
as we behold, being taught by experience, that there will be a great Antipathy
between the slain body's contracted spirit, and the murderer; insomuch that
the lively spirit of the dead, being contracted after death by cold, into its
Center, does through an angry Antipatheticall passion move again from the
Center unto the Circumference, as it were to resist the deadly enemy; and does
cause the congealed blood to flow and move, as if it would meet with and
assault afresh the murtherer's emitted spirit; So we must surely confess, that
where one spirit concurreth in Sympathy with another of the like nature, the
power must be the greater, and the action performed at a larger distance, as is
evidently expressed in the abstruse operation which is in the Magnetic cure,
effected between the weapon or ointment, and the wounded* person: of which I
have spoken so much, in that hot encounter, which has been between Mr. Foster
and my self, in the Book where I was provoked to squeeze his Sponge; and
farther do purpose in this present Treatise to enlarge my self a little better
touching that point, by way of a comparison made between the Magneticall virtue
in Man, and that of the Lodestone.

The Argument of Mr. Foster, consists upon the impossibility of that
operating virtue at so large a distance, as is propounded by some, to be
effected by the Ointment, or rather of the lively blood's Emanation and
emitting forth of his exciting spiritual beams or influences, unto the dead
or congealed blood; which impossibility, if it were true indeed in the Animal
kingdom, which is the most dilative and less bound with bodily bonds: I wonder
that it should not be far more impossible, and unfezible in the mineral bodies,
by reason of the firm and close solidity of them, which are therefore apter to
retain their influentiall beams, then the bodies which are made lax, and
porous. Besides all this, the Animal body is hot and fiery, and consequently
the readier to dilate, and send forth his virtue the further; but the mineral
is cold, and therefore the less active and powerful in sending forth his
beams. And yet for all this, experience teaches us, that the Loadstone looks
toward the North-star, sends forth his spiritual aspect unto it: as also
the star does at the like distance send out his beams unto his Northern
mineral mark, at an unmeasurable distance, as is said before; which being so,
why should not (I beseech you) the Animal star derived from his celestial
Fountain, send out also his beams unto the frozen and chill blood, in his
unctuous earth, I mean the Weapon-salve, or unto the blood's invisible spirit,
sucked into the Iron by his attractive Sulphurous nature? For experience
teaches us, that though no corporal blood be found on the Iron, yet if the
place of the weapon that wounded the person be anointed, it cures by a like
Sympatheticall aspect: For country-Chirurgions have made trial, when they
durst not search the wound with the Probe, and found by experience, namely, by
putting the weapon into the fire, that the part of the sword or weapon will
discover it self, which wounded the party, being that it will change color
from the rest; whereby they perceive how deep the wound is, by the observation
of that part of the weapon which did penetrate. And therefore this is an
evident argument of the ingression of the bloody spirits into the wounding
instrument, and consequently it argues, that there are essential spirits,
which emanate or issue forth of the blood, quite forsaking the body: whereby
also it is expressed, against Mr. Foster, that if the grosser spirits of the
blood are able to pierce the close-grained steel, its finer and more subtle
spirits are able to penetrate without any resistance, all other things in
manner of an influence. But we will approach a little nearer to our purpose, and
will remove ou^ argument from the mineral demonstration, unto the vegetable,
that thereby we may express like by like, in our animal subject. I will
therefore insist upon the Grain of Wheat, which being dead and putrified in the
earth, is suscitated by the beamy influences of the Sun. For like does draw his
like by a magnetic power, and like rejoices in his like, and like is
suscitated, and revived and quickened, or evoked from his rest or center, by
his evoking, and alluring, or embracing like; and by this means, the beamy
spark or atom of sunny influence in the grain, being idle, and doing nothing in
the center thereof, is stirred up by his external like, to act and operate his
own delivery out of the elementall mire, or the slimy band of the elementary
compound: And therefore, as it was before contracted from the external cold
into the center, it is now by the presence of fresh solary irradiation from
above, exsuscitated, as is were, from death unto life; and so by the assistance
of those celestial beams, it passes beyond the limits of the corrupted grain,
and soareth above the earth, and seeks by all means to ascend unto his native
region, from whence it descended; but being cumbered in his ascent by the
sublunary substance of the importunate elements, which enclose it on every
side, it is beset with the volatile salt of the air, and instead of mounting
into his desired place, it is contented to multiply in his kind and to have
companions, namely, other grains, procreated like it self. In like manner the
microcosmical Sun of life, reigning (as Scriptures do teach us) in the blood,
does emanate and send out his spiritual beams which are inseparable, by
continuity joined unto, and continued with, the spirit of the congealed blood,
which is sucked into the iron, or other weapon, and retained in it; for, so
pure, worthy, and subtle is the spirit of man's life, that every creature does
by a natural instinct affect to participate with it; F sellus de Demon.
yea, the very devils are said to affect a dwelling place in man's body, by
reason of the excellent temper thereof. Neither would I have any man to scorn
this saying of mine; for there is a concupiscible passion even in the very
stones and minerals themselves, as in the Lodestone and Iron it is made
manifest; and the spirit of the Iron, though it be mineral, is of the same
condition in his catholic nature, that all other spirits are. And therefore
marvel not, though I say, that the universal spirit affects the animal,
being that for the same reason there has been noted to be both a
sympatheticall and antipatheticall condition between, as well the mineral and
vegetable, and the mineral and animal, as between the animal and vegetable. But
I will produce unto you a probable demonstration: There was an Earl (of whom,
in my Book, entitled, The squeesing of Parson Foster's Sponge, I made mention)
that had his Gardener cruelly wounded in his hand with a sith, as he was mowing
of grass the wound bled shrewdly, and could not be stenched: They went up unto
his Lord, and signified so much unto him, and implored his assistance, and
desired to have some of his weapon-salve. He commanded, that forthwith the
sith should be knocked off from his wooden handle, and conveyed unto him. The
wounded fellow hearing so much, took a hammer himself, and holding it with one
hand, he struck hard upon the weapon or sith with the other, and immediately (a
wondrous thing to tell, and yet far from any suspicion of diabolical art!) the
blood stenched, and he bled not one drop after it; as if the mineral spirit,
which retained that of the animal, were terrified, and, as it were, in awe of
the animal spirit that struck it, and thereby lost all the faculty of
attraction; or that the spirits included in it, which did consent in harmony
with the spirits of the bleeding man, had rejoiced in a kind of revenge which
was taken on the weapon: For know, that there is a sympatheticall and
antipatheticall irradiation, as well between the animal and the mineral, as
between the animal and animal, or mineral and mineral. But mark, I pray you, a
second notable observation, touching this point; Sir Bevis Thelwell told me,
that for trial upon a Wheelers ax, that had wounded him grievously on his leg,
after it was anointed and wrapped up, the wounded person that could not sleep
for pain in five nights before, did sleep immediately after the ointment, and
was at rest; which when Sir Bevis Thelwell espied, he would needs make trial
of a thing, which he had heard confirmed by many: He opened the anointed Ax,
and scraped off the ointment at one corner of it, and forthwith he was
advertised, that the party complained of a grievous pain, which he felt just
about that part of the wound where the ax was bare by scraping; whereupon also
he anointed that protion over again, and suddenly the party felt ease. The
same experiment was made and found true by the said Lord, Captain Styles, and
Sir Nicholas Gilbourn. I can also say upon mine own knowledge, that in the
Churchyard on Bred-street-hill, a widow-Gentlewoman having a box of this
ointment, cured many of the Tooth-ake, by pricking the pained tooth with a
sharp stick, till it bled, and putting that stick into her box of ointment.
Among the rest, one of her neighbors, a contentious woman, having the
tooth-ake, made means unto her for her cure, or to have ease. Her teeth were
pricked, and the stick put into the ointment, and she grew well. But within
three or four days after, she fell out with the Gentlewomans maid, and gave
her Mistress but bad language; all which the maid did certify her Mistress of.
The Gentlewoman being merrily disposed, said, She would make her repent it, and
went unto the box, and took away the stick belonging to this woman out of the
pot, and put it into a basin of cold water, and immediately the woman had such
pain, as she was forced to sue to the Gentlewoman, and she receiving another
stick which had pricked her teeth anew, it gave her immediate ease. Which
accidents, when I had well contemplated, I thought with my self, that the
included spirit had his chiefest comfort from the ointment, by keeping them
warm; and that if the ointment was removed, the cold air, which is an enemy to
the activity of the bloody spirits, was potent over it, and did congeal them;
and so by consent of the beamy influence of life, emitted from the wound unto
the included spirits, and continuated ever unto them, as inseparable, (for it
was one and the same spirit, according unto Ezekiel's testimony, in two
several properties, that blowed from the north wind, and the south) what
distemper befalls the included and congealed spirits in the weapon,
happens, by effect of remission of evoked beams, and, as it were, by a
report, unto the wound of the patient. Again, we must consider, that the
separated blood has in it each respect of the Microcosm, no otherwise, than a
portion of a whole Loadstone, being divided from the whole, has in it all the
proportions of the World, namely, the Poles, Aequinoctial, and so forth, as
well as the whole in it; so that the Idea of the wounded member, is in the
spirits of the emitted blood, and makes his relation to every part thereof, no
otherwise, than the poles of a piece of the Loadstone do unto the whole. As
also there is the like occult attraction and emission of beams, between the
little blood emitted, and the whole bulk of blood retained in the veins, as is
between the small amputated Lodestone, and the whole. I conclude therefore*
that as the congealed bloody spirits in the weapon, or amputated blood, do by
virtue of the homogeniall heat, and unctuosity of the salve or ointment, ripen
and exspire out by little and little unto his fountain, no otherwise than the
spark in the grain of corn, being kept and preserved in the earthly matrix from
the cold crude air, does aspire upward to the heavenly Sun; so also by little
and little does the wound heal, and mend in the wounded creature. And thus much
for the manner of action, between the wound and weaponsalve. Now a word or two
touching the intervall, or longitude of distance, between the wound and the
ointment.

The distance betwixt the Pole star and the Lodestone is unknown, and yet the
one does operate in the other, by sending out their reciprocal beams upward
and downward; therefore here can no certain limited sphere of activity be
assigned unto their action. The Sun and the spirit in the grain of wheat do
operate in like manner, by a continuation of one and the same nature. Lo here,
is the limited sphere of activity also abolished, being no man can justly
determine of the extension of the solar influence, of whose nature, the beam in
the grain does participate no otherwise, than one small Lodestone cut out of a
great one, has his parts, or poles and circles, in every respect corresponding
with those of the great one. Man has a most subtle influence, or vivifying
spirit of life, sent down and infused into him by divine inspiration, in which
is the property of the four winds, (as the Prophet Ezekiel tells us) and
consequently the Idea of every nature; but the essence of this spirit is
indivisible, and therefore the vivifying spirit sent from it into man, has all
the properties of the spirit that infused it, no otherwise than a lesser
Lodestone, cut out of the greater, has in every respect the property of the
greater. And consequently, the spirit of the one is no more divided from the
other, ^han the Sunbeams can be divided from the Sun. But the Spirit of the
Lord fills all things, (as Solomon has it) and makes the dimension of his
operation in man more or less, according unto his will; and therefore will
admit no such fantastical limited sphere of activity, as the wisdom of man's
invention, I mean, the subject of the pagans Philosophy, which is folly before
God, would infer. For this reason therefore Hermes says, Anima mente Deoque
plena, intima mundi replet, complectitur extima; Pimand. 11.
vitamque haec omnibus suggerit. The soul or vital^ spirit being full of
divinity, fills the world, and embraces external things, and this gives
life unto all things without; it gives life unto the great and perfect animal
the world, and breathing unto each thing that lives within it. And again
elsewhere, Natura incorpore^ nihil est capacius, nihil velocius, nihil validius
aut potentius. Sic iterum a te ipso incipiens meditare, atque animae tuae
praecipito, quae citius quam praeciples evolabit. Jubeto (inquam) ut transeat
in Oceanum, illa priusquam ^usseris ibi erit, indenbi nunc est nequaquam
discedens. Jubeto iterum ut in coelrm volet, nullis pennis egebit, nihil ejus
obstruet cursui, non solis incendium, non aetheris amp i^udo, non vertigo
coelorum, non syderum antiquorum corpora, quin penetrans omnia ad supernum
usque corpus transcendat. Quinetiam sivolueris Globos omnes transire coel^rum,
quodque supe^ius est investigare, id quoque tibi licebit. Adverte, quanta sit
animae ^uae potestas quantae celeritas: There is nothing more capable than the
incorporeall or spiritual nature; nothing more swift, and quick or nimble;
nothing more strong or powerful. Again, Beginning thus with thy self, do thou
meditate, and command thy soul, what thou please, and it will fly sooner
than thou command: Command it (I say) that it pass into the Ocean sea, and
it will be there before thou bidst it. Again, command it that it fly into
heaven, and it will want no wings; nothing will hinder her or stop her in her
course, no not the heat of the Sun, nor the vast largeness of the heavenly or
aethereall vault, nor the whee^ing about of the starry orbs, nor yet the bodies
of the other stars, but peircing all these, it passes quite through, even
unto the highest body. Moreover, and if thou will have her to pass ^ver the
celestial Globes, and to search out whatsoever is above, thou may do it
also. Mark therefore how great the power of the Soul is, and how swift and
quick it is in its execution, etc. thus far the wise Hermes. By both which
places we may observe, first, that the Soul in general, and therefore in
particular, is full of Divinity, and consequently that it is this Divine
Essence, that works in this soul all in all, in the world, and every member
thereof, as the Apostle says, and therefore the said Philosopher in the place
before: Anima m^nte Deoque p^ena, etc. Secondly, that this Divinity in the
catholic created spirit fills all things, in an Angelical existence; that
is, indueth the mantle of the vast world^s spirit. And this agrees with
Scripture, Sap. 12.1.
which says, that Spiritus Dei implet omnia, The Spirit of the Lord f^lleth
all things. Spiritus incorruptibilis inest omni rei: The incorruptibe Spirit is
in all things. Pimand. 10.
Deus vivificat omnia: God vivifieth all things, and consequently, is the
essential act and life of the world, as I have proved fully in the first Book
of this Treatise: wherefore Hermes in another place says thus: Animae univers^
per omnem mundum ab una mundi totius anima profluunt, tanquam d^stributae
circumferentes: The universal souls throughout the whole world, do proceed as
it were distributed concurrent^ from one soul of the whole world; which is all
one with that which we have said before, namely that all Souls in this world,
are certain beamy streams, proceeding from that catholic Emanation, which
issued from the eternal Fountain of the illuminating act, to some more
copiously, and to some more sp^^ingly; and therefore Man ^s said to be in
dign^ty little less then the Angels, by reason of the large portion of Light
bestowed upon him: Job.
Spiritus Dei fecit me (says Job): sed inspiratio Omnipotentis fecit me
^mel^igere. Thirdly, That in the very twinkling of an eye, it is able to
penetrate quite through all things, and that at what distance it pleases, and
consequently will not be limited by any imaginary Sphere of activity. But Mr.
Foster and his accomplices will reply, that the spirit which should operate in
the blood, and from the bl^od, to the Ointment, is a natural spirit, and not
this Divine Spirit. This Objection makes me to smile: As who should say, that
this act of vivifying, yea, and of every other faculty belonging unto man's
spirit, does not move from one and the same Divine Fountain when the Apostle
says, In him we move, we live, and have our being. Again, it is said, that in
the blood is the soul or spirit of life. And St. John says, In Verbo erat
vita, in the Word was life. I will tell you therefore what a true Philosopher
says, touching this point, Anima (says he) ad similitudinem totius sapientiae
facta, omnem in se gerit similitudinem, est que spiritus intellectualis, semper
vivens, semper in motu, and secundum su^ operis officium, variis nunc^pa^ur
n^m^nibus. Dicitur vita dum vegetat; spiritus dum contemplatur; sensus dum
senti; animus dum sapit; men's dum intelligit; ratio dum discernit; memoria dum
recordatu^; dum vult voluntas: and ista omnia non sunt nisi una anima
proprietate diversa sed essentia unica: The soul of Man framed after the
similitude of all wisdom, does bear in it self the likness of all things; and
it is an intellectual spirit, ever living, and ever in motion, and it is
termed by diverse names and appellations, according unto the office of the work
which it effects: For when it vegetateth or causes to grow and multiply, it
is called life; when it contemplateth, it is termed a spirit; it is called
sense, when it is conversant about the function, which belongs unto the
external sense; it is termed the mind, when it is versed about wisdom; it is
called Men's or the mental beam, when it understands; it is termed reason,
when it discerns between good or bad; it is called memory, when it
remembers; it is styled Volunty when it wills; and yet all these are but
only one soul, diverse properties, I say, but one only essence. So that it is
the same essential act, which causes life, and contemplation; which makes
sense and intellect; which effects memory and reason; and, to conclude, that
wills or nilleth. Which being thus, Is it not a sinful thing in ignorant
persons, to make the occult actions of this abstruce spirit, by which they
live, move, understand, discern between good and evil, remember, see, feel,
hear, touch, and ^ast, the effects of the devil; and consequently to rob their
bright soul of her honor, instead of giving her thanks for her assistance, by
ascribing her arcane operations most irreligiously and falsely, unto the devil?
And why I pray? Why, because they cannot dive into the depth of her activity,
by whom they themselves do live, move, and have their being. Yea, and to limit
her activity with bounds, according unto their pleasure, who (though they know
not so much) have their life and volunty from her, which limiteth them
according as she pleases, who is infinite in her being; for so much as she is
a portion, not divided from that Divine Emanation which is infinite in his
extention. It is evident therefore, that this vivifying Spirit can send forth
its action unto any mark in the world, from any specific nature, but
especially from the Microcosmicall creature; and the rather* if the mark be of
the same specific condition, and the vehicle of the spirit, namely the effused
blood, measuring first the distance between the wound and the Ointment.
Moreover, we shall find this confirmed by other of her operations, effected in
the same Microcosmicall Mine, from whence it emitteth its beams, at an
unlimited distance. As for example: It is found by experience, and that by
natural means, without any suspicion of Cacomagicall devices or superstitious
artifices, that if a persons urine that has the Yellow Jaundis, be conveied at
the distance of a hundred miles (as by an honorable Person of no small rank,
and entire in Religion, I am informed, who has often times made the trial
hereof) unto a place where a composition shall be made of the urine, and ashes
of a certain tree, commonly known and had in this Kingdom, with certain blades
of Saffron, (as has been told you in my Book, entitled The Squeezing of Parson
Foster's Sponge) it oftentimes cures that disease, when the best of Physical
experiments have failed; and this Medicine misseth seldom, where the disease is
curable. And now I will relate a true story, which befell this last year 1630,
upon a Chirurgion's wife, who dwelled not far from the Tower of London: She
fell desperately sick of the Yellow Jaundis, and had sick gripings, and
shou^ings withal, about her Stomach; my self after many others was called unto
her, but prevailed but little by our Physical means over the disease;
wherefore she hearing me tell of the many cures which this Noble Earl I spoke
of, did perform in having the Parties water, she sent her man unto me with her
water, to request me to make some means unto the Noble Man for her. The fellow
was sent by me with a letter four miles into the country, and when he came unto
the house, he found two that were there to give thanks for their recovery: For
by that means they were cured. The urine was received for my sake, and the
fellow sent away: But mark the consequence; so soon as the fellow was parted
with the urine, the sick woman was tatled unto by demure Gossips, and told that
it was done by witchcraft and the devil, and therefore dangerous for her
soul, which made her rage and cry-out upon witchcraft, and was much
discontented; which when I heard, I came no more unto her, esteeming her
ungrateful, and sent suddenly to the Earl, to request him to undo the
business, and break the clods; which he sent me word he would do, but told me
it was to late: For (said he) it will work the effect howsoever. Indeed the
woman mended immediately after it, and no doubt did ascribe the cure unto some
other inefficacious Physical trash, applied per chance unto her by some
Mountebank. All this I spoke to my knowledge; and I am not ignorant of the
manner of the cure: For it pleased the Noble Personage to impart unto me the
manner; yea, and the Ladies his daughters have cured many of this disease;
as well rich as poor, who have made some means unto them for this cure. And
this worthy Lord did assure me, that he had cured at an hundred mile's
distance. I cannot chose but make you acquainted with another cure, which he
effected upon a noble Lady that was my patient. She had extremely the Jaundis,
and though I did in some sort remove them for a while, yet it returned again. I
then requested the Noble Knight her husband to send her water unto the foresaid
Honorable Personage, and promised him to write my letter by him. All was done
as I counseled, and the Countess her self took it into her care to dispose of
the water; and the rather, because the Lady that was sick, was of a Noble
Parentage. Somewhat i wrought with the disease, but not to our purpose:
Whereupon I did visit this Noble Man, and told him of the small success that
his Medicine had. He willed me to send her water once more; and told me, that a
Lady was with him in the foresaid noble patients behalf, the day before. I sent
again her water, and from that time forward she mended apa^e, and was perfectly
cured. There are a hundred who can justify this to be true. Neither can it be
alleged, that it might be done by some medicine used in ^he mean time. To ^ut
off this objection, she was prohibited for all that season to take any
medicine, but bare food only. Now the reason of this cure is no otherwise
effected, then that of the weapon-salve; for the spirit of the blood in the
infected person, has a continuated relation unto his salt, yea, and its
habitation is in the aereall salt of the blood, which being a subtle earth, in
the center whereof is the spirit contracted, and being partly dispersed in the
urine, which is the whey of the blood, it sucketh and draws unto it his like
from the infected body, whereby it being, as it were, resuscitated, and newly
revived, it emitteth new beams to meet, comfort, and correct the infected
beams, emitted out of the sick body. And again, the infecting spirit of the
i^te^itious humor is, by virtue of the salt in the ashes, and saffron,
conquered and tam^^d; so that as it dies, the insulting humor, and his
venomous spirit, decays and fades by little and little in his strength, till
it be finally quite extinguished. Whereby it is evident, that by one and the
same medicine, the spirit in the urin's salt, and that in the sick-man's blood,
are both sympathetically refreshed and purified, and the flame of the evil
infecting spirit of the disease as well as in the urine as sick body, is
antipathetically quenched and annihilated. In this respect therefore, we
compare the composition of urine, ashes, and saffron in this cure, unto the
weapon-salve, in the consolidating of wounds; and the urine carried from the
sick unto the mass so compounded, unto the blood or spirit on and in the
weapon; and the exsuscitating of the congealed spirit in the salt of the urine,
unto the revivifying and exagitating of the spirit in the dead blood, or sucked
up by the po^y substance of the weapon; so that we see here all one consent:
For as the dead blood came from the lively fountain of blood, so the urine was
the whey or serous substance of the same wellspring, not left destitute of the
bloody spirits.

What shall we say unto the admirable effects, in the transplantation of the
bloody spirits in man, into other animals or vegetables? Ve^ily, it is a thing
well known unto such, as are well seen in the mysteries of natural*
micro^os^i^all, and macro^os^icall Magic, that the spiritual Mummy, whose
sent is in the microcosmicall blood, may be su^ked or drawn out of man's ^ody by
a Magne^, extracted out of the same subject, and transplanted into a beast,
tree, o^ herb; so that the disease also of the sick man may be conveyed from
the sick person into them* by means of this microcosmicall Magnes, the practice
whereof shall be expressed more at large in the next Book. Also Johannes
R^melius Pharamund^s does profess, that he has cured diverse of the Gout, by
cutting off the hairs of the feet and thighs, and paring off the nails, and
thrusting of them into a hole which he bored unto the very pith of an Oak, and
closing or ramming up the ho^e again with a peg or pin, made of the same tree,
and afterward daubing it up, and covering it over with cow dung. Then, says
he, if the Gowte come not again within the space of three months, the Oak will
be sufficient to draw magnetically unto it the disease; but if the Gowt come
again within three months space, it notes the insufficiency of the Oaks
magneticall virtue. Wherefore then he proceeds after this manner: He boreth a
hole in another Oak as before, and keeps those pieces which in the boring
came out of the Oak, and bruiseth them, and quilts or stitcheth them up in a
bag, and applies them to the member grieved; and this he does just three days
before the new Moon: Then in the very hour of the new Moon, he takes away the
bag, and takes out the bruised wood, and puts it into the hole of the tree,
and rammeth it in with a peg or pin of the same Oak. And if for all this the
Gowt shall be perceived within three three months after, then he cutteth off
the hair and nails of the feet, and tyeth them unto the back of a Crab-fish,
and casts it into the running water, and the gowty person will be cured. This
Doctor of Physic does profess in a certain Book of his, set forth by him in
the German Tongue, that he has cured many by the first experiment, and many
other by the first and second, one after another; and lastly, many desperate
ones by the first, second, and third. And he says, that this manner of cure is
commonly found certain in those Gowts, which happen of a sulphurous cause; but
in those Gowts which rise from a Mercuriall and salt nature, it often fails.
And therefore leaving this magnetic manner of cure, he betaketh himself unto a
more external kind of remedy.

I have (also in my, Squeezing of Mr. Foster's Sponge) related unto you, the
strange sympathy which is betwixt the Vegetable, called Rosa-solis, and the
matrix of a woman, and how it being laid in Plantain water, it closes it self,
and if a part of that water be drunk by a woman that is in Travel, and the
herb in the water be removed into another house, yet at that very instant that
the woman is upon delivery, the flower or herb will by little and little open
it self, even as the matrix of the woman does: An evident argument, that those
beams which issue from these two, do sympathize with one another. To conclude,
it is most evident, that seeing the spiritual Astralicall virtues, in each
inferior creature, do descend from celestial stars, and are of one continued
nature with them, as the Sunbeams which are here below, are not divided or
separated from their fountain of light, it follows, that they emit their
beamy influences unto one another, even as the two stars do in heaven, from
whence they are animated: so that if the two stars in heaven be friends, they
both do sympathize in the occurrences of their emanations with one another; but
if they be enemies to one another in heaven, they will, in their applications
of beams, antipathize and decline from one another. And as touching the
distance which they observe in their mutual action with one another, we must
imagine it to extend it self so far, as their beams are able to apply to one
another. And I would have such men, as are only conversant about sens^ble
affairs, know, that the action of these creatures by aspect unto one another,
do operate occultly, though the effect does nor always manifest it self unto
ou^ sense; but withal they ought to conceive, that the nearer in natural
affinity the stars in heaven, and consequently the things beneath, which are
subject unto those spirits, are unto one another, the more efficacious will the
sympathising effects prove, by reason* that then their beams will meet
directly, that is, without any swerving or declination.

CHAP. VI.
That the devil does make use of natural things to operate his stratagems
amongst men, without the which, he can effect nothing truly, but only
prestigiously, or by delusion; And, whether those Natural things are therefore
Cacomagicall, and to be eschewed of Mankind, because their secret effects do
sometimes conform themselves unto the volu^ty of the devil.

WE read in many places in Scripture, that the devil makes use of Gods
creatures, to bring to pass his secret devices and stratagems against mankind:
as for example, Satan, to impoverish and ruinate the fortune of patient Job,
did make use of the winds, and did call (as the Text says) the fire of God
from heaven to consume his cattle. God forbid, that we should esteem for this
reason these creatures of God to be cacomagicall and diabolical, because God
made them act to accomplish the will of the devil: He made him also a Prince
of the air, insomuch as he has power to stir up tempests in the seas, and
storms in the elementary heavens; and therefore the air by some is called, The
Synagogue of Satan: What! must we therefore abhor the air and winds, because
the devil does at sometimes act by and in them his mischievous feats? when as
the air is cleared and purified from all corruption (as Aristotle says
rightly) by agitation of the winds, for if it were not excited and moved by the
winds, it would putrify, as the standing waters does. Again, if we should fly
from, and loath the air, how should we live? when the airy spirit is the
spiritual seed of our life. We read also in Scriptures, that God causes the
Sun indifferently to rise upon the good and bad, and that the Sun and Moon do
harm or hurt some, as again they are comfortable and propitious unto others;
Psalm. 121.5.
and therefore David says, The Sun shall not harm thee by day, nor the moon by
night. The Moon, which is termed by the Poets, H^ccate, is the goddess of
witches, for unto her did the famous Enchantress Medaea make her orisons, for
the furthering of her purposes; and yet the air, the water, and the earth, are
seasoned with her humid or madid virtues, and the plants, yea, and animals, do
acknowledge her the Patroness of vegetation; the makes the seas to swell, and
again, by another kind of her position or aspect, the seas are abated in their
pride, and humors are more scanty in every living or vegetating thing: Yea, we
find, that all the malignant watery spirits are subject unto her influences;
and that Satan also takes his advantage on the diverse positions of her, or
conjunctions and applications with other as well fixed as erratik stars to work
his feats: for he is an old beaten Soldier in Astrology, and knows the
effects of every situation of the heavens, and therefore can take the advantage
of their strongest influences, upon animal, vegetable, or mineral creatures,
which are subject unto them, he knows the due times when they are poured down
upon them, and is expert in their virtues, which are then only of greatest
efficacy and force, when the powerful point of their proper constellation
strikes upon them, and stirs up their Centrall spirits, to show forth the
uttermost of their occult or arcane natures and conditions, and then at the
very instant, he collecteth the herb or stone, or makes use of the Animal's
members, or teaches such as are Sorcerers to do it, without knowing the
mystery of the constellation's concurrence or application at that time of the
collection with the natural creatures so collected; So that when they attempt
to make use of the same Simples at another time, they find them weak and of
none effect; because the spirits of every herb, animal, or mineral, are
weakest, when the star which is their nursing celestial mother, has least
power or dominion in heaven. All which the true Astrologicall Philosopher
knows right well by experience, to be true: For gathering of a Simple at the
point, when the constellation, as well fixed as erratick, which has the
essential dominion over it, is in his greatest dignity and power in heaven, he
finds an admirable efficacy in it, as well in his occult as evident property;
when contrariwise, if it be collected at a season, wherein the heavenly Patron
is weak and feeble, they will appear as it were faint and almost dead in their
power: Whereby it is most apparent, that it is the natural creature's, which
by their own essential natures work, even as well those sympatheticall as
antipatheticall effects, which the devil does make use of to perform his
devices, even as the Physician, Philosopher or natural Magitian does, to
effect their own ends. What shall we say then? what? that whosoever shall use
or operate by the same creatures, be they animals, vegetabls, or minerals, are
Cacomagicians and their work diabolical* because the devil at some times
makes use of their subtle and abstruse action, to build himself a name amongst
fools? Is it not God that works such effects in these his creatures? Did he
not by his Word bestow such virtues on them in their Creation, and continued it
in their sucession by generation? Why then is it not as possible unto Man, who
is framed after God's Image, to know the true time of the collection of these
creatures, with the uses and virtues thereof, as well as the devil? What?
because, forsooth, he since the fall Adam, is blinded with ignorance, and
cannot see or distinguish light from dakness? That Adam knew the virtues of the
stars and of every particular earthly creature subject unto every one of these
stars, we partly gather out of Scripture: For else could he not have assigned
a proper name unto each of them, agreeing to his nature. But if the sucession
of Adam is blind, and cannot distinguish of colors, and therefore is ignorant
also in these hidden treasures of God; How, I pray you, came the devil to have
so deep an insight in them, being that he fell for his rebellion, far deeper
than Man, and is clogged with a darker vayl than he, and therefore is called
the Prince of darkness. Oh, you reply, the devil is a spirit without body, and
therefore is able to discern the hidden things of God in nature, sooner and
beter then Man, who is a gross bodily creature. And again, Man dies every Age,
but the devil by reason of his long continuance, is of great experience. I
answer: That though Man die and continues not long; and though he be obscured
in his understanding by reason of his Forefathers fall; and though he be clad
or endued with a dark and combersom body, yet has he the revelation of the
Truth, and a discovery of the abstruce mysteries of Natural things first from
God, bequeathed and left unto him by succession; that is, by a Cabalisticall
tradition, even from our Fore-father Adam, and by the revelation of God's
Wisdom, Sap. 7.17.
or the good Spirit, which he has bestowed upon the Elect: For by it (as
Solomon himself does restifie) he came to know the disposition of the Earth;
the virtue of the Elements; the beginning, end and middle of times; the change
of manners the division of times; the course of the year; the disposition of
the sta^rs; the natures of living creatures; the condition of beasts; the force
of the winds; the differences of Plants; the virtues of roots; yea, says he,
and I discovered all hidden and abstruce things: For Wisdom who is the worker
of all things taught it me, etc. And again, it is said, that he knew and was
instructed in the mysteries of all Plants, even from the lowly Hysop, unto the
lofty Cedar of Libanon. Was it then a diabolical action in Solomon, to look
after, and to practice upon the abstruce natures of Plants and Animals, and to
find out by his skill in Astrology the proper stars, which are their true
Patrons and charitable Mothers in heaven, and to make election of their due
times and seasons in gathering of them; being that the Divine Wisdom that made
them, operates in them, and by them, taught him this skill; because the devil
also is by his acute observation made partaker of their knowledge, and does make
use also of all these things to serve his own turn: What? because, I say he,
has this knowledge to elect every Simple, in his force and season, by
observation of that reference which is between the stars and them; Therefore
must not Man be partaker of their natural virtues, or be made cunning in the
skill of collecting them, but by the aid and revelation of the devil? When in
flat terms the Scriptures say, that God made them all for the use of Man, must
they be esteemed diabolical in all that use them, and therefore be forbidden,
because the devil does sometimes serve his turn with them? As who should say,
that God should create any thing, only for the devil's use, and not to serve
man in each necessity, and that according unto his free will, being that it is
said, that He gave man power, and made him Lord over all his creatures. What if
the animal, or vegetable, or mineral Simple, do in some cases harm and prove
venomous, yet in other respects it proves salutary. There is no wind so bad,
but blows unto some men, good.

The Colloquintida, Scamony, Euphorbium, Cucumer asininus, Titimall,
Bea^s-foot, Flammula, Garlic, and such like, in the vegetable kingdom, prove
in some respects venomous, and yet may be applied after a salutary condition,
unto the body of Man. Also Arsenick, Orpiment, Antimony, Quicksilver, and such
like, in the mineral Sphere do kill, being malevolously and without correction
applied. The Toad, the Viper, or Adder, the Spider, the Scorpion, the
Can^harides, and such like in the animal region, are deadly poison unto man
kind; and yet they may be so prepared, that they may prove wholesome medicines
unto him, and become counter-poysons. But besides all this, as there is nothing
in the world, that works more effectually by Sympathy and according unto
nature, than one wholesome and sound nature does with another; So verily is
there nothing, that operateth more Antipathetically, and contrary to nature or
destructively, than the corruption of an empoysoned or infected spirit, does
with a wholesome spirit of his like Species. And the reason is because it
coveteth and desires by an earnest communication of his beams, to receive (as
it were help and succor in its distress from the sound spirits, unto the
irradiations whereof, it applies it self for relief: as we see in the time of
contagion, the spirit arising or emanating from the infected person, applies
his infected beams greedily unto the emanating spirit of his wholesome like; and
so by a continuation of one unto the other, the fiery venom of the one
impoysoneth and co-inquinateth the salutary nature of the other, and that only
with his specific like: For commonly the Plague, familiar unto Men, does not
stick or cleave unto the spirit of beasts, namely unto that of Sheep, and such
other. As in like manner, the Murren in beasts, infecteth not Man's spirit; but
the like specific nature is evermore aprest, to embrace and apply his beams
unto his like: For this cause therefore it is evident, that as our of a
wholesome Man, there may be had a spiritual Mummy, which is wondrous healthful
and salutiferous unto mankind; in^omuch that for his universal respects, it
may be esteemed as a Panacaea or catholic medicine, to preserve health; So
also there may be attracted out of Man, after a strange manner of corruption of
his spiritual Mummy, a venom, than the which there cannot be found a more
pernicious or malignant one to mankind in the world: For this reason therefore,
a certain Jew, (as I was by a Merchant that came newly from Fess in Barbary
unto L^^orn credibly informed) after he had beheld an English Mariner in the
ship, who had a red head, and faining himself to be much taken with the love of
him, wrought so with him, that for 300 Pound, he agreed to sell himself unto
him for his slave, thinking in time to come to give his Jewish Master the slip,
and run away: Within a while after the ship being ready to return, and the
Mariners going to take their leave of their captive fellow, they resorted unto
the Jew's house, who after they had demanded for their fellow, led them into a
back Court, where they found the red-headed captive, his back being broke, and
a gagge in his mouth and chops and throat swollen; which, as he said, was
caused by the stinging of Vipers, which were forced into his mouth; and so hung
up and exposed unto the hot Sun, with a silver basin under his mouth, to
receive that which dropped from his mouth; of which (as he related unto me) the
Jew made a kind of poison so deadly, that it did surely kill where it touched;
affirming that he sold it at an excessive rate. The like was effected, (as I
was told by the Pope's Apothecary, dwelling in Avinion; and since, it has been
confirmed by others, that came from Rome) by a certain Cardinal, who immediately
after he had got his red-headed Mistress with child, and nourishing her with all
the delightful dainties that might be, till she was delivered, did in a secret
Court in his Palace bury her, arms and all, unto the paps, and so let loose
unto her two hungry Asps, or, as a German heard it related, two deformed Todes,
the which making immediately unto her dugs, sucked, and in sucking bit her, and
impoysoned her dugs; and when the Todes were full, that milk became (as he
said) so venomous and deadly, that it infected any one that touched it, it was
so subtle and piercing. And besides, (as the former story goes) the woman was
taken up, and after her back was broken, was hanged her legs upward against the
Sun, to receive that venomous liquor which distilled from it into a silver
vessel, wherewith he intended to have poisoned that Cardinal, which stood as
a block in his way between the Popedom and him. But all was discovered, and he,
according to his merit, did endure the fiery trial for it. And the reason why
the red headed man or woman is elected most fit for this purpose, is, because
they are subject by their nativity unto the influences of the Sun, and
therefore are the more capable of, and obnoxious to corruption; wherefore their
spiritual Mummy being contaminated by the animal poison, is after his
fermentation and putrefaction, made admirably subtle, and exceeding malicious.
And although the sympatheticall desire be in the specific Mummy, to be joined
with his like, yet by reason it is infected, and intoxicated by that
antipatheticall spirit of the invenomed beast, which has got the mastery over
it, it cannot embrace his like sympathetically, but it infecteth it also by his
antipatheticall additament, and so the accidental venom converteth them both
into his nature. That there was a certain Hermit, that lives not far off from
A^x in Pr^vence, is fresh yet in every mouth of that place, that with the like
philtre did infect the whole City with so desperate a plague, that it did
destroy most of the people the^eof; only they were preserved and cured when
this Hermit pleased, who for that cause was styled by the name of Holy Hermit;
for as he p^ysoned the hammers of each of the doors, so that whosoever knocked
with them was fo^thwith infected, he that poisoned had his counter-poyson to
cure. This devilish person was at the last discovered, and burnt alive, as he
well deserved. By the like stratagem, a little before my coming into Prov^nce,
the plague was brought into Tu in in Piamont, by certain lewd persons, who
suffered for it, their flesh being torn from them by hot fiery pincers. Also
lately, by the strewing of a veno^ous powder, the plague was multiplied in
Millan, the conspirators discovered, and executed: And thus by these wicked
inventions, the internal spirits of men were infected, and the external air
polluted. Neither can this to the true Naturalist apppear strange, since it is
proved by experience, that a wholesome air is oftentimes converted by a
venomous blast of the southern wind, unto a corrupted and contagious
disposition, and the air that was pure and unpolluted, is now by the
pestiferous breath of a plaguey person, or the infecti^^ carbuncle, or both,
inquinated and made venomous; and that air so corrupted, will also corrupt his
next aerie neighbor, which was ^ound and healthful before. Let us but observe,
how the infected spirit of the plaguey person, or one possessed with the small
Pox or Measels, Ptisick, or Ophthalmy, or blear eyes, does infect the spirit of
a sound man at a good distance; and the Leprosy, Epilepsy, French Pox, by an
immediate contact; and we shall find, how that which was created wholesome and
salutary in man, is become contaminating and venomous by disorder. What
therefore shall I say? must we conclude, that we must abandon our own nature,
because it may be made infectious and deadly unto us? Nay, must we therefore
esteem human nature to be therefore abominable, and abhorred of man, because
the witches and sorcerers do, by the devils doctrine and instructions, make
use of man's flesh, hair, nails, excrements, blood, yea, and of both his
spiritual and corporal Mummy, to b^ing their wicked purposes and enchantments
to pass? That this is so, we find it as well maintained by History, as daily
practice, observed amongst the witches; for Apuleius (who, for his magical
relations, was censured by some to be a witch) tells, how his sweetheart
^otis, was by her mistress, being a notorious witch, sent into a Barbers shop
secretly for men's hair, to employ it about her witchcraft. Also he shows,
that it was a thing so frequent in those days, by reason of the abundance of
sorceresses which abode in Thessa^y, to have watchmen with store of lights, to
attend upon the dead corses or corpse, immediately after their death, to hinder
and prevent the witches, which used to come in secretly by night, in the form
of Weasels and such like shapes, to steal away some part of the carcass to
serve their turns, about their wicked art. Moreover, it is a common thing,
amongst them and the Necromancers, to frequent the Churchyards, and to visit
the graves of such as are dead, either for some part of them, or else for a
piece of their winding sheet, or of the coffin wherein they were buried, by
reason of the spiritual Mummy which sticks unto them, to effect their
ceremonies and naughty devices. It has been confessed by a witch, that
destroyed a Noblemans children of this Land, that she could have no power over
one of them, till she had recovered an old glove that it wore, and afterward
she had power over it: the reason was, because of the relation which the
spiritual Mummy of the child, that entered by sweat into the glove, had with
that of the body; no otherwise than that spirit upon the weapon has, unto the
spirit of the wounded body; so that as that fares, either in hot or cold
distempers, so also it fared with the spirit in the wound, as it appeared, when
the ax or weapon was uncovered by chance, the wound would be dolorous and
distempered with cold; and when of purpose part of the ointment was pared off
from the weapon, that part of the wound which corresponded unto it, would ache
and be troubled; so also the witches, applying their naughty venom unto the
Mummy in the glove, shoe, or other part of the worn-shirt, smock, sock, or
such like, do produce their venomous effect afar off. We read also in
cacomagicall books, in what esteem the members of young children were among
enchanters, and especially their skin, of which, after many diabolical and
necromanticall consecrations, they create their virgin parchment, on which they
write the names of god, of the angels they invoke, and the character of the
planet or star unto which they do belong. Must therefore the magnetic effect
of man's nature, or spiritual Mummy, with his like, be esteemed damn^ble and
diabolical, because the mystery thereof is by the devil revealed unto
witches, and the secret p^operty thereof converted unto an evil sense, and
unchristian-like use? Must air be refused and banished from man, because it
may be by bad means corrupted, and so be made to kill; or is fire to be excluded
as condemnable, for that it, being ill applied, proves now destructive, which
being rightly applied, does cherish and comfort? If by contaminating or
changing our spiritual Mummy into a contagious and venomous disposition, we
infect another, as one plaguey person poysoneth another, ad distans; and one
house on fire sets fire unto another, though it be not contiguous or
touching; must therefore the use of the air and fire be condemned, and
banished from man's use? Or, must Gods fire from heaven be abhorred, because
Satan made use of it in a destructive sense, and for the ruin of Job's
possession? Shall, I say, the occult property of the spiritual Mummy, and the
admirable efficacy of man's spirit, in wholesome and salutary uses, be therefore
eschewed and abhorred, because by infection it may be converted to a poysonsome
disposition? Shall a good sword, which is ordained for the defense and
safeguard of its master, b^ therefore broke and cast away, because a bad man
kills another with it? A good thing being ill applied, may do harm. The
influence and light of the heavenly Sun, in the which is the spiracle of life,
being ill received, does sometime breed unnatural effects, yea, the devil
himself makes use of it, to serve his use at several seasons; and yet neither
it, nor his virtues, can for all that be esteemed diabolical. In like manner,
if we descend from the animal sphere, unto the vegetable and mineral, we find,
that the notorious Enchantress Medaea, made special use in her enchantments,
(as also the same is related of other sorcerers and witches) of herbs, stones,
and mineralls, without the help of which natural things, neither they, nor
their devil, which revealed unto them their secret virtues, could effect or
accomplish their desires. And for this purpose, (as Ovid tells the story) she
searched the lofty tops of Ata, to find out herbs for her purposes. Many
operate their feats by the virtuous property of stones, which the devil does
deliver unto them, though they themselves know neither the starry influence
that gives the force, nor yet how they should be prepared for the operations
of such strange effects: As for example, There was a witch in Scotland, who at
her arreignment did confess, that by the property of a stone which was taken
from her, she could discover any thing, namely if a thing were true it would
sweat, and if it were false, it would not sweat; and also it would reveal other
things unto her by changing colors. And again, when they desired to see some
conclusions from her, she said, that if they would let her have her stone, she
would show them some: But they fearing that she would escape by that means
durst not let her have it, but did burn her at the Queens Ferry in Sco^land.
Some are instructed by him to take a metal and to prepare it under his proper
constellation, and to grave on it the characters of the star, and Angels
belonging unto it, at such a time as the star is most potent in heaven, and
well encountered by other Planets. And then they find these plates to be of a
strange effect, in many Magical executions. What? And because the devil
knows the virtue and properties of these natural things, and can instruct
his minsters in the evil usage of them; therefore does it follow, that Adam,
and Solomon, and the wise Magitians of the East, and many other good and godly
persons, do not know their virtues, their times of collection, and their manner
of application in goodness; yea, and if they see a just cause in a contrary
sense, and that without the transgression of the bounds of natural and lawful
Magic, whose true subject is the Spirit of Wisdom, which is the Basis or
foundation of true Natural Philosophy? What make we of the means which Moses
used, when he by dispersing of ashes, brought the botch over all Egypt? But
some will say, that this was supernaturally done: Let them but look into the
occult Secrets in the nature of other animals, vegetables, and mineralls, and
they shall find as great mysteries as these contained naturally in them, all
suspicion of commerce with the devil being set apart. Was the reverend Father
Albertus Magnus a Cacomagician, because he recites the abstruce, occult, and
mystical virtues of Animals, Plants, and Stones. The like did Hermes, Plato,
and many other profound Philosophers. Or must these be the pupills of the
devil, because they know the times and hours of their collection, and manner
of preparation, though they kept that secret unto themselves? No verily, for
they had it from tradition, namely from the mystical and profound Philophers
or natural Wisemen, such as Solomon, Hermes, and the wise men called Magi, or
natural Magicians of the East, which revealed them unto the worthy, by
succession from one Age unto another. Was it not a wondrous propery in Gyges
his ring, that cold make him, by the natural property that it had, to walk
invisible? And yet forsooth the blind buzards of our Age (such, I say, as Mr.
^oster, and his Accomplices are) will have all these miraculous effects in the
creatures, to proceed from the devil; and so deprive the Omnipotent Spirit of
God, and his Nature, of their right; when Solomon in plain terms confesses,
that all the knowledge of the secret times of Election, of the mystical natures
in the stars, of the occult virtues and properties of Man, Beasts, Plants, and
Roots, and all things else known or unknown, proceed from the Spirit of God,
and therefore he concludes in these words: Omnium enim opifex me docuit
Sapientia: For wisdom the worker or maker of all things taught me. In which
words he infers, first, That the Spirit of Wisdom teaches, and discovers
unto man, the abstruce mysteries of Natural Philosophy, which consists in
the knowledge and discovery of natural virtues, as well above as beneath. And
secondly, That it is the same Spirit that made those virtues in every specific
thing, namely in the stars above; and in the animal, vegetable, and mineral
kingdoms beneath. Which being so, what can the devil, being but a reasonable
creature as well as man, do, in the creating of these essential virtues by
which he works his feats, more then man? Or why should we attribute that unto
him, which does rightly belong unto the all-creating and acting Spirit in the
internal creature? If man please, he may attribute the wickedness of the
action unto the devil, which instigateth man to evil, and teaches him the
means to effect his bad intent; that, verily, does of right belong unto the
devil: For he was created for a destroyer, as the Prophet Isaias testifies to
us; and to effect it he makes use of God's natural creatures; for he used the
fire of God from heaven, to destroy Job's cattle, and the corrupt air to kill
with the Plague or Pestilence the Israelites for David's sins: Neither was it
ever observed, that he could do ought against man of himself, saving only in
temptation: but he opera^eth to destroy, or make sick by such natural
antipathising means, as God has framed for a directer usage; although also
unto some of his veneficall scholars, he is pleased to show and reveal a
counter-poyson, by which they may by a stronger sympatheticall operation, drown
or extinguish such antipatheticall effects as they have imposed upon man's
external spirit, when they are moved either for fear of punishment, or for
gain, or for compassion to do it: which is the reason that some witches can
undo those afflicting maladies, which they themselves, or other witches have
laid on persons; but always they must operate by a real and manifest natural
Substance, Nichol. Pennigius Demonolo. lib. 1.
as are Powders, Ointments, Herbs, and such like. As for example: Claudaea,
Fellea, Joan, Banno and Nicola Piscatrix, with all their Society, in Lorraine,
confessed the 9. of May 1581. that they had delivered unto them by the devil,
subtle powders of three natures, the which were distinguished in color: For
(said they) that of a black color kills, being strewed on meat, or rubbed on
the body, or sprinkled on the apparel; and that of an ashen or reddish color,
causes diseases: but the white Powder did cure those diseases. And Odella
Boncuriana being arraigned the 18. of January 1586. says that it was the
manner of the witches of his faction, to strew a poisoned powder in the way
where they should pass, on whom they would work mischief. And Francis Perine,
confessed the 4. of November 1588. that an herb was given her by the devil, to
be laid in the way that Riberianus (who did beat her for stealing some of his
pears) did pass, which caused him suddenly to fall sick. Francis Follers, and
Marget Warny, and Jacobit Equine, confessed the 15. of January 1584. that they
had Ointments, by which they anointed rods and whips; So that if they touched
therewith, but the vestments of any one, he died not long after. Also they
said, that if they anointed their hand with this Magical Ointment, if they but
touched any one's garments, they died within a small space after. Thus you see
how the devil cannot work but by natural poisons: For nothing proceeds
merely of himself, but prestigious apparitions, namely those which seem, but
indeed are no more in effect, then a painted image is in regard of the true
substance.

And therefore let not the devil's ministers make their braggs, that this
comes from his invention: For the true Alchymists speak upon their own
experience, that their Matter when it is in rotting and black, is more
destructive then the venomous Tyrean or Serpent, and therefore it kills
suddenly; wherefore they warn the operatours to beware of their Fumes: but when
it appears in decoction between white and black, it reduces the Patient into
a straight between death and health; that is, into a sickly constitution; and
the white, which signifies perfection of maturity, causes health, and cures
infirmities, and preventeth the malice, that the black and ash color bring
with them; So that you see the devil can do no more of him self then man is
able. Again, for strewing of the destroying powder, the same was effected by
man's wicked invention in Millane, the year 1629. And for the Ointment which
kills by an immediate contact, the Jew and the Cardinal knew that wicked
craft, namely to abuse God's creatures as well as the devil: for whosoever it
touched, it killed; and again, the Hermit effected the same business by
anointing the hammers of the doors, and had his Alexipharmacon or
counter-poyson for it, as well as the devil; So that you may see that the
wicked-minded man, that abuses God's good creatures, as well as the devil,
altering it from the true sense, for which it was created by God, for the
benefit of Man; may rightly be rancked with the devil, and be termed justly, a
devil incarnate, in that without the devil's furtherance; he can effect many
devilish ways, to destroy, as well as the devil, without flesh and bones. I
conclude therefore, that it is a great absurdity; yea, and a gross foppery or
madness in ignorant men, so lightly to adjudge and censure the abstruce
Magnalia, or occult Mysteries of God in Nature, as to affirm them to be actions
or inventions of the devil, though their effects were bad, much less when they
are good, and salutiferous; as is that of the Weapon-salve, when it is commonly
known unto God, and all truly understanding men, that it is the animal,
vegetable, or mineral creature, which effects the one by abuse, and the
other in the true property and virtue; that is, for the use, for which it was
created by God: For God created all creatures good, and consequently for a good
use; but it is the malice of the devil, that diverteth it from his true use;
which also is evidently confirmed by the Wiseman in these words, Creavit Deus
ut essent omnia, and sanabiles fecit nationes orbis terrarum, and non est in
illis medicamentum exterminii, Sap. 1.14. Sap. 2.24.
nec Inferorum regnum in terra, creavitque hominem inexterminabilem, and ad
imaginem similitudinis suae fecit eum: invidia autem Diaboli mors introivit in
orbem terrarum: God created all things that they might exist or be, and made
all the nations of the earth wholesome, and there is not any deadly thing to be
found within them, nor yet the kingdom of hell and destruction upon the earth.
And he created Man inex^erminable, that is, to last for ever, and he made him
after his own image; but death entered into the world by the envy and malice of
the devil, etc. For know this, that before the fall of Adam, all things were
straightly and rightly taken, and consequently not mistaken; but after that he
had tasted of the Tree of good and evil, his corporal eyes were open, and the
creatures were interpreted and distinguished for good and evil, and were
converted unto both uses; for from that hour, the mysteries of iniquity and
righteousness began to reign in the world, and evil began in the very first
practice after the fall, to shoulder goodness; and vice did first prevail
against virtue, and by natural means was employed by the first fruits of
wickedness, to wit, the vegetable creature, or a piece of wood, by the envy of
unrighteous Cain, to knock out the brains of his righteous brother Abel; when
contrariwise this vegetable creature was in another sense a piece of wood,
namely, in the form of a cross, (signifying the opposition which in this world
is made between good and evil) an instrument of Christ's death, without the
which, there was no assurance of salvation.

We see therefore, that all occult operations proceed from the hidden virtue in
natural things, which were discovered by Gods Spirit, as well unto mankind, as
conceived by the sharp-witted observation of Satan. Unto good men, I say, they
were detected by the good Spirit, to do good, and prevent evil; for except the
evil be known, a counter-poyson will hardly be found out: Unto bad men, they
were administered to execute mischief and iniquity. I will reckon up some of
these secret virtues, in each of the three kingdoms of compound creatures,
namely, Animal, Vegetable, and Mineral.

First therefore for the Animal. The Owl is said by Albertus Magnus, to have
many notable virtues; For, says he, if his heart and right foot be put upon
one that sleeps, he will forthwith tell what he has done, or any thing that
you shall ask him; and he says, that it has been tried by some of his
brethren to be most true. And again, if one do but put it under the arm-pit, no
dog will bark at him. Also the Goat's blood is reported by him, to turn glass
into a soft and malleable temper, if the glass be sod in it and vinegar, that
one may handle it like paste, so that if it be cast against the wall, it will
not break. And if one makes an ointment of the same composition, and do
anoint his face with it, things will appear horrible and terrible unto him.
And if the said composition be put in the fire, and there be present one that
has the falling sickness, and a Loadstone touch him, he will presently fall
into a fit as dead, and if some cold water be given him to drink, he will
recover. So (says he) if a candle be anointed with the Camel's blood, all men
in the room will seem to have Camel's heads. And thus he proceeds in his
History, with a description of admirable wonders, which are effected by the
occult properties of beasts, vegetables, and stones. If Mr. Foster and his
adherents shall say, that all these are lies, I reply, That it was a learned
Philosopher, and famous Theologian that relates them, who, no doubt, would, if
he lived, tell him, That he should learn to understand the hours of elections,
the stars that have dominions on the earth, and their times of exaltation or
fortitude on the earth. And lastly, over what creatures in the three compound
Kingdoms they have their proper influences. For my part, I know admirable
secrets in man and beasts, for the which the Peripatetick Philosophy can yield
no reason; as for example, That the Pike or Jack-fishe's guts dried, should
mightily provoke urin; the sucking of blood from a Mole, whose nose is cut off
for the same purpose, will cure the falling sickness, and that after the taking
of it, it makes the party exceeding sick; as experience has taught us, by the
cure of a Lady in Kent, who was cured thereby: Also, that it being burnt unto
powder, it should, by an occult nature, expel the cholick. That the heart and
liver of the Frogs should be approved, for the falling sickness. That a Snake's
skin should accelerate and hasten a woman's delivery. That the menstrues in a
woman should cause a Leprosy. That the Toad dried should stench blood, as also
the Spider, being applied unto the nostrills of him that bleedeth, as I have
often tried.

As for other occult miracles in stones, mettles, herbs, and animals, the true
scholars unto Solomon, I mean, Hermes, Plato, Albertus Magnus, Diascorides,
and such like, are full; and doubtless they would not prove so sottish and
indiscreet, to publish lies, and to write things of impossibility, averring
them to be effected in their knowledge, and so by that means, lose that
reputation, which they have gained in the world by their wisdom But as
concerning the practice of our main business, which is, touching the
sympatheticall and antipatheticall respect, that is between the different Mummy
which is in man's body, and the ocular demonstration thereof, produced from the
Loadstone, I purpose in this next Book to show and prove more unto you, than
any one has done before me unto this present, as I may imagine.

The Third BOOK.
Which touches many practical Proofs, and experimental Conclusions, to
confirm the loving Microcosmicall Attraction, or sympatheticall Coition, and
antipatheticall Expulsion or hatred, by the magnetic and expulsive property of
the Macrocosmicall Lodestone.
The Argument of this Book. The Author's Proem unto this present Book, wherein
he briefly and in few words, recites what is said before.
I Have related to you in my precedent discourse, and made sufficient proof of
it, that the spiritual Christ, ^oloss. 2.1.
the divine Word, or eternal wisdom, is the true basis or foundation of the
essential Philosophy, as is proved by the Apostle's testimony, forasmuch as he
is the sure and never-failing cornerstone, Joh. 1. 1 Tit. 6. 1 Cor. 12.
on which every creature is builded, and in whom it consists; seeing that in
it is life, and that life is the essential light, which vivifieth all things,
and consequently operateth all in all, Act. 17. Sap. 1. Sap. 12.1.
as the Scriptures do sufficiently testify: For if the Spirit of the Lord does
impart unto the creature life, and inspiration, and all things: And if again
that Spirit does replenish the earth, and be in every thing, (as Solomon
confesses) then must we also acknowledge, that this centrall Spirit of every
specific thing is that Divinity, wherein the essential root of all magnetic
sympatheticall attraction, and antipatheticall expulsion in every kind,
consists. For being it is the catholic love which imparteth it self unto
every particular existence, to give it action and motion, to attract his like
nature, for a convenient nourishment, assistance, and consolation; so also it
makes the organ in which it acts, to resist and expel all such emanations,
as either in order, quality, or essence, do disagree, and are opposite or
harmfull to the specific existence or conservation. For this reason therefore
it endueth the creature with a double affection, namely, with a concupiscible
desire, and an irascible hatred, whereof the one does rejoice or sympathize
with his like, and therefore allureth or draws it unto him, to consolate and
assist him in his being; the other does eschew and drive away, by an
antipatheticall and odious aspect, that which may be harmfull and noisome unto
it. And this is the act of that all-creating and sustaining Wisdom, which made
each creature, by a kind of successive preservation, which it sucketh from his
like in the world, to be and exist; and consequently has given it an irascible
faculty to defend it self, from that which is contrary unto it: Whereby we may
see, how this vivifying spirit does moderate all things with an unpartiall
hand, insomuch that though it has framed all things by opposition, namely,
light and darkness, and therefore in man's regard both good and evil; yet he
ordained, that each individual should have the faculty, to eschew with an
irascible and antipatheticall disdain, that which unto it is contrary either in
order or nature, or both: until the time be accomplished, in which after he is
exalted, he shall expel all contrariety and discord out of this world, by
making a sympatheticall union amongst all things, which also St. Paul does
argue in these words: Cum evacuaverit omnem Principatum, 1 Cor. 15.
and Potestatem, and Virtutem: Oportet autem eum regnare, donec ponat omnes
inimicos sub pedibus suis: novissima autem inimica destruetur Mors, Omnia enim
subjecit pedibus ejus: Cum autem ei subjecta fuerint omnia, Heb. 3.
tunc and ipse filius subjectus erit illi, qui subjecit sibi omnia, ut sit Deus
omnia in omnibus: When he has evacuated every Principality, and Potestat, and
Virtue: For he must reign until he put all his enemies under his feet: the
last enemy death shall be destroyed: For he shall subject all things under his
feet. And when all things are made subject unto him; then also the Son shall be
subject unhim, who has made all things subject unto him, that God may be all
in all. Whereby it is evident, that the catholic Magneticall virtue, which
resideth in God's eternal Spirit, shall at the last be exalted after, his
glorious victory, and draw all things unto him, and all things shall be one in
him, and he in them, and consequently all Discord and Hatred being banished and
laid apart, Love, Peace, and Unity, shall erect the perpetual and never-dying
Trophy of this hallowed Victory. This universal Magnetic Virtue, is
acknowledged by the Spirit of Christ in these words: Joh. 12.
Si exaltatus fuero a terra, omnia traham ad meipsum: If I shall be exalted
from the earth, I will draw or attract all things unto my self; that is, I
will, by mine attractive or conjoyning, Unite all things, and, as it were,
ingraft them into mine own Nature; So that in the beginning, all things came
from one Unity, as comprehending in it implicitly, all things which are
explicitly unfolded, and comprehended under two contrary Principles; So in the
end all things containd under discordant Principles, shall be again reduced
unto one and the same radical beginning. But as yet we are subjected under
contrary Principles; for the whole world, and the members thereof, are composed
yet of strife and concord; of enmity and friendship; of darkness and light; of
evil and good; and therefore under the protection of this Divine Wisdom, which
governs all things, and striveth to have the victory over confusion and
dissension in this world, that a general peace and union may be made. And
therefore that all things may return and live in him, who is only Love, the
creature has power to make a sympatheticall accord with his like, and to
repel, by an irascible or antipatheticall property, his contrary.

Now therefore since that this Spirit is all in all, Colos. 1.13.
and therefore in every Specific, it consequently follows that it attracteth
sympathetically, that which is conservative, or of a like nature and condition,
in the animal, vegetable, or mineral kingdom, and expels antipathetically
from it, that which is harmfull, odious, and detestable, or of a contrary
disposition unto it. And thus much touching a brief of my precedent
sympatheticall and antipatheticall Theory, mentioned in my precedent discourse.
I will now enter boldly into the Practick of them both, that thereby you may be
the easlier induced to believe, that such things as are spoke of before
Theorically, are feazible and easy to be brought to practice, and that only
naturally, without any Cacomagicall act, or Diabolical assistance; as many
temerarious and rash-headed fools of this world have scandalously blazed
abroad, not only in their vain and windy Words, but also by their
inconsiderate Writings. I will proceed therefore unto my purpose, and divide
this present Book into two several members: Whereof the first shall handle
such sympatheticall effects; and the second such antipatheticall events, as are
Magnetically produced in the animal, vegetable, and mineral kingdoms.

The first Member of this Book, entreating of the admirable effects in
Sympathy, which are brought to pass by the Magneticall Attraction of like unto
like.
CHAP. I.
Herein is expressed, how by comparing the Mineral Lodestone, and his
attractive Virtues with those of the Animal and Vegetable, we may find out and
bring to a demonstrable light, the wonderful effects that do lurk in them both.

SInce it is a thing most worthy of observation among wisemen, that there is
nothing in the celestial Orb, which has not his like in the terrestrial; So
verily, there is nothing in the mineral kingdom which has not his like in the
vegetable; and again, the likness of the vegetable Sphere is found in the
animal, I mean in love and hatred; in attraction and expulsion; in union and
divorce. But, because in the mineral kingdom, there is found nothing in all the
world, so near in virtue unto the action and life of the animal, as is the
Magnet or Lodestone; Since that it affects sensibly, his ferruginous like,
it seems to woo and lust after it, and attracteth it eagerly* and lasty,
uniteth it self unto it after a mavelous manner, even as the the female and
male do in the animal kingdom. For this reason every like particle in the
animal or vegetable kingdom, that works after the same manner, are justly
termed Magneticall. Hereupon the well experimented Doctor, Paracelsus, when he
writes of the mystical Mummies, as well corporal as spiritual, and of the
attractive means or manner to extract them, as well out of the living as dead
body; He, for the better instruction of his Scholars, and such as he terms
filios Artis, the children of Art, expresses examples, drawn from the
Lodestone and the Iron: For by it he does sufficiently declare the manner of
extracting the said Mummy, and consequently does open after his fashion, what
the Microcosmicall, or Animal Magnet is, by means whereof it is extracted out
of the body, namely that it is a corporal or substantial thing, as he seems
to justify in these words: Spiritualis Mummia non operatur nisi per corporalia
media: The spiritual Mummy works not but by corporal means. Where he
intimates by corporal means, those secret Magneticall bodies, which suck it
forth of the living animal, and make it to operate, as well at home by an
immediate contract as abroad, namely in or at an unlimitted distance; that is
to say, by a natural and convenient transplantation. He therefore who is wise
and profound in these mysteries of Nature, and unto whom the Sympatheticall
Concordance, abstruce properties, nature, virtues, and original of the
Lodestone, and the Iron, is well known, will know that their example may fitly
be applied unto man: For by it he may easily discern the Microcosmicall
Magnets, and understand the manner of their extraction of the spiritual Mummy
out of man, and withal conceive the proper end and usage thereof. That
thetefore these things may be the better dilated and enucleated unto the
well-wishing Reader, I think it fit in the first place, to touch a little the
same string of one symphoniacall Concordance, that does concern the nature and
Original of the Lodestone, and the Iron, which we have more fully mentioned
in the precedent Book of this our discourse, that thereby we may with the
greater facility, gather what the Microcosmicall Magnets are.

As I told you before, in the third Chapter of the second Book of this
Treatise, that it was evident, that the Lodestone, otherwise called the
Calamite, or mineral Magnes, proceeds, not of any natural beginning, but
rather of a monstrous birth and original, forasmu^h as it seems after the
manner of a Mule, to be procreated of unequal and unlike genitors or parents,
being that his mother, or corporeal and passive mass appears evidently to be
a common, Saturnine, stony, Mercuriall substance; and his father, or active
form, a mettallick or sulphurous Martial spirit: Now after what manner the
mixtion of these two are made, I beseech you to observe in a word: When the
Saturnine Mercuriall liquor of the stony nature was as yet in his first matter,
near unto the Mercury of Mars, (for these two are most commonly found together)
namely, the Magneticall nature, and the Iron mine; for this reason, to wit,
because of their near alliance, and propinquity in exidence, there was required
but a light and easy transmutation, to unite them into one body, and therefore
it seems to enjoy a middle nature, between a metal and a stone. And it may
well be called a half transmuted Saturnine Mercury, into the which, when ^he
spirit of the Martial sulphur, as a metallic form, has entered, it receives
it as his passive mother, and conserveth it within it self, and is coagulated
into a stony body, which is called the Calamite, Magnet, or Loadstone. Now
since every spirit does p^in^ipally affect and covet, to be nourished with that
which is nearest and likest unto his nature, the which nature and spirit is
found to be only in Iron; and therefore they are observed to proceed from one
Mine, or the same terrene matrix; yea, that out of the Magnet body, the
perfectest Iron or Steel is extracted, it arises from the consideration, that
the Martial and Saturnine spirit of the Lodestone, sucketh and attracteth
from his center the body of Iron unto it, drawing forth of it his formal
beams, as it were his spiritual food; but because the Iron-body will not
forsake so easily his inward spirit, it follows and is su^ked unto it. And
again, the Iron finding the like spirits in the Lodestone, does covet as fast
to be possessor of them, by an equal coition or desire, and so a conjunction
or union is made no otherwise between them, than between man and wife. But
because the Loadstone is fuller of the Saturnine stony Mercury than the Iron,
which is purified from it by fire, and consequently more near unto the property
of the male, therefore it sucketh not the Lodestone so greedily unto it, as
the Lodestone does the Iron. For it is an old confirmed axiom, That Matter
does desire and long after Form, and as eagerly does draw and allure it, as the
female does the male. But that the Iron is in lieu of the male, it appears,
in the strength that it adds unto the Lodestone, for if the Load-stones pole
be capped with steel, it does so far animate it beyond his own proper nature,
that it causes it to draw unto it a far greater proportion of Iron, then
otherwise it was able. This therefore being rightly considered, we may with the
greater facility collect, what that micro^osmicall Lodestone should be, that
is able to extract the microcosmicall spirit, without any damage or
debilitation of the body.

If therefore we would attempt to effect this excellent exploit, we must do it
by such a corporal Magnet, as shall be taken out of the Microcosm, or Man,
whose production and generation must in every respect accord and agree with
that of the macrocosmical, or terrene mineral Loadstone, which is mentioned
before; the which I purpose only by circumlo^u^ion, and not in plain terms,
to express unto you, that thereby so great a secret as this key, to unlock the
balsamic cabinet of man's Mummiall nature, may be hidden from the unworthy, and
yet sufficiently made manifest unto the worthy and religious Philosopher, by
evident circumstances; for if that such hidden mysteries in nature were
vulgarly discovered, there would be no difference had between a wise man and a
fool. And therefore Solomon did teaeh us, Quod sit sapientis celare rem, It is
the part of a wise man to hide the thing. And the wise Philosophers in their
Writings, did so considerately express the secret of nature, that they might
hide it from the ignorant and incapable vulgar, and yet speak plainly to such
as are the children of art, and sons of true learning. But this is not all, for
I would have you to understand, that the property of the magnetic
microcosmicall work is so universal, that it shows the way, as well to
infect the Mummiall spirits of man with a venomous and pernicious
antipatheticall nature, as to extract it in its wholesome and sympatheticall
condition, whereby it may be employed in good and salutary usages. And for that
reason, namely, because evill-minded persons, as well witches and sorcerers,
whom the devil has instructed in the abuse of this excellent mystery, as also
wicked minded-men, I mean incarnate devils, may do great mischief in the
world, by the public revelation thereof; for most men are proner unto
mischief, than inclined to do goodness; I think it to be the wisest part, not
to name the internal microcosmicall Magnet openly, but only to express it in
more general terms. I would have therefore each wise man to understand, that
the magnetic nature, as well antipatheticall as sympatheticall, of all things,
consists only in the sulphurous virtue of the vital spirits, which by
reason of their incarceration, are apt to attract their like unto them, by
contracting of it self from the circumference unto the center: Even so the
animal, vegetable, and mineral salt, which is the immediate receptacle of this
sulphurous spirit, that by reason of its pure, Saturnine, Mercurial earth,
sucketh and draws by the act of the included spirits their like from the
circumference, whereby they vegetate and multiply, both in their airy volatill
salt, which by a Saturnine or northern condition, is like snow or frost
condensed, and in their aetheriall or celestial fire. And again, the
sulphurous spirit flies back, or reflecteth his beams into its centrall salt,
after it did emanate unto the circumference of the body by northern accidents,
namely, by external cold, as it appears by the fiery or heavenly seeds
included in the air, that is retained within the Weather-glass, which when the
north wind blows is contracted, by reason that the expansed spirits of the
celestial sulphur, or the heavenly fire which is in it, flying from his cold
opposite, betaketh it self unto the center of the air, compassing, as it were
it self with a clowd, or making it a house, to resist the northern blasts
inclemency. For (as hereafter I will show you in my magnetic demonstration)
that the sulphurous Equator is an enemy to the cold Mercurial poles. Also in
man's body, when a northern or stupid fear possesses it, the sulphurous
spirits contract themselves, and leave the external aspect pale, bluish, and
wan, and in so doing, contract the internal spirits of the body unto the
center; but this motion is antipatheticall, and caused by unnatural passion.
Again, those sulphurous included spirits being at liberty, they dilate and
expanse themselves into the open air, as having no evident magnet to attract
or contract them into a narrower room. To conclude therefore, the
microcosmicall Magnet must issue and be engendered from the microcosmicall
sulphurous spirits in his proper salt, which is his form, and from a more
strange Mercury, which by his vicinity and propinquity, is most familiar with
it, and, as it were, akin unto it by adoption, and this is his passive matter.
Wherefore of these two microcosmicall portions, I mean, the formal and
material, our secret Magnes is framed, by the which, the spiritual Mummy is
extracted out of the living man, by means whereof, admirable cures, and
pernicious harms may be effected, as well ad distans, or afar off, as near at
hand, or by an immediate contact or administration. Moreover, the same
internal Magnet, or attractive salt in man, in whose interior the sulphurous
vivifying spirit does dwell, and of whose condition and root, our foresaid
microcosmicall Magnet is, will perform the self same salutary effects, and many
other rare experimental conclusions, if it be conveyed into the blood by
transplantation from the alive person by an effluxion; or in the nails and
hair, separated from him to another subject. There is also another
microcosmicall Magnet, which is taken from the dead man, by the means whereof,
the spiritual Mummy may be drawn out of the living man, and applied for man's
health, as well by an immediate administration, as by transplanting of it into
a vegetable plant, herb, or tree, as in the progress of this Book shall be more
amply declared. But because the order of these things in our demonstration, a
posteriori, or by progression from the effect unto the original cause of these
things, will be most convenient for the common and vulgar capacity, I will
begin to ascend in this mine explication from grosser elements, unto more
subtle, intricate, and abstruce things, as if by proportionate degrees I should
mount from the earth into heaven. I purpose therefore first to express and
demonstrate unto you, those things magnetically, which are only wrought by the
corporal contact of two several bodies of the same natural condition. But
before I will begin with the Mummy, which is taken out of man's dead body, I
think it in the first place most necessary, to entreat of the dead carcass his
mystery, that we may proceed the more methodically in our intent.

CHAP. II.
That there are four sorts of corporal Mummy, whereof one only is useful and
necessary for salutary purposes. In this Chapter also is set down an
experiment, with certain ocular Demonstrations, confirming the magneticall or a
tractive virtue of the Basamick spirits, which are in the useful Mummy.

SUch as have profoundly considered, and deeply respected, as well the
external as internal nature of man, have perceived, that the microcosmicall
Mummy is of two conditions, namely, corporal or spiritual; of the first, I
purpose to speak in this present Chapter; the second shall be handled
hereafter, and that at large. Touching the corporal Mummy, it is either
naturally sympatheticall, or unnaturally antipatheticall. We find therefore by
experience, that the natural Mummy is only medicinable and salutiferous,
after his due preparation, which is effected chiefly by his own magnetic
property; the rest are apter to breed diseases, and to infect such persons as
are in health, than to afford them any salutary relief or consolation; for, as
according unto the nature of the four elements, there are four kinds of
corporal and substantial Mummyes, so also are they distinguished according
unto those elements, whose natures they have endued; of the which, three of
these are corruptible, and inducers of death and sickness, namely, the earthly,
the watery, and the fiery; and only that which is airy, is util to man's life,
and amicable unto his nature. Concerning those three kinds of Mummy which breed
corruption, the reason why they prove corruptible, is this: We must hold it
first for a general axiom in Philosophy, Quod corruptum corrumpentis naturam
in se induit, That the thing corrupted, does endue the nature of the thing
corrupting: As for example, If the dead carcass of a man be corrupted in the
earth, it is changed and passes into the nature of the earth, and becomes
inutil for man's health, and indeed rather destructive then constructive or
wholesome. Again, if the corruption be made in the water, then the corrupted
flesh or dead body will acquire or endue a waterish and masseluginous
disposition, which also will prove very incommodious or unprofitable, for the
conservation of the vital spirits. And lastly, by the inordinate violence of
fire, the spirits in the Mummiall body will be consumed, wasted, or expired.
Now the reason why these said corporal Mummie's in those estates, are
inconvenient for the conservation of health, is* Because the foresaid three do
so destroy and corrupt the body of them, that they make and constrain his
earth, his water, and his fire, to return unto their first matter; so that
whereas the earth and the water are ordained, to be the recepta^les of two
vivifying elements, namely, of fire and air, which only can be conserved in a
body that is incorrupted, it must of necessity follow, that in the three
foresaid Mummies, those vivifying spirits must needs vanish and fly away, for
want of a natural body, which is now become corrupted and destroyed, and
therefore unnatural. Seeing therefore nothing is required in the true Mummy,
more then that which is apt and proper for the conservation of life, yea, for
life it self, which is the air, which is banished and expelled from the three
forsaid Mummies, therefore nothing can be extracted out of them, but sickness,
death and destruction, and consequently antipatheticall effects; so that if a
sound, murdered, o^ strangled body, do rot under the earth, or in the water,
it is not fit or proper for the wholesome use of man's body. The very self-same
regard is to be had unto such bodies, as die through infirmityes and diseases,
and although they are not visibly corrupted by the three foresaid external
elements, yet nevertheless it happens so, that a certain invisible
corruptible influence and impression, is made or caused from the external
elements, into the internal. From hence therefore proceeds that intestine
war in man's body, whereby the elements do kill and corrupt one another, but
after a diverse fashion, namely, otherwise in one body than in another,
according as one element or elementall alteration, is said to have dominion or
rule over the other. And this is the reason, that such variety of diseases do
haunt man's body: as for example, The Dropsy comes of the strong impression
of water, the Hectic or burning Feavor of fiery insultations, and the Leprosy
of the dominion of earth, etc. And therefore also, where any such elementary
corruption happens unto the body, there the wholesome spirit of the corporal
Mummy, with his habitacle or dwelling mansion, is utterly overthrown, and the
spirit is forced to depart, and consequently contrary Mummiall spirits, do
dominere, and are ready to operate antipathetically as shall be expressed in
the second member of this Book.

But if the sound body, that is, not having any infirmity be killed only by
and in the Element of air; that is to say, through strangling or by hanging,
then there will be found no impression of the foresaid Elements in the
corporal Mass of man's carcass. And for that reason it will remain incorrupted,
and will not suffer any Elementall resolution, so long as it is conserved in
the air. If therefore the body or tabernacle of the spirits, and vital Balsom
remains entire, then that aereall vital Balsom is not compelled to depart
from his lodging, so long as the body is not resolved by nature or art, But if
it be resolved, then it will forsake the body, as the soul does; as also the
animal astral spirit, which did reconcile the one with the other. But the
vital, vegetable and Balsamic spirit, remains in the incorrupted body: It
follows therefore, that this airy kind of Microcosmicall Mummy, is most
proper for the conservation of vital spirits in the living man, being
extracted, prepared, and rightly after preparation to be applied, I will
therefore come briefly unto our Magneticall Experiences, touching this Mummiall
Subject.

The Proposition.
If this salutary kind of airy Mummy, with his vehicle or Magneticall
instrument, be taken, or chosen, or selected rightly, it will indue by reason
of the absence of actual life, and the dominion of cold, the condition of the
Northern pole, and consequently by that reason, those airy included spirits,
which were whilst the body was living, of an hot aequinoctiall nature, and
therefore more dilative from the Center of the Circumference than attractive,
are now by death made to act from the Circumference to the Center, if they be
excited by their like spirits, which are aequinoctiall and lively, and then
they become attractive of the aequinoctiall Mummy, namely by contracting
themselves into the Center, and consequently this airy microcosmicall Mummy,
must be endued with the Magneticall property of the Northern pole, and
therefore by a contactuall application of it to his like the living man, it
will suck and attract greedily his like nature; and having drawn it in, will
retain it; So that it may, by a due preparation, be made sympatheticall, and
reduced into a singular medicine for man's health and conservation: Or it may be
so contaminated, and made antipatheticall with the impure and infectious Mummy,
of the infirm living creature, that it may free the infirm, by extracting out
the poison which did infect it, and infect a wholesome and sound body, unto the
which it shall be given inwardly.

An Experiment upon this.
I collected a portion of this Northern Mummy, namely of the flesh of a man
strangled in the air, in which the spritual Mummy, was Centrally contracted by
cold, and I applied it typically unto the part of my body, which was nearest
unto it in natural position. I found it in the contact passing cold, and as it
were ice and Northern. After it had remained on, a certain time, I found, that
in the exciting of his frozen and Northernly contracted spirits, by the
aequinoctiall heat of my body, they drew off my Mummiall and vivifying spirits
greedily, and at some times, and as it were by fits, I felt them in their
Magnetic operation sensibly, and after a kind of dolorous fashion, to tug and
pull some adjacent parts close about it; in conclusion, after a certain time I
took it off, and found it much altered in smell and view, by reason of the
quantity of my spirits, which they attracted unto them; both which Mummiall
spirits, so Magnetically congregated together, I extracted, and prepared after
my manner, for the use of mine own body. But because my assertion will
perchance be of little credit, I will prove the feisibility of it, and
probability of every particle or member hereof, by many and sundry examples or
Demonstrations.

I. Demonstration or Proof, made by a Relation unto the Microcosmicall nature.
To prove and demonstrate, that the airy spirit of the Microcosme, is apt to
take any polar impression, as well as the air of the Macrocosm, and by
consequence is more Magneticall, or attractive in his Northern or cold
property, than in his aequinoctiall or Southern habit. Look considerately upon
the air included in the Wether-glass, which served as a catholic
demonstration unto my precedent Philosophy, and you shall see, that when the
aequinoctiall, namely the Eastern and Southern winds do blow in the air, the
particular included air, and therefore the universal Element of air excluded,
is less Magnetic or attractive, than when the Northern winds do blow. The
proof is made evident, because that when those winds do blow, the external
air, and therefore the internal, is more apt to be dilated, by reason of the
Emanation of the Sulphurous or celestial spirits, which are included in each
airy spirit, from the Center unto the Circumference, making thereby a certain
expulsion, or rather expansion of airy parts, by ratifying of the body of it.
And therefore it is observed in the Instrument, not to draw the water higher
then the figure 1. but to repel it down lower: Contrariwise when the North
winds blow, the dilated and mobil air is by attraction or condensation,
contracted into immobil snow; that is to say, into an earthly condition, So
that we see that the air in this estate is admirably contractive, as it is
expressed to the life, in the demonstrative Instrument or Wether-glass: For the
included spirit attracteth the ponderous water upward, and contracteth it self
out of a large room or place, into a narrow Angle or space, as it appears
when the Northern Snow and Frosts, have had long dominion in the Macrocosmicall
world, by a Northern breath, at which time we shall find the water against his
nature, to be sucked up unto the upper figure 7. The reason whereof I have
showed you before, namely because the occult Sulphurous nature or spirit, which
is the Sun of light, and the actor in life, being carried in his airy vehicle,
flies from the persecuting cold, which is his adversary, and armeth it self
about in the Center, with a condensed air, to hinder or break the universal
assault of cold, which is the impe of darkness, and therefore has his seat at
the pole, which is furthest off from the presence of the Sun. In like manner,
the dead and cold Mummial spirits being for this reason Centrally contracted,
and as it were mortified and congealed by application of it to the lively
Spirits, as the cold Northern air, or spirit unto the aequinoctiall or
Southern Sun then reviving, and incited by the living man's contactuall or
contiguous presence, do greedily draw them in, as imploring their aid against
their cold adversary, and having the possession of them seems better
satisfied. I will prove this to be so by this demonstrative Example, taken from
the Lodestone.

II. Demonstration.
That the dead spirits in a body, will not attract unto them dead spirits; nor,
that lively spirits in a body, will not suck unto them Magnetically lively
spirits, but very moderatly; it is argued by the operation of the Lodestone,
in this manner.

Problem 1.
The Southern pole of one Lodestone does with a certain hatred fly from, and
eschew the Southern pole of another, and will by no means be joined together in
friendship, but avoideth by a natural antipathy, the contact of one another.
But if the Northern pole of the one be applied unto the Southern pole of the
other, they will stick and cleave together by a strong attraction.

As for Example.
Take a Lodestone with his distinct poles, namely his Australl and Boreall
pole being marked out; Gilb. l. c. 5. fol 6. vid. Rid. 82. and 95.
put it into a little vessel or boat to flote in a basin, or cestern, or tub
of water, in such a manner, that the two poles thereof be disposed unto the
plain of the Horizon: then hold in your hand another Lodestone, whose poles
are well known unto you; So that the South-pole of that in your hand, be
directed to the North of that which floteth, the two not being far from one
another, and you shall find that the boat will follow your hand whither soever
it moves, and will not leave until it cleaves unto it. But if contrariwise
you shall offer or apply the North Pole of that in your hand, unto the
North Pole of that in the boat, or the south-pole of the one unto the south
pole of the other, you shall perceive that the one Stone will by his aspect drive
away the other, and the little Bark will forthwith turn from it, as if the Helm
thereof were moved another way.

Application.
Even so the northern natured Mummy will not at all, or but weakly, operate on
his like; nor the southern, or hot lively flesh, on his like; but contrary
poles will act, and by a magnetic virtue will be united unto one another, by
the attractive faculty of the northern, or cold dead man's flesh or blood, which
coveteth by a secret instinct the hot nature of the Aequinoctiall south.

III. Demonstration.
Touching the fortification and augmentation of spirits in the dead and
impotent, or northern Mummy, by the contact of the southern or lively Mummy or
flesh, it is magnetically maintained to be possible and probable, by this
problematicall Demonstration, which proves, that the northern Magnet, or airy
Mummy, is exalted in his power by the southern.

Problem 2.
The stronger Magnet or Lodestone, and the bigger in quantity, does augment
the force of the lesser; as also of Iron, by putting the lesser Magnet upon the
pole of the greater, so that the northern pole will become stronger in his
attraction. As for example, A piece of Iron being put on the pole of the lesser
Stone in that position, it will hold it up perpendicularly on the north point
A. which on the pole B. will no way be effected. Gilber. lib. 2. de Mag. c. 25.
Vid. Ridl. c. 84




In like manner the northern Mummy, by the conjunction of it unto the southern
nature, is exalted in strength, and sucketh new spirits and vigor unto it, by
drawing power from the stronger, and so leaving the stronger weaker, which is
better proved by this third Problem.

Problem 3.
Ridl. c. 24.
If two Magnets, armed by two Iron steely teeth a piece, be set before you, the
one being strong, the other weak, or much less, whose axis or diameter between
the teeth are equal, and of a like length; then set the teeth of these
together, that come from contrary poles and parts, and the stronger will
apprehend and lift up the weaker; and the weaker being united and incorporated
with the stronger, by the virtue that it receives from the stronger, will lift
up from the ground, and retain the stronger and greater very firmly, although
he be much heavier than the weight the small Stone does ordinarily lift up.

Application.
Even so the weaker or northern Mummy being lesser in quantity, will gather
force, and multiply spirits, by his faculty of attraction from the stronger and
bigger mass, of the southern or lively Mummy. Lastly, that by the application
of this dead, northern, or congealed Mummy, unto the lively, southern, or
aequinoctiall Mummy, the most evident and strangest attraction proceeds from
the northern Mummy; it is manifested by this example in the Lodestone.

Problem 4.
There is a magneticall attraction from the equator of the Lodestone, but far
different from that of the northern pole, both in violence, and in manner of
attraction; for the aequinoctiall attraction is more naturally mild, as if it
were a mean betwixt the two poles; and yet in substance, all is but one earth,
though various in formal execution: As for example, The erection of a piece of
Iron will be the less perpendicular, and the attraction will be the weaker, by
how much the nearer it approaches from the pole unto the a^quinoctiall. Again,
all that have written the magneticall History, do ascribe the greatest force of
attraction unto the northern pole of the Magnet, as shall also hereafter be
declared and proved more at large.

I will conclude with a demonstration taken from the like Mummy of beasts; and
it is this.

The fourth demonstration, which is Animal.
It is a common thing, and vulgarly in use, to take a piece of raw beef, and
apply it unto the nape of the neck, to draw away rheumes or defluxions out of
the eyes: And I was informed by one of credit and learning, that when a simple
fellow that was troubled with sore and watering eyes, was counseled to apply
raw beef behind in his neck, to draw back and divert the humor; he mistaking
the business, applied the raw cold beef upon both his eyes, and it was his bad
chance, that it attracted so strongly, that instead of drawing out the rheum,
it pulled forth his eye-holes. Also, a worthy Gentlewoman of mine acquaintance,
had (as she tells me) raw beef applied unto her neck, for to divert the rheum
from her eyes; but she confessed, that it drew so strongly unto it, that she
felt her eyes, as it were, sucked or drawn into her head, and will not be
persuaded to this day, but that her eyes are deeper in her head than they were.
Whereby it is argued, that by far greater reason, the experiment above
mentioned is in every respect demonstrated to be true, being the Magnet of it,
is composed of subtle air, Mummiall spirits, coagulated by an internal and
centrall virtue, in the magneticall mass.

Another relative Animal Demonstration.
A Nobleman of Bohemia named Burgravius, did use for his Gowt this medicine;
He took a piece of Beef, and did moisten it a little with wine, and laid it on
the place affected, renewing the same medicine every six hours space, and it
drew forth a great deal of filthy and sordid matter. And if afterward the same
flesh be given to be eaten of dogs, it will infect them with the same Gowty
disease as it did the man: and this was tried upon a couple of that Lord's
dogs, as Hans Tanker, the Minister of the Lord Hofman, did relate it from the
said Burgravius his own mouth, and also he himself saw it effected on a dog.

If this gross mass of magneticall stuff in its simple nature, Note here.
could draw so strongly unto it, much more should our faith be grounded on a
more spiritual and airy animal Mummy, or mummiall Magnet, which I know, but am
not disposed at this time, neither do I think it fit in this place, openly to
reveal, or to express, either its manner of preparation* or diversity in usage,
because by the abuse thereof, wicked and naughty-minded persons may do as much
harm thereby, in inducing of diseases, as the honest Physician may do good, in
expelling or curing of them. A third of Mr. Cotton 's Dog.

A fourth relative animal-Demonstration.
It is esteemed to be an excellent magneticall cure in the plague; when the
sore or carbuncle does appear, to take a dried Toad, macerated in vinegar, and
afterward to apply it to the infected place of the body: for it is reported* to
suck or draw the venom to it strongly. This has been often tried, and it may
be proved, by reason that the Toad is magnetically attractive, and stiptick,
partly because of her cold venom, and Boreall, dull and heavy, or melancholy
disposition, and then forasmuch as it is observed to stench blood. So that this
gross and terrestrial venomous Magnet performs his office, in attracting
from the Botch or Carbuncle his like, though not so subtly and spiritually,
as the Elementary or airy Northern Mummy does from the lively or Southern
natured man. I could tell you of many vegetables, which have a Magnetic
property, to suck and draw unto them* being applied unto the soles of the feet,
or pulses of the wrists or arms, for diverse Aguish distempers. But that I
should in so doing, prove perchance too tedious, unto you; and therefore I will
proceed unto the second degree of the Magneticall virtue in the Mummy, which is
to draw or suck unto it his like; not by contact or touch only, but ad
distans, and that by a spiritual attraction in the air, and at an unknown
longitude, as shall better appear in these Chapters following.

CHAP. III.
How by relation of Natural things unto one another, they do, after that a
corporal contact or touch is ma^e betwixt them, operate wonderfully, and that
by a Magneticall concent, or Spiritual continuity, both after a contact or
touch is made in the curing of maladies, or wasting his like, by a mutual
operation at an unknown distance.

I Will proceed as I began, from a general proposition unto diversities of
experiences, the which afterward I will prove feisible and possible, by diverse
Demonstrative relations.

The Proposition.
It is possible that two Mummyes of opposite condition, that is to say, the one
being of a deadly Boreall condition; and the other of a lively and Southern, or
aequinoctiall property, may after a corporal contact made betwixt them,
operate from one to another a far distance, by a spiritual relation, which is
continued between them, as well antipathetically as sympathetically.

Experiment to confirm the same.
An Italian Lord by an accident had his nose cut off, and by the counsel of his
Physician made a wound in one of his slaves arms, and clapped his mut^lated
nose unto it, and so continued it until a perfect union was made betwixt the
flesh of the slave and his Master. Afterward a gobbit of the slaves flesh
which cleaved to the nose, was cut out, and formed into the shape of a nose.
The servant's wound was healed up, and for his painful service during this
exploit was manumitted or freed, and with store of money in his purse went unto
Naples, which was above a hundred miles from the place where his Master
remained, whose adopted flesh on his nose, prospered and did nourish from the
veins; so long as the man which was made free, did live. It came to pass that
the manumitted person did die at Naples, and thereupon immediately the adopted
flesh unto the Master's nose did decay, and begun to gangrenate, insomuch that
if he had not cu^ it off, it would have marred all the rest and killed him.
This relation is known to be so true and certain, that to this day it is famous
over all Italy, and in every man's mouth of that Country, and testified by some
German Writers and maintained as well by some Scotch as English men, which have
been in that Country. By this History therefore we may se^, that so long as the
two bodies which made contact were of one disposition, namely Southern or
aequinoctiall, they, though being in body far remote from one another, did
operate spiritually, and were present in spirit; that is, they did concur
together with the aspect of their sympatheticall beams, and the flesh was
spiritually vivified from the slave's lively fountain, even as the grain of
Wheat has (...) nourishment, and vivi^ieth by the application of the Sun's
beams unto it: but when the Southern, or aequinoctiall, or lively property of
the bondman's spirit was changed into a deadly Northern and cold disposition,
then the vivifying spirit did ^^ase to apply any more unto the adopted flesh,
and in liew of it, the deadly Northern spirit, did suck or draw away that which
the Southern had bestowed upon it, no otherwise then the Northern Frost in the
world kills and draws out the life of the grain, or seed, or plant, or
herb, by his contractive and Boreall property. And for this cause the Gangrene,
which is a Northern disea^e, did take the borrowed portion of flesh on the
nose. Here therefore we see, how the same spirit, altered from a Southern or
aequinoctiall, unto a Northern condition, operateth by a contrary, and
unnatural, and depriving means, and that secretly and a far off.

I. A Corollary Demonstration, taken from the Macrocosm^.
We see in the Wether-glass (of which I spoke before) that between the
bolts-head and the place of the water, to wit, in the whole pipe of the
Mattras, there is an invisible airy spirit, which though it be not seen of it
self, yet does it operate visibly in effect: For if the external air be very
hot, then it dilateth the air included in the bolts-head; whereby the water at
the other end, is observed to sinck down, though no ocular Agent may be found:
but by intellectual eyes we may discern, that it is done through the virtue,
and lively Emanation of Sulphurous Light in the air, by the secret emission of
whose beams, the air is rare^^ed, and by rarefaction beats the water
downward; and contrariwise, by Northern cold the water is lift up through the
contraction of the emitted Spirits; So that we may discern how lively
Emanations, and consequently acting and vivifying spirits, are sent forth from
the lively and Microcosmicall fountain unto the creatures, which are apt to
animate and vivify: but if the fountain become cold and icie, in liew of a
Southern acting addition of life, it induces a mo^tifying, and privative
substraction, and that as you may perceive in the Wether-glass, by a spiritual
concurrence, or rather an invisible, and insensible continuity, which is
between both extremes; as you may easily see it demonstrated in the
Wether-glass.

II. A Demonstration derived from the Load-stone's property.
If we shall take an ovall Lodestone, Gib. lib. de Mag. cap. 5.
namely and shall divide it in the middle, namely in the aequinoctial about B,
C, and then shall expose the part A, B, into his little vessel to flote on the
water; and also put the other half C, D, in another little boat, or vessel in
the same water, we shall find that these two halves B, C, being of one
aequinoctiall nature, will desire to be joined again together, and to be
reduced into the same continuity it was before; and for that reason, the spirit
which is continued between them, though the body be divided, being invisibly
united unto both divided portions, does direct them both, and by an actual
emanation out of each of them, attract, suck, and agglutinate as it were each
of them in their natural position, as they were before.

Application.
By this therefore, the continuation of spirits betwixt the flesh of the
forementioned captive at Naples, and that which the master borrowed, remaining
elsewhere, is evidently argued and confirmed. And though it may be alleged,
that the Lodestone does not draw without his orb, yet I say, that though men
do guess at the sensible attraction of weights, yet can they not limit the
penetrating action which is between magnetic bodies, as I have proved in my
precedent Book, and will hereafter demonstrate it more at large.

A Progression in the foresaid Magneticall Demonstration.
But contrariwise, if we shall attempt to apply the Aequinoctiall, or Southern
place of the division in the Lodestone C, unto the pole A, in their barks
thus; the one will fly from the other, and be contrary unto the other; for in
so doing, nature will be perverted, and the form of the Stone disturbed.
Therefore this flight from one another, or hatred between them, arises from
the evil position or application of natures, discording in their genuine
order, which stir up an intestine war, hatred, or antipathy between the parts,
and cause a contrariety or distortion of spirits.

Application.
By which it appears, that the aequinoctiall spirit of the late-living
captive, being turned northern or Boreal, will in no wise accord with the
southern nature of the yet-living adopted or borrowed flesh, which is possessed
by the Master, as it did before; but proves antipatheticall and destructive
unto it, that is, it warreth with a contrary property against it, being that
now it as fast with-draweth the beams of his spirits from the circumference
unto the center, namely, from the flesh lent unto the Master, as, whilst it
lived, it did send them after an aequinoctiall manner, forth from the center
unto the circumference, namely, from the live fountain in the captive, unto the
like in the Master.

III. Demonstration, taken from the Lodestone.
It is evident also, that the Needle touched with the Lodestone, will aspect
the Lodestone at any position, whilst the Lodestone is strong and lively; but
when the Lodestone is dead, or that he have lost his virtue by the fire, the
property of the Needle will also dye.

A second Experiment, confirming the foresaid Proposition.
Against the time that I was to read my public Anatomy in the College, I had
(as our custom is) a certain body of one that was hanged, to be anatomized at
my house privately: at which time I was solicited by Mr. Kellet, the
Apothecary, to permit a Gentlewoman, who had a Scirrhous tumor in her belly, to
be touched and stroked with the dead man's hand, because experience had taught
it to be very efficacious, for the abolishing of the like horrid protuberation
in others, as they averred. The Gentlewoman, with her husband and brother, came
unto my house, and, as they desired, things were effected. Within a while after
the Apothecary, with the Gentlewomans husband, came to give me thanks for that
courtesy, assuring me, that it had done his wife good, and taken away the
tumorous swelling. Now this does show, how the contact of this northern Mummy
in the dead man's hand, did cause the southerly growing and vegetating tumor,
which did more and more send out its beams from the center to the
circumference, to decrease and diminish, and caused it to rot and moulder away,
by the centrall continuation or union of the northern spirit in the dead, with
that which did vegetate unnaturally in the living, and that at a far distance.

A third Experiment, to express the self-same effect.
It is evident, and often approved by common people, that if Warts be rubbed
with a piece of fresh beef, and the said beef be conveyed into a field, and
buried under the earth, that as the beef wastes and rotteth in the earth, so
will the warts languish and pine away. In like manner it has been often
observed, that if a piece of bacon be rubbed on warts, and afterward be nailed
on a post against the Sun; as the bacon does waste and diminish, so also will
the warts fade and waste away. Also a dead bodies hand touching warts, they
will dye.

Whereby is evidently proved, that as things are sympathetically maintained in
their being, that is to say, in their increase or vegetation; so also, by an
antipatheticall aspect, or spiritual continuity, between two remote natures,
after a corporal contact is made between them, whereof the one is Boreall, the
other Southern or Aequinoctiall, the one which touched, will cause it to fade
and vanish, after the nature of the toucher. So that as the northern property
is an enemy unto life, and southern heat; so by his contact it causes
unnaturally-growing things to fade away by a like property, in changing the
vegetating nature of the thing touched, into his decreasing, contracting, and
mortifying nature. The experimental Glass does teach us, that the action of
cold is quite contrary unto that of heat, in one and the same spirit. And
Scripture tells us, (if we will not stand unto experience) that the self-same
word in his southern property, does undo and destroy the snow and ice, which it
did make in his northern condition.

CHAP. IV.
How certain excrementitious parts, taken from the inform member of the Animal,
and transplanted into a vegetable or growing tree, has a spiritual relation
or continuity with the spirit of the sick and impotent member, and consequently
of the sick creature. I will for the better method's cause, express in the
frontispice of this Chapter a Proposition, as I have done in the precedent.

The Proposition.
THe magneticall force of the spiritual Mummy does dwell and act, even in the
excrementitious or superfluous excrescences, of any member of man's body, after
that they are separated from it, and transplanted into some convenient
magneticall vegetable or plant; so that by a secret emanation from them, or
application unto the beam of the member, from whence they were cut or derived,
and consequently by a continued spiritual relation which is had between them,
and the body or m^mber from whence they were extracted, they are able, by the
magneticall plants assistance (whose vegetable nature they borrow and indue) to
operate vegetatively upon the same defective dolorous decayed limb or member
at an unlimited distance.

The first Experimental History.
My Mathematical Master, excellent for his knowledge in the art of Ingeniery,
(remaining with the Cardinal St. George at Rome) did assure me, that if any
one had a withered or consumed member, as a dried arm, leg, or foot, or such
like, (which Physicians call, An A^rcphy of the limbs) and if he did cut from
that member, be it foot, or arm, the nails, hair, and scrapings of the skin,
and shall pierce a Willow tree, with an anger, or wimble, unto the pith; and
after that shall thrust in those pared nails, cut hair, etc. into the hole; and
stop the hole close with a peg or pin made of the same wood: observing withal,
that this action must be effected, when the Moon is increasing, and the good
Planets in such multiplying Signs, as is Gemini, and Saturn, who is a great
drier, be depressed, the limb so wasted, shall by little and little
re-vegetate again, even as the Tree (in which the excrements are closed) shall
daily increase, grow, and flourish. Also he did aver unto me, that I should
find the self-same effect, if I did put those excrements into a hole, made in
the root of a Hazel-tree, and close up again the hole with the bark of the same
Tree, and afterward cover it with earth; assuring me, that it has been tried,
that as the Tree grows* so will the member prosper. But above all, he wished
me to observe the due order of the heaven, and such secret and proper
constellations, as he has instructed me in; for, without them, the cure or
amendment will be the less effectual.

II. Another Magneticall Experiment to confirm the precedent.
Out of a small Book, lately printed in the German Tongue.
Johannes Rhumelius Pharamondus, cures the Gowt by the very self-same manner
of transplantaion in this manner. He cutteth off the hair from the feet, legs,
and thighs; and also he pareth off the nails of the feet. Then he makes a hole
in an Oak, even unto the very Center or pith of the body, and pulls into it
the hair and the nails, and afterward he stops up the hole with a peg or
pin, framed out of the same Tree; and lastly, he daubeth it without with
cow dung. This Author says, that by this Magneticall experiment only he has
cured many. But if it chance (says he) that the Gowt shall for all this return
again, within the space of three months, then it is an Argument that the Oak is
insufficient to draw Magnetically: and then he proceeds thus, namely he
boreth another like hole in a second Oak; and after this, he takes the pieces,
of the Oak, which fall out in the boring of the hole, and bruiseth them, and
sticheth them in a little bag, and applieh it unto the dolorous or infected
member. And this he does three days before the New Mood. Then in that very
hour, that the New Mood is in, he removes the bag from the part affected, and
thrusts it into the hole of the same Tree, and stops it with a pin of the
same wood, as before. And he affirms, that by this second practice, when the
first has failed, he has cured many. But if it happen for all this, that the
pain does return within three other months; then he cutteth of the hair, and
pareth the nails, the second time, and tieth them upon the back of a Crab, or
Crab-fish, and so casts it into the running waters, and the sick will be
cured. He concludes there, that he has cured many by the first; many others
by the first and second; and many, by the first, second, and third Experiments.

A third Experiment tried by the same Author.
The same Author does verify, that by this very manner of transplantation, he
has cured many of the Rupture or Hernia; and his practice is after this
manner. He takes a new laid Egg piping hot (as they say) and he rubbeth the
Gowty place with it often, but gently: then he takes away the bark of a good
big tree, and with a great auger, he boreth a hole so big, as that the Egg
might easily enter into it; then does he lay on again the bark as before,
stopping well the hole thereof with it, and anointing or daubing it with tree
wax or caement. All which businesses must be effected in due order and time.
And he tells us, that when the barks of the tree do grow together, then also
will the Hernia and rupture also close up. But if it happen that the Hernia be
not cured within one month, then bore a hole in an Oak, and take the pieces
that fall from the hole, bruise them, and stick them in a small bag, and apply
it to the grief as is said, about three days before the new Moon; and then
about the hour of the new Moon, put it into the hole, and do in all things as
is told you before. He tells many other observations, as well touching the
time, namely if the Hernia's first increase, were in the Moon's increase or
decrease; which for brevity sake I here omit: Lastly, if the Hernia be not for
all this so dered or glued up, then he boareth a hole in the Oak, and puts in
the nail and hair of the Patient's hands and feet; as also the hair of his
privy parts, stopping it as is before said: For he affirms that when the hole
will be grown up, the Hernia will be also closed. There also he shows the
reason, that he is forced to use more or less of these operations in his cure,
according unto the nature of the Hernia, namely to the incipient Hernia one
operation will serve; to the inveterate more will be required. And he says,
that in this cure is chiefly to be observed the time, the measure of the tree,
and the depth or profundity of the hole.

Another Experiment by him.
Also he says, that if we take the nails of the feet and hands of an
Hydropick person, and transplant them on the Crey-fish of the river, and bind
them unto the back of her, and cast her into the river, it will cure the
Dropsy. Whereby you may plainly observe by approved experience, that the marrow
and strengh of the foresaid Proposition, is in every respect confirmed; and
again, if we do but burn the nails, and hair, and scrapings of the skin, and
take, by an alimbeck without a bottom, the fume of it, we shall find a kind of
Balsamic oil to issue from them, which is very attractive, drying, and
agglutinating of wounds. And therefore it appears, that there is a Balsamic
virtue in these kind of Excrescences; though unto the ignorant they appear but
of little value. But this Magnetic virtue of these Excrementitious parts, may,
in some sort, be also demonstrated by the property of the Mineral Lodestone.
As for Example.

IV. A Magneticall Demonstration.
We may rightly compare the mass of these superfluous Excrescences, unto a
lesser Lodestone, capped with steel: For when it is transplanted into the
Plant, it becomes of a greater force of attraction: For as the Iron being
added unto the pole of the Lodestone, though it be but weak; yet it does
fortify it, and makes it able to attract a far greater weight; for the Iron
gives it strength. In like manner, if Magnetic Excrescences, be grafted in
the body of the Magneticall Tree; then that Tree will suck and draw his like,
namely the spirit of defective limbs more strongly unto it; making them to
become vegetative, and to increase and grow, which before did pine and wither:
For the spirit sucked and continued by dilatation, from the member unto the
vegetative nature of the Tree, does indue the like nature; and does by a
continuity animate the fading spirits in the member, to increase, and vegetate,
or prosper in his growth. Now to prove this Magneticall relation, I will
produce certain Problems, touching the nature of the Lodestone.

1. Problem.
There is a strong Union in a Lodestone, Gilbert. lib. 2. cap. 19. Magnet.
armed with steel, and heavier weight may be by it taken up, than if it be not
armed.

Application.
The reason is, because vis unita est fortior; for the Iron adds force unto a
Lodestone that is weak, as is confirmed by this Problem.

2 Problem.
Ridley of the Magnet. c. 24.
If there be a thin plate of Steel or Iron held or fastened unto the nether pole
of the Load stone, between the Lodestone and the weight; then the Magnet will
lift up double, and sometimes decuple, or ten times so much again. And from
this practice came the capping or arming of the Adamant with Steel or Iron,
after diverse manners.

Application.
By the like correlation, If that the animal Magnet be armed with the vegetable
power, it will more forcibly attract unto it, spirits from the greater animal
Magnet, or rather the animal Iron. Also this Problem following is worthily to
be noted.

3. Problem.
Paracels. Tract. 3. de Philos.
Every Body unto the which the lively Mummy of another man is administered or
drunk up, does forthwith become a Magnet, and will be armed to attract his like.

Application.
And therefore the lively Mummy of the decaying member, being in part included
in the nails and hair thereof, and afterward conveyed into the vegetable body,
that vegetable body which receives them, is made forthwith magneticall, and
draws to it the spirits of the member, and does impart unto them of his
vegetable power. And also the magnetic Mummy in the hair and nails, though of
themselves they are but weak, yet are they made more strong and forcible, by
being planted in a stronger magnetic vegetable, so that the one does fortify
and enable the other. This is demonstrated by this Problem.

4 Problem.
A weak Magnet being rubbed at one of the poles of a stronger, will be bettered
by it in his vigor and virtue.

Demonstration.
Ridley in his Mag. Treat. c. 16
Also, set a Magnet of small force that can be perceived, upon a Lodestone of a
good strength and vigor, especially upon the poles, and he will show a vigor,
as if he were as strong as the stronger Stone is, whereunto he is united.

Application.
So by the like reason, we may transplant the superfluous excrescences, in
which there appears but a small sign of any magnetic virtue, upon a
stronger vegetable Magnet, or magneticall plant, and especially in his pith or
axil-tree, and he will show forth a magnetic vigor, equal unto that of the
plant, which appears in this, namely, because it does direct by his beams the
vegetable power, unto the decayed member. Now that the reference between the
tree and the member is caused by a spiritual continuity, it is made plain by
this magneticall Problem.

5 Problem.
Ridl. lib. c. 17.
If a long Iron be conjoined unto the pole of the Lodestone, and unto the end
of this another be laid, and at the end of that a third, and so forward, the
Adamant will, by virtue of his beamy emanating spirit, hold them all, or most
of them, according unto the vigor thereof, all touching one another, and
cleaving together like a linked chain.

Application.
Whereby it is evident, that as the spirit of the Lodestone is continuate, and
by his continuity is apt to fasten and join bodies in a union, from his center
unto his spiritual circumference; even so, by the emanation from the double
Magnet united in one, from their center unto the weak line or member, there is
caused and engendered a continual succession of vegetation in it, by degrees.
Now that two Magnets uniting their forces in one, do emit a more vigorous
emanation, and are endued with a greater magneticall force, it is proved in the
second Problem of the third Demonstration of the second Chapter, before
mentioned.

CHAP. VI.
Herein is proved, that vegetables contain in themselves magneticall spirits,
by means whereof, they do sensibly attract, as well from the Animal, as
Vegetable and Mineral kingdom: And it is first expressed by two Propositions,
and maintained by diverse experimental Demonstrations.

The first Proposition.
THere is a magneticall virtue, as well in the vegetable, as in the animal and
mineral, which does operate and act attractively, both on his like in the
vegetable, and also in the animal and mineral.

The first experimental Demonstration.
The experience hereof is manifold, and by that which has been related in the
precedent Chapter, that the magneticall relation or union which is made between
the vegetable and the animal, is sufficiently expressed, and shall be more at
large enucleated hereafter. Again, if one that has an Ague do take the herb
called Iberis, namely, a handful thereof, and put it into either of his shoes,
and walks upon it until he wax very hot, he will find, that it will draw a
great deal of waterish matter downward, and cure the ague. But (says my Master
that taught me) it is not to be cast in the way that man or beast does pass,
for the animal that treads on it will be infected, and be aguish. This
Christopher Schufzen, a German, did affirm that he had tried this, and found it
to be true.

2 Experience.
Joannes Carfmanus delivers it for a truth, that warts are taken away out of
the hands and other places, by taking of strawes, and cutting the knots in
them, and he prepares in that manner two for every wart, and the strawes must
be of a fingers length, which being thus prepared, you must put two sections of
the knots in this fashion X upon every wart, so that the nodes do touch
directly the warts, and they must strongly be pressed down; and this must be
done unto every wart with a double straw, as is already said. Then take those
strawes, and dig a hole under a spout or gutter, and cover it with a stone; and
you shall find (says he) that as the strawes do rot, so also will the warts
consume away.

3. Experimental Demonstration.
Mr. Balthazar Wagner says, that he has often tried this magneticall cure, in
the inflammation and redness of the eyes most true; Experiment of the Cammelion.
he takes the root of the common Mallow, when the Sun is in the middle of
Virgo, and applies it backward unto the nuke or nape of the neck, binding it
fast thereunto, averring, that it will attract and draw unto it with efficacy,
all the cause of the redness.

4. Experimental Demonstration.
As there is a kind of Lodestone called Evax, Plin. l. 37. c. 10
which Pliny does affirm to have a Magneticall power to attract flesh unto it;
So also in another place he tells us that there is another kind of Magnetic
Stone, called Sa^da, which has a property to draw wood unto it so strongly,
that they cannot be separated from one another, except the wood be cut off from
it. But leaving these things as uncredible, I will relate unto you, that
mutual love and sympatheticall affection, which (to my knowledge) has been
found between the Vegetable and the Mineral.

5. Experimental Demonstration.
There are diverse men which do work in the Mines in Germany, of which a couple
were employed about the Silver-Mines in Wales, who do use to gather at a due
season, a forked rod of the Hazel-tree, and holding in either hand one of the
two twigs in such manner, that the part where the fork begins to be
perpendicular etc. there is so great a sympathy between this vegetable and the
Mine, if it be rich, that the man that marches on the hill where the Mine is,
and holds this Hazelrod in this posture, shall presently perceive the top or
perpendicular of the rod to incline violently downward, when the man treads
on a place, where any Mine is; which is an evident Argument of the Magneticall
affection, which is between the one and the other.

6. Experiment.
A man that has many boils in his body, was counseled (when other things
would not cure him) by an old woman, to find out a bramble which grows out of
the earth at both ends, or both ends rooted in the ground: and this man was
counseled to creep in his clothes under the bramble backwards, three times,
and he was cured; so his boils vanished by little and little, in five or six
days. Mr. Fuller.

2. Proposition.
The singular order, and sympathy or antipathy of the vegetable parts between
themselves, is described and typically set forth, by a relation or respect, had
between it and the Lodestone; whereby is argued, that the vegetable and
mineral, and consequently the animal observe one sympatheticall, or
harmonicall proportion, as well in their sympatheticall order, as
antipatheticall irregularity in their disorder.

A Problem for the confirmation of the foresaid Proposition.
In all Magneticall things, be they vegetable or mineral, and consequently
animal; evermore nature does tend unto a convenient unity, both in nature and
position: and contrariwise, where their parts do not according unto the course
of nature, incline unto a conjunction, there happens a disturbance, and as it
were a diversity between part and part.

Demonstration in the Mineral Magnet.
Take a long Lodestone or Mineral Magnet, and let it be C, D; and let C, be
the North Pole, Gilbert. 3. lib. cap. 6. de Magnet.
B, and D, the South A; Then divide this long Lodestone in the middle between
the two poles, where the equator passes, namely in E, F, and E, will be South
or aequinoctiall unto the pole D, and F, unto the pole C. As therefore these
parts of the Lodestone did respect one another in their entire disposition; So
also nature tends after their division, to unite them again. And therefore
where the division is made, the end E, desires and coveteth to cleave and
adhere unto F. But E. will not be joined or have any commerce with D, nor yet
F, with C, and then one must convert C, unto D, and they will well agree and be
combinated together.



For D, turns to the South as before, and C, to the North. But E, and F,
which should be parts naturally conjoined, and united in the Stone, are in so
doing mightily displaced, so that they do not accord and unite together by a
material union, but they receive their motion and inclination from the form of
the Stone; So that the ends of this Stone, whether they are disjoined or
united, do Magnetically tend after one manner unto the poles of the earth, both
in its first entire and divided figure, as in the second; and the Magneticall
concourse F, E, in the second figure into one body, will be as perfect as that
of C, D, even as it was engendered in his vein, and F, E, as the flote in their
boat.

Application unto the Vegetable.
This self-same convenience and inconveniency of the Magneticall Form, Gilbert.
lib. 2. cap. 7.
which is noted to be in the Mineral Magnet, will also be observed in
vegetables: For take a wand or rod of a Willow Tree, or any other Plant, which
grows easily, and let it be A, B, and A is the uppermost part of the rod, and
B the lower part, next unto the root: divide this rod in the middle D, C: I say
then, that if the end D, be grafted again in the end C, it will grow. Also if
B, be grafted on A, they will be consolidated together, and sprout forth: But
if D, be grafted upon A, or C. upon B, they will be at strife, and consequently
will never grow, but one of them must needs dye, by reason of the preposterous
order and inconvenient position, because that the vegetative force or vigor,
which proceeds after one manner, is now diverted, and compelled or forced
into contrary parts.

I will say no more touching this point, but proceed unto the main burden of
these practical Magneticall Conclusions, with their infallible Demonstration.

CHAP. VI.
How the feisiblity and possibility of the Magneticall manner of cure by the
Weapon-salve, is produced, and demonstrated to be natural: The which that we
may the better effect, we will first set down our main Proposition touching
this kind of cure; and afterward elucidate and clearly demonstrate it by
evident proofs, derived especially from the virtue of the Lodestone.

The Proposition.
IF after the wound is made, a portion of the wound's external blood, with his
inward spirits, or of his internal spirits only, that have penetrated into
the weapon, or any other thing, which has searched the depth of the wound, be
conveyed from the wound, at any reasonable, but unlimited or unknown distance,
unto an Ointment, whose composition is Balsamic, and agreeing specifically
with the nature of the creature so wounded, and be in a decent and convenient
manner adapted, and, as it were, transplanted or grafted into it; the ointment
so animated by those spirits will become forthwith magneticall, and apply with
a magneticall aspect or regard unto the bearny spirits, which stream forth
invis^^bly from the wound, being directed thereunto by those spiritual bloody
spirits in the weapon, or other thing, which has received or included them;
and the lively and southern beams streaming and flowing from the wound, will
with the northern attraction of the ointment, so magnetically animated, concur
and unite themselves with the northern and congealed, or fixed bloody spirits
contained in the ointment, and stir them to act southernly, that is, from the
center to the circumference; so that by this reciprocal action, union, or
continuity, the lively southern beams will act and revive the chill, fixed, or
northern beams, which do animate the ointment with a magneticall virtue, and
quickened spirits of the ointment, animated by the spirits of them both, and
directed by the spirits which were first transplanted into it, does impart by
the said union or continuity, his balsamic and sanative virtue unto the
spirits in the wound, being first magnetically attracted; and they afterward
by an unseperable harmony, transfer it back again unto the wound. And this is
the reason of that sympatheticall and antipatheticall reference or respect,
which is by experience observed to be between the ointment and the wound, so
that if the whole space of the weapon that made the wound, be covered and
anointed with the unguent, and the unguent be well wrapped and kept warm, the
wound will find consolation, and be at ease; but if a part of the oynment be
pared away, or wiped off from the weapon, it has been often tried, that pain
or dolor will immediately ensue and afflict the wound. Moreover, if the place
anointed be kept temperately warm, the wound will also rest in temper; but if
it be uncovered, and left in the open cold air, then will it happen, that the
wound will also be distempered and vexed with cold.

Certain Problematicall Demonstrations, to prove the foresaid Proposition to be
true in every point, and consequently to manifest this manner of Magical cure
to be effected Naturally, and therefore not Cacomagically.
The particulars of the foresaid Proposition are easily proved and maintained
by such ocular demonstrations, as may be produced from the virtuous operation
of the mineral Lodestone, unto the which we may rightly compare all
magneticall bodies, with their actions, because they have their denominations
from the mineral magnet, and therefore this weapon-salve is termed by some
men, Un^uentum magnet^cum, and the cure is also called Magneticall. I proceed
therefore in my purpose after this fashion, to prove the Proposition
punctually, and therefore I divide it into members or portions.

The first member of those Propositions, with certain experimental Conclusions
from the Lodestone to confirm it.
First therefore we gather by the said precedent Proposition, that two
magneticall bodies of a like nature, may spiritually meet and conjoyne together
by a like natural inclination. And that the weapon wounding, or other
material penetrating, does imbibe the spirits, and is made magneticall.

1 Problematicall Demonstration, taken from the Lodestone.
Take two Loadstones, and place them in small wooden vessels, or boats of cork
or wood, and set them upon a basin, or tub, or cistern of water, so that each
of the Magnets may aspect one another, within the visible orb of his virtue,
and you shall perceive them sensibly to move, and as it were, to incite each
other to mutual embracement; so that at the contrary poles unto one another,
they will meet and unite themselves; which is an argument, that dissevered
spirits, of an identity of nature, do sympathetically operate and act one upon
the other, at a distance.

2 Demonstration from the same.
In the like manner, Gilb. lib. 1. c. 5.
if we shall place a piece of Iron in one little boat, and a Lodestone in
another, you will find, that the Iron will hasten with the like celerity unto
the Lodestone, being also in his small barck; for you shall perceive, that
each of them will be carried unto the other, and will the one stick and adhere
unto the other in the midway; and after that the desire of each of them is
accomplished, that is, after coition and union, they will stand still, and rest
in their consents.

3 Demonstration. 1 Problem.
One vein of Iron being rightly disposed, Gilb. lib. 1. c. 9.
will draw unto it another if the vein be rich, and of the color of Iron. As
for example, put one piece of the vein in his little cup, or small boat or
bark, as is said before of the Lodestone, and hold in your hand another piece
of the same Mine, somewhat near the other, and you shall find the other in his
bark to move unto it, but nothing so swiftly as will the Iron unto the
Loadstone.

2 Problem.
You shall find it also for a most true experiment, Gilb. lib. 1. c. 11
that if Iron be taken nakedly of it self, that is, not being excited by the
Lodestone, or any thing else, it will draw another Iron unto it, though not so
swiftly as the Load stone, that is vigorous; A trial is made thus. Make a
piece of cork round, and as big as a hazel-nut, and pierce it through the
center with a reasonable big piece of wier, till the middle of the iron be in
the center of the corck: put it into a quiet water to swim in, and apply it
unto its other end very near; but so, that it touches it not, the end of
another piece of wier; and you shall see, that the piece you hold in your hand
shall draw the other in the cork, so that as you move the one, the other shall
slowly follow. And this must be effected by the application of such of their
ends, as shall agree in their pole. The Demonstration is this:

Application.
By these examples therefore it is made evident, how the two spirits of like
disposition, or rather of one identity of nature, are apt and prone by a
natural inclination to covet and embrace their like, and that at a distance,
or space between each body, and consequently, that it is not the bodies that
acts. For they are divided and distant from one another; but the formal
spirits, which by an astrall emanation do sympathetically and lovingly, first
aspect one another, and then by an equal attraction, do, as it were, kiss and
hug together. And therefore it cannot seem strange or impossible unto wise men,
that the bloody spirits in the ointment, and those in the wounded person,
should at a far distance meet and apply together, by a sympatheticall aspect,
being that they are but one continued and indivisible quintessentiall spirit,
though altered in elementary property, even as the northern air is by the
north wind made to differ from the south, though all is but one essential and
indivisible air.

Touching the last branch of this Member, it argues, that spirits may be, nay
are imbibed by the weapon that wounds, which by this axiom of Paracelsus,
makes the place of the weapon which wounds a magnet, or magneticall. The
Problem is this.

3. Problem.
Every Body, after that it has imbibed the Mummy, which issues from man, is
forthwith made a Magnet unto him.

And this is proved Magnetically by this Problem.

4. Problem.
Paracels. Trac. 2. de Plilos.
Iron incited or touched by the Lodestone at the Pole, does draw unto him the
like of the Lodestone that touches it.

Application.
Now that the vital spirits of the wounded animal, do penetrate in the very
moment of the stroke into the weapon, and that the weapon does greedily suck
them in; it is proved by this following observation.

Some Country Chirurgions, not daring to search some deep wounds with a Probe,
do use to take the weapon that made the wound, be it sword, dagger, knife, and
such like, and put it into the fire; and though before you saw no difference in
the color of the weapon, yet after it comes out of the fire, you shall see
the place of it that wounded, altered in color from the other, by reason of
such spirits as it did imbibe. This is commonly found true by experience.

Another proof to maintain this, is, that if a Viper or Adder be cut with a
sword or knife, in pieces, the venomous, odious, and irascible spirit of the
Serpent will penetrate into the substance of the steel; which is confirmed by
this, namely because that if a man be afterward wounded by this weapon, that
did cut and divide the Adder or Viper, it will so invenome the wound, that it
will be made incurable, except an Antidote made of Adder or Viper be applied:
So also the Scorpion, being bruised and applied unto the wound, that is made by
the Scorpion, will cure it; as also an Oil made of the same.

The second member of the Proposition, with the proofs.
Secondly, that if a Magneticall body, be it animal, vegetable* or mineral, be
divided into parts, the spiritual nature of these parts do always tend unto
Unity, although these parts be divided far from one another: which is an
Argument, that they are no continued thing in spirits; and therefore one part
does directly cooperate and send out actual beams of sympatheticall identity
unto another, though the bodily divided parts be absent or distant in space
from one another.

A Demonstration to confirm this.
This is sufficiently proved, by the ocular Demonstrations, recited for the
confirmation of the first member; but more especially by the second
Demonstration of the eighth Chapter of this present Book: where I have showed
you, that if a long Lodestone be divided in the middle, between the two Poles;
that is to say, about the aequinoctial line, and each of these divided parts be
put to flote in his small vessel or bark on the still water. The influentiall
spirit, which is one in essence, and continued between them, does desire and
covet to unite the divided mineral bodies, whose limbs are by a wound or
Solution of continuity separated, and to reduce them into the natural estate,
they were in at the first; and for that cause B, and C; whereof the one is
Meridionall, namely B; and the other Septentrionall, to wit, C, which were at
the first continuated parts, but now divided, are by that unseparable Spirit,
which gives life unto both the parts, reunited, sucked, and drawn together,
and reduced unto the estate of their pristine continuity; that is, of two
stones they are made one; so that the portion of spirit in C, draws and
attracteth the bodily B, unto it, and the proportion of spirit in B, sucketh
and inticeth C, unto it: For we must note, that the unity of spirit, does
evermore desire and effect the unity of the body, in which it dwells; for the
quintessentiall or formal spirit, delights not in the variable disposition
of the airy spirit, and therefore coveteth to inhabit the close specificall
house or palace, which it did possess immediately after his descent from his
celestial starry parents. This is the reason, that one specific spirit is
most easy, yea, and rejoices to communicate with his like; but especially one
and the same spirit must needs act with, and never be absent from the other;
and therefore when the frozen, Northern, and as it were congealed nature is
incited and stirred up, by the aequinoctiall or Southern property, if it be
rightly adopted; and the Southern Iron's property is touched with the
Magneticall North Pole of the other, they will effect attraction the better;
and to this purpose speaks this Problem.

Problem.
If Magneticall bodies be divided, Gilbert. de Mag. l. 2. c. 33.
or any part broken off from the whole, each part so broken off, will have his
North and South.

And therefore each particle of Iron, or of the Load stone, being divided from
the whole, will have a Northern property, and a Southern, which does manifestly
confirm unto wise men's capacities, that the spirit of every Specific, yea, of
every individual, has a Northern and a Southern condition, and consequently
an attractive and dilative property; and not only the spirit of the whole, but
also of every particular of it (if it may be spoken) being that the formal
spirit is in all, and in every part.

Application.
Ye may therefore perceive by this, how possible and fezible it is, that the
spirit in the dead blood or weapon, being transferred, and as it were
transplanted at a far distance in the Ointment, as having a Balsome not
differing from the animal nature; Vznea staunch blood.
but especially in respect of the vegetable Salt of the Uzneas, in the which
altogether lurk spirits, which by the present application of the Southern,
lively, and warm spirits in the wounded man, guided unto it by the spirits
transported. or transplanted bood, does re-vivify, and cooperate with the same
spirit; not only in the stanching of the flowing blood, but also in the
healing and consolidating of the wound: as shall be showed you more amply
hereafter.

The third Member of the Proposition, is confi^med by these proofs.
Thirdly, that it is not the animal's external blood, but the internal in the
external; which being separated from his fountain, 3.
and transplanted on another unctuous stock, does operate Magnetically from the
stock on which it is planted, unto the fountain or spring, from whence it
flows. And it is maintained thus.

A Demonstration to confirm this first Problem.
It is not any corporeal thing, which flows from the Lodestone, or which
penetrateth into Iron, Gilbert. de Mag. l. 2. c. 4.
or that is poured, or extracted out of the Iron, being awaked by the
Load-stone's power: but one Lodestone disposes another, by an original or
primary Form; and the Lodestone does revoke, and disposes the Iron, which is
familiar unto his nature, together with it self, unto a formed vigor, for
which reason, the Iron runs unto the Lodestone, and does greedily conform it
self unto it, (each forces or vigours symphoniacally provoking).

Application.
Therefore it is a formal spirit, or subtle celestial influence, which does
operate mutually from the wounded body, unto the transported or transplanted
blood, and not the body, or the blood, or the air, or the ointment, in which
the transported blood, or bloody spirits are contained; so that the excited
spirits in the ointment, do apply their regard unto the beams of the exciter,
the north spiracle unto the southern; and so a union is made between the
spirits of the ointment with the adopted blood, and those of the wounded body.
And as we see, that by the concourse in the macrocosmicall air of the
north wind and the south, both spirits are united into one form, and are
magnetically, with their airy vehicle, contracted into a clowd, which
contains in it a formal fire or lightning, and a watery body: So the two
emanations do cause a contracted aerie spirit in the place of their concourse or
application, which does in his contraction attract the balsamic spirit which
the ointment does send forth; even as we see in the Weatherglass, that the
contracted air sucketh up with it the mass of the water, and yet the air so
contracted is not for all that visible. But this is further confirmed by this
Problem.

2 Problem.
Gilb. de Mag. lib. 2. cap. 4.
Iron is allured and drawn, only by the immateriall act of form, that is to
say, by an incorporeall proceeding, the which does act and is conceived in the
iron subject, as in a continuate homogeneall body: And this is the reason, that
Iron is moved and drawn unto the Lodestone, without being impedited or
hindered, by the interposition of dense and well-compacted bodies between them.
And again, Iron draws to it the Lodestone it self, and the concourse unto
unity is moved by a mutual consent and vigor, the which concourse is vulgarly
termed Attraction.

Application.
Here we see that reference, which is between the Magnet and the Mine, out of
which that spirit which does animate the Magnet is drawn; As for example, In
the forementioned Chapter, the spirit of the microcosmicall Mummy is in the
excrementitious excrescence transported unto the Plant; and so the plant,
animated by that spirit, becomes a magnet, which directs his vegetating
spirit to apply unto the spirit or beam of the weak member, etc. I come now to
the proof of the fourth Member.

The fourth Member of the Proposition is demonstratively proved thus.
Fourthly, that there is a spiritual penetration made from one body unto
another, before any magneticall operation can be effected.

Demonstration.
This member is sufficiently confirmed by that which is already said in the
other members, and yet it is more plainly expressed by this Problem.

Problem.
The Lodestone does guide and direct magneticall things, the which do conceive
vigor and force from it, Gilb. de Mag. lib. 2. cap. 4.
not only in their extremities, but also in their interiours, and very marrow:
As for example, A piece of Iron, so soon as it is touched or attainted with the
very breath of the Lodestone, it is excited magnetically at the end at which
it is touched or regarded, and that very power which it received by that touch,
passes quite through from the end touched unto the other, not only
superficially, but also centrally, and (as I may say) at the very marrow.

Application.
It appears evidently by this, that as the formal beams of one Lodestone
does penetrate unto the very center of the other, and the other again
reciprocally into the very center of it; so also the spirit of the wounded man
does penetrate, partly by emission from it self, and partly by attraction of
his like in the ointment, into the bowels of the ointment, unto the spirits of
his own kind that are hid in it, and reciprocally the ointment being made a
magnet by the imbibing of the Mummial spirits of the blood, applies his
attractive beams unto those, which are emitted from the wound, being directed
therein by the spirit of the dead blood in the unguent, as shall be showed
hereafter more at large.

The fifth Member of the Proposition, with the Proofs.
Fifthly, 5.
that the magneticall act and operation of celestial, astralicall or starry,
and influentiall spirits, are not to be limited, nor yet to be impedited or
hindered in their motion, if we look into the mystery of this business with
intellectual eyes.

We must distinguish this Member, for your better understanding, into two
several articles or branches, whereof the first must show, that the extension
of the emanations made from two astralicall or starry spirits, are not to be
limited by man's understanding, howsoever by an external effect, it may at
random be guessed at. These one shall prove, that such influentiall starry
beams, or quintessentiall emissions, as are sent forth from the Lodestone unto
the Iron, or from one Lodestone unto his like in nature, and consequently from
all other magneticall bodies, o^ like condition in essence, cannot be hindered
by the interposition of any solid or well-compacted bodies, as some Fool
losophers, rather than Philosophers, have ^emerariously averred in their
writings.

Touching the first, which includes the imaginary termination or bounding of
beamy or formal extensions, or emanations from magneticall bodies, within a
settled, or known limited sphere of activity, the impossibility thereof
(howsoever our Peripatetick Philosophers have feigned the contrary) is argued
by these following problematicall Demonstrations.

Certain Problematicall Demonstrations, confirming the contents of this Members
first Article 1. Problem.
The vigor in heavenly bodies, whereby they move themselves, does argue a soul
in them, and for that reason they are esteemed by the wisest Philosophers, to
be endued and animated with a divine act or spirit, by means whereof they move;
which being so, the extension of application of their beams must also prove
uncertain, and therefore without limit, being that their spirits, after the
emanation made, do concur sometimes in the air, sometimes in the water, and
sometimes, without resistance, they pierce even unto the center of the earth,
to operate upon the mineral Kingdom, bestowing on the earthly subjects that are
under them, of that very formal act and virtue, whereby they operate in their
acute penetration: And therefore these inferior creatures of a like nature,
are able to send forth and extend their astralaicall or beamy virtues as far,
and to apply their beams at as an unterminable distance, as their stars in
heaven are observed to do.

2 Problem.
It is rightly then said, that the Lodestone does move the Lodestone, and
does both dispose of one another by their primary form, which it receives from
his starry fountain. And therefore it was not any absurdity in the wise man,
Thales Milesius, nor yet any madness in Scaliger, to assign a soul unto the
Magnet, seeing that by it, it is centrally incited, directed, and carried or
moved circularly: As for example.

Example.
Gilbert. lib. 2. cap. 4.
If two Magnets be put one against the other in their small barks, upon the
water, they will not presently concur together, but first they do mutually
conform themselves unto one another, or else the lesser does obey the greater,
moving it self after a circular fashion, and when at the last they are
disposed, according unto their natural position, they run or concur together.

The like effect also will appear between the Magnet and the Iron, and the
Iron and the Iron; as shall be expressed hereafter.

An Addition.
Whereby, although it may be replied, that this Act of the Lodestone with the
Lodestone, or it with the Iron, does by effect seem to be limited, within a
certain dimension, and therefore what I say, proves not much as yet, for the
unbounded dimension of the Magneticall body's emanation. I answer, That the
sensible act, which is between the Lodestone and Lodestone, does not argue,
that because the two ponderous bodies, have their motion but at such a
distance, therefore their spirits can extend themselves, or apply their beams
no further: For it is one thing to operate sensibly, by a violent attraction of
a heavy mass, and another thing for one Form only, to embrace and concur in a
natural rejoicing sympathy with another. And this alteration, is verified even
of such as are well practiced in the Load-stone's property, by this following
Problem.

3. Problem.
The Orb of the internal or spiritual Magneticall virtue, does extend it
self at a larger distance, Gilbert. de Mag. l. 2 c. 33.
than the Orb of any sensible, or external, or visible motion can warrant:
For the thing that is Magneticall, is effected in the extremity of it, a far
off, although it does not move by a local motion: But if the Lodestone be
applied nearer unto it, then will also the whole Magnetic mass move corporally
unto it.

Whereby is acknowledged, that the virtuous extention of the Magnet, is far
beyond the limits of the Orb of visible Magneticall motion. But I will prove
it by degrees more evidently, namely that the starry influentiall virtue in the
Magnet, extends it self beyond the limits of any sensible capacity.

4. Problem.
The needle touched Magnetically, will aspect the North Pole, even from the
aequinoctiall point, Gilbert. de Mag. l. 2. c. 33.
which is an Argument of the unlimited extention of the Load-stones virtue. As
for example: Let there be a long Lodestone prepared, and directly in the
middle upon the aequinoctial B, where the Axis runs, plant an incited
needle, and it will look directly unto the North Pole A. Also if within the
Orb you place another incited needle without the Stone in C, it will also look
directly upon the said Pole: whereby we may discern, the long distance which is
between the aspect of the Magnet, and that of the incited body, namely 90
Degrees.

Again, each part or fragment that is divided from the Magnet, (be it animal,
vegetable, or mineral) has therefore the self-same dimension, because it is
as well endued with his polar virtues, as the whole. And this is sufficiently
testified by this Problem.

5. Problem.
If Magneticall subjects be divided, or any piece be broken off from it by any
means, Gilbert. de Mag. l. 2. ^. 33. Ri^ley c. 2^.
every part so broken off from the whole, will have an end as well
Septentrional as Meridional, as well as the whole had. As for example: If a
smaller part or piece be taken out of a greater Lodestone, it will be endued
which the same life and vigor, which the whole Magnet had, no otherwise then the
child will, touching his life wholly correspond with the Father in life and
parts; and it will be as it were a new creature, and will have his poles and
aequinoctial as well as the whole Stone had. Ridley c. 17.
Also if an Iron-rod, as is that of the Curtain be hung up, and have his
position North and South, without being touched (for being to god North and
South, it will indue those properties, namely the polar virtues, and move in
the air being hung up by a thread, or put into a boat on the water, unto the
North and South; If (I say) a small piece of the rod be broke off from the
North part, it will have his North and South-pole, as well as the whole rod of
Iron from the which it was broken.

Whereby it is apparent, that if every portion or fragment of the Lodestone or
Iron, have his pole as well as the whole, then the spirit which is within, has
his relation or application with the Northern pole star of the great world; and
does also behold the Southern Virtue, with his South-pole; for except there
were the Scintil of the Anima mundi, which is in it and operateth in it,
according unto the small proportion of it, no otherwise then it does in the
great world, it could not aspect each Pole, as it is observed by experience to
do; and consequently as the actions of the Anima mundi are so catholic, that
they cannot be limited; so are the spiritual, quintessentiall, or astralicall
Emanations. I prove it further thus.

6. Problem.
If you take an Iron rod, made of good Iron, and hang it up in the air on a
thread, as if it were touched with a Lodestone, etc.

The Experience is this.
Take a straight piece of Iron or steel of six foot long, and a finger thick,
hang it up in a close chamber, Ridley.
into the which there comes no wind, (and therefore this experiment ought to
be tried when the air is calm, and the day not windy; and must hang on a
silken thread, which is not twisted but woven; and the Iron must hang directly
equilibrous, or in an equal balance) and you shall discern it slowly to move,
and by little and little to attain with his extremities or ends of the points
of North and South, no otherwise then the needl's do in the Dialls, which are
touched with the Lodestone.

Moreover, we shall find that the Lodestone, or any thing else, that is
touched or excited by the Lodestone, will direct their aspect, being planted
in small boats, on the needle on his vertical unto the North Pole.

The Conclusion.
Wherefore it is made manifest, that the extention of the Load-stone's
spiritual or formal Emanation; as also that of other Magneticall bodies, is
not to be limited, being that they do act and apply their beams, unto the very
state of the Pole Star, and the Pole Star by his like emitted influences, does
operate reciprocally and apply unto or aspect the Lodestone, and so make a
continuated Spiritual union betwixt them, being that we ocularly discern, that
both it and the Iron, does diligently, and with a manifest Sympathy aspect, and
actually move unto the said star. And then, after this is well considered, let
us but think and ponder the distance, which is between the Pole Star and the
Magnet, namely betwixt the eighth Sphere, and the earth, and he will perceive
it to be in a manner infinite and incommensurable, and consequently the emitted
beams of the Lodestone, cannot by any fantastical Sphere, of sensible and
sensual Philosophers, be comprehended or limited. But if the act of the
Pole Star on the Magnet be denied. And Fracastorius his opinion, with that of
many other learned men, be received, namely that the Lodestone, the Iron, and
the needle touched, do tend unto the North Pole, by reason of the attraction of
certain Rocks of Lodestone, which are in the Hyperboreal mountains; if this
opinion (I say) were admitted to be true, yet may we see by it, that the act of
the Magnet, and the actual respect, which the Magneticall body bears unto
it, is not to be limited; being that so they will be observed to cooperate
from the aequinoctiall, unto the Northern Hyperborean Rocks. But this opinion
has been proved false by us in another place, and shall hereafter be
demonstrated by us to be so. We will now come to our Application, touching this
first Article.

Application.
The first and second Problem teaches us, that there is such a celestial or
astralicall subtle spirit, in all magneticall bodies of the earth, as is in the
heavenly ones, and consequently, that the beams of each of them may penetrate
as far, though they be not discerned by sense, as the beams of each star. By
this therefore we may be assured, that man's heavenly spirit being of a more
pure and subtle a stuff, than is that of the Lodestone, may send forth the
astralicall beams of his virtue, not only to the mark that the Lodestone
aims at, but also unto the highest throne of divinity. Again, hereby it is
argued, that the spirit in the transplanted blood, is able to operate at any
distance on the wound; and the beamy spirit of the wound again, to cooperate,
and have a continuated union and respect unto one another.

The third instructs us, that though the ointment and blood in it do not
appear mobil or movable at a far distance, yet they may cooperate and be
conjoined with the spirit of the wounded, at an unknown proportion of space,

By the fourth and fifth we learn, that the extension of the northern bloods
aspect unto the southern, may be so far, as the aequinoctiall is from the pole,
namely, 90 degrees. But, I say, that as the northern and southern emanation of
the soul of the world, fills all the cavity of the world, so also by it, and
in it, may this act of that soul in man extend it self, far beyond the capacity
of flesh and blood and therefore is only intellectually to be understood.

By the fifth, that each particle of man's blood, or spiritual Mummy, being
divided from the whole, has all the parts or proportions in it ideally
described, that the whole has, and therefore does operate as well with a
northern, as southern aspect, and consequently draws down from the heavens a
like property, as occasion is given: For so this one Spirit is said to come
from the four winds, and yet it is but one spirit in essence, Ezekiel. 36.
though fourfold in property; for it was by the virtue of it, that the dead,
mentioned by the Prophet, did rise again. And therefore so far as the north
wind or south winds extension may be, so far is this spirit in man able to send
forth his spiritual beam.

I will come now unto the proof of the second.

Touching the second Article, which shows the acute penetration of this
spirit, and that it is effected without any impediment, contrary unto some
ignorant persons opinion, who think, that castles, stones, woods, hills, and
such like, may hinder the penetration of this subtle and all-penetrating
spirit: The proof is made by these problematicall demonstrations.

Demonstrations confirming this Member's second Article. 1 Problem.
Gilb. de Mag. lib. 2. c. 4.
Neither fire, nor water, nor earth, can hinder the ingressive action, or
piercing virtue of the Lodestone upon the Iron, being it is proved by
experience, that it sucketh and draws it unto him quite through them; as for
example, If a candle, or flame of fire, be interposed between the Lodestone,
and a small piece of wire, you shall find the piece of Iron will leap quite
through the flame unto the Lodestone. Gilb. de Mag. lib. 2. c. 4.
In like manner, the Needle on his turn-pin, will, for all the interposition of
a flame, turn unto the Lodestone, and that with the same celerity that it
would do in the open air. So that you may see by this experiment, that the
coition of these magneticall bodies are not hindered by fire. Also if water or
earth be interposed between them, it will do the like.

There is another Problem, which expresses the unresistable penetrative virtue
of this, more effectually, in these terms.

2 Problem.
Iron is allured only by an immateriall act, or an incorporeall process, which
does operate, and is conceived in an Iron subject, as in a continuated
homogeniall body, and therefore it has no need of large or wide passages: And
for this reason, the Iron is moved and drawn by the Lodestone it self; and
again, the Iron does draw the Lodestone it self, and a concourse, or a meeting
together in a unity, is made by their beams, although that think bodies be
interposed as sticklers between them.

So that you see, that the putting or applying of think sub^tances between the
Iron and the Lodestone, cannot hinder the coition of spirits; which is a
token, that the influentiall or formal spirit cannot be impedited in hi^
^otion. And therefore ^his subtle spirit, which has his beginning from the
soul of the world, is said by the wisest Philosopher, Omnia permeare entia, ^o
pass or travers all things.

But yet more plainly.

3 Problem.
The Lodestone, Gilb. de Mag. lib. 2. c. 2.
without any frication or rubbing, or being exsiccated by heat, or perfused
with moisture, in the air in the water, does provoke and allure unto it
magneticall subjects, and also solid as well-compacted bodies, as thick boards,
or tables of stone, or gross plates of mettle, as silver, gold or brass, being
put between.

And Ridley says, Ridley in his Treatise ^f Magneticall bodies, cap. 14.
That although such substances as be not magneticall, be placed between the
Needle and the Lodestone, yet they cannot hinder the orb and proceeding of
the magnetic vigor: As for example, If a Lodestone should be placed in a box
of wood, stone, tin, silver, or brass, yet the Loadstone will extend his
magneticall orb.

Application.
I conclude therefore by this typical expression, that the emissions of man's
vital spirits are so subtle, and so piercing, that no interposed bodies are
able to hinder it in its motion to his pretended mark, nor yet the magneticall
blood in the ointment being excited, can be hindered in his concou^^e o^ union,
with the same southern ^r vivifying spirit, and that especially, because the
formal spirits of the one is continued and homogeneal unto the other. I
proceed now unto the sixth Member of the foresaid Proposition.

The sixth Member of the Proposition, with the Proofs,
Sixthly, that after a Body (be it Animal, Vegetable, or Mineral) is made, by a
transplantation of another bodies spirits, magneticall, or a magnet, unto that
other body; it does, by attracting of its beloved's spirits unto it, impart
unto them of that virtue and property, which appertains unto it self;
insomu^h that as the lover does participate with the nature of the beloved, so
also the beloved does partake and share with the lover's condition, especially
if they be homogeneall in kind, and reciprocal in affection.

Certain Problematicall Demonstrations, to confirm this member of the foresaid
Proposition. 1 Problem.
Quodlibet corpus cui Mummia viva in alio homine propinatur, Paracels. Tract.
3. de Philos.
illico fit magnes: Every body, to whom the lively Mummy from a man is given or
administered, is forthwith made a Magnet.

Application.
This Problem is animal, and not mineral, but it infers, that by the
transplanting of man's bloody spirits into the ointment, the ointment is
forthwith become magneticall and attractive; even as before I told you, that
the hair and nails being planted or grafted on the Oak, make it forthwith, by
communicating of the spirits of the one with the spirits of the other,
attractive and magnetic.

2 Problema Magneticum.
The Lodestone has nothing, neither can do any thing, which the Iron being
excited cannot do; and that not only by contact, but at a reasonable distance.

Application.
Neither can the live man's spirit perform any action, that the dead blood
transplanted in the Salve, by the Magneticall assistance of the Salve, cannot
perform: yea verily, it goes yet further; for it inspireth into the wound a
Sanative influence.

3. Problem.
Iron being touched, does recreate another Iron, and instructs it unto
Magneticall motions; Gilbert. de Mag. l. 2. c. 4.
so that it draws unto it a third. As for example: The Lodestone being
applied unto A, it draws unto it the piece of wier B; and also after B, it
draws C, and after C, it draws D.

Application.
The Iron B, is compared unto the spirits, that are first animated by the
lively spirits in man, and that animates the Oyntment's spirits, which are of a
Microcosmicall nature, by reason of Uzneas volatile salt, which is the
receptacle of such vegetating and vivifying Spirits as give life unto man, save
only they are of a Northern property, and as it were dead: These spirits in
Ointment are referred unto C, which work and operate, being so excited in D;
which imports the emitted spirits of the wounded man: so that we see, that it
is but one and the same continuated Spirit, which puts into action the three
several Subjects, and their spirits, namely the blood transported, the
Ointment and the Body of the wounded.

4 Problem.
Gilbert. de Mag. l. 2. c. 4.
The Lodestone and the vein of Iron are all one, and have all one matrix, and
are found in one Mine as twins; yea, and the robust Magnet, has Iron in it.
And therefore the Iron which is extracted from them both, has all the
Magneticall virtues, as well in the vein, as being made by separation, but more
weakly, except it be excited by the Lodestone, and added unto it by capping:
For so it will be stronger in his Magneticall power, than the Lodestone it
self.

Application.
In like manner, the blood in the wounded person, and that which is
transplanted to be purified, and comforted in the Ointment, came out of one and
the same vein, and have all one matrix, and therefore that extracted blood,
has in it all the Magneticall virtues, but more weakly, and more in puissance
than in act, except it be excited by the Southern fountain of blood, and capped
with the Balsamic nature of the unguent, For being so prepared, namely incited
and addressed, it will have his own Northern power, and that Balsamic and
attractive virtue of the Uznea, is so powerful in his Northern Saturnine
condition, that it suddenly seals up and arresteth by congelation, the
Southern blood that flows; even as the Northern wind converteth the air into
fix, and immobil snow or hail.

5 Problem.
Gibe^t. de Mag. l. 1. c. 16.
The Load stone and the Iron, among all other bodies that are known unto us, are
more near in nature and condition unto the earth; for they have in them a
substance that is most genuine and homogeniall, and approaching unto the earth.
And therefore these three do agree in nature together.

Application.
By this it appears, what near reference there is, between the body of Man,
which we compare rightly unto the Earth, and the blood which issues out of the
veins of the Earth referred to the Load stone, and the Ointment endued with a
bloody spirit, and which was extracted out of blood: For the fat and the Uznea,
and Mummy were of blood: For Scriptures tell us, that the Soul of the flesh,
and consequently of the fat and bones, is in the blood. Whereby we may see,
that though these three do differ in bodily Substance, yet they agree in the
homogeniety of spirit. And therefore it is no marvel, though there is a
continuity between the spirit of the bodily blood, and that transplanted;
neither also ought we much to wonder at the natural commerce, which is between
the bloody spirits, and the Ointment, that so sudden a union should be made
between them, and that it should forthwith become a Magnet, adopted only in
his Balsamic and sanative operation: for the wound, being that it is guided
and directed by these bloody spirits, which are transplanted in it, and, after
animation, did convert the beams of his nature unto his like, being as near in
spirit and property unto the wounded man's blood, as is a piece of Iron, or
Lodestone, which is broken from off the whole, which accords in every
respect with the spirit of his Father, from whence it sprung. So also we see,
that though the Macrocosmicall air does seem to va^y in nature, according to
his position, (for the Northern air is cold, the Southern or aequinoctiall is
hot); yet it is but one spirit, howsoever it is divided into this o^ that
cloud. And again, the internal or formal Spirit, which animateth diversely the
four winds, is but one and the same indivisible spirit, (as the Prophet Ezekiel
tells us). In like manner, it is but one and the same identity of spirit,
which acts in the wound, the conveyed blood and the Ointment, being all
three, as it were but one blood, Acts 17.
as the Apostle taught the Athenians, that all men came of one blood, and
consequently of one spirit in the blood. I prove it also by this Problem.

6. Problem.
Attraction is made in the primary bodies, and these are nearest unto one
another, and of a mutual consent, among themselves, by reason of their
identity, in condition. And for this reason the Lodestone draws the
Lodestone, and Iron draws Iron, and earth of them all draws earth; and
again, each of them draws another.

Application.
Hence therefore is gathered a reason, why blood draws blood, and one body
his like, and the Ointment being animated by one and the same nature, does
attract his like unto him. And therefore Paracelsus says justly, Quodlibet
corpus, cui Mummia viva in alio homine propinatur, illico fit magnes: Every
body that drinks or takeeth inwardly the lively Mummy of another man, is
forthwith made a Magnet. And therefore we may say justly, seeing experience
has made it manifest, that every Microcosmical Ointment, that has imbibed or
comprehended the spiritual Mummy of another man's blood, is forthwith made a
Magnet, and by the incitation of the Mummial spirit, which it contains, does
greedily thirst, and covet after his like. And for that reason draws, and
allureth it unto it; thereby to impart as well unto it, as it does communicate
his vivifying property unto his attractor. I could say much more, to prove the
reason of the strong attraction of this Ointment, after it is animated with the
live man's spirits: but I shall be too redious; and again, I shall touch it in
the consequence; and for that reason, I will leave this member to proceed to
the seventh.

The seventh Member of the Proposition with the Proofs.
Seventhly, that the Agent which causes the Alien or strange body, much more
that which is of his consanguinity, to be come Magnetic, and affectionate, or
concupiscible, and that by a kind of proximity in nature, is the bloody spirit
transplanted into the animal unguent, or vegetable plant, (of which I have
spoken before) the which spirit also is the director or guider unto the
unctuous Magnet, to operate magnetically upon the subject, and his spirit from
whence it was derived; the which spirit, if it be strong and potent, it works
potently; if debil or weak, it operateth but weakly.

Certain Problematicall Demonstrations, to confirm the Member of the foresaid
Proposition.
This Member, for the better explication of our purpose, we must divide into
three Articles or Particles, whereof the first shall prove, That the
transplanted spirit makes the unguent, into the which it is committed, a
Magnet unto the wounded person: The Second, That it is the only guider and
director of the ointments force, and conductor of his balsamic faculty unto
the wounded spirit: And the last shall demonstrate, how a weak and impotent
spirit operateth but weakly of it self, and yet by the assistance of a sounder
and stronger nature, it is refreshed, and becomes strong again.

Demonstrations confirming the contents of this Members first Article.
Touching the first Article of this Member, which makes the transplanted
spirit the cause, that the ointment is magneticall, we prove it thus.

1 Problem.
Gilbert. de Mag. l. 2. c. 25.
Experience has taught us, and Baptista Porta confirms so much, that if a
weak Lodestone be hid in the dust of Steel for a season, it will become more
strong and powerful in his attraction, also the Steel will be bettered by his
nature. But Paracelsus comes more near in his relation, and says, That by
heating of the Lodestone, and extinguishing of him in an oil of Crocus
Martis, which is made of the best Carinthian Steel, so often, till it will
imbibe no more, it will so corroborate this Lodestone, that it will have ten
times more force then it had, in attraction,

Application.
By a like relation, the weak spirits in the transplanted blood being imbibed
by the animal unguent, which has the self-same relation unto the spiritual
Mummy in it, as the oil of Crocus Martis has unto the weak spirits in the
Lodestone, will be revived and recreated in his magnetic vigor, and being
mingled with his unctuous like, will make a compounded Magnet, which will draw
his like spirits more strongly by far, then it could before. Again, as the
small or weak Magnet does recover force, by being buried in the dust, or
ferruginous earth, which is of his nature; so also the bloody spirits being
interred in the unctuous earth of his own nature, does by the attraction of his
like from the fountain of blood, and of the salutary spirit from the ointment,
so unite it self unto the ointment, that it creates by emanation a fit Magnet,
which communicates his balsamic nature unto them both, and by attraction of
the spirit of the wounded member, it renders it self medicinable; so that by a
continuity and integrity of spirit, it conferreth, through an immediate
spiritual contact, the balsamic spirit of the Uznea, and other unctuous
ingrediences, into the wound. Do we not observe, that the water which passes
or runs by a heap of salt, does endue wholly the virtue of the salt, though
the stream of it be long, and does communicate that nature from one extreme
unto the other: And much more the air will carry the nature of the place it
passes by afar off, and yet all that air so animated, will be continuate, and
therefore much more that subtle celestial spirit which does inhabit the air.

2 Problem.
Gilbert. de Mag l. 2 c. 4.
Iron being touched, does recreate other Iron by touching it, and instructs it
unto magneticall motions.

Application.
By the like proportion in the Animal kingdom, the transplanted spirit being
first animated by his southern or living fountain, does animate and recreate
magnetically the unguent, so that it does operate upon the wounded man's
spirit, being emanated and attracted unto it by bettering of his wounded
nature, through his balsamic emission.

3 Problem.
Set a Lodestone of no force or strength that can be perceived, Ridley in his
Treatise of the Lodestone, c. 16
upon a Lodestone of good strength and vigor, especially upon the poles, and
he will show a vigor, as if he were as strong as the other Lodestone,
whereunto he was united; but after he is taken away, he will be as weak as he
was before, unless it be done again often. The self-same effect follows, if a
piece of Iron be placed on a strong Lodestone, but take it away from the
Stone, and almost all the virtue will be lost.

Application.
In the like manner, the weak northern blood being transplanted into the
ointment, and applying it self unto the lively spirit's emanation, by the
preservation and corroboration of the ointment, waxes strong, and draws or
operateth effectually, rendering the whole ointment magneticall. But if it
happen, that the ointment be either pared off from the place of the weapon, in
which the spirits did penetrate, (as Sir Bevis Thelwel did prove on the ax that
wounded the Wheeler) or be struck or wiped off, (as did happen unto the ax that
wounded the Ship-wright, by the striking down unadvisedly of Sir Nicholas
G^lburn's hilt of his sword) then it will leave his virtue which it received
from the bloody spirits in the live man, and the balsamic uncture of the
unguent; and therefore will the wound by that division, be as dolorous, or more
painful, than before: But if the ointment be reapplyed unto the place again,
and it be wrapped warm, the magneticall concourse will be renewed and the
dolor will forthwith cease, as it has been tried by many; and this distemper
is not made by the cold air only, causing a chill dolor in the wound, but
also by the heat of the fire it becomes inflamingly or burningly dolorous:
For Mr. James Virot, sometimes my servant, but now Apothecary unto the Queen,
and dwelling in Blackfriars, did this last year make of the unguent; and for a
trial, did wound with his Lancet a man in the arm, and afterward did anoint
the Lancet, and applied it to the fire, that the ointment melted, and the
Lancet waxed hot; and it so fell out, that at that instant the wounded person
found so great a burning pain in his wound, that he could not endure it; and
then immediately he anointed it again, and the wound was forthwith pacifick,
and healed immediately. The Apothecary is extant, and will be ready to maintain
it. The same is better confirmed by this Problem.

4 Problem.
If a weak Magnet be rubbed at one of his poles with a stronger Lodestone,
Ridley, ibid.
it will be bettered by it by his vigor and virtue, if not augmented in power.

Application.
The very same proportion of action, is between the Mummy in the nails and
hair, and the vegetable Magnet; as also between that in the transplanted blood,
and in the ointment: for the vegetable Magnet or Oak did reduce the occult and
secret Mummy in them, from puissance unto act, by opening the closets of
nature, no otherwise than the earth does the grain of Wheat by rotting; and
even so also is the potentiall or northern nature of the spiritual bloody
Mummy, being extracted and reduced unto action, by the unctuous earth, or
magnetic ointment.

5 Problem.
Ridley c. 19.
If the magneticall Needle, being first touched with a Lodestone, be made
red-hot in the fire, it will lose all his polar puissance or virtue, and
directive faculty; but if it be freshly touched again, it will recover his
virtue and act again.

Application.
So by converting the Proposition for eadem est ratio contrariorum, the reason
of contraries point at one and the same. If the transplanted blood, which was
touched magnetically with the spirit of life, be frozen or congealed with cold,
it loses all his strength, and operative and directive virtue; but if it be
conforted by the ointment, and re-animated with the Southern or vital spirit,
as before, it will not only wax alive and act again, but also render the
ointment magneticall, and direct it in his course unto the member affected.

6 Problem.
Ridley, Treatise of Magnetic bodies.
If there be a thin plate of Steel fastened unto the nether pole of the Magnet
or Lodestone, namely, between the Lodestone and the way of it, then the
Magnet will lift double, and sometimes decuple, or ten-times so much as it did.
From this practice began the capping or arming of the Lodestone with Steel or
Iron, after diverse manners.

Application.
So is the translated northern blood rightly compared unto the Lodestone, and
the Ointment to the capping or arming with Iron: For by uniting the frozen
blood unto the Ointment, the attractive power and Magnetical force is far the
greater, and is able to suck and draw strongly unto it, the Southern spirit of
lively blood in the wounded. I prove this better, by this Problem following.

7. Problem.
If two Load-stones, armed with two teeth a-piece be set before us; the one
being strong the other weak, or much less, whose Axis or Diameter betwixt the
teeth is equal, and of like length; then set the teeth of these together, that
came from contrary Poles and parts, and the stronger will apprehend and lift up
the weaker; and the weaker being united, and incorporated with the stronger, by
the virtue that it receives from the stronger, will lift up from the ground,
and retain the stronger and greater very firmly; although he be much heavier
then the weight which the small stone does ordinarily lift up.

Application.
By this Mineral type we are taught, (by changing the measures of weights into
proportions, in vigor of spirit) that the frozen, evacuated, and transported
bloody spirits, being capped and armed with the Ointment, whose nature is as
near as the blood unto the spirits, is made a Magnet so puissant, that it is
able to attract unto it self, the bigger and stronger bloody nature, by
applying to it the lesser Magnet's Northern nature, and as it were his
Northern-pole, unto the bigger Magnets Southern nature; for by that means in
the mineral kingdom, a natural Union is made, as is proved by this Problem.

8. Problem.
Ridley. ibid.
There is a natural Union, and a violent and depraved Union; and the natural
is, when the coition is made by contrary Poles, as by the North pole and the
South. Again, that the strongest attraction is from the North Pole, this
Problem does confirm.

9. Problem.
The North Pole is the most strong and vigorous pole, Ridley c. 6.
to all Magnetic intents and purposes, if he have the quantity that the South
has.

Application.
Whereby it is evident, Ridley c. 6.
that the Northern nature; which is in the unctuous Magnet and his influentiall
spirit, is by far more attractive than the Southern or warm spirit; neither can
the Southern or aequinoctial draw unto it, but as he participates of the
Northern nature, by a natural concurrency, unto his like; and that is the
reason, that the natural Union, is said to be where a concurrency is made of
opposite polar natures: For from them is the strongest attraction made; because
that it is the nature only of cold to contract; as contrariwise, heat does
dilate. This polar force therefore, is conclusively maintained by this Problem;
with the which I conclude this Article's proof.

10. Problem.
The Load-stones that be capped, Ridley c. 24.
take and apprehend at the Pole only.

Application.
As who should say, that the Northern or congelated Mummy, capped or armed with
the Ointment of his own nature, and the Southern or lively Mummy, capped with
flesh, do apply Magnetically unto one another at the Poles; namely the lively
Mummy, at the Southern or aequinoctiall, and the weak and frozen at the
Northen; and therefore the manifest attraction is from the unctuous Magnet, and
his imbibed Agent.

I now come unto the second Article, 2. Article.
or Particle of this Member.

Demonstrations confirming the Contents of the Member's second Article or
Particle.
As concerning the second Article of this member, which shows that the
spiritual Mummy of the transplanted blood, is the director and guider of the
Ointments Magneticall force, or vigor unto the wound, at what distance soever;
I demonstrate it, by these problematicall assertions following.

1. Problem.
The Lodestone does guide and direct Magneticall things, Gilb. de Mag. lib. 2.
c. 4.
which do conceive vigor and force from it, not only in the extremities, but
also in their interior and veiny marrow. As for example: So soon as a piece of
Iron is apprehended, it is accited Magnetically into the end where it was
touched, and that very force so bestowed upon it, penetrateth quite throughout,
even unto the other end or extremity, not only superficially but also
centrally.

Application.
By this Example it is proved, that the formal Mummy of the blood, operateth
in the very like manner with the Ointment; which is to it, as the Iron is unto
the Lodestone; so that as the Lodestone by touching the Iron, makes it after
the imbibition of his spiritual vigor a Magnet; So also after the imbibition
of this bloody spiritual Mummy, the unguent becomes a Magnet: Forasmuch as
it is thoroughly animated with a Magneticall vigor. And does by virtue of this
Mummiall soul, direct his beam and Balsamic force, unto the fountain, from
whence that Mummiall spirit did arise. I prove the direction to be true, by
these other Problems following.

2. Problem.
One Lodestone does dispose of the other, one does convert the other, and
reduces it in his order, and guides and directs it into his Concordances,
and when they are met and joined together, they do mutually adhere firmly unto
one another. The example is evident: For if you take two Irom wiers of a
length, being excited at the ends by contrary Poles, and thrust them through
round corks, as big as Hazel-nuts, and put them to swim in the water; you shall
find that they will by little and little order themselves, and the Northern
spiritual contact of the one, will first direct his axil-tree, and after draw
the South-pole unto it, until both meet one another, in the manner of two
Tilters or Hors-men with their spears.

The Demonstration. Application.
The spiritual Mummy in the transplanted blood, is one Lodestone, which does
dispose the Ointment in such a manner, that it becomes a Magnet also; and this
Magnet is directed by the spirit of the Mummy into the concordances of the
spiritual Mummy, which breaths forth of the living wounded man, which i^
attracteth and uniteth, and partly participateth with his vivifying force, and
partly communicates with him of his Balsamicall spirit; which by reason of his
continuity with the wound, it does easily, though invisibly transfer unto the
wound. I proceed now unto the third Article or Particle of this Member.

Demonstrations, confirming the Contents of this member's third and last
Article or Particle.
As for the third and last Article of this Member, which shows, that a weak
and impotent spirit operateth but weakly of it self, 3 Article.
but by the assistance of a stronger nature, it is recreated, and becomes
vigorous. And lastly again, it is also confirmed by many sufficient
Problematicall conclusions, which are produced from the Load stone's properties.

1 Problem.
A Lodestone loses his attractive virtue, and does, as it were, decay with
age, if it be long exposed unto the open air, Gilb. lib. 1.
and not kept and put into the filings or scales of Iron.

Application.
Gilb. lib. 1.
Also the lifeblood, so soon as it is effused out of his warm mineral veins,
and tastes of the cold air, loses his active virtue, and becomes dead and
congealed, except it be with the weapon conveyed unto his ointment, which
keeps it from the cold air, and serves the spiritual Mummie's turn to
preserve it, as the filings of Steel does the formal spirit of the Lodestone.

2. Problem.
Baptista Porta did take a Lodestone, and kept it in the filings of Steel a
good while, and afterward he found it more vigorous and efficacious in his
attractive virtue. Also Paracelsus, by heating a Lodestone, and imbibing it
with the oil of Iron, did increase the vigor of it by many degrees, as is said
before.

Application.
In like manner, if the spiritual Mummy in the transported blood be but weak
or faint, yet if it be kept a while in the animal salve, it will become
vigorous, insomuch that it will also animate the whole salve.

3 Problem.
Set a Magnet, of no force or strength that can easily be perceived, upon a
Lodestone of good strength and vigor, Ridl^y's Treatise of Magnetical bodies,
c. 17
especially upon the poles, and he will show a vigor as if he were as strong
as the Lodestone is, whereunto he is united; but after he is taken away, he
will be as weak as before, unless it be often done.

Application.
So also if the spirits, transported with the blood, be planted on a found and
balsamic unguent, it will gather strength; but if the unguent be either wiped,
or pared, or melted off from the weapon, it will immediately lose his force.
And again, if it be freshly anointed, and covered warm, it will be forthwith
recreated again, as is said before. Moreover, this is also confirmed by this
Problem mentioned before.

4 Problem.
If a weak Magnet be rubbed at his poles with a stronger Lodestone, Ridley,
ibid.
he will be bettered by it in his vigor and virtue, if not augmented therein.

5. Problem.
A stronger and bigger Lodestone does augment the force of a lesser, Ibid.
if it be put on the pole of the greater Magnet, for then will the north pole
of it be the more vigorous

Application.
The strong blood and spirit in the wounded man by aspect, makes the weak
blood and spirit, which is transplanted in the ointment, to operate
magnetically, and to apply and direct the spirit of the unguent unto it
strongly, which it would not do, without the union which it has with its
fountain, which is more lively, agil, and robust.

The eighth Member of the Proposition, with his Proofs.
The eighth Member of this Proposition is, that in all magneticall operations,
there must be a reciprocal application or aspect, made between the lover and
the beloved, as between the matter or feminine which coveteth,, and the form or
male which is coveted; and by a likeness or continuation of formal spirits,
like is united unto his like, which acts in the matter. So the Boreall
spirit, with his unctuous material body, coveteth and allureth effectually the
formal and aequinoctiall beams, or emanating spirit of the wound, and
directs the unctuous Magnet to bring to pass the effect of his concupiscence,
which is easily effected, being that there is a continuation between their
spirits. But to our Proofs.

Certain Problematicall Demonstrations, to confirm this Problem. 1 Problem.
The magneticall coition is an act of the Lodestone and the Iron; Gilbert. de
Mag. l. 2. c. 4.
not of one, but of both, like man and wife.

Application.
As the woman that is colder, and of a more northern nature, does covet the man
which is of a hotter and southern disposition, so also by a sympatheticall
likeness in either's spirit, they meet and unite their seeds of affection: In
the very like manner, the cold spirit in the congealed blood, coveteth the hot
spirits of the lively and active blood, and after each of them are met, they
unite natures, and procreate a third, as a child, which partaketh of them both.

2 Problem.
The first virtue of the primary form in the Iron, was at the first distinct,
but is now confused, Gilb. ibi^.
by the fusion or melting of his body, when the magneticall or iron-vein was
examined; and yet nevertheless, after that a whole and strong Lodestone is
applied unto, it returns again unto his former act; for his form being
disposed and ordered with the magnet, they both do conjoyne together sociable
forces, consenting magnetically and mutually unto unity in all motions, and are
adjoined together without any corporeal contact, and consequently are made all
one.

Application.
The self-same is the reason of Contraries, and therefore the self-same may be
said touching the extremity of cold, which is, in the Problem, reported of the
extremity of heat. We say therefore, That the blood, which, whilst it was in
his natural vein, was distinct in his action, is now, by pouring it out into
the cold air, made confused, and void of any manifest formal action; but when
by the assistance of the ointment it is stirred up, and applied again, unto the
spiritual emanation of the strong blood, it is rectifyed again, and does
conjoyne his nature with the adopted power it has from the ointment, and so a
union of both natures is made, whereby the wound's spirit does participate with
the balsamic nature of the Mummy. Again, in the true nature of the said
Problem, without any conversion of proposition, the bloody spirit in the
^nguent became confused through overmuch heat, as it appears by Mr. James
Viret his experiment, in holding the Lancet by the fire, after it had wounded,
and was anointed.

3 Problem.
Gilb.
Two Load stones being disposed into severed Boats, and placed on the
superficies of the water, if they be sufficiently placed within the orbs of
their virtues, they will with mutual affection prepare themselves for a
meeting, and at the last embrace or adhere unto one another.

Also if an Iron be fitted in one Bark, and a Lodestone in another, the Iron
will hasten in the very same manner unto the Lodestone, and also the
Lodestone being in his Bark, will move unto the Iron, insomuch that either of
them are carried from their places in such a manner, that at the last they are
joined together, and so do rest, as being well satisfied and contented in their
loves.

The like also will be effected, if two wiers, excited by the Lodestone, be
put through like corks, and placed on the water to swim; for you shall see them
make love to one another, and moving by little and little, they will sensibly
meet, and with their ends strike and touch one another.

Application.
Ridley c. 14.
In like manner, the Northern or congealed blood, or bloody transported Mummy,
by the conduct of his unctuous vehicle, which is also by his presence made
Magnetic, does covet the Southern union, of the living and moving bloody
spirits of the wounded, as Matter does Form, or the female does the male; and
because the spirit is continuated betwixt them both, as the air is continuated
betwixt the North Pole, and the South aequinoctial in the great world, though
each extremity be of different natures, namely the one cold and dry,
congelative, attractive, and immobil; the other hot and moist, dissolutive,
discussive, and mobil, or agill; therefore they easily do concur, and meet with
a sympathetical embracing.

4. Problem.
Ridley c. 22.
The natural union of Magneticall Spirits, is, when the condition is made by
contrary parts, as by the pole North or South.

Application.
So the Northern blood or the spirits in the transported blood, that are
congealed, and have assumed a Northern property, will easily concur with
spirits of a Southern or aequinoctial nature, namely with the spirits of the
lively fountain, from whence they come, being that like does naturally covet
his like; especially when it is compassed about by the cold and crude air, and
so constrained to contract it self with its airy vehicle from his cold
adversary: for spirits that are derived from the aequinoctial, do eschew by a
natural instinct, even as the airy nature does, the chill disposition of the
earth; and therefore being fled or contracted into the Center, it draws unto it
the lively beams of the Southern blood. This is the reason in the Macrocosm,
that when the North Wind blows strongly, and the South wind not so strongly,
the air is often times condensed into a cloud, by the contraction of the
fiery, formal, and aequinoctial or astrall beams in the air so condensed;
which, by reason of the outward cold, do fly from the air's Circumference unto
the Center: Insomuch, that for this reason often times it is seen, that it
breaks out into Lightnings and Coruscations. This contraction also in the
included air, when the external air is cold, is easily discerned in effect,
by the Wether-glass, namely when the water is drawn up, and the included air
contracted or coarcted into a narrow room.

The ninth Member of the Proposition, with his Proofs.
The ninth member of the Proposition is, that the strong attractive faculties
of every Magnet is of a Northern condition, or Boreal property, and
consequently has his chief attractive faculty from the pole star. And
therefore after the manner of the Lodestone, it draws from the Circumference
unto the Center. Again, all things coveted or beloved; forasmuch as they are
formal, do participare of the aequinoctiall faculty, which emitteth beams by
dilatation from the Center; and therefore their union by application, makes a
mixtion of temper, which is between the Northern-pole, and the aequinoctial,
that is partly attractive, and partly dilative, as is man's vital spirit, which
acts in Systole and Diastole, or contraction and dilatation, even such is the
Act of Magneticall coition.

Certain Problematical Demonstrations to confirm this Member.
First, I will prove unto you demonstratively, and that by a relation made unto
the Lodestone, that the most vigorous Magneticall attraction is from the
North Pole and consequently that by the blood's induing of a Northern and
congelative faculty, it must needs become most attractive and contractive of
his like, as we see that the movable and thin expansed air becomes thick
Snow, when the North wind does blow, or ice, or frost, or hail.

1. Problem.
The North Pole is always the most vigorous and strong pole, 23. Ridley c. 6.
to all Magneticall purposes, if he have the quantiry the South has.

Application.
Therefore the bloody spirit induing the natute of the North, is most
efficacious to operate upon the Southern nature Magnetically or attractively.

2 Problem.
The Loadstone draws the Iron more strongly from the North Pole, Gilbert. de
Mag. lib. 1.
than any point else of the said Stone.

Application.
This confirms the foresaid Problem. To conclude, the Magneticall attraction
of the Northern blood, is the cause of planting the light of more spirits in
the unctuous Magnet; whereby it is made stronger in his operation.

3. Problem.
The Loadstone has his points, Gilbert. de Mag. l. c. 4.
that is to say, his true poles, in the which do abide his greatest virtue. And
for this cause it does not attract the Iron with equal force, from every part;
and also the Magneticall Subject does not move or flow unto every part of the
Magnet.

4 Problem.
The parts that are nearest the North Pole, are the strongest in attraction,
and the parts that are remote, are observed to be the weaker and more infirm in
their drawing virtue.

Demonstration.
Now that the greatest attractive virtue is from the North, I demonstrate it
many ways. And first, If we shall hang up a long piece of Iron, by a thread
(as is said before) the Northen part of the world will attract unto it, the end
of it; So that it will stand directly North and South.

Ridley c. 14.
Secondly, if a wier of four or five inches in length, be thrust through a cork,
and touched by the Lodestone, and the cork be put into the water, the
Northern-Star will suck the end of the Iron unto it.

Ridley c. 17.
Thirdly, if a long Iron be forged North and South, and so be laid to cool in
the same situation, it will be animated and endued with the virtue of the Pole,
and move in the air, being hung up by a thread, or put into a boat on the
water, and it will be drawn by the North, and have as it were a coition with
the North-star.

Ridley ib.
Fourthly, if a long piece of clay newly burnt, does cool North and South, it
will then receive a Magneticall power from the earth, and pole.

Ridley ib.
Fifthly, set two Load-stones with their poles of one denomination, namely the
North Pole or South-pole of each, at each end of a piece of clay, while it
cools, and both ends will be of one nature.

Ridley.
Sixthly, put a piece of clay of a long form into the fire, and afterward let it
cool North and South, and it will receive a polar virtue: After that burn it
again, in the fire, and let that end which cooled first North, cool now South,
and it will be changed into the nature of the South, and the other into the
nature of the North.

Application.
By the first therefore of these Problems and experiments, it is apparent, that
the fountain of vigorous attraction is from the pole; because that the property
of Northern cold is to attract, and therefore the bloody Spirit induing the
nature of the North becomes Magneticall, as well as that of clay or Iron.

I will come now therefore to demonstrate the effect, that this Northern
spirit, and the Southern, do make by their mutual concourse and union, as we
see that the Northern and Southern-pole by their intermediate concourse, do
produce an aequinoctial nature, which is vernall, and temperate; that is to
say, hot and moist, as is the living blood; So that a Media natura, or mean
nature, which participates of both extremes, is produced between the confluence
of their aspect or application, which receives from the one, and communicates
with the other. My magneticall proofs are these.

5 Problem.
Ridley c. ^9.
Two magneticall bodies being joined together at their poles, those two poles
that touch together, have the nature of the Equator or equinoctial, and will
not excite or hold a needle thus touching.

Application.
The northern or contracted bloody spirit, joining by application with the
southern equinoctial, or lively or dilated one, will endue by this conjunction
an equinoctial nature, which will have relation unto each extremity, namely,
by receiving from the ointments spirits, and giving or imparting them
sympathetically unto the wound.

The tenth Member of the Proposition, with his Proofs.
The tenth Member of the Proposition is, that by a lively southern spirit, a
portion of his like being made, by effusion of it into the open and cold air,
weak, drooping, northern, or congealed, may, after transplantation, be revived,
quickened, and corroborated; and so by returning again unto his southern or
equinoctial nature, may, by a sympatheticall union, be made all one
homogeneall nature with the lively bloody spirit, conferring along with it by
little and little the nature of the plant or animal mass in which he is
grafted, and so may cause each extreme nature to participate with the symptoms
of one another, be they good and salutary, or bad and dolorous.

Certain Problematicall Demonstrations to confirm this Member. 1 Problem.
If a Magnet of no force or strength, that can easily be discerned, be set on
the pole of a Lodestone that is strong, Ridley. c. 16.
he will show a vigor, as if he were as strong as the Lodestone is, whereunto
he is united; but after he is taken away, he will be as weak as before, unless
it be often done.

Application.
The Southern blood penetrating through the unctuous Magnet, does animate it,
and by animation does revive it, and as well preserving the transplanted spirit
from the external aire's inclemency, as calefacting or heating of it by his
attracted southern nature, it does revive again the dead spirits of the
fainting blood so transported, even as we see the spirits in the dead grain of
Wheat buried in the earth, is by the earth animated with the Sunbeams, being
revived, as it were, from death to life. But if that a part of the ointment be
taken away from the place of the weapon, where the blood does stick, or the
bloody spirits did penetrate, then will the revived spirits faint again, and
the wound will be dolorous as it was before the blood was buried in the
ointment; even as also, if the earth be removed from the vigorous spirits in
the dead grain, they will fade, and the plant will not grow and multiply. But
if the ointment, animated as before, be re-applyed, the wound will prosper, and
heal without pain; no otherwise also then if the earth, that was removed from
the revived spirit in the grain, be re-applyed unto it, suddenly it will
prosper again.

2 Problem.
If a weak Magnet be rubbed at one of his poles with a stronger Magnet, Ridley,
c. 16.
it will be bettered by it in vigor and virtue, if not augmented therein.

Application.
This typical proof does confirm also exactly the same member, namely, the
lively spirits will vigorate fainting-ones.

3 Problem.
The Magnet will lose some of his attractive virtue, and will, as it were,
languish with old age, Gilb. Mag. l. 2.
if it be long exposed unto the open air, and be not put again, and reserved
or buried in the filings of Iron.

Application.
So also man's blood effused out of his Mine, Gilbert. de Mag. l. 2. c. 4. and
lib. 1. cap. 16
and exposed into the open air, does languish, and becomes weak, if it be not
preserved in the weapon-salve, which is of his nature.

4 Problem.
One Iron being touched does recreate another, and instruct it unto magneticall
motions.

Application.
So the Mummiall unguent, animated by the emitted beams of the lively blood,
does recreate, incite, and corroborate the spirits in the transported blood.

The eleventh Member of this Proposition, with his Proofs.
The eleventh Member is, That the alteration of the air does operate equally
upon either extreme, which is an evident argument of a continued unity in
spirit, between the transplanted blood in the ointment, and the wound; so that
what passion the distempered or unclement air operateth in the one, is felt by
the other, no otherwise, than if a thread be tied at both ends of a Gallem, the
one end being touched, the other end does sympathize, or act likewise by
consent, which is an evident argument, that the air is the medium or vehicle,
in which the spiritual influence does pass; and that the said formal,
celestial, or influentiall spirit which is carried in it, does, by an
immediate contact, communicate with the distempers of its airy vehicle, and, by
consequence, it is by that means changed by turns and by portions, into a
northern or southern disposition. And therefore by the external air's cold, it
sucketh spirits from the wound, and leaves it distempered and dolorous, it
being by that kind of attraction deprived of some natural heat. So that
sympathy is turned into antipathy, as it appears, when the ointment is taken
off from the wounding place of the weapon, either totally, or in part, as is
said before.

Certain Problematicall Demonstrations, to confirm this Member. 1 Problem.
In the Weather-glass, so often mentioned before, you shall find between the
bolts-head or mattras above, and the water below, a continued air in the neck
of the glass; and you must imagine, that such included air is not without his
sulphurous spirits, which by dilatation of themselves, do also dilate the airy
vehicle they are in, and with the dilated vehicle the water is stricken down;
and by contraction of themselves, the airy vehicle is also contracted, and the
water is sucked up. And yet we see, that the air which is between both
extremes, is all one continued air from the one extreme unto the other, and
therefore much more the occult and celestial sulphurous spirit, which
dwells and acts within it, and is as the soul in a body, in toto and in
qualibet part, and that indivisibly, or not separated into parts. And because
this included acting spirit being but one in number, is derived from the soul
of the world, Look as the general works in the great world, namely, from the
north or from the south; even so also does this member of the general operate
in his included air: For if the catholic spirit of the world acts or
breaths from the north, and brings forth in the air, congealative and
contractive effects, then the centrall spirit in the glass does operate
likewise after the same manner, for it contracteth his vehicle, and sucketh up
the water: But if the world's catholic spirit blows from the south, then is
the air, before contracted, now again dilated; and then also will the included
formal spirits in the glass operate after the same fashion, and dissipate or
extend out their airy vehicle in a larger proportion or manner, as by ocular
observation you may discern in the said Instrument.

2 Problem.
The north wind blowing in the great world, continues the essence of his blast
from north to south, but the nearer that it approaches the equinoctial line,
the more weak is his effect in contraction and congelation, agreeing in this
with the Magnet or Lodestone, whose parts the nearer they are unto the pole,
the more potent are they in their operative or attractive power; and the
farther they are off, the more infirm and debil they are. But this emanating
spirit from the north to the equinoctial, is one and the same spirit in
essence, although in property it varieth in his parts. Likewise the south wind
having dominion, does send out from the equinoctial unto the north his blast,
without any discontinuance of his essence; and yet the nearer it approaches
unto the north, the weaker is his force in dilatation and dissolution, and yet
the spirit is one and the same in essence with that of the north; for it is but
one anima mundi, or vivifying spirit of the world, which the Platonist esteem,
to have his dwelling in the Sun. And David says, He put his tabernacle in the
Sun. And therefore the winds are called by some Titanei filiI, the sons of
Titan or the Sun. And the Prophet argues as well the Unity as the Omnipotency,
Ezekiel. 36. Wisd. 36.
of this vivifying Spirit, where he says, Veni, Spiritus, a quatuor ventis,
and insuffla interfectos istos, ut reviviscant: Come, Spirit, from the four
winds, and breathe upon these slain persons, that they may live. Where he
argues, that it is but one essential Spirit, which (as Solomon says) fills
the world, and is in every thing of the world; but after a manifold property.

The conclusive Application.
We conclude therefore, that the spirit in the wounded man's blood, not
exhausted, and that in the blood exhausted, is all one spirit in essence,
howsoever it vary in property; and therefore being continuate and indivisible
in essence, it is no marvel though it acts from one extreme unto another
diversely, namely Magnetically and attractively from the Ointment: for there by
reason of its absence from the Southern or lively blood in the body, it indueth
a Northern nature, and sucketh or attracteth his like, being emanated in the
air, and the Southern-pole or aequinoctial point by dilatation, sends out
his spirit to be attracted; and so there is made a communication betwixt the
Balsamic nature, and the wounded, the self-same spirit operating diversely. And
I will express unto you a notable example in the great world. When the Sun is
beyond the aequinoctial Southward, (which happens in the winter) then is the
Northern nature most powerful in attraction, congelation, and inspissation on
this side the aequinoctial. As contrariwise, the Southern nature is most
vigorous, and efficacious in dilatation, dissolution, and subtiliation; and yet
you shall plainly discern, how one and the same Spirit in the world, does
operate from the one extreme unto the other: For when the Sun in the South,
does dilate the air and the waters there, which the precedent winter had
thickened and incrassated by attraction of cold, and by dilatation does
dissipate it, then that air and water so dissipated, requires a larger place,
and flies from the aspect of the Sun Northward. And again, the Northern
property of the same spirit, being now in the winter time most potent, does by
attraction suck and direct Magnetically, those spirits, which are chased from
the South; and the nearer it draws them unto the pole, the more suddenly it
condenseth them into clouds; which by reason of the Sulphurous nature, which
it brings from the Summer or aequinoctial, do immediately dissolve themselves
into rains. And this is the reason that the Southern winds are so rife among us
in the winter, and consequently, that we have so much rain in that season; So
that we may see how the double property of one and the same spirit, does
operate at one and the same time, about the effecting of one and the same
thing, in one and the same catholic air of the world: as I have told you
before in my foregoing Discourse, As also, in the ascending or descending of
fountains in each Hemisphere, the like is effected. All which is most lively
demonstrated and performed in the Weather-glass; as I have expressed before.
Whereby it is confirmed, that being the Microcosmicall spirit is all one in
condition, with the Macrocosmicall. It follows, that though the body of it be
divided, yet the spirit remains indivisible, and can dilate and contract it
self at any extention; as is proved by the properties of the two contrary
winds, whose spirit is continued from both extremities; and by the small pieces
in the Lodestone, which have their complete poles as well as the whole. Also
by this, a man way see, that this spirit's operation, is not to be limited by
any of the Peripateticks imaginary Sphere of activity, and consequently that it
may work at any distance, being directed and guided by a right and homogeniall
Magnet; that is to say, agreeing at the leastwise in speciality, if not in
individuality or both; as the blood of the wounded, which is transplanted, and
that in the body, both which are identity in nature; and also as is the Uznea,
and Mummy in the Ointment, which is of the same Specific, though not of the
Individual.

You see therefore (Learned Reader) how plainly this business, or the foresaid
Proposition, has been demonstrated, as well by the Lodestone, as the natural
practice in the great world, and in practice of the Weather-glass; which I term
my Demonstrative Instrument. But because there are some strange accidents,
which happen in this cure, by chance and unlooked for; a reason whereof, could
never hitheto be expressed: I will speak a word or two of them in a second
Proposition; and so I will end this Chapter.

The second Proposition.
It has been observed, in the cure of wounds, by the Weapon-salve, that if
there happen in the time of the cure, any issue of blood from some other part
of the wounded man, as bleeding at the nose, pissing of blood, or by some other
wound; or else if he have to do with any menstruous woman in the mean time, the
force of the Ointment will be diverted, and the efficacy of it will stand but
in little stead* and the reason that I can give, is, because the Southern
bloody spirit, which, reigning in the veins, did emit and direct his beams unto
the Ointment, was easily attracted, and imbibed by the Ointment: but when that
spirit is diverted and turned another way, and is attracted by a contrary
Magneticall Subject; then will a divorce, as it were, be made by the second
Magnet, betwixt the emanating Spirit and the attractive in the Ointment. And I
will maintain and demonstrate this to be true, by this Magneticall experiment.

A Problem to confirm the Proposition out of Gilb. lib. 2. de Mag cap. 31.
Two Load-stones or Irons excited, rightly cohaering by the coming of another
fresher and stronger Lodestone or Iron excited, do make an abort; and the new
commer will easily drive away the other, with a contrary face, and will command
him; and so the endeavor or the desire of the other two, which were first
joined, will end.

Application.
Thus you see, how fitly these two do concur, namely the fore-recited animal
act, with these of the mineral. I end this Chapter with this Assertion. Spirits
that have their subtiliation and action from natural heat, do act livelily; so
long as they abide within the sensible Orb of Light's calefacting beams, being
stirred up a centro ad circumferentiam. But if the said Spirits depart or
wander out of the Orb of Light, and are environed by the cold act of darkness,
then they contract themselves from the Circumference unto the Center, and so
resting in the Center, do cease to act except they be incited or provoked by
the virtue of heat, which does subtiliate, and by subtiliation make both
extremes alike. As is proved by the Weather-glass, and by blood issuing out of
the wound, etc. as is said before. Wherefore I will boldly conclude, that the
spirits of the blood, conveyed either in the body of the blood, or sucked up
into the wounding weapon, or in a stick, knitting-needle, probe, or suchlike;
may be evoked, extracted, or revived, and united unto his fountain; partly by
preserving it from the external aire's inclemency, till it be dissevered by
comfortable warm heat of his kind; and partly by the lively coition, or
concurrence, and conjunction of his like, by a favorable and salutary aspect.
I have been (I fear me) too tedious in this Chapter; and yet not longer than
the business does rightly deserve; considering how the world has been
puzzelled, and all Philosophers put to their wits end, about the due search and
enquiry of this curing exploit: Forasmuch as they in the concluson, were able
to say so little, and to demonstrate less to prove this manner of cure to be
natural; that they gave way without controlement, unto the rash and
temerarious censures of such self-conceited persons, as would (forsooth) have
this kind of cure, to be only Cacomagicall, and Diabolical; which they
insultingly go about therefore to maintain; because great appearing
Philosophers, which did write in the defense of this Subject, could say so
little, and to so small purpose unto the contrary. I will speak a few words
concerning some other Histories, which are, and may be referred unto the
selfsame manner of cure.

CHAP. VII.
How it is possible by Natural and Sympatheticall operation, that a D'sease in
the Blood may be cured, only by transplantation of the excrements thereof at a
far distance, into a vegetable earth; not vegetating, but comforting the
infected nature, by mortifying of the disease.

The Proposition.
IT is possible, that an infectious disease in the blood and body may be cured,
by transplanting of the excrementitious whay of the blood, to wit, of the sick
party's urine at a far distance, in the ashes of a vegetable, which is proper
to comfort nature, and to kill and destroy the infection which does debilitate
it.

An experimental history to confirm this.
There is a Nobleman of no mean rank, and very wise, religious, and one of
the best esteem* who uses commonly to cure the yellow Jaundies at the distance
sometimes (as he has related it unto me) of an hundred miles, and that only
by means of the sick parties urine translated unto him, and the manner is this:
He takes the ashes of a certain Tree, commonly known among us here in England,
and mingleth the urine with it, and causes his man to mould it up in the form
of a paste, the which is divided into lumps, which he causes to be framed up
into 3, 7, or 9 balls, and in the top of each of the said balls he makes a
hole, and puts a blade of Saffron into each hole, and so fills up the hole
with the said urine; and then he puts or disposes these balls into a secret
place, where no body may meddle with them, and immediately the Jaundies in the
patient, be he further or nearer off from the place of the medicine, will by
little and little fade and wear away. And this experiment has been tried on
above a hundred poor and rich, and many of them were such as Physicians have
dispaired of. This not only he, but also the noble Ladies his daughters, who,
for Gods sake, have in this case done good to many poor people, do affirm to be
true. And thus much I can affirm my self, that being called unto a Chirurgions
wife, Anno, 1637. after that other Doctors had been with her, but to little
purpose, who was filthily infected with this disease; and having used some
medicines, but to little purpose, at her request, I sent her man into the
country with a Letter unto that noble personage, to implore his help: But in
the interim that the urine was sent, the woman was persuaded by some sincere
fools, that it was witchcraft, which made her half mad, and to rave, and to
use her man hardly at his return: Whereupon I sent a messenger forthwith to
desire his Lordship, to undo what he had caused to be done, because of the
ingratitude of the woman. He sent me word, that he would; But, said he, it will
be but in vain, for it will cure her, do now what I can: And indeed she mended
immediately upon it. Also there was a noble Lady, daughter unto a Lord, who was
much infected with the same disease, and finding that usual remedies in
Physic did her little or no good, I sent her water unto the said noble Earl,
who did his endeavor: But when I found, that the disease did stick still upon
her, though her urine did amend in color, I took horse, and did certify that
noble personage of the small effect the medicine had. He wished me to send it
again, and the sick Lady did send her water the second time, and did forthwith
begin to mend, and within a few days was perfectly well. There is another,
who, unto my knowledge, has cured forty of this disease, by boiling of their
water or urine away on a gentle fire; things (God he knows) far enough from
either superstition or witchery.

Certain Problematicall Demonstrations, to confirm the probability of this
Proposition. 1 Problem.
The nails and hair of the sick party being taken, and put into a hole that is
bored in an Oak, and the Oak being stopped up with a peg of the same wood,
cures an Atrophiaticall or wasted member, as is proved before.

Application.
And therefore much more the serous matter which is separated from the blood,
because the essential vegetable salt of the blood in the specific, in which
are some scintills or sparks, is mingled with it; and by virtue of them, there
is a continuated sympathy or respect between the salt and sulphur in the
balls, and the infected blood: For (as I proved in the precedent Chapter) the
spirit in the urine is as continuated with that in the blood, as was the spirit
of the wounded and the ointment; so that by a continuity and union of consent,
the curative faculty of the vegetable ashes does operate spiritually, as well
upon the infected blood in the body, as upon the urine; and therefore that is
the reason, that as the salt in the ashes do work on the salt in the urine, so
do both of them communicate their forces by a mutual consent, through the
reason of the same continuity, unto the blood; so that as the virtue of the
plant with the Saffron do kill and poison the infection in the urine; so also,
by the mutual consent which is betwixt the two infecting extremes, namely, the
blood and the urine, the infection also in the blood is observed by little and
little to dye, wither, and decay. But I will produce unto you a magneticall
Problem, to confirm the possibility of this Proposition.

2 Problem.
Two Load-stones rightly cohering at opposite poles, by the coming of a
stronger Lodestone or Iron incited, do make an abort, and the new commer will
easily drive away the other which is with a contrary face, and will command
him, and so the coherence or union of the other two will cease or end.

Application.
So that union which was made between the spirit infected, with the corrupting
humor and the corrupted blood is separated, and the unnatural is forced to
fly and depart from the natural, by the help of another, which is more potent
then the unnatural, which is less homogeneall, and proper to rectify and
purify by the union of his spirit, the impurity in the natural blood, and to
kill and mortify the corrupter in the urine.

I need not to say much more for the proof hereof, being that the precedent
Chapter does fully confirm, and that by relation had unto the Lodestone, and
Weather-glass, in every particle of this Proposition, being that as blood is
transplanted from the wounded parties fountain of blood, and, as it were,
grafted on the ointment; so also is the urine with bloody spirits, transferred
from the bloody fountain in the icteritious person, and is planted or placed in
a bed of salutary ashes, from whence it operateth no otherwise in the living
blood, then the blood or spirits in the ointment do, in the veins of the
wounded person.

I will now proceed unto the microcosmicall Magnet, which is taken out of the
living man: and I purpose to describe unto you briefly, and in general terms,
the wonderful effects in sympathy, which it produces by his extraction of the
spiritual Mummy out of man's body, and by the transplantation and right
application thereof.

CHAP. VIII.
Wherein the secret Magnet, which is extracted out of the Microcosm, or Man yet
living, is in general terms mentioned; with the manner of his attraction or
extraction, of the spiritual Mummy out of Man, and the application; and as
well the Antipatheticall as Sympatheticall operation thereof.

I Will now in few words relate unto you a History, of the abstruce manner of
healing by Transplantation; which if it be rightly considered, it does far
surpass that of the Weapon-salve: For it does not only cure at distance, as
that does; but it operateth that feat, by the vegetative spirit of the plant.
And yet I hope that my Story shall no way sound unto Wisemens ears, as
Cacomagicall, but only naturally Magical, and therefore ordained by God to be
wrought upon in the right use thereof, for man's good and salutary benefit: For
unto that end did the Spirit of Wisdom teach those which were inclined unto
wisdom (as Solomon witnesses) as well those things which are occult and
hidden, as such as are manifest and apparent unto man's sense. And because that
good things may, by abuse, be converted unto evil and unlawful purposes; as a
sword, to kill as well as to save, as shall ^e told you hereafter; Therefore is
it God's will, that these mysteries should be hid from the unlearned, or at
leastwise from such of the vulgar, as are wickedly minded; and ordained them
to be laid open, unto such as are honest, wise, and discreet. But leaving all
preambles, I will come to the point, and proceed with that style and method, in
which I began.

The General Proposition.
There may be extracted out of a living man, without any prejudice unto his
health, a Magnet, which by a several application of it unto convenient parts of
the body, will draw or suck out according unto the pleasure of the Applier, the
animal, vital, or natural spiritual Mummy, out of one and the same living
Man, and that without any detriment unto his person, the which being rightly
with the Magnet that imbibed it transplanted and made vegetative, will operate
as well by an internal administration as at a far distance, or by a spiritual
emanating relatition, after it be duly ordered and adapted, both to the health
and preservation; and infection, and damage, and destruction of mankind.

An Explication of every Member of this Proposition.
This Proposition does consist of many Members; whereof the first, touches the
generation, condition, and preparation, of the Magnet. The second, the manner
of application, for the extraction of the spiritual Mummy. The third, opens
the fashion of a manifold Transplantation of that Mummy, being so extracted:
and lastly, as well the usages as the abuses thereof. Of all which Particles or
Members, thus in order.

Of the Microcosmicall Magnet.
We term this the Microcosmicall Magnet, because it has the properties of the
Mineral Lodestone. And it may therefore easily be conjectured and guessed, by
such as are wise in their apprehension, what it is, by comparing the animal
Magnet with that of the Mineral: For as the Mineral Magnet is not of a
natural, but monstrous birth, for it is not engendered of like and equal
Genitors; but is begotten after the manner of the Mule, being that her mother
or passive corporeal mass, is a common Saturnine and stony Mercury; but his
Father or active Form, is a Metalline, Sulphurous, Martial spirit; So also this
our Microcosmicall Magnet does consist of a Sulphurous Martial spirit, being as
it were his Formal Father; and of a strange or foreign Mercury, which is
nevertheless, a near neighbor in position, and condition unto the
Microcosmicall Mercury, as his passive or Mercuriall matter. As for the Mine of
which it is extracted, it is the living Man, and it is taken or derived from
him without any prejudice unto his health, and after a certain preparation of
it, it is made a fit Magnet, to suck or draw unto it the spiritual Mummy out
of the living Man, and that without any detriment unto his health.

The Manner of this Magnet's application, for the extraction of the Spiritual
Mummy.
As for the manner of its application, it is this; We take the Magnet so
prepared, and, if we would extract the Animal's Mummiall spirits, we must apply
it unto those places, which are aptest for their evacuation. As for example: If
we desire the Mummy of the vital parts, then we must adapt our Magnet to suck
at that place, which nature has ordained to purge the vital region. Lastly,
if we would have the natural spiritual Mummy, we must apply it unto that
place of the body, out of which nature is accustomed to send forth the
spiritual fumes, or sweaty evacuations from that member, namely from the
Liver. To conclude, if you would make a general Medicine, which should respect
the animal, vital, and natural parts, all at once; then must your Magnet be
applied unto them all, and after that it has sucked a sufficient proportion,
then ought you to reserve it, for to make your Transplantation.

The Act of Transplantation of the Spiritual Mummy.
Touching the act or manner of Transplantation: Paracelsus says, that the
extracted spiritual Mummy does not ooperate unto health and preservation, but
by mineral, vegetable, and animal means. And therefore it is necessary, that
the spiritual Mummy attracted, or extracted out of the body, by the virtue of
the Animal Magnet, must be introduced into a vegetative nature; whereby the
said Mummy, not being of it self vegetative, may by adoption as it were be
introduced into, and be endued with a vegetative nature or condition.

We ought therefore to mingle a proportion of this imbibed Magnet, with a
certain proportion of his mother-earth, and sow in this composition the seeds
of such herbs, as are proper for thi^ or that disease, and this or that ill
affected principal part of man's body, or this or that infirm member, which is
contained in his region. As for example: For the Lungs in the vital region,
when the disease is the Ptifick, sow Line-seed or Juniper, in the natural
region; when it is Dropsy, Pimpnel or wormwood; in the bruising or contusion of
parts, Hypericon or Plantain; in tumor or wounds, Persecaria, or the great or
lesser Cumfry; in Salt diseases as are the toothache, pain in the eyes, and
flowing Menstrues, Persecaria maculata, and so forth. The herbs must grow in
this compounded earth, and that in the open air: and as the herb or plant
grows, it will sympathetically and Magnetically extract the imbibed Mummiall
spirits out of the Magnet, and will by that means cause the Mummy extracted out
of every particular member, according unto his condition, to be fit to cure the
infirmity of his proper member.

Of the Use and Virtue of the Transplanted Mummy.
Lastly, as concerning the manner how to use this Transplanted Mummy, now that
it is changed into a vegetable nature or condition:

If the disease be dry and of a combust nature, as is the yellow Jaunders, the
Ptisick, etc. and you would cure it or expel it out of the body; then take the
herb with his Magnetic earth, and cast them into the running water, and the
disease will fade and die, by little and little.

But if the disease be moist, then you must burn the herb, with the Magneticall
earth. Again, if the disease be more temperate, namely between the extremities
of water and fire; then hang up the herb in the air, or smoke, to dry; and the
disease will languish by little and little, as the herb does fade. If you shall
give the herb or fruit unto the beast that is of a stronger nature than the
sick, then the beast will be infected with that disease, and the sick will be
free. Also if the spiritual Mummy so extracted, out of some peculiar member of
a sound Man, be conserved in his continual vegetation, if you take of his
fruit, and transplant it into a sound oken tree, by that means the member out
of which the Mummy was extracted, will grow continually, and continue in his
natural and robust proportion of vegetation, without defect. After this manner
also, are the Willow trees, but that they increase so suddenly, and by reason
thereof, they are not so fit for this purpose, lest the member should grow too
hastily, for by that means, many inconveniences may follow: As for example, If
after that manner the hair of a person be shut up into a willow-tree, they will
grow so suddenly and so copiously, that unless they be removed thence, or the
Willow be burned, the eyes and brains will endure damage and detriment, as
dolours, fluxes, etc. namely, by the sudden increase, or too much humidity of
the Tree. And therefore according unto the proportion of the person, there must
be a proportionate tree found out, into the which the Mummy is to be
transplanted; but the Oak is to be elected before all others, because it
increases and grows but temperately and strongly, and a man's life will not
easily exceed the days of an Oak.

By this mystical kind of attraction, the true and wise natural Magician,
(for so I may call the true Philosopher, that operateth, as Solomon did, by the
properties of natural things) may bring to pass such things, which in wonder
will excel (as I said) by many degrees, the power or act of the weapon-salve;
for by it, wise men have procured friendship and love, between such as have
been utter enemies; and again, by the use of it, grace and affection may be
recovered from another, whose favor is desired. Paracelsus speaking darkly of
this Mummiall faculty, does show, how the Ape and the Snake (betwixt the which,
a natural antipathy, or strife and hatred, is ever observed to be) may be made
friends, and familiar unto one another. But to our purpose.

If the members out of the which the second Mummy is extracted, are to be
corroborated, then you must make the extracted Mummy to vegetate, as before, by
transplantation temperately, and according unto the natural proportion in the
Oak, or other such like sound tree. But if the members be too dry, then let
their extracted Mummy vegetate in the Willow tree, and from thence again be
transplanted into some other temperate Tree. So also in a humid complexion, it
may for a time be transplanted into a hot and slowly growing tree, as is the
Juniper; only observing, that the fruit in which the Mummy is transplanted, be
preserved from all external damage.

Demonstration.
I need not waste the time in further demonstration, of the possibility and
feazibility of these acts in the spiritual transplanted Mummy, when by the
very self-same proofs, whereby I have confirmed the manner of curing by the
weapon-salve, and by transplantation, which is set down in one of the Chapters
of this present Book, I have fully demonstrated the reasons of these occult and
abstruse actions in this kind of cure, unto such as will not (with St. Thomas)
believe any thing, but what is confirmed by sense. And therefore, for the
manifestation of this hidden action, by a relation of natures, I refer you unto
that very place also, where the salve is compared unto the vegetable and
Magnet, the bloody spirits unto the spiritual Mummy, the manner of application
of beams from the Mummy to the sick member, unto the application of the
transplanted bloody spirits to the wounded member; the keeping the
spiritually-growing spirit in the ointment from cold, unto the preserving the
vegetable fruit, in which the Mummy is planted, from external damage. So that
eadem est ratio utriusque, and by consequence, eadem est demonstrationis via in
ambobus.

It is too tedious in this place to express the efficacious operations of this
secret mystical Mummy; and I am assured, that some ignorant Momus, or Cynicall
ignorant, will either laugh or bark at what is said already touching it; for,
Quis major scientiae inimicus, quam ignarus? And therefore I will conceal the
rest of his occult properties, and their sympatheticall effects, from such
Critics, and lock it up in the treasury of truth: Only in a word, I say, that
by it, the Dropsy, Pleurisy, Gout, Vertigo, Epilepsie, French Pox, Palsy,
Cancer, Fistula, foul Ulcers, Tumors, wounds, Herniaes, Fractions of Members,
superfluity and suppression of Menstrues in women, as also sterility in them;
Feavors, Hecticks, Athrophy, or wasting of members, and such like, may by this
natural magical means be cured, and that at distance, and without any
immediate contact. And, to conclude, Paracelsus affirms, that this
magneticall kind of cure which is effected by natural Magic, does excel in
virtue all other Physical secrets, which may be extracted or separated, either
out of Herbs, or Roots, or Minerals.

I will now come to the second Part or Member of this Book, which speaks of
the antipatheticall effects of this Mummiall experiment.

The Second Part or Member of this Book, which handles the practice of
Antipathy.
CHAP. I.
In this Chapter the Author expresses, how by the self-same internal spirit
in the creature, as well Antipatheticall as Sympatheticall effects may be
produced. Herein is also set down the reason, why a spirit, that is infected
and corrupted with a poison some cond^tion, is most venomous and contagious
unto his kind.

AS it is certain, that like does naturally affect his like; for Nature does
rejoice at the presence of his nature, and nature does correct and corroborate
his nature, if it be sound, and full of vivifying and wholesome spirits: So also
nature, if it be poisoned and infected by a venomous nature, will, by uniting
it self unto a sound and wholesome nature, quickly corrupt and inquinate it, and
so by such a kind of abortive and depraved union, antipathy is placed instead
of sympathy. Now how this is possible in nature, I will in few words relate
unto you. As nature does magnetically effect and allure unto it her like; so,
if that like which it ^ucketh unto it be inquinated with corruption, the said
attracting spirit, be it never so sound, will quickly taste of the bitter with
the sweet, namely, of the poison, and so will also be corrupt equally with that
spirit, which is homogeneall unto it, in which the infection dwells, being
forced unawares to entertain strife, dissension, and antipathy into his
tabernacle unawares; even as we see a sound spirit in the Animal, which
thirsting after his like spiritual celestial food, which hovereth occultly in
the air, to be refreshed by it, does unawares draw in an enemy with it,
namely, a pestilent and corrupt fume, whereby it is oppressed and inflamed with
a putredinous fire; so that it was not the appetite or desire of the sound
spirit to draw in that poison unto it, but the spirit like it self that was
poisoned. And again, each spirit which is incumbered with any antipatheticall
and unnatural accident, desires to shake off contentious antipathy, and to
reassume that peaceful sympathy which it enjoyed before; but finding it self
unable, it is apt to cleave and adhere unto good and sound spirits for its
relief, being that vis unita fortior; and if more sound spirits of his like
were joined unto it, then might it the easilier conquer and expel his
antipatheticall adversary. So also we see, that one blear-eyed person, by
darting his infectious beams for relief at a reasonable distance, becomes a
flame, which sets on fire the sound spirit unto the which it applies: for
spiritual poisons are like secret flames of malignant fire. Wherefore as
spirits are by union joined together and multiplied, like oil added unto oil,
so does the infectious flame increase, and feed equally upon them both: For as
the sound spirit desires the society of his like, to comfort it, and the
corrupted spirit so desired, does also covet the sound spirit to assist it
against his enemy. So corruption is sucked in by them both, and antipathy is
forced to roust among them, and forsakes them not, until it has penetrated
and gnawed into even their bowels, and poisoned their very entralls. And we
must note, that there is no poisoned spirit that does sooner take hold of a
spirit, then such as is specific, and of a homogeneal nature: For that is the
reason, that one Man's spirit being infected with the Plague, does so multiply
it in his kind chiefly; as also the Murren does chiefly rage in the spirits of
Sheep, and medles not with the spirits of Men. Do we not commonly see, that a
like nature being altered by putrefaction, is most deadly unto his like? So
worms avoided out of the body, and dried to powder, do by inward administration
kill the worms. Spitle that is avoided from the Pulmoniack, cures after
preparation, the P^isick. The Spleen of a Man prepared, is an enemy unto the
swelling and vegetable Spleen. The stone of the Kidney or Bladder, by
calcination cures and dissolveth the Stone. The touch of a dead man's hand
cures the schirrous tumors. The Scorpion being bruised, or his body macerated
in oil, cures the wounds of the Scorpion; and the oil of the Viper; as also
the trochises of his flesh, the bitings of the Adder or Viper; dead and
congealed blood, and the salt excrescence out of man's bones, is
antipatheticall unto the flowing blood: In conclusion, there is nothing that is
more powerful to check or correct an impediment in a spirit, then by applying
of the same Specific spirit, being altered from his nature by a contrariety;
So also there is nothing that infecteth a sound nature sooner, than a nature
homogeneal unto it self, which has endued corruption; and that is the reason,
that the infirm and corrupted Mummy of one man, is so apt to putrify and
corrupt that of another, as we may not only discern by these words of
Paracelsus: Corrupta Mummia, corpus etiam sanum quod attingit, De Philos.
Tract. 3.
and cum quo unitur, corrumpit; ea autem sani corporis corruption, est corporis
alterus, ex quo Mummia sumpta est, valetudo and sanitas: The corrupted Mummy.
does also corrupt the sound body, that it lays hold of, and is united unto;
and the corruption of the sound body, is the health of the other body, out of
which the corrupt Mummy was extracted. As for example: If a man be Leprous, and
I extract, by the Microcosmicall Magnet, the Mummy out of him, and give it to a
sound man, it will reduce the Leprous person unto his health again; but it will
filthily infect the sound man that took it, with the same disease, as shall be
told you hereafter more at large. But before we come unto the bulk of this
business, it will be most fit, that I make an Apologeticall transgression, lest
some persons, of more envy and indiscretion, than profundity in the true
natural Magia, may unworthily accuse me of Cacomagy, and that only because
they are altogether ignorant in the mysteries of those lawful Acts in nature,
which were taught unto Solomon, and revealed unto the wise men of this world,
for the good and benefit of mankind, by the good Spirit of God; neither are
they therefore to be eschewed, because that by evil men they may be converted
unto evil effects, and so diverted from their true usages, for which God did
ordain them; but rather a skillful natural Magician, such as a true Physician
ought to be, should first know the good uses of such hidden mysteries in
nature, that they might with the better effect employ them, for the good of
mankind, and then not be ignorant of those abuses, which may be produced by
them, that they thereby may the better prevent, and put by, all such wicked
effects, as naughty men would produce by them, unto the damage and destruction
of Gods creatures.

AN APOLOGY.
A short Apology for the usage of the Mystical or Spiritual Mummy, and to
prove that as well the Antipatheticall abuses, as Sympatheticall uses of it,
and all other natural things, are to be known and well understood, by the
natural Magician or wise Physician, for preventions cause; though not always
put in execution, but only where need requires.

I Know that there will be many barking Cynicks, inveighing Critics, and
railing or Satyricall Momus's, whose only delight is fostred with the fire of
disdain or malice; who, smothered as it were, with the blind and foggy smoke
or fume of ignorance, will say, that if the Sympatheticall effects of the
spiritual Mummy be allowable for a Physician, yet are the Antipathetiacall
properties thereof odious, and no way to be endured; nay they are Cacomagicall,
because the devil does instruct his ministers, about the abuses of this
Microcosmicall kind of corruption; and therefore for this reason, the very
knowledge of such a thing is not to be endured, etc. These objections, I know,
will these senseless and unreasonable kind of bablers make, touching the
knowledge of so mystical a business. But if their saying should take place
amongst the wise, what should become of Solomon's skill in natural Logic? Or
wherefore should he (who was esteemed the wisest among men) be so overseen, as
to aspire unto the knowledge of all things whatsoever, and to understand as well
the enemies as friends unto man's nature: For it is said of him, Sap. 7.
that he knew the natures of living creatures; the fier^ness of beasts; the
cogitations of Men; the difference of Plants; the virtues of roots, and all
things else that were occult and secret? Nay, why should he say, that Wisdom,
the Work-Mistris of all things, taught it unto him? Are there not Plants, and
Animals, and Minerals, that are stark poison and venomous unto man's nature, as
well as benign and salutiferous? He knew (says the Text) the natures of all
living creatures or animals; and why so, if that were true, which those
Scoffers mutter? Why should he know or look after the property of such things,
which are poison and harmfull unto mankind? Are not the Aspis, the Viper,
Adder, and that putrefying or corrupting Worm, termed Seps in Latin, or
Pur^isur in French, by reason of his rotting venom. The Serpent called Dipsas,
which infecteth the spirit with an immensurable drouth, the Amphisbena, the
Basilick, the Dragon* the Hollio: Among creeping creatures, the Spider, the
Scorpion, the Toad, the Lizard, the Salamander, the Cantharides, and an
infinite number of other, as well earthly as watery Animals, venomous and
wonderful pernicious unto mankind? He knew also the differences and virtues of
Plants. But say these temerarious Judges, What reason had Wisdom to show and
discover unto him the abominable effects of the herb called Aconite? which is
so pernicious unto Man and Beast, that the Poets fained, that it grew along
the shore of the venomous River Acheron, in hell. The Hemlock, which was the
character of death among the Athenians; for with the juce thereof they poisoned
the condemned persons. The Jusqu^ame or Hen-bane. The Poppy of whose juce the
somniferous Opium is derived. The Toadstool, Scamony, Euphorbium,
Colloquintida, Bears-foo^, Tit^mal, or Spurge, Assera bacca, Grunsell,
Flammula, and an infinity of such like vegetables. Also amongst the Mineralls,
Antimony, Quicksilver, Arsenick, Rosalgar, Verde^rease, Lithurge, Cerusse,
Vitriol, and an infinity of others? My answer is, That all these things, though
in themselves they are venomous, yet being rightly handled and used by wise
men, they are made passing medicinable. And I would have them know, that God
created all things good; but it is the Devil and his instruments, who by ill
employing of them do make them odious, and detestable unto man's nature: For as
by their right use and application, they may produce sympatheticall effects: so
by their abuse they produce nothing else but antipatheticall actions, and
rebellious conflicts with man's nature: God, I say, ordained them for a good
use, namely for man's health; but the Devil does apply them destructively, and
maliciously, which also the foresaid wise natural Magician, Solomon,
confirms in these words: Sap. 14.2.23.
God created all things that they should exist and be; and he made all the
Nations of the Earth sound and durable; so that there was not a destructive
medicine in them. Also God created Man inexterminable; but it was by the malice
of the Devil, that death entered into the world. And the wicked imitate him
and are of his seed. Whereby it is plain, that it was the Devil, and naughty
men, which are his instruments, and indeed true Devils incarnate, which do
adapt that for a wicked use, which indeed is good and righteous in it self:
What shall I say more? what? because that the Devil does apply a good thing
unto a bad use, must that thing for ever be abhorred and eschewed of wise men?
And must for that reason the good use thereof be excommunicated out of man's
society, and be for ever after reputed for Cacomagicall, damnable, and
diabolical? As for example: Because the Devil and his adherents, I mean the
witches and Necromancers, do by the Divel's instructions, apply the Mummy of
man as well corporal as spiritual, about their pernicious and destructive
inventions: Therefore must all ^hey which use the same for a good and
salutiferous intent be esteemed Cacomagicians? Is it a sign that the Physician
who cures diseases by it, has for that reason a commerce with the Devil? Or,
must a Christian Physician, because he is acquainted with the evil which the
properties of natural things may effect, by an unnatural or antipatheticall
adaptation, needs put that evil in execution unto the prejudice of man's
health? Verily, if things are rightly considered, the knowledge of good and
evil in the creatures, do well befit the science of a Physician, for except he
be acquainted with the evil as well as the good, how is it possible to cure
the harms which are effected by the bad, being that except the cause be known,
the effect will hardly or never be cured. As for example, If the nature of the
spiritual philtre which infecteth, be not discovered, how should the cure be
performed, or the cause be extinguished or taken away? The true Magitian does
not intrude into the science of the Simples venomous nature, to do harm
thereby, but to discern the counter-poyson which should prevent the mischief
thereof, as the Scorpion cures the Scorpions, the Viper the Vipers harms. Must
every man that has a sword needs kill, or do a mischief with it? May he not
defend another from being killed or harmed? So also it follows not, that he
must therefore poison his patient, because he knows the poison, and the
manner how to correct or amend his malice, which has deprived his patient of
his health. Except the poison be known, the Alexipharmicon or counter poison
will hardly be had. If the Hermit of Aix (of whom I have spoken before) had not
known the especial antidote to cure those, which he had poisoned and infected
with the pestilence, many of those which he afterward cured would have died
with the rest. If there be devils incarnate, whose d^light is to destroy, (as
some men that wear swords delight in quarrelling and killing; and othersome
that know the good use of fire employ it naughtily, as he did, who destroyed
with it D^ana's temple of the Ephesians) God forbid that such natural
creatures, as are fire, iron, and such like, should be abandoned, and not
exercised in their right usage, because they do harm when they are abused.
There are Saints as well as there are devils on the earth, who being
acquainted with the impious inventions and devices of these devils, with their
arch-master Satan, are able to challenge and combat them at their own weapons.
Scholars learn of Aristotle the art of sophistry and fallacy, not that they
should deceive, but that they should prevent deceit and the honest, and most
skillful and faithful Physician, prieth into the mystery of the most
spiritual poison, not with an intent to poison, or do any evil by it, but
that he may with the greater assurance, and vigorous efficacy, attempt the
cure, and take away the cause after it is known; for the nature of the poison
being well understood the cure will be the more certain. The venomous wound of
the Viper (as I have said) is cured by the Theriacall antidote, into whose
composition the flesh of Vipers does enter; the oil of Scorpions, or the
Scorpion of it self being bruised, does cure the sting of the Scorpion, and
that by a magneticall attraction of his like. All which being so, why should
not the wise Physician look into the nature of spiritual venoms, as well as
the spiritual counter-poysons that are in man. When we find, that the venom
that wounds, is, by reason of his homogeniety in nature, the perfectest
Magnet to suck and draw unto it his like? If by the sound Mummy in man, I can
cure or take away the corruption or venom, which his like nature has
accidentally imbibed, is it not a fit and convenient thing to know the one as
well as the other.

I must confess, that there are fleshly devils upon earth, I mean, abominable
ministers and children of Satan, who being abandoned unto their master and
head, commit (as I have told you before) many insolences, and treacherous
straragems, by the blood, hair, bones, skin, and corporal Mummy of man's body;
but above all the rest, the wickedness of certain thieves, hangmen, and other
of that Necromanticall faction, is abominable before God and man, and worthy
to be whipped out with iron, or wiped away with fire, out of every good
Commonwealth, which by their diabolical sleights, do make use of man's last
breath in their expiration of life, to serve for their wicked employment, as
spirits made obedient to their wills, and so do disturb the quiet rest of the
dying man's spirit. Of which kind of wicked persons, Paracelsus speaks thus,
Per triplices hasce Mummias multa passim praestita and confecta sunt, De (...)
Tract. ^.
ab iis cumprimis qui illas ipsimet prepararunt, ut sunt carnifices, lictores,
latrones, etc. qui non solum vitam hominibus ademerun^ and jugulatos ipsos
Mummiam fecerunt, sed etiam jugulatorum spiritum, quem spiritum hominis
vocaverunt, exceperunt; illumque sibi in extremo mortis momento subjecerunt,
seu subjugaverunt, ac variis impositis oneribus exagitarunt. Hinc ars enata est
Necromantiae, taliter ab ipsis vocatae. Vae autem huic arti, ac illis universis
qui tam faede ill^ abutuntur. N^cromantia quidem and ipsa est; sed diaboli, seu
a diabolo instilla^a, docta, and tradita; ac ab ipsius instrumentis seu
mancip^is in abusum tam grandem conversa: sunt enim illi homines nocentissimi,
quibus praestaret lapidem molarem de collo suspendi, ac ita in profundum ma^e
e^ici. By these three kinds of Mummies, there are many things done and
effected, and that especially by such as have prepared them, as are the
hangmen, the s^rgeants, and thieves, etc. who do not only bereave men of their
lives, but also they have received the spirit of those whose throats they have
cut, or strangled, and do make them subject, or do subjugate it unto them. From
hence springs the art of Necromancy, so termed by them. Fie upon this art,
and upon all such as are so filthily abused by it: Verily it is Necromancy, but
of the devil; or it is instilled, taught, and delivered by the devil, and is
by his instruments or slaves converted into so great an abuse; for these are
wicked and harmful persons, about whose neck it were better that a millstone
were hanged, and that they were with it cast into the bottom of the sea. I am
advertised, that the hangmen of Germany are commonly artists in this devilish
kind of trade, and by it can do wonders, the more is the pity that they are
suffered. Thus therefore each man may discern a manifest difference, between
the true use, and the abominable abuse of a good thing, and how (as I said
before) there are devils incarnate, as well as Saints, or good and pious men
upon the earth, whereof some do use Gods creatures to the benefit of man, and
others unto his ruin and destruction: And consequently, that it is lawful for
a Physician to be conversant in both extremes, though his only practice ought
to be employed in doing good. I will now descend unto my subject.

CHAP. III.
How Sympathy may by accident or disorder be changed into Antipathy. Here also
certain magnet^call Demonstrations, convenient to prove each Proposition
concerning this subject, are expressed.

I Purpose in this Chapter, which touches the effects of Antipathy, to proceed
after the self-same method, which I observed in my preced^nt discourse of
Sympathy; and therefore in the first place I will propose unto you certain
grounds, which I for that reason call Propositions; and then afterward I will
demonstratively maintain them many ways.

1 Proposition.
As by sympathy in natural spirits, each member may be corroborated and
fortified; so by their antipathy, members may be debilitated, corrupted, and
infected.

An experimental Example or Demonstration.
If the spiritual Mummy extracted out of man, be mingled with venomous things,
and so be suffered to rot, or else be mingled with the Mummies of infirm or
infected persons, or with the poysonsome menstrues of a woman, and then a herb
be planted, or the magnet so imbibed, and be conserved in a continual
vegetation, it may be a cause, that the disease should be of continuance. Also
if one give the herb or fruit which savoureth of a sick man's Mummy, unto a
beast that is of a stronger nature then the sick, then the beast will be
infected with that disease, and the sick will be free. From this experiment,
many egregious abuses may and would be effected by wicked men, if this manner
of diverting the creatures virtue from good to bad, were known unto them; for
by it, they may disseminate agues and the pestilence over a whole Country: for
the plant will suck out the spiritual Mummy of such persons, as are infected
with such venomous diseases, by reason of its vegetating activity. Also, if the
spiritual Mummy be extracted by means of this microcosmicall Magnet, out of a
body infected with the Leprosy, and be applied, or any way administered
inwardly unto another, that is healthful and sound, it will infect the sound
person, and free the infected, as it has been proved by some.

2 Proposition.
The antipatheticall Mummy of the sick may be extracted, and infected or
infused into another that is sound.

A demonstrative Example.
This is confirmed by the precedent proofs, and is further maintained thus.

If one do sow seeds or herbs pertaining unto the three principal members in
the Mummy of a dead carcass, or in the Mummy extracted out of a sick or
infected person, and the fruit of these vegetables be given or administered unto
man or beast, then the disease will be transplanted upon the said man or beast.
By this means also naughty men may infect and poison. But because these
mischiefs are horrible to a religious spirit, I dare not farther express the
effects of antipathy in spirits, which may be brought to pass by the abusing of
Gods blessings. I will therefore enter into another kind of antipatheticall
practice, which shall rather tend unto the conservation of man, then the
destruction of it.

3 Proposition.
If two lively fleshes that are wounded be applied to each other, they will
sympathize and be united, assimilated, and made one continued flesh, so that as
the one prospers, the other will do the like also; conditionally, that the
party from whom the added flesh is borrowed, continue in his lively and
vegetable disposition; but if the animal tree from which the graff was taken, I
mean, the body out of which the flesh was lent or cut, do wither or die, that
is, does leave to vegetate and act, then will that borrowed flesh also be at
jarr and discord with the flesh of the borrower, that lives and vegetateth;
and consequently antipa hy will spring out from that union, which was
sympatheticall before; so that except the dying flesh be amputated, or taken
off from the lively flesh, upon the which it was grafted or transplanted, it
will cause the living flesh also to gangrenate, and corrupt with it self.

An experiment to confirm this.
This is well proved and maintained, by that experiment in Italy before
mentioned; for when a certain noble personage had lost his nose by a wound, and
had by the Physicians advice made a wound in one of his slaves arms, and
clapped it unto his wounded nose, and so the flesh of the one was bound fast
unto the flesh of the other, continuing after that manner, until by a
sympatheticall agglutination and union, both fleshes became one flesh. Then a
gobbit of the slave's flesh was cut out of the arm, and was framed into the
shape of a nose on the Nobleman; and the slave was manumitted, with money in
his purse, for his pains. It befell, tha^ on a certain time after, the slave
did die, and though he departed this life being far distant from his master,
yet the borrowed flesh on the masters nose withered and gangrenated, insomuch
that the antipathy between these two fleshes, though united into one substance,
became so great, that if immediately that dead flesh had not been cut off, it
would have corrupted and destroyed the rest.

A Problematicall Demonstration from the Lodestone.
One Lodestone does draw another in his natural position, but being
unnaturally ordered, it drives away or resists the other.

The demonstration of this Problem has been expressed, as well by a Lodestone
divided in Boats, as by two Irons swimming on corks.

2 Problem.
If a plant be cut off (as, for example, a willow-wand) and if it be regularly
planted or grafted on the same stick, it will grow; but if irregularly, it will
die.

For the proof of this Problem, look the 2 Proposition of the 5 Chapter, in the
Application unto the Vegetable.

The Application.
So if the spirits of the two fleshes be unnaturally disposed unto one another,
and turned from their sympatheticall union, unto an antipatheticall duality or
disunion, or discord in natures; then will it, after unequal jars, follow a
general corruption: for, (as is said before) Corruptum corrumpentis naturam
facillime induit.

4 Prob^em.
If a spiritual Mummy be corrupted by some alien, or strange infectious nature,
yet in respect of the natural Mummy of the sound and wholesome body which is so
infected, the sound and wholesome Mummy of a body not infected, will magnetically
attact it, though not so affectionately, but more slowly; by reason of the
union or adhering of the strange venom unto it, which causes a mixtion of
antipathy with that of sympathy; and the reason of that slowness in the
repelling of the antipatheticall insult, is, because the sound and homogeniall
Mummy does partly, by his concupiscible act, attract unto it his sympatheticall
like, and partly expel his contaminating unlike, by his irascible property:
But for that this antipatheticall unlike cleaves so fast unto his infected
like, therefore it happens, that the expulsive resistance is but slow; and so
the sound spiritual Mummy becomes as well corrupted and infected as the
other, and by that means Sympathy is turned into Antipathy.

An Experiment to confirm this.
There are many proofs to maintain this, for when a corrupted spiritual Mummy
is carried in the air, from one infected with a pestilent Feavour, or small
Pox, the Mummy so infected does unite it self, being homogeniall unto the sound
man's spirit, and in that regard the one embraces the other; but the sound
Mummiall spirit, perceiving and tasting of the heterogeniall, or infected
nature, which adhereth unto his like, does slowly expel or resist it, by
reason that it does covet his like, and therefore sympathetically attracteth;
and again, hates his unlike, and therefore antipathetically expels, which
is, for that reason, but slowly performed; and this is the cause, that the
expulsive crisis is not made suddenly, after the poysonsome infection is
received; neither will sweats, or fluxes, or eruption of blood out of the nose,
which are arguments of the resistance and expulsive faculty of contagious
antipathy, suddenly appear: and this is effected sometimes by the sound spirits
conquest, and sometimes by the vain attempt thereof.

1. A Problematicall Demonstration derived from the Lodestone.
When a small piece of Iron is put into a small Boat, with materials of
another loading, to float upon the water, and a Lodestone be placed in another
vessel on the same water, near one another, the coition which will be made
betwixt these two magneticall bodies will be depraved, weak, and unnatural,
because the Magnet affects and draws unto it most strongly his like, or
best-beloved, when she is not laded or mixed with materials of a contrary
nature, and consequently not agreeing in sympathy with it.

An Application.
To conclude, A Mummy which has an antipatheticall infection joined unto it,
and applies in conjunction unto a sound or strong and wholesome Mummy, is like
as if a portion of the stone called Theamides, (which is antipatheticall unto
that of the Magnet, for it ^^pelleth Iron or the Magnet it self, as the Magnet
does attract them unto it) were joined in a little bark unto the Magnet, or a
piece of Iron also placed in it, and that bark or boat so burdened were
applied unto a stronger Magnet in another bark in a basin of water; the strong
Magnet or Lodestone would partly attract his like, namely, the Magnet or Iron,
and partly resist and expel his enemy, and so by reason of his attraction, his
expulsion would be the flower. Therefore also the magneticall Philosophers hold
this for a Maxim.

2 Problem.
The coition or union betwixt two magneticall bodies is more quick and nimble,
than the flight or divorce from one another; for experience teaches, that
magneticall bodies are more sluggishly repelled then they are allured or drawn
unto one another; and the reason is, because there is some antipatheticall
invasion which causes that hatred, and makes that irascible resistance
between the homogeneall spirit of the Mummy, and the heterogeniall poison or
infection in it: for we ought to consider, that magnetic bodies do covet
sympatheticall union.

5 Proposition.
Two Mummies of diverse bodies, whereof the one is sound, and the other
infected, though in their first coition they seem to agree, by reason of that
homogeniall respect which is between them, being in their purity but of one and
the same essence; yet, for that the one is infected, and for that cause has
endued a heterogeniall disposition, contrary unto the essence of them both; for
that reason (I say) the second Mummy endeavors to be divorced from them
both. And this is proved thus by this problematicall Demonstration, drawn out
of the Load-stone's property.

3 Problem.
If you shall set two small wiers on the poles of a Lodestone, Gilbert. de
Mag. l. 3. c. 8. Ridl. cap. 21.
these wiers will be observed to adhere at the lower ends together, upon the
point of the pole, but at their tops they will be at discord, and averse unto
one another at their upper ends, so that they will be observed to make a fork,
as if one end did eschew and fly from the company and society of the other.

THE CONCLUSION.
I Could (judicious Reader) have made a whole Volume of experimental
Propositions, with their problematicall proofs, touching the infinite abyss of
Sym^heticall and Antipatheticall effects in the three Kingdoms, namely, Animal,
^^getable, and Mineral, both mutually between each species or kind, as from the
^^dividualls of one kind unto another: But it is not my intention to express my
^ore bold and settled opinions touching the true Philosophy and his appendixes,
(...) a larger English phrase, considering the roughness and harshnesse of my
pen, (...) reason of my defect, and the insufficiency in the polished nature
thereof. Again, know, that filed words and phrases are but superficial
flashes, and flying sha^owes of a wealthy and rich subject, the which, as they
are, Proteus-like, changable unto an infinity of colors, so also are men's
fancies and judgments as variable, being the Proverb is, So many men, so many
minds. I do imagine, and my mind gives ^^e, that although I be never so
curious in my inditing, or laborious in the phrase ^f mine expression; yet will
my best endeavors appear faulty in the curious eye^^ght of some men, though
perchance acceptable enough unto others. I esteem it ^ufficient therefore, that
I dare be hardy and bold in the fundamental subject of the essential
Philosophy, being that it has Truth it self to maintain and defend it, without
any adornation made by the gilded tresses of superficial speeches, or verbal
explication; and therefore as veritas non quaerit angulos, so also she needs
not the expression of eloquent words, and refined sentences or phrases to
illustrate it, and make it more perspicuous in the eyes of wise and learned
men, being that it is not unknown unto them, that she does conquer all, for she
is the bright splendor or emanation, which springs from the omnipotent and
eternal fountain; she enlighteneth all, she acts essentially in all, and
over all, and reveals her self in effect to all; and therefore she is so
manifest in all her works, that she needs not any golden-tongued Orator, nor
smooth and methodicall Rhetorician, or lip-learned Philosopher, to do her
honor, in the expression of her excellency, and recording the perfection of
her graces, revealed unto all the world, though the unworthy worldlings will
not acknowledge or receive her with reverence, as they ought to do, but rather
hide her perpetually, by their best endeavors, with the vail of obscure
ignorance, and thereby do not desist to persecute and crucify daily that
spiritual Christ, which is the only verity, true wisdom, cornerstone, and
essential subject of the true Philosophy, whose Name be blessed for ever and
ever; who only has made the heavens and the earth, and every thing therein,
and sustaineth and preserves them by the vivification of his Spirit; which
operateth all in all, and reigns in power and glory with the Father, for ever
and ever: Who will defend his servants from the oppression of evill-minded men,
and stand as a shield of defense, to preserve the proclaimer of his truth from
the Serpentine tongues of malicious back-biters, and the venomous carpings of
the Cynicall and Satyricall Momus. Luke 21.15.
It is he that says unto the adorer of his truth, Ego dabo vobis os and
sapientiam cui non poterant resistere and contradicere omnes adversarii vestri.
And therefore I will say as the Prophet David did, In alarm tuarum umbra
canam; I will sing the truth under the shadow of thy wings. O Lord, in thee do
I put my trust; keep and preserve me from mine enemies, for thy mercie's sake,
AMEN.

FINIS.

