Tractatum hunc cui Titulus THE PRETERNATURAL STATE OF Animal Humors, etc.
Dignum judicamus qui Imprimatur.

Samuel Collins, Praeses. Tho. Burwell, Rich. Torlesse, Will. Dawes, Thom. Gill,
Censores.
Dat. in Comitiis Censoriis ex Aedibus Collegii nostri, Dec. 6. 1695.
THE Preternatural State OF ANIMAL HUMORS DESCRIBED, BY THEIR Sensible
Qualities, Which depend on the different degrees of their Fermentation. And the
Cure of each particular Cacochymia is performed by Medicines of a peculiar
Specific Taste, described.

To this Treatise are added TWO APPENDIXES.

I. About the Nature of Fevers, and their Ferments, and Cure by particular
Tastes.

II. Concerning the Effervescence and Ebullition of the several Cacochymia's;
on which all Inflammations, Tumors, Pains, and Fluxes of Humors depend;
especially those in the Gout and Asthma; and the particular Tastes of the
Medicines curing Ebullitions, are described.

By the Author of the (...).

LONDON, Printed by W. Downing, for Michael Johnson. And are to be Sold by
Robert Clavel, Sam, Smith, and Benjamin Walford, in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1696.

TO THE Much Honored Sir Charles Holt, Bart. at Aston in Warwickshire.
Sir,
YOUR great Skill and Judgment in the Practice of Physic, is so well known to
all Your Country, as well as to many of the Learned of Our Faculty, that I
can need no Apology for the Dedication of a Physical Treatise to You.

If I Reflect on those Favors I have received from Your Honored Family, they
may justly claim this Expression of my Gratitude for Them: But I think my self
most particularly Obliged to make this Public Acknowledgement of those great
Advantages I have had by Your Learned Conversation.

Your Chemical Experiments have given me clear Notions of the Principles of
many particular Bodies, and their Sensible Qualities, by Anatomical
Dissections. You have procured for me some Animal Humors to Taste and Examine;
and by Your Microscopes, I have observed more of the Consistence of Fluids than
I could otherways have known.

These Notions which I here present You, were the Subject of our frequent
Conferences; and I never liked any of them so well as those Your Judgment
approved of.

When Your Kindness to Your Neighbors, or Charity to the Poor, Obliged You to
prescribe Physic, (which frequently You do) I have observed, when I was called
to any Consultation with You, Your exact Judgment in distinguishing the nicest
Cases, Your Rational Prescriptions, grounded on the true Indications, taken
from the History of the particular Case, and directed against the Cause of the
Disease; and also, Your great Value for Simple Medicines, prescribed in their
due Quantity; and I can most truly affirm, That a great Success always attended
this rational Practice.

Sir, Your exact Judgment in Physic deserves the highest Expressions of Esteem
from the most Ingenious Writers in our Art; but I must depend on that great
Candor and Civility You constantly express to Our whole Faculty, for Your
Accepting of the Patronage of these Papers which are Presented by Him who has a
real Value both for Your Virtue and Learning; and who am,

SIR, Your most Humble JOHN FLOYER.
Lichfield, July 26 1695.
THE PREFACE.
IT is very reasonable, That the present Age should admit all the sensible
Observations made on Human Bodies by the preceding. And those it ought farther
to explain and illustrate by the Philosophy of the present times; for that of
every Age soon alters, and the Variety of Hypotheses, and Terms, confounds all
Ordinary Readers; and the present being so extravagantly different from those
of Ages very remote, the Old Authors become most unacceptable to the Moderns;
but they who are conversant in all the Natural Phenomenon will easily take the
Sense both of the Old and New Writers, and give a candid Censure of Both.

My Design in this Treatise, is, To explain Animal Humors by the Observations
given of them by the Ancients, as well as by those Improvements made by Modern
Philosophy, Chemistry, and Anatomy.

The Ancient Physicians explained Animal Humors by sensible Qualities; and
also their Morbid State by the same.

By the Touch they explained the Heat, which shows us the high degree of
Fermentation in our Humors; and the Cold intimates the Depression of our
Natural Fermentation.

By the same Sense they observed the Moisture, by which we understand the
Fullness of the Habit of the Body, and intimates a Plethoric State of Humors;
and the Dryness of our Bodies is evident in thin, lean Habits, where the
Nutritious Juyces are deficient.

Because a high Fermentation or Digestion may happen in a full, moist Habit, or
a lean, thin One, and a low Fermentation may happen in both, they have
therefore observed various Compositions of our Constitutions, not dis-agreeable
to the Nature of them, which depend on the particular Digestion, and quantity
of our Humors, and not immediately on any Mixture of Qualities and Elements;
for particular Bodies, such as Plants and Animals, cannot be explained by those
general Elements, which constitute the great Mass of Matter in the World; but
both have their Origin from some Matter prepared.

By Fermentation or Digestion, Plants theirs from a Bituminous Nutriment; and
Animals theirs from an Albuminous Liquor.

Chyle was not esteemed by the Ancients any of the Humors; but from it they
deduced the several Humors constituting the Blood.

The Red Part of Blood they most particularly called Blood, which tinges the
whole Mass, and makes the Blood and Face florid. They described it as hot,
moist, and sweet; and by these contrary Tastes, viz. the Cold, the Dry, the
Bitter, they used to correct it.

The Choler they observed by the Yellowness in the Arterial Blood. They
described it as hot, fiery, bitter, acrid, and dry; and to correct it, they
used the Cold and Moist Tastes: But we observe, as the Salso-Acid of Urin
corrects Coloquintida Bitterness, so the Salt of Blood and Chyle alters the
Taste of the Choler mixed with both, and makes it sweet or insipid; and
Lixiviums have the same effect on Choleric Humors.

The Bilis Nigra made the Body, and Blood, and Spleen black, cold, dry, and
Humors acid; and by the warm, sweet and humid Tastes they corrected it. They
observed that Blackness was given to Oily Humors by Adustion.

Phlegm was described, as the coldest Humor, sweet, and moist, and
preternaturally acid, and salt; and these they esteemed the Matter of all
Defluxions, as, in reality, the lacteal and serous Lympha's be; but the sweet
Phlegm is the chylous Liquor. The hot and dry Tastes are contrary to Phlegm.

They observed, That Heat corrects Cold; Moisture, Dryness; and sweet and oily
things, the Acerbity and Austerity of Humors.

Though the Serum and fibrous Cake of the Blood were the chief Parts of the
Mass of Blood, and well known to the Ancients, yet it did not agree with their
Hypothesis to make them Principles of the sanguineous Mass; but the mentioned
Humors, by exceeding in quantity or quality, produced these several
Cacochymia, and Defluxions of Humors.

The Old Writers wanted a full Knowledge of Fermentation, by which the chief
morbid Alterations are produced in the Humors; and they attributed their
preternatural State either to Crudity of Digestion, or Adustion.

There is a remarkable Instance in Galen, which shows most plainly a Notion,
not much different from Wine, about the Preparation of our Humors, viz.

The Blood is in the midst of those Humors we call bilious; and those whose
Genus is called by one Name, the crude Humor or Phlegm; for they are produced
by over-digestion of Blood; but these by its imperfect Digestion; and there are
innumerable differences of both kinds. And in another place he asserts, That
both Biles are from an Excess of Heat, and Acidity from Indigestion, and
Saltness from Putrefaction.

A pure Temperament is only an Idaea of Fancy; but that which comes nearest to
it, is the sanguineous Constitution, in which there is the most exact Digestion
of Humors; and because there is also the greatest Sweetness of them, there is
generally a Fullness of the Habit of the Body from the quantity of Nutriment,
and a Floridity in the Face from the good Digestion of the Red part of the
Blood; and here the Nutritious Humors are most free from those ill qualities,
which make them unapt to assimilate, or which stimilate the Sensible Parts to
evacuate them out of the Body.

The various natural Constitutions or Qualities in Wines, resemble the various
Temperaments of our Humors, which, like them, depend on some certain degree of
Fermentation natural to both; and because that degree of Digestion causes
sometimes the watery or slimy, sometimes the acid or acerb, or the oily
Sweetness, to predominate, the Ancient Writers believed that this depended on
the greater Mixture of some of the Elements.

The Crude Wines, are the Waterish, the Austere, the Acerb, the Pendulous or
Slimy, the New, Sweet, Flatulent; but those Wines which depend on a very high
Digestion of vegetable Juyces, are the bitter Wines, the old, hot, spirituous
and sharp; the faeculent, viscous or thick; the fragrant or foetid.

Many of these ill qualities are produced in Wines by long Keeping, or
preternatural Preparations of them.

By a weak Fermentation a pendulous Sliminess is produced, which answers a
pituitous State, or an Acerbity, which resembles the Tartar of our Humors, or
Waterishness, which is like the Serosity of our Blood.

By over-Fermentation, or long Keeping, Wine becomes bitter, as the Caecubum;
sharp, as in Hock, like the vitriolic Acidity; they grow thick, like the
Viscidity of our Humors; or foetid, like the putrid State of them.

These are the preternatural States of Wines, and Animal Humors, occasioned by
various Fermentations, which Galen observed, when he explains the Alteration of
Humors by new, sweet Wine fermenting by its own Heat; and he compares the
Effervescence on the Wine to Choler, and the Faeces to Melancholy.

Many Phenomenon may more easily be explained now, than they could be in former
Ages, when the Circulation of Humors, the fermentative Dissolution of our
Meats, and the Defluxions through particular Glands, were unknown.

The Motion of particular Humors was accounted for, by the Old Writers, by the
Attraction of Parts, which drew their like; but the Pulse, which circulates
several Humors, as well as the Blood, better explains all the Motion of
Humors.

Galen observes Two Species of Styptics; and that the Styptic Quality is
greater in the Acerb, than the Austere; but the Explication of the Virtues of
Specific Medicines he imputes to their Substance, which may be more easily made
by the particular Taste of them, which raises or depresses the Fermentation of
Humors, and they frequently have a Similitude or Contrariety to the
Secretitious Humors in Taste and Quality.

The Ancients imputed Sanguification to the Liver; but we, more properly, to
the Gall, and a Mixture of the Salt Lympha's, and also a long Circulation with
the Blood it self.

The Digestion of Meat was explained by Heat, which the Moderns more clearly
deduce from a Fermentation which half putrefies the Food, and dissolves it out
of its hollow Fibers, whether they be Animal or Vegetable; for it is their
Juyces chiefly which are our Food; for the solid Parts turn into Excrements.

But the best Explication we can yet give of the Vital and Animal Spirit, is
not much different from that of Galen, who affirms, That the Vital Spirits are
bred in the Arteries and Heart, and that the Matter of them is from the Air
inspired, and the Vapors of the Blood, and that the Animal Spirits are made
out of the Vital.

This Hypothesis is more fully explained in another Book ascribed to Galen, de
usu Respirationis; Constat autem vires corporis esse ex nervorum tensione,
causa autem tensionis nervi nulla est alia quam spiritus nervum inflans --
spiritum autem voca, non solum vaporem sanguinis, sed etiam aerem inspiratum,
qui ei admiscetur.

The innate Heat differs not from the Vital Spirit, which he deduces from an
unctuous Humor in the Blood, after the same manner as Flame is produced from
the Oil of a Lamp, and both are in a continual Motion, like the Water of a
River.

All the Eructations he imputes to the Air, which, mixed with our Meats, create
Wind, and this Air passes included in the Pores both of our solid and liquid
Meats; and this, upon Fermentation of our Food, is intermixed with its light or
volatile Parts, and gives them that Elasticity observable in all fermented
Liquors; and these Elastic Particles give a strong Pungency to the Taste, and a
strong Odor to the Smell: These rarefie fermented Liquors into Bubbles, and
give the great force in breaking their Vessels; and these easily evaporate into
Air, having that naturally in their Mixture; but that the Spirits are not
purely Aerial, is evident, because they both Smell and Taste of their
Vegetable. These Spirits we artificially separate in Distilling Brandy Spirits,
which are evidently light, oily Parts mixed with a volatile Acid.

Windy Spirits we commonly experience upon the Digestion of our Meats in the
Primae Viae, and there we feel Inflations, and find windy Bubbles in the
Contents of the Intestines; and we observe no Liquor so full of them, as the
fermented be.

All spirituous Liquors of Vegetables inflame our Animal and Vital Spirits, by
producing an Effervescence and Heat in the Blood, and some Affection in the
Nerves, of Tremor, Stupidity, or Giddiness. And since our Juyces are made of
the Vegetable, they are probably fermentiscible like them.

The Semen puts Females into a Fever upon Impregnation; and all Animal Humors
which poison, are putrefying Ferments. The Eggs of Insects ferment the Juyces
of the Plants, into which they are inserted; and there are many Poisonous
Plants which certainly affect both the Blood and Spirits of Animals, which
produce both Fever and Delirium. The greatest Poison for Darts, is believed to
be made of putrid Humors.

It seems impossible to the Ancients, to impute the sudden Running of Pains to
any other Cause; but some of our Humors rarefied into Spirits, or Vapors.
Melancholy Distempers are deduced from Spirits drawn from that Cacochymia. The
Phrenitis from Choleric Spirits, and the Epilepsie from Fumes.

As to the use of the Brain, Galen observes, That the Skins, and outward Part
of the Brain, may be cut away without loss of Sense or Motion; but when the
Medullary Part of the Brain or Nerves is wounded, both perish.

He asserts, That the Nerves bring the Faculty of Motion to the Muscles, by
this Experiment; If a Nerve be cut, or the Spinal Marrow, all the Parts below
the Incision lose their Sense and Motion, but those above preserve it.

He was as much perplexed about the Porosity of the Nerves, as the Moderns; but
neither can otherways explain the Diseases of the Nerves, than by supposing
some Aerial, and innate Animal Particles, like Vapors, passing through the
Nerves, to give them a Tension. And as no Age could ever doubt of the Passage
of the Chyle into the Blood, before the Discovery of the Lacteals; so we are
forced to confess the Contents of the Nerves, though we can no way discern
them; for, upon the Death of an Animal, the Spirits may readily sink into the
Muscles, or Veins, or Lymphatics, and Glandules; or else be so Aerial, as many
Liquors be, which evaporate upon the least approach of Air; or else their
Minute Canals suspend their Liquors, as small Glass-Pipes do: But it seems most
probable, That proper Experiments have not yet been made, by Ligature or
Incisions, in Living Animals, which might demonstrate the Nervine Lympha; and
it is impossible, at present, for us otherwise to explain the Nature of the
Spirits, than by comparing them to Air or Fire, till we can, by some lucky
Experiment, discover the Contents of the Nerves, and their particular Qualities.

I have added Two Appendixes to this Treatise of Animal Humors; The First
describes the Nature of Fevers, and their Ferments; and the Second deduces many
Diseases from the simple Ebullition, Effervescence or Orgasmus of the Blood, on
which most Inflammations, Tumors, Pains, and Fluxes of Humors, depend; and
without a due respect to that Effervescence, none of the mentioned Diseases can
be rationally cured. In the ensuing Treatise I have endeavored to explain the
Opinion of the Ancients, in all their Discourse of Fevers; but we are obliged
to the Ingenious Car. Piso, for giving the first hint of Diseases depending on
an Effervescence of the Serum; but that wanted a farther Explication, because
he knew not the Circulation of Humors, nor the Use of the Glands, nor the true
Nature of the Serum of the Blood, and that the Effervescence is in the Mass of
Blood, and the Serum has only a violent Motion given by the Ebullition, which
forces it to pass those Glands, through which the Fluxion is made; and that
Pains cause Fluxions, only by stopping the Circulation of Humors, by
contracting the Vessels, by help of the Convulsed Nerves; and that all Tumors
happen by the Obstruction, or Stagnation of Humors in the Circulating Vessels.

Books Printed for, and Sold by R. Clavel, at the Peacock in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
THE Church History cleared from the Roman Forgeries and Corruptions found in
the Councils and Baronius: In Four Parts. From the Beginning of Christianity,
to the end of the Fifth General Council, 553. By Thomas Comber, D. D. Dean of
Durham.

Aristophanis Comoediae Duae, Plutus and Nubes, cum Scholiis Graecis Antiquis.
Quibus adjiciuntur Notae quaedam simul cum Gemino Indice. In usum Studiosae
Juventutis.

The Reasons of Praying for the Peace of Jerusalem: In a Sermon Preached before
the Queen at White Hall, on the Fast Day; being Wednesday August 29. 1694. By
Thomas Comber, D. D. Dean of Durham, and Chaplain in Ordinary to Their
Majesty's. Printed by Their Majesty's Special Command.

A Daily Office for the Sick; Compiled out of the Holy Scriptures, and the
Liturgy of our Church; with occasional Prayers, Meditations, and Directions.

The Catechisms of the Church, with Proofs from the New Testament, and some
additional Questions and Answers, divided into Twelve Sections, by Z. J. D. D.
Author of the Book lately Published, Entitled, A Daily Office for the Sick,
with Directions, etc.

A Church Catechism, with a brief and easy Explanation thereof, for the help
of the meanest Capacities and Weakest Memories, in Order to the Establishing
them in the Religion of the Church of England, by T. C. Dean of D.

(...): Or, The Touchstone of Medicines. Discovering the Virtues of
Vegetables, Minerals, and Animals, by their Tastes and Smells. In Two Volumes:
By Sir John Floyer of the City of Lichfield, Knight. M. D. of Queens-College,
Oxford.

The Pantheon, Representing the Fabulous Histories of the Heathen Gods, and
most Illustrious Heroes; in a short, plain and familiar Method, by way of
Dialogue, for the Use of Schools. Written by Fra. Pomey, of the Society of
Jesus; Author of the French and Latin Dictionary, for the Use of the Dauphin.

What Mistakes have happened I desire may be corrected by the Errata's here
annexed.
Page 11. l. 2. it ought to run thus, The Fat is produced from the Buttery part
of Chyle. p. 26. after, and that depends on, is omitted in the last Line
secretitii. 33. l. 18. the stop after sometime. 43. l. 6. so they are, r. which
are. l. 11. cold not old. 44. l. 21. dele as in Rhue. 45. l. 2. r. Cure instead
of are. l. 11. one dram not one Ounce. l. 19. Catchup, divide it from Mango.
l. 48. omit the Comma betwixt Milk and Water. 49. l. ^3. for which Flames, r.
with Flannel. 53. l. 10. dele so. 66. ^^^ 8. r. pungent. 83. l. 25. r. compare.
95. l. 21. r. Hog Fenil. 96. l. 20. r. acid not acrid. 102. l. 16. r. for not
fat. 107. l. 25. r. rapid. 112. l. 22. r. fat Cows, not Faulcon. 114. l. 14. r.
Flowers, not Flames. 117. l. 10. no breach. 127. l. 15. r. soon, not some. 129.
l. 1. r. the. 155. l. 24. r. are. 157. l. 17. r. preter, not pretty. 171. l. 8.
r. Stomach, not Sumach. 181. l. 2. r. Onions, not Crocus. 188. l. 24. r. from,
not above. 199. l. the last. r. Aq. Panatae. 191. l. 1. r. mild, not wild. 202.
l. 1. (...). 206. l. 22. dele as. 208. l. 28. r. of, not or. 209. l. 21. add
less. 211. l. 11. r. for, not so. 224. l. 2. r. Bursa pastoris. dele and. 260.
stop after Italy, the, not they. add of after use. 261. l. 6. r. Oxymels.

THE Preternatural State OF ANIMAL HVMOVRS described, etc.
CHAP. I.
Of Diseases in General, and particularly of those of the Solid Parts.

THE Ancient Doctrine of Hippocrates, divided the Parts of an Animal, into the
Containing and Contained: The Containing are the Vessels, and the Parts
Contained are the Humors, amongst which we reckon the Spirits, which are also
of a Fluid Nature.

The Anatomy of an Embryo evidently confirms this Doctrine; for at its first
formation and increase in the Egg, there appears nothing but Humors and
Membranes containing them, which are plainly of a Nervous Nature.

The first Stamina which appear in an Embryo after Incubation, are probably the
Arteries, which have some Pulse; and from these arise all the Viscera and
Vessels, as Veins, Lymphatics, Nerves, and Glandules.

The Veins, in which the thicker Mass circulates; the Lymphatics into which the
Serum of the Blood is received from the Arteries: The Glands (which are
Conglomerate) are vascular, and are prolongations of the Arteries designed for
the secretion of Humors; the Brain is also vascular; and the Nervous Fibrillae
also, like the other Lymphatics, receive a clear Lympha from the Arteries, and
seem to return their Nervous lympha by the conglobate Glands into the
Lymphatics; the substance of the Spleen, Kidneys, and Liver, is also
Glandulous, arising from the Arteries.

Since the Arteries not only appear first in an Embryo, but also they supply
all the other Vessels with their several Liquors, I do not improbably assert,
That they are the Root of all the Animal Vessels and Solid Parts.

The Fibrillae of the Brain compose the several Membranes of the Body, which
cover the Vessels, Viscera, and constitute the substance of the Lungs, Guts,
Stomach, Skin; and the Flesh of all the Muscles is made up of these Membranous
Fibers, which their Membranous Tendons evidently prove. Nothing is observed in
an Embryo, more hard, firm, and solid, than its Membranes; so that its Bones,
Teeth, Nails, Hair, and Horns, were at first tender Membranous Fibrillae,
stuffed with a viscid Nutriment, from which they have their rigidity and
hardness; so the Woody substance of Vegetables is only a bundle of hollow
tender Pipes; and after the same manner the solidity of the parts of Animals
may be produced.

By the preceding Description we may observe, that all the Parts of the Body
are originally of the same Membranous or Nervous Nature, and therefore they are
really to be accounted Similar, and from the various conformation of the
Similar Parts, and their complications, arise all the Dissimilar Parts; so from
the Veins, Nerves, Bones, Membranes, all the Organical Parts are framed, which
are designed for sensible Impressions, as the Eye, or Ear, etc. or some Animal
Motion, as the Muscles; or the Preparation of the Animal Humors, as the
Stomach and Guts; or the Secretion of them, as the Glandulous Viscera.

Since all the Animal Parts, are either Vessels which make the Solid Parts, or
else Humors and Spirits, which make the Fluid, I will divide all the Diseases
of an Animal according to those Parts; viz. into, 1. The Diseases of the Solid
Parts. 2. The Diseases of the Humors. 3. The Diseases of the Spirits, which
are the most Fluid, or Aerial Parts of our Humors.


1. The Intemperies of the Solid Parts, depends on,

1. The Humors circulating through them, as the Blood and Spirits, and they
communicate either a sense of Heat or Coldness to them. A dry Intemperies is
only a defect of the Nutritious Juices, and a moist Intemperies a fullness of
the Nutritious Liquor. 2. The Humor which nourishes the Solid Parts, must give
them their quality with their Nutriment; an oily hot Blood will give a
Nutriment of the same quality: An Acid Nutriment will produce a Coldness in the
Parts, a Viscid Nutriment gives a Dryness, and a Serous an Hydropical Humor.
And since the Intemperies depends on those Humors, the correcting of their
several preternatural States, cures all these preternatural dispositions of the
Similar Parts; for these may be esteemed as Symptoms depending on the other,
and need not be more particularly Treated of. But I will only add, that the
Transient Intemperies depends on the circulating Humors, and is soon altered,
but the permanent, which depends on nutriment, more difficultly. 2. The due
Magnitude of a Part, is either increased by too much Nourishment, or by fullness
of viscid Humors impacted, and the due natural Magnitude is abated by the
defect of the Nutriment, or the obstruction of the Vessels by viscid Humors;
so that this Species of the Diseases of the Solid Parts, depends on the
different state and motion of Humors, and that being altered, the
preternatural Magnitude is Cured. 3. The natural Cavities of the Solid part or
its Vessels, are chiefly obstructed by viscid or coagulated Humors, and on
them depends the Cure of Obstructions, which also sometimes depends on an
External Tumor compressing the Vessels, or the growing together of its Vessels
after an Ulcer. 4. The Tone of a Solid part is altered by the Relaxation of its
Nervous Fibers, which happens through defect of the Spirits, or the obstruction
of the Vessels by viscid Humors; and therefore this Diseased State is cured by
supplying the quantity, or altering the quality of the Humors. The curing of
the vitiated Tone of a part which depends on too much Extension, or Humidity of
it, belongs to Surgery. 5. The Continuity of the Solid Parts is vitiated by
the Plethora of Humors, which burst the Vessels; or the Corrosive quality,
which eats them. The Cure of Wounds properly belongs to Surgeons. 6. The
Natural and voluntary Motion of Parts depends on the Influx of Spirits, and
other right dispositions of the Organs, so that all preternatural alterations
of Motion, whether increased, lessened, depraved, or abolished, depend on the
different disposition of Organs and Motions of the Spirit, and by rectifying
them are Cured. 7. The Pain of the Solid Parts is the corrugation, or violent
agitation of their Fibers when the Spirits are irritated by sharp Humors, or
the Motion of Humors obstructed; from Choler is a hot Burning pain; a cool
gnawing pain from Acid Melancholy Humors; a Corrosive pain, neither Hot nor
Cold, from the Salso-Acid Serum; a Distending pain from rarefied windy Spirits;
a Heavy Pain from Pituitous Humors; a Beating pain from the Pulse of the
Artery; a Tensive pain from the distention of the Parts by the fullness of
Humors. These Diseases from Pain are only Cured by evacuating the quantity,
and altering the quality of the Humors. All other Pains depending on external
Objects, relate to Surgery. 8. The Natural Figure of the Solid Parts may be
altered, the Cure of which belongs to Surgery, when it does not depend on
the fullness or vicious State of Humors. 9. The number of Parts exceeding or
deficient, is properly supplied or abated by Surgery. 10. The undue
Situation or connection of Parts in Fractures, Luxations, Hernia's, or the
Prolapsus of the Anus or Vterus, are to be rectified by Chirurgical means.
These are the chief preternatural Indispositions of the Solid Parts, which
hinder their Use and Actions; and they are called the Diseases of the Solid
Parts, or alterations from their Natural Constitution, State, or Qualities; and
I have observed, how far each of them depends on the preternatural State of
Humors as their Cause, that they may be more easily Cured by removing that,
and that the Species of Diseases might not unnecessarily be multiplied, but
reduced to the sewest Heads.

CHAP. II.
Of the Preternatural State of the Humors, or the Diseases of the Fluid Parts.

THE Fluid Part of an Animal Body is usually called the Humors, with which not
only the Sanguineous, or Chyle, or Lymphatic Vessels do abound, but also all
the Nervous and Membranous Tubes or Fibrillae, which are filled with a
Spirituous Liquor, which is the Vehicle of the Animal Spirits, and many other
Humors, secreted by their peculiar Glands from the Blood or Chyle, are
contained in their Vessels, or rejected by Nature out of the Body. Although
these Humors be of different kinds in an Adult Animal, yet whilst the
Animalculum begins to increase in the Egg, they all have their Production from
the white of the Egg, colliquated by the heat of the Hen; and that Liquor which
begins to circulate is white and serous at first, not unlike the Albuminous
Nutriment by which it is Increased, but by the digestive heat of the Hen, and
the long circulation, the several Parts of the Sanguineous Mass are produced.

The Fibrous Parts of the Blood are produced from the Viscid Particles of the
Albuminous Liquor, which, upon boiling, are made thick and white, of which
Color the Fibers of the Blood appear when they are washed with Water.

The Red Part of the Blood is from the Oily and Acid Parts long digested into a
Purple Color, and that tinges the whole Mass of Blood.

The Serum or watery Vehicle, in which the other Parts swim, is only the
Albuminous Liquor less digested.

The Secretitious Humors of Animals arrive not at their Perfection in an
Embryo, till after a long Circulation, Digestion, and Volatilization of their
Principles, for their Spirits are poor and phlegmatic, their Choler but a
little bitter, nor their Lympha very salt, nor their Blood much vitriolic; for
these Qualities are the Products of a stronger Heat, and a longer Digestion.

In an Animal brought forth, the Chyle is the first and original Liquor, from
which the Blood receives its several Parts.

1. Its Fibrous Parts are from the Caseous Parts of Chyle.

2. Its Oily Red Part from the Butyrous Parts of Chyle.

3. Its Vitriolic Acid from the Acid Tartar of Chyle.

4. Its Serum is the Chyle it self in a middle state betwixt Chyle and Blood,
whose waterish Particles are the same as was in the Chyle it self.

These are the Principles of Animal Humors, out of which all the several kinds
of them, according to their several degrees of Digestion or Mixture of those
Principles, are naturally constituted and distinguished from one another.

These following Humors are separated from Chyle it self, by the Conglomerate
Glands, and therefore have the same Mixture of Principles, and a like Digestion
as the Chyle it self.

1. The Spittle and the Pancreatic Juice, whose Chylous Lympha's agree in their
Use, Color, and Glandules.

2. The Lympha of the Guts and Stomach.

3. The Mucus of the Windpipe and Nose, and many other Cavities, as that of
the Joints, is of a more Viscid Consistence, useful for the defending the
Membranes of those Parts.

4. The Spirituous Lympha of the Brain, Eyes, and Nerves, serving for a Vehicle
of the Spirits.

5. The Milk in the Breasts.

6. The Seminal Lympha's in both Sexes.

7. The Fat of Chyle is produced from the Buttery Parts.

From the Serum of the Blood, is produced the Salt Lympha.

1. The Lympha of the Lymphatics. 2. The Nutritious Juice in the Amnion, which
is Saltish, and is designed for the Nourishment of the Embryo. 3. The Salt
Lympha in the Pericardium, necessary for the Motion of the Muscles of the
Heart. 4. The Salt Lympha of the Eyes.
As the Milky Lympha's are designed chiefly for the producing of the Chyle,
which is the first Digestion in an Animal; so the Salt Lympha's are designed
for the turning of it into the Serum of the Blood, by its Saltness, which must
be esteemed the second degree of Digestion in Animal Humors.

The third Digestion is when the Serum is fully sanguified, and the
Secretitious Humors prepared, which require the highest Digestion, as the
Spirits, the Semen, the Choler, and the Vitriolic Acid of the Blood.

From the Blood it self well digested are separated these two Humors.

1. The Choler, which is precipitated from the Blood by the Vitriolic Acid of
the Spleen, and was its Oily and Red Part.

2. The Sub-acid and Slimy Humor of the Spleen, which is separated by the
Spleen from the Viscid and Vitriolic Particles of the Blood; and this chiefly
serves the Separation of the Choler from the Blood; but the Choler is designed
for the correcting the Crudities of the Chyle; and by this means the Liver
sanguifies, and helps Chylification.

I have given this large Catalogue of the Animal Humors, that the original
Liquors, from whence each Secretitious Humor is prepared, may be observed,
upon whose healthful Constitution the perfect natural Temper of each Secreted
Humor depends.

It would cause endless Repetitions to treat of the preternatural State of each
Secreted Humor, for they have the same as their original Liquors, which are
the Chyle, the Serum, and the Blood it self.

1. The Chyle must be well prepared by Fermentation from proper Food, and
acquire that degree of Fermentation which is natural to each Animal.

2. The Chyle ought to be well changed, and digested into Serum.

3. The Serum must be truly sanguified by a long Digestion.

4. The Quantity of Humors ought to be proportionable to their Vessels, and to
be contained in them.

5. Humors ought to have their natural Circulations, as the Blood, the Lympha,
and Spirits; and the Secretitious Humors, their full Secretion; and those that
be unuseful, their expulsion out of the Body; and those that be useful, their
return into the Blood, as their common Ocean; or to be preserved in their
several Vessels.

These are the natural States of the Humors, which are necessary for the
healthful Constitution of Animals, and the contrary to those many Alterations
from them in an unhealthful or a diseased State; of which, I shall make the
following Scheme.

First, If the Animal Humors are ill prepared or digested, or fermented to any
degree below their natural State, some of the cold Cacochymia's are produced;
of which, I shall reckon these several degrees.

1. A Mucilaginous State of the Chyle, or other Humors, and this is what is
commonly called the Pituitous Cacochymia.

2. The Tartareous or Acerb State of Chyle, or other Humors, and they appear
in Bodies subject to Sowreness, and is a higher degree of Digestion than the
Pituitous State, but both stand below the natural Digestion or Fermentation of
the Meat.

3. A Flatulent Temper or State of the Chyle, or other Humors, when the
Spirits of the Chyle are begun to separate, and have half fermented the
Chylaceous Mass, and then it has the State of New Drink not fully ripened by
Fermentation.

4. A Serosity of Blood is the natural consequent of a Mucilaginous,
Tartareous, or Flatulent Chyle.

Secondly, If the Chyle be over-fermented or digested too much, it becomes
Bitter, Acrid, Rancid, or Putrid, for we often perceive the Meat in the Stomach
either Burning, or Bitter, or Oily, or Stinking; and from this State of Chyle
are produced these several degrees of the hot Cacochymia in the Blood, and
other Humors.

1. A Bilious, Bitter, Acrid State of Humors; and this is known by the
Bitterness in the Stomach, and the Abhorrence of bitter things, and the
continual Heat in the Habit of the Body, as well as the Passions of the Mind,
as Anger, Revenge, Courage.

2. A Viscid State of Blood, which produces Pains and Inflammations, and is
evident upon Bleeding, when there is a defect in the Serum, or a Viscid
Consistence of the Chyle, upon the top of the Blood, which is called its
Siziness.

3. The Vitriolic Acidity of the Blood, which appears by any black Humor
evacuated, and by the Affections of Fear and Sadness.

4. The Serum of the Blood acquires a Salt Acrimony, which corrodes and eats
the Gums, infects the Skin with Spots, and is the Hot Scurvey.

5. The Putrefaction of any Humor is the highest resolution or dissolution of
its Principles, from that State and Mixture which made it the Humor of a
particular Animal; of which, these several Species are very evident;

1. Diseases depending on an inward Ferment, altered by the ill use of the Six
Non-Naturals, as Fevers intermitting, with the several Symptoms attending them.
2. Those Diseases which depend wholly on an outward Ferment received into, 1.
The Flesh; as Hydrophobia, by the Bite of a Mad-Dog; or the Poison of any
Venomous Animal, by its Bite or Sting. 2. The Serum, by the Infection of the
touch of a Salt Humor, to which the Morphews, Scab, Pox, and Scald-Head, are
referrable, and Leprosy; all which are in some measure Infectious, by a
Corrosive Humor. 3. All Venomous Medicines which corrode and ferment the
Humors, become Poisonous to the Animal. 4. All Malignant Fevers, as the
Smallpox, Measles, and Plague, or Pestilential Fevers, have their original
from the Malignity of the Air, and the Poisonous Sulphurs of the Earth. 5.
Worms and Lice are either produced by an Egg received into the Animal, or the
Putrefaction of its Humors.

Thirdly, If the Chyle be very plentiful, it breeds the following Diseases.

1. An over-abundance of Milk in the Breasts of Women.

2. A Satyriasis, or an abundance of Seminal Lympha's.

3. A Fatness, or over-growing of the habit of the Muscular Flesh, or the great
quantity of Fat, both which is called an Obesity, or too Fat, with an abundance
of the Chylous Lympha's.

4. An undue increase of the Viscera, or other Parts, whilst the others decay,
as in the Rickets, and the Imposthumations of the Viscera, especially the
Liver. The Rickets are a Species of the Palsy.

5. A Plethora of Blood.

Fourthly, If the Chyle, or other Nutritious Humors, be wanting or deficient,
these several kinds of Defects are produced.

1. A Defect of Milk in the Breasts. 2. A Defect of the Semen in Sterility. 3.
An Atrophy of the Body, or any part of it, or the Viscera. 4. A Defect of the
Saliva in Thirst.
The following Diseases depend on the vitiated Motion of Humors.

All Obstructions depend on the stoppage of the Motion of the Animal Humors
through their Vessels.

I. The Obstruction of the Chyle-Vessels, which produces the Tumors of the
Mesentery, and its Glands. II. The Obstruction of the Blood Vessels. 1. As in
the Polypus, and suffocating Catarrhs. 2. The Reflux of Blood is stopped in
Inflammations and Tumors, Varices, and Haemorrhoids.
III. The Secretion of Humors through their several Glands is hindered. 1. In
the Jaundice the Choler is hindered from its Secretion. 2. In the Diseases of
the Spleen the Separation of the Vitriolic Slimy Humor is stopped, and that
evacuated into the Stomach. 3. The Secretion of the Salt lympha is hindered in
the Scrophula, and in Catarrhs; or else of the Milky lympha's in the cooler
kind, and in the Tumors of the Breasts. 4. The Secretion of Animal Spirits is
hindered through the Glands of the Brain: In Apoplexies, Lethargies, or any
other sleepy Distempers.


Fifthly, The Motion of the Animal Humors, which are excrementitious, are
suppressed in the following Diseases.

1. In an Ischuria, which is a Stoppage of Urine. 2. In a want of Stools, or
Astrictio Alvi. 3. In the stoppage of Transpiration or Sweat. 4. In a
Suppression of the Menses. 5. In a Suppression of the Lochia. 6. In the long
retaining of a Mola. 7. In the Suppression of the Haemorrhoids.
Sixthly, The preternatural Evacuation of Nutritious Humors out of the Body,
are, 1. By a continual Vomiting. 2. By a Diarrhaea or Looseness. 3. By a
Diabetes. 4. By a Ptyalismus. 5. By a Gonorrhaea. 6. By the Fluor Albus. 7. By
too much Sweating. 8. By an Abortion. 9. By an Epiphora or Flux of Tears. 10.
Incontinence of Vrin.


These are the Fluxes which cause Diseases.

Seventhly, The Evacuations of Blood, are,

1. The Bleeding at Nose. 2. Spitting of Blood from the Throat or Lungs. 3. The
great Flux of the Haemorrhoids. 4. The Flux of Blood, like the washing of Meat,
in Fluxu Hepatico. 5. Too great a Flux of the Menses. 6. The Pissing of Blood.
7. The Vomiting of Blood.
Eighthly, The preternatural Evacuation of Serous Humors into the Cavities of
the Body, are,

1. In an Ascites, when the Water fills the Cavities of the Belly. 2. In the
Dropsy of the Breast, or Head, or Testicles, it fills those particular
Cavities. 3. In an Anasarca it fills the Muscular Habit of the Body.
These Diseases depend on the vitiated Motion of Animal Spirits, and their
preternatural Qualities.

First, The Motion of the Animal Spirits is stopped in the Nerves by the
Viscidity of their Succus Nervosus.

1. In those belonging to half the Body, or the whole, in Palsies. 2. In those
belonging to the Heart, or Pulse, in Fainting, or Syncope's. 3. In the Nerves
of the Eyes, in a Gutta Serena. 4. In those of the Ears, in a Deafness. 5. In
those of the Tongue and Nose, in the loss of their Smell and Taste. 6. In those
of the Stomach, in the want of Appetite. 7. In the Nerves of the Generating
Organs, in Venere languida. 8. In those of the Oesophagus, in deglutitione
impedita.
Secondly, The Motion of the Animal Spirits into the Senses is continued longer
than usual, and this Expansion is called Vigiliae, or want of Sleep, and
depends on a hot Flatulency, or Elasticity of Spirits.

Thirdly, The Animal Spirits are sometimes irritated, and violently agitated in
particular Parts by some ungrateful Object: and this is called Pain:

Whose Species are,

1. Cephalalgia, or Pain of the Head. 2. Cardialgia, or Pain at the Stomach. 3.
Colica, or Pain in the Stomach or Guts. 4. Odontalgia, or Pain in the Teeth. 5.
Otalgia, or Pain in the Ear. 6. Stranguria, or Pain in the making of Vrin, from
sharp Humors. 7. Calculus, or Pain in the Vrin Passages, from the Stone. 8.
Podagra, or Pain in the Joints. 9. Arthritis Scorbutica. 10. All the
Inflammations and Ulcers following them cause great Pain:
Whose Species are,

1. Aphthae, or Inflammations of the Mouth. 2. Angina, or Inflammations of the
Throat. 3. Inflammations of the Uvula, and Tonsils, and Gums. 4. Parotis, or
Inflammations of the Glands about the Ears. 5. The Inflammation of the Stomach
or Intestines. 6. The Inflammation of the Anus, and Haemorrhoids. 7. The
Inflammation of the Liver or Spleen. 8. Nephritis, or the Inflammation of the
Kidneys. 9. Phrenitis, or the Inflammation of the Membranes of the Brain. 10.
Ophthalmia, or the Inflammation of the Eyes. 11. Peripneumonia, the
Inflammation of the Lungs. 12. Pleuritis, the Inflammation of the Pleura and
Muscles of the Breast. 13. Inflammations of the Breasts. 14. Rheumatismus, or
the Inflammations of the Muscles of the Limbs in general, or else of some
particular Muscles, as those of the Hip, in the Ischias; or the Back, in
Lumbago. 15. Inflammation of the Stones.
By the continuance of the Inflammations, Imposthumes and Ulcers are bred in
all the Parts of the Body, the chief of which, are,

1. Vomiea, or an Abcess in the Lungs contained in a Bladder. 2. Empyema, or a
collection of Matter in the Cavity of the Breast. 3. Phthisis, or an Ulcer in
the Lungs. 4. Dysenteria, or an Ulcer in the Intestines. 5. Tenesmus, or an
Ulcer in the Intestinum rectum. 6. Ulcers of the Eyes. 7. Ulcers of the Kidneys
and Bladder. 8. Ulcers of the Anus. 9. Ulcers of the Viscera, as Liver, Spleen.
10. Ulcers of the Glands in the Scrophula or King's Evil. 11. Ulcers of the
Mouth and Throat, Nose or Ears, Gums and Stomach. 12. Gonorrhaea, or Ulcers of
the Prostatae.
All these Ulcers may conveniently be treated of immediately after the
Instammations of their several parts, to which each Ulcer must be referred.

Because the Fever attending Inflammations for the most part, though at first
it occasions them, yet afterward it depends on the Tumor and Pain; I chose to
referr them to the Class of Pains, rather than to that of Fevers; and also,
because many Inflammations depend on other causes than Fevers; but all are
attended with great Pain.

Fourthly, The Animal Spirits are some time in an explosive Motion, by which
they cause Convulsions, which depend much on the hottest Flatulency of Humors;
as,

1. Epilepsia is a Convulsion of all the outward Parts, with a falling down
suddenly. 2. Passio Hysterica is a Convulsion of the inward Parts, as the
Lungs, Diaphragma, Mesentery, Womb, and Muscles of the Belly. 3. Chorea Sti
Viti, is a Species of Convulsion observed in the Lameness of Girls, before
their Puberty, with shaking of their Leg and Hand. 4. The Convulsions of
Children from Pain, as in the breeding of Teeth, Gripes, or Worms. 5. The
Convulsion from Serous Matter in the Heads of Children, or the Metastesis of a
Malignant Fever thither. 6. The Palpitation of the Heart is a Convulsion of it.
7. Singultus is a Convulsion of the Stomach and Diaphragma. 8. Coughing is a
Convulsive Motion of the Breast. 9. Sneezing is a slight Convulsion from
Humors irritating the Nose. 10. Priapismus is a Convulsion of the Penis, which
causes Painful Erection of it.
Fifthly, The Animal Spirits have sometimes a violent, tumultuous, or restless
Motion in the Brain, by which the Judgment is depraved, and the Idaea's
confused.

1. Mania is a furious Motion of the Animal Spirits, with the Passion of Anger
and Boldness; these Spirits are from a Rancid, Choleric Blood.

2. Melancholia is a restless Motion of the Spirits, joined with the Passion of
Fear and Sadness; from a Vitriolic State of Blood.

3. Furor uterinus is a Delirium joined with an immoderate Appetite of Venery,
in which case the Spirits, as well as the other Humors, are tinctured with the
Seminal Faetid Lympha.

Sixthly, The Animal Spirits acquire some crude or mixed Flatuosity; or become
windy, as in bottled Liquors, or the Spirits of those not fully fermented.
These Distempers happen in a flatulent Cacochymia.

1. Vertigo, which is a vertiginous Motion of Spirits.

2. Tympanites is a permanent Inflation of the Membranes of the Abdomen, by
flatulent Spirits.

3. Asthma is the Inflation of the Membranes of the Lungs, and of the Membranes
covering the Muscles of the Thorax, but does not continue long.

4. Incubus is an Inflation of the Membranes of the Stomach, which hinders the
Motion of the Diaphragma, and Lungs, and Pulse, and Motion, but with a sense of
a weight oppressing the Breast.

5. A windy Inflation of the Vterus, after Childbed, in many Hysterical Women,
and those especially who have often Miscarried, are sensible of Wind passing from
the Womb.

6. The flatulent Tumors of particular Parts.

Seventhly, The Animal Spirits are unfit for the Motions of Sense or Reasoning,
or Memory, by their depauperated or waterish State, or some Indisposition in
the Canals of the Nervous Fibers in all Fools, which we call Morofis, and the
low, phlegmatic, or waterish, or tartareous Cacochymia's. Each Cacochymia
produces Animal Spirits of a peculiar Temper suitable to it; so that by
observing the Cacochymia, we may know the particular ill State of the Spirits;
and this cannot be cured without altering the other. The Spirits are a Secreted
Humor, and often circulating through the Blood; they must partake of its
several Cacochymia's; and this Observation is most certain; qualis chylus,
talis est sanguis; qualis sanguis, talis est succus nervosus, caeterique omnes
humores secretiti.

CHAP. III.
Of the Preparation of Animal Humors by Fermentation.

FRom the Crude and Watery Juices of Vegetables, we prepare all our Wines by
Fermentation, which dissolves the Slimy Mucilage of the Grapes, or other Fruit,
into a more fluid Consistence; it separates the Acid Particles from the more
Earthy, and volatilizes the oleous Particles, and unites them with the Acid;
for we observe that all fermented liquors (whether from Fruits or Corn,) are
composed out of a sweet rarefied and well digested Mucilage, and of Acid Oleous
Particles, (which are their pungent Spirits,) all which being dissolved in a
Watery Vehicle, the fermented liquors obtain a clear, lympid, and equal
Consistence.

The Particles which compose our Chyle, are very like those mentioned of
fermented liquors, and by the following Discourse it will be manifest, that the
Chyle has its preparation by being fermented as other Liquors be.

Chyle has the same Principles as Milk, a viscidity from the Caseous Parts, an
oyliness from the Butyraceous Parts, and an Acidity from the Tartareous, which
we taste in Buttermilk; besides, a waterish Serosity, in which the other
Principles swim and are mixed.

It is scarce doubted by any of our Modern Physicians, that the Chyle is
prepared by Fermentation, when they consider the nature of the Saliva, how much
it ferments Animal Humors* when any one is Bitten by a Mad Dog or other
Venomous Creature; and the most familiar use of the Runnet is to ferment our
Milk, and give a strong foetor to Cheese. Besides the Saliva, there is observed
in the Stomach of Animals, a slimy lympha issuing from the Glandules of the
Cavities there, which being Slimy, Foetid, sub-Acid, or salso-Acid, it
resembles the natural temper of the Rumet, and likewise its use, by being an
Animal Ferment.

In Birds there are no Relics of the former Digestion in their Craws, or
Gizards, and therefore the lympha of the Primae Viae, suffices for a Ferment
without the Acid Relics, and the same suffices in the first digestion of the
Succus Nutritious in an Embryo.

That I may the better explain the Fermentative Nature of the Saliva, and the
other lympha's of the Stomach, I will compare it with Barm, which,

1. Is separated from a fermenting Liquor, and contains the Spirits of it in
Bubbles; so the Saliva is separated from the Chyle new mixed with the Serum of
the Blood, and from thence it has its preternatural Acid, Bitter, or Salt Taste.

2. Barm has viscid Parts, it smells strong, and gives a heat on the Tongue. I
have Distilled a vinous Spirit from it, so that it contains Spirits fit to
ferment. The Saliva is viscid, and gives a Milky crust, when dried, on the
Tongue; it is naturally frothy, and it much weakens the digestion to Spit much;
it has no considerable Smell or Taste, because it ought to take sapid Particles
from other Bodies in most Animals, but Birds who swallow whole Grains can have
no Taste. Wheat Meal, with the white of an Egg, ferments in the want of Barm,
and the white of an Egg is a glandulous Milky lympha.

3. The Spirits included in Barm, agitate the Spirits of new Drink, so the
Saliva contains an oily Acid in it, which gives it a whiteness like Chyle, and
these active Particles give a ferment ative Motion to those included in the new
Meats.

This foetor in the lympha of the Stomach, is from the Spirits of the Animal,
(for it resembles the Smell of each Animal, and no foetor is produced without a
high fermentation.) This therefore easily communicates its Internal agitation,
(when the Food comes chewed and broken into the Stomach) to the oily Acid
Particles of the Alimentary Mass, whose viscid Particles are rarefied by the
mentioned agitation, and the oily Acid dissolved in the liquid part, and hence
is the Color and Consistence given to Chyle.

That the Meat in the Stomach is dissolved by fermentation, appears by the
following observations.

The Contents in the Stomach, after their dissolution, strike the Nose with a
pungent Acidity, from the volatilization of the Tartar of the Chyle.

There is also in the Contents in the Stomach a flatulency, and a great foetor,
which are the natural effects of fermentations in Vegetables, and of
putrefaction in Animals, which is the highest degree of fermentation.

We know not yet any Menstruum which can so suddenly dissolve Flesh Meats, but
we find that they soon Putrefie, and those that be half Putrefied, are easiest
digested.

As to our Drink, that is wholly prepared by Fermentation; and we find, by our
Experience, that all fermented Meats and Drinks are easiliest digested; and
those unfermented, by Barm or Leaven, are very hardly digested.

But the fermentation of our Chyle will appear more evidently, by observing,
that whatsoever Medicine helps the fermentation of Wines, those of the same
nature promote also the preparation of our Chyle, which is by raising its
fermentation.

1. Calx viva and Gypsum put into fermenting Wines, help their Fermentation, by
precipitating their Crude Tartar which fixes the oily Spirits, and coagulates
them. After the same manner Physicians, by their fixed and volatile Salt, and
testaceous Medicines, exalt the fermentation of the Blood, and free the oils
from the austere Tartar, with which the Medicines mentioned are coagulated, and
pass off by Stool or Urine, and the same Medicines help the digestion in the
Stomach.

2. Aromatics, as Cubebs, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, Orris, or Cloves, are usually put
into crude poor Wines, to give them more oily Spirits, and to excite their
languid Motion; and for the same end crude Wines are included in resinous
Vessels; and we add Resin, or shavings of Fir to vapid Wines. These are easily
turned into a flame by Fire, and these therefore more readily produce heat and
ebullition in fermenting Wines, which is only a less degree of Fire, from a
less intense Motion of its oily Acid Particles.

Physicians for the same end use all sorts of Aromaticks, and Resinous Plants,
that by their volatile Oils, they might agitate and rarefie the Oily Particles,
both in the Chyle and Blood, and by that means raise their fermentations.

3. Bitter Acrid Plants help the fermentation and depuration of all Malt
liquors, and therefore Mustard and Ginger are sometimes added to Bcer or Cider,
to promote their fermentation; and Hops or Wormwood have the same effect.

Our Blood and Humors are much heated by Bitter and Acrid Medicines; they
excite our Appetite, and hasten the digestion of our Food, as every ones
experience does evince.

4. The Greeks use Sulphur in the preparation of Crude Wines, and in many
Places, the Vessels are sulphurated with Brimstone; by experience we are
taught, that Metallic Sulphurs exagitate the Oils of Animals, and thereby
promote their Chylification and Sanguisication.

5. Vinous Liquors abound with an Oleous Acid Spirit, whereby they much promote
the fermentation of other Liquors, and for this reason vapid Wines are put upon
the Lees of more noble Wines to give them a Spirit, and for the same reason we
Stum our crude Wines to new ferment them, and to renew their Spirits.

In the crudities of the Chyle, all Animal ferments are useful, as old Cheese,
in which the Runnet lies: Vinous Liquors which have undergone a fermentation,
are apt to produce the same in other Liquors; so Spirituous Liquors cause the
Chyle and Blood to boil and ferment, and sometimes produce a Fever.

We use the inward skins of Gizards of Hens and Pigeons, in which the Animal
ferment lies, to help our digestions; we invent new Sauces and Pickles, which
resemble the Animal ferment in Taste and Virtue, as the Salso-Acid Gravies of
Meat; the Salt Pickles of Fish, Anchoves, Oysters; Pickled Fruits, as Mangoes,
Olives, Capers, Chatchops, and an Indian liquor; all which promote the
fermentation of our Meats, and so produce a Surseit; sometimes French Wines and
Rhenish heat the Blood and ferment the Chyle.

The same Medicines not only ferment both the Chyle and Wine, but also the
fermentation is restrained and stopped by the same alike.

The heat of the Fire promotes fermentation, and much Cold checks it; so we
apply heating Medicines or Skins outwardly to a weak Stomach, and we find all
Cooling things inwardly and outwardly to cause pain and gripes in weak
digestions.

Acids, Fats, austere Juices, and those that are very Mucilaginous and Watery,
are difficultly fermented by Art, but hinder both the fermentation of Wines and
the Chylaceous Mass, for these Tastes hinder the agitation of the Oleous Acid
Particles, because they consist of Particles difficultly moved.

This fermentation by which the Chyle and Blood are prepared, may be depraved
both ways, for it may be depressed under its natural State, or exalted above
that degree which is suitable to the natural temper of any Animal, of both
which Errors, and the Cachochymia's depending on them, I shall next discourse.

But I shall first farther observe, that though the Chyle is prepared by
fermentation, yet all other humors arising from it, as the Serum and Blood,
and all the secretitious humors from each of them, are prepared only by
circulation and a longer digestion, by mixture and secretion; for by these they
may acquire their peculiar Crases and Tastes; by the ferment of the Stomach,
the various kinds of Meats are changed into the natural temper of each Animal,
and the lympha of the Stomach has most eminently the Specisic Taste of each
Animal, as will appear to any person who will taste it.

If the Chyle be rightly fermented, all the humors arising from it are duly
prepared; but if the fermentation of that is vitiated, all the other humors
produced from vitiated Chyle, retain a Tincture of its defect in their
preparation.

Whatsoever ferments the Meat, helps and raises the digestion of all other
humors, and therefore we need not enquire for any ferment or other digestives,
for the particular humors of Animals, besides those which ferment the
Chylaceous Mass.

All the conditions requisite to a fermentation, are to be found only in the
Stomach, and its fermentation very clearly explained, by comparing the
digestion of the Stomach with Artificial fermentations of Vegetables; for we
first pound the Plant which is to be fermented, and dilute it with Water in
which some ferment is dissolved, and afterward it is to be placed in some warm
place till it acquires a Vinous acid smell, and then it is fit for the yielding
a brisk inflammable Spirit.

After the same manner our Meat is chewed and swallowed into the Stomach, and
there mixed with the Saliva, and the viscid slime of the Stomach, which are its
ferments.

The Stomach has a gentle digesting heat from the neighboring viscera, which
are Sanguineous, whose warmth digests the Meat into a pulp, which smells
sub-acid and foetid, and that stimulating, the Stomach excites its expulsion;
for if it should stay longer there, it would become putrid; but no more is
requisite, but the loosening the natural Texture of our Aliments, and making
the oily acid parts and the viscid free to dissolve into an Alimentary
Tincture, which is only the juyces of Vegetables and Animals dissolved out of
their fibrous Vessels, and then they will as easily ferment as they did in the
Plant or Animal in which they were first produced. The capacity of the Stomach
makes it fit for a fermenting Vessel, and its Membranous substance makes it fit
for the distention necessary upon a fermentation, and its two Orifices are
prepared for the letting forth of the rarefied Spirits in ructus or windiness,
the common effects of all fermented liquors.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Depressed Fermentation of Humors in General.

WHen a slimy, acerb, or flatulent Chyle is produced, and when from thence a
watery serous Blood is digested, we must acknowledge that both the Chyle and
Blood have had too weak a fermentation, and by that are ill prepared; of which
defect we usually observe these Causes.

First, When the Meats we use have some vicious Quality, which gives the same
Tincture to the Chyle, and that is not corrected by the Digestion, as in Meats
hardly fermented, as those which have a tough consistence: All Meats of a
Watery, Mucilaginous, Acerb, Viscous, Oleous, Acid, Austere, and Fat Taste, and
such as the Meat is in any eminent quality, such is the Chyle, and the state of
Humors thence arising, for we observe a Mucilage in crude Corn; and those
Green Sickness Girls, who eat great quantities of Oat-Meal, abound with an
extraordinary quantity of crude Mucilaginous Chyle which oppresses their
Stomachs, and stusss their Lungs, and gives a great Paleness to the whole habit
of the body.

Not only the quality of our Diet depresses the fermentation in the Stomach,
but the quantity may be more than the ferment can concoct or suffice to
dissolve and agitate; so by frequent Debauches, the Digestion is weakened, and
after too great a fullness the Stomach is oppressed, and flatuosities produced
in it.

Secondly, The Preternatural state of the ferment which ought to be separated
from the Chyle, well circulated and exalted in the Blood, by the Glands of the
primae viae, and to have the faetid Animal Spirits mixed with a Chylous
Mucilage, and Tartareous acid, whilst it retains, its healthful Constitution,
but it is altered from this state in a depressed fermentation.

1. When the ferment of the Stomach is vapid, or less impregnate with the
faetid Animal Spirits, when its consistence is too viscid or phlegmatic, or
its acidity too acerb or crude and less volatile.

2. The Bile if it be insipid, watery, viscous, depresses the fermentation of
the Chylaceous Mass, for by its bitterness and acrimony, it ought to correct
the acidities of it, which are produced by the fermentation in the Stomach, and
by the same Tastes, like bitter Plants in other Liquors help their depuration,
and fermentation, and with the Acid unite into an Animal volatile Salt.

3. These ill qualities of the Ferment and the Bile depend on a crude, watery,
austere, mucilaginous Blood, derived from Parents, or otherways produced; for
the ferment will retain the crude state and temper of the Humors, from which
it is derived.

4. A remiss Circulation of the Blood ill digests, and worse separates the
ferment from it.

5. Waterish Humors, which ought to have been separated by other Glands, being
detained in the Blood, they deprave and enervate the ferment, which are also
transmitted to the Stomach with it; so by the suppression of the Menses, or
other Evacuations, and especially by Fevers, and a Catarrh, the Stomachical
ferment is vitiated.

6. Great Evacuations which carry off the nutritious Humors, weaken the
ferment, as Haemorrhagies, which depauperate the Blood by Vomitings and
Looseness, which carry off the fermenting Mass, Convulsive distempers, and all
Nervous effects, which spend the Animal Spirits, or divert them from the
Stomach.

7. Some of the six Non-Naturals alter the ferment, as our Diet, which is
mentioned above, and Idleness, or want of Motion, hinders the secretion of the
ferment, and distribution of the Chyle, from which it is prepared.

Sleep causes the same Stagnation of Humors, if immoderate.

Fear stops the Circulation of Blood, and Secretion of the Humors.

Too much heat in the Summer time causes the Blood and Humors to evaporate
their volatile parts, which promote the Fermentation.

In a cold and moist Region the Ferment is too slimy and waterish.

Thirdly, Digestion is vitiated by the Diseases of the Stomach; when it wants
its Rugosity, the Meat descends undigested too soon, or is vomited up; when it
is stopped by any Tumor, Contraction or Compression about the Pylorus, the Meat
turns sour and flatulent.

The Cure of a weak Digestion consists,

I. In avoiding all these evident Causes which produce it, and by using the
contrary; as,

1. Avoiding Waters, fat, acerb, acid, austere or viscous Vegetables, and all
Drinks half boiled, and half fermented, turbid or acid. 2. The most convenient
Diet, is that of Flesh-Meats, in which there is a foetid Oyliness, and a
natural Saltness, and no Crudities. The most convenient Liquor, is small Ale
for constant Drink, or else small Wines. The Physical Tastes in our Diet which
help a weak Digestion, are, the aromatic, the salt, the bitter, the acrid, or
vinous Taste, these help the Fermentation in the Stomach, and are to be
commonly mixed with our Meats. The Flesh-Meats of an easy Digestion, are the
Flesh of all young Animals, as Pig, Lamb, Rabbit, Chicken, Potched Eggs, and
fresh Fish; but the Diet which has the Physical Tastes abovementioned, is more
easily digested by weak Stomachs. Bread well fermented, and small Ale, are the
most easily digested by a weak English Stomach. Salt Meats excite the Appetite,
keep the Body open, cut the Phlegm, strengthen the Stomach, and help Digestion.
3. Motion helps the Depuration of Wines, if carried in a Ship, or shaked; so
exercise helps the distribution of the Chyle, the circulation of the Blood, and
secretion of Humors, and the digestion in the Stomach, as well as
sanguification of the Chyle, for an external Motion of fermenting Liquors
promotes the internal Agitation of Parts, in which the nature of Fermentation
consists. 4. Instead of Fear and Sadness, Joy and Anger are to be indulged; for
these make a brisker Motion of Humors; but the former check the Expansion of
our Spirits, and cool the Body. 5. All natural Evacuations of Humors must be
restored; but too much Venery cools the Humors. 6. A serene and clear thin Air
helps Digestion, by giving a greater expansion to the Spirits. 7. Cares and
Watching excite the Animal Spirits to a brisker Agitation; but long Sleep dulls
them: Sleep of 7 or 8 hours is sufficient.
II. The Second Intention respects the correcting the Ferment, and the Faults
of the Humors from whence it arises, and the Evacuating of the quantity of any
preternatural Humors, by Vomiting and Purging, which is described in the Cure
of the following Cacochymia's.

III. The Third Intention, is the Suppressing of all preternatural Evacuations,
which will be described in the Cure of them.

IV. The supply of the Defect of the Ferment, by Medicines like it in Taste and
Virtue.

V. The Diseases of the Stomach are to be cured by the prescribed Method for
those particular Distempers, so they are of want of Appetite, Inflammations, or
Pains of the Stomach, the stopping Evacuations by Vomit or Stool, etc.

The following Tastes are the general Digestives in all the old Cacochymia's,
which depend on a low Fermentation. These promote the Fermentation of the
chylaceous Mass, the Circulation of Blood, and Secretion of Humors. These
deterge the viscous Phlegm from the Membranes of the Stomach, and corroborate
its Fibers; and upon these accounts these Tastes are the general Stomachics.

I. The Cresse Acrids, as Horseradish, Scurvy Grass insused in Wine and
Mustard Seed.

II. The Corrosive Acrids, as Aaron-Roots in Powder or Wine, and Pulvis ari
Compositus; these Two Tastes quicken the Appetite, and Garlic preserved does
the same.

III. The Bitter Acrids of a Wormwood Taste, as Conserve of Wormwood, and
Wormwood in Rhenish or Sack, or Wormwood-Cakes made with the Oil and Sugar.

IV. The bitter nauseous Plants, as Centaury, Buck-Bean, Gentian, of which Thea
may be made or Wines by Infusion, and Aromatics added, or Sal volatile taken
with them.

V. The Aromatic Acrids.

1. Of the sweet Class very burning or biting, as Ginger, Galanga, Calamus
Aromaticus, Orris, Zedoary, Cardamum. 2. Of the sweet Fenil Class, as Seeds of
Fenil, Anise, Caroway, Cummin, Dill, Angelica, and Imperatoria Roots. 3. Of the
Laurel Class, as Orange and Limon Peals, Winter-Bark, Bay Berries, Cloves,
Cinnamon, Lign'aloes, Nutmegs, Jamaica Pepper, Myrtil-leaves; and these are
properly infused in Wine, or made into Powders, or Lozenges, as of the
distilled Oils, of Oil of Cinnamon and Cloves. 4. Of the Corrosive Class, as
Pepper, Cubebs, Species Diatrion, Pipereon, in rotulis. 5. Of the
Terebinthinate Class, as Juniper Berries Candied, as in Rheu, Balsamum Peru,
Mechae, Mastich. 6. Of the Bitterish Styptics, as Rosemary, Mint, Marjoram.
VI. The Mineral Sulphurs which exagitate the Animal Oils, and so promote
Fermentation, as Chalybeates, Antimonial, and common Sulphur.

VII. The testaceous stony Medicines, and all Salts, volatile and fixed, the
Ashes of Vegetables, and Calces of Minerals, are Acidities.

VIII. All these Tastes prescribed in the Cure of the Defect of a Ferment,
supply its Office, and contain an Animal Ferment in them. As,

1. The Mucous, sub-Acid, Faetid Diet, made of Animal Humors; as Cheese, the
inward Skins of Gizards, which have the Tincture of the Gall, or i of Rennet of
a Hare, or Calf; all Meat or Fish somewhat putrefied, as Anchoves, pickled
Oysters; and outwardly we apply Leaven, with the Juice of Mint. 2. By
Artificial Sauces we imitate the natural foetid and sub-acid Slime of the
Stomach, as in Catchupmango Plumbs, Mushrooms, and some Indian Liquors or
Sauces of Garlic, assa foetida, -- Salt, and Aromatics, Mustard Seed, with
Vinegar in common Mustard. 3. By the salso-Acid Medicines, as Tartar.
Vitriolat. Sal Ammoniac. Arcan. Duplicatum, Terra Full. Tartari, Lixivium of
Lime and Oyster-Shells, we help Fermentation. 4. By the vinous, sweet, and
sub-acid Spirits or Juyces, Spiritus nitri dulcis, sweet rit of Salt, Spirit of
Bread, Elixir Vitrioli, Spirit of Mastich, which is Acid, Spirit of
Verdegrease, Juyces of Citrons, Limons, Oranges, Berberries, Currants, Spirit of
Vinegar, all sharp Rhenish Wines, old Hock, conserve of Hips, Water of Vine
Leaves, or other acid Juyces, and all physical, aromatic Vinegars. Acids before
Meat excite an Appetite, Salso-Acids with Meats, and Aromatics are good after
Meat to help Digestion.

Fourthly, External Applications are described below, which increase the heat
of the Stomach, and strengthen the Fibers.

CHAP. V.
Of the Mucilaginous State of Animal Humors, and especially the Chyle, and
Chylous Lympha's, which is usually called the Pituitous Cacochymia.

THE Food of Animals contains in it much of a sweetish Mucilage, as is in all
Corn, Grass, Milk, and the Legumens; neither does Flesh-Meat want their
Sliminess. The White of an Egg is ropy, slippy, and is a nutritious Lympha
separated from the Chyle by the Glands of the Ovarium. The Decoctions of Fish
have a great Mucilage; and the Gellies of Broih sufficiently prove the viscid
Sliminess in the Flesh-Meats we eat.

From our Food Animals necessarily take the matter of their Mucilaginous
Humors, as will appear by these Causes of Phlegm.

1. All Drinks occasion a great quantity of slimy Phlegm, which is only the
Mucilage of Barley extracted from the solid Parts of the Grains. All
Mauli-Drinks may be boiled into the Consistence of a slimy Syrup, or that of a
Plaster.

All sweet Fruits have their Mucilage, as Grapes, Gooseberries, etc. and
therefore these yield much phlegmatic Matter in Digestion; and all thick Wines
made of them are accounted Phlegmatic.

All the Legumens, as Peace and Beans, have an evident Sliminess; and so have
all Cakes, and crusty baked Pyes, or such like; and all Meats prepared of
Flower.

All the Olera, as Cabbage, Turnips, Lettuce, Spinach, Cucumbers, Melons, etc.
have an evident Sliminess, which they always produce in Animals, who eat them.

This Mucilage in Plants is their crude Juice, and is of an Oily Nature, as
appears evidently in Linseed; this is of a cooling quality, as Phlegm is
accounted: from their crude Slime many Plants prepare their sweet, bitter,
acrid or aromatic Tastes; and Phlegm is a nutritious Juice, which may be
farther digested into Blood.

The Nervous Parts of Animals yield the greatest Slime, as the Calves Feet and
Head; the Guts are Membranes of Animals, the shavings of Horns, and the
decoctions of Bones. The Liver, Spleen, and Brains, have much Slime.

Fish and Waterfowl, who feed of turbid and muddy slimy Water, are accounted
to be the Causes of Phlegm, especially Eels.

All Flesh full of Nourishment, as Beef, Pork, Gellies, Gravies, and Eggs,
increase the matter of Phlegm.

Young Creatures, as Pig, Lamb, etc. yield a very great Slime, if eaten too
young.

Goats-Flesh cats very slimy.

All fat Meats are slimy, and of hard Digestion; and fat Bodies are usually
phlegmatic* Oil has a Slimeness, and so has Fat always joined with it.

Milk breeds much Phlegm from the Caseous parts in it; and Butter is accounted
phlegmatic from its oily fat parts.

Too great a quantity of Meat, and often Drinking great quantities, breed a
Sliminess in the Chyle, by hindering the Fermentation of the Meat, and its
perfect Dissolution.

2. Sleep and Idleness hinder the circulation of Humors, and produce a
stagnation of them, by which, their viscid, oily or sibrous parts cohere and
unite into a Slime.

3. A Mucilage is increased in the Humors by a fenny, wet Country, or moist
Air, which clogs the Spirits fermenting; and a cold Air coagulates the Humors;
so the lymphatic Liquor, exposed to the Air, immediately grows thick or
gellies: and all our strong Broths grow thick and viscid by cooling.

4. Cares and Sadness stop the Motion of Humors, and thicken them; and hence
it is that melancholy Persons are phlegmatic, and spit much viscid Phlegm.

5. The Suppression of Evacuations, as the Menses in Girls, and stoppage of a
Cough, or Spitting, increases Phlegm in the Stomach.

6. Haemorrhages, long Fevers, Fluxes of the Belly, or other Chronical
Diseases, produce much Slime.

8. Those who have been born of phlegmatic Parents, or live in a moist, cold
Country, near standing Waters, or the Seaside; those who are of a great Age,
for want of a perfect Digestion; and those who are very Young, as Children,
through their much and disorderly eating; Women, by reason of the lesser degree
of Fermentation in that Sex, abound most with Phlegm. The Cold and the Moisture
of the Air stopping the Pores in the Wintertime, makes that Season to be
accounted most phlegmatic.

9. The Mucilaginous Temper of the Blood, Chyle, and Ferment of the Stomach, is
natural to some Constitutions, who dissolve their Meat only into a Mucilaginous
Juice, which is the greatest Crudity of our Digestion; and therefore, from this
arises all our Phlegm; for that was accounted, by the Ancient Physicians, the
coldest Humor; which being a nutritious Juice, it, by only fasting, was turned
into Blood.

This crude Chyle swims in the Blood, and appears as Milk in the Blood, let out
of some Persons who are greatly Cachectic; and by putting Spirit of Hartshorn
to such milky Blood, I have turned it reddish, or of a rosy Color. Such was
the Blood of a Gentleman who had drank hard, and bled much; this milky Blood*
in him was never turned into Serum; but in others of a less Crudity, the milky
Chyle is imperfectly turned into Serum, but that is very much in quantity, and
watery or insipid, rather than very salt.

The Sanguification is hindered for want of an acrid Bile; and the Saltness
thence proceeding.

The Circulation is hindered by the viscidity of the Slime, and the Secretion of
most of the glandulous Humors. The Chyle is never digested further than to a
nutritious Sweetness, and from hence the habit of the Body is very fleshy and
fat; but the Pulse slow, soft, and weak; the Spirits are dull and torpid; the
Bile ropy and sweet, rather than bitter, or acrid; the Juice of the Spleen very
mucilaginous, for want of Digestion, and the Blood has more of a gelatinous
Consistence, than fibrous; and Tumors happen in the Viscera or Glands. In the
Brain, sleepy Distempers, and Dullness of the Senses, or Stolidity from the
thick Sliminess of the nervous Juice; the Vrin is pale and waterish, with thick
and white farinaceous Contents, or without any, if there be Obstructions, and
an Appetite is wanting.

The Sweats are cold and viscid, for Phlegm offends by both those qualities.

The Succus Nutritious abounds with Slime, and causes a leucophlegmatia, or pale
Tumor of the habit of the Body.

The Seminal Lympha's are cold and slimy in Sterilities, and the fluor albus,
or Gonorthoea simplex, and so becomes unsit for the use of a Ferment in
Generation.

The Lympha lactea is most abundant in the phlegmatic, for that is immediately
produced from the mucilaginous Chyle, and separated by the Glands of the Mouth,
whence the slimy Phlegm is hawked up; and this is plentifully emptied into the
Stomach, where it causes a loss of Appetite, a saburra pituitosa, and
windiness; and in the Lungs it causes Coughs, and ^^oppage of Phlegm, or
dyspnoea, with Lassitude in the Limbs, a slow Fever, and Palenes, of Vrin, and
of the Countenance, and Palpitation of the Heart, which are the signs of a
pituitous Cachexia, evident in the Green Sickness.

All outward oedematous Tumors arise from the succus nutritious of a pituitous
Temper.

This Chyle, and the Lympha lactea, is the natural and alimentary Pituita,
which the Ancients described as insipid: (...), is Galen's description of it:
this is the humid, cool, and sweetish part, which is so agreeable to the Taste
of the Blood; and they esteemed that Blood pituitous naturally, which abounded
with an exceeding quantity of sweetish Chyle, which remained something
undigested in the Blood, and was not wholly sanguified, but capable of it;
this, of all the Humors to the touch, was, (...), or coldest, and they called
it most viscid, or (...), when it is made so by the great Ebullition of Blood
in Inflammations, for they thicken it into that tough Skin which covers the
Blood, when cooled in the Dish.

But when this chylaceous part of the Blood, or the Lympha's thence arising,
become preternatural, Galen describes the Phlegm thus, (...). The lacteal
Lympha's have their Acidities from Stagnation in their Glands, or the Tartar
abounding in Chyle. They have their Saltness from the Saltness of Chyle, and
that of the Serum in Catarrhs.

In respect of the Consistence, the Pituita is watery and thin, or mucous, or
slimy, or tenaceous, when the thin parts are evaporated, the vitreous Pituita
is from the thickness of Chyle, or its Stagnation in the Lungs, and this is
clear, like Gum-tragacanth dissolved. Cold may coagulate a pellucid Lympha into
such a Consistence.

The Tartareous or Gypsea Pituita is from the earthy petrefying Parts, mixed
with the viscid Phlegm, which is Salso-acid.

By the following signs, the Ancients guessed at the differences of the Pituita.

1. By the pale, clear Vrin, and want of Appetite, they discerned the insipid
Phlegm, or the lowest state of Digestion.

2. By a pale, thin, milky Water, and the greatness of the Appetite, they knew
the Acidity of the Phlegm.

3. By a lacteal, pale, thin Water, with a globous troubled Residence, (and the
Cholic) they guessed at the vitreous Phlegm; but this is frequently spit up,
and evacuated by Stool or Vrin, and so best observed.

4. By the Citrine Vrin of a thicker Consistence, and high-colored Sediment,
the Saltness of Phlegm is known.

The Mucilaginous State of Humors is to be Cured,

First, By avoiding the Diet, and all the other evident Causes abovementioned,
which produce them, and using the Diet mentioned in the Cure of a weak
Digestion or Fermentation.

The Diet in which there is least Slime is best, as Wheat-Bread well baked, and
dry; Wine and Water; the Flesh of Birds; roasted Meats, as Mutton, Rabbit,
Larks, Sparrows; and all salt Meats, or broiled Meats.

Fasting spends the Phlegm.

Secondly, The abundant mucilaginous Phlegm must be evacuated,

I. By Vomiting; and those of, 1. A. bitter, acrid Taste, as Vinum Scylliticum.
2. Or vitriolic Taste, as Sal Vitrioli. 3. Or Sulphurous, as infusio croci
Metallorum. 4. Mercurial Styptic, as Merc. Vitae.
II. By Purgers. 1. Aloetics, which are acrid, bitter, and nauseous, as Tinct.
Sacra, Pil. Hierae cum Agarico, Aloephanginae, Stomach. Mastichin. de Ammoniac.
Pil. Foetid. cum Gummi, Aloe Rosata, Elix. Proprietat. 2. By acrid Purgers, as
Jalap, Agaric, Scammony, which contain an acrid, corrosive Rosin, with a
Sliminess. 3. By Mercurials, a plentiful Evacuation of phlegmatic Humors are
procured, for the acid Phlegm, like Spittle, easily mixes with the Mercury, and
Mercury injected into the conglomerate Glands, through the Artery, easily
passes them
III. By Sudorifics, which are bitter and acrid, as Decoctions of the Woods,
for the Sweets often appear glutinous, and smell acid or sour. IV. By
Diuretics, the Phlegm is sometimes evacuated, or, at least, corrected by their
Acrimony. V. In Women, Acrid Pessi evacuate an albuminous Pituita from the
Vagina. VI. By the Errhines (which also excite a Cough) from the Nose and
Lungs, a Pituita is evacuated. VII. Salivation and Masticatories evacuate
considerably, but Salivation many Pints of Phlegm in a Day, and very much by
Chewing of Tobacco.
These are the natural Evacuations of the pituitous Lympha, which the
Physicians procure by Art, and imitate the natural Evacuations of it, through
the secretory Glands.

Thirdly, The Fermentation of the Chyle is to be reduced to its natural degree,
by the Tastes abovementioned, in the Cure of a weak Digestion; and,

1. More particularly all acrid and bitter Gums seem appropriate Specifics by
their mucilaginous Consistence, by which they adhere to the Slyme; but by their
Bitterness they deterge it, and by their Acrimony dissolve it; such is
Ammoniacum, Bdellium, Galbanum, assa foetida, Myrrha, and all terebinthinate
Gums and Balsams.

2. The ropy Consistence of Wines is cured by a Lixivium made of Vine Branches,
by calx viva, or Chalk, or Flints burnt, which precipitate the crude Tartar
with the Slyme; and for the Phlegm, we use the Ashes of Vegetables, and the
Calces of Minerals.

3. Ropy Wines require Styptic Precipitators, as Alumen ustum; or Salso-Acids,
as Bay Salt: and the bitter Styptics may effect the same in the Blood, as
Ash-Bark, and the Cortex Peruvianus. We add Salt to our Dough to attenuate its
Mucilage; and Sal Armoniae. and Tart. Vitriol. dissolve the Phlegm.

4. We use bitter Acids, as Elixir Proprietatis, or spirituous Acids, to
deterge the Phlegm of the Stomach, and the precipitating of it; and for this
reason we sulphurate the Vessels of ropy Wines.

5. All the bitter, nauseous Medicines deterge the Pituita, as Gentian,
Aristolochia, etc* and the bitter slimy, as Carduus, etc. help the clearing of
Beer.

6. The ropy Phlegm is dissolved by volatile and fixed Salts, which dissolve
all our mucilaginous Gums; and for this end Sylvius prescribes Sal Volatile
Oleosum with our Diet, or immediately after it, which may be used then with
Milk, Water, and Sack.

Stum is added to ropy Wines, and Spirit of Wine, that we may excite a new
Fermentation in them: and by the same Experiment we are taught to use all
things of a fermenting, nature, both in our Diet and Medicines; for nothing
dissolves the Viscidity of a mucilaginous Liquor like giving it a Fermentation;
so the white of an Egg is dissolved into a Colliquamentom by the Incubation of
a Hen, which is also made very liquid or sluid by becoming rotten, and
putrefied by keeping; and then, if Eggs be boiled, they will never grow thick,
like new Eggs boiled.

The White of an Egg is made thin, and more fluid, by beating of it; and from
hence we learn, that much Exercise attenuates Humors that are slimy, and
Fermentation does the same, which is an internal Agitation of Parts, whereby
the Viscidity of Vegetables is dissolved in any Liquor, as in making of
M^-Liquors and Wines.

All (...) Liquors before they have undergone ^tion are ropy and sticking, but
(...) their Consistence becomes more fluid.

By Experience we find that all hot fermentative Medicines, as oily, resinous
Vegetables, Steel and Salts, cure the pituitous Cacochymia in the
Green Sickness; and to such Persons we give Stum it self, as a great Ferment to
their cold Humors.

Quicksilver Medicines easily mix with Phlegm, and so are fit to evacuate it;
but by its Acidness it seems to depress the Fermentation of Humors, and so is
not a fit Medicine, as an alterer in this Cacochymia.

Fomentations of Wines, and aromatic Astringents, or Brandy, which flames, and
Aromatics infused, hot oily and resinous Plasters, or Cataplasms, excite and
cherish the inward Heat and Digestion; and outward Heat helps the Digestion and
Putrefaction of all other Bodies, whether Vegetables or Animals.

The greatest quantity of the slimy Pituita is lodged in the Stomach, and
without a Vomii it is almost impossible to remove the great quantity of
phlegmatic Humors. I found a great quantity of Phlegm in the Stomach of a Pig
fed with Peace, which could not proceed immediately from the Meat it self,
because, though that was dissolved, it differed in Color and Consistence from
the Phlegm, and in Taste also; besides, in the glandulous ring above the
Gizards of Birds, there is a viscid Phlegm, though the Corn pass through it
entire and unbroken into the Gizard; this Phlegm then arises from the Chyle,
and passes through the Glandules of the Stomach, to whose Skins it constantly
adheres, and Fomentations outwardly may help the Secretion of it through its
Glands, and the Dissolution of it from the Stomach.

That Fermentation is the most natural way of Curing the phlegmatic Cacochymia,
appears by our ordinary Preparation of Bread; for the Ferment and Baking
perfectly corrects the slimy Mucilage of Corn; and we observe how heavy and
slimy, and how hard to be digested, all Bread unfermented or unleavened proves.

If we view Mucilages, such as the White of an Egg, or Cherry-Tree Gum,
dissolved in the magnifying Glasses, we cannot discern any Globuli, but an
uniform Consistence. The small Particles of Mucilages exclude all Air, and
cohere close, which makes them ropy and tenaceous; but if we look upon Milk,
which is little different from Chyle, and therefore is made out of the
mucilaginous Juyces of Plants, we may observe the Particles of Milk to be only
a heap of Globuli. Fermentation makes all mucilaginous Liquors fluid, by
agitating their Particles, and dividing into small Parts the viscous Mass; so
that the Air may incompass each Particle, and form them into Globuli, as it
does great Drops of Water in the falling of Rain. Water is nothing else, as it
appears in those Glasses, but a Congerics of Globuli; by which Observation, I
may probably guess, that the nature of Fluidity consists in having the small
Particles of Liquors divided into Globuli by the Air; and the nature of a
Mucilage, in having no Air intermixed betwixt its Particles, nor globular Figure
to yield upon any Pressure or Motion. We observe in fermented Bread how many
airy Bubbles are intermixed in the whole Mass after Baking; and also in all
fermenting Liquors, how full of Air the Fermentation makes it. Barm it self is
almost all Froth, whose Efficacy lies in exciting the Spirits of the fermenting
Liquor into an Agitation, to break its Viscidity, and admit the Air to frame
the Globuli necessary to all Fluidity. We could not observe any Motion in the
Globuli, to which the Fluidity of Liquor might be imputed, but seemed wholly
owing to the globular Figure of the Particles, which appeared clearly in Water,
the most fluid of all our Liquors.

Oil and Butter appear in the Glass of the same uniform Figure as the Mucilages
do, and this makes them easily to mix together.

I mixed diverse Medicines with a Mucilage of Quince-Seeds, and the White of an
Egg, that I might thereby inform my self more in the nature of Mucilages, and
their Coagulations.

Spirit of Vitriol soon coagulated the Mucilage of the Seeds.

Green Vitriol and Alum thickened the Mucilage, and the White of an Egg was
curdied by Alum.

Common Sal Ammoniac. and common Salt, rather thinned than thickened the
Mucilage, but made no great change, nor Cream of Tartar.

Salt of Wormwood, and Sp. Sal. Ammoniac. made the Mucilage more thin, and gave
it a Marmolade Color.

Brandy made no Alteration in the Mucilage, but curdled reddish on the top of
the White of an Egg.

Aqua Fortis and Saccharum Saturni, turned the White of an Egg into a
coagulated Milk, which showed the Original of the Animal Slimes to be from
Chyle.

The Heat of the Fire seemed to make the Mucilage more thin; and to dry it into
a Skin, like the Mucilage of the conglomerate Glands of the Joints, which, as
Dr. Havers informs us, is like the White of an Egg, of a saltish Taste; and
this, he says, with the Heat of the Fire, turns into a Liquor more tenulous
than it is naturally, and produces upon Evaporation a thin film on the top,
with some little white Coagulum, and what remains is not a thirteenth part. He
made these further Experiments on it.

Vinegar coagulated it, but testaceous Medicines would not dissolve it.

Claret, which is Styptic and Acid, produced a Coagulation like a Jelly; but
White Wind and Sack less. Alum, Vitriol. Sacc. Saturni coagulated it; and
Vinegar more, than Oil of Vitriol.

Sal Ammoniac. dissolved all the Coagulations by Acids or Styptics, and so does
Oleum Tart. per deliquium made without Niter.

Aqua Fortis and Spirit of Niter coagulated it like Milk.

Styptic Plants, as decoction of Galls, Red Roses, the Cortex, coagulated it.

These Experiments being made on an Animal Mucilage, show the Coagulation of it
by Acids; for which Reason I transcribed them from the Ingenious Dr. Havers's
Book.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Tartareous Acidity or Acerbity of Animal Humors; especially the Chyle
and Lacteal Lympha's, which commonly appears in the sourness of our Stomachs.

ALL Vegetables have their Tartar or Sour part, although they Taste nothing of it,
but are very Bitter, yet their Juyces being Boiled to an Extract, manifest
their Tartar to the Taste, as in Extract of Wormwood.

All Liquors prepared from Vegetables, and Bread made of them, are apt to sour
by keeping, and therefore manifest the Tartar which lay concealed in it before,
under the sweet oily Taste.

Not only Vegetables, but the Animal Chylous Juyces have a sour Tartar in them;
for Milk which is a depurated Chyle, sours by keeping, and Butter-Milk has an
evident Acidity in it. The Chyle of Animals is often observed to be coagulated
by its own Innate Tartar in the Glands of the Mesentery, or other Viscera,
where Cheesie coagulations are often cut forth.

The Milk in the Breasts, is often coagulated by its own Acidity or External
Cold, and by its Stagnation produces Tumors.

The Lacteal Lympha is often coagulated in the Conglomerate Glands of the
Mouth, Nose, Throat, and in the Bladders of the Lungs, by its own Tartar or
Cold; and the taste of the Saliva is often observed to be Sour.

The Serous Salt Lympha is coagulate in Rheumatic pains in the Lymphatics, and
in the Conglobate Glands in Scrophulus Tumors.

The Lympha of the Nerves may be coagulated in the Palsy and Cataracts.

The Blood it self is coagulate and grumous from too Acid Chyle, which causes a
low Pulse and Fainting.

The austere Juice of the Spleen produces obstructions in the Hypocondria, and
coagulates the Bile like Alum.

The Contents of the Guts being austere, they produce Cholics, and the binding
of the Belly, and a compression in the Stomach and Breast.

If we consider only the Principles which Chemistry extracts from Animal
Humors, we shall find no sensible Animal Acid pure and evident in them; for
they only show us a volatile Salt, and foetid Oil, and phlegmatic Water; but if
we examine the Stomachs of Animals, and both Smell and Taste the Contents,
there we shall observe a manifest Acidity; from whence I shall observe, that
our bare Senses, if diligently employed about natural subjects, inform us more
truly than the Chemical Experiments by strong Fires, about the Nature of them.

A different Quantity and Quality of Acids appears in the Stomachs of Animals,
according to the difference of their Meats.

In the Stomachs of Rabbits a manifest pungent Acidity may always be observed,
if they feed on Grass.

In the Stomach of a Lamb an acid Taste and Smell may be observed very
different from the former, like the Sowreness of Milk.

In Birds who feed on Grass, the same Acid Smell appears as in Rabbits.

In the Carnivorous Animals, and in granivorous Birds, the Acid is less
evident, and their lymphatic Ferment tastes insipid or sub-acid; but the
Contents of Carnivorous Stomachs coagulate Milk; and I believed the Digestion
of Ram and Beef was sub-acid, as I observed.

From hence it appears, that Acidity is produced by the Digestion in the
Stomach, and is only a consequent of it, and not the cause. Acidity is more
observable in Young Creatures, who feed on Liquids, than in the Elder; but
these ought to have had a stronger Acid Menstruum, (if our Meat were to be
dissolved by it) which, if it were as strong as Aqua Fortis, it could not
dissolve Corn, which is very easily dissolved by Fermentation, for it is
nothing but the sweet slimy Juyces of Plants which yield the Nourishment to
Animals, and that is easily dissolved out of the Bladders of Plants by any
Menstruum, and as easily prepared by Fermentation; for its becoming a
nutritious Juice, and the solid Bladders and Fibers of Plants mixed with a Slime
and Choler, constitute the Exerements of Granivorous Birds.

This Acid is natural, and necessary to the Health of Animals.

1. To help Digestion, and excite Appetite. Leaven has a spirituous Acidity in
it, and then it ferments best. Not every Acid helps the Digestion, but a
spirituous Acid is chiefly required; and those Acids which are well tempered by
a Salt or Earth, as common Salt, or the Sal Ammoniac. of Animals.

2. By the Acid of digested Meats the Choler is coagulated in the Guts, and
there the Animal salso-Acid is produced, the Blood is cooled, and its
Consistence thickened, and the Volatility of its Salts allayed.

3. All Acids in Animals are from our Food, and when the Food contains a
greater Acid, the more of it appears in the Stomach, as in Cider, French and
Rhenish Wines, Vinegar, Sorrel, Verjuice, Limons.

4. All Acidities are produced naturally by Fermentation; so Herbs, Fruits, and
all Liquors, as Pottage, Milk, whether fermented without, or in the Stomach,
sensibly afford an acid Smell or Taste. The close union of the Oil, Acid and
Earth, which is naturally in all Vegetables and Animal Bodies, being loosened
by Fermentation, which is an inward Agitation of Particles, the Acid begins to
appear, as well as the Oil, and both give a quick strong Smell, and a
spirituous quick Taste to fermented Liquors.

This Acidity in the Stomach is volatile, like Spiritus Salis, and Nitri
dulcis; and this Acidity gives the Heart-burning to Animals, if it be very
sharp and active; but if in a natural State, it passes first off the Stomach,
and is corrected in the Guts by the Choler.

Our Vinegars, made of Acid, Oleous Plants for Sawces, resemble this Acid,
creating an Appetite in some, but in others, Heart-turning them, if corrosive,
or meeting with a choleric Humor in the Stomach.

5. The Relics of the fermented Meat are more sour; so when we distill the
Spirit of Elder-Berries, the spirituous Acid comes off first, and a more fixed
sour Acid remains in the Still. This Acid may be compared to the Sowreness of
Acid Liquors, whose spirituous Parts are evaporated, as sour Beer. The
Contents of the Colon are of a sour, foetid, acid Smell in Rabbits; but the
Acidity of their Stomachs is more grateful and spirituous.

By a great Quantity of Acid Meats there are more Crudities produced than can
be corrected by the Animal Choler; and then the Chyle and Salts are made very
Acid, and the Consistence of the Blood thickened like Jelly; and this sort of
Diet pleases most in hot Weather and Fevers.

When this Acerbity, or tartareous State happens, we observe it by Sowreness in
the Stomach, which, like Vinegar-Vessels, tinctures all our Aliments with the
same Taste, the Belly is bound, Gripes and Windiness attend it, and all sour
Medicines and Meats increase it; the Blood appears grumous, like the Gellies of
sour Fruits, or like Blood mixed with an Acid Spirit; and therefore the
natural heat is depressed, and the Pulse low, and the Vrin pale and turbid,
sharp or milky; and in Children, the Bellies swelled with Obstructions of the
Mesentery: In older Persons, the Acidity which always abounds in the
Cholic-Guts, give hypochondriacal or splenetic Symptoms; the Face looks pale;
there is no Thirst nor Fever.

The evident Causes of this tartareous State of Humors, are,

1. Food which abounds with it, as the Fruits, and sharp Liquors made of
Vegetables, Red, White, Rhenish Wines, and Cider, stale Drink; and all sweet
things, as Honey, Sugar, Broths, and Milk, and Spoon-Meats; and all sorts of
Herbs offend such Stomachs, and produce great Acidities, as Experience daily
confirms. Well-Waters, and standing Vitriolic, or boggy Waters, are also very
injurious.

2. Cold Air, in which a nitro-sulphureous Part abounds, coagulates Humors,
especially the phlegmatic Lympha's, and increases Acidities, and a greater
Appetite is produced.

3. Sadness and Melancholy breed an Acidity, by dissipating the Spirits, and
causing Stagnation of Humors, which also hinders the Separation and Exaltation
of the Oil, which naturally tempers the Tartar, and gives it a Fluidity in
Liquors.

4. The Binding of the Body increases Acidities.

5. A Defect in our Exercise produces it, for that is necessary to help the
Distribution and Digestion of our Nourishment, and the Circulation and
Secretion of other Humors, and many times the Sweat smells sour, and so
evacuates it that way.

The internal Causes of the tartareous State of Humors, are,

1. A depressed and weak Fermentation; and the same happens to crude and
unfermented Wines, for want of a due Fermentation.

2. The Acrimony of the Bile is wanting, which being less pungent and bitter,
it cannot correct the Acidity of the digested Meat, nor turn it into Salt, nor,
consequently, perfectly sanguifie the Chyle, which is the chief office of
Choler. In the Jaundice the Choler is wanting; and the Icterical have a great
Sowreness, and Gripes, with Windiness.

3. The Chylous Humors, like Milk kept in a hot Place, if they stagnate in the
Guts or Lacteals, they soon coagulate, and become Acid.

4. Diverse Diseases which depend on a vitriolic Acidity in the Blood, and are
produced by too high a Fermentation, as the Hypochondriac, and hysterical
Distempers, when they have long continued, weaken the natural Fermentation, and
so produce that Sowreness in the Stomach, of which those Patients complained
very much.

The Cure of this tartareous State, is,

I. By Vomiting, with some gentle Antimanial, or Wine of Squills, or Sal
Vitrioli.

II. By Purging, with Aloetics, as Pil. Aloephanginae, Salt of Wormwood, and
Extract. Gent. or Tinct. Sacra; adding Aethyops Mineralis, Steel, or testaceous
Powders, to the Aloetics.

III. By correcting the Acidity or Tartar, by raising the Fermentation to its
natural State, by the Medicines abovementioned; the chief of which are the
acrids, aromatics, resinous, bitters, chalybeates, and salt Tastes; so we add
Stum to crude, sour Wines, to raise the Fermentation. Alteratives do more good
than Purgers in this state of Humors.

IV. The Tartar may be precipitated and carried off by Vrin.

1. By Lixivium of Lime or Oyster-shells, and both sixth and volatile Salts. 2.
By the calces of Minerals, or ashes of Animals, and Egg-shells burnt. 3. By
testaceous Medicines, or stony Minerals, as Chalk, Crab's-eyes, Corals, Pearls,
Eggshells, etc.
V. Sudorific decoctions evacuate the sour Humors by Sweat; as Salts, Mineral
Sulphurs, and bitter Acrids.

VI. Clysters draw off the Acid relics restagnating in the Colon.

VII. The Acrimony of Choler is to be increased, and its Passage through the
Liver promoted, by bitter, acrid, Hepatics, by Steel, and Salts, and aromatic
or foetid Gums or Oils. The defect of the Choler is supplied by those Medicines
which precipitate the Tartar, as all burnt Animal Ashes, especially Eggs and
Oyster-shells; so from sour Wines we precipitate the Tartar by burnt Marble,
or Flints, or Lime, Chalk, or Lixivium; so Vinegar is sweetened by Crab's-eyes,
and when the Tartar is precipitated, the oily Part is raised, and that conceals
and tempers the Acidity of Tartar.

VIII. The Circulation of stagnating Humors must be promoted by Steel, and
Salts, and aromatic, acrid Tastes.

IX. The Diet ought to be of sweet, not sour small Ale, of Bread well
fermented, and Flesh-Meat; but if the Acidity be much, no fermented Liquor in
which there is Tartar, nor no Vegetables, nor Liquids, will agree with the
Stomach; but these Physical Tastes may be given to our Diet.

1. Aromatic; as Pepper, Ginger.

2. Acrid; as Mustard, Garlic.

3. Bitter; as Aloes, Wormwood, and hopp'd Drink, and Mum.

4. Saltness; as all high Brines; for Salt it self abates the sour in Vinegar,
and Oysters cure Heart-burning.

5. Roast, and broiled, and baked Meats, and those that are burnt, are most
agreeable: Cheerfulness, moderate Exercise, constantly keeping the Body open,
and a dry Air and Marl-Pit Water, are very agreeable to sour Stomachs; and
Springs flowing from Chalk-Stones, Bath-Waters, and strong Chalybeate Waters in
small quantities, may agree well; and Wine and Water in many Constitutions for
ordinary Drinks.

I have observed, That those who have too much Acid in their Stomachs by a
natural Instinct, refuse all meally Meats, and eat little Bread, as we observe
those who abound with much Choler to have a great Abhorrence to all bitter
Medicines; and the observing the Diet of our Patients will frequently give some
Intimation of the particular State of their Humors; for I believe it is
generally true, that all Persons naturally desire that Food which is contrary
to the present preternatural State of Humors, as watery Liquors, and Acids in
Fevers, Ashes, and Terrene Absorbers in the Sowreness of their Stomachs, bitter
Drink in Jaundice; a weak Stomach is pleased with stronger Liquors, and hot
Constitutions with the smaller Drink: This agreableness of some Tastes every
Person naturally observes; and if they use them moderately, they may preserve
the natural State of their Humors, and correct the Disorders of them.

There is a remarkable Observation in Sir Theodore Mayhern, about the Use of
Diuretic Liquors, which ought to be used after a perfect distribution of the
Nourishment, to which he attributes much in the Cure of the Scrophulae, by a
Diuretic Drink, qui Tartarum liquidum ante sui coagulationem ad renes ablegare,
and per vesicam expurgare, citra coneoctionis praecipitationem, potuit. From
this Observation, I think a useful Rule ought to be drawn to use our Diuretic
Diet-Drink: Toward 5 or 6 a Clock at Night, so many Hours after Meat, and,
again, in the Morning, to carry off the Tartar-Acid of our Chyle; and to take
some testaceous Lozenges or Pills with our Diuretic Drinks, which may coagulate
with the Acids at that time.

CHAP. VII.
Of the flatulent, crude Cacochymia of the Chyle, and other Humors.

WHEN the Aliments are half fermented, and then are checked in attaining their
perfect Dissolution; or their Ferment is too weak to perform it, a Windiness is
produced in the Stomach, for the Spirits of the Meat being somewhat loosened,
are lodged in a slimy Mass, but cannot render it fluid, but only rarefie it
into Bubbles, which distending by the heat of the Stomach burst, and create
Eructation or Wind. The most weak Stomach produces an insipid Wind, but the
Acid Ructus is a sign of some degree of Digestion. In these Cases there is an
Oppression, or Fullness at the Stomach, and Weight, Ructus frequently happen,
and all hot Meats and Medicines agree well, but the cold ones do much Injury.

The Stomach it self is loaded with slimy, acid Phlegm, which is its weak
Ferment, and the Guls distended by Wind.

The Constitution of Humors is crude, mucilaginous, and windy, as appears by
the Paleness of the Vrin, and Frothiness; and the Spleen is generally
obstructed and pained, and the Stools like Barm, the serous Lympha being
vitiated by the same crude, windy Chyle, it produces a Heaviness in the Limbs
of the whole Body, and a Fullness, or wandering, dull Pains, etc.

The chief Effects of the Wind appear in the primae viae, where the Chyle
ferments; or in the Spirits, which are made of the crude, windy Spirits
included in the Slime; and for want of a due Volatilization, they produce in
the Nerves,

1. A Pandiculation, or Oscitation, or Stupor, or Cramp in the Muscles; the
Noise in the Ears, and Vertigo in the Brain, and wandering Pains.

2. Inflations of the Parts, as Tympanitis, and windy Tumors in the Limbs.

3. An Inflation of the Lungs, as the Asthma of the Stomach in Sleep, as the
Incubus of the Vterus, after Hysterical Fits, of the Penis in a Priapism.

Many other Species of Windiness are produced from too high a Fermentation,
when the Ructus are bitter, acrid, or foetid; or the acrid Choler ferments like
contrary Salts, with the sharp Acid of the digested Meat in the Jejunum, and
there produces Flatuosities; or when some extraneous Ferment extraordinarily
rarefies and putrefies our Humors; but these belong to that State of Humors
which depends on too high a Digestion.

The external Causes of Flatulency, are,

I. Crude Meats which are hardly fermented and digested, as the hard, the
acerb, watery, oily, viscous Styptic, and too great a quantity of Meats; for
these, by the strongest Ferment, will rarely attain a due Fermentation in the
Stomach.

1. The watery, as Broths, and Milk-Meats are windy to Stomachs troubled with
acid Ferments; and all small Liquors hinder their Digestion; and for these
Stomachs, the more solid Diet of Flesh-Meat is best, and small Ale, and nothing
of Vegetables, but well fermented Breads.

2. The viscous Vegetables, which contain a pungent Salt mixed with much
Mucilage, as Onyons, Leeks, Garlic, Radish, Turnip, Cabbage; these have a
Mucilage hard to be digested, and an Acrimony which rarefies it into Wind, and
Ructus; and from hence we know all windy Herbs, by having an Acrimony lodged in
a Mucilage.

3. All the sweet and mucilaginous Legumina, as Beans, Peace, are hardly
digested, by reason of their Sliminess and Sweetness, apt to ferment.

Wines of the sweet and mucilaginous Fruits, as Figs, Raisins, Grapes, and
other Fruits, and all the Mault-Liquors made of Corn, are full of a vegetable
Mucilage, and contain also an oily, acid Spirit, which is stopped from its due
Fermentation by the Sliminess, or outward Accidents, or for want of a due
Ripeness in the Fruit it is made of; for this Reason, Wines made of our acid
and crude English Fruits are very windy, the airy, elastic Particles seem to
mix with the oily, acid Spirits of all Vegetable Liquors; and when they are not
thoroughly fermented those elastic Particles remain mixed with the crude, slimy
Liquor, and create the Windiness of it; or if any fermenting Liquor be shut up
in Bottles before those elastic, airy Particles have evaporated, which are
observed to produce the Froth in all fermenting Liquors; they create a great
windiness in those bottled Liquors, and they become very unhealthful to
flatulent Bodies.

Sugar and Honey make windy Liquors, because they are apt to ferment, and their
Spirits are depressed, and the airy, elastic, fermenting Particles are detained
by their innate Gummosity.

4. Oils and Fats are hardly digested, because of the Mucilage they have joined
with them; so Butter, Oil, and fat Meat, lie long in the Stomach, and are
hardly turned into a thin Chyle; and for this reason Chessnuts, and all oily
Nuts, are commonly thought windy.

5. All crude Plants, as Spinach, Lettuce, Purslain, Mushrooms, are windy, by
reason of their crude Mucilage, and unaptness to be digested.

6. All Acids, and acerb Fruits, are windy, as being less apt to ferment,
unless with contrary Salts.

Mr. Boyl's Vacuum proves all Liquids to be full of airy Particles, which rise
upon the pumping of the Air; but that Acids have the least of it; and therefore
I have observed March-Drink to have the least Windiness, and all other ripe
Liquors.

7. All very mucilaginous Flesh-Meats, as the Extremities of Animals, and Fish,
and Waterfowl, are accounted windy, by reason of their abundant Sliminess.

II. All external Causes which hinder a just Fermentation, produce Windiness,
as Idleness, want of due Exercise, too much Sleep, cold Air, Fear, Sadness, too
much Evacuation by Venery, Baths, Exercise, spend the Spirits too much, which
help the Invigorating of the stomachic Ferment, and all Evacuations stopped in
the Haemorrhoids or Menses vitiate the stomachic Ferment, by mixing the Guts
with it; and in Obstructions of the Viscera are blown up continually.

The internal Causes of a cold Flatulency, are,

1. A Stomachic Ferment which wants Spirits, being only sour, or mucilaginous,
acerb, or austere.

2. The vapid, watery, mucilaginous or crude State of Blood and Humors; for
they who have a strong Heat, or due Fermentation, have no Flatulencies, unless
the Meat be of the qualities abovementioned, which are unfit for Fermentation,
and so cannot thoroughly be dissolved by it, by reason of their unaptness to
ferment.

They who have a very low Digestion have no Windiness, because they cannot
raise the Spirits in the slimy Meat so far as to become windy; but those only
are flatulent who can digest to some degree, whereby the Spirits begin to
separate, but do not perfectly volatilize themselves, and separate the aerie
Particles from the fermenting Liquor, which, by its Sliminess, retains much of
the aerie, elastic Particles.

3. When the Pylorus is so obstructed, that the alimentary Tincture does not
descend to the Guts, it becomes windy in the Stomach.

4. When the Choler does not correct the Acidities of the Aliments digested, as
in the Jaundice, Flatuosities are produced.

5. In the Obstruction of the Viscera, the Spleen-Juyce, or the Hepatic, is
mixed with the animal Ferment in the Stomach, and vitiates the Digestion; or the
conglobate Glands send their serous Lympha's thither in Catarrhs, or the
Obstructions hinder the Distribution of the Chyle.

The Cure of Flatulency consists,

1. In Evacuation of the slimy Humor, which burdens the Stomach, by Vomits,
and Purges, and Clysters, which are Carminative and Phlegmagogues.

2. By avoiding all noxious, windy Meats and Drinks, and using a contrary Diet
to help Digestion, as those abovementioned, and all the carminative Aromatics
added to it; as Pepper, Ginger, Cloves, Nutmegs; and by avoiding all fullness of
Diet, and Surfeits, and to use a very simple Diet of Flesh-Meats, small Ale,
and Bread, and no other; to avoid Suppers, and Venery after Meat, and much
Exercise, and all sorts of Vegetables in Diet, as Legumens, Malt Drinks, and
Sallets.

3. The pituitous, acerb and vapid Temper of the stomachic Ferment, and of the
Blood, must be corrected by Digestives abovementioned; and the Phlegmagogues
must evacuate it, as Pilulae Aloephanginae, etc.

4. The Matter rarefied into Flatus must be evacuated by Pil. Mastich.
Aloephangin. by Clysters and Vomits.

5. The Flatuosities must be discussed.

1. By sweet Aromatics; as Semen Ammcos ss. boiled in Wine, or Caraways,
Cummin, Fenil, Aniseed, Dill, Lovage, Parsly-Seeds, infused in Wine, or
Eleosacchara of them; as, Fenil. Ol. Gutt. 6. in Wine, Daucus-Seeds in Beer.
^eptic Powders of the Seeds mentioned, and restaceous Powders, Roots of
Angelica in Powder or Wine, Spirit or Tincture of Imperatoria, wild
Parsnip-Seeds, Lovage-Roots, boiled.

2. By the acrid Aromatics; as Pepper, whose Tinct. with Brandy, or Spirit of
Sal Ammoniac, or Diatrion, Pipereon in rotulis, cum Sacch. and Ol. Feniculi,
Cubebs, Cardamom in Spirit, Tincture or Wine.

3. The Laurel Aromatics; as Ol. Cinnam. Caryophill. cum Sacch. Forbiculi,
addend. Ambr. Grys. Confect. e baccis Lauri ij. ante pastum; Orange Peels and
Limons, Nutmegs, Winter-Bark in Tincture or Wine, or Bay Berries in Wine.

4. Terebinthinate Aromatics; as Juniper Berries candied, No. X. or Syrup of
the same made with Wine, or Juniper-Wine; Enula compound Candied.

5. Acrid, sweet Aromatics: Calamus Aromaticus, Ginger, Zedoary, Galanga, which
may be infused in Wine or Brandy thus, Calami Aromatici, Zedoarii, Galangae,
Zinzib. an. ij. Senae vi. Agarici, Turbethi, an. iij. Cardamom i. Fiat infus.
in Vin. alb. lbij. colat. Capiat iij.

Let Zedoary be chewed in the Mouth, or infused in Wine.

Use Costus and Iris in Wine or Tincture.

6. Cephalic, acrid, styptic Aromatics, and hitterish; as Calaminth, Mint,
Pennyroyal, Thyme, Rosemary in Wine, or their Oils in Lozenges, or spec.
Diacalaminth in Lozenges.

7. Bitters deterge the phlegmatic Matter joined with Aromatics; as
Wormwood-Wine with Sal volatile oleosum, or Enula, and Orange Peels, Chamomil
Flowers two handfuls in a Bottle of Sack; bitter Wines of Centaury, Gentian,
and Orange Peels.

Decoction of Polium Montanum in Wine, or Conserve of Tansie.

Theriaca, or Mithridate with Wine, Syrup of Carduus iij. with i. of Extract of
Calamus Aromaticus.

8. Foetids; as Rheu in Wine, or Syrup, or distilled, or in Clysters; and
outwardly, Oil of Rheu, and Amber.

9. Animal Foetids; as Castor, and the Dungs of Animals, as that of Pigeons,
and Hens; or Infusion of Horse-Dung, and the same fried in Oil, applied
outwardly.

10. Vegetable Acrids, or Corrosives; Garlic, and Onyons, and Aaron Roots.

11. Terebinthinate Foetids; Rad. Asari, Nardi, Savin. boiled in Wine, and
applied as a Cataplasm, and the Wine drank.

12. Narcotics:. Aqua Fl. Cham. iv. Menth. Mirabilis, an. iss. Spir. Nitri
dulcis ss. Laud. gr. ij. Ol. Anis. Gutt. 2. Sir. Foeniculi i. Misce.

The external Applications are Fomentations of Aromatics boiled in Wine:
Calamus, Zedoary, Galanga, Cyperus, Mace, Cinnamon. Of Bitters: Wormwood,
Chamomil, Bay Berries, Mint, Empl. de Baccis Lauri, de Cymino.

Balsams: Ol. Nutmegs expressed ss. Balsam. Peru ij.

Oils: Chemical Ol. Salviae, Caryophill. Dill, Rheu, Amber.

Bags of Millet, Cummin, Aniseed, fried with Salt and Oats.

Bread or Flannels dipped in Brandy, in which the Aromatics are infused.

Clysters of Sack, and carminative Oils, or ij. of Aqua Vitae added.

Or Purgers added, as Benodict. Laxativ. i. Infus. Croci Metal. iij. to a
Carminative Decoction of Calamint, Pennyroyal, Origanum, Fl. Chamomil, and the
Seeds, with El. e Baccis Lauri iss. Oil of Aniseeds ss. in the Yolk of an Egg.

A Cake may be fried of Yolks of Eggs, and Cummin Seeds, and Oil of Chamomil.

Aniseeds, and Chamomil Flowers, infused in Aqua Vitae for a Fomentation.

Cupping-Glasses applied to the Belly.

Plaster Tachamahac, Caranna, and Plaster of Bay Berries mixed in equal Parts.

A Pound of Ginger may be boiled in a Vessel of small Ale, for ordinary Drink.

In the Cure of Flatuosities we must insist chiefly on Digestives, which
promote the Fermentation of Humors; the discussing the present Flatuosities,
and evacuating the slimy Matter cannot hinder the Production of new
Flatulencies: but the Curing the low Fermentation, perfectly cures all
Flatulencies; but those which depend on the Obstruction, and Tumor of the
Viscera, cannot be cured without a respect to these Distempers that occasion
the Flatuosity. Such are the Flatuosities in the Tympany.

And the Distempers of the Nerves, as Hysteric Fits, and Asthma, which produce
symptomatical Inflations of the Guts, which cause Windiness; and that is cured
by removing the original Distemper.

The Windiness appears much in all new fermented Liquors; and the further they
are fermented or ripened, the less windy they are. The bottling Liquors stops
their Fermentation; and therefore, such Liquors are to be avoided in the windy
Cacochymia of our Chyle.

If the Matter in which the windy Spirits are included be not well evacuated,
the Carminatives occasion a greater Flatuosity, by rarefying the Wind. Ginger
and hot Sherry I have observed very good in Windiness of the Stomach, and
Cholics thence produced.

Boiling any Liquor that is windy evaporates the Spirits, and the same windy
Spirits may be discussed out of Animal Humors by Exercise or Bathing.

The drinking boiled or warmed Drink with Steel, may be convenient in the
Windiness of the Stomach.

The drinking the Bath-Waters washes off the sour Tartar from the Stomach and
Blood; and bathing in those sulphurous Waters very much exalts the
Fermentation of the Chyle, and higher digests the Blood; and upon these
accounts, both inwardly and outwardly, it agrees with most cases depending on a
depressed Fermentation of Humors, but disagrees with the contrary, which arise
from too high a Fermentation of our Humors, especially in their beginning,
whilst a high Fermentation lasts; and for this reason, Bathing dis-agrees with
hot Bloods, the Hypochondriac, Hysteric, Asthmatic, Nephritic, Convulsive.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Serous Cacochymia of Animal Humors.

WHEN the Chyle is no way changed into the Serum of the Blood, but swims mixed
with it, that is the lowest state of Crudity in the Blood; for the Chyle ought
to be changed into the Serum, by the Saltness and Oyliness of the Blood, which
absorbing the Acid of the Chyle, it loses its Milkiness. The Serum and Chyle
differ most by their Color and Consistence; for Acid Spirit of Nitre makes the
Serum Milky, and Spirit of Sal Ammoniac. makes it clear Serum again. We often
observe the Chyle on the Cake of Blood in milky Spots, or mixed much with the
Serum in Cachectic Persons; and this is cured by Chalyboates, and volatile
Salts, which turn it to Serum.

The next degree of Crudity in the Sanguification of our Chyle, is, when the
Serum is not digested into a gelatinous Lympha, fit for the Nourishment of the
Solid Parts; for the viscid part of the Serum, which evidently contains the
caseous parts of the Chyle, as appears by its Inspissation by the Fire, or
Coagulation by Alum, or other Acids, is naturally changed, by a long
Circulation and Separation of its superfluous Humidity, by Sweat or Vrin, into
the Lympha salsa serosa, which being exposed to the cold Air, when it is taken
out of the lymphatics, it presently turns to a Jelly.

There may be a further degree of Crudity reckoned, when the gelatinous salsa
Lympha, made out of the Serum, does not become fibrous, for want of a due
Viscidity or Gumminess; for then we believe Humors have attained their perfect
Digestion, when there appears a fibrous Hypostasis in the Vrin, which depends
upon the viscid part of the Serum turned into the fibrous Cake of the Blood.

The rosy or red oily Particles of the Chyle ought to become more red and
florid, by a long Digestion, by their Mixture with the Volatile Salt, and red
Oil of the Blood; but in Cachectic Persons we observe the Cake of Blood to be
of a pale, Pink Color, and less florid, like Milk and Blood mixed.

The Acid part of the Chyle ought to be digested into the vitriolic Acid of the
Blood; but by reason of the Crudity of the Blood, it keeps its tartareous
Nature, and hinders the Rarefaction of the Blood, and abates the Volatility,
both of the Volatile Salt, and Oil in the Blood.

The abundant Aquosity of the Serum ought to have been evacuated by Sweat and
Vrin; but the Chyle being not fully digested, the watery part cannot easily be
separated from the viscid contents; neither can it acquire its Salt Tastes,
which fits it for a Secretion by its proper Glands: hence it will inevitably
follow, that the Veins and Lymphatics are greatly filled and distended by the
abundance of the Serum, which produces diverse Distempers in several parts.

I. If it stagnates in the habit of the Body, and is mixed with crude Chyle,
which cannot circulate through the Lymphatics, it produces an Anasarca.

II. If it stagnates in any particular Part, it produces external Tumors
containing Water.

III. If it be evacuated into diverse Cavities, it produces diverse sorts of
Dropsies; as,

1. Hydrops Ascites, when the Serum breaks the Lymphatics, and fills the
Cavities of the Belly, either by Fullness of the Serum, or by the Distention of
the Vessels, which are compressed by the Tumors of the Viscera.

2. The Serum may be evacuated into the Cavity of the Head, in the
Hydrocephalus.

3. Hydrops Thoracis, is when it is evacuated into the Cavity of the Breast.

4. In the Dropsy of the Womb, the Water is contained in the Cavity of it, or
its Testicles, or distends the Lymphatics into Vesiculae.

5. In the Hydrocele, the Water is evacuated into the Cods.

These Distempers depend on too great a Serosity of the Blood; but they being
Evacuations of it into particular Cavities, ought to be treated of under that
head.

The external Causes of the Serosity of the Blood, are,

I. A wet and a moist Region, which supplies great, foggy Air, for our
Respirations; and by that we imbibe its Humidities, and that also hinders
Transpiration, and so increases the Serosity.

II. A crude, watery, mucilaginous Diet of Vegetables, Fish, immoderate
Drinking, Milk-Meats, Broths, Water drinking, Herbs, and Fruits.

III. The Intermission of dew Exercise, which ought to discuss by Sweat; and
that also helps Chylification, Sanguification, and the Circulation, and
Secretion of Humors.

IV. The Suppression of Evacuations by Sweat and Vrin in the Stone, or the
Suppression of Fontinels, Menses, Haemorrhoids, or Looseness, make the Blood
more serous.

V. The Sanguification is weakened by great Evacuations, as Haemorrhagies,
Dysenteries, Fluxes of the Menses; as also, by the Fluor Albus, and Vomitings,
and Quartanes.

VI. Sadness and Sleep stop the Motion of our Spirits and Humors, and by that
means hinder our Sanguification of the Chyle.

The internal Causes of too much Serosity of the Blood, are,

1. A weak Ferment, and a watery Chyle.

2. A vapid, watery Blood, which is less florid and oily, and wants its due
Saltness, by which it ought to turn the new Chyle into the Serum, and the Cake
of Blood.

3. The Circulation of the Blood being hindered by any inward Polypus, or Tumor
of the Viscera, as the Lungs, Liver, Spleen, Kidneys, either cause an
Extravasasion of the Serum, or hinder its Digestion and Sanguification, and the
Stagnation of it is observed in some part.

The Circulation of the Blood is deficient in the languid and dying, and their
Legs pit.

The Circulation being often stopped, occasions that Dropsies follow, Asthma's,
Hysterical Fits, and other Convulsions.

The Signs of a serous Constitution, and of the serous Cacochymia, are,

The Use of watery Meats and Drinks, Evacuations of Sweat or Vrin, or any other
stopped.

The Swelling of the Belly, Legs, or Face, under the Eyes, much Sweating, or
great quantity of pale Vrin, watery Stools, and much Water contained in the
Blood, when let forth, above an equal weight of the Serum, in respect of the
Cake.

The Cure of the serous Cacohymia requires,

First, A dry Diet, and that which is heating, drinking Wine, or strong Beer,
Roast rather than Boiled, all manner of salt, bitter, acrid or aromatic
Pickles, and abstinence from much Liquids, only lbiss of Wine in a Day, for 40
Days, or else with Wormwood, Juniper Berries, Anti-scorbuties, and Ashes in
constant Drink.

Secondly, The Evacuation of the Chyle, which is watery, from the primae viae,
Blood, or Cavities of the Body.

1. By Purgers, which, by their Tithymaline Acrimony, carry off the Water; as
Extract. Esulae, Pil. De Gambogia. Turbeth.

2. Or by Purgers which have an acrid Resin; as Jalap, Mechoacan, Scammony,
with Merc. dulcis.

3. Or by nauseous Bitters; as Syrup. de Spina, Roots and Seeds of Dwarf Elder,
Juice of Briony, Solanum Lignosum, Soldanella, Troches of Alhandal, Elaterium,
Extract of Hellebor.

Or by other gentler Acrids; as Jayce of Iris.

Or Vitriolic Minerals; as Crystals of Silver, Squamae Aeris, Antimonials,
Infusion of Crocus Metallorum, Mercurius Vitae, Turbeth. Mineral. and these
work by Vomit, and evacuate the Serum both ways.

Thirdly, The Serum must be evacuated out of the Cavities by Paracentesis,
unless the Dropsy depend on a Schirrus of the Viscera, for that is incurable.

The Parts may be pricked with a Needle above the Knee, and Escarotics applied
of Ash-Ashes, or Blystering Plaster.

Fourthly, The serous Matter is most plentisully evacuated by Vrin.

1. By Lixiviums of Broom, Juniper, Bean-Ashes infused in White Wind, with
Orange and Limon Peels, or Flints extinguished in Wine. 2. By Salso-Acids,
Tart. Vitriol. Sal Ammoniac. or Salt of Wormwood, and Spirit of Salt dissolved
in any diuretic. Julep. Sal. Succini, Sal. Prunell. or Salt of Tartar nitrated,
the Herb Kali half a dram three Mornings successively.
3. By acrid and caustic Turpentines, Juniper Berries. Golden Rod, Conyza
Roots, Enula Campane, Squinanth. Asarabacca Roots, Spikenard. Leaves of
Arse-smart. Savin, or Pine- Leaves. Hepatica Terrestris.
4. By watery Caustics. Ranunculus Hederaceus, Aaron Roots. Anagallis Mas, Ros
Solis. Squills, Garlic, Acrids; as Garlic infused in Ale, or its Juice in
Broths or Onions, or Leeks in the same, or Nettle Roots, which have a caustic
Juice in them.
5. By Cresse Acrids. Infusion of Mustard Seed in Wine, Spirit of Scurvy Grass,
and the Leaves of Scurvy Grass, Juyces of Watercresses.
6. By aromatic, sweet Acrids; as, Daucus, Parsley, Fenil, Dill-Seeds,
distilled Water from Water Parsnip, Roots of long Fenil, Smallage, Parsley,
Chervil.
7. By the smoaky, bitter Acrids; as, Eryngo, Scabious, Carduus, Roots of
Burdock, and the Seeds.
8. By the aromatic, bitterish Acrids; as, Pennyroyal, Hyssop, Rosemary, Sage.
9. By the acrid Legumens; as, Asparagus, and Butchers Broom-Roots,
Periclymenum Flowers, Broom.
10. By the acrid Foetids; as, Rheu, Crocus. Rheu boiled in White Wind,
Posset-Drinks, help the Tympanitical to make Water plentifully.
11. By the bitter Acrids of a wormwood Taste; as, Sea, and common Wormwood.
12. By the acrid Bitters of a Mather Taste; as, Radix Rabiae.
13. By Acrids of a laurel Taste; as, Bay Berries, Ash- Seeds, tops of Holly,
and Ivy-Berries.
14. By acrid Insects; as, Millepedes, Earthworms, Scarabaei, Grasshoppers.
15. By burning Acrids of the Orris kind; as, Xyry, Acorus.
16. By the bitter Acrids; as, Grana Alkakengi, Bacc. Fraxini, Bubulae.
17. By volatile Salts, and chemical, acrid Cyls of Vegetables, or Bitumens.
18. By Acid Minerals, Spirit of Salt, Oil of Vitriol. By acid Vegetables, Juice
of Limons, Cream of Tartar. Vinegar helps the Thirst. 19. By the lamium
Faetids; as, Hedera Terrestris.
20. By the strong Bitters; Salvia Agrestis, Lupulus, Scordium, Chamaedrys,
Marrubium, Vervein. 21. By the sweet, nauseous Bitters; as, Centaury, Trifolium
Palustre, Gentian.

Fifthly, The Serum may be evacuated by Clysters; as,

1. Vrinous. 2. Terebinthinate. 3. Of the bitterest Purgers; as Coloquintida.
4. By Sulphurous Medicines; as Infusion of Crocus Metallorum. 5. By Tithymaline
Acrids added; as Gambogia ss. dissolved in Sack.
Sixthly, A sweating Diet of Guaiacum; and with that he may dilute his Wine for
ordinary Drink. Baths, or Fomentations, or the frequent Use of Venice Treacle,
discuss by Sweat; and the Balsamum Polychrestum.

Seventhly, All Hydropical Tumors may be discussed by Baths, Fomentations,
Cataplasms, Ointments, Plasters.

1. By the acrid, foetid, and aromatic Plants abovementioned, being boiled in
salt Liquors; as Seawater, a Lixivium of Ashes, or Aqua Calcis.

2. By the Stercora of Animals boiled in Wine, Vrin, or a Lixivium, and Sulphur
added to them.

3. By Purging Unguents; Vng. Aprippae, Arthanitae, Ointments of Elder Bark,
and Dwarf Elder. By Ointment of Birch-Bark and Leaves.

4. By Caustic Plants, or Animals boiled in Oil; as Oil of Scorpions, Oil of
Flammula.

5. Cataplasms of Roots of Wild Cucumbers.

Indication requires the higher Fermentation of the Mucilaginous Chyle, by the
Tastes mentioned in the Cure of a low Fermentation; but these more specifically
respect the Serosities, and cause its Sanguification.

First, All sorts of Bitters.

I. The nauseous Bitters, or Lychnis Bitters; as Centaury, Buck-Bean,
Saponaria. II. The Mather Bitters; as Rubia, Celandine. III. The Wormwood
Bitters. IV. The smoaky Bitters; as Carduus. V. The Turpentine Bitters; as
Enula, Eupatorium. VI. Lamium Bitters; as Chamaedrys, Marrubium, Scorodaria.
VII. The Pea Bitters; as Broom. VIII. The Laurel Bitters; as Ash, and Birch,
Bark, and Seeds. IX. Bitter Gums; as Aloes, Myrrh, Ammoniacum.
1. These Bitters supply the want of the bitter Acrid of Choler, necessary for
Digestion and Sanguification of the Chyle.

2. All acrid and caustic Plants make the Blood more florid, and so we find
them to help Sanguification.

3. All Salt Tastes, volatile and fixed, make the Blood more florid; they
supply the want of an Animal Salt, which, by absorbing Acids, turns the Chyle
into Blood, and promotes the Mixture and Sanguification of both.

4. Testaceous Medicines, the Calces of Minerals, and Ashes of Animals, by
absorbing the Acidities of Chyle, help the Mixture of it, and the Blood.

5. Oily, acrid, and resinous or oily Plants, exagitate the red Part of the
Blood, and supply its defect; as all Aromatics, and aromatic Wines, and
volatile, oily Salts.

6. Mineral Sulphurs raise the oily, red Part of the Blood; as Chalybeats,
Antimonials, Cinnabarines.

I tried the salt, clear, limpid Water, taken out of the Belly of an Hydropical
Person by Tapping, and could neither inspissate it by Fire, nor coagulate it by
Vitriol or Alum. This was the crude, lymphatic Liquor, too serous and crude;
the Spleen was Schirrous after a Quartain: This Lympha sometimes appeared milky.

Though all the Serum be evacuated by Purgers, Diuretics or Blisters on the
Legs; yet it will regenerate, if the Digestion of Humors be not raised, and
the Schirrosities cured which caused its Evacuation into the Cavities, and the
breach of the Lymphatics stopped, which seems impossible.

An Hydropical Gentlewoman was Tapped once a Week, for fourteen Weeks, and
lived in a tolerable State for some time longer, by the help of five Grains of
Laudanum every Night. No Diuretic caused Water; but Wine and Water helped that
most, and allayed the hectical Symptoms. Every time after Tapping more Water
was made by Vrin; but the Belly filled with the Serum in a Weeks time, and a
Gallon or two was taken out every Week; but, at length, the Belly did not fill
much, but sank, and a Plaster laid on helped its Tumor; and a Consumption, at
last, most afflicted the Person who was before so Hydropical.

I have observed that Fomentation after Tapping abates the hardness of the
Belly and Viscera.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Fermentation of the Humors into degrees above their Natural State.

WHEN the Fermentation in the Stomach is carried too high, the Contents of the
Stomach become bitter or rancid, very acid, acrid, or salt; and so are all the
Humors thence produced.

By a strong Fermentation all the Parts of the Chyle acquire an Acrimony; The
oily Part becomes rancid and bitter, and stinks; the acid Tartar, being
volatilized, becomes corrosive, or acid-acrid; the earthy Part neither adhering
to the acid nor oily Part, is left in the primae viae, to go off by Stool; and
the Mucilage of the Meat being attenuated by a high Digestion or Putrefaction,
the Chyle becomes more thin, and fluid, and nidorous Ructus frequently rise
from the Stomach.

Not only the Chyle, but the Blood also is vitiated by too high a state of the
Principles of the Chyle, and from the Volatility of the Oil, and the Pungency
of the Acid, the Blood is made more florid, and the Vitriolic Acid more sharp
or corrosive, like the Spirit of Acid Juyces high fermented. A rosy Chyle will
make a florid Blood, and an acrid, bitter, salt, acid Chyle will give the same
quality to the Blood, and a putrid, thin Chyle will make a putrid Blood.

All the Diseases depending on this State of Humors, are, the hot
Constitutions of Humors, and are contrary to the former described; which are
the several Species of cold Constitutions; Fat to the Mucilage of Humors; a
putrefied thin Consistence is contrary; and to the Acerbity, a vitriolic
Acidity and Saltness; and to the Serosity, an Inspissation or Viscidity; and to
a crude Flatulency, a rancid Flatuosity, and nervine, wandering Pains.

When the oily, acid, earthy or viscid Principles of Chyle acquire too high a
State by Fermentation, they produce these several Species of hot Cacochymia's.

1. A Bitterness of the Chyle and Humors in Choleric Constitutions.

2. The Chyle and Blood in the hot Scurvy have a rancid, oily State.

3. A Viscidity of the Serum, or Inspissation of the new Chyle mixed with it,
as in Inflammations and Rheumatisms.

4. A Saltness of Blood.

5. A Vitriolic Acidity, or Corrosiveness of Blood.

6. A Putrefaction of Blood, which causes its want of Fibers, or Thinness, or
Fluidity.

7. A Nidorous Ructus from the Stomach, and a hot, nervine Flatuosity, with
convulsive Pains, or hypochondriac or hysteric Symptoms, and a feverish Temper
of Blood.

The evident Causes of too high a Digestion, are,

1. A Hot Diet, which digests and ferments too quick; so acrid, aromatic,
vinous, Salt, and very sweet Meats, produce an acrid, aromatic, salt, vinous
Chyle; and Honey and Sugar, and sweet Wines, are apt to ferment too much. All
Flesh-Meats high salted, peppered, or pickled, fried, broyled, or baked Meats,
breed a Chyle too rancid or hot. Fish, as Salmon, or Crabs, Lobsters, are apt
to Surfeit, and putrefie in the Stomach. All Meats a little putrid before they
be eaten exalt the Fermentation too much. All Gravies, Anchovies, Oysters, and
the Indian Sawces, are too great Stimulaters of a Fermentation in the Stomach,
and all those Meats which contain an Animal Ferment in them, as old Cheese.

II. By immoderate Labor, by the Heat of the Season, or the Countries nearer
to the Sun; by Cares, Watchings, Anger, Joy, Pain, the Blood is heated, and its
Circulation quickened, and Sanguification is much promoted.

III. The same Causes produce a bitter, acrid Bile, which promote Digestion
much, and Sanguification also. Fasting sharpens the Choler; and those who are
apt to Vomit Yellow Choler, and those who digest too fast, have Choleric
Fluxes. In Young Men, and hot Seasons, Choler much abounds.

IV. The Retention of salt, foetid Serum, for want of Evacuation by Sweat or
Vrin, produces Feverish Dispositions, which cause a high Fermentation in the
Blood.

The internal Causes of too high a Fermentation, are,

1. A spirituous, foetid, sub-Acid or salt Ferment in the Stomach, and this
ferments too much all our Aliments.

2. A natural oily, acid, foetid, or acrid, salt Temper of the Blood, which is
apt to ferment too much.

3. A bitter, acrid Choler, which, with the Tartar of the Meat, produces a
great Saltness of the Blood.

4. A frequent and impetuous Circulation of the Blood, which raises the
Digestion of it, which happens often in Summer, and to Young Men, by Passions
or Surfeits.

5. Foetid Humors retained ferment the Humors; as, the salt Serum, the Semen,
the Choler, and many extraneous Ferments come into the Blood from without, as
in the Itch, Leprosy, Pox, the Ferment of infectious Fevers, or the Poisons
from Mad-Animals, or venomous Bites of them: All which have their Effects on
the Animal, by Fermenting its Humors.

Such as the Blood and Spirits of Animals be, as to their Qualities, such is
the Temper of their Stomachic Ferment, for that rises from the other; and any
Error committed in Chylification is communicated to the Blood and Spirits.

The Cure of too high a Fermentation requires,

First, That all the Evident Causes be avoided, and that we use a contrary Diet
of crude, acerb, watery, mucilaginous Styptics; as crude Vegetables, Bistort,
Lettuce, Spinach, Cucumbers, Sorrel, Melons; Fruits; as Apples, Plumbs,
Cherries, Strawberries, Sloes; the Legumens, as young Peace, Beans, boiled
Wheat; and all the farinaceous Meats of Oat or Barley Meal, Rice, or Pudding,
Panados.

The Drink ought to be small Beer, or Water two Parts, with a little Wine; or
else the Drinking Mead, Elder-Wine, or Wood-Drinks, or Water it self, or thin
Milk. Milk-Meats are very useful in this State, for we add Milk to fermenting
Wines to stop their Fretting.

Secondly, All Choleric Humors ought to be evacuated, and the Rancid Contents
of the Stomach.

I. By Vomiting, with Carduus, or Sal Vitrioli, or Squills. II. By Cholagogues,
and those, 1. Nauseous Dock-Bitters; as Chewing of Rhubarb, or its Infusion
with Manna by Dock-Beer. 2. By Aloetics; Elixir Proprietatis cum Acido. 3. By
Bitterish and Nauseous Pea-Tastes; as Sena.
III. By the Bitterish, Purging Waters. IV. By Diagrydiates mixed with Tartar,
or some Acid, Rhubarb Powder, by Pil. Tartareae. V. By Lenitive, Sweet Purgers;
as Manna, El. Lenitiv.
Thirdly, The oily, bilious or salt Temper of the Ferment and Blood, and its
frequent Circulation, are to be corrected and checked,

1. By Acids; as Spirit of Salt, Vinegar, Sulphur, Niter, Alum, Conserve of
Roses, vitriolated cum Tinct. Rosar. which coagulate the Chyle, the Bile, the
Salt Serum, and the oily Particles of the Blood, and thereby fix them. Bitters
are always corrected by Acids, so the Bitter of Aloes, Coloquintida is abated
by Spirit of Sulphur, or Vitriol.

2. Styptics preserve the Consistence of the Blood, and hinder or cure Fevers;
as Plantain, House-Leek, Tormentil, Cinquefoil, Purslain.

3. The Mucilaginous incrassate or thicken the Consistence; as Gum Tragacanth,
and Icthyocolla, Borrage, Bugloss, Emulsions, Lettuce.

4. Watery Liquors temper and dilute hot Humors; as Mineral Waters, Whey, with
Syrup of Violets, and cool, bitterish, slimy or acid Juyces, Milk-Waters,
drinking Milk and Water.

5. Bitterish, Crude Plants deterge away the Choler; as the Cichory Bitters, as
Decoction of Cichory-Roots, or Dandelion in Whey, with Cream of Tartar.

6. Opiates stop the vapid Circulation of Blood.

7. Mercurial Medicines depress the Fermentation and cool Humors, and stop
Putrefaction.

Fourthly, Frequent Bleeding abates the Fullness of Humors, and checks their
Fermentations, or Fervors, or Ebullitions.

Fifthly, All Evacuations suppressed ought to be renewed, and all extraneous
Ferments to be corrected or evacuated.

Sixthly, Externally we may check the Ebullition of the Blood, by applying
Water and Vinegar to the Pulses, Stones, Forehead, Feet, and in an
extraordinary Case the Patient ought to be put into cold Water, or dipped,
according to the Method communicated to me by my Ingenious Friend Dr. Baynard,
a Member of the College of Physicians; whose Success by it in Curing such
Diseases as depend on too high a Fermentation of the Blood, is very well known;
and the Practice seems to me very Rational, if managed according to the Rules
his Experience has found out.

The Diseases which chiefly affect the Stomach upon too high a Fermentation,
are, an Oyliness and Rancidity of its Contents, and a Nidorous Ructus; The
Causes of these are,

1. A Salso-acid, spirituous Ferment. 2. Meats which are half putrid, or oily,
or rancid, or fat, or fried with Fat, and corrosive Vegetables; as Garlic,
Onyons, or the much Use of Tobacco. 3. Choleric or Salt Humors mixed with the
natural Ferment.
Since these Nidorous Ructus depend on the Acrimony of Humors, and the Foetid
Spirituosity of the Ferment, and the Putridness of the Meat, they are
improperly imputed to a Crudity; for a Foetor is rather a sign of a
Putrefaction, and in no Crudity are the oily, acid Spirits so far volatilized
in the Stomach.

The Cure of this Nidorosity, is,

1. By Evacuation, by Vomiting and Purging, as is directed.

2. By Correcting the Oleous Temper of the Bile, or Ferment, or Meat, by the
Acids mentioned, as Cream of Tartar, Juice of Limon, Decoction of Tamarind,
Spirit of Niter dulcified, with Spirit of Mint or Aniseeds.

Or by Salso-Acids; as Sal Prunellae.

3. By Externals, Styptics, Aromatics, and Acids; as Quinces and Mint, with
Vinegar and Leaven.

By too great a Fermentation of the Meat, the Lacteal Lympha, as the Saliva,
becomes nauseously Sweet and Sharp, and the Ferment of the Stomach of the same
quality, which produces a Nauseousness; and by its Salso-Acid, a hot Cholic.
The Mucus of the Larynx and Aspera Arteria becomes Sharp, or Salso-Acid, and
produces Coughs.

The Milk in the Breasts becomes bitter, rank, oily, salt, thick, which gives
Gripes to Children, and Vomits them.

The Semen becomes salt and stimulating; as in Furor Vterinus.

The Succus Nervosus salt, or more lucid than ordinary; as in Deliriums, and
more Oily and Foetid.

The Salt Lympha becomes more Salt; as in the Gout, Stone, Haemorrhagies, and
the Scurvy.

Those are most disposed to this State of Blood, who are of Choleric, hot
Constitutions; for the same kind of Diet produces much Choler, which
over-ferments the Blood; as all acrid, bitter, salt, aromatic and sweet things,
and all hot Meats and Medicines injure them, but cool ones, and those that are
Serous, refresh them. The Choleric have their Senses and Actions of the Mind,
and Motions of the Body, very quick and ready, their Passions of Anger and
Revenge violent, and their Dreams cruel, and little Sleep, and their Pulse full
and hard, and all these Symptoms depend on Fiery or Choleric, Hot Spirits.

The Abundance of Choler abates the Appetite, creates Thirst, and requires a
cool-Diet, and disposes to Fevers, and Phrensies.

The Erysipelas, and Choleric Vomitings, and Loosenesses, and a bitterness in
the Mouth, the Vrin is thin, yellowish, or flame Colored, or red.

The Habit of the Body is generally lean, and the Color of the Face yellowish,
and the Hair yellow or black.

By these Signs mentioned we may know when Humors are too high fermented, and
Choler produced: but that the Nature of Choler may be more fully explained, and
the Cure of its Bitterness by Coagulations, I will annex the ensuing Discourse
about its Nature, Use, and Colors, and its Coagulations by Acids.

Choler may be compared to the Juyces of bitter Plants, for their Bitterness
depends on an Oil and Acid, mixed with much Earth, digested into a particular
State, and by the Mixture of these Principles they acquire the Texture of
Particles, necessary to a bitter Taste.

There is a good quantity of Water mixed with Choler, whose Superfluity is drawn
off by the Lymphatics, that the Choler might be left more ropy. Some of the
bitterness goes off with the Lympha, which gives a bitterness to it, if it be
tasted in the Vessels, which return the Lympha from the Vesica Bilaria; and
because this meets the Chyle in the common Receptacle, it certainly helps there
its Sanguification, which the Ancients, by Mistake, imputed to the Liver its
self, but that is more rationally ascribed to Choler, which is produced by the
Liver.

The Principles of Choler are easily mixed with watery Liquors, and diluted by
them. When it is too slimy or hot, we use much Whey or Water for that end to
dilute it.

A great quantity of an Earthy Principle appears in Choler, because it is apt
to breed Stones, and it leaves a great Thickness or Crassamentum upon
Evaporation.

The Oyliness in Choler appears in its ropy Sliminess, and for this reason it
serves Painters to mix (like Oil) with their Colors; and it is used for the
Washing of Clothes, because of its Oily Parts. I have observed in Faulcons a
small quantity of Gall in the bladder of Gall, the Oleous Parts of Chyle being
spent most on the Fat, and not digested so high, as to produce Choler; and the
reason that fat Constitutions are more cool than the lean, is, because they
breed less Choler.

Spirit of Hartshorn put into the yellow Choler of a Hog precipitated it a
little, from whence, I supposed some Acid might be in it.

There is naturally no Volatile Salt in Choler, but that is made by
Fermentation of it, or by a strong Fire in Distillation. This ought much to
discourage Physicians from confiding in Chemistry for the Explaining the Nature
and Principles of Animal Humors, since it produces so much of a Volatile Salt,
which is not naturally in Choler; and I think I have a much clearer and certain
Notion of Choler, and its Use, from its Sensible Qualities, especially its
Taste.

The Green Choler of a Cow tasted sweet, bitter, sub-acrid, or a little
pungent, and it turned Syrup of Violets green.

The yellow Choler of a Hog had the same, but a stronger Taste, and it turned
Syrup of Violets green.

The florid Part of the Blood is that which the Ancient Authors meant by the
Bilis Alimentaria, or natural Choler; for the florid Part being of an Oily and
Acid Nature, it is the immediate Matter of Choler; but the great Slime
observable in Choler, is sent to the Liver by the Spleen.

All Choleric Persons have very florid Bloods, and that very hot, which both
depend on the oily, acid, red Part of the Blood.

Choler is easily mixed with Blood, if they be stirred together, and so gives a
very florid Color to it, which shows a great Agreement betwixt the Red and
Yellow in Animal Humors.

The change of the red, oily Acid in Blood, to a yellow Color in Choler, is
from a further Digestion of the same Humor, or a Mixture of a Spleen Acid with
it; so Brimstone, in its Natural State, is mixed with much Acid and Earth, and
is of a greenish Color; but when sublimed, it has less Earth and Acid, and
then is of a yellow Color; but if the yellow Flames be melted with Salt of
Tartar, the Hepar Sulphuris is red, and the Balsam made of it, or its Tincture;
but if a Lixivium be made of the Hepar, and it be precipitated by a good
quantity of Acid, it becomes Milky, as in Lac Sulphuris.

The Oil in Animal Humors gives us as great a Variety of Color, according to
its different kinds or quantities of Acid mixed with it, as Sulphur does in the
Experiments mentioned, or in the Variety of the Colors of Metals, which
depends on their different Digestions, or Mixtures of their Sulphur with a
Mineral Acidity.

I. The Oil or Butter in Chyle gives a Milky Color, by the Mixture of it with
a Tartar Acid, and resembles the Color and Mixture of Lac Sulphuris.

II. The Oil gives a florid Color to the Blood, by its Mixture with the
volatilized Vitriolic Acidity and Saltness there, and this resembles the Hepar
Sulphuris in Color and Mixture of less Acidity, with a Saltness.

III. The Oil in the Choler is of different Colors, according to the
difference of its Spleen Acid mixed with it, or the Acid of the Meats digested
in the Stomach.

1. It is Green in Sheep, Hens, Rabbits, Cows, Dear, who feed on Herbs, which
supply a great quantity of crude or acerb Tartar to the Animal Humors. If we
drop Spirit of Nitre into yellow Choler, it turns it Greenish, and our
Excrements look Green from Chalybeate Water, in which there is the Acid of
Sulphur joined with a Stypticity. All our Green Vomits in Women are from a
Mixture of Yellow Choler, and an Acid in the Stomach; they taste and smell
Sour: They are cured by the grossest Steel in Hysterical Women, or Testaceous
Medicines in Children, when they are griped by a Green Humor; from which
Observations it appears, that the Bilis Porracea is from a crude Tartar Acid
mixed with Yellow Choler in the Stomachs of the Hysterical, or Hypochondriacal,
or Children Griped by that Humor; and the Green Choler of the Animals
abovementioned is, from the red florid Parts of the Blood, too much fixed by a
crude Acid, and much of Earth, which those Animals have from their Food of
crude Grass.

These Animals have a milder Heat than those who have Yellow Choler; the
lowness of their Fermentation may be discerned by a less offensive Foetor of
their Bodies, and the watery Paleness of their Vrins in a natural State: From
hence we may observe, that all Green Humors are signs of Indigestion, and a
crude Acidity, and they are to be cured as the Tartar Acid of Chyle, already
described.

2. The Paleness of Choler is from a great Serosity mixed with it; and this is
a sign of a great Weakness of Digestion, and a Serous Cacochymia.

3. The Sliminess and Sweetness of Choler is from a weak, pituitous Blood, and
a sign of it, and belongs to Fat Constitutions.

4. IV. In Animals, whose Heat is very strong, and their Fermentation more
violent, and whose Bodies have a stronger Foetor, as Men, Pigs, Cats, Dogs,
etc. the Choler is of a Yellow Color.

V. The Bilis Vitellina differs from the Yellow Choler only in Consistence and
Acrimony; it is compared to the Yolks of Eggs, and is a sign of a viscid State
of Blood.

VI. The Blue Choler is commonly called Isatodes, like the Color Woad gives.

This I once observed in a Young Hysterical Woman, who Vomited Blue after the
Death of her Father, and upon a Surfeit.

I observed the same Blue was Vomited by a Young Person, when all his Stools
were Black; and this Blue Choler must be attributed to the Vitriolic Acidity of
the Spleen, or such a State of Acid mixed in the Stomach with Yellow Choler,
and this Color of preternatural Choler the Ancients attributed to too much
Adustion of Choler, or Torrefaction, which brings it near to the Nature of Atra
Bilis, and this Choler ought to be esteemed the lowest State of the Atra Bilis.

VII. Choler of a deep Orange Color, is what the Ancients called Aeruginosa
Bilis, and is the Effect of a Cholera, when the Yellow Choler is altered by the
Splenetic Acid, and made Corrosive, as the Ancients describe it, but it is of
no considerable Taste, as those that Vomited it described it to me; it is of a
Brown and Yellow Mixture, as appears by the Linen stained by it. This Vomited
plentifully often proves Fatal.

The Cure of this ought to be managed, as in the Cholera, by Vomiting
plentifully at first, by Glysters and Laudanum, but not Purging. It seems very
probable to me, that it is the Effect of an intermitting Fever, and a Symptom
of it, and requires the Use of the Cortex, with Laudanum, after Evacuation,
with Aqua Pulli, or Posset Drink, and Glysters, and Bleeding, if the Pulse will
bear it. This Choler is a sign of a putrid State of Humors.

VIII. Choler of a Flaming Color seems to be of a high State of Digestion; so
I have observed in a Fitchet which stinks much, a Choler of a Red, Flaming
Color, and the higher or hotter the Choler is, the less Acerb Acidity there is
in the Body, and the higher its Color is, the more the Body stinks.

In River-Fish, the Choler is of a Citrine Color, which is only a thin Yellow,
and is produced by a lower State of Digestion than the Yellow Choler of
Quadrupeds. Yellow Choler becomes Citrine by diluting it, as it is probable
that of Fish is much more diluted than the other. I tasted the Choler of a
Jack, which was Sweet, Bitter, Sub-Acrid, Slimy, and of a Color like Oil of
Amber, Fish Choler bites the Tongue, but is less Bitter than other Choler,
because there is less Fat in Fish, and therefore the Choler is less Oleous or
Bitter.

The Acrimony or Pungency in Choler, is like that of Acrid Plants, or Insects,
without a Salt Taste, and it seems an Oily Acid, which, like that in Soot, is
in a near Disposition to be made a Salt, by Fire or Fermentation.

The Color of the Oils amongst Vegetables very much explains their several
Digestions.

Their Paleness is a Sign of a Serosity in Oil of Walnuts, and Milky Juyces are
Turpentines dissolved in Water.

Their Sliminess of a Crudity in Oil of Linseed.

Their Greenness of an Acidity in Oils of Olives.

The Sweetness of Oils shows the middle State they are in betwixt a high and
low Digestion.

To the Yellowness of Turpentine is joined its Acrid Taste, and Bitterness.

The Blue Turpentines are higher digested in Flos Solis, and Hypericum.

The Rosins, and thick Turpentines, resemble the Consistence of the thick
Vitelline Choler.

The Citrine Balsams; as that of Mecha, and the Black ones, as that of Peru,
represent the State of Black or Citrine Choler.

There are Foetid Balsams and Gums which may answer the State of putrefied
Foetid Choler, which is in Stools of a putrefied Smell.

As to the Atra Bilis, I will reserve the Discourse of it to the Chapter of
Vitriolic Acidity.

Choler may be coagulated by diverse Acids, like the Serum of the Blood; but
Choler most easily.

I put to the Yellow Choler of a Hog, which was about ij. a small quantity of
Spirit of Vitriol, by which it turned into hard and yellow Curds, the Serum
swimming on the top. I have observed such hard Concretions in the Stools of
some Icterical Persons, which proceed from such Coagulations by an Acid.

Spirit of Salt coagulated it less, and the Coagulations were of a paler Color.

Spirit of Niter coagulated the Choler into Green Curds, which were very hard,
and the Serum was very clear above the Coagulations.

The Oil of Tartar nitrated coagulated Choler by its nitrous Acid.

The Green Choler of a Chicken was made by Spiritus Nitri Dulcis, of a more
clear Green Color.

Vitriolate Tartar coagulated Green Choler, and the Coagulum looked Yellowish,
as the Green Choler always does by the Mixture of the White Cremor in the Guts,
which is Sub-Acid.

Alum coagulated the Green Choler into Yellow Curds, but they looked White by
adding a fixed Salt; so Alum Waters precipitate a White Color by Spirit of Sal
Ammoniac.

Neither Sal Ammoniac, nor common Salt, nor Sal Chalybis, coagulate Choler.

Salt of Wormwood made no Effervescence with the Green Choler; whence I infer,
that there is no loose Acid in it to produce its Greenness.

Chemical Oil of Wormwood swam upon Choler, whence it is evident, that Choler
is not wholly Oil.

Green Choler looked Yellow by a Mixture of burnt Hartshorn, which may abate
or alter the Acid of the Green.

It is evident, that Choler is not purely a Stercus Liquidum; for then it ought
not to have been emptyed into the Guts so near to the Stomach, for its
Gallbladder being there inserted, every Motion of the Guts or Stomach, near
its Insertion, must evacuate some Part of it, to mix with the digested Meat
descending from the Stomach.

The first Use I shall ascribe to Choler, is the correcting the Acidities of
the Meat digested in the Stomach, for that might other ways Gripe the Belly, or
coagulate the Chyle, or thicken the Blood.

An Acidity is produced always by artificial Fermentations, and the same is
evident in the Contents of the Stomach of Pigs, Rabbits, Sheep, to any ones
Smell. The Contents of the Carnivorous coagulate Milk; and I found that Bread
digested in the Stomach of a Dog coagulated Milk.

The Bitterness and Acrimony of the Choler corrects this Acidity of the
digested Meat, and, by this means, volatilizes the Chyle, because nothing fixes
the Blood and Chyle so much as Acids do, especially the Oils and Salts in
Animal Humors are coagulated by them.

Thus Sulphur is opened by fixed Salts, and Spirit of Wine by Salt of Tartar is
rectified.

II. The Second Use of Choler is to prevent too great a Fermentation, or a
perfect Putrefaction of our Meats; so Hops and Wormwood prevent the decay as
well as sowring of our Liquors.

Myrrh, and other Bitter Gums, preserve Dead Carcases from Putrefaction. Other
Bitters, as the Cortex, Gentian, Centaury, and Chamaedrys, by their Bitterness,
stop the Fermentation of Fevers, and hinder the Putrefaction of Humors, and
the Gangreen of the Solid Parts; from hence we may infer, that Choler may
prevent the corruptive Fermentation of our Meat and Humors, as well as correct
their Acidities.

III. The Coagulation of the Choler by the Acidity of the digested Meat, helps
the Oil of the Meat to separate from the Faeces, which are of an Earthy Nature,
to which it was united by an Acidity, and the thick nutritious Parts of the
Meat are easily extracted from the rest by the liquid Juyces of the Stomach,
and both the Oily and Nutritious Parts being dissolved in a Liquor constitute
the white Milky Liquor, which is our Chyle.

I took some dry Relics of Peace, digested in the Stomach of a Hog, who was
fed twenty four Hours before he was Killed with Peace only, and Water, which
smelt like boiled Gooseberries, pleasantly Acid: I put some Water to the
digested Peace, and made it Milky, by Addition of some of the Hog's Gall. To the
Liquor squeezed out of the Contents of the Stomach, I put some Gall, which was
coagulated by it; from whence it appears, that Choler is naturally coagulated
by the Acid Relics of the Stomach.

I put some Spirit of Sal Ammoniac to Gall coagulated by Spirit of Vitriol, and
it produced a Milky Color; from both these Experiments I did collect, that the
Coagulation of Choler by the Acid of the digested Meat, together with the Oily
Parts of the Meat, produce the White Color of our Chyle; so in Preparation of
Lac Sulphuris, the Milky Color follows the Precipitation of the Tartar by an
Acid Spirit, and the Oily Parts of the Sulphur give a Milky Color; Oily or
Resinous Liquors, as Tincture of Benjamin, Turpentine it self, being diluted
with Water, become Milky. Emulsions are Milky from the Oyliness of their Seeds.
The best Oils thickened by cold, and the Fat of Animals have a White Color;
and Milk it self has its Whiteness from the Caseous Fibers, and its Buttery Oil.

IV. The Choler has its grosser Parts separated by the Acidity of the digested
Meat, and that gives Color and Consistence to the Excrements, and the Choler
abounding with much Slime, as appears by its Ropyness that inviscates the Gross
indigested Parts of the Alimentary Mass, whereby the Chyle (like Liquor
clarified by the White of Eggs) becomes more pure from the Sediment of Choler,
and the indigested Parts of the Meat, and so only consists of a thin, slimy,
nutritious Juice, with Volatile, Spirituous, Oily Parts, which can only pass
the Canals of the Lacteals.

V. The Fifth Use of Choler, is to help Sanguification, and the Production of
an Animal Salt, of which I will discourse in the Chapter of Saltness.

I mixed the Bitter Decoction, sine sena, with volatile and fixed Salts, and
these abated its Bitterness, which may intimate the Use of them in some
Choleric Cases. Cream of Tartar and Spirit of Sulphur more evidently destroyed
the Bitterness of it. Common Salt and Spirit of Salt seemed rather to increase
than destroy the Bitterness of the Decoction. Mercurius dulcis made it Muddy,
but little altered it: the same effect probably those Medicines will have on
Bitter Choler.

CHAP. X.
Of the Hot Scurvy, or Oily, Vitriolic, Rancid State of the Blood.

THAT Dyscrasie of the Blood, wherein the Oily and Acid Particles are too
highly exalted, is commonly called the Scurvy, which is divided into the hot or
cold Scurvies, according to the various Constitutions of Blood it falls into,
for where the Oil is more abundant in the Blood than the Acid, it produces the
hot Scurvy, the Signs of which are, the high Color of the Vrin, red Spots in
the Skin, from the coagulated or putrid Blood fixing there in its Circulation,
the Gums are Bloody, they are subject to Fevers, Dysenteries, Choleric
Diarrhaea's, Night-Sweats, and Consumptions; these Symptoms are produced by the
rancid or scorbutic Bloods; but in the nervous Liquor, the following Symptoms,
the Running Gout, or Rheumatism in the Nerves, Convulsions, Palsies,
Apoplexies, hot Cholics, and Asthma, and Crackling of the Bones. Since the
Scurvy is cured by Acid Fruits, and crude Plants in Seamen, who have long lived
on a Salt Diet; I may hence, as well as from the mentioned Symptoms, observe,
that the Scurvy depends on too high a Fermentation of the Blood.

The Causes which produce the Oily, Acid Temper of the Blood, are those evident
Causes which excite an Ebullition, or Effervescence in it, as in all hot Diet
of Wines, strong Drinks, and Salt Meats, Sea Air, and Fish, which some putrefie.

2. The Passion of the Mind, and Studies, and a Sedentary Life, or Suppression
of Evacuations.

3. The Scurvy is Hereditary, or Contagious, or succeeds other Diseases; as
Fevers, Rheumatisms, Melancholy, Agues, especially the Quartan.

I. The Cure consists in Evacuating the hot, salt, bitter, acrid, and vitriolic
or viscid Humors, by the Vomits and Purgers mentioned in the Cure of too high
a Fermentation, and frequent Bleeding.

II. By Evacuating the Salt Serum by gentle Sweats, as will be hereafter
mentioned, or a Diet-Drink of Sarsa and China, of each half a Pound, Hartshorn
and Ivory Shavings, of each one Ounce, boil all in eight Gallons to six, and
add Juyces of Watercresses, Brooklime, of each two Pints, of Gill and
Liver-wort, of each one Pint, six Nutmegs sliced, put all into six Gallons of
Ale, drink three Draughts in a Day of it.

III. The Salt Serum may be evacuated by Vrin.

By Terebinthinates; as tops of Pine in all our Ale.

IV. The Oil Acid Foetor of the Blood, and its high Fermentation, is to be
corrected, By,

1. Acids; as Wood Sorrel, Juyces of Oranges and Limons mixed with the cooler
Antiscorbutic Juyces, Conserve of Hips, Wood Sorrel.

2. The Mucilaginous crude Juyces of some Legumens are used; as Juice of
Fitches ij. in White Wind, or Juice of Fumitory, or Green Peace, or Green Corn
distilled.

3. Other cooling Mucilaginous Plants, or Animal Parts, are used to cool the
Blood, and dilute it; as Juice of Borrage, Bugloss, Barley Water, Emulsions,
drinking Milk and Water, Antiscorbutic Milk Waters, Mineral Waters, or Fountain
Water, or Water and Wine, Lettuce Water, with Sal Prunell. and Syrup of Limons.

4. The Acerbs supply their quantity of cruder Acids wanting in the Humors; as
Juyces of Apples, Grapes, the Sorrels, House-Leek, the Juice of spotted
Arsesmart, or House-Leek in bilious Diarrhaea's. Coral prepared with Juice of
Limon. Purslain Water with Sal Prunell.

These Styptics, Acerbs, stop the hot Fermentation of Humors; as Plantane
boiled in Broths, and Ribwort Plantane.

5. Austere Styptics do the same, as Bark of Tamarisk, Ash, the Cortex.

6. Sweet Styptics of the Fern Class; as Polypody, Ceterach, Maiden Hair do the
same.

V. The Coagulations by the Scorbutic Acidity may be dissolved,

1. By the watery Antiscorbutic Acrids; as Juyces of Brooklime, and its
Conserve, and Scurvy Grass and Watercresses may be put into Milk with the
Juice of Orange and White Wind, and that to turn into Posset Drink.

Spirit of Scurvy Grass and Sal Ammoniac may be given in Milk, or the Juice of
Scurvy Grass may be so used. Conserv. Beccabungae, Rad. Cich. Lujuloe, an. ij.
Ras. Eboni Pulv. iij. Sal Prunell. Diatrion, Santal. an. ij. cum Sir. Lujuloe.
F. Elect.

2. By Vitriolic Chalybeates; as Sal Vitrioli dissolved in Antiscorbutic Milk
Waters, or Willis's Steel so dissolved, or Mineral Waters Chalybeate, Steel
prepared with Juice of Apples, or Wood Sorrel, or Oranges, and a Tincture may
be extracted with Spirit of Scurvy Grass, Tartar Chalybeate; as Cremor Tartari
ij. Sal Prunell. i. Vitriol. Martis gr. iij. Capiat cum Jusculis alterantibus.

3. By mixed Salts; as Sal Ammoniac. Arcanum duplicat. Vitriolat. Tartar.
Nitrous Acids; as Sal Prunell. or Mixture of different Salts; as Cream of
Tartar, and Salt; Spirit of Salt, and Spirit of Scurvy Grass mixed.

4. By Testaceous Medicines; as Crabs Eyes.

VI. The Choler must be cleansed,

1. By Cichoraceous Bitters; as Cichory, Dandelion Roots. 2. By Dock Bitters
and Sorrel Roots in Beer, or clarefied Whey. 3. By Chewing Rhubarb, and Purging
Waters, and the Chalybeate. 4. It must be diluted by Milk and Water, by
Avoiding fermented strong Liquors, and all hot Diet.
CHAP. XI.
Of the Viscidity of the Serum, or Inspissation of the Chyle new mixed with it
in the Sizie, Rheumatic, or Inflamed Bloods.

THERE is a Natural Slimy Viscidity in all the Lacteal Lympha's, and Milky
Humors of Animals, and this is like dissolved watery Gums in its Natural
State; but beside this Viscidity, there is another naturally in the Cake of
Blood, which makes it congeal and stiff when cold: this natural Viscidity is
altered by too high a Fermentation of Humors, and becomes like Inspissate
Gums, which is the Gummy Viscidity, or Gelatinous, like Jelly Broths.

1. The Lympha Lactea, such as the Spittle, becomes of a Gummy Consistence, and
covers the Tongue with a white Skin, and all the Phlegm from the Salivatory
Glands is Viscous.

2. The Mucus of the Aspera Arteria is Viscid, and is formed into Globuli, such
as the Grando Pulmonum: This Mucus is also thickened by Stagnation, during
which, the Heat of the Body dries it; or the Air by its Cold, or Nitrous
Particles thickens it; or the Nutriment of the Nervous Membranes is deposited
into the Vesiculae, being depraved or hindered in its Assimulation.

The Sub-acid Mucus of the Stomach and Guts is made more Viscid by Fevers, or
hot Diet, and this lines the insides of the Stomach with a Pituitous Saburra,
which hinders the Sense of the Appetite.

4. The Lymphatic Vehicle of the Spirits is made more Viscid in the Palsy,
Apoplexy, and Sleepy Distempers.

5. The Humors of the Eyes are sometimes very Viscid, and reflect the Light by
flying about in the Eye, like Motes in the Sun, and the Thickness of the watery
Humor is a Cataract, but that of the Crystalline produces a Glaucoma.

6. The Thickness of the Chyle produces Obstructions in the Lacteals, and that
in the Breast Inflammations.

By the Thickness of the Lacteal Lympha's Scrophulous Tumors are produced in
all the Conglomerate Glands, or at least Catarrhs.

The Seminal Lympha of the Vagina or Testicles being too Viscid, may produce
Sterility.

This Viscidity of the Chyle, and its Lympha's, may be called the Gummous
Viscidity, which is produced by Thickning their Natural Mucilage, for a watery
Gum differs only from a Mucilage by its Inspissation; for the Mucilages of
Plants may be boiled into a Gummy, Tenaceous or Emplastic Consistence, and the
White of an Egg grows hard by the Heat of the Fire.

There is another Species of Viscidity proper to the Serous Lympha, when it is
inspissate by Heat, or congeals by Cold, or coagulates by an Acid. Broths long
boiled become Viscid Jellies, and they melt with the Heat, because of the
Oyliness mixed with them. Turpentines and Oils leave a Colophony upon the
Separation of their thinner Oil; and such a sticking gluey Substance is made by
the Oil of Hartshorn, when the thinner Oil is distilled off from it.

The Serum of the Blood inspissates, as it does in a Spoon at the Fire, by long
Fevers, and it produces Tumors, and Obstructions of the Parts, and Rheumatic
Pains, and Pustules in the Skin. This Viscidity of the Serum makes the Vrin to
have thick Contents; as in Rheumatisms, and all Inflammations, Catarrhs,
Fevers. It produces Pains by stagnating in the Lymphatics, and by being stopped
out of its Glands.

The Blood it self becomes of a viscid Consistence, and produces Polypous
Concretions, and Palpitations, and sudden Syncopes. The viscid Blood stops the
Flux of the Menses.

The Consistence of the Choler is thickened by too hot a Diet, which thickens
its ropy Slime, and produces the Jaundice.

The Slimy Lympha of the Spleen, thickened by too high a Fermentation, produces
Obstructions in the Spleen, or this is thickened by being coagulated by its own
innate Vitriolic Acidity, or by Stagnation of the Slimy Humor, or Transmission
of Viscid Humors there after Quartans. The ropy Vehicle of the Bile may be
coagulated by the Vitriolic Acid of the Spleen, and produce the Atra Bilis.

The Salso-acid Temper of the Blood may coagulate the new Chyle which comes
into it, and so produce all the Inflammations, Pains, Tumors, sudden Death,
Suffocations in Catarrhs.

The evident Causes of the Gummous and Gelatinous Viscidities, are,

1. Too much external Heat of Air, Cloths, Baths, Fire which inspissate by
Evaporating the watery Vehicle of the Caseous Parts of the Serum and Lympha's.

2. Too much Cold thickens Liquors, which, by Constriction or Compression,
stops the Motion of the Active Particles, which cause their Fluidity, and their
Viscid Particles cohere like Oils thickened by Cold, or the Blood thickened by
the cold Air, when out of the Vein.

3. Acrid Meats, or the Aromatic Spices, or Vinous Liquors, by their fiery
Particles thicken the Mucilaginous Humors; so the White of an Egg is hardened
by Spirit of Wine, and the Serum of the Blood in them who drink Brandy.

4. The thin Serous Parts are evaporated by too much Sweat, immoderate
Exercises; by Watchings and Passions the quantity is abated; by Diarrhaea's,
much spitting in taking Tobacco, or great Fluxes of Vrin, by which, the Blood
is made grumous, or void of Serum.

5. The great Use of Viscid Meats; as Fish, Jellies, Mealy Vegetables, Rice,
Wheat, etc. or by strong, thick, Viscid Ale or Wines, or the much Use of White
Bread made without Bran.

The internal Causes of Viscid Humors, are,

1. A Rancid, hot Fermentation of the Meat, so as to resemble fried Eggs by
their Ructus.

2. Acrid Choler, which hastens the Digestion, and quickens the Sanguification,
and evacuates the Serum by Vrin.

3. The Natural, Oily Temper of the Blood, which resembles the ropy Consistence
of other Oily Liquors, or the Salso-Acid Temper which carries the Serum off by
Vrin, as the Medicines of that Taste, or else a preternatural Fermentation,
which makes the Blood of the Scorbutic like a Jelly.

4. The Blood is often coagulated by its own Acids so, if, through Exercise, or
hot Diet, it be rarefied, and suddenly cooled with external Accidents, as
sitting in a cool Place, or cold Air, the Serum of the Blood, or the new Chyle
mixed with it, becomes a viscid Jelly, which stopping its Circulation in the
Glands, Membranes, and Muscles; it produces all the Inflammations with Pain and
Heat, so Milk, when sour, often coagulates by being boiled, and Milk injected
into a Vein is presently coagulated.

5. The Vitriol Acid of the Spleen coagulating the Lympha Lactea produces the
Scrophulous Tumors, or the Cancerous; by coagulating the Serum it produces the
Arthritis Vaga Scorbutica, and this is properly the Caseous Viscidity which is
in all Animal Humors, and may be precipitated from them by mixing an Acid to
precipitate it, and coagulate it.

6. A Putredinous Ferment coagulates all Humors, as Milk with Rennet is
turned; the Plague Infection coagulates the Blood, and the Exanthemata are its
coagulated and mortified Parts; the Serous Lympha, by the venomous Ferment of
the Itch and Pox, is turned into putrid Matter; and the Bite of a Viper
coagulates the Blood, and precipitates its Viscid Parts from the rest of the
Mass.

The Cure of the Viscidity requires,

I. A thin, watery cool Diet, and Abstinence from fermented Liquors; as Whey,
Milk and Water, Wine and Water.

II. The hot Contents and Ferment of the Stomach, and Acrid Choler, must be
evacuated by the Vomits and Purgers described in the Cure of too high a
Fermentation.

But it must be observed, That Purges in all Inflammations are improper in the
beginning, but very profitable after large Phlebotomies; when the Viscid has
had time to putrefie and digest, it will easily pass the Intestinal Glands,
which it cannot do at first; and, for the same reason, Diuretics nor Sudorifics
do no Service till the latter end, that is, after fourteen days, when the
Viscid is putrefied; and this is agreeable to Experience in Rheumatisms.

III. Frequent Bleeding carries off much of the Viscid Serum, and Vomiting that
of the Viscid Slime in the Stomach, as well as the Choler.

IV. The Acrid Ferment, and sharp Choler, and the great Fervor of Humors,
must be corrected by the Tastes mentioned in the Cure of too high a
Fermentation.

V. The preternatural Scorbutic Fermentations must be cured as the hot Scurvy,
or prevented.

VI. All Putredinous Ferments are to be avoided, as well as sudden taking cold,
or drinking cool Liquors.

VII. The Viscidity of Humors must be diluted by watery Liquors; as Asses
Milk, Whey, Mineral Waters, and Milk Waters, which may supply the thin Serum
which is evaporated.

VIII. The Viscidity must be attenuated, and incided, and gently putrefied, by
which it is made more fluid, so that it may pass off by Stool, or Vrin, or
Sweats; so the viscid Spittle in the Pipes of the Lungs is at first glutinous,
and sticks too fast to be Coughed up; but after some Days it becomes purulent,
and more fluid. In Rheumatisms the Siziness putrefies after some time, and
passes off thick Contents in the Vrin, or glutinous Sweats: The Salso-Acids
will help its passing off; as Sal Prunell. Vitriolate Tartar, Sal Ammoniac.

We know no Medicines which will help the Putrefying of the Viscid, but those
which ripen Imposthumes, or help the ripening of the Phlegm in the Lungs, as
the sweet Slimy Roots; and Fruits may be useful, as Pectoral Decoctions, and
Ptysans, and keeping the Body in a moderate Heat, and moist thin Diet.

The watery Antiscorbutics dilute the Viscidity, and incide it, or else are
good Diuretics; but I learnt by the following Experiment, that no Pungency can
incide or attenuate the sizy Blood.

I cut the Skin off the top of such Blood, after it was cool in the Dish, and
put it into Spirit of Sal Ammoniac, which could not at all dissolve it, neither
do I think it possible to reduce the White of an Egg boiled, to its former
Fluidity. It is, therefore, by Putrefaction alone that Nature dissolves and
attenuates all our Viscid Humors, and that makes Eggs fluid.

IX. The Coagulation of the Chyle or lacteal Lympha's, or the Serum, must be
prevented.

1. By Evacuating all Acids by Vomits, and Aloetic Purgers, to which Salt of
Wormwood, Steel, or Mercurial Powder, or the Testaceous, are added.

2. The Acidity is cured by Steel, or Mercurial Medicines, or Salts, Ashes of
Animals and Vegetables, the Calces of Minerals, by petrefied Stones, or the
testaceous Powders.

X. The Circulation of Viscid Humors may be promoted by Chalybeate Vitriols,
by Volatile, Oily Salts, or by the Aromatic Acrids, or bitter Plants. So
Agitation alters the Viscid Sliminess of the White of an Egg.

XI. The attenuated or putrefied Viscid must be expelled by Sweats.

1. By the Acrid Woods, or Volatile Salts.

2. By Cathartics of Mercurials, which precipitate the Viscidities by their
Stypticity, and mix with all Animal Acids most freely, as appears by Killing it
with Spittle, and passes the Lymphatics and Glands most easily of any Medicine.

Or by Cathartics, which are gummous, and by that cohere with the Viscid Slime
of Animals, and purge them off, as Gum Pills, with Purging Rosins.

XII. The putrid Viscid may be precipitated out of the Blood by Styptics, as
the Cortex, or Acerbs; so Sloes pounded in a Mortar are put into ropy Wines, to
precipitate their Mucilage, and they shake them together, and after eight Days
it is clear.

Vitriol. Martis much helps the Depuration of the Blood after Rheumatisms.

CHAP. XII.
Of the Saltness of the Blood, and other Humors.

1. AN Animal Saltness may be tasted in the Stomach of the Carnivorous Animals;
but that depends on the Taste of their Flesh-Meat digested, which contains the
salt, serous and nutritious Juyces of another Animal, or else it is the natural
Taste of the Lympha, which is the Ferment of their Meat, and is produced in the
Blood, and brought thence into the Stomach; but this Saltness depends upon the
Nature of our Diet, and is externally taken into the Humors, and not produced
by them; but we may inquire whence those Animals have a Saltness of Blood, who
seed on Vegetables which taste not Salt in the Stomach.

2. A Salt is made in the Guts of Birds, and other granivorous Creatures, by
the Mixture of Acrid Bile, and the Acidity of the Cremor, expressed in the
Gizern, from the Seeds on which they feed, and which have not acquired any Salt
Taste in the Stomach by Digestion.

That an Acid makes part of a Salt Taste, is sufficiently evident by the
Dissolution of Crabs Eyes in Vinegar, which produce a Saltish Taste.

Common Sal Ammoniac tastes more Salt than either volatile or fixed Alkalies,
both which probably have some Acid in their Composition, as well as that; for
Green Plants yield more Salt than the dry; and because we observe no Acid in
the Distillation of volatile Animal Salt, nor much fixed in the Caput Mortuum,
it is probable, that the Acid in the Humors is spent in the Composition of the
volatile Salt, and gives a Salt Taste, for an Acid put to a volatile or fixed
Salt makes them taste more Salt. i. of Salt of Hartshorn will imbibe ij. of
Spirit of Salt before the Ebullition ceases, and they be resolved into a
Liquor; and from hence it appears, how much the volatile Acrid of Bile, and the
Salt produced in the Blood, may imbibe from the Acid of digested Meat.

Common Salt yields a great deal of Acid upon Distillation; and we can meet
with nothing of a Salt Taste in Nature, but what is made of an Acid and Earth,
or other Salt. The volatile and fixed Salts are made by the Fire, and they are
most clear from Acidities.

We taste this Saltness in the Chyle as soon as it comes into the Lacteals, and
this is of a Salso-Acid Taste; but when it is vitiated by too great an Acidity
of the Meat too high digested, or the Acrimony of the Choler, it may properly
be called a Muriatic Saltness.

This Natural Saltness swims in the Serous Part of the Chyle, and passes with
it into the Blood, and the Vrin seems to be produced from this Salso-Acid
Serum, when it has parted with the more Caseous, Nutritious Parts of the Chyle
in the Blood Vessels.

That the Choler may help to produce the Excrementitious Parts of the Vrin, as
well as that of the Stools, seems probable, because we observe Stones to be
bred in the Gall Bladder, as well as in the Vrinary Passages, which seem to be
Choler coagulated.

Bitters are accounted Diuretics, and the Gall does naturally pass by the Vrin
in the Jaundice, and usually gives a Citrine, or Red, or Yellow Color, or
Black to the Vrin. Choler easily dissolves in Water, and seems to give it a
Color like Vrin. All mixed Salts resemble the Mixture of Choler, and the Acid
of the Meat, and are Diuretic; as Sal Ammoniac, Tart. Vitriol. Sal Succini, Sal
Prunellae. All Acids are diuretic by fixing on the Choler, as the Tartar Acid
of the Stomach does; and volatile Salts mix with the Acid in the Stomach, and
pass by Vrin. The superfluous Parts of the Chylous Substance produce the
Contents in the Vrin, which makes it probable, that the Salso-Acid part of the
Chyle produces the salt, serous part of the Vrin, and that Salso-Acid is
produced from the Choler.

3. There is another sort of Saltness which we taste in the Serum of the Blood,
and this is in a great quantity.

Those Animals who feed only on Grass and Fruits digest their Meats in their
Stomachs only into a volatile Acidity, and not a Salt Taste; these therefore
must farther digest their Nourishment till it come near to a Putrefaction
before it can produce an Vrinous Salt, for we cannot extract any volatile Salt
out of Vegetables till they have been putrefied, and then they yield Vrinous
Spirits, and by putrefying Blood, Vrin, or Choler, a plentiful volatile Salt is
produced, separable by a gentle Heat.

The Sanguification of our Aliments, dissolved by Digestion, seems to have
these several steps; for by correcting the Acidities of them, they are turned
into Blood. First, The Choler mixes with the Acidity, and turns the Chyle
White. Next, The salt Serum of the Lymphatics mixes with the Chyle, and turns
it Rosy or Reddish. Last of all, The Salt of the Blood, and the Oily Parts of
the Blood, unite with the Oily Acid Parts of the Chyle, and the more Serous
Part turns into Serum, which contains the Caseous and Watery Parts, and the
Salso-Acid Aqueous Superfluities pass off by Vrin.

The Natural Tartar in the Chyle mixing with the Salt generated in the Blood
produces the Ammoniac Salt of the Blood, which if it were purely Volatile, it
would preserve the Blood from Coagulation, as Spirit of Hartshorn does, and
would more easily rise by Distillation, but neither of these happen; and Spirit
of Sal Ammoniac blackens the Blood, which is taken from the Vein, if we bleed
upon it; but the natural Salt of the Blood rather makes, or at least does not
hinder, the Floridity of the Blood, and therefore I call the Salt of the Blood
a mixed Ammoniac Salt, produced by a half Putrefaction, or long Resolution of
the Parts of our Chyle, in which the Oily Acids of the Blood join with some
terrene Parts, upon the ultimate Resolution of the Nutritious Juyces, and
produce a Salt which has that Taste from the Mixture of an Acid and Earth, and
the Volatility and Pungency depends on the volatile Oil mixed with them; this
smells Vrinous, and is carried off naturally by Sweat and Vrin.

By the Rise of the Muriatic Saltness from the Choler it appears, that bilious
States of Humors, by a higher Digestion, become Saline, or Muriatic, and the
Signs of each Constitution differ only in degrees.

The Pulse is great, frequent, and hard; the Thirst is great, and they drink
frequently; their Taste of the Saliva is Salt; the Color of the Vrin thin,
citrine, salt or bitterish; the Habit of the Body is thin and lean; the Heat is
sharp, and the Stools of a burnt Yellow Color. Cool things agree with them,
but salt and hot inflame them, and they ill bear Fasting.

The Chyle is Salso-Acid, and that makes the Lacteal Lympha of that Taste, and
then produces Thirst, Vomiting, or Gripes, Diarrhaea's, or Catarrhs, and
Inflammations of the Mouth. The Semen is made stimulating in the Salacious.

The Nervous Juice being salt, produces wandering Pains.

The Salt Serum being over salt, produces the Stone, and Gout, and Strangury.

The Saltness of Nurses Milk produces Pains in the Breast, and Gripes in the
Children, and Sore Mouths.

The Saltness of the Nutritious Juyces produces the Scab, or Consumption of the
Parts; it destroys its Natural Caseous, Nutritious Parts, and carries them off
by Vrin.

The Blood is made more thin by being very salt, its thick Viscid Parts being
corroded or precipitated, as in Haemorrhagies; and corrodes, as in the Menses.

The Choler is made more acrid and bitter, and of a darker Brown Color.

The Juyces of the Spleen become Salso-Acid, and less slimy, and less fit to
separate the Choler from the Blood.

The Tears of the Eyes corrode and inflame them when over salt, and dry into a
Gumminess.

The Salt Saliva corrodes the Teeth, and the Gums shrink or dry, and waste
away, as in the hot Scurvy.

An Atrophy dries up the Flesh, as Meat over-salted shrinks.

The external Causes of the Muriatic Saltness, and the Ammoniac Saltness, very
much are the same, but these particularly of the Muriatic Saltness.

1. Salso-Acid Aliments, Salt Fish, Salt Water, Salt Sea Air. 2. The
Evacuations of the Acrid Choler, and the Spleen Acid or Tartar Acid being stopped
in the Binding of the Belly.
The external Causes of the Vrinous Saltness, or the Armoniacal, are,

1. Acrid, vinous, bitter and aromatic Meats. Fasting makes the Humors more
acrid, and sweet Diet becomes bitter, acrid, on Digestion.

2. A laborious Life, with much Exercise, too much addictedness to Venery; for
the Lympha returning from the Testicles becomes foetid, and ferments the
Humors more.

3. Too much Watching, Anger, Cares, inflame the Spirits.

4. The Evacuation of the Salt Serum by Water or Sweat being suppressed, or the
Binding of the Body.

Whatsoever ferments the Blood too much breeds Choler, and that the Animal
Saltness.

The internal Causes of Saltness, are,

1. The Natural Saline Temper of the Blood, which supplies a Ferment for the
Chyle of the same Nature, to turn it into the like Saltness.

2. Too quick a Circulation of the Blood excites too great an Ebullition, and
makes the Choler more acrid, and the Salt more sharp, and in greater quantity.

3. The acrid Choler, and sharp Acid of the Spleen, or Tartar Acid, which is
corrosive, produce the sharpest Salt.

4. A preternatural Putrefaction in Fevers, or long Effervescences, make the
Blood very salt. So a Cancer, Fistula, the Itch, or Lues Venerea, or
Consumptive Lungs, Kidneys, or other Viscera, give a Ferment to the Blood, and
putrefie it into a Saltness.

The Cure of the Muriatic and Ammoniac Saltness requires,

I. To abstain from fermented Drinks, and to use watery Liquors; as Milk and
Water, and the Decoction of the cooler Woods, Wine and Water, or Water boiled
with Coriander Seeds and Sugar.

To abstain from Salt Meats, and those dried in Smoke, or Pickles.

To abstain from Ferments; as old Cheese, Fish.

To use slimy Meats; as new Cheese, Fruits, Farinaceous Meats, and Milk Meats,
Snails, Tortoises, Jellies, Cray Fishes, Tripes, and the Feet of Animals, and
Young Pigs, Goat, Lamb, Veal.

In short, The Diet must be crude, watery, acerb, mucilaginous, farinaceous,
subacid.

The Air dry, and not foggy Sea Air.

II. The Salt Humors must be evacuated by the Sennate, Rhabarbarate, and sweet
Manna Purgers, with Acids added, or the Purging Waters, which are nitrous, or
aluminous, or vitriolic; these wash and cool by their Waterishness, and
precipitate the Salt by their Stypticity.

Hydragogues, which evacuate the Serum, abate the Saltness.

III. The Salivation by Mercury evacuates plentifully the Salt Serum, and
Aethyops Mineralis and Merc. dulcis correct the Saltness by joining with the
salso-Acid of the Blood; and all Mercurials depress the over-Fermentation of
the Blood as much as Chalybeates exalt the low Fermentation.

IV. The Salt Serum is sweat off by salso-acid or urinous Medicines, and for
the same end we use Baths, and much Exercise, the Decoctions of the Acrid
Woods, and Frictions, and Fontanels.

V. Diuretics plentifully evacuate the Salt Serum; as all Acid Diuretics, and
the testaceous and bitter cichoraceous Plants.

VI. The Saltness of the Blood, and the Ferment of the Stomach, the acrid Bile,
or splenetic, sharp Acid, or that of the Stomach, must be corrected, and the
frequent Ebullition, Circulation or Putrefaction removed.

1. All Acids correct volatile Salts and Oils which are foetid, and all
Lixiviums are made more mild by Acids.

2. The mucilaginous Temper, the Acrimony of Salts; as Gum Tragacanth Powders,
Decoction of Snails, Althaea Roots, and Emulsions.

3. The Saltness may be diluted by a watery Diet or Medicines; as thin Broths,
Whey, Chalybeate Waters, Milk Diet, and distilled Milks, Watergruel.

4. Opiates and Styptics stop the Motion of the Blood.

5. Bleeding evacuates the Old Blood, which is most salt; and the New Blood,
which comes in its room, is more fresh, and less salt; so Broths of Flesh Meat
are salter by long boiling.

6. All Extraneous Ferments ought to be removed from the Blood; and by the
Cortex, or other Antifebriles, the Fermentation must be stopped.

That the Vrin contains an Acidity naturally in it, appears by the Correcting
of Coloquintida by it, whose Bitterness is made near insipid by it*

The Purging Quality in the Coloquintida is enervated by the Vrin, as well as
its Bitterness. Hence it appears, how great a Correcter of Choler the Vrin may
be, and how much it may preserve the Humors from Putrefaction, as it preserves
Ulcers by its salso-Acid Taste.

A Lixivium of Oyster-shells changes the Bitterness of the Species of the
Bitter Decoction boiled in it into a Sweetness, and this therefore may be used
to correct Choleric Heart-burning in the Stomach, and this may correct the
Bitterness, as well as Acidity of Humors. But from this Experiment let our
Prescribers consider, whether they do not abate the Virtue of the Cortex, by
extracting it with a fixed Salt, since the Taste of it is altered thereby.

I remember, a Tincture of Wormwood made with Brandy, and Salt of Wormwood, did
not taste very bitter by being made with a fixed Salt; but that made with Spirit
of Wine, and a little Oil of Sulphur, was very bitter; and in the Vomitings of
our Patients we find both very bitter, and very sour, which did not correct
each other, but a fixed Salt in this case may correct both sour and bitter.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Vitriolic Acidity of the Blood.

IN the most Healthful Blood, we discern many Tastes besides a Sweetness and
Saltness; a vitriolic or chalybeate Taste is evident, therefore we cannot doubt
of the vitriolic Acidity of the Blood, nor that it is produced from the
tartareous Acidity of the Chyle, which, by Digestion, is exalted, and
volatilized into a sulphurous Spirit. The Acid sulphurous fumes from the
Earth, produce the Tartar in Plants, as it is mixed with Earthy Parts; but by
the Animal Digestions, and Fermentations, and Precipitation by Salts, the Acid
may recover its Mineral Nature, and appear to be a vitriolic Acid in the Blood,
or else it may acquire that Savor by its Mixture with the oily, acid, foetid
Particles of the Blood, which somewhat resemble Sulphur.

This vitriolic Acidity was the Natural Alimentary Melancholy of the Blood,
which the Ancient Physicians observed in it. They called it a Black Humor,
which gave the Blackness to the Blood; for it is certain, that Acids turn the
Blood black. They believed there was an Astriction in this Humor to bind the
Belly; and it is plain, by the vitriolic Taste, that it is capable of Binding
the Body; for Spirit of Vitriol and Vitriolum Martis bind the Body by their
Stypticity, though tartar Acids purge, and have not that effect, unless they be
acerb. They believed it to be cooling and drying, because of the cooling
quality of Vinegar; and by being a great Diuretic, both Vinegar and the
vitriolic Acid dry up or evacuate the Succus Nutritious. All Melancholy Persons
are great Spitters, and make too much Vrin, and the Ancients called those
Constitutions dry, who had little of the Succus Nutritious in them to make the
Habit of the Body plump, as it is in Lean Persons, and the Fat more moist
Constitutions.

They esteemed this Natural Melancholic Acidity to be the limous or slimy,
faeculent Part of the Blood, like to the Lees of Wine, and so compared it to
the Element of Earth, for in all Tartar there is a great deal of Earth, which
makes it to subside in the Wine; and this black Melancholic Acidity colors the
bottom of the Blood most, when it is cool in a Dish.

This Chalybeate Taste is in all Blood, and is Natural to it; part of it
constitutes the splenetic Humor, when it is mixed with a Sliminess, and it is
separated by its Glands, for the Use of the Choler, which is precipitated from
the Blood by it. I boiled a a fresh Spleen of a Hog, which made a very slimy
Decoction; I put some Choler to it, and they readily mixed together; and I
thought it very probable, that the Sliminess which makes Choler ropy was from
the Spleen: This vitriolic Acidity may give a Consistence to the Blood: It
fixes its Salts and Oils, by coagulating with them into a salso-acid Taste, and
by that disposes the Serum for its passage by the Kidneys.

I have described the Tartar Acid above, but here must consider only the
vitriolic Acidity, as an effect of too high a Digestion, or Fermentation of the
Humors, and being in this State, the Ancients called it Atra Bilis, which is
extremely hot, corroding, burning, exulcerating, and being spilt upon the
Earth, it ferments it like Vinegar, or Aqua Fortis, and excites Bubbles.

The Ancient Physicians reckon four Species of this Atra Bilis, but in reality
there is but one, which is produced from the vitriolic Acid of the Blood, by a
Fervor or Putrefaction of Blood, and the differences of the Atra Bilis are
either from a Mixture of Choler with it, or Blood, or Serum of the Blood, or
Corruption of some of our Diet in a Surfeit.

1. They attribute one Species of the Atra Bilis to the Exustion of Choler,
which, in reality, is nothing but a Mixture of the splenetic Acidity too high
digested with sharp Choler, and this Mixture is either naturally made in the
Gall Bladder, and Hepatic Vessels, and the Choler is then observed to look
black in the Vesica Fellea upon Dissection; or else, this vitriolic Acidity
being pretty naturally evacuated into the Stomach and Guts, it there mixes with
the Choler, and produces black Vomits, and Stools black, and this appears in
the black Jaundice by the black Color of the Skin, and in some Fits of the
Cholic. Generatio Atrae Bilis a nimio calore dependet, quia humores valde
adurere solet, was the Observation of Sennertus.

2. They attribute a second Species to putrid, burnt Blood, which is only the
high digested vitriol Acid of the Blood, mixed with putrid Blood, which is made
very black by the Acidity, and this appears like Pitch or Tar when it is
evacuated from some Artery in the Stomach in the black Hypochondriac Vomitings,
or from the Blood Vessels in the Piles, or bloody Stools. The real Atra Bilis
is distinguished from this, because it does not grow thick, as Blood being cold
does. This Species gives a Blackness to the Vrin, and if the Blood be taken
from a Vein, the black Faeces subside to the bottom of the Dish, as this may be
observed, for which reason I cause such Blood to be taken in a Glass.

I have met with a remarkable Instance of this kind in a Gentleman, after a
long Fit of the Gout; he was about Fifty Years Old, and always subject to
Pains, and Vomiting ill Humors from his Stomach.

He Vomited a black Serum in great quantities: I guess four or five Gallons in
a Weeks time; what came by Stool was black, as Tar; his Blood let out of the
Veins of the Arm had a great black Sediment, like that he Vomited; the Blood
taken away looked very Sizie or Rheumatic, and the black Sediment filled half
the Glass, which was full of Blood; upon the Humor which was Vomited, I made
the following Experiments.

The black Serum turned reddish with Spirit of Hartshorn, and it had the same
Color from Salt of Wormwood mixed with it, whence it is evident, that this
black Serum was originally Blood, the red Part being blackened by an Acid; this
would not inspissate by the Fire, and therefore was not pure Serum, neither did
it contain much Viscidity in it, for Oil of Vitriol could not coagulate it,
neither did it change its Color, because it was changed black before, to which
Acids change the Blood; neither for the same reason did Alum coagulate it, or
change its Color, for putrefied Humors neither can be inspissated by the
Fire, or coagulated by Acids.

Sublimate alone coagulated it, and changed it into a greyish Color.

Galls did not blacken the Humor more, but set to the Fire it turned whitish;
and hence it appears, the vitriolic Acid of the Blood does not strike a Black
so great as common Steel vitriols.

Syrup of Violets mixed with the black Serum became reddish, as if an Acid were
mixed with it; and from hence I collect, that some Acid was in that black
Humor. I observed no Smell in that Humor, nor the Patient any Taste, as he
informed me.

I evacuated this Humor, being corrupt, by small Beer plentifully drank, by
which he Vomited plentifully, being Sick; and I Purged him with Sena every Day,
or gave Glysters. When this black Humor stopped its Evacuation, he was very
Sick, and it caused Convulsions.

I could not procure the opening of this Gentleman, when Dead, and so wanted an
Information whether this Humor came from the Arteries of the Stomach, or the
Bileducts.

3. The Third Species of Atra Bilis was attributed, by the Ancients, to the
Pituita Salsa, which, by long Adustion, grew corrosive, and this seems only to
be a sharp, fiery Salt of the Blood mixed with the vitriolic Acidity, by which
it is made a black Serum or Sanies, such as in cancerous, or other putrid
Ulcers.

4. The Fourth Species of Atra Bilis the Ancients make the Natural Melancholy,
burnt, or putrefied, or over-fermented, and this is that I call most properly
the Atra Bilis, which, by Mixtures, makes the several Species mentioned: and
one more I find Authors have forgot, but I have met with it in my Practice, and
that is the Meats that corrupt and putrefie in the Stomachs of those who have
that Atra Bilis in their Bloods, for this blackens the Vomits in such
Constitutions, and gives also black Stools; and this I lately observed in a
Person very Healthful, of a good Stomach, but black Countenance; at first he
Vomited black, and bluish Humors afterward, but the Stools were all black,
with Fainting, and cold Sweats.

I let this Patient Blood, but found no Blackness in it; so that these black
Serum Stools were no Corruption of that; neither would Spirit of Hartshorn
turn this Humor reddish, as it did the black Humor which was produced from
the Blood. I Purged him, but after some few Stools at first black, none of the
last were so; and by Purging off the Surfeit, which was made by stale Beer, and
hanged Beef, he recovered.

The Signs of the vitriolic Humors are chiefly the Evacuations of the black
Humor by Vrin, and black Spittle from the Lungs, like a Spider's Web over it
in the Asthmatic, and Splenetic. The Saliva tastes salso-Acid in Catarrhs,
Ulcers of the Mouth and Gums, and Rottenness of the Teeth. The Mucus of the
Larynx being Coughed up causes Consumptions, Spitting of Blood, Catarrhs, and
tastes sweet, vitriolic, like Blood it self.

The slimy Lympha of the Stomach being vitriolic, causes Vomiting,
Heart-burning, or a great Appetite, Hypochondriac Ructus, and Pains of the
Stomach.

The Nervous Lympha is vitriolic in Melancholies, which causes a Fear and
Sadness without a manifest Cause, an implacable Anger, Watchings, or Dreams of
black things, or Devils. Their Motion is slow and grave, their Aspect
inconstant, sad, and frightful.

The serous and nutritious Lympha is salsoacid in the Hypochondriac, by which
it is made unfit for Nourishment, for nothing nourishes but a sweet Humor. The
Acidity curdles the Serum, and that stops in the conglobate Glands, and breeds
the Scrophulae, and schirrous Tumors of the Liver and Spleen.

The Vrin is pale, and plentiful in Melancholy Constitutions, and frequently
full of a Sediment, which sticks to the sides of the Pot.

The pale Vrin gives an Acid Dysuria to be tempered by Hartshorn Spirit, or
Steel.

The Blood, the Choler, the Serum, and the Juyces of the Stomach, look black by
the Atra Bilis.

The Skin appears dry, hard, cool, and rough. The Color of the Face is brown,
or black, or lead colored, from the Atra Bilis mixed with the succus
Nutritious. The habit of the Body is thin, and lean, and the Hair is black,
hard, and curled.

The black Humor is vomited, and purges downwards; the Haemorrhoids swell, and
break; there is much Spitting, but the Belly is bound; the Vrin is black,
livid, thick, but sometimes thin and white; a Cremor swims on the Vrin with
much farinaceous Sediment.

The Pulse is slow and hard.

Melancholy Distempers preceed; as Quartans, Swelling of the Spleen, Leprosy,
Varices of the Legs, Haemorrhoids, great Voracity, and little Thirst, but Acid
Ructus.

Their Parents were Melancholy. The Age betwixt Forty and Sixty, and a
vitriolic, natural Temper of Blood and Spirits, and the Autumn dispose to
Melancholy.

The external evident Causes of the Atra Bilis, are,

1. A high fermenting Diet; as old Cheese.

Flesh-Meats which are strong and blackish; as Venison, Hare, Swines, Beef,
which abound with a black Blood; Birds feeding in Fens; as Geese, Ducks,
Woodcock, Snipes, Swans, etc. by Drinking Fen, Vitriolic Waters, have both
black Blood and Flesh; Fish in Ponds, and Seafish, which are called the
Cetacei, salted or dried in the Smoke, have a salso-acid Taste, and breed
Melancholy: The Drinking of such boggy, vitriolic Waters dispose to
melancholical Humors.

Strong Wines or Drinks, fried Meats, and those dried in the Smoke, Acrids and
Aromatics in our Diet, over-ferment the Blood; as Fasting does, and all produce
an Atra Bilis.

The salt Sea Air fills the Blood, with the Sulphur fumes from it, and the Fens
with vitriolic, sulphurous Exhalations; for vitriolic, blue Concretions swim
on such Waters.

2. The Melancholic Evacuations stopped by the Suppression of the Haemorrhoids,
or the hepatic Flux which is from the Arteries of the Mesentery, or the Varices
vanishing, or the stoppage of Sweat, in a sedentary Life.

3. By too much Evacuation of the Spirits, by Watchings, Cares, Studies,
Solicitude, Anger, Exercise, the Motions of Humors are quickened, and the
Digestions heightened, and the Oily Parts of the Humors evaporated, and the
Vitriolic remain, and prevail over all.

The inward Causes of the vitriolic Acidity.

1. A black, vitriolic Humor in hot and dry Constitutions, which makes the
Blood black, and the Color of the Face so too, and this is increased by being
in a hot Region, or hot time of the Year, by hot Diet, or violent Passions, etc.

2. The Evaporation of the oily Spirits; so Vinegar is prepared, when by the
Heat of the Sun, or Fire, the Spirits are evaporated.

There is in the Spirit of Wine some Acidity, by which Brandy curdles Milk; and
that there is such an Acidity in Animal Spirits is probable, for the Animal
Spirits, like that of Wine, are very inflammable, or a thin lucid Flame; and it
appears, that some Acid makes Oils more inflammable; for Oil of Turpentine, and
fresh Aqua Fortis, upon their Mixture, turn into a Flame. All the Spirits of
fermented Liquors are acid, oleous, and are very pungent on the Tongue by their
Acid; but if the Oil be separated, they taste only sour, or sharp, from their
Tartar. After the same manner the Spirits of Animals are compounded of a foetid
Oil, and vitriolic Acid; and the spirituous Parts of all fermented Liquors have
the same Composition; and these being the most volatile Parts, must needs
compose the Spirits of Animals, which are produced also by the Fermentation in
the Stomach, and after are prepared by a long Digestion, or Circulation in the
Blood; therefore, if the Oily Part be evaporated by violent Passions, or
Diseases, the Spirits remain vitriolic, or like Aqua Fortis in the Melancholy
and Hysteric Persons; and this Acidity of the Spirits infects the Blood.

3. There is another way of Preparing Vinegars besides the Evaporation of the
Spirits mentioned, which is, by addition of a new Ferment to Wines; and by both
these ways the Blood becomes vitriolic. I have mentioned the Evaporation of its
Oily Spirits; and now will describe the Ferments which sour it.

The Viscera filled with putrid Humors; as in the Phthisis, old Jaundices,
wherein the Lungs and Liver are ulcerated, send a putrid Ferment into the
Blood, and these ferment the Blood into an acetous Temper.

So the Natural Humors long detained, as the seminal Matter, which is of a
fermentative Nature, or by the Haemorrhoids or Menses retained, the Blood
suffers an Ebullition, and it is not unusual, that any Aminal Humor corrupted
should become a Ferment, as appears in the Saliva of a Mad Dog; and in all
contagious Diseases; as the Itch, Pox, and malignant Fevers, wherein the
corrupt Humors ferment those which they infect into the same preternatural
State.

Burning Fevers are commonly the occasion of the Atra Bilis, for they make the
Blood black and thick; and Pestilential Fevers have the same black Humors both
in the Skin, and sometimes evacuate it by Stools, or Vomiting, or Vrin.

Galen affirms, That all who evacuate black Humors in the Plague die; but
those who do not, have the black mortified Blood in the Skin, where it spots
it; and he imputes this Blackness to the over-heating or Adustion of the Blood;
and he imputes all melancholy Cases to the same extraordinary Adustion of the
Blood, (...).

This Atra Bilis happens in Haemorrhagies, where the Fibers of the Blood are
putrefied, and black in the bottom of the Chirurgeon's Dish.

The Ancient Physicians esteemed the Spleen to be the place where the Atra
Bilis is bred, which, in old and hot Animals, appears very black; but in young
ones, or those of a cooler Constitution, more reddish; for the vitriolic Acid
is more strongly digested, and becomes more sharp, and blacks more in the old
and hot Animals, than in the contrary. They thought the Spleen attracted such a
Humor as the Lees of Wine, or the Amurca of Oil; and this is the vitriolic
Acidity mentioned.

4. The Obstruction of the Spleen, when schirrous or inflamed, obliges the
vitriolic Humor to pass through the Arteries into the Stomach, and there it
corrupts its Ferment, and changes all the Mass of Meat toward an Acidity, like
too much sour Leaven in our Bread; so that Hysterical Persons vomit a great
deal of acid Humors, and so do the Hypochondriacal, and both eat too much, and
have their Bodies too much bound. Or else the vitriolic Acidity passes through
the hepatic Artery into the Bile Vessels, and there, by fermenting with it, it
produces those Fluxes of Choler which happen in the Cholera, or Cholics, or
Diarrhaea's, and the various Colors of them.

The Cure of the Muriatic Acidity of the Chyle, and the Vitriolic and
Armoniacal of the Blood require,

1. The Evacuation of Acidities from the Stomach by Vomits, in hysteric and
hypochondriac Cases, and the frequent gentle Evacuation by Stools, and keeping
the Body open by Lenitives of Sena.

2. All the evident Causes mentioned must be avoided, especially a tartareous
or muriatic Diet. Moderate warm things agree well with them, but no very hot
ones, nor no strong Purgers. The Diet must moisten, or be thin and nourishing,
as well as a little warm. All Passions, Studies must be avoided.

3. The muriatic and vitriolic Acidities are naturally evacuated by Vrin and
Sweat, and therefore we use Diuretics and Sudorifics.

4. The Secretion of the vitriolic Humor through the Spleen, must be promoted
by Steel Medicines, which resemble its vitriol Taste, and the abundant Acidity
in the Chyle and Blood precipitated, as in the Cure of the Tartar Acerbity.

5. All extraneous Ferments are to be avoided, and Humors suppressed evacuated.

6. This vitriolic Acidity at last fixes the Blood, and makes it congeal, and
then the Digestives mentioned in the Cure of a low Fermentation are necessary,
which, by exagitating the Oily Parts of the Chyle and Blood, give them a
Predominancy over the Acidity.

7. The high Fermentation of Humors must be checked by the Diet and Medicines
prescribed in the Cure of too high a Fermentation of Humors.

When the vitriolic Acidity chiefly troubles and infects the Blood, it may be
esteemed the cold Scurvy; but when the Nerves are also affected by the
vitriolic Acidity it produces the Hypochondriac Affections, and the Spleen is
obstructed also. It coagulates in the Kidneys with some terrene Matter, like
Limestone, and there produces all the Calculous Concretions. The Corrosiveness
of Humors depends much on too high a state of the vitriolic Acidity; and the
splenetic Flatuosities on a violent Agitation or Expansion of Spirits.

First, Of the vitriolic, oleous Scurvy.

In this Scurvy, the vitriolic Acidity prevails over the oily Spirits, and for
that reason it produces many of the Symptoms attending a low Fermentation of
Blood; for the Blood becomes ropy, mucilaginous, and sharply Acid, by too high
a Fermentation of a depauperated chylous Blood, naturally more Acid than Oily;
the Vrin is pale, and a salt Cremor swims on it; there are no Spots in the
Skin, but the Spirits are weak, unfit for Motion, whence the Lassitude
proceeds, or Fainting, Palpitation of the Heart, and dull Pains, and Windiness,
and the Asthma, a Streightness of the Breast, a wandering Fever, with sudden
Changes of Heat and Cold; these are the ordinary Symptoms attending the cold
Scurvy, which in respect of the hot, oily, vitriolic State of Blood in the hot
Scurvy mentioned above, it may be called the cold Scurvy, because the Blood is
more poor, and less spirituous; but this is also produced by an
over-fermentation of such kind of Blood; and the cold Symptoms depend on the
Greatness of the vitriolic Acidity, which coagulates the Blood, and fixes all
the volatile Salts and Oils, and that is the reason it must be cured as in the
tartareous Acidity.

I. The Acid must be evacuated by Aloetic Purgers, Pil. ex Ammoniac. Ruffi,
Sumach; or by Sennates, or those of black Hellebore.

II. The Fervor of Humors may be diluted by the watery Liquors; as Whey,
stilled Milks, Asses Milk, Steel Waters, Wine and Water. See the Cure of too
high a Fermentation.

III. All Acid Liquors must be avoided; as Wines, Cider, Beer that is stale;
and all the evident Causes producing Acidities.

IV. The Scorbutic Acidity must be evacuated by Vrin, and the Digestion of
Humors raised.

1. By Acrid Plants; as Scurvy Grass, Horseradish, Watercresses, Rocket,
Lady-Smock, Mustard Seed. 2. By volatile and fixed Salts. 3. By Turpentine
Plants; as Pine Tops, and Juniper Berries in Drink, Gilead Balsam. 4. By
bitters Acrid of the Wormwood Class; as Wormwood Wine. 5. By the acrid
Aromatics; as Angelica Roots, Galanga, Zedoary, Contrayerva, Cardamoms, Orange
Peels, Winter-bark. 6. By the Laurel, bitter Acrids; as the Bark and Seeds of
Ash, Decoction of Guajacum, and the Use of the Cortex. 7. By the foetid, lamium
Bitters; as Chamaedrys, Marrubium, Wood-Sage, ground Ivy, and ground Pine. 8.
By the leguminous Bitters; as Broom. 9. By nauseous Bitters; as Gentian,
Centaury, Buck-Bean. 10. By the corrosive Acrids; as Aaron, lesser Celandine,
Arsesmart, Piperitis. 11. Chalybeates, which are of least heat; as Vitriol
Martis made into Pills with Gum Tragacanth, or else dissolved in distilled
Milks.
Secondly, Of the Hypochondriac Affection.

This seems to differ from the cold Scurvy, by being a higher degree of it.
When the vitriolic Acidity has so far coagulated the Blood, as to produce many
Obstructions in the Viscera, especially in the Spleen, whence the abundant
vitriolic Humor is thrown upon the Stomach, where it produces Corrugations,
and Pains, and Inflations, a great Appetite, and continual Windiness, and
Vomiting; after the Meat the Face is red, and the Hands burn, the Countenance
is black, and the Habit of the Body lean.

When the Vitriolic Humor affects the Brain, it produces Vertigo's, various
Fancies, Headaches, Convulsions, Palsies, Alterations of the Pulse,
Oppressions, Trembling, and Palpitation of the Heart, Constriction of the
Breast, a Sense of Formication, and Stupor in the extreme Parts.

The Vrin is various, commonly turbid, and thick, or blackish, with sandy, red
Sediment.

The Belly is bound, and the Stools frequently black.

A thin Vrin preceeds some Fits.

I am not singular in my Opinion, that the Acid of melancholic Blood is
Vitriolic; but can quote a remarkable part of Sennertus, where he says, Atram
Bilem ipsamque melancholiam vitriolatae naturae participem, aut certe ei
cognatam esse, and ferrugenei quid sapere, nemo facile negaverit.

This Affection happens about the Thirtieth Year of our Ages, and then the
Blood seems to be at its highest Digestion; but by Accidents acquiring a great
Ebullition, it loses its Spirits.

Those Constitutions in whom much sour Ructus and phlegmatic Vomits are
observed, bear the hotter Medicines; and those who have choleric Vomits burning
in the Hypochondria, and Thirst, and Fury in the Spirits, require the coolest
Medicines.

Sweet things ferment, and are offensive to the Hypochondriac and Hysteric,
which was anciently observed.

(...).

The Cure requires,

I The avoiding of a Tartareous Diet, and that which is Muriatic, and Vinous;
to avoid Passions, Studies, too much Solicitude, and Labor, and to help all
Evacuations stopped, especially that of the Haemorrhoids.

II. The Saburra pituitous, tartareous, or bilious, must be evacuated often by
Vomits, and the Body kept open by Aloetics, and Sennate Medicines, or Wines,
and Clysters, or Purging Waters, and a Pill of Ammoniacum once a Week.

III. Frequent Bleeding small quantities checks the preternatural Fermentation,
and keeps the Humors from Stagnation and Obstructions, especially the opening
the Haemorrhoids, procuring the Menses, and giving way to the varicous
Swellings in the Legs, without binding them. Bleeding at the Nose does good.

IV. In the cold Melancholy we use hot Digestives; as, 1. Acrids. 2. Causticks.
3. Bitters; Elixir Antiscorbuticum, Tinct. Sacra. 4. The Salts volatile; as Sal
volatile oleosum, Sal Absynthii, Cochleariae, and testaceous Medicines. 5. The
Aromatics, all which are mentioned in the cold Scurvy. 6. The Chalybeates,
which are most Sulphurous; as Chalybs cum Sulph. praep. and the Filings.


V. In the hotter Constitutions all strong Drinks and hot Medicines are
offensive, and these require,

1. Watery Liquors and Medicines, according to the Observation; Melancholici
non diutius curantur, quam humectantur; and for this end they use Whey, and
Syrup of Violets in all black Humors, and cool Clysters to evacuate it. We use
distilled Milks, Mineral Waters, etc. Wine and Water to cool and moisten. 2.
Cichoraceous Bitters; as Decoct. of Dandelion, Conserve of Cichory Flowers and
Roots, Decoct. of Scorzonera. 3. The mucilaginous Bugloss, Borrage Leaves, and
Flowers, Sir. Borraginis, de Pomis citri. 4. Sub-acid; as Juice of Limons,
Citrons, Sir. de Pomis, which Syrups are good in Whey, and Spirit of Alum to
fix furious Spirits; but Vinegar is injurious to the Melancholic. 5. The Fern
Styptics; as Polypody, Spleenwort, Ceterach, these stop the Fermentation of
Humors. Boil them in Whey, or small Ale, with Antiscorbutics.
VI. The vicious Acidity of the Spirits must be corrected by,

1. Aromatic Cephalics; as Pennyroyal, Thyme, Sage, Bettony, Lavender, the
Spirit of Lavender. 2. By Cardiac, Odoriferous Medicines of Ambergrease.
Lozenges made of Species of Diamber, or Laetificans Galeni with Oil of
Cinnamon. Cubebs candied with Sugar are good for the Vertiginous. Some Tincture
of Aromatics with Ambergrease. 3. Testaceous Medicines, and Powders of
Antimony, Steel, Cinnabar Mercury, Lapis Lazuli with Purgers. 4. Narcotics.
Diascordium, and Confect. Alchermes with Laudanum. Fomentations to the
Hypochondria, with proper Ointments; for Schirrus of the Viscera, Baths of warm
Water are much commended; an Issue betwixt the first and second Vertebra of the
Neck or Shoulders.
The best Diet for Hypochondriac Affection is, fresh Flesh-Meats, and small
Ale, with Pine-tops, Dock-Roots, and other Antiscorbutics.

VII. Anti-splenetics, which open the Obstructions of the Spleen; for the
Secretion of the vitriolic and viscid Humors from the Blood are absolutely
necessary; for the Hypochondriac Winds are to be cured by vomiting up the
corrupt, sour Ferments, by diverting the splenetic Humor from the Stomach,
and keeping the Body open by Aloetics, Tinct. Sacra, Pil. Ammoniacum.

We use hot Medicines in Hypochondriac Cases, because of the Obstructions by
viscid Humors, and the evaporated Spirits must be supplied by spirituous
Medicines; and in all long chronical Diseases a decay happens in our
Digestions, for want of Spirits, and a crude Saburra of Humors is produced,
though the original Distemper proceeded from a hot Cause, that is an
over-Fermentation of Blood.

Thirdly, Of the Concretion of Stones or Sand in the Humors of an Animal.

The Vrin contains three parts.

1. The viscid Particles of the Succus Nutritious, which make its Contents. 2.
The salso-acid and oily Particles, which give the salso-acid or bitterish Taste
to the Sweat and Vrin. 3. The thin, serous, watery Part, which carries all the
other Parts and dilutes them.
When the oily Part of the Vrin, which I suppose to be the Choler, is too high
digested, it looks red, and flame colored, or deep yellow. The red Part of the
Blood seems, in some hot Bloods, to color the Sediment red.

When the vitriolic Acid abounds, it joins its self with such Earthy Particles
as are observed in all Liquors, (for Limestone Particles may be observed in
all Waters, but most plentifully in the Purging ones) and that, with these
stoney Particles, coagulates into Sand or Stones.

The same vitriolic Acid coagulates the Lympha's into tophaceous or cretaceous
Stones in the Joints, and Limbs, and Lungs: Not only the milky Lympha's, but
the serous, are subject to this Coagulation, as appears by the Stones in their
several Glands.

If the Salts of the Blood were only coagulated by this vitriolic Acidity, they
would not appear in any firm tenaceous Consistence in the Stone; but all Stones
would be friable, like Tartar, therefore this Acid coagulates some viscid Parts
with the saline. If there were no Earthy Parts, then the Stones would appear
gummy, or tenaceous only, and not solid.

Stones are generally bred like Tartar, which consists of the Acid Part of the
Wine joined to the Earthy, and mixed with the slimy Foeces into a hard, Stony
Substance: so from the Tartar of Vegetables, coagulate with stony Particles,
the Stones and hard Cases of their Fruits and Seeds are produced.

The evident Causes of the Stone, are,

1. A hot, acrid and aromatic Diet, and a muriatic Diet, which over-ferment the
Blood, and supply a salso-acid Matter for the Stone, or a viscid, as all Diet
of that kind.

2. Strong Diuretics force the salso-Acid to the Kidneys too much, if used too
often, or mixed with our Diet.

3. Too much Venery, Baths, Passion, Flannel, or hot Clothes on the Back, or
soft Beds, lying on the Back, Exercise after Meat, much Riding; all these
weaken the Kidneys, by Heating them, or forceing the calculous salso-Acid
thither.

The inward Causes, are,

1. A rancid, viscous Chyle from hard Drinking strong Liquors.

2. A Saltness of Blood, and a bilious Temper.

3. A vitriolic Acidity of the Spleen.

4. Narrow Pores, or Canals in the Kidneys.

5. Such a Conformation of Pores, or Temper of Humors, may be derived from the
Parents, and Children have Stones bred in them before they are Born, for the
same reason; and because they retain their Vrin so long in their Vrinary
Vessels, whilst Embryo's.

The Stone is often bred from the Nurses Milk.

The Cure of the Stone consists,

I. In evacuating and correcting the rancid Chyle, the Saltness and Viscidity
of Blood, and the vitriolic Acidity, as is above-directed, and evacuating the
calculous Serum by Diuretics.

II. In making the Passages slippery,

1. By Vomiting, with Posset Drink, in which Althea Roots are boiled in the
beginning of Fits. 2. By a mucilaginous Glyster, and Bolus of Cassia. 3. By
Emollients, Baths, or Fomentations; as Crocus, Mallows and Pellitory fried with
Butter, and applied. By Emollient Plasters and Ointments, Empl. Melilot. 4.
Oily Medicines; as Oil of Sweet Almonds, and Sperma Ceti; an Oily Glyster, Oily
Emulsions, Butter and Sugar, or Milk half churned. 5. Watery Liquors force it;
as distilled Waters with Diuretics, Whey, Milk and Water, Asses Milk, Mead,
Posset Drink with Chamomile Flowers, Pellitory and Mallows, Chalybeate Waters,
and Water distilled from Birch Juice and Daucus Seeds. 6. Vomits, Sneezing,
Leaping, Standing on the Head, and Cupping-Glasses, Riding, Stroaking the Loins
and Belly, or Cupping-Glasses, help to remove the Stone; and Bleeding in the
Arm or Foot, and Purging, to which Laudanum must be added. 7. Narcotics allay
the Pain. 8. The Glysters may be made deterging; as of Turpentine, Vrin, and
Purgers; or Carminatives and Diuretics, with Soap and Oils.
The Preservation from the Concretions of Stones requires,

1. Vomiting and Cholagogues, Purging Waters, or Purging Antiscorbutic Diet
Drinks; or Purging once a Month.

2. The salso-acid or vitriolic Blood is corrected by Chalybeate or Bath
Waters, Asses Milk drank, distilled Milk, Oat Malt.

Whey with Antiscorbutics, Water drinking, a Toast and Water, and Nutmeg, every
Morning fasting; or Antiscorbutic, cooling Juyces, Emulsions, Strawberry Water.

3. The vitriolic Acid requires temperate Chalybeates, Testaceous, Salts
volatile and fixed, Tinct. Antimonii, Tartari.

4. The Use of Vulneraries which deterge; as Veronica, Strawberry Roots, Virga
Aurea, Hypericon, Millefoyl, ground Ivy, Pine Tops, Ceterach boiled in Beer or
Water, to which Honey and White Wind must be added, and Lucatellus's Balsam
taken at Night, or Turpentine Pills with Bole cum Mastich, or Rhubarb. A Plate
of Lead must be worn on the Back.

The Stone in the Bladder must be cured,

1. By Diuretics, if the Stone be small, and can pass; as by the Acrids or
Caustics, as Water distilled from Caicus, or the Powder of Millepedes i.

2. By Lixiviums.

3. By Cutting: if the Stone cannot pass the chalybeate Waters do Injury in
such a case, and the palliative Cure requires the Evacuating the calculous
Matter which increases it; the allaying the Pain and Strangury by gum and
mucilaginous Medicines; as Comfrey Roots, Milk and Water, Emulsions, and Asses
Milk, and Narcotics, and Vulneraries.

Fourthly, Of the Hypochondriac Flatulencies arising from too high a
Fermentation of Humors.

Windiness is an extraordinary Complaint in all Hypochondriacal Cases, which
arises either Symptomatically, from the Obstruction, Schirrus, or Inflammations
and Imposthumations of some of the Viscera; or else it depends on some viscid,
sour Phlegm lodged in the Stomach; or some putrid Humor which ferments the
new Mass of Meat into continual Eructions, which taste either hot, burning,
broyling, fat, foetid, or very sharp, sour, according as the Ferment of the
Stomach is tinctured, either with too much bitter Choler, salt Serum, or the
vitriolic Spleen Juice, which is also viscid, and thrown upon the Stomach.

The Cure of this Flatuosity requires the Evacuation of the flatulent Mass, and
the vitiated Ferment, and afterward the Humor that tinctures it must be
carried off by those Glands, which are made for its Secretion. We must, lastly,
use those cooling Alteratives which are prescribed in the overfermentation of
Humors. This is the Flatulency properly of the Chyle over-fermented; but the
second Species of hot Flatulencies is from too great a Rarefaction or Expansion
of the Spirits in the Mass of Blood; and such a Fret of the Spirits we observe
in all vinous Liquors, when they are kept too hot; for then those Liquors are
very windy, and taste hot, and froth much. Such is the Temper of the natural
Spirits of the Blood, when it is apt to febrile Effervescences upon very slight
occasions, in Hysterical, Hypochondriacal, or Scorbutic Persons, who are
sensible of sudden Alterations of Heat and Chilness; and I have observed in a
Scorbutic person, a sudden Tumor rising in the Flesh, which would immediately
subside again. This flatulent Effervescence of Spirits must be cured as an
Ephemera, removing the Occasion, and tempering the Humors by Acids, Acerbs,
Mucilages, and Opiates, as will hereafter be described, and the Disposition to
this Flatulency will be removed by a long use of the Cortex, and those cooling
Alteratives which depress too high a Fermentation.

There is a third kind of hot Flatulency, which happens in the Nerves, who
receive their flatulent Spirits from the Blood.

In the Nerves, the Spirits being rarefied or expanded, produce the Asthma, of
which I shall particularly treat; or the Tympany, Cramps, and running Pains.

Poisons tumifie the Body, by rarefying the Spirits; and some who die of
Convulsions are prodigiously swelled; those who die of the Iliac-Passion have
their Bellies much swelled.

This Nervine Flatulency requires the same Method for Curing the Inflammation
of the Spirits, as in an Ephemera; and also the same Method for preventing any
new fit of Windiness in the Nerves, as is mentioned above; for the Natural and
Animal Spirits differ not in Nature; for what is in the Blood now, after a
small time is carried through the Nerves, and so returns into the Blood again.

The Ferment producing hot Flatulencies, was esteemed, by the Ancient Writers,
to be, Humores adustos, atrabilarios, acidos instar fermenti sese habentes, as
Sennertus describes it; and of this Opinion was Diocles, Carystius; for which
he quotes Galen's Third Book, de Locis affectis.

The crude Flatulencies are produced by a weak Heat, as they called it; that
is, a low, crude Ferment, which does not thoroughly ferment the Meat, and that
is either serous, or a viscid Slime in the Stomach, or tartareous Acidities;
but in all hot Flatulencies, the Ferment producing the Flatulencies is either
bilious, saline, vitriolic, or putrid. Some Flatulencies are imputed to the
Contrarieties of Humors; as that which is produced by fixed Salt, or Alcali,
and acid Spirits, such may be observed in the Guts, betwixt acid Meats, and
acrid Choler, which produce the nitrous Flatulency.

These following Flatulencies are not produced by a weak Heat or Fermentation,
but by adust Humors; that is, an over-fermentation, as the Flatus in a hot
Cholic are from Inflammation of the Guts.

The Tympany depends on a hot Flatulency rather than on a cold, or low
Fermentation.

The Hypochondriac Affection is accompanied with so much Flatulency, that it is
called, (...), and depends on too high a Fermentation, and the Blood is too
thick, and hot, and the Spirits inflamed.

These are Flatulencies depending on the hot Ferments mentioned; and these
produce it from any kind of Meat taken; but there is a different Flatulency
arising from the hot Spirits lodged in some kind of Meats; as in Poisons,
Garlic, and many oily Fruits, and fried Meats, and all other Diet which turns
nidorus on the Stomach.

Any Animal Humor kept to putrefie, as the Serum of the Blood long bottled,
becomes flatulent; Putrefaction, in all Tumors ripened, swells them; by which
it appears, that all Windiness is an effect of some preternatural Ferment,
either too strong or weak, or mixed with other Humors, by which it
preternaturally ferments them; for when the stomachic Ferment does its Office
well, no Ructus are produced; and from hence it appears, that the windy Fumes
or Vapors are nothing but the natural Spirits of our Humors ill fermented;
and these coming into the Nerves, produce what we describe by Vapors in the
hypochondriac and hysteric Cases; for all sorts of Convulsions, as Epilepsies,
hysteric and hypochondriac Fits, Vertigo, the Palpitation of the Heart,
Singultus, Chorea Sancti Viti, depend on the highest and hottest Flatulency of
our Spirits; but the Tympanites, Asthma, Incubus, are different from the
former, as much as a gradual Elasticity or Expansion of the gentle Air does
from a violent Blast or Storm. I will here annex a strange Account of a
Priapismus, from Windiness, first premising, that it is no effect of a Venereal
Distemper, nor a Melancholic Fancy. The Person is of a middle Age, and fat
habit of Body, who every Night has a Priapism in his Sleep, cum emissione
Seminis; it never seizes him but in his Sleep at Night, and never in the
Daytime, though he sleep then. This painful Erection he imputes wholly to
Windiness, and thus he describes it; I often plainly and loudly hear the Wind
to make a Noise in that part, like that of the Guts, especially in a Morning;
for, constantly, as soon as I wake, the Wind begins to return from that part,
and in going back is very audible for near a quarter of an hour, till the Part
is fully fallen; and sometime when it is returning I find a Pain, and Fullness
ensues in my Breast; and, at the same time, I have constantly a Noise and
Piping in my Ears. He bled in the Penis without any Benefit; and drank
chalybeate Waters without any great Success, and used Steel and Nervines,
Fomentations and Unguents.

The Medicines against a Priapism, above the hot Flatulencies, are nitrous
Medicines, Spirit of Niter, Emulsions, Acids, Narcotics externally and
internally, Bath Waters, Chalybeate Waters. The hot Carminatives are Camphire,
Rheu, Cummin Seeds, Species Diambrae, Agnus Castus Seed, and Hemp Seed.
Glysters do more than Purges.

The Indications in the Cure of the hot, foetid Flatulencies, are,

I. To evacuate by Vomits, or gentle Purges, or Glysters, the nidorous, Acid,
bitter Salt, or foetid Mass from the Stomach, and by frequent Purges to divert
those Humors from thence, which give an ill Tincture to the Ferment of the
Stomach. Cholagogues and all the specific Purgers are here proper, Purging
Waters especially.

II. To correct the choleric, salt, vitriolic or putrefactive State of the
Blood, which insects the stomachic Ferment; and for this we must use those
Alteratives which are prescribed for each Cacochymia.

III. All the hot Flatulencies of Humors must be depressed, by fixing the
fermenting Spirits.

1. By Acids, Sp. Nitri dulcis, Salis dulcis, Succi Citri, Ribium, Decoct.
Tamarind. Elixir Vitrioli, Elixir Proprietat. cum Acido, Crem. Tartari, Spirit
of Vinegar. Aq. Menth. Simp. Fl. Chamomeli, Foeniculi. an. iv. Sp. Carui iss.
Sp. Aceti i. ocul. Canc. vel Antimonii Diaph. i. Sir. Corticis Aurant. i. Laud.
gr. iij. Gas. Sulphuris, Cochi cum Aq. Paratae Haustu.
2. By Salso-Acids. Acids mixed with Volatiles, Mixtura Simplex. Sp. Carminans
Secretus ex Tartaro and Nitro. Sal Prunellae, Sal Ammoniac, and all nitrous
Medicines; Sal Succini.
3. By watery Liquors; as Aq. Parata, distilled Waters, drinking Wine, and two
parts of Water, or Wood-Drinks, Spaw-Waters, Milk and Water in salt
Cacochymia's, the Bath Waters inwardly, but outwardly they increase all hot
Flatulencies. Cold Water is more useful, or Vinegar and Water, dipping or
immersion in cold Water, Solutions of Niter, and Sal Ammoniac.
The cool Juyces of Plants; as Sempervivum, Purslain, Brook-Lime, Plantain, and
Raw Fruits, cool such flatulent Bloods.

But since all the hot Flatulencies procure a decay of Spirits, the
Fermentation becomes at length depressed; and as in all chronical Diseases a
Saburra is produced, which requires Digestives of the cooler kind to renew the
Fermentation of the Blood, and depurate it from some secretitious Humor
suppressed. As,

1. The cool Chalybeates; as Vitriolum Martis, Chalybs Willisianus in Milk
Waters.

2. The wild aromatic Carminatives, and gentler Bitters; as Chamomile Flowers,
Zedoary, Angelica, Orange Peels.

3. The Use of a moderate Diet, in which there is little Slime, or acrid Parts,
especially Liquors in which no spirituous Parts are, and which are not apt to
ferment.

The Nervine, hot Flatulencies cannot be composed without Opiates, which weaken
the Elasticity of the Spirits. All hot Nervines, as Castor, the hot Gums, Assa,
Galbanum, and all Amber Medicines, increase the hot Flatulencies, and also all
Chemical Oils, Balsams, and all Salts, whether volatile or fixed, and also all
hot Applications outwardly; but the cool Medicines mentioned above, which cool
and temper the sanguineous Spirits, have the same effect upon the Animal, or
Succus Nervosus.

It often happens that there is a cool Flatulency depending on a weak Digestion
in the Stomach, when a hot Flatulency infects the Blood and Nerves, as in the
Asthma, Tympany, Hypochondriac and Hysteric Cases, and then the Medicines must
be mixed, and of a middle temper, neither too hot, nor too cold.

Aq. Menth. Fenicul. an iij. Sp. Carminativ. Sylvii iss. Sp. Nitri gr. xx. Ol.
Juniperi gr. vi. Sir. Cort. Aurant. iss. Laud. gr. iij. Capiat cochleat.

Fifthly, Of the Corrosiveness of the Humors.

When Humors are corrosive they produce Pains, Burning, Ulcers, Rottenness of
the Bones and Teeth, and Fluxes of the Belly, or Haemorrhagies, and a thin,
foetid Sanies in ulcerated Parts.

1. A corrosive Acidity in the Stomach and Belly produces the Pain and
Heart-burning in the Stomach, a Cholera, or Cholick, or Dysentery, or Boulimia,
and Ulcers.

2. A corrosive Temper of the Spittle corrodes the Teeth and Gums, and
occasions sharp Catarrhs. The corrosive Temper of the Mucus of the Aspera
Arteria produces a Phthisis, Spitting of Blood; and the corrosive Temper of the
Mucus of the Nose an Ozena.

3. A corrosive Acrimony in the Seminal Lympha produces Salacity, Gonorrhaea
Simplex, and Fluor Albus, if with Pain and Corrosion.

4. The Corrosiveness of the Lympha Nervosa is made evident by wandering,
corroding Pains of the Head, and Limbs in the Scurvy, and Lues Venerea, and in
Convulsions, or Cramps, and Melancholies.

5. The Humors of the Eyes have a salso-acid Corrosiveness, which inflames and
ulcerates them.

6. The Milk in Women's Breasts acquires a corrosive Acidity, which produces
cancrous or schirrous Tumors.

7. The Blood has a corrosive Saltness in the Scurvy and Haemorrhagies.

8. The salt Serum and the Lympha serosa have a muriatic Corrosiveness, which
corrodes the Flesh, and hinders the Nourishment.

9. The Vrin is corrosive in the Strangury.

10. The Bile is corrosive in Diarrhaea's.

11. The Spleen-Acid is corrosive in Melancholies.

The external Causes of Corrosiveness, are,

1. Sharp, corrosive Diet, of sharp, stale Beer, and salt Meats, and smoaked,
dried Meats, burning Brandy Spirits, and sharp, acid Wines.

2. Violent Passions, Sadness, Anger, Anxiety, and Watching, Studies.

3. Immoderate Labor, and Venery.

4. Suppression of sharp Humors usually evacuated.

The internal Causes.

1. The Ebullition, or high Fermentation of Humors, which stands next to the
putrefied State; for whether the corrosive Acrimony be vitriolic, saline, or
muriatic, which is a Mixture of both; it depends on a violent, immoderate
Fermentation of Humors. As the natural Acidity, Saltness, and muriatic or
ammoniac salso-Acid depends upon a natural and moderate Fermentation of Humors.

Corrosive, Acid Spirits are prepared by Chemists, with an extraordinary degree
of the Fire; and so are the salt, acrid, pungent Acrimonies, as that of
volatile Salts, which taste fiery, burning, salt, and pungent. There is a
burning Acid in Oil of Vitriol, in which the Acid is combined with Sulphur, and
fiery Particles.

The Chemists prepare another corrosive kind of Medicines from an Acid and
Metal, which mix in a cutting, tearing Texture, such as is that in the Crystals
of Silver, and Sublimate.

In the tithymalline, corrosive Plants there is a Milky Juice made of the Oil
and Acid, both which are very volatile.

In Minerals there is a natural corrosive Texture in Arsenick; which contains a
Mixture of Sulphur and sharp Acid.

Whatsoever corrosive Qualities our Nourishment can acquire by Distillation by
a strong Fire, the same may be produced by Fermentation, and Digestion in the
Humors, when they are over-digested.

From Animals, a volatile, fiery Salt may be produced, and by that the Chyle
and Blood, and all their secretitious Humors are made salt, and the hotter the
Animal, or the stronger the Fire is, the greater is the Corrosiveness of the
Salt.

1. The Salt in the Animal Humors is made corrosive by its too great
Volatility, and by this the Apthae in Fevers are produced in the Tongue and
Mouth, as the Tongue is blistered by Spirit of Sal Ammoniac very volatile. This
I call the Vrinous Corrosiveness, and it is cured by the same Medicines as the
Saltness of Humors; for these States differ but in degree of a high
Fermentation, by which they are prepared, and therefore requires the same
Specific Tastes of watery, acerb, tartareous and mucilaginous Medicines; but
those which are more strong can only succeed in the corrosive State.

2. The next Species of corrosive Acrimony is produced from a tartareous, or
natural vitriolic Acidity much raised by Fermentation, when, being joined to
the volatile Oil of Blood, it is made more sharp; so from Bread, and all
tartareous Vegetables, an acid Spirit may be distilled.

The Acrimony of the Spurge Juice resembles this Acrimony. The Oil is manifest
by the Milkiness of the Juice; and that an Acid is in the same Juice, appears,
because it changes the Color of the Knife which cuts it. Moreover, This milky
Juice is dried into a Resin, and all Rosins yield much Oil, and a little Acid.

3. The Third Species of Corrosiveness is from the Mixture of a pungent,
burning Salt, and a high vitriolic Acidity, like that in Sal Ammoniac, which
burns and corrodes the Mouth, and this may be called a muriatic or armoniacal
Corrosiveness.

4. The Fourth and highest Species of Corrosiveness arises from Putrefaction.
All Putrefaction is joined with a foetor, and all foetid Matter corrodes the
Ulcer.

The Cure of Corrosiveness is by the correcting the vitriolic Acidity or
Saltness, by the Medicines abovementioned, and by stopping the high and
putrefactive Fermentation of Humors.

The Acrimony of Aqua Fortis is corrected by the Oyliness of Spirit of Wine, or
the Caput Mortuum of the same Minerals from which it is distilled; so the acid
Corrosiveness of animal, vitriolic Acidities is tempered by Minerals, or Animal
Ashes, and volatile Salts. And the salt Corrosiveness by the crude Tastes; as
Tartar Acids, and Styptic, mucilaginous Plants.

The Saturnine Styptics stop Fermentations most strongly, and so do acerb
Styprics, as Plantane, and Opiates also. All Evacuations by Bleeding, Purging,
are necessary, and a cooling Diet also.

CHAP. XIV.
Of the Putrefaction of Animal Humors.

1. THE Meat in the Stomach is sometime putrid by too high a Digestion in a
foetid Ructus, which is very Nidorous, or the Ulcers of the Stomach.

2. The Saliva has a nauseous, foetid Savor, sometimes from putrid Fevers, or
the Corruption of the Foetus in the Womb, or Ulcers in the Lungs or Mouth.

3. The Mucus of the Aspera Arteria, and the Nose is foetid, from the Ulcers in
those parts.

4. The Seminal Humors are foetid, by the Ulcers in the Genitals; and the
Blood of the Infected, by the Pox is full of a putrid Ferment, or acrid Salt,
which makes their Sweat and Breaths to have a foetid Savor.

5. The Spirits themselves become very foetid in putrefied Bloods, by Pains
(...) Passions, and Infections. By (...)mous Bites the Foetor is also
in(...)ased.

6. The Milk putrefies by the Stagnation in the Breasts.

7. The Humors of the conglomerate and conglobate Glands putrefie and ulcerate
in the Scrophulae.

8. The Blood putrefied has lost its Fibers, which makes it not to coagulate
when cold, and it smells foetid.

9. The Salt Serum of the Blood is turned by extraneous or internal Ferments
into the Matter of the Itch, Leprosy, and Ulcers. Upon the Evaporation of the
natural Spirits, the vitriolic Acid prevails, on which depends the chylous
Whiteness of Matter, which is precipitated and changed by it; so the Serum of
the Blood is changed into a white, milky Liquor by Spirit of Niter.

10. The Vrin and Sweat stink in putrid Fevers, as the bilious Stools do, and
the Blood it self.

There are Three kinds of Thinness in Animal Humors.

1. An aquous Serosity, which is evident in the Blood, which is crude.

2. A more fluid Consistence of Blood, depending on a great Rarefaction of
Blood, whereby its own oily and salt Particles, by their Agitation, attenuate
and dissolve the natural Viscidity of the Blood, as appears in Hoemorrhagies,
and the hot Scurvey; this is only the next degree or step to Putrefaction.

3. The Third Cause of Tenuity in the Humors is the Putrefaction of them,
which is a perfect Destruction of all their viscid or fibrous Consistence, by a
high and a long Fermentation; so in the perfect, ripe Matter of an Ulcer, the
Viscidity is destroyed; and in putrefied Eggs their ropy Consistence is
altered, and made fluid, so as not to thicken by Boiling.

The Causes of Putrefaction, and a high Fermentation, differ only in degree.

1. The natural Fermentation produces only nutritious Humors, and no farther
resolves the alimentary Mass than what is necessary for the perfection of a fit
Nutriment; but a preternatural high Fermentation proceeds farther, and produces
both the Acrimony, Saline, or vitriolic, or a thick Consistence by Coagulation
of the Chyle upon the Blood; but in the putrefactive Fermentation it is
continued to the perfect Dissolution of all the Viscidity of our Humors,
according to the Observation of Crato, Fibrae Sanguinis, cum mittitur infectis
peste ita putridae sunt, ut concrescere nequeunt; and this is properly called
the putrefactive Fermentation; for in the Plague, the Infection putrefies the
Blood, and the coagulate or putrid Parts are thrown upon the Skin, and the
whole Body stinks; so that the Eremite, whom Borellus mentions, knew a Place
infected by the Plague only by the Smell, which Smell was as he related;
foetidus instar calceorum ustorum; and Crato observed, contagii and foetoris
magnam esse similitudinem.

Whatsoever other Causes produce a high Fermentation, and continue the same
very long, they cause a Putrefaction in the Blood, as all feverish Ferments.

2. When an extraneous Ferment corrupts a particular Humor, as the Pox does
the feminal Humor, the Itch, and external Venoms from the Bites of mad or
poisonous Animals, infect the Succus Nutritious, or Blood near the Skin, and
this is a virous Putrefaction.

3. Any inward Humor stagnating corrupts, and becomes a Ferment, as the Sanies
in the Ulcers of the Lungs, Liver, or Kidneys, or Cancers, or Gangreens, which
infect and putrefie the whole Mass of Blood by little and little; and this may
be called an Vlcerous Putrefaction, such as is procured by Suppuratives laid to
Apostemes.

4. There is a cadaverous Putrefaction in Gangreens, with the greatest foetor,
and Bladders containing a sharp Water. Cancers have such a Smell, and that is a
corroding Ulcer.

In the Scurvy there is a Foetor of the Mouth, and the Teeth and Gums are
corroded.

The Humor which issues from a carious Bone being tasted is salt, as Mr. Regis
affirms.

By the great Foetor we may know the Putrefaction of Ulcers, and the corrosive
Sharpness of the Humors; and this may be called a Scorbutic Putrefaction.

The Cure of Putrefaction requires,

1. The Avoiding of the evident Causes of Putrefaction of Humors, and the
insisting on an incrassating Diet, which may produce a viscid Consistence in
the Blood; as all viscid Broths, and Jellies of Calves Feet, Hartshorn, Ivory,
Iceing-Glass. All the Mealy Diet is here very convenient, and Milk Diet, and
all the Diet prescribed in the Cure of too high a Fermentation; but the Diet in
Fevers must be thin.

2. The sharp Choler and acrid Ferment in the Stomach, and oily Temper of
Blood, must be evacuated, and corrected by the Medicines mentioned in the Cure
of a high Fermentation, for to that all Putrefaction must be imputed, according
to the Observation of our Ancient Physicians; (...), whatsoever putrefies is
made hotter.

3. Every extraneous Ferment, and all kind of purulent Matter, must be
evacuated according to the old Rule; non alterari quod putridum, sed tolli
postulat.

These following Tastes check the Fermentation, and preserve the Consistence of
Liquors, and precipitate the Ferment.

1. Acids, by which we stop Fermentations and Putrefactions. We preserve our
Plants in Vinegar, when pickled. We find the Vinegars, which we call
Theriacalia Aceta, to do much good in putrid Fevers, and the Plague. Treacle
Water has much of an Acid in it. We ferment Gangreened Parts with Vinegar; and
the Juyces of Vegetables are preserved from Corrupting by the Acid Fumes of
Sulphur, which also restore them to their former Vigor. The Oil of Vitriol is
useful to putrid Parts.

2. The salso-Acids are very good in all Putrefactions, and therefore all
Gangreens are fomented with Brine, Seawater, or Vrin; and common Salt
preserves our Humors from Putrefaction; and Spirit of Salt is useful for
Imbalming and Freserving of Bodies, and against the Putrefactions in the Mouth.

3. Styptics, Acerbs, and Austeres; as Tormentil, Pentophil, Bistort Roots,
Bole, Terra Sigillata, are used as Preservatives in malignant Fevers, and the
Bitings of Mad-Dogs.

These following Tastes preserve the Mixture of Humors, and their Fluidity.

1. Fixed Salts hinder Putrefaction and Fermentation; so we foment Mortified
Parts with Lixiviums and Lime Water. Both volatile and fixed Salts hinder the
fermenting of Milk by Rennet, and volatile Salts hinder the Putrefaction of
Animal Humors by the Bite of a Viper.

2. Bitters preserve fermented Liquors from Decay. Our Chyle is preserved from
Putrefaction by the Bitterness of Choler; and our bitter Turpentines, as well
as Cedar it self, preserve dead Bodies from Corruption; and we prevent
Gangreens by bitter Plants; as Roots of Gentian, Aristolochia, Leaves of
Centaury, Rhue, Wormwood, Scordium; and by Myrrh, Aloes, and Meal of Lupines:
and we give inwardly Treacle and Mithridate; all which have a great Bitterness.

3. We use Acrid Plants inwardly and outwardly in Gangreens. By the Scurvy, as
Watercresses, Horseradish, Spirit of Scurvy Grass, Mustard Seed, lesser
Celandine, and Garlic or Leek Pottage. Outwardly, Decoctions of Turnips, and
Cataplasms.

4. By the acrid Aromatics we sweat, and outwardly discuss Humors; as Roots of
Serpentariae, Contrayerva, yellow Flag.

By Spirit of Vine, Ulcers are preserved from their foetor; and for the same
end we use spirituous Cordials inwardly.

5. We use vitriolic Styptios, which are corrosive, also outwardly; as burnt
Alum, Sublimate, and Precipitate, which, by their Stypticity, stop the creeping
Ulcer; and by their caustic Acrimony, they deterge the sordid Ulcers, and
separate the dead Flesh.

APPENDIX I.
CHAP. XV.
Of FEVERS.

IN a Feverish State of Blood there happens a violent Fermentation of the whole
Mass of Blood, as appears by the quick Pulse, the high-colored Water, the
Alterations of Heat and Chilliness. This sudden and great Alteration of the
Humors the Ancients explained by Putrefaction of the Blood, or of Choler, or
Melancholy, or Pituita. There are many other Notions framed for the explicating
the Nature of Fevers, and their Symptoms; but I shall endeavor to explain more
particularly the Opinion of the Ancients, and to accommodate it to the Modern
Hypotheses.

That a Fever is a Putrefaction of the Blood, or some of its Parts, seems
probable by the foetor of the Sweat and Vrin in that Disease, by the infectious
Nature of it, which lies in its foetid Effluviums, which reduce the Blood of
another Animal to the same State and Symptoms. None can deny the Putrefaction
in the Plague, which putrefies all our Humors to a mortified State.

The Petechiae and purple Spots show malignant Fevers, and the Smallpox and
Measles, to be lower degrees of the same Putrefaction.

The violent Heats in ordinary intermitting Fevers produce a putrefactive
Dissolution of Humors, which are thrown off in Sweats, and appear in the
precipitated Sediment of our Vrin, as well as by the Evacuation in a Cholera,
Diarrhaea, Salivation, which are Symptoms of the Fever, the whole Succus
Nutritious is dissolved from the solid Parts, as well as the Mass of Blood.
Hence the Body becomes flaccid, and empty of Nourishment after long Fevers; and
then we supply that defect by a nourishing Diet, as after the Fever.

Since there appears so much of a Putrefaction in Fevers, I think that Notion
of the Ancient Writers ought to be inserted into the Definition of a Fever.

I shall next consider the Notion of a Fever, described by a Fermentation, or
Ebullition of Blood, caused by some extraneous Ferment. And such a Commotion of
Blood happens by too high a Diet, which stums or ferments the Humors; or else
any of the Humors, which are naturally to be evacuated, being stopped in their
Expulsion, become an extraneous Ferment to the Blood, or else the Succus
Nutritious, as soon as it arrives at the Blood, is perverted by some Dyscrasie
of it into an extraneous, morbific Nature, and becomes a Ferment, or else the
Nutritious Juyces are precipitated from the Blood by external Cold, and become
the ferment of all intermitting Fevers.

The particular Ferment which produces each kind of Fever differs by some
Cacochymia which was in the Blood, or Succus Nutritious before it was
precipitated, by some abuse of the Non-Naturals, or Surfeits, or Colds, though
the Succus Nutritious, altered by external Causes, is the general ferment of all
Fevers; yet that differing, according to the several Cacochymia's that may
happen to it, the ferment of each Fever (being the immediate Cause of its
Ebullition, and the first thing to be removed or changed) ought most
particularly to be described, because the Cacochymia, with which the Succus
Nutritious abounds, produces the most eminent Symptoms of each intermitting
Fever, and that Cacochymia does very much alter the general Cure of an
intermitting Fever. As for instance, If Rheumatic Pains accompany an
intermitting Fever, the Cacochymia preceding the Fever is a viscid State of
the Succus Nutritious, and the Blood is sizie, as in Rheumatisms. In the Curing
of this, the common Method for Curing the intermitting Fever is not sufficient,
of giving the Cortex without due Preparation, viz. for the Cacochymia infecting
the Succus Nutritious, there must preceed the Evacuations, indicated by a viscid
State of Blood, viz. Bleeding, and Purging, or Vomiting, but not so much as in
a Rheumatism, without an evident intermitting Fever.

The Symptoms preceding the Fit generally denominate the particular kind of
Fever, and if great, the whole depraved Succus Nutritious being evacuated upon a
particular Part, the Cure is chiefly to be managed by removing that particular
Inflammation, as Pleurisy, or Peripneumonia, without any or very little regard
to the intermitting Fever.

The Notion of a Fever being produced by the Irritation of the Spirits in the
Blood and Nerves, very well explains the Action of the Air, and infectious or
Animal Humors, for those are first infected; and that the febrile
Effervescence, Commotion, Ebullition, Expansion (call it as you please, for the
same thing is understood by all these Terms) is managed by the Animal Spirits,
which circulate from the Nerves into the Blood, and from thence to the Nerves
again, is very probable, and this Galen seems long since to have described,
when he defines a Fever to be the turning of the innate heat (which is the
Spirits) into a fiery Nature; but it is as evident, that every Person has some
antecedent Cacochymia, by which the particular Symptoms of the Fever are
produced, and this, by exceeding the Strength or Expansion of Spirits, makes
the Fever malignant, or by being in no great quantity, or more loosely mixed
with the Succus Nutritious, the Fever is mild, and easily cured. The several
stages of the Disease are very naturally described by the separation of the
greater quantity of the Succus Nutritious from the Blood, in the increase of the
Fever, and the Crisis is a full or perfect Separation of all the depraved
Succus Nutritious from the Mass of Blood, when the Fever is curable, and then
the febrile Effervescence ceases; but if the Succus Nutritious be but in part
separated, the Mass of Humors remain turbid and undepurated, and the Fever
becomes fatal.

The Spirits being the chief Instruments of all Fermentations, the several
Stages of this Disease must be managed by them; but we must look farther, and
describe the Humors which irritate them first into Motion, and the depraved
Humors, which the irritate Spirits endeavor to exterminate from the Mass of
Blood, the Motion of the Spirits would soon be stopped, as we find in Ephemera's,
if some depraved Humor in the Blood did not support the Irritation of them,
who cannot naturally depurate the Blood under 14 or 21 Days, or longer. Hence
it appears how reasonable the Opinion of our Moderns is, who describe a Fever
as an Effervescence of the Blood, by which it clears it self of some
heterogenious Particles, which, as they produce the Effervescence, are called a
Ferment; and as they irritate the Spirits a Venenum; and as they are the
depraved Matter of the Succus Nutritious, the putrid Particles of it, or febrile
Sediment, appearing in the Vrin. It is not my Design to oppose any Author's
Judgment, but to reconcile these several Opinions, and put them all into the
Definition of a Fever, thus.

A Fever is a preternatural Fermentation or Effervescence of the Blood,
occasioned by some Ferment irritating the Spirits of the Blood and Nerves; so
the Dissolving, or Putrefying, and Separating some part of the Cacochymical
Succus Nutritious from its Mixture with the Mass of Humors.

The tumultuous Agitation of the Spirits in the Ephemera happens by the ill Use
of the Six Non-Naturals.

1. As Surfeits, which are Cured by a Vomit, Purge, Clyster, by which the
putrefying Diet, which is the Ferment here, is carried off.

2. The Heat of the Sun being excessive inflames the Spirits; and Opiates, and
cool things, readily compose them, and Oxyrrhodines.

3. Too much Labor spends and agitates the Spirits, in which case Spirituous
Cordials, Wine, and Rest, are necessary.

4. Anger disorders the Spirits, whose surious Motions are best repressed by
Opiates, and cool Emulsions.

5. Long Watchings require Opiates and Anodynes.

6. Grief agitates the Spirits, and spends them; for which, Wine, Spirits, and
Opiates, are necessary.

The Cure of an Ephemera, which is a tumultuous Motion or Inflammation of the
Spirits, requires these Tastes. 1. Acids in cool Liquors, Sp. Nitri dulcis, Sal
Prunell. Tamarinds, Gas Sulphuris, or the Juyces of Acid Fruits. 2.
Mucilaginous and watery Liquors, Aq. Hordei, cum Sir. Limonum, Milk Waters,
Emulsions. 3. Opiates. 4. Diaphoretics of a mild Nature, bitterish. 5. Styptics
watery to stop the Fever, Plantane.


Bleeding, Purging, Clysters, Vomiting, Quiet, and Abstinence, or a thin Diet,
often stop the Effervescence, by carrying off the fermenting Humors.

The Ancient Writers distinguished putrid Fevers by the Putrefaction of Blood,
Choler, Melancholy, and Phlegm; and this is to be explained by an Effervescence
happening in such a particular Cacochymical Blood.

The common Fever in England is an intermitting Fever; and that is the putrid
Fever the Old Physicians have described, and this is produced by the Changes of
our Air, the viscid Nature of our Diet, or the infectious Vapors of the Earth,
and Seas encompassing us, which precipitate or putrefie the Nutritious Juyces
of our Bodies, and that is evident in our Vrins, and is the Matter of all
critical Evacuations, by which the Fever is cured, and this supplies all the
Humors for colliquative Evacuations in Fevers; as Diarrhaea's, Salivations,
Sweats, etc. This being evacuated upon particular Parts produces the several
Inflammations; as Quinsie, Apoplexies, Lethargies, Palsies, Pleurisies,
Rheumatisms, Cholics, which are the Symptoms of the ordinary intermitting
Fever, and distinguish it into its several Species.

This depraved Succus Nutritious, by Natures Method, ought to be fully separated
from the Blood; but Physicians do not commonly trust that tedious way, but by
the Cortex they precipitate what is easily separable of Nutriment by the Vrin,
and re-assimulate the rest of the Nutritious Serum to the Blood, as will
manifestly appear by observing the several Changes of the Vrin, and its
Sediment; and we observe that Bitters, like Choler, are the best Sanguifiers,
and also the best Febrifuges, and the Cortex has a most eminent Bitterness, not
unlike the Bitterness of bitter Almonds, by which it re-assimulates part of the
Nutritious Juyces to the Mass of Blood.

I will mention the several Cacochymia's, which are only the several States of
the Nutritious Humors, antecedent to the febrile Effervescence, by which, the
several Species of the intermitting Fever are distinguished; but I must first
observe, that the intermitting Fever differs little from the Ague, but by
having more of the Succus Nutritious putrefied, and precipitated from the Mass
of Blood, and that so much of it is not sweat off by every Paroxysm in the
intermitting Fever, as is in the Ague Fit, which makes the Fever less in the
Intervals of the Fit; but the intermitting Fever often changes into the Ague,
and is cured by the same Method.

First, If the Fever happens in the bilious Cacochymia of Blood, and in Young
Persons in the Summer time, a Causus is produced, with extreme Heat and Thirst,
and in this the Heat and Thirst is much abated by Acids, and the Fever is to be
treated by such Methods as respect both the bilious Cacochymia, and continued
or intermitting Fever, whether the Tertian Ague has the same Cacochymia, and
intermits every other Day.

The Cure of this Cacochymia indicates,

I. Vomiting in the beginning, and Purging on the Days of Intermission, with
Decoct. Amarum, or Glysters, to evacuate the abounding Choler.

II. The Choler is to be precipitated from the Blood, by Vrin, and Sweats, and
the Liver opened. 1. By Acids; as Crem. Tart. i. in Chamomile Flower
Posset Drink, given before the Fit, or Juice of Limons, with Water and Wine, or
Spirit of Sulp. 20 drops in Fountain Water or Purslain-Water, with Sp. Sulph.
ss. and Syrup of Limons. 2. Salso-Acids are Diuretics and Sudorifics; as Tart.
Vitriol. Sal Ammoniac. Arcanum duplicatum, of any gr. xv. Oc. Canc. ss. Or the
Salt Mixture of Riverius; as Sal Absynth. ss. Sp. Sulph. gut. xii. Syrup of
Poppies ss. Carduus-Water iij. Or Mixed Salts; Sal Absynth. Prunell. Antim.
Diaph. ana gr. xv. 3. Bitters have the same effect of Sweating, or
re-assimulating the Nutritious Juyces; as Aq. Plantag. iij. Theriacae i. before
the Fit, Gentian, Centaury, Feverfews, Chamomile-Flowers, Chamaedrys, Vervein,
etc. decocted, and given with Myrrh or Mithridate, before the Fit; these open
the Liver, for the better Passage of the Choler; they also depurate the Succus
Nutritious, and prevents its Putrefaction in Fevers. Chelandine and Saffron are
also useful in Tertians, by opening the Liver, and helping the Secretion of
Choler, as is also Dandelion.


III. The feverish Ebullition may be suppressed by Acerbs; as Decoction of
Ribwort, Plantain, or the Juyces of Plantain, House-Leek, Sorrel, Purslain,
Polygonum; or by Austeres; as Avens, Cinquefoil, Roots of Plantain, St. John's-
Wort, Roots of Tormentil, Vlmaria Leaves, Juice of Millefoil, Barks of Ash,
Tamarisk; but in general Use the Cortex has the greatest Commendation.

Alum is also much extolled; but repeated Bleeding, and all the Methods for
Curing the Cacochymia, I constantly use before the Cure of the Fever by the
Cortex, unless the Danger of Delay be great.

Outwardly we apply, 1. Styptics, Nut-Tree-Bark steeped in Vinegar, and
Mouse-Ear, or Shepherds Purse, Goose-Tansie steeped in the same, with Salt
applied to the Wrists. 2. Opiates externally as well as internally, Vng.
Populeon ij. Opium gr. iv. Spiders Web, s. a. applied to the Wrists. 3.
Salso-Acids externally as well as internally, Sal. Gemm. Sal Ammoniac. and
Niter, Soot and Vinegar, with Spiders Web, Sea Salt, Currants and Hops, applied
to the Wrists.


Secondly, If an intermitting Fever happens in a mucilaginous Constitution of
Blood, such as is in Phlegmatic Persons, Women, or Children, the putrid Fever
takes the Type of a Quotidian, the Paroxysms last many Hours, and the Disease
40 Days or more, and a Paroxysm happens every Day, with great Cold, and the
Heat is not very great afterward.

In this pituitous Dyscrasie of Blood, we must vomit off the quantity of
Pituita, and purge upon Intermissions, and the pituitous Cacochymia must be
corrected by Bitters; as,

1. Bitter Decoction, Wormwood-Wine, Myrrh, Juice of Wormwood one Spoonful, or
Juice of Chamomile in Wine, before the Fit, Mithridate or Treacle before the
Fit, or Carduus-Leaves powdered. Elixir Proprietatis i. Aq. Lumbric. ij. before
the Fit. Radix Serpentariae ss. externally. The Stomach may be fomented with
Gentian, Wormwood, Mint and Aromatics boiled in Wine.

2. Fixed Salts and volatile evacuate the Cacochymia, both by Sweat and Vrin.
Sal Absynth. Sp. Sal. Arm. in Aq. Card. and Theriac.

3. Aromatics, Sal volatile. oleosum.

The external Applications are such as quicken the Pulse, and thereby keep off
the Cold; as Camphire, Soot, Saffron, Galbanum, Turpentine with Olibanum and
Bole, Myrrh, Saffron, Aloes, Onion, Gunpowder and Soap, Nettles, Rheu,
Featherfew, Wormwood, bruised together.

This Fever Sylvius calls his Salivaris, or Pituitosa.

Thirdly, If an intermitting Fever falls into a tartareous Blood, or Lympha,
this Fever has Gripes, and Pains of the Belly attending it, a low Pulse, little
Thirst, crude and watery Vrin, but much Cold; for the Curing of which
Cacochymia, Vomits and Clysters, such as are used in the Cholic, much conduce
to discharge the tartareous Lympha, and for the correcting of it.

1. Volatile Salts.

2. Distilled, aromatic Oils, which correct the Chilliness attending this
Fever. Oil of Cloves, Mace, or Sal volatile oleosum, with Laudanum, for the
Pains.

Fourthly, If the intermitting Fever falls into a flatulent, crude Blood, a
Distension is perceived in the Belly, or Inflation, short Breathing in the
Lungs, and wandering, nervous Pains in the Limbs, with Giddiness, and Noise in
the Ears. In the Cure of this Fever the Flatulencies must be removed, as well
as the Effervescence suppressed.

Fifthly, If a Fever happens in a serous Cacochymia, the conglobate Glands are
affected, and the Limbs with Lassitude or Pains; the conglomerate Glands are
also affected, as appears by Dullness of the Head, and Sleepiness; by Coughs,
Hoarseness; and this Sylvius calls, The Catarrhal Fever, and the Cure of this
requires, the Evacuations of the Serum, by Purging, Vrin, Sweating, as well as
the Cure of the Effervescence. Errhines, Masticatories, and Fumes, are useful.

Sixthly, If a Fever happens in a rancid, oily State of Blood, it produces a
scorbutic Fever, with high-colored Vrin, and Spots in the Skin; and in this
Antiscorbutics are as necessary as the Febrifuges.

Seventhly, If an intermitting Fever happens in a sizie, viscid Blood, it
produces rheumatic Pains, and all kinds of Inflammations; as the Apthae, or
Inflammations of the Mouth, the Quinsie, Parotis, or the Inflammation of the
Glands, the Inflammation of the Intestines, or Stomach, or Liver, or Spleen,
Nephritis, or Inflammation of the Kidneys, Phrenitis, or the Inflammation of
the Brains, Ophthalmia, Peripneumonia, Pleurisy, Inflammation of the Breasts,
the Vterus, or Stones, Lethargies, Apoplexies, Palsies, Rheumatisms, and all
hot Pains.

These are the Distempers attending Fevers, when the Blood is sizie, and that
requires all the Methods proper for altering that, as well as stopping the
Fever.

Eighthly, If the Fever happens in a salt Blood, it has great Thirst attending
of it, and Haemorrhagies, and runs into a tabid State. In this Fever, I
observed a Haemorrhage to preceed every Fit of the intermitting Fever; in Mr.
Schrimsher of Aquilate, who, through an Aversion to the Cortex, lost his Life
in it, and died Convulsed after diverse Fits of the Fever, with a Haemorrhage,
which returned at a certain Hour.

Ninthly, If the intermitting Fever happens in a vitriolic State of Blood, all
the hypochondriac Symptoms are joined with the Fever, and the Fever appears
under the Type of a Quartan: The Cure of which requires Evacuating,

I. Of the vitriolic Humor in the Stomach, by Vomiting, and Purging off the
same on the intermitting Days.

II. The vitriolic Humor must be corrected,

1. By Bitters, bitter Decoction, Wormwood Wine, Elix. Proprietatis, Myrrh,
with Treacle. 2. By fixed Salts, Extract. Carduus with Salt of Wormwood. Take
Conserve of Hips, Wormwood, Enula, Scurvy Grass, Citron Pills, of each i.
Saffron ij. Sal Absynth. ij. Confectio Alcherm. ss. with Syrup of Citron, make
an Elect. 3. Chalybeates are absolutely necessary after the Fever is stopped, to
correct the vitriolic Humor; and sometimes the Fever cannot be stopped till the
Humor is corrected, as I have often experienced in my younger Son, who had the
Quartan four Years by Relapses. No Febrifuge could put off his Fit till he had
used Steel fourteen Days, or three Weeks, and the Cortex could do him no
Service, nor would put off a Fit; at last, he having used at least a Pound of
it, by often repeating of it, profuse Bleeding, as 40 Ounces of Blood from a
Child of Nine Years Old, did more for the Cure of his Ague than all the
Febrifuges, for his Blood was extreme viscid, and Steel always cured his
Cachexy. I gave him Vitriolum Martis sometimes, and Dr. Willis's Steel at
others, dissolved in a convenient Julep. 4. The Earthy Calces; as Antim. Diap.
Bezoar Minerale, with fixed Salts and volatile, may be reduced into Pills, with
Extract of Gentian. The Ashes of Oyster-shells are good to correct the
vitriolic Humor.
III. The Paroxysm must be checked or stopped,

1. By bitter Styptics; as the Cortex. The reason of its inefficacy in the
Dose, in which it was formerly given, is the Mixing of the Chips of the Tree
with the Bark; and it is evident, that the Bark exceeds the Taste of the Wood
in all Trees, and is of a stronger Virtue. Let therefore the Apothecaries keep
the Chips for Decoctions, and use the Cortex only in Powder; for they well
know, that the Cortex of Guaicum is stronger than the Wood. Lignum Colubrinum,
Ash, Guaicum, black Cherry-Tree, are much oommended for Quartans; as are also
Myrtle-Leaves, and Misletoe. Five-Leaved-Grass, Potentilla, Avens,
Plantain-Roots, are austere.
2. By Acerbs; as the Leaves of Ribwort Plantain boiled in Posset Drink, which
cures some where the Cortex has failed. Alum is very much used, i. in bitter
Decoction, or with Nutmeg.
3. Nauseous Bitters; as Carduus Leaves ss. Alum i. taken in Ale before the
Fit, or Myrrh ss. in Wine, or Treacle i. before the Fit. 4. By acrid
Terebinthiuates; as Roots of Asarum, Valerian, Serpentaria, Decoction of
Ivy-Wood, and Savin applied to the Pulse with Salt. 5. By other Acrids of the
Orris Class; as Zedoary, Ginger, Contrayerva; or other acrid Aromatics; as
Pepper, Radix Imperatoriae i. cum Vino, Pepper 14 grains in Wine. 6. Foetid
Acrids; as Rhue one handful, Red Sage as much, infused in Wine, and given
before the Fit. A Nutmeg roasted in an Onion. 7. Salso-Acids; as Sal Absynth.
iss. Sal Prunell. ss. Sacch. Perl. ij. The Acerbs and bitter Styptics
precipitate the depraved Succus Nutritious from the Blood, the Acrids and Salts
throw it off by Sweat and Vrin. A Purge given six or eight Hours before the Fit
evacuates the digested Succus, and is successful after six or eight Months.
8. Opiates stop the Pulse, and all Fermentations. 9. The Pericarpia are of
Styptics; as Bole, Mastich, Bursa, and Astoris, Knot-Grass, Argentina. Or
Acids; as Vinegar with Gunpowder. Or Caustics; as Nettles, Ranunculus, black
Soap.
Tenthly, If the Fever happens in a Blood putrefied, the several Sorts of
Malignant Fevers are produced, with a low Pulse, feverish Symptoms, Watching,
Delirium, Convulsions, and a sudden failing of the Spirits.

I. The Spirits being decayed, fixed, or oppressed, or weakened by Evaporation,
become unfit to manage any extraordinary Fermentation; for the Depurating of
the Blood by an Effervescence from any of its depraved Succus Nutritious; and,
in this Case, all the Medicines against Malignity, which are of the following
Tastes, are very necessary; as,

1. Volatile Salts and fixed, Cineres Eufonum, Salt of Vipers. 2. Acrids,
Angelica, Zedoary, Imperatoria, Petasitis, Serpentaria Virginiana, Contrayerva,
Aq. Ber. spec. liberantis. 3. Bitters: decoct. Amarum sine sena, Mithridate, or
Treacles, Sir. of Carduus, Scordium, Veronica, Vervein, or the Juyces or
Extract of them. 4. Foetids, Camphire, Garlic, Castor, Troches of Vipers Flesh,
Rhue. 5. Mineral Sulph. and Calces, Antimon. Diaph. Bez. Miner. Cinnab. Antim.
6. Acids, Acetum Bezoardicum, Sir. of Citrons, Spirit of Vitriol. 7.
Salso-Acids made by Mixing contrary Salts.
II. The Second Species of a malignant Fever is from the Translation of the
depraved Succus Nutritious upon the Head and Nerves in the intermitting Fever,
which requires all manner of Revulsion; as Bleeding in the Neck, Glysters,
Blisters, Cataplasms to the Feet; besides Diaphoretics, Diuretics, and
Cordials, to support the Spirits, and the Fermentation.

III. The Third Species of a malignant Fever is from the Infection of the Air,
whose foetid Sulphurs cause diverse degrees of Putrefactions in several parts of
our Bloods, and accordingly produce the several epidemical, malignant or
pestilential Fevers.

1. In the petechial, spotted Fever, and the scarlet Fever, or Measles, the
florid Particles of the Blood are corrupted, or coagulated, or putrefied, and
thrown into the Skin.

2. In the Smallpox, not only the florid, but also the viscid Particles of the
Serum are coagulated, and thrown into the Skin to putrefie, and be expelled. We
observe in the Smallpox a sizie Blood, as well as a putrefactive State of
Humors; the Siziness makes it an inflammatory Fever, and commonly requires
Bleeding before and afterward. We keep a thin and low Diet, both in respect of
the Inflammation and Fever. We use also Medicines against Malignity, because of
the Imbecility of Spirits in so great a Putrefaction of Blood, and that we may
expel the putrid Particles of the Succus Nutritious. We use also, after the
Expulsion of the Succus, Febrifuges, as the Cortex, to remove the Paroxysm of
the intermitting Fever, joined with the Smallpox or Measles. And we ought to
consider the several Cacochymia's which distinguish the Species of the
Smallpox.

3. In the Plague and Poisons, which putresie the Blood, the whole Mass is
putrefied; in this, a great Pain of the Head, with the greatest Faintness,
seizes; a stinking Breath, wandering Pains about the Emunctories, Heat and Cold,
are the usual Symptoms.

The Bubo's, Carbuncles, and Petechioe, are Particles of the Blood drove into
the Skin.

All things which preserve from Putrefaction, preserve from the Plague. As,

1. Bleeding, and Purging with Aloetics; as Pil. Ruffi. Elix. Proprietatis.

2. The Antidotes are,

1. Bitters; Extract of Gentian with Myrrh, Conserve of Tansie, Wormwood, Rhue
with Diascord. Treacle, and Conserve of Wood Sorrel.

2. Acids; as Spir. of Sulph. Niter, Salt, Vitriol in Wine, Drink, or Broths,
or Juice of Limons, Rhue, Vinegar, with Bread and Butter. Posset Drink with
Acetum Bezoardicum. Juniper Berries steeped in Vinegar.

3. Aromatic Acrids; chewing Zedoary, Angelica, Mace steeped in Vinegar,
Marigold-Flowers in Vinegar. In pure Bodies the Aromatics do Injury; and to
Infants vehement Dryers; Camphorates, Myrrhates, and Bitters.

4. Foetids; Rhue, Vinegar, and Camphire, are to be smelt to, and Tobacco
smoaked in the Morning, and the bitter Wine in the Morning, and a Sudorific
Elect. at Night.

Sulphur with Honey is accounted an excellent Antidote.

Saltpeter and Sulphur correct the Air by their Fumes, or Gunpowder, or
Acetum Theriacale.

3. Styptics; as Bole, Tormentil, Pimpinella, Vlmaria in Wine.

In the Summer, Young Men, take heed of hot things, and use Acids and Styptics,
and moderately hot; as Borrage, Balm, Saffron, Burnet, Citron Pills,
Clovegilly-flowers; or moderate Aromatics internally, and Vinegar with Gamphire.

Aromatics inwardly are fittest for Winter and Old Persons; Oil of Amber, Bals.
Peru, Nutmegs. Outwardly, and in Fumes, Pitch, Frankincense, Assa Foetida,
Turpentine, Myrrh, and other resinous Plants. Juniper, Cedar-Wood.

All the Bezoardics abovementioned are necessary to promote Sweat, and drive
forth the putrefied Particles of the Blood.

The pestilent Camp Fever is from Eating of putrid Meats, which ought to be
Vomited and Purged off, and after Bezoardics for the Malignity, or putrid State
of Humors.

In all putrid Fevers Authors advise to respect the Malignity, as well as the
Fever.

The continued Fever differs not from the intermitting, since it remits in the
beginning, or intermits at length, and they frequently change from one to the
other, and the depraved Succus Nutritious is the ferment of both; but in the
continued Fever it is not so easily precipitated from the Blood, and discussed
by a Paroxysm, as in the intermitting, and their Cure differs little.

1. All evident Causes of those Fevers must be removed.

2. The depraved Chyle, or its quantity, must be evacuated by Vomits, Purges,
Clysters, that no new Matter may be supplied to irritate the Blood.

3. The Effervescence of Blood must be depressed if too high.

1. By a thin Diet, sub-acid or mucilaginous Ptysans.

2. By tartareous Acids, Syrups of Limons, Citrons, and Acid Spirits, or
Quiddanies of Fruits.

3. By Acerbs, Tinct. of Roses, Plantain, Sorrel decocted, Sedum, Posset Drink,
Servises, Berberries.

4. By watery and mucilaginous Liquors; as Emulsions, Purslain, Lettuce-Waters.
By the cichoraceous Plants; Barley-Water, or Milk-Water, or Whey.

5. Opiates.

6. By Bleeding, Glysters, Vomiting, Purging in the beginning.

4. The Effervescence of the Blood must be raised, if depressed through
Weakness of Spirits, or multitude of corrupt Succus Nutritious, which stops the
Circulation.

The Bezoardics abovementioned excite a greater Effervescence.

5. The depraved Succus Nutritious must be precipitated from the Blood in the
beginning, or increase of the Fever, by Acids, Acerbs, Styptics, which are the
best Febrifuges: But the Salts, both volatile and fixed, best precipitate the
tartareous Parts of the Blood, separated by a long Effervescence at the end of
the Fever, and they separate it by Vrin or Sweats; but the Acids, Acerbs, and
Styptics, are good Precipitators of the viscid Salt, and oily Particles, which
promote the increase of the Fever.

6. The disturbed Crasis or Consistence of the Blood must be restored; that is,
some of the Succus Nutritious remixt with it into an equal Consistence, and that
by digestive Medicines, which partly precipitate the looser Particles, and
reunite the rest. Such are,

1. Bitter Acrids; as Theriaca, Rad. Serpent. Contrayerva.

2. Salso-Acids.

3. The Calces of Minerals, and testaceous Medicines.

4. Bitter Styptics; as the Cortex, which precipitates, as is evident in the
Vrin, by its Stypticity, and digests, unites, or assimilates the depraved
Succus Nutritious to the Mass of Blood, which, for want of a due Dose, separates
again from the Blood, and renews the Fever.

That the Succus Nutritious depraved is the ferment of a Fever, is evident,
because any Animal, Nutritious Humor depraved and suppressed, produces a Fever.

1. The Milk in the Breasts produces the Febris Lactea, which being repelled,
or putrefying in the Breasts, is the ferment of that Fever, and is to be
evacuated by a plentiful Sweat, or the Lochia.

2. The Suppression of the Lochia produces the purple Fever in Women, which
Langius calls, Pestis Sororum; and this must be cured by Restoring the
Evacuation; for the Lochia are here the ferment of the Fever; and by
Bezoardics, the putrid Blood must be exhaled.

3. The Suppression of the Menses, or seminal Matter, produces the Febris alba,
with Pain of the Head, Stomach, Back, and sudden Effervescences happen, with
Lassitude, Palpitation, Dyspnaea, and Inflation of the Hypochondria. This is to
be cured by restoring the Evacuation of those Humors which ferment the Blood.

4. The Suppression of Transpiration produces a Fever, with Rheumatic Pains,
and till that viscid Serum is cleansed by Vrin, or Sweat, that is the ferment
of a Fever.

A vinous or high Diet is often the occasion of Fevers, and in this Case the
depraved Chyle is the ferment.

Many of the colliquative Fevers are cured by Nature's Evacuation of the
depraved Succus Nutritious by Stools, Vomiting, Sweating, or Spitting, Bleeding;
and the reason of these different Evacuations, is, because the Succus Nutritious
is tinctured by some of the Humors, which ought to be secreted by the
secretory Glands for that Humor; as Choleric Vomits, or Diarrhaea's, are by
the Liver; Phlegmatic Evacuations by Salivation, or Pancreas; and critical
Evacuations of Blood by the Nose.

In Inflammations, the Fever preceding it depends on a viscid Succus
Nutritious, which being all evacuated on any particular part, the Fever abates,
which sufficiently intimates what was the ferment of that Fever.

A Hectic Fever is produced by the depraved Succus Nutritious, which, by reason
of the Viscidity and Saltness of the Blood, cannot be assimilated to the Mass,
but it becomes a febrile Ferment, and it is evacuated by Sweats, Vrin,
Spitting, and Looseness, and then the Hectic Fit is over, when the Succus
Nutritious, which is the ferment, is wholly spent.

The Matter of an Apostemum is the ferment of a Hectic; as in those of the
Liver, Lungs, Kidneys; and this Hectic cannot be cured, without curing the
Imposthume; but the former scorbutic Hectic must be cured by altering the
Viscidity and Saltness of the Blood, by frequent Bleeding, and diluting of it,
by Milk Diet, or the Chalybeate Waters, Decoction of the Woods, Emulsions,
distilled Waters, and leaving off fermented Liquors, Pectoral Decoctions, and
using a thin Diet, most apt to mix with viscid Blood.

When I had observed, that all sorts of Cacochymia's were joined with Fevers, I
could not omit this Discourse about Fevers, as not impertinent to my Design, of
describing the preternatural State of Humors. I will farther observe, that the
several Cacochymia's depend not on the Fever, as an effect of it, though that,
after some time, may produce some of them; as a viscid, salt, vitriolic or
putrid State of Humors: but the Fever finds the Cacochymia in the Blood, which
produces the Symptoms preceding the Paroxysm; as Pains, Coughs, Vomitings,
Gripes, Diarrhaea's, etc. Hence it appears, that the antecedent Cacochymia
depends on the same Causes, as at other times, when there is no Fever; but the
febrile Effervescence agitates the Cacochymia, and thereby produces the
Evacuations, or Inflammations, to which it pre-disposed the Patient. And these
Symptoms require the same Method of Cure, as at other times, but Care must be
taken because of the Complication with the Fever, that nothing may be done in
Cure of the Cacochymia, which may prejudice the general Cure of the Fever.

The Cacochymia alters the Nature of the Fever, for a pituitous, tartareous,
serous or flatulent Cacochymia depresses the feverish Ebullition too much; and
for these, the Old Authors rationally used Digestives in Fevers, to correct the
Cacochymia, and to raise the Fermentation, which is depressed by them, that the
Succus Nutritious may be more easily digested, or putrefied, and, at last, by a
Crisis separated from the Blood.

In a bilious, rancid, salt or putrid State of Blood, the Fever is generally
too acute, and (unless in the malignant Fever or Plague) must be depressed by
cool Alteratives, which are the Digestives or Precipitators in such Fevers; and
this seems to be a general Rule in Fevers, that as the general Cure of the
Fever must not increase the Cacochymia, so neither must the Cure of the
Cacochymia either too much irritate or depress the Fever; but by Bleeding,
Vomiting or Purging in the beginning, we abate the quantity of the Cacochymia,
and, by Digestives, dispose it for a Separation from the Blood, which, at
length, the Fever expells, with the depraved Succus Nutritious, or, at least,
prepares it for a Purgation afterward, which ought to respect the particular
Cacochymia's after the Fever, as well as before.

If we consider the various Causes of a Cacochymia abovementioned, we cannot
believe but every body is inclined to some one or other of them.

We have some particular degrees of Fermentation, by which our Humors are
prepared that arise to a particular quality, by which the Constitution is
called either pituitous, tartareous, flatulent, or serous, if they be too cool,
or else they are too hot, as the choleric, or scorbutic, salt, viscid,
vitriolic or putrid Constitutions of our Humors. We have some of these from
our Parents, and the Age, as it runs on, produces a various Temper of our
Humors. In Children, the Blood is like the Milk they feed on, apt to turn
sour; and for that reason, Vomitings, Gripes, and Loosenesses, attend their
Fevers, as well as Coughs, and sore Mouths, and comatous effects from the
Serosity of their Bloods.

In the Middle Age, the Blood is florid and salt, by which, they of that Age
are disposed to Haemorrhagies, and all sorts of Inflammations, Consumptions,
and the hot Scurvy, which are frequently complicated with Fevers in the Middle
of our Ages; as Pleurisies, Quinsies, Phrensies, Rheumatisms.

In the Consistent Age, the Blood grows vitriolic, and produces Dysenteries,
Cancers, Cholera's, Melancholic Winds, which, with Lethargies, Apoplexies,
Peripneumonia's, are frequently, at that Age, complicated with Fevers.

In Old Age, the feverish Ebullition runs low, and it is most easily stopped with
a smaller Dose of the Cortex; and since the Saltness, Viscidity, and vitriolic
Acidity, abounds in Old Men, as well as the pituitous and serous Cacochymia,
they have some of the Diseases depending on them; but especially Catarrhs, and
Atrophy, and Pains of the Limbs, are complicated with the Fevers of Old Men.

Particular Cacochymia's are not only produced by our several Ages, but also
the different Seasons of the Year incline us to different Cacochymia's.

The Winter disposes us to Rheums, Pains, and Coughs, which depend on too much
Serosity retained, or stopped in the Blood; and the Cold checks the Fermentation
of Blood, as well as other fermented Liquors, which hinders the thorough
Digestion or Fermentation of Humors; from hence it appears, that Winter Fevers
have Coughs, Rheums, Pains, and greater Coldness attending them, and are longer.

The sudden Alterations of Hot and Cold produces a Siziness of Blood, and makes
the Spring attended with Pleurisies; Rheumatisms, Apoplexies, Lethargies, and
intermitting Fevers, have then such Symptoms.

Cold is not so Injurious as the Moisture of the Air, which makes the
Transpiration less, and the pressure of the Air also less; and, for this
reason, Fevers frequently happen in wet Weather, with Looseness, Heaviness of
the Senses, and many inward Inflammations; as Apoplexies, Quinsies, Epilepsies.

In the Spring far advanced the Blood becomes more heated, and choleric, and
then Tertians and Erisipela's are complicated with the Fever and Haemorrhagies.

In the Summer, the Blood is more rancid, salt, viscid, and hot, and produces
the highest burning Fevers, with Vomiting, Diarrhaea's, and Inflammations, and
sore Eyes.

In Autumn, the Blood is most vitriolic, on which, Quartans, Melancholies,
Dysenteries and Epilepsies much depend on.

This is the chief Season for the intermitting Fever, with which the preceding
Diseases are frequently complicated.

Since the late severe, cold Winter, it has been observed, that the Blood has
been more sizie than usual; and it is not improbable that such a Cacochymia,
may last some Years in the Blood of all Persons, which may, upon the Fit of a
Fever, produce the Rheumatic Pains, and Inflammations lately observed in
Fevers. It seems probable, that after some time this State of Blood may be
altered to another of a different kind, as a putrid, and then we must expect a
pestilential Fever. If there be a common Epidemical State, or Cacochymia of
Humors, (which the common Changes of the Air, or the Seasons of the Year, or
the particular Digestion of our Diet, or some secret Effluviums of the Earth,
or Mineral Tinctures in our Water, may produce) as we must observe by some
common Distemper, which seizes many every Year; we may very well allow, that
the same Cacochymia, which produces the Epidemical Disease every Year, should
also occasion some particular Symptoms in the intermitting, stationary Fever,
not unlike the Nature of the Epidemical Disease, as if that were complicated
with the Fever; so we may observe, that Rheumatisms have been frequent of late,
and all our Fevers have Rheumatic Stitches very much.

It seems very probable, since the Plague visits us once in about Forty Years,
which depends on a putrid State of Humors, that all the other Cacochymia's,
which produce the several different kinds of Fevers, have also some kind of
Revolution, in which they return also; and when it is mucilaginous, the Fever
is like a Quotidian; when tartareous, it has Cholical Symptoms; when serous, it
is a Catarrhal Fever; when flatulent, a vertiginous Fever, with Windiness in
the primae viae, and Running Pains: but if the Cacochymia be Choleric, a
Tertian is produced; if rancid, oily, a scorbutic Fever; if viscid, Rheumatic
Pains; if vitriolic, Quartans are produced. These several Cacochymia's, and
their Epidemical Disease, and stationary Fever, both depending on the same, may
be observed every Year; and by keeping an exact Account, we shall, in time,
find what Cacochymiae and Fevers succeed each other, and in what periods we may
expect their returns, though, it is probable, we shall never discover the
general Causes which introduce the several Cacochymia's, upon which all
Epidemical Diseases depend.

APPENDIX II.
An Introductory Discourse to the Treatise of the Asthma; containing an
Explication of the old Notion of the Defluxions of Humors, whereby the Asthma,
and diverse other Chronical Diseases, are produced.

ALL the Diseases which depend on a sudden preternatural Motion, or Flux of
Humors, are produced either by an intermitting Fever, or an Ephemera.

That most Diseases may be Symptoms of Fevers, does sufficiently appear to a
diligent Observer of the Phenomenon of Fevers, and they are described in the
Books of our Modern Writers.

The particular Cacochymia in our Humors cannot produce the Symptoms of
Fevers, without being rarefied, impelled, or transmitted by Defluxion on some
particular Part; and the Occasion of this Flux, the Ancients imputed to the
Intemperies of some Parts, which was the terminus a quo, as the Head or Liver;
but the true Cause of the Defluxion is an Effervescence in the Blood, and the
terminus a quo is the Blood it self. The Vessels through which the Flux is
carried, are, the Veins, Arteries, Lymphatics, and Nerves, and several
excretory Glands. The terminus ad quem, is the Part affected with sudden Pains;
as in Rheumatisms, or in sudden Inflammations; as in Pleurisies, Quinsies,
Peripneumonia, etc. or sudden Evacuations of the serous, nutritious Humors, in
Vomitings, Diarrhaea's, Coughs, Sweats, Diabetes, etc. or else by
Haemorrhagies; as Haemoptoe, Fluxus Mensium; and most of the Nervous Distempers
(like those of other Glands) depend on the Admission or Propulsion of
cacochymical Serum into the Nerves; as in Apoplexies, Lethargies, Carus,
Epilepsies, Convulsions, Vertigo, Asthma, Palsies, Tympanies.

All Tumors which rise suddenly depend on the Defluxion of Humors on that
part in which they stagnate; as Buboes, Erysipela's, Herpes, etc.

All the preceding Diseases are frequently the Symptoms of an intermitting
Fever, occasioned by the Fevers agitating, or impelling a particular Cacochymia
upon some Part. If this Cacochymia, which disposed the Blood to that particular
Symptom, be evacuated, or altered by the Fever, none of those Symptoms remain;
but when the Fever is too soon suppressed, those Symptoms become periodic,
chronical Diseases, or at least Anniversary, as appears in the Asthma,
Hemicrania, and other Pains, Inflammations, Convulsions, or Evacuations, which
have periodic Fits; or, at least, return upon the Changes of the Year, or when
any external Causes, or hot Medicines, occasion an Effervescence in the Blood:
Then the Symptoms of the former Fever appear; and the Cure of the Defluxions,
depending on a suppressed intermitting Fever, is as follows;

1. We must evacuate the particular Cacochymia by Vomits and Purges; and
afterward it is to be corrected by its particular Specific Tastes, which must
either raise or depress the natural Fermentation of Humors.

2. The Disposition to a Fermentation must be stopped by a Febrifuge, as the
Cortex, for that precipitates by its Stypticity, and re-assimilates, by its
Bitterness, the depraved Nutritious Serum, which is the immediate Ferment of
intermitting Fevers.

A simple Ebullition of Blood, such as happens in Ephemera's, is sufficient to
produce many Defluxions. of Humors, in which there appears no Putrefaction of
the Succus Nutritious, as in putrid intermitting Fevers, which we discern to be
putrid by a Precipitation of a high-colored, thick Sediment in the Vrin,
(which is of a Brick Color, like Blood calcined, as Mr. Boil observed) and we
call the Fever unputrid, when the Vrin is always pale, as in Ephemera's,
without the former Sediment.

When only an Ebullition happens in a cacochymical Blood, the Mass is only
agitated or rarefied, (in which is contained the serous, salt Lympha, the Chyle
and its Lympha, and the whole Succus Nutritious of an Animal). This chylous or
serous Mixture being lately fermented in the Stomach, is, of all the Mass, most
readily fermented or rarefied; and, again, this serous, nutritious Mass is more
readily circulated into the Cutaneous, or remotest Parts of the Body, than that
sanguineous or red Mass of the Blood, or, at least, more easily secreted
through the Glands and Lymphatics. This is the more immediate subject of an
Ephemera, or rather an immediate Ferment, or occasion of it, when it is an
irritated Ebullition by inward Causes; as the Fullness, or Acrimony, of the
Cacochymia, or depend on the abuse of the Six Non-Naturals. This nutritious
Serum is not colliquated by the Fever, as Authors affirm, (liquatur and
funditur) for that is only the effect of a pestilential Putrefaction; and the
Serum, by a violent Effervescence in an intermitting Fever, becomes more
viscid, and thick, which disposes it to precipitate, and putrefie; whereas, in
an Ephemera, the gentle Heat can only occasion an Effervescence, as to rarefie
the nutritious Serum, and drive it through the several Strainers of the Glands,
which are appointed for the several Cacochymia's, with which it is saturated.

The Signs of these Chronical Defluxions, depending on an Ephemera, are, pale
Water, like the Healthful at first, a gentle Heat, a general Lassitude, such as
is observed in wet Weather, Heaviness in the Head, and an Inclination to Sleep,
and great quantity of Water.

This Effervescence depends on the general Changes of the Year. The Alteration
of the Weather then produces irregular Fermentations in our Bloods, as it does
Ebullitions in Wines, and all other fermented Liquors; and also the Changes of
the Weather at other times, when Rains succeed fair Weather, or the East or
North Wind blows after warm Weather, which causes the same Ebullition, both in
Wines and Blood; for by these, the Pressure of the Air is altered, the
Transpiration of our Bodies is stopped, and the different degrees of Heat and
Cold expand or check the Rarefaction of our Spirits, by which our Bloods, as
well as all other fermented Liquors, are agitated, depurated, digested, or
changed; and on these external Causes the sudden Effervescence of our Humors
immediately depends; to which, the Plenitude of Humors, or their vicious
qualities, disorderly, hot Diet, too much Exercise, Passions, or other
Accidents, very much conduce, which also produce Ephemera's.

Those Parts of the Body are most usually affected with the Flux of Humors,
through which vicious Humors ought to be evacuated, or to which the vitiated
Succus Nutritious can most easily circulate, or where its Motion is most easily
stopped, or most frequently, or the Tone of a Part vitiated by former Distempers.

Though the Occasion of the Effervescences, on which the Defluxion depends, be
external for the most part, yet there is an inward Disposition in the Blood to
an Inflammation, which makes the Blood apt to impell its cacochymical Humors
upon some Part. The several Species of these Defluxions I will enumerate,
according to the Number of the several Cacochymia's, (which I have described in
another Discourse of them) and their Complication with Intermitting or Ephemera
Fevers.

First, If the Blood, abounding with a pituitous Cacochymia, effervesces, as in
an Ephemera, it depurates its self from some of the Lacteal Lympha through the
Glands of the Mouth, or Lungs, and, by that Flux, produces a Catarrh, or much
Coughing, or Spitting, which is always complicated either with an intermitting
Fever, or an Ephemera, which resembles the Effervescence in Beer or Wine,
whereby they clear themselves of Barm or Lees.

I have observed a Chin-Cough, complicated with an intermitting Fever, which
was cured by the Cortex after general Evacuations.

If the pituitous Cacochymia be transmitted to the Stomach, it produces
Nauseousness, want of Appetite, a pituitous Diarrhaea, and Cholics.

If it is evacuated into the Trachaea, or stagnates in the Vesiculae of the
Lungs, it produces a Dyspnaea, as in the Cachexies of Virgins; in whom also it
produces a Paleness in the Skin, and frequently oedematous Tumors, when the
Pituita suffers a Flux, according to the Notion of the Ancients; that is, when
it is suddenly evacuated through the conglomerate Glands, or impelled on some
particular Part where it stagnates.

Secondly, If an Ephemera be raised in a tartareous, acid Constitution, on a
sudden, corrosive Pains are produced on the Membranes, with Fluxes of the
Lacteal Lympha; as in Pains of the Teeth, and Head; or else Gripes, or Pains in
the Stomach, are produced.

When the Blood, or Chyle, and Lacteal Lympha, are tinctured with an acid
Cacochymia (whose chief vehicle they be) upon any accidental Effervescence, the
viscid Parts of the Serum, or sanguineous Mass, may be precipitated by their
own Acidity, (like Milk which is very salt, and turns into Posset by boiling);
and such kind of Coagulations seem to happen in Rheums, Fluxes of Vrin,
Dysenteria alba, or in scorbutic and melancholic Salivations, or Sweats, or
Diarrhaea's.

Thirdly, If an Ephemera be produced by any external Cause in a flatulent
Cacochymia, the Blood is tumultuously moved with sudden Effervescences, and a
crude or acid Windiness distends the Hypochondria, as appears by a Ructus of
the same Nature, Wandering Pains may be observed in the Limbs, Noise in the
Ears, Vertigo in the Head; such are the Disorders which happen in Hypochondriac
and Hysterical Persons, upon the least Occasion, which excites an Effervescence
in their Bloods.

A remarkable Instance of Windiness, complicated with an Effervescence, may be
observed in a Priapism, which always happens by the Heat of the Bed, by which
the Flux of windy Spirits is made into the Penis; for such Patients usually
complain of Noise in their Ears, of nubming Pains in the Hands and Arms in
their Sleep, and their Sides, which goes off with a prickling and tingling Pain
upon Waking; and as the Erection subsides, a Noise is heard in the Belly, and
Wind breaks forth in a Crepitus, and a Deadness or Numbness remains in the
Part, as well as many other Parts of the Body.

Fourthly, If the Serous Cacochymia be agitated by an Ephemera, Tumors happen
in the Limbs suddenly, which are pure, watery, hydropical Tumors, or else the
Serum is suddenly evacuated into the Cavities of the Head, Breast, Belly,
Scrotum, or Testicles of Women, of which, Cases are mentioned by the Ingenious
Carolus Piso, de Morbis a serosa colluvie; but he seems mistaken in this
Description of the Serum, as if it were only Aqua pura puta, because the Serum
contains the nutritious, fibrous or caseous Parts of the Chyle, as well as its
watery Elements. Piso mentions an Hydrocephalos which returned by Fits, and
that cannot but depend on an Effervescence in the Blood; it was cured by him by
Purges, and a Lixivium to wash the Head.

He also relates a Case of Sleepiness, with Pains on the Head, depending on a
serous Blood; and that increased toward Night, which was cured by an actual
Cautery applied to the hinder part of the Head.

He mentions a Carus, with a Fever depending on the Serum passing the Brain, to
which Children are most subject; this was purged off the Ninth Day; and he
believes Nocturnal Convulsions to depend on the Serum impelled into the Nerves.

The conglobate Glands, designed for the Passage of the Serum, are frequently
swelled by an Effervescence depurating or impelling the Serum; and when the
Vrin, which ought to be transcolated from the Serum by the Kidneys, is
suppressed, a Sleepiness seizes the Head, or gripes the Belly from the Serum
translated to that Part.

The great Quantity of Serum is usually imputed either to the Quantity of
serous Diet, or the Retention of its Evacuation.

Fifthly, An Ephemera in a bilious State of Blood occasions the Jaundices, by a
sudden Translation of the bilious Serum into the Skin, or else it is evacuated
into the Stomach in a Cholera, or the Intestines in a Diarrhaea.

If the Serum be both viscid and bilious, it produces an Erysipelas with a
Fever.

Piso describes an Hemicrania, which returns upon the Changes of the Year, and
Alterations of the Weather, to wet, with Vomiting of bilious Serum, Inclination
to Sleep, and Convulsive Pains in the Belly, and the Pains in the Head preceed
those in the Belly; the Pulse and Thirst show the Fever; and he concludes,
sudores sunt remedium Hemicraniae, prophylacticum, and praecipuum, and seri
evacuatione, curatur. An exquisite drying Diet, and an Oxyrrhodine applied to
the Head helps much.

Sixthly, In a scorbutic, salt Blood, a simple Effervescence produces the
scorbutic Spots, or Blisters in the Skin, which suddenly appear, and subside
again, and all other scorbutic Pains depend on a sudden Effervescence, which
make the Vrin high-colored.

In a salt Blood this simple Effervescence, usually called an Ephemera,
produces diverse Pains and Inflammations; as the Toothache, Ophthalmia, Otalgia,
Gout, nephritic Pains, (which usually happen in Autumn) and a Fever usually
goes along with all Pains, which excite symptomatic Fevers, and that is always
referred to the Class of Ephemera's.

If the salt Serum be inclinable to stony or sandy Coagulations, an
Effervescence of the Blood, tinged with that Humor, produces the Gout, and
stone Fits. This Effervescence preceeds the Gout some Days, with a Lassitude in
the Limbs, and Heaviness of the Body, and a preternatural Heat, Watching,
Thirst, Nauseousness, and a Dryness on the Tongue. This Effervescence or Fever
lasts usually 30 or 40 Days, which is the common Term of great Fluxes and acute
Fevers. This Fever has Exacerbations toward Night, and remits in the Morning;
but the Ingenious Piso thinks it to be Febris imputris, synocha legitima,
potius quam putris, quae dolores arthriticos comitatur.

The Effervescence in the Blood of Gouty Persons forces the salt Serum upon the
nervous Parts of the Joints, through their Glands, whereby the acute Pains of
the Gout are produced, and the convulsive Cramps preceding the Fit. The Water
is pale in the beginning, and afterward high-colored, with thick Sediment.

The Fit of the Gout is cured as usual. Fluxes depending on an Ephemera, by
Bleeding once or twice, by Glysters, and Opiates, and by a thin, spare Diet for
the three first Days, or a perfect Abstinence; but afterward Water Gruel,
Chicken-Broth, Sack-Posset-Drink: After a Week, when the Fever and Pain
decline, which will appear by the Vrin. Purging agrees well, by some Lenitive;
as Decoct. Senae. An Anodyne Poultess at first must be laid to the Part, and
afterward Discutients and Nervines are necessary.

For the Preventing the Fit, frequent Vomitings once in a Month, Purging with
Rhubarb three Days before the Full and Change of the Moon, and three Days after
them. A spare Diet, and Abstinence from all strong Liquors, with moderate
Exercise, are absolutely necessary.

All hot Arthritics are Injurious in the Fit; as Theriaca, Sp. C. cervini,
Guaicum: And it is a general Error of Practisers, to prescribe hot Specifics
during the Effervescence, which occasions a Defluxion; but they are more
properly used in the Intervals of the Fit, to correct the Cacochymia; and we
find too long use of them occasions a new Effervescence and Defluxion. Bitters
help the Digestion of the Arthritic; and Drinking Bath-Waters cures the
Saltness of their Bloods, or else Asses Milk alters the Saltness.

Seventhly, If the Serum be both salt and viscid, and by any Accident
effervesces, Haemorrhagies are produced at the Nose, Lungs, Arms, Womb, which
are accompanied with a feverish Effervescence. And we may observe, that
Bleeding, the Cortex, Opiates, and cool antiscorbutic Juyces, and Abstinence
from fermenting, Liquors, by abating the Fever, cure more successfully than any
Styptics whatsoever.

If the Effervescence be in a viscid Blood only, it produces Rheumatisms, Pains
of the Hips, Shoulders, Loins, Knees, Head, as in the Hemicrania; but that of
the Muscles generally is called a Rheumatism; but if it fall inwardly, it is a
Pleurisy, or Peripneumonia when it affects the middle Region; if on the
Kidneys, it makes a Nephritis; if on the Brain, externally a Lethargy, or more
internally an Apoplexy on the Nerves, a Paralysis on the Guts, a Cholic, on the
Eyes Ophthalmia, etc. In all the forementioned Cases there is an Effervescence
preceding the Pains and Inflammations, as appears by the Chillness and
Shivering which first seizes them in the beginning of those Diseases, which
soon are succeeded by burning Heats, high-colored Water, and quick Pulse.

Eighthly, A febrile Effervescence in a melancholic or vitriolic State of
Blood, is the Occasion of the following Diseases.

1. Hot Pains, and Windiness in the Stomach and Guts, from a hot Windiness.

2. Pains in the Spleen, and Sides, and Limbs, from a windy Spirit.

3. In the Nerves the windy Spirits produce Palpitations of the Heart, want of
Sleep, Sinking of the Spirits, and diverse kind of Convulsions; as Hysteric
Fits, Epilepsies, and all the Inflations of the Nervous Parts; in the Asthma,
Tympany, Ephialtes, Priapismus. All which depend on a simple Ebullition of
Humors.

The immediate Cause of the Asthma, is the Constriction of the Trachaea, or
Bronchia, which streightens the Passage of the Air, and produces the Wheezing;
and the Vesiculae of the Lungs being also contracted, a laborious Inspiration
is necessary to force the Air into the Lungs.

There being no Tumor, Inflammation, or Pain, in the respiratory Muscles, they
cannot occasion the Asthma; but in pure convulsive Cases, in which they often
produce a Dyspnaea.

The Fit of the Asthma happens suddenly, through the Effervescence of Blood,
occasioned by external Causes, which separate the Lympha Lactea from the Blood,
and that stops in the swelled Glands of the Lungs, and is at length evacuated
into the Trachea. In the spitting Asthma, and in the Hysteric, the Serum of the
Blood seems to be forced into the Nerves by this Effervescence; or into the
Lymphatics of the Lungs, where, by Stagnation, it may irritate the Fit.

Though the Water be pale, and the Pulse low, and the Extremities cold, yet the
Asthmatic Fever is evident, for they have an inward Sense of Heat, and great
Restlessness of Spirits in the Fit. Caelius Aurelianus observes, in his
Description of the Asthma, the Ferver Igneus, and a Color Morbidus, though the
Asthma is not always joined with a Fever. I have observed the Asthma,
frequently joined with an Inflammation of the Lungs, or intermitting Fever, and
at all other times with an Ephemera, which appears by the general Lassitude,
Oppression of the Breast and Head, want of Sleep, Thirst, and those Causes
which excite an Ephemera, produce the Asthma; as extreme Heat or Cold, the
Dog Days Heat, in which Wines are apt to ferment; and whatsoever produces an
inflammatory Disposition in the Blood, produces the Asthma; as high Diet,
strong Wines, all hot Pectorals, or Digestives, or anti-Convulsive Medicines,
Steel, or strong Purges; hot Diaphoretics, or Febrifuges, which, by exciting an
Effervescence, increase, and produce the Asthma, and cannot cure it: But
whatsoever cures the Ephemera, cures also the Asthma Fit; as Bleeding,
Clysters, Opiates, cool Pectorals, with Ol. Sulphuris, Sal Prunell. Gas
Sulphuris, Milk-Waters, thin Emulsions, Ptysans. For the Preventing a new Fit,
these Two Indications must be respected.

1. To cure the mucilaginous, serous and flatulent Cacochymia by Vomits,
Purgers, and Digestives of specific Tastes, contrary to the mentioned
Cacochymia's; as Alteratives, or Diuretics, or Sudorifics, as Decoction of the
Woods.

2. To prevent the sudden Effervescence of the Blood, by avoiding Fullness, and
Variety of Meats, and all strong, fermented Liquors, which produce frequent
Effervescences of our Humors; and to remember Piso's Caution, Parcissime
Bibendum; for after Drinking our Horses are most Asthmatic; and for Avoiding
the Watering of them, we wet their Hay.

Those cool Febrifuges, which cure the Effervescence in the Fit, seem proper to
prevent the Return; but we must not always rely on the Cortex, for that does
not succeed so well in the Spitting, as hysteric Asthma; but, in many Cases, a
Draught of fair Water with a Toast, or a Draught of Pectoral Drink with Gas
Sulphuris, three Days before the New and Full Moon, and three Days after them,
may be given in the Morning to prevent the Fit.

Sarsa Drink and Lucatellus's Balsam best cleanse the Lungs in the spitting
Asthma after the Fit.

If an Inflammation of the Lungs be joined with the Asthma Fit, Bleed three or
four times, give Emulsions, Pectoral Drinks, Oily Mixtures, and Laudanum, and a
Decoction of the Cortex, which may be mixed with that of the Pectoral Drink;
and Gas Sulphuris a Spoonful may be given in a Draught of Pectoral Drink to
cool. After fourteen Days Purge with Decoct. Senae and Manna; after which
repeat the Laudanum and Cortex again; and, at last, for Cleansing the Lungs,
Lucatellus's Balsam, and Decoct. Sarsae; and this Method I have found very
successful.

All other Asthma's depending on the Tubercula of the Lungs, or Collection of
Matter, Serum, Blood in them, or the Cavities of the Breast, as also that on
the Gibbosities, or ill Formation of the Thorax in the Rickets, or Tumors of
the Viscera, are improperly called Asthma's.

Though they produce an Ephemera by Stopping the Nutritious Serum in its
Circulation, yet they have an evident Cause which requires to be removed before
they can be cured.

Children subject to Rheums, with scabbed Heads, if that be ill cured or
repelled, they become Asthmatic, with Returning Fits about the Solstices and
Aequinoctials. In this Case all the Methods for Scald Heads must be used; as
Decoct. Sarsae, Mercu. Dulcis, Bath-Waters, Sulphur Medicines, Vitriolic
Waters; but these generally dis-agree with the Asthmatic; and by giving them a
Catarrh, produce the Fit; and much Drinking of Fountain Water produces Dropsies
in the Lungs, to which they are subject.

Ammoniacum Medicines, used to some Ounces, much help the Viscidity of a
mucilaginous Slime in the Lungs; but that, and the Cortex, has failed me, when
the Blood, by an accident, as the Use of the Bath, is made more than ordinary
prone to an Effervescence; and all high Diet and strong Liquors make all
Specifics ineffectual, till the Aptitude to an Effervescence be taken off by
Bleeding, Vomiting, Purging, or, above all, by a cool, thin Diet, and
Abstaining from fermented Liquors, by which Method, my Asthma has intermitted
three or four Months, which before was rather irritated by all other Medicines
this Winter.

The Anointing the Breast, and keeping it hot, or rubbing it, and
Cupping-Glasses, and all hot Medicines, were the Errors of the Ancients; but,
as the Fit declines, the Pectorals are necessary to deterge the Phlegm; and the
Drymphagia, which Caelius Aurelianus mentions, is very proper to help
Expectoration. He commends Acetum Scylliticum before Meat, and Nitre with
Vinegar, Decoction of Hyssop and Figs, Pine-Nuts with Mulsum, Turpentine with
Honey or Nettle-Seeds, or Cress-Seeds with Honey or bitter Almonds.

He recommends Traveling or Navigation, the Drinking Bath-Waters. In Italy
they use Theriacae Antidoti. And he also recommends the cold Immersion, Vtilis
consuetudo frigidi lavacri, quam Pseucrolusian appellant. He mentions
Cataclysmus sive illisio aquarum superne iisdem locis, qui patiuntur. But
though the Pumping of the Breast may give the scorbutic or hypochondriac
Symptoms some Ease, yet they rather do Injury for the future. He orders the
Asthmatic, Jacere altioribus stramentis, thorace and capite sublevato, loco
lucido atque calido mediocriter. Adhibita requie and abstinentia cibi usque ad
tertium diem si vires permiserint. He dislikes strong Purges of Diagrydium, and
the Spurges. He mentions Castor to be used in and out of the Fits, which
probably they used for the hysteric Asthma; but that, I fear, cannot cure them
without Laudanum, and the Cortex.

I believe the Old Oxymels, with proper Evacuations, have cured more Asthma's
than the Moderns, by their anti-Convulsives; for the Notion of the Asthma,
being a Defluxion of Humors, when clearly stated, gives very true and useful
Indications; whereas the Convulsive Inflations are Symptoms of the
Effervescence only; and all the Medicines designed for the Cure of the
Convulsive Symptoms, by increasing the Effervescence, occasion more frequent
Fits of the Asthma, and cure none.

Ninthly, An Ephemera, in a putrid State of Blood, produces the Impetigo, Scab,
Scald Head, which are, by an Effervescence, thrown into the Skin Spring and
Fall, as common Experience informs us.

The Cure of the simple Effervescence, which is generally called an Ephemera,
though it sometimes lasts Thirty or Forty Days, is in the following manner.

I. By Bleeding: for Vessels full of Liquors are most apt to ferment; and,
therefore, upon the Fermenting of Wines, we draw off some of the Liquor; and
for Preventing the Ebullitions, some part of the Vessels is left empty; and the
same effect Bleeding has, which is done in proportion to the Fullness, and by
that we check Fluxes, Pains, Inflammations, which depend on the Ebullition of
our Humors.

II. By Glysters: at first the fermenting Mass in the Guts is drawn off, which
resembles the Lees in Wines, that occasion frequent Fermentations.

III. Specific Purges, (after seven, eight, nine or fourteen Days) when the
Ebullition remits, are necessary to evacuate the Fullness of some particular
Cacochymia.

IV. All Diuretics ought to be cool; as Decoct. Pectoral, Rad. Graminis,
Cichorei, Liquiritiae, Decoct. Sarsae, Chinae, Ras. Eboris, C. cervini,
Emulsions.

All hot Specifics irritate the Fever.

V. Ante-febrile Medicines check the Ebullition. As,

1. Styptics, which hinder the Ebullition of Blood, as well as the Fluxes of
Humors. Decoct. Corticis mixed with any specific Decoctions. The Powder of
Acorns allays the Pains and Inflammations in Pleurisies.

2. Acids, Ol. Sulph. cum Conserv. Ros. Gas Sulphuris, Sal Prunell. in Pectoral
Drinks.

3. Opiates, which suppress the expanded Spirits, that produce the Nervous
Inflations.

VI. All Pains must be treated with Anodynes, and Tumors discussed, and Fluxes
stopped by proper Specifics.

VII. The Diet must be thin, such as is in Fevers; or perfect Abstinence for
one or two Days is very necessary to cure the Effervescence.

For the Preventing the return of these Effervescences.

1. The Cacochymia must be evacuated by Vomits repeated Monthly, or Quarterly;
by Purges once in fourteen Days, and an Opiate the Night after; by Bleeding
Spring and Fall; by a long use of Specifics, for the several Cacochymiae: And
moderate Exercise, and a cooling, spare Diet, is necessary to prevent that
Fullness of the Succus Nutritious which produces the Ebullition in Chronical
Cases.

2. The inflammatory Disposition of the Blood, and its Effervescence, must be
checked by the cool Febrifuges abovementioned; by the Decoction of the Cortex
at the Changes of the Year; or that of the Moon, when the Fluxes or Fits
usually happen; or Gas Sulphuris for three Days before and after the Changes of
the Moon, when the Alterations commonly happen in the Weather, which excites
the Effervescence, and especially in the extreme hot Time of the Dog Days, when
Wines are most apt to ferment, and when the intermitting Fevers begin; and, by
the Observation of all Asthmatics, that is the worst time of the Year for the
Asthma.

The inflammatory Disposition of the Blood is best cured by the cool Juyces of
Herbs; as Dandelion, Brooklime, Sorrel, Watercresses, Milk-Waters,
Sarsa-Drinks, Whey, Milk and Water, Abstaining from Malt Drinks, or by the
cold Immersion.

3. The Tumor of any Part, or the Obstruction in its Vessels, or the Weakness
of its Tone, must be cured, that it may become less subject to Defluxions.

4. All external Accidents must be avoided, which may excite an Ephemera; but
chiefly hot Diet, strong Drinks, and Tobacco; and, if possible, all fermented
Liquors, and full Meals, and Changes of Weather.

FINIS.

