A DECLARATION From his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, and his Council of
WAR: Concerning their proceedings in the proposalls prepared and agreed on by
the Council of the Army, to be tendered to the Commissioners of Parliament
residing in the Army, and with them to be treated on by the Commissioners of
the Army: Together with The heads of the said Proposalls, containing the
particulars of their desires, in pursuance of their former Declarations and
Papers, in order to the clearing and securing of the Rights and Liberties of
the Kingdom, and the settling of a just and lasting Peace.

To which are added, Some further particular desires, for the removing and
redressing of diverse present pressing grievances, being also comprised in, or
in necessary pursuance of their former Representations and Papers appointed to
be treated on.

Printed at CAMBRIDGE: Anno Dom. 1647.

A Declaration from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and his Council of
War: Concerning the proposals of the Army for settling of a Peace, and the
grounds of publishing the heads thereof.
SInce our drawing back to Reading, we have applied our selves with all
diligence to frame and hasten an entire body of all the particular Proposals
which we would tender to the Commissioners of Parliament residing with the
Army, to be treated on in pursuance of those general desires expressed in our
former Declarations, and Papers, for securing of the common rights and
liberties, and a present settling of the peace of the Kingdom. In which
business (notwithstanding the many interruptions and disturbances, with daily
advertisements of the indirect and treacherous practices and preparations of
the Committee of Militia, and others, in and about the city of London, and
elsewhere, tending to a new war, have occasioned to the diverting or
retarding of our proceedings therein, yet) we have made a progress, as speedy
as the nature and weight of such a work would admit, and having finished the
same, we have delivered in an abstract of the heads thereof unto the said
Commissioners of Parliament to be treated upon. But the late pernicious
engagement set on foot in the City; and (much more) that prodigious violence
done to both Houses of Parliament on Monday last, having wholly taken us off for
present, and rendered all proceeding in the way of Treaty thereupon, merely vain
and hopeless, until it shall please God the Parliament be righted and
vindicated against that violation done to it, and restored to a condition of
freedom, so as unquestioned Members of it may repair together, with safety,
and proceed according to their just freedom. We have thought good in the mean
time, to make this public tender of the heads of the said Proposals to the
consideration of the whole Kingdom, wherein though all circumstances requisite
to be determined in an actual settlement, be not so fully and perfectly
expressed, as upon the Treaty intended, (if not interrupted as before) they
might speedily have been; yet all men may see and understand in these, the
effect and bottom of our desires, whereupon we have sincerely studied that a
present Peace might be settled, which same thing (with and after such
vindication of the Parliament as may again render it into a capacity to
establish the same) we shall still faithfully endeavor to the utmost of our
power, and accordingly shall expect the cheerful and hearty concurrence of all
those, who are or shall be satisfied, concerning the integrity of our
intentions to the peace and welfare of the Kingdom in these our proposals; or
who shall (for the main) desire or approve of the same things with us, in order
to a settlement.

And to these Proposals which we here first tender, as necessary to a peace,
and upon which we desire the seal of Peace (in the restitution of his Majesty
and others to their rights, and in an Act of oblivion to be past) we cannot but
add the further expression of our desires in some other particulars, which
(though not so essential to peace, as necessary to precede to the settling of
it, yet) being matters of very public, and (most of them) of general
grievance to the Kingdom (which we every where find the outcryes of) and being
contained in, or pursuant of the same things expressed in our former
Representation and papers, We shall desire that the Parliament being set free,
no time may be lost for a speedy consideration of them, so as the former things
for a present settling of Peace be not delayed thereby.

Colebrook, AUGUST 2. 1647. By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, and the Council of War. Signed, Jo. Rushworth.

The Heads of the Proposals, agreed upon By his Excellency Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX
and the Council of the Army, To be tendered to the Commissioners of Parliament
residing in the Army, and with them to be treated on by the Commissioners of
the Army.
Containing, The Particulars of their desires in pursuance of their former
Declarations and Papers, in order to the clearing and securing of the Rights
and Liberties of the Kingdom and the settling of a just and lasting Peace. To
which are added some further particular Desires (for the removing and
redressing of diverse present pressing grievances) being also comprised in, or
in necessary pursuance of their former Representations and Papers appointed to
be treated upon.
I. THat (the things hereafter proposed being provided for by this Parliament)
a certain period may by act of Parliament be set for the ending of this
Parliament: (such period to be within a year at most) and in the same Act,
provision to be made for the succession and constitution of Parliaments in
future, as follows:

1. That Parliaments may Biennially be called and meet at a certain day, with
such provision for the certainty thereof, as in the late act was made for the
Trienniall Parliaments. And what further or other provision shall be found need
full by the Parliament, to reduce it to more certainty. And upon the passing of
this the said Act for Trienniall Parliaments to be repealed.

2. Each Bienniall Parliament to sit an hundred and twenty days certain
(unless adjourned or dissolved sooner by their own consent) afterward to be
adjournable or dissolvable by the King, and no Parliament to sit past 240.
days from their first meeting, or some other limited number of days now to be
agreed on, upon the expiration whereof, each Parliament to dissolve of course
if not otherwise dissolved sooner.

3. The King upon advise of the Council of State, in the intervalls betwixt
Bienniall Parliaments, to call a Parliament extraordinary, provided it meet
above 70. days before the next Bienniall day, and be dissolved at least 60.
days before the same, so as the course of Bienniall elections may never be
interrupted.

4. That this Parliament and each succeeding Bienniall Parliament at or before
the adjournment or dissolution thereof may appoint Committees to continue
during the intervalls for such purposes as are in any of these proposalls
referred unto such Committees.

5. That the Elections of the Commons for the succeeding Parliaments may be
distributed to all Counties or other parts or divisions of the Kingdom,
according to some rule of equality or proportion: so as all Counties may have a
number of Parliament members allowed to their choice proportionable to the
respective rates they bear in the common charges and burdens of the Kingdom,
or according to some other rule of equality or proportion, to render the house
of Commons (as near as may be) an equal representative of the whole: And in
order thereto, that a present consideration be had to take off the elections of
Burgesses for poor decayed or inconsiderable Towns, and to give some present
addition to the number of Parliament members of great Counties that have now
less then their due proportion, to bring all (at present) as near as may be to
such rule of proportion as aforesaid.

6. That effectual provision be made for future freedom of Elections and
certainty of due returns.

7. That the house of Commons alone have the power from time to time to set
down further orders and rules for the ends expressed in the two last precedent
Articles so as to reduce the elections of members for that House to more and
more perfection of equality in the distribution, freedom in the Election,
order in the proceeding thereto, and certainty in the returns; which orders and
rules (in that case) to be as Laws.

8. That there be a Liberty for entering dissents in the house of Commons, with
provision that no member be censurable for ought said or voted in the House
further then to exclusion from that trust and that only by the Judgment of
the house it self.

9. That the Judicial power or power of final Judgment in the Lords and
Commons (and their power of exposition and application of Law without further
appeal) may be cleared. And that no Officer of Justice, Minister of State, or
other person adjudged by them may be capable of protection or pardon from the
King without their advise and consent.

10. That the rights and the liberties of the Commons of England may be cleared
and vindicated as to a due exemption from any Judgment, Trial, or other
proceeding against them by the House of Peers without the concurring judgment
of the house of Commons, As also from any other judgment sentence or
proceeding against them, other then by their equals, or according to the Law
of the Land.

11. The same act to provide that Grand Jury men may be chosen by and for
several parts or divisions of each County respectively in some equal way (and
not remain, as now, at the discretion of an under Sheriff to be put on or off)
and that such Grand Jury men for their respective County may each Assize
present the names of persons to be made Justices of Peace from time to time (as
the Country shall need, for any to be added to the Commission) and at the
Summer Assize to present the names of their persons, out of whom the King may
prick one to be Sheriff for the next year.

II. For future security to Parliaments and the Militia in general, and in
order thereunto that it be provided by Act of Parliament,

1. That the power of the Militia by sea and land during the space of ten years
next ensuing, shall be ordered and disposed by the Lords and Commons assembled,
and to be assembled in the Parliament of England, or by such persons as they
shall nominate and appoint for that purpose from time to time during the said
space.

2. That the said power shall not be ordered, disposed, or exercised by the
Kings Majesty that now is, or by any person or persons, by any authority
derived from him during the said space, or at any time hereafter by his said
Majesty without the advice and consent of the said Lords and Commons or of such
Committee or Council in the intervalls of Parliament as they shall appoint.

3. That during the same space of 10. years the said Lords and Commons may by
Bill or Ordinance raise and dispose of what moneys and for what forces they
shall from time to time find necessary, as also for the public debts and
damages, and for all other the public uses of the Kingdom.

4. And to the end the Temporary security intended by the three particulars
last precedent may be the better assured it may therefore be provided,

That no subjects that have been in Hostility against the Parliament in the
late war shall be capable of bearing any office of Power or public trust in
the Common wealth, during the said space of five years without consent of
Parliament or of the Council of State, or to sit as members or assistants of
either Houses of Parliament, until the second Bienniall Parliament be past.

III. For the present form of disposing the Militia in order to the peace and
safety of this Kingdom and the service of Ireland.

1. That there be Commissioners for the Admiralty, with the Vice Admiral and
rear Admiral now to be agreed on with power for the forming, regulating,
appointing of Officers and providing for the Navy, and for ordering the same to
and in the ordinary services of the Kingdom, and that there be a sufficient
provision and establishment for the pay and maintenance thereof.

2. That there be a General for the Command of the land forces that are to be
in pay both in England, Ireland, and Wales, both for the Field and Garrison.

3. That there be Commissioners in several Counties for the standing Militia
of the respective Counties, (consisting of trained Bands and Auxiliaries not in
pay) with power for the proportioning, forming, regulating, training and
disciplining of them.

4. That there be a council of State, with power to superintend and direct the
three several and particular powers of the Militia last mentioned, for the
peace and safety of this Kingdom and of Ireland.

5. That the same Council may have power as the Kings privy Council for and
in all foreign negotiations, provided that the making of war or peace with
any other Kingdom or State shall not be without advise and consent of
Parliament.

6. That the said power of the Council of State be put into the hands of
trusty and able persons now to be agreed on, and the same persons to continue
in that power (si been se gesserint) for a certain term not exceeding 7. years.

7. That there be a sufficient establishment now provided for the salary forces
both in England and Ireland. The establishment to continue until two months
after the meeting of the first Bienniall Parliament.

IV. That an Act be passed for the disposing of the great Offices for 10. years
by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, or by such Committees as they shall
appoint for that purpose in the intervalls (with submission to the approbation
of the next Parliament) and after 10. years they to nominate three, and the
King out of that number to appoint one for the succession upon any vacancy.

V. That an Act be passed for restraining of any Peers made since the 21. of
May 1643. or to be hereafter made from having power to sit or vote in
Parliament without consent of both Houses.

VI. That an Act be passed for recalling and making void all Declarations and
other proceedings against the Parliament or against any that have Acted by or
under their authority in the late war, or in relation to it, and that the
Ordinances for Indemnity may be confirmed.

7. That an Act be passed for making void all grants etc. under the great Seal
that was conveyed away from the Parliament, since it was so conveyed away
(except as in the Parliaments proposition) and for making those valid that have
been or shall be passed under the great seal made by the authority of both
Houses of Parliament.

VIII. That an Act be passed for the Confirmation of the treaty between the two
Kingdoms of England and Scotland, and for appointing conservatours of the
Peace betwixt them.

9. That the Ordinance for taking away the Court of Wards, and Liveries, be
confirmed by Act of Parliament; provided his Majesty's Revenue be not damnified
therein, nor those that last held Offices in the same, left without reparation
some other way.

X. An act to declare void the cessation of Ireland, etc. and to leave the
prosecution of that war to the Lords and Commons in the Parliament of England.

XI. An Act to be passed to take away all coercive power, Authority, or
jurisdiction of Bishops, and all other Ecclesiastiall Officers whatsoever,
extending to any civil penalties upon any, and to repeal all Laws, whereby the
Civil Magistracy has been, or is bound, upon any Ecclesiastical censure to
proceed ex Officio, unto any civil penalty, against persons so censured.

XII. That there be a repeal of all Acts, or Clauses in any Acts, enjoining the
use of the Book of Common Prayer, and imposing any penalties for the neglect
thereof: As also of all Acts or Clauses in any Act, imposing any penalty for
not coming to Church, or for meetings elsewhere, for prayer or other Religious
duties, exercises, or Ordinances, and some other provision to be made for
discovering of Papists, or Popish Recusants, and for disabling of them, and of
all Jesuits, or Priests, from disturbing the State.

XIII. That the taking of the Covenant be not enforced upon any, nor any
penalties imposed upon the refusers, whereby men might be constrained to take
it against their judgments and consciences; but all Orders or Ordinances
tending to that purpose to be repeald.

XIV. That (the things here before proposed, being provided for settling, or
securing the Rights, Liberties, Peace, and safety of the kingdom) his
Majesty's person, his Queen and Royal issue, may be restored to a condition of
safety, honor, and freedom in this Nation, without diminution to their
personal Rights, or further limitation to the exercise of Regal power, then
according to the particulars aforegoing.

XV. For the matter of Compositions: First that a less number out of the
persons excepted, out of the two first qualifications (not exceeding five for
the English) being nominated particularly by the Parliament (who together with
persons in the Irish Rebellion, included in the third qualification) may be
reserved to the further judgment of the Parliament, as they shall find cause:
All other excepted persons may be remitted from the Exception, and admitted to
Composition: Secondly, that the rates for all future Compositions, may be
lessened, and limited not to exceed the several proportions hereafter
expressed, respectively, that is to say,

1. For all persons formerly excepted, not above a third part.

2. For the late members of Parliament under the first branch of the fourth
qualification of the Proposition, a fourth part.

3. For other members of Parliament in the second and third branches of the
same qualification, a sixth part.

4. For the persons nominated in the said fourth qualification, and those
included in the 10 qualification, an eighth part.

5. For all others included in the sixth qualification, a tenth part, and that
real debts either upon record, or proved by witnesses, be considered and
abated in the valuation of their estates, in all the cases aforesaid.

3. That those who shall hereafter come to compound, may not have the Covenant
put upon them, as a condition, without which they may not compound, but in case
they shall not willingly take it, they may pass their Compositions without it.

4. That the persons and estates of all English, not worth two hundred pounds
in land or goods, be at liberty and discharged: And that the Kings meniall
servants, that never took up arms, but only attended his person according to
their Offices, may be freed from Compositions, or to pay (at most) but the
proportion of one years revenue, or a twentieth part.

5. That in order to the making and perfecting of Compositions, at the rates
aforesaid, the Rents, Revenues, and other dues and profits of all sequestered
estates whatsoever (except the estates of such persons, who shall be continued
under exception as before) be from henceforth suspended and detained in the
hands of the respective Tenants, Occupants, and others, from whom they are due
for the space of six months following.

6. That the Faith of the Army, and other Forces of Parliament given in
Articles upon surrenders to any of the Kings party, may be fully made good, and
where any breach thereof shall appear to have been made, full reparation and
satisfaction may be given to the persons injured; and that the persons
offending being found out, may be compelled thereto.

7. That there may be a general Act of Oblivion, to extend unto All, (except
the Persons to be continued in exception, as before) to absolve from all
Trespasses, Misdemeanors, etc. done in prosecution of the War; and from all
trouble or prejudice, for or concerning the same, [after their Compositions
past] and to restore them to all Privileges, etc. belonging to other Subjects,
provided as in the fourth particular under the second general Head aforegoing,
concerning security.

And whereas there has been of late strong endeavors and practices of a
factious and desperate Party to embroil this Kingdom in a new War. And for
that purpose, to induce the King, the Queen, the Prince, to declare for the
said Party: And also to excite and stir up all those of the Kings late Party,
to appear and engage for the same: which attempts and designs, many of the
Kings Party (out of their desires to avoid further misery to the Kingdom) have
contributed their endeavors to prevent: [as for diverse of them we have had
particular assurance.] We do therefore desire, that such of the Kings Party,
who shall appear to have expressed, and shall hereafter express that way,
their good affections to the Peace and welfare of the Kingdom, and to hinder
the imbroiling of the same in a new War, may be freed and exempted from
Compositions, or to pay but one years Revenue, or a twentieth part.

These Particulars aforegoing are the Heads of such Proposalls as we have
agreed on, to tender in order to the settling the Peace of this Kingdom,
leaving the terms of Peace for the Kingdom of Scotland, to stand as in the
late Propositions of both Kingdoms, until that Kingdom shall agree to any
alteration.

Next to the Proposal aforesaid; for the present settling of a Peace, We shall
desire that no time may be lost by the Parliament, for the dispatch of other
things tending to the welfare, case, and just satisfaction of the Kingdoms,
and in special manner.

I. That the just and necessary liberty of the People to represent their
grievances and desires by way of Petition, may be cleared and vindicated
according to the fifth head in the late Representation or Declaration of the
Army sent from Saint Albons.

II. That in pursuance of the same Head in the said Declaration, the common
grievances of the People, may be speedily considered of, and effectually
redressed, and in particular.

1. That the Excise may be taken off from such Commodities whereof the poor
People of the Land do ordinarily live, and a certain time to be limited for
taking off the whole.

2. That the oppressions and encroachments of Forest Laws, may be prevented
for future.

3. All Monopolies (Old or New) and restraints to the freedom of Trade, be
taken off.

4. That a course may be taken and Commissioners appointed to remedy and
certify the inequality of Rates, lying upon several Counties, and several
parts of each County, in respect of others, and to settle the proportion for
Land, Rates to more equality throughout the Kingdom: In order to which, we
shall offer some further particulars which we hope may be useful.

5. The present unequal troublesome and contentious way of Ministers
maintenance by Tithes to be considered of, and some remedy applied.

6. That the Rules and course of Law, and the Officers of it may be so reduced
and reformed; as that all Suits and Questions of Rights may be more clear and
certain in the issues, and not so tedious nor chargeable in the proceeding, as
now: in order to which we shall offer some further particulars hereafter.

7. That Prisoners for debt or other debtours (who have estates to discharge
them) may not by embracing Imprisonment, or any other ways, have advantage to
defraud their Creditors, but that the Estates of all men may be some way made
liable to their debts, (as well as Tradesmens are by Commission of Bankrupt)
whether they be imprisoned or not, and that such prisoners for debt, who have
not wherewith to pay, or at least do yield up what they have to their
Creditours, may be freed from imprisonment, or some way provided for, so as
neither they nor their Families, may perish by their imprisonment.

8. Some provision to be made, that none may be compelled by penalties, or
otherwise to answer unto Questions tending to the accusing of themselves, or
their nearest relations in Criminal causes, and no man's life to be taken away
under two witnesses.

9. That consideration may be had of all Statutes and Laws, or Customs, or
Courts, or Actions, imposing any Oaths, either to repeal or else to qualify
and provide against the same, so far as they may extend or be construed to the
molestation or ensnaring of Religious and peaceable People, merely for
nonconformity in Religion.

III. That (according to the sixth Head in the said Declaration of the Army)
the large powers given to Committees or Deputy Lievetenants, during the late
times of War and distraction, may be speedily taken into consideration to be
recalled and made void, and that such powers of that nature as shall appear
necessary to be continued, may be put into a regulated way, and left to as
little Arbitrarinesse, as the nature and necessity of the things wherein they
are conversant will bear.

4. That (according to the seventh Head in the said Declaration) an effectual
course may be taken, that the Kingdom may be righted and satisfied in point of
Accounts for the vast sums that have been levied.

5. That provision may be made for payment of Arrears to the Army, and the rest
of the Souldierie of the Kingdom, who have concurred with the Army in the
late desires and proceedings thereof. And in the next place for payment of the
Public Debts, and Damages of the Kingdom, and that to be performed first to
such Persons, whose Debts or Damages (upon the Public Account) are great, and
their Estates small; so as they are thereby reduced to a difficulty of
subsistence.

In Order to which, and to the fourth Particular last preceding, we shall
speedily offer some further Particulars (in the nature of Rules) which we hope
will be of good use toward Public satisfaction.

August 1. 1647. Signed by the appointment of his Excellency Sir THOMAS
FAIRFAX, and the Council of War. John Rushworth Secretary.
I do appoint this to be forthwith Printed and published at Cambridge.

Colebrook, Aug. 2. 1647. T. FAIRFAX.




