A DECLARATION From his Excellence Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, and the General Council
of the ARMY, Held at Putney, on Thursday September 16. 1647.

Concerning the Delays in raising Moneys for supply of the Army, and other
Forces of the Kingdom.

And their humble Offers and Desires in Relation thereto.

Tendered To the Right Honorable Commissioners of Parliament residing with the
Army, and by them to be presented to the Houses.

With his Exceliencies Letter to the Commissioners concerning the same.

Also a Narrative of the Soldiers behavior toward the L. Lauderdale.

By the Appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the General
Council of the Army. Jo. Rushworth Secretary.

Printed at London, for George Whittington, at the Blew Anchor, in Cornhill,
near the Royal Exchange, 1647.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
THe extreme necessities of the Army, and other Forces in the Kingdom,
together with the present pressures of the Country where it Quarters, for want
of Moneys, as well as the delays of them from whom you might e're this time
have justly expected a better Account on this behalf then is as yet heard of,
is the occasion which yesterday produced a Resolution upon this enclosed Paper,
which I herewith tender to your Lordships, Desiring it may be speedily
communicated to both Houses: I remain,

Your Lordships most humble servant, THO. FAIRFAX.
Putney 17 Septembris, 1647. For the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons,
Commissioners of Parliament residing in the Army.



A Declaration from his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, and the General
Council of the Army held at Putney on Thursday September. 16. 1647.
THe extreme wants of the Soldiery (both of the Army and other Forces and
Garrisons that have concurred with us, as also the sufferings of the Countries
in respect of free Quarter, and the necessities of the Kingdom for a speedy
supply of money in relation to the disbanding of superfluous forces, the
sending over of others for the relief of Jreland, and for the supplying of
those forces that are there already, so as to prevent the danger of those
distempers lately raised amongst them,) are such as we are and have been very
sensible of and exceedingly pressed with the consideration of them.

Yet the care the Houses have so many ways expressed for providing a present
supply of monyes, in relation to all these affairs, have made us hitherto
silent as to that point* in expectation to have found ere this time an
answerable effect thereof in actual supplies. But finding that notwithstanding
all their care, yet through the neglect or delay of those on whom the Houses
have depended in that particular, there is little or nothing hitherto effected
therein, and especially considering the delays made by the Lord Mayor Aldermen
and Common Council of the City of London, in the advancing of that sum which
the Houses have demanded of them upon the security of the Arreares (so long
since) due from the City to this Army, and for that tax whereupon all or most
other places have long since paid in their proportions.) We are enforced to
make this present address to the Houses in relation thereunto.

First we cannot but consider the notorious readiness of that Court to the
advancing of far greater sums for the raising of a new War and
prosecution of the late mischievous practices and designs against the
Parliament and Army. And that as their precipitate forwardness therein, was
the occasion of the Armies coming into these parts: so their backwardness to
the raising or advancing of the money now required for the service of the
Parliament and supply of the Army, has been and is the occasion of the Armies
continuance here: And therefore we cannot but offer it as what we humbly
conceive most just and reasonable.

That for what time their default or delays have occasioned and shall further
occasion the Armies stay hereabouts (so much to the burden and oppression of
these parts) the charge thereof should some way be laid upon them and their
adherents in and about the City, together with those persons from whom the said
arreares are due, and those in whose default it lies that they have hitherto
been either not assessed or not collected. And for that purpose that at least
in case the sum required be not paid in at the time limmitted by the Houses.
There may be a proportionable penalty imposed by way of daily increase of the
sum required for so long time as the payment thereof shall be further delayed.
Next for as much as the Lord Mayor Aldermen and Common Council, may perhaps
conceive themselves not so much obliged (either to execute the authority given
them by the Parliament for leavying of money upon others, or to advance it
themselves by way of loan in behalf of others until it can be leavyed) as
they would be to provide what should justly be charged upon themselves: We
therefore humbly offer (at least) in case the sum required upon the arreares
be not paid in by the time limited.

II. That the Houses would be pleased speedily t^ consider of the delinquency
of that Court an^ Council, in those things that were lately done by them as a
Court, and set such Fine upon them for the same as shall be agreeable to
justice, which money being chargeable so properly upon themselves we presume
they willl not have the like excuse not to provide.

Lastly, since it is most evident that for the speedy bringing in of the money
required upon the arrears there wants not in the said Major, Alderme^ and
Common Council, either authority to levy it or ability to advance it by way of
Loan till it can be levied: nor do the persons from whom the arrears are due
want ability to pay them, but the only fault and defect lies in the want of
will to the thing, both in the one and in the other, and want of power in the
hands of willing men to enforce it, without which we see little hopes that it
will in any tolerable time be effected; We therefore offer

III. That in case the money be not brought in (by the time limited the
Parliament would be pleased to give leave and power to the General (with the
advice and directions of the Committee for the Army* for the levying of the
said arrears, together with such penalties and fine as the Houses shall find
cause to impose as aforesaid, or (at least) the penalties allowed by the
Ordinances for that tax for the Army, and then if the moneys be not speedily
brought in for the Parliament to dispose of let us bear the blame.

And all these things we desire the rather, because we have grounds both of
reason and evidence from the speeches of many in the City, to believe that in
this long witholding of money, the designs and hopes of the Parliaments and our
enemies, are to raise the Army into distempers, and the country about us into a
flame, whereby at least to hinder and interrupt all proceedings to the
execution of Parliamentary justice, or settlement of the Kingdom, and to expose
the Parliament again into tumultuous violence, of all which the danger is very
evident and imminent, if not speedily prevented by some such vigorous and
effectual remedies as aforesaid.

Putney Sept. 16. 1647. By the appointment of his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax
and the Council of war: Signed John Rushworth Secretary

A Narrative of the Soldiers demeanor toward the Lord Lauderdale at the
Court at VVoburne, in luly last, presented to his Excellency Sir Thomas
Fairfax, under the hand of Colonel VVhalley, and by him sent to the
Commissioners of Parliament in the Army; with a letter from his Excellency
concerning the same.
Toward the latter end of July last, when the King lay at Woburne, the Lord
Lauderdale came one morning about four or five of the Clock to the Court, lost
no time* but presently made his repairs to His Majesty with whom he had much
private Communication. It was commonly reported and generally believed that he
had come post all the night before. But whether so or not, I know not, but this
I know, that his early coming, and hasty speaking with His Majesty at that
Conjuncture of time, when that unparalleld violence was committed upon the
Parliament, and that treasonable engagement for fetching the King to London,
and preparations for a new War, were so violently prosecuted in the City,
drove the Court into fears, and the Soldiers into jealousies, that his
Lordship came to endeavor the perfecting at Court that design, which was
begun and prosecuted in the City, and that which made them (as I conceive) the
more jealous of his intentions, was a common report, that his Lordship was a
fomenter of the Cities Tumults, or corresponding with the Authors of them. And
indeed I find, that the Soldiers had long entertained harsh thoughts of the
Lord Lauderdale ever since his Relation, concerning His Majesty's going from
Holmsby, (...) in the painted Chamber so much to the prejudice, and
disadvantage of the Army; and his undertaking there to engage the whole
Kingdom of Scotland, as one man against the Army; they were playn^ with him at
New Market, the^ minding him of it, and told him he had publicly declared
himself their enemy; therefore they could not but think he came to do them,
and the Kingdom in Offices: And had not my self and other Officers
interposed, they had then at least persuaded him away from the Court, but at
that time the Soldiers endured his stay, though with some regret; But his
Lordships second appearance at that time and manner as before related, so
hightened, (it seems their former jealosies, and exasperated them into such
resolution^ as that diverse of them (whose names I protest I know n^^ not so
much as one for present) being of several R^^iments came about five or six of
the Clock, next morning* to his Lordship* Chamber door, desired to speak with
him upon notice whereof, I hastened to the Earl of Lauderdales Lodgings, and
the Earl of Denby with me: We found the Soldiers and the Lord Lauderdaile
reasoning very calmly together, his Lordship telling them he was a public
person, and they could offer him no affront, but it would reflect upon the
Kingdom of Scotland, and tend to divide the 2. Nations, the Soldiers told
him, they found he many times acted as a private person, as when in the painted
Chamber he undertook for all Scotland to engage as one man against the Army,
(which as they heard) he had no Commission for from the State of Scotland, what
they did was in Reference to the Lord Lauderdale, and not to the Scottish
Nation; and had his Lordship showed them any Commission, pass, or warrant,
testifying his being sent or employed thither as a public person from the
States of Scotland, or their Commissioners, I conceive it might have satisfied;
The Earl of Denbigh endeavored with all the Reasons and Arguments he could to
persuade them to let the Earl of Lauderdale stay, and not meddle with him, and
my self commanded them some to their Guard, and the rest to be gone: But from
commanding, (the discontent being very high) I was enforced for the present, to
fall to persuading, I confirmed what the Earl of Denby before had said to
them, that it might be construed as an injury to the State of Scotland, that
it would be an offense to the Parliament of England, and added that it was a
contemning of the Generals power, when they would not obey commands, and would
expose both themselves, and me to danger, but all in vain; for indeed that
horrid violence so lately done to the Parliament, and the forced flight of the
Members of both Houses (whereby that highest Authority of the Kingdom s^emed
to be at a st^^d) (...) both the City and mo^^ parts of the Kingdom into a
monstrous ^^in of conf^sion* and of distracted and licentious workings, and
weakened (for present) the hands of all men in Authority under the Parliament,
so it wanted not its influence of like nature upon the Army and Soldiery
throughout the Kingdom, so as Officers could not (at that time) have the like
command of their Soldiers, as formerly, nor as now again, since the Authority
of the Parliament has been vindicated, and both Houses (through Gods blessing)
restored to their Honor and Freedom: For my own part as affairs then stood) I
am confident the Lord Denbigh will witness it for me: I did my utmost
endeavors to have gotten the Soldiers away, I commanded, I persuaded, but
neither commands, nor persuasions wou^d prevail, the soldiers being
unanimously resolved his Lordship should not stay at Court, nor speak again
with the King for that time: And therefore they would not depart till his
Lordship was ready and willing to take coach. When I saw I could not exercise
my commanding power for the present in that matter, nor by it, nor by
persuasion divert them from their Resolutions: I desired them at least to be
civil toward his Lordship which they performed, not giving his Lordship an
ill word, nor laying any hands upon him, Mr. Cheasley his Lordships Secretary
likewise seconded me, desiring the Soldiers to be civil, and to give his
Lordship leave to say his Prayers, the Soldiers answered with all their
hearts, they would join with him; but his Lordship told them he had not the
gift of prayer, he would not pray publicly, and presently after went quietly
to his Coach, the Soldiers attending him.

Thus have I given a true Relation of the demeanor, and Carriage of that
toward the Lord Lauderdale at W^bur^^, for the conformation whereof I refer my
self to the Earl of Denby, who was present all the while, and in testimony*
of the truth hereof, I have hereunto set my hand.

September 11.1647. EDWARD WHALLEY.
Vera Copia,

William Clarke.



My Lords and Gentlemen. IN persuance of the Commands* I received for enquiring
into the business of the affront done to the Earl of Lautherdale, I sent Order
to Col. Whalley, to make enquiry of it, and to return to me an account
thereof. I have hereuppon received from him a Narrative under his hand of the
occasions, and whole carriage of that business (so far ^s his own knowledge
or present Informations concerning it do extend,) which I have sent you hear
enclosed, I desire it may be emparted to both Houses, for their present better
satisfaction Concerning that business, and if this do not amount to their full
Satisfaction therein, but that they think fit to have any Further enquiry or
Examination to be had about it, I shall upon further notice of their pleasures
therein give Order to Colonel Whaley, Accordingly I remain.

Putney 17. September 1647. Your Lordships humble Servant THOMAS FAIRFAX.
For the Right Honorable the Lords and Commons Commissioners of Parliment
residing with the Army.



FINJS.

