THE Christian Directed IN HIS RACE to HEAVEN: OR, A Short ACCOUNT of that
Knowledge and Practice that leads thither.

By JAMES FORBES, Minister of the Gospel, at Gloucester.

LONDON, Printed by J. Brudenell for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and
Three-Crowns in Cheapside near Mercers-Chappel, 1700.

THE CHRISTIAN Directed IN HIS Race to HEAVEN.
FIRST, Consider often the Great End of your Creation, and Redemption by
Christ: The great Jehovah was no more a Debtor to you, than to the most
worthless Worm that creeps upon the Earth; the Distinguishing you from Brutes,
Sensitive, and Imanimate Creatures, is a mere Act of Favor, in Furnishing you
with such an Excellent Immaterial, Immortal, Spiritual and Divine Substance,
the Soul, consisting of Understanding, Will, Conscience, Memory and Affections,
whereby you are capable of the Knowledge of, and Communion with the High and
Lofty One that Inhabits Eternity: Your Body is also wonderfully framed, Ps.
139.14. and fitted by the hand of an infinite Skilful Artificer, both for
Services and Sufferings: I beseech you therefore by the Mercies of God, that
you Consecrate your selves, Souls and Bodies, a Living, Holy, and acceptable
Sacrifice to the Author of your Being, which is your Reasonable Service, Romans
12.1. And Glorify him with both, as knowing you are not your own, you are
Bought with a Price, 1. Cor. 6.20. O remember you were sent into the World for
Higher Ends than merely to Eat, Drink, Sleep, and satisfy the Lusts of the
Flesh, Study to Answer the Ends of your Creation and Redemption.

The Second Thing I commend to you is in the Words of the Wise Man, Prove. 2.3,
4, 5, 6. If thou Cryest after Knowledge, and liftest up thy. Voice for
Understanding, if thou seek her as Silver, and searchest for her as for hid
Treasures, then shall thou understand the fear of the Lord, and find the
Knowledge of God: For the Lord gives Wisdom, out of his Mouth comes Knowledge
and Understanding. Be well Grounded in the Infallible Assurance of a Deity, s
being the first Letter in the Alphabet of Christianity. Believe that there is a
God, Heb. 11.6. Give Credit to Scripture-revelations concerning him, that he is
such a one as is there Described; and let the Knowledge of his Incomprehensible
Perfections leave some suitable Impresses upon you Spirits: Contemplate often
the Infathomable depth of the Divine Glory of his Attributes, and you will find
it to be an Exercise both Pleasing and Profitable, John 17.3. This is Life
Eternal to know God

1. Look upon him as an Eternal Being, which knew no beginning, and shall have
no end, the Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last, Genesis 21.33. Isa. 44.6. and
57.15. Romans 1.20. Revel. 1.8. Such an Antiquity as is Eternity is truly
Honorable: This will make you have an undervaluing Esteem of the Choicest
Creatures which are of Yesterday, and at best but Breathing nothings, in
Comparison of him, Ps. 103.15, 16. As for Man, his Days are as Grass; as a
Flower of the Field so he flourishes; for the Wind passes over it, and it is
gone, and the place thereof shall know it no more; but the Mercy of the Lord is
from Everlasting to Everlasting to them that fear him, and his Righteousness to
Childrens Children. And 102.25, 26, 27. Of old have thou laid the Foundation of
the Earth, and the Heavens are the Work of thy Hands; they shall Perish, but
thou shall endure; yea all of them shall wax Old like a Garment, as a Vesture
shall thou Change them, and they shall be Changed; but thou art the same and
thy Years shall have no End. The Children of thy Servants shall continue, and
their Seed shall be established before thee.

2. Survey his Glory as he is the being of beings, both as to their original
and continuance, Acts 17.24, 25. The Apostle there brings a practical inference
from this Position, that seeing God is the Being of Beings, all acts of
Adoration should be suitable to so glorious a Being. God that made the World,
and all things therein, seeing that he is Lord of Heaven and Earth, dwells
not in Temples made with Hands, neither is Worshipped with Men's Hands, as
though he needed any thing, seeing he gives to all Life and Breath, and all
things v. 29. For as much then as we are the Offspring of God, we ought not to
think that the Godhead is like unto Gold, or Silver, or Stone; graven by Art,
and Man's device, John 4.24. God is a Spirit and they that Worship him must
Worship him in Spirit and in truth.

3. Take some view of the Infiniteness of his Wisdom, Prove. 3.19, 20. The Lord
by Wisdom has founded the Earth, by Understanding has he established the
Heavens, by his knowledge the Depths are broken up, and the Clouds drop down
the Dew: Such a Survey will cause a Soul-humbling reflection upon your own
folly and ignorance, Prove. 30.2, 3. Surely I am more brutish than any Man; I
neither learned Wisdom not have the knowledge of the Holy: Who has ascended up
to Heaven? or descended? Who has gathered the wind in his fists? Who has
bound the waters in a garment? Who has established all the ends of the Earth?
What is his name and what is his Sons name, if thou can tell? This will make
thee believe, that he can make thee wise unto Salvation, notwithstanding of all
that darkness and folly that is upon you, Job. 12.13. With him is wisdom, and
strength, he hat counsel and understanding. And you must needs break forth into
admiration, Romans 11.33. O the depth of the Riches both of the wisdom, and
knowledge of God! And into that Apostolical Doxologie, 1 Timothy 1.17. Now unto
the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only wise God, be Honor and Glory
forever and ever Amen. Jude 25.

4. Survey him in the Glory of his Immensity Ubiquity, Omnipresence, and
Omniscience: And your great care will be at all times, and in all places, to
walk as under his All-seeing eye, saying with the Psalmist, Psalm. 139.2, 3.
Thou know my down-sitting and my up-rising, thou understandest my thought
afar off; whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or whither shall I flee from thy
presence? If I say surely the darkness shall cover me, even the Night shall be
light about me, yea the darkness hides not from thee, but the Night seems as
the Day, the darkness and the light are both alike unto thee. 1 Samuel 16.7. 1 Chronicles. 28.9. The Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the
imaginations of the thoughts, Psalm. 7.10. Heb. 4.13. Acts 17.27, 28. God is not
far from eevery one of us, for in him we live. This also would much heighten
your apprehensions of God in all addresses to him, as being one that fills
Heaven and Earth, Jer. 23.24. 1 King. 8.27. Will God indeed dwell on the Earth?
Behold the Heaven, and Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee, how much less
this House that I have built? Is. 66.1. with Acts 7.49. Thus says the Lord,
the Heaven is my Throne, the Earth is my Footstool, where is the House that ye
build unto me? and where is the place of my rest? Psalm. 145.3. Great is the
Lord, and greatly to be praised, and his Greatness is unsearchable, 1 Timothy 6.16.

O let Holy David's practice be yours, that so his expierience may be yours
also, Psalm. 16.8. I have set the Lord always before me, because he is at my
right hand, I shall not be moved.

5. Survey him in the bright shining beauty of his Holiness, Revel. 4.8. Holy,
Holy, Holy Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come: This will make
you with Isaiah say, Chap 6. v. 5. Woe is me, for I am undone because I am of
unclean Lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean Lips, for mine
eyes have seen the King, the Lord of Hosts. And with Job, Chap. 42. v. 5.6. I
have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye sees thee,
wherefore I abhor my self in dust and ashes. This will take you off from
stinting your selves to any Scanty measures of Holiness, making you pursue
after it, to be Holy in all manner of conversation, as he that has called you
is Holy, Levit. 19.2. 1 Pet. 1.15.

I might go over the rest of the Attribute; Mercy, Grace, Love, Longsuffering,
Infinite Power, All sufficiency, and Faithfulness: But from what is already
hinted, the Way is in some measure made plain how you may manage such
Meditations.

Thirdly, what hitherto has been mentioned is little more than what is
attainable by an improved Heathen, I must therefore call aloud upon you to soar
yet higher in your contemplations of God in Christ. And here you may see that
which is, and will be to all Eternity matter of admiration to Men and Angels, 1
Pet. 1.12. Here you may see God Reconciling an apostate and perishing World to
himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. Here you may see a most noble unparallelled contrivance
of infinite Wisdom and free Grace hatched in the womb of Eternity, how the Sons
and Daughters of Adam, that by Sin had debased themselves as low as Hell, might
be advanced to a state of Royal dignity as high as Heaven: Here you may see the
Creators condesinsion in stooping so low, as to cloth himself with Man's Nature,
that Man might be made partaker of the Divine: Here you may see Mercy and
Justice reconciled, Righteousness and Truth kissing each other. So great is his
Justice, that Sin shall not pass unpunished, no not in his own dear Son, though
a Sinner only by imputation, and having no personal pollution: And so great his
is Mercy to most miserable sinners, that they have what of God is communicable,
and what they are capable to receive, Grace and Glory upon free cost: Justice
is satisfied to the full, as if there had never been any offense, and the
ransomed of the Lord are restored to a better estate than Adam's was before the
Fall. Behold here the reason why the World has stood near this 6000 years, its
by Christ all things consist, Col. 1.17. Come and behold an unspeakable union
of hearts and affections between God and sinners, Angels and sinners, sinners
and sinners, and of the whole Creation. Behold what encouragement the greatest
of sinners have to come unto God with hopes of access and acceptance; and O
what invincible obligations do all of us ly under highly to honor, adore,
fear, reverence, worship, love, serve, pray unto, praise, and confide in this
God! O my Soul, and all that is within me, magnify the unsearchable riches of
the glorious grace of this God, and let the whole Creation concur with me in
celebrating his praiseworthy name. Luke 1.68, 69. Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel, for he has visited and Redeemed his People, and has raised up a horn
of Salvation for us, that we should be saved from our Enemies, and from the
hand of them that hate us, that we might serve him without fear in Holiness and
Righteousness before him all the days of our life. Revel. 5.11, 12. I beheld,
and heard the voice of many Angels round about the Throne, and the Beasts and
the Elders, and the number of them was ten thousand times ten Thousand, and
Thousands of Thousands, saying with a loud voice, worthy is the Lamb that was
Slain, to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Srength and Honor, and
Glory and Blessing: And every Creature which is in Heaven and on Earth, and
under the Earth; and such as are in the Sea, and all that are in them heard I
saying, Blessing, Honor, Glory and Power be unto him that sits on the Throne,
and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.

Fourthly, Rest not satisfied with a rational head-knowledge of the most
sublime Gospel Mysteries, without some practical and experimental knowledge of
the effectual, heart-renewing, and Soul-Sanctifying operations of the Spirit of
God upon your Hearts; study a translation from Death to Life; from Satan to
God; from the power of darkness into the Glorious Kingdom of our Lord Jesus.
Put off the whole old Man with all his deceivable Lusts, and put on the Lord
Jesus. Study Regeneration; know what it is to be be born from above by the Word
and Spirit, John. 3. Begin. That you may say with those Tit. 3.3, 4. We our
selves also were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse Lusts
and pleasures, living in Malice and Envy, hateful and hating one another; but
after that the kindness and love of God appeared, not by works of Righteousness
which we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of
regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly;
that being justified by his Grace, we should be heirs according to the hope of
eternal life. And Ephesians. 2. Begin. Even when we were Dead in sins, has he
quickened us together with Christ, and has raised us up together, and has
made us sit together in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus; we are the Workmanship
of God Created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which were before ordained,
that we should walk therein. O take heed of being mistaken in the business of
Gospel-conversion, it concerns no less than the eternal Salvation or Damnation
of your immortal Soul; its something else than a bare literal knowledge,
civility, morality, partial reformation, having some flashes of good desires,
and resolutions, and something else than a bare outward profession, saying
Lord, Lord: Know once what it is to have Heaven-born principles in your heart,
what it is to have the old stony, hard, carnal, unclean, covetous, proud,
impenitent and unbelieving heart, with all old things done away, and all things
made new, 2 Cor. 5.17. New understanding, new will, new conscience, new
affections: Give all diligence to make your calling and election sure, and it
will much conduce to your comfortble walking throughout the course of your
conversation.

Fifthly; In order hereunto, I commend to you that of Heb. 6.1. Lay such a
foundation of Repentance from dead works, and Faith toward God, as you shall
have no occasion afterward to overturn. In these two consists the whole of
Gospel Conversion, therefore you had the more need see that both be of the
right stamp: When you set about the work of Repentance, and closing with Christ
by Faith, do it with all your might, that you may have no cause to repent of
your Repentance, or to say, Ah! it is a great question whether ever to this day
I have truly repented or believed; if my Repentance had been real, I had not
relapsed into such and such Sins; I have been but a mere Hypocrite, and I must
begin anew again, as if I had never known or professed any thing of God at all.

Let your Repentance be such that you may say these five things of it.

1. There Is no known Sin that ever I have been guilty of, but it has cost me
some Tears, and my Heart has been even like to break with Sorrow for it. Oh! woe
is me for what I have brought from the Womb into the World with me, and woe is
me for what I have added to it since. O! what cause of Self-abhorrency is
there, that I am born with inbred Principles of Enmity and Rebellion against
the most High? The Seeds and Spawn of all Sins are in my Soul, and accordingly
what Sin is it but either I have actually committed, or would have committed,
if left to my self, and not under some restraint?

2. There Is no Sin but I have forsaken at least in Affection and Endeavor; the
Lord knows there is no Sin which I love, but I do hate every false way; its my
Soul's desire to be rid of every thing that offends, and my strivings in the
stnength of Christ are in some measure suitable to my desires.

3. Its Love to the Lord Jesus makes me thus to mourn for Sin, and to study
Reformation of what is amiss; Oh! there is an infiniteness of Evil in Sin, it
strikes against the very being of Divine Majesty, it robs him of the Glory of
all his Attributes, its the transgression of the righteous Law of a great and
good God, that has loved me so as to send his Son to dye for me; Oh! its Sin
that crucified the Lord of Glory, Zech. 12.10. therefore I cannot any longer
continue in it for a thousand Worlds. Ah and alas that I have acted so
disingenuously against a God of so great Mercies, Love, Long-suffering and
Patience! I would not do as I have done if it were to do again for ever so
much; if there were no Hell to punish Sin, nor Heaven to reward Holiness, I
would forsake the one, and follow after the other,

4. This Sorrow for, and forsaking of Sin is not for a flash, when the hand of
God is upon me in Sickness or otherwise, but it is a continual, lasting,
soaking sorrow, Psalm. 51.2. Mine iniquity is always before me. God is the same
still, and therefore there is reason for me to be a repenting still, for Sins
committed twenty years ago, as if they had been committed but last Hour.

5. There Is no Sin but I can freely confess and acknowledge, either openly if
it has been a public Sin, 1 Timothy 1.13. or secretly to God, if it has been only
a secret Sin, Psalm. 32.5. 1 John 1.9. or to particular Persons; if I have
injured them, I am willing to make restitution and reparation for the wrong
done, Luke 19.8. I am not ashamed to take shame to my self, when God's Glory,
and the Edification of others calls for any such thing at my Hands. James 5.16.
Josh. 7.19.

And so for your Faith, see that you may say these five things of it,

1. Its a Faith of God's working, Col. 2.12, its that that never grew in
Nature's Garden; its a thing I was not born with: Time was when I had it not,
but was an Unbeliever; its the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. Phil. 1.29.

2. This Faith of mine gives a cordial assent unto, and compliance with the
whole will of God so so far as it is revealed to me in the Word. I close with
Divine Precepts to be found in the Practice thereof, Psalm 119.66. with
threatenings to tremble thereat. Isa. 66.5. as well as Promises to taste the
sweetness and comfort thereof, 2 Peter 1.4. Heb. 11.13.

3. This Faith of mine closes with Christ in all his Offices: I am a poor
Ignoramus in the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven; I do therefore enter my
self a Scholar in Christ's School, to be taught and instructed by him who is
anointed with an unmeasurable measure of the Spirit, to open the Eyes of the
Blind, and unstop the Ears of the Deaf, Isa. 61.1. Ps. 45.7. this is to close
with him in his prophetical Office. Sin has caused such an estrangement between
God and Me, that if all the Angels in Heaven, and Creatures on Earth, would
offer up themselves as a Sacrifice for my Sin, they could never satisfy Divine
Justice, nor work Reconciliation for me, but there is virtue enough in the
Lamb's Blood for effecting the same; this is to close with him in his priestly
Office. Hitherto my Heart has been greatly at Enmity against Holiness, but am
now through Grace made willing to submit to the Scepter of Christ's Government,
and to acknowledge him for my King, Lord and Lawgiver, Isa. 26.13. Other Lords
besides thee have had dominion over us, but by thee we will make mention of thy
Name; this is to close with him in his Kingly Office.

4. this Faith of mine is operative and working, Gal. 5.6. fruitful, James
2.14. I am not a Solifidian,, but would have Faith and Works go together; a
Heart-purifying, and Soul-sanctifying, Acts 15.9. as well as a justifying
Faith, a Soul-humbling Faith, Habak. 2.4. Conquering and Victorious, 1 John 5.5
a Faith that in some measure fits me for doing and suffering what Christ and
his cause calls for: See the whole Eleventh Chapter to the Hebrews.

5. This Faith of mine is that which highly calls and sublimates my Spirit far
beyond what Nature improved to the utmost could ever do, that through it I
cannot only rejoice in the hope of Glory, but also glory in Tribulation, as
knowing that Tribulation works Patience, and Patience Experience, and
Experience Hope, and Hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed
abroad in my Heart by the Holy Ghost which is given me, Romans 5. begin. 1. Pet.
1.8. whom having not seen ye love; in whom, though now ye see him not, yet
believing, ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of Glory, Romans 15.13. Now
the God of hope fill you with all Joy and Peace in believing, that ye may
abound in Hope through the power of the Holy Ghost.

6. When once you are clear in this Soul-concerning Business of the soundess of
your Conversion, and solidity of the Foundation which you have laid, let it be
your great care ever after to demean your self in all things, as it becomes
one that is dignified with so high and holy a Calling.

1. Let the consideration of your espousals to the Royal Bridegroom Jesus
Christ be a holy check to your Affections, that they do not inordinately run
out after any strange Lovers.

2. As you are a Child of God, a Son or Daughter of the King of Heaven, let it
be your care to Love, Honor and Obey your Father; make addresses to him with a
Child-like Confidence, with a holy and humble Boldness, actual dependence upon
him for a supply of all Wants, Bodily and Spiritual, for this Life, and that
which is to come.

3. As your Body is honored to be a Temple for the Holy Ghost, see that no
sinful uncleanness or pollution be found upon it, 1 Cor. 6.19. and 3.17. he
that defiles the Temple of God, him shall God destroy.

4. As you are listed among the Lamb's followers, look to the great Captain of
your Salvation, Heb. 2.10. Write after his Copy, and follow his Example wherein
it is imitable; acquit your self as a good Soldier, having on the whole Armor
of God, Ephesians. 6. for it is not with Flesh and Blood, but with Principalities
and Powers, and spiritual Wickednesses in high Places you wrestle.

5. As you have entered your self under the Tutorage of the great Prophet Jesus
Christ, be still taking out new Lessons from his Word and Spirit.

6. As he is the High Priest of your Profession, make use of him to lead you by
the Hand into the Holy of Holies, as often as you have occasion to go thither,
Ephesians. 2.13. 18. Hebrews 2 end, and 4 end.

7. As you are a Subject of so glorious a Kingdom, swear Fealty and Allegiance
to your Sovereign; be true and loyal to him; keep the King's Laws, for in so
doing, you may expect spiritual Peace, Gal. 6.16. Psalm. 119.165. and protection
from all Enemies, 1 Pet. 3.13. Who is he that will harm you, if ye are
followers of that which is good?

8. As you are a Fellow Citizens with the Saints, Ephesians. 2.19. Let your Heart
be united in the strictest Bond of Christian Love and Charity to all
Heaven-born Ones: Be not ashamed to own for your Equals and Companions, such as
are of the same Blood Royal with your self, Psalm. 16.3. David, though a Prince,
counted it no disparagement to familiarize himself with such whose Fellowship
was with the Father and the Son, Psalm. 119.63.

9. As you are elected and redeemed from among Men, Revel. 14.3, 4. be careful
to keep you Garments clean from the pollutions of the World, James 1.27. Be not
partaker of other Men's Sins, 1 Timothy 5.22. Shun all unnecessary converse with
them that are visibly wicked; Evil Communication corrupts good Manners, 1 Cor.
15.33.

10. As you are an Heir of Glory, Born to an inheritance incorruptible,
undefiled, and such as fades not away, reserved for you in the Heavens, 1 Pet.
1.3, 4. mind Heavenly and not Earthly things, set your Affections on things
above, not on Sublunaries, Col. 3.1. Pass the time of your sojourning here in
fear, 1 Pet. 1.17. 1 John 3.3 Every one that has this Hope in him, purifieth
himself even as God is pure, 2 Pet. 3.11, 12, 13, 14. Wherefore Brethren,
seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent that ye may be found of him in
peace, without spot and blameless, and be crucified to the World through the
Cross of Christ, looking upon all its perishing Glory, to be but a Toy and
Trifle, not worthy once to be named in comparison of that Glory to be revealed.

Seventhly, consider more particularly what the special Duties are which you
owe unto God, unto others, and in respect of your Self; studying faithfulness
and conscionableness in the performance and practice of each of them; the
Summary of all is comprehended in that of Tit. 2.12. Holiness toward God,
Righteousness toward others, and Sobriety in respect of your self. To enlarge
here according to the amplitude of the Subject might prove too teedious; study
the Decalogue or Ten Commands exactly, reading Divine, Dod's Exposition upon
them, with two other small pieces, called, The Marrow of modern Divinity, and
there you will find much more than I can, in a few Lines in such a Compend as
this communicate. I Will only give you a brief hint of things.

The main things you owe to God are, Worship, Service, Suffering, with what
else his Word and Works of Providence do require.

His Worship is either inward, spiritual and moral; and so,

1. You are bound to study the Knowledge of God. Why do you think did the Lord
create the World? but that the Heavens might declare his Glory, and the
Firmament show forth his Praise, Psalm. 19.1. What were the Scriptures written
for? but that in Judah God might be known, and his Name great in Israel, Psalm.
76.1. What did Christ come from the Bosom of God for, but to give forth
Declarations of the Father, John 1.18. and 14.6, 7. What is the Law written in
our Hearts for? Romans 2.15. and what is the Spirit promised for? but that
thereby we might attain to the Knowledge of the Almighty, John 14.26. And has
not the Gospel brought Life and Immortality to Light, 2 Timothy 1.10? All things
considered, your ignorance of God now will be inexcusable, and Knowledge is an
indispensable requisite.

2. You are to fear God, having a high reverential esteem of him in your Heart,
dreading to offend him, not only because of his greatness and justice, but also
and especially because of his goodness and Mercy, Hos. 3.5. Levit. 19.14. Deuteronomy.
6.13. Psalm. 2.11. Isa. 8.13. Heb. 12.28.

3. Love him with all your Soul, Strength and Mind, Matthew. 22.37. he will admit
of no Rivals or Copartners in your Affections; he and he alone must have your
Heart, the whole of your Heart, and that in the most intense Degrees, and
always.

4. Give a credential assent to every Tittle that proceeds out of his Mouth,
relying also upon, and trusting in him, as one in whom there is everlasting
Strength, Isa. 26.4. Psalm. 2.8. and 11.1.

5. Thankfulness for every Mercy, and Patience under all Afflictions, is that
which you owe unto God, 1 Thessalonians. 5.18. Psalm. 107.1. Luke 21.19. Heb. 10.36.
Ephesians. 5.20. James 1.4.

6. Sincerity of Heart, and Zeal for his Glory, are Duties indispensable; what
you do in matters of Religion, must not be to be seen in Men, or for any other
base sinister selfish ends, but do all for the Glory of God, 1 Cor. 10.31.
Phil. 2.3, 11.

7. Be clothed with Humility, having always a low esteem of your self,
notwithstanding of Honors, Riches, Birth, Beauty, Breeding, Parts,
Perfections, Privileges, Performances, Gifts, Graces, Experiences, Enjoyments,
Doing and Suffering, Romans 12.2. Coll. 2.12.

8. Perseverance in the Faith and way of Well doing, is an ingredient of this
inward Spiritual Worship; you must not begin in the Spirit and end in the
Flesh, for then your last Estate will be worse than the Beginning, 2 Pet. 1.20,
21. So run that you may obtain, 1. Cor. 9.24. Rev. 2.7, 11, 17, 26, 27, 28. and
3.5, 10, 12, 21. Or 2dly. His Worship is External and Ceremonial, and here I
commend these three Rules to you, 1. In Gospel Worship there is no religious
Ceremony to be observed, as such, but what has the stamp of Divine Institution
upon it: For any to institute new Ordinances, or to add Inventions of their
own, as essential Ingredients thereof, is too high a Presumption for poor
Creatures, neither must such human impositions be submitted unto. 2. As no
Ceremony of human Institution is to be observed, so all of Divine are.
Sincerity is inconsistent with a slighting and wilful neglect of any one known
Ordinance, Luke 1.6. Prayer, Praising, Preaching, Hearing, Baptism,
Lord's Supper, Church Communion, Censure and Discipline are all of them to be
kept up. As the first Command requires inward Worship, so the second that we
worship him by such Ways and Means only as himself has appointed. 3. It is not
enough to worship the only true God according to the first, and in his own
Ordinances according to the second, but all must be done in a due Manner; and
so as that the Name of God may be sanctified according to the third: Rest not
on the Observation of external Ceremonies, though such as are of Divine
Institution, but use them, 1. In Testimony of your Obedience to God's Command.
2. As a significative Expression of the Truth and Reality of your inward
Worship; pray and praise that it may be know, how highly you esteem of
Reverence and Love God, and that you acknowledge him-as the Author of all Good
trusting in him, and testifying your Gratitude for Mercies received. 3. As
means of his own Appointment, wherein the choicest of Mercies are to be had
from God through Christ, and the outgoings of our Hearts toward him are to be
enlarged at the highest Rate. 4. The Worship which God's People perform unto
him, is all the active Glory which he has from the Creatures: His Justice is
glorified in a passive way, in the eternal Condemnation of the Wicked, but the
Spiritual Sacrifices and Services of his peculiar Ones, is all the active Glory
which he has from his Creatures. 5. The Work of God's Worship is nothing else
but an initiation and beginning of the Life of Heaven here on Earth; it is an
habituating, inuring, and accustoming our Selves beforehand, to what we must do
more solemnly and perfectly, and after another way and manner, when we come
home to Emanuel's Land.

The Duties which you owe to others are these; Do by all, as you would be dealt
by your Self. Matthew. 7.12. Show all Meekness to all Men, Tit. 3.2. Be Kind,
Courteous, Affable, Merciful and Compassionate to all; Love your Enemies; hate
the Sins of all, but the Persons of none; pray for them that persecute you;
bless them that curse you; render to no Man Evil for Evil, or Reviling for
Reviling, but contrariwise, Blessing, knowing that you are thereunto called,
that you should inherit a Blessing, 1 Pet. 3.8, 9. Matthew. 5. end. Romans 12. end.
Do good to all, especially those of the Household of Faith, Gal. 6.10. Use
Hospitality without Grudging, 1 Pet. 5.9. Be kindly affectioned to Strangers,
not forgetting to entertain such, for thereby some have entertained Angels.
Remember them that are in Bonds, as bound with them, and them which suffer
Adversity, as being your self also in the Body, Heb. 13.2, 3. Weep with them
that Weep, and Rejoice with them that do Rejoice, Romans 12.15. Visit the
Fatherless and the Widow in their Affliction, James 1.27. Cloth the Naked
Backs, Feed the hungry Bellies, and let the Loins of the Poor bless you, Job
30.19, 20. You are not to think, speak, or do ought that may have a tendency to
the taking away the Life of any one in an unjust illegal way, but use all
lawful Means for preservation of the same, according to the sixth Command: You
are not only to possess your own Vessel in sanctification and Honor, not in
the Lust of Concupiscence, even as the Gentiles which know not God, 1 Thessalonians.
4.4, 5. but also, use all lawful Means for preservation of others Chastity, not
thinking, speaking or doing what may deprive them thereof, by wanton Looks,
obscene filthy Speeches, unseemly Carriages, gaudy Attire, excessive Feeding or
pampering the Flesh, Whorish Dresses, mixed Dances, or any such like, according
to the Seventh Command, Ephesians. 5.3, 4, 5. Fornication, and all Uncleanness, let
it not be once named amongst you, as becomes Saints, neither Filthiness,
Foolish Talking, nor Jesting, which are not convenient; for this ye know, that
no Whoremongers nor unclean Person has any Inheritance in the Kingdom of
Christ, and of God.

You are to take no indirect course whereby to damnifie any Person in his
Estate or Goods, according to the Eighth Command, Ephesians. 4.28. Let him that
Stole steal no more, but rather let him Labor, working with his Hands the
thing which is good, that he may give to him that needs, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6. Let no
Man go beyond or defraud his Brother in any Matter, because that the Lord is
the Avenger of all such, as we also have forewarned you and testified.

You are not to say or do any thing that may take away the good name of
another, or wrong them in their Reputation; for a good Name is better than
precious Ointment, Eccles. 7.1. and rather to be chosen than great Riches,
Prove. 22.1. He that speaks Truth, shows forth Righteousness, but a false
Witness, Deceit; there is that speaks like the piercings of a Sword, but the
Tongue of the Wise is Health: The Lip of Truth shall be established for ever,
but a lying Tongue is but for a Moment, Prove. 12.17, 18, 19. These six things
does the Lord hate; yea, seven are an Abomination to him; a proud Look; a lying
Tongue, and Hands that shed innocent Blood; a Heart that devises wicked
Imaginations; Feet that be swift in running to Mischief; a false Witness that
speaks Lies, and him that sows Discord among Brethren, Prove. 6.16, 17, 18,
19. The words of a Talebearer are as Wounds, and they go down into the
innermost parts of the Belly. Prove. 18.8. 2 Cor. 12.20, 21. I fear, lest when I
come, I shall not find you such as I would, and that I shall be found unto you
such as ye would not; lest there be Debates, Envyings, Wraths, Strifes,
Back-bitings, Whisperings, Swellings, Tumults; and lest when I come again, my
God will humble me among you, and that I shall bewail many which have sinned
already. Lastly, let your Conversation be without Covetousness, and be content
with such things as ye have; for he has said, I will never leave thee nor
forsake thee, so that we may boldly say, the Lord is my helper, and I will not
fear what Man shall do unto me, Heb. 13.5, 6. The Substance of all is, in that
of Phil. 4.8. Whatsoever things are Honest, whatsoever things are Just,
whatsoever things Pure, whatsoever things are Lovely, whatsoever things are of
good Report; if there be any Virtue, and if there be any Praise, think on these
things; and Romans 13.8. Owe nothing to any Man but Love, for they that love one
another, have fulfilled the Law.

More particularly the several Duties of all Relations are Christianly and
Conscionably to be performed: And that this small piece may be of the more
universal usefulness, to all of all sorts into whose Hands it shall come, I
will endeavor by the Divine Assistance, to make it a clear Prospective or
Looking-glass, wherein every one may see the Duties of their Respective
Relations.

Are you Magistrates? 1. Be truly thankful to God for advancing you above your
Brethren, not having an overweening conceit of your selves, because of your
Exaltation; so God did require of him that was to be over his own People, Deuteronomy.
17.20. That his Heart should not be lifted up above his Brethren.

2. Acquaint your selves both with the Law of God, that you may know what is
Just and Honest, and also with the Laws of that Kingdom, Commonwealth, Country
or Corporation, where you exercise your Office, Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19. When he
sits upon the Throne, he shall write him a Copy of this Law, and it shall be
with him, and he shall read them all the days of his Life.

3. Hate Sin and Vice in your selves, ruling in the fear of God, 2 Samuel 23.3.
that so you may the better punish Vice in others.

4. As in the Administration of Justice you represent God's Person on Earth, so
in all your judicial Proceedings do nothing but as if God were the Actor
thereof himself; he is no respecter of Persons, no more must you; he cannot be
bribed with Gifts to pervert Justice, no more must you, 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7.

5. As you are to take severe Notice and inspection of the wicked Works of
profligat Persons, punishing them according to their Demerits, so where you
observe such as are Ingenious, Industrious, Virtuous and Peaceable;
Countenance, Encourage and reward them, Romans 13.3, 4. Rulers ought not to be a
terror to good Works, but to Evil; he that bears the Sword is to be an Avenger,
to execute Wrath upon him that does Evil, but a Minister of God for good to
them that do Well.

6. Let Justice be mixed with Mercy, not executing the rigor of the Law, unless
in Cases highly Criminal, and unless an unevitable Necessity urges to it;
Summum jus summa injuria: And do not so show Mercy to incorrigible Offenders,
as by remissness in Justice to encourage others to the like Offenses; show
Mercy especially to the Poor, the Oppressed, Fatherless and Widows.

7. Preserve Propriety, Peace and Safety, promoting Piety and the Means
thereof, Reformation and Righteousness, that your Government may have an
influential Operation upon the Godliness and Honesty of all in their Lives and
Conversations, 1 Timothy 2.2. And that in you, that prophecy of Isa. 49.23. may
have its Accomplishment, being to the Church and People of God, what a Father
and Mother, a nursing Father and nursing Mother is to a poor young Suckling.

8. Prefer the Peoples Good to your own private and personal Interest, being as
little chargeable as it is possible, Nehem. 5.15. The former Governors that had
been before me were chargeable unto the People, and had taken of them Bread and
Wine, beside 40 Sheckels of Silver; yea, even the Servants bare rule over the
People; but so did not I, because of the fear of God.

Duties of Subjects.
1. Bless God for hedging you about with such a Fence of Magistracy, as an
Ordinance, whereby you are secured against all Injuries and Violence, which you
are liable unto from Adam's apostate Posterity; Men turned into Monsters: The
Consideration of the desperate Wickedness that now lodges in the Hearts of the
Sons of Men, has often made me put a high Estimate upon this Mercy of
Magistracy, for if it were not for it, the whole World would be quickly filled
with horrid Robberies, Adulteries, and Murders, sheathing our Swords into one
another Bowels: As God's Glory and his People's Good have been the two great
ends which he has proposed to himself in all his Transactions, so in this, Romans
13.4. He is the Minister of God to thee for Good; therefore be thankful.

2. Seeing God has so well provided for you, you are to suffer any injury,
rather than be your own Avengers, Matthew. 5.39, 40, 41. Whosoever shall smite
thee on the Right Cheek, turn to him the other also; and whosoever will sue
thee at the Law, and take away thy Coat, let him have thy Cloak also, i. e.
rather than fall a quarrelling, and fighting with him that thus misuses thee.
If thou art injured, thou have God's Deputy to go unto; but a private Person
and a Christian must never be his own Avenger, nor retaliate injuries for
injuries, Romans 12.17, 18. If it be possible as much as in you lies, live
Peaceably with all Men: Dearly beloved, avenge not your selves, but rather give
place unto Wrath; for it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the
Lord, Deuteronomy. 32.35.

3. Honor the Persons of Magistrates, whether Wicked or Godly, for their
Office sake, as being Gods upon Earth, 1 Pet. 2.17. Fear God, Honor the King,
Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy People;
no, not in thy Thought or Bedchamber; for a Bird of the Air shall carry the
Voice, and that which has Wings shall tell the Matter, Eccles. 10.20.

4. Seeing your peaceable possession of Temporals is from them as an Ordinance
of God, you are to contribute to their maintenance, according to your Ability
and their public Necessities, Romans 13.6, 7. For this cause pay you Tribute
also, for they are God's Ministers, attending continually upon this very thing;
render therefore to all their Due, Tribute to whom Tribute, Custom to whom
Custom.

5. Obey them in all their lawful Commands, and in Case they command any thing
contrary to God's Word, submit to their Authority, and the Penalties inflicted
by them, without making resistance, Romans 13.1, 2. Let every Soul be subject to
the Higher Powers, for there is no Power but of God; whosoever therefore
resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God.

6. Pray for them, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. I exhort, that first of all Supplications,
Prayers, Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be made for all Men, for Kings,
and all that are in Authority; for this is good and acceptable in the fight of
God our Savior.

7. As thou art a Subject, and so one that in conjunction with others,
constitute'^ a Body Politic, study to promote the Public good, according to
thy Power, and the station in which Providence has placed thee; Pray for
mercies to the Nation, Country, City and Town where thou live, as well as for
mercies to thy self and Family, Jer. 2.9, 7. Bless God for Public, as well as
Personal mercies; mourn for national Sins and Calamities: Whatever thy Talent
is, Public or Private; I mean for a more Public or Private use, wrap it not
up in a Napkin; if it be for Preaching, Physic, Teaching School, or for
advancing Trade and Manufactures, make improvement of it accordingly: maintain
a civil concord, with all that are Members of the same Body Politic with thy
self: Envy not Superiors, walk humbly toward Inferiors; let every one of us
praise his Neighbor for his good to edification; Romans 15.2. and 14.19.

Duties of Ministers.
1. Retain a deep sense of the weightiness of this Soul-concerning work to
which you are called 2 Cor. 2.16. Who is sufficient for these things?

2. Let the Sense of self-insufficience, and weightiness of the work, put you
upon driving a great Trade with Heaven, in acting dependence upon, and making
frequent addresses unto God, for supplies suitable, 2 Cor. 2.3, 5. We are not
sufficient to think any thing of our selves, but our sufficience is of God; he
that does not fetch his Sermons by Prayer from Heaven, is never like to reach
the Hearts of others.

3. Study the Scriptures, your own Hearts, Providence, the Hearts, tempers,
constitutions, customs and conversations of others much, using all other men's
diligently and industriously, whereby you may be able, and apt to Teach, upon
all occasions, 1 Timothy 4.13, 14, 15, 16. Give attendance to Reading, to
Exhortation, to Doctrine; meditate on these things, give thy self wholly to
them.

4. Deliver no Message but what you receive from the mouth of God in the Holy
Scriptures; keep back no part of the Counsel of God; speak as the Oracles of
God, in the Name and Authority of the Son of God, as Ambassadors of Christ,
representing his Person, as such, that believe the Truths which you commend to
others, Ezekiel. 3.17. Acts 20.27. 1 Pet. 4.11. 2 Cor. 5.20. and 4.13. Psalm.
116.10.

5. Manage Christ's work with Christ's Spirit not your own: His Spirit is a
Spirit of Wisdom, show your selves Workmen that need not be ashamed, dividing
the Word of God aright, 1 Timothy 2.15. His Spirit is a Spirit of self-denial and
Zeal: To get a livelihood or great name to your selves, must not be your
principal nor ultimate end in preaching the Gospel; for that were not to preach
Christ, but your selves, 2 Cor. 4.5. 1 These. 2.4, 5, 6. As we were allowed of
God to be put in trust with the Gospel, even so we speak, not as pleasing Men,
but God, which tries our Hearts, for neither at any time used we flattering
words, as ye know, nor a Cloak of Covetousness, God is witness; nor of Men
sought we Glory, nor of you, nor yet of others.

9. Show all tenderness of compassion, love and pity to the Souls of Sinners, 1
These. 2.8. So being affectionately desirous of you, we were willing to have
imparted not the Gospel of God only to you, but also our own Souls, because ye
were dear unto us, 1 Cor. 2.19, 20, 21, 22. Psalm. 1.8. 2 Timothy 4.25, 26. 2 Timothy
4.1, 2. Comfort the feeble minded, and support the weak. 1 These. 5.14. Be
tender of troubled and afflicted Consciences, Heb. 12.12, 13. Lift up the Hands
which hang down, and the feeble Knees, and make straight paths for your Feet,
lest that which is lame be turned out of the way, but rather let it be healed,
Gal 6.1. If a Man be overtaken in a fault, restore such a one in the Spirit of
meekness, considering thy self, lest thou also be tempted.

7. To Soundness in Doctrine add Holiness of Conversation, being Exemplary in
all works of Piety and Charity, Tit, 1.7, 8, 9. A Bishop (and a Minister of the
Gospel) must be blameless, as the Steward of God, not self-willed, not soon
angry, not given to Wine, no striker, not given to filthy lucre, but a lover of
Hosptiality a lover of good Men, Sober, Holy, Just, Temperate; holding fast the
faithful word, as he has been taught, that he may be able by sound Doctrine
both to exhort and convince the gainsayers. And Tit. 2.7. In all things showing
thy self a pattern of good works, in Doctrine showing uncorruptness, gravity,
sincerity, sound speech, that cannot be condemned, that he that is of the
contrary part may be ashamed, having no evil to say of you 2 Timothy 2.22. Flee
youthful Lusts; but follow Righteousness, Faith, Charity and Peace with them
that call on the name of the Lord with a pure Heart, 1 Timothy 6.11, 12. and 4.12.
Be thou an example of the Believers in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in
Spirit, in Faith, in Purity, and 3.7. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2. Feed the Flock of God
which is among you, not as being Lords over God's heritage, but as being
examples to the Flock.

8. Be painful and laborious in the Lord's Vineyard; for the Harvest is great
and the Laborers are few, 1 These. 2.9. 2 Cor. 12.14, 15. I will very gladly
spend, and be spent for you, though the more abundantly I love you, the less I
am loved, 2 Timothy 4.2. Preach in season and out of season, Acts 5.42. Daily in
the Temple, and in every House, they ceased not to Preach Jesus Christ: Much
unlike many Loyteres among us, who count it a great matter to Preach, or rather
Read an old rusty Homiley, once a Month or six Weeks: Watch over the Souls of
your People, as Remembring-that you must give an account, Heb 13.17. And
therefore habit constant coaation, and frequent familiar converse with them
will be necessary, Acts 20.28. Take heed to your selves, and to all the Flock,
over which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God,
which he has purchased with his own Blood. Non residents never had their
Commission from Christ, and they will have but few or none to present unto him
as their Crown and Glory, in the great day of accounts:

9. Look well to the government both of your own House, and of the House or
Church of God, 1 Timothy 3.4, 5. One that rules well his own House, having his
Children in subjection with all gravity; for if a Man know not how to rule his
own House, how shall he take care of the Church of God? Let nothing be seen in
your selves, or those that belong unto you, that may give just occasion of
offense to others, whereby the work of God may be hindered: Be Faithful,
Impartial, and Authoritative in the administration of Censures, as an Ordinance
of Christ: The Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven are a great trust; sh^^^ not
Heavens Gate, or the Door of the Church, against the weakest visible believer,
whom Christ and his People would have admitted: And keep in none that are
scandalous, and obstinate, whom Christ and his People would have excluded, in
nothing aming at the destruction of any, but the edification of all, 2 Cor.
10.4, 5, 6. The weapens of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God,
to the pulling down of strong holds, and having in a readiness to revenge all
disobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled.

Lastly, if you have a clear providential Call to suffer persecution for any
truth of the Gospel, or Ordinance of Christ, decline it not, 2 Timothy 2.3. Endure
hardness as a good Soldier of Christ, v. 8, 9, 10. Remember that Jesus Christ,
of the Seed of David, was raised from the Dead, according to my Gospel, wherein
I suffer as an evil-doer, even unto bonds; but the word of God is not bound:
Therefore I endure all things for the elects sake, that they may also obtain
the Salvation which is in Christ Jesus with eternal Glory, Phil 2.17. Yea, and
if I be offered up upon the Sacrifice and service of your Faith, I joy and
rejoice with you all, 1 Timothy 12, 13, 14. 2 Timothy 1.8. Be not ashamed of the
Testimony of our Lord, nor of me his Prisoner, but be thou partaker of the
afflictions of the Gospel according to the Power of God.

Are you now Members of a Gospel Church and in Communion with Saints? Consider
the Duties of this relation, 1. In Reference to God, and the dignity of a
Church state. 2. To those that are over you in the Lord. 3. One to another.

Duties of the first sort are these;
1. God has made over himself, by a most solemn covenant-engagement unto you;
put a high estimate upon this more than ordinary privilege, and make a due
improvement thereof; let the thoughtful remembrance of this overaw you to a
constant walking in his Holy ways, and observation of his Statutes, Deuteronomy.
26.17, 18, 19, 20. Thou have avouched the Lord this day to be thy God, and to
walk in his ways; and the Lord has avouched thee this day to be his peculiar
People, and that thou should keep all his Commandments, and to make thee
high above all Nations in Praise, and in Name and in Honor; that thou may
be a Holy People unto the Lord thy God: Let the memory of this be always recent
and fresh upon your Spirits, and it will much influence persiverance in
Holiness, and prove an excellent Antidote against Apostasy.

2. The Gospel Church is often called the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 3.2 and 5.19.
and 11.12. and 13.14. and 16.19. And if God has made you Members hereof, it is
a vertual declaration of his Mind and Counsel, concerning your Election from
Eternity and Salvation to all Eternity; which calls aloud upon you for
Spiritual Rejoicing, more than if you had been made Earthly Kings and Queens,
Luke 10.20. In this rejjoyce not, that the Spirits are Subject unto you, but
rather rejoice because your Names are written in Heaven, 2 These. 2.13, 14, 15.
We are bound to give thanks unto God always for you Brethren, Beloved of the
Lord, because God has from the beginning chosen you to Salvation, through
Sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the Truth, whereunto he called you
by our Gospel, to the obtaining of the Glory of our Lord Jesus: Ephesians. 1.4, 5,
6. 2 Timothy 1.9, 10.

3. Though once ye were Darkness, yet now ye are all the Children of Light, and
of the Day: Therefore sleep not as others, but watch and be sober, 1 These. 5.5,
6, 7. They that sleep sleep in the Night, and they that are Drunken are Drunken
in the Night; but let us who are of the Day, be sober, putting one the
Breastplate of Faith, and for a Helmet the hope of Salvation, Romans 13.12, 13.
The Night is far spent, the Day is at hand, let us therefore cast off the works
of Darkness, and put on the armor of Light; let us walk honestly as in the
Day, not in Rioting and Drunkenness, not in Chambering and Wantonness, not in
Strife and Envying, but put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for
the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof, 1 Pet. 2.9, 10. Ye are a chosen
Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an Holy Nation, a Peculiar People, that ye
should show forth the praises of him that has called you out of Darkness into
his mavelous Light, which in time past were not a People, but are now the
People of God, which had not obtained mercy, but have now obtained mercy.
Dearly beloved, I beseech you, as Strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from Fleshly
Lusts which war against the Soul, having your conversation honest among the
Gentiles, that whereas they speak against you as evil doers, they may, by your
good works which they shall behold, Glorify God in the day of visitation,
Math. 5.16.

4. You are made sharers and copartners with Christ in all the Privileges and
Precious things, which he has purchased with his Blood, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19, 20.
And wherein will you testify your thankfulness* to him? Has he Died for you,
and will not love constrain you to live unto him? 2 Cor. 2.5, 14. As he Died
for your sins, so he Rose for your justification, Romans 4.25. And will not you
Dye to Sin and ascend in your Hearts after him? Will not you study to know the
Power of his Resurrection, and the Fellowship of his Sufferings, being made
conformable to his Death? Phil. 3.10, 11? Romans 6.10, 11, 12, 13. In that he
Died, he Died unto sin once; but in that he Lives, he Lives unto God:
Likewise ye also reckon your selves to be Dead unto Sin, but alive unto God,
through Jesus Christ our Lord: Let not Sin therefore reign in your Mortal
Bodies, that ye should obey it in the Lusts thereof, neither yield your Members
as Instruments of unrighteousness unto Sin; but yield your selves unto God, as
those that are alive from the Dead; and your Members as Instruments of
Righteousness unto God: He has now broke the Serpents Head, triumphed over
Principalities and Powers, taken away the Handwriting of the Old Covenant that
was against you, Nailing it to his Cross; has conquered the World, and
delivered you from it: Has made Death stingless, and has swallowed up the Grave
in victory; has abolished the condemning Power of the Law, himself being made a
curse for you. What hinders then, but that you take up that Apostical Triumph,
Romans 8. to the end. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of God's Elect? It is
God that justifies, who is he that condemns? It is Christ that Died; Yea,
rather that is risen again, who is even at the Right hand of God, who also
makes intercession for us. Who shall separate us from all the Love of Christ?
shall tribulation? who are the Enemies, and what are the evils, which the
Church redeemed with the Blood of God, should be afraid of, Heb. 10.19, 21, 22.
Having therefore, Brethren, boldness to enter into the Holiest by the Blood of
Jesus, by a new and living way, which he has consecrated for us, though the
Veil, that is to say, his flesh, and having a high Priest over the House of
God, let us draw near with a true Heart, in full assurance of Faith; having our
Hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our Bodies washed with pure
water, with the thing it self that was signified by legal washings.

5. God has reposed this great trust in you to be Instrumental conservators of
his Truths and Ordinances, Romans 3.2. 1 Timothy 3.15. Show fidelity in preserving
truth among your selves, keeping your Understandings and Judgments untainted
with errors and heresies, Acts 20.19, 30, 31. Ephesians. 4.14. Heb. 13.9. Be not
carried about with strange Doctrines, for it is a good thing that the Heart be
established with Grace, not with Merits, which have not profited them that have
been occupied therein, 2 Cor. 2.11. 2, 3, 4. I am zealous over you with a Godly
jealousy, for I have espoused you to one Husband, that I may present you as a
chaste Virgin to Christ; but I fear lest by any means, as the Serpent beguiled
Eve, through his Subtilty, so your Minds should be corrupted from the
simplicity that is in Christ: For if he that comes perceives another Jesus
whom we have not prepared, or if ye receive another Spirit which ye have not
received, or another Gospel, which ye have not accepted, ye might well bear
with him, Gal. 1.8. Though we or an Angel from Heaven, Preach any other Gospel
unto you, than that which we have Preached unto you, let him be accursed:
Contend for the truth, against all that shall corrupt or oppose it, Jude 1. Let
no Ordinance be lost, or adulterated with your good will; restore all to their
primitive purity, and keep them in it: Let the word of the Lord also go forth
from you, unto others, that you being the Lord's Holy Mountain, may be a rich
Blessing to all places round about, Ezekiel. 34.26. Psalm. 110.2. Think your selves
of some expedient how to propagate the Gospel, according to your capacities,
abilities, and as present Providence will permit, after the pattern of the
Church of Thessalonica, 1 Ep. 1 Chap. v. 6, 7, 8. Yea, become followers of us,
and of the Lord; having received the Word in much affliction, with joy of the
Holy Ghost, so that ye were examples to all that were at Macedonia, and Achaia,
for from you sounded out the word of the Lord.

6. God has fenced you with many Hedges, and strong Fortifications, to wit with
his own Power, Providence, Spirit, Word, Angels, and other Creatures, insomuch
that the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against you: Let therefore Mount Zion
be glad, and the Daughters of Judah be glad; walk about Zion, go round about
her, tell the Towers thereof; mark well her Bulwarks, consider her Palaces,
that ye may tell it to the Generations following, for this God is our God for
ever and ever, he will be our guide unto Death, Ps. 48. to the end Isa. 4.5, 6.
The Lord will create upon every dwelling place of Mount Zion, and upon the
Assemblies, a Cloud and Smoke by Day, and shining of a Flaming Fire by Night;
for upon all the Glory shall be a defense; and there shall be a Tabernacle for
a Shadow in the Daytime from the Heat, and for a place of Refuge, and for a
covert from the Storm and Rain. And 41.10, 11, 12. Fear not, for I am with
thee; be not dismayed, for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee, yea I will
help thee, yea I will uphold thee with the Right Hand of my Righteousness;
behold all they that were incensed against thee shall be ashamed, and
confounded: They shall be as nothing, and they that strive with thee, shall
perish: Thou shall seek them, and shall not find them; even them that contended
with thee, they that were against thee shall be as nothing, and as a thing of
naught,

7. As God has made many Promises to you, my indeed all Promises are Yea and
Amen to you that believe, 2 Cor. 1.20. So suck the Breasts of these
Consolations, and let the Word of Christ dwell Richly in you, in all Wisdom,
Col. 3.16. Choose Promises as a part of your Portion, Psalm. 119.111. Acting
Faith and Patience, for the accomplishment thereof, and comforting your selves
therewith, in all your Affictions, Distresses, and Tribulations: Get some
compendious Catalogue, not only in your Heads, but also in your Hearts, of such
promises especially which may afford you some comfortable relief against the
temptations and troubles that do ordinarily attend a Church State. ^^le instance
in a few, to show you how to make improvement of the rest.

1. Are you at any time under perturbation of Mind, fearing the Rage and
Rejection of the Men of the World for your separation, not walking with them in
the same way of visible Worship? Let that of 2 Cor. 6.17, 18. be ready at hand
as a present remedy: Come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the
Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, and will be a
Father to you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord God
Almighty: Its true this Scripture is principally understood, of separation from
Idolatry and Idolaters, but not exclusive of other separations, where there is
visible Righteousness and Unrighteousness, Light and Darkness, Christ and
Belial, Piety and Tolerated Profaness: As you may see v. 14.15.

2. Is the want of able Officers, or being de. prived of such as ye had, your
grief? Make use of Ezekiel. 34.15, 16. I will feed them in a good Pasture, and
upon the high Mountains of Israel shall the Fold be: I will seek that which was
lost, and bring again that which was driven away, and will bind up that which
was broken, and strengthen that which was sick, Jer. 3.14, 15. I will take you
one of a City, and two of a Family, and I will bring you to Zion, and I will
give you Pastores according to mine Heart, which shall feed you with Knowledge
and Understanding: If it be for God's Glory and your good, you may believe that
some time or other that of Isa. 30.20, 21. shall be fulfilled: I limit not the
Holy One to Days, Weeks, Months or Years, Though the Lord give you the Bread of
Adversity, and the Water of Affliction, yet shall not thy Teachers be removed
into a Corner any more, but thine Eyes shall see thy Teachers, and thine Ears
shall hear a Word behind thee, saying, this is the way, walk ye in it, when ye
turn to the Right Hand and to the Left.

3. Are you a reproach to Neighbors, vile and contemptible in the Eyes of all
that are round about? See Isa. 28.5. The Lord of Hosts shall be for a Crown of
Glory, and for a Diadem of Beauty to the residue of his People. And 62.3. Thou
shall also be for a Crown of Glory in the Hand of the Lord, and a Royal Diadem
in the Hand of thy God (...) Thou shall no more be termed, forsaken, neither
shall thy Land any more be termed, desolate but thou shall be called Hephzibah,
and thy Land Beulah, for the Lord delights in thee, and thy Land shall be
Married, Isa. 51.7. Hearken un to me ye that know Righteousness, the People in
whose Heart is my Law. Fear ye not the reproach of Men, neither be afraid of
their Revilings, for the Moth shall eat them up as a Garment, and the Worm
shall eat them as Wool; but my Righteousness shall be for ever, and my
Salvation from Generation to Generation, Isa. 54.4, 5. Ezekiel. 36.15. ^

4. Is it so that Ordinances do you but little good, your Souls are still
Barren and Unfruitful, for all their droppings, and bedewings? Act Faith upon
Psalm. 92.13, 14. The Righteous shall Flourish like the Palm Tree, he shall grow
like a Cedar in Lebanon: Those that be Planted in the House of the Lord shall
Flourish in the Courts of our God, they shall still bring forth Fruit in Old
Age, they shall be Fat and Flourishing, to show that the Lord is upright, Isa.
27.3, 6. I the Lord water the Vineyard of Red Wine every moment: He shall cause
them that come of Jacob to take Root, Israel shall Blossom and Bud, and fill
the Face of the World with Fruit, And 35.5, 6, 7. Then shall the Eyes of the
Blind be opened, and the Ears of the Deaf shall be unstopped: Then shall the
Lame Man Leap, as an Heart, and the Tongue of the Dumb shall speak: For in the
Wilderness shall Waters break out, and Streams in the Desert: The parched
Ground shall become a Pool, and the Thirsty Land Springs of Water, in the
Habitation of Dragons, where each lay, shall be Grass, with Reads and Rushes.
And 44.3, 4. I will pour Water upon him that is Thirsty, and Floods upon the
dry Ground. I will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my Blessing upon thine
Offspring, and they shall Spring up as among the Grass, as Willows by the Water
side, Mal. 4.2. Unto you that fear my Name shall the Sun of Righteousness arise
with healing in his Wings, and ye shall go forth, and grow up as Calves of the
Stall.

5. Are you troubled with any bad Members, the Looseness and Carnality of whose
Conversation proves a scandal to the Gospel, and a reproach to your profession?
Comfort your selves with the promised purity of such a Church State yet to
come; which will admit of no Persons visibly unholy, Zech. 14.20, 21. In that
Day shall there be upon the Bells of the Horses, Holiness to the Lord: And the
Pots of the Lord's House, shall be like Bowls before the Altar; yea, every Pot
in Judca and in Jerusalem shall be Holiness unto the Lord of Hosts, and all
they that Sacrifice shall come and take of them, and sees therein; and in that
Day shall there be no more the Canaanite in the House of the Lord of Hosts,
Isa. 35.4, 5. And a Highway shall be there, and it shall be called the way of
Holiness: The unclean shall not pass over it; but it shall be for those: The
way-fairing Men, though Fools, shall not err therein: No Lion shall bethere, nor
any Ravenous Beast shall go up thereupon; but the Redeemed of the Lord shall
walk there, Isa. 60.21. Thy People shall be all Righteous, Zeph. 3.13. The
remnant of Israel shall not do Iniquity, nor speak Lies; neither shall a
deceitful Tongue be found in their Mouth,

6. Are you troubled with intestine divisions, carnal discords, strises,
emulations, and envyings, by reason of which you cannot cordially join together
in Acts of Worship? See Zeph. 3.9. I will turn to the People a pure Language,
that they may call upon the Name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent,
Zech. 14.9. The Lord shall be King over all the Earth. In that Day shall be one
Lord, and his Name one, Jer. 32.39. I will give them one Heart, and one Way,
that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and of the Children after
them, Isa. 11.13. Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex
Ephraim: Though this promise does more particularly relate to a Reconciliation
between the Ten Tribes and the Two, yet by converting it into a Prayer it is
applicable to your case. Thus, Lord, have thou said that thou will do, and so
for the Jews, and will not thou do so also for us? Are not we made partakers of
the fatness of the Olive, are not their privileges ours? And their promises in
some degree ours? Ephesians. 3.6. And, 2.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.

7. Are you so poor in temporals, that you know not how to Subsist your selves,
nor how to maintain your Poor? See Psalm. 132.13, 14, 15. The Lord has chosen
Zion, he has desired it for his Habitation: This is my rest for ever, here
will I dwell; I will abundantly bless her Provision, I will satisfy her Poor
with Bread. And 33.18. The Eyes of the Lord is upon them that fear him, to keep
them alive in time of Famine. And 34.9, 10. There Is no want to them that fear
the Lord: The young Lions do lack, and suffer hunger, but they that seek the
Lord shall not want any good thing.

8. Have you much ado to trust God for your Children and Posterity, how they
shall be provided for, as to Spirituals and Temporals, See 5 Genesis 17.7. I will
establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed after thee in their
Generations, for an Everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy
Seed after thee, Isa. 59.21. My Spirit and my words shall not depart out of thy
Mouth, nor out of the Mouth of thy Seed, nor out of the Mouth of thy Seeds
Seed, Deuteronomy. 4.40. Thou shall keep his Statutes and Comandments, which I command
thee this Day, that it may go well with thee, and with thy Children after thee,
Psalm. 103.17. The mercy of the Lord is from Everlasting to Everlasting upon
them that fear him, and Righteousness unto his Childrens Children, Acts 2.39.
The promise is to you and to your Children, Isa. 44.3. and 65.23. and 66.22.
Psalm 102.28. and 89.30, 31, 32, 33.

9. Are you at any time under despondency, because of persecution for the
Gospel? See Math. 5.10, 11, 12. Blessed are they which are persecuted for
Righteousness sake, for their's is the Kingdom of Heaven: Blessed are ye when
Men shall revile you, and persecute you; and shall say all manner of Evil
against you falsely, for my Name sake: Rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great
is your reward in Heaven: So perfected they the Prophets which were before you,
Mark 10.29, 30. Verily I say unto you, there is no Man that has left Houses, or
Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands, for
my sake, and the Gospels, but he shall receive now an hundredfold in his time,
Houses and Brethren with persecutions, and in the World to come Eternal Life, 1
Pet. 4.12, 13, 14. Beloved, think it not strange concerning the fierce trial
which is to try you, as though some strange thing happened unto you, but
rejoice in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's Sufferings; that when his
Glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy: If ye are
reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye, for the Spirit of Glory and of
God rests upon you. Are you convented before Courts, and called before
Magistrates, and know not how to carry it in such a case? See Math. 10.18, 19,
20. Ye shall be brought before Governors and Kings, for my sake for a
Testimony against them, and the Gentiles: But when they deliver you up, take no
thought how, or what ye shall speak; it shall be given you in that same hour:
For it is not ye that speak, but the Spirit of your Father which speaks in
you.

10. If the Lord should suffer you to be Imprisoned, or Banished, be comforted
from Jer. 15.11. The Lord said, Verily it shall be well with thy Remnant;
verily I will cause the Enemy to entreat thee well in the time of Evil, and in
the time of Affliction, Psalm. 12.5. For the oppression of the Poor, for the
Sighing of the Needy. Now will I arise, says the Lord, I will set him in
safety from him that puffs at him, Isa. 35.10. The ransomed of the Lord shall
return to Zion with Songs, and Everlasting joy upon their Heads, they shall
obtain Joy and Gladness, and Sorrow and Sighing shall flee away, Jer. 30.18,
19. 20 Thus says the Lord, behold I will bring again the Captivity of Jacob's
Tents, and have mercy on his dwelling places; and out of them shall proceed
thanksgiving, and the voice of them that make merry: I will Multiply them, and
they shall not be few: I will also Glorify them and they shall not be small:
Their Children also shall be as aforetime, and their Congregation shall be
established before me, and I will punish all them that oppress them. And 33.10,
11.

11. Are you afraid that you may so Apostatize and fall away as cease to be a
Church, and God's People? See Isa. 54.9, 10. As I have Sworn, that the Waters
of Noah shall no more go over the Earth; so have I Sworn that I would not be
Wrath, nor Rebuke thee: For the Mountains shall depart, and the Hills be
removed; but my kindness shall not depart from thee, neither shall the Covenant
of my peace be removed, says the Lord that has mercy one thee, Jer. 31.35,
36, 37. Thus says the Lord, which gives the Sun for a Light by Day, which
divides the Sea, when the Waves thereof Roar. If those Ordinances depart from
before me, says the Lord, then the Seed of Israel also shall cease from being
a Nation before me for ever: Thus says the Lord; if Heaven above can be
measured, and the Foundations of the Earth be searched out beneath, I will also
cast off all the Seed of Israel, for all that they have done, Joh. 10.27, 28,
29. My Sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me, and they shall
never perish, neither shall any Man pluck them out of my Hand: My Father which
gave them me, is greater than all, and no Man is able to pluck them out of my
Father's Hand.

Lastly, Would you be comforted with some grounded assurance, that God's work
in the latter Days shall go on and prosper maugre all oppsition? The Kingdom of
Christ shall be advanced, i. e. There shall be a glorious reformation in
Doctrine, Worship and Discipline; Antichrist and Antichristianism shall
gradually be extirpated. God's ancient People the Jews, shall be converted, and
a more abundant measure of the Spirit of the Lord shall be poured forth. See
Isa. 2. Begin. Micah 4. Begin: In the last Days it shall come to pass, that the
Mountain of the House of the Lord shall be established in the top of the
Mountains, and it shall be exalted above the Hills, and People shall flow unto
it, and many Nations shall come and say, Let us go up to the Mountain of the
Lord, and to the House of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways,
and we will walk in his paths: For the Law shall go forth of Zion, and the word
of the Lord from Jerusalem. v. 5, 6, 7. All People will walk every one in the
Name of his God, and we will walk in the Name of the Lord our God, for ever and
ever: In that Day, says the Lord, will I assemble her that halteth, and I,
will gather her that is driven out, and her that I have afflicted: And I will
make her that halted a Remnant, and her that was cast far off, a strong Nation;
and the Lord shall Reign over them in Mount Zion from hence forth even, for
ever, Psalm. 2.6, 7, 8. 2 These. 2.8, 9. Then shall consume with the Spirit of
his Mouth, and destroy with the brightness of his coming, Rev. 14.6, 7, 8, 9.
Romans 11.25, 26. Rev. 11.15.

Would you know how to demean your selves, to them that are over you in the
Lord?

1. You owe them Love and Respect for their Office, and Works sake, as they are
the representeves of Christ's Person, 1 These. 5.12, 13. We beseech you Brethren,
to know them which labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish
you, and to esteem them very highly for their works sake, Gal. 4.13, 14. Ye
know how through infirmity of the Flesh, I Preached the Gospel to you at first,
and my temptation which was in the Flesh, ye despised not, nor rerejected, but
received me as an Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus: I bear you record, that
if it had been possible, ye would have plucked out your own Eyes and have given
them to me.

2. Be not too credulous of every calumny and report that is raised against them
without due Examination of the truth or falsehood thereof, 1 Timothy 5.19, Against
an Elder receive not an accusation, but before two or three witnesses.

3. Walk according to their example, so far as they are followers of Christ,
Phil. 3.17. Brethren, be followers together of me, and mark them which walk so,
as ye have us for an example, 1 Cor. 4.15, 16. Though ye have Ten Thousand
instructors in Christ, yet have ye not many Fathers, for in Christ Jesus have I
begotten you, through the Gospel; therefore I beseech you be followers of me.
And 11.3. Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ, 1 These. 1.5, 6,
Jam. 5.10. Take my Brethren the Prophets, who have spoken in the Name of the
Lord for an example of suffering, affliction, and of patience.

4. Pray heartily for them, Ram. 15.30, 31* Now I beseech you Brethren, for the
Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the Love of the Spirit, that ye strive
together with me in your Prayers to God for me, that I may be delivered from
them that do not believe in Judea: And that my service which I have for
Jerusalem, may be accepted of the Saints; that I may come unto you with joy, by
the will of God, and may be refreshed with you, Ephesians. 6.19, 20. And for me,
that utterance may be given unto me, that I may open my Mouth holdly, to make
known the Mystery of the Gospel, for which I am an Ambassador in bonds, that
therein I may speak boldly, as I ought to speak, 2 These. 2.1, 2. Brethren, pray
for us, that the Word of the Lord may have free course, and be glorified even
as it is with you, and that we may be delivered from, unreasonable and wicked
Men; for all Men have not Faith, Heb. 13.18, 19. Pray for us, for we trust we
have a good conscience in all things, willing to live honestly: But I beseech
you the rather to do this, that I may be restored to you the sooner, Phil.
1.19, 20

5. Give obedience to their Doctrine, and submission to their censures which
are according to the Gospel, and adminstred in the name of Christ, Heb. 13.17.
Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch
for your Souls; as they that must give account, that they may do it with Joy,
and not with Grief, for that is unprofitable for you.

6. If they devote themselves, Souls, Bodies Strength, Time, Talents, with
whatever is dearest to them, wholly for the service of your Souls, and to
comunicate Spiritual things unto you, its agreeable to the mind of Christ, and
sound reason that you should communicate temporal things unto them, according
to your abilities, and as the necessities, in doing, or suffering, do require,
Gal. 6.6. Let him that is taught in the word communicate to him that teaches,
in all good things, 1 Cor. 9.6, 7, 8. Have not we Power to forbear working? Who
goes a Warfare at any time on his own charges? Who plants a Vineyard, and eats
not the Fruit thereof? And who feeds a Flock, and eats not of the Milk of
the Flock? Say I these things as a Man? Or says not the Law the same also? For
it is written in the Law of Moses, thou shall not muzzle the Mouth of the Ox
that treads out the Corn: Does God take care for Oxen? Or says he it
altogether for our sakes? For our sakes no doubt this is written; that he that
Ploweth should Plow in hope; and he that Thresheth in hope should be partaker
in hope: If we have Sown unto you Spiritual things, is it a great matter if we
should reap your carnal things? Do not ye know, that they which Minister about
Holy things, live of the things of the Temple? and they which wait at the
Altar, are partakers with the Altar? even so has the Lord Ordained, that they
which Preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. Let the
Elders that Rule well, be counted worthy of double Honor, especially they who
labor in the Word and Doctrine; for the Scripture says, Deuteronomy. 25.4. Thou
shall not muzzle the Ox that treads down the Corn. And Matthew. 10.10. The
labourer is worthy of his reward. If these or the like expressions were only
the words of a Man, whose interest led him so to speak, they might well be
suspected as savouring of selfishness, but by this time you and I know one
another so well, that there is no need for me to Apologize, for my thus writing:
Though my administrations amongst you have been attended with many other
infirmities, yet in time I know, you will bear me witness, that I have not
sought yours, but you; neither indeed needed I to do so, for I must bear you
this Testimony, that since my necessities have called for supply, you have been
more ready to communicate than I to receive. My end is to inform you of the
Mind of God in this thing, and to confirm your Faith in your Practice; doing
what you do as an Ordinance of God, upon which you may expect a Blessing,
according to Matthew. 10.40, 41. He that receives you, receives me, and he that
receives me, receives him that sent me: He that receives a Prophet in the
name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophet's reward: And whosoever shall give
to drink to one of these little ones a Cup of cold Water, only in the name of a
Disciple, verily he shall in no wise lose his reward. And though you are
sufficiently instructed, yet this may be of use to others.

Duties of Church Members toward one another.
1. Study unanimity or oneness of Mind as much as is possible, 1 Cor. 1.10. I
beseech you Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak
the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you, but that ye be
perfectly joined together in the same Mind, and in the same Judgment, Phil.
2.1, 2. If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of Love, if any
fellowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels and mercy, fulfill ye my joy; that ye be
likeminded, having the same Love; being of one accord, of one mind, Romans 15.5.
The God of patience and consolation, grant you to be likeminded one toward
another, according to Christ Jesus; that ye may with one Mind and Mouth
glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

2 Make conscience of that necessary, but so much neglected Duty of Brotherly
Admonition, Matthew. 18.16, 17. If thy Brother Trespass against thee, go and
tell-him his fault between thee and him alone: If he shall hear thee, thou have
gained thy Brother; but if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or
two more; that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be
established: And if the shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the Church:
But if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as a Heathen Man,
and a Publican, Romans 15.14. I my self am persuaded of you, Brethren, that ye
also are full of Goodness, filled with all Knowledge, able also to admonish one
another, 2 These. 3.15. Col. 3.16.

3. Mutual Exhortation is another Duty, Heb. 3.12, 13. Take heed Brethren, lest
there be in any of you an evil Heart of unbelief, in departing from the living
God: But exhort one another Daily, while it is called to Day, lest any of you
be hardened through the deceitfulless of Sin. And 10.24, 25. Let us consider one
another, to provoke unto Love, and to good Works; not forsaking the assembling
of our selves together, as the manner of some is; but exhorting one another,
and so much the more as ye see the Day is approaching.

4. Let not them that are strong, in respect of Knowledge, Gifts, Graces,
Experiences, Seize, and Enjoyments, Undervalue, or Disesteem the Weak,
and let not the Weak envy them that are Strong, Romans 15.1, 2. We that are
Strong, ought to bear with the Infirmities of the weak, and not please our
selves. And 12.3. I say through the Grace given unto me, to every Man that is
among you, not to think more highly of himself than he ought to think; but to
think Soberly, according as God has dealt to every Man the measure of Faith, v.
10. In Honor preferring one another, 1 Cor. 12. Chap. throughout. Especially
v. 18.21, 22. God has set the Members, every one of them, in the Body, as it
has pleased him: The Eye cannot say to the Hand, I have no need of thee, nor
again the Head to the Feet, I have no need of you; nay, much more those Members
of the Body which seem to be more feeble, are necessary, and those Members of
the Body which we think to be less Honorable, upon these we bestow more
abundant Honor, and our uncomly parts have more abundant comeliness, Phil. 2.3.
Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory, but in lowliness of Mind let
each esteem other better than themselves, Romans 12.16. Mind not high things, but
condescend to Men of low Estate.

5. If any difference in Principles or Practices fall out among you, pursue
after Peace notwithstanding thereof, especially if it be not in fundamentals of
Faith, and if it be visible that what the parties that differ from you do, is
from a Principle of Conscience, and are in all other things conscientious, Romans
4.2, 3. One believes that he may eat all things, another who is weak, eats
Herbs: Let not him that eats, despise him that eats not, v. 17, 18, 19. The
Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink, but Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in
the Holy Ghost; for he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to
God, and approved of Men: Let us therefore, follow after the things which make
for Peace, and things wherewith one may edify another, Phil. 3.15, 16. Let as
many as be perfect, be thus minded; and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded,
God shall reveal even this unto you: Nevertheless whereto we have already
attained, let us walk by the same Rule, let usmind the same thing, Ephesians. 4.3,
4, 5, 6.

6. Harbor not suspicious thoughts of one another Hypocrisy, Rom 14.4. Who
art thou that judge another Man's Servant? To his own Master he stands or
falls; yea he shall be holden up: v. 10. Why do thou judge thy Brother? We
shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ, Jam. 4.11, 12. Speak not
evil one of another, Brethren, he that speaks evil of his Brother; and
judges his Brother, speaks evil of the Law, and judges the Law; but if thou
judge the Law, thou art not a Doer of the Law, but a Judge: There is one
Lawgiver, who is able to save and to destroy, Who art thou that judge
another? Matthew. 7.1, 2. Judge not, that ye be not Judged; for with what
Judgment ye Judge, ye shall be Judged, and with what Measure meet, it shall be
Measured to you again.

7. Be very tender of doing any thing that may give just cause of offense to
your Spiritual Relations, especially in matters indifferent, Romans 14.13, 14.
Let no Man put a Stumbling Block, or an occasion to fall in his Brother's way:
I know, and am persuaded by the Lord Jesus, that there is nothing unclean of it
self, ( i. e. none of those Meats which were unclean under the Law, are so now
made under the Gospel) but to him that esteems any thing unclean, to him it
is unclean: If thy Brother is destroyed with thy Meat, thou walk not
charitably; destroy not him with thy Meat for whom Christ Dyed, 1 Cor. 9.10,
11, 12, 13. Take heed lest by any means this liberty of yours become a
stumbling Block to them that are Weak: For if any Man see thee which have
knowledge, sit at Meat in the Idols Temple, Shall not the Conscience of him
that is weak be emboldned to eat those things which are offered to Idols? And
through thy knowledge shall the weak Brother perish, for whom Christ Died? But
when ye sin so against the weak Brethren, and wound their weak Conscience, ye
sin against Christ; wherefore if Meat make my weak Brother to offend, I will
eat no Flesh while the World stands, lest I make my weak Brother to offend, 1
Cor. 10.23, 24. All things are Lawful for me, but all things are not expedient;
all things are Lawful for me, but all things edify not; let no Man seek his
own, but every Man another Wealth. v. 32.33. Give none offense, neither to the
Jews nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God, even as I please all Men in
all things, not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many, that they may
be saved, Matthew. 18.6, 7. Gal. 5.13. 1 Pet. 2.16.

8. Visit one another as frequently as your occasions will give leave, and let
your Visits be as Acts of Charity: When you come together spend not your time
in talking of News, Trifles, or against others, but fall upon some
Soul-edifying discourse, Mal. 3.16. They that feared the Lord spoke often to
another, and the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a Book of Remembrance was
written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and thought upon his Name,
and they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts in that Day when I make up my
Jewels. Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt Communication proceed out of your Mouth,
but that which is good to the use of edifying, that it may Minister Grace to
the hearers. Col. 4.6. Let your Speech be always with Grace, seasoned with Salt.

9. Pray one for another, Ephesians. 6.18. Praying always, with all Prayer and
Supplication in the Spirit, watching thereunto with all Perseverance, and
Supplication for all Saints.

10. Show a tender Sympathy with each other in your several conditions, 1 Pet.
3.8. Have compassion one of another, and be pitiful, 1 Cor. 12.26. If one of
the Members do suffer, all the Members should suffer with it: If one Member be
Honored, all the Members should rejoice with it, Gal. 6.2. Bear one another
Burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ.

11. Confess your faults one to another, and forgive one another, even where
there has been not only supposed, but real injuries, Jam. 5.16. Col. 3.12, 13.
Put on, as the elect of God, Holy and Beloved, Bowels of Mercies, Kindness,
Humbleness of Mind, Meekness, Longsuffering, forbearing one another, and
forgiving one another, even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye, Matthew. 5.23.
If thou bring thy gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy Brother has
ought against thee, leave there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way;
first be reconciled to thy Brother, and then come and offer thy gift.

12. If there are such among you as are really Poor, Sick, Aged, and Infirm,
not able to work for themselves, or impoverished by the Hand of Providence,
contribute to their necessities out of that which God has lent you, 1 John
3.17. Who so has this World's Good, and sees his Brother need, and shuts
up his Bowels of compassion from him, how dwells the Love of God in him? Read
the whole Eighth Chapter of the 2 Epistle to the Corinthians: Where the Apostle
exhorts them unto a liberal distrubition to the poor Saints at Jerusalem, from
the example of the Macedonians, from the commendation of their former
forwardness, from the example of Christ, and the Spiritual profit that would
redound to themselves thereby. Moreover, Brethren, we do you to wit of the
Grace of God, bestowed on the Churches of Macedonia, how that in a great trial
of Affliction, the abundance of their Joy, and their deep Poverty abounded unto
the Riches of their liberality: For to their Power I bear record; yea and,
beyond their Power, they were willing of themselves, praying us with much
entreaty, that we would receive the gift, and take upon us the fellowship of
Ministering to the Saints: Therefore as ye abound in every thing, in Faith, in
Utterance, in Knowledge, in all Diligence, and in your Love to us; see that ye
abound in this Grace also: For ye know the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ that
though he was Rich, yet for your sakes he became Poor, that ye through his
Poverty might become Rich. See also the whole 9th Chap. Where he stirs them
up to a bountifulness in Almsgiving, as being a Sowing of Seed which shall
return a great increase to them, and occasion great thanksgivings unto God: As
touching the Ministering of the Saints, it is superfluous for me to write unto
you; for I know the forwardness of your Mind: But this I say, he which Sows
sparingly, shall Reap sparingly, and he which Sows bountifully, shall Reap
bountifully; every Man as he purposes in his Heart, so let him give, not
grudgingly, or of necessity, for God loves a cheerful giver: And God is able
to make all Grace abound toward you, that ye always having all sufficiency in
all things, may abound to every good Work being enriched in every thing to all
Bountifulness, which causerh through us thanksgiving unto God: For the
administration of this service, not only supplyeth the want of the Saints, but
is abundant also by many thanksgivings unto God; while by the experiment of
this Ministration, they glorify God for your professed subjection unto the
Gospel of Christ, and for your liberal distribution unto all Men. If it be duty
to distribute to the necessities of Members of other Churches, how much more to
those of your own? The substance of all the forementioned Duties is reduceable
to this one, of Love: And though this be a thing you are not ignorant of, and
though in every Epistle I have put you in mind of it, yet it is not altogether in
vain to do so still; nay, while I breath and have any opportunities afforded
for correspendence in this way, I must breath forth something of this
Evangelical Doctrine of Christ to you, Love one another, Love one another, Love
one another, 1 Pet. 1.22. Seeing ye have purified your Souls in obeying the
Truth, through the Spirit, unto unfeigned Love of the Brethren: See that ye
Love one another with a pure Heart fervently, 1 These. 4.9, 10. As touching
Brotherly Love; ye need not that I write unto you, for ye are taught of God to
Love one another; and indeed ye do it to all the Brethren which are in all
Macedonia; but we beseech you Brethren, that ye increase yet more and more,
Joh. 13.35. By this shall all Men know, that ye are my Disciples, if ye have
Love one to another, Romans 12.9. Let Love be without dissimulation, 1 John 3.18.
My little Children, let us not Love in Word or in Tongue, but in deed and in
truth, and hereby we know that we are of the Truth, and shall assure our Hearts
before him, 1 John 2.8. 9, 10, 11. A new Commandment I write unto you, because
the Darkness is past, and the true Light now shines; he that says he is in
the Light, and hates his Brother, is in Darkness even until now: He that
Loves his Brother abides in the Light, and there is no occasion of stumbling
in him. And 4.7, 8. Beloved, let us Love one another, for Love is of God; and
every one that Loves is Born of God, and knows God; he that knows not,
loves not God for God is Love. v. 16. He that dwells in Love dwells in
God, and God in him. v. 20.21. 1 Cor. 13. Though I speak with the Tongues of
Men and Angels, and have not Charity, I am become as sounding Brass, or a
tinkling Cymbal. Charity suffers long, and is kind. Charity envyeth not,
vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly,
seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, rejoices not in
iniquity, but rejoices in the truth; bears all things, believes all things,
hops all things, endures all things; Charity never fails, 1 These. 3.12.
The Lord make you to increase and abound in love one toward another, and
toward all Men, even as we do toward you.

Duties of a conjugal Relation.
1. Ye that are Husbands, Love your Wives: Let her that lives in your Bosom
have your Heart and Affection, so far as it is communicable to any Creature,
Ephesians. 5.25. Husbands love your Wives even as Christ also loved the Church. v.
28. So ought Men to love their Wives, as their own Bodies; he that loves his
Wife loves himself, for no Man ever yet hated his own Flesh: Love Purely,
Peculiarly, Sincerely, and Constantly: Let not Sickness, Poverty, Deformity,
old Age, or Infirmities, cause an abatement of your Affection.

2. Let the company and society of your Wives be pleasant and delightful to
you, Prove. 5.18, 19. Let thy Fountain be Blessed, and Rejoice with the Wife of
thy Youth; let her be as the loving Hind, and as the pleasant Roe; let her
Breasts satisfy thee at all times, and be thou always Ravished with her Love.

3. Keep the Marriage Covenant as to the dispose of your Bodies, Prove. 5.15.
Drink Waters out of thine own Cistern, and running Waters out of thine own
Well, v. 20. Why will thou my Son, be Ravished with a strange Woman, or embrace
the Bosom of a Stranger? Flee Fornication, Uncleanness, Adultery, Incest, and
all Tentations leading thereunto, Prove. 6.25, 26. Lust not after the Beauty of
a Stranger in thine Heart, neither let her take thee with her eyelids; for by
means of a Whorish Woman a Man is brought to a morsel of Bread; and the
Adultress will hunt for the precious life. Can a Man take Fire in his Bosom,
and his Cloths not be Burnt? Can one go upon hot Coals and his Feet not be
Burnt? So he that goes in to his Neighbors Wife, whosoever touches her he
shall not be innocent. v. 32, 33. Who so commits Adultery with a Woman
lacks understanding: He that does it destroys his own Soul; a Wound and
Dishonor shall he get, and his Reproach shall not be wiped away. So 7.22, 23,
24. Col. 3.5, 6.

4. As you are not Adulterously to meddle with any strange Woman; so 1 Cor.
7.3, 4. let the Husband render unto the Wife due Benevolence; likewise also the
Wife unto the Husband: The Wife has not power of her own Body, but the
Husband; and likewise also the Husband has not power of his own Body, but the
Wife: Defraud ye not one the other, except it be with confent, for a time, that
you may give your felves to Fasting and Prayer, and come together again, that
Satan tempt you not for your incontinency.

5. Let them communicate with you in all the good things which God bestows
upon you; provide liberally for them, letting them want no conveniencey which
you can afford, cherishing and nourishing them as your own Bodies, and as
Christ cherishes the Church, Ephesians. 5.29. Be not harsh, nor hard, churlish nor
unkind, Col. 3.19. Be not bitter against them.

6. Dwell with them as Men of knwledge, 1 Pet. 3.7. Let your carriage toward
them in all things be with Prudence and Discretion; admit them to a
copartnership with your selves in the administration of domestical and familiar
affairs: Let them have Power over Children and Servants, Genesis 16.6. Make use of
their advice and assistance in common concerns, Genesis 21.12. Correct their
misdemeanors with gentle and seasonable admonitions: If any difference happen,
let there be a speedy reconciliation; study one another tempers, and bear with
one another infirmities.

7. Give Honor unto them as unto the weaker Vessels, and as being Heirs
together of the Grace of Life, that your Prayers be not hindered, 1 Pet. 3.7.
Its duty to pray together as Husbands and Wives, and consequently your
demeanor in all things should be such, that you may be ready upon all
occasions to go Hand in Hand to Heaven, and to the Throne of Grace together.

8. If you are providentially Yoaked with carnal and ungodly Wives, you are not
to leave them; nor put them away, how cross or untoward soever, if they are
willing to continue with you: The same also I say, or rather the Apostle
concerning Godly Wives that have wicked Husbands, 1 Cor. 7.12, 13. If any
Brother has a Wife that believes not, and she be pleased to dwell with him,
let him not put her away; and the Woman which has a Husband that believes
not, if he be pleased to dwell with her, let her not leave him; for the
unbelieving Husband is sanctified by the Wife; and the unbelieving Wife is
sanctified by the Husband: But if the unbelieving depart let him depart; a
Brother or Sister is not under, Bondage in such cases: But God has called us
to peace; for what know thou, O Wife, whether thou shall save thy Husband?
Or how know thou O Man, whether thou shall sav^ thy Wife?

9. Get your Hearts every day more and more weaned from such dear Relations,
that when ever God shall be pleased to cause a divorce you may be able to bear
it with such patience and contentation as becomes Christians, 1 Cor. 7.29.
This I say, Brethren, the time is short, it remains, that they that have
Wives be as though they had none, and they that weep, as though they wept not, for
the Fashion of this World passes away, 1 These. 4.13, 14. I would not have you
ignorant, Brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow not even
as others, which have no hope; for if we believe that Jesus dyed, and rose
again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him.

Duties of Wives.
1. Let it be your great care as to answer the end of your Creation, so also of
this institution of Marriage, which was that you should be meet helps in all
things, and hindrances in nothing, to your Husbands, Genesis 2.18. The Lord said,
it is not good that Man should be alone, I will make him an help meet for him:
Be helpful to them in their Souls, Bodies, Families and Estates.

2. Let your Husbands have a reverential respect from you, being studious how
to please, and loath to displease them, Ephesians. 5.33. And the Wife see that she
reverence her Husband, 1 Pet. 3.6. Sarah called her Husband Lord, 1 Cor. 7.34.
The unmarried Woman cares for the things of the Lord, that she may be Holy,
both in Body and Spirit: But she that is Married cares for the things of the
World, how she may please her Husband.

3. Be subject and obedient to all their Lawful commands, Tit. 2.4, 5. Teach
the Young Women to be Sober, to Love their Husbands, to Love their Children, to
be Discreet, Chaste, keepers at home, obedient to their own Husbands, that the
Word of God be not Blasphemed, Col. 3.18. Submit your selves to your own
Husbands, as it is fit in the Lord, Ephesians. 5.22, 23, 24. The Husband is the
Head of the Wife, even as Christ is Head of the Church; therefore as the Church
is subject to Christ, so let the Wives be to their own Husbands in every thing,
1 Pet. 3.1. Likewise ye Wives, be in subjection to your own Husbands, that if
any obey not the Word, they may be won by the conversation of the Wives, while
they behold your Chaste Conversation coupled with fear, v. 5.6. For after this
manner in the old time, the Holy Women who trusted in God, were in subjection
unto their own Husbands, even as Sarah obeyed Abraham.

4. Be of a quiet and meek Spirit, counting that your chief Ornament, rather
than costly Attire or gaudy Apparel, according to the Fashion of the World, 1
Pet. 3.4. Whose adorning, let it not be that outward adorning, of plaiting the
Hair, and wearing of Gold, or putting on of Apparel; but let it be the hidden
Man of the Heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the Ornament of a meek
and quiet Spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price, 1 Timothy 2.9, 10.
Let Women adorn themselves in modest Apparel, not with broidered Hair, or Gold,
or Pearls, or costly Array, but (which becomes Women professing godliness) with
good works. Read Isa. 3 from v. 16. to the end.

Duties of Parents to Children.
1. Instill Scripture-principles into them from their Infancy; be teaching
them, according to their capacities, to know God, and themselves: Instruct them
of the Works of God, of Man's original happiness before the Fall, of his misery
now by Sin, of Redemption by Christ, and the glory of the World to come, Psalm.
75.3, 4, 5, 6. which we have heard and known, and our Fathers have told us; we
will not hide them from their Children, showing to the Generation to come the
praises of the Lord, and his strength, and his wonderful works which he has
done: For he established a Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel;
which he commanded our Fathers, that they should make them known to their
Children; that the Generation to come might know them, even the Children, which
should be Born, who should arise and declare them to their Children, 2 Timothy
3.14, 15. Continue thou in the things which thou have learned, and have been
assured of, knowing of whom thou have learned them, and that from a Child thou
have known the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto
Salvation, through Faith which is in Christ Jesus, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. These words
which I commend thee this Day shall be in thine Heart, and thou shall teach
them diligently unto thy Children, Psalm. 34.12. Prove. 4.1, 2, 3, 4. Psalm. 44.1,
2.

2. Use the Rod in Love, and with discretion, when no other means will make
them mend, Prove. 13.24. He that Spares his Rod, hates his Son, but he that
Loves him, chasteneth him betimes. And 19.18. Chasten thy Son while there is
hope, and let not thy Soul spare for his crying. And 23.13, 14. And 29.15, 17.
Heb. 12.9, 10.

3. Bestow Breeding and Education upon them, at School, and otherwise, if you
are able, that so they may be fitted for some calling, whereby to serve their
Generation, being useful both to Church and State: Observe their Genius,
Nature, Temper, Talents, Disposition, and Inclination, Prove. 20.11. Even a
Child is known by his doings, what way he is inclined, whether to good or evil.

4. Provide Temporals for them, by all Lawful and Honest ways, without wronging
your own Consciences or others, Prove. 19.14. House and Riches are the
Inheritance of Fathers, 2 Cor. 12.14. The Children ought not to lay up for
their Parents, but the Parents for their Children, 1 Timothy 5.8. If any provide
not for his own, specially for those of his own House, he has denied the
Faith, and is worse than an Infidel.

5. As much as in you lies, transmit a Blessing to your Posterity, with
Temporals, being chiefly Sollicitous, that they may become the Children of God,
having true Grace wrought in their Souls, Prove. 8.10, 11. Receive my
Instruction, and not Silver, and Knowledge rather than choice Gold: For Wisdom
is better than Rubies, and all things that may be desired, are not to be
compared to it, Psalm. 37.16.

6. Improve not your parental Authority with too much rigor, lest they be
driven to take desperate courses, Col. 3.21. Fathers provoke not your Children
to anger, lest they be discouraged: When once they are of Age deal with their
Consciences, convincing them of the sinfulness of their ways, mixing lenity and
tenderness with your Authority, Ephesians. 6.4. Bring them up in the Nurture and
Admonition of the Lord. Charge them to serve the Lord God of your Fathers, 1
These. 2.11. Genesis 18.19. I know Abraham, that he will command his Household, and
his Children after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do Justice
an Judgment, Deuteronomy. 32.46. Set your Hearts unto all the words which I testify
amongst you this day, which ye shall command your Children to observe, to do
all the words of this Law.

7. Provide fit matches for them, being careful that they Marry in the Lord,
Genesis 24.2, 3, 4. Abraham said to his Servant, thou shall not take a Wife unto
my Son, of the Daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I dwell, but thou shall
go to my Country and to my Kindred, and take a Wife unto my Son Isaac.

8. Be much in seeking the Lord for them, that they may be abundantly Blessed
with all Blessings Spiritual and Temporal: Parents Prayers may prove their
Childrens best Portion, even a Treasure laid up in Heaven for them. Children of
many Prayers seldom miscarry: Be affected toward your Children as Paul to the
Galatians, Chap. 4. v. 19. My little Children, of whom I Travel in Birth again,
until Christ be formed in you. Job sent and sanctified his Children, Chap 1. v.
5. i.e. He sent up Prayers to God for them, he offered burnt offerings,
according to the number of them all.

Duties of Children to Parents.
1. Give them all due Reverence and Respect, Ep. 6.2. Honor thy Father and thy
Mother which is the first Commandment with Promise, that it may be well with
thee, and thou may live long on the Earth.

2. Obey their counsels and commands, Prove 23.22. Harken unto thy Father that
begat thee, and despise not thy Mother when she is Old And 30.17. The Eye that
mocketh at his Father, and despises to obey his Mother, the Ravens of the
Valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it, Col 3.20. Ephesians.
6.1.

3. Submit to their correction, Heb. 12.8. We have had Fathers of our Flesh
which have corrected us, and we gave them reverence, v. 7. What Son is he whom
the Father chasteneth not?

4. Trace the steps of your godly Parents, Joh. 8.39. If ye were Abraham's
Children, ye would do the works of Abraham, 1 Pet. 3.6. -- Whose Daughters ye
are, as long as ye do well, 2 Timothy 1.5. When I remember the unfeigned Faith
that is in thee, which dwelt first in thy Grandmother Lois, and thy Mother
Eunice, and I am persuaded that in thee also, Romans 4.11, 12, 19, 20; 21.22.

5. Dispose not of your selves in Marriage without their consent: Where Parents
consent is wanting, as one says, there God's blessing is away; Yea, a Curse
comes often upon such Matches. Seth's Sons Marrying with Cain's Daughters,
without the consent of their godly Parents, had a wretched Posterity. Juda,
Marrying a Canaanite, without his Father's advice, contrary to the principle of
the pious Patriarchs, which was against the mixed Marriages of an Israelite
with a Canaanite, had two such Sons that God would not suffer them to live, but
slew them himself, Genesis 38.2, 3. and 26.34. 34. with 27.46. Esau marrying after
the same manner, his Wives were a grief of mind to his Father and Mother.
Rebecca said to Isaac, I am weary of my life, because of the Daughters of Heth;
if Jacob take of them for a Wife, what good shall my life do me?

6. If Providence do so impoverish your Parents, that they have not a
competence for a subsistence, you ought to provide for them, and supply their
wants, 1 Timothy 5.4. If any Widow have Children, or Nephews, let them learn first
to show Piety at home, and to requite the Parents, for that is good and
acceptable before God, v. 16. If any Man or Woman that believes have Widows,
let them relieve them, and let not the Church be charged, that it may relieve
them that are Widows indeed. Joseph nourished his Father, with all his household
and Brethren, Genesis 47.12. Ruth gave of her gleanings to her Mother-in-law
Naami, chapter 2.18. Matthew. 15.5. Be not more unnatural than the Stork which feeds
her aged Parents, carrying them on her Shoulders into the Meadows, and bringing
them back again.

Duties of Masters to Servants.
1. Be Christianly affectionate both to the Souls and Bodies of your Servants:
Catechize and Instruct them in the knowledge of God: Exhort them to serve God
with their Souls as well as your selves with their Bodies. Allow them time for
Reading the Scriptures, and Private Prayer: See that they Sanctify the
Sabbath, in hearing Sermons, and in other religious exercises, craving an
account how they have profited: Be not too rigorous in imposing hard labor
upon them, which they cannot perform: Do not over-task nor over-work them, like
the Egyptians to the Israelites, Exodus 5.7, 8. A righteous Man is merciful to
his Beast, how much more to his Servant? If they fall Sick in your service; be
wanting the use of no means, that may be for their recovery; not like the
hardhearted Amalekite, that left his Servant in the Field, because of Sickness,
2 Samuel 30.13. but like the Centurion, who besought Christ to cure his
paralytick Servant, Mat. 8.5, 6, 7.

2. Give unto your Servants that which is just and equal, knowing also that you
have a Master in Heaven, Col. 4.1. Let them have Food an Raiment, Meat, Drink,
and Wages according to their deserts, and your agreement with them, Luke 17.8.
Gird thy self and serve me, till I have Eaten and Drunken, and afterward thou
shall Eat and Drink, Prove. 31.15. And 27.27. Mt. 20.8. The Lord of the Vineyard
says unto the Steward, call the Laborers, and give them their hire, beginning
from the last unto the first. To withold the Laborers Wages is a crying sin,
Deuteronomy. 24.14. Thou shall not oppress a hired Servant that is poor and needy;
thou shall give him his hire at his Day; neither shall the Sun go down upon it,
lest he cry against thee unto the Lord, and it be sin unto thee. Jam. 5.4.
Behold the hire of the Laborers which have Reapt down your Fields, which is of
you kept back by fraud, cries, and the cries of them which have Reaped are
entered into the ears of the Lord of Sabbaoths.

3. Bear with many infirmities and small faults in Servants, not being too
couriosly sollicitious to pry thereinto. Eccl. 7.21. 22. Take no heed to all
words that are spoken, lest thou hear thy Servant curse thee; for often times
also thine own Heart knows, that thou thy self have cursed others.

4. Do the same things unto them; forbearing threatening, knowing, that your
Master also is in Heaven; neither is there respect of Persons with him, Ephesians.
6.5. Deal by them, as you would have your Heavenly Master deal by you; and as
you would have Earthly Masters deal by you, if you were Servants: They are to
obey you in the Lord, so command them only in the Lord, command them nothing
against their own consciences: You would have them serve you, not with
eye-service, but sincerly and in singleness of Heart; so show your selves kind
to them, not dissemblingly, or fraudulently; but uprightly and conscionably.
You would have them leave nothing of your work undone, so leave nothing of
their Wages unpaid. Carry not your selves Imperiously, Harshly, Churlishly, nor
Nabal-like to them; give them not provoking or irritating Language.

5. Walk exemplarily in all Holiness and Righteousness of conversation, before
them, especially in the performance of Family Duties: The eyes of Servants are
much on their Masters and Mistresses, to mark what they say, and do, Prove.
29.12. If a Ruler hearken to Lies, all his Servants are wicked, Ps. 101.2, 3,
4. I will walk within mine House with a perfect Heart; mine Eyes be upon the
faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with me: He that walks in a perfect
way he shall serve me; he that works deceit, shall not dwell within my House;
he that tells Lies shall not tarry in my sight. Let not wickedness dwell
within your Tabernacles, that so God may make the Habitation of your
Righteousness prosperous, Job 8.6. Col. 4.12. Masters continue in Prayer, and
watch in the same with Thanksgiving.

Duties of Servants.
1. Honor your Masters, 1 Timothy 6.1. Let as many Servants as are under the
Yoke, count their own Masters worthy of all Honor, that the name of God and
his Doctrine, be not Blasphemed, 1 Pet. 2.18.

2. Do in all things Lawful according to their command, Ephesians. 6.5. And Col.
3.22. Obey in all things your Masters according to the Flesh Tit. 2.9.

3. Do their work cheerfully, and readily, at all times, when their eye is off,
as when upon you, and as remembering you are still under God's eye, Col. 3.22,
23, 24. Not with eye-service, as Men-pleasers, but in singleness of Heart,
fearing God: And whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto
Men, knowing that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the Inheritance;
for ye serve the Lord Christ, Ephesians. 6.5, 6, 7, 8. Doing the Will of God from
the Heart, with good will doing service as to the Lord, and not to Men, knowing
that whatsoever good thing any Man does, the same shall he receive of the Lord
whether he be bound or free.

4. Disclose not their secrets, neither discourse of things out of the Family
to their prejudice: Servants must not be as spies in the House, nor Taletellers
out of it, for such are worse than Thieves.

5. Be diligent in the quick dispatch of their bussiness, and speedy execution
of their commands, Genesis 24.31. Abraham's Servant would not eat till he had
told his errand; and as soon as he had done, he says thus, v. 54. Send me away
that I may go to my Master,

6. Do for them as for your selves; nay prefer their business before your own.
Genesis 30.30. The Lord, faith Jacob to Laban, has Blessed thee since my coming
to thee, and now when shall I provide for mine own House also? See Genesis 37.38.
Do not Purloin, Steal, or Wast their Goods by riotous Eating, Drinking, or any
unnecessary expenses; you must not wittingly or willingly cosen them of a
Farthing. Tit. 2.10. Not purlonging, but showing all good fidelity, that they
may adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in all things. Mat. 25.23.

7. When you are Rebuked or Chid for your faults, do not return any proud or
saucy replies, but rather answer with silence, Tit. 2.9. Not answering again,
Prove. 15.1. A soft Answer turns away Wrath, but grievous words stir up Anger.

8. If Providence cast you upon such as are harsh and untoward, who both in
words and deeds do misuse you, carry it meekly and patiently toward them, 1
Pet. 2.18, 19. Servants be subject, not only to the good and gentle, but also
to the froward; for this is thankworthy: If a Man for conscience toward God,
endure grief, suffering wrongfully, for even hereunto were ye called.

9. If ye are Servants to such as are Godly, show them not the less, but
rather, more respect upon that account, 1 Timothy 6.2, 3, 4. They that have
believing Masters, let them not despise them, because they are Brethren, but
rather do them service, because they are Faithful, and Beloved, partakers of
the benefit. These things Teach and Exhort; if any Man Teach otherwise, and
consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
Doctrine which is according to Godliness, he is Proud, knowing nothing, but
doting about questions, and strifes, and words, whereof comes envy.

Thus you have had some delineation of the Duties which you owe unto God, and
others: The Conclusion of all shall commend some few things which concern every
particular Christian, in reference to the right order^ing of his own
Conversation.

1. Let God have the first Fruits of your thoughts every Morning; you will find
it profitable and advantageous to your Souls, to begin and end every day with
some Godly meditations: As soon as you awake, let this or some such thought
enter into your Heart, O what mercy is it, I am yet out of Hell, that the Lord
has given me any comfortable refreshment this last Night; my awaking thus after
Sleep, and rising after a lying down, may serve as an Ebmleme to put me in mind
of the Resurrection of the Body, after it has slept the sleep of Death in the
Grave for some season: O how comfortable to the Eye is the Light of the Sun
after a dismal Darkness, but how much more comfortable would the Light of God's
countenance prove to my dark and disconsolate Heart, showing himself as a
reconciled God to me in the Blood of a Savior? What is the end of God in
sparing me this one day more? And what is the work carved out for this day? And
how shall I manage it? When you are putting off or on your Clothes, have these
or the like thoughts, O that I could cast off the works of Darkness and put on
the Armor of Light! O that I might be divested of the Old Man, and invested
with the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus! When you are Washing your Hands, send
up this or some such Ejacluation to Heaven, O that all my sinful pollutions may
be done away this Morning, by the Blood and Spirit of the Lord Jesus.

2. Drive some Trade with Heaven oftener than once, every Day, by Private
Prayer, Ps. 55.17. Evening, and Morning, and at Noon, will I pray, and cry
aloud. First, Choose the most seasonable times for it, and what time is thus
spent, account it no hinderance, but rather a furtherance to your oher
Business. Secondly, Shun Formality and Pharisaicalness in it. Mat. 6. begin.
3ly, Let the whole Heart be engaged in it, with all possible seriousness, and
Spirituality, without Distracting, Carnal, Roving, Wandering, and Worldy
thoughts. 4ly, Consider your Soul-wants beforehand, that you may know what to
say to God, when you go to him. 5ly, Go in a most humble self-abasing Sense of
your own vileness, and unworthiness, but with some Holy confidence, upon the
account of Divine precepts and promises, Christ's Death and Intercession: Look
upon God in Christ as a Fountain of all supplies. 6ly, Do not give over
wrestling till you can say that more or less your Soul has found something of
God in this duty. 7ly, Rest not on the Duty done, but study to keep your Heart
from Morning to Night in a praying temper. Luke 18. begin. These. 8. O for the
Lord's sake let me engage you to perseverance in this so Soul-concerning an
exercise. Eighthly, Take heed of frequent intermissions upon pretense of
Business, present indisposition, or any other account whatsoever: He or She
that will leave off Praying for one or two whole Days together, may come to do
so for Months together. I have known some professors my self, that have sadly
smarted under the experience of laying side Private Prayers.

3. Be diligent in the duties of some Lawful Calling, Prove. 10.4. The Hand of
the diligent makes Rich: Be just and honest in it: Make conscience of
following it close, because of God's command to work Six Days. This you will
experience to be an excellent preservative from many evils, and
inconveniences, which Idleness would expose you unto: An Idle Person lies open
to all temptations, he is a cushion for the Devil to sit down on, and a Horse
ready Sadled to Ride to Hell on.

4. Be critical in the observation of every Days Sins, for exciting an
assiduous renual of repentance for the same, and of every Days mercies, not
forgetting to give thanks unto God for them: Say thus toward the close of the
Day, O that I might not go to Bed with guilt upon my Conscience this Night,
whatever in me has been offensive to thy Holy Majesty, in Thought, Word, or
Action; pardon for Christ's sake, the carnality of my thoughts: When first Ia
woke in the Morning, my backwardness, formality and deadness in Private Prayer,
the Earthliness, Vanity, Frothiness and Levity of my Spirit all Day long. And
so for mercies say thus, O Blessed be God for Food and Raiment, Health and
Strength, and Liberty and Relations, Protection and Preservation: O Blessed be
God, that I have been keept from the actual commission of such sins as many
others are wallowing in, and I my self might have been, if not restrained by
Grace.

5. Take heed of the first rising and beginning of every the least sin. Keep a
continual strict watch over your Hearts; take present notice of what you
discover amiss within, check your selves for it; dally not with any temptation
without, making some vigorous resistance: That which may be easily nipt in the
Bud, may cost you Thousands of Prayers and Tears, afterward. Custom in sin is
not conquered with a wet Finger. Have a Holy jealousy of your selves as to
every sin, otherwise you know not what height of impiety you may come to, ere
you be aware, Luke 21.34. 1 Cor. 10.12. 1 Pet. 4.7. And 5.8.

6. Study mortification, especially of your Beloved Sins and Lusts; such as
your Natural temper or education, or strong temptations with which you are
continually haunted, or such as your Calling most prompts you unto, that so you
may approve your Hearts unto God, in something beyond what is attainable by the
most refined Hypocrite, Ps. 18.23. Keep under your Bodies, make no Provision
for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof: Deny your selves of carnal
pleasures, rather than suffer an interruption of your inward peace, and
communion with God: Rest not satisfied with a bare cessation from the external,
acts of sin for a season, with the silence of a secure Conscience, ceasing to
trouble you, with the removal of temptation, or the exchange of one sin with
another: But get the unclean Spirit totally dispossessed; lay the Ax to the
Root of the Tree, and strike at the most inward, close, unmortified corruptions
of the Heart: Pray for the fin-mortifying Spirit of. Jesus Christ, and draw
virtue from him whereby you may be enabled to mortify the deeds of the Body,
Romans 8.13.

7. Look well to the government of your affections. First, Never desire things
sublunary but with submission to the Will of God; but let your desires after
God and Christ, Grace and Glory, know no bounds or limits, being enlarged to a
kind of infinitness. Secondly, Lay not out your Love so inordinatly upon any
Creature, Person, or thing, so as to bereave the Lord of Glory of his due: Love
Creatures for what of God is in them, for what of God you may have from or by
them, and so as contentedly to part with them, when Providence would have it
so. Thirdly, Hare the Persons of none in the World, but so as that you can
cordially pity and pray for the vilest. Sin is to be the only object of your
hatred in whatsoever Subjects, your selves, or others. Fourthly, Moderate your
joy for outward enjoyments and also your Sorrow for outward Crosses, and
Losses; all excess in carnal mirth, and melancholy is discommendble, 1 Cor.
7.29. Phil. 4.4. Fifthly, Give not way to servile fear, where there is no cause
of fear, neithere be too Foolishly bold, or venturous, when there is just cause
of fear. Sixthly, be Angry at no thing but sin, and sin not in being Angry at
sin. Ephesians. 4.26, 27. If at any time you are Angry, let not the Sun go down upon
your wrath, lest by that time you have slept a little upon it, it turn into
malice. Labor to subdue your Passions so as that you can patiently bear with
affronts and indignities without a Passionate retribution of like for like.
Seventhly, Be never too hotly zealous in pleading for your own Private Personal
concerns; but be zealous in the cause of God, for his Glory and Honor,
tempering your Zeal still with Knowledge, anda Holy descretion. Eighthly, Let
your hopes for Heaven be well bottomed; not the Hypocrites hope; and persist in
a patient waiting to the end, for what is wrapped up in the promise, and for what
Faith has believed, so as never to be swallowed up in a distrustful despair,
Pet. 1.13.

8. Be frequent in self-examination, try the truth of your Graces by the
Touchstone of the Word, 2 Cor. 13.15. Lament. 3.40. Ps. 119.59. Ps. 4.4.
Interrogate your selves sometimes whether yet there be an effectual change
wrought upon your Hearts; whether at this instant God is present with, or
absent from you; whether you are Dead and Lumpish, or Lively and Active in the
present temper of your Spirits; whether you are going backward, or forward,
there will be no time lost in communing with your selves about Soul-concerns,
for if upon search you discover an advance and growth in Grace, it will
occasion praises and thanksgivings; if otherwise, humiliation and reformation.

9. In every Ordinance of Worship, mind the sanctifying of God's Name, the
furthering your Souls communion with God, and the increase of Grace in you.

1. Peruse the Scriptures as a Love-Letter sent from Heaven, wherein you may
Read as in Letters of Gold, engraven with the point of Diamond, the eternal
purpose and counsel of God, concerning your Salvation: Be of David's mind, Ps.
19.10. The Judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether; more to be
desired than Gold, yea than much sine Gold; Sweeter also than Honey and the
Honey Comb. Always with Reading join Prayer and Meditation: Observe some order
and method: Be constant in it; using it as your Souls daily Food, 1 Pet. 2.2.
Let them that are able and can spare time, Read the Bible with some helps for
better understanding the literal sense thereof: I humbly commend Jackson's
Annot. from Genes. to Isa. and the Dutch Annot. from Isa. to the end: To them
that would Read Practical Observations, Piscator, and the Scottish Divines, so
far as they have gone in commenting thus on the Scriptures.

2. Where the Word is Preached, in the Name of Christ, as an Ordinance of God,
by such as are Authorized from Heaven, make conscience of hearing it, not as it
is the Word of Man, but as it is the Word of God, which effectually works in
them that believe, 1 These. 2.13.

3. When you have occasion to sit down at the Lord's Table as a
fellow-communicant with the invited guests of the King of Glory, Come, First,
self-examination being previous, according to the command of Christ, 1 Cor.
11.28. Secondly, With a more than ordinary edge upon your Appetite. 3ly, With
Knowledge and Faith, to discern the Lord's Body. 4ly, With such a penitential
frame of Heart, that you cannot tell how to look upon him whom you have
pierced, with dry Eyes. 5ly, Let Sacrament seasons be solemn renuals of your
Covenant with God, coming under a sacred Oath, that you will with full purpose
of Heart cleave unto him, and his ways all your Days. 6ly, Study to answer the
ends of Christ in this institution, in experiencing it to be a Soul-sanctifying
Love-feast, in respect of the sweet communion you have with himself therein,
and with those that are visible Members of his Body mystical. 7ly, What Kisses
of Christ's Mouth and Embraces of Bosom-Love are there communicated, be chary
of them; walk worthy of the Lord unto all well-pleasing, not turning Grace into
wantonness.

4. Let the Lord's Day be your delight. First, Set it apart wholly for the
service of God, in works of Piety and Charity, Isa. 58.13, 14. Let it be a Holy
Day indeed to you, on which you are not to think your own thoughts, speak your
own words, nor do your own works, or use recreations at other times Lawful.
Secondly, Observe it as a time of Triumphant Joy and Thankfulness for the
Glorious work of our Redemption by Christ. Thirdly, As a significative memorial
of your celebrating an eternal sabbatism in the Heavens.

10. Learn contentation with every condition, studying the duties that are
proper both for a prosperous and an afflicted state, so as to be found in the
practice thereof.

Duties of a prosperous State.
1. When you are high in Estate be humble in Mind, having low thoughts of your
selves, as being less than the lest of all God' s mercies, Genesis 32.10.
Secondly, In fullness deny not God, saying, Who is the Lord? Prove. 30.9.
Thirdly, Acknowledge him with Thankfulness, as the Author of all your
Enjoyments. 4ly, Testify your Thankfulness in Honoring him with your
substance, and with the first fruits of your increase, Prove. 3.9. Fifthly,
Despise not the poor, neither shut your Bowels against them. Sixthly, Take not
encouragement to sin the more against God, because his Grace abounds toward
you; but fear him because of his goodness, Hos. 3.5. Seventhly, Read, Pray,
Hear, Meditate, watch over your Hearts, maintain a constant communion with God
in Holy walkings, and perform all Holy duties as much then as ever. Eighthly,
When you are at the highth and top of prosperity, expect and prepare for a
change every Day, that it may never surprise you unawares, but that with Job
you may say, there is no evil come upon me, but what I feared. 9ly, Be so far
from Glutting and Surfeiting your selves with Creature comforts and Enjoyments,
terminating your satisfaction and content wholly therein, that you shall rather
thereby be made to long for Heavens Glory the more, saying often thus within
your selves, If a little Water that comes from the Cistern now be so sweet and
refreshing, O what will a full draught of the Water of Life, Drunk at the
Fountain and Wellhead be, to all eternity! If there be so much comfort in
Creatures, O what is in the Creator himself when he shall be all in all to us,
and in Christ, when we shall see him, and be as he is! Come Lord Jesus, even so
come quickly.

Duties of an afflicted State.
1. Eye the Hand of God in all cross ocurrences, as considering there is no evil
in the City, but what is of him, Amos 3.6. Secondly, Consider what in your
selves may be the cause of the crosses; search, till you find out the plague of
your own Hearts. Thirdly, Be humbled for whatever has provoked the Lord to deal
thus by you, and turn unto him that smites you with a hearty and thorough
Reformation. 4ly, Is any Man afflicted? let him pray. Jam. 5.13. If ever there
was a time for you to pour out your Souls into the Bosom of God, Its when his
chastening Hand is upon you, Isa. 26.16. Hos. 5.15. Fifthly, Harbor not any
thoughts of repining at God's good pleasure, but bear his indignation
patiently. 6ly, Be Thankful not only for former mercies, but also for the
present temperature and mixture of mercy with justice, Lam. 3.22. Say with Job,
the Lord gives, the Lord takes, Blessed be the Name of the Lord for ever, Job.
1.21. Seventhly, Act Faith upon particular promises made to an afflicted
condition, faying with Job, Job 13.15. Though thou kill me I will trust in thee.
8ly, Sympathize with others in a suffering condition, Romans 12.15. Ninthly,
Study more to get good to your Souls by sufferings, than simply to be rid of
them, that you may come forth as Gold refined seven times, Zech. 13.9. In one
word, study exactness in this Divine Art of Knowledge, how to use mercies
aright when you have them, that you may never sin them away any more, and how
to want them, when Providence deprives you of them; that you may Pray, Repent,
and Believe them back again. Eleventhly, Live the Life of Faith at all times,
and in all conditions, the Doctrine whereof teaches us,

1. Whatever God in his Word commands you to do, and whatever by his Providence
he calls you to suffer, that do, and suffer, without any further dispute about
self-damnifying events, that may follow thereupon. Secondly, Let the sense of
self-insufficiency put you upon fetching supplies every moment from Christ, for
enabling you both to do and suffer. Thirdly, Whatever Sense and Reason may
suggest to the contrary; Believe that to be best for you and others of the
Lord's people, which the infinitely wise God carveth out for you and them: His
way of ordering things, his time and what else is his, is best; its best for me
to be Sick now, Poor now, Persecuted now. Fourthly, Use no unlawful means for
your deliverance, how low sowever you are brought; but wait upon God still, Ps.
37.34. and 27.14. believing that he both can, and will work it for you, when,
and by what means seems good to himself. Fifthly, Whatever promises God has
made to Persons in your condition, you may be as sure of the accomplishment
thereof, as if the thing were already done: If you are such as seek God in his
Ordinances, and he has promised his presence there, go with an expectation: If
you are such as walk uprightly, and he has promised Grace and Glory to you, Ps.
8, 4, to the end. You may rest fully assured, that he will not be worse than
his word, Men nor Devils shall not be able to deprive you of the promised and
purchased Inheritance. And so long as you are assured of God's presence here,
and Heaven's Glory hereafter, you need not much value what you suffer in this
World: This is the proper work of Faith, to support the Spirits of drooping
Saints, Ps. 27.13. against all imaginable discouragements. O acquaint your
selves herewith, and you are fit for any thing that can befall you.

Lastly, Learn what it is to Dye-Daily that so the work may be facilitated and
made easy to you beforehand: Have frequent meditations of mortality, in Health
as well as in Sickness: Live every Day as if it were to be your last. Clear all
accounts with your Judge, be sure that your sins are pardoned, your Persons
justified, your Natures sanctified, your Hearts renewed, that your conversation
be according to the Gospel; and as to your present temper that you be
Spiritually and Heavenly minded, ready to welcome the Lord if he should come at
this very instant, if the King of terrors were at the Door. Let your House be
set in order, that you may have nothing to do but to Dye, resigning up your
Spirits into the Hands of your Heavenly Father, that at your last Hour you may
say with Hezekiah, Isa. 38.3. Remember now, O Lord, how I have walked before
thee in truth, and with a perfect Heart, and have done that which is good in
thy sight. And with Paul, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. I have Fought a good Fight, I have
finished my course, I have kept the Faith, hence forth there is laid up for me
a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give me at
that Day; and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing.

FINIS.

