LUCIAN's GHOST: OR, DIALOGUES Between the Dead, wandering in the Elyzian
Shades.

BEING Certain Satirical Remarques upon the vain ostentatious humors of
several Learned and Philosophical Men and Women, as well Ancient as Modern.

Composed first in French, and now Paraphrased into English, by a Person of
Quality.

LONDON, Printed for James Norris, at the King's Arms without Temple Bar. 1684.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO LUCIAN IN THE ELYZIAN FIELDS.
Illustrious Ghost,
IT is but Justice, that having borrowed an Idaea, which does of right belong
to, you, I should at least make my Acknowledgments, and pay my Homage for it to
you, who do so justly merit it. That Person to whom an Author is most indebted,
is the most proper Hero for his Epistle Dedicatory; it is him alone he ought to
Praise, and choose for his Protector. Perhaps I may be accounted bold and rash,
for having dared to tread in your Paths, but I should with much more reason
have merited those Appellations, if I only had pursued the Traces of my own
Fancy, and I may justly hope to have this advantage to make my own course Metal
pass currently in the World, which so advantageously bears your Image and
Character; and I am bold to say that if my Dialogues have but the least
success, they will do you more Honor than your own, and show that so Excellent a
design needs no overcurious management. I Relied so much upon the firmness,
and stability of the Foundation, that I thought a small part on it might serve
for so mean a superstructure. I have therefore left out Plato, Charon,
Cerberus, and such Infernal company, who are so frequently Introduced in these
Entertainments. You have already made the best Remarks on the choicest
Subjects, as on the vain and insignificant fear of Death, the Affected Bravery
and Resolution of some Philosophers, which they Assumed when they were just
giving up their Last, and the Ridiculous misfortunes of young Gentlemen who
died before those old Dotards whose Estates they Gap't after; so that there are
only Trifles Left for me: yet since the design is yours it cannot be
unsuccesfull, and I make an Offering to you of that as the only thing that
merits your Acceptance. I have also been bold to imitate you in the end and
Intentions of my conversations, by moralizing all my dialogues after your
example, else what need had there been to have gone to Hell for company? If
they had talked their Ribaldry without design, living Mortals might have served
my Turn as well. Besides, it is no difficult matter to suppose the dead to make
Reflections on the Follies of the Living, since they have been so well
furnished, not only by long Experience, but by a calm and undisturbed Peace
and Leisure, and behold the Affairs of the world with such Indifferency as
gives 'em no concern in the consequences and Events of 'em, and therefore most
fitting to make their observations. You thought the Dead were no great Talkers,
and therefore made all their Dialogues short and pithy, and I have also made
you my pattern in this particular as carrying much Reason and probability. The
dead are Masters of so much Wit, that they can presently discern the main scope
and Intent of a Discourse without windings and circumlocutions. The living only
are those who wanting sense to understand one another's meanings do wrangle and
dispute, and like the blind do stumble in that Road they cannot see; yet I am
persuaded that their Characters are not so much altered to forsake all their
former opinions, which they embraced with so much Eagerness in the world;
wherefore I have so far complied with the mode and custom as to draw 'em in the
same Colors now they are dead, by which they were represented to us when they
were living. You thought it not improper to raise Imaginary Ghosts, and to
attribute the glory of some Adventures to others, who never merited 'em. But I
have no reason to assume this Privilege, since History has furnished me with so
many true Relations, that I have no need of having recourse to Fiction for
succor. But be you not surpised that I make the Dead so frequently to
converse about the Affairs of the upper world which happened so long after they
had quitted it, because so much Company is still coming thence who bring 'em
fresh Intelligence. Renowned Shade, I doubt not but your Candor is as great as
was your Wit, and that you will easily pardon the Imperfections perfections of
the Living, but especially his who has no other pretensions than to imitate so
excellent a Copy as yours.

ERRATA.
PAge 13. line 10. for the whole read our. page 41. lin. 24. for Orator r.
Poet. p. 44. l. 12. dele of. p. 86. for Ambitious r. Ambition's. p. 88. l. 18.
r. most sensibly. p. 91. l. 4. r. had been. p. 91. l. 14. for sat r. sets. p.
96. l. 6. dele that.

THE CONTENTS.
Dialogues of the Ancients.
I. Alexander. Phryne. A Comparison between Beauty and Greatness. II. Milo.
Smindarides. On Delicacy. III. Dido. Stratonice. On that Amor which Virgil
falsely attributes to Dido. IV. Anacreon. Aristotle. On Philosophy. V. Homer.
Aesop. On the Mysteries which are veild in Homer 's Works. VI. Athenais.
Icasia. On the Fantasticalness of Fortune. Dialogues of the Ancients with the
Moderns. I. Augustus. Peter Aretine. On Praises. II. Sappho. Laura. Whether it
be most proper for the Man or Woman to make the first Courtship. III. Socrates.
Montaigne. Whether the Ancient or Modern Ages were most Virtuous. IV. The
Emperor Adrian. Margaret of Austria. What Deaths are most generous. V.
Erasistratus. Harvey. Of what advantage the Modern Discoveries are in Natural
Philosophy and Physic. VI. eren ice. Cosme II. de Medicis. On the Immortality
of one's Name.
Dialogues of the Moderns.
I. Anne of Britain. Mary of England. A Comparison between Love and Ambition.
II. Charles V. Erasmus. Whether there be any thing on which a Man ought to
value himself. III. Q. Elizabeth. Duke d'Alenzon. On the Emptiness of
Pleasures. IV. William de Cabestan. Albert Frederick of Brandenburg. On Folly.
V. Agnes Sorel. Roxilana. On the Power of Women. VI. Joan of Naples. Anselm. On
the Eager desire that Men have to know what will be.
LUCIAN's GHOST: OR, DIALOGUES Between the Dead, etc.
DIALOGUE I. Between Alexander and Phryne.
Phryne. ALL the The bans of my time can tell you, I offered at my own Expense
to Re-build the Walls of Thebes, which you had Demolish't, provided only they
would set up this Inscription on 'em, Alexander the Great Razed these Walls,
but Phryne the Curtizan Reared them up again.


Alex. It seems then you were extremely afraid, lest succeeding Ages might be
ignorant, how well you thrived in your Vocation.


Phr. I have been Eminent, and all extraordinary persons, of what Profession
soever, are guilty of so much vanity, as to covet to Eternize their Names by
Monuments and Inscriptions.


Alex. It Is true, Rhodope did the same before you, and heap't together so much
Money by the same profession, as served to Erect one of the stateliest Pyramids
of Egypt. And I remember, being in company to'ther day with some Modern Ladies
(who had, like you, no mean opinion of their Beauty) to whom she making a
Relation of her Victories, and the Monument she had Reared to perpetuate their
Memory. These discontented Shades began to lament the Age wherein they lived,
when the most Charming were unable to raise such Trophies to their Conquests.


Phr. But still you must acknowledge, I have this advantage over Rhodope, That
in Re-building the Walls of Thebes, I am placed in Competition with you, the
great Conqueror of the Universe; That the World might know my Beauty had
Repaired those Ruins which your Valor made.


Alex. So, you have drawn a parallel between two things which was never thought
on before: It seems then you were very well pleased with your self, for knowing
how to manage so many Intrigues so much to your own advantage.


Phr. And you were no less satisfied to have lain the better part of the World
in Heaps of Rubbish. But how had you been deceived, if there had been a Phryne
in every Town you Conquered, when you could have left no marks of your fury
behind you?


Alex. Were I to live my life once over again, I would be the same Alexander,
and the same great Conqueror.


Phr. And I would be the same Little Conqueror again. Beauty by right of
Nature presides over men, whereas Valor is indebted to Force and Power for all
its Empire. The Fair are Victors every where, which Kings and Emperors cannot
pretend to: But more clearly to convince you, I grant your Father Philip was a
Valiant man, and so were you; yet neither of you were able to stop the mouth of
the Orator Demosthenes from declaiming against you all his life. Yet there was
another Phryne besides my self (I think the very name is happy) who being ready
to lose her Cause, which was of no small consequence, and her Advocate having
showered down all his Eloquence in vain, she bethought her self of a more
powerful Argument, and more suitable to the present extremity of her Affairs:
She only unvailed her Face, at whose Luster the Court was so surpised, that
whereas before they were just ready to give sentence against her, all of a
sudden they changed their opinions. From whence you may observe, that though
the Terror of your Arms, for many years, could not make one Orator hold his
peace, yet the Charms of one handsome Face in one moment silenced the loudest
Advocates, and corrupted a whole Areopagite.


Alex. What? though you have called another Phryne to your Aid, I don't think
that the Cause of Alexander is so weak; 'twere strange indeed if --


Phr. I know well enough what you are going to say, that Greece, Asia, Persia,
and the Indies, were mighty Conquests. Nevertheless, if I should divest you of
that Glory, which by Right belongs not to you; If I should give to all your
Soldiers and Captains, and even to Chance it self what properly is their due,
can you imagine but you will be a loser? But a handsome Woman lets no one
partake in the Honor of her Conquests, and is therefore beholding to no one
but her self: Believe me, a fair Woman has no reason to complain of Nature for
having made her so.


Alex. It seems then you are very positive in your opinion: But can you think
to stretch the number of yours beyond the Glory of my Conquests?


Phr. Yes, without vanity I do; yet I must needs declare, that I have as far
surpassed the bare Character and ordinary pretensions of a handsome Woman, as
you have done that of a prudent General; for you and I have gained too many
Victories ever to take such measures; had I entertained but two or three
Amors, It had been no more than what is customary, and merits not to be
regarded: But to be able to re-build the Walls of Thebes, by the Number and
Riches of my Gallants, is Transcendant, and surpasses all the Rules and
Measures of my Sex. So, on the other side, if you had only Conquered Greece,
with some of the Neighboring Islands, and perhaps some small part of the
Lesser Asia, so as to be able to reduce 'em within the compass of one Monarchy,
it had been only rational and discreet: But to be always on the March, and yet
not knowing whither; To be always Taking Towns, without knowing wherefore; and
to be still Enterprizing without design: This is what the most thinking sort of
men call Rash and Extravagant.


Alex. Let these thinking men say what they please; had I confined my Valor
and Fortune within the compass of their Politics, my Name and Memory would
have been quite forgotten by succeeding Ages.


Phr. And so had mine, had I used the same wise Conduct in the distribution of
my Favors. For whoever designs to become Eminent, may be satisfied, that the
most rational methods are not always the most proper.


DIALOGUE II. Between Milo and Smindarides.
Smind. YOu think you have gained a great deal of Honor, because at the
Olympic Games you were able to carry an Ox upon your shoulders.


Mile. 'Twas certainly a very gallant Action, and had the Applauses of all
Greece; the Fame on it reached even the Remote Crotonia, my own Native Country,
which has been so Eminent for Wrestlers; but your Town of Sybaris has been
derided by every body, because of the Effeminacy of its Inhabitants, who
Banished all their Cocks, because their Crowing disturbed their Rest; and
invited their Guests to Feasts, a year before they made 'em, that they might
have time to provide every thing which was delicate and grateful to the palate.


Smind. You make your self very merry with the Sybarites: But thou dull
Crotonian art not sensible, that when thou boastest thou art able to carry an
Ox, thou own'st that thou art not unlike one?


Milo. And can you believe your self a man, when you have complained to have
past whole nights without Repose, only because one of the Rose-leaves of which
your bed was made, was doubled?


Smind. It Is true, I acknowledge my self a man of that delicacy. But wherefore
does it seem so strange to you?


Milo. Pray, how is it possible it should seem otherwise?


Smind. What? have you never seen a Lover, who has received many Favors from
his Mistress, and to whom he has been no less Assiduous in his Services? yet
how concerned he is in the very possession of his happiness, lest Gratuity
should have the Ascendant in the heart of his Mistress above her Inclinations?


Milo. No truly, I never knew any such Lover; yet granting, I had --


Smind. Or have you never heard of some Renowned Conqueror, who on his return
home from some glorious Expedition, yet did not find that satisfaction in the
Triumph the World imagined, because he thought himself indebted more to
Fortune, than either his Valor or good Conduct, and all his designs succeeded
upon false and ill taken measures?


Milo. No, no; I never heard of any such Warrior: But once again, what would
you conclude from hence?


Smind. That this Lover, and this Conqueror, and almost all Mankind, though
they lie on Beds of Roses, yet the folding but of one Leaf might be enough to
disturb their rest. A very small uneasiness is sufficient to destroy our
pleasures; and these are our Beds of Roses, where 'twill be a matter of some
difficulty to make all the Leaves lie smooth and easy.


Milo. I must confess, I am not very knowing in these matters; but in my
opinion, you, your Imaginary Lover, and your Conqueror, and every body else of
this temper, do your selves a great deal of wrong by being so over-nice and
delicate.


Smind. Ah Milo! Men of wit are no Crotonians, as thou art, but Sybarites like
me.


Milo. Now I guess what you would be at; That nature having made 'em of a more
delicate frame than ordinary, they would enjoy too many pleasures, if the
fineness and subtilty of their Reason did not divest 'em of those that were
superfluous.


Smind. You're mistaken in your Guesses; men of wit have no pleasures that are
superfluous.


Milo. Then they are fools to take so much pains to destroy their own happiness.


Smind. Behold the misery of the whole Creation; Mankind only does enjoy this
fineness of temper, which is produced by the brisk and and lively motion of the
blood and spirits: Every body is satisfied with himself, when he has it; and he
that has it not, is still in pursuit after it; yet it diminishes our pleasures,
and makes 'em flat and dull, which of their own natures are insipid enough. How
miserable therefore is the condition of humane nature, that is furnished but
with so few delights, and yet our subtle reason marrs 'em all in the enjoyment.


DIALOGUE III. Between Dido and Stratonice.
Dido. ALas! my Stratonice, how unfortunate am I? you must needs have heard how
I lived the mirror of Chastity, and proved so constant to my first Vows, that
I chose rather to burn alive, and sacrifice my self to the shade of my first
Husband, than endure a second. Yet I could not secure my self from the Censure
of evil Tongues as to my very death, which was the Crown and Ornament of my
life. It has pleased a certain Poet, called Virgil, to change me (who always
had the reputation of a wise and prudent Matron) into a young Coquet, who let
her self be Charmed with the good Mien of a stranger, the first day she saw
him; and in fine, he has turned the whole History of my Life into a Romance.
Yet he would not rob me of my last Funeral Pyle: But can you guess the Reason
he gives, why I cast my self into it? not to avoid a second Marriage, but
despair of seeing my self forsaken by the handsome stranger.


Straton. On my word such feigned Relations may prove of very ill consequence to
the World, and we shall have but few Women die Martyrs to Conjugal Fidelity, if
every Capricious Poet may take the liberty of saying what he pleases of 'em,
after they are dead; perhaps Virgil has not done you so much injury, though as
you imagine, and has only disobliged you by discovering some Intrigue which
you hoped would be concealed.


Dido. Had there been any probability in the Amor, which the Poet would make
me entertain, I should not so much complain of him. But he gives me Aeneas for
my Lover, a man that left the World Three hundred years before I came into it.


Straton. I must confess, that what you say is something; yet there is so great
a Resemblance in the several Stories of your Lives, that you seem very much to
be made the one for the other; you were both constrained to forsake your native
Lands, and try your Fortunes in Foreign Kingdoms. He was a Widower, and you a
Widow; so that the Agreement of your Loves might well Answer that of your
Fates. It Is true, you were born Three hundred years after him; yet the Poet had
so much Reason to make you meet and Love, that he might very well dispense with
Three hundred years, and thought it not of consequence enough to spoil so
plausible an Amor.


Dido. What sort of Reasoning is this? are not Three hundred years always Three
hundred years? and how can two persons living at this distance meet and love?


Straton. 'Twas in this very point that Virgil has most showed his wit; he was
a man that understood the world, and well knew that in such Amorous
Entertainments, men judge not of the truth of the Relation by the speciousness
of its appearance, but sometimes by the very improbability of the Story.


Dido. I am not well satisfied that he has fixed his handsome Mysteries, and
plausible Romances, on me.


Straton. Why? has he Ridiculed you, and made you speak impertinently any where?


Dido. Neither; It Is my Character which gives his Poem all its beauty; and
though he has belied me, yet there is something Divine in his very Fiction; and
had he been obliged to have drawn me with my native Honesty, his Aeneids would
have lost very much of their Luster.


Straton. Wherefore then do you complain so much? Though he has sullied your
Virtue which you so much relied on, yet in return he has given you Wit and
Beauty, which perhaps you never could pretend to.


Dido. What then? is that a sufficient recompense?


Straton. I know not what temper you were of; but I Am sure most women would
rather have their Virtue sullied, than either their Wit or Beauty; and I do
ingenuously acknowledge to you, it was my temper. There came a Painter to the
Court of the King of Syria, my Husband, who on some occasion I had disobliged;
and to revenge himself on me, Painted me in the Embraces of a Common Soldier;
and having exposed the Picture, fled; my Subjects, zealous for my Honor, would
publicly have burnt it; but because he had drawn me so admirably well (though
the motions he gave it were more to the advantage of my Beauty than Virtue) I
preserved it from the flames, and sent kindly for the Painter, and pardoned
him: Now if you had been of my mind, you should have dealt with Virgil after
the same manner.


Dido. If Wit and Beauty were the most considerable Qualifications of a Lady,
it were not then amiss.


Straton. I cannot decide to which the precedence is due; but in Common
Conversation, if the discourse be of a Woman, who is a stranger to any of the
company; the first question is, whether she be handsome; the second, if she
have Wit; and it rarely happens that any body gives himself the trouble to ask
a third.


DIALOGUE IV. Between Anacreon and Aristotle.
Arist. I Could not have believed that a Sonnet-maker should have the
confidence to compare himself with a Philosopher, and one of my Reputation too.


Anac. You would make the name of a Philosopher sound very great; I can assure
you my Songs have purchased me the title of the wise Anacreon; and I Am sure
there is no Phisopher can pretend to a better Epithete.


Arist. Those that gave it you, either did it only out of Ceremony and
Complement, or else they knew not what they said: For what have you ever done
to merit that Character?


Anacr. Why? I have drank, and sang, and been very amorous, and so I gained the
title of Wise for my reward; whereas you, for all those infinite pains you have
taken, have got no other than that of the Philosopher. How many nights have you
watch't to no other purpose, than to amuse the world with thorny Questions in
your Dialecticks? how many huge Volumes have you composed on such obscure and
intricate Subjects, that I question very much whether you your self could
understand your own Writings?


Arist. Indeed you have found out a very commodious and easy way to be thought
wise, and purchase more honor by your Lute and your Bottle, than the greatest
men in the World could do by all their labor and industry.


Anacr. You pretend, I think, to Rally; but I Will maintain, it is more difficult
to drink and sing, as I have, than to play the Philosopher, like you; for to
drink and sing aright, one ought to have his mind calm and quiet, and free from
all the Gusts of Passion, not to aim at that which is out of ones reach, and to
lay hold on Time always when it is in ones possession; and in a word, there are
so many disorders to be regulated ever a man can arrive to this pitch and good
humor, (though there be no great need of Logic) yet 'twill cost him some
pains before he can attain it. But it is possible for a man to be a Philosopher
with much less trouble and difficulty; he need not despoil himself neither of
his Ambition, nor his Avarice; he may make his appearance at the Court of
Alexander the Great, and receive Presents to the value of Five hundred thousand
Crowns, on pretense of making Philosophical Experiments; yet contrary to the
Intention of the Donor, reserve the greatest part to his own private use; but
true Philosophy is very opposite to such practices.


Arist. Certainly you have had a very ill Character given of me by some body,
that you are so much prejudiced; but I Will still maintain, a man's no longer so
without his reason; and there can be nothing more glorious, than to instruct
Mankind in the search of Nature, and to unvail all those Riddles and
Difficulties which can be proposed.


Anacr. Do but observe how those men put their false Glosses on things, and
turn all up-side-down. Philosophy is in it self a very admirable thing, and may
be of great advantage to Mankind, if rightly made use of; yet because it is a
little uneasy to their humor, in that they are obliged to apply it to
themselves, in subduing of their passions; they have therefore mounted it up
unto Heaven to observe the motion of the Stars, or else they make it walk on
the Earth, to make their fantastical Remarks on every trifling Object; and, in
fine, they are very careful to employ it on any thing that is remote from
themselves. Nevertheless they would purchase to themselves the title of
Philosophers at this easy rate, though they are only in pursuit of natural
Causes.


Arist. And what more suitable name can be given to 'em?


Anacr. Philosophy has relation only to Man, the lesser World, without having
any prospect to the greater. It Is the part of an Astronomer to Contemplate the
Stars, the Naturalist to study Nature, but the Philosopher himself alone. But
alas! this is too hard a Province for any of these pretenders, therefore they
ought to content themselves with the bare title of an Astronomer or a
Naturalist, without assuming that of a Philosopher, for my part I never did
desire to amuse my self with their Airy Speculations, and in my opinion there
is not so much of true Philosophy to be found in some of their Books, which
bear that specious Title in the Frontespiece, as there is in one of my Songs
which you despise. I Will instance you in one.

If Gold could bribe my Fate,
To spin out Life beyond its date;
I Would heap up shining Oar
'Till my cramb'd Chests could hold no more.
Then give it all to Destiny,
At its approach to set me free.
But since 't has no such power,
To stem the Fleeting hours,
I Will smooth'em all with Love and Wine,
Which do so equally combine,
To make 'em happy whilst they are mine.

Arist. Well, since you will acknowledge that only to be the true Philosophy
which regards the regulating our Manners: You may find in my Treatises of
Morality such Rules as far surpass your Songs, and that obscurity which you
reproach me so with (and perhaps not without some reason, in some of my other
more subtle Books) yet it is not to be found in these. And it is the vogue of
the world that nothing can be more clear and fine.


Anacr. How you abuse your self! The Controversy is not how to define the
Passions, and divide 'em with that exactness as they say you have done, but to
subdue 'em. Men easily become Votaries to that Philosophy which only obliges
'em to consider the evils of their Nature without any prospect to their cure.
They have found out a Secret of being Moral Philosophers with the same ease
they can be Astronomers. How can one forbear laughing to hear men for money
preach Contempt of Riches, and errand Cowards ready to fall together by the
Ears about the Definition of Magnanimity?


DIALOGUE V. Between Homer and Aesop.
Homer. TRULY all those Fables which you have recited to me, cannot be enough
admired; there had need be a great deal of Art to disguise the most useful
Instructions, that Morality can give us in such Facetious Tales, and to cover
the severity of its Precepts with such easy and delightful Shadows.


Aesop. It does not a little please me to be praised for Excelling in that Art
by him who was so great a Master in it.


Homer. Who I? for my part I never pretended to it.


Aesop. What? did not you conceal the greatest Mysteries in your Poems?


Homer. Alas! not I.


Aesop. Yet all the Wits of the Age wherein I lived did maintain it, and there
was nothing in your Iliads or Odysses to which they did not give the finest
Allegories in the world, they would needs have it that neither Divinity,
Natural Philosophy, nay the Mathematics too contained any thing that was
excellent or curious but what was veiled in your Poems, yet there was still
some difficulty in the disclosing of 'em, for where one would attribute to 'em
a moral sense, another would a natural, yet they all agreed in this that you
had known and said every thing, and there only wanted a capacity to discover
it.


Homer. I did imagine that there would be some people, who would pretend to
find out wit where 'twas never meant: and I writ my Fables with the same
success as he that prophesies of Future Ages, where posterity takes care to
find out the meaning and fulfill it.


Aesop. It seems you reli'd very much on the wit and candor of your Readers to
find out Allegories where you never meant 'em, what would you have done had
they taken 'em in the Literal sense?


Homer. Why truly I should not have thought it so great a misfortune.


Aesop. What? that your Gods should wound and mangle one another, and Jupiter
the Thunderer at an Assembly of the Deities threaten to beat the mighty Juno?
that the Warrior Mars should bellow so loud as ten thousand men, when he was
wounded by Diomedes? and instead of taking the revenge of an Hero, and cutting
all the Greeks in pieces, go crying to Jupiter to make complaint of his Wound?
all this had been very fine without an Allegory?


Homer. And why not? You may imagine that the wit of Man searches only after
Truth, but be not deceived, Falsity and Humane Invention sympathize extremely.
If you have Truth to tell, you had need disguise it in a Fable to make it
relish: but if Fiction only be your Province there is no need of intermixing
Truth, 'twill better please without it, so that what is true dare not appear in
its own native colors, but is constrained to borrow of some gaudy Fable to
make it be received, whereas whatever is Fictitious need assume no other than
its own. Man's wit and fancy being the place of its birth as well as of its
abode, and to which Truth is always a Stranger. I Will tell you moreover, had I
put my Invention upon the stretch, and almost cracked my Brains to find out
Allegories and Allusions, it might well have been that men would have swallowed
the Fable without having any prospect to the Figure, and that is the reason that
the Stories of my Gods and Heroes were not found so ridiculous.


Aesop. Oh! you make me tremble, then I fear it is believed that my Beasts did
really speak, as I made 'em in my Fables.


Homer. This Fear of yours is mighty pleasant.


Aesop. Why? if it were really believed as you say, that the Gods had those
discourses together, only because you related it, why might it not be credited
with the same ease, that my Beasts spoke because I said it?


Homer. Oh! The case is not the same, for men would very easily believe that
the Gods are as great Fools as they are, yet they will not allow Beasts to be so
wise.


DIALOGUE VI. Between Athenais and Icasia.
Icasia. SInce you are willing to know the principal Adventures of my Life,
I Will tell it you in short. The Emperor under whom we lived had an inclination
to Marry, and to make the better choice of an Empress, he issued out his
Proclamation to give notice, that if any Woman thought her Beauty capable of
raising her to a Throne, she should on a prefixed day make her appearance at
Constantinople, and (God knows) there were no small number of pretenders; among
the rest I was one, who had so good an opinion of my self, that I thought my
Youth and Beauty, the liveliness of my Eyes, with the sweetness of my Air, and
handsomeness of my Mien, might not without some reason raise my hopes to the
Empire. On the meeting of this handsome Assembly we all surveyed each others
Faces not without some uneasiness, and I observed when they came to mine they
fixed their Eyes with Envy and Emulation. At length the Emperor came into the
Aslembly, and having taken several turns between our Beautiful ranks, when he
came to me (just as I wished) he stopped, and beholding me with a loving Air,
Indeed, says he, these Women are dangerous Creatures, being capable of doing so
much harm; I straight believed I needed only show a little wit to crown all my
hopes, so between hope and fear I made this quick Reply. But, Sir, Women in
recompense can and have often done much good. But this unhappy Answer destroyed
all my pretensions, for the Emperor fansied it so witty, he dared not espouse
me.


Athen. Certainly this Emperor was of a very strange humor so much to fear a
witty Woman, and I doubt he had but little wit himself because he found so much
in your Reply; but to deal frankly, I think you had no such great reason to be
angry with your self.


Ica. So the Fates would have it, that your wit alone should make you Empress,
and the very appearance on it defeat me. You were not only witty but a
Philosopher too, and yet you could Espouse the Emperor Theodosius the younger.


Athen. If I should have had so sad an Example as yours before my Eyes, I
should have been a little frighted though; for after my Father had bred me a
Scholar, and given me all the advantages of Education, he disinherited me,
supposing that my knowledge in the Sciences was a very ample Fortune, and to
speak the truth, I believed so too. But now I see my error, and that I ran a
very great risk of making no other Fortune but what my bare Philosophy could
give me.


Icasia. See now what use may be made of this Example, 'twould be pleasant if
some person on the like occasion, who knowing my story should make this
advantage of it, as not to show her wit, though there were never so fair an
opportunity for it.


Athen. I would not answer for her, that her strategeme should succeed, since
'twas designed. It Is those follies we commit by chance that make us happy: have
you never heard the Story of the Painter who drew a Bunch of Grapes so natural
and fine that he deceived the very Birds, who as soon as ever they saw 'em
exposed, flew to taste 'em? You may judge what reputation he got by this piece,
they were painted in the hand of a little Country Boy, who was drawn in the
same piece. It happened that some person skillful in that Art, commended the
painting of the Grapes, which were so naturally drawn as to allure the Birds,
but not the Boy because he did fright them from 'em. And certainly his
observation was very rational; yet if the Painter had remembered to have drawn
the Boy with the same exactness, he had never gained that honor by his Grapes.


Ica. Well, I am satisfied, though we know how to take the justest measures,
yet we could not assure our selves of their success: and this instance of the
Painter might well make us tremble, lest, like him, we had not made some
necessary fault in the management of our affairs to make 'em prosperous.
There Is nothing certain in the world above, since Fortune takes such care to
give different successes to the same Action; it baffles all their humane
policy, and obliges Mankind to live without either Rule or Order.


Dialogues of the Ancients and Moderns.
DIALOGUE I. Between Augustus and Peter Aretine.
P. Aret. YES, I was one of the most eminent Wits of the Age, and Pensioner to
the most considerable Princes in Europe.


Aug. Then you were still obliged to write very much to their Advantage.


P. Aret. Not at all: I received Gifts and Presents from all of 'em, and that
would never have been, had I made it my only business to write Panegyricks.
They were warring continually one with the other, and as some were the
Conquerours, others were distressed, so that I could never commend'em all.


Aug. What did you then?


P. Aret. I Lampoon'd 'em, and though I could not crowd 'em all into one
Panegyric, yet I could do it well enough in one Satyr. The terror of my name
had reached so far, that the greatest Princes paid me a constant Tribute, and
their Purses still compounded for their Follies. The Emperor Charles V. (whom
undoubtedly you have heard of here below) having made a very unsuccessfull War
on the coast of Africa, on his return home made me a Present of a Golden Chain,
which I received but coldly, and made the Bearer this Reply, That I thought it
was not of sufficient value to compound for so great a Folly.


Aug. Then you had found out a new method to enrich your self.


P. Aret. I think I had reason to hope to raise my Fortune on others Follies as
being the most sure and certain foundation.


Aug. Notwithstanding all you can say to the contrary, the Art of praising is
much the surer and the better way.


Aret. Oh Lord, Sir, I never had Impudence enough to commend any body.


Aug. Yet you had enough to Libel every body.


P. Aret. But your parallel will not hold, there is no necessity of despising
those we put in Satyrs, but to lash 'em now and then for their Follies, to
teach 'em more discretion, whereas weak or extravagant praises are a Libel in
themselves, and reflect more upon the person they would seem to honor than the
sharpest Satyrs. It seems as if they never merited the one nor had sense to
understand the other. With what impudence could Virgil tell you, that after
your Translation among the Deities, it was uncertain what charge you would
please to undertake, whether you would take on your self the care of the Nether
World once again, or else become a Watery God, by Espousing one of the Daughters
of Thetis, and receive for her Dowry the dominion of the Seas, because of the
Honor of your Alliance; or whether you should be placed in the Skies near to
the crooked and double Constellation Scorpio, and for the honor of your
neighborhood be made of a more straight and regular Figure.


Aug. You need not so much wonder at the Impudence of Virgil, for Praises are
like Allegories, not always taken in the literal meaning; and if there be any
deficiency, the kindness of that person to whom they are addressed helps out the
Modesty of the Panegyric, but it often happens Princes merit Honors which are
never paid 'em.


P. Aret. Then you reli'd upon the word of the Poet, and were in hopes to
Espouse one of the Seanymphs, or else to have your Apartment assigned you in
the Zodiac.


Aug. No, no; there must be always something abated in Praises of this kind,
but yet not all, and one may at least receive this satisfaction from such
Extravagancies, to believe ones self above all ordinary Praises, and it is Merit
alone that made the Orator surpass all the bounds of nature.


P. Aret. Well, though I should allow their vanity to be guilty of all the
Excess imaginable in the Extolling of their Heroes; but to commend at different
times for those Actions which are directly opposite one to another, I think
it is the height of Impudence; as for instance: If you proved bloody and
unmercifull to those you Conquered, then there had been nothing so glorious, as
to revenge your self on those who dared to oppose you: but if on the contrary,
mildness appeared in your Nature, and you were ready to forgive them, then the
scene is quite changed, and the mercy of a mild and gentle Prince shall far
surpass the revenge of a bloody and inhumane. So that one part of your Life
must be commended at the expense of the other, therefore choose you which you
will for the Character of a Hero, and I can bring you almost equal Arguments
for either.


Aug. I think there is no need to take so near a view, it is enough to the
Advantage of Princes that all their Actions are capable of Praises, and when
they receive 'em for those which are so opposite, it is a sign they have more
than one sort of Merit.


P. Aret. What? did you never reflect on those Eulogies they heapt on you, and
was there not need of some Art to refine 'em, to make you believe they were
directed to you rather than to those of your rank and quality? Princes are not
distinguished by the Praises that are given 'em, and not only Heroes, but more
ordinary persons lay claim to 'em, but yet posterity makes this difference by
confirming those that are given to some, and abolishing 'em to others.


Aug. Then you will grant at least that I received none but what I merited, since
succeeding Ages as well as that wherein I lived have confirmed 'em. But yet I
think I have reason to complain as being always looked upon the most perfect
Model for Princes, they are often therefore resembled to me, and I am wronged
by the Comparison.


P. Aret. Be comforted and let this be the occasion of your Complaints no
longer, for according to all the relations which the more modern Dead have
given us of Charles II. now Monarch of the British Isles, his will be esteemed
a more perfect Model; and so much I can foresee, that Future Ages when they will
undertake to commend their Princes, will think they can do 'em no greater
honor, than by comparing 'em to this wisest and best of Kings.


Aug. Well then; don't you think that those who are honored with the
Comparison will not hear it with pleasure?


P. Aret. It Is not improbable, for men are naturally so greedy of Praises, that
they will dispense with Justice, Truth and reason for to gain 'em.


Aug. It seems then you would quite exterminate all Praises, and if only the
good must have 'em, there would be but very few Panegyrists.


P. Aret. Yes, there would be some few without interest and design who would
undertake it. And it is they who properly ought to do it; so your Virgil
handsomely commended Cato, when he called him President at the Assembly of
honest men, in the Elizian Fields, because Cato himself was dead, and the Poet
could pretend to no reward: But 'twas not so well done when he flattered you so
much in the beginning of his Georgicks, when, if I am not mistaken, he received
a Pension for it.


Aug. Then it seems all I gave on that score was thrown away.


P. Aret. It Is no great matter; you had better done like one of your
Successors, who as soon as he was seated in the Empire, forbad all the Poets
to make Verses on him.


Aug. I must own he had more reason than I: True Praises are not those are
given us, but those we merit.


DIALOGUE II. Between Sappho and Laura.
Laura. IT IS true, we two have equally felt Love's passion, neither did we
banish the Muses to solace it: but yet with this difference; you were best
pleased to compose Madrigals on your Lovers, but I to have 'em presented me by
mine.


Sappho. What then? that is to say, I loved as much as you could be beloved.


Laura. That Is no wonder, for I know Women are more susceptible of that gentle
passion than Men; but that which surpised me most was, that instead of the
Defendant you became the Aggressor, and by the charms of your Poems endeavored
to inspire your Lovers with the same passion that you felt when you writ 'em.


Sap. I was sensible of those Fetters that humane policy and ill custom had
imposed on our Sex, and was therefore resolved to throw 'em off: for I always
thought the Man's part, which is to make the Courtship, was much more easy
than ours to receive it.


Laura. In my opinion we have no reason to complain against the common custom
of making Love, and if there be any advantage it lies of our side; whenever we
are Courted we can yield our selves Captives when we please; but they that
attaque us are not always Conquerours when they would.


Sap. You forget that men in their Courtships pursue their inclinations, but we
to whom they are made don't always with the like satisfaction.


Laura. Then you count those sweet attaques they make on us, and so often
repeated for nothing, and how much they esteem the conquest of one Heart.


Sap. And do you account that nothing to resist with pain the power of so many
charms? they behold with pleasure the successful progress which they make,
whilst we are angry with our selves and them too, that our resistance has so
much success.


Laura. Yet at last after all their Pains, and when we can defend our selves no
longer, they will yet acknowledge themselves indebted to us for the Surrender.


Sap. That hinders not, but what is their Victory, is our Defeat; they taste no
other Pleasure in Love, than to Triumph in the yiedling of the beloved, and
they account themselves no otherwise happy Lovers, but as they are Conquerours.


Laura. What? would you introduce a Custom, that Women should Court the Men?


Sap. What need is there of that Formality, That the Man must always be the
Attacker, and the Women make a Coy Resistance, when yet they Love each other as
much as Heart can Wish?


Laura. Oh! Matters would go too quick then, Love is so pleasing a Traffic,
and yet so quickly dies in the purchase, that I think we do well in what we can
to prolong it. If we did receive it always when 'twas offered, what would
become of all those delightful Pains, that Lovers take to please; those little
uneasinesses our Sex do feel when they Reproach themselves for not having
pleased enough, and all those Intrancing Joys which Lovers find, and in a Word,
that agreeable mixture of Pains and Pleasure which do make up Love? 'twould
Vanish ever 'twas Born, and nothing would be more Inspid than the divinest
Passion.


Sap. Methinks there is a great Resemblance between Love and War; where those
have the advantage, who make the Enemies Country the Seat of the War. You your
self confessed, but now that our Sex was most susceptible of that Passion, and
should therefore know how to manage the braver Part.


Laura. Yes, but I Fear they would Defend themselves too well, and since some
Resistance, in the management of this Passion, is so necessary, and only so
much to make the Victor relish the Conquest, without Defeating of the Passion;
and one ought not to be so weak, as to yield at first Summons, nor yet so
stubborn as to hold out for ever, I think it is only our Province, and I
question whether Men would know so well how to manage it. One that has Wit, may
reason on any other Subject, as well as that of Love; but 'twill be found that
it is best for all things to remain in the same Order that they were, and your
pretended Reformations do often Terminate in the greatest Confusion.


DIALOGUE III. Between Socrates and Montaigne.
Mont. MOST Divine Socrates, I Rejoice to see you, I have made it my Business,
from the first moment of my Arrival hither, to find you out. I writ a Book
which is almost every where filled with your Praises. I should now desire to
have a more Intimate acquaintance with you, that I might Learn of your self,
how that Virtue became so Natural to you, and all it is Motions so easy, and
yet in an Age, wherein you had no Example.


Socrat. I am glad I have met with a Man in the nether World, who seems to be a
Philosopher, and since you are newly Arrived here from above, and it is so long
since I have seen any Person here, for there are very few fond of my
Conversation. I hope you will not take it ill, that I ask you some News; as how
the upper World goes, and whether it be'nt much changed from what it was?


Mont. Oh! Extremely, you would not be able to know it.


Socrat. I am glad to hear it, for I always thought that 'twould become better
and wiser at length than 'twas in my time.


Mont. No, you are mistaken, it is more Foolish and Corrupted than ever it was,
and on this occasion 'twas, I so much desired to see you, to know the History
of that Golden Age, wherein you Lived, when Honesty and Justice seemed to Reign.


Socrat. And I on the contrary expected to hear Miracles of the latter Ages.
What? are not the Follie's of Antiquity yet amended?


Mont. I believe you only slight Antiquity, because you your self were one of
the Ancients; one cannot enough bewail the Miseries of the present Age, wherein
every thing is degenerated, and grown worse.


Socrat. Is it possible? Things in my time went ill enough, yet I still
believed that Mankind would take up at length, and grow wise by the Experience
of many Years.


Mont. But we are convinced by that of the contrary, for Men are like Birds who
are caught in the same Snare, in which their Predecessors were before 'em;
there is no Body comes into the World clean, and unspotted, but is as much an
Heir to the Follies of his Father as his Estate.


Socrat. That Is because they don't attempt their own Freedom, for I should
think the World might grow wiser as it is more advanced in Years, and more
Moderate than in its Youth.


Mont. Men of all Ages have Naturally the same Inclinations, over which Reason
has no greater Power at one time, than at another; so that wherever there are
Men, there are the same madness and follies.


Socrat. And granting this, what reason had you to conclude that past Ages were
wiser than the present?


Mont. Oh Socrates! you had a more particular, and refined way of reasoning,
than the rest of Mankind, and knew by the Justness and weight of your
Arguments, how to lead Men in that Path that you had Chalk't out for 'em; 'twas
from thence you gained the Title of Succesfull Midwife of your Thoughts,
because you never suffered any to miscarry: for my part, I must confess to you,
I never could effect any thing, but what was contrary to my first design, yet I
know not how to grant you this, for now there are none of those Vigorous and
Noble Souls which they had in former times, as that of Aristides, Phocion,
Pericles and Socrates.


Socrat. What should be the reason on it? is Natures Fountain quite run dry,
that it can produce no more such Men? why should it be productive of all things
else, and yet so barren of reasonable Men? can you Instance me in any of the
Works of Nature which are degenerated? and therefore why should Man?


Mont. I know not, but we have been convinced by woeful Experience it is so; it
seems that Nature only gave us Images of some few Men, to let us know her
Power, and what she could do, if she pleased, but I Am sure, she was negligent
enough in the rest of her Composures.


Socrat. Always observe, Antiquity is singular in this, that whereas all other
distances do diminish the Object, yet that of time makes it seem much bigger;
had you known Aristides, Phocion, Pericles, and my self, (since you are pleased
to Rank me with 'em,) you would have found that in your own Age, there would
have been some that might resemble us: Antiquity is so much advanced because
Men are Prejudiced against the present Age, and therefore they would say any
thing to discredit it, and so are very well pleased to exalt their Ancestors,
so they may depress their Contemporaries. When we Lived, we also esteemed our
Ancestors much more than they deserved, and our Posterity deals just so with
us. But I believe if our Ancestors, we and our Posterity, could be beheld at
the same time, by an Indifferent Eye, the prospect would be found to be very
much the same.


Mont. I always thought that every thing was in Motion, and that every Age had
produced different Humors, and Characters of men. Have there not been some
wise, and other ignorant Ages? some that have been heavy, and others more
refined? some more serious, and others more trifling, and Fantastical?


Socrat. It Is true, there have.


Mont. And wherefore by the same reason, may not some Ages have been more
Virtuous, and others more Vicious?


Socrat. The consequence does not follow, for though the Habit change the
Figure, the Body still continues as it was. Wit, Bravery, Knowledge, Ignorance,
the serious, or the Trifling Humor are not essential to the Man, but may be
put off or on, like Clothes. But the Heart of Man that never changes, and it is
that which distinguishes him. This is an Age of Ignoramus, but it may be the
Mode of the next to be more learned. This is an Interest Age, yet I believe the
contrary will never succeed; perhaps in the vast Number of Men, that may be
born in the space of an Hundred Years, Nature may produce Twenty or Thirty of
Wit and Sense, who are equally dispersed all the World over, yet there is no
where so many of 'em to be found as to make their Virtue and Honesty become the
Mode.


Mont. Is Nature always then the same? and makes the same Distribution of 'em
in every Age? why may not one be blessed with many more than others?


Socrat. Because Nature always Acts by Rule, though we are Ignorant of its
Motions.


DIALOGUE IV. Between the Emperor Adrian, and Margaret of Austria.
M. Austr. WHAT ails you, you are in such a heat?


Adrian. I have had a contest but even now with Cato of Vtica about the manner
of our Deaths, and I endeavored to show that in the last Scene of my Life, I
approved my self more a Philosopher than he.


M. Austr. Methinks you were a little Confident though, to compare your Death
with his; What could be more Glorious, than first, to put his Family in order
at Vtica, to provide for the safety of his Friends, and then to kill himself as
desirous to die rather with the Liberty of his Country, than to fall into the
hands of the Conqueror?


Adrian. If you take but a nearer view on it, you may observe there were many
things amiss. First of all, he was so vainglorious in his Preparation, that
there was scarce any Body in all Vtica but knew his design. Secondly, he was
forced to read over some Dialogues of Plato, about the Immortality of the
Soul, before he had courage enough to put it in Execution. And lastly, the
thoughts on it had put him so out of Humor, that looking for his Sword under
his Beds-head, where he had designedly laid it, (which was taken thence by one
of his Servants, who feared lest despair might make him attempt something on
himself,) but not finding it there, he calls for him in Rage, and gave him with
his Fist so severe a Blow on the Mouth, as beat out several of his Teeth, and
wounded his own Hand.


M. Austr. I cannot deny but 'twas a very barbarous stroke, and was a little
scandalous to his philosophical death.


Adrian. You cannot imagine what a noise he made about his Sword, how he
reproach't his Son and his Domestics, as if they designed to bind him Hand and
Foot, and deliver him to Caesar, and stormed at 'em at that rate, as made 'em
all quit his Chamber, to kill himself.


M. Austr. What need was there of making all that noise about it? had he waited
but one day longer he might have done it calmly and quietly, for there is
nothing easier than to die when one has a mind to it, but all those measures he
had taken were founded upon his resolution of doing it that day, and had he
deferred it but one day longer, he might have failed of putting his design in
execution.


Adrian. You speak very rationally, and I see you are capable of judging what
deaths are most Glorious.


M. Austr. Yet it is reported that when Cato had his Sword again, and every body
left him, he fell asleep and snor'd; methinks this was very pleasant.


Adrian. What Story is this? but just before he made a noise as if he were
undone, then beat his Servant, and yet in this heat to fall asleep is something
strange; besides, his Wound troubled him so much, as not to suffer him to take
any rest, for he himself but just before professed he could scarce support the
pain of it, and made his Physician dress it a little before he killed himself;
yet at last when his Sword was brought him, at Midnight he read Plato's
Dialogues twice over, and I cannot think he had the courage to sleep after that,
and his snoring was no more than dissimulation, that his Servants who were
listening at the Door might report it to his advantage.


M. Austr. You do ill to be so severe a Critic on his death, which still had
something in it that was glorious; but how could you pretend to prefer yours to
his, for, if I mistake not, you died quietly in your Bed, and there was nothing
in it that was remarkable?


Adrian. What! was not that remarkable to make these Verses just as I was
breathing out my last? Adieu my little Soul, my dear'st delight,
To what far Country do thou take thy flight?
Trembling and naked thou wilt alone be left,
And of thy Body's clothing quite bereft.
What will become of all thy Jollity,
When thou art gone, I know not where, from me?
Cato in my mind treated Death too seriously, but I made it my diversion, and
it is on this account that I do pretend mine to have surpast his. It Is much
easier to Brave one's fate than it is to Rally at it; and to entertain it kindly
when it comes to our relief, than when we have no occasion for it.


M. Austr. I Will allow you died more decently than Cato, yet 'twas my misfortune
never to hear of those Verses which were the ornament on it.


Adrian. See how the world's imposed on, because Cato tore out his own Entrails
rather than fall into the hands of his Enemies, yet such an action shines so in
Story, that every body that beholds it is dazel'd with its luster: but let a
man die calmly, and in such good humor to droll on death it self, yet our dull
Historians never regard it.


M. Austr. Alas! there can be nothing truer than what you say; for I my self
when I thought I should have died, took my farewell of the World more
handsomely than you, and yet't has made but little noise in it.


Adrian. How! what say you?


M. Austr. I was Daughter to an Emperor, and betrothed to a King's Son, who
after the death of his Father sent me back again with disgrace to my Friends
without ever consummating the Marriage, and not long after I was contracted to
another King's Son, and on my Voyage to his Country there arose so dreadful a
Storm that I was in apparent danger of my life, yet I was calm enough to write
my own Epitaph, which was this. Margr'et that Royal Damsel here is laid,
Who twice was Married and yet died a Maid.
I must confess I died not then, yet what is the same, I thought I should.
Cato's firmness was extravagant in its kind, and so was your Jollity in
another, but mine was the only natural and easy; he was too serious, you to
vain, and I the only rational person.


Adrian. What! do you reproach me then, that I had too little concern for death?


M. Austr. Yes, you seemed as if you slighted its approaches, yet I doubt you
took as much pains to dissemble your resentments, as Cato did to rip up his
Bowels. I expected without fear to be shipwrack't every moment, and yet in cold
blood I made my own Epitaph. If there had not been something natural in my
story the world might have made some difficulty in believing it, or at least
that I did it out of extravagancy or fear; but at the same time I was a poor
Maid, and though twice contracted, was like to be so unfortunate as to die one:
and you may observe that I regretted the severity of my Fate, and it is that
which makes my story appear so natural, and from whence it borrows all its
luster: your Verses, if you observe, speak nothing but what seems strained and
affected, whereas mine easily represent my fortune without art or dissimulation.


Adrian. On my word, I never could have believed, that the trouble of dying
with your Virginity on your hands, would have proved so glorious.


M. Austr. You may make your self as merry with me as you please, yet my death,
if it may be so called, has this advantage over yours and Cato's, that as you
lived with the reputation of Philosophers, so in honor you were obliged to
die, and if you had but dared to fear it, the world might have been very severe
on you on that occasion; but for my part I might have trembled at the
apprehension of drowning, and made my cries reach the Heavens, and no body ever
esteem me the less for it, yet I was composed enough to write my own Elegy.


Adrian. Between you and I, was it not made on Land?


M. Austr. That trifling evasion of yours is a little uncivil. I made no
difficulty of believing you.


Adrian. I own my self subdued by your reasons, and shall henceforward be of
your opinion, That that virtue is greatest and most commendable which surpasses
not the bounds of nature.


DIALOGUE V. Between Erasistratus, and Harvey.
Era. YOU tell me wonders: What? that the Blood Circulates in the Body? that
the Veins carry it to the Heart, and the Arteries receive it from thence, to
convey it to the exterior Parts?


Har. I have demonstrated it by so many Experiments, that now there is no one
doubts it.


Era. Then we Ancient Physicians were very much deceived, when we attributed to
the Blood only, a slow and gentle Motion, from the Heart to the Extremity of
the Parts. The World has reason to be much obliged to you, for abolishing this
old mistake.


Har. I am satisfied it has, and not only for that, but by putting 'em into a
Method, of making all those modern discoveries in Anatomy, which so much
Illustrate the Art of Physic; the Motion of the Blood was no sooner
discovered, but immediately there were new Canales, new-Pipes, and new
Repositories found out for it. It seemed as if the whole Frame and Machine of
Man's Body were taken in Pieces and cast over anew. What Advantage the modern
Physicians have over you, who pretended to cure the Diseases of that Body ye
had so little knowledge of?


Era. I grant you, that the Moderns are something better Naturalists than we,
but yet I do deny that they are better Physicians. I should desire very much to
see how you or any of 'em, would have managed such a Patient as Antiochus in
his Quartane Ague. You must needs have heard of my Success in that Case, and
how I discovered by the brisker Motion of his Pulse in the presence of
Stratonice, that he was enamored of that Beautiful Queen, and that his
Disease proceeded from that Violence he did himself in Endeavoring to conceal
his Passion: yet I performed that difficult Cure without the knowledge of the
Circulation of the Blood, whereas had you been in my Place, you would have
found your self extremely puzl'd with all your Inventions, your new Pipes and
Canales would have served you then but to little purpose; the Disease was in
the Heart, and therefore 'twas of more Importance to know that.


Har. That Is not always necessary to be known, neither are all those that are
sick Enamored of their Mother-in-Laws, as was Antiochus. I doubt not but for
lack of this knowledge of the Circulation of the Blood you let many of your
Patients die on your Hands.


Era. Then you believe your new Discoveries are of great use and benifit to the
World?


Har. Without doubt they are.


Era. Then pray Answer me one question, what is the reason the Dead come
crowding hither as thick as ever they did?


Har. Oh! if they dye now, it is commonly the Fault of the Patient; not of the
Physicians.


Era. Therefore your modern discoveries do conduce very little to the Cure.


Har. Perhaps they have not leisure to make those advantages of our discoveries as
they might, but it is probable in a little time we may see more surprising
Effects.


Era. On my word, all things remain in the same Station where they were,
there is a certain measure of necessary knowledge which Men do easily attain to,
and they are so far obliged to Nature for inspiring 'em with that which is so
much to their advantage. Men were very unhappy, if they were always beholding
to the slow and often unsuccesfull Motions of their reason, for all they know,
and those things that are not of the like necessity, are discovered by degrees
and long pursuit of many Years.


Har. Why may not a skillful Anatomist make the same advantage of the perfect
knowledge of the Machine of a Man's body, as an Artist does of a Clock or
Watch, and by the in-sight that he has of its springs and wheels best know how
to regulate its Motions when they are disordered? but if it be of so little
use, as you would have it, men strive in vain, to advance that Science, and
'twere much better if 'twere let alone.


Era. Oh no! then there would be much diverting knowledge lost; but for any use
there is in it, I think to discover some new conduit in the body, or some new
Star in the Heavens is much the same. We cannot break great Nature's rule who
has Ordained, that men must mutually succeed one another, which can be done by
no other way but Death. Mankind may make defenses, and seem to combat with
diseases, till they come to the brink of Fate, but neither the newest
discoveries in Anatomy, nor a search into the Closest recesses of the Body, can
ever make Mankind pass over that, Nature will still be Conqueror and Death
will put an end to all their Pretensions.


DIALOGUE VI. Between Berenice. Cosme. II. de Medicis.
C. de med. I am told by the modern Wits lately come hither, some news, which
troubles me; you know Galilaeus, who was my Mathematician, had discovered
certain Planets which move about Jupiter, and in honor to me called 'em de
Medicis, that they are now known no more by that Name, but called the
Satellites, it must needs be that the World is grown ill natured to rob me of
that honor which is my due.


Beren. I never knew a more remarkable instance of its Malice.


C. de med. You may speak without concern, nor have you the same reason to
complain as I, you made a vow to cut off your hair, if your Husband Ptolomy
returned Victor, from I know not what Wars, which he afterward did, and you to
perform your vow, made an offering of your hair in the Temple of Venus; but the
next Day a certain Mathematician stole it thence, and Published that 'twas
taken up to Heaven, and placed amongst the Stars, and to this Day one of the
Constellations goes by the Name of Berenice's hair they might as well call the
Stars after a Prince's name, as a Woman's Locks; yet you are remembered in the
Skies; and I am forgotten.


Beren. Were it in my Power to present you with my Heavenly Locks, I should be
very willing to part with 'em, for your satisfaction, and yet have no reason to
upbraid you with the greatness of the Obligation.


C. de med, I should esteem it very considerable to be assured, my name should
live as well as yours.


Beren. Alas! if all the Constellations were called by my name, what should I
be the better? they are placed above in the Heavens, whilst I am here below.
Men know not how to Rob Death of's due, and yet they would make two or three
Syllables survive; this is a very pleasant evasion, were it not as well that
they and their names died together?


C. de med. I am not of your mind, we naturally desire to die but as little as
may be, and after Death it self, we endeavor to preserve our lives on some
Marble-stone or Monument.


Beren. Why? those very things which seem to give us Immortality, do also at
length die themselves. On what 'Object would you fix your name? neither City,
Town, nor Empire could answer your desire.


C. de med. 'Twas well contrived then to give it to the Stars, for they always
last.


Beren. Nor there could you be secure, the Stars themselves being Subject to
the same Fate of changes and revolutions, and if we can believe Astronomers,
new ones rise, and the old do disappear, and it may come to pass at length that
my Locks may also vanish; or if we knew how to fix it on something that was
more permanent, our names as well as that whereon it was set, might suffer a
Grammatical Death by the change of words and letters, enough to puzzle the
greatest antiquaries to find 'em out. Sometime since there were two of the Dead
who disputed one with another with some heat, and I observing on it desired to
know who they were; and what was the grounds of their Controversy, and I was
told that one was Constantine the Great, and the other was an Heathen Emperor,
and that their past greatness was the Subject of their quarrel. Constantine said
he had been Emperor of Constantinople, and to give it the Preference, said it
was situated upon three Seas, the Euxine, the Thracian Bosphorus, and the
Propontis; The Heathen Emperor said he was so of Stambould, which has as
advantageous a situation, on the black Sea, the Strait, and the Marmorean.
Constantine was surpised at the resemblance between Constantinople and
Stambould, but after he had exactly informed himself of the situation of the
place, he was much more so, when he found it was the very same, which he knew
not because of the alteration of the name, and cried out, Alas! I might as well
have left it it is ancient name of Bizantium, for who can find the name of
Constantine in Stambould, I doubt it is therefore drawing near it is utmost
Period.


C. de med. I am somewhat satisfied, and resolve hence forward to be more
patient, and since we cannot free our selves from death, not to be concerned
about our names which is of so much less Consequence.


Modern Dialogues.
DIALOGUE I. Between Anne of Britain and Mary of England.
Anne of B. CErtainly you were very well pleased with my death, for I was no
sooner dead, but you crossed the Seas to Espouse Lewis the Twelfth my Husband, to
seat your self in that Throne which I had but just forsaken, but yet you
enjoyed it not long; and your youth and beauty, which so much charmed the King,
hastened his death and your departure.


Mary of E. It Is true, my Royalty did no sooner appear but it vanished.


Anne of B. Yet after that you became Duchess of Suffolk, that was a great fall
from Queen of France: thanks to Heaven for my better Fate. When Charles the
Eighth, my former Husband, died, I preserved my Quality by espousing his
Successor, which was a singular instance of my good Fortune.


Mary of E. Believe me, I never envied it.


Anne of B. No? I conceive well what it is to be Duchess of Suffolk after being
Queen of France.


Mary of E. But I loved the Duke of Suffolk.


Anne of B. That Is no matter: when one has relisht once the sweetness of a
Throne, all other pleasures become insipid.


Mary of E. I grant it: excepting those of Love, you have no reason to be angry
with me for succeeding in your Title, since had it been in my power, I would
have assumed no other than that of Duchess, which I so quickly did when I was
discharged from being Queen of France.


An. of B. Could you have thoughts so mean?


Mary of E. The uneasinesses of Ambition could never suit my temper; Love is
Nature's gift, and like all its other Bounties is calm and quiet, and easy to
attain to; but Ambition, like its Parent the Fancy, is restless and unquiet,
and never possesses it self of any thing but with pain and difficulty.


Anne of B. What? has not Nature inspired Mankind with Ambition as well as Love?


Mary of E. We must needs own Ambition to be the product of the Imagination,
whose stamp and character it bears; for like that it is stormy and unquiet, full
of fantastic projects, and sets up bounds to it self it never reaches.


Anne of B. But unhappy Love arrives at it too soon.


Mary of E. The joys of Love do often make us happy, and frequently we taste
its pleasures, whereas that of Ambition affords but little satisfaction to its
greatest Votaries; and though we might suppose that they often reap fresh
delights, which were still like their Laurel green and flourishing, yet still
greatness is only made for few; but Nature's gifts are all diffusive and free
as the Air and Sun, and all the world do love, or if any are exempted from this
great rule, it is only they who place their happiness on the top pinnacle of
Honor: some mighty King who can have an hundred thousand men to await his
pleasure, yet he cannot assure himself the conquest of one Heart, and the person
of some private Man shall be more taking than all His greatness: so that he
often parts with the simple and innocent pleasures of his life as the purchase
of his Royalty.


Anne of B. Those exemptions they have as due to their condition, do not
derogate from their happiness, when we see their will is not only obeyed but
even prevented, by all those services and cares which are offered to 'em, and
on whom depends the raising of so many Fortunes. I think it is indifferent to
know whether they are esteemed for their Person or their Quality. You say
ambitious Joys are only made for few, and it is that which makes me like it;
those that rule have so many advantages above other Men, that though they loose
some of those little pleasures which are common to the world, yet they are
sufficiently recompensed by the number of the rest.


Mary of E. You may judge of the loss they generally suffer by the sweetness of
the pleasure which they sometimes find in the enjoyment. I Will tell you a story
I lately heard here of an English Princess (who reigned long and happy in that
Kingdom without ever being Married:) When some Dutch Ambassadors had their
first Audience, it happened that there was a handsome young Man of the Retinue,
who as soon as ever he saw the Queen applied himself to those that were near
him, and said something with a low voice, but yet with such an Air that the
Queen could easily divine what he meant (for Women have an admirable Instinct
that way) and it proved that there was more wit in those two or three words of
that dull Hollander, than in the whole Harangue of the Ambassadors; for as
soon as they were dismissed the Presence, she being willing to satisfy her self
so far as to know whether she had guessed the truth, ask't what that young Man
said, but was answered with much respect that they dared not repeat it to her;
but at length she made use of her authority, and commanded 'em to tell her, and
then 'twas only that he thought her Majesty a very handsome Woman, with other
such dull expressions, which yet had sense enough to please the Queen; and the
event on it was, that when the Ambassadors had their last Audience she made the
young Dutchman a considerable Present. Observe therefore how in the midst of
all her Royalty and Greatness the pleasure of being thought handsome did
sensibly affect her.


Anne of B. But yet she never parted with her Crown, for all those Imaginary
pleasures; that which is too simple and easy suits not with our natures, it is
not enough that pleasures tickle the imagination, but they must transport it
too, hence it is that the innocent lives of amorous Swains, which Poets paint
with so much elegancy, are no where to be found but in their Poems, it is too
soft ever to succeed so far as to be put in practice.


Mary of E. Then what is the reason that the prospect of the most glorious Court
affords not so much pleasure as the bare Idoea of this pastoral life? unless it
be that men are most naturally inclined and delighted with its innocence.


Anne of B. So that your calm and easy pleasures consist only in those
Chimera's which are formed by an idle fancy.


Mary of E. No, No, for though some people are of so distempered a palate that
they relish not those Joys at first, yet in the end they do. After the
imagination is tired in the pursuit of such false and fleeting objects, it
fixes it self at last on those that are true.


DIALOGUE II. Between Charles Vth. and Erasmus.
Erasm. DOUBT it not, had I got hither among the dead, but one minute before
you, I should have disputed the preeminence.


Charles. What? a Grammarian, a Scholar, and to push your pretensions as high
as they can reach? a man of wit, to contend with me, who was so glorious in my
life, as to see my self master of the better part of Europe?


Erasm. You may add America to the rest of your Dominions, and yet I shall have
as little reason to submit to you. What was the source and fountain of all this
greatness, but blind Chance, which so wonderfully united so many different
parts into one Empire? If Ferdinand your Grandfather had been a man of honor,
What pretensions could you have had to any part of Italy? If other Princes had
had but sense enough to have believed the Antipodes, Columbus would never have
applied himself to him, nor America of the number of your Conquests; what would
have become of your Spanish Rhodomontade? That the son never sat in your
Territorie's? If on the death of the Duke of Burgundy Lewis the 11th. had but
reflected on what he did, Maximilian had never been Instated in that Dukedom,
nor you in the Low Countries? If the Reputation of Henry of Castl^e, your great
Uncle had not been scandalous among the women as to his manhood, as the Virtue
of his wife something doubtful, his Daughter might have been well enough
thought Legitimate, and you had been deprived of the kingdom of Castile.


Charles V. Oh! you put me into a fright, then it seems I might have lost
Castile, the Low Countries, America, or Italy.


Erasm. Mock not, you know not how to own these Truths, but at your own cost,
for as well the Impotency of your Uncle as the levity of your Aunt, did
contribute to your greatness; therefore see, how beautiful a Fabric that is,
which is built upon no other Foundation, than that of Chance.


Charles V. I know not how to sustain so severe a scrutiny as yours, and
acknowledge that your wit makes all my Grandeur disappear.


Erasm. Yet these are the qualities you so much pride your self upon, of which
I have with so much ease despoiled you. You may have heard the story of Simon
the Athenian, who having taken many Persian captives, exposed 'em naked to be
sold, they on one hand, and their clothes on 'tother, which being very rich and
gaudy, every body crowded to purchase 'em, whilst the poor Persians were not
regarded: On my word the same which happened to those Persians would to others
also, if their personal merit could but be separated from that, for which they
are indebted to Fortune.


Charles V. What is this personal merit, which you so much value your self upon?


Erasm. Is that a question to ask? it is that which is in our selves, and has no
dependence on any thing without us, such as wit, learning, etc.


Charles V. And can a man with reason glory so much in these?


Erasm. Without doubt, they are not the gifts of Fortune, like nobility and
riches.


Charles V. That were strange indeed, what don't the learned possess their
knowledge, as men do their estates by succession? don't you as much inherit the
wisdom of the Ancients as we do the possessions of our Fathers? Hence it is
that the learned with the same veneration do regard their Opinions, as we do
the Mansion-houses of our forefathers, and commonly relinquish them with the
same difficulty.


Erasm. No, for great men are born heirs to their fathers Fortunes, but
Scholars by their Birth inherit no part of their learning; it is not derived to
us by succession, but acquired by industry.


Charles V. Well then, the goods of Fortune are preserved with the same
difficulty, as those of the mind are first acquired; and there is as much on it
to be met with in the common affairs of the world as in the deepest
speculations of the closet.


Erasm. We don't speak of sciences but of wit alone which has no dependence
upon Chance.


Charles V. What does it not depend on a certain conformation of the brain? and
is there not as much of Chance inbeing born a possessor of this happy
disposition, as there is inbeing born the son of a King? You had the good
Fortune to be a witty man, yet ask a naturalist the reason why you were not as
well dull and blockish, and he will answer you, that the Fibers of your brain
were of a more delicate contexture than ordinary, and some other swall matter
which the most discerning Anatomist has not yet discovered. Yet these witty
gentlemen think they have reason to prefer themselves before all others, as
being so independent upon Chance.


Erasm. Therefore by your reckoning the rich and the witty are equally
deserving.


Charles V. I must confess it is better luck to be born witty than rich, yet
it is Fortune only to which they are both indebted.


Erasm. Then every thing falls out by chance.


Charles V. Yes, all that happens we know not why: you shall be Judge if I have
not laid open Mankind more than you, who would only take from 'em the
Advantages of their Fortune, whereas I have that of their Wit too: Therefore if
Men would but first assure themselves, that any thing is their proper Right
before they are proud on it, there would be no more vanity in the world.


DIALOGUE III. Between Queen Elizabeth and Duke of Alenzon.
D. Alen. WHY did you flatter me so long with hopes of marriage, when you were
resolved never to consummate it?


Q. Eliz. You were not the only deluded person, there were others also who had
as fair pretensions. I was the Penelope of my age, there was You, the Duke of
Anjou your brother, the Archduke and the King of Sweden were all pretenders,
and would have been willing to have made your selves masters of an Island, much
more considerable than that of Ithaca; I kept you in Chase for many Years, and
when you had given me sufficient diversion I dismissed you.


D. Alen. Here are some among the dead, that will not allow that just
resemblance between you and Penople in every thing, but we seldom light on
such comparisons as hold good in every point.


Q. Eliz. If you had more wit, and less obstinacy --


D. Alen. Well well, to be serious, do but observe what Rhodomontades you made
of your Virginity, witness that vast continent in America, which you named
Virginia in memory of one of the most doubtful of all your qualities, but yet
this Country was in the other world, and so 'twas well enough; but to return to
the subject of our debate, give me but a reason of your mysterious conduct in
all your projects of matrimony, was it that your Father Harry the Eighth's six
marriages, was a lesson for you not to Marry at all, as the constant Rovings of
Charles the Fifth, taught his Son Philip the Second never to stir out of Madrid?


Q. Eliz. I might make that my pretense which you have furnished me with, and
seem to dislike it, because my father spent all his life in marrying, and
unmarrying, in divorcing himself from some, and cutting others heads off. But
the true reason of this my Conduct, was because I found more pleasure in
forming designs, and making preparation, than in putting 'em in Execution, for
the expectation is always more than the enjoyment; and as soon as Objects
forsake the fancy where they have their being vanish into nothing: when you
came into England to Court me, we had Balls, Masks, and Entertainments, nay it
proceeded so far that I presented you with a Ring, and so much on it was
pleasant, as consisting only in the Idaea, and Image of marriage, but when
these grew stale, I preserved my self as I was, and sent you home again.


D. Alen. Then your maxims, and mine suited not well together, for mine reached
at something more substantial than Chimaera's.


Q. Eliz. All the pleasures of our lives consist in such imaginary fancies. Now
I see you were not sensible of the greatest happiness of your life till 'twas
too late.


D. Alen. What satisfaction could I receieve in all my life, to whom nothing
ever succeeded? I thought four times I should have been a King, first of
Poland, afterward of England, then of Flanders, and last of all of France,
which did of right belong to me, but the end of all my hopes was nothing.


Q. El. See how much happiery ou were than you dreamed of, you were always
feasted with hopes and imagination without having 'em destroyed by reality and
enjoyment, for you did nothing all your life but make preparations for a Crown
as I did for Matrimony.


D. Alen. But I believe as a real marriage would have done you no injury, so a
substantial Crown would have much better pleased me.


Q. Eliz. Pleasures have not solidity enough to endure the touch, but vanish
like fairy money in the handling, or not unlike to marshy ground where men must
tread but gently lest they sink.


DIALOGUE IV. Between William de Cabestan and Albert Frederick of Brandenburgh.
A. de Bra. I Like you so much the better for having been as very a Fool as my
self: pray let me know the History of your Folly, and how it first began.


W. de Cab. I was a Poet of Provance, and much esteemed by the age wherein I
lived, which was the occasion of all my misfortunes. It happened I fell in Love
with a certain Lady, to whom my Poems had done no small honor, and she
relish't 'em so well, that she envied any other should have the like advantage;
so to assure her self of the fidelity of my Muse, she gave me, some cursed
drink which turned my brains, and put me out of condition ever of Rhyming more.


A. de Bran. How many Years have you been dead?


W. de Cab. I think it may be much about four hundred.


A. de Bran. Certainly Poets were very scarce in that age, when they put that
value on 'em as to poison 'em after such a manner. Had it been your fortune to
have lived in mine, you might have made your Poems on all the Beauties of the
times, without fear of being poisoned for the matter.


W. de Cab. I know it, for of all the wits that have come hither since, I have
heard none complain of my destiny. But pray inform me how you became a fool?


A. de Bran. After a very grave, and rational manner, there was a certain King
became so only at the sight of an Apparation in a Forest, which was no great
matter, but what I saw was much more terrible.


W. de Cab. What did you see?


A. de Bran. Why, all the Ceremony and preparation for marriage; I was wedded
to Mary Eleanour of Cleaves, and during all the marriage Feast, I made such
serious and Judicious Reflections upon Matrimony, that from that time I quite
lost my wits.


W. de Cab. Had you never any Intervals of reason in your Distraction?


A. de Bran. Yes.


W. de Cab. So much the worse, 'twas my misery to have my senses quite returned
again at last.


A. de Bran. I should never have looked on that as a misfortune.


W. de Cab. When one's once a fool it is best to be entirely so, it is only your
half-witted fools who have the returns of wit and folly, and who happen to be
so by Chance, whose number is very inconsiderable; but those who are so by
course of Nature and cracked in their Cradles, with whom the world's so
thronged, are always fools, and and are so fortunate as never to admit of any
cure.


A. de Bran. For my part I always thought that the lightest touches of folly
were best.


W. de Cab. Oh! then I find you never understood the use on it, for it hides a
very melancholy prospect from us, that of our selves; and as one would never
suffer such uneasiness if one could help it, so neither would we any return of
reason which should cause it.


A. de Bran. You say well, but you shall never persuade me that there are any
other sort of fools in the world, but those that are like you and I; some men
speak reason, else 't had been no great matter to lose one's wits, and those
that are Frantic could not be distinguished from Men of Sense.


W. de Cab. The Frantic are only fools of another kind, but the common
follies of the world, though they are never so extravagant, yet being of the
same nature like Atoms of a resembling figure, do very easily combine, and
fasten the link of humane society, witness the vain desire of Immortality,
false glory, and many other such like Principles on which Men's Actions all are
founded; but the Frantic are a certain sort of fools which cannot be brought
into order, neither will their follies suit with those of others, and therefore
are not fit for the ordinary Commerce of Life.


A. de Bran. Madmen have so little wit as to treat every body like Madmen and
themselves, but men of sense do not so.


W. de Cab. You're mistaken, all men point at one another, and know not how to
prevent that, which is so ordained by nature; The solitary Man laughs at the
Courtier, yet never goes to Court, to let him know it. The Courtier too
despises him, and yet never seeks to find him out in his retreat: If there were
any party that was generally acknowledged to be most rational, all the world
would embrace it, and the crowd were not to be endured; it is better therefore
that Men's Fancies were divided, so as not to hinder one another in their
imaginary pursuits, and continue still to laugh at one another.


A. de Bran. With all your reasonings, I take you for a fool still, and I
believe the Lady's Potion has not done working in your Head.


W. de Cab. Observe what Notion one fool has of another. True wisdom
distinguishes its possessors, but the Opinion of it equals every body, and
yields as much content and satisfaction.


DIALOGUE V. Between Agnes Sorel and Roxilana.
A. Sorel. TO speak the truth, I cannot comprehend your Turkish Gallantry, where
your Lovers need only Will, and without farther ceremony Enjoy: you make use
of none of those feigned and engaging Resistances (Love's most powerful and
attractive charm) neither do men make their approaches with that gentle
submission and care to please as they ought, so that your Sultans and Sultana's
are insensible of the greatest Joys of Love.


Roxil. Why? the Turkish Emperors, who are extremely jealous of their Power
for some reasons of State, will not submit to use that refined way of Courtship;
they fear lest those Beauties who have naturally too great a power over Men,
might by that means usurp upon their Souls, and so intermeddle in State Affairs.


A. Sorel. Perhaps that had not been so great a misfortune as they imagined;
and often Love is not only delightful in it self, but also of advantage to
that which seems to have no dependence on it; I my self was Mistress to a King
of France, and the absolute Dominion which I had over him was the saving of my
Country: you might have heard what extremity France was reduced to in the time
of Charles the Seventh, and how by the successful valor of the English 'twas
almost brought to nothing.


Roxil. Oh, yes; that Story made no small noise here, how that France was saved
by a Woman: were you that Person then?


A. Sorel. No, you're mistaken, you mean another; the King (who loved me) was
just resolved to quit his Kingdom to the Conqueror, and retire for his Safety
to the Mountains; but to defeat his design I contrived this Strategeme. I
ordered a certain Astrologer to come to me (whom I had privately managed
before) to tell me my Fortune in the presence of the King, and after he had
seemed to have considered very well of my Nativity, The Stars (said he) are the
greatest cheats in Nature, or else you will inspire some great Monarch with a
long and lasting passion; upon which I applied my self to the King, and told
him, that I hoped he would not take it ill if I went to the English Court,
because he no longer would be King, and I lay under a necessity of fulfilling
my Destiny. The fear of losing me made him once more resolve to be King of
France, and from that time he began to be successful: France has therefore
reason to be obliged to Love, and treat that kindly which was its preservation.


Roxil. It Is true, but to return to the Maid: We have been therefore much
deceived in Story, which gives that honor to a Country Girl, which of Right
belongs to a Court Lady, and the King's Mistress.


A. Sorel. There has been such a Maid who by the Bravery of her Actions and
Speeches animated the fainting Soldiers, but 'twas I that first inspired the
King; she did him no small service with her Sword, but he was indebted to my
Charms for his Delivery: and in fine, you can have no longer reason to doubt of
the good Service I did my fainting Country, when it is so manifest by the
testimony of one of the Successors of Charles the Seventh in these Verses.
What Cloistered Nun or praying Hermit dare
With you most beauteous Agnes to compare?
Your Charms have saved your King and Country too,
And that was more than all their Prayers could do.
Now what say you Roxilana; if I had only been a Sultana like you, and had no
more power of Charles the Seventh than you had over your Sultans we had been
all undone.


Roxil. I admire at your vanity, to value your self so much on so small an
action: What difficulty was there for you a free Woman and Mistress of your
self to assume so much power over your Lover? But I had the courage to throw
off all subjection to the Sultan, though I were his Slave; you made Charles the
Seventh a King against his will, and I made Solomon against his will my Husband.


A. Sorel. How so? they say the Sultans never Marry.


Roxil. It Is true; yet it came into mine Head to espouse Solomon (though he had
so often satisfied his passion before, and to effect my design I contrived this
Strategeme: First I built many Mosques and Religious Houses, and performed some
other actions of Piety and Devotion, and having so done, I dissembled a
profound Melancholy: The Sultan a thousand times desired to know the cause of
it, to whom I replied after the Ceremony on it was over, that the Doctors of
the Law had told me all my works of Piety would be of no advantage to my self
because a Slave had performed 'em, and all I had done was for my Lord Solomon.
Whereupon he presently made me Free, that I might reap the benefit of my own
works; afterward when he would have taken his former freedom with me, I told
him with a grave and serious Air, I thought he had no power on the person of a
Free Woman. Solomon who was of a nice and tender Conscience went immediately to
consult with a Doctor of the Law (whom I had secretly managed before) and had
this Answer returned him; That he must have a care how he treated me any longer
as a Slave, he himself having made me Free, and there was no way left of
Enjoying me but Marriage. Upon this he was more Amorous than ever, and,
contrary to the custom of all his Predecessors, Married me.


A. Sorel. I must aknowledge that was pleasant, to catch those in that Net
which they are so cautious to avoid.


Roxil. Man is not that headstrong Animal we fancy, and when he is caught by
the passions, it is an easy matter to lead him any where. Were I to live but
once again, and had assigned me the most Imperious of 'em all to manage, I
would make him be my humblest Vassal, provided only I had much Wit, some
Beauty, and but a little Love.


DIALOGUE VI. Between Joan of Naples and Anselm.
J. of Nap. WHat, cannot you let me know my Fortune? surely you have not forgot
your Astrology that you were so great an Artist in in the the other World?


Ansel. Whence should I take my observations? there is neither Stars nor Heaven
here.


J. of Nap. It Is no matter, I Will dispense with you from observing all the rules
of your Art so exactly.


Ansel. That were pleasant, for a Man that is dead to turn Astrologer; But what
would you desire to know?


J. of Nap. Something in relation to my self.


Ansel. Good! why you are dead, and will be always so, and your Affairs and
condition here will always remain in the same posture, and that is the sum of
all that I can tell you.


J. of Nap. That Is it which gives me all my trouble, I am well enough assured
there is nothing new can happen here, yet if you would but foretell me
something, the thoughts on it would divert me. You cannot Imagine how melancholy
it is to have a prospect still of the same Fortune: Come, one little Prediction
I beseech you, be it what it will.


Ansel. Could one believe that you should suffer the same uneasinesses here
that you did above? there they are never satisfied with the present, and are
always anticipating the Future; we should be wiser now we are here.


J. of Nap. If men do so, it is not without reason; the present time is but an
instant, and 'twere great pity to bound one's life but with that one point, and
take no delightful prospect beyond that; is it not much better to enjoy the
future with the present, than that alone which creates all the pleasures of
Avarice?


Ansel. And what is the event on it? they borrow so much from the future by their
hopes and fancies, that when it becomes the present they find it so rifled and
deflour'd that they know not how to relish it: And though the pleasure's dead,
yet their Impatiences are not so. It Is the great concern of Men to know what
will be; and therefore the Astrologers are so hunted after to inform 'em, who
tell 'em, with a great deal of Confidence, that there are hot and cold Signs,
Male and Female; that some Planets are good, and others hurtful; and that some
are neither one nor the other, but are so complaisant to conform themselves
according to the humor of the Company they are found in; yet all these Follies
are very well received, because they are in hopes by them to be brought to the
knowledge of the future.


J. of Nap. What? do they let us know nothing then? I wonder that you who were
my Astrologer should speak so ill of your own Art.


Ansel. Hark ye! the Dead don't use to lie, I abused you with that very Art
which I professed, and you so much esteemed.


J. of Nap. Oh! but I will not believe you: how could you foretell me then that I
should be four times married? and what probability was there that any rational
person would let her self be so often caught in the same Noose? therefore I am
certain you read my Destiny in the Stars.


Ansel. I Will assure ye I consulted the Stars much less than your Inclinations,
and though some of our Predictions come to pass, yet this is no proof of the
Infallibility of the Art. I could bring you to one of our Fraternity, who can
tell you a very pleasant Story on this Subject. This Man was a professed
Astrologer, and relied as little upon his own Art as ever I did; yet to
satisfy himself whether there was any certainty in it or not, he dedicated one
whole day to make his Observations, whether the particular Actions of it could
any ways answer to his Rules, and it happened that he foretold many things
which were far more strange than your four Marriages, which mightily surpised
him: but afterward more narrowly examining his Astronomical Tables, on which
his Predictions were grounded, he found 'em to be all false and imperfect; and
if they had been rightly made, he should have been obliged to have foretold the
quite contrary.


J. of Nap. If this be true I Am forry I knew it not in the other World, that we
might have been no longer cheated with these Impostors.


Ansel. There are Stories enough in the World to their disadvantage, and yet
the Art continues still in vogue. Men are so Infatuated with a desire of
knowing what is to come, that they will by no means suffer themselves to be
disabus'd, with pleasure they sacrifice their All to a future hopes; yet when
it comes to their possession, they straight fly from it as if spightfull Nature
had so ordained, that Mankind should never enjoy those goods they have, nor
think of making themselves happy the present moment, but still refer it to that
which is to come, as if at its Arrival, it would not be like the former.


J. of Nap. I own it is still the same, yet it is not good that one should think
so.


Ansel. I shall make you understand the folly of this fond Opinion, by the
Relation of a Fable: There was a Man that was thirsty, and sitting at a
Fountainhead, refused to taste the Waters, because he hoped at length they
would become more clear and pure, the Waters still continued running, yet still
the same; which made him wait as formerly in expectation. But at last the
Fountain became dry, and when he would, there was nothing left for him to drink.


J. of Nap. I believe this story might not only be applied to me, but to all
the dead, and our Glass of Life is quite run out, before we know what use to
make of it. But what then? methinks it is Expectation makes the greatest
Blessing, and there is something of pleasure not only in the hope, but in the
fear of what is to come: would you have a Man live in the world, as we do here,
where the present and the future are all alike?


Ansel. Man's Life were very pleasant indeed, if all the happiness on it
consisted in the prospect of distant and imaginary Objects. What pleasure can
it be to aspire at that which can be never enjoyed, and pursue a shadow which
can never be Caught?


FINIS.
A Catalogue of new Books Printed for, and sold by James Norris; at the King's
Arms without Temple Bar. 1684.
1. MAssinello, or a Satyr against the Association, and the Guild Hall Riot,
Quarto. 2. Eromena, or the Noble stranger, a curious Novell, Octavo. 3.
Tractatus adversus Reprobationis absolutae decretum, nova methodo and
succentissimo compendio adornatus and in duos Libros digestus, Octavo. 4. An
Idea of Happiness, in a Letter to a Friend, enquiring wherein the greatest
happiness attainable by Man in this Life does consist, Quarto. 5. A Murnival of
Knaves, or Whiggism plainly displayed, and, if not grown shameless, Burlesqu'd
out of Countenance, Quarto. 6. The accomplished Lady, or deserving
Gentlewoman; being a Vindication of Innocent and Harmless Females from the
Aspersions of Malicious Men; wherein are contained many Eminent examples of the
Constancy, Chastity, Prudence, Policy, Valor, Learning, etc. wherein they have
not only equaled, but excelled many of the contrary Sex, Twelves. 7. Patriae
Parricida, or the History of the horrid Conspiracy of Cataline, against the
Commonwealth of Rome, in English, Octavo. 8. Core Redivivus, in a Sermon
Preached at Christ-Church Tabernacle, in London, upon Sunday, September the
9th. 1683. being a day of Public Thanksgiving for the late Deliverance of his
sacred Majesty's Person and Government, from the Treasonable Rebellion and
Fanatic Conspiracy, Quarto. 9. Romes Rarities, or the Pope's Cabinet unlocked
and exposed to veiw, being a true and faithful account of the Blasphemy,
Treason, Massacres, Murders, Lechery, Whoredom, Buggery, Sodomy, Debauchery,
Pious Frauds, etc. of the Romish-Church, from the Pope himself to the Priest,
or inferior Clergy, Octavo.

