THE PILGRIM, A COMEDY: As it is Acted at the THEATER ROYAL, IN DRURY LANE.

Written Originally by Mr. Fletcher, and now very much Altered, with several
Additions.

LIKEWISE A Prologue, Epilogue, Dialogue and Masque, Written by the late Great
Poet Mr. DRYDEN, just before his Death, being the last of his WORKS.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Took, near the Middle-Temple-Gate, in
Fleet Street, 1700.

PROLOGUE.
Written by Mr. DRYDEN.
HOW wretched is the Fate of those who write!
Brought muzled to the Stage, for fear they bite.
Where, like Tom Dove, they stand the Common Foe;
Lugg'd by the Critique, Baited by the Beau.
Yet worse, their Brother Poets Damn the Play,
And Roar the loudest, though they never Pay.
The Fops are proud of Scandal, for they cry,
At every lewd, low Character, -- That Is I.
He who writes Letters to himself, would Swear
The World forgot him, if he was not there.
What should a Poet do? It Is hard for One
To pleasure all the Fools that would be shown:
And yet not Two in Ten will pass the Town.
Most Coxcombs are not of the Laughing kind;
More goes to make a Fop, than Fops can find.
Quack Marus, though he never took Degrees
In either of our Universities;
Yet to be shown by some kind Wit he looks,
Because he played the fool and writ Three Books.
But if he would be worth a Poet's Pen,
He must be more a Fool, and write again:
For all the former Fustian stuff he wrote,
Was Dead-born Doggrel, or is quite forgot;
His Man of Uz, stripped of his Hebrew Robe,
Is just the Proverb, and As poor as Job.
One would have thought he could no longer Iog;
But Arthur was a Level, Job's a Bog.
There, though he crept, yet still he kept in sight;
But here, he founders in, and sinks down right.
Had he prepared us, and been dull by Rule,
Tobit had first been turned to Ridicule:
But our bold Britton, without Fear or Awe,
O're-leaps at once, the whole Apocrypha;
Invades the Psalms with Rhymes, and leaves no room
For any Vandal Hopkins yet to come.
But what if, after all, this Godly Geer,
Is not so Senceless as it would appear?
Our Mountebank has laid a deeper Train,
His Cant, like Merry Andrew's Noble Vein,
Cat-Call's the Sects, to draw 'em in again.
At leisure Hours, in Epique Song he deals,
Writes to the rumbling of his Coaches Wheels,
Prescribes in have, and seldom kills by Rule,
But rides Triumphant between Stool and Stool.
Well, let him go; it is yet too early day,
To get himself a Place in Farce or Play.
We know not by what Name we should Arraign him,
For no one Category can contain him;
A Pedant, Canting Preacher, and a Quack,
Are Load enough to break one Asses Back:
At last, grown wanton, he presumed to write,
Traduced Two Kings, their kindness to requite;
One made the Doctor, and one dubbed the Knight.
EPILOGUE. By Mr. Dryden.
PErhaps the Parson stretched a point too far,
When with our Theaters he waged a War.
He tells you, That this very Moral Age
Received the first Infection from the Stage.
But sure, a banished Court, with Lewdness fraught,
The Seeds of open Vice returning brought.
Thus Lodged, (as Vice by great Example thrives)
It first debauched the Daughters and the Wives.
London, a fruitful Soil, yet never bore
So plentiful a Crop of Horns before.
The Poets, who must live by Courts or starve,
Were proud, so good a Government to serve;
And mixing with Buffoons and Pimps profain,
Tainted the Stage, for some small Snip of Gain.
For they, like Harlots under Bawds professed,
Took all the ungodly pains, and got the least.
Thus did the thriving Malady prevail,
The Court, it is Head, the Poets but the Tail.
The Sin was of our Native growth, it is true;
The Scandal of the Sin was wholly new.
Misses there were, but modestly concealed;
White Hall the naked Venus first revealed.
Who standing, as at Cyprus, in her Shrine,
The Strumpet was adored with Rites Divine.
E're this, if Saints had any Secret Motion,
'Twas Chamber Practice all, and Close Devotion.
I pass the Peccadillo's of their time;
Nothing but open Lewdness was a Crime.
A Monarch's Blood was venial to the Nation,
Compared with one foul Act of Fornication.
Now, they would Silence us, and shut the Door
That let in all the barefaced Vice before.
As for reforming us, which some pretend,
That work in England is without an end;
Well we may change, but we shall never mend.
Yet, if you can but bear the present Stage,
We hope much better of the coming Age.
What would you say, if we should first begin
To Stop the Trade of Love, behind the Scene:
Where Actresses make bold with married Men?
For while abroad so prodigal the Dolt is,
Poor Spouse at home as ragged as a Colt is.
In short, we'll grow as Moral as we can,
Save here and there a Woman or a Man:
But neither you, nor we, with all our pains,
Can make clean work; there will be some Remains,
While you have still your Oats, and we our Hains.
Persons Represented.
Men.
ALphonso, an Old Angry Gentleman. Mr. Johnson. Curio, His two Friends.
Seberto, His two Friends. Pedro, The Pilgrim, A Noble Gentleman, Servant to
Alinda. Mr. Wilks. Roderigo, Rival to Pedro, Captain of the Outlaws. M. (...).
Lopez, Two Outlaws under Roderigo. Jacques, Two Outlaws under Roderigo. An Old
Pilgrim. Governor of Segovia. Mr. Simson. Verdugo, A Captain under him. A
Gentleman of the Country. Courtiers. Porter. Beggars. Master and Keeper of the
Mad folks. A Scholar. Madmen. Mr. Thomas. A Parson. Madmen. Mr. Haynes. An
Englishman. Madmen. Mr. Cibber. A Welshman. Madmen. Mr. Norris. A Tailor.
Madmen. Mr. Pinkeman. Servants. Peasants
Women.
Alinda, Daughter to Alphonso, in Love with Pedro. Mrs. Oldfield Iuletta,
Alinda's Maid, a smart Lass. Mrs. Moor. A Fool.
THE PILGRIM, etc.
ACT I. SCENE I.
Enter Alphonso, Curio, and Seberto. Cur. SEignior Alphonso, you are too rugged
with her, too harsh; indeed you are.


Alph. Yes, it seems so.


Feb. A Father of so sweet a Child, so good, so beautiful; Fie, Sir, fie, so
excellent a Creature.


Alph. She Is a Fool; away.


Seb. Can you be angry? Can any wind blow rough upon a blossom so fair and
tender? Can a Father's Nature, a Noble Father's too?


Alph. All this is but prating: Let her be ruled; let her observe my Humor;
with my Eyes let her see, with my Ears let her hear; I am her Father; I begot
her, I bred her, and by Jupiter I will --


Seb. No doubt you may compel her, but think how wretched you by force may make
her.


Alph. Wretched! wretched! Is It not a Man I force her to? A noble Man; A Rich
Man; A Handsome Man; A Young Man; A Strong Man; none of your piec'd Companions,
none of your washy Rogues, that fly to fitters upon every puff of Weather. I
force her to a strong Dog, don't I? What would the Flirt have?


Seb. I grant you, Roderigo is all these, and a brave Gentleman: But does it
therefore follow, she must dote upon him? Will you allow no Liberty in choosing?


Cur. Alas! she is tender yet.


Alph. Tough, Tough, Tough as the Devil; you see I cannot break her.


Seb. You put her to too hard a Trial: You know, though he has Merit, he is a
banished Man, an Outlaw; you know the Life he leads; That he is the head of a
rough Band of Robbers; Judge what Effect his bloody Rapines must needs e're
this have workt upon his nature. A rugged Mate, I doubt, for such a Dove.


Cur. Rugged indeed; Such different Tempers, where can you ever hope to
reconcile?


Alph. Abed, abed, Do You hear? abed, Sir. She will not find him so rugged there,
I Will warrant you: She Will find ways to soften him. And for the Pranks he plays
in's Banishment, it shows he is a mettled Fellow: He Will make them weary of their
Sentence; a small Composition will restore him. But I know the Secret of all
this: My Minx has some other in View; some flickering Slave or other, some
sweet-scented Coxcomb, that -- a -- Sings, I Will warrant you, and -- a -- Lutes
it, Languishes, and has no Beard; ha! Is It not so?


Seb. So far from what you charge her with, I would engage my Life, she has not
yet a Glance to answer for.


Cur. I never yet beheld more Modesty.


Seb. Nor I, in one so young; so much discretion.


Alph. -- Hum -- and yet there was a Fellow (Dead I hope) whom I have seen her
glance at, 'till I thought the Hussy would have stuck her Eyes into the Rascal.


Seb. Pray, who was that?


Alph. Pedro, Sir, only Pedro, old Fernando's hopeful Heir; my Mortal Foe,
who is Family I wish consumed; that is all, Sir.


Seb. If that be all, you have nothing le^t to fear; for Pedro, urged by secret
discontent, has left his Father, Friends, and all; and, as it is said, is gone
to range the World.


Alph. With all my heart: He was a Beggar, so strolling is his Business.


Cur. He was a Beggar, but a noble Beggar; shame on the Court for suffering him
to be so.


Alph. Shame on those who encourage Beggars, I say. Here Is this young Slut, in
the midst of her Rebellion, is so very Religious, she undoes me with her
Charity. Why, what a Crew of Vermin have I about my Door every day, to receive
Meat, Drink, and Money, from her fair hands. Not a Rogue that can say his
Prayers, groan, and turn his Pipe to Lamentation, but she thinks she is bound to
dance to.


Enter Alinda, and Juletta. Alph. O, are you there Mistress? Well, how goes
Disobedience to day? -- That Is a base down Look -- Ah you sturdy young Jade.


Cur. Pray be more gentle to her.


Alph. Pray be quiet; I know best how to deal with her: and I will make her
obey, or I will make her --


Alin. Sir^ you may make me any thing; you know I Am all Obedience, there is
nothing but my Prayers and Tears oppose you.


Alph. Then will I oppo^e nothing but your Prayers and Tears. Now I hope you
cannot complain of me.


Cur. Poor Lady, how I pity her.


Alph^ Pray, keep your Pity for a better occasion. Look you, Gentlewoman, you
know my Will; and, in that, you know all; So I leave you to digest it; and I
desire these Gentlemen will do so too.


Cur. Seb. A better hour attend you, Madam. Exit Alphonso, followed by Curio
and Seberto.


Alin. I thank ye Gentlemen: Alas! I want such Comforts. Would I could thank
you too, Father; but your Cruelty will not give me leave. Grant, Heaven, I may not
forget my Duty to him.


Iul. If you do, Madam, Heaven will forgive you for it, never fear it. A
perverse old Rogue. Aside.


Alin. What Poor attend my Charity to day, Iuletta?


Iul. Enough of all sorts, Madam; some that deserve your Pity, some that don't:
But I wish you would be merry with your Charity; a Cheerful Look becomes it.


Alin. Alas! Iuletta, what is there for me to be merry at? What Joy have I in
View?


Iul. Joy; why what Joy, in the name of Venus, would you have, but a Husband? A
handsome lusty young Fellow, that will make such a bustle about you, he will send
your Spleen to the Devil, Madam.


Alin. Away, light Fool; I doubt there is poor Contentments to be found in
Marriage. Yet could I find a Man --


Iul. You may, a thousand.


Alin. Mere Men, I know I may. But such a Man, from whose Example (as from a
Compass) we may steer our Course, and safe arrive at such a Memory as shall
become our Ashes; such Men are rare indeed. But no more of this, it is not
Discourse that is suited to thy Giddy Temper: Let Us in, and see what poor
afflicted Wretches want my Charity. Exeunt.


SCENE II.
Enter Porter, Beggars, Pedro, and an old Pilgrim. Port. Stand off, and keep
your Ranks. Twenty foot farther. There, louse your selves with Reason and
Discretion -- The Sun shines warm. No nearer. The farther still the better:
Your Beasts will bolt anon, and then it is dangerous.


1 st. Beg. Hey ho! Heaven bless our Mistress.


Port. Does the Crack go that way, old Hunger, ha? 'Twill be of my side anon.


2 d. Beg. Pray, Friend, be kind to us.


Port. Friend! your Friend; and why your Friend, Sirrah, Meager Chaps? What do
you see in me, Louse-trap, or without me, ha! that I should be your Friend?
Have I got the Itch, Scrub, or do I look like some of thy Acquaintance hung in
Gibbets? Have thou any Friends, Kindred, or Alliance, or any higher Ambition
than an Alms Basket? This young soft-hearted Mistress of mine does make these
Rogues so familiar.


2 d. Beg. I Am sure I would be your Worship's Friend.


Port. No doubt on it, Vermin; and so you shall, when I Quarter the same Louse
with you.


3 d. Beg. I Am sure it is Twelve a Clock.


Port. It Is ever so with thee; when thou have done scratching; For that
provokes thy stomach to ring Noon. O the infinite Seas of Porridge thou have
swallowed! Alms do you ^all it, to relieve these Rascals?


Enter Alphonso, Curio, Seberto. Alph. Look you there! Did not I tell you how
she would undo me! What Marts of Rogues and Beggars!


Seb. It Is Charity Methinks you are bound to love her for.


Alp. Yes, I Will warrant you. If Men could Sail to Heaven in Porridge-pots, with
Masts of Beef and Mutton, what a Voyage should I make? What are all these here?


1 st. Beg. Poor People, an't like your Worship.


2 d. Beg. Wretched poor People.


3 d. Beg. Very hungry People.


Alph. And very Lousie. And what are you! to the Pilg.


Old Pilg. Strangers, that come to wonder at your Charity; yet People poor
enough to beg a Blessing.


Cur. Use 'em gently, Sir, they have a reverend M^en. You are Holy Pilgrims,
are you not?


Old Pil. We are, Sir, and bound far off; to offer our Devotions.


Alph. What do you do here then; We have no Relics, no Holy Shrines.


Old Pil. The Holiest we ever heard of: You keep a living Monument of Goodness;
a Daughter of that Pious Excellence, the very Shrines of Saints sink at her
Virtue. We come to see this Lady, not with Profane Eyes, or wanton Blood, to
dote upon her Beauty; but through our tedious way, to beg her Blessing.


Alp. This is a new way of Begging; these Commendations cry Money for Reward,
good store too: Ah! the Sainting of this young Harlot will Cost me Dear.

[to Pedro] Well, Sir, have you got your Compliments ready too, and your empty
Purse? Hah! what nothing but a bow; Modesty?


Cur. A handsome well looked Man. aside


Alph. What Country Craver are you? What! nothing but Motion? A Puppit Pilgrim.


Old Pil. He Is a stranger, Sir, these four days I have traveled in his Company;
but little of his Business or his Language yet I have understood.


Seb. Both young and handsome; only the Sun has injured him.


Alph. Would you have Money, Sir, or Meat, or a Wench? What kind of Blessing
does your Devotion point at, Still more Ducking? Are there any Saints that
understand by sign only? Hah, more Motion yet? This is the prettyest Pilgrim;
the Pink of Pilgrims.


Cur. Fie, Sir, Fie; rather bestow your Charity then Jest upon him.


Alp. Say you so? Why then, look ye, Pilgrim; here is a poor Viaticum, very good
Gold, Sir, I Am Sorry it is not heavier. But since the lightest Grain of earthly
Dross would be a Burden to a Heavenly mind -- I Will put it up again.


Cur. O horrible! you are too Irreverent.


Alp. You are a -- Must I give my Money to every Rogue that carries a grave
Look in's Face? Must my good Angels wait upon him? I Will find 'em other business.


Seb. But consider, Sir, the Wrongs you do those Men may light on you:
Strangers are entitled to a softer Usage.


Alph. Oon's, half the Kingdom will be strangers shortly, if this young Slut's
suffered to go on with her Prodigalities. But I must be an Ass: Here, Sirrah,
see 'em relieved for once; do it effectually too; do you hear? Burst 'em, that I
may never see 'em more. Were I young again, I Would sooner get Bear-whelps than
She-Saints. Exit.


Cur. Such a Face as that, sure I have seen.


Seb. I thought so too; but we must be mistaken. Exit.


Port. Come, will ye troop up, Porridge Regiment? Captain Poor-Quarter, will ye
move?


Enter Alinda and Juletta. Alin. Why are not these poor Wretches served yet?


2 Beg. Bless our good Mistress.


Port^ They are too high fed, Madam; their Stomachs are not awake yet.


Alin. Do you make sport with their Miseries? Sir, learn more Humanity, or I
shall find a way to teach it you.


3 Beg. Kind Heaven preserve her, and for ever bless her.


Alin. Bless the good end I mean it for. Exit Beg.


Iul. aside. Would I knew what that were; if it be for a Man, I Would say Amen
with all my heart.

You have a very pretty Band of Pensioners, Madam.

Alin. Vain Glory would seek more and handsomer;
But I appeal to Virtue what my end is.
What men are these?

Iulet. Holy Pilgrims they seem to be. What Pity it is that handsome young
Fellow should undergo so much Penance: Would I were the Saint he makes his Vow
to; I Would soon grant his Request, let him ask what he would.


Alin. You are Pilgrims, Sirs, Is It not so?


Old Pil. We are, fair Saint; may Heaven's Grace surround you;
May all good Thoughts and Prayers dwell about you;
Abundance be your Friend, and Holy Charity be ever at your hand to Crown you
Glorious.


Alin. I thank you, Sir; Peace guide your Travels too;
And what you wish for most, end all your troubles.
Remember me by this; ( Giving him Money) and in
Your Prayers, when your strong Heart melts,
Meditate my poor Fortunes.

Old Pil. All my Devotions wait upon your Service.


Alin. Are you of this Country, Sir?


Old Pil. Yes, worthiest Lady, but far off bred: My Fortune's farther from me.


Alin. I am no Inquisitor, whatever Vow or Penance pulls you on, Sir,
Conscience, or Love, or stubborn Disobedience; That Saint you Kneel too, hear
and ease your Travels.


Old Pil. Yours never begin; and thus I Seal my Prayers.


Exit. Alin. aside. How steadfastly this Man looks upon me? How he Sighs? Some
great Affliction sure's the source of his Devotions.

To Ped. Right Holy Sir: He turns from us. Alas he weeps too: Something presses
him he would reveal, but dares not. Sir, be Comforted: If you want, to me you
appear so worthy of Relief, I Will be your Steward. Speak and take. He Is Dumb
still. This Man stirs me strangely.


Iul. Would he would stir me a little; I like his shape well. Aside.


Alin. It may be he would speak to me alone; Aside.

Retire a little, Iuletta; but do you hear, don't be far off.


Iul. I shall not, Madam: Would I were nearer him: A young smug handsome Holiness
has no fellow.


Aside. Exit. Alin. Why do you grieve? Do you find your Penance sharp?
Are the Vows you have made, too mighty for you?
Or does the World allure you to look back, and make you mourn the softer Hours
you have lost? You are young, and seem as you were formed for Manly Resolution;
Come, be Comforted:


Ped. I am, fair Angel: And such a Comfort from your words I feel, that though
Calamities, like angry Waves, curl round, contending proudly, who shall first
devour me, yet I will stem their Danger.


Alin. He speaks Nobly. Aside. What do you want, Sir?


Ped. All that can make me happy: I want my self.


Alind. Your self! Who robbed you, Pilgrim?
Why does he look so earnestly upon me? I want my self. Aside^
Indeed you Holy wanderers are said to seek much,
But to seek your selves --

Ped. I seek my self, and am but my self's shadow, have lost my self, and now
am not so Noble.


Alin. aside. I seek my self; sure, something I remember bea^s that Motto? It
is not he; he' younger, has a smoother Face; yet for that Self sake, Pilgrim,
who so e're it be, take this.


Ped. Your hand I dare take; that be far from me: Your hand I hold, and thus I
kiss it; and thus I bless it too. Be constant still: Be good: And live to be a
great Example.


Exit. Alin. One word more. He Is gone: Heaven! How I Tremble? Be Constant
still; it is the very Poesy here; and here without, Be Good. He wept too, as he
left me. It must be Pedro. Iuletta.


Enter Juletta. Iul. Madam.


Alin. Take this Key, and quickly fetch me the Jewel that lies in my little
Cabinet. That will determine all, ( Exit Julet.) It must be he: His Face was
smoother when I saw him last; yet there is a Manly Look, and Noble Shape, still
speak him Pedro.


Enter Juletta. Alin. Let me see it: It Is so; It Is he; it must be he. He spoke
the words just as they stand engraven here. I seek my self, and am but my
self's shadow.

Poor Pedro! But how shall I recover him?
Iuletta, the Pilgrim, where is he? which way did he go?

Iul. Alas, Madam, I don't know; it is in vain to seek him now.


Alin. I tell thee, I must see him; I gave him nothing.


Iul. That was ill done, indeed; for he is the handsomest Fellow I have seen
this many a Day. What makes her look so thoughtful? Sure here is something afoot
more than ordinary.


Alin aside. It Is enough. He has done much for me: I Will try what Recompense
it is in my power to make him. Exit.


The End of the First Act.
ACT II.
Enter Alphonso, Curio, Seberto, Juletta and Servants. Alph. CAn she slip
through a Keyhole? Tell me that; resolve me; Can she fly in the Air? Is she
Invisible? Gone, and no body knew it!


Seb. Pray, be more moderate.


Alph. Some Goatish Rogue has watched her hour of Itching, and has clawed her,
clawed her; the Dog has clawed her. 'Oons find her out, or I Will hang ye all;
you, Wagtail, you know her Designs, you were of her Council, ( to Iulet) her
bawdy Adviser; where is she, Strumpet?


Iul. You would know of me, Sir.


Alph. Of you Sir? Yes of you Sir; why, what are you Sir?


Iul. Her Servant, Sir, her faithful Servant.


Alph. Servant? Her Bawd; her Fiddle-stick; her Lady Fairy, to oil the Doors
o'nights, that they may not creek. Where is she, Infamy?


Iul. It Is very well.


Alph. You Lie, it is ill, Damnable ill; and either confess, or --


Iul. Indeed I will not.


Seb. Why?


Iul. Because I cannot; if I could, I Would give another Reason.


Alph. Well said; but I shall deal with you, you Slut you. What say you,
Thick-skull, which way did she get out? why were not my Doors ^hut?


to the Porter. Port. They were, a'nt Please you; nothing open but the Keyhole.


Alph. Where did she lie? Who lay with her?


Port. Not I, an't please you; I lay with Frederick in the Flea-Chamber.


Alph. Once more, of thee I demand her; tell me News of her, or expect -- the
Devil and all.


to Iulet. Cur. Come Iuletta, if you know any thing, tell him --


Iul. Look ye, Sir, if I knew all, and had been entrusted by her, not all the
Devils you could call upon, should scare one single Hint from me. But, since I
know nothing worth your knowing, I Will tell you what I do ^now. I know she is
gone, because we cannot find her. I know she is gone cunningly, because you cannot
find which way. I know she was weary of your Tyranny, because the Devil would
have been so too: And I know, if she is wise, she will never come again --


Alph. Out of my Doors.


Iul. That Is all my poor Petition. For were your house Gold, and she not in it,
I should think it but a Cage to whistle in.


Alph. Whore; if she be above ground, I Will have her --


Iul. I Would live in a Colepit then, if I were she.


Cur. Indeed, Sir, I fancy she knows nothing of her Flight; you know her mad
way of talking.


Alph. Hang her, hang her, she knows too much.

Enter Servant drunk. Well Rascal, have you any News of her?


Serve. N. -- N. -- Not a Drop Sir. The Butler gave me the Key of the Cellar, to
search the Cellar, Sir; so I have been searching the Cellar.


Alph. Here Is a Dog for you.


Serve. I searched every Hogshead, Sir, and opened some Bottles, but could not
find a spoonful of her.


Alph. You Rascal, get you out of my reach, or I Will be thy Murderer.


Enter another Servant that stammers. Serve. S, S, S, S, Sir.


Alph. Well, what News? Be quick:


Serve. My yo, yo, yo, yo, young La-Lady is gone --


Alph I know she is gone, you Dog, but where?


Serve. Out at the P --


Alph. Out with it, you Son of a Whore --


Serve. The Po, ho, ho, ho, ho, hostern Gate of the Ga, ha, ha, ha, ha --


Alph. This Dog will make me mad; but one stammering Rogue in the Family, and
it must fall to his share to give me an account of her. The Wind's in the East
too; The Dog will not get it out this Hour. Where was it, Sirrah, where was it?


Serve. The Gaarden Sir, the Ga-arden.


Alph. The Garden, Sir, the Garden; was it so?
And how do you know she got out at the Garden, ha?

Serve. Is -- s -- saw, an't p, p, p, p, p-lease you, the P -- Print of^ her fo,
fo, fo, fo, Foot.


Alph. Right, a Foot, a little Foot, a young Where Is Foot?


Serve. Ye, Yes Sir.


Alph. And from thence scrambled over the Wall into the Park, and so to the
Devil?


Serve. So I sup, -p, -pose, Sir.


Alph. It Is very well, ye Stars, it is very well: This comes of Indulgence, I
must needs allow her the Key of the Garden, to walk on Fast-days, and
Contemplate with a Pox: But I Will fetch her again, with a Firebrand at her
Tail. My Horses there --


Seb. You Will give us Leave to wait upon you?


Cur. You Will give us Leave to wait upon you?


Alph. That you may if you please. My Horse there; dispatch. Are you so Hot, I
Faith? I Will Cool you, Mistress; Must you be jumping Joan? If I catch you again,
I Will clap such a Clogg about your Neck, you shall leap no more Walls I Will
warrant you; I Will hang Roderigo there, In Faith. My Horses, quick; and do you
hear, keep me this young Lirry Poop within doors, fast; I shall discover Dame
--


Exit Alph. etc. Iul. Indeed you will not Sir.


Aside. Well, Love, if thou be'st with her; or whatever Power else arms her
Resolution, conduct her carefully, and keep her from this Madman -- Direct her
to her Wishes; dwell about her; let no dishonorable End overtake her, Danger
or Want; and let me try my Fortune --


Enter Roderigo and four Outlaws. 1 st Out. You are not merry Captain.


Rod. Why, we get nothing, we have no sport; Whoring and Drinking spoils us; we
keep no Guard.


2 d Out. I Am sure there is neither Merchant nor Gentleman passes, but we have
Tribute.


Rod. Yes, and while we spend that idly, we let those pass that carry the best
Booty: I Will have all searched and brought in. Rogues and Beggars have found the
Trick of late to become Bankers. In short, Gentlemen, I Will have none Escape but
my Friends and Neighbors, who may be useful in laying my Innocence before the
King: All others shall pay their Passport.


2 d Out. You now speak like a Captain; if we spare any, flea us, and Coin our
Cassocks.


Rod. You hear of no Preparations the King intends against us?


3 d Out. Not a Word; Don't we see his Garrisons?


Rod. Who have we out now?


2 d Out. Good fellows, that, if there be any Purchase stirring, will not flip it;
Jacques and Lopez, Lads that know their Business.


Rod. Where Is the Boy you brought in e'n now? he is a pretty Lad, and of a quick
Capacity --


1 Out. He Is within at Meat, Sir; the poor Knave's hungry; yet he seasons all
he eats or drinks, with Tears.


2 Out. He Is young; it is Fear and want of Company.


Rod. Don't use him roughly, and he will soon grow bolder. I intend to keep him
to wait upon me; I ^ike the Boy, there is something in this Face pleases me
strangely: Be sure you all use him gently.


1 Out. Here Is a little Box, Sir, we took about him, which almost broke his
Heart to part with; I fancy there is something of Value in it; ^ cannot open it.


Rod. Alas! some little Money, I warrant you, the poor Knave carried to defray
his Charge: I Will give it him again.

Enter Jaques, Lopez, with Pedro. How now! Who Is this? What have you brought me
here, So^diers?


Iaqu. Why Truly we don't well know; only he is a damned sullen fellow.


Rod. Where did you take him?


Lop. Upon the skirt of the Wood, sauntring and peeping about, as if he were
looking for the best Access to our Quarters: Money he had enough, and when we
threatened him, he smiled and yielded, but would not speak one word.


Rod. Pilgrim, come hither; are you a Pilgrim, Sir? A Piece of pretty Holiness;
do you shrink, my Master? A smug young Saint this. What Country were you born
in, I pray? What, not a Word? had your Mother this excellent Virtue too? Sure,
she was a Matchless Woman: What a blessed Family is this Fellow sprung from!
sure he was begot in a Calm. Are your Lips Sealed, or do you scorn to Answer?
Look you, Sir, you are in my Hands, and I shall be too hard for you: Put off
his Bonnet, Soldiers. You have a speaking Face, Sir.


Lop. A Handsome one, I Am sure; this Pilg^im cannot want She-Saints to pray to.


Rod. Stand nearer: Ha?


Ped. Come, do your worst; I am ready.


Rod. Have you found your Tongue then? Retire all, and let me ta^k with him
alone; and keep your Guards st^ict. ( Ex. all but Rod. and Ped. So, now, what
art thou?


Ped. What am I? My habit shows me what I am.


Rod. A Desperate Fool; and so thy fate shall tell thee. What Devil brought
thee hither? For I know thee.


Ped. I know thou do; and since it is my Fortune to light into thy hands, I
must conclude, the most malicious of Devils brought me; yet some Men say thou
art Noble --


Rod. Not to thee; that were a benefit to mock the giver. Thy Father hates my
Friends and Family; and thou have been the Heir of all his Malice; can two such
Storms then meet, and part without Kissing?


Ped. You have the mightier hand.


Rod. And so I Will use it.


Ped. I cannot hinder you; less can I beg submissive at his knees that knows
no Honor, that bears the stamp of Man, and not his Nature. You may do what you
please.


Rod. I will do all.


Ped. I do expect thou will; for had thou been a Noble Enemy, thou would
have sought me whilst I carried Arms, whilst my good Sword was my Profession,
and then have cried out, Pedro, I defy thee; then stuck Alphanso's Quarrel on
thy point; the mercenary anger thou serv'st under, to get his Daughter. But
now, thou poorly, basely, set thy Toils to catch me, and like the trembling
Peasant, that dares not meet the Lion in the face, dig'st crafty Pitfalls. Thou
shame to Spanish Honor.


R^d. Thy bravery is to thy Habit due: That Holy dress thou think will be
thy sanctuary; thou will not find it so.


Ped I Look not for it; The more unhallowed Wretch however art thou t'invade it.


Rod. When you were bravest, Sir, and your Sword sharpest, I durst affront you,
you know I durst; when the Court Sun gilded you, and every Cry was, The young
hopeful Pedro, Alonso's sprightly Son, then I durst meet you, when you were
Master of this mighty Fame, and all your Glories in the full Meridian. Had we
then come to Competition, which I often sought --


Ped. And I desired too.


Rod. You shoud have seen this Sword and felt it too, sharper than Sorrow felt
it. Then like a Gentleman I would have used thee, and given thee the fair
Fortue of thy cast: But since thou steal'st upon me like a Spy, and Theif-like
think that Holy Case shall save thee, base as thy Purposes thy end shall be.
Soldiers, appear, and bring a halter with ye. I Will forgive your Holy Habit,
Sir, but I Will hang you.


Enter Lopez, Jaques and Out Laws. 1. Out. Here Is a Halter, noble Captain, what
service have you fort?


Rod. That Traitor has Service for it. Truss him up.


1. Out. With all my heart; do you want a band, Sir? I Will fit it to your Collar
immediately.


Lop. What Is his fault, Captain?


Rod. It Is my will, he perrish; that is his fault.


Ped. A Captain of good Government: Come, Soldiers, come, you are roughly bred,
and Bloody; show your Obedience, and the Joy you have, in executing Impious
Commands. You have a Captain Seals you liberal Pardons: Be no more Christians,
it is not in your way, put Religion by, 'twill make you Cowards. Feel no
Tenderness; nor let a thing called Conscience trouble you; alas! 'twill breed
delay. Bear no Respect to what I seem; were I a Saint indeed, why should that
stagger ye? You know no Holiness; to be excellent in Evil is your Goodness; and
be so, '^will become you; have no Hearts for fear you should repent, for
Repentance will be dangerous.


Rod. Truss up the Preacher.


Ped. The Racks of Conscience are of dire Importance.
Be therefore steady in your Mischiefs; waver not.

Rod. Up with him, I say.


Ped. Why do you not obey your Chief? Come, this one daring stroke at Heaven,
will make ye hardened Soldiers of Iniquity.


Rod. What do the Villains gaze at? Why am I not obeyed?


Iaq. What would you have us do?


Rod. Dispatch the Babbler --


Iaq. And have Religious Blood hang over our Heads?
We have sins enough already, to make our Graves loath us.

Rod. I shall not be obeyed then?


Lop. Obeyed? I don't know; though I am a Thief, I Am no Hangman^ They are two
Trades; I don't care to meddle with Holy Blood.


Rod. Holy, or Unholy, I Will have it done.


1 Out. If I do it, I Will be Damned.


2 Out. Or I.


3 Out. Or I. We'll do any thing that is reasonable; but the Devil would flinch
at such a Job.


Iaq. I have done as many Villainies as another; and though I say'^, with as few
Qualms: But I don't like this, it goes against my Stomach.


Rod. Have ye then conspir'd^ ye Slaves?


Ped. Why art thou so disturbed at their Refusal; if it is my Life alone ^hou'
want, why with thy own cursed hand do thou not take it? Thine's ^he
Revenge; Be thine the Glory: Engross it to thy self, take the whole ^in upon
thee, and be Mighty in Evil, as thou art in Anger. And let not those poor
wretches howl for thy sake.


Rod. It Is enough; I Will make ye all repent this stubborness; nor will I yet be
baffled, I Will find another means to have my Will obeyed. Let him not escape, I
charge ye, on your Lives. Exit Rod.


Iaq. What the Devil have you done Pilgrim, to make him rave and rage thus?
Have you killed his Father, or his Mother, or strangled any of his Kindred?


Lop. Or has he no Sisters? Have not you been Bouncing about them?


1 Out. OF my Conscience his Quarrel to thee is not for being Holier than he.


Lop. Nor for seeming an Honester Man; for we have no Trading here with such
stuff. To be excellent Thieves is all we aim at. Hark thee, Pilgrim; will thou
take a Spit and a Stride, and try if thou can outrun us?


Ped. No, I scorn to shift his Fury.


Iaq. Thou will be hanged then.


Ped. I cannot dye with fewer faults about me.


1 Out. I fancy he will shoot him; for the Devil's in it if he hang him himself.


Lop. No, he is too proud for that; he will make some body do it: See, here he
comes again, and as full of Rage as ever.


1 Out. He has got the Boy with him; sure he will not make him do it.


Lop. As like as not.


Enter Roderigo and Alinda. Rod. Come, Sirrah, no wonders. Nay, don't Stare,
nor hang back; do it, or I Will hang you, you young Dog --


Alin. Alas, Sir, What would you have me do? Heaven's Goodness shield me.


Rod. Do? Why, hang a Rogue that would hang me.


Alin. I Am a Boy, and weak, Sir; pray excuse me.


Rod. Thou art strong enough to tie him to a Bough, and turn him off. Come, be
quick.


Alin. For Heavens sake, Sir.


Rod. Do ye dispute, Sirrah?


Alin. O, no, Sir; I Will do the best I can. Which is the Man, Sir?


Rod. That in the Pilgrim's Coat there; that Devil in the Saint's Skin.


Alin. Guard me, ye Powers.


Rod. Come, Dispatch.


Ped. I wait thy worst.


Iaq. to Lop. Will the Boy do it? Is the Rogue so bold? So young, so deep in
Blood!


Lop. He shakes and trembles.


Ped. Do thou seek more Coals still to sear thy Conscience? Work Sacred
Innocence to be a Devil? Do it thy self, for shame: Thou best becomest it.


Rod. Thou art not worthy on it. No, this Child shall strangle thee. A Crying
Girl, if she were here, should Master thee.


Alin. How shall I Save him? How my self from Violence? Are you prepared to
dye, Sir?


Ped. Yes, Boy; Prithee to thy Bu^iness.


Iaq. The young Dog begins to look as if he would do it in earnest.


Alin. If you are prepared, How can you be so angry, so perplext'd? Heaven's won
by Patience, not by Heat and Passion.


Lop. The Bastard will make a good Priest.


Ped. I thank thee, gentle Child, thou teach rightly.


Alin. Methinks you seem to fear too.


Ped. Thou see more than I feel, Boy.


Alin. You tremble sure.


Ped. No, Boy, it is but thy tenderness; prithee make haste.


Alin. Are ye so willing then to go?


Ped. Most willing. I would not borrow from his Bounty, one poor hour of Life,
to gain an Age of Glory.


Alin. And is your Reckoning stated right with Heaven?


Pedro. As right as Truth, Boy; I could not go more joyful to a Wedding.


Alin. Then to your Prayers! I Will dispatch you presently.


Rod. A good Boy; I Will reward thee well.


Alin. I thank you, Sir; but pray allow me a short word in private. Now guide
my Tongue, ye blessed Saints above. Aside.


Rod. What would thou have, Child?


Alin. Must this Man Dye?


Rod. Why do thou ask that Question?


Alin. Pray be not angry; if he must, I Will do it: But must he now?


Rod. What else; Who dares reprieve him?


Alin. Pray think again; and as the Injuries are great this Man has done^ you,
so suit your Vengeance to 'em.


Rod. I do; it is therefore he must dye --


Alin. A Trifle.


Rod. What is a Trifle?


Alin. Death, if he dye now.


Rod. Why, my best Boy?


Alin. I love you, Sir, I would not tell you else. Is it Revenge to Saint your
Enemy; Clap the Dove's, Wings of Downy Peace upon him, and let him soar to
Heaven, is this Revenge?


Rod. Yet die he must.


Alin. Right. Let him die, but not prepared to die. That were the Blessing of a
Father on him; and all who know and love Revenge would laugh at you. You see,
thus fortified, he scorns your Threats, despises all your Tortures; smiles to
behold your Rage; so blind your View, that ^ while you aim his hated Soul to
Hell, you shoot it up to Heaven. Shall he die now?


Lop. What has the Boy done to him?


Iaq. How thoughtfully he looks?


Alin. Come, Sir, you are wise, and have the World's regard; you are valiant
too, and see your Valor honored. 'Twill be a Stain to both, indeed it will,
to have it said, you have given your Fury leave to prey on a poor passive
wayward Pilgrim --


Rod. The Boy has shaken me: What would thou have me do?


Alin. Alas Sir, do you ask a Child? But since you do, I Will say the best I
know. I Would have you then do bravely, scorn him, and let him go. You have made
him tremble, now seal his Pardon; and when he appears a Subject fit for Anger,
fit for you, his pious Armor off, his hopes no higher than your Sword may
reach, then strike the noble Blow. aside I hope I have turned him.


Rod. Here; Let the Fool go. I scorn his Life too much to take it from him. But
if we meet again --


Ped. I thank ye, Sir.


Rod. No more: Be gone.


Exit Pedro. Alin. Why this was greatly done, most noble. aside But whether is
he gone! O, shall we never meet happy?


Rod. Come, Boy, thou shall retire with me; I love thy Company: Thou have a
pleasing Tongue; come with me, Child.


Alin. I Will wait upon ye, Sir. aside O! Pedro.


Ex. Rod. Alin. Lop. The Boy has don't; he has saved the Pilgrim. A Cunning
young Rogue, I shall love him for it heartily.


Iaq. And so shall I. But the Knave's so good, I Am afraid he will ruin us, he will
make us all honest.


1 Out. Marry Heaven forbid.


2 Out. He Will find that a harder Task, than to save the Pilgrim.


Lop. That I believe: But come, Gentlemen, let us to Supper; we'll Drink the
Boy's Health, and so about our business.


Exeunt. The End of the Second Act.
ACT III.
Enter Roderigo, Jaques, Lopez, and three Outlaws. Rod. It Is strange none of
you shoud know her.


Iaq. Alas! we never saw her, nor heard of her, but from you.


Lop. I don't think 'twas she; Methinks a Woman shoud not dare --


Rod. Thou speak thou know not what: What dares not Woman, when she is
provoked? Or what seems dangerous to Love and Fury? That it is she, These
Jewels here confirm me, for part of 'em I my self sent her, which (though against
her Will) her Father forced her to accept and wear.


Lop. It Is very strange, a Wench and we not know it, I used to have a better
Nose.


Iaq. But what could be her business here?


Rod. That Is what distracts me. O! that canting Pilgrim, that Villain Pedro;
there lies my Torture. How cunningly she pleaded for him? How Artfully she
saved him? Death and Torments, had ye been true to me, I never had suffered
this.


1 Out. Why, you might have hanged him if you would; and would he had been
hanged, that is all we care for it, so we had not don't --


Rod. But where is she now? What care have ye had of that? Why have ye let her
go, to despise and laugh at me?


Lop. The Devil that brought her hither, has carried her back again, I think;
for none of us saw her go.


Iaq. No living thing came this Night through our Watches. You know she went
with you.


Rod. And was by me, 'till I fell asleep. But when I waked and called was gone.
Curse on my Dullness, why did I not open this? This would have told me all.


Enter Alphanso and two Outlaws. Alph. Prithee bring me to thy Captain,
where is thy Captain, Fellow? Oh, I am foundered, I am melted; some Fairy has
led me about all Night; the Devil has enticed me with the voice of a Whore.
Where Is thy Captain, Fellow?


1 Out. Here Sir, there he stands.


Alp. O! Captain, how do thou, Captain? I have been fooled, bubbled, made an
Ass on: My Daughter's run away; I have been haunted too; have lost my Horse, am
starved for want of Meat, and out of my Wits.


Rod. I Am sorry, Sir, to see you engaged in so many Misfortune's; But pray walk
in, refresh your self, and I Will inform you what has happened here; but I Will
recover your Daughter, or lose my Life: In the mean time all these shall wait
upon you.


Alph. My Daughter be damned. Order me Drink enough; I Am almost Choked. Ex.
Alp. Rod.


Rod. You shall have any thing. What think you now Soldiers?


Iaq. I think, a Woman's a Woman; that is all.


Lop. And I think the next Boy we take, we should search him a little nearer.
Exeunt.


Enter Juletta Sola, in Boys Clothes. Iul. This is Roderigo's Quarter; my old
Master's gone in here, and I Will be with him soon; I Will startle him a little
better than I have done. All this long Night have I led him out of the way, to
try his Patience. I have made him Swear and Curse, and Pray, and Curse again: I
have made him lose his Horse too, whistled him through thick and thin. Down in
a Ditch I had him; there he lay blaspheming, till I called him out to guide his
Nose pop into a Fuz bush. Ten thousand Tricks I have p^ay'd him, and ten
thousand will add to them before I have done with him. I Will teach him to plague
poor Women. But all this while, I cannot meet with my dear Mistress. I Am cruelly
afraid she should be in Distress; would to kind Heaven I could come to comfort
her: But, till I do, I Will haunt thy Ghost^ Alphonso; I will, old Crab-Tree. He
shall not sleep; I Will get a Drum for him, I Will frighten him out of his wits; I
have such a Hurricane in my head, I have almost lost my own already; and I Am
resolved I will not be mad alone. When a Woman sets upon playing the Devil, 'twere
ashame she should not do it to the purpose. Exit.


Enter Seberto and Cu^io. Seb. It Is strange, in all the Tour we have made, we
sh^u'd have no news at all of her.


C^r. I Cannot think she is got so far.


S^b. She Is certainly disguised; her Modesty would never venture in her own
Shape.


Cur. Let her take any Shape, I Am sure I could distinguish her.


Seb. So could I, I think. Has not her Father found her?


Cur. Not he, he is so wild, he would not know her if he met her.


S^b. I hope he would not; for it is pity she should fall into his hands. B^t
where are we, Curio?


Cur. In a Wood, I think; hang me if I know else: And yet I have ridden all
these Coasts, and at all hours.


S^b. I wish we had a Guide.


C^r. If I am not much mistaken, Seberto, we are not far from Roderigo's
Qu^rters. I think it is in this Thicket he and his Outlaws harbor.


Seb. Then we are where Alphanso appointed to meet us.


Curi. I believe we are, would we could meet some living thing to inform us.


Seb. What Is that there? Enter Alinda.


Curi. A Boy, I think; stay, Why may not he direct us?


Alin. I am hungry, and I am weary, almost quite spent, yet cannot find him;
keep me in my Wits, good Heaven! I feel 'em wavering. O my Head.


Seb. Hey Boy, do hear, thou stripling!


Alin. O my fears, some of Roderigo's wicked Crew. If I am carried back to him,
I then indeed am wretched.


Curi. Do know what place this is, Child?


Alin. No indeed, Sir, not I. O my Bones!


Seb. What do thou complain for, Boy? A very pretty Lad this.


Curi. What Is the matter with thee, Child?


Alin. Alas, Sir! I was going to Segovia, to see my sick Mother, and here I
have been taken, robbed, and beaten by d^unken Thieves. O my back.


Seb. What Rogues are these to use a poor Boy thus! Look up Child, be of good
cheer, hold up thy head.


Alin. O, I cannot, it hurts me if I do; they have given me a great blow on the
Neck.


Curi. What Thieves are they, do know?


Alin. They call the Captain Roderigo. O Dear, O Dear.


Curi. Look you there; I knew we were thereabouts.


Seb. Do thou want any thing?


Alin. Nothing but ease, Sir.


Curi. There Is some Money for thee however, and get thee to thy Mother.


Alin. I thank ye Gentlemen, pray Heaven bless ye.


Seb. Come let us along, we cannot lose our way now. Exit.


Alin. I Am glad you are gone, Gentlemen; I know you are honest men, but I don't
know whether you are on my side upon this occasion; Lord how I tremble, send me
but once into Pedro's Arms, Dear Fortune, and then come what will -- Which way
shall I go, or what shall I do? it is almost Night again, and I know not where
to get either Meat or Lodging. These wild Woods, and the various fancies that
possess my Brain will run me Mad. Hey ho. Enter Juletta with a Drum.


Iule. Boy, Boy.


Alin. More set to take me.


Iule. Do hear, Boy? a word with thee.


Alin. It Is a Boy too, and no bigger than I am, I can deal with him.


Iule. Hark ye young Man; Can you beat a Drum?


Alin. A Drum!


Iule. A Drum! Ay, a Drum; did never see a Drum, mun? Prithee try if thou
can make it grumble.


Alin. Aside. Iuletta's Face and Tongue; is she run mad too? Or is theresome
design in this? I Am Jealous of every thing.


Iule. I Will give thee a Royal, but to go along with me to Night, and hurry
durry this a little.


Alin. I care not for your Royal nor you neither, I have other business,
prithee Drum to thy self and Dance to it.


Iule. Why how now, you saucy young Dog you! I have a good mind to lay down my
Drum, and take ye a slap over the Face.


Enter Roderigo and two Outlaws. Alin. Hark; here comes more company, I shall
be taken at last. Heaven shield me! Exit.


Iule. Basto; who is there? Aside.


Lope. Do you need me any farther, Captain?


Rod. No, not a foot: Give me the Gown: so: the Sword.


Iule. This is the Devil Thief; and if he take me, woe be to my Gaskins.


Lope. Certainly Sir, she will take her Patches off, and change her Habit.


Rod. Let her do what she will, she cannot again deceive me. No, no, Alinda,
it is not the Habit of a Boy can twice delude me.


Iule. A Boy, and Patches on, what a dull Jade have I been! Aside.


Rod. If she be found in the Woods, send me word presently, and I Will return; she
cannot be yet got far. If you don't find her, expect me -- when you see me. No
more, farewell. Exit.


Iule. I Am very glad thou art gone. This Boy in Patches was the Boy I talked to;
the very same, how hastily it shifted me! what a mop-ey'd Ass was I, I could
not know her. It must be she; it is she: now I remember her, how loath she was
to talk: how shy she was of me. I Will follow her, but who shall plague her
Father there? No, I must not quit him yet: I must have one flurt more at him,
and then for the Voyage. Come, Drum, make ready. Thou must do me Service. Exit.


Enter Jaques, and one Outlaw. Iaq. Are they all set?


Out. All, and each quarter's quiet.


Iaq. Is old Alphonso a-sleep?


Out. An hour ago.


Iaq. We must be very careful in our Captain's absence.


Out. It concerns us, he will not be long from us. Hark -- Drum afar off.


Iaq. What!


Out. A Drum.


Iaq. The Devil.


Out. It Is not the wind, sure.


Iaq. No: that is Still and Calm. Ha^k again.


Out. Tat, Tat.


Iaq. It ^omes nearer: we are surpised; it is by the King's Command; we are all
Dead men.


Out. Hark, hark, a Charge now. Our Captain has betrayed us all.


Iaq. This comes of Love: Poverty, a scolding Wife, and ten Daughters be his
recompense. Enter Lopez.


Lop. Do You hear the Drum?


Iaq. Yes, we do hear it.


1 Out. Hark, another on that side. Enter two Outlaws.


1 Out. Fly, fly, fly, we are all taken, we are all taken.


2 Out. A Thousand Horse and Foot, a Thousand Prisoners, and every Man a Halter
by his side.


Lop. A dismal Night, Companions! what is to be done?


Iaq. Every Man shift for himself. Exeunt.


Enter Alphonso. Alph. Ay marry Sir, where is my Horse now? what a Plague did I
do amongst these Rogues? is there never a hole to creep into? I shall be taken
for their Captain, and out of respect to my Post, be hanged up first. A Pox of
all Ceremonies, cry I; what will become of me! I must be a Daughter-hunting,
with a Pox to me: Lord! Lord! that a foolish young Whore should lead a wise old
Rogue into so much mischief. But hark: hark, I say: ay; here they come. That I
had but the Strumpet here now, to find 'em a little Play while I made my
escape. --


Enter Seberto, Curio, and Outlaws. Seb. What do you fear? what do you run
from? Here are no Soldiers, no Body from the King to Attack you, are you all
mad?


1 Out. Ay, but the Drum, the Drum Sir, did not you hear the Drum?


Curi. I never saw such Pidgeon-hearted Rogues: what Drum, you Fools? What
Danger? who is that stands shaking there behind, enough to infect a whole Army
with Cowardice. Mercy on me, Sir, is it you? what is it that frights you thus?


Alph. Is there any hopes; do ye think I could buy my Pardon?


Seb. What is it that has frighted you thus out of your Senses? here is no danger
near you: A Drum I heard indeed, and saw it, a Boy was beating it; Hunting
Squirrils by Moonlight.


Curi. Nothing else, upon my Word, Sir.


Alph. That Rogue, the very Boy, no doubt on it, that haunted me all last Night.
I wish I had him, he has plagued my heart out. But come, let us go in, and let
me get on my Clothes; if I stay here any longer to be Martyred thus, I Will beget
another Daughter. Where is that Jewel? Have you met her yet?


Seb. No; we have no news of her.


Alph. Then I can tell you some, she has been here in Boys Clothes, she has
trust up her Modesty in a Pair of Breeches. There has been a Pilgrim at her
Tail too. I suppose the Game's almost up by this time.


Curi. A young Boy we met, Sir.


Alph. In a Gray-Hat.


Curi. In a Gray-Hat.


Alph. Patches on.


Curi. Patches on.


Alph. The Strumpet.


Curi. Impossible.


Alph. True -- in the Litteral Sense.


Seb. It Is wonderful we should not know her.


Alph. Dam her, that is all. Come get me some Wine, a great deal: This Halter
makes me kekkle in the Throat still. Exit.


Enter Juletta sola. What a fright have I put 'em in! a brave hurly burly; IN
faith, if this do but bolt him, I Will be with him again, with a new part. I Will
ferk him; as he hunts her, I Will hunt him, no Fox with a kennel of Hounds at his
Tail, ever had such a time on it. Exit.

SCENE Segovia. Enter Pedro and a Gentleman. Gent. You need make no Apology
Sir, I take a Pleasure in waiting upon Srangers, and showing 'em what is worth
their seeing in our City. Besides I observe you are sad, I would divert your
melancholy if I could. Will ye view our Castle?


Ped. I thank ye, (...), but I Have already seen it; it is strong and well
provided.


Gent. How do you like the Walks?


Ped. They are very pleasant; your Town stands cool and sweet.


Gent. But that I would not add to your sadness -- I could show you a place
were worth your view.


Ped. Shows seldom alter me, Sir, pray what place is it?


Genesis It Is a House here, where People of all sorts, that have been visited with
Lunacies, and Follies, wait their Cures. There Is fancies of a thousand stamps
and fashions: Some of Pity, that it would make you melt to see their Passions:
And some again as light that would divert you. But I see your temper, Sir, too
much inclined to Contemplation to have a taste of such Diversions.


Ped. You mistake me, Sir, I should be glad to see 'em; if you please, I'^l
wait upon you thither.


Gent. Since you are willing Sir, I shall be proud to be your guide.


Ped. I never yet had so much mind to take a view of misery. Exeunt.


Enter two Keepers. 1 Keep. Carry mad Bess some Meat, she roars like Thunder.
And tie the Parson short; the Moon's in the full, he has a thousand Pigs in's
Brain. Who looks to the Prentice? Keep him from Women, he thinks he has lost
his Mistress: And talk of no Silk Stuffs; 'twill run him Horn mad.


2 Keep. The Justice keeps such a stir yonder with his Charges, and such a coil
with his Warrants.


1 Keep. Take away his Statutes; the Devil has possessed him in the likeness of
Penal Laws; keep him from Aqua-vitae, for if that Spirit creep into his Quorum,
he will commit us all. How is it with the Scholar?


2 Keep. For any thing I see he is in's right Wits.


1 Keep. Thou art an Ass; his Head's too full of other Peoples Wits, to leave
room for his own. Enter English Madman.


Engl. Give me some Drink.


1 Keep. O ho, here is the English Man.


Engl. Fill me a thousand Pots, and froth 'em, froth 'em; down of your knees,
you Rogues, and pledge me roundly; one, two, three -- and four. To the great
Turk, I Am his Friend, and will prefer him, he shall quit his Crown -- and be a
Tapster.


1 Keep. Peace, thou heathenish Drunkard, Peace for shame. These English are so
Malt-mad, there is no meddling with them; when they have a Fruitful Year of Barley
there, the whole Island's thus.


Engl. Who talks of Barley? my Drink's small; down with the Malt-Tax. Huzza.


1 Keep. Hold your Tongue, you Bear you, or I shall so Chastise ye --


Eng. Who Is that? An Excise man? The Devil Enter a she Fool.


Fool. God give you good Even, Gaffer.


2. Keep. Who has let the Fool loose here?


1 Keep. If any of the Madmen get her, they will Pepper her, they will Bounce her, l'
Faith.


Fool. Will you walk into the Cole-house, Gaffer?


2 Keep. She Is as Leacherous as a she Ferret.


1 Keep. Who a Vengeance looks to her? Go in Kate, go in, and I Will give thee a
fine Apple.


Fool. Will you buss me, and tickle me, and make me Laugh?


1 Keep. I Will whip you, Hussy.


Engl. Fool, fool, come up to me, fool.


Fool. Are ye peeping?


Engl. I Will get thee with five Fools.


Fool. O fine, O Dainty.


Engl. And thou shall lie in a Horse-cloath like a Lady.


Fool. And shall I have a Coach?


Engl. Drawn with four Turkeys, and they shall tread thee too.


Fool. We shall have Eggs then; and shall I sit upon 'em?


Engl. Ay, Ay, and they shall be all Addle, and make a Tanzey for the Devil.
Come, come away; I am taken with thy Love, Fool, and will mightily belabour
thee.


1 Keep. How the Slut Bridles! How she twitters at him! These English men would
stagger a wise Woman. If we should suffer her to have her will now, we should
have all the Women in Spain as mad as she here.


2 Keep. They Would strive who should be most fool: Away with her.


Fool. Pray ye stay a little, let us hear him sing: He has a fine Breast.


Enter Master, three Gentlemen, Pedro, a mad Scholar. 1 Keep. Here comes my
Master: to the Spit, you whore; and stir no more abroad, but tend your
business, you shall have no more sops in the pan else. Away with 'em both. Exit
Keep. with the Madman and fool.


1 Genesis I Will assure you Sir, the Cardinal's angry with you for keeping this
young Man.


Mast. I Am heartily sorry, Sir; if you allow him sound, pray take him with you.


2 Genesis We can find nothing in him Light nor Tainted; no starts, no rubs in all
his Answers: His Letters too are full of Discretion, Learning, and in a handsome
style.


Mast. Don't be deceived Sir, mark but his Look.


1. Genesis His grief and his Imprisonment may stamp that there.


Mast. Pray talk with him again then.


2 Genesis That will be needless, we have tried him long enough, and if he had a
taint, we should have met with it.


Ped. A sober Youth: It Is Pity so heavy a misfortune should attend him.


2 Genesis You find no sickness?


Scho. None Sir, I thank Heaven; nor nothing that disturbs my understanding.


1 Genesis Do you sleep a Nights?


Scho. Perfectly sound and sweet.


2 Genesis Have you no fearful Dreams?


Scho. Sometimes, as all have, who go to Bed with raw and windy stomacsh.


1 Genesis Is there no unkindness you have received from any Friend, or Parent? or
Scorn from what you loved?


Scho. No truly Sir, I have not yet s^^n Vill^ny enough, to make me doubt the
truth of Friend or Kindred -- and what Love is, unless it lie in Learning, I am
ignorant.


1 Genesis This Man is perfect; I never met with on^ that t^lk'd more regularly.


Mast. You Will find it otherwise.


2 Genesis I must tell you plainly Sir, I think you keep him here to make him mad,
but here is his Discharge from my Lord Cardinal. Come Sir, you are now at
Liberty to go with us.


Scho. I thank ye, Gentlemen; Master farewell.


Mast. Farewell Stephano. Alas! Poor Man.


1 Genesis What flaws and gusts of Weather we have had these three days? How dark
and hot it is? The Sky is full of mutiny.


Mast. It has been stubborn Weather.


2 Genesis Strange work at Sea, I doubt there is old Tumbling.


1 Genesis Bless my old Uncle's Bark, I have a Venture in it.


2 Genesis And so have I, more than I Would wish to lose, I Am in some fear.


Scho. Do you fear?


2 Genesis Ha! How he looks?


Mast. Nay, mark him better, Gentlemen.


2 Genesis Mercy on me, how he stares?


Mast. Now tell me how ye like him? What think ye of him for a sober Man now?


Scho. Does the Sea stagger ye?


Mast. Now you have hit the Nick.


Scho. Do ye fear the Billows?


1 Genesis What Ails him, who has stirred him?


Scho. Be not shaken: Let the storm rise; let it blow on, blow on: Let the
Clouds wrestle, and let the Vapors of the Earth turn mutinous. The Sea in
hideous Mountains rise, and tumble upon a Dolphin's back, I Will make all shake,
for I am Neptune.


Mast. Now, what think you of him?


2 Genesis Alas! poor Man.


Scho. Your Bark shall Plough through all, and not a surge so saucy to disturb
her: I Will see her safe, my Power shall sail before her -- Down ye angry Waters
all,
Ye loud whistling Whirlwinds fall.
Down ye proud Waves; ye Storms cease,
I command ye, be at Peace;
Fright not with your Churlish Notes,
Nor bruise the Keel of Bark that floats.
No devouring Fish come nigh,
Nor Monster in my Empery
Once show his Head, or terror bring,
But let the weary Sailor sing,
Amphitrite, with white Arms
Strike my Lute, I Will sing Charms.



Mast. Now he must have Music, his fit will grow worse else.


2 Genesis I pity him. Music.


Mast. Now he will go in quietly of himself,
And clean forget all.

Genesis We are sorry, Sir, and we have seen a wonder.
Pray Excuse our unbelief. Exeunt Gent.

Ped. This was a strange Fit.


Mast. Many have sworn him right, and I have thought so; yet on a sudden, from
some word or other, when no Man could expect a Fit, thus he has flown out.
Enter Alinda.


Alin. Must I come in too?


Mast. No, my pretty Lad, keep in thy Chamber, thou shall have thy Supper.


Ped. Pray what is that, Sir?


Mast. A strange Boy that was found last Night wandering about the Town a little
distracted, so was sent hither.


Ped. How the pretty Knave looks! and Plays, and Peeps upon me! Sure such Eyes
I have seen.


Mast. Pray take care, Sir, if you seem to take notice of him, you will make him
worse.


Ped. I Will warrant you, I Will not hurt him: How he smiles! Let me look once
again; but that the Clothes are different -- Sure it is not she -- How tenderly
it presses me?


Mast. I must attend else where, pray take heed. Exit Master.


Ped. Fear not: How my Heart beats and trembles! He holds me hard; thou have a
mind to speak to me, he Weeps: What would thou say, my Child? Do know me?


Alin. O Pedro, Pedro!


Ped. O my Soul.


Genesis Hey, what fit's this; I think the Pilgrim's off the Hooks too.


Alin. Let me hold thee, and now come all the World, I fear not.


Ped. Be wise my Angel, you will discover your self; oh, how I Love thee. How
do thou? tell me.


Alin. I have been Miserable. But your Eyes have blessed me; pray think it not
immodesty I kiss ye. Oh, my Head's wild still.


Ped. Be not so full of Passion, nor hang so eagerly upon me, 'twill be
observed.


Alin. Are ye then weary of me! but you shall not leave me: No, I Will hang here for
ever. Kiss you eternally, O my dear Pilgrim.


Enter Master. Mast. Look ye there now; I knew what you would do. The Boy's in's
Fit again: Are ye not ashamed to torment him thus? I told you, you would bring it
upon him. Either be gone, and presently, I Will force ye else: Who waits within!
Enter two Keepers.


Ped. Alas! good Sir, this is the way never to recover him.


Mast. Stay but one minute more, I Will complain to the Governor. Pull away the
Boy; look ye there, do you see how he pulls, and tears himself. Be gone you had
best, for if the Boy miscarry I Will make you rue it.


Ped. O Misery.


Alin. Farewell, for ever. Exeunt different ways.


The End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
Enter Alphonso, and a Gentleman^ Juletta follows 'em unseen. Genesis YOU are now
within a Mile oth' Town, Sir; if my business would give me leave, I Would guide ye
farther. But for such Gentlemen as you enquire for, I have seen none. The Boy
you d^sc^ibe, or one much like it, was sent in the other Night a little maddish,
and now is in the House appointed for such Cures.


Alp. It Is very well, I thank ye Sir.


Iule. (aside) And so do I: for if there be such a place, I ask no more; you
shall hear of me, IN faith, old Gentleman, I Will follow you there too, as
foundered as I am. And make ye kick and roar before I have done with you. I Will
teach you to hunt Mad-Houses.


Alp. (aside) It must be she. It Is very well, is your blood so hot, In Faith, my
Minx? I Will have ye madded, I Will have ye worm'd.


Enter Alinda as a Fool. Genesis Here Is one belongs to the very House, Sir, it is a
poor Idiot. But she will show you the way as well as a wiser Body. So, Sir, I
leave you. Exit Gent.


Alp. Your Servant. Here Fool, a word with thee, Fool.


A^in. O I am lost, it is my Father in all his rage.


Alp. Hark thee, Fool.


Alin. He does not know me, Heaven grant I may deceive him still! will ye give
me two pence, Gaffer, and here is a Crow Flower, and a Dazie? I have some Pie in
my Pocket too.


Alp. This is an errant Fool, a mere Changeling.


Alin. Think so, and I am happy. Aside.


Alp. Do thou dwell in Segovia, Fool?


Alin. No, no, I dwell in Heaven; and I have a fine little House made of
Marmalad; and I am a lone Woman, and I spin for St. Peter. I have a hundred
little Children, and they sing Psalms with me.


Alp. A very pretty Conversation I am falling into here, especially for a Man
in a Passion. Can thou tell me if this be the way to the Town?


Alin. Yes, yes, you must go over the top of that high Steeple, Gaffer.


Alp. A Plague of your Fools face.


Iul. ( aside.) No; take her Counsel, do.


Alin. And then you shall come to a River, Gaffer, twenty Miles over, and
twenty Miles and ten; and then you must pray, Gaffer, and pray, and pray, and
pray, and pray, and pray.


Alp. Pray Heaven deliver me from such an Ass as thou art.


Alin. Amen, sweet Gaffer; and fling a Sop of Sugar-Cake into it, and then you
must leap in naked.


Iul. ( aside) Would he would believe her.


Alin. And sink seven days together. Can ye sink, Gaffer?


Alp. Pox on thee, and a Pox of that Fool that left me to thee. Exit. Alp.


Alin. God be w'ye Nunkle.


Iul. How I rejoice in any thing that vexes him! I shall love this Fool as long
as I live, for putting her hand to the Plough. Could I but see my Mistress now,
to tell her how I have labored for her, how I have worn my self away in her
Service! -- Well, sure I shall find her a^ last.


Alin. ( aside) It Is Iuletta. -- Sure she is honest; yet I dare not discover my
self to her.


Iul. Here, fool, here is something for thee to buy Apples, for the sport thou
have made in crossing thy Nunkle.


Alin. Thank ye, little Gentleman; Heaven bless ye. Pray keep this Nutmeg;
'twas sent me from the Lady of the Mountain, a Golden Lady.


Iul. How prettily it prattles!


Alin. It Is very good to rub your Understanding; and so good Night; the Moon's
up.


Iul. Pretty Innocence!


Alin. ( aside) Now Fortune, if thou dare do good, protect me. Exit. Al.


Iul. I Will follow him to your Town; he shall not 'scape me. -- Let me see. -- I
must counterfeit a Letter, a Letter of Authority for him. -- Yes, 'twill do;
certainly do. -- How I shall make his old Blood boil! Rare sport in faith! --
But what in the Name of Innocence has this Fool given me! She said 'twas good to
rub my Understanding; is it Bread or Cheese? -- Hah! a Ring! a right one! a Ring
I know too! -- The very same -- A Ring my Mistress took from me, and wore it. I
know it by the Posie. None could deliver this but she her self. 'Twas she.
Curse of my Sand-blind Eyes. Twice deceived! Twice so near the Blessing I am
seeking! What shall I do? Here are so many cross-ways, it is in vain to follow
her. I hope however, for all her Dress, she is in her Senses still, for sure she
knew me. -- Well, to divert my melancholy ^ill I can meet with her again, I Will
go and have the other touch with her Father.

Exit. Iul.
Enter Roderigo. Rod. She Is not to be recovered; and, which doubles my Torment,
he is got beyond my Vengeance. How they laugh at me! Death and Furies! But why
should I still wander thus, and be a Coxcomb, tire out my P^^ce and Pleasure
for a Girl? a Girl that scorns me too? a thing that hates me; and, consider at
the best, is but a short Breakfast for a hot Appetite? -- Well thought: That
short Repast I Will make on her, and so I Will rest. -- Look to it, my young
deceiver; we shall meet; which when we do, not all the Tears and Cries of
trembling Chastity shall save you. You have fired my Dwelling, and shall quench
my Flame. Enter Alinda.


Alin. Is not that Pedro? It Is he; it is he. -- Oh my --


Rod. What art thou?


Alin. Hah! -- Oh! I Am miserable. Aside.


Rod. What the Devil art thou?


Alin. ( aside) No end of my misfortunes? Heavens! that Habit to betray me! ye
holy Saints, can ye see that? Do your selves Justice, and protect me.


Rod. It dances! Hey-day! The Devil in a ^ool's Coat! Is he turned Changeling?
What mops and mows it m^ke^! How it frisks! Is It not a Fairy? It has a mortal
F^ce, and I Have a great mind to it. But if it should prove the Devil! --


Alin. Co^^ hi^her, Dear.


Rod. I t^ink '^will ravish me. I^'s a handsome thing, but basely Sunburnt.
Wh^t's that it points at?


Alin. Do thou s^e that S^ar there? that just above the Sun? Prithee go
thither and light me ^^is Tob^cco, and stop it with the Horns of the Moon.


Rod. The thing's mad, quite mad. Go sleep, fool, go sleep.


Alin. Thou can not sleep so quietly; for I can say my Prayers, and then
slumber. I am not proud, nor full of Wine;
This little Flower will make me ^ine:
Cruel in heart, for I will cry
If I see a Sparrow dye.
I am not watchful to do ill,
Nor glorious to pursue it still;
Nor pitiless to those that weep.
Such as are, bid them go sleep.
Do, do, do; and see if they can.


Rod. It said true. Its words sink into me. Sure it is a kind of Sybil; some mad
Prophet. I feel my Fury bound and fettered in me.


Alin. Give me your hand, and I Will tell you your Fortune.


Rod. Here, prithee do.


Alin. Fie! fie! fie! fie! fie! Wash your Hands and pare your Nails, and look
finely, you shall never kiss the King's Daughter else.


Rod. I wash 'em daily.


Alin. But foul 'em faster.


Rod. ( aside) This goes nearer me.


Alin. You shall have two Wives.


Rod. Two Wives!


Alin. Yes; two fine Gentlewomen. Make much of 'em, for they will stick close ^o
you, Sir. And these two in two days, Sir.


Rod. That Is a fine Riddle!


Alin. To day you shall wed Sorrow, and Repentance will come to morrow.


Rod. Sure she is inspired.


Alin. I Will tell you more, Sir. Sings. He called down his merry men all,
By One, by Two, by Three.
William would fain have been the First,
But now the Last is he.



Rod. The very Chronicle of my misfortunes.


Alin. I Will bid you Good-Ev'n; for my Boat stays for me, and I must sup with
the Moon to Night in the Mediterranean. Exit. Alin.


Rod. Can Fools and Mad-folks then be Tutors to me? Can they feel my Sores, yet
I insensible? Sure this was sent by Providence to steer me right. I Am wondrous
weary; my thoughts too, they are tired, which adds a weighty burden to me. I
have done ill; I have pursued it too; nay, still run on. I must think better;
be something else, or nothing. Still I grow heavier. A little rest would help
me; I Will try if I can take it; and Heaven's Goodness guard me. Lies down.


Enter four Peasants. 1 Pea. We have escaped to day well. If the Outlaws had
known we had been stirring, we had paid for it, Neighbors.


2 Pea. A murrain take 'em, they have robbed me thrice.


3 Pea. Me five times, my Daughter fifty; though to give 'em their due, they
never take any thing from her, but what she can very well spare.


4 Pea. Ah! my poor Wife has been in their hands too: But, to say the truth, I
don't find she has lost much neither.


1 Pea. For my part, I ought not to complain, for I have got three Children by
'em. Poor Ione! they have peppered her Jacket.


2 Pea. Would we had some of 'em here, to thank 'em for their kindnesses.


3 Pea. So we were strong enough to Circumcise'em, I don't care if we had.


4 Pea. What Is that lies there?


1 Pea. An old Woman that keeps Sheep hereabouts.


2 Pea. Drunk, I suppose.


3 Pea. And a Sword by her side to keep the Wolves off? -- Hah! Captain
Roderigo, or the Devil. -- Stand to your Arms, Gentlemen.


4 Pea. It Is he.


1 Pea. Speak softly.


2 Pea. Now Is our time.


3 Pea. Stay, stay, let us be provident. Shall we wake him before we kill him,
or after?


4 Pea. Let me kill my share of him before he wakes.


1 Pea. Let me have the first blow; he robbed me last.


2 Pea. No, I ought to have the first; he Cuckolded me last.


3 Pea. Hold, hold; no Civil Wars, do you hear? Beat his Brains out between ye,
-- And then I Will pick his Pockets. Aside.


4 Pea. Draw your Knives, and every Man seize a Limb.


Omn. Huzzah!


Rod. Slaves! Villains! will ye murder me?


3 Pea. No, no; we'll only tickle you a little. Do You remember Joan, Captain?
I Will spoil ye for a Cuckold-maker. Enter Pedro.


Rod. For Heavens sake! as you are Men; as you are Christians.


3 Pea. Neither Man nor Christian upon this occasion, but a Cuckold with a
Knife in my hand.


Rod. Oh help! Some help there!


Ped. Ye Villains! are ye at Murder? Off, ye in human Slaves! -- Do ye not
stir? Nay then have among ye.


Omn. Away, away, away. Exeunt.


Ped. Villains! use Violence to that Habit?


Rod. Pedro! Nay then I am more wretched than ever. Aside.


Ped. Hah! Roderigo! What makes him here thus clad? Is it Repentance, or a
Disguise for Mischief? Aside.


Rod. To owe my Life to him, makes me all Confusion. Aside.


Ped. Ye are not much hurt, Sir?


Rod. No. -- All I can call a Wound, is in my Conscience. Aside.


Ped. Have ye considered the Nature of these Men, and how they have used you?
was it well?


Rod. ( asid^) I dare not speak, for I have naught to answer.


Ped. Did it look noble to be o're-laid with odds? Did it seem manly in a
multitude to opp^ess you? If it be base in Wretches low like these, what must
it be in one that is born like you? Ah Roderigo! had I abando^'d Honesty,
Religion, broke through the Bonds of Honor and Humanity, I had set as small a
price upon thy Life, as thou did lately upon mine: But I reserve thee to a
nobler Vengeance.


Rod. I thank ye; you have ^he Nobler Soul, I must confess it; and of your
Passions are a greater Mas^er. T^' Example's glorious, and I wish to follow it.
There is a s^^^n of ^nf^my about me, and the Dye is deep; yet possibly occasion
may present, that I may wash it off.


Ped. I Will give you one, a noble one, I think. We have a quar^el, we have a
Mistress too. We are single, and our ^^ms alike. In one fair risque of Life let
all determine, our Ran^our past, and Happiness to come.


Rod. ( a^ide) His Virtue puzzles me. -- I da^e ^ight, Pedro.


Ped. I do believe you dare: Or if you wanted Cour^ge, the beauteous Prize for
which we now contend would rouse you to it.


Rod. Hah!


Ped. If you deserve her, draw.


Rod. I do not, nor such a noble Enemy: I therefore will ^ot draw.


Ped. I could compel you to it, but would not willingly.


Rod. You cannot, to increase my Guilt: The Load's already more than I can
bear; I wo'not add to it.


Ped. Poor Evasio^n.


Rod. Thou wrong'st me, much thou wrong'st me; time will convince thee on it.
I Will satisfy ^hee any way but this. I have been wicked, but cannot be a
Monster. My Sword refuses to attempt the Man preserved me; its temper starts at
thy Virtue. If thou will have me sight, give me an Enemy, for thou art none.


Ped. I Am more, for I Am thy Rival.


Rod. That is not in thy power, for I no more am thine. No, Pedro; the wrongs
I Have done my self and thee, let that fair Saint atone for: There Is nothing
more I or the World can give, and nothing less can expiate my Crimes, or
recompense thy Virtue.


Ped. Is It possible thou can be such a Penitent!


Rod. I am most truly such; and left I should relapse again to Hell, forget the
Debt I owe to thee and Heaven, this sacred Habit I have so profaned, shall
henceforth be my faithful Monitor.


Ped. Noble Roderigo, how glorious is this Change! Let me embrace thee.


Rod. Thou great Example of Humanity, do thou forgive me?


Ped. I do; with joy I do.


Rod. Then I am happy -- All I have more to ask, is, leave to attend you in
your present difficulties; that by such service as I have power to render, I
may confirm you I am what I seem.


Ped. There needs no further proof. However, in hopes I doubly may return those
Services, I Will not refuse 'em. Exeunt.


Enter Alphonso, Master and Keepers. Mast. Yes, Sir, here are such People: But
how pleasing they may be to you, I cannot tell.


Alp. That Is not your concern; I desire to see 'em, to see 'em all.


Mast. All? Why, they will quite confound ye, Sir; like Bells rung backwards,
they are nothing but confusion, mere Noise.


Alp. May be I love Noise? -- But hark ye, Sir; have ye no Boys? handsome young
Boys?


Mast. One, Sir, we have, a very handsome Boy.


Alp. Long here?


Mast. But two Days. A little crazed, but may recover.


Alp. That Boy, I would see that Boy; perhaps I know him -- ( Aside) This is
the Boy he told me of; it must be she -- The Boy, Master, I beseech ye the Boy.


Mast. You shall see him, Sir, or any else: But pray don't be so violent.


Alp. I know what to do, I warrant ye; I Am for all fancies; I can talk to 'em,
and dispute if occasion be -- Who lies here?


Keep. Pray don't disturb 'em, Sir; here lies such Youths will make you start,
if they begin to Dance their Frenchmores.


Mast. Fetch out the Boy, Sirrah. [Shaking of Irons within.] -- Hark!


Alp. Hey-boys!


Enter English Madman, Scholar and Priest. Eng. Bounce. Clap her of the
Starboard. Bounce. Top the Can.


Schol. Dead, ye Dog, dead! Do You quarrel in my Kingdom? Give me my Trident.


Eng. Bounce! -- 'Twixt Wind and Water! Laden with Mackerel! -- Oh brave Meat!


Scho. My Sea-Horses. I Will charge the Northern Wind, and break his Bladder.


Alp. Brave sport, in faith!


Priest. I Will sell my Bells, before I Will be outbrav'd thus.


Alp. What Is he.


Mast. A Priest, Sir, that run mad for a Tythe-pig.


Alp. Curran-sawce cure him.


Priest. I Will curse ye all, I Will excommunicate ye. Thou English Heretic, give
me the tenth Pot.


Eng. Sue me, I Will drink up all. Bounce I say once more -- O-ho! have I split
your Mizen? Blow, blow, thou West-wind; blow till thou rise, and make the Sea
run roaring; -- I Will hiss it down again, with a Bottle of Ale.


Scho. Tryton! why, Tryton!


Eng. Tryton's drunk with Metheglin.


Scho. Strike, strike the Surges, strike.


Priest. I Will have my Pig.


Eng. Drink, drink; it is Daylight -- Drink, diddle, diddle, diddle, Drink.


Priest. I Will damn thee.


Eng. Priest, proud Priest, a Pig's Tail in thy Teeth.


Priest. My Pig -- or I Will marry thee.


Eng. Say no more. My Drink's out. Hush is the word -- and to sleep.


Mast. Their Fits are cool now; let 'em rest.


Alp. Mad Gallants, mad Gallants, in faith; I love their Faces; I never fell
into better Company in my Life. Enter mad Tailor.


Tay. Who Is that? -- The King of Spades?
I Will make him a new Mantle?

Alp. Hey Day: A mad Tailor too! What
The Pox made thee Mad?

Tay. Cabbage -- Snip goes the Sheers --
And the Coat's never the shorter.

Alp. You Are a brave Fellow, and shall make me
A new Doublet.

Tay. For thy Coronation -- I Will do it;
But Money down; do hear? Money down.
The King of Spades is a Courtier.

Priest. I Will have a new Gown.

Tay. So thou shall, made of Shreds -- and a
Tithe Louse -- to prevent Damnation --

Alp. Wo't be my Chaplain?

Priest. And say Grace to boild Meat? -- The Devil.

Alp. Can thou Preach?


Priest. Give me a Text.


Tay. Pudding.


Priest. Where is it? -- I Will handle it -- Divide it -- Subdivide it -- and give
my Parish -- never a bit on it.


Tay. My Lady's Woman shall have a slice.


Priest. Mum.


Tay. I Will cut thee a pair of Britches, out of the tail of her Petticoat.


Priest. Warm ware -- Dog Days -- but Hush: Put out the Candle -- Maiden-head's
the Word. If the Cardinal hea^'s on it -- he will have a Pair too.


[ Enter Keepers, and she Fool in Alinda's Cloaths] 1 Keep. You stinking Whore,
who did this for you? Who looks to the Boy? Pox take him, he was asleep when I
left him.


2 Keep. I suppose he made the Fool drunk.


Mast. What Is this noise about? Where Is the Boy?


1 Keep. Here Is all the Boys we have found^


Mast. These are his Clothes; but where is he?


1 Keep. Ay, that is all I want to know.


Mast. Where Is the Boy, ye Slut you? Where Is the Boy?


Fool. The Boy's gone a Maying; he will bring me home a Cuckow's Nest. Do you
hear, Master? I put my Clothes off, and I dizen'd him; I pinned a Plume in his
Forehead, and a Feather, and buss'd him twice, and bid him go seek his Fo^tune.
He gave me this fine Money, and he gave me fine Wine too, and bid me sop; and
gave me these trim Clothes too, and put 'em on, he did.


Alp. Is this the Boy you would show me?


Fool. I Will give you Twopence, Master.


Alp. Am I Fooled on all sides? I met a Fool in the Woods in a long py'd Coat;
they said she dwelt here.


Mast. That was the very Boy, Sir.


Fool. Ay, ay, ay; I gave him leave to play forsooth; he will come again morrow,
and bring Peascods.


Mast. I Will Peascods your Bones, you Whore.


Alp. Pox of your Fools and Bedlams; Plague of your Owls and Apes.


Mast. Pray, Sir, be moderate; such Accidents will happen sometimes, take what
care we can.


Alp. Damn Accidents: You're a Juggler, and I Am abused.


Mast. Indeed, Sir, you are not.


Alp. It Is false; I am abused, and I will be abused, whether you will or no,
Sir. Enter Welchman.


Well. Whaw, Mr. Keeper.


Alp. What a pox have we got here?


Well. Give me some Cheese and Onyons; give me some W^sh-prew; I have hunger in
my pellies; give me apundance. Pendragon was a Shentleman, mark you, Sir? And
the Organs at Wrexham were made by Revelations; there is a Spirit plows and
plows the Pellows, and then they sing.


Alp. Why, this Moon Calf's madder than all the rest. Who the Devil is he?


Mast. He Is a Welch-man, Sir: He ran mad, because a Rat eat up his Cheese.


Alp. The Devil he did.


Well. I will peat thy Face as plack as a plue Clout.


Mast. He will not Hurt you, Sir, don't be afraid.


Well. Give me a great deal of Cuns: Thou art the Devils, I know thee by thy
Tails: I will will peg thy Pums full of Pullets.


Alp. This is the rarest Rascal! He speaks as if h' had Buttermilk in's Mouth.


Well. Basilus Manus is for an old Codpice, mark ye. I will porrow thy Ursip's
Whore to Seal a Letter.


Alp. Ha, ha, ha.


Mast. Now he begins to grow Villainous.


Alp. Methinks he is best know.


Mast. Take him away.


Alp. he shall not go.


Mast. He must, Sir.


Well. I will Sing, and dance, and do any thing.


Alp. Will thou declaim in Greek?


Scho. Do, and I Will confound thee.


Well. I will eat some Puddings.


Eng. Pudding! where is it? Baked or Boiled, Plums or Plain, it is mine by Magna
Charta. -- The King of Spain eats White-Pot.


Alp. Oh brave English Man? Wilt have any Beef, Boy?


Mast. Nay, now, Sir, y' have made him stark mad. Lay hold of him there quickly.


Eng. Beef! ye Gods! Beef! -- I Will have that Ox for Supper -- Knock him down --
Chines, Surloins, Ribs, and Buttocks. -- Lead me to the French Camp -- They
fly! they fly! they fly! they fly! they fly! they fly! Huzzah!


Mast. Away with him; he will be so mad now, the Devil cannot tame him. Take 'em
all away. [ Exit Keeper and Madmen.]


Alp. He shall not go. What a Pox makes ye spoil company?


Mast. Away with him, I say.


Alp. I gad I Will see him in's Lodging then; I have a mind to sup with him. If
he is such rare company now he is sober, what will he be over a Bottle?


Mast. What the Devil would this old Spark be at? I think he is as mad as any of
'em. Enter Juletta.


Iul. ( aside) He Is in, and now have at him -- Are you the Master, Sir?


Mast. Yes, What do you want?


Iul. I have a business from the Duke of Medina. Is there not an old Gentleman
come lately here?


Mast. Yes; and a mad one too; but he is no Prisoner.


Iul. There Is a Letter, pray read it -- ( aside) I shall be with you now,
in faith, my old Master; I Will rouse your Blood now to the purpose; I Will teach ye
to plague Women, ye old put you.


Mast. This Letter says the Gentleman is Lunatic: I half suspected it.


Iul. It Is but too true, Sir; And such pranks he has played --


Mast. He Is some Man of note, I suppose, the Duke Commands me with such care to
look to him. He Is in haste too, I find, for his Recovery; for he bids me spare
no Correction.


Iul. He directed me to say the same thing to you. Pray, Sir, have no regard to
his Age or Quality: But since it is for his Good, strap him soundly.


Mast. He shall have the sharpest Discipline, I promise you. -- Pray how did
you get him hither?


Iul. By a Train I laid for him; he is in Love with a Boy you must know; there
lies his Crack.


Mast. He came hither to seek one.


Iul. Yes, I sent him. We should never have got him here by force.


Mast. Here was a Boy last Night.


Iul. He did not see him, did he?


Mast. No; he was slipped away first.


Iul. So much the better. Pray, Sir, look well to your Charge; I must see him
lodged before I go; the Duke orde^'d me. I fancy you will find him very rough.


Mast. Oh! that is nothing. We are used to that; we can be as rough as he, I Will
warrant him.


Iul. See here he comes. -- ( aside) Oh! how it tic^les me!


Enter Alphonso and 2 d. K^^per. Alp. What do talk to me of noises? I Will have
more noise. I love noise: I Will have 'em all loose together. Your Master has let
my Boy loose, and I Will do as much by his.


2 K^ep. Will you go out, and not make disturbances here?


Alp. I will not go out, you Rascal; I Will have 'em all out with me. There Is no
body mad here, but thee and thy Master. -- [Irons shake.] Hey brave Boys! Mad
Boys! Mad Boys!


Iul. Do you perceive him now?


Mast. It Is too apparent. -- Do You hear, Sir? Pray will ye make less stir, and
see your Chamber?


Alp. Ha!


2 Keep. Nay, I thought he was mad. I gad our Master has found him out. I^ll
have one long lash at your back, in faith, old Spark.


Mast. Come, Sir, will you retire quietly to your Chamber?


Alp. My Chamber! What do thou mean by my Chamber? Where Is the Boy, you
Blockhead you?


Mast. Look ye, Sir, we are People of few words here; either go quietly to your
Chamber, or we shall carry you there with a Witness.


Alp. A strange fellow this! -- And what Chamber is it thou would have me go
quietly to?


Mast. A Chamber the Duke has ordered to be prepared for you within; you shall
be well lodged, don'^ fear.


Alp. The Duke! What, what, what have thou got in thy Head? what D^^e, Monkey,
ha?


Mast. Ha^k ye, Sir, let me advise you, don't expose your self; you are an old
Gentleman, and should be Wise; you are a little mad, which you don't perceive;
your Friends have found it out, and have delivered you over to me. [Alph. Spits
in his Face.] -- Say ye so, old Boy? -- A hey! Seize him here, and fifty slaps
of the back presently.


Iul. ( aside) I Am afraid they will make him mad indeed. -- Rare sport!


Alp. Hold, hold, hold, hold, hold. -- Hark ye, Gentlemen, Gentlemen, one word,
but one word. Pray do me the favor to show me my Chamber.


Mast. O-ho! I Am glad to see you begin to come to your self, Sir. I don't
doubt, by the blessing of Heaven, and proper methods, to bring you to your
senses again.


Alp. Yes, Sir, I hope all will be well. Really I find my self at this time, as
I think, very sensible -- of some strokes of the back. Aside.


Mast. I can see your madness very much abated.


Alp. Yes, truly, I hope it is; though I cannot say but -- a -- I am still -- a --
little discomposed.


Mast. There must be some time to restore a Man. ^ome was not built in a day.
But since the Duke has so much kindness for you to be in haste for your Cure,
when your next sit comes, we'^l double the Dose. -- Here, lead the Gentleman to
his Chamber. But he must have no Supper to night; take care of that.


Alp. Pray, Sir, may I sleep?


Mast. A little you may. In the morning we'll take 30 or 40 Ounces of Blood
away; which with a Watergrewel-Dyet for a Week or ten days, may moderate things
mightily. -- Go carry him in, I Will follow p^esently.


Alp. What a Wretch^d Dog am I! Exit Keepers and Alp.


Mast. You see, Sir, the Duke's Orde^s are obeyed.


Iul. I Will not fail to acquaint him with it. Pray let the old Gentleman want
nothing but his Wits.


Mast. He shall be taken perfect care of. -- My humble Duty to his Grace. Exit
Master.


Iul. So, now I think I have fixed thee. This has succeeded rarely! -- I could
burst with laughing now, lie down and roll about the Room, I Am so tickled with
it: But I have other business to do; now is my time to serve my Mistress. Good
Stars guide me where she is, and I have nothing more ^o ask you, but a Husba^^
Exit.


ACT V.
Enter Seberto and Curio. Seb. OF My Conscience we have quite lost him: He Is
not gone home, we heard from thence this morning.


Cur. Faith, let us even turn back; this is but a Wildgoose-Chace.


Seb. No, hanged, let us see the end of these Adventures now we are out: They
must end soon one way or other.


Cur. Which way shall we go? We have scowr'd the Champion-Country, and all the
Villages, already.


Seb. We'll beat these Woods; and if nothing start, we'll to Segovia.


Cur. I Am afraid he is sick, or fallen into some danger. He has no Guide nor
Servant with him.


Seb. Hang him, he is tough and hardy; he will bear a great deal.


Cur. Shall we part, and go several ways?


Seb. No, that will be melancholy; let us even keep on together. Come, we'll
crose here first; and as we find the Paths, let them direct us. Exeunt.


Enter Alinda and Juletta. Iul. Indeed, Madam, it is very cruel in you to show
this strange Mistrust of me. Have I not always served you faithfully? Why do
you shun me thus? What have I done to call my Truth in question? But I see you
are still doubtful; it is enough; I Will leave you; and may you light of one will
serve you better. Farewell.


Al. Prithee forgive me. I know thou art faithful, and thou art welcome to me;
a welcome Partn^r to my Miseries. Thou know I love thee too.


Iul. I have indeed thought so.


Al. Alas! my Fears have so distracted me, I durst not trust my self.


Iul. Pray throw 'em by then, and let 'em distract you so no more; at least,
consider how to prevent 'em. Pray put off this Fool's Coat; though it has kept
you secret hitherto, it is known now, and will betray you. Your Arch-Enemy
Roderigo is abroad, and a thousand more are looking for you.


Al. I know it, and would gladly change my Dress if I knew how: But, alas! I
have no other.


Iul. I Will equip you. I lay last night at a poor Widow's house here in the
Thicket, where I Will carry you, and disg^ise you anew; my self too to attend you.


Al. But have thou any Money? for mine is all gone.


Iul. Enough for this occasion; I did not come out empty.


Al. Have thou seen Rod^^igo lately?


Iul. This very morning, in these Woods. Take heed, for he has got a new Shape.


Al. A Pilgrim's Habit, I know it. Was he alone?


Iul. No, Madam. And, which made me wonder, he was in Company with that very
Pilgrim, that handsome Man you were concerned you gave nothing to.


Al. Is It possible?


Iul. The very same. -- See how one may be deceived! I should never have
thought him a Companion for such a Villain.


Al. Did they seem Friends?


Iul. The greatest that could be.


Al. Intimate?


Iul. Walked with their Arms about one another's Waste.


Al. What can this mean?


Iul. Lord! how she trembles!


Al. Can thou show 'em me?


Iul. Not for the World in this Dress: But come with me to my Old Woman's; and
when we are new cased, I Will show you any thing.


Al. Let Us be speedy then, for I am full of Agitation. Come, as we go, I Will
tell thee all my Secrets.


Iul. I Will keep 'em faithfully. -- This is the way, Madam. Exeunt.


Enter Governor, Verdugo, and Citizens. Gov. Use all your Sports, good people,
all your Solemnities; It Is the King's Birthday, a Day we ought to honor.


1 Cit. We will, Noble Governor, and make Segovia ring with Joy.


2 Cit. We should be a little more hearty in our Mirth though, if your Honor
would take into your Consideration the Miseries we suffer by these Outlaws
here. Our Trade's undone by 'em, Strangers dare not come near us; besides, our
Wives and Daughters make woeful Complaints of 'em.


Gov. I Am sorry for it, and have Orders from the King to help ye; You shall not be
long perplexed with 'em.


3 Cit. It Is time they were routed truly; for they grow fearful Confident.
They Will come to Church sometimes, and carry off our Altar-Plate. Father Dominic
has cursed 'em all till he is grown hoarse again; so he says they are damned,
which is some comfort.


1 Cit. If your Honor were not here to awe 'em a little, they would come and make
us a Visit at this good time.


3 Cit. Yes; they would eat all our Meat, drink up our Drink, ring our Bells
backwards, piss out our Bonefires; and when their Mettle was up, have at the
Fairest in faith.


2 Cit. Nay, have at All: They are none of your nice ones. My poor Mother's
Fourscore and odd, and she made shift to get her self ravished amongst ^em.


Gov. Are they so fierce? Do You hear, Verdugo? after this Solemnity is over,
I Will send you with a Party to attack 'em. We'll try if we can tame 'em.


Ver. Their Captain Roderigo is to be piti'd; A Gentleman, and a brave Soldier
too.


Gov. The Count has not rewarded him as his Services have deserved; their
neglect of him has urged him to this Course.


Ver. They have a hungry Eye on his Estate; it is That, I doubt, keeps back his
Pardon.


Gov. It had been passed e're this else: but he wants Temper to discern the
Cause.


V^r. Have you never heard, Sir, of the Noble Pedro yet?


Gov. Never. I fear he is dead. The Court bewails his loss; the King himself
laments him.


Ver. He has reason; 'twas in his Service he undid himself: And if he had
rewarded him as he deserved, he had had him still to merit more.


Gov. If he be still alive, and e're returns, I know he is resolved to make him
happy. But come, let us to the Church, and there begin the Celebration of our
Royal Master's Birthday.


Enter Roderigo and Pedro. Rod. How sweet these solitary Places are! how
wantonly the Wind blows through the Leaves, and Courts and Plays with 'em! Will
ye sit down and sleep? It Is wondrous Hot.


Ped. I cannot sleep, my Friend: My Heart's too watchful to admit of Slumbers.


Rod. The Murmurs of this Stream perhaps may lull you into Rest: Hark! the
Birds join too to Ease you. Pray sit down.

aside. I fain would woo his Fancy into Peace; I see it is much disturbed --
Will you not try to take a moment's Rest?


Ped. It is impossible: Have you seen no one yet?


Rod. No Creature.


Ped. What strange Music was that we heard far off?


Rod. I cannot guess; it was uncommon; sometimes it seemed hard by, at least I
thought so.


Ped. It pleased me much: what could it be? here is no Inhabitants.


Rod. They talk of Fairies, and such airy Beings: If there are such, methinks
they could not choose a lovelier Dwelling.


Ped. Those Rocks there look like enchanted Cells, formed for such Inhabitants.
Hark! more Music! [Musick.] It Is here again! Hark! gentle Roderigo! O Love!
what fuel's this to feed thy Flame? O Alinda!


Rod. aside. By all his Woes, he weeps. They lie down.


Enter Alinda and Juletta like Old Women. Rod. What are these?


Ped. What!


Rod. Those there; those things that come upon us: Did not I say these Woods
had Wonder in 'em?


Iul. Now you may view 'em: There are the Men you wished for. There they are
both; Now you may boldly talk with 'em, and never be guessed at. Don't be
afraid: See! they are surpised! they don't know what to make of us!


Alin. I tremble! --


Iul. Then you spoil all: Take Courage and attack 'em, I Will bring you off I Will
warrant ye.


Alin. It Is he and Roderigo; What Peace dwells in their Faces? What a friendly
Calm?


Rod. They seem Mortal: They come upon us still.


Ped. Let Us meet 'em; Fear will not become us. Hail Reverend Dames!


Alin. What, do you seek, good Men?


Ped. We would seek happier Fortunes.


Alin. Seek 'em, and make 'em.
Lie not still, nor longer here;
Here inhabits naught but Fear:
Be Constant, Good, in Faith be clear,
Fortune will wait ye everywhere.

Ped. Whither should we go? For we believe thee, and will obey thee.


Alin. Go to Segovia; and there before the Altar pay thy Vows, thy Gifts and
Prayers; unload thy Heaviness.

There shed thy mournful Tears, and gain thy Suit;
Such honest noble Showers never wanted Fruit.

Iul. to Rod. And next for you.
See how he Quakes!
A secure Conscience never shakes.
Thou have been ill, be so no more;
A good Retreat, is a great Store:
Thou have Commanded Men of Might;
Command thy self, and then you are right.

Alin. Command thy Will, thy foul Desires;
Quench thy wild, unhallowed Fires.
Command thy Mind; let that be pure;
A Blessing then thou may procure.

Iul. Take sage Advice: Go say thy Prayers;
Thou have as many Sins as Hairs.
Of Lawless Men, a Lawless Chief;
A Rebel bloody, and a Thief.

Alin. Retire thou Trembling Guilt, retire;
And purge thee perfect in his Fire:
His Life observe; be that thy Guide,
And Heaven may then be on thy side.

Iul. At Segovia, both appear.

Alin. Be wise, and Happiness is near.

Both. Be wise, and Happiness is near. Exeunt.

Rod. Astonishment! what can this mean? They know my very Soul.


Ped. Mine they have Inspired: -- Be wise, and Happiness is near. Those were
their parting words. They had the awful Sound of sacred Truth, and I have faith
to Comfort me. Come on my Friend. The Oracle enjoins an easy Pilgrimage. Let Us
try what Fate intends us. Exeunt.


[ Enter Master of the Mad-house, Seberto and Curio.] Curi. We have told you
what he is, what time we have sought him, his Nature and his Name, The seeming
Boy too. We have given you I think a fair Account of.


Seb. That the Duke should send that Letter, is Impossible; He knows him not.
And for his madness, that we both can clear him of. A Humourist he is indeed a
great one, violent too on every small occasion -- but no more --


Curi. 'Twas some Trick that brought him hither; The Letter and the Page, both
Counterfeits: If therefore you would be well advised, don't keep him longer here.


Mas. Gentlemen you have satisfied me, and I Will release him: Though I must
confess, whether you will call it madness or not, I believe a little more of our
Discipline would do the old Gentleman a kindness. But I Will dispute no longer --
you shall have him.


Seb. Sir, we thank you. Enter Lopez.


Mas. Here, bring out the old Gentleman, I believe he may be something weak,
for we have Dieted him low, and taken a good deal of Blood from him.


Curi. Poor Alphonso.


[ Enter Keeper with Alphonso.] Seb. Poor Alphonso indeed! Was there ever such
a Skeleton! Sir, I Am glad once more to meet with you, To Alphon.


Curi. I Am overjoyed to find you.


Alph. Soft, no flights: Passions are all forbid here. Let your Tongue go like
a Pendulum, steady: or that Gentleman there will regulate your Motion, with
fifty Strokes of the back presently.


Seb. There Is no Danger: You are safe too; we have satisfied the Master, who,
and what you are; And he has consented to release you.


Mas. Yes, Sir, these Gentlemen have assured me you are a sober Person, so I
ask your excuse for what is past, and restore you to your Liberty.


Alp. Very concise indeed: Sir, I am much beholding to you truly, and do
confess with great humility I have not deserved the Favors you have been
pleased to bestow upon me. But if I have the Honor to see you at my House, I
shall not forget to return your Bounty with some Strokes of Acknowledgement.


Mas. Sir, your very humble Servant.


Alp. Sir, Entirely yours.


Mas. Farewell Gentlemen. Exit M^ster.


Alp. Come Friends, one under one Arm, and the other under the other. I must make a
pair of Crutches of ye --


Seb. You are very weak indeed.


Curi. You look wretchedly.


Alp. A little in Love only, that is all. Ah Seberto. Ah Curio -- such
Discipline, the Lord have mercy on me. Had I been here till to morrow morning,
this Dog would not have left me Six Ounces of Blood in my whole Body.


Seb. Can you imagine who put this Trick upon you?


Alph. The Devil to be sure; but who gave him his Cue I cannot tell -- Come,
Carry me off: Lead me to Church, I Am in a very Religious fit at this time, and
will give some small Thanks for my Delivery: when that is over, I Will be
revenged. Exit.


SCENE an Altar. Solemn Music. Enter Governor, Verdugo, Courtiers, Ladies, who
make their several Offerings Kneeling. Gov. This -- To Devotion sacred be.
This -- To the Kings Prosperity.
This -- To the Queen, and Chastity.

Cor. Sings. Long live the King;
Prolong ye Powers, Prolong his Sway;
Repeat, repeat this Joyful Day,
Long live the King.

Ver. These Oblations first we bring
To Purge our selves: These to the King:
To Love and Beauty these: Accept our Offering,

Cor. Long live the King, etc.

Enter Pedro and Roderigo. Ped. For our selves first Thus we bend;

Rod. Forgive us Heaven, and be our Friend.
With Glory bless, and Long preserve
The Prince we do, or ought to serve;
Accept our Offerings we Implore;
The Peace which we have Lost restore.

Ped. Give me Alinda, and I ask no more.

Co. Long Live the King, etc.

Enter Alphonso, Curio, Seberto. Alp. For my Lost Wits (Let me see)
First I pray; and Secondly,
To be at home again and Free;
And if I Travel more, -- hang me.
Next for the King, and for the Queen,
That they be wise, and never seen
Where I was, in the Madman's Inn.
For my Daughter I should pray;
But since the Strumpet's run away,
In Heaven's presence I forsake her
And give the Devil leave to take her.
Long live the King, etc.

Enter Alinda and Juletta like Shepherdesses. Iule. Here they all are, Madam,
but fear nothing: The Place protects you. My old Bilboa Master, of my
Conscience. How in the name of mischief got he out? but they have peppered him
I see. That Is some Comfort.


Alin. Hail to this sacred Place. Going to the Altar.


Seb. It Is She, sure.


Cur. It Is, certainly.


Ped. Is it a Vision? or is it She?


Rod. It Is she, and what you were fortold is now at hand. Rejoice, my Friend,
for happiness attends you.


Gov. aside. What is it these Strangers seem so much surpised at?


Alph. I had a Daughter once with just such a young whorish Leer as that: A
Filly too, that waited on her; much such a Slut as the other. Are they come to
keeping of Goats: it is very well.


Alind. Thus we kneel, and thus we pray,
Happiness attend this Day.
Our sacrifice we hither bring,
And sue for Blessings on the King.

Iulet. These of Purple, Damask, Green,
Sacred to the Virtuous Queen,
Here we hang; As these are now,
May her Glories spring and flow.

Alind. These for our selves, our Hopes and Loves,
Full of Pinks and Ladies Gloves.
Of hearts-ease too, which we would fain,
As we labor for, Attain.
Hear me Heaven, and as I bend
With faith and hope, some comfort send;

Iulett. Hear her, hear her, if there be
A spotless Sweetness, this is She.

Co. Long live the King, etc.

Ped. Now Roderigo I may stand in need of your Assistance.


Rod. My Life is yours.


Ped. Then with a Joy that Lovers know, but none can else conceive,
Let me approach this beaut^ous Wanderer.

Alin. O Pedro.


Ped. My Life, my Heaven.


Alp. Pedro: the Devil it is?


Gov. Pedro, Noble Pedro, are we so happy to have you still among us!
This is an Unexpected Blessing.

Alph. aside. A very Great Blessing indeed.


Ped. In spite of all my Griefs, Life still prevails: Fate seems to have some
farther business for me; if it is to wander on with fruitless Care, and buffet
still with Disappointments, let Manhood be my Aid. But if the sullen cloud that
long has lowering hung about my head, be destined to withdraw, it is the warm
Influence of your blessing Sir, that must disperse it. Kneels to Alphonso.


Alp. I bless thee! -- ha, ha: -- Damn thee.


Gov. Sir, though I am a Stranger both to you, and the Request the Noble Pedro
makes you, his merit's so well known to me, that I must be his second in his
suit, and tell you nothing can er'e be in your Power to grant, but his desert
may claim. --


Alp. I don't know what his desert may claim, Governor: But if he claims any
thing but a Gallows, he is a very impudent Fellow.


Rod. Perhaps I being a Mediator, Sir, may change your thoughts of him --


Alp. Roderigo?


Rod. Roderigo, Sir, becomes a supplicant for Pedro, that you would bless your
self in blessing him, and bless him with the Fair Alinda.


Alp. aside. Here Is a Dog for you: He finds the Jade's a Scamperer, so he has a
mind to be off of the Lay.


to Rod. Are you serious in this request, Sir?


Rod. Most serious, Sir,


Alp. aside. I believe you may. Let me see: he has a mind to be rid of her, why
should not I? Pedro's a Dog, and if I could hang him, I would. But since I
cannot, I Will be revenged another way: He shall marry the Whore.


to Ped. Look ye Sir; and Madam, [ Rowing to Alinda.] I have made some short
Reflections upon the present Posture of Affairs, and am come to a short
Conclusion. As to my Blessing, I cannot Conveniently spare it you; but if you
c^n contrive to bless one another, you may even be as Blessed as you please.


Ped. Most Generous Alphonso. --


Alp. Most Courtly Pedro: you may spare your Compliment; for if you take my
word for it, the Present I have made you does not deserve it.


Iule. But I that know her better than he that got her, say she deserves the
world. --


Alp. Hark you, Madam, you had a Gillian once; nimble Chaps I think we called
her: Pray is this the Lady?


Iule. No, Sir, She Is at home as you ordered her; I Am a little Footboy that
walk a Nights, and Frighten old Gentlemen, make 'em lose Hats and Cloaks.


Alp. And Horses too, ha?


Iule. Sometimes I do Sir, when the Case requires it. I teach 'em the way too
through Hedges and Ditches: And how to break their Shins against a Style.


Alp. A very pretty Art truly.


Iule. Sometimes I Am a Drum, Sir; a Drum at midnight, Ran tan dan, dra dan tan,
Sir; a Page too upon occasion to carry Letters for the securing of old Strolers.


Alph. Thou art the Devil.


Iule. I Am worse, Sir, I Am an old Woman sometimes that tells Fortunes.


Rod. Ha!


Iule. And fright Pilgrims, and send 'em to Segovia for their Fortunes. I am
Music too, any thing to do her good. And now she has got her Lover, I am
Iuletta again, and at your service Sir, if you please to forgive me.


Alp. I dare do no otherwise, lest thou should follow me still: so I desire
we may be Friends with all my heart; and Gentlemen, if any of you have a mind
to marry her --


Iule. Sir, I am obliged to you; but I Am married to my Mistress; with her I
hope to p^s^ some three or fourscore Years; so when you have any more Pranks to
Play, Sir, you know where to have me --.


Alp. It Is very well, I shall be sure to send to thee.


Ped. One reconciliation more lies on my hands: In which I must engage the
genero^s Governor. Rod^rigo, Sir, is not unknown to you; nor is he a Stranger
to your interest with the King. I hope you will employ it to restore him.


Gov. The King indeed is much incensed; but when his merit shall be laid before
him, I hope he will find it easy to forget his Crimes. Be it my Care to set him
right at Court.


Alp. And mine to get home to my house again; and if I leave it for such
another Expedition,


To Iule. May thou be my Fellow-Traveller.


Gov. I hope before you go, Sir, you will share with us, an Entertainment the late
great Po^t of our Age pr^par'd to Cel^brate this Day. Let the Masqu^ begin


SONG of a Scholar and his Mistress, who being Crossed by their Friends, fell
Mad for one another; and now first meet in Bedlam.
Written by Mr. DRYDEN.
[Musick within.] [The Lovers enter at Opposite Doors, each held by a Keeper.]
Phillis. LOok, look, I see -- I see my Love appear:
It Is he -- It Is he alone;
For, like him, there is none:
It Is the dear, dear Man, it is thee, Dear.

Amyntas. Hark! the Winds War;
The foamy Waves roar;
I see a Ship afar,
Tossing and Tossing, and making to the Shore:
But what is that I View,
So Radiant of Hue,
St. Hermo, St. Hermo, that sits upon the Sails?
Ah! No, no, no.
St. Hermo, Never, never shone so bright;
It Is Phillis, only Phillis, can shoot so fair a Light:
It Is Phillis, it is Phillis, that saves the Ship alone,
For all the Winds are hushed, and the Storm is overblown.

Phillis. Let me go, let me run, let me fly to his Arms.

Amyntas. If all the Fates combine,
And all the Furies join,
I Will force my way to Phillis, and break through the Charm.

[Here they break from their Keepers; run to each other, and embrace.] Phillis.
Shall I Marry the Man I love?
And shall I conclude my Pains?
Now blessed be the Powers above,
I feel the Blood bound in my Veins;
With a lively Leap it began to move,
And the Vapors leave my Brains.

Amyntas. Body joined to Body, and Heart joined to Heart,
To make sure of the Cure;
Go call the Man in Black, to mumble over his part.

Phillis. But suppose he should stay --

Amyntas. At worst if he delay;
It Is a Work must be done;
We'll borrow but a Day,
And the better the sooner begun.

CHORUS of Both. At worst if he delay, etc.

They run out together hand in hand. THE Secular Masque.
Written by Mr. DRYDEN.
Enter Janus. Ianus. CHronos, Chronos, mend thy Pace,
An hundred times the rolling Sun
Around the Radiant Belt has run
In his revolving Race.
Behold, behold, the Goal in sight,
Spread thy Fans, and wing thy flight,

Enter Chronos, with a Scythe in his hand, and a great Globe on his Back, which
he sets down at his entrance. Chronos. Weary, weary of my weight,
Let me, let me drop my Freight,
And leave the World behind.
I could not bear
Another Year
The Load of Human-kind.

Enter Momus Laughing. Momus. Ha! ha! ha! Ha! ha! ha! well have thou done,
To lay down thy Pack,
And lighten thy Back,
The World was a Fool, ever since it begun,
And since neither Ianus, nor Chronus, nor I,
Can hinder the Crimes,
Or mend the Bad Times,
It Is better to Laugh than to Cry.

Co. of all 3. It Is better to Laugh than to Cry.

Ianus. Since Momus comes to laugh below,
Old Time begin the Show,
That he may see, in every Scene,
What Changes in this Age have been,

Chronos. Then Goddess of the Silver Bow begin.

Horns, or Hunting-Musique within. Enter Diana. Diana. With Horns and with
Hounds I waken the Day.
And hye to my Woodland walks away;
I tuck up my Robe, and am buskined soon,
And tie to my Forehead a wexing Moon.
I course the fleet Stagg, unkennel the Fox,
An chase the wild Goats over summets of Rocks,
With shouting and hooting we pierce through the Sky;
And Echo turns Hunter, and doubles the Cry.

Cho. of all. With shouting and hooting, we pierce through the Sky,
And Echo turns Hunter, and doubles the Cry.

Ianus. Then our Age was in it is Prime,

Chronos. Free from Rage.

Diana. -- And free from Crime.

Momus. A very Merry, Dancing, Drinking,
Laughing, Quaffing, and unthinking Time.

Cho. of all. Then our Age was in it is Prime,
Free from Rage, and free from Crime,
A very Merry, Dancing, Drinking,
Laughing, Quaffing, and unthinking Time.

Dance of Diana's Attendants. Enter Mars. Mars. Inspire the Vocal Brass,
Inspire;
The World is past its Infant Age:
Arms and Honor,
Arms and Honor,
Set the Martial Mind on Fire,
And kindle Manly Rage.
Mars has looked the Sky to Red;
And Peace, the Lazy Good, is fled.
Plenty, Peace, and Pleasure fly;
The Sprightly Green
In Woodland-Walks, no more is seen;
The Sprightly Green, has drunk the Tyrian Dye.

Cho. of all. Plenty, Peace, etc.

Mars. Sound the Trumpet, Beat the Drum,
Through all the World around;
Sound a Reveille, Sound, Sound,
The Warrior God is come.

Cho. of all. Sound the Trumpet, etc.

Momus. Thy Sword within the Scabbard keep,
And let Mankind agree;
Better the World were fast asleep,
Than kept awake by Thee.
The Fools are only thinner,
With all our Cost and Care;
But neither side a winner,
For Things are as they were.

Cho. of all. The Fools are only, etc.

Enter Venus. Venus. Calms appear, when Storms are past;
Love will have his Hour at last:
Nature is my kindly Care;
Mars destroys, and I repair;
Take me, take me, while you may,
Venus comes not every Day.

Cho. of all. Take her, take her, etc.

Chronos. The World was then so light,
I scarcely felt the Weight;
Joy ruled the Day, and Love the Night.
But since the Queen of Pleasure left the Ground,
I faint, I lag,
And feebly drag
The ponderous Orb around.

Momus. All, all, of a piece throughout;
Pointing to Diana. Thy Chase had a Beast in View;

to Mars. Thy Wars brought nothing about;

to Venus. Thy Lovers were all untrue.

Ianus. It Is well an Old Age is out,

Chro. And time to begin a New.

Cho. of all. All, all, of a piece throughout;
Thy Chase had a Beast in View;
Thy Wars brought nothing about;
Thy Lovers were all untrue.
It Is well an Old Age is out,
And time to begin a New.

Dance of Huntsmen, Nymphs, Warriors and Lovers. FINIS.

