VALENTINIAN: A TRAGEDY.

As it is Altered by the late EARL of ROCHESTER, And Acted at the Theater Royal.

Together with a Preface concerning the Author and his Writings.

By one of his Friends.

LONDON: Printed for Timothy Goodwin at the Maidenhead against St.
Dunstans-Church in Fleetstreet. 1685.

Prologue spoken by Mrs. Cook the first Day.
Written by Mrs. Behn.
WIth that assurance we to day address,
As standard Beauties, certain of Success.
With careless Pride at once they charm and vex,
And scorn the little Censures of their Sex.
Sure of the unregarded Spoil, despise
The needless Affectation of the Eyes,
The softening Languishment that faintly warms,
But trust alone to their resistless Charms.
So we secured by undisputed Wit,
Disdain the damning Malice of the Pit,
Nor need false Arts to set great Nature off,
Or studied Tricks to force the Clap and Laugh.
Ye VVou'd-be-Criticks, you are all undone,
For here is no Theme for you to work upon.
Faith seem to talk to Jenny, I advise,
Of who, likes who, and how Loves Markets rise.
Try these hard Times how to abate the Price;
Tell her how cheap were Damsels on the Ice.
Amongst City-VVives, and Daughters that came there,
How far a Guinny went at Blanket-Fair. The Fair on the Thames so called.

Thus you may find some good Excuse for failing
Of your beloved Exercise of Railing.
That when Friend cries -- How did the Play succeed?
Deem, I hardly minded -- what they did.
We shall not your Ill Nature please to day,
With some fond Scriblers new uncertain Play,
Loose as vain Youth, and tedious as dull Age,
Or Love and Honor that o're-runs the Stage.
Famed and substantial Authors give this Treat,
And 'twill be solemn, Noble all and Great.
Wit, sacred Wit, is all the business here,
Great Fletcher, and the Greater Rochester.
Now name the hardy Man one fault dares find,
In the vast Work of two such Heroes joined.
None but Great Strephon's soft and powerful Wit
Durst undertake to mend what Fletcher writ.
Different their heavenly Notes; yet both agree
To make an everlasting Harmony.
Listen ye Virgins to his charming Song,
Eternal Music dwelt upon his Tongue.
The Gods of Love and Wit inspired his Pen,
And Love and Beauty was his glorious Theme.
Now Ladies you may celebrate his Name,
Without a scandal on your spotless Fame.
With Praise his dear loved Memory pursue,
And pay his Death, what to his Life was due.
Prologue to VALENTINIAN.
Spoken by Mrs. Cook the second Day.
IT IS not your easiness to give Applause,
This long hid Jewel into public draws
Our matchless Author, who to Wit gave Rules,
Scorns Praise, that has been prostitute to Fools.
To factious Favor, the sole Prop and Fence
Of Hackney-Scriblers, he quits all Pretense,
And for their Flatteries brings you Truth and Sense.
Things we our selves confess to be unfit
For such side-Boxes, and for such a Pit.
To the fair Sex some Complement were due,
Did they not slight themselves in liking you;
How can they here for Judges be thought fit,
Who daily your soft Nonsense take for Wit;
Do on your ill-bred Noise for Humor dote,
And choose the Man by the embroidered Coat?
Our Author loved the youthful and the fair,
But even in those their Follies could not spare;
Bid them discreetly use their present store,
Be Friends to Pleasure, when they please no more;
Desired the Ladies of maturer Ages,
If some remaining Spark their Hearts enrages,
At home to quench their Embers with their Pages.
Pert, patched, and painted, there to spend their days;
Not crowd the fronts of Boxes at new Plays:
Advised young sighing Fools to be more pressing,
And Fops of Forty to give over dressing.
By this he got the Envy of the Age,
No Fury's like a libelled Blockhead's Rage.
Hence some despised him for his want of Wit,
And others said he too obscenely writ.
Dull Niceness, envious of Mankind's Delight,
Abortive Pang of Vanity and Spite!
It shows a Master's Hand, 'twas Virgil's Praise,
Things low and abject to adorn and raise.
The Sun on Dunghils shining is as bright,
As when his Beams the fairest Flowers invite,
But all weak Eyes are hurt by too much Light.
Let then these Owls against the Eagle preach,
And blame those Flights which they want VVing to reach.
Like Falstaff let 'em conquer Heroes dead,
And praise Greek Poets they could never read.
Critics should personal Quarrels lay aside,
The Poet from the Enemy divide.
'Twas Charity that made our Author write,
For your Instruction it is we Act to night;
For sure no Age was ever known before,
VVanting an AEcius and Lucina more.
Prologue intended for VALENTINIAN, to be spoken by Mrs. Barrey.
NOw would you have me rail, swell, and look big,
Like rampant Tory over couchant Whig.
As spit-fire Bullies swagger, swear, and roar,
And brandish Bilbo, when the Fray is over.
Must we huff on when we are opposed by none?
But Poets are most fierce on those wh'are down.
Shall I jeer Popish Plots that once did fright us,
And with most bitter Bobs taunt little Titus?
Or with sharp Style, on sneaking Trimmers fall,
Who civilly themselves Prudential call?
Yet Witlings to true Wits as soon may rise,
As a prudential Man can ere be wise.
No, even the worst of all yet I will spare,
The nauseous Floater, changeable as Air,
A nasty thing, which on the surface rides,
Backward and forward with all turns of Tides.
An Audience I will not so coursely use;
It Is the lewd way of every common Muse.
Let Grubstreet-Pens such mean Diversion find,
But we have Subjects of a nobler kind.
We of legitimate Poets sing the praise,
No kin to the spurious Issue of these days.
But such as with desert their Laurels gained,
And by true Wit immortal Names obtained.
Two like Wit- Consuls ruled the former Age,
With Love, and Honor graced that flourishing Stage,
And t'every Passion did the Mind engage.
They sweetness first into our Language brought,
They all the Secrets of man's Nature sought,
And lasting Wonders they have in conjunction wrought.
Now joins a third, a Genius as sublime
As ever flourished in Rome's happiest time.
As sharply could he wound, as sweetly engage,
As soft his Love, and as divine his Rage.
He charmed the tenderest Virgins to delight,
And with his Style did fiercest Blockheads fright.
Some Beauties here I see --
Though now demure, have felt his powerful Charms,
And languish'd in the circil of his Arms.
But for ye Fops, his Satyr reached ye all,
Under his Lash your whole vast Herd did fall.
Oh fatal loss! that mighty Spirit's gone!
Alas! his too great heat went out too soon!
So fatal is it vastly to excel;
Thus young, thus mourned, his loved Lucretius fell.
And now ye little Sparks who infest the Pit,
Learn all the Reverence due to sacred Wit.
Disturb not with your empty noise each Bench,
Nor break your bawdy Jests to the Orange-wench;
Nor in that Scene of Fops, the Gallery,
Vent your No-wit, and spurious Raillery:
That noisie Place, where meet all sort of Tools,
Your huge fat Lovers, and consumptive Fools,
Half Wits, and Gamesters, and gay Fops, whose Tasks
Are daily to invade the dangerous Masks;
And all ye little Brood of Poetasters,
Amend and learn to write from these your Masters.
Drammatis PERSONAE.
Valentinia Emperor. AEcius The Roman General. Maximus Lieutenant General.
Pontius A Captain. Licinius Servants to the Emperor. Balbus Servants to the
Emperor. Proculus Servants to the Emperor. Chylax An Eunuch belonging to
Maximus. Lycias An Eunuch belonging to Maximus. Lucina Wife to Maximus.
Celandia Ladies attending Lucina. Marcellina Ladies attending Lucina. Ardellia
Lewd Women belonging to the Court. Phorba Lewd Women belonging to the Court.
Phidias Friends to AEcius, and Servants to the Emperor. Aretus Friends to
AEcius, and Servants to the Emperor.
THE TRAGEDY OF VALENTINIAN.
ACT. I. SCEN. I.
The Curtain flies up with the Music of Trumpets and Kettle-Drums; and
discovers the Emperor passing through to the Garden, Attended with a great
Court. AEcius and Maximus stay behind. Maximus. AEcius. Max. GReat is the
Honor, which our Emperor
Does by his frequent Visits throw on Maximus;
Not less than thrice this Week has his Gay-Court,
With all its Splendour shined within my Walls:
Nor does this glorious Sun bestow his Beams
Upon a barren Soil, My happy Wife,
Fruitful in Charms for Valentinian's Heart,
Crowns the soft Moments of each welcome Hour,
With such variety of successive Joys,
That Lost in Love, when the long Day is done,
He willingly would give his Empire up
For the Enjoyment of a Minute more,
While I --
Made glorious through the Merit of my Wife,
Am at the Court adored as much as She,
As if the vast Dominion of the World
He had Exchanged with me for my Lucina.

AEcius. I rather wish he would Exchange his Passions,
Give you his Thirst of Love for yours of Honor.
And leaving you the due possession
Of your just Wishes in Lucina's Arms,
Think how he may by force of Worth and Virtue,
Maintain the Right of his Imperial Crown,
Which he neglects for Garlands made of Roses;
Whilst, in disdain of his ill-guided Youth,
Whole Provinces fall off, and scorn to have
Him for their Prince, who is his Pleasures Slave.

Max. I cannot blame the Nations, Noble Friend,
For falling off so fast from this wild man,
When, under our Allegiance be it spoken,
And the most happy Tie of our Affections,
The whole World groans beneath him: By the Gods,
I Would rather be a Bondslave to his Panders,
Constrained by Power to serve their vicious Wills,
Than bear the Infamy of being held
A Favorite to this fowl flattered Tyrant.
Where lives Virtue,
Honor, Discretion, Wisdom? Who are called
And chosen to the steering of his Empire,
But Whores and Bawds and Traitors! Oh my AEcius,
The Glory of a Soldier, and the Truth
Of men made up for Goodness sake, like shells
Grow to the rugged Walls for want of Action,
Only your happy self and I that love you,
Which is a larger means to me than Favor. --

AEcius. No more, my worthy Friend, though these be Truths,
And though these Truths would ask a Reformation,
At least a little Mending -- Yet remember
We are but Subjects, Maximus, Obedience
To what is done, And Grief for what is ill done,
Is all we can call Ours, The Hearts of Princes
Are like the Temples of the Gods: pure Incense,
(Till some unhallowed Hands defile their Offerings,)
Burns ever there. We must not put 'em out
Because the Priests, who touch these Sweets are wicked.
We dare not, Dearest Friend; Nay more, we cannot
(While we consider whose we are, and how,
To what Laws bound, much more to what Lawgiver,
While Majesty is made to be obeyed;
And not inquired into.

Max. Thou best of Friends and Men, whose wise instructions
Are not less charitable, weigh but thus much,
Nor think I speak it with Ambition,
For by the Gods I do not. Why my AEcius,
Why are we thus? or how became thus wretched?

AEcius. You Will fall again into your Fit.

Max. I will not
Or are we now no more the Sons of Romans,
No more the followers of their mighty Fortunes!
But conquered Gauls, And Quivers for the Parthians:
Why is the Emperor, this Man we honor,
This God that ought to be,

AEcius. You are too curious.

Max. Give me leave, -- Why is this Author of us?

AEcius. I dare not hear you speak thus.

Max. I Will be modest,
Thus led away, thus vainly led away,
And we beholders! Misconceive me not,
I sow no Danger in my Words; but wherefore
And to what end are we the Sons of Fathers
Famous and fast to Rome! Why are their Virtues
Stamped in the Dangers of a thousand Battles,
Their Honors Time out-daring
I think for our Example.

AEcius. You speak well.

Max. Why are we Seeds of those then to shake hands
With Bawds and base Informers? Kiss Discredit,
And Court her like a Mistress? Pray your leave yet,
You Will say th'Emperor's young, and apt to take
Impression from his Pleasures,
Yet even his Errors have their good Effects,
For the same gentle temper which inclines
His Mind to Softness, does his Heart defend
From savage thoughts of Cruelty and Blood,
Which throu' the streets of Rome in streams did flow
From Hearts of Senators under the Reigns
Of our severer Warlike Emperors?
While under this scarcely one Criminal
Meets the hard Sentence of the dooming Law,
And the whole World dissolved into a Peace,
Owes its Security to this Man's Pleasures;
But AEcius -- be sincere, do not defend
Actions and Principles your Soul abhors.
You know this Virtue is his greatest Vice:
Impunity is the highest Tyranny:
And what the fawning Court miscals his Pleasures,
Exceeds the Moderation of a Man:
Nay to say justly, Friend, they are loathed Vices,
And such as shake our Worths with Foreign Nations.

AEcius. You search the Sore too deep; and let me tell you
In any Other man, this had been Treason;
And so rewarded: Pray depress your Spirit;
For though I constantly believe you honest,
(You were no Friend for me else); and what now
You freely speak, But good you owe to the Empire,
Yet take heed, Worthy Maximus, all Ears
Hear not with that distinction mine do, few you will find
Admonishers, but Urgers of your Actions,
And to the Heaviest (Friend) and pray consider
We are but Shadows, Motions others give us,
And though our Pities may become the Times,
Our Powers cannot, nor may we justify
Our private Jealousies, by open Force,
Wife or what Else to me it matters not,
I am your Friend, but durst my own Soul urge me,
And by that Soul I speak my just Affections,
To turn my hand from Truth, which is Obedience,
And give the Helm my Virtue holds, to Anger,
Though I had both the Blessings of the Bruti
And both their instigations, though my Cause
Carried a Face of Justice beyond theirs,
And as I am a Servant to my Fortunes,
That daring Soul that first taught Disobedience,
Should feel the first Example.

Max. Mistake me not my dearest AEcius,
Do not believe that through mean Jealousy
How far th'Emperor's Passion may prevail
On my Lucina's thoughts to our Dishonor,
That I abhor the Person of my Prince,
Alas! That Honor were a trivial Loss
Which she and I want merit to preserve;
Virtue and Maximus are placed too near
Lucina's Heart, to leave him such a fear,
No private loss or wrong, inflames my Spirits,
The Roman Glory, AEcius, languishes;
I am concerned for Rome, and for the World,
And when The Emperor pleases to afford
Time from his Pleasures, to take care of those,
I am his Slave, and have a Sword and Life
Still ready for his Service.

AEcius. Now you are brave,
And like a Roman justly are concerned:
But say he be to blame. Are therefore we
Fit Fires to purge him? No, My Dearest Friend,
The Elephant is never won with Anger,
Nor must that man who would reclaim a Lion
Take him by the Teeth,
Our honest Actions, and the Truth that breaks
Like Morning from our Service chaste and blushing,
Is that that pulls a Prince back, then he sees
And not till then truly repents his Errors.

Max. My Heart agrees with yours: I Will take your Council,
The Emperor appears; let us withdraw
And as We both do love him, may he flourish. Exeunt.

Enter Valentinian and Lucina. Val. Which way, Lucina, hope you to escape,
The Censures both of Tyrannous and Proud,
While your Admirers languish by your Eyes
And at your feet an Emperor despairs!
Gods! Why was I marked out of all your Brood
To suffer tamely under mortal hate?
Is it not I that do protect your Shrines?
Am Author of your Sacrifice and Prayers?
Forced by whose great Commands the knowing World
Submits to own your Beings and your Power.
And must I feel the Torments of Neglect?
Betrayed by Love to be the Slave of Scorn?
But it is not you, Poor harmless Deities,
That can make Valentinian sigh and mourn!
Alas! All Power is in Lucina's Eyes!
How soon could I shake off this heavy Earth
Which makes me little lower than your selves,
And sit in Heaven an Equal with the first;
But Love bids me pursue a Nobler Aim.
Continue Mortal, and Lucina's Slave,
From whose fair Eyes, would pity take my part,
And bend her Will to save a bleeding Heart,
I in Her Arms such Blessings should obtain,
For which th'unenvy'd Gods might wish in vain.

Lucin. Ah! Cease to tempt those Gods and Virtue too!
Great Emperor of the World and Lord of me!
Heaven has my Life submitted to your Will!
My Honor's Heavens, which will preserve its own.
How vile a thing am I when that is gone!
When of my Honor you have rifl'd me,
What other Merit have I to be yours?
With my fair Fame let me your Subject live,
And save that Humbleness you smile upon,
Those Gracious Looks, whose brightness should rejoice,
Make your poor Handmaid tremble when she thinks
That they appear like Lightning's fatal Flash,
Which by destructive Thunder is persu'd,
Blasting those Fields on which it shined before!
And should the Gods abandon worthless Me
A Sacrifice to shame and to dishonor;
A Plague to Rome, and Blot to Caesar's Fame!
For what Crime yet unknown shall Maximus
By Me and Caesar be made infamous?
The faithfull'st Servant, and the kindest Lord!
So true, so brave, so generous, and so just,
Who never knew fault: Why should he fall to Shame?

Val. Sweet Innocence! Alas! Your Maximus
(Whom I like you esteem!) is in no Danger
If Duty and Allegiance be no shame!
Have I not Praetors through the spacious Earth
Who in my Name do mighty Nations sway?
Enjoying rich Dominions in my Right,
Their Temporary Governments I change,
Divide or take away, as I see good;
And this they think no Injury nor Shame;
Can you believe your Husband's Right to you
Other than what from me he does derive?
Who justly may recall my own at pleasure;
Am I not Emperor? This World my own?
Given me without a Partner by the Gods?
And shall those Gods who gave me all, allow
That one less than my self should have a Claim
To you the Pride and Glory of the whole?
You, without whom the rest is worthless dross;
Life a base Slavery, Empire but a Mock:
And Love, the Soul of all, a bitter Curse!
No, only Blessing, Maximus and I
Must change our Provinces, the World shall bow
Beneath my Scepter, grasped in his strong hand
Whose Valor may reduce rebellious Slaves,
And wise Integrity secure the rest:
In all those Rights the Gods to me have given;
While I from tedious Toils of Empire free,
The servile Pride of Government despise!
Find Peace and Joy, and Love and Heaven in Thee,
And seek for all my Glory in those Eyes.

Lucina. Had Heaven designed for me so great a Fate,
As Caesar's Love I should have been preserved,
By careful Providence for Him alone,
Not offered up at first to Maximus;
For Princes should not mingle with their Slaves,
Nor seek to quench their Thirst in troubled streams.
Nor am I framed with thoughts fit for a Throne.
To be commanded still has been my Joy;
And to obey the height of my Ambition.
When young in Anxious Cares I spent the Day,
Trembling for fear least each unguided step
Should tread the paths of Error and of Blame:
Till Heaven in gentle pity sent my Lord,
In whose Commands my Wishes meet their end,
Pleased and secure while following his Will;
Whether to live or die I cannot err.
You like the Sun, Great Sir, are placed above,
I, a low Myrtle, in the humble Vale,
May flourish by your distant influence,
But should you bend your Glories nearer me,
Such fatal Favor withers me to dust
Or I in foolish gratitude desire
To kiss your feet, by whom we live and grow,
To such a height I should in vain aspire,
Who am already rooted here below
Fixed in my Maximus's Breast I lie!
Torn from that Bed, like gathered Flowers, I die.

Val. Cease to oppress me with a thousand Charms!
There needs no succor to prevailing Arms!
Your Beauty had subdued my Heart before,
Such Virtue could alone enslave me more:
If you love Maximus to this degree!
How would you be in Love, Did you love Me?
In Her, who to a Husband is so kind,
What Raptures might a Lover hope to find?
I burn, Lucina, like a Field of Corn
By flowing streams of kindled Flames ore-born
When North-winds drive the Torrent with a storm,
These Fires into my Bosom you have thrown,
And must in pity quench 'em in your own:
Heaven, when it gave your Eyes the Inflaming power
Which was ordained to cast an Emperor
Into Loves Fever, kindly did impart
That Sea of Milk to bathe his burning Heart.
Throu' all those Joys. Lays hold on Her.

Lucina. Hold, Sir, for Mercy's sake --
Love will abhor whatever Force can take.
I may perhaps persuade my self in time
That this is Duty which now seems a Crime;
I Will to the Gods and beg they will inspire
My Breast or Yours with what it should desire.

Val. Fly to their Altars strait, and let 'em know
Now is their time to make me Friend or Foe,
If to my Wishes they your Heart incline,
Or they are no longer Favorites of mine. Exit Lucina.
Ho Chylax, Proculus?
Enter Chylax, Proculus, Balbus and Lycin. As ever you do hope to be by me
Protected in your boundless Infamy,
For Dissoluteness cherished, loved and praised
On Pyramids of your own Vices raised,
Above the reach of Law, Reproof or Shame,
Assist me now to quench my raging Flame.
It Is not as heretofore a Lambent Fire,
'Rais'd by some common Beauty in my Breast,
Vapors from Idleness or loose Desire,
By each new Motion easily suppressed,
But a fixed Heat that robs me of all rest.
Before my Dazzled Eyes could you now place
A thousand willing Beauties to allure
And give me Lust for every loose Embrace,
Lucina's Love my Virtue would secure,
From the contagious Charm in vain I fly,
'Thas seized upon my Heart, and may defy
That great Preservative Variety!
Go, call your Wives to Council, and prepare
To tempt, dissemble, promise, fawn and swear,
To make Faith look like Folly use your skill
Virtue an ill-bred Crosseness in the Will.
Fame, the loose breathings of a Clamorous Crowd!
Ever in Lies most confident and loud!
Honor a Notion! Piety a Cheat!
And if you prove successful Bawds, be great.

Chy. All hind'rance to your hopes we will soon remove,
And clear the Way to your triumphant Love.

Bal. Lucina for your Wishes well prepare,
And show we know to merit what we are Exeunt.

Val. Once more the power of Vows and Tears I Will prove,
These may perhaps her gentle Nature move,
To Pity first, by consequence to Love.
Poor are the Brutal Conquests we obtain
Ore Barbarous Nations by the force of Arms,
But when with humble Love a Heart we gain,
And plant our Trophies on our Conqu'rors Charms.
Enter AEcius. Such Triumphs even to us may honor bring
No Glory's vain, which does from Pleasure spring:
How now AEcius! Are the Soldiers quiet:

AEcius. Better I hope, Sir, than they were.

Val. They Are pleased I hear
To censure me extremely for my Pleasures;
Shortly they will fight against me.

AEcius. Gods defend, Sir. And for their Censures they are
Such shrewd Judges
A Donative of ten Sexterces
I Will undertake shall make 'em ring your Praises
More than they sung your Pleasures.

Val. I believe thee!
Art thou in Love AEcius yet?

AEcius. Oh no, Sir, I am too coarse for Ladies, my Embraces,
That only am acquainted with Allarms,
Would break their tender Bodies.

Val. Never fear it.
They are stronger than you think --
The Empress swears thou art a Lusty Soldier,
A good one I believe thee,

AEcius. All that Goodness is but your Creature, Sir.

Val. But tell me truly,
For thou dare tell me;

AEcius. Any thing concerns you
That Is fit for me to speak, or you to pardon.

Val. What say the Soldiers of me! And the same Words,
Mince 'em not, good AEcius, But deliver
The very Forms and Tongues they talk withal.

AEcius. I Will tell you Sir; but with this Caution
You be not stirred: For should the Gods live with us
Even those we certainly believe are righteous,
Give 'em but Drink, They Would censure them too.

Val. Forward!

AEcius. Then to begin, They say you sleep too much,
By which they judge you, Sir, too sensual:
Apt to decline your strength to ease and pleasure:
And when you do not sleep, you drink too much;
From which they fear Suspicions first, then Ruin,
And when you neither drink nor sleep you guess, Sir,
Which they affirm first breaks your Understanding,
Then dulls the edge of Honor, makes them seem
That are the Ribs and Rampires of the Empire,
Fencers and beaten Fools, and so regarded:
But I believe 'em not: for were these Truths,
Your Virtue can correct them.

Val. They speak plainly.

AEcius. They say moreover, Sir, since you will have it;
For they will take their freedoms though the Sword
Were at their throats: That of late times like Nero,
And with the same forgetfulness of Glory
You have got a vein of Fidling: So they term it.

Val. Some drunken Dreamers, AEcius.

AEcius. So I hope, Sir.
They say besides, you nourish strange Devourers;
Fed with the Fat of the Empire, they call Bawds,
Lazy and lustful Creatures that abuse you.

Val. What Sin's next? for I perceive they have no mind
To spare me!

AEcius. Nor hurt you, on my Soul, Sir: but such people
(Nor can the power of man restrain it)
When they are full of Meat, and Ease, must prate.

Val. Forward.

AEcius. I have spoken too much, Sir.

Val. I Will have all.

AEcius. It is not fit
Your Ears should hear their Vanities, no profit
Can justly arise to you from their Behavior.
Unless you were guilty of these Crimes.

Val. It may be, I am so. Therefore forward.

AEcius. I have ever learned to obey.

Val. No more Apologies.

AEcius. They grieve besides, Sir,
To see the Nations whom our ancient Virtue
With many a weary March and Hunger conquered
With loss of many a daring Life subdued
Fall from their fair Obedience, and even murmur
To see the Warlike Eagles mew their Honors,
In obscure Towns, that used to prey on Princes,
They cry for Enemies, and tell the Captain
The Fruits of Italy are Luscious: Give us Egypt,
Or sandy Afric to display our Valors,
There, where our Swords may get us Meat and Dangers!
Digest our well-got Food, for here our Weapons
And Bodies that were made for shining Brass,
Are both unedg'd and old with Ease and Women!
And then they cry again, Where are the Germans
Lined with hot Spain or Gallia? Bring 'em near:
And let the Son of War, steeled Mithridates
Pour on us his winged Parthians like a storm:
Hiding the face of Heaven with showers of Arrows,
Yet we dare fight like Romans; then as Soldiers
Tired with a weary March, they tell their Wounds
Even weeping ripe, they were no more nor deeper,
And glory in these Scars that make 'em lovely.
And sitting where a Camp was, like sad Pilgrims
They reckon up the Times and loading Labors
Of Julius or Germanicus, and wonder
That Rome, whose Turrets once were topt with Honor
Can now forget the Custom of her Conquests;
And then they blame you, Sir -- And say, Who leads us!
Shall we stand here like Statues! Were our Fathers
The Sons of lazy Moors, our Princes Persians!
Nothing but Silk and Softness? Curses on 'em
That first taught Nero Wantonness and Blood,
Tiberius Doubts, Caligula all Vices;
For from the spring of these succeeding Princes --
Thus they talk, Sir.

Val. Well!
Why do you hear these things?

AEcius. Why do you do 'em?
I take the Gods to witness with more sorrow
And more vexation hear I these Reproaches
Than were my Life dropped from me through an Hourglass.

Val. It Is like then you believe 'em or at least
Are glad they should be so: Take heed -- you were better
Build your own Tomb, and run into it living
Than dare a Prince's Anger.

AEcius. I am old, Sir:
And ten years more addition is but nothing:
Now if my Life be pleasing to you, take it.
Upon my knees, if ever any Service
(As let me brag, some have been worthy notice!)
If ever any Worth or Trust you gave me
Deserved a Favor, Sir; If all my Actions
The hazards of my Youth, Colds, Burnings, Wants
For You and for the Empire be not Vices:
By the style you have stamped upon me, Soldier!
Let me not fall into the Hands of Wretches.

Val. I understand you not.

AEcius. Let not this Body
That has looked bravely in his Blood for Caesar
And covetous of Wounds, and for your safety.
After the escape of Swords, Spears, Slings and Arrows,
Against which my beaten Body was my Armor!
Throu' Seas, and thirsty Deserts, now be purchase
For Slaves and base informers: I see Anger
And Death, look throu' your Eyes -- I am marked for
Slaughter, and know the telling of this Truth has made Me,
A man clean lost to this World -- I embrace it,
Only my last Petition, Sacred Caesar!
Is, I may die a Roman. --

Val. Rise! my Friend still,
And worthy of my Love: Reclaim the Soldiers!
I Will study to do so upon my self.
Go -- keep your Command and prosper,

AEcius. Life to Caesar. -- Exit.

Val. The Honesty of this AEcius,
Who is indeed the Bulwark of my Empire
Is to be cherisht for the good it brings,
Not valued as a Merit in the Owner!
All Princes are Slaves bound up by Gratitude,
And Duty has no Claim beyond Acknowledgment
Which I Will pay AEcius, whom I still have found
Dull, faithful, humble, vigilant and brave:
Talents as I could wish 'em for my Slave:
But oh this Woman! --
Is it a Sin to love this lovely Woman?
No: She is such a Pleasure, being good;
That though I were a God, she would fire my Blood.

The End of the First Act.
ACT. II. SCEN. I.
Enter Balbus, Proculus, Chylax; Lycinius. Bal. I Never saw the like she is no
more stirred,
No more another Woman, no more altered
With any Hopes or Promises laid to her,
Let them be never so weighty, never so winning,
Than I am with the motion of my own Legs.

Proc. Chylax!
You are a stranger yet in these Designs,
At least in Rome, tell me, and tell me truth
Did you ever know in all your course of Practice
In all the ways of Women you have run through
For I presume you have been brought up, Chylax,
As we, to fetch and carry.

Chyl. True -- I have so.

Proc. Did you, I say again in all this Progress
Ever discover such a piece of Beauty
Ever so rare a Creature, and no doubt
One that must know her worth too and affect it,
I, and be flattered, else it is none: and honest
Honest against the Tide of all Temptations?
Honest to one Man, and to her Husband only,
And yet not Eighteen, not of Age to know
Why she is honest.

Chyl. I confess it freely
I never saw her Fellow, nor ever shall:
For all our Grecian Dames as I have tried
And sure I have tried a hundred -- if I say Two
I speak within my Compass: All these Beauties
And all the Constancy of all these Faces
Maids, Widows, Wives, of what Degree or Calling
So they be Greeks and fat: for there is my Cunning
I would undertake, and not sweat for it: Proculus,
Were they to try again, say twice as many
Under a Thousand pound to lay them flat:
But this Wench staggers me.

Lycin. Do you see these Jewels?
You would think these pretty Baits now; I Will assure you
Here Is half the Wealth of Asia.

Bal. These are nothing
To the full Honors I propounded to her.
I bid her think and be, and presently
Whatever her Ambition, what the Council
Of others would add to her, What her Dreams
Could more enlarge, What any President
Of any Woman rising up to Glory;
And standing certain there, and in the highest
Could give her more, Nay to be Empress --

Proc. And cold at all these Offers?

Bal. Cold as Crystal,
Never to be thawed.

Chy. I tried her further:
And so far that I think she is no Woman.
At least as Women go now.

Lycin. Why what did you?

Chy. I offered that, that had she been but Mistress
Of as much spleen as Doves have, I had reached Her
A safe Revenge of all that ever hate her,
The crying down for ever of all Beauties
That may be thought come near her.

Proc. That was pretty.

Chy. I never knew that way fail; yet I tell you,
I offered her a Gift beyond all yours
That, that had made a Saint start well considered;
The Law to be her Creature; she to make it,
Her Mouth to give it; Every thing alive
From her Aspect to draw their Good or Evil
Fixed in 'em spite of Fortune, a new Nature
She should be called, and Mother of all Ages;
Time should be hers, what she did, flattering Virtues
Should bless to all Posterities, Her Air
Should give us Life, Her Earth and Water feed us,
And last to none but to the Emp'ror.
(And then but when she pleased to have it so:)
She should be held a Mortal.

Lycin. And she heard you?

Chy. Yes, as a sick man hears a Noise, or he
That stands condemned, his Judgment.
Well, if there can be Virtue, if that Name
Be any thing but Name, and empty Title,
If it be so as Fools are used to feign it,
A Power that can preserve us after Death,
And make the Names of Men out-reckon Ages,
This Woman has a God of Virtue in her.

Bal. I would the Emperor were that God.

Chy. She has in her
All the Contempt of Glory, and vain seeming
Of all the Stoics, All the Truth of Christians,
And all their Constancy; Modesty was made
When she was first intended; When she blushes
It is the holiest thing to look upon;
The purest Temple of her Sex, that ever
Made Nature a blessed Founder,
If she were any way inclining
To Ease or Pleasure, or affected Glory,
Proud to be seen or worshipped, 'twere a Venture:
But on my Soul she is chaster than cold Camphire.

Bal. I think so too: For all the ways of Woman
Like a full sail she bears against: I asked her
After my many Offers, walking with her,
And her many down Denials, How
If the Emperor grown mad with Love should force her?
She pointed to a Lucrece that hung by,
And with an angry Look -- that from her Eyes
Shot Vestal Fire against me; she departed.

Pro. This is the first Woman I was ever posed in,
Yet I have brought young loving things together
This two and thirty Year.

Chyl. I find by this fair Lady
The Calling of a Bawd to be a strange
A wise and subtle Calling: And for none
But staid, discreet and understanding People:
And as the Tutor to great Alexander
Would say, A young man should not dare to read
His Moral Books till after five and twenty,
So must that He or She that will be Bawdy,
(I mean discreetly Bawdy, and be trusted)
If they will rise and gain Experience
Well steept in Years and Discipline, begin it --
I take it it is no Boys Play.

Bal. What Is to be thought of?

Proc. The Emperor must know it.

Lycin. If the Women should chance to fail too --

Chy. As it is ten to one.

Proc. Why what remains but new Nets for the purpose --
The Emperor. --

Enter Valentinian. Emp. What! have you brought Her?

Chy. Brought her, Sir! Alas,
What would you do with such a Cake of Ice
Whom all the Love in the Empire cannot thaw.
A dull cross thing, insensible of Glory,
Deaf to all Promises, dead to Desire,
A tedious stickler for her Husband's Rights,
Who like a Beggars Curr has brought her up
To fawn on him, and bark at all besides.

Emp. Lewd and ill-manner'd Fool, were not for fear
To do thee good by mending of thy Manners
I Would have thee whipped! Is this the account you bring
To ease the Torments of my restless mind.

Balb. Kneeling. Caesar! In vain your Vassals have endeavored
By Promises, Persuasions, Reasons, Wealth,
All that can make the firmest Virtue bend
To alter Her. Our Arguments like Darts
Shot in the Bosom of the boundless Air
Are lost and do not leave the least Impression:
Forgive us, if we failed to overcome
Virtue that could resist the Emperor.

Emp. You impotent Provokers of my Lust,
Who can incite and have no power to help,
How dare you be alive and I unsatisfied,
Who to your Beings have no other Title
Nor least Hopes to preserve 'em, but my Smiles;
Who play like poisonous Insects all the Day
In the warm Shine of Me your Vital Sun;
And when Night comes must perish --
VVretches! whose vicious Lives when I withdraw
The Absolute Protection of my Favor
Will drag you into all the Miseries
That your own Terrors, Universal Hate,
And Law, with Jayls and Whips can bring upon you,
As you have failed to satisfy my VVishes,
Perdition is the least you can expect
Who durst to undertake and not perform!
Slaves! was it fit I should be disappointed?
Yet live --
Continue infamous a little longer;
You have deserved to end. But for this once
I Will not tread out your nasty snuffs of Life;
But had your poisonous Flatteries prevailed
Upon her Chastity I so admire,
A Virtue that adds Fury to my Flames!
Dogs had devoured e're this your Carcasses;
Is that an Object fit for my Desires
Which lies within the reach of your persuasions!
Had you by your infectious Industry
Showed my Lucina frail to that degree,
You had been damned for undeceiving me,
But to possess her chaste and uncorrupted,
There lies the Joy and Glory of my Love!
A Passion too refined for your dull Souls,
And such a Blessing as I scorn to owe
The gaining of to any but my self:
Haste strait to Maximus, and let him know
He must come instantly and speak with me;
The rest of you wait here -- I Will play to night.
You, saucy Fool! send privately away To Chylax.
For Lycias hither by the Garden Gate,
That sweet-fac'd Eunuch that sung
In Maximus's Grove the other day,
And in my Closet keep him till I come. Exit Valent.

Chyl. I shall, Sir.
It Is a soft Rogue, this Lycias
And rightly understood,
He Is worth a thousand Women's Nicenesses!
The Love of Women moves even with their Lust,
Who therefore still are fond, but seldom just:
Their Love is Usury, while they pretend,
To gain the Pleasure double which they lend.
But a dear Boy's disinterested Flame
Gives Pleasure, and for mere Love gathers pain;
,,In him alone Fondness sincere does prove,
And the kind tender Naked Boy is Love. Exit.

SCENE 2 A GARDEN.
Enter Lucina, Ardelia and Phorba. Ard. You still insist upon that Idol Honor,
Can it renew your Youth? Can it add Wealth?
Or take off wrinkles? Can it draw men's Eyes
To gaze upon you in your Age? Can Honor
That truly is a Saint to none but Soldiers,
And looked into, bears no Reward but Danger,
Leave you the most respected Woman living?
Or can the common Kisses of a Husband
(Which to a Sprightly Lady is a Labor)
Make you almost immortal? You are cozened,
The Honor of a Woman is her Praises,
The way to get these, to be seen and sought to,
And not to bury such a happy Sweetness
Under a smoking Roof.

Lucina. I Will hear no more.

Phorb. That White and Red, and all that blooming Beauty,
Kept from the Eyes that make it so is nothing:
Then you are truly fair when men proclaim it:
The Phoenix that was never seen is doubted,
But when the Virtue's known, the Honor's doubled:
Virtue is either lame or not at all,
And Love a Sacrilege and not a Saint,
When it bars up the way to men's Petitions.

Ard. Nay you shall love your Husband too; We
Come not to make a Monster of you.

Lucin. Are you Women?

Ard. You Will find us so; and women you shall thank too
If you have but Grace to make your Use.

Lucin. Fie on you.

Phor. Alas, poor bashful Lady! By my Soul
Had you no other Virtue, but your Blushes,
And I a man, I should run mad for those!
How prettily they set her off! how sweetly!

Ard. Come, Goddess, come! you move too near the Earth,
It must not be, a better Orb stays for you.

Lucin. Pray leave me.

Phorb. That were a Sin, sweet Madam, and a way
To make us guilty of your Melancholy,
You must not be alone; In Conversation
Doubts are resolved, and what sticks near the Conscience
Made easy and allowable.

Lucin. Ye are Devils.

Ard. That you may one day bless for your Damnation.

Lucin. I charge you in the Name of Chastity
Tempt me no more: how ugly you seem to me!
There Is no wonder Men defame our Sex,
And lay the Vices of all Ages on us,
When such as you shall bear the Name of Women!
If you had Eyes to see your selves, or sense,
Above the base Rewards ye earn with shame!
If ever in your Lives ye heard of Goodness
Though many Regions off, -- as men hear Thunder;
If ever you had Fathers, and they Souls,
Or ever Mothers, and not such as you are!
If ever any thing were constant in you
Besides your Sins!
If any of your Ancestors
Died worth a Noble Deed -- that would be cherished,
Soul-frighted with this black Infection,
You would run from one another Repentance,
And from your Guilty Eyes drop out those Sins
That made ye blind and Beasts.

Phorb. You speak well, Madam!
A sign of fruitful Education
If your religious Zeal had Wisdom with it.

Ard. This Lady was ordained to bless the Empire,
And we may all give thanks for Her.

Phorb. I believe you.

Ard. If any thing redeem the Emperor
From his wild flying Courses this is she!
She can instruct him -- if you mark -- she is wise too.

Phor. Exceeding wise, which is a wonder in her;
And so religious that I well believe,
Though she would sin she cannot.

Ard. And besides
She has the Empire's Cause in hand, not Love's,
There lies the main consideration
For which she is chiefly born.

Phorb. She finds that Point
Stronger than we can tell her, and believe it
I look by her means for a Reformation,
And such a one, and such a rare way carried.

Ard. I never thought the Emperor had wisdom,
Pity, or fair Affection to his Country,
Till he professed this Love. Gods give 'em Children
Such as her Virtues merit and his Zeal;
I look to see a Numa from this Lady,
Or greater than Octavius.

Phor. Do you mark too
Which is a noble Virtue -- how she blushes,
And what flowing Modesty runs through her
When we but name the Emperor.

Ard. Mark it!
Yes, and admire it too: for she considers
Though she be fair as Heaven, and Virtuous
As holy Truth; Yet to the Emperor
She is a kind of Nothing -- but her Service;
Which she is bound to offer, and she will do it;
And when her Countries Cause commands Affection,
She knows Obedience is the Key of Virtues;
Then fly the Blushes out like Cupid's Arrows,
And though the Tie of Marriage to her Lord,
Would fain cry, stay Lucina -- yet the Cause
And general Wisdom of the Prince's Love
Makes her find surer Ends and happier,
And if the first were chaste these are twice doubled.

Phor. Her Tartness to us too.

Ard. That Is a wise one.

Phor. I like it, it shows a rising Wisdom,
That chides all common Fools who dare enquire
What Princes would have private.

Ard. What a Lady shall we be blessed to serve?

Lucin. Go -- get you from me,
Ye are your Purses Agents not the Princes,
Is this the virtuous Love you trained me out to?
Am I a Woman fit to Imp your Vices?
But that I had a Mother and a Woman
Whose ever living Fame turns all it touches
Into the Good, it self was, I should now
Even doubt my self; I have been searched so near
The very Soul of Honor. Why should you Two
That happily have been as chaste as I am!
Fairer I think by much (For yet your Faces
Like Ancient well built Piles show worthy Ruins)
After that Angel Age, turn mortal Devils!
For Shame, for Womanhood, for what you have been
(For rotten Cedars have born goodly Branches)
If you have hope of any Heaven but Court
Which like a Dream you will find hereafter vanish:
Or at the best but subject to Repentance!
Study no more to be ill spoken of
Let Women live themselves; if they must fail;
Their own Destruction find 'em.

Ard. You are so excellent in all
That I must tell it you with Admiration!
So true a joy you have, so sweet a fear!
And when you come to Anger -- It Is so noble
That for my own part I could still offend
To hear you angry: Women that want that
And your way guided (else I count it nothing)
Are either Fools or Fearful.

Phorb. She were no Mistress for the World's great Lord
Could she not frown a ravished Kiss from Anger,
And such an Anger as this Lady shows us
Stuck with such pleasing Dangers (Gods I ask ye)
Which of you all could hold from?

Lucin. I perceive you,
Your own dark Sins dwell with you and that price
You sell the Chastity of modest Wives at,
Run to Diseases with you -- I despise you,
And all the Nets you have pitched to catch my Virtue,
Like Spiders webs I sweep away before me!
Go! tell The Emperor, You have met a Woman,
That neither his own Person, which is God-like,
The World he rules, nor what that World can purchase,
Nor all the Glories subject to a Caesar!
The Honors that he offers for my Honor,
The Hopes, the Gifts, and everlasting Flatteries,
Nor any thing that is His, and apt to tempt.
No! not to be the Mother of the Empire
And Queen of all the holy Fires he worships,
Can make a Whore of.

Ard. You mistake us, Madam.

Lucin. Yet tell him this, h'as thus much weakened me
That I have heard his Slaves and you his Matrons.
Fit Nurses for his Sins! which Gods forgive me
But ever to be leaning to his Folly,
Or to be brought to love his Vice -- Assure him
And from her Mouth, whose Life shall make it certain,
I never can; I have a Noble Husband
Pray tell him that too: Yet a Noble Name,
A Noble Family, and last a Conscience.
Thus much by way of Answer; for your selves
You have lived the shame of Women -- die the better. Ex. Luc.

Phor. What Is now to do?

Ard. Even as she said, to die.
For there is no living here and Women thus,
I am sure for us two.

Phor. Nothing stick upon her? --

Ard. We have lost a Mass of Money. Well Dame Virtue,
Yet you may halt if good Luck serve!

Phor. Worms take her,

Ard. So Godly --
This is ill Breeding, Phorba.

Phor. If the Women
Should have a longing now to see the Monster
And she convert 'em all!

Ard. That may be, Phorba!
But if it be I Will have the Young men hanged,
-- Come -- let us go think -- she must not escape us thus. Exeunt.

ACT. III. SCEN. I.
The Scene opens, and discovers the Emperor at Dice. Maximus. Lycin. Proc. and
Chylax. Emp. NAy! set my Hand out: It Is not just
I should neglect my Luck when it is so prosperous:

Chy. If I have any thing to set you, Sir, but Clothes
And good Conditions, let me perish;
You have all my Money.

Proc. And mine.

Lycin. And mine too.

Max. You may trust us sure till to morrow,
Or if you please, I Will send home for Money presently.

Emp. It Is already Morning, and staying will be tedious.
My Luck will vanish ere your Money comes.

Chy. Shall we redeem 'em if we set our Houses?

Emp. Yes fairly.

Chy. That at my Villa --

Emp. At it -- It Is mine.

Chy. Then farewell, Fig Trees: For I can never redeem 'em.

Emp. Who sets? -- Set any thing.

Lycin. At my Horse.

Emp. The Dapple Spaniard?

Lycin. He.

Emp. He Is mine.

Lycin. He is so.

Max. Hah!

Lycin. Nothing, my Lord! But Pox on my Damned Fortune.

Emp. Come Maximus; You were not wont to flinch.

Max. By Heaven, Sir, I have not a Penny.

Emp. Then that Ring.

Max. O Good Sir, This was not given to lose.

Emp. Some Love-Token -- Set it I say!

Max. I beg you, Sir.

Emp. How silly and how fond you are grown of Toys!

Max. Shall I redeem it?

Emp. When you please to morrow
Or next day as you will: I do not care
Only for luck-sake --

Max. There Sir, will you throw?

Emp. Why then have at it fairly; the last stake!
It Is mine.

Max. You Are ever fortunate! to morrow
I Will bring you -- what you please to think it worth.

Emp. Then your Arabian Horse: but for this night
I Will wear it as my Victory.

Enter Balbus. Balb. From the Camp
AEcius in haste has sent these Letters, Sir;
It seems the Cohorts mutiny for Pay.

Emp. Maximus -- This is ill News. Next week they are to march.
You must away immediately; no stay,
No, not so much as to take leave at home.
This careful haste may probably appease 'em;
Send word, what are their Numbers;
And Money shall be sent to pay 'em all.
Besides something by way of Donative.

Max. I Will not delay a moment, Sir,
The Gods preserve you in this mind for ever.

Emp. I Will see 'em march my self.

Max. Gods ever keep you -- Exit Max.

Emp. To what end now de'e think this Ring shall serve?
For you are the dull'st and the veriest Rogues --
Fellows that know only by roat as Birds
Whistle and sing.

Chy. Why, Sir, it is for the Lady.

Emp. The Lady! Blockhead! which end of the Lady?
Her Nose!

Chy. Faith, Sir, that I know not.

Emp. Then pray for him that does -- Exit Chylax.
Fetch in the Eunuch;
You! See th'Apartment made very fine
That lies upon the Garden, Masks and Music,
With the best speed you can. And all your Arts
Serve to the highest for my Masterpiece
Is now on foot.

Proc. Sir, we shall have a care.

Emp. I Will sleep an hour or two; and let the Women
Put on a graver show of Welcome!
Your Wives! they are such Haggard-Bawds
A Thought too eager. Enter Chyl. and Lycias.

Chy. Here Is Lycias, Sir.

Lyc. Long Life to mighty Caesar.

Emp. Fortune to thee, for I must use thee Lycias.

Lyc. I am the humble Slave of Caesar's Will,
By my Ambition bound to his Commands
As by my duty.

Emp. Follow me.

Lyc. With Joy. -- Exeunt.

SCENE 2. GROVE and FOREST.
Enter Lucina. Lucin. Dear solitary Groves where Peace does dwell,
Sweet Harbors of pure Love and Innocence!
How willingly could I for ever stay
Beneath the shade of your embracing Greens,
Listening to Harmony of warbling Birds,
Tuned with the gentle Murmurs of the Streams,
Upon whose Banks in various Livery
The fragrant offspring of the early Year
Their Heads like graceful Swans bent proudly down,
See their own Beauties in the Crystal Flood?
Of these I could mysterious Chaplets weave,
Expressing some kind innocent Design
To show my Maximus at his Return
And fondly chiding make his Heart confess
How far my busy Idleness excels,
The idle Business he persues all day,
At the contentious Court or clamorous Camp
Robbing my Eyes of what they love to see,
My Ears of his dear Words they wish to hear
My longing Arms of th'Embrace they covet:
Forgive me, Heaven! if when I these enjoy,
So perfect is the happiness I find
That my Soul satisfied feels no Ambition
To change these humble Roofs and sit above.

Enter Marcellina. Marc. Madam, My Lord just now alighted here,
Was by an Order from The Emperor
Called back to Court!
This he commanded me to let you know,
And that he would make haste in his return.

Lucin. The Emperor!
Unwonted Horror seizes me all over,
When I but hear him named: sure it is not Hate;
For though his impious Love with scorn I heard,
And fled with terror from his threatening force
Duty commands me humbly to forgive
And bless the Lord to whom my Lord does bow!
Nay more methinks he is the gracefullest man,
His Words so framed to tempt, himself to please,
That it is my wonder how the Powers above,
Those wise and careful Guardians of the Good,
Have trusted such a force of tempting Charms
To Enemies declared of Innocence!
It Is then some strange Prophetic Fear I feel
That seems to warn me of approaching Ills.
Go Marcellina, fetch your Lute, and sing that Song
My Lord calls his: I Will try to wear away
The Melancholy Thoughts his Absence breeds!
Come gentle Slumbers in your flattering Arms
I Will bury these Disquiets of my Mind
Till Maximus returns -- for when he is here
My Heart is rai'sd above the reach of Fear.

Marcellina sings -- SONG.
By Mr. W.
WHere would coy Aminta run
From a despairing Lovers Story?
When her Eyes have Conquests won,
Why should her Ear refuse the Glory?
Shall a Slave whom Rackes constrain
Be forbidden to complain?
Let her scorn me, let her fly me,
Let her Looks her Life deny me.
Never can my Heart change for Relief,
Or my Tongue cease to tell my Grief;
Much to Love and much to Pray
Is to Heaven the only Way.
Mar. She sleeps. The Song ended, Exeunt Claudia and Marcellina before the
Dance. SCENE 3. Dance of Satyrs.
Enter Claudia and Marcellina to Lucina. Claud. Prithee, what ails my Lady,
that of late
She never cares for Company.

Marc. I know not
Unless it be that Company causes Cuckolds.

Claud. Ridiculous! That were a Childish Fear!
It Is Opportunity does cause 'em rather,
When two made one are glad to be alone.

Marc. But Claudia -- Why this sitting up all Night
In Groves by purling streams? This argues Heat!
Great Heat and Vapors, which are main Corrupters!
Mark when you will; Your Ladies that have Vapors,
They are not Flinchers, that insulting Spleen
Is the Artillery of powerful Lust;
Discharged upon weak Honor which stands out
Two Fits of Headache, at the most, then yields.

Claudia. Thou art the frailest Creature, Marcellina!
And think all Women's Honors like thy own!
So thin a Cobweb that each blast of Passion
Can blow away: But for my own part, Girl!
I think I may be well styled Honors Martyr.
With firmest Constancy I have endured
The raging Heats of passionate Desires!
While flaming Love and boiling Nature both
Were poured upon my Soul with equal Torture:
I armed with Resolution stood it out
And kept my Honor safe.

Marc. Thy Glory's great!
But, Claudia, Thanks to Heaven that I am made
The weakest of all women: framed so frail
That Honor never thought fit to choose me out,
His Champion against Pleasure: my poor Heart
For diverse years still tossed from Flame to Flame,
Is now burnt up to Tinder every Spark
Dropped from kind Eyes sets it a-fire afresh,
Pressed by a gentle hand I melt away,
One Sigh's a Storm that blows me all along;
Pity a wretch, who has no Charm at all,
Against the impetuous Tide of flowing Pleasure,
Who wants both Force and Courage to maintain
The glorious War made upon Flesh and Blood,
But is a Sacrifice to every wish
And has no power left to resist a Joy.

Claud. Poor Girl! How strange a Riddle Virtue is?
They never miss it who possess it not;
And they who have it ever find a want.
With what Tranquillity and Peace thou liv'st!
For stripped of Shame; Thou have no cause to fear;
While I the Slave of Virtue am afraid
Of every thing I see: And think the World
A dreadful wilderness of savage Beasts;
Each man I meet I fancy will devour me;
And swayed by Rules not natural but affected
I hate Mankind for fear of being loved.

Marc. It Is nothing less than Witchcraft can constrain
Still to persist in Errors we perceive!
Prithee reform; what Nature prompts us to,
And Reason seconds, why should we avoid?
This Honor is the veriest Mountebank,
It fits our Fancies with affected Tricks
And makes us freakish; what a Cheat must that be
Which robs our Lives of all their softer hours,
Beauty, our only Treasure it lays waste.
Hurries us over our neglected Youth,
To the detested state of Age and Ugliness,
Tearing our dearest Hearts Desires from us.
Then in reward of what it took away
Our Joys, our Hopes, our Wishes and Delights
It bountifully pays us all with Pride!
Poor shifts! still to be proud and never pleased,
Yet this is all your Honor can do for you.

Claud. Concluded like thy self, for sure thou art
The most corrupt corrupting thing alive,
Yet glory not too much in cheating Wit:
It Is but false Wisdom; and its Property,
Has ever been to take the part of Vice,
Which though the Fancy with vain shows it please,
Yet wants a power to satisfy the Mind.

Lucina wakes. Claud. But see my Lady wakes and comes this way.
Bless me! how pale and how confused she looks!

Luc. In what Fantastique new world have I been?
What Horrors past? what threatening Visions seen?
VVrapt as I lay in my amazing Trance,
The Host of Heaven and Hell did round me Dance:
Debates arose betwixt the Powers above
And those below: Methoughts they talked of Love.
And named me often; but it could not be
Of any Love that had to do with me.
For all the while they talked and argued thus,
I never heard one word of Maximus.
Discourteous Nymphs! who own these murmuring Floods
And you unkind Divinities of the VVoods!
When to your Banks and Bowers I came distressed
Half dead throu' Absence seeking Peace and Rest.
Why would you not protect by these your Streams
A sleeping wretch from such wild dismal Dreams!
Misshapen Monsters round in Measures went
Horrid in Form with Gestures insolent;
Grinning throu' Goatish Beards with half closed Eyes,
They looked me in the face frighted to rise!
In vain I did attempt, methought no Ground
Was to support my sinking Footsteps! found.
In clammy Fogs like one half choked I lay,
Crying for help my Voice was snatched away.
And when I would have fled,
My Limbs benumbed, or dead.
Could not my Will with Terror winged obey
Upon my absent Lord for help I cried
But in that Moment when I must have died:
With Anguish of my Fears confusing pains
Relenting Sleep loosed his Tyrannick Chains

Claud. Madam, Alas such Accidents as these
Are not of value to disturb your Peace!
The cold damp-Dews of Night have mixed and wrought
With the dark Melancholy of your Thought.
And throu' your Fancy these Illusions brought.
I still have marked your Fondness will afford
No hour of Joy in the absence of my Lord.

Enter Lycias. A Ring! Lucin. Absent, all night -- and never send me word?

Lycias. Madam, while sleeping by those Banks you lay!
One from my Lord commanded me away.
In all obedient haste I went to Court,
Where busy Crowds confusedly did resort;
News from the Camp it seems was then arrived
Of Tumults raised and Civil Wars contrived;
The Emperor frighted from his Bed does call
Grave Senators to Council in the Hall --
Throngs of ill-favored Faces filled with Scars
Wait for Employments praying hard for Wars
At Council Door attend with fair pretense
In Knavish Decency and Reverence
Banquers, who with officious Diligence --
Lend Money to supply the present need
At treble Use that greater may succeed,
So public Wants will private Plenty breed,
Whispering in every Corner you might see.

Lucin. But what is all this to Maximus and me?
Where is my Lord? what Message has he sent?
Is he in Health? What fatal Accident,
Does all this while his wished Return prevent?

Lycias. When ere the Gods that happy hour decree,
May he appear safe and with Victory;
Of many Hero's who stood Candidate
To be the Arbiters 'twixt Rome and Fate;
To quell Rebellion and protect the Throne
A Choice was made of Maximus alone;
The People, Soldiers, Senate, Emperor
For Maximus with one consent concur.
Their newborn hopes now hurry him away,
Nor will their Fears admit one moments stay:
Trembling through Terror lest he come too late
They huddle his Dispatch while at the Gate
The Emperor's Chariots to conduct him wait.

Lucina. These fatal Honors my dire Dream foretold!
Why should the Kind be ruined by the Bold?
He never reflects upon my Destiny
So careless of himself, undoing me
Ah Claudia! in my Visions so unskilled
He Will to the Army go and there be killed.
Forgetful of my Love; He Will not afford
The easy Favor of a parting Word;
Of all my Wishes he is alone the Scope
And he is the only End of all my Hope,
My fill of Joy, and what is yet above
Joys, Hopes, and Wishes -- He is all my Love:
Mysterious Honor tell me what thou art!
That takes up different Forms in every Heart;
And do to diverse Ends and Interests move
Conquest is his -- my Honor is my Love.
Both these do Paths so oppositely choose
By following one you must the other lose.
So two strait Lines from the same Point begun
Can never meet, though without end they run --
Alas, I rave!

Lycias. Look on thy Glory, Love, and smile to see
Two faithful Hearts at strife for Victory!
Who blazing in thy sacred Fires contend
While both their equal Flames to Heaven ascend,
The God that dwells in Eyes light on my Tongue
Lest in my Message I his Passion wrong;
You Will better guess the Anguish of his Heart,
From what you feel, then what I can impart;
But Madam, know the Moment I was come,
His watchful Eye perceived me in the Room;
When with a quick precipitated haste
From Caesar's Bosom where he stood embraced
Piercing the busy Crowd to me he past --
Tears in his Eyes; his Orders in his Hand,
He scarce had Breath to give this short Command.
With thy best speed to my Lucina fly,
If I must part unseen by her I die,
Decrees inevitable from above,
And Fate which takes too little Care of Love,
Force me away: Tell her it is my Request,
By those kind Fires she kindled in my Breast;
Our future Hopes and all that we hold dear,
She instantly would come and see me here.
That parting Griefs to her I may reveal
And on her Lips propitious Omens seal.
Affairs that press in this short space of time
Afford no other place without a Crime;
And that thou may not fail of wished for Ends
In a success whereon my Life depends
Give her this Ring. Looks on the Ring.

Lucin. How strange soever these Commands appear
Love awes my Reason, and controuls my Fear.
But how could thou employ thy lavish Tongue
So idly to be telling this so long!
When every moment thou have spent in vain,
Was half the Life that did to me remain.
Flatter me, Hope, and on my Wishes smile,
And make me happy yet a little while.
If through my Fears I can such Sorrow show
As to convince I perish if he go:
Pity perhaps his Generous Heart may move
To sacrifice his Glory to his Love.
I Will not despair!
Who knows how eloquent these Eyes may prove
Begging in Floods of Tears and Flames of Love. Exit Lucina.

Lycias. Thanks to the Devil, my Friend, now all is our own,
How easily this mighty work was done!
Well! first or last all Women must be won --
"It is their Fate and cannot be withstood
"The wise do still comply with Flesh and Blood;
"Or if through peevish Honor Nature fail
"They do but lose their Thanks; Art will prevail. Exit.

SCENE 4.
Enter AEcius persuing Pontius, and Maximus following. Max. Temper your self,
AEcius.

Pont. Hold, my Lord -- I am a Soldier and a Roman!

Max. Pray Sir!

AEcius. Thou art a lying Villain and a Traitor.
Give me my self, or by the Gods, my Friend,
You Will make me dangerous: How dare thou pluck
The Soldiers to Sedition and I living?
And sow Seeds of rank Rebellion even then
When I am drawing out to Action?

Pont. Hear me!

Max. Are you a man?

AEcius. I am true, Maximus!
And if the Villain live, we are dishonored.

Max. But hear him what he can say!

AEcius. That Is the way
To pardon him, I am so easie-Natur'd,
That if he speak but humbly, I forgive him.

Pont. I do beseech you, worthy General!

AEcius. H'has found the way already. Give me room,
And if he escape me then, H'has Mercy.

Pont. I do not call you Worthy, that I fear you:
I never cared for Death; if you will kill me,
Consider first for what! not what you can do:
It Is true I know you are my General;
And by that great Prerogative may kill. --

AEcius. He argues with me!
By Heaven a made-up finished Rebel.

Max. Pray consider what certain ground you have.

AEcius. What Grounds?
Did I not take him preaching to the Soldiers,
How lazily they lived; and what dishonor
It was to serve a Prince so full of Softness!
These were his very Words, Sir.

Max. These! AEcius,
Though they were rashly spoken, which was an Error,
A great one, Pontius! yet from him that hungers
For War, and brave Employment might be pardoned!
The Heart, and harbored Thoughts of ill makes Traitors, --
Not spleeny Speeches --

AEcius. Why should you protect him?
Go to -- it scarce shows honest --

Max. Taint me not!
For that shows worse, AEcius! All your Friendship
And that pretended Love you lay upon me;
(Hold back my Honesty!) is like a Favor
You do your Slave to day -- to morrow hang him;
Was I your Bosom-Friend for this?

AEcius. Forgive me!
So zealous is my Duty for my Prince,
That often it makes me to forget my self;
And though I strive to be without my Passion,
I am no God, Sir; For you whose infection
Has spread it self like Poison throu' the Army,
And cast a killing Fogg on fair Allegiance!
First thank this Noble Gentleman; you had died else:
Next from your Place and Honor of a Soldier
I here seclude you.

Pont. May I speak yet?

Max. Hear him.

AEcius. And while AEcius holds a Reputation
At least Command! you bear no Arms for Rome, Sir.

Pont. Against her I shall never: The condemned man
Has yet the privilege to speak, my Lord,
Law were not equal else.

Max. Pray hear, AEcius,
For happily the fault he has committed
Though I believe it mighty; yet considered,
If Mercy may be thought upon will prove
Rather a hasty Sin than heinous.

AEcius. Speak.

Pont. It Is true, my Lord, you took me tired with peace
My Words as rough and ragged as my Fortune,
Telling the Soldiers what a man we serve
Led from us by the Flourishes of Fencers;
I blamed him too for softness.

AEcius. To the rest, Sir.

Pont. It Is true I told 'em too
We lay at home to show our Country
We durst go naked, durst want Meat and Money;
And when the Slaves drink Wine, we durst be thirsty.
I told 'em too the Trees and Roots
Were our best Pay-masters.
It Is likely too I counseled 'em to turn
Their warlike Pikes to Plow-shares, their sure Targets
And Swords hatched with the Blood of many Nations
To Spades and Pruning-Knives: their warlike
Eagles, into Daws and Starlings.

AEcius. What think you
Were these Words to be spoken by a Captain
One that should give Example?

Max. 'Twas too much.

Pont. My Lord! I did not woo 'em from the Empire,
Nor bid 'em turn their daring Steel against Caesar;
The Gods for ever hate me if that motion
Were part of me; Give me but Employment
And way to live, and where you find me vicious
Bred up to mutiny, my Sword shall tell you,
And if you please that Place I held maintain it
Against the most daring Foes of Rome, I Am honest!
A Lover of my Country one that holds
His Life no longer His than kept for Caesar:
Weigh not -- (I thus low on my Knee beseech you!
What my rude Tongue discovered 'twas my want,
No other part of Pontius; You have seen me
And you, my Lord, do something for my Country,
And both the wounds I gave and took
Not like a backward Traitor.

AEcius. All your Language
Makes but against you, Pontius! you are cast,
And by my Honor and my Love to Caesar
By me shall never be restored in Camp;
I will not have a Tongue, though to himself
Dare talk but near Sedition: As I govern
All shall obey, and when they want, their Duty
And ready Service shall redress their needs,
Not prating what they would be.

Pont. Thus I leave you,
Yet shall my Prayers, although my wretched Fortune
Must follow you no more, be still about you.
Gods give you where you fight the Victory!
You cannot cast my wishes.

AEcius. Come, my Lord!
Now to the Field again.

Max. Alas poor Pontius! Exit.

The End of the Third Act.
ACT. IV. SCEN. II.
Enter Chylax at one Door, Lycinius and Balbus at another. Lyc. HOw now!

Chy. She Is come.

Balb. Then I Will to the Emperor! Ex. Balb.

Chy. Is the Music placed well?

Lyc. Excellent.

Chy. Lycinius, you and Proculus receive 'em
In the great Chamber at her Entrance.

Lycin. Let us alone.

Chy. And do you here Lycinius.
Pray let the Women ply her farther off.
And with much more Discretion, one word more
Are all the Maskers ready?

Lycin. Take no care man. Ex.

Chyl. I am all over in a Sweat with Pimping;
It Is a laborious moyling Trade this. --

Enter Emperor, Balb. and Procul. Emp. Is she come?

Chy. She is, Sir! but 'twere best
That you were last seen to her.

Emp. So I mean.
Keep your Court empty Proculus.

Proc. It Is done Sir.

Emp. Be not too sudden to her.

Chy. Good sweet Sir
Retire and Man your self: Let us alone,
We are no Children this way: One thing Sir!
It Is necessary, that her She-Companions
Be cut off in the Lobby by the Women,
They Will break the Business else.

Emp. It Is true: They shall.

Chy. Remember your Place, Proculus.

Proc. I warrant you -- Ex. Emp. Balb. and Proculus.

Enter Lucina, Claudia, Marcellina and Lycias. Chyl. She enters! Who waits
there? The Emperor
Calls for his Chariots, He will take the Air.

Lucin. I am glad I came in such a happy hour
When he will be absent: This removes all Fears;
But Lycias lead me to my Lord,
Heaven grant he be not gone.

Lyc. 'Faith, Madam, that is uncertain!
I Will run and see. But if you miss my Lord
And find a better to supply his Room,
A Change so happy will not discontent you. -- Exit.

Luc. What means that unwonted Insolence of this Slave?
Now I begin to fear again. Oh -- Honor,
If ever thou had Temple in weak Woman
And Sacrifice of Modesty offered to Thee
Hold me fast now and I Will be safe for ever.

Chy. The fair Lucina; Nay then I find
Our Slander'd-Court has not sinned up so high
To fright all the good Angels from its Care,
Since they have sent so great a Blessing hither.
Madam -- I beg The Advantage of my Fortune,
Who as I am the first have met you here,
May humbly hope to be made proud and happy
With the honor of your first Command and Service.

Lucin. Sir -- I am so far from knowing how to merit
Your Service, that your Complements too much,
And I return it you with all my heart.
You Will want it Sir, for those who know you better.

Chy. Madam, I have the honor to be owned
By Maximus for his most humble Servant,
Which gives me Confidence.

Marc. Now Claudia, for a Wager,
What thing is this that cringes to my Lady?

Claud. Why some grave Statesman, by his looks a Courtier.

Marc. Claudia a Bawd: By all my hopes a Bawd!
What use can reverend Gravity be of here,
To any but a trusty Bawd?
Statesman are marked for Fops by it, besides
Nothing but Sin and Laziness could make him
So very fat, and look so fleshy on it.

Lucin. But is my Lord not gone yet do you say Sir?

Chy. He is not Madam, and must take this kindly,
Exceeding kindly of you, wondrous kindly,
You come so far to visit him. I Will guide you.

Lucin. Whither?

Chy. Why to my Lord.

Lucin. Is it impossible
To find him in this Place without a Guide,
For I would willingly not trouble you?

Chy. My only trouble, Madam, is my fear,
I Am too unworthy of so great an Honor.
But here you're in the public Gallery,
Where the Emperor must pass, unless you would see him.

Lucin. Bless me Sir -- No -- pray lead me any whither,
My Lord cannot be long before he finds me. Exeunt.

Enter Lycinius, Proculus, and Balbus. Music. Lycin. She Is coming up the
Stairs: now the Music,
And as that softens -- her love will grow warm,
Till she melts down. Then Caesar lays his Stamp.
Burn these Perfumes there.

Proc. Peace, no noise without.
A SONG.
Nymph.
INjurious Charmer of my vanquished Heart,
Can thou feel Love, and yet no pity know?
Since of my self from thee I cannot part,
Invent some gentle Way to let me go.
For what with Joy thou did obtain,
And I with more did give;
In time will make thee false and vain,
And me unfit to live.
Shepherd.
Frail Angel, that would leave a Heart forlorn,
With vain pretense falsehood therein might lie;
Seek not to cast wild shadows over your scorn,
You cannot sooner change than I can dye.
To tedious life I le never fall,
Thrown from thy dear loved Breast;
He merits not to live at all,
Who cares to live unblest.
Chor.
Then let our flaming Hearts be joined,
While in that sacred fire;
Ere thou prove false, or I unkind,
Together both expire.

Enter Chyl. Lucina, Claudia, Marcellina. Lucin. Where is this Wretch, this
Villain Lycias?
Pray Heaven my Lord be here; for now I fear it.
I am certainly betrayed. This cursed Ring
Is either counterfeit or stolen.

Claud. Your fear
Does but disarm your Resolution,
Which may defend you in the worst Extremes:
Or if that fail. Are there not Gods and Angels?

Lucin. None in this Place I fear but evil ones.
Heaven pity me.

Chy. But tell me, dearest Madam,
How do you like the Song?

Lucin. Sir, I am no Judge
Of Music, and the words, I thank my Gods,
I did not understand.

Chy. The Emperor
Has the best Talent at expounding 'em;
You Will never forget a Lesson of his Teaching.

Lucin. Are you the worthy Friend of Maximus
Would lead me to him? He shall thank you Sir,
As you desire.

Chy. Madam, he shall not need,
I have a Master will reward my Service,
When you have made him happy with your Love,
For which he hourly languishes -- Be kind -- Whispers.

Lucin. The Gods shall kill me first.

Chy. Think better on it.
It Is sweeter dying in the Emperor's Arms.
Enter Phorba and Ardellia. But here are Ladies come to see you, Madam,
They Will entertain you better. I but tire you;
Therefore I Will leave you for a while, and bring
Your loved Lord to you -- Exit.

Lucin. Then I Will thank you.
I am betrayed for certain.

Phorb. You are a welcome Woman.

Ard. Bless me Heaven!
How did you find your way to Court?

Lucin. I know not; would I had never trod it.

Phorb. Prithee tell me. Call Emperor behind.
Good pretty Lady, and dear sweet Heart, love us,
For we love thee extremely. Is not this Place
A Paradise to live in?

Lucin. Yes to you,
Who know no Paradise but guilty Pleasure.

Ard. Heard you the Music yet?

Lucin. 'Twas none to me.

Phor. You must not be thus froward. Well, this Gown
Is one of the prettiest, by my troth Ardelia,
I ever saw yet; 'twas not to frown in, Madam.
You put this Gown on when you came.

Ard. How dee ye?
Alas, poor Wretch, how cold it is!

Lucin. Content you.
I am as well as may be, and as temperate,
So you will let me be so -- Where Is my Lord?
For that is the business I come for hither.

Phor. We Will lead you to him: he is in the Gallery.

Ard. We Will show you all the Court too.

Lucin. Show me him, and you have showed me all I come to look on.

Phor. Come on, we will be your Guides; and as you go,
We have some pretty Tales to tell you, Madam,
Shall make you merry too. You come not hither
To be sad, Lucina.

Lucin. Would I might not -- Exeunt.

Enter Chylax and Balbus in haste. Chyl. Now see all ready, Balbus: run.

Balb. I fly Boy -- Exit.

Chy. The Women by this time are warning of her,
If she holds out them; the Emperor
Takes her to task -- he has her -- Hark, I hear 'em.

Enter Emperor drawing in Lucina. Ring. Emp. Would you have run away so slily,
Madam?

Lucin. I beseech you Sir,
Consider what I am, and whose.

Emp. I do so.
For what you are, I am filled with such Amaze,
So far transported with Desire and Love,
My slippery Soul flows to you while I speak,
And whose you were, I care not, for now you are mine,
Who love you, and will do at on you more
Than you do on your Virtue.

Lucin. Sacred Caesar.

Emp. You shall not kneel to me; rise.

Lucin. Look upon me,
And if you be so cruel to abuse me,
Think how the Gods will take it. Does this Face
Afflict your Soul? I Will hide it from you ever;
Nay more, I will become so leprous,
That you shall curse me from you. My dear Lord
Has ever served you truly -- fought your Battles,
As if he daily longed to die for Caesar;
Was never Traitor Sir, nor never tainted,
In all the Actions of his Life.

Emp. How high does this fantastic Virtue swell?
She thinks it Infamy to please too well. Aside.
I know it -- To her.

Lucin. His Merits and his Fame have grown together,
Together flourished like two spreading Cedars,
Over the Roman Diadem. O let not.
(As you have a Heart that is humane in you)
The having of an honest Wife decline him;
Let not my Virtue be a Wedge to break him,
Much less my Shame his undesery'd Dishonor.
I do not think you are so bad a man;
I know Report belyes you; you are Caesar,
Which is the Father of the Empires Glory:
You are too near the Nature of the Gods,
To wrong the weakest of all Creatures, Woman.

Emp. I dare not do it here. Rise, fair Lucina. Aside.
When you believe me worthy, make me happy
Chylax; wait on her to her Lord within.
Wipe your fair Eyes -- Exeunt.
Ah Love! ah cursed Boy!
Where art thou that torments me thus unseen,
And ragest with thy Fires within my Breast,
With idle purpose to inflame her Heart,
Which is as inaccessible and cold,
As the proud tops of those aspiring Hills,
Whose Heads are wrapped in everlasting Snow,
Though the hot Sun roll over 'em every day?
And as his Beams, which only shine above,
Scorch and consume in Regions round below,
Soft Love which throws such brightness through her eyes,
Leaves her Heart cold, and burns me at her feet;
My Tyrant, but her flattering Slave thou art,
A Glory round her lovely Face, a Fire within my Heart.
Who waits without? Lycinius?

Enter Lycinius. Lycin. My Lord.

Emp. Where are the Masquers that should dance to night?

Lycin. In the old Hall Sir, going now to practice.

Emp. About it strait. 'Twill serve to draw away
Those listening Fools, who trace it in the Gallery;
And if by chance odd noises should be heard,
As Women's Shrieks, or so, say, it is a Play
Is practicing within.

Lycin. The Rape of Lucrece,
Or some such merry Prank -- It shall be done Sir. Ex.

Emp. It Is nobler like a Lion to invade,
Where Appetite directs, and seize my Prey,
Than to wait tamely like a begging Dog,
Till dull Consent throws out the Scraps of Love.
I scorn those Gods who seek to cross my Wishes,
And will in spite of 'em be happy: Force
Of all the Powers is the most generous;
For what that gives, it freely does bestow,
Without the after-Bribe of Gratitude.
I Will plunge into a Sea of my Desires,
And quench my Fever, though I drown my Fame,
And tear up Pleasure by the Roots: No matter
Though it never grow again; what shall ensue,
Let Gods and Fate look to it; it is their Business. Exit.

SCENE III.
Opens and discovers 5 or 6 Dancing-masters practicing. 1 Dan. That is the
damn'st shuffling Step, Pox on it.

2 Dan. I shall never hit it.
Thou have naturally
All the neat Motions of a merry Tailor,
Ten thousand Riggles with thy Toes inward,
Cut clear and strong: let thy Limbs play about thee;
Keep time, and hold thy Back upright and firm:
It may prefer thee to a waiting Woman.

1 Dan. Or to her Lady, which is worse.

Enter Lycinius. Ten dance. Lycin. Bless me, the loud Shrieks and horrid
Outcries
Of the poor Lady! Ravishing do you call it?
She roars as if she were upon the Rack:
It Is strange there should be such a difference
Betwixt half-ravishing, which most Women love,
And through force, which takes away all Blame,
And should be therefore welcome to the virtuous.
These tumbling Rogues, I fear, have overheard 'em;
But their Ears with their Brains are in their Heels.
Good morrow Gentlemen:
What is all perfect? I have taken care
Your Habits shall be rich and glorious.

3 Dan. That will set off. Pray sit down and see,
How the last Entry I have made will please you.

Second Dance. Lycin. It Is very fine indeed.

2 Dan. I hope so Sir --. Ex. Dancers.

Enter Chyl. Proculus and Lycias. Proc. It Is done Lycinius.

Lycin. How?

Proc. I blush to tell it.
If there be any Justice, we are Villains,
And must be so rewarded.

Lycias. Since it is done,
I take it is not time now to repent it,
Let Us make the best of our Trade.

Chy. Now Vengeance take it:
Why should not he have settled on a Beauty,
Whose Modesty stuck in a piece of Tissue?
Or one a Ring might rule? or such a one
That had a Husband itching to be honorable,
And ground to get it? If he must have Women,
And no allay without 'em, why not those
That know the Mystery, and are best able
To play a Game with judgment, such as she is?
Grant they be won with long siege, endless travel,
And brought to opportunities with millions,
Yet when they come to Motion, their cold Virtue
Keeps 'em like Beds of Snow.

Lycin. A good Whore
Had saved all this, and happily as wholesome,
And the thing once done as well thought of too.
But this same Chastity forsooth.

Chy. A Pox on it.
Why should not Women be as free as we are?
They are, but will not own it, and far freer,
And the more bold you bear your self, more welcome,
And there is nothing you dare say but Truth,
But they dare hear.

Proc. No doubt of it -- away,
Let them who can repent, go home and pray. Exeunt.

Scene opens, discovers the Emperor's Chamber. Lucina newly unbound by the
Emperor. Emp. Your only Virtue now is Patience,
Be wise and save your Honor; if you talk --

Lucin. As long as there is Life in this Body,
And Breath to give me words, I Will cry for Justice.

Emp. Justice will never hear you; I am Justice.

Lucin. Will thou not kill me Monster, Ravisher?
Thou bitter Bane of the Empire, look upon me,
And if thy guilty eyes dare see the Ruins
Thy wild Lust has laid level with Dishonor,
The sacrilegious razing of that Temple,
The Tempter to thy black sins would have blushed at.
Behold, and curse thy self. The Gods will find thee,
That Is all my Refuge now, for they are righteous;
Vengeance and Horror circle thee. The Empire,
In which thou liv'st a strong continued Surfeit,
Like Poison will disgorge thee; good men raze thee
From ever being read again;
Chaste Wives and fearful Maids make Vows against thee;
Thy worst Slaves, when they hear of this, shall hate thee,
And those thou have corrupted, first fall from thee,
And if thou let'st me live, the Soldier
Tired with thy Tyrannies break through Obedience,
And shake his strong Steel at thee.

Emp. This prevails not,
Nor any Agony you utter Madam:
If I have done a sin, curse her that drew me;
Curse the first Cause, the Witchcraft that abused me;
Curse your fair Eyes, and curse that heavenly Beauty,
And curse your being good too.

Lucin. Glorious Thief!
What restitution can thou make to save me?

Emp. I Will ever love -- and ever honor you.

Lucin. Thou can not;
For that which was my Honor, thou have murdered;
And can there be a Love in Violence?

Emp. You shall be only mine.

Lucin. Yet I like better
Thy Villainy than Flattery; that is thy own,
The other basely counterfeit. Fly from me,
Or for thy safeties sake and wisdom kill me;
For I am worse than thou art: Thou may pray,
And so recover Grace -- I am lost for ever,
And if thou let'st me live, you are lost thy self too.

Emp. I fear no loss but Love -- I stand above it.

Lucin. Gods! what a wretched thing has this man made me?
For I am now no Wise for Maximus;
No Company for Women that are virtuous;
No Family I now can claim or Country,
Nor Name but Caesar's Whore: Of sacred Caesar!
(For that should be your Title) was your Empire,
Your Rods and Axes that are Types of Justice,
And from the Gods themselves -- to ravish Women.
The Curses that I owe to Enemies, even those the Sabins sent,
When Romulus (as thou have me) ravished their noble Maids,
Made more and heavier light on thee.

Emp. This helps not.

Lucin. The sins of Tarquin be remembered in thee,
And where there has a chaste Wife been abused,
Let it be thine, the Shame thine, thine the Slaughter,
And last for ever thine the feared Example.
Where shall poor Virtue live now I am fallen?
What can your Honors now and Empire make me,
But a more glorious Whore?

Emp. A better Woman.
If you be blind and scorn it, who can help it?
Come leave these Lamentations; you do nothing
But make a noise -- I am the same man still,
Were it to do again: Therefore be wiser; by all
This holy Light I would attempt it.
You are so excellent, and made to ravish,
There were no pleasure in you else.

Lucin. Oh Villain!

Emp. So bred for man's Amazement, that my Reason
And every help to do me right has left me:
The God of Love himself had been before me,
Had he but Eyes to see you, tell me justly
How should I choose but err -- then if you will
Be mine and only mine (for you are so precious)
I envy any other should enjoy you;
Almost look on you, and your daring Husband
Shall know he has kept an Offering from the Emperor,
Too holy for the Altars -- be the greatest;
More than my self I Will make you; if you will not,
Sit down with this and silence: for which wisdom,
You shall have use of me, if you divulge it,
Know I am far above the faults I do,
And those I do, I am able to forgive;
And where your credit in the telling of it
May be with gloss enough suspected, mine
Is as my own Command shall make it. Princes
Though they be sometimes subject to loose Whispers,
Yet wear they two edged Swords for open Censures:
Your Husband cannot help you, nor the Soldiers;
Your Husband is my Creature, they my Weapons,
And only where I bid 'em strike -- I feed 'em,
Nor can the Gods be angry at this Action,
Who as they made me greatest, meant me happiest,
Which I had never been without this pleasure.
Consider, and farewell. You Will find your Women
Waiting without. Ex. Emperor.

Lucin. Destruction find thee.
Now which way shall I go -- my honest House
Will shake to shelter me -- my Husband fly me,
My Family,
Because they are honest, and desire to be so.
Is this the end of Goodness? This the price
Of all my early prayers to protect me?
Why then I see there is no God -- but Power,
Nor Virtue now alive that cares for us,
But what is either lame or sensual;
How had I been thus wretched else?

Enter Maximus and AEcius. AEcius. Let Titus
Command the Company that Pontius lost.

Max. How now sweet Heart!
What make you here and thus?

AEcius. Lucina weeping.
This is some strange offense.

Max. Look up and tell me.
Why art thou thus? my Ring! oh Friend I have found it!
You are at Court then.

Lucin. This and that vile Wretch Lycias brought me hither.

Max. Rise and go home. I have my Fears, AEcius.
Oh my best Friend! I am ruined. Go Lucina,
Already in thy tears I Have read thy Wrongs.
Already found a Caesar? Go thou Lilly,
Thou sweetly drooping Flower; be gone, I say,
And if thou dare -- outlive this Wrong.

Lucin. I dare not.

AEcius. Is that the Ring you lost?

Max. That, that AEcius,
That cursed Ring, my self and all my Fortunes have undone.
Thus pleased the Emperor, my noble Master,
For all my Services and Dangers for him,
To make me my own Pandar! was this Justice?
Oh my AEcius! have I lived to bear this?

Lucin. Farewell for ever Sir.

Max. That Is a sad saying;
But such a one becomes you well, Lucina.
And yet methinks we should not part so slightly;
Our Loves have been of longer growth, more rooted
Than the sharp blast of one Farewell can scatter.
Kiss me -- I find no Caesar here. These Lips
Taste not of Ravisher, in my opinion.
Was it not so?

Lucin. O yes.

Max. I dare believe you.
I know him and thy truth too well to doubt it.
Oh my most dear Lucina! oh my Comfort!
Thou Blessing of my Youth! Life of my Life!

AEcius. I have seen enough to stagger my Obedience.
Hold me, ye equal Gods! this is too sinful.

Max. Why were thou chosen out to make a Whore of,
Thou only among millions of thy Sex?
Unfeignedly virtuous! fall, fall crystal Fountains,
And ever feed your Streams, you rising Sorrows,
Till you have wept your Mistress into marble.
Now go for ever from me.

Lucin. A long farewell Sir!
And as I have been faithful, Gods, think on me.

AEcius. Madam farewell, since you resolve to die.
Which well considered,
If you can cease a while from these strange thoughts,
I wish were rather altered.

Lucin. No.

AEcius. Mistake not.
I would not stain your Virtue for the Empire,
Nor any way decline you to Dishonor:
It is not my profession, but a Villain's;
I find and feel your loss as deep as you do,
And still am the same AEcius, still as honest;
The same Life I have still for Maximus,
The same Sword wear for you where Justice bids me,
And it is no dull one. Therefore misconceive me not.
Only I Would have you live a little longer.

Lucin. Alas Sir! why
Am I not wretched enough already?

AEcius. To draw from that wild man a sweet repentance,
And goodness in his days to come.

Max. They are so.
And will be ever coming, my AEcius.

AEcius. For who knows but the sight of you, presenting
His swollen sins at the full, and your wronged Virtue,
May like a fearful Vision fright his Follies,
And once more bend him right again, which Blessing
If your dark Wrongs would give you leave to read,
Is more than Death, and the Reward more glorious;
Death only eases you. This the whole Empire
Besides compelled and forced by violence,
To what was done. The deed was none of yours;
For should the eternal Gods desire to perish,
Because we daily violate their Truth,
Which is the Chastity of Heaven? No Madam --

Lucin. The Tongues of Angels cannot alter me.
For could the World again restore my Honor,
As fair and absolute as ere I bred it,
That World I should not trust; again, the Emperor
Can by my Life get nothing but my Story,
Which whilst I breathe must be his Infamy:
And where you counsel me to live, that Caesar
May see his Errors and repent; I Will tell you,
His Penitence is but increase of Pleasure;
His Prayers are never said but to deceive us;
And when he weeps, (as you think, for his Vices)
It Is but as killing Drops from baleful Yew-trees,
That rot his harmless Neighbors, if he can grieve
As one that yet desires his free Conversion,
I Will leave him Robes to mourn in -- my sad Ashes.

AEcius. The Farewell then of happy Souls be with thee,
And to thy Memory be ever sung,
The Praises of a just and constant Woman:
This sad day whilst I live, a Soldier's Tears
I Will offer on thy Monument.

Max. All that is chaste upon thy Tomb shall flourish;
All living Epitaphs be thine; Times Story,
And what is left behind to piece our Lives,
Shall be no more abused with Tales and Trifles.

AEcius. But full of thee stand to Eternity,
Once more farewell -- Go find Elysium,
There where deserving Souls are crowned with Blessings.

Max. There where no vicious Tyrants come: Truth, Honor,
Are keepers of that blessed Place; go thither. Ex. Lucina.

AEcius. Gods give thee Justice.
His Thoughts begin to work, I fear him yet;
He ever was a worthy Roman, but
I know not what to think on it. He has suffered
Beyond a man, if he stand this.

Max. AEcius,
Am I alive, or has a dead Sleep seized me?
It was my Wife the Emperor abused thus,
And I must say -- I am glad I had her for him.
Must I not AEcius?

AEcius. I am stricken
With such a stiff Amazement, that no Answer
Can readily come from me, nor no Comfort.
Will you go home, or go to my House?

Max. Neither.
I have no home, and you are mad AEcius,
To keep me Company -- I am a Fellow
My own Sword would forsake, not tied to me.
By Heaven I dare do nothing.

AEcius. You do better.

Max. I am made a branded Slave, AEcius,
Yet I must bless the Maker.
Death on my Soul! shall I endure this tamely?
Must Maximus be mentioned for his Wrongs?
I am a Child too; what do I do railing?
I cannot mend my self. 'Twas Caesar did it.
And what am I to him?

AEcius. It Is well remembered;
However you are tainted, be not Traitor.

Max. O that thou were not living, and my Friend!

AEcius. I Will bear a wary Eye upon your Actions:
I fear you, Maximus, nor can I blame you,
If you break out; for by the Gods, your Wrong
Deserves a general Ruin. Do you love me?

Max. That Is all I have to live on.

AEcius. Then go with me.
You shall not to your own House.

Max. Nor to any.
My Griefs are greater far than Walls can compass;
And yet I wonder how it happens with me.
I am not dangerous, and in my Conscience,
Should I now see the Emperor in the heat on it,
I should scarce blame him for it: an awe runs through me,
I feel it sensibly that binds me to it,
It Is at my Heart now, there it sits and rules,
And methinks it is a pleasure to obey it.

AEcius. This is a Mask to cozen me. I know you,
And how far you dare do. No Roman farther,
Nor with more fearless valor, and I Will watch you.

Max. Is a Wifes loss --
More than the fading of a few fresh Colors?

AEcius. No more, Maximus,
To one that truly lives.

Max. Why then I care not; I can live well enough, AEcius:
For look you, Friend, for Virtue and those Trifles,
They may be bought they say.

AEcius. He Is crazed a little.
His grief has made him talk things from his nature.
Will you go any ways?

Max. I Will tell thee Friend,
If my Wife for all this should be a Whore now,
'Twou'd vex me,
For I am not angry yet. The Emperor
Is young and handsome, and the Woman Flesh,
And may not these two couple without Scraching?

AEcius. Alas, my Maximus!

Max. Alas not me, I am not wretched, for there is no man miserable
But he that makes himself so.

AEcius. Will you walk yet?

Max. Come, come; she dares not die, Friend, that is the truth on it
She knows the enticing Sweets and Delicacies
Of a young Princes Pleasure, and I thank her,
She has made way for Maximus to rise.
Wilt not become me bravely?

AEcius. Dearest Friend,
These wild words show your violated mind,
Urged with the last extremity of grief;
Which since I cannot like a Man redress,
With tears I must lament it like a Child;
For when it is Caesar does the injury,
Sorrow is all the Remedy I know.

Max. It Is then a certain truth that I am wronged,
Wronged in that barbarous manner I imagined:
Alas, I was in hopes I had been mad,
And that these Horrors which invade my Heart,
Were but distracted melancholy Whimseys:
But they are real truths (it seems) and I
The last of men, and vilest of all Beings.
Bear me cold Earth, who am too weak to move
Beneath my load of Shame and Misery!
Wronged by my lawful Prince, robbed of my Love,
Branded with everlasting infamy.
Take pity Fate, and give me leave to die:
Gods! would you be adored for being good,
Or only feared for proving mischievous?
How would you have your Mercy understood?
Who could create a Wretch like Maximus,
Ordained though guiltless to be infamous?
Supreme first Causes! you, whence all things flow,
Whose infiniteness does each little fill,
You, who decree each seeming Chance below,
(So great in Power) were you as good in Will,
How could you ever have produced such ill?
Had your eternal minds been bent to good?
Could humane happiness have proved so lame,
Rapine, Revenge, Injustice, thirst of Blood,
Grief, Anguish, Horror, Want, Despair and Shame,
Had never found a Being nor a Name.
It Is therefore less impiety to say,
Evil with you has Coeternity,
Than blindly taking it the other way,
That merciful and of election free,
You did create the mischiefs you foresee.
Wretch that I am, on Heaven to exclame,
When this poor tributary Worm below,
More than my self in nothing but in name,
Who durst invade me with this fatal Blow,
I dare not crush in the revenge I owe.
Not all his Power shall the wild Monster save;
Him and my shame I Will tread into one Grave.

AEcius. Does he but seem so?
Or is he mad indeed? -- Now to reprove him,
Were council lost; but something must be done
With speed and care, which may prevent that Fate
Which threatens this unhappy Emperor.

Max. O Gods! my Heart, would it would fairly break;
Methinks I am somewhat wilder than I was,
And yet I thank the Gods I know my Duty.

Enter Claudia. Claud. Forgive me my sad Tidings Sir -- She Is dead,

Max. Why so it should be -- [He rises] How?

Claud. When first she entered
Into the House, after a world of weeping,
And blushing like the Sunset --
Dare I, said she, defile my Husband's House,
Wherein his spotless Family has flourisht?
At this she fell -- Choakt with a thousand sighs!
And now the pleased expiring Saint,
Her dying Looks, where new born Beauty shines,
Oppressed with Blushes, modestly declines,
While Death approacht with a Majestic Grace,
Proud to look lovely once in such a Face:
Her Arms spread to receive her welcome Guest,
With a glad sigh she drew into her Breast:
Her Eyes then languishing toward Heaven she cast,
To thank the Powers that Death was come at last.
And at the approach of the cold silent God;
Ten thousand hidden Glories rushed abroad.

Max. No more of this -- Begone. Now my AEcius,
If thou will do me pleasure, weep a little;
I am so parcht I cannot -- Your Example
Has taught my tears to flow -- Now lead away Friend,
And as we walk together -- Let us pray,
I may not fall from truth,

AEcius. That Is nobly spoken.

Max. Was I not wild, AEcius?

AEcius. You were troubled.

Max. I felt no sorrows then, but now my Grief,
Like festering Wounds grown cold begins to smart,
The raging Anguish gnaws and tears my Heart.
Lead on and weep, but do not name the Woman.

Exeunt. The End of the fourth Act.
ACT V. SCENE I.
AEcius Solus. A Letter. AEcius. LOOK down, ye equal Gods, and guide my heart,
Or it will throw upon my hands an act
Which after Ages shall record with horror:
As well may I kill my offended Friend,
As think to punish my offending Prince.
The Laws of Friendship we our selves create,
And it is but simple Villainy to break 'em;
But Faith to Princes broke, is Sacrilege,
An injury to the Gods, And that lost Wretch
Whose Breast is poisoned with so vile a Purpose,
Tears Thunder down from Heaven on his own head,
And leaves a Curse to his Posterity:
Judge him your selves, ye mighty Gods, who know
Why you permit sometimes that Honor bleed,
That Faith be broke, and Innocence oppressed.
My Duty's my Religion, and however
The great Account may rise 'twixt him and you,
Through all his Crimes I see your Image on him,
And must protect it no way then but this,
To draw far off the injured Maximus,
And keep him there fast Prisoner to my Friendship;
Revenge shall thus be flattered or destroyed,
And my bad Master whom I blush to serve,
Shall by my means at least be safe. This Letter
Informs him I am gone to Egypt, there
I shall live secure and innocent;
His sins shall never overtake me, nor his fears,
Enter Proculus. Here comes one for my Purpose, Proculus;
Well met, I have a Courtesy to ask of you.

Proc. Of me, my Lord! Is there a House on fire?
Or is there some knotty Point now in debate
Betwixt your Lordship and the Scavengers?
For you have such a popular, and public Spirit,
As in dull times of Peace will not disdain
The meanest opportunity to serve your Country.

AEcius. You witty Fools are apt to get your Heads broke:
This is no season for Buffooning Sirrah;
Though heretofore I tamely have endured
Before the Emperor your ridiculous Mirth,
Think not you have a Title to be saucy;
When Monkey's grow mischievous, they are whipped,
Chained up and whipped. There has been mischief done,
And you (I hear) a wretched Instrument:
Look to it, when e're I draw this Sword to punish,
You and your grinning Crew will tremble, Slaves;
Nor shall the ruined world afford a Corner
To shelter you, nor that poor Princes Bosom,
You have envenomed and polluted so;
As if the Gods were willing it should be
A Dungeon for such Toads to crawl and croak in.

Proc. All this in earnest to your humblest Creature?
Nay, then my Lord, I must no more pretend
With my poor Talent to divert your Ears;
Since my well-meaning Mirth is grown offensive.
Though Heaven can tell,
There Is not so low an Act of servile Duty,
I would not with more Pride throw me self on,
For great AEcius's sake, than gain a Province,
Or share with Valentinian in his Empire.

AEcius. Thou art so fawning and so mean a Villain,
That I disdain to hate, though I despise thee;
When e're thou art not fearful, thou art saucy;
Be so again, my Pardon gives thee leave,
And to deserve it, carry this my Letter
To the Emperor: Tell him I am gone for Egypt,
And with me, Maximus; 'twas scarce fit we two
Should take our leaves of him: Pray use your Interest
He may forgive us. 'Twill concern you much,
For when we are gone, to be base vicious Villains,
Will prove less dangerous -- Exit AEcius.

Proc. What the Devil possesses
This rusty Back and Breast without a Headpiece?
Villains and Vicious! Maximus and Egypt!
This may be Treason, or I Will make it so:
The Emperor's apt enough to fears and jealousies;
Since his late Rape. I must blow up the fire,
And aggravate this doting Hero's Notions,
Till they such Terrors in the Prince have bred,
May cost the Fool his worst part, that is his Head. Exit.

SCENE II.
Enter Emperor, Lycinius, Chylax, and Balbus. Emp. Dead?

Balb. It Is too certain.

Emp. How?

Lycin. Grief and Disgrace,
As people say.

Emp. No more, I have too much on it,
Too much by you. You whetters of my Follies;
Ye Angel-formers of my sins; but Devils,
Where is your cunning now? you would work Wonders.
There was no Chastity above your practice;
You Would undertake to make her love her Wrongs,
And dote upon her Rape. Mark what I tell you,
If she be dead!

Chy. Alas Sir!

Emp. Hang you Rascals.
Ye blasters of my Youth, if she be gone,
'Twere better ye had been your Fathers Camels,
Groaned under weights of Wool and Water.
Am I not Caesar?

Lycin. Mighty, and our Maker --

Emp. Then thus have given my Pleasures to destruction --
Look she be living, Slaves --

Chy. We are no Gods, Sir,
If she be dead, to make her live again.

Emp. She cannot dye, she must not dye: are those
I plant my Love upon but common livers?
Their Hours told out to 'em? Can they be Ashes?
Why do you flatter a belief in me,
That I am all that is? The World my Creature;
The Trees bring forth their Fruit, when I say Summer;
The Wind that knows no limits but its wildness,
At my command moves not a Leaf: The Sea,
With his proud mountain-Waters envying Heaven,
When I say still, runs into crystal Mirrors.
Can I do this and she dye? Why ye Bubbles,
That with my least breath break, no more remembered,
Ye Moths that fly about my Flames and perish;
Why do ye make me God, that can do nothing?
Is she not dead?

Chy. All Women are not dead with her.

Emp. A common Whore serves you, and far above you,
The Pleasures of a Body lamed with lewdness,
A mere perpetual Motion makes you happy.
Am I a man to traffic with Diseases?
You think, because ye have bred me up to Pleasures,
And almost run me over all the rare ones,
Your Wives will serve the turn; I care not for 'em,
Your Wives are Fencers Whores, and shall be Footmens,
Though sometimes my Fantastic Lust or Scorn,
Has made you Cuckolds for variety;
I would not have ye hope or dream, ye poor ones,
Always so great a Blessing from me. Go,
Get your own Infamy hereafter Rascals; ye enjoy
Each one an Heir, the Royal Seed of Caesar,
And I may curse ye for it.
Thou Lycinius,
Have such a Messelina, such a Lais,
The Backs of Bulls cannot content, nor Stallions,
The sweat of fifty men a night does nothing.

Lycin. I hope Sir, you know better things of her.

Emp. It Is Oracle,
The City can bear witness, thine's a Fool, Chylax,
Yet she can tell her twenty, and all Lovers,
All have lain with her too; and all as she is,
Rotten and ready for an Hospital:
Yours is a holy Whore, friend Balbus.

Balb. Well Sir.

Emp. One that can pray away the Sins she suffers,
But not the Punishment; she has had ten Bastards,
Five of them now are Lictors, yet she prays.
She has been the Song of Rome and common Pasquil,
Since I durst see a Wench, she was Camp-Mistress,
And mustered all the Cohorts, paid 'em too,
They have it yet to show, and yet she prays.
She is now to enter old Men turned Children,
That have forgot their Rudiments; and am I
Left for these withered Vices? And was there but one,
But one of all the World that could content me,
And snatched away in showing? if your Wives
Be not yet Witches, or your selves? now be so,
And save your Lives; raise me the dearest Beauty,
As when I forced her full of Chastity,
Or by the Gods --

Lycin. Most sacred Caesar --

Emp. Slaves.

Enter Proculus. Proc. Hail Caesar, Tidings of Concern and Danger,
My Message does contain in furious manner,
With Oaths and Threatenings, stern AEcius,
Enjoined me on the peril of my life,
To give this Letter into Caesar's hands,
Armed at all points, prepared to march he stands,
With crowds of mutinous Officers about him,
Among these, full of Anguish and Despair,
Like pale Tysiphone along Hell-brinks,
Plotting Revenge and Ruin -- Maximus
With Ominous aspect walks in silent horror,
In threatening Murmurs and harsh broken speeches,
They talk of Egypt and their Provinces,
Of Cohorts ready with their lives to serve 'em,
And then with bitter Curses they named you.

Emp. Go tell thy fears to thy Companions, Slave!
For it is a Language Princes understand not;
Be gone, and leave me to my self. Ex. all but Emperor.
The names of AEcius and of Maximus,
Run through me like a Fever, shake and burn me;
But to my Slaves I must not show my poorness.
They know me vicious, should they find me base,
How would the Villains scorn me and insult?

Letter. He reads. Sir,
Would some God inspire me with another way to serve you,
I would not thus fly from you without leave; but
Maximus his wrongs have touched too many, and should
His presence here encourage 'em, dangers to you might follow;
In Egypt he will be more forgot, and you more safe by his Absence.

Emp. A Plot, by Heaven! a Plot laid for my Life,
This is too subtle for my dull friend AEcius;
Heaven give you Sir, a better servant to guard you,
A faithfuller you will never find than AEcius,
Since he resents his Friends Wrongs, he will revenge 'em;
I know the Soldiers love him more than Heaven,
Me they hate more than Peace; what this may breed
If dull security and confidence
Let him grow up, a Fool may find and laugh at.
Who waits there? Proculus.
Enter Proculus. Well, have thou observed
The growing power and pride of this AEcius?
He writes to me with terms of Insolence,
And shortly will rebel, if not prevented;
But in my base lewd Herd of vicious Slaves,
There Is not a man that dares stand up to strike
At my Command, and kill this rising Traitor.

Proc. The Gods forbid Caesar should thus be served,
The Earth will swallow him, did you command it!
But I have studied a safe sure way,
How he shall dye and your will never suspected.
A Soldiers waits without, whom he has wronged,
Cashiered, disgraced, and turned to beg or starve.
This fellow for revenge would kill the Devil;
Encouragement of Pardon and Reward,
Which in your name I Will give him instantly,
Will make him fly more swiftly on the Murder,
Than longing Lovers to their first appointment.

Emp. Thou art the wisest, watchful, wary Villain,
And shall partake the secrets of my soul,
And ever feel my Favor and my Bounty.
Tell the poor Soldier he shall be a General,
AEcius once dead.

Proc. Ay, there you have found the point Sir,
If he can be so brutish to believe it.

Emp. Oh never fear! urge it with Confidence.
What will not flattered angry fools believe?
Minutes are precious, loose not one.

Proc. I fly Sir -- Exit Proculus.

Emp. What an infected Conscience do I live with,
And what a Beast I Am grown? when Lust has gained
An uncontrolled Dominion in man's Heart!
Then fears succeed with horror and amazement,
Which rack the wretch and tyrannize by turns.
But hold --
Shall I grow then so poor as to repent?
Though AEcius, Mankind, and the Gods forsake me,
I Will never alter and forsake my self.
Can I forget the last discourse he held?
As if he had intent to make me odious
To my own face, and by a way of terror,
What Vices I was grounded in, and almost
Proclaimed the Soldiers hate against me. Is not
The sacred Name and Dignity of Caesar?
Were this AEcius more than man sufficient
To shake off all his Honesty? He is dangerous,
Though he be good, and though a Friend, a feared one,
And such I must not sleep by; as for Maximus,
I Will find a time when AEcius is dispatched.
I do believe this Proculus, and I thank him;
'Twas time to look about; if I must perish,
Yet shall my fears go foremost, that is determined.

Exit Emperor. SCENE III.
Enter Proculus and Pontius. Proc. Besides this, if you do it, you enjoy
The noble name of Patrician, more than that too;
The Friend of Caesar you are styled. There Is nothing
Within the hopes of Rome, or present being,
But you may safely say is yours.

Pont. Pray stay Sir.
What has AEcius done to be destroyed?
At least I would have a Color.

Proc. You have more.
Nay, all that can be given; he is a Traitor.
One, any man would strike that were a Subject.

Pont. Is he so foul?

Proc. Yes, a most fearful Traitor.

Pont. A fearful Plague upon thee, for thou lie; Aside.
I ever thought the Soldiers would undo him,
With their too much Affection.

Proc. You have it.
They have brought him to Ambition.

Pont. Then he is gone.

Proc. The Emperor, out of a foolish Pity,
Would save him yet.

Pont. Is he so mad?

Proc. He Is madder,
Would go to The Army to him.

Pont. Would he so?

Proc. Yes Pontius, but we consider.

Pont. Wisely.

Proc. How else man, that the State lies in it?

Pont. And your Lives?

Proc. And every man's.

Pont. He did me Aretus here.
All the disgrace he could.

Proc. And scurvily.

Pont. Out of a Mischief merely. Did you mark it?

Proc. Yes, well enough.
Now you have means to quit it;
The Deed done, take his Place.

Pont. Pray let me think on it,
It Is ten to one I do it.

Proc. Do, and be happy -- Exit Proculus.

Pont. This Emperor is made of naught but mischief,
Sure Murder was his Mother. None to lop
But the main Link he had? Upon my Conscience,
The man is truly honest, and that kills him.
For to live here, and study to be true,
Is all one as to be a Traitor. Why should he dye?
Have they not Slaves and Rascals for their Offerings;
In full abundance, Bawds, more than Beasts for slaughter?
Have they not singing Whores enough, and Knaves besides,
And millions of such Martyrs to sink Charon,
But the best Sons of Rome must fall too? I will show him
(Since he must dye) a way to do it truly.
And though he bears me hard, yet shall he know
I Am born to make him bless me for a Blow. Exit.

SCENE IV.
Enter Phidius, Aretus, and AEcius. Aret. The Treason is too certain; fly my
Lord.
I heard that Villain Proculus instruct
The desperate Pontius to dispatch you here,
Here in the Antichamber.

Phid. Cursed Wretches,
Yet you may escape to the Camp, we will hazard with you.

Aret. Lose not your Life so basely Sir; you are armed,
And many when they see your Sword, and know why,
Must follow your Adventures.

AEcius. Get ye from me.
Is not the Doom of Caesar on this Body?
Do I not bear my last hour here now sent me?
Am I not old AEcius ever dying?
You think this Tenderness and Love you bring me;
It Is Treason and the strength of Disobedience;
And if ye tempt me further ye shall feel it.
I seek the Camp for safety, when my Death,
Ten times more glorious then my Life and lasting,
Bids me be happy. Let Fools fear to dye,
Or he that weds a Woman for his Honor,
Dreaming no other Life to come but Kisses.
AEcius is not now to learn to suffer;
If ye dare show a just affection, kill me,
I stay but those that must; why do ye weep?
Am I so wretched as to deserve men's Pities?
Go, give your Tears to those that lose their worths,
Bewail their miseries: For me, wear Garlands,
Drink Wine, and much. Sing Paeans to my Praise,
I am to triumph, Friends, and more than Caesar,
For Caesar fears to dye, I love to dye.

Phid. O my dear Lord!

AEcius. No more, go, go I say,
Show me not signs of sorrow, I deserve none.
Dare any man lament I should dye nobly?
When I am dead, speak honorably of me;
That is, preserve my Memory from dying,
There if you needs must weep your ruined Master,
A Tear or two will seem well; This I charge you,
(Because ye say ye yet love old AEcius.)
See my poor Body burnt, and some to sing
About my Pile what I have done and suffered.
If Caesar kill not that too: At your Banquets,
When I am gone, if any chance to number
The times that have been sad and dangerous;
Say how I fell, and it is sufficient.
No more I say; he that laments my end,
By all the Gods, dishonours me; be gone,
And suddenly and wisely from my Dangers,
My Death is catching else.

Phid. We fear not dying.

AEcius. Yet fear a wilful Death, the just Gods hate it,
I need no Company to that, that Children
Dare do alone, and Slaves are proud to purchase,
Live till your honesties, as mine has done,
Make this corrupted Age sick of your Virtues.
Then dye a Sacrifice, and then you will know
The noble use of dying well and Romans.

Aret. And must we leave you Sir?

AEcius. We must all dye,
All leave our selves, it matters not where, when
Nor how, so we dye well. And can that man that does so,
Need Lamentation for him? Children weep
Because they have offended, or for fear;
Women for want of Will and Anger; is there
In noble man, that truly feels both Poyses
Of Life and Death, so much of this weakness,
To drown a glorious Death in Child and Woman?
I am ashamed to see you, yet you move me,
And were it not my Manhood would accuse me,
For covetous to live, I should weep with you.

Phid. O we shall never see you more!

AEcius. It Is true.
Nor I the Miseries that Rome shall suffer,
Which is a Benefit Life cannot reckon;
But what I have been, which is just and faithful;
One that grew old for Rome, when Rome forgot him,
And for he was an honest man durst dye.
Ye shall have daily with you, could that dye too,
And I return no Traffic of my Travels,
No Annals of old AEcius, but he lived.
My Friends, ye had cause to weep, and bitterly;
The common overflows of tender Women
And Children new born; Crying were too little
To show me then most wretched; if Tears must be,
I should in justice weep 'em, and for you;
You are to live, and yet behold those Slaughters,
The dry and withered bones of Death would bleed at.
But sooner than I have time to think what must be,
I fear you will find what shall be.
If you love me,
Let that word serve for all. Be gone, and leave me;
I have some little practice with my Soul,
And then the sharpest Sword is welcomest -- Go,
Pray be gone. Ye have obeyed me living,
Be not for shame now stubborn -- So -- I thank ye --
And fare you well -- A better Fortune guide ye.

Phid. What shall we do to save our best loved Master? Aside.

Aret. I Will to Affranius, who with half a Legion
Lies in the old Subbura, all will rise
For the brave AEcius.

Phid. I Will to Maximus,
And lead him hither to prevent this Murder,
Or help in the Revenge, which I Will make sure of.

Exit Phidius and Aretus. AEcius. I hear 'em come, who strikes first? I stay
for you.
Enter Balbus, Chylax, Lycinius. Yet will I dye a Soldier, my Sword drawn,
But against none. Why do you fear? Come forward.

Balb. You were a Soldier Chylax.

Chy. Yes, I mustered,
But never saw the Enemy.

Lycin. He Is armed.
By Heaven I dare not do it.

AEcius. Why do you tremble?
I am to dye. Come ye not from Caesar
To that end? speak.

Balb. We do, and we must kill you.
It Is Caesar's Will.

Chy. I charge you put your Sword up,
That we may do it handsomely.

AEcius. Ha, ha, ha!
My Sword up! handsomely! where were you bred?
You are the merriest Murderers, my Masters,
I ever met withal. Come forward, Fools.
Why do you stare? Upon my Honor, Bawds,
I will not strike you.

Lycin. I Will not be first.

Balb. Nor I.

Chy. You had best dye quietly. The Emperor
Sees how you bear your self.

AEcius. I would dye, Rascals,
If you would kill me quietly.

Balb. Plague on Proculus,
He promised to bring a Captain hither,
That has been used to kill.

AEcius. I Will call the Guard,
Uuless you kill me quickly, and proclaim
What beastly, base, cowardly Companions
The Emperor has trusted with his safety;
Nay, I Will give out you fell on my side, Villains;
Strike home you bawdy Slaves.

Chy. He will kill us,
I marked his hand, he waits but time to reach us;
Now do you offer.

AEcius. If you do mangle me,
And kill me not at two blows, or at three,
Or not so, stagger me, my Senses fail me,
Look to your selves.

Chy. I told ye.

AEcius. Strike me manly,
And take a thousand strokes. Enter Pontius.

Balb. Here Is Pontius. Licinius runs away.

Pont. Not kill him yet?
Is this the Love you bear the Emperor?
Nay, then I see you are Traitors all; have at ye.

Chy. Oh I am hurt.

Balb. And I am killed -- Exit Chylax and Balbus.

Pont. Dye Bawds,
As you have lived and flourisht.

AEcius. Wretched Fellow,
What have thou done?

Pont. Killed them that durst not kill,
And you are next.

AEcius. Art thou not Pontius?

Pont. I am the same you cast, AEcius,
And in the face of all the Camp disgraced.

AEcius. Then so much nobler, as thou art a Soldier,
Shall my death be. Is it revenge provokt thee?
Or art thou hired to kill me?

Pont. Both.

AEcius. Then do it.

Pont. Is that all?

AEcius. Yes.

Pont. Would you not live?

AEcius. Why should I?
To thank thee for my Life?

Pont. Yes, if I spare it.

AEcius. Be not deceived, I was not made to thank
For any Courtesy but killing me,
A fellow of thy Fortune. Do thy Duty.

Pont. Do you not fear me?

AEcius. No.

Pont. Nor love me for it?

AEcius. That Is as thou do thy Business.

Pont. When you are dead, your Place is mine, AEcius.

AEcius. Now I fear thee,
And not alone thee, Pontius, but the Empire.

Pont. Why? I can govern Sir.

AEcius. I would thou coul'dst,
And first thy self: Thou can fight well and bravely,
Thou can endure all Dangers, Heats, Colds, Hungers;
Heavens angry Flashes are not suddener,
Then I have seen thee execute, nor more mortal,
The winged feet-of flying Enemies,
I have stood and seen thee mow away like Rushes,
And still kill the Killer^ were thy mind
But half so sweet in Peace as rough in Dangers,
I died to leave a happy Heir behind me.
Come strike and be a General --

Pont. Prepare then,
And for I see your honor cannot lessen,
And 'twere a shame for me to strike a dead man,
Fight your short span out.

AEcius. No. Thou know I must not;
I dare net give thee such advantage of me
As Disobedience.

Pont. Dare you not defend you
Against your Enemy?

AEcius. Not sent from Caesar?
I have no power to make such Enemies,
For as I am condemned, my naked Sword
Stands but a Hatchment by me, only held
To show I was a Soldier; had not Caesar
Chained all defense in this Doom. Let him dye,
Old as I am, and quenched with Scars and Sorrows,
Yet would I make this withered Arm do wonders,
And open in an Enemy such wounds,
Mercy would weep to look on.

Pont. Then have at you,
And look upon me, and be sure you fear not,
Remember who you are, and why you live,
And what I have been to you: Cry not hold,
Nor think it base injustice I should kill thee.

AEcius. I am prepared for all.

Pont. For now AEcius,
Thou shall behold and find I was no Traitor, Pontius kills himself.
And as I do it, bless me -- Dye as I do --

AEcius. Thou have deceived me Pontius, and I thank thee,
By all my Hopes in Heaven thou art a Roman.

Pont. To show you what you ought to do this is not;
But noble Sir, you have been jealous of me,
And held me in the Rank of dangerous persons,
And I must dying say it was but justice,
You cast me from my Credit, Yet believe me,
For there is nothing now but truth to save me,
And your forgiveness, though you hold me heinous
And of a troubled Spirit that like fire
Turns all to flames it meets with: You mistook me,
If I were Foe to any thing, 'twas ease,
Want of the Soldiers due. -- The Enemy.
The nakedness we found at home, and scorn
Children of Peace and pleasures, no regard
Nor comfort for our Scars, nor how we got 'em;
To rusty time that eats our Bodies up,
And even began to prey upon our hours,
To Wants at home, and more than Wants, Abuses;
To them that when the Enemy invaded,
Made us their Saints, but now the Sores of Rome;
To silken Flattery, and Pride plained over,
Forgetting with what Wind their Fathers sailed,
And under whose protection their soft pleasures
Grow full and numberless. To this I am Foe,
Not to the State or any point of Duty;
And let me speak but what a Soldier may,
Truly I ought to be so, yet I erred,
Because a far more noble Sufferer,
Showed me the way to Patience, and I lost it;
This is the end I dye for, to live basely,
And not the follower of him that bred me,
In full account and Virtue, Pontius dares not,
Much less to outlive all that is good, and flatter.

AEcius. I want a Name to give thy Virtue, Soldier,
For only good is far below thee, Pontius,
The Gods shall find thee one: Thou have fashioned Death
In such an excellent and beauteous manner,
I wonder men can live! Can thou speak one word more?
For thy words are such Harmony, a Soul
Would choose to fly to Heaven in.

Pont. A farewell,
Good noble General your hand: Forgive me,
And think whatever was displeasing to you,
Was none of mine, you cannot live.

AEcius. I will not,
Yet one word more.

Pont. Dye nobly, Rome farewell,
And Valentinian fall.
In joy you have given me a quiet Death,
I would strike more Wounds if I had more Breath Dies

AEcius. Is there an hour of goodness beyond this?
Or any man that would outlive such Dying?
Would Caesar double all my Honors on me,
And stick me over with Favors like a Mistress;
Yet would I grow to this man: I have Loved,
But never doated on a Face till now.
Oh Death! Thou art more than Beauty, and thy Pleasures
Beyond Posterity: Come Friends and kill me.
Caesar be kind and send a thousand Swords,
The more the greater is my fall: why stay you?
Come and I Will kiss your Weapons: fear me not;
By all the Gods I Will honor ye for killing:
Appear, or through the Court and World I Will search ye,
I Will follow ye, and ere I die proclaim ye
The Weeds of Italy; the dross of Nature,
Where are ye Villains, Traitors, Slaves -- Exit.

SCENE V.
Valentinian and the Eunuch discovered on a Couch. Emp. Oh let me press these
balmy Lips all day,
And bathe my Love-scorch'd Soul in thy moist Kisses.
Now by my Joys thou art all sweet and soft,
And thou shall be the Altar of my Love,
Upon thy Beauties hourly will I offer,
And pour out Pleasure and blessed Sacrifice,
To the dear memory of my Lucina,
No God, nor Goddess ever was adored
With such Religion, as my Love shall be.
For in these charming Raptures of my Soul,
Claspt in thy Arms, I Will waste my self away,
And rob the ruined World of their great Lord,
While to the Honor of Lucina's Name,
I leave Mankind to mourn the loss for ever.

A SONG.
1.
KIndness has resistless Charms,
All besides can weakly move;
Fiercest Anger it disarms,
And clips the wings of flying Love.
2.
Beauty does the heart invade,
Kindness only can persuade;
It guilds the Lovers servile-chain,
And makes the Slave grow pleased and vain.
Enter AEcius with two Swords. Emp. Ha!
What desperate Madman weary of his Being,
Presumes to press upon my happy Moments?
AEcius? And armed? Whence comes this impious Boldness?
Did not my Will, the Worlds most sacred Law,
Doom thee to die?
And dare thou in Rebellion be alive?
Is Death more frightful grown than Disobedience?

AEcius. Not for a hated Life condemned by you,
Which in your Service has been still exposed
To Pain and Labors, Famine, Slaughter, Fire,
And all the dreadful Toyls of horrid War!
Am I thus lowly laid before your feet?
For what mean Wretch, who has his Duty done,
Would care to live, when you declare him worthless?
If I must fall, which your severe Disfavour
Has made the easier and the nobler Choice,
Yield me not up a wretched Sacrifice
To the poor Spleen of a base Favorite.
Let not vile Instruments destroy the man
Whom once you loved: but let your hand bestow
That welcome Death your anger has decreed.

Lays his Sword at his feet. Emp. Go, seek the common Executioner
Old man, through vanity and years grown mad,
Or to reprieve thee from the Hangman's stroke,
Go, use thy military Interest
To beg a milder Death among the Guards,
And tempt my kindled Wrath no more with folly.

AEcius. Ill-counsell'd thankless Prince, you did indeed
Bestow that Office on a Soldier;
But in the Army could you hope to find
With all your Bribes a Murderer of AEcius?
Whom they so long have followed, known and owned
Their God in War? and thy good Genius ever!
Speechless and cold without, upon the Ground
The Soldier lies, whose generous Death will teach
Posterity true Gratitude and Honor.
And press as heavily upon thy Soul,
Lost Valentinian, as thy barbarous Rape.
For which since Heav^n alone must punish thee,
I Will do Heavens justice on thy base Assister. Runs at Lycias.

Lycias. Save me, my Lord.

Emp. Hold honest AEcius, hold.
I was too rash. Oh spare the gentle Boy!
And I Will forgive thee all.

Lycias. Furies and Death. Dies.

Emp. He bleeds! mourn ye Inhabitants of Heaven!
For sure my lovely Boy was one of you!
But he is dead, and now ye may rejoice,
For ye have stolen him from me, spiteful Powers!
Empire and Life I ever have despised,
The vanity of Pride, of Hope and Fear,
In Love alone my Soul found real Joys!
And still ye tyrannize and cross my Love.
Oh that I had a Sword, Throws him a Sword.
To drive this raving Fool headlong to Hell. Fight.

AEcius. Take your desire, and try if lawless Lust
Can stand against Truth, Honesty and Justice!
I have my Wish. Gods! Give you true Repentance,
And bless you still: beware of Maximus.

They fight. Acius runs on the Emp. Sword, and falls. Dies. Emp. Farewell dull
Honesty, which though despised,
Can make thy owner run on certain Ruin.
Old AEcius! Where is now thy Name in War?
Thy Interest with so many conquered Nations?
The Soldiers Reverence, and the Peoples Love?
Thy mighty Fame and Popularity?
With which thou kept'st me still in certain fear,
Depending on thee for uncertain safety:
Ah what a lamentable Wretch is he,
Who urged by Fear or Sloth, yields up his power
To hope protection from his Favorite?
Wallowing in Ease and Vice? feels no Contempt,
But wears the empty Name of Prince with scorn?
And lives a poor lead Pageant to his Slave?
Such have I been to thee, honest AEcius!
Thy power kept me in awe, thy pride in pain,
Till now I lived; but since thou art dead, I Will reign.

Enter Phidius with Maximus. Phid. Behold my Lord the cruel Emperor,
By whose tyrannick Doom the noble AEcius
Was judged to die.

Emp. He was so, saucy Slave!
Struck by this hand, here grovelling at my feet
The Traitor lies! as thou shall do bold Villain!
Go to the Furies, carry my Defiance, Kills him.
And tell 'em, Caesar fears nor Earth nor Hell.

Phid. Stay AEcius, and I Will wait thy mightier Ghost.
Oh Maximus, through the long vault of Death,
I hear thy Wife cry out, revenge me!
Revenge me on the Ravisher! no more
Aretus comes to aid thee! oh farewell! Dies.

Emp. Ha! what not speak yet? thou whose wrongs are greatest;
Or do the Horrors that we have been doing,
Amaze thy feeble Soul? If thou art a Roman,
Answer the Emperor: Caesar bids thee speak.

Max. A Roman? Ha! And Caesar bids thee speak?
Pronounce thy Wrongs, and tell 'em over in Groans;
But oh the Story is ineffable!
Caesar's Commands, backed with the Eloquence
Of all the inspiring Gods, cannot declare it.
Oh Emperor, thou Picture of a Glory!
Thou mangled Figure of a ruined Greatness!
Speak, say thou? Speak the Wrongs of Maximus.
Yes, I will speak. Imperial Murderer!
Ravisher! Oh thou royal Villainy!
In Purple dipped to give a Gloss to Mischief.
Yet ere thy Death inriches my Revenge,
And swells the Book of Fate, you statelier Madman,
Placed by the Gods upon a Precipice,
To make thy Fall more dreadful. Why have thou slain
Thy Friend? thy only Stay for sinking Greatness?
What Frenzy, what blind Fury did possess thee,
To cut off thy right Hand, and fling it from thee?
For such was AEcius.

Emp. Yes, and such art thou;
Joint Traitors to my Empire and my Glory.
Put up thy Sword; be gone for ever, leave me,
Though Traitor, yet because I once did wrong thee,
Live Like a vagrant Slave. I banish thee.

Max. Hold me you Gods; and judge our Passions rightly,
Lest I should kill him: kill this luxurious Worm,
Ere yet a thought of Danger has awaked him.
End him even in the midst of night-Debauches,
Mounted upon a Tripos, drinking Healths
With shallow Rascals, Pimps, Buffoons and Bawds,
Who with vile Laughter take him in their Arms,
And bear the drunken Caesar to his Bed,
Where to the scandal of all Majesty,
At every grasp he belches Provinces,
Kisses off Fame, and at the Empires ruin,
Enjoys his costly Whore.

Emp. Peace Traitor, or thou dy'st.
Though pale Lucina should direct thy Sword,
I would assault thee if thou offer more.

Max. More? By the immortal Gods I will awake thee;
I Will rouse thee Caesar, if strong Reason can,
If thou had ever sense of Roman Honor,
Or the imperial Genius ever warmed thee.
Why have thou used me thus? for all my Service,
My Toyls, my Frights, my Wounds in horrid War?
Why did thou tear the only Garland from me,
That could make proud my Conquests? Oh ye Gods!
If there be no such thing as Right or Wrong,
But Force alone must swallow all possession,
Then to what purpose in so long descents
Were Roman Laws observed or Heaven obeyed?
If still the Great for Ease or Vice were formed,
Why did our first Kings toil? Why was the Plow
Advanced to be the Pillar of the State?
Why was the lustful Tarquin with his House
Expelled, but for the Rape of bleeding Lucrece?

Emp. I cannot bear thy words. Vexed Wretch no more.
He shocks me. Prithee Maximus no more.
Reason no more; thou troublest me with Reason.

Max. What servile Rascal, what most abject Slave,
That licked the Dust where ere his Master trod,
Bounded not from the Earth upon his feet,
And shook his Chain, that heard of Brutus Vengeance?
Who that ere heard the Cause, applauded not
That Roman-Spirit, for his great Revenge?
Yet mine is more, and touches me far nearer:
Lucrece was not his Wife as she was mine,
For ever ravished, ever lost Lucina.

Emp. Ah name her not! That Name, thy Face, and Reason,
Are the three things on Earth I would avoid:
Let me forget her, I Will forgive thee all,
And give thee half the Empire to be gone.

Max. Thus steeled with such a Cause, what Soul but mine
Had not upon the instant ended thee?
Sworn in that moment. -- Caesar is no more;
And so I had. But I will tell thee Tyrant,
To make thee hate thy Guilt, and curse thy Fears,
AEcius, whom thou have slain, prevented me;
AEcius, who on this bloody Spot lies murdered
By barbarous Caesar, watched my vowed Revenge,
And from my Sword preserved ungrateful Caesar.

Emp. How then dare thou, viewing this great Example,
With impious Arms assault thy Emperor?

Max. Because I have more Wit than Honesty,
More of thy self, more Villainy than Virtue,
More Passion, more Revenge, and more Ambition,
Than foolish Honor, and fantastic Glory.
What share your Empire? Suffer you to live?
After the impious Wrongs I have received,
Could thou thus lull me, thou might laugh indeed.

Emp. I am satisfied that thou did ever hate me,
Thy Wifes Rape therefore was an act of Justice,
And so far thou have eased my tender Conscience.
Therefore to hope a Friendship from thee now,
Were vain to me, as is the Worlds Continuance,
Where solid pains succeed our senseless joys,
And short-lived pleasures fleet like passing Dreams.
AEcius, I mourn thy Fate as much as man
Can do in my condition, that am going,
And therefore should be busy with my self:
Yet to thy memory I will allow
Some grains of Time, and drop some sorrowing Tears.
Oh AEcius! oh!

Max. Why this is right, my Lord,
And if these Drops are orient, you will set
True Caesar, glorious in your going down,
Though all the Journey of your Life was cloudy.
Allow at least a Possibility,
Where Thought is lost, and think there may be Gods,
An unknown Country after you are dead,
As well as there was one ere you were born.

Emp. I Have thought enough, and with that thought resolve
To mount Imperial from the burning Pile.
I grieve for AEcius! Yes, I mourn him, Gods,
As if I had met my Father in the dark,
And striving for the Way had murdered him.
Oh such a faithful Friend! that when he knew
I hated him, and had contrived his Death,
Yet then he ran his Heart upon my Sword,
And gave a fatal proof of dying Love.

Max. It Is now fit time, I Have wrought you to my purpose,
Else at my entrance with a brutal Blow,
I Would felled you like a Victim for the Altar,
Not warned you thus, and armed you for your hour,
As if when ere Fate called a Caesar home,
The judging Gods looked down to mark his dying.

Emp. Oh subtle Traitor! how he dallies with me?
Think not thou saucy Counselor, my Slave,
Though at this moment I should feel thy Foot
Upon my Neck, and Sword within my Bowels,
That I would ask a Life from thee. No Villain,
When once the Emperor is at thy Command,
Power, Life and Glory must take leave for ever.
Therefore prepare the utmost of thy malice;
But to torment thee more, and show how little
All thy Revenge can do, appears to Caesar.
Would the Gods raise Lucina from the Grave,
And fetter thee but while I might enjoy her,
Before thy Face I Would ravish her again.

Max. Hark, hark Aretus, and the Legions come.

Emp. Come all, Aretus, and the Rebel Legions;
Let AEcius too part from the Gaol of Death,
And run the flying race of Life again.
I Will be the foremost still, and snatch fresh Glory
To my last Gasp, from the contending World;
Garlands and Crowns too shall attend my Dying;
Statues and Temples, Altars shall be raised
To my great Name, while your more vile Inscriptions
Time rots, and mouldring Clay is all your Portion.

Enter Aretus and Soldiers. They kill the Emperor. Max. Lead me to Death or
Empire, which you please,
For both are equal to a ruined man:
But Fellow Soldiers, if you are my Friends,
Bring me to Death, that I may there find peace,
Since Empire is too poor to make amends
For half the Losses I have undergone,
A true Friend and a tender faithful Wife,
The two blessed Miracles of humane Life.
Go now and seek new Worlds to add to this,
Search Heaven for Blessings to enrich the gift,
Bring Power and Pleasure on the wings of Fame,
And heap this Treasure upon Maximus,
You Will make a great man not a happy one;
Sorrows so just as mine must never end,
For my Love ravished, and my murdered Friend. Ex. omnes.

Epilogue.
Written by a Person of Quality.
IT IS well the Scene is laid remote from hence,
'Twould bring in question else our Author's sense.
Two monstrous things, produced for this our Age,
And no where to be seen but on the Stage.
A Woman ravished, and a Great man wise,
Nay honest too, without the least disguise.
Another Character deserves great blame,
A Cuckold daring to revenge his shame.
Surly, ill-natured Roman, wanting wit,
Angry when all true Englishmen submit,
Witness the Horns of the well-headed Pit.
Tell me ye fair ones, pray now tell me, why
For such a fault as this to bid me dye.
Should Husbands thus command, and Wives obey,
'Twould spoil our Audience for the next new Play,
Too many wanting who are here to day.
For I suppose if ere that happened to ye,
'Twas force prevailed, ye said he would undo ye.
Struggling, cried out, but all alas in vain,
Like me ye underwent the killing pain.
Did you not pity me, lament each groan,
When lest with the wild Emperor alone?
I know in thought ye kindly bore a part,
Each had her Valentinian in her heart.
FINIS.

