A LETTER FROM A Gentleman of Quality IN THE COUNTRY, TO HIS FRIEND, UPON His
being Chosen a MEMBER to serve in the Approaching PARLIAMENT, and desiring his
Advice. BEING AN ARGUMENT Relating to the Point of Succession to the Crown:
SHOWING From Scripture, Law, History, and Reason, how Improbable (if not
impossible) it is to Bar the next Heir in the Right Line from the Succession.

Printed in the Year 1679.

To my Honored Friend A. B.
SIR,
YOU have been pleased (among far better choice) to consult a mean Man in a
great Point now depending before you in Parliament, and agitated in every Man's
mouth; it is no less than, Whether the Parliament of England may by their Act
exclude, and disable the next Heir of the Blood Royal from Succession to the
Crown. I know it has been commonly discoursed, that the Statute of 13o Eliz.
cap. 1. has already settled this Point, and anticipated the Debate thereof,
wherein it is Enacted; That whosoever shall after the Death of that Queen
affirm, That the Parliament of England has not full Power to bind the Crown in
Point of Descent, and Succession, shall forfeit his Goods and Chattels. But,
Sir, under favor this Law does not in any wise affect either you or me, as
this Case is. It does not affect you, because you being a Member of the Grand
Council of the Nation, have thereupon a part and share in the Legislature, that
is, in the making new, and abrogating of Old Laws; and all Men know that
Freedom and Liberty of Speech, and Debate, are the very Essence and Soul of all
Councils. It does not affect me, because this being a Point stirred in your
House, and being also of that sublime Nature and Importance, it is but natural
for any Member thereof freely to advise with his Friend about it with mutual
security; for if it were enacted even by Parliament that no Member thereof
should consult his Books, or Friends, about any Affair moved in either House,
that Act would be null, and void in it self, as being ridiculous and
impertinent. And I am able to prove by irrefragable Records of Parliament which
I have perused, That the Members of your House in ancient time, have sometimes
demurred to pass certain Bills of extraordinary Nature, till they have conferred
and advised with their Countries who had entrusted and chose them. And if the
Question now before you be not of that Nature, I know not what is. But because
the Objection founded upon the said Statute of 13o El. is one of the Herculcan
Arguments now in every Man's mouth, and of which I observe some Men are not a
little fond, and lay a great part of their stress upon it, it shall not so
easily escape my Animadversions; and therefore toward the close of this
Discourse, I hope you will find I have stabbed it into the fifth Rib. Only I
conceived it not altogether unseasonable to pinch this sturdy Objection a
little in the beginning by way of Anticipation.

Sir, There is no English Man has a more profound Veneration and Deference for
the public Sanctions and Establishments of my Country than my self; I know well
they contain the collective Wisdom and Providence of the Nation. They are in
great measure the Ramparts and Sea-walls of the Common Liberties and Propriety.
They are (humanly speaking) the Fountains and Sources of all that is dear to
our Souls and Bodies; but withal it is to be remembered, That God, Nature, and
the immutable Customs of this Realm, have placed some Things and Matters above
their Influence and Coercion. And we know that the Judges of the Common Law (to
whom alone by a deep Polity the Construction and Superintendency of all
Statute-Laws is entrusted) have in all Ages made bold sometimes to weigh the
same Statute-Laws in the Balance, and for certain Reasons appearing to them,
have now and then (without deflowring their Consciences and Integrity) adjudged
them null and void. Of this kind I shall produce some Instances in their proper
place.

Neither is it to be forgotten that his Sacred Majesty (whose concernment in
the Fate and Event of this Question is not small) has in several of his late
Speeches, Printed and Published by his Special Command, admonished the Two
Houses, That they do not in any of their Bills Impeach the Right of the
Succession, nor the Descent of the Crown in the true Line. Upon this Foundation
it is; together with that profound Duty which I owe to my gracious Sovereign;
and Love to my Country (to say nothing of my particular respect to your self)
that I have undertaken the following Discourse. In the which you will perceive
I have laid before you my Sentiments and Notions with that Freedom and
Assurance which becomes a faithful Advisor and Friend. And I should be sorry
you should find any thing in the whole Discourse contrary to right Reason, or
the Laws of England, or not munited with Authorities Sacred and Inviolable.

There is one Thing I had almost forgot to tell you (which yet perhaps may seem
superfluous enough to your self, who knows me so well) which is, That I am an
unworthy Member of the Church of England, I was Baptized in that Faith, and I
design (by God's Grace) to Live and Dye in it. And (which does not always
happen) I know no Relation I have in the World of a contrary Persuasion. For my
Principles, as they respect the State, I am for supporting the Monarchy of
England, with those Regalities and Flowers with which the Laws of my Country
have embellished and illustrated the Crown; And yet am, and shall upon all
Occasions appear as Zealous in the Defense and Vindication of the Common
Liberties and Property of my Countrymen as any Man whatsoever; And (if I may
mention it without too much Ostentation, or Envy) my Relations were Fidele and
Loyal to the Crown during our late Domestic Revolutions, the tragical Marks
whereof (I praise God) we have cheerfully born in our Bodies and Estates.

Having thus premised these things, I shall now address my self to the Debate
of the principal Matter, wherein, Sir, I must all a long so consider your Time
and Patience, that I must much more consider the Dignity, and Nature of the
Argument, and subject matter. And I doubt not (under favor) effectively to
maintain and prove,

That the Parliament of England cannot by their Act, exclude, or disable the
next Heir of Blood Royal from Succession to the Imperial Crown of this Nation.

This I shall make good by great and important Reasons and Authority drawn from
the Laws of God, Nature, the Laws of England Common and Statute, the Canon and
Civil Laws, Histories Ancient and Modern, and Records of Parliament, and other
Courts; from which Foundations a Point of this nature and sublimity is to be
decided.

1. Reason.
First then, I shall lay this down for a Ground: That the Succession of the
Crown of England, by the Laws of God and Nature, is inseparably annexed to
proximity and nextness of Blood: And then all Statute-Laws contrariant to the
Laws of God and Nature are ipso facto null and void. So then I am here to prove
two Things:

First, That the Succession to the Crown is inseparably annexed to proximity of
Blood by the Laws of God and Nature.

Secondly, That Statute-Laws contrariant to those Laws are null and void. That
the Succession of the Crown by the Laws of God is inseparably annexed to
proximity of Blood, appears plainly by that Statute Law (or Statute of
Judgment, as it is there called) which God himself with his own mouth
pronounced for the ordering the Descent of Honors and Possessions, Numb. chap.
27. which are there by his immediate direction to be conferred by Birthright,
and Propinquity of Blood; and not by the Election or Discretion either of
Moses, their Supreme Magistrate, or the Community of the People, a part, or
both in conjunction. And there, Verses 9 and 10, it is expressly enjoined by the
same Divine Authority, That if a Man have no Son, or Daughter, his Inheritance
shall descend upon his Brother.

The preference likewise and prerogative of Primogeniture in point of Dignities
and Possessions, is of the same Divine Institution, as appears in several
places of the Holy Scriptures. As where God said Genesis 4. 7.
to Cain of his younger Brother Abel. His desires shall be subject unto thee,
and thou shall rule over him. Again, where he forbids Deuteronomy. 21. 17.
the Father to disinherit the Firstborn of his double Portion, because by
right of Birth it is due unto him. And lastly, where he makes choice of the
Firstborn Exodus 13. 1. 22. 9.
to be sanctified and consecrated to himself.

Consonant hereunto are the Suffrages of the Fathers, Numb. 3. 13. Luc. 2. 23.
and Doctors of the Civil or Imperial Law. St. Hicrom In Epist ad Onagr. Et in
Genesis 49.
writes, That a Kingdom is due unto the Firstborn. St. Chrysostom Hom. 5.
adversus Judaos.
says, The Firstborn is to be esteemed more Honorable than the rest. Bodine,
the Great French Lawyer, tells us, De Repub. lib. 6. cap. 5.
That it is not enough that the Kingdom go in Succession, but that it descend
also upon the eldest issue Male, where he is next of the Blood, [sic enim Ordo
non tantum Naturae, and Divinae Legis, sed etiam omnium ubique Gentium
postulat.] For so (says he) not only the Law of God, and Nature, but also of
all Nations does require. And Baldus, Lex hoc D. de Just. and Jure.
(a famous Doctor of the Civil Law) says, [semper fuit, and semper erit, etc.]
Always it has been, and always it shall be, That the Firstborn, and next of
Blood, succeeds in the Kingdom. Wherein he is followed with open Cry of all
the choice Interpreters, both of the Canon and Civil Law; as namely
Panormitanus, Iac. licet de voto.
Hostiensis, Corsetta, Tract. de Pot. and Excel. Regia. q. 9.
Alciat, In l. obvenire D. de verb. sig.
and innumerable others.

Now what has been said here of Primogeniture in Point of Succession to the
Crown, is said likewise with equal consequence of proximity of Blood. For by
the Civil Law, if a King have issue, five Sons, and the Firstborn die before
the Succession fall, or if he being possessed of the Kingdom die without Heirs
of his Body, his right of Primogeniture devolveth unto the next in Blood; and
if he dies in like manner, then unto the third; and so likewise to the next in
Order. And herein Albericus In proaem. D. Sect. Discipuli. Et in 1. Donationes,
C. de Don. inter Vir. and Vx.
(a famous Doctor) is most express in Point. And Baldus says, In L. 2. C. de
Jur. Emph.
That Succession has reference to the time of Death, and respects the
Priority that is then extant. And again, Per L. ex facto Sect. pen. D. ad Treb
He is not said the Firstborn in Law, who dies before the Fee opens, but he
who at that time is eldest in Life. Cons. 275. lib. 2.
And of the same Opinion is In L. proximus D. de Verb. Sig.
Alciate; for as Celsus says; L. ex duobus D. de Vulg. and pup.
[primus is dicitur ante quem nemo sit] He is first who has none before him.

And herein the Common Law of this Nation accords with the Civil Law. And
therefore the second Son of the King of England (after the Death of the
Firstborn) is eldest Son within the Statute of 25 Ed. 3. Cokes 3d. Inst. 8.
where it is enacted, That it shall be high Treason for a Man to compass the
Death of the King's eldest Son, and Heir, etc. So if the first Son dye in the
Life time of the King his Father, the second Son forthwith becomes
Primogenitus, or Firstborn, within the Charter of King Edw. 3. for the Duchy
of Cornwall, as it was resolved Jac. The Case of the Duchy of Cornwall.
in the case of Prince Charles, upon the Death of his elder Brother Prince
Henry.

By which it appears, that Proximity of Blood is ennobled with all the
Prerogatives and Preferences of Primogeniture.

But leaving this way of arguing the Point, to be farther illustrated and
pursued by the Churchmen and Civilians; I shall for the most part derive my
own Proofs thereof from the Authority of the Common and Statute-Laws of
England, from Records of Parliament, and other Eruditions of that kind, as best
sorting with my Person, and Profession, and a Discourse of this nature.

First then it is most evident, That all the Human Acts and Powers in the World
cannot hinder the Descent of the Crown upon the next Heir of the Blood, (I do
agree they may hinder the possession, and enjoyment, and so they have often
done by open Hostilities and Violence) but I say they cannot hinder the
Descent. And the reason is plain, because this is a Dowry which the great King
of Kings has reserved to his own immediate Donation, and has placed above the
reach of a mortal Arm; and Mankind can no more hinder or intercept this
Descent, than it can the Influences of the Stars, or the Heavens, upon the
sublunary World, or beat down the Moon: And this (though perspicuous enough in
it self) I shall farther prove anon in my last Reason of this Point, by
irrefragable Authorities of the Common Law of England; and in my Answer to the
second Objection. This being so, I shall add, That in the very moment of the
Descent, the Person on whom it descends, by the Law of this Nation, becomes
complete and absolute King to all intents and purposes. And so it was expressly
Resolved by all the Judges of England, 1o Jacobi, Watson and Clarks Cited in
Coke's 7th Rep. 10. v 11. d. Calvin's Case.
Case. And the same Person being thus complete and absolute King by the said
Descent, I do then farther add, That the Ligeance and Fidelity of the Subject
is due to that person by the immutable Law of Nature. And so it was solemnly
adjudged by the Lord Chancellor, and all the Judges of England, in the
Exchequer Chamber in the great Case of Calvin, 6 Jacobi. Coke's 7th Rep. 12. v.
13. a. etc. and 25. a. And herewith concurs the Principal Secretary, or
Amanuensis of Nature, I mean Aristotle, who Arist. Ethic. Nicomac. lib. 8. cap.
13.
writes, (...). By the Law of Nature the Father has the Rule over his
Children; and the King over his Subjects. And Seneca the Philosopher has a
saying not De Clemen. lib. 1. cap. 19.
unlike, Natura commenta est Regem. Nature (says he) did first find out a King.

And for this Reason it is, that our 24 H. 8. cap. 12. 34 H. 8. cap. 1. 23
Eliz. cap. 1. etc.
Statute-Laws do so frequently style the King our Natural Liege Lord, and the
People, Natural Liege Subjects; And the Fidelity which the Subject owes to the
Crown, Natural Obedience. And this more clearly appears in Indictments of
Treason (which of all other Law Process, are penned with the greatest Niceness
and Certainty.) And therefore in the Indictment of the Lord Dacre (upon the
Northern Rebellion) 26 H. 8. it is said, Predictus Dominus Dacre debitum fidei,
and Ligeantiae suae quod prefat. Domino Regi Naturaliter, and de jure impendere
debet, minime curans, etc. The said Lord Dacre not regarding the Faith, which
he did Naturally and of Right owe to the King, etc. And Reginald Poole (a
Cardinal of the Church of Rome) was Indicted 30o H. 8. for committing Treason
[contra Dominum Regem supremum and Naturalem Dominum suum.] Against the Lord
the King, his supreme and Natural Lord. And the constant form of the
Indictments against the Persons lately executed for the Popish Plot, is, That
they as false Traitors against the most Illustrious, most Serene, and most
Excellent Prince Charles the Second, etc. their Supreme and Natural Lord; the
cordial Love, and natural Obedience, which faithful Subjects should, and of
right, ought to bear to our said Sovereign Lord the King, wholly withdrawing,
did compass, etc.

And therefore as the Common Law is more worthy than the Statute, so the Law of
Nature is more worthy than both.

So then, no Human Power can hinder the Descent upon the Right Heir of the
Crown. The Descent makes the King, Allegiance is due to the King by the Law of
Nature; the Law of Nature cannot be abrogated by Human Power; ergo, The right
Heir of the Blood cannot be excluded by Parliament, which is a Human Power.

Secondly, It is evermore a certain Vestigue or Footstep of a Law founded in
Nature, when a Thing displaced is seldom or never in a State of Rest, until it
be composed again in its own Native Center, and Repository. For though all
human and written Laws may be worn out by Desuetude, and tacit Consent, yet the
Institutions of Nature will never be abolished by the longest tracts, and
courses of Time, but will always retain an Animum revertendi, and will
certainly at length attain it. And of this kind is the Law of Succession to the
Crown by the right Heir. For we find in the Stories of all Nations, as well
Barbarous as Civil, that during Usurpations and Invasions upon the Crown,
though countenanced even by public Establishments and Consent of the People,
that those States notwithstanding have always continued under Convulsion, and
Disease, like a Magnetic Needle, that never cease to tremble and trepidate
'till it have found out its beloved North Pole. And in such Case it has
constantly fared with those Bodies Politic, as with a Body Natural upon
Dislocation of a principal Bone; they have breathed it may be, and moved a
little, but still under Languors, and Anguish, and Feavorish Habits, and
Dispositions, and never well 'till the Bone was set again, and reduced to its
right place. I will rather choose to extract some short Instances of this kind
out of the Memoirs of our own, than foreign Nations, (as being Argumentum ad
Hominem.) And shall for brevity ascend no higher than the Norman Conquest. And
the same Instances shall be of Usurpations upon the Crown, contenanc'd by the
Public Sanctions of this State.

The second William, and first Henry, usurped the Crown, and thereupon this
Realm remained constantly under inquietude, and commotion, until the Death of
Robert their elder Brother, and his Son William, without Issue, whereby the
Right of the Crown centred in the said Henry.

The Usurpation of Stephen upon Maud the Empress (Daughter and Heir of the said
Henry) was accompanied with Tragical Convulsions of this Nation, which never
ceased till the Restoration of the right Heir, viz. Henry the second Son of
the said Maud, in which Henry the Saxon Blood was likewise restored, his
Grandmother being next Heir of the Blood to Edgar Atheling.

Upon the Disinherison of the House of York by that of Lancaster, this State
sustained a Convulsion not to be paralleled in all the Stories of the World.
It is infinite to recount the Laniages, the Butcheries, the Rapines that were
committed here: There were fought in this Island during this Tempest of War (as
a modern Author has observed) 17 pitched Battles, and no less than 8 Kings and
Princes of the Blood, 40 Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls, besides Barons and
Gentlemen innumerable, and 200000 of the Common People slaughtered and
destroyed. And though this Combustion continued 60 years, (for so long it was
from the Usurpation of Henry the Fourth, to the Expulsion of his Grandson Henry
the Sixth) yet the Body Politic enjoyed little ease till it had purged out the
Usurpers: like a Body Natural, that having received into the Stomach matter
inimical and contrariant to Nature, is never at quiet till it have worked out
the same noxious and malignant matter by all the Passages of Evacuation, though
to the manifest hazard or destruction of the Man himself.

The Usurpation of Richard the Third determined in his own death, and the
Introduction of the right Heir some time after.

That of Jane Gray of the House of Suffolk, was but an Offer of Usurpation, as
being a Quotidian Ague that lasted but nine days, which ended upon the
Restitution of Queen Mary.

Lastly, it is a matter of fresh and bleeding sentiment and experience, what
Agonies and Throws the English Nation sustained after that fatal and impious
stroke given to King Charles the First, of ever Glorious Memory: Nature is
wanting in adequate Metaphors and Similitudes to express so great a Calamity.
This State was like the Demoniac in the Gospel; she was torn, worried, and
shak'd together. and of this there was no intermission until the evil spirit
was dispossessed, and His Gracious Majesty that now is (whom God long preserve)
restored to that Crown which God, and Nature, and the immutable Customs of this
Nation had given him.

So then it does most evidently appear by these Instances, that the Succession
of the Crown to the next of Blood is a Law eternal, and wrote with the
immediate hand of God and Nature. And that although Nature may for some time be
repelled and kept off with the Forks and Instruments of humane violence, that
yet it will sooner or later ever more recur, and return with the greater swing
and vigor. And that therefore a Dominion obtained by Usurpation is like a vast
and ponderous Globe of Iron, supported in the Air by main strength of Arms,
which upon removal or withdrawing of the same force by fatigue or imbecility
of the Bearers, will at length certainly attain its Center of Gravity, and with
the fall crush and confound the Supporters.

And where ever this eternal Law and Rule of Nature has been impeached and
violated, that has evermore been done by the immediate and most visible act
and finger of the Divinity it self, who is King of Kings, by whom they reign,
and that gives the Kingdoms of men to whom he will, (as the holy Scriptures
tell us.) And who being the Creator of Nature, can alone (when it pleases him
control her Methods and Operations, as appears by the Interruptions of the
Succession in the cases of 1 Samuel 16 1.
David, Solomon, 2 Kings 9. 4.
Jehu, and the like. And they that from these and other instances of this
nature do fancy they may maintain the Lawfulness of impeaching the Succession
of the Crown in the true Line, may as well infer, that they may lawfully rob
and spoil their Neighbors, because God commanded the Israelites to spoil the
Exodus 11. 2. 12. 35.
Egyptians. In those cases we are bound to the Law, but not to the Example.

I come now to Records of Parliament, which shall be three in number.

First, that of the 39 H. 6. Rot. Parl. 39. Hen. 6. Number. 10. 13, 15, 27.
wherein the daring Rich Plantagenet D. of York, by his Council exhibited to
the Lords in full Parliam. a Writing, containing his Right and Claims to the
Crowns of England and France. Against which Claim it was objected on the King's
part, That the same Crowns had been entailed by Act of Parliament upon the
King's Grandfather King Henry the Fourth, and the Heirs of his Body, from
whence the same King Henry the Sixth did lineally descend. The which Act (say
the King's Friends there) is of Autoritee to defeat any mannere Title made to
any person, (for so are the words.) To which Objection the said Duke of York
answers, (I shall cite the words of the Record as they are entered up in the
old English) That if King Henry the Fourth might have obteigned and rejoysed
the said Corones of England and France by Title of Enheritaunce, Descent, or
Succession, he neither needed nor would have desired, or made them to be
granted to him, in such wise as they be by the said Act. The which takes no
place, neither is of any force or effect against him, that is right Enheritor
of the said Corones; as it accords with God's Laws and all natural Laws,
(says the Roll.) And this Answer of the Duke of York to the King's Title, and
his said Claim, is afterward by express Act of the same Parliament, declared
and recognized to be good, true, just, lawful, and suffisaunt, (as it is there
worded.) And at the same time for preventing Effusion of Blood an Accord, by
the free consent of the said Duke, is likewise established, That King Henry the
Sixth shall during his Life enjoy the Crown, and that from thenceforth the Duke
of York should be reputed Heir Apparent to the Crown.

The next Record is that of 1 Ed. 4. Rot. Parl. 1 Ed. 4. number. 8. etc. and 9 Ed.
4. 10. a. Bagot's Assise.
wherein after that Parliament has in a long Pedigree disclosed the Title of
the same King Edward to the Crown, as being in a right line descended from
Lionel Duke of Clarence, third Son to King Edward the Third; and, upon the
death of his Father the above mentioned Richard Plantagenet, next Heir of the
Blood Royal, they immediately add these very words; Knowing also certainly
without doubt and ambiguity, that by God's Law and Law of Nature, he (i. e.
King Edward the Fourth) and none other, is and ought to be true; rightwys, and
natural Liege and Sovereign Lord. And that he was in right from the death of
the said noble and famous Prince his Father, very just King of the same Realm
of England.

So here it is most expressly declared by two Parliaments of different
Complexion and Interest, and therefore the more remarkable, that the Succession
of the Crown of England is inseparably annexed to Proximity of Blood by the
Laws of God and Nature: And that a Title of this Sublimity and Grandeur is not
at all impeachable even by Act of Parliament. And besides the said Parliament
of 39 H. 6. does make the same Declaration to the manifest prejudice of the
Title of the King in possession, who was ordained also by the same Accord to
reign over them during his Life, and whom for that reason it must be presumed
they would have favored, if they had found but the least color so to have
done.

1 Jac. c. 1.
The last Record is the Statute of Recognition made in the first year of King
James by the whole Parliament, in which among other things, They do in most
humble and lowly manner (I shall all along use the very words of the Act)
beseech His most Excellent Majesty, that as a Memorial to all Posterity, it
might be publicly declared and enacted in the High Court of Parliament, That
they being bound thereunto by the Laws of God and Man, did with unspeakable Joy
recognize and acknowledge, that immediately upon the Decease of Queen Elizabeth
the Imperial Crown of the Realm ofEngland, etc. did by inherent Birthright, and
lawful and undoubted Succession, descend and come to His most Excellent
Majesty, as being lineally, justly, and lawfully next and sole Heir of the
Blood Royal of this Realm. And that by the goodness of God Almighty, and lawful
Right of Descent, His Majesty was King of England, etc. And to this Recognition
we do (say they) most humbly and faithfully submit, and oblige our selves and
posterities for ever, until the last drop of our blood be spent.

And all the Judges of England some time after in the great Case of Calvin in
the Exchequer Chamber do resolve, 6 Jac. Co. 7 Rep. 10. v. and 14. v.
That King James his Title to the Crown was founded upon the Law of Nature,
viz. by inherent Birthright and Descent from the Blood Royal of this Realm.

So that this Parliament does not in the least manner pretend to give any Title
to King James or his Posterity by their own Act and Establishment, but on the
contrary does expressly recognize, that the same King's Right and Title to the
Crown does accrue to him by the Laws of God and Man only, as the said Judges
do by the Law of Nature, viz. as next and sole Heir of the Blood Royal. By all
which it does most manifestly appear, That in the Opinion of the three several
Parliaments, the Succession of the Crown is united to Proximity and Nextness of
Blood, by the Laws Divine, Natural, and Human: And a threefold Cord of this
Sanctimony, and Strength is not easily broken; to say nothing of the said
Resolution of all the Judges of England in the Point, which (as our Books tell
us) in matters of Law, is of the most sacred Authority next unto the Court of
Parliament.

This being thus made out, I come now to prove, That Statute-Laws contrariant
to the Laws of God and Nature, are ipso facto null and void.

And here I shall first observe, That by a profound Polity of our Law, the sole
Power of expounding Statute-Laws, whether relating to Church or State, is
entrusted and lodged in the Judges of the Common Law, as King Charles the first
has noted in his Printed in Poulton's Statutes. 3 Car. 1.
Speech to both Houses, upon passing the Bills of 3d of his Reign. And as the
Authorities of Coke's 1. Iast. 344. a.
Law are very clear, now the Judges have exerted this constructive Power in
expounding Statute-Laws, sometimes even null and void for certain Reasons to
them appearing.

As sometimes for Repugnancy, and Impertinence, and therefore where the Statute
of Carlisle enacted, That the Common Seal of the Cistercian and Augustine Monks
should be in the Custody of the Abbot, and four others of the Covents; And that
any Deed sealed with the same Seal, not so kept, should be of no effect. This
Statute was adjudged void 27 Hen. 6. Fitch Title Annuity 41.
for Repugnancy, because the Seal being in the Custody of the four, the Abbot
could not Seal with it; and when it was in the hands of the Abbot, it was out
of the Custody of the four. And so by this Statute, these two Orders could make
no Deed valid in Law.

Sometimes for Absurdity, as where the Statute of 1 Edw. 6. cap. 14.
Edw. 6. gives Chantries to the King, saving to the Donors, and Founders, all
Services, etc. This Act was adjudged void as to the Services. For it is absurd
and contrary to Common Reason (says the Book) that the King should hold of, or
do Service to his Subjects. 14 Eliz. Dyer. 3. 13. a. Mich. 16 and 17 Eliz. etc.
B. Strowd's Cited in Coke's 8. Rep. 118. v. Dr Bonham's Case.
Case.

Lastly, the Judges have expounded Statute-Laws void in themselves, when they
are contrary to those of God and Nature; and they are bound to adjudge them so,
when ever such Statute Laws come before them; because the Laws of God and
Nature are the Rays, and Emanations of the Divinity, they are eternal,
indelible, immutable, and therefore cannot be altered, or Impeached by any
human Power, or Authority, but only by the God of Nature it self, who did
originally ordain them. And of this (because it is the principal Matter now in
hand) I shall be the more plentiful in Instances.

And therefore if it should be enacted by Parliament, That no Man should honor
the King, or love his Parents or Children, or give Alms to the Poor, or pay
Tithes to the Parson of his Parish, or the like, these Acts are ipso facto
void, because they are contrary to the express Divine Commands. Dr. and Stud.
lib. 1. cap. 6. 21 Hen. 7. 2. v.

So where a Man was made Judge in his own Cause by Act of Parliament, This Act
has been adjudged void; because (say our Books) it is contrary to the Law of
Nature, that one and the same Person should be Judge and Party. Cokes 8 Rep. a.
and v. Dr. Bonham's Case. Hobart's Rep. 87. Day. v. Savadge.

So an Act of Parliament can never make the Grant of an Idiot or Lunatic good,
for Jura Naturae sunt immutabilia (says the Book.) The Laws of Nature are
immutable. Hob. 224. Needler's Case.

By the Statute of the 25 Edw. 3. cap. 22. a Man attainted in a Praemunire, is
by express words out of the Kings protection generally, and that it should be
done with him as with an Enemy; by which words any Man might have slain him as
it is holden, 28 Hen. 8. Title Crown Br. 197) until the Statute of 5 Eliz. 1.
yet the King may protect him, and pardon him. Because the Protection of the
Sovereign to the Subject is due by the Law of Nature. Coke's 7th Rep. 14. a.
Calvin's Case.

The Statute of 23 Hen 6. cap. 8. and several other Statutes enact, That no Man
shall be Sheriff of any County above one year; and that any Patent of the King
to any person for a longer Term, though with an express Clause of Non obstante,
shall be absolutely void, and of none effect; and the Patentee perpetually
disabled to bear the Office. And yet notwithstanding it is resolved by all the
Judges of England, That these Acts of Parliament are void. And that the King
may by non obstante, constitute a Sherif for Years, Life, or Inheritance. And
what is the Reason which the Judges give of this Resolution? Why because, say
they, in express words this Act of Parliament cannot bar the King of the
Service of the Subject, which the immutable Law of Nature does give unto him;
for Obedience* and Ligeance of the Subject (add they) is due to the Sovereign
by the Law of Nature. See 2 Hen. 7. 6. v. Calvin's Case, 14. a. in Coke's 7th
Rep.

And thus upon the whole Matter of my first Reason, I have (as I conceive)
effectually proved these two Propositions: First, That the Succession of the
Crown of England is inseparably annexed to Proximity of Blood by the Laws of
God and Nature. Secondly, That Statute-Laws contrariant to those of God and
Nature, are ipso facto null and void. And from hence it does necessarily
follow, That the next Heir of the Blood Royal, cannot be barred from the
Succession by Act of Parliament.

Secondly; 2 Reason.
The Succession of the Crown to the next Heir of the Blood Royal, is a
fundamental and primary Constitution of this Realm; and, indeed the Basis, and
Foundation of all our Laws. Sir Ed. Coke Preface to his fourth Rep. in
principio.
says, That the Kingdom of England is a Monarchy successive by inherent
Birthright, of all others, the most absolute and perfect form of Government,
excluding Interregnums, and with it infinite inconveniences. The Lord
Chancellor Egerton tells His Argument of the Case of the postnati. page 36.
us, That in Cases of the Crown the Eldest, sole (or alone) is to be preferred.
And this he reckons among the ancient Customs of this Nation, against which
there never has been (says he) nor ought to be any Dispute. And indeed if the
Parliament may alter so essential and fundamental a Custom, or Constitution,
then the Monarchy of England, which by the Law is, and ever since we were a
Nation, has been Hereditary, will immediately become Elective, and disposable
at the Arbitry, and Will of the People. And by the same reason, that they may
exclude, and reprobate the next Heir, they may the next to that, and so by
consequence the whole Line: For when Men have once transgressed, and broken
down the Boundaries which the Law has set and prefixed, the Progress is
infinite, and there is no stop: And though the Common Law of England (which, as
I have said, does superintend all Statute-Laws) does allow the Parliament to
repair and amend, and improve the Building, yet it does never allow them to
pull it down, and subvert the Foundations thereof.

And it is some odds that such Electors may in time believe, that they have a
Power to mar what they can so easily make, and that with good Conscience they
may destroy (when they think fit) their own Creature, and Work of their own
hands: And therefore those Kings of England who have submitted their Necks to
this popular, or Statute-Kingship, (as I may call it) it is plain they came not
in at the Door, but evermore at the Windows; and have been constrained, during
their whole Reigns, to stand upon their Guards, and to defend their wrongful
Possessions by Divine Right of the Sword, (as some in Raillery have called it)
as well even against the People that chose them, as the Right Heirs. As I shall
anon Demonstrate at large.

And this alteration of the Monarchy in so fundamental a part thereof, from
Inheritance to Election, may prove equally mischievous also to a King in
Possession, though he claim too by Inherent, and undoubted Birthright; for the
same Reason which the People may think sufficient to exclude the Right Heir,
may (when they please) be deemed valid enough also to depose, and eject the
lawful Possessor of the Crown.

Thirdly; 3 Reason.
No Person, or Community of Mankind, can give away, or transfer a thing, which
they never had in them to give. And of this Nature is the Right of Succession
to the Crown, which is not the Gift of Man, but the immediate Dowry of God,
Nature, and the immutable Customs of the State. This may be proved by the
Scriptures, Fathers, Councils, Canon, Civil, Common, and Statute-Laws, of which
I shall give only a Taste.

Fourthly; 4 Reason,
The Succession of the Crown to the next Heir of the Blood, is one of the
highest, most essential, and undivided Rights of the Crown; and a Pearl of the
most transcendent Oriency and Magnitude in the Imperial Diadem of England. And
the Kings of England themselves, their Chancellors, Treasurers, and all other
the great Officers of State, their Privy Counselors, and the 18 Ed. 3. The
Oath of the Judges printed in Poulton.
Judges, (who are only to expound all Statutes by which this Right of
Succession may be violated) are all by provision of the Law solemnly sworn upon
the Holy Evangelists, to maintain and defend the Rights of the Crown, and that
they suffer no Disinherison or Damage to accrue thereto. And every Member of
the Commons House (who is to be a Party to the making these Laws of
Reprobation) by the Statute of 5 Eliz. ca. 1.
Eliz. is obliged before he enter or have voice in the said House, to swear
that he will to his power defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences,
and Authorities united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm; and if
he do not, he shall be deemed no Member of that House, and shall receive also
further Punishment. And the Co. 7. Rep. 6. v. Calvin's case.
Oath at this day to be taken in the Court Leets all over the Kingdom, by every
Subject above 12 years old, is, That he will be true and faithful to our
Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second, and his Heirs, etc. And it is
remarkable, that in the Rot. Parl. 42 Ed. 3. nu. 7.
Parliament of 42 Ed. 3. the Lords and Commons being demanded their Advice by
the King in a matter relating to the Crown, did answer with one voice, That
they could not assent to any thing in Parliament, that tended to the
Disinherison of the King and his Heirs, or the Crown, whereunto they were
sworn. And Sir Edward Coke 4 Inst. 14. in margin.
(commenting upon that Record) says, That it is Law and Custom of Parliament,
That no King can alien the Crown from the right Heir, though by consent of the
Lords and Commons. And in another place he says, 12 Rep. 28.
That King John 's Resignation of the Crown to the Pope was utterly void:
Because (says he) the Royal 'Dignity is an Inherent inseparable to the Royal
Blood of the King, descendable to the next of Blood of the King, and cannot be
transferred to another: thus he. And which is much more, the 1 Jac. c. 1.
Parliament of 1 Jacobi do recognize, That the Crown of England did descend
upon King James by inherent Birthright, A Recognition that the Crown of England
is lawfully descended unto King James, his Progeny and Posterity.
as being lincally, justly, and lawfully next and sole Heir of the Blood Royal.
And to this Recognition they do submit themselves and Posterities for ever,
until the last drop of their Blood be spilt. And further do beseech his
Majesty to accept of the same Recognition as the first fruits of their Loyalty
and Faith, (not only) to His Majesty, (but also) and to his Royal Progeny and
Posterity forever; (for so are the words.) So here this Parliament do oblige
themselves and Posteritics (which we are) to defend and maintain the Succession
of the Crown, not only to King James, but also to his Royal Progeny, and that
not in a general way to any of his Blood, but only to such Person to whom it
shall be due by inherent Birthright and Proximity of Blood, as (they recognize)
it was to the same King James.

So then the Succession of the Crown to the next Heir of the Blood, being a
fundamental Right of the Crown, and a Right annexed and secured to the same
Heir, not only by the Laws Divine, Natural, and Humane, but also (as I have
clearly proved) by the Obligation and Sanctimony of National, Lawful
Recognitions and Oaths; it does evidently follow, That the Parliament of
England cannot by Law alter or violate the said Succession, contrary to the
same National and Legal Recognitions and Oaths.

Lastly; The right Heir of the Crown cannot be barred or excluded by Act of
Parliament: Because the Accession and Descent of the Crown in an instant
absolutely purges and discharges all Obstructions and Incapacities
whatsoever, created by the same Act of Parliament. And the reason given in our
Books of Law is, Because (say they) upon Descent of the Crown immediately a
Body Politic is superadded to the Body Natural of the King's; and these two
Bodies in an instant become Consolidate, Consubstantiate, and Indivisible in
one and the same Royal Person; and thereupon the Body Politic, which is the
more worthy and sublime Nature, and that is in no wise subject and obnoxious to
the humane Imbecillities of Death, Infancy, Crime, or the like, draws from
the Natural Body all Imperfections and Incapacities whatsoever, and in a moment
endows and ennobles the same Natural Body with the Divine Embellishments and
Perfections of the Politic. As it has been frequently resolved by the Judges
of England, Plowd. Com. 238. v. Lord Barkley's case. Et ibid. 2* 3. a. v. the
case of the Duchy of Lancaster. Coke's 7th. Rep. 10. a. Calvin's case. And in
the same Calvin's case 12. a. (a Case argued by the Lord Chancellor and all
the Judges of England) it is affirmed, That the King's being a Body Politic is
founded upon Necessity, and the deepest Polities and Wisdom of our Law. And why
so? Because (says that Case expressly) Hereby the Attaindors and Disability of
him that has Right to the Crown are avoided, lest in the interim there should
be an Interregnum, which the Law will not suffer. This I shall now proceed to
make good by two great and impregnable Instances, drawn out of our Books of
Common Law, Histories, and Records.

The first is that of King Henry the Sixth, K. H. 6 Rot. Parl. 1 Ed. 4. number.
12, 22.
who being discomfited in Battle by King Edward the Fourth, was in the first of
the same King Edward disabled from all Regiment, and attainted of High Treason
by Act of Parliament. The said King Henry some years afterward (by the
assistance of the great Earl of Warwick) was restored again to the Crown, and
held a Parliament. And the Judges of that time were all of opinion, That
notwithstanding the Parliament of Edward had disabled Henry from all
Government, and attainted him of Treason, that yet in the same moment that
Henry reassumed the Crown, the said Parliamentary Incapacities were to all
intents discharged and avoided. And yet Henry was at first but only King de
facto, the true and legal Title abiding in the House of York. See to prove this
Brook Parl. pl. 105. 1 H. 7. 4. v.

The second Instance is that of King Henry the Seventh. K. H. 7.
This King while he was Earl of Richmond (together with many Lords and Commons
that took his part) were all attainted of High Treason by the Parliament of
Richard the Third. Afterward at the Battle of Bosworth the Earl obtained the
Victory, and slew Richard in the Field, and on the same day assumed the Crown
upon him, and presently afterward summoned a Parliament.

On the first day of this Parliament (say our Books of Law and Histories) all
the Judges of England were assembled in the Exchequer Chamber, to resolve a
very rare and perplexed Case, viz. What should be done about the reversal of
the said Parlementary Attaindors of the King, and diverse Lords, and many
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, that were to sit in Parliament that day. And
after mature Deliberation had among themselves they all Resolved, That for all
the Lords and Commons that were attainted, they advised them not to sit in
Parliament till an Act of Parliament was passed by the other Lords and Commons
not attainted, and assented to by the King, for the reversal of those
Attaindors; and after the Reversal, then all of them to sit in the Houses: For
that it was not convenient that any should sit as Judges in those Houses that
were attainted. But concerning the King himself they unanimously Resolved, That
the Crown takes away all defects in Blood and Incapacities by Parliament. And
that from the time the King did assume the Crown the Fountain was cleared, and
all the said Attaindors and Corruptions of Blood, and other Impediments,
absolutely discharged And yet the said King Henry the Seventh was only King de
facto also, the legal Title (as I have before observed) abiding in the House of
York See to prove all this the Books of 1 H. 7. 4. v. Fitz. Parl. pl. 2. Brook
P. and Statutes pl. 37. and 175. Plowden's Com. 238. v. Lord Barkley's case Co.
7 Rep. 12. ^. Calvin's case. Co. 1 Inst. 16. a. Jenk. centuries 203. Lord
Bacon's Hist. H. 7 fol. 13. All in express terms. And if the Influence and
Operation of Law be so forcible and vigorous in Cases of colorable and
specious Title only, (as that of the said King Henry the Seventh was, as I
shall demonstrate at large in the sequel of this Discourse) how much more will
it be where there is Proximity of Blood and undoubted Right?

The last Instance is that of Queen Elizabeth, an Instance of fresh and recent
memory. This Princess had been bastardiz'd and rendered incapable of Succession
to the Crown by solemn Act of Parliament; 28 H 8. cap. 7.
and yet notwithstanding upon the Death of Queen May the said Queen Elizabeth
succeeded to the Crown. And Sir Nicholas Bacon Lord Keeper of the Great Seal,
and Oracle of the Law in that Age, and upon whom the Queen altogether relied in
matter of Law, and who no doubt in a Case of that Importance had consulted all
the Judges of England, was clear of Opinion, Vita Eliz. An^, no 2. regni.
(says Cambden) That there needed not any formal Repeal of the said Act, as
there never was any; because (says the same Author) the Law of England had
long before pronounced [Coronam semel susceptam omnes omnino Defectas tollere]
That the Crown once obtained, does absolutely wipe out all Defects whatsoever.

And in this Point the Civil Law agrees also with the Common Law of England;
for Vpian, In Lib. Barbarious D. de Offic. Praesid.
a famous Doctor, tells us, That the possession of the Crown purges all
Derects, and makes good the Act of him in Authority, although he wants both
Capacity and Right.

Moreover by the Laws of England the right Heir becomes absolute, and perfect
King, in the very moment that the Crown descends upon him, though he happen to
be at the same time in the remotest parts of the World, and before he be
actually Crowned. And therefore King Edward the first, though at the time of
his Father's Death he was absent in the Holy Land in War against the Infidels,
yet he was immediately acknowledged here by the whole Realm for their King. And
in his return homewards did Homage to the French King, for the Lands which he
held of him in France, Walsingham in vita. Ed. 1.
and repressed certain of his Rebellious Subjects in Gascoign, and yet he was
not crowned till almost two years afterward. And the Case of his Sacred
Majesty that now is, was very like, for he began his Reign from the moment of
that fatal and impious Stroke, given to his Royal Father of ever glorious
Memory, and yet his present Majesty was not at that time in England And this is
expressly resolved to be the Law of this Nation by all the Judges of England.
Dyer. 165. a.
Mich. 1. Eliz. Dyer's Rep. 165. a.

So King Henry the sixth, Edward the fourth, Henry the seventh, summoned
Parliaments, condemned Traitors, made Grants, and did all other Acts which a
crowned King may do, before their several Coronations. And the like was done by
King Henry the eighth, Edward the sixth, Queen Mary, Queen Elizabeth, King
James, King Charles the first, and His Gracious Majesty that now is: For
coronation is but an Ornament, and Solemnization of the Royal Descent, but no
part of the Title; and the Kings of England are to all Intents and Purposes
complete and perfect Kings before Coronation; and so it was expressly resolved
by all the Judges of England, 1o Jacobi, Coke's 7th Rep. 11. a. Postnati.
in the Cases of Watson, Clarke, and Sir Walter Raleigh, which in a matter so
clear shall suffice.

Having thus (as I conceive) made my Point good and impregnable, Viz. That the
next Heir of the Blood cannot be excluded from the Succession by Act of
Parliament. I come now to answer certain Objections, which some Men I perceive
are fond of, and do not a little glory therein; and the most considerable of
them are three in Number.

First, 1 Objection.
(say they) there are several Instances of Kings of this Realm, whose Titles to
the Crown depended purely upon the Election of the People, and Acts of
Parliament, and not upon Proximity of Blood, and Inherent Birthright, as (to
go no higher) the Titles of King John, Henry the fourth, Henry the seventh.
Moreover Henry the eighth entailed the Crown upon himself, and his Children, by
Act of Parliament. And these Establishments by Parliament were looked upon as
good Titles to the Kings in Possession, and bars against the next Heirs.

I Answer, Answer.
they were never looked upon as good Titles to the Kings in Possession; or bars
against the right Heirs, neither ought they to be deemed so, as does most
evidently appear by the former part of this Discourse. And which I shall now
farther demonstrate by Enquiry into the Titles, and Circumstances of each
particular King, mentioned in the Objection.

First for King John, King John.
it is plain he was King de facto, but not de jure, for he invaded the Crown
against the Right of his Nephew Arthur of Britain, (who was the Son of Geossry,
John's Eldest Brother) as all the Histories of that time do observe and lament.
And therefore wanting that Title which God, Nature, and the immutable Customs
of this Realm give to the Right Heir, he was constrained to pray in Aid of the
People, and to patch up a Title from them by Election. The Story is this, Vita
Johannis. fol. 197.
(as I have extracted it out of Matthew Paris, a learned Monk, who lived in
that time, and who became afterward Chronologer Royal to King Henry the third,
Son of the said King John.

John (says the Monk) upon the Death of his Brother King Richard the first,
was advanced to the Throne by the favor and help of the great Ministers of
State; and at his Coronation, in the presence of the Clergy, Nobility, and
Populace, Hubert, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Chancellor of England (a Man
of profound Subtilty and Reach) tells them all in a very fine Harangue, That no
Man whatsoever was to succeed in the Kingdom here, upon any previous Reason,
unless he were freely Elected by the universality of the People, with
consideration had of his Moralities, and other personal Virtues, after the
Example of Readiness Election; and then he added, That John was a well qualified
Person in that kind, and that therefore they ought to choose him for their
King. But when the said Hubert was afterward demanded, why in so great an
Assembly he durst broach so notorious a falsehood, viz. That the Monarchy of
England was Elective; O, says he, this I did out of certain Revelations and
Prophesies that I have received, That John will at some time or other endanger
the Realm, and bring all into confusion. [Et ne haberet liberas habenas hoc
faciendi, ipsum Electione, non Successione haereditaria eligi debere,
affirmavi; for so are the Historian's Words.] And that I might curb him with
this Bridle from effecting these things, I did pronounce him admitted to the
Crown by Election, not by hereditary Succession. So then we see here that the
pronouncing the Monarchy of England to be Elective, was done only by way of
Umbrage, and Dissimulation, and to serve a turn at a certain Crisis, and
juncture of time. And the truth is, the People did accordingly afterward check
this unfortunate King with the same Bridle, and reduced him to a very low
condition, and they chose Lewis (the French King's Son) their King. And this
was the consequence of King John's Election by the People, and Invasion of the
Right of his Nephew; which Tenure was good only so long as he could maintain it
with his Sword; and so likewise is the Tenure of Pirates, and Robbers, when they
have ravished the Properties of other Men.

Secondly; Henry 4th.
For King Henry the fourth, he was likewise King de facto only, and not de
Jure, for he laid violent hands upon the Crown, by the treasonable, and
barbarous Deposition, and Murder of his natural Lord and Sovereign King Richard
the second, after whose Death, without Issue, the legal Title remained in the
House of Clarence, being the elder Line; and so King Henry the fourth was
constrained to truckle under an Election by the People, and their Establishment
in Parliament, which Establishment was ipso facto void and null in Law against
the House of York, (which married afterward with the said House of Clarence)
as I have evidently proved by the Roll of Parliament of 39o of Henry the sixth,
Rot. Parl. 39.
recited by me at large here in the beginning of this Discourse. H. 6. Number. 10.
13, 15. 27.
And indeed this very King Henry the fourth, well knowing how much a Title to
the Crown by the Common Law, and Inherent Birthright, exceeded a Title by
Statute, and Suffrage of the People, made his solemn Claim to the Crown in
Parliament by Descent from King Henry the third, which though it was the
meerest figment and pretense that ever was, (as all the World knows) yet he
thought he might with more security rely upon that (though fictitious) than
popular Establishment, though real: The Story is considerable, and therefore I
shall extract my Account thereof from the Roll of Parliament of that time. Rot.
Parl. 1 H. 4. Memb. 20.


Forthwith (says the Record) upon vacancy of the Realm by Deposition of King
Richard the second, Henry Duke of Lancaster rising from his Seat, and standing
up, so that he might be well seen by the People, and humbly crossing his
Forehead and Breast, calling upon our Savior's Cross, he claimed and
challenged the Realm of England, thus void; in his Mother Tongue, under this
very form of Words:

In the Name of Fader, Son, and Holy Ghost, I Henry of Lancastre challenge
this Rewme of Ynglonde, and the Crown, with all the Members, and Appurtenances,
als I that am descendit be Right Line of the Blood, coming fro the good Lord
King Henry therde, and thorghe that right that God of his Grace has sent me,
with help of my Kin, and of my friends to recover it, and which Rewme was in
point to be ondone for defaut of governance, and un endoying of the good Laws.

So we see here, that the Title he laid stress upon was, Als descendit be right
line of the blood coming fro the good Lord King Henry Therde; he meant from
Edmund second Son of King Henry the Third, from whom the same Henry the Fourth
by the Mother's side lineally derived, and who would fain have faced down the
World, that the said Edmund was elder Brother to King Edward the First,
contrary to his own knowledge, and that of all Mankind in that Age, and the
express Testimony of Vita H. 3. fol. 488. and 654.
Matthew Paris, (who was Chronologer Royal to the said King Henry the Third at
the time of the Birth of the said Edmund, and In Ane Vitae H. 3. and principio
H. 4.
Polydore Virgil, and all our Historians.

Thirdly; Henry 7.
For King Henry the Seventh, he was also King de facto, but not de jure, the
legal Title abiding at that time in Elizabeth the eldest Daughter of King
Edward the Fourth, with which Elizabeth the same King Henry did afterward
marry: Now because the Claim of the same King Henry the Seventh to the Crown is
not generally understood, and it will conduce much to my present purpose to
clear that matter, I shall crave leave here briefly to open it.

It is to be known then that King Henry the Seventh laid claim to the Crown, as
descending in a right line from John Duke of Somerset, eldest Son to John of
Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, by his third Wife Katharine Swinford, by which
Katharine the same John of Gaunt had Issue the said Duke of Somerset, and other
Children, before Marriage with her; and during his Marriage with his second
Wife the Lady Constance, Daughter and Heir of Peter King of Castile. So the
said Children were plainly all Bastards by our Law, and by consequence not
capable of inheriting any thing. After the death of his second Wife, John for
the passionate affection which he bare to his Children by Katharine, married
her; and some time after procured them by Act of R. 2 number. 29. Rot. Parl. 20.
Rot. Parl. 20. Ri. 2. Pars secanda memb. 6. Rot. Parl. 8 H. 4. Pars prima memb.
14.
Parliament to be legitimated, and made inheritable to all Preheminences,
Honors, Dignities, etc. [Excepta Regali Dignitate, for so are the very words
of the Record, Excepting the Regal Dignity.] Besides, Margaret Countess of
Richmond and Derby, the Mother of King Henry the Seventh, (through whom he must
necessarily derive what ever Title he could pretend to) died not till Lord
Herbert H. 8. fol. 8.
1 H. 8.

So then here are four plain Legal Impediments in the Title of King Henry the
Seventh: 1. He derived from a Bastard Stem or Slip. 2. Though the said Children
by Katharine Swinford were legitimated by Parliament, yet the Dignity Regal was
excepted by the same Parliament, and they remained illegitimate as to that. 3.
His Mother outlived him. And 4. (which was worst of all) the only true and
legal Title remained in Elizabeth eldest Daughter to King Edward the Fourth,
(who descended lineally from Lionel Duke of Clarence, John's elder Brother)
with which Elizabeth the said Henry afterward married, as I have observed. And
therefore this Prince having so many palpable Flaws and Impediments in his
Title, and well knowing that the Laws Divine, Natural, and Humane, were all
against him; no man (I suppose) will wonder that he made his Courtship and
Addresses to the People for their favor and good will, and was so sollicitous
of an Establishment by them.

And as the most considering and thinking men of that Age had no great opinion
of this Prince's Parliamentary Title, so it is plain that this King himself
laid no great stress upon it; which is the more remarkable, because all our
Historians do with one voice proclaim him one of the wisest and most sagacious
Princes, that ever swayed the Scepter in this Realm.

Now that he himself relied not upon this Statute-Kingship is most plain from
two Acts of Parliament which I that produce.

First, by that very Statute Law by which the Crown was established upon him:
for, Bacon Hist. 11. 12.
as my Lord Bacon has observed, he did not press to have that Act penned by
way of Declaration or Recognition of Right, as on the other side he avoided to
have it by new Law or Ordinance; but chose rather a kind of middle way, by way
of Establishment, and that under covert and indifferent words, viz. That the
Inheritance of the Crown should rest, remain, and abide in the King, etc. Which
Words might equally be applied, That the Crown should continue to him, but
whether as having former right to it, (which was doubtful) or having it then in
fact and possession, (which no man denied) was left fair to Interpretation
every way.

Secondly, 11 H. 7. cap. 1.
from that Act of Parliament which he procured to be made in the 11th. of his
Reign, in which it was ordained, That no person that shall serve the King for
the time being (for so are the very words) in his Wars, shall therefore be
attainted or impeached in his Person or Estate, what fortune soever fall by
chance in Battle against the mind and will of the same King for the time being.

This Law (says the Lord Chancellor Bacon, His History of H. 7. fol. 144.
who comments very handsomely upon it) had in it parts of prudent and deep
foresight, for it took away occasion for the people to busy themselves in
prying into the King's Title to the Crown; for howsoever that fell out to be
good or bad, the People's Safety was already provided for. Ib. fol. 233. and
217.
And the same Author in the close of this King's Life, reckons his opportune
and seasonable Death among his greatest Felicities, which withdrew him from any
future blow of Fortune; which certainly (continues he) in regard of the Title
of his Son, being then 18 years of Age, and a bold Prince, had not been
impossible to have come upon him: Because upon the decease of King Henry's
Queen, in whom (as I have often said) the true Title lodged, and who died some
years before, the Crown immediately by the Law of England descended upon Prince
Henry; for there can be no Tenancy by the Courtesy of the Crown. So then in
the Opinion of the said Lord Chancellor also this King's Title by Statute was
of small account in respect of that of his Son by Common Law. By all which it
plainly appears, that this King had no legal or inherent Right of his own to
the Crown; and therefore full contrary to his own inclination he was
constrained to stoop and truckle under an Establishment of the People, which
notwithstanding was invalid and null in Law, as I have proved.

For King Henry the Eighth, Henry 8.
though no man ever doubted but that he was King de jure, as bearing (united in
his own individual Person) his Father's pretended Title of Lancaster, and his
Mother's legal and undoubted one of York; yet there happened to fall out in
this Prince's Case certain anomolous and odd Circumstances, and Niceties, and
secret Intrigues, which necessitated him (contrary to his better knowledge and
the native greatness of his Soul) to allow his People a share or copartnership
(as I may say) in the ordering the Succession of the Crown, that so the matter
might go as far as Human Power could carry it.

And therefore first by the Statute of 25 he confirms his Divorce from
Katharine, 25 H. 8. c. 22.
and bastardizeth Mary her Daughter; and on the other hand corroborates his
Marriage with Anne, and legitimates Elizabeth her Daughter, and makes her
inheritable to the Crown. The Legitimation or Bastardy of these two Daughters
depending much upon the validity or weakness of the Papal Dispensation in the
first Marriage; and this point being a Vexata Quaestio in those days, he had
hoped to have cut this Gordian Knot (which he could not untie) with the Sword
and pretended Omnipotency of a Parliament. And then after he had done this, he
forthwith marries Jane Seymour, 28 H. 8. cap 7.
and by the Statute of the 28 attaints his Wife Anne, and bastardizeth
Elizabeth her Daughter; and so then (according to the Poet)

Qui color albus erat nunc est contrarius albo.
And then breaking down the Boundaries of all Law and common Reason, and with a
prodigious wildness and extravagancy he procures it to be Enacted, That in case
he had no Issue by Jane, he might dispose of the Crown to whatsoever Person he
did in his own discretion think fit. And the whole Nation was obliged by the
Sanctimony of an Oath to the defense of this Law. This he did that he might
advance to the Throne his Natural Son Henry Fitz Roy Duke of Richmond, Heylin's
Ecclesia restaurata, fol. 5.
whom he loved most passionately, (who yet died not long after) and so to
exclude for ever his Sister Margaret of Scotland, and all her Descendents.

Then by the Statute of 35 he entails the Crown upon himself, 35 H. 8. cap. 1.
Prince Edward, and the said Mary and Elizabeth; and in case they happened to
have no Issues of their Bodies, then he was again empowered by the same Act of
Parliament to dispose of the Crown to what person or persons soever he pleased
by his last Will and Testament. And the whole Narion was likewise sworn to the
Maintenance of this Law. And by virtue of this extravagant Power (in case his
three Children died without Issue, as afterward they did) he bequeathed the
Crown to the House of Suffolk, being the younger House, and in defiance of all
Laws, and Brotherly Affection disinherited, and totally excluded the elder
House of Scotland: And therefore all those Niceties and Designs considered, it
is most plain King Henry was constrained to pray in Aid of the People, to give
some Color at leastwise to all the Contradictions and Impossiblities. And
therefore, I conceive that no Man of common Reason, or that bears true Faith
and Allegiance to His Majesty that now is, or his Crown, will draw Arguments
from the three Statutes above mentioned, to prove that the Parliament of
England may exclude the next Heir of the Blood.

So that upon the whole matter of this first Objection, it appears most
plainly, That the Princes which submitted and stooped to these tumultuous and
Statute-Kingships, either it was because they invaded and usurped the Crown
contrary to the Laws Divine, Natural, and Humane, or to give a color and
varnish to Contradictions, and Impossibilities, and private Intrigues and
Designs. And yet after all these popular Establishments, though munited, and
fenced about with the highest Penalties and Oaths that mortal Men could devise;
yet could not in reality transfer the Right from the next Heir of the Blood
(that being a Dowry, as I have said, which God reserves to his own immediate
Donation, and has placed above the reach of a mortal Arm.) For though an Act
of Parliament shall command me to say, That an Ethiopian is White, and that
under the highest Oaths and Penalties; or, That an Ape is a Man; yet
notwithstanding the Ethiopian can never in truth change his Skin, or
Complexion, nor the Ape his Species, and commence a Creature rational.

Ay; 2 Objection.
but (says another) Why may not the Crown be transferred from the next Heir of
the Blood by Parliament, as well as all other Inheritances, and Possessions
whatsoever in the Kingdom may, from the Right Heir of the Subject?

I Answer there is no similitude between the Cases. Answer.
For; 1. Private Men derive their Inheritances from their Ancestors; but the
next Heir of the Blood Royal derives not the Crown from his Predecessor, or the
People, but immediately from God; Nil dat quod non habet.
as I have proved at large in this Discourse. And no Person, or Community can
give away, or transfer a Thing, which they never had vested in them, either in
Possession, or so much as Right.

Secondly; 1. Inst. 11. v. and 344. a.
The Law of the Crown (which yet is a principal part of the Common Law of
England) differs from the Law of the Subject in Point of Descents; and
therefore that may be Law in case of the Crown, which is not in case of the^
Subject, of which I shall here give some Instances.

A Private Man being an Alien Born, cannot by our Law inherit Land here, But
the Crown shall descend upon the next Heir of the Blood, though an Alien; as it
happened many years ago, in the case of King Henry the second, who was an Alien
born, and begot of a Father who was also an Alien: And the like happened not
long since in the case of King James, of ever blessed Memory.

If a King of England have three Daughters, and dye, the Crown shall descend
upon the Eldest alone; but in case of a Subject, the Inheritance shall go to
all three Daughters. Co. 1. Inst. 165. a: 25 H. 8. cap. 22. circa medium.

If a Subject marry an Heiress, and has Issue by her, a Son, and the Wife dye,
the Husband shall enjoy the Wive's Lands during his Life; but if a Man marry a
Queen Regnant of England, and has Issue by her a Son or a Daughter, and then
she dies, here the Crown descends immediately upon the Issue, which becomes
King or Queen presently, though the Father be alive; as ought to have been in
the Case of King Henry the Seventh, and his Son Prince Henry, (as I have before
observed;) and would have been in the Case of Philip that married Queen Mary,
if she had dyed having Issue. Ellesmere's Postnati 36. Lord Bacon's H. 7. fol.
4. 121, 217, 231.

So the half Blood is no Impediment to the Descent of the Lands of the Crown,
as it happened in the Cases of Edward the Sixth and the two Queens Mary and
Elizabeth; and yet in the Cases of Subjects it is clearly otherwise. Plowd.
Com. 245. a. Co. 7. Rep. 12. v. Postnati. Co. Inst. 15. v.

So likewise if the Right Heir of the Blood, or the Father or Mother of the
Right Heir from whom the Crown descends, are attainted of High Treason by
Parliament, these Attainders yet are no Obstructions to the Descent of the
Crown, as it happened in the Cases of our King Edward the Fourth, and his
Father Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York, who were both attainted of High
Treason by Act of Parliament. (...) Eliz. Reg. 28. 1586. (...) die (says
Cambden) (...) sententia in Scotorum Regia (...) prolata est, a Delegatis and
(...) Judicibus declaratum erat, ^^rentiam iliam nihil derogare Jacobo Regi
Scotorum in Jure aut ^^onore; sed ilium in eodem esse (...), Ordine, and Jure,
ac si S^mentia illa nunquam lata fuiset. (Fo. so are the very Words of the
Historian.)
As also in the Case of King James, as it is related to his Mother Mary Queen
of Scots, who was attainted of High Treason, and executed, and yet the
Commissioners and Judges that gave Sentence upon her, set forth a public
Declaration, That the Attainder of the Mother did not at all derogate from the
Right of her Son to the Crown of England: But all Men know it is otherwise in
the Case of Subjects, whose Descents are obstructed by the Attainders of their
Ancestors.

I could be infinite in Cases of this Nature, but by these few Instances
(wherein the Law, for ought I know, is no more alterable by Parliament than the
Succession) it does plainly appear, That there is no small difference in Point
of Law; between the Descents of the Crown, and Private Inheritances. And
therefore, though an Inheritance may thus be given away from a Subject, yet it
does not in any wise follow that the Crown may be disposed from the next Heir.

The third, 3 Objection.
and last Objection is founded upon the Statute of 13o Eliz. cap. 1. wherein it
is enacted, That if any Person shall affirm, That the Parliament of England
has not full Power to bind, and govern the Crown in Point of Succession and
Descent, that such Person (during the Queen's life) shall be guilty of High
Treason, and after her Death; shall forfeit his Goods and Chattels, etc.

I Answer; Answer.
First, it is to be observed; That this Law was made in the time of a Queen,
whose Title to the Crown depended upon Statute Law, as appears by the very Act
recognizing her Title to the Crown; ^ Eliz. cap. 3.
and this Act of 13o was made in affirmance and vindication of such Title to
the Crown by Statute; and this is plain from the Body of the same Act, wherein
it is expressly Enacted, That if any Person shall affirm, That any Statute for
recognizing the Right of the Crown of England to be lawful in the Royal Person
of the said Queen, is not, or ought not to be for ever of sufficient force to
bind all Persons, and their Rights, that in any wise may, or might claim an
Interest to the same Crown in Possession, or otherwise, shall, during the Life
of the Queen's Majesty, be judged a High Traitor; and therefore the same Queen
had little reason to scruple the passing a Bill of this Nature. But I much
doubt, whether a Common Law-Prince (who owes his Title only to God, Nature, and
the immutable Customs of the Nation) unless under like Circumstances with King
Henry the Eighth, would have assented to an Act, so derogatory to the
Regalties; for the manifest Inconveniences that might ensue to himself, and
posterity, by such Assent and Condescension: Some of which I have discovered in
the beginning of this Discourse in my second Reason, why the Succession of the
Crown is annexed to Proximity of Blood.

Secondly; Wise men do not only consider Things that are acted, but more
especially the Season and Junctures of Time, when those things were acted; and
Sir Edward Coke (a great Master in the Science of our Law) does frequently
admonish us, (...) a.
That the true Scope and Design of our Statute-Laws, are oftentimes not at all
intelligible, without the help of the Chronicles and Memoirs of that Age,
wherein the said Statute-Laws were made. Of which there cannot be a more
pregnatn Instance than this here. And therefore I will in Charity believe, That
the Contrivers of this Objection did never rightly inform themselves of the
History, and true Reason of making this Statute, which in Truth was this:

Some time before this Statute, Mary Queen of Scots (Dowager of France, and the
Mother of our King James) being discomfited in Battle by her own rebellious
Vassals of Scotland, she (like a Dove pursued by Vultures) fled into the bosom
of her Kinswoman Elizabeth of England for Protection. Elizabeth (who inherited
her Father's Malaversion to the House of Scotland, and contrary to those Royal
Sympathies which one Sovereign Prince ought to have for another in Distress;
and indeed against the Rules of common Hospitality) commits Mary to a loathsome
Prison. The Pope, with some of the Catholic Princes, and others of her
Friends, thought this was no very kind Treatment, and therefore endeavor not
only to set her at liberty, but also to advance her to the Throne; the
generality of Mankind in that Age looking upon the said Mary's Title to be much
clearer than that of the Queen in possession, 28 H. 8. cap. 7.
the later being bastardiz'd, and rendered incapable of the Crown by solemn Act
of Parliament, which still stood unrepeal'd, and therefore valid in Law; at
leastwise but a Statute-Queen, as I proved before: And the former deriving (as
is showed above) by the Common Law, and a direct true line from Margaret the
eldest Daughter of King Henry the Seventh, and Elizabeth his Queen. And
besides, in the very year this Statute was made, there was a Marriage warmly
prosecuted between the said Queen Elizabeth; Cambden in 13 Eliz.
and Henry Duke of Anjou, (who afterward became King of France, upon the death
of his Brother Charles the Ninth;) and no small care was then taken for
Establishment of the Succession upon the Issues proceeding from the same
Marriage. And there is a remarkable Clause among others in the same Statute of
13, viz. That every person or persons, of what Degree and Nation soever they
be, shall during the Queen's Life declare or publish, that they have any right
to enjoy the Crown of England, during the Queen's Life, shall be disenabled to
enjoy the Crown in Succession, Inheritance, or otherwise after the Queen's
Death. Which Clause was most apparently contrived against the same Mary and her
Son King James.

So that the plain scope and design of this Statute was, utterly and for ever
to exclude and disinherit the same Mary Queen of Scots, and all her Posterity,
and to extinguish absolutely that Right to the English Crown, which the Laws of
God and Nature, and the Common Law of England, had given to her and them. And
therefore how any man that pretends Loyalty or Allegiance to His Gracious
Majesty that now is, (who derives his Title lineally from the said Mary Queen
of Scots) can object this Statute was a Precedent for Exclusion of the next
Heir by Act of Parliament, I cannot understand. And the Objector may do well to
consider, how far he may enforce this Objection without hazard to his Person
and Estate; for no man can maintain the validity of this Statute, without
manifest Derogation and Injury unto his Majesty's Title.

Thirdly; To affirm that the Parliament has no Power to bind the Succession of
the Crown in point of Descent; and to affirm that the Parliament has no power
to exclude the next Heir of the Blood Royal, is the same Proposition. Now I
have proved above, That the Succession of the Crown is annexed to Proximity of
Blood by the Laws of God and Nature, and that Acts of Parliament contrariant to
those Laws are void. So then the Case is no more than this; An Act of
Parliament ordains, that no Person under a certain Penalty shall dare to
affirm, That Statute-Laws contrary to those of God and Nature are null and
void; I think no man ever did, or does, or will doubt, but that such Act of
Parliament is absolutely void in it self, and that the Judges are obliged to
expound it so, when ever it comes before them in Point of Judgment.

Lastly; This Act of 13 being a Law made (as I have proved above) in
diminution, or rather in open and hostile Defiance of the Title of Scotland to
this Crown, it was by tacit and implied consent of the Law, and the whole
Nation, utterly abrogated upon the first moment of the happy Union of the two
Crowns in the person of King James; 4 Jac. cap. 1.
or at leastwise by the solemn and express Repeal here of all hostile and
unkind Laws between England and Scotland, of which I am sure this of 13 was
none of the least.

I shall draw toward a Conclusion with a certain apposite Note, Rerum
Anglicarum Annals lib. 3. Vita Mariae Re
which one of our Latin Historians makes upon the nine days Reign of Jane Gray,
and the easy Admission of Queen Mary to the Crown.

Tali and constanti veneratione nos Angli legitimos Reges prosequimur, ut ab
little debito obsequio, etc. Such and so constant a Veneration (says he) have
we Englishmen for our lawful Princes, that we are not to be drawn from our
Allegiance and Loyalty to them, by any colors or specious pretenses
whatsoever, no not with the Bait even of Religion it self; of which matter this
Case of Jane may be a memorable and plain Instance: For though the Foundations
of her Government were laid as firm as was possible, and the Superstructure
also wrought with all the Art and Cunning in the world; yet as soon as ever the
lawful and undoubted Heir of the Crown appeared, and showed her self to the
People, all this fine and curious Frame presently fell to the ground, and was
ruined as it were in the twincle of an Eye; and that principally by the hands
and industry to those very persons, who upon the account of Religion were
thought to have most favored the Interest of Jane. And though the Duke of
Northumberland (Jane's Father in Law, and a man of prodigious Subtilty) had
instructed the Preachers of London to cry down the Title, and blacken the
person of Mary in their Pulpits by all the ways imaginable; yet this Device was
smoked, and would not take even with the Londoners themselves; no though
Ridley their Bishop (a man of singular Sanctity and Persuasion, and whose
Person they passionately revered) labored in the matter with all his Might,
etc. So far the Historian.

Thus I have (as I conceive) answered all material Objections, and have
likewise made good my Proposition, viz. That the Parliament of England cannot
by the Laws of England exclude the next Heir of the Blood from Succession to
the Crown. And I doubt not His Sacred Majesty that now is, will not in his time
suffer a Pearl of this Magnitude and Oriency to be ravished by any Hands out of
the Imperial Diadem of this Realm.

Sir, I doubt not but upon a serious and deliberate Perusal of this Discourse
(which I have composed at your earnest Entreaty) you will gather some Notices
and Knowledge which may be of use and satisfaction to you. Whatever it be, I
beseech you to believe that I am,

SIR, Your Faithful and Humble Servant, E. F.

FINIS.

