Tractatus cui Titulus, An Enquiry into the right Use and Abuse of Hot, Cold
and Temperate Baths in England, Imprimatur.

Tho. Millington Praeses. Censores.
Tho. Burwell. Rich. Torlesse. Will. Dawes. Tho. Gill.


Dat. Ex Aedibus Collegii in Comitiis Censoriis. June 4. 1697.
AN ENQUIRY INTO THE Right USE and ABUSES OF THE Hot, Cold, and Temperate BATHS
In ENGLAND.

In which

I. The several Kinds of Baths are examined, and their Virtues explained by
their sensible Qualities.

II. The right Use and the Abuses of Hot Baths are discovered.

III. The proper Use and Abuses of the Temperate Baths are described.

IV. Cold Bathing, as it is used by the Ancient and Modern Physicians, is
recommended, and the Injuries of it in some Cases are observed: With a
particular Description of the Virtues and Use of Buxton-Bath in Derby-shire;
being the most Excellent, Temperate, and safe Cool Bath in England.

To this is added

I An Extract of Dr. Jones's Treaty on Buxton-Bath; with some Additions, and
Remarks on it.

II. A Letter from Dr. Clayton of Lancashire, concerning the use of St.
Mungus-Well.

III. An Abstract of some Cures performed by the Bath at Buxton.

By Sir JOHN FLOYER, Knight. M. D.

B. V. V. Corrumpunt Corpora sana, conservant eadem. B. V. V.

LONDON, printed for R. Clavel, at the Peacock in St. Paul's-Church-yard, 1697.

To His Excellency, the most Noble Prince, WILLIAM Duke of Devonshire, Marquess
of Hartington, Earl of Devonshire, and Baron Cavendish of Hardwick; One of the
Lords Justices of the Realm of England during His Majesty's absence, Lord
Steward of His Majesty's Household, Knight of the most Noble Order of the
Garter, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Derby, and one of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council.
May it please Your Grace,
NOne of the extraordinary Rarities of the Peake surprised me with greater
Admiration, than Your Grace's famous Baths at Buxton, which seemed to me like
some rich Mineral concealed amongst the monstrous Hills.

This Jewel of Nature is happily bestowed on Your Illustrious Family, who know
best how to adorn such natural naked Rarities, with magnificent, pleasant, and
convenient Buildings, and, by Your great Example, give encouragement to the
frequenting of these excellent and useful Baths.

Where such natural Baths have been wanting, great Princes, or Emperors have
supplied their Defect by artificial ones; by which they express their Opinion
of the usefulness of Baths to the Public; and by the erecting them, they
designed to oblige the Multitude, who desired the use of them for their
Pleasure, Beauty, or curing Diseases.

In the most flourishing Times of the Roman Empire, the number of Baths was
infinite at Rome. The Dioclesian Baths equalled four of the greatest Palaces in
Italy. And the Antonine Baths contained Sixteen Hundred Seats; and by its
spacious Building, Places for Exercise, Ponds, Walks, Portico's, resembled a
whole Province: And these Baths were adorned with Statues, noble Columns,
Silver Pipes, and rich Gems.

Your Noble Family did formerly erect these Baths at Buxton; and what is
wanting for Pleasure and Convenience, is by all expected from Your generous
Hand.

Baths were always thought worthy of the Care of Statesmen; and Cato opposed
the introducing the use of bot Baths in Rome, by which the Roman Manners might
be corrupted, and their Bodies made more Effeminate: He discerned the Mistake
of the Grecian Doctors, who recommended Hot Baths for the helping of Digestion,
whereas it was evident, that they subverted and weakened the Stomach. I hope
Your Grace will imitate the Counsel of this Noble Patriot, by incouraraging
this prejent Age to leave off the imprudent Use of Hot Baths, and to regain
their ancient natural viguor, strength and hardiness by a frequent Use of Cold
Bathing.

Your Grace's Bath at Buxton is so exactly tempered by a mild Heat, that it
puts the nicest Constitutions in no fear of danger by the uses of it; but the
benefit of it is extraordinary, by restraining the preternatural quantity of
Perspiration, by strengthening the Nerves and natural Heat. By these it is
easy to prevent all Inflammations, Pains, Rheums, Fluxes, and Gout, and all
other Effervescences in our Humors.

The benefit of Cold Water was anciently known to the Germans, who dipped their
newborn Children into Rivers, to harden them; and the Northern People rub
their frozen parts with Snow, to regain their natural Heat and Color. But I
will give Your Grace some Examples of Cold bathing from the Romans in the most
flourishing time of their Empire; by which it will appear, that I publish no
new Doctrine, but only design to revive the Ancient practice of Physic in
using Cold Baths, amongst which, Buxton is the most temperate and safe.

Antonius Musa first practiced this Cold bathing at Rome, by which he cured the
Emperor Augustus, who being subject to Distillations, had long despaired of his
Health, till Musa observing the Hot Baths to do him injury, did try a contrary
Method, and cured him by Cold bathing. After which, Suetonius relates, that
Augustus used Hot Baths very rarely; but for his Nerves he used Seawater for a
Bath, or the Albulae, which were the most temperate Baths in Italy; in Virtue
and Heat most resembling that at Buxton. For this miraculous Cure, Augustus,
nobly rewarded Musa, and placed his Statue next to Aesculapius.

By this Success on Augustus, Musa was encouraged to try cold Baths in all
Diseases: but as it happens to all Emperical new Methods, it was improperly
applied by him in the Winter, to young Marcellus, whom Musa killed six Months
after he had cured Augustus: and this rash use of cold bathing is described by
Horace, which was exposing their Heads and Breasts to the falling of cold
Springs on them, in the severe Cold of Winter. But this Accident did not
discourage this practice, but obliged the Physician to be more cautious, and to
find out the right use of Cold bathing; for Horace, by the Advice of Musa, left
the hot Baths, which did injury to his inflamed Eyes, and went to the cold
Baths at Clusium and Gabii; but finding those Countries too cold, he writes an
Epistle to Vala about the cold Baths at Valie and Salernum.

Seneca afterward practiced Cold bathing in the Sea, and cells it his old Art;
and gave himself the name of Psuchrolontes, in his Epistle to Lucilius; and it
appears that he was so great a lover of Cold bathing, that in the Calends of
January, he leapt into a Spring near Tybur.

I could give more of the History of cold bathing from the Roman History; but I
think it sufficient that their greatest Emperor, the wittiest Poet, and their
most admired Philosopher, practiced the Psuchrolusia.

This practice of Cold bathing was certainly brought by the Romans into
England; but it was known and practiced also by the Germans, and from them it
might come to their Neighbors. The Heathen Priests grounded their Worshipping
of Wells on the Virtue of Medicinal Waters, attributing their cheap and sudden
Cures to a present Deity. The bringing Alms and Offerings to Wells, was
anciently forbid by Edgar's Canons: And Dr. Hammond mentions the Injunctions
against worshipping St. Edmund's Well without St. Clement's at Oxford. This
Custom was afterward imitated by the Romish Priests, who dedicated the
Medicinal Springs to particular Saints: So one of the Wells at Buxton is called
St. Ann's; and by the particular Offerings, Pilgrimages, and Devotions, the
Common People were deceived, and attributed all their Cures to the Merit of
that Saint, and their own Devotion, which was due to the Physical Virtue of
cold Springs, and God's Blessing on a Natural use of them

The Disuse of these Waters at Buxton I believe was owing much to the
Reformation, which gave a general Aversion to the Romish Superstition, with
which the People being out of Humor, they refused the good Use, as well as the
Superstition of the Baths. And that Age being very ignorant in Philosophy, they
discerned not the natural Virtue of Cold Water, such as is that at Holywell,
and St. Mungus, the most excellent of the Coldest Baths, and the most used to
this time.

The Civil Wars have occasioned the neglect of many famous Waters. But I will
add this most particular Cause of their disuse; As the Virtues of the Waters
formerly supported the Reputation of the Saints, so now the want of a proper
religious Office to be used by the Devout at the time of bathing and drinking
Waters, leaves all to a general Debauchery of Manners in such public places,
and does very much lessen the number of those who would come thither, if both
the Ends of Devotion and Health were served by coming to those places. This
neglect of our Church I could not but censure, being no less injurious to the
Bodies, than the Souls of good Men.

I have endeavored truly to represent to my Country the Virtues of the Bath at
Buxton; and it were to be wished, that the Church would propose some proper
Devotions fitted to such Occasions; and we must depend on Your Grace's
Munificence, for the Splendour and Ornaments of that place, on Your Presence
sometimes, which will occasion a greater Concourse there: And I must humbly beg
Your favorable Acceptance of what I here have writ concerning Buxton; who am,

Your Grace's most Faithful, humble Servant, John Floyer.
Lichfield, May 1. 1697.
THE PREFACE.
Concerning the Nature, Causes, and Effects of Perspiration; and the Regulating
of it by Baths.
BEfore I discourse of particular Baths, it is very necessary to explain the
Nature of Perspiration, which the Hot, Cold, and Temperate Baths do most
evidently alter, as appears by increasing or diminishing the Weight of our
Bodies; and this will oblige me to describe the several Effects or Qualities
produced by the Elements, on both the solid and fluid Parts of Animals, for the
explaining the Changes in our Perspiration by them; by the Fire we heat, by
Water we cool, by the Air our Humors are made fluid, by the Earth, or rather
the Vegetated part of it, as also by our Animal Food, we obtain the Consistence
of our Humors, or the dryness or solidity of our containing Parts. These first
Impressions on an Animal Body, and its Humors, I will, with the Ancients, call
the first Qualities. The Heat and Cold, the Fluidity or Dryness, are perceived
by our Touch; and these produce several other Qualities in our Bodies, as they
are applied either to the solid or fluid Parts; so Heat raresies, and Cold
compresses the Consistence of any Blood and Spirits. And there is a third sort
of Qualities, which the old Writers mention, which depend on the second
Qualities, as they produce Mechanical Effects on our organized Bodies; so Fire
first heats, then rarefies our Humors, and thereby produces Sweat; and these
several Qualities I will describe in the following Discourse, to justify and
fully explain these useful Notions of our Ancient Physicians, which they
observed from what occurred to their Senses.

1. The external Effect of Fire on our solid Parts, is to heat; but we blister
or cauterize them, to cure the Putrefaction, Fluxion, Pains, Convulsions in
them: But its Effects on our Humors are to cause a greater internal Motion in
them, and by its own actual Heat and diffused Motion, so to excite the Motion
of the Aerial Spirits, as to quicken the Circulation, and thereby produce many
mechanical Actions; and by expanding the Air, the Humors are rarefy'd, or
attenuated, as all Liquors boiled on the Fire swell, and are inflated by the
expansion of their included Air.

2. By the violent agitation in the Particles of Fire, and the Inflation
mentioned, some heterogeneous Parts, like a Scum, may be separated from our
Humors, as it appears by boiling or digesting of Juices.

3. Fire attenuates, expands, and resolves the Humors, so as to turn our
Humors into Vapor, and fit them for Perspiration. This Effect of Fire we
observe in distillation of Vegetables, which turns the Watery Liquor into a
humid Vapor, condensible into Liquor again: It dissolves the Gums and
Turpentines lodged in the Vessels of Plants, and by the help of the Watery
Vehicle, distills them, and melts them into the Form of an Oil; It turns the
crude Tartar of Vegetables, partly into an acid Spirit, and partly calcines it
into a fixed Salt; and the rest of the Terrene Parts into Ashes. After the same
manner Fire will resolve Animal Humors: First, The Serous Part into Water.
Secondly, The natural Ammoniac Salt in the Humors into a Volatile Salt, and
the Acid into a fixed Salt. The Oil is nothing but the Globuli of Fat melted,
and the thin part of it distilled over by the help of Water. The Earthy part is
the Ashes remaining. By this Explication it is evident that the Fire changes
the natural States of the Principle by Distillation; but it produces no new
ones, but every distinct Chemical Principle has its Parent both in the Animals
and Vegetables which produced it; but the Difference and Virtue is from the
Fire.

4. External Heat attracts to the outward Parts; for by rarefying the Humors,
it distends the Vessels, and opens the Pores, by expanding the included Air,
and gives way to the Pulse to press the Humors outwardly: So in
Cupping-Glasses, the Pressure of the external Air is taken off by the Heat of
the Fire in them; and the same Heat rarefies the Air included in the Animal
Pores and Juices, which produce the Tumor of the Part.

5. Heat condenses or thickens the Animal Humors, by evaporating the Serous
Vehicles.

6. It colliquates fat Liquors, which coagulate by Cold, as Jelly Broaths, all
Fats, and Axungia's.

7. There is another sort of Colliquation made by external Heat, which we call
the Putrefaction of our Humors, when the natural Viscidity is so far dissolved
or colliquated, as to want a sufficient tenacity or cohaesion of Parts, which
is necessary to make the Bullulae Sanguineae, for retaining Aerial Spirits.
Soap gives this viscidity to Water, which makes it fit to retain the Air blown
into it. We observe all putrid Humors to be very thin and sanious, as it were
colliquated like melted Oil.

The Effects of Cold on our Humors, are contrary to that of Heat; and
therefore as Fire acts by the agitation of its Parts, and diffusion of its
Particles every way, so Cold, whose Seat is chiefly in Water, (for we naturally
depend on that for extinguishing the common Fire, as well as all Animal Heats
or Burnings) affects our Sense of Feeling, and produces its several Effects by
its less agitation in the Particles of Water, than there is in the Humors of a
living Animal. Cold Water is heavier than our Humors, or any other fermented
Liquors; that giving them a great plenty of Elastic Air, makes them lighter,
and more easily agitated than Water. And the same Water may seem Cold or Hot,
according to the different Degrees of Heat, or agitation of our Humors; so the
Urine appears cold to a Person in a very hot Bath: Therefore I must attribute
all the Effects of cold Water on our solid and fluid Parts, to its weight,
pressure, or lesser agitation than that in our Humors.

1. Cold chills the Nerves, by compressing the Animal Spirits, and checking
their Rarefaction, or natural aerial Expansion; and hereby it occasions the
Skin to contract and shrivel, and stops its Pores, and hardens the Skin.

2. Cold Water compresses or condenses the Consistence of our Animal Juices,
partly by its weight, or contact of Parts less agitated, and also by
compressing the rarefy'd Elastic Air in the Bullulae Sanguinis.

3. By the stopping of the Pores, by the compressing of the Juices, the
internal rarefy'd Vapors which are only Watery Globuli expanded by rarefy'd
Air, are retained; and this may be observed by breathing upon a Magnifying
Glass, on the side next the Object, and immediately looking through it, the
Breath appears like a Congeries of large Water-Bubbles broken on the Glass.
These rarefy'd Bubbles in the Humors, and their natural hot Effluviums,
produced by their Digestion, Motion, Circulation, or Fermentation; and if they
be too much evacuated by hot Baths, they make the Body weaker, the Spirits
exhausted; but if moderately retained, the Spirits are more invigorated, and
all the Animal Actions depending on them, Digestion, Circulation, Perspiration,
are well performed: And by this means Cold Water strengthens the natural Heat,
Spirits, and Vigor or Tone of our Bodies; and for this reason the Northern
Nations rub their Frozen Parts with Ice, and have always hardened their Bodies
by bathing in Cold Water.

4. Cold Water by overmuch compressing the fluid Parts of Animals may stop
their Motion, and extinguish their natural Heat; but by a moderate compression,
the Humors may be checked in their Motion; and if very viscid, the Globuli may
cohere, and thereby become grumous, or coagugulate; and this way Rheumatic
Blood may be made by excessive cold Weather, which causes the viscid Particles
to cohere in the Pores when too much compressed. The good Effects of this
Compression are to preserve the natural Consistence and Rarefaction of our
Fluids, and thereby hinder Putrefaction; but excessive cold makes the external
Parts pale, and at last mortifies them with a Gangrene, by hindering the Afflux
of warm Nutriment into the external Vessels, and by congealing some of the
Blood in its Vessels, which putrifies there for want of Nourishment or Motion.

5. Cold Water repels the Circulation of Humors in wardly, and thereby it
occasions Fluxes by Urine, Stool, or Spitting: The quantity of the perspirable
Aerial Parts retained, causes Fevers or burning Heats. The Serous perspirable
retained, give Matter to the Distillations or Fluxes. Cold Countries make our
Bodies pale and white; but the hotter Climes black, swarfey, yellow, by drawing
the Humors more outwardly, and tinging the Skin with their Color: Choler
makes the Face yellow or green; the well-digested Blood florid; the Vitriolic
Spleen Juice, gives a blackness to the Countenances: And by those sensible
Marks, our old Physicians truly judged of the preternatural State of our
Humors. But our Moderns too much neglect the useful sensible Notions observed
formerly; and through a Humor of Innovations, they reject all the Ancients have
writ, though very useful, and as certain as our Senses, upon which they grounded
all their Observations.

The Operation of the Air on our solid Parts, is to compress them. We may
easily discern that Effect, by taking off that Pressure by Cupping Glasses, or
the Air Pump; for then the solid Parts swell by the force of the Air compressed
in our Humors, which always expands it self by its Elasticity, according as
the pressure of the Air, and its Weight are altered; but the great use of the
Air is inwardly, by giving fluidity, which was formerly understood by the
humidity of our Humors. This Effect of the Air on our Humors was not so well
understood formerly; but now we allow that Air is included in all Liquors, and
gives the following Alterations to the Animal Humors.

1. It being included in the empty Pores of our solid Meats, as well as in the
Bubbles of our fluids, by the heat of the Stomach, the included Air being
rarefy'd, it dissolves and separates the Particles of our solid Food, and
agitates those of the Liquors we drink. By this internal Agitation and
Rarefaction of the elastic Particles of the Air, the Food is dissolved,
digested, and fermented in the Stomach, this Air becomes more elastic by a long
Digestion in the Stomach, as is the Spirit of our Animal Juices in its first
Origin, and was properly called by the Old Writers, The Natural Spirit, which
helps the Digestion, Fluidity of Humors, and the Distribution of Nutriment;
the more windy part is that which is too elastic, and goes off in the form of
Wind, both upwards and downwards.

2. In the Blood this Aerial Spirit is more purified, the windy Parts are
thrown off by perspiration, or else by breathing. A violent Agitation or
Rarefaction is produced in the Blood, by every Ferment which occasions a Fever,
or Defluxion of Humors. It is rarefy'd and compressed, according to the Heat,
Cold, or Weight of the external Air; and a violent Circulation occasioned by
any Passion of the Mind, causes the same Ebullition or Effervescence as in
Fevers.

By the Rarefaction of the Air, the Serous Humidities are exhaled by
Perspiration; and by the stoppage of this, either Pains, Fevers, Defluxions, or
Cachexies are produced; the continual Flux of this Humid aerial Part, is
necessary to prevent Putrefaction in our Humors. This is usually called the
Ventilation of them; for as the stoppage of the Fumes of wet Hay occasions an
actual Fire, so the too free Evacuations of these aerial Particles, over-cool
our Bodies, and weaken them.

3. The greatest Effects of the Air is in producing of Animal Spirits, which
consist of the purer Lympha, impregnated with a fine digested elastic Air. The
Glands of the Brain prove that some Lympha is strained through them into the
Nerves; and because none comes forth upon cutting the Nerves, the greatest part
of it must be aerial, by which I express the light fluid elastical Mixture of
Air, Water, and the light Oily Parts of the Animal Juices, produced out of our
Nourishment by Fermentation in the Stomach, and a long Digestion in the
Blood Vessels; and whilst it remains in the circulating Mass, it is properly
called the Vital Spirit; but in the Nerves, the Animal, as it is the immediate
Instrument of the Soul; and this does more immediately receive the Impressions
of Hot and Cold in our Skins, and is variously affected, according to the
change of Weather, and the pressure of the Air. These aerial Spirits are fit to
represent the Agitation of the external Air in Sands; the Motion of the Oily
Particles of Smells, will easily rarifie the aerial Spirits, and thereby
violently affect the whole: This gives Tension and Motion to all the Muscles,
and frequently circulates into the Blood again.

Windy moist Air hinders Perspiration, by altering the Tension of the Skin, or
the Pressure of the outward Air, and by causing an Ebullition in the Humors;
for in Fevers the Perspiration is very much stopped; and when the Blood is in a
confused Motion, and quick Circulation, by an Inflation of the inward
Membranes, the Skin is contracted.

External Cold hinders Transpiration in weak Bodies, where the Fermentation is
low; but it helps it in the strong, as all the Northern People experience, who
are more lightsome; and their Bodies weigh less in cold Frosty Weather, by
reason of a more plentiful Perspiration; and that the Change of Air from Hot to
Cold in the Summer, hinders Perspiration about lb. j. and this produces Fevers
and Distillations, when we change our Clothes too soon: This Perspirabile
retained, makes the Spirits uneasy, till it is evacuated again by Urine,
Stool, or Sweat within three days.

We experience, that in our Bodies being heated, cool Air stops Perspiration;
yet it is as certain that an excess of Cold heats strong Bodies, and makes them
really lighter.

I have described the Effects of Fire, Water, and Air in our Bodies, because
they very much alter the Perspiration; and it is plain, that the Element of
Earth taken in our Food, supplies part of the Perspirabile, and alters the
Excretion of it, according to its different Qualities.

From the time of our eating we perspire unequally, that is, about lb. j. in
the first five Hours, and from five to twelve lb. iij. and from twelve to
sixteen but lb. ss. By this Observation of Sanctorius, it is evident, that our
daily Food must supply the Matter transpired; that till there has been a full
Digestion in the Stomach, and a Sanguification of it by Circulation, no
considerable quantity perspires. And from this Observation it is easy to make
a Rule for our Hot bathing and Exercise, That the Body will perspire more by
them, after five Hours, which time the Meat is digesting in the Stomach; and
that Cold bathing twelve Hours after Meat cannot stop Perspiration much, or
occasion any Fever or Defluxion by shutting up the Pores, the Perspiration
being finished.

The liquid part of our Diet is the greatest and heaviest, and the solid
lightest, being more filled with Air; and so it is in our Excrements; in the
space of one Night we perspire insensibly forty Ounces or more. The quantity of
Urine is about sixteen Ounces; and the hard Excrement but four Ounces.

The quality of the Meat alters Perspiration; copious and crude Meats, as
Melons, Cucumbers, Mushrooms, make the Body heavier; and all the vaporous and
thin or fermented, lighter.

Thin Meats perspire about forty Ounces, as Mutton does; but the thicker, as
Swines Flesh, eighteen Ounces, and in the space of a Night.

Fasting perspires as much; which shows, that in good and convenient feeding,
we perspire the eighteen Ounces from our antiquated Humors, and about twenty
two from our new Diet.

The Flatus in our Diet is, as Sanctorius affirms, rude quoddam perspirabile:
and there are two parts of Perspiration, the one is flatulent aerial, the
grosser part is serous; but sweating is altogether unnatural, unless we eat or
drink more than is necessary.

The preservation of our Health requires, that we should add as much to our
weight as we daily lose, and that we should return every Morning to the same
weight again.

By weighing before and after sensible Evacuation in a Morning, we find that if
our Diet amounts to lb. viij. in a Day, lb. v. passes off insensibly; and that
exceeds all the other sensible Evacuations.

We then account our selves most healthful, when we perspire every Day alike;
and Sanctorius assures us, that we should live to extreme old Age, if our
Bodies in the four Changes of the Year were preserved of an equal weight; but
in the beginning of Autumn the weight of the Body increases, and that makes a
Ferment for Winter Tertians; and from the Autumn Equinox till the Winter
Solstice, we perspire less lb. j. every day; and then we begin to perspire more
till the Spring Equinox; and he observes that in the Summer our Bodies weigh
less by lb. iij.

In the hot Air of Summer, our Bodies are of less Strength; therefore in Summer
it is necessary to concenter our Strength and Spirits by Cold bathing: And
there is not any more certain way to preserve our selves from this dangerous
inequality of weight, than by these kind of Cold Baths, which by frequent use
make the Skin less subject to the sense of Cold, and consequently to an
unnatural Contraction, to stop Perspiration, when we suddenly find the Air to
change from Hot to Cold; or to spend too much of our Strength, when it changes
from Cold to Hot.

That cold Water renders the Skin callous, or, as Pliny calls it, carneous, is
apparent by the Skins of Fishermen, who can endure all the Extremities of
Weather, the thickness of the Skin making it incapable of different Tensions:
But all the tenderness we keep our selves in, makes the Skin more sensible of
Air, and more subject to contract or relaxe, and thereby transpires inequally.

The Causes which stop Perspiration are,

1. After eating, the Circulation goes more inwardly, and the Stomach and Guts
are more tinged with Blood, they growing more warm by their fermenting
Contents, may occasion the Humors to flow thither; and their Contraction upon
the Meat may stop the circulating Humors there; and for this reason eating in
the Morning, in the time of the greatest Perspiration, is improper, till after
twelve Hours, when it is over. Abstinence hinders Perspiration.

2. All Evacuations by vomiting, purging, venery, stop Perspiration, by turning
the Circulation from the Habit of the Body, and may be improper when
Perspiration is necessary.

3. Water-drinking hinders it; and cool, viscid, acid, mucilaginous, styptic
Diet is neither easily digested, nor perspired.

4. The Passions of Fear and Sadness, by stopping the Circulation hinders our
Transpiration; and therefore Hypondriacks cannot be cured, till their Bodies
are made transpirable by temperate Baths, and humid Diet.

5. The pituitous Cacochymia, the serous, tartareous, or flatulent
Constitution, and old Men, and all in whom there is a weak Heat, perspire least.

6. Cold Air and Water, tossing in Bed, Wax, Oil, Fat, outwardly hinder
Perspiration, and ruin malignant Ulcers.

The Inconveniences which attend the stoppage of Perspiration are Pains,
Fevers, Windiness, Lassitude, Tumors, Gangrenes, Erysipela's, Sciatica's,
Fluxes by Urine or Stool, and the Body is heavier.

The Causes of too great a Perspiration will cure the Stoppage of it; and are
as follow.

1. All hot, vinose, acrid, aromatic, salt Tastes in Diet, the actual Heat of
Tobacco, do injury to the Head and Spirits, which requite Cool things; that
Heat over-digests the Humors in the Stomach, and occasions a quicker
Circulation, and febrile Rarefaction of the Blood, whereby it produces great
Defluxions of Serum; it depresses a preternatural Heat on the solid Parts and
Spirits, if the Constitution be hot, choleric, salt, viscid, or putrefactive;
and Tobacco can be only proper for the Cold Constitutions, as the serous,
mucilaginous, and windy. I have often observed Smoking the Cause of
Consumptions, and Scurvy, and Defluxions.

Hippocrates tells us, that the frequent use of hot things, makes the Mind
effeminate, the Nerves weak, the Spirits torpid, and occasions Haemorrhages and
Deliquium's of the Spirits. This seems to me an occasion of the Vapors in Men
and Women, which come by the use of too hot Liquors and Diet, with high Sawces.
Many drink Tea, Coffee, and actually warm Liquors, which put us to continual
Sweats, and evaporate the Spirits; but Pliny observes, that no Animal drinks
hot Liquors besides Mankind.

2. Hot Baths promote Perspiration, and so does hot Air: The warming of Beds,
and the sitting by the Fire, and keeping in the Air of a warm House, disposes
us to sweat; which being, as Sanctorius says, an unnatural Evacuation, they
weaken the Spirits, and the Stomach, fill the Head with Vapors, occasion
Defluxions, softness, and flaccidity of the Flesh.

Many hot Clothes, and wearing Flannel, promote Perspiration too much, and
beget a Lassitude, which proceeds from less Strength, as as well as more Weight
in our Museles.

3. The violent Exercise of the Mind evacuates the aerial insensible
Perspirabile; but that of the Body evacuates the serous Perspirabile, and that
diminishes the Strength. Eating too much, makes Heat, and violent Exercise,
always make the Perspiration visible; but the invisible is only natural and
healthful, and that which follows a perfect Digestion.

Too much Exercise kills more than too little, because of the Accident of
stopping the Pores unwarily by cold Air.

Going into cold Water after violent Exercise, Sanctorius condemns as
dangerous; for by Exercise the Humors are much rarefy'd; and by sudden Cold
the heated Humors immediately coagulate; and for this reason we must not
Exercise before cold bathing, though the Ancients prescribe it, and practiced it.
And the Ingenious Dr. Clayton of Wakefield, (to whom for his Observations on
St. Mungus Well, I am very much obliged) gives me an account in a Second
Letter, that the Americans make sweating-Ovens on the side of the Banks of
their Rivers, which they heat as we do our Ovens, and when cooled again, they
put the Patient to sweat in them for Fevers; and in the height of his Sweat, he
runs into the River, and dives over Head; and these Ovens the Docter has seen
in Virginia and Maryland.

This Practice being against the Reason of our Philosophy, and the Inclination
of our tender Patient, it will not so readily prevail, though Experience stands
on its side; neither would I recommend a Practice very hazardous, to which
nothing should persuade me, till I am satisfied of some extraordinary Advantage
by it, in curing some desperate Distemper.

The Passion of Anger, Joy, as well as Exercise, enlarge the Circulation
outwardly, and thereby propel the Perspirabile outwardly; and they also enlarge
the Expansion of the Animal Spirits in the Cutis, to open the Pores thereof; so
a Net, by only holding it gently, opens its Mashes, but by stretching of it,
they close more.

4. All hot Constitutions and Cacochymia's, such as the Scorbutic, the
Choleric, the Salt states of Humors, perspire too much, their Bloods are like
a Jelly, and the Habit of the Body dry and thin.

In hot Countries, and the hottest Season, and Youth, these Constitutions
suffer most; the Perspirabile is more acrid in these Constitutions, and in
Summer; and if this be retained, it produces Malignant Fevers in Summer; for
Perspiration hindered, produces a Putrefaction; and nothing hinders that more
than a large Ventilation; for Gangreens are cured, and all Tumors, by
restoring Perspiration: But all these Constitutions are fittest for cold Baths,
and receive Injury by hot Baths.

In Sleep we perspire about lb. iij. but in Watching about 20 Ounces; the Body
will fully perspire by being ten Hours in Bed; and we find our selves more
lightsom in the Morning, because our Bodies are really more light, by the loss
of the weight mentioned.

The way to know what Perspiration is natural, is thus; if after a larger
Supper we find by weighing in the Morning fifty Ounces to have perspired in
twelve Hours time; and if we observe our weight in the Morning when we eat
nothing at Night, and that be twenty Ounces, we must endeavor by the use of
the several Causes which promote or hinder our Perspiration, to reduce it to
come near the middle, betwixt fifty and twenty Ounces, viz. thirty five Ounces:
And this will preserve our Health to a Hundred Years, as Sanctorius affirms;
who also assures us, That that Health is most stable, which alters little in
Perspiration.

If by the hot Regimen I have mentioned, as Brandy, Spirits, strong Wines,
smoking Tobacco, strong Ale, hot Baths, wearing Flannel and many Clothes,
keeping in the House, warming of Beds, sitting by great Fires, drinking
continually of Tea and Coffee, want of due Exercise of the Body, by too much
study or Passion of the Mind, by Marrying too young, or by too much Venery,
which injures the Eyes, Digestion and Perspiration to a fourth part, and breeds
Wind and Crudities, heats the Blood, and weakens the Nerves; for all the
Effeminacy, Niceness, and Weakness of Spirits is produced in the Hysterical and
Hypochondriacal: I hope my Counmen will pardon my Freedom of Correcting these
Vices or Errors, when I show them the only Remedies to prevent or cure these
Disorders in their Bodies and Minds, which is by hardening their Bodies in the
experienced cold Baths, first at Buxton, for the most tender, and old infirm
Persons; and afterward at Holywell, or St. Mungus-Well; and the drinking of
the Mineral Waters in Summer, will prepare their Stomachs for frequent drinking
cold Water at other times, by which all hot Constitutions will receive more
benefit, than by Tea, Coffee, Brandy, Spirits, or strong Liquors and hot Baths.

Tacitus gives us the reason why the German Children enjoyed the Strength of
their Parents. Ser a Juvenum Venus, eoque ienxhaust a pubertas. Dominum ac
Servum nullis educationis deliciis dignoscas.

A Languor Lassitude, and more weight, are Signs of immoderate Coition; old Men
are made colder by it by the loss of Spirits, and heavier; but young Men hotter
and lighter.

I do not persuade my Reader to change those Errors of living, without having
first done so my self; for by leaving off strong Liquors, and all hot Diet,
Teas, Coffee, etc. and by Water-drinking, and bathing at Buxton, I have
procured to my self better Health, and more Hardiness, than I have enjoyed for
many Years before. And by the long use of this cold Regimen, I believe we may
reduce our Bodies to an equal Perspiration; if we often weigh our selves in the
time of cold bathing every Morning, we shall find the most natural and
healthful Degree of Perspiration; and we need not fear the stopping of our
Pores suddenly by cold Water, for that for the present will strengthen our
Natural Heat, and cause a more plentiful Perspiration: And by Sanctorius's
Scales he found the Body to weigh less after bathing in cold Water: And that
part of the Perspirabile which passed too much by the Skin, is either hindered
from being bred in the Body, or else passes by Urine; for the more the
Perspiration is promoted, the less are the sensible Evacuations, and e contra.

The Inconveniences and Signs of the Perspiration too much, an languor of the
Spirits, flaccidity of the Flesh, the quick Sense of cold Air, and Shivering
with it, and a coldness of the external Parts: The aerial Perspirabile
retained, disposes to Anger and Joy, but the serous to Fear and Sadness. All
the hot Regimen and hot Baths have preceeded the profuse Perspiration. It is
Sanctorius's Assertion, that those who perspire too much through the Passions of
the Mind, are hardly brought to a due Perspiration: for too much Motion of the
Mind hurts more than that of the Body.

I have more fully reckoned up the Causes and Signs of the stopped or profuse
Perspiration, that by the use of the hot or cold Baths, we might regulate all
Excesses, and by different Baths, make the Rules of Sanctorius practicable, in
maintaining an equal just weight of our Bodies, and that the Addition by Diet,
and Substraction by invisible Perspiration, may be proportionable and healthful.

That I might farther encourage the use of Cold bathing, I will give an account
from Jones, of what he writ concerning Buxton-Baths; and from the rest of our
English Writers, which mention that and other cold Baths.

Hollingshead, concerning Baths, commends Buxton-Baths, and says, St. Vincent's
Well at Bristol, and Holywell, have the same Virtue.

He mentions King's-Newnam near Coventry, and calls the Water Aluminous, and
that he found it to taste like Alum, but not unpleasant in drinking. There are
three Wells, the biggest rises out of a Hill, and from thence the Water is
carried to diverse parts of the Realm to be drank: It cures the Palsy, dimness
of Sight, dullness of Hearing, the Cholic and Stone, old Sores, green Wounds: It
Petrifies by gathering about Oak or Ash Sticks, fine Sand. At first Entrance it
is cold, but after a while it warmeth, giving an indifferent Heat; no Man has
sustained Injury by the same: The Virtue thereof was found 1579. And the Fame
of this Water in Hollingshead's time, equalled that of Bathe.

Speed's Geography mentions these Wells, which he says are Sovereign against
Imposthumes, Stone, green Wounds, Ulcers,; and he says it Petrifies.

Cambden describes the Newnam Springs, near the River Avon in Warwickshire, as
Fountains strained through a Vein of Alum; and that the Water carries both the
Taste and Color of Milk; and that it was reported to cure the Stone, and
procures Urine abundantly, and cures green Wounds. With Salt it loses, and
with Sugar it binds. And from these Experiments we have the hint of using Sal
Mirabile, and Polychrestum, to increase the purgative Faculty of our Waters.

Speed mentions Buxton-Wells, and says, out of the Rock at Buxton, within the
compass of eight Yards, nine Springs rise, eight of them warm, but the ninth
very cold; these run from under a fair square Building of Freestone, and about
sixty Paces off receive another hot Spring, from a Well enclosed with four flat
Stones, called St. Ann's-Well: Near unto which, another Cold Spring bubbles up.
The Report goes amongst the by-dwellers, that great Cures have been done by
these Waters; but daily Experience shows, that they are good for the Stomach,
and Sinews, and very pleasant to bathe the Body in it.

Hollingshead mentions St. Neots, fifty Miles from Cambridge, where there are
two Springs, the one fresh, the other salt: This is good for Scabs, Leprosy;
and the other for Dimness of Sight; and these were very famous, and found out
1579.

The Lord Bacon mentions the deficiency of imitating artificially the natural
Baths, by dissolving the Salts, Sulphurs, Vitriol, in common Water. I believe
we may try to imitate them; and the quantity of the Minerals must give a
similitude of Taste to the natural Waters; the Heat must proceed, as in the
Earth, from actual Fire: And the Quantities of the Contents described by those
who have evaporated the Mineral Waters, show us also what quantity of the
aforesaid Minerals we should dissolve.

Dr. Lyster observed ij. of Salt in lb. viij. of a Salt Spring Water. And Pliny
says, Sextarius salis cum quatuor aquae sextariis, salsissimi maris vim and
naturam implet. And this may be the proportion of common Salt in Salt Baths.

In England we do not yet use the Copper-Waters, as the Ancients did, to drink;
and we want also the use of the Salt Baths, which are very much commended by
Pliny; and diverse other bituminous Waters and Baths. In this Enquiry we have
not yet equalled the Ancients, nor in our accounts of Cold Baths.

Pliny mentions the Albulae near Rome, which healed Wounds, Egelidae hae, sed
Cutiliae in Sabinis gelidissimae, actu quodam corpora invadunt, ut prope morsus
videri possit, aptissimae stomacho, nervis, universo corpori.

He mentions the Spiariae Ficis, Conceptus mulieribus repraesentat, item in
Arcadia flumen elatum; and that the Fountain Linus hinders Abortion. And the
like Virtue we may attribute to St. Winifred's-Well, and other cold Springs,
which stop all Fluxes out of the Body.

Vitruvius describes the Nature of many Springs and Fountains; and observes,
that there were hot Springs without any taste of Minerals, and that Heat was
from actual Fire, maintained by a bituminous or mineral Earth. We observe the
Water in some Springs so rarefy'd or inflated, as to be thrown up as it were by
a Wind. He imputes the Coldness to Salt Petre dissolved in Water, and their
petrifying Waters are coldest. He observes the cold nitrous purging Waters at
Cutiliae, which diminish the Tumors of the Strumae. He observes the Virtues of
the sulphurous Waters, to help the Nerves, the aluminous the Paralytic: But
that all Mineral Waters, inconstant Diet, affect the Nerves and Limbs, by an
Inflation, and nervi Inflatione turgentes contrahuntur, and ita aut nervicos,
aut podagricos efficient homines.

Pliny and Vitruvius mention the Tastes of Waters; that the River Hemera in
Sicily, divides it self into two Parts; and that near Aetna is exceeding sweet;
and the other part, by running through a Salt-Mine, very salt: And others uncti
oleo erumpunt, as the River Lyparis in Cilicia: These Bitumens they used
instead of Oil, for Lights; and they had the Consistence of either Oil, Tar,
Pitch; and they mention one Bitumen of the smell of a Citron at Carthage. Many
miraculous things are related by Pliny of Waters, as their inebriating Quality,
and poisonous, and the changing the Color of the Hair of Animals. And
Vitruvius mentions the smell of Metals in their melting; Gold has little smell,
or more sweet; Silver is a little sulphurous; Lead, Brass, Iron, more foetid.
He mentions the bitter or ingrate Taste of Copper; and that the other Tastes of
Metals were evident by the Water, to which they give a Tincture by standing.

I desire leave to recommend the following Baths to the Consideration of our
Country Practisers, the Virtues of which are the same as the other Cold Baths
have; but the Specific Virtue depends on the Mineral.

At Willowbridge in Staffordshire, there is a bituminous Water, of a pleasant
Oily Taste, somewhat bitterish: It is the smoothest Water I ever tasted or
felt. It seems proper as a bituminous Cold Bath outwardly and inwardly.

The bituminous Baths are useful for the Itch, Leprosy, Tetters, outward
Ulcers; it discusses, and is good for Pains, Gout, dullness of Sight, heals
Wounds, smooths the Skin, helps Lameness and Contraction of Sinews, by its
Oiliness. Inwardly it cures Coughs, Asthma's, Hoarseness, Stone, Gravel,
sharpness of Water, Gripes, Dysentery, by its Oiliness: And by its discussing
warming Quality, it opens Obstructions of the Liver, Womb; and eases inward
Pains, Tumors, King's Evil.

I distilled a clear Oil out of the Water; and, in short, I do recommend this
Water, as one of the best bituminous Baths I believe in England.

At Godsall in Staffordshire, there is a cold Sulphur-water, formerly famous
for Leprosy; and this I may recommend for a Cold Sulphurous Bath, and may be
used as a Sulphur Medicine.

There are diverse Salt Springs in our Country; and these, if mild, may be used
both inwardly and outwardly.

There is an exceeding cold Spring in Sutton-Park, called Routhen Well, which
the Country use for Cold bathing in the Itch; and it may serve the uses of Cold
bathing very well. Small Cottages were built there. The Taste of it is smooth
and Oily.

We have many Chalybeate Waters very useful, at Lichfield, Polesworth, Bromage,
and Blurton; and those who would try the utmost of Cold bathings, must begin
with Buxton, then go to Holywell, and at last try Willowbridge-Bath, which will
Oil and lubricate the Skin; and by this we imitate the Custom of the Romans and
Grecians, who used to anoint with Oil after bathing.

THE Touchstone of Medicines; discovering the Virtures of Vegetables,
Minerals, and Animals, by their Tastes and Smells. In two Volumes.

The Preternatural State of Animal Humors described by their sensible
Qualities, which depend on the different Degrees of their Fermentation, and the
Cure of each particular Cacochymia is performed, by Medicines of a peculiar
Specific Taste, described. To this Treatise are added two Appendixes. First,
About the Nature of Fevers, and Cure by particular Tastes. Second, Concerning
the Effervescence and Ebullition of the several Cacochymia's on which all
Inflammations, Tumors, Pains, and Fluxes of Humors depend, especially those
in the Gout and Astma, and the particular Tastes of the Medicines curing
Ebullitions are described.

By Sir John Floyer, of the City of Lichfield, Knight. M. D. of
Queen's-College, Oxford.

An Inquiry into the right Use and Abuse of the Hot, the Cold, and Temperate
Baths in England.
CHAP. 1.
In which the Nature of Baths and their several Species are examined, and
explained by their sensible Qualities.
THE Occasion of my Inquiry into the Nature of Baths, was some Observations I
formerly made at Bathe, about 3 Years since, and what I thought observable in a
late Visit I made to Buxton's Bath in Derbyshire.

I found these two Baths of different Use in curing Diseases; and I observed
great Irregularity in the Use of both of them.

I observed that many Persons came to the hot Baths at Bathe, without any good
Advice; or they who came with it, indiscreetly and imprudently managed their
Bathing (by using of it without due Evacuation, or continuing of it too long)
that they went from thence worse than they came; some having inflamed their
Blood, and thickened its Serum, so as to renew their Rheumatic Pains: Others
died of Fevers, Consumptions, Convulsions, Bleeding, Imposthumes, not long
after. I frequently reflected on what is also observed by the Ancient Writers
of the particular Injuries done by Bathing; that healthful Persons receive much
Prejudice by hot Baths, which colliquate the Humors, and occasion Fevers, and
Defluxions of Humors, Pains, Inflammations, Obstructions.

These Instances may convince all considering Persons, that we ought not to use
hot Baths for Pleasure, especially where there is a fullness of Humors, and a
hot Constitution; and since the following Accidents frequently happen upon
Bathing, they will certainly overbalance all the Pleasure of it. These
Inconveniences come by hot Baths, Thirst and Fevers, by raising the natural
Fermentation or Rarefaction of our Humors into a putrified State, making them
viscid and salt. Hence come the Pains and Rheums occasioned by hot Baths, and
the Inclinations to much Sweating, and profuse Haemorrhages. Many Diseases of
the Brain are produced by hot Baths; as, Apoplexies, Sleepiness, Vertigo,
Convulsions, Asthma's, Debility of the Sight, Swooning, a general Lassitude,
and a Dejection of the Appetite, and Torpor of the Mind, and Effeminacy of the
Flesh. Hot Bathing binds the Body, swells the Belly, if many Obstructions and
inflammatory Cholicks be there; and makes the Stomach weak, by diverting the
Circulation of Humors to the Habit of the Body, and often occasions Vomitings,
and Coughs, Hickup, and many other Inconveniences I shall hereafter mention.

My Journey to Buxton-Well this last Year discovered to me a Bath very diferent
from that at Bathe, it being a very temperate Bath, prod ucing no Sweating
after it, but rather a Coldness; and upon a due Consideration I found the Bath
very useful in many Cases, in which that of Bathe did Injury; as in
Consumptions, hot Scorbutic Pains, and all Defluxions of Humors, and
Bleedings, and all the hot inordinate Flatulencies of the Animal Spirits in
Hysteric and Hypocondriac Cases. And these I found used by the Northern
Countries, chiefly for Pleasure, without any Method or Preparation, or
Regularity of Diet; and as the Baths at Bathe are commended like a Medicine of
some eminent Quack, for all Diseases, though they require a contrary Remedy to
cure them; so these in the Opinion of the Northern People, cure all their
Diseases, whether depending upon a hot or cold Cause.

By the Observation of the different Nature of the two mentioned Baths, as well
as the Contrariety of the Diseases incident to Animal Humors, I did believe
that some short Treatise would be useful, which explained the Nature of the
several kinds of Baths, and directed in what particular Case each might be
useful, so that Physicians might not send Persons to improper Baths; nor they
incur great Hazard of their Healths by an indiscreet Choice, or Use of a
Disagreeing Bath.

I always believed our Senses were sufficiently acute to discern what was
useful both to a diseased as well as a healthful Body: For by them, we, as well
as the Brutes do examine both our Medicine and Diet.

We perceive that all Odours show the hot Temper of our Medicines and Meats;
That the cooler emit no Odor considerable.

The Taste more evidently discovers the Virtue of all Liquids.

The Astringent Taste discovers a Cooling, Condensating, Repelling, Obstructing
Quality.

The Acid attenuates, incides without Heat, and opens and repels.

The Acrid heats, attracts, discusses.

Bitters cleanse, open, attenuate thick Humors, without manifest Heat.

Watery Tastes cool; thicken, obstruct, mortify, or stupifie.

Salt Tastes dry without great Coldness or Heat, astringe; they preserve from
Putrefaction.

Sweet Tastes concoct; mollify, rarifie, or ferment.

Oily Tastes moisten; mollify and ease Pain.

By the Experiments on particular Tastes, and the observable Modes of our
Tastes, old Physicians, Galen, Aegineta, Orobasius, Aetius, as is evident by
their Discourse upon the Tastes of Medicines, discovered the several
Temperaments of Medicines, and the Effects of them; and by these Tastes they
most particularly examined the Virtues of all Medicinal Waters and Baths. By
them the most barbarous Nations, the Asiatic, African, European, and other
Nations found out the Virtue and Use of their Baths, naturally produced in each
Country, before any great Knowledge was got in Chemistry, Physic, or any
general Philosophy.

There was no other Physic for many Years than Bathing, Exercise, and Diet at
Rome. They believed Bathing to empty all Superfluities; and that Bathing cured
all Diseases depending on an ill Diet, and external Causes, by evacuating the
Fumosum and Humidum, which ought to pass by Transpiration. It corrects the Heat
of our Humors, and discusses the Salt Putrid Humors, producing cutaneous
Effects; as, the Scab and Leprosy.

We have many Senses to help in our Enquiry into the Nature of Bath Waters: The
Touch inform us of those that are hotter than the natural Heat of our Humors;
which are the hot Baths, the Heat of whose Water seems to me most probably to
depend on some Neighboring subterraneal Fire (as Baccius has most probably
conjectured by the burning Hill near the Neighboring Baye;) And he describes
Places in the Field, called Sulphuraria, where the Water really boyls as in a
Caldron; And he imputes the different Degrees of Heat in the Bath Waters to
their being nearer to the Chymnies or Channels of Fire, when they are very hot;
and that the tepid Waters are more remote from them; and he affirms that some
Waters are so hot at Puteoli, that they can depend on nothing less than actual
Fire for their Scalding Heat; because they burn, and blister, and excoriate as
scalding hot Water does: And Baccius further observes, in quibusdam locis ignis
and aqua cum fervore emergunt.

The Neighborhood of Vesuvius and Aetna to the hot Baths in Italy and Sicily
give a sufficient Demonstration of the Cause of the Heat of them; and by Parity
of Reason we may guess that the same Cause gives the like Heat to Baths of
colder Climates, though the Actual Fires are not so evident there.

There are in those Countries Sudatory Caves, where there is a violent actual
Heat; and in some Places the Noise of boiling Waters; all which prove the
Neighborhood of Actual Fire, which has sufficiently manifested it self by
frequent Eruptions, which burnt to Ashes the most Celebrated Buildings of those
Baths.

The fervid Baths in the first Degree are intolerable by their Excess of Heat
excoriating.

The second Degree of hot Baths are very hot, yet fit for Baths, which are
either more distant from the actual Fire, or made more mild by the Mixture of
the cooler Minerals; as, Nitre, Alom or cool Springs. These have very good or
bad Effects, according as they are applied to diverse Constitutions and Diseases
which I will describe in the following Chapter.

The hottest Bath we have, is the long Bath at Bathe; and the King and Queen's
Bath; and the Cross Bath is more mild, but much too hot for a temperate Bath,
the Effects of which will be described in the next Chapter, to heat and dry,
and not moisten.

The second Degree of Baths which our Sense of Feeling discovers is the
temperate Baths, which are near the natural Temper of our Humors; and these
may be useful for the Preservation of our Healths, as well as our Pleasure, and
the curing of some cutaneous Diseases; such are the Baths of warm Water, which
mollify, discuss, concoct, strengthen, and warm.

These are good in Ephemera's, Thirst, Lassitude and Itch.

The third Degree of Baths, of which our Sense of Feeling informs us, is the
cold Baths, which chill our Humors, stop the Pores, and strengthen our Limbs
and Spirits.

The fourth does not only discover the Heat and Coldness of Water, but also the
Roughness or Dryness and the Softness of Waters.

That all these kind of Bathings are very useful, the Experience of all Ages
testifies; and they always applied them to different States of our Humors: For
if we be too hot, our Reason, as well as Experience, prescribes cold Bathing in
Ephemera's and excessive Heats; But if our Bodies be chill, and pained, we use
hot Baths; and for Pleasure, cleansing the Skin, and Preservation of Health,
the most temperate Baths.

The other Senses which inform us of the Medicinal Nature of the Minerals
dissolved in the Fountain Waters, are our Taste, and Smell and Sight.

Fountain Water as such, only lubricates, cools, and mollifies; but the purging
and altering Quality depends on the several Minerals dissolved in Fountain
Waters. These Mineral Waters we artificially imitate, by dissolving several
prepared Minerals in them; and by the Taste of the natural Mineral Waters, we
may be best directed to the nearest Proportion and Mixture of our Artificial
Baths in Imitation of the Natural. There is scarce any two Mineral Waters which
have exactly the same Mixture of Minerals, as we may observe by their Variety
of Tastes and Virtues.

Our Taste shows us that all Mineral Waters dry: For they evidently dry the
Tongue and shrivel the Skin: Though most Baths have compounded Tastes, yet some
one is most predominant; and by that I will distinguish the several sorts of
Mineral Waters and Baths.

1. The sulphurous foetid or stinking Baths: Sulphur is dissolved in these
Baths, which is like the Soot of a Chimney, or Fuliginous Vapors from the
inward inflamed Parts of the Earth. Metals burned, send forth the Steam of
Sulphur; and that is knownby its Putor, and the Taste of Sulphur, is evident in
many Baths.

The Sulphurous Baths are generally hot; but there are many Sulphurous Waters
evidently cold and stinking; for which reason we believe the actual Heat
depends not on the Sulphur alone.

These Sulphurous Baths agree with the cold Cacochymia's, and cold solid
Parts; but are injurious to all hot Constitutions, Fevers and Defluxions of
Humors; in which we prescribe to abstain from Wine, Venery, the Sun and Baths.

It was observed by Aetius, that sulphurous and bituminous Baths very much
offend the Head if it be pumped with them.

The sulphurous Waters may be imitated by boiling Hepar Sulphuris, or Sulphur
Flower in some Lixivium; or a Mixture of Sulphur and Filings of Iron moistened
with Water till they grow warm; or by boiling the Pyrites in Water; the
Quantity of the Water must be so much as to give it a Taste like o the Sulphur
Waters.

2. Bituminous Baths.

Bituminous Waters are known by their acutus Nidor (for the Smell of Bitumen is
foetid) by this their Acrimony and Bitterness, they discuss and heat; but they
mollify more than the sulphurous Baths; because Bitumens have an Oily
Viscidity in them.

All Places that burn in the Earth, have either a Bitumen or Sulphur in them.

Bituminous Waters that have only the Nidor of Bitumen in them, may safely be
drank to heal, dry and mollify; they heal Ulcers, cicatrize Wounds; but they
fill the Head, cause Sleep, and hurt the Senses and Eyes.

These may be artificially imitated by boiling the Pissasphaltus Stone in hot
Water, such as is got in Shropshire, out of the Coal-Pits near Bentall; or the
Matter of the Tar-Wells, may be mixed in Baths; or Ointments for mollifying and
discussing, and the Pitch made of those Stones in Emplasters. No Bituminous
Waters are yet eminent with us in England; though I have been informed, that an
Oil like Turpentine has been distilled from Willow-Bridge Water in
Staffordshire, which has been much commended for external Maladies.

It may be considered how far Barbados Tar, or the common Petrolaeum may be
used for mollifying and discussing Baths, by boiling them in Water to make a
Bath like the Hydrolaeum.

I have heard of a Bituminous Mud in Lancashire, and in other Places, which
would supply the Illutamentum used by the old Romans in External Parts.

Dr. Plot examined the Water in Willow-Bridge Park, History of Staffordsh.
which gives an Oily Taste to the Glasses long used; and that upon
Distillation, the Oil runs over upon the least Heat before the Water, of a
bright yellow Color; and this must be of a Balsamic Quality inwardly, and
have the Effects of a cold Bituminous Bath outwardly: And if this Water were
heated by boiling in a Furnace it must have the Virtue of a hot Bituminous Bath.

Carduan believes Bitumen to contain Sulphur and Niter; it is certain there is
an Oily Part and an Acid in it.

Speed mentions a Well at Itchford in a private Man's Yard, whereon floated a
thick Bituminous Scum, not yet sufficiently experimented.

3. Arsenic Acrid Waters, which burn, dry, absterge and depilate; they erode
the Gums, hurt the Stomach, loose the Teeth, destroy the Horns and Hoofs of
Beasts: Such is the Nature of Arsenic it self, which burns, eats, breeds
crusts, like actual Fire.

Baccius commends the Waters mixed with Sandaracha, if much diluted, for
cleansing the Breast from purulent Matter, and helps the Suspirious, and short
breathed.

We imitate these Waters by a Mixture of Arsenic and Calx viva, boiled for a
depilatory Medicine.

All Acrid Waters corrode, penetrate, putrify, and absterge. Pliny mentions a
Fountain in Germany, on the Seacoast, of sweet Water, which occasioned the
Teeth to fall; Stomace Medici vocabant, and Sceleterbe ea mala. These
Putrefactions in the Humors were occasioned by that Fountain, which must
depend on some such Mineral as Arsenie; and the Herb Britannica was it that
curedit, which was not Scurvy Grass; but by the Description, some kind of Docke.

4. Salt Lixivial Baths from Ashes, as the Calces of Stones; especially Lime,
Marble or Metals burnt.

Where there are Natural Fires in the Earth, there these may be observed to be
dissolved in the Neighboring Waters; and these have the Virtue of Limewater,
together with a Vitriolic Tincture from the calcined Metals.

These Baths have the Virtues of a Lixivium, being inwardly Diuretic, and
externally drying in Hydropical Tumors and Ulcers, and may be imitated by a
Lixivium of Vegetables, or Limewater.

5. Salso acid Baths.

Baths of Seawater are most in Use; which taste bitterish and salt, with a
Dryness and Acrimony, by which it absterges and dries all Ulcers, Scabs, scaled
Heads, Itching and Leprosy, Corns, Tumors and Pains of the Limbs. It kills
all Insects, Lice, Worms; and we bathe in it for the Cure of the Hydrophobia:
These also prevent all Putrefaction in Gangrenes and putrid Ulcers, or venomous
Bites. These salt Waters dry the Hands, and make them rough; and for that
Reason are good for Over-Fatness, and prevent Cachexies and Dropsies.

The salt Waters do not only dry and astringe; but heat, discuss, absterge and
cleanse.

They cure too great a Plethora of Nutriment, or Hydropical Serous Tumors,
according to the old Rule, Sale, Sole, and Siti curatur Hydropisis.

Salt-Waters are good for all Inflammations in Baths, as the Gutta Rosacea, the
Heat of the Feet, Inflammations of the Stones.

It discusses the Inflation of the Womb, and is excellent in the Cure of the
Tympany.

If the salt Waters be boiled and pumped, they cure all Catarrhal Effects,
Deafness, Stupors, Tinglings, Pains of the Head, Spasms, Resolution of the
Nerves. Optimum est in aqua marina assidue natare, was Aetius's Advice for the
loss of Smell.

It helps the Dimness of the Eyes; being warmed, it is proper for Clysters in
Cholicks, Sciatica and Cholera; and in the Mola Vteri, let Women swim in salt
Water, or apply the Steam of it in which Vterines are boiled.

The Spuma Matris used for Warts and other Diseases, is only the Sea Salt
naturally coagulating on the Rocks.

Pliny observes the Saltness of Rains; and that in Autumn they are most salt;
but least in Winter.

Inwardly, Salt binds in Diet, by drying; but being used more plentifully in
Medicine, it purges, by pricking the Intestines; and a large Quantity of it
vomits: It purges by Urine, as all Salts do; and is very useful in Clysters. In
Diet it promotes the Flux of the Saliva; and thereby, as well as by promoting
Fermentation, it helps Digestion. The Sea Salt which is dissolved in the
Bath-Waters, naturally excites Appetite, cleanses away all hot Humors from the
Liver, Spleen, Womb, Kidneys and Bladder, and maybe usefully drunk all Summer
in Nephritic Cases, for the Ardor of Urine.

They are usually prescribed from lb. j. to lb. iij. and so they help the
Dysentery, kill Worms, cure the Putrefaction of the Mouth and Gums: They also
cure the Flatulencies and the Pituitous, and Serous Cacochymia's in the
Cachexies and Dropsies.

They cure the Arthritic and Gouty, being used in Baths, and drank; and very
much strengthen the Limbs, and preserve from the Cholic. They stop the
Gonorrhaea, and Fluor albus.

Salt-Waters are much commended for the Asthma, and they cure the Inflations of
the Womb, bring out the Mola, or Dead Child. They help the Hypocondriac
Inflations, cure the Humidity of the Eyes, the Oedemata of the Limbs, and all
their Pains.

All Salso-acid Medicines by their cleansing Faculties are proper for all the
Cacochymia's, whether hot or cold: For Salt neither heats or cools much; but
preserves the present State of whatsoever Liquor it is mixed with; but salt
Waters are not without some Inconveniences: For the Seawater offends the
Stomach, by its Acrimony: Wormwood much helps the Sea-sickness. The Seawater
much offends the Eyes. Salt Liquors purge, and salt things fill the Head, and
dispose to the Scab, corrupt the Blood, breed a Dysentery, or Consumption and
Scurvy, as is manifest in Mariners; but Navigation is commended for some
Diseases; as, Consumptions, Haemorrhages, Leprosies, Dropsies, Apoplexies, a
cold windy Stomach, old Pains of the Head; and these it may cure by causing
Vomiting. Sailing into Egypt was prescribed, not for it self, but the Length
of the Journey.

We may easily imitate these Waters by dissolving Salt in hot Water to a
demi-Taste: For Baths, or Drinking the Seawater will yield the best salt Bath;
and the next to the Seawater, is the Steam of the boiling Salt at the Wiches,
which cures many Pains and Humors.

There is a great Saltness both in the Bath-waters at Bathe and Buxton. The
Degree of Saltness in both of them seems much alike. If there be any
diffetence, I think Buxton more salt than the other.

Though Dr. Lister found not ij. in two Gallons of the Water, yet if I were to
make an artificial salt Bath, ij. of common Salt or Sal Ammoniac, seems not too
much; and the Use of these seems very profitable. The Waters of Apani are so
salt, as out of them they make common Salt.

The salt Springs contain from a 4th to a 9th of Salt; and the Sea, as Pliny
affirms, is one Part of Salt to four of Water. He commends Seawater in the
Quartan. He commends the Thallassomeli for purging pleasantly, which is made of
equal Parts of Rain and Seawater and Hony-botled.

Aetius commends swimming in the Seawater for the Elephantiasis, and for the
Itch, twice in a Day, before Dinner and Supper.

6. Salt Nitrous Waters.

They taste salt, bitterish, and earthynauseous; by which they become Purgative
and Diuretic, as all Salts be; and thereby cleanse away Gravel in all Nephritic
Cases.

These are proper inwardly for all the hot Cacochymia's, to carry off the sharp
salt Choleric Humors, without Gripes or raising any Effervescencies, to
occacasion new Defluxions in the Gout, Asthma's, Coughs, Inflammations.

There is a Roughness in all the Waters at Epsom and North-hall, and other
English Purging Waters, which will curdle Milk; and this therefore cools all
our rarified Humors; and they strengthen the Stomach and Viscera by it, and
the Gums.

Nitre dissolved in cold Water makes it colder and fitter for the cold
Immersion; and by the Solution we must imitate Nitrous Baths to cleanse the
Skin. The Ancients used to rich it with Nitre in their Baths.

Niter, Ashes and Bitumens make the Waters of a bitter Taste.

We observe a Bitterness in Ashes and Soot, and all burnt things. Sweet becomes
bitter by Heat; and the Blood does bilescere, or become bitter, when
overheated.

In every Gallon of Water there is six Drachms, or eight or ten of the
Sediment, which is compounded of a stony Matter, and common Salt, and Nitre
Calcarium.

In Feverish and Choleric Heats these Waters are most agreeable, and in all
Defluxions on the Head, or Breast, and Hydropical Tumors with a Hectic, and
the Schirrus of the Viscera. They are proper in all Inflammations; Stone,
Scabs, Tettars, hot Cholicks, and all hot Pains; Scorbutie Rheumatisms,
Nephritic Pains, Heat of Urine or Suppression, Jaundies; In Distempers of the
Head; as, Mania, Melancholia, Headaches, Vertigo, in the Itch and Binding of
the Body.

These Nitrous Purging Waters have a mixed Salt of Nitre and common Salt, by
which they purge.

The artificial bitter Salt of Epsom Waters is bitter, and has a remarkable
Pungency. j. dissolved in lb j. of Water, imitates the Taste of the natural
Water. It is usually prescribed ss. to j. dissolved in lb iiij. of any Liquour.

This Water is proper for Vomiting and Heat in the Stomach, dejected Appetite,
Cholicks at the Stomach, Heart-Burning, Hypocondriac and Hysterical Inflations,
Worms.

This is injurious in Fevers, Green Sickness, Paralyticks, Women with Child,
the Hydropical, where the native Heat is decayed, and in all violent
Evacuations and Haemorrhages; as the Cholera Morbus, Suppression of Urine from
a great Stone or Ulcer.

7. The Acid Waters.

These taste cool, and sour or sharp, by which they cool, penetrate, absterge,
excite Appetite, cleanse the Kidneys; they make lean, and keep long incorrupt;
and they resemble Vinegar in Virtue, and kill Worms, and resist Putrefaction.

The Acid seems to be from Sulphur, and may be joined with Nitre, Salt, Copper
or Steel.

We find the German Spaw-Waters to taste sharply Acid, as if it were
sulphurated, which none of our chalybeated Waters do.

We imitate this sort of Waters by Gas Sulphuris, whether for outward or
inward Use, putting so much into Fountain-VVater as to make it tart.

Vitruvius commends Acid Waters for curing the Stone. We by Experience find,
that Vinegar dissolves Egg-Shells, Lead, Copperas, Margarites, and burnt
Flints; and this explains the dissolving Virtue of Acids in soft Stones.
Outwardly we use Fomentations of Vinegar for the Gout.

8. The Styptic Waters, as such, do strengthen the Viscera; and the Ancients
called them hard or rough Waters, and believed them to be from Alom; but our
Moderns call it a Nitrum Calcarium; and such is the Nature of our Well-Waters,
and all our Bath-Waters have a Roughness.

There are these several sorts of rough Waters.

1. Petrifying Waters which are called Gypseae, which contain a Gypsum or Lapis
Calcarius; as the Albulae in Italy.

Mineral Stones have an earthy, drying stopping Faculty. They look whitish, and
have a thick Sediment after Evaporation: They stop Sweat, contract the Skin,
and all the Vessels and Pores, and stop Diarrhaea's and Diabetes's; but are not
commonly wholesome: For Gypsum it self has a drying choking Faculty,
coagulating Humors, stopping the Urine and Breath, and produces Swelling in
the Throat; but they cure Ulcers.

Cool Waters from Marble are compounded for curing Sterility in those Women who
miscarry through Laxity of the Uterus, and a hot and moist Fluxion.

Dr. Lister observed in 60 lb. of a petrefying Water ij ss. of the Lapis
Calcarius, and j. of Salt.

2. The Aluminous Waters cool and astringe without Acrimony. The Aluminous
Taste strengthens the solid Parts. by its Stypticity, and stop all Evacuations
of Humors.

All Astringents are of an earthy Nature, cool.

In Baths these are proper for the Itch, Leprosy, Ulcers, Apthae, Ulcerate
Gums, and Tonsillae, Haemorrhoides, Herpes, Ulcers of the Wombs.

They stop all Haemorrhages of the Lungs, Womb, Abortion, too much Sweating,
and Varices, and Vomitings.

But these hurt the Breast, as all Astringents do, both in drinking and
bathing, particularly in Asthma's and Peripneumonia's; they injure the Voice,
and those that be very thin.

Aluminous Waters curdle Milk by their Stypticity, and so they may alter, fix,
precipitate, or curdle the Humors of Animals. They will not bear Soap, but fix
on the Salt, and separate the Oil from it, by which they find they will fix all
the Animal Volatile Salts; and the Spirit of Urine turns Alom-Waters milky. By
these Experiments we know Alom-Waters, and demonstrate their Virtues.

3. The Vitriolic Calybeate, which are Astringent with an Acerbity.

These by their Stypticity strengthen the Viscera, and are therefore good in
Fluxes, Spitting of Blood, Cholera, Whites and red Diabetes, Abortion,
Nocturnal Pollutions, Obstructions of the Spleen, Liver, Cholic, Hestic Fevers
and Quartans. They cure Vomitings, Stoppage in the Kidneys, Womb and Bladder.

They cure the Hydrophobia; for which let them drink through a Cloth, that they
may not see the Water: They are also proper for Scabs, Ulcers, Consumptions;
and cure all the hot Cacochymiae, the choleric, salt, viscid, muriatic,
vitriolic, and putrefactive State of our Humors; but they are injurious
sometimes in Fluxes of Humors, in Coughs, Asthma's, Gouts, Schirrhus's, and
Fevers.

These Chalybeates are most specifically proper for the Stomach and Spleen.

These have a mixed Quality, and operate according to the Virtue of the
prevailing Quality of the Mixture: For the Chalybeate heats and opens, though the
Waters cool.

These we imitate by putting j. of Vitriolum Martis to two Quarts of Water or
j. of Dr. Willis's Steel infused into a Pint of Water, thus;

. Chalibis Willis j. fiat Infusio frigida per triduum, in aq. lactis lb. j.
colaturae, capiat coch. j. in haustu aquae quolibet mane per mensem unum vel
alterum in Aestate.

The Water in which Gold is quenched, leaves some Impression from the Heat of
the Fire, but no Metallic Vitriolic Taste; neither does Silver heated and
quenched.

The Chalybeate Waters are from the Pyrites, and are good Eye-Medicines, being
Acrid and Styptic in Taste.

Raddle, Bole, Lapis Haem^atitis, Smirum, Schistos, have something of the Iron
Tincture: Lapis Haematitis gives a dry cooling styptic Quality to Water: Lapis
Schistos is found in Iron Mines.

All Waters that look red, or tincture the Earth with a Rust, have another.

Other Waters incide, and are Diuretic, abstersive, and differ according to the
Metals amongst which they grow.

Marle makes Water styptic, and makes Cider into which it is thrown of a
Vitriolic Taste. Marle-Waters bind much.

Our salt Springs are observed by Dr. Lister to turn with Galls.

4. The Copper Waters have an Acrimony with an Acerbity, as other Waters have.

Copper Waters are the Atramentosae called so by the Ancient Writers, Omnis
Atramentosa aqua tenet Aeris naturam.

They are very styptic and hot, or acrid; They dry, thicken and contract, and
are unfit for drinking; They corrode the Stomach, and purge by their Acrimony.

Calcitis is the Stone; Calcanthum is the Rust of it.

These Waters astringe less than the Iron; but have a Virtue of Healing and
drying, and cleansing by their Acrimony. Outwardly they cleanse the Leaprosie,
discuss Oedematous Tumors, stop Bleeding both by the costic and styptic
Quality; and by the same they cure the Scab and scald Head.

Aetius recommends Copper-Waters for the Mouth, the Tonsils, Uvula and Eyes,
when ulcerated: They are also useful for the Diseases of the Breast, Senses,
Sterility, dejected Appetite, Fluor albus, Scab, Asthma, Ulcers, Dropsy,
Apthae, Flatus,

Chrysocolla grows in Copper-Mines, and partakes of that Mineral; as, Lapis
Armenius and Lazuli do.

By these the Waters may be impregnate: Chrysocolla may be wholly dissolved in
Water, and give a hot drying abstersive Quality to them, sometimes offensive to
the Stomach.

The Factitious Borax is made from Nitre and Urine, agitated in a Copper
Mortar. And this is the Factitious Chrysocolla. Dioscorides.

Chrysocolla is the Rust of Copper and Gold, as the other is of Lead, Aerugo of
Copper, and Ferrugo of Iron.

We may imitate Copper Waters by putting some sort of the Vitriol to them in
such a Quantity as may give the Tastes of the Natural Waters impregnated with
Copper, which is about j. or ij. to every Gallon of hot Water.

Punice found in any Waters is a Sign of a Copper Mineral.

All purging Waters have either Nitre, or Salt, or Sulphur, or Copper or
Bitumen in them, and most a Mixture of them, and are proper for different
Cacochymia's.

Cardan commends Copper Waters for the Atra bilis, if they have a Mixture of
Gold, and are moderately hot, as Viterbium.

In Italy and the Piperinae in Germany these purge, that Humor; these clear
the Senses, conduce to Cheerfulness and long Life.

Dr. Grew affirms, that Spirit of Nitre affus'd to the Calamy-Stone, and both
put into Water, give a very acerb and very bitter Taste like the Chrystals of
Silver,

That the Taste of Copper is bitter, ingrate, Vitruvius affirms.

5. Lead-Waters are very cooling: For Water agitated in a Lead-Mortar, and any
Ointment in the same manner, becomes more cooling.

These Waters dry Ulcers, the Leprosy and Cancers, and the Piles, and are
proper for all those Cases in which we use Lead-Medicines; but they are
esteemed injurious to the Breast, the Nerves, Stomach and Intestines, which
they oppress, and seem heavy, and they are said to weaken the Joints.

Saccharum Saturni dissolved, may imitate these Waters, about j. to every
Gallon; but the Taste must determine the Quality, till we have exactly adjusted
the Strength of the Artificial and the Natural Waters by the Similitude of
Taste.

The Water at Holy-well is believed to come from the Lead-Mines, and to receive
its extraordinary Coldness from thence; by which it becomes a famous cold Bath
in many Diseases.

6. Quicksilver Waters.

Such have been observed in Spain at the River Minium, where the Waters are hot
and sulphurous, with a native Minium. These Waters are impregnate with Sulphur
and the noxious Vapors of Quicksilver. The factitious Cinnabar may probably
imitate the native; because they both contain Sulphur and Quicksilver; and
either may be boiled in Water to supply these natural Baths. These are used for
Scabs and all Ulcers, and will do whatsoever Sulphur and Quicksilver can
effect: But these Waters are described as acrid, by Baccius, who recommends
them for the Itch Leprosy and pocky Ulcers.

7. Antimonial Waters. Those are reckoned amongst the Steel Waters, styptic and
astringent; and must be also accounted sulphurous.

How far the Decoctions of Antimony, or the Preparations of it may imitate the
Natural, may be easily tried.

Pliny recommends Antimony for a Medicine for the Eyes.

8. Waters are mentioned by Baccius impregnated by the Minerals of Gold and
Silver. Those we cannot expect in our Country, where we can only quench Pieces
of those Metals in saline Water, to which they only give an Impression from the
Heat of the Fire, and probably rarifie the Air contained in fair Water; but
they give no metallic or vitriolic Taste to the Water, as I have tried by
tasting the Water; But the Metals must be purely refined; but the natural
Waters must have a Vitriol, by which they are esteemed useful to the Splenetic
and heal Ulcers.

9. Tin certainly impregnates some of our Waters in England; but I have not any
Account of their eminent Virtue, which must have the Medicinal Virtue of that
Metal.

We cannot but admire the great Wisdom as well as Kindness of Providence in
preparing so many Mineral Medicines for the Use of the Diseased Part of
Mankind. The great Creator only, knows the infinite Variety of Diseases,
Constitutions, and the great Necessities of Mineral as well as Vegetable
Medicines. Them he has prepared in as great a Variety as the Diseases and
Constitutions themselves.

For which I need no other Instance to prove my Assertion than the Variety of
the Baths and Mineral Waters I have mentioned; which are so eminently
impregnated with Variety of Minerals, Salts, Vitriols, Sulphurs, Stones, etc.
which evidently prove a distinct Nature of every one of those Waters; and to
apply these, the great and wise Architect has required no more of Mankind but
to use his Senses to discover by their Impression how each Mineral Water
affects their Tastes, Smells, and alters their Bodies upon Man's external
Experiments made of them.

By these means our Reason, and Sense, and Experience directs us to a right Use
of these Waters; therefore nothing can be more irrational, as well as
prejudicial to Mankind, than to use any one Bath, as the narrow-Soul'd
Physicians do for all sorts of Diseases.

Nature seems so concerned to unlock the Mysteries of her Chemistry, that by
the Colors of some Waters we may discover their Contents, as well as by their
Tastes.

Okre makes the Mineral Waters yellowish, Sandaracha, Stybium, Mehuteria,
Molibdena, livid and raddle, reddish Nitre, clear Gypsum, whitish, the Sediment
after Distillation. The Curious of this Age have tasted and observed their
Color, and Quantity, and made many Experiments with them to observe their
Virtues; but since there are so great a Variety of Mineral Tastes mixed in Bath
Water, and many of them so volatile, as to evaporate upon Distillation, I
cannot confide in these Experiments as certain Trials to discover the Contents
of Mineral Waters; But in the curious Tasting of them by a Palate Experience
and internal Preparations; for that Sense takes the Object in a perfect State;
but after Evaporation, all the Volatile Mineral Particles exhale; so that by
that Means it is impossible to discover the true Contents of Mineral Waters,
which have so great a Variety of Tastes, and Virtues, that scarce any Two have
the same Mixture of Minerals in them.

By the Microscope we have in this Age attempted to improve the Knowledge of
the Ingredients of Mineral Waters, by observing the Figures of the
Chrystallizing Salts: And this Method may succeed well enough where there is
only Salts dissolved in a Mineral Water, and that but of one sort; but since
most Waters have other Minerals besides Salts, and frequently a Variety of
Salts; such as the Microscopical Observations want a Name for; and therefore
call it Sal sui generis.

For this Reason I should never trust the Microscope for giving a full and
satisfactory Account of any Waters, without an Appeal to our Senses of Taste,
Smell, Feeling, and many practical Experiments, both inwardly and outwardly.
All the Advantage by Microscopes is, to confirm our other Senses, and help them
to discover the Figures of the Mineral Salts which affect the Taste.

CHAP. II.
Concerning the right Use and Abuses of the hot Baths.
HOT Baths both by being drunk or used outwardly, heat the Humors, and raise
the Pulse, and quicken the Circulation, Agitation of the Blood, and its
Compression by the Pulse, the Heat expands the Aerial Spirits contained in the
Humors, which is the immediate Instrument of Digestion, Fermentation, and the
Feverish Ebullition of the Animal Humors to produce the several kinds of
Defluxions.

I call those hot Baths which have very hot Water, and some Tincture from the
Sulphur or Bitumen.

The Waters at Bath have not only a considerable actual Heat, by which they
produce their Effects; but they have a Saltness to cleanse, as well as a
Roughness, to strengthen. The Sulphur in them, has also particular Effects by
its discussing Faetor: And I remember the Cross-Bath Pump-Water tastes
evidently Vitriolic.

The Roughness in the Water depends on the Nitrum Calcarium. The Saltness on
common Salt, which is in double Proportion to the Nitre. The Lapis Calcarius is
double in proportion to the Salts; but the other evaporates by boiling.

From all these sensible Qualities, we may deduce very easily all the Effects
of the hot Baths at Bathe, as well as the Injuries they do when they are used
improperly.

1. The Actual Heat makes these Baths agreeable to all Constitutions that are
Pituitous, Serous, Cold, Flatulent, or have any Acerbity in their Stomachs, or
Gachexies in their Bodies, or are very cold fat Constitutions. To all these
Diseases of the fluid Parts the hot Baths are contrary, and effectually alter
them.

2. In an Obesity, or too full a Habit, we evacuate the Succus Nutricius by
sweating in these Baths.

3. These hot Baths by rarifying the Humors and relaxing the Parts, open all
the Obstructions in the Blood Vessels or Nerves, dissolving the scirrhous,
serous, oedematous and flatulent Tumors and the Obstruction of the
Chyle-Vessels in the Tumors of the Abdomen.

The Reflux of the Blood is promoted by these hot Baths, at the latter end of
all Inflammations, of any inward or out Part, in the Varices and Haemorrhoides.

4. The Secretion of Humors through their Glands is promoted by hot Baths.

First, In the Jaundice.

Secondly, In Hypocondriac Obstructions of the Spleen.

Thirdly, In the cooler Scrophulae not inflamed.

Fourthly, In the Secretion of the Animal Spirits through the Brain in
Stupidity, their Expansion through the Nerves in the Palsy and Rickets,

Fifthly, These hot Baths cure the Suppression of the Excrementitious Humors
by agitating the aerial Spirits in them, as well as by opening the Pores by
their actual Heat.

1. In a Suppression of Urine. 2. Want of Stools by Purging, if drank to two or
three Quarts: to which usually common Salt formerly or of late Sal
Polychrestum, Sal Mirabile Glauberi, Sal Catharct Epsom are added. 3. The
Stoppage of Transpiration is immediately helped by these hot Baths, and the
Pains and Fevers depending on it if used in the Beginning. 4. The Suppression
of the Menses. 5. The Retaining of a Mola. 6. The Suppression of the
Haemorrhoides. 7. The Tumors of the Limbs and Anasarca are discussed by Sweat.
Sixthly, Hot Baths promote the Motion of the Animal Spirits through the Nerves
and their due Expansion.

1. In Palsies, Apoplexies, Lethargies, toward the latter End. 2. In
Blindness, or Gutta Serena, after due Evacuations. 3. In Deafness, being pumped
on the Ear. 4. In Loss of Speech, and Taste, and Smell. 5. In the want of
Appetite. 6. In Venere languida. 7. In Difficulty of swallowing.
Seventhly, Hot Baths relieve all Pains depending on the cold Cacochymia's, or
external Accidents; as Wounds, Bruises, Fractures.

1. Old Headaches. 2. Pains at the Stomach. 3. Cholicks. 4. Tooth Aches,
Ear-Ach. 5. Strangury, from the Gravel, and the Pain of the Stone. 6.
Joynt-Pains; as, the Sciatica, Rheumatism, and old Gouts in cold Constitutions.

In all these Pains it eases very much, if no Fever nor Inflammation attend
them, if the Fluxion of Humors be over, and the Body well cleansed by bleeding
and purging.

Eighthly, There is a detersive Faculty in the Bath-Waters from the Salt and
Sulphur, by which they are also Diuretic; and by their Stypticity they heal all
Ulcers.

As,

1. A Varica and Pthysis. 2. A Dysentery and Tenesmus. 3. Ulcers of the Eyes,
Ears, Stomach, Mouth, Womb, Arms, Gums. 4. Ulcers of the Viscera, Liver,
Spleen, Kidneys, Lungs, Ulcers of the Glands in the King's Evil. 5. Gonorrhaea,
or Ulcers of the Prostatae, Elephantiasis. 6. The Itch and spots in the Skin.
Ninethly, Hot Baths cause a Revulsion of Humors, and so stop the Evacuations.

1. By Vomiting. 2. Diarrhaea's and Fluxes after strong Purges. 3. The Fluor
Albus. 4. Incontinence of Urine through Weakness.
Hot Baths turn the Circulation outwardly into the Skin; And in Poisons these
Baths by rarifying the Humors and opening the Pores, occasion the Circulation
to be enlarged more outwardly.

Tenthly, Hot Baths discuss the Humors in the Pores of the Skin, as in the
Itch, Leprosy, and are good in the Use of the Psylothra.

Eleventhly, Hot Baths may be used in a depauperate state of the Spirits,
depending on pituitous, serous, flatulent Cacochymia's, and in all Flatulencies
of the Womb after Miscarriages.

Purging is proper for old Diseases affecting the Head, Nerves, and Joints. The
Top of the Head must be pumped in Cepha^a Hemicrania, Memory lost, Melancholy,
Lethargy, Stupor, Deafness, Blindness. Let it be done in the Morning, and it is
usually prescribed at Midnight for 20 Days, but in Spasms, Palsies, Trembling
of the Head and Hands, Pump the Neck and spinal Marrows.

This Pumping only agrees with cold Diseases and cold Constitutions; but for
the hot Head no bituminous or sulphurous Waters do well; but the Aluminous and
Fountain or cold Waters.

The End of the Spring and Beginning of Summer in the best time for Bathing in
hot Baths; because the Summer following continues the Pores open. Autumn
Bathing occasions the Pores to be so open toward Winter, as to render all
Persons subject to the Changes of Weather, and makes them sensible of Cold all
Winter. And this let my Countrymen consider, who are used to the contrary.

Bath-Waters are best drank when most free from Rain; but the best time is in
May: For the Waters heat, and cause Transpiration.

Hot Bathing and drinking Waters is improper for hot Weather.

The Injuries done by the hot Baths are,

1. The Vehemence of Heat in the Baths are over dry, heats body, and thickens
their Humors: Therefore they are unfit for Children, and delicate tender
Persons, whose Flesh is easily dissolved by excessive Heat, which also
over-drys and decays old Men, dissipating their languid Spirits; and all thin
languid Persons are much decayed by them; and the thin Hypocondriac are
over-dry'd by their Heat, and made subject to Ephemera's, Fluxes and hectic
Fevers.

2. Hot Baths are injurious to choleric Constitutions, by exciting intermitting
Fevers and Ephemera's.

3. This sort are injurious to all viscid Constitutions of Humors, which
produce Rheumatisms, Inflammations and Pains during the Effervescence of
Humors, and the Defluxions.

4. The Saltness of Blood is increased by hot Bathing, which raises the
Digestion of Humors, and promotes a violent Circulation of them.

But the drinking the Bath Waters is not injurious to these Constitutions;
because they cleanse away the Choler, dilute the Viscidity, and wash away the
Saltness of Humors.

6. The Putrefaction of Humors is promoted by hot Baths. For this Reason we
condemn such Baths in Fevers intermitting and malignant, in the Hydrophobia,
and Poisons and Pox. Some Minerals are dissolved in that Water, convenient for
the Itch, Leprosy, scald Head, such as Salt and Nitre which kill Worms and
Lice that are the Effects of Putrefaction.

7. In a general Leanness tho'they spend the Succus nutritious; yet they open
the obstructed Pores, and restore the Circulation to a Paralytic Member in an
Atrophy of it.

In very great Fullness of Humors, hot Bathing occasions the Breach of a Vein,
by rarifying the Aerial Spirits in the Blood.

If Thirst be troublesome, Bathing increases it, and Drinking allays it.

8. The Defluxion of all Humors is promoted by hot Baths, which colliquate or
rather rarifie the Aerial Spirits in our Humors, and open the Glands through
which they may flow. And for this reason we forbid hot Baths duing all
Defluxions in Catarrhs, Gout, Asthma's or Pains; Inflammation and Cephalic
Diseases depending on a Defluxion, Ephemera, or intermitting Fevers, and in all
sorts of Inflammatious and hot Pains, with Fevers, as, Erysipelas, Phlegmons,
Cholicks, Headache, Strangury, Stone, Gout, Rheumatism, Quinsie, Parotis,
Inflammations of the Piles, Intestines, Stomach, Liver, Spleen, Kidneys,
Phrenitis, Opthalmy, Inflammations of the Lungs, Pleura, Breasts of Women,
Testicles of Men, and all running Ulcers succeeding them. All Ulcers and
Inflammations receive Prejudice in the Beginning by hot Baths, and also by
drinking the Waters very hot; but in the Declination, the Bath discusses the
Inflammation and cleanses the Ulcers; but all necessary Evacuations ought to
precede.

Hot Baths ripen all inward Imposthumes in the Lungs, Liver, Spleen, Kidneys,
Womb, Intestines, Bladder. These Baths are injurious in all Putrefactions; as,
Fevers, especially Hectics, Apoplexies, Phrensies, Carbuncles, Cancers.

Hot Baths excite Venereal Pains, as all Fevers do, and make all Coughs and
Catarrhs worse; for which we better prescribe cool Diet, Air and cool Drinks,
which better agree with them.

9. In all Haemorrhages these hot Baths are mischievous; as in that by the
Nose, Womb, Anus, Vomiting, or pissing Blood, and Coughing it up, or in the
Hepatic Flux.

10. These Baths are injurious in Fluxes of Humors out of the Body as
Diabetes, Gonorrhaeas, Abortions and too much sweating.

11. They are mischievous in Evacuations of the Semen into the Cavity of the
Body, as in Ascites, Dropsy of the Thorax, Hydrocephalon; they promote the
greater Flux of the Rheum into the Cavities.

12. The great Expansion of Spirits producing Watching, usual to old Men, and
salt Constitutions are made worse by Bathing.

13. The great Explosion of the Spirits in Convulsions is much irritated by the
Heat of Bathing; as in Epilepsies, Hysteric Passions, and other Convulsions,
Palpitations, Singultus, Coughs, Sneesing.

14. The irregular Motions of the Spirits in the Brain is promoted by hot
Baths. In the Melancholia, Mania, Hydrophobia.

15. The Flatuosity of the Spirits is too much rarefied by hot Baths, in
Vertigoes, Asthma's, Tympanites, Incubus, and Hysteric Tumors.

Sulphur Baths, and the Bituminous offend hot Spirits by their strong Smell,
and so occasion Fluxes.

Hot Bath-Waters cool by Accident, by opening the Pores, for evaporating of the
Heat; or if they purge, or be very Diuretic, and have a Tincture from Lead,
Nitre, Alom.

Hot Baths after Meat occasion Rigors, Horrors, Fevers; and after Bathing we
must not eat till all Disorders are over, and then the Stomach will not be
disordered, nor the Head filled. Sleep after Bathing, and Abstinence digests
and evacuates Humors, and composes the Disorders of Bathing.

Vini potus a Balneo tanquam venenum habendum, was the Observation of the old
Physicians. A Horror at the Beginning of Bathing, which may be produced either
by the hot or cold Baths, by the Constriction of the Pores, or Fullness of
Humors, shows the Profitableness of that Bathing.

Those that have Fevers, Pains, Fluxes, or any great Evacuations are not fit
for hot Baths; and we must take care of the Injuries of Weather after Bathing.

We are more secure in Night-Bathing, when after the Exercise of the Day, we
bathe, and sup after Bathing: And the Gentlemen who go to Bath for Pleasure may
practice this.

The Time of continuing in the Bath, is an Hour, or according to strength; and
after 7 Hours, the ancient Prescription was to return to the same. Young Men
may bathe oftener than old Men; who are too dry; Once in a Day, or every other
Day is enough for them.

The salt, nitrous, sulphurous, aluminous Baths purge, by which they cure
Obstructions and Dropsies; and the Drinking the Water is necessary for 14 Days
before Bathing.

CHAP. III.
Of Temperate Baths.
THE more temperate Baths have only a mild Heat, like that of our Bodies, and
are therefore less beneficial for cold Diseases, and less injurious to the
Healthful, who use them chiefly to wash their Skins, to temper the natural
Heat, to take off Weariness, and strengthen the Limbs; but these Baths are
frequently prescribed by the Ancient Physicians for Preservation of Health
after Exercise, in an empty Stomach; and after a Stool in full strength; and
they ought not to sweat after them; but they were dried and anointed, and eat
after the Disturbance of the Bath was over; and a regular Diet was used for
some time after Bathing, avoiding Repletion of Meat or Drink, too much ^leep,
Watching, great Exercise, Passions, Injuries of the Weather; after Excess and
Venery, they avoided Bathing, and after Bathing avoid Wine, which offends the
Head.

But these Baths have many Physical Uses, besides Cleanliness, and Beauty, and
Pleasure, and are observed to be useful in the following Cases.

Tepid Baths moisten and warm; if more tepid, they cool and moisten; if more
hot, they heat, and moisten less.

Temperate Baths are proper for Children who are moist and hot; but all
Minerals dry them too much.

Wash the Infants after long Sleep, when most empty, and rub them.

This cures their Coughs, stuffing in their Heads, their Scurf and Itching, and
breeding Teeth.

In the breeding Teeth the Ancients bathed when the Fever remitted, and
prescribed Water-drinking to the Nurse.

Bathing Infants does Injury to their Ruptures.

Since old Age is cold and dry, by hot Baths we relieve them, which by their
temperate Heat warm and moisten; and Wine is allowed them after Bathing, and
then Sleep. Ut lavit, sumpsitque cibum det membra sopori.

Temperate Baths cure all hot Intemperies, and are proper for all the hot
Cacochymia's, the bilious, viscid, vitriolic, corrosive state of Blood,
especially if Nitre, Alom and Steel be dissolved in them, and are usually
prescribed for the Choleric and thin Hypocondriac at the End of the Spring; but
all hot Baths injure those Constitutions.

A Plethora without a Fever is helped by Bathing frequently and long in these
temperate Baths; and much Exercise is to be used before Bathing as well as
Friction; and after Bathing anoint with hot Oil in these full Bodies.

Dry Constitutions may bathe after eating, and that will feed them: They may
bathe again after 4 Hours, and be fed with As^es Milk, and anointed with cool
Oils before they be clothed. The Ancients used this Method to cure the dry
Intemperies, and prescribed a convenient Diet, and Friction; and they cured a
hot Intemperies, if joined with a dry, by Water-drinking.

By Baths of temperate Heat we cure Ephemera's, which depend on Heat,
Lassitude, or Cold; but if a Catarrh attend them, that is not convenient till
the Declination.

In a Diary of many Days, after three Days, bathe, if no sign of Crudity
remains.

Hectic Fevers require temperate and cooling Baths; and unless the Head be put
into cold Water, bathing does them no good.

Baths are injurious in Fevers, if there be Pains, or Inflammations in any
part, or the Fever be putrid. Sometimes in the Declination, after the
concoction of Humors, they may promote Sweat. In these acute Diseases Rhasis
condemns them. Nunquam vidi Balnea in aliqua dispositione febricitantibus esse
utilia.

These Baths are useful in Hemicrania's, and all other Pains; as that of the
Spleen; and is very proper in the Declination of Inflammations, as in a
Phrenetic, if that Disease has lasted long, and the Body be thin; and the same
Bath agrees with the Lethargy in the Declination.

These are proper in Melancholic cases, in the declination, where they are to
be moistened, or nourished.

In young Men and Lovers they help the Melancholy.

After fourteen days the Pleuritic may use it.

After the Inflammation and Pain of the Gout is over, and sometimes in the
vigor of the Fit, when Watching, and Pain are excessive: But the use of much
bathing relaxes the Parts, and excites a new Flux in all Pains and
Inflammations, and Rheumatisms, by opening the Pores, and heating the Humors.

Temperate Baths help the passing both Urine and Stool, even in Fevers. In the
Cholera they are good in the declination, and for Diarrhaea's.

Dysenteries, Inflammations from Crudities, the Jaundice, and the Stone, the
suppression of the Menses, and Strangury from a hot Cause.

They are proper for all Priapisms, and Inflations of the Womb, and that
dryness of it which causes Sterility.

It facilitates the birth for them that have hard Labor, by relaxing and
mollifying.

It brings away a dead Child, and Mola, and false Impregnation; especially a
Bath of temperate Salt Water.

For Poison from Cantharides, we use a Bath of Hydrolaeum.

It cures all the Diseases of the Skin, Itching, which Opium gives.

It helps Ulcers, Scabs, Bruises, Strains, Pimples, wounded Nerves, after the
Flux is over, and all Heats of the Viscera, and several Parts, by exhaling the
fuliginous Vapors through the Pores.

Bathing cures Watching, and causes Sleep.

Emaciate Limbs must not sweat, but be pumped, or wet with the Water.

These Baths help weakness of Digestion, weak Memory, Sadness, Apoplexies,
Palsies, and Tremblings after the Flux is over. It cures the Scurvy, and
corroded Gums.

In short, these Baths open and discuss by their heat; they promote the
digestion of the Stomach, the distributing of the Nourishment, the circulation
and digestion of Humors, the secretion of the excretory Juices, and discuss
all Infirmities out of the Pores of the Skin.

Bitter detergent Baths.
We may make these Baths of Marine-Water, and impregnate them with Bean or
Lupin-Flower, which is bitterish; or with Fenugreek, to cleanse the Skin, and
bitter Almonds.

Briony-Root, or the Bulb of Narcissus, are used for bitter deterging Baths;
and Bran is useful to cleanse as well as Soap.

Anodyne Mucilaginous Baths are made of the Decoctions of Althaea, Mallows,
Mercury, Linseed, Fenugreekseed, Fleaban, Violets, Bran, Thistles, Chickweed,
Duck-meat; to which may be added Narcoticks, Cynogloss, Poppy-heads, Henbane,
Solanum.

Nutritive Milky Baths.
A Bath of Milk and Water twice in a Day, or else the Decoction of Sheeps-Head,
or Capon-Broath, is proper for the Consumptive. Or else a Decoction of Barley,
and sweet-Almonds in Water; to which may be added the Cold Seeds; or the
Decoction may be made of the whole Gourd, to cool and moisten.

For the Leprosy a Bath of Blood is commended.

Wine Baths.
These heat, strengthen, dry, ease Pains, discuss Swellings, strengthen the
relaxed Parts, cleanse Ulcers, heal Wounds.

As the Wine inwardly hurts the Brain, Nerves, and Joints; so it makes amends
to these Parts outwardly: And we experience the Bath of Must to be more useful
to the Joints, by its fermenting heat; and the fervor of the Wine heats, opens,
discusses, comforts the Limbs, and removes Pains, and is profitable to
Oedematous Swellings and Inflations.

Oil Baths may be placed under this Title, useful in Convulsions, Pains,
Suppression of Urine; the fifth part of the Oil being heated, and added to the
rest; and this used in a Tetarus twice in a Day; but a long Stay in a Bath of
Oil, does much spend the Spirits, as Aegineta observes.

Baths of Hydrolaeum moisten the dry and weary Members, ease Pains, Headache,
and Wounds, with Convulsions, Colic, Pains, difficulty of Urine, Wounds of the
Nerves, and hard Labor.

The Cross-Bath at Bathe ought to be kept of a more temperate Heat than it is
usually managed, that it might have the Benefit abovementioned; but it
appeared to me of a Heat above that Temper; and is made very hot, to answer the
Effects of the hot Baths, by letting in hot Water through Pipes from other Baths:
For which reason it becomes very injurious in all the Cases I have mentioned,
and particularly to Plethoric hot Constitutions, and Hysterical Women.

I have sometimes observed it moderate; but generally it is abused, so that it
cannot answer the Design of a temperate Bath, fitted for healthful Persons, or
the Diseases mentioned.

I could not but observe another great Absurdity practiced there, which is the
drinking the Water very hot from the Pump, to have more of the Mineral-Virtue
thereby; for that Gas of the Mineral too much affects the Head, and causes
Sweats, and is injurious to the Hysterical, Asthmatic, and all hot
Constitutions.

Healthful Men may bathe according to Custom in moderate Baths.

Trallianus tells us, that bathing after Meat does thin Bodies more good than
Morning-bathing, if the Bath be of a moderate heat; such as that of Aqua-Dulcis.

Studying and Sleeping much is very injurious in the use of Baths.

Bathing till the Parts begin to swell, nourishes them; but longer continued it
wastes them.

The Injuries done by the Temperate Baths are the same as by Hot Baths, but in
a lower Degree; for if the Body be not prepared, Baths produce Fluxes of
Humors, especially if there be any inward Inflammation, they are mischievous,
or if there be a Plethoric Body, they may occasion an Asthma, Apoplexy,
Vertigo, Convulsions, Pleurisy, Peripneumonia.

If any inward Part be infirm, as the Lungs, Heart, Stomach, Liver, or any
disposition to the Gout, or any other Flux, these Baths colliquate the Humors,
and open the Glands or Pores to receive the Flux: It is like applying
Fomentations before Evacuatives; these weaken the Spirits by Evaporation, and
fill the Head, occasion the Epilepsie, Vertigo, and other Convulsions.

These Baths ripen all Impostumes, and are therefore dangerous in Obstructions
of the Liver, Consumptions, weak Kidneys; and they promote all unnatural
Evacuations, as Haemorrhages, Whites, Gonorrhaea's.

In the time of the Plague they occasion the Infection to be more easily taken,
and prepare the Humors to receive any other Infection.

Hysteric Women ought to abstain from bathing, which fills the Head.

The Asthmatic receive much prejudice by bathing; it ripens the Tubercula in
the Lungs.

CHAP. IV.
Of Cold-bathing; the Benefits and Injuries of it: To which is adjoined an
account of the Bath at Buxton in Derbyshire.
THE use of Cold bathing is very Ancient; for Pliny relates that Carmis, a
Massilian Physician, condemned the Custom of Hot bathing, and persuaded the
Romans to bathe in Cold Water; in the midst of the Winter, Months during the
greatest Cold, he dipped the sick in the Lakes of Water. Videbamus senes
consulares in ostentationem usque rigentes.

This Cold Demersion was used in Augustus's time, by Antonius Mysa, and his
Brother Euphorbius, to astringe the Pores, to unite the Heat, and to strengthen
the Limbs; and Galen was so much of their Opinion, that he thought the Hot
Baths were only preparatory to Cold bathing; and on that, the greatest Benefit
depended.

Bathing in Rivers, and the Sea, was most Ancient for Exercise, Pleasure, and
curing Diseases.

A place for swimming in Cold Water was provided for in the Roman Baths, and
was more Ancient than they.

The manner of the Romans was to conclude their Hot Bathing with the Cold
Water; which shows the good Opinion they had of Cold Immersion.

Galen's Method of Bathing was thus; first they exercised in a Morning; then
they entered the Laconicum, where the Air was warm or hot by the Steams of the
Water, or Fire; and there the Pores are opened, and they sweat; the tensity of
the Skin relaxes, and the Humors more rarified to pass the Sudatory Glands,
through which the Pulse being raised by the heat, or the less pressure of the
external humid Air, propels the attenuated Serum.

From the Laconicum they descend into the Lavacrum, or into hot Water, where
they sweat as much as they please: And from thence they came to the Cold Water,
that what was overheated by exercise or bathing, might there be cooled, and the
Strength confirmed by thickening the Skin, that the innate Heat might not
transpire too much, and thereby make the Body cold; for Cold bathing
constringes the Pores, and hardens the Body, as hot Iron is cooled and hardened
by cold Water. By these it is evident, that they invented the Hot Baths to
prepare weak Bodies for the Cold. From the Cold Bath they went into the
Tepidarium or Apodyterium, where the Air was tepid, and they were rubbed from
Sweat; and anointed. Afterward Meat and Drink, and Sleep were prescribed.

It was the Custom of the Germans to carry the newborn Child to a River, there
to dip it in the Water, to strengthen the Body, and to try their natural
Vigor; for if it were very weak, it often died; for which reason Galen
condemns this Custom as barbarous and dangerous. This Custom he says is more
fit for Beasts, to procure them a hard Skin, insensible of Cold; and he
believes it not necessary for Men to have a thick and hard Skin; for according
to Hippocrates's Observation, a rare thin Skin is necessary for those who
transpire out many hot Vapors and Fumes; for if they be retained, the Body
suffers by them: And a thick Skin is useful against the Injuries of the
Weather: Both Excesses are to be avoided; the Skin is not to be thickened so
far as to hinder transpiration; or to be kept so rare, that by all Accidents of
Weather it may be much affected.

Virgil takes notice of the Custom of bathing Children in cold Water, in these
Verses;

Durum a stirpe genus natos ad flumina primum,
Deferimus, saevoque gelu duramus and undis.
This is the Method Galen gives for Cold bathing, for the preservation of
Health in Persons fully grown, for strengthening the Limbs, and thickening the
Skin against the Injuries of Cold, he advises this Method in the beginning of
it, in the hottest time of the Year, in the middle of the Day, and in fair
Weather, when the Water is not perfectly Cold, but Tepid, and the Person be
fasting and empty, then he must use this Bath, having first exercised, to
excite a natural Heat, to resist the Coldness of the Water: And after Exercise,
and Friction, let him demergere into Cold Water. The Demersion ought to be
sudden, and not gradual, to prevent a Horror.

The Person who must be used to Cold Water, ought to be in the midst of the
fourth Seven Years, in perfect Health, and to be well rubbed with Linen, and
after well rubbed with Oil. The first time the Water must be Tepid, not very
Cold; but the second time he may use it very Cold; and at his going out let him
be rubbed with Oil till he is very hot. Continue this Three or Four Days; then
after an Interval, if he approves of a Second, but not a Third bathing for the
same time.

They stay a moderate time in the Water who come out well-colour'd after
Friction; but if they be less warm, and pale colored, they have staid in too
long, which must be avoided.

After Clothing, let the Person rest an Hour at least, and then eat more than
he drinks; for after this Cold Immersion, the Appetite increases, the Thirst
abates, they concoct better, their Muscles are stronger, and the Skin is more
hard and dense.

These Baths unite the Heat, turn the fuliginous Vapors into Sweat, excite the
Expulsion of the Excrements, and loosen the Body: It cures Lassitude if used by
intervals, and the Heat occasioned by traveling in the Sun; the Caninum
appetitum ex immodica transpiratione.

Thus far Galen has instructed us in the use of Cold Baths.

Hippocrates gives us this Aphorism concerning Baths.

A Salt Bath heats and dries; a Hot Bath extenuates the Person that is fasting,
but heats and moistens him that has eat: And Cold Baths effect the contrary. By
which Aphorism we perceive he knew the Virtue of Cold bathing, that it warmed
and hindered the extenuation of our Body when empty, by closing the Pores, and
restraining the evaporation of our Aerial Spirits; but the Cold Baths cool and
dry them that have eaten: It cools by checking the Fermentation of the Humors,
and their rarefaction: It dries by repelling the nutritious Humors from the
Skin, as Hot Baths are said to plump it up by relaxing it, and rarefying the
Humors contained in the Vessels of it.

From Hippocrates's Aphorisms about the use of Cold Water in Fomentations, we
may learn the Benefits and Injuries of Cold Water; for Fomentations are bathing
particular Parts only.

This is the use of Cold Things, or Water; we must apply them to the place that
bleeds, or about them; and they may be used to extinguish the ardor and burning
of Inflammations, which have a Sanguine Color at the first, but if the
Inflammation have continued long, it causes a livid Color: It also helps an
Erysipela not ulcerated, but is very dangerous to them that be ulcerated. He
also recommends Cold Water to foment the hot Tumors, and Pains of the Gout, or
Joints, which are without Ulcers, and for Convulsions. In these he prescribes
the affusion of much Cold Water, which mitigates the Pain, and extenuates the
Part; and a moderate Stupor allays the Pain.

By these Aphorisms we are plainly taught, that the Cold Baths may be
profitable for all Haemorrhages, Inflammations, Erysipela's, Pains, Gout,
Convulsions; and he deals thus Ingenuously in giving an account of the Injuries
of cold Fomentations: And the same are of cold Baths.

Cold is injurious to Ulcers, for that hinders the Evacuation of their Sores,
and the Nutrition of the Part. It thickens the Skin by contracting the Parts.

Cold hinders pained Parts from Suppurating, by checking the Flux of Blood to
it. It produces Livors or Blackness in the Parts if too long continued, by
stopping the Circulation of the Blood, and Transpiration of Vapors. It
occasions Febrile Rigors, from the Irritation of the Nerves, by hot Vapors
retained in the Body. It occasions Cramps from the same Cause; and the Stoppage
of the Circulation through the Muscles.

All these Inconveniences happen in Cold Bathing, which I will give an Account
of.

Aetius mentions the famous Albulae, quae sapore subsalse and tactu lactei
teporis. He says they were Aluminous, Sulphurous, and that by their Nitrous
Salt they cleanse Ulcers; and that they were drank the first day three
Hemina's, viz. thirty Ounces; the second Five Hemina's; the third Six Hemina's,
to purge and cleanse: They promote Sweat and Urine, stop Bleeding, strengthen
the Parts, stop all Fluxes of Women and Men, heal the Ulcers of the Bladder and
Kidneys, prevent Abortions, Fluxes of the Belly, Laxity of the Stomach,
Vomiting; they excite Appetite, cure all hot Intemperies, an ill Habit of the
Body, and Dropsy, discuss Flatus, and cure Cholicks.

Gallen mentions the Injuries of the Albulae, that one by Stoppage of the Skin
fell into a Fever by the use of them: And though they be eminently petrifying
Waters in their own Springs, yet they produce no such Effect in the Bodies of
Men.

Aetius commends Cold Baths for curing all Diseases depending on Defluxions of
Humors, especially if they have any Medicamental Taste, viz. from the Minerals
(of Lead, Iron, Alum, Nitre; for these are all of them the Cool Baths, as
Bitumen, Sulphur, and Salt make the Hot Baths.) He commends the Albulae to be
drank, as very profitable against all Defluxions.

Caelius Aurelianus commends Cold bathing in all Fluxes of Blood in the Asthma,
and acquaints us with Asclepiades's Opinion, that Water-drinking and the
Pseuchrolusia were necessary for the preservation of our Health.

Thus far I thought necessary to transcribe from the Ancient Writers, to show
their Opinion and use of Cold bathing; and from hence I suppose our English
Physicians did formerly direct the use of the Cold Immersion in England. Such I
must call the bathing in St. Winifred, St. Mungus, and Buxton Baths, by which
many particular Diseases are cured, or the Health preserved: But the Niceness
and Effeminacy of this Age, has much neglected their Use; and the reason of
this may be the absurd Advice given to Patients, to frequent the Baths at Bathe
for all Diseases; and the use of them will render all Persons more Effeminate:
But I hope all prudent Men will in time consider the disingenuity of that
Advice, and endeavor by the use of the Cold Bath, to render their Bodies
strong, and their Skins less subject to the changes of Weather. It is the Hot
Countries which want Hot Baths, to evaporate the extreme Hot Particles of their
Blood; but in our Northern Climes, we must close our Pores, preserve our native
Heat, and, if we will live long, and healthful, we must render our Skins dense
and close, by Cold Water, that the sudden and frequent Changes of the Air may
not give us so many intermitting Fevers, and so many Defluxions of Humors,
which render the English People unhealthful; nor upon all Occasions let the Air
affect the Spirits of Hysteric and Hypochondriacal Persons.

Cold Baths in England may be distinguished into Two Degrees;

First, The extreme Cold, such as that at St. Winifrid's-Well, and the other at
St. Mungus-Well, in Yorkshire, near Knaresborough. The Experience of our
Countrymen has approved of these Baths, as very useful in the Rickets, and many
other Diseases, which depend on Transpiration in too great a measure; and the
High Fermentation, the quick Circulation or Digestion of Humors, or the
frequent Defluxions or Evacuations of them through the Glands.

The Second Degree of the Cold Baths is the Bath at Buxton, for that being one
of a Milky Tepor at the first feeling, and by being long felt, renders the Body
more cold and shivering; and by this chilling of the Body I may easily infer,
that though it has an actual Heat, and boyls up with Bubbles, as the Baths do at
Bathe, yet it has not a Heat equal to the Rarefaction and natural Warmth of our
Humors; and for this reason I cannot but reckon it as one of the Cold Baths:
And a most excellent Contrivance Providence has shown in it, by giving it so
much Heat as to hinder the sudden or violent Constriction of our Pores, so as
to occasion Fevers or Defluxions, and to indue it with such Ingredients of Salt
and Nitre, or Alum, as to cool, strengthen, cleanse the solid Parts, and close
up the natural Heat of our Humors, by constriction of the Pores.

The Effects of these two kinds of Cold Baths may very probably be guessed at,
because these Baths have contrary Qualities and Effects to the Hot Baths, and
therefore it is very just to assert, that where the Hot Baths disagree with our
Patients, the Cold ones will be proper.

According to this Rule I will describe the Virtues both of the extreme Cold,
and the Tepid Bath at Buxton; they all have the same Effects, but Buxton is
more mild and safe, because of its actual Tepor.

Children, Women, and old Men faint in the Hot Baths; but the Cold ones agree
with every Age and Time; but the Coldest Baths agree best with young Persons in
perfect Health, whom they make more robust; but they must be brought to the use
of them by degrees; and the best time to use them is in the Summer, not in the
Winter.

The use of the Bath at Buxton being very safe, it is fittest for all infirm
Persons to use first, before they try the colder kinds; for by the use of this,
they may be safely and by degrees used to Cold bathing. And this is proper for
Autumn-Bathing, to close the Pores against Winter, and after the use of the Hot
Baths.

The Constitutions or Cacochymia's in which the Cold Baths are most agreeable,
are the Cacochymia's which are Hot, as the Choleric, which may be very much
cooled, and altered by drinking of Cold Water, especially the Water of St.
Ann's Well at Buxton, for that will cleanse away all the Choleric Sediments
from the Stomach, Guts, Liver, and Blood; and by bathing long, check the Pulse
and high digestion of the Blood; for that does not occasion any Sweat after
bathing, but we stay in the Bath till we are very chill, and then go to a warm
Bed, and lie there without sweating, till we become dry and warm again.

Hot Baths make the Pulse vehement, great, quicker, and by this the Humors are
more attenuated, the Aerial Bullulae in the Blood agitated, rarified, and by
compression propell'd through the Glands of the Skin, because the Pressure of the
external Air is much lessened by the Humidity and Heat of the Bath.

But in all the Cold Baths the contrary happens; the Pulse becomes slow, small,
rare, languid; the Bullulae in the Blood are more compressed, and the external
solid Parts shrink, and are constring'd, and all Evacuations are stopped.

Because of these Effects I infer, that the use of Buxton Baths externally and
internally, are proper for all the Hot Intemperies of the solid Parts, and all
the Hot Cacochymia's, viz. the Choleric, the Salt, the Viscid, the Muriatic or
Corrosive, the Vitriolic or Melancholic and Putrid State of Animal Humors.

But as the temperate hot Baths cool by opening the Pores, and evaporating the
Hot rarified Humors, or Aerial Bullulae, so the Tepid Baths, or moderate Cool
Baths, a little stop the Pores, and for some time after the use of Cold Baths
of that temper, we observe Persons to be warmer sensibly to themselves, as I
have heard them to complain, from their Observation of their own Temper.

But as the hotter Baths at Bathe do wonderfully inflame all Persons, and
thicken their Serum; so on the contrary the coldest Baths produce a full
Stoppage of the Pores, and occasion a Redness in the Skin; and after they are
put to Bed, great Sweats, Fluxes of Urine, and Stools; so that the use of the
coldest Baths put all Persons into an Ephemera, and that occasions the
Defluxions by Stool, Urine, and Sweat observed after cold bathing.

We ought nicely to distinguish between the permanent Effects of the Hot and
Cold Baths, upon the fluid Parts of Animals, viz. the Blood and Spirits, and
the Alteration which the use of them gives, by a sudden Evacuation, or stoppage
of Transpiration; for the permanent Effects of the Hot Bath is the
Volatilization of the Oily and Acid parts of the Blood, and the raising the
Digestion of our Humors, as well as more invigorating the Pulse and
Circulation, and rarefying the Aerial Bullulae or Spirits in an Animal, though
for the present they evacuate some hot Particles, and by accident cool us, as
is evident by using Hot Baths in Feverish Dispositions, Defluxions of Humors;
and we observe all Hot Constitutions to complain of their Heat; so that Cold
Baths, they heat by Accident, by stopping the Hot Humors from transpiring; but
cool and stop the Agitation of the Aerial Particles; and they agree with
Fevers, Hecticks, and all Hot Constitutions depending on the over-digestion of
Humors.

The Reason of the Heat following Cold Baths, may be given from the hot
rarified Particles being straightened from evaporating, which act like a Ferment
in the Blood; or else may be explained by the Changes in Water upon its
freezing; for the Vertuosi inform us, that by applying of Salt and Ice for
freezing of it, it first subsides, and afterward rises again in the Bottle in
which it is froze; and this Effect probably depends on the Air included in the
Water.

That Cold bathing cools the Humors appears by the following Instances, in
which Galen experienced it.

In a very hot burning Fever Galen advises as soon as the Signs of Concoction
appear, if the Strength be strong, and a young Person, boldly to give him cold
Water to drink; and if he be corpulent, and the Season hot and dry, to put him
into cold Water, which he says may be done without Injury; and thereby he will
universally Sweat, and some Persons will have bilious Stools: But if the Fever
be mild, and the Strength weak, and there appear signs of Concoction, he
advises the temperate hot Baths, and Wine: And concludes that of Fevers, as
Fevers, Cold Water is the Remedy, unless there be a Putredo, an Obstruction of
the Pores, a Fullness or Debility of Strength, or Stomach, or some Tumor in any
Part.

He prescribes all bathing for Fevers in the Declination, not in the Beginning.

He gives the Cold Water to drink, as much as the Patient pleases, in all
continent Fevers, by which all Sweat, Vomiting, or Looseness was produced; and
this was the general practice in Continent Fevers, by bleeding, drinking Water,
and Cold bathing. But in Lassitudes, heat upon Travels, Pimples, and
Transpiration stopped, bathing in temperate warm Water was used.

In Hectics Galen affirms that the temperate Bath does no good, but the Cold,
to which the hot Water only prepares them; and this he confidently prescribes,
if there be no putrid Fever, or Inflammation of the Lungs; but he condemns the
drinking Cold Water in Fevers, as injurious to Hectics.

The manner of bathing Hectics was thus; Let him be carried in a Sheet by Four
Men, and dipped twice or thrice in the hot Water, and after let him be dipped in
the cold once; then put him into other Linen, and dry him, and remove him to
Bed; let him stay but little in the cold Water, and be dipped but once, and
anointed with Oil.

All the Ancient Writers commend bathing in Cold Water for the Hydrophobia; and
hence comes our Custom of Dipping Persons bit by Mad-Dogs in the Seawater.

Not only the frequent throwing of Persons into the Water may cure the odd
Fancy against Liquids, but the Coldness may prevent the Fever attending that
Venom; and as Salt outwardly is used to the Bites, so that Water may check the
putrefaction of our Humors by that Poison. In this Disease the Water at Buxton
may profitably be drank and bathed in for one Month's time, till the Change of
the Moon is over; for this Water is salt and styptic; by both which Qualities
it may be useful.

That the Water at Buxton is profitable for the Salt Cacochymia, is evident by
the cure of the Itch; and Wiseman commends the swimming in Rivers for scabby
Soldiers; the saltness cleanses the Skin from its putrid Ferment; and the
stypticity heals its Ulcerations.

It is also observed, that the drinking of St. Ann's Water is useful for the
Scurvy by its cleansing salt Quality; and it heals the putrid Gums.

These Salt-Waters at Buxton are useful in the Morphew, Scald-head, Tetters,
and all other Diseases depending on external putrid Ferment; they may ease the
Pains in the Venereal Diseases, for all hot Baths irritate them.

These Buxton Baths are useful also for the Leprosy, after general Evacuations.

The drinking the Water, because of its evident Saltness, is good against the
Worms.

The experiencing this Bath, and the two colder at St. Winifred, and St.
Mungus, is not irrational; for the Cancerous Humor, whose Putrefaction they
may probably more effectually check than any other Method yet known; for if
these Cold Baths can check Putrefaction, they must be used as well as a cool
Diet, against this State. In a Putrefaction the viscidity of the Blood is
destroyed, and the Consistence of the Blood is made fluid, because the natural
viscidity of the Cake being dissolved, the Liquor thereof cannot be made into
Bullulae, to contain the Aerial Spirits, and that gives the great languor in
all putrid states of Blood, as the Scurvy and Malignant Fever; we commonly
observe, that a viscid Liquor, such as Soap and Water, or new Beer, may be
easily raised into Bladders or Bubbles, by mixing Air in it; but in stale
Liquors the Consistence wants a Viscidity to retain the Air in Bubbles: And all
Gangrenes, Cancers, and very putrid Ulcers, have a thin Sanies; we observe a
Rheumatism Blood in the Cancerous; but that is only the Chyle coagulated by the
Vitriolic Blood; not withstanding that the Cake of the Blood often appears then
putrid. And since the Hot Baths increase all Putrefactions, the Cold ones may
probably do the contrary.

Plato was cured of a Fever by an Egyptian Priest, who ordered him a Bath of
Seawater, as Diogenes Laertius affirms.

Cold Water is used in Kent for the cure of the Quartane, as some of that
Country have informed me, standing in it before the Fit.

A Bath of Tepid Water is useful for the cure of Ephemera's; and the Bath at
Buxton is used by them that frequent it, the same Night they come thither, to
cure their lassitude, heat, and thirst: I may therefore commend this Water in
Ephemera's, to cool in their Declination, and to be drank in the beginning.

This Water at Buxton is useful in too great an Obesity, or Tumor of the
Viscera; by its saltness it cleanses by Urine; and its stypticity externally
shrinks the Flesh.

The drinking those Buxton Waters may be useful in many Obstructions of the
Viscera, as Jaundice, Obstructions of the Mesentery, Spleen, Kidneys, by reason
of their Saltness; but their Stypticity makes them fitter for all Fluxes of
Humors, in which old Authors most commend them: And since the Hot Baths do
that Effect of Deobstructon sufficiently, we may leave Obstructions to their
cure.

Aetius de seminis profluvio recommends bathing or swimming for that Infirmity,
and affirms that the Cold Water cures all Diseases depending on Defluxion of
Humors, especially if they have any Physical Quality, as the Albulae in Italy,
which being drank, are profitable to all Defluxions; and those he describes as
Sapore subsalsae, and tactu lactei teporis; and there was a Mixture of Alum in
them, as the old Writers guessed, by their stypticity, by which they astringe
all the solid Parts both outwardly and inwardly; and that renders them less
subject to Defluxions.

The Effects, Heat, and Taste of the Waters at Buxton being so like the
Albulae, I cannot but compare them with one another; and by Analogy to them,
explain the Virtues of Buxton Waters.

When they are drank, they must by their Humidity dilute the viscid Humors, by
their saltness they cleanse away the precipitated Salts, or Sediment of our
Blood, by Urine; and by their stypticity they stop the rarefaction of the
Bullulae in the Blood, and the violent agitation of the Aerial Spirits enclosed
in them. I compare Blood to other fermenting Liquors, which have large Aerial
Bullulae contained in them after a demi-fermentation, which gives the briskness
and pungency to such Liquors.

By the Taste we observe these Effects of the Buxton Waters on both the fluid
Parts, viz. the Blood and Spirits; and the solid Parts, or hollow Pipes, which
contain the other; and we do from thence rationally infer, that they are useful
in the following Defluxions; and Experience has confirmed the same, in these
following Species of Defluxions.

1. The Flux of Blood by the Nose, Anus, Uterus, Vomiting, Spitting, Urine, and
in the Hepatic Fluxes and Dysentery, and all Haemorrhages.

2. In the preternatural Evacuations of the Nutritious Humors by Vomiting,
Looseness, Diabetes, Plyalismus, Gonorrhaea, Fluor albus, Abortion, weeping of
the Eyes; in all these Buxton Waters are convenient; and in all incontinence of
Urine, and in all Catarrhs and Asthma's, these Bath-Waters of Buxton may safely
be drank and bathed in; and they most particularly stop too much Sweating by
their stypticity and coolness: They both thicken the Humors in the Glands, and
constringe the Excretory Vessels in the Skin; and inwardly they, like other
cool Diet, thicken or check the rarefy'd Humors and Air; for if Fluids be a
Congeries of Bubbles, with Air included, the Matter we expire and transpire,
(which the old Authors call another sort of Respiration) is some of those
Globuli or Bullulae, which are the Integrant Parts of Fluids; and the Air being
rarefy'd by Motion and Heat, make the Bullulae too light for the gravitation of
the other Parts, and more fit to be forced out of the Animal Liquor, both by
the Pulse, and Gravitation of the other Globuli, to which the Rarefaction of
the external Warmth contributes, by weakening the Pressure on the Fluids in
Animals.

That Aluminous Baths condense the Skin, is evident by the tanning of Leather;
the Skin is frequently condensed by the Blast of cooler Air, which occasions
its Constriction by a sort of a Convulsion we call a Horror; by both these ways
externally we may condense the Skin, and constringe the Pores by bathing in
Buxton Waters.

The density of Skin is known by its pale Color, hardness, and its Pores
appearing as the Skin does in Winter, like a Goose-Skin: They are difficultly
heated by Exercise, and sweat little, and have no great Color after it in the
Skin. If this Constriction be too much, we must cure it by Hot Baths, anointing
with Dill-Oil, or that with Horseradish, with a soft Friction.

In Dropsies the use of Salt Water outwardly, and inwardly, such as that at
Buxton, may do very well; and by the Saltness, to cleanse by Urine; and by the
stypticity to strengthen, or heal the Lymphaticks, in the Ascites and Anasarca.

In the cure of the Motion of the Animal Spirits, the Cold Baths have these
Advantages.

1. In Palsies they stop the Pores, and accidentally occasion an Ebullition in
the Humors; that is, first by a subsidence of the Aerial Bullulae, and after
that by a kind of Spring natural to the Air, a Restitution or Expansion again
to their Natural Vigor, Motion, and Extension, by which a Distension is made
in the Nerves, and an Ephemera in the Blood; and by these means a
De-obstruction is made in the Nerves in Paralytic Persons; and this has been
sufficiently experienced in the Palsy and Rickets.

As to the Palsy, I heard a Relation of a Cure done by my Ingenious Friend Dr.
Barnard, upon Dr. Gold's Son-in-Law, who told me a Story, the Particulars of
which I cannot well recollect, more than that a young Boy being Paralytic, with
the loss of Speech, by a few times being put to the Cold Bath, recovered his
Motion and Speech, when he had tried all other Hot Methods, and the Hot Baths,
without any Success. This was related to me by Dr. Gold himself at Bathe.

As to the Rickets, I have annexed the Letter of Dr. Clayton, concerning the
Virtues of St. Mungus-Well, near Knaresborough in Yorkshire; and it seems to
me that an Ephemera occasioned by Hot bathing, does the same thing as a
preter-natural Heat, or an Ephemera from an Annual or long use of Hot
Medicines, which are Nervine. The cure of the Rickets and Palsy both by cold
bathing, shows the Rickets to be a Species of the Palsy in Children, whilst
they are increasing, which makes the Bodies unequally nourished, the Pulse of
the Arteries being very deficient in the Paralytic Parts, and the Humors
unequally circulated, the Head is too big for the Proportion in Embryo's,
because the Bones are made before the Muscles; and the Muscular Flesh does not
so well increase in any Bodies, as in those that have due Spirits, to give a
Stop to the Circulation of the Blood in the Muscles, which probably is the
Cause of their Motion; and the Muscular Parts by Motion, Friction, Cold
bathing, grow robust, plump, and of a due proportion to the rest of the Body;
and for the increase of the Muscular Flesh and Strength, Cold Bathing is used
at St. Mungus-Well.

In the want of Appetite, the drinking St. Ann's Well at Buxton may be useful
both by the Saltness to stimulate and cleanse, and the stypticity to strengthen
the Stomach.

The effect of the coldest Baths may be tried in the Gutta Serena, Syncope's,
Deafness, in the loss of Smell and Taste, in Weakness of Erection, or Venere
languida, in the Weakness of Swallowing; for if the Cold Baths can cure an
universal Palsy, why may they not cure the Palsies of particular Parts, which
I have mentioned?

In the want of Sleep, the Bullulae of the Serous Humors which fill the
Nerves, are too much expanded, and this causes the Vigiliae: This elasticity of
Spirits is abated by the humidity, coolness, and stypticity of Buxton-Waters,
both drank, and used for Baths; and for this reason we bathe in them going to
Bed.

2. Pains depending on Inflammations, and Viscidity of Humors may be corrected
or prevented by these Baths, as hot Headaches, Gouts, Scorbutic Rheumatisms,
Pain at the Stomach, Cholic, Tooth Ach, Strangury, Stone, Quinsie,
Inflammations of the Mouth, Uvula, Tonsils, Gums, Glands about the Ears,
Stomach, Intestines, Anus, and Haemorrhoids, Liver, Spleen, Kidneys, Phrenitis,
or the Inflammations of the Spirits; Inflammations of the Eyes, Lungs, Pleura,
Breast, Stones, Muscles, of which all the former Inflammations are only
Species's, which are distinguished by the Effects the Inflammation causes in
each Part, the drinking and bathing in these Water, at Buxton, being the chief
Remedy to prevent them, but not to cure them, unless in particular
Circumstances.

As to the Ulcers inwardly and outwardly, the Bath at Buxton being drank
cleanses and heals, a Vomica, Phthisis, Empyema, Dysentery, Tenesmus, Ulcers of
the Eyes, Kidneys, Bladder, Anus, Viscera, Spleen, Liver, Glands, in the
King's Evil, the Ulcers of the Mouth, Throat, Nose, Ears, Gums, Stomach,
prostatae in a Gonorrhaea.

3. The Third Species of Fluxes is that through the Nerves, and the Glands they
arise from, as the Epilepsie, Hysteric Passion, Chorea St. Viti, Convulsion of
Children, Palpitation of the Heart, Singultus, Coughing, Sneezing, Priapismus;
in all these Cases the Coldness and Stypticity of the Water both drank and
bathed in, as that at Buxton, may do good by cooling the Humors, and
strengthening the Glands; and in these Cases the Hot Baths do Injury, and for
that reason the Cold Baths must be most agreeable.

4. The Motion of the Animal Spirits in the Brain, is best relieved by the
coldest Baths, which considerably overcome the Animal Spirits, when too much
rarified, by thinking, or Passion, or Fevers in the Maniac or Phrenctic Persons.

In Melancholicks the Vitriolick Water near Buxton may be most agreeable to
drink, and the Bath to use outwardly for cooling the Humors, and strengthening
the Spirits, by constringing the Pores.

In this Bath we ought to bath for the Furor uterinus, and all kinds of
Deliriums, to abate the exceeding Rarefaction and Motion of the Aerial Spirits
included in the Bullulae, in the Nerves, and Blood.

5. The Animal Spirits produce the Flatuosity in the Nerves, when too much
rarefy'd; and this Rarefaction is checked, by drinking and bathing at Buxton,
in the Vertigo, Tympanites, for which we ought to bathe in Seawater, as the
Ancients prescribe.

6. This Cold bathing is much commended in the Asthma; and in that Disease I
and diverse others have observed it useful. And I met with a Lady at Buxton, who
had used that Bath for some Years, for an Asthma, and found benefit by it; and
I find Caelius Aurelianus has much commended the Pseucrolusia for the Asthma.
And this is agreeable to my Notion, that it depends on an Ephemera, as a
Symptom in the Nerves. But I cannot commend this Bath in cold Flatulencies, as
that of the Vterus, and particular Parts: But for all Flatulencies depending on
the Hot Cacochymia's, as the Choleric, Salt, Vitriolic, putrid, it seems very
profitable, by cooling the Rarefaction of the Aerial Bullulae, both outwardly
and inwardly used. Those that be of a hot, bilious, and dry Constitution, have
their Halitus, which pass by Transpiration less humid, but more acrid, and
fumose, as as Orabasius calls them, and that renders them more subject to
Ephemera's and Defluxions; and for those Hot and Dry Constitutions
Water-drinking is absolutely necessary; for all fermented Liquors agitate and
rarefie the Bullulae in the Humor, and cause Defluxions through the Glands.

7. Drinking Water in the Morning cools the Blood, prevents Defluxions, and
washes off the bilious and salt Recrements by Urine.

Drinking Water after Dinner cools the Digestion, and stops the high
Fermentation and Windiness in the Stomach.

Drinking it at Night stops the Fever produced by the mixture of the Chyle and
Blood, as it happens in Hectical People.

The Waters at St. Winifred's-Well, and St. Mungus, I never heard were proper
to be drank, because of their excessive Coldness: But the Bath-Water at Buxton
may be drank to two, three, or four Pints, without occasioning any Vomiting;
but it will cause vomiting if it be drank hastily, because of its Warmth and
Saltness.

The Injuries by cold Baths are the following; but I must except the Bath-Water
at Buxton, because of its natural Tepor, from them.

Very Cold Water may do as much Injury as Hot Baths, though it strengthens and
collects the natural Heat in strong healthful Bodies. It may extinguish the
innate Heat, (that is, the natural Tepor arising from the Motion, and Mixture
of our Humors) in Persons that are weak, infirm, or very old.

Cold bathing is injurious to Infants and Boys; for Galen observes, that it
hinders their increase, and is not allowed by him till 25 Years of Age; or the
middle of the fourth seven Years. From this Observation I believe our English
Physicians learnt the advantage of Cold bathing the Rickety Children, to hinder
the growth of the distorted Part, and strengthen the Muscles.

It agrees not with thin, lean, tender Persons; and those of a Cold
Constitution, or that have some of the Cold Cacochymia's, as the Pituitous, the
Serous, Cold, Windy, or Acerb Humors; and those who have not used it, must be
brought to it by degrees, and not in the Wintertime.

Since Cold Baths astringe and stop Fluxes, as Cold Diet, Cold Air, and cool
Liquors do, they cannot be convenient in any Obstructions of the Secretion of
the Animal Humors, and therefore improper for all Tumors of the Viscera, as
Jaundice, Tumor of the Spleen, Kernels, and inward Inflammations: And Caelius
Aurelianus dislikes it in Lethargies, because it stops the Passages. And he
also condemns it in a Pthysis; and by Analogy it is easy to guess that
Cold-Water-Baths stop more the suppression of Water, but may occasion at first
a great Flux, by stopping Transpiration, and exerting an Ebullition in the
Blood.

It may help in the binding of the Body by the same Accident, turning the
Circulation inwardly; for as Hot Baths are used for Revulsion, as turning the
Circulation more into the Habit of the Body; so the Cold act contrarily to
them; in other Evacuations suppressed, as the Menses, Haemorrhoids, Mola,
Lothing, they are injurious; and in an Ascites they seem injurious, except the
Water be salt.

In the beginning of Fevers, or Defluxions of Humors, or violent Pains, they
are dangerous; but in the Declination, or to prevent them, very useful; as in
Pains of the Head, and a Phrenitis, Stone, Strangury, Gout, Rheumatism.

In a Tertian Cold Water is esteemed dangerous; and it is known to be very
offensive in all Ulcers.

It may produce cold Pains; but cures the hot ones, or those depending on the
hot Cacochymia's, after due evacuation; but it seems improper in the
Cholic-Pains, and in all in ward Ulcers, cold bathing is improper, though the
drinking the Water is useful.

Cold bathing is much condemned in the Epilepsie, or Convulsions, by
occasioning a Flux of the Serum into the Nerves; but in many hot Inflations, it
is evidently useful, though they be Nervous Effects, as in a Priapism, Asthma,
Tympany, Mania, Melancholy, Vertigo, Incubus, and Hysterical Fits.

The Preparation for the Bath is to be by due evacuation of the Humors
abounding in quantity, or purging, or altering their ill quality, to avoid the
great Ebullition or Heat occasioned by Cold Baths at first.

We may vomit with St. Ann's-Well at Buxton, by drinking the Water hastily, to
two or three Quarts; and this is useful in the Gout, Sciatica, Obstructions of
the Mesentery, Spleen, Liver, Dropsy, Inflations, Asthma, Melancholy,
Epilepsie, Hydrophobia; in all these Cases Vomiting is by experience found
profitable; and this may safely be done by that Water at Buxton.

Purging may be recommended in other full Bodies, by dissolving ss or j. of the
Epsom Salt, or Sal Mirabilis, in the Water of St. Ann's-Well, which is of it
self a little laxative.

Aetius orders that we should observe an exact Diet in cold bathing; and it is
safest when empty, for then it cannot occasion so great a Flux upon any infirm
Part. He advises it not to be used after Venery, great Lassitude, nor on a full
Stomach; not after Vomiting, Purging, or any Weakness of Spirit, or natural
Heat; and that the Person be twenty five Years Old, and be used to it by
degrees; and at first not to absolutely Cold Water, but that which is Tepid:
And by parity of Reason I may recommend Buxton Bath as the best Preparative to
Cold bathing.

He advises the Friction with Linen, the Rubbing with Oil, and after that
Exercise: Then to leap into the Cold Bath; and when he came forth, they rubbed
the Body again with Oil, till the Skin was warm, and then gave them Meat.

The Ancients anointed with Oil after Rubbing, to mollify the Skin, and take
away its Tension and Dryness, they stopped Sweats by it; and for that end used
Styptic Oils, as Oleum Omphaceum.

By Oils they defended the Skin from the Injury of the ambient Air; and for the
same end it is probable the Indians paint the Skin.

I believe some Practice of this kind may be useful in dry and tender Bodies.

Those who are extenuated by a long Disease, were only washed in the hot Bath,
and went immediately into the Cold Water, and after were anointed; and those
that were tired with a Journey, they anointed before and after bathing.

If Sweating be designed, no Oil was used either before or after bathing.

We may imitate the Ancient bathing by putting our Patients first into a warm
Bath, in a Tub of hot Water, in a warm Chamber, thence into a hot Bed, to Sweat
and Sleep; and when he has returned to his natural Temper, we may put them into
a Cold Bath, or a Tepid one; and after rubbing him with Oil or Butter, or use
him to swimming in cold Water, or at the going out of the hot Bath, Persons are
to be sprinkled with Tepid Water, if the Cold be offensive.

My Ingenious Friend Dr. Baynard will in some time give us his Experience about
Cold bathing, and how he prepares his Cold Baths artificially from Pump-Water,
Nitre, or Pond-Water, with Sal Armoniack, and Nitre.

He uses this Cold bathing to cure Hectic Fevers, Itch, Convulsions, Weakness
or Tremor of the Limbs, Rickets, Palsies, Rheumatisms; but dissuades this Cold
bathing in Epilepsies and Haemiplagia's.

The particular use of this bathing he gave me in Writing three Years since,
which occasioned my Curiosity of reading Galen, and the old Writers on that
Subject; and I cannot but believe that we had the practice of Cold bathing from
the Romans, when they governed here, as well as the method of using the Hot
Baths.

All that has been writ on that Subject is by the Greeks, and Romans long
since; only the Religious Men in our Kingdom have preserved the Practice of
bathing at Holywell, and St. Mungus, and gave the credit of curing to the
Saint's Merits, which may probably be accounted for by the natural Effects of
Cold-Water.

I was once informed of an old Catholic, who staying too long in St.
Winifred's Water, died there, the extremity of the Cold extinguishing the
natural Heat: Therefore these Cold Baths are only fit for Summer, and young
Persons.

The old Writers believed that Cold Water gave Foecundity to Women; and this is
much ascribed to Holywell, and for that cause may be frequented in hot
Constitutions, and Hysterical Women; and it will stop all Evacuations that are
injurious to the Womb.

This Water I have no particular knowledge of as yet, for its Cures, but I find
it most used for Devotion, and Pleasure, by young Persons, who have told me,
that it had no effect on them, more than to make them very lightsome, and that
they never sweat after it, nor catched cold.

The time of staying in these, is according to our easy bearing the coldness
of the Water; and it is very proper to dip over Head diverse times, in the use
of these Baths.

We have yet a greater Prejudice to Cold Baths than to the Hot, because they
occasion Cramps, Febrile Rigors.

Cold is found to be an Enemy to the Teeth, Nerves, Spinal Marrow, and Brain;
and the old Aphorism runs thus, Nix and glacies pectori inimica, tusses movnct,
and sanguinem, and distillationes: We commonly are sensible of the Injuries of
Cold Air, when we are hot; and the sudden change of the Air affects us with
Distillation; the same we fear from Cold Water, and therefore we believe it
dangerous, and not so safe as the Hot Baths. But to this I may answer, that we
use the Cold Baths only in Summer; that for preservation of Health the robust
Persons only use them: And the Servants near Holywell and Buxton, make it a
part of their Agreement with their Masters, that they may have leave to go to
those Waters every Year for their Health. But in the hotter Constitutions which
occasion Diseases, as the Choleric, Scorbutic, Vitriolic, Salt, and Putrid;
these want the extreme Coldness, to reduce the excess of Heat, Fermentation,
Digestion, or Motion of the Globuli, call it as you please, to their natural
Temper; and Experience has sufficiently satisfied us, that Holywell, St.
Mungus, and Buxton-Waters, are not only innocent, but also very useful, for the
Cure of many Diseases.

Aetius commends the swimming in Seawater Cold twice before, Dinner and
Supper, for the Itch and Leprosy.

We may make our selves artificial Cold Baths of Pump-Water in the Summer; and
the Person that uses them must be prepared by bleeding and purging, as the
Disease and Constitution requires. In the Morning it must be used, being empty,
and dip over Head in the Water, in which he must continue up to the Neck, from
two or three Minutes to half an Hour, as the Patient can bear it; and then be
dried, and put to a warm Bed, with a Flannel Shirt on, and there sleep. This
Immersion may be repeated thrice or oftener; and the first time sit in the Tub
but two or three Minutes, and longer afterward; and convenient Medicines may
be given, as well as a suitable Diet to the Disease; that is, the coolest Diet
is most agreeable to Cold bathing, which is used for the Hot Diseases, as
Hectic Fevers with Phrenitis, and all Rheumatic Bloods. And for more
particular Directions, it is necessary to consult a Physician, who has found
out by Experience the best Method of Cold bathing. I never yet heard of any who
has made any successful Trials of it, but Dr. Baynard in Surrey-Street in the
Strand; to whose Management I would recommend those who want the benefit of a
Cold Bath.

A Letter from Dr. Clayton, concerning the Virtues of St. Mungus. Well, near
Knaresborough in Yorkshire.
SIR,
ST. Mungus Well abounds with very little of a Mineral, unless it be something
of a Nitrous Salt, and a little Vitriol, which render it particularly Cold,
wherein chiefly consists its Virtue.

Therefore the Operations that it has on the Body, is to make the Pores of the
Body contract and close, so as to keep in that natural Heat which should
strengthen and invigorate the Body, and so particularly strengthens the Nerves:
For you must know, as there are many Thousand Pores we constantly transpire
thereat, so that they are as so many Chimneys to the Body, through which the Heat
of the Body constantly passes, and which is called, (because these Fumes that
so pass are insensible,) Insensible Transpiration. And though this Transpiration
be insensible, yet in a Day's time it is so considerable, that at all the Pores
of the Body we transpire very nigh twice as much as we void either by Stool or
Urine, or even both; for a Man that eats and drinks in twenty four Hours forty
Ounces of Meat and Drink, voids not by Stool and Urine past fifteen Ounces; the
other twenty five Ounces pass by this insensible Transpiration. Therefore this
being so considerable, when these are too open, it must needs enfeeble and
waste the Body as well as a constant purging, and a too great evacuation any
other way. Therefore the bathing in these Cold Waters makes the Pores contract
themselves; particularly it also cleanses them of that foul Sweat that clogs
them, and renders them unapt for the Performance of the Duty they are designed
for, which is to contract or dilate themselves proportionably to the external
Heat or Cold; and if they be defective either way, too remiss, or too rigid,
proportionably various Distempers happen: As when too remiss in Children, the
Rickets, generally in the Extremities a Wasting; so their Legs and Arms grow
lean and emaciate; but that part of the Body that is next the Heart, which is
the Fountain of Heat, is supplied with Heat sufficient, and therefore that part
of the Body continues pretty plump; but generally the Head, that is fortified
with a Scull, and not liable to this preternatural Transpiration, grows
extraordinary big in such Children.

Fools and heavy-spirited People are little liable to this Distemper; but the
witty Children, whose Spirits are the most refined and subtle, are the aptest
thus to a preternatural Transpiration.

This bathing likewise upon the same account is good for some Hectical thin
People, whose Distemper is owing to the same Cause.

But there is a Hectical Distemper that is owing to the contrary Cause, the too
rigidness of the Nerves, that keeps in the Heat too much. And this is the Cause
of many Fevers; and therefore as bathing in these Cold Waters is good for the
Rickets, so is Sweating extraordinary good in such Fevers; for as the one
contracts the Pores, the other dilates them.

Therefore the Distempers it is good for is particularly the Rickets above all
others; as likewise Hectical Persons, of a flaccid soft Flesh; and for some
windy Pains in Persons likewise of a flaccid Flesh, and the like.

The manner of bathing is only as we do commonly in a River. Children they
swill and dip them, and so frighten and stir up the Spirits, by a particular
Agony the more. Often pop them over the Head, and carry them to a Bed, or the
like, to sweat gently after it, that so the Pores may be brought to the due
Tone of opening and contracting, as they ought to do; and therefore they do the
same three or four Days, that the Dilation and Contraction may be the more
perfect.

I am Your most assured Friend, and humble Servant, Clayton.

An Extract of what is useful from Dr. Jones 's Treatise of Buxton-Bath; writ
1571; with some Additions and Remarks upon it.
THis Bath is in the high Peake in Derby-shire, 10 Miles from Chatsworth, 16
Miles from Manchester, 16 from Chesterfield, 20 from Derby, 30 from
Westchester, 30 from Lichfield, and 20 from Stafford.

It is observed that no Baths have a healthful Air about them, because these
Baths, viz. Buxton and Bathe, are situated very low, in a Valley, betwixt two
Hills; and the Country near Buxton standing so very high, frequent Rains are
observed to fall there: But in the Summer it is frequented by many Persons of
Quality, for Hawking; the Moors thereabouts being very large like a Wilderness;
the Poots are so plentiful there in their Seasons, that a Person of Quality
killed twelve Brace in a Day for one Week he staid there last Summer.

This Country being in the Winter unpassable, because of its Snow, is
frequented only for the Bath's sake in the Summer time, and out of Curiosity by
others, to admire the Wonders of that Place; amongst which that Bath is much
esteemed as one, by all its Northern Neighbors, who visit it once in a Year.

The Wells have the Name of the Town, and that of some Saxon or Dane. It bath
for many Years past been frequented for the Health of Thousands, for bathing,
as well as it is now in these our Days: For between Burgh and it, there is a
Highway forced over the Moors, all paved, of such Antiquity as none can
express, called Bath-gate.

More came out of a Superstition they had in the Well, than for any assurance
they had in the Property, Quality, or Temperature of the Bath; for of it, and
the use thereof, they were ignorant.

And to this Day the Common People frequent it for Pleasure, now they have
disused any Devotion to St. Ann, by whose Name one of the Wells is called.

Cambden observes, that at the Rise of the River Wye, there were Nine Springs
of Hot Water, called at present Buxton-Well, which he says were found by
Experience good for the Stomach, the Nerves, and the whole Body; and the most
Honorable George Earl of Shrewsbury had lately adorned them with Buildings;
and they began to be frequented by great Numbers of the Nobility and Gentry:
About which time the Heroic and Unfortunate Princess, Mary Queen of Scots, took
her farewell of Buxton, in these Verses, Buxtona quae calidae celebrabere nomine
lymphae,
Forte mihi posthac non adeunda, val^.
And from this Queen, the Pillar in Pool's-Hole, which is near Buxton, may have
its Name.

That these Baths were anciently known to the Romans, the Roman Causey, called
Bath-gate, which continues Seven Miles to the Village Burgh, evidently shows;
and from them we learned the use of bathing.

But the Priests of the following Age did not understand how the great Effects
of that Bath could be produced by so Tepid a Water; that according to the
Humor of the Age, it was attributed to the Merit of St. Ann, to whom the Sick
made a religious Visit.

The Bath at Buxton has a fiery Heat evident to the Sense; but it is in a
moderate Degree, or Tepor rather than Heat.

It contains no sign of Brimstone; but it boils up with Bubbles, as at Bathe;
so that its Heat comes from some actual Fire: There is the same depression of
the Earth into a deep Valley at Buxton, which appears at Bathe; and that
Contrivance was probably necessary, to come nearer to the Central Fire, for the
boiling of the Water.

Buxton-Bath has not the Fourth part of the Heat as the Baths at Bathe, nor
the Minerals that be there; viz. the Sulphur.

Buxton-Water is much like as if a Quart of boiling Water were mixed with a
Gallon of cold Water: But Bath-Water is as if to a Gallon of seething Water a
Quart of cold Water were put; by reason whereof it attracteth and dissolveth
more speedily, but Buxton more sweetly, and more temperately, not bringing so
many grievous Accidents as Bath does. This operates effectually, though not so
speedily as Bath Waters do; but for many Infirmities more commodiously, by
restraining all unnatural Evacuations, and strengthening the feeble Members,
assisting the Animal, Vital, and Natural Faculties, dispersing Opilations, and
qualifying Griefs.

There was no necessity of Sulphur in Buxton-Water, nor no great Heat, because
Buxton-Waters were designed by Nature for a Cold Bath, and that the most
moderate and safe; for which End it was prepared with a lacteal Tepor, to
prevent any fear of a sudden stoppage of Pores, and to be less offensive to the
nicest Constitutions.

The Well-Springs are situate in a Valley hard by a running Brook, and run into
it, where you may perceive the Hot Water on the one side of the River, and the
Cold on the other, which hinders the River of freezing in coldest Weather, for
a quarter of a Mile; which is an Argument of the Power of the Heat of those
Springs, or else of the Saltness of them.

There be five or 6 other Springs not so good as that first mentioned. If the
Mineral Men bored to find the Cold Springs, and turn them away, the Springs
would be more excellent.

This depends on the common Vulgar Error, that these Baths were designed for
Hot Baths; and that there can be no good Effects from cold Temperate Baths; and
upon this Prejudice there have been diverse Enquiries made, to find out the cold
Springs, and divert them from the hotter; but we may thank God, who has not
permitted the Mistakes of Men to injure his Blessings.

I designedly enquired of all the old People I could meet with in Buxton, about
the Heat of the Bath-Water, who assured me, that it has been the same many
Years past; which I may confirm by the Writing of Dr. Jones, who led the People
into this Mistake, who would have it made more hot, that more cold Infirmities
might be cured by it; but this is unreasonable that Cold Baths should be made
fit for Cold Diseases, nor the Hot Baths for the Hot. Let proper Baths rather
be chosen for every particular Disease; Cold for the Hot, as those at Buxton;
and the Hot for the Cold, as those at Bathe.

Seeing God has bestowed on us these Baths for our great Benefit, if so be
there be nothing that can more readily take away Distempers, (as Galen says,
de usu partium) of Heat and Cold, or evacuateth by the Pores the superfluous
Humors, than a Dulce or pleasant Bath of warm Water, or that maintains
Health more; for whereas it is by Nature moist, and moderately Hot; by its
humidity it humecteth, it dries, heateth, all cooled or congealed Humors; it
strengthens the loosed by insensible Transpiration; it discusses and
mundifies the Skin; all which is proved by daily Experience.

I find the Taste of St. Ann's Well-Water and Buxton-Bath to be the same as to
Heat and Minerals. It is evidently of a Milky Tepor, very Salt and Rank, which
the Ancients called Aluminous; but I will translate Dr. Lister concerning them,
who gives the Ingredients of these Waters, and says out of 32 th. of both
Fountains boiled to dryness, he had scarce two 3 of Salt, without any Flakes of
Stone, though he observed in the boiling the Brass Vessel to be infected with the
Powder of an Ash-colored Stone. The Salt coagulated into Crystal of Common
Salt; amongst which were some Crystal of a Lapis Calcarius.

This Spring at Buxton runs plentifully; and the Bath may be emptied in a
Quarter of an Hour, and is immediately filled again in the space of an Hour, or
less.

This Bath is contained in a Room built over it, the Air of which is very warm;
and a Fume rises from it like boiling Water.

The Water does not feel very Tepid upon our first Immersion into it; but after
some time, you may find it warmer; and in some particular parts of the Bath
more warm to your Feet; and it fumes most in the Winter.

Their stay in this Bath is an Hour or more, till every one feels themselves
very cool; and then they are wiped, and put to a warm Bed, to lie half an Hour,
and sleep; but no Body sweats with it, nor catches cold, though they go in naked:
But I think the Men ought to use Drawers, and the Women Shifts of Linen or
Flannel. But Custom has taught the Sexes to have separate times of bathing.

The Bath-Water is so clear, that we may see to the Bottom, though the Water be
usually up to the Neck.

It is convenient to dip the Head all over in these Tepid Baths, or lay a wet
Cloth on it; for it cools the Head much, and checks the arising of Fumes.

The Times of bathing are Morning and Night; fasting in the Morning, and after
Supper.

They usually swim and walk about in the Bath; for it is impossible to stand
still without chilling too much.

The Well of which we drink is St. Ann's Well; and of that some drink two,
three, or four Pints, which may cause Vomiting if drank hastily; but I and some
others drank it without any great offense, except its stypticity and saltness,
or Tepor, make it nauseous to some.

I could not find any Vitriolic Taste in the Waters, but can fairly give an
Account of their Virtues from their cooling effects on our Bodies; for they are
made cooler by the use of it; and the actual Heat has not any considerable
Effect on us; for by that we are neither heated, nor sweat; therefore no more
Heat was necessary, but to prevent the inconveniences of too sudden a coldness
by the Water.

The Saltness of the Water cleanses, and has an effect as well as all Salt
Baths have, as a Diuretic, etc. Vide the account of Salt-Baths.

The stypticity of the Water helps the Coldness to stop the Pores, to
strengthen the solid Parts, and stop Fluxes; so that from the moderate
coolness, the saltness, and stypticity, I may give a fair account of the
Virtues of this Water.

Buxton Water, by reason that it rarifies the Parts, it provokes Transpiration,
and wipeth away the Filth of the Skin; and it also confirms, joyneth,
consolidateth the loosened, severed, and weakened Parts, qualifying the
Overheated Members, drying such as be over moist; therefore good for all
Diseases as come of overmuch contrary heat, and for such as come of overmuch
Moisture; for all Choleric and Salt Humors.

If these be the Effects of Buxton-Baths, they are the same as in all Cold
bathing at St. Winifred's, and St. Mungus's; for they strengthen, and cool, and
constringe the solid Parts, and cure the hot Cacochymia's of our Blood; for
which reason I may esteem Buxton one of the most temperate and safe Cool Baths
in Europe, as Experience has confirmed it.

The Diseases it cures are Rickets, Inflammations, Fevers, and Rheums;
Headaches, weak Sinews, old Scabs, Ulcers, Cramps, Numness, Itchings,
Ring-Worms, Impostumes.

These Wells help Women, who by reason of over-moisture be unapt to Conceive.
Also all such as have their Whites too abundant: Also weak Men that be
unfruitful: Likewise for all that have a Priapismus, and that be parboyl'd in
Venus 's Gulf; all these it cools, cleanses, and strengthens by its coldness
and stypticity.

It beautifies the Skin, and cleanses it.

It is profitable for those that have the Consumption of the Lungs. It cools
them, and stirs all Evacuations, or Looseness, Haemorrhages.

It cures Apoplexies, Palsies, Tremblings, Vertigo, King's Evil, Redness of
the Face, St. Anthony 's-Fire, Melancholy, Hypochondriack Winds, Jaundice,
Dropsy, Pains in the Breast and Stomach, the Scurvy and Night Pains,
Rheumatism, Sciatica, Gout, Stone, Ulcers, Cancers, Schirrhus, Cholic, Hysteric
Passions, Catarrhs, Asthma's, Leprosy, Dysentery.

It is beneficial to all such as vomit Blood, as has been well proved.

It is very good for the Inflammation of the Liver, and excellent for overmuch
Heat, and stopping of the Veins, and for such as have burning Urine, or
Tenesmus.

In stops a Gonorrhaea, Haemorrhoids, Piles, Menses.

It stops Vomitting, Hickup.

It opens Obstructions of the Milt and Liver.

It is good for the Short winded.

It stops the Fluxes of the Milt and Liver.

It cures the Green Sickness perfectly.

It cures the Morphews, and defends from the Stone. And,

It preserves the Health in a good State.

By this Catalogue of Diseases we may see how great and numerous the good
Effects of this Bath are in all the hot Cacochymia's, in all hot Defluxions,
Pains, Evacuations; so that it equals the Bath Waters in the Virtues and good
Effects, but has no ill Effects on any Person, because of that exact Temper of
its Heat, which wants but little of the Natural Tepor in Animal Humors.

As to that long Discourse about Diet and Exercise, in Jones, I think them not
necessary, nor fit to be printed, because there is nothing new in them, but
what occurs in Galen, Aetius, Avicenna, and many more, Jones quotes; by which
we may be convinced he was as well read, and of as good Judgment, as any of
that Age.

He recommends both Dinner at Eleven a-clock, and Supper about Five; and that
the Persons who come from the Southern Parts be well clothed, because it is a
much colder Air, but very pure; and that good Fires do well; and he says you
may use a more plentiful Diet at Buxton than at Bathe: And I see no reason to
alter our ordinary Diet at these Baths; for as we use more cooling Diet in hot
Bodies and Baths, so in the cooler Baths we must use a more heating Diet; and
that is an ordinary Diet of Flesh-Meats, and moderate Drinks. In the Morning
after bathing drink either St. Ann's-Well, or 2 Quarts of the Vitriolic
Chalybeate Water lately found out there: And Water-drinking does not only cool
and strengthen the inward Viscera, but hinders the breeding of hot Fumes,
Vapors, or Spirits in the Body, which could not safely be stopped in the Body;
and both together seem to me powerfully to alter the hot Cacochymia's in
Animals.

At Dinner eat of your accustomed Diet: Herbs, Fruits, Legumens, Milk-Meats,
and Salt Meats are usually condemned at Baths, being at all times but
indifferent Food. But if the Diet must be Physical, it must be ordered as the
Strength, Custom, Disease, and the Nature of the Bath requires. And since the
Bath cools, and the Diseases be hot, the Diet here may be made as for all hot
Cacochymia's; more cold and moist, if the Disease require it: And the weak and
thin are to be more plentifully nonrished, and the Quality of the Diet contrary
to the hot State of Humors; but in healthful Persons the ordinary Diet is most
convenient in these Baths.

Bath-Waters seem improper with Meats, because Diuretic.

In the use of those Baths, we must avoid all Excess, Lassitude by great
Exercise, and Retention of Excrements, or Evacuations too much, by Venery,
Stools, Sweats.

The Ancient Writers prescribe Exercise before these Cold Baths; and Persons
commonly bathe as soon as they come thither. The design of the Exercise was to
excite a greater Heat, to conflict with the cold Water; but cannot be necessary
here, because the Bath is Tepid.

Jones orders to tarry two or three Days before you enter the Bath; and truly
this time might be well spent in Vomiting with St. Ann's Well-Water, for those
it is convenient: And after purging with Epsom Salt, or Sal Mirabile,
dissolving ss or j. in two Quarts of that Water.

The time of bathing Jones orders to be in the Morning and Evening, but after
your Exercise and Purging, and altogether before Meat, in the Summer Season,
between the beginning of May, and the latter End of September.

In the Bath you may tarry two or three Hours if you please, and the Body be
fit for it, and the Disease require it.

But I think the Time is to be discerned by every Person's own Sense; for when
they are very much chill, they ought to go forth.

After you come forth, your Clothes well air'd (in the next Room) your Bodies
well dried, and especially your Head, they may go to Bed, and Sweat, with two
Bladders of Water applied to them hot.

This Practice is disused; for it is not rational to Sweat when we come to
close our Pores, and cool our Humors; but we go to Bed only to keep our selves
warm.

The Diet, Exercise, Friction, Purging, Bleeding, mentioned in Jones, are no
more than common Rules writ by Galen and others.

He advises to continue at Buxton Fourteen, Twenty, or Forty Days; the common
practice is a Week.

All the Exercise necessary is what is usual at any other time for our Healths;
he who when he is very hot, would go into the Water to chill him; that is, to
create hot Fumes, and stop the Pores; and will certainly produce a Fever or
Defluxions.

He proposes a Register of the Patient's Name, Disease, Country, coming and
going thence, paying for it according to the Quality of the Person, some to the
Poor, and the rest to the Book-keeper.

An Abstract of some Cures performed by Buxton-Bath; taken from Diverse
Certificates and Letters sent to me by Mr. White, the Keeper of that Bath.
IN the Gout the Virtues of this Water have been well experienced; and were
successfully tried by Caleb Pott, Schoolmaster of Audlem in the County of
Chester, who came thither on his Crutches, and went away very well, and
testified this under his hand, 1689.

I met with an old Divine there last Year, who constantly frequents that Bath
every Summer, and acknowledged to me, that he had received great Benefit by
that Bath against the Gout.

I met with a Person who had been there for a Scorbutic Rheumatism, and he
assured me, that after general Evacuations, his Pains immediately ceased by
frequent bathing.

Mr. Stephen Kaye, Rector of Marton in Lincolnshire, who used the Baths four
Years successively, was cured of the Gravel in the Kidneys, which tortured him
for several Years: And also of the Gout, to which he was subject. Of this he
gave his Testimony in writing.

This Bath has had good success in Lameness, and Pains of the Limbs, as
appears to me by a Certificate under the Hand of Edmund Horncastle, of
Clarbrough, in the County of Nottingham, who by the use of this Bath recovered
of his Lameness and Pains, and went away without his Crutches.

The Statute of 43 Eliz. provided for the passing of cripled or sick Persons to
Buxton as well as Bathe; which is a sufficient Testimony of its being eminent
for curing Lameness in those Days.

Mr. White the Bath-keeper gave me many Instances of Cures done on the Scurvy,
Leprosy, Dropsy, Lameness, Pains, Gravel, Stone; and in the Gravel it had
great Effect on Robert Downs, Bath-keeper there; and another Person from Hull.
And he farther gave me an Account of a young Woman from Vttoxeter, who long
languished under a Consumption, and was there cured.

It is very useful in Distillations and Asthma's, by which I believe I received
much Benefit; the Pseuchrolusia is no less beneficial than the Hydroposia. And
here we drink the same kind of Water we bathe in, as they do at Bathe. And we
alter the Humors by drinking, which helps the Effects of the Bath-Water
externally.

Mrs. Tripp of Weston-Vnderwood, in the County of Bucks, was cured of a high
Scurvy, and of a Consumptive Cough, Ann. Dom. 1689.

Mr. Fauler of South-Wells in Nottingham-shire, 1691. was cured of a Rheumatism
mixed with the Dropsy and Scurvy.

Thomas Redford of South-Wingfield, in the County of Derby, was cured of an
Universal Leprosy, 1696. And, Elizabeth Cruchbow of the same Town, was also
cured of the same.

Josiah Stock of Sheffield in Yorkshire, was cured of an Ague about thirty
Weeks standing.

This Water did not curdle Milk, as I tried by boiling; nor did it much
precipitate White with Spirit of Hartshorn; but it turned a little.

A brief Description of diverse rare and admirable Cures (from Lidia Morewood)
and the same perfectly effected by the Virtue of Buxton-Bath.
MRs. Elizabeth Dorley in Yorkshire, was by Sickness and Pains almost deprived
of the use of her Body for Five Years; and by the Application of this Bath, in
one Week she regained her Strength so much, that she could walk abroad, and
within Sixteen or Seventeen Days, she perfectly regained her Health and
Strength of Body.

One Manforth of Yorkshire was brought by three Men, who in one Week regained
his Strength so much, that he could walk abroad, and by a continued Application
of the same, he perfectly recovered.

Mr. Bateman's Son of Youlgreave, who had lost the use both of his Speech and
Limbs, was perfectly cured by this same Bath.

A Stationer's Daughter of Nottingham, which had her Body wholly overspread
with Scurf and Scales, regained a pure and free Flesh by this Bath.

Mr. Gill, near Ragby in Yorkshire, was seized with a Tumor in one side,
which the Physicians and Surgeons failing to cure, he came to this Bath, and
thereby received an absolute and perfect Cure.

Dr. Wheatly near Barnsley having for several Years frequented this Bath, but
having this last Summer omitted the same, acknowledged a decay of his Health
through his omission; which within the same Year gave an Exit to his Life.

Several People, which being Strangers to me, I cannot express their Names; but
I can assuredly testify, that many who have had Red Spots within their Flesh,
wholly defacing their Body, were taken away by this Bath.

And very many lame and impotent People, which have come hither, some by the
help of Crutches, others born by Men and Horses, have regained their Strength,
and the use of their Limbs, by the same Bath.

These were truly penned by Thomas Bishop, Schoolmaster in Buxton, from me
Lidia Morewood.

A Boy having his Hands and Feet overspread with an obdurate scaly Matter,
regained a pure, soft, and free Flesh by this Bath. Attested by Lidia Goodwin
of Buxton.

Mr. Low of Arraslee in Derby-shire, having very dangerously hazarded his Life
by excessive drinking, with other Companions, which died thereupon, continued
in this Bath for Twelve Hours, and from the same received a Cure. By Roger
Goodwin of Buxton.

Sarah Middleton of Buxton having a Lameness in one Knee, so that for half a
Year she was supported with Crutches, was by this Bath perfectly cured.

A certain Man which came from Nottingham, went by Crutches; in one Months time
by this Bath regained his full Strength. By Sarah Middleton of Buxton.

Mrs. Hill from York was so lame that she went by Crutches; in one Weeks time
regained her full Strength and use of Limbs, by this Bath.

A Gentleman from York having a Relapse of a cold Palsy, in two Weeks time was
cured by this Bath.

A certain poor Man near Warrington in Lancashire, having many Sores and
Runnings upon his Body, in two Weeks time received a perfect Cure from this
Bath.

Ralph Saxon of Buxton, having several Sores and Runnings of his Body, was
cured by this Bath.

Mr. Jackson, a Minister of the Gospel, having left a Place of considerable
Value, came and served at this mean Place of Buxton, in expectation of the
benefit of this Bath; and received a perfect Cure for the Stone from the same
By Anthony Cleaton Sen. of Buxton..

These are all impartial Accounts, as testified by Cornelius White.
23 Jan. 1696.
New Improvements at Buxton-Baths, Anno Domini 1695 and 1696, by Cornelius
White, an Attorney of his Majesty's Court of King's Bench at Westminster, and
one of the Society of Clement 's-Inn, London; present Tenent to the Premises,
under his Grace William Duke of Devonshire.
BY taking off some of the cold Springs from the hot, the ancient Bath repaired
and paved, and new one made, for the better convenience of the poor and
impotent; And a Sough about 200 Yards in length, to drain both, for the
cleansing thereof every Day; with more private Apartments for Lodgings, new
Stables, new Gardens, new Bowling-Green, and several Green Walks; a cold
Mineral Spaw now discovered within 200 Yards of the warm Spaws, the warm
Springs being separate, and about 40 Yards distant from the Bath, approved of
by the most eminent Physicians. About the middle of the Sough a Cistern of of
Lead was found two Yards square, and one Foot deep, being four Yards within the
Earth, supported by several Oaken Planks: Something higher, in the same Sough,
was found a place seven Yards wide, and twenty Yards long, being smooth and
even on both sides and at the bottom, two Yards deep in the Earth, and made of
Stone.

FINIS.

