A DESIGN For bringing a Navigable RIVER FROM Rickmansworth in Hartfordshire,
to St. GYLES in the Fields; the Benefits of it declared, and the Objections
against it answered.

map of river diversion The new navigation

Thames.



LONDON, Printed for JOHN CLARKE. 1641.

CR


A DESIGN FOR Bringing a Navigable River from Rickmansworth in Hartfordshire,
to St. Giles in the Fields; the Benefits of it declared, and the Objections
against it answered.
THe Kings most excellent Majesty, taking into his Princely consideration the
great inconvenience and danger for want of water in many parts of London, and
Westminster, put a Bill in Parliament for the bringing Water from Rickmansworth
in Hartfordshire, by Harrow on the Hill, to St. Giles in the Fields.

Edward Forde of Harting in Sussex Esquire, undertaking and giving very
sufficient security to perform the same according to his Majesty's design,
the said Edward Forde finding it also both feazable and profitable, yea and
very grateful both to the Country through which, and to the City of London
unto which, this Water course is to come, to have it made Navigable: though it
were first proposed to him and he no farther obliged, or any way preft to do
any thing more in this work, then to bring the Trench broad enough to serve
the Cities only with water, yet though the work must now of necessity be
near twice so broad, besides the extraordinary depth, he at his own charge
undertakes (for the greater benefit of the public) to do it, and to secure
all men from any prejudice by it: He offers for security to perform the same,
8000. 1. Lands per annum, and offers to secure all men from any prejudice by it.

To undertake this Work he was encouraged by his Majesty, by diverse of the
Lords and other persons of quality, and by the earnest persuasions of very
many of all sorts both in City and Country, but especially by the
consideration of the great and most apparent Commodities which, by the
performance hereof, will certainly arise to the City and Country. For,

I.
First, a great multitude of poor Laborers will have hereby good employment,
both in making and perpetual repairing of the Trench, and many of them yearly
Stipends and wages for daily over-seeing the several parts of it, and the
Rowing and sailing the Boats in it.

II.
Many parts of Hartfordshire, Buckingshire, and Middlesex, whose chiefest
livelihood is the sending of Meal to London, will have Portage at far
cheaper rates and a more plentiful vent for it, then now they have, and so
likewise for all other their Commodities.

III.
Chaulk and other Manure, which some parts abound with, and others extremely
want, will by reason of the cheapnesse of Portage, be both vented by the
sellers far quicker and at better rates, and also got and obtained by the
buyers, more plentifully, speedier and at easier rates, and so sold dearer and
bought cheaper.

IV.
The Soil of London, which is one of the chiefest means of enriching the
Country, and indeed the only means of bringing their lands to heart after it
is worn out with Chaulking and Plowing, will by this means come much more
plentifully and at easier Rates, for the carriage whereof they now pay
excessively, and yet cannot on any conditions have so much brought to them as
they desire and stand in need of.

V.
Fuel and all other Commodities of London will come to them upon easier
terms.

VI.
Their Cattle on both sides of this new River will have the great benefit of
fresh Water all the year, by little drinking places made for them.

VII.
Their Highways, which now through perpetual Cartage are much spoiled and
impassible, to the Inhabitants extraordinary charge, and the Passingers great
inconvenience, will by this diversion of their Carriage be kept in a better
condition with much less charge.

All these benefits and advantages will accrue unto all those that are
Inhabitants any thing near any part of the said River, the length whereof will
be between Thirty and forty miles, and yet every one of those fully paid for
the Ground that shall be cut, and for all other prejudices whatsoever.

VIII.
The City of London will also by this have the Ornament of a Navigable River,
on the North-west-side, as it has ^n the South by Thames, and on the East by
Ware River.

IX.
Corn and other Commodities will be imported more plentifully, and
consequently at cheaper Rates (as well they may be afforded) the trouble and
charge of Carriage being by this means much abated, and in particular many
Commodities, which are now heated, bruised, and often spoiled, by driving, or
carriage, will be conveyed without the hazard of any of these inconveniences.

X.
The Dung also and Soil of this City, the keeping whereof is very noisome,
and the riddance chargeable, will by this means have a speedy exportation, and
beneficial to them to whom it is now chargeable.

XI.
Those parts of London which are new very much scanted of water, will have it
in a plentiful measure, and such as shall be always clear and fit for all
uses: all Land-floods, and foul waters, which frequently occasion the
muddinesse of Sr. William Middletons water, being by Artificial conveyances,
diverted and kept wholly out of the stream, hereby also their streets and
houses will be kept sweeter, and cooler, and freer from the danger of Fire and
Infection, which often times, from this City, spreads into the whole Kingdom.

Many objections against this work have been made several days to the Lords
of the Committee, who carefully hear and examine all. The now only Objection
which remains, is this;

THat the Water being taken away at Rickmansworth will much prejudice all those
that dwell upon the River below.

I.
By depriving them of their Fish.

II.
By hindering their Winter land Floods which both enrich their meadows and
also bring down to them a rich Soil, which they call Moore-earth, whereof
they make great advantage.

III.
By taking away their Fences which the River affords them.

IV.
By spoiling their Corne-mills, and so consequently their markets which
consists most of Meal.

V.
By spoiling their Paper Mills.

To all which the Answer is.

I.
IN general that the whole Objection is built upon a mistake, as if the
purpose were to take away all their water, whereas it is intended and shall be
sufficiently secured; That no more water shall be turned from the Ordinary
course then what shall run between an hatch of four Foot wide, always to be
maintained at the bead of the work, which upon a just survey will appear to
be not the fortieth part of the water which comes down to them who oppose the
design, nor will take away half an Inch of the superficies of their water.
For before it comes to Uxbridge there fall in together five several plentiful
swift streams, upon every one of which, stand several Mills of good value,
many of them yielding 40. l. and some 50. l. per annum, and besides this, there
also falls in the head of the River Colne, after some miles running without any
Mill upon it.

Now that which is taken for this Navigation is but a little part of a part of
all those, so far it is from being intended to turn the whole stream out of
its natural course, but for fuller satisfaction it is further particularly
answered.

First, their Fish shall be none of them diminished, but all kept out, by a
great set before the head of this work.

II.
Their Winter land-Floods may and must be wholly kept out of this Trench,
which shall receive no muddy water into any part of it, nor more water in the
Winter then in the Summer, so that they will not be deprived of any part of the
benefit arising to them by these Floods.

III.
Thirdly, for their Fences it is presumed that an inch of water in the depth of
their Rivers, will make no considerable difference.

IV.
Fourthly, their Corne-Mills neither can possibly be sensible of the loss of
this so little water.

1. Because some of them have the whole River running wast by them, they being
erected upon a by-cut to avoid the danger of too much water, as my Lord
Shando's Mills by Harfield, whose Millers yet with the rest, pretended to fear
that they also hereby should want Water.

2. Because others have the six Rivers before mentioned, which meet above
Uxbridge, with the addition of a seventh stream, which falls in below Uxbridge
to serve but two Mill-cuts only, as namely my Lord Pagets tenants of Juer and
Thorney Mill upon one cut, and Drayton Mill upon the other cut, which yet are
but of in different value, the Rent of the one being but about 16. l. per
annum, the other 25. l. per annum: and the third 40. l. per annum, so that they
have little cause to fear want of water, for the discharge of their employment.

3. Thirdly, because others have the six foresaid Rivers which meet above
Uxbridge for 3. Mill-cuts, as the five Millers by Uxbridge, and so all the rest
of the complainers, from Uxbridge to Thames, (excepting only one Mill or two
at the most) have likewise the foresaid 6. Rivers above Uxbridge, and two other
streams below Uxbridge, and two other streams below Uxbridge, eight in all,
but for three Mill-cuts (excepting only one Mill of 30. l. per annum at Stanes.

4. Fourthly, because they have such plenty of water that they permit Ditches
and watering trenches to lie continually open which steals away their water
from their Mills.

It plainly therefore appears, that these Corne-Mills cannot by this work,
be brought to want water, seeing they that have least water have six Mill
streams at the least, to serve three mill Cuts at the most; and yet those
Mills above, which stands but upon the single stream, have all plenty of
Water, many of them more employment and pay greater Rents then most of these,
who have double their water to raise less Rent.

5. And lastly for their Paper-mills, which are but seven in all, and stand
upon the foresaid Cuts. The water taken for this Work cannot possibly be
missed by them, unless it be for the time of a Month or two in a dry Summer,
when perhaps it may for that short time hinder the working of some few Hammers;
And for satisfaction of this, or any other damage whatsoever, there is the very
same care taken in this Act, as has been in other Acts, wherein, for the
public benefit of Navigation, the undertakers have had full power given them
to pull down even Corne-mills.

And so all Objections being (as it is conceived) fully answered. It is the
undertakers hope, That this work shall now proceed with general approbatio^,
especially because that any delay now may occasion the loss of a years time
in effecting of it.

FINIS.
Page 8. line 2. for great read Grate. Page 9 1. 20. leave out that Parenthesis
(excepting only one Mill as Stanza.

map of Colne river The Map of Colne River*
A map of Colne with all its branches and mills, and the particular place
whence the navigaco^n is to be taken.




