LONDONS Resurrection, Poetically represented, AND HUMBLY PRESENTED To His Most
Sacred MAJESTY.

woodcut of shield bearing two crossed swords

LONDON, Printed by A. M. for S A: GELLIBRAND, in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1669.

LONDON's Resurrection, etc.
MY Salamander-Muse, which newly sprung
From London's Fires, her Mother-Furies sung;
Wreathed with a lambent Flame; then viewed the waste,
And in her Arms the dear Remains embraced,
Crimes
Which marked with London's Brands our dismal Times:
Turned Phoenix now, claps her new-imped Wings,
And the New City's Resurrection sings.
Would Orpheus lend me his renowned Lyre,
Amphion's Lute my Song inspire!
Their Airs (perhaps) might turn my Verse to Charm,
And raise fallen London without Tool or Arm.
My mighty Rhimes should quickly (then) remove
The Hercynian Forest, and Dodona's Grove.

Within its Gates; and in each ruined Street
( Squared by a Wish) to every place assigned
Dispose themselves after the Builder's mind.
This Quill should dig down Mountains, and my Muse
Marbles from their Beds seduce.
The whole Parian Quarrey should obey her calls,
And march a Voluntier to London's Walls.
Yea, the glad Mason should sit by, and play,
Whiles massy Rocks both square themselves, and lay

Content her Power give measure to her Aims.
Accept her kindness (though) in what she is skilled:
To bless, and press, is virtually to build.
Words linked in Numbers, (though they be but wind)
Force in vain designed.
Who blows the Trumpet, though he never engage,
Governs the Fight, and whets the Fighter's Rage.
Permit ( Great Prince) my Swan-like Muse to sing
Her Farwel-Notes under your sacred Wing.
Poets, as Cities, hardly e're rise high,
But under the Influence of Majesty.
London, and I, equal Ambitions have
By Your sole Aspect to survive the Grave.
Nor let displeasure seize Your Sacred Breast,
meaner Names addressed.
Safe flights, as then, doubting her Wing, she flew;
But meant those lower Perches Stairs to You.
So the young Bird, before she trust the Sky,
From Twig to Twig, does rather hop than fly.
Neighbour-Tree, till past her flights,
She feels her strength, and dares the greatest heights.
And, (though Your Name bespangle all my Verse,
Yet) whiles Attendant on so sad an Hearse;
Too much like an illomen 't would have shown,
mourning Blacks to have approached the Throne.
But now, since London springing from her Tomb,
(Your Royal Work) my Royal Theme's become:
Both by an equal Title are Your due,
As both Her Founder, and her Poems too.
You, when the City by desponding flight
Yielded the Flames an undisputed Right;
Sounded the Alarm, and by a fresh Array
Renewed the ONSET, and restored the Day.
Your prudent Acts, confounded Rights decide,
Bounds to potent Neighbor's Pride.
Your Threefold League all Foreign Wars accords,
And We to Spades and Tru'ls reform our Swords.
Janus's Temple now is triple-barr'd;
Our Drums are silent whiles our Laws are heard.
Devotion Heavens, Trade Earth's Riches brings:
The Plowman whistles, and my Clio sings.
On, ( Royal Sir) tile Your own Bounties over,
And check our bashful Hopes by doing More.
Our Ruins yet afford Your Glories ground
spread themselves, and make Your Reign renowned.
Let next Age add, when they Your Titles sing,
London's Restorer, to Great Britain's King.
Till the old Founder more obscure is grown,
Not as out-dated now, but as outdone.
Almighty Architect, whose Call
From Nothing's Womb produced this glorious All;
Which friendly Atoms in firm Nuptials tied,
Divorcing those which native Jars divide;
Which, from rude Justles in the unbounded space,
proper place:
Thou, whose Command we Christians firmly trust,
Shall re-compose us out of crumbled Dust;
When Limbs, which vastest Distances detain,
Shall travel till they meet and hugg again;
Souls shall once more know, and wed
Anew, those very Bodies whence they fled:
Thy Suppliants hear. The Work we call thee to,
Not mis-becomes Omnipotence to do.
Lo, here, a City to a Chaos turned,

Bring a like Power to a like Design;
And Resurrection with Creation twine.
Thus, while's on London's Stage thou shall present
Our Faith an Instance, Hope a President:
Atheism shall be disproved by Sense,
And blush to crave a farther Evidence.
Our Creed's hard knots, Example shall dissolve,
And what may be, by what has been, resolve.
Joy to my Muse! Heaven our Requests does hear,

Often hungry Hopes with slow Reliefs are pined;
But we are twice answered both in speed and kind.
Hark! The Oracle its sacred Veil displays,
And [ London Rise] the potent Whisper says.
Hail, Glorious Day; May thou be writ in Gold,
Which saw the Sceptered Hand the Truel hold,
To lay that Stone, whence the Exchange became
Anew entitled to its Royal Name!
Henceforth, proud Pillar, to thy Readers view
own story, and thy Founders too.
Fruitful Example! From the Royal hand
Each Artist now takes Pattern and Command.
Hark, how the clatt'ring Tools confused sound
Divides the Ear! The Pick-axe rends the ground
To load the Spade. Its Loads bestowed between
Ridder, and the searching Skreen.
The Saw the File, the Ax the Grindstone whets;
The knotty Tree this hews, the other eats.
The Arm the Plane, the Maul the Chissel drives.
Through heart of Oak the groaning Auger dives.
Steel the weighty Sledges stroke
Beats into Form; which quenched does hiss and smoke.
Room (next) for Miracles, profaned by use;
The Issues of the famed Vitruvian Muse.
And that grave Architect's whose ominous Hand
learned Eines on Syracusan Sand.
Whose dying Gore did the choice Figures drown,
And's dying weight in their Room stamped his own!
Here twisted Skrews, whiles planted on the ground,
worm themselves through a like wreathed Round,
Prop tottering Roofs. Versatile Rundles there,
By equal Helps their fellows Burdens bear,
Transferred by clasping Ropes; whence greatest weights
By a small force are wound to greatest heights.
Balance-Engine next, whose loaded End
The tenth part of its Burden makes to ascend.
Nor is it less wondrous, that the vastest Beams,
On Cylinders supporting both Extremes,
Tough Levers roll; whiles every lifting Hand
One Interjection jointly does command.
Thus goes the Building on. Confused grounds
Just Verdicts part; and (whiles they fix the bounds
To public Streets by the Imperious Line)
Surveyors like unbounded Sov'raigns reign,
Each House clasps with its neighbor; and the Square
Each Front unto its fellow-wall does pair.
And Sister-Piles, whiles thus they intermarry,
Like Sister-Faces, uniformly vary.
Lady Enchantress of the ravished Ear,
Art effect what Chance does here!
Whiles building Noises by the pleased Mind
Are into all harmonious Notes combined,
Orpheus to us would grate, Apollo jarr:
Hammers and Truels sweeter Music are.
By this one Spell each melancholy breast
Legion-Devil dispossessed.
And where yet falling London's doleful Knell
Does in retentive apprehensions dwell;
By Sympathetick Cure these joyful sounds
glad Idea's heal the Phansies wounds.
The Fields are busy too. Bold Miners found
In paunched Hills a London under ground.
The Realm of Silence, and eternal Night,
Is startled at the approach of Noise and Light.
Twin-stones long clasped in their Mother-bed,
Now severed, yield with Foreign Rocks to wed.
Each polisht Marble to a Mirour grows,
Mocks its own Workman, and retorts his blows.
Here, the green Robe pulled off, the unbowel'd ground
Clay, which with chopp'd stubble bound
First, the Sun fastens; then the brittle Cakes
The rapid Furnace to just hardness bakes:
An hardness that out-stands the fiercest showers
Which Heaven from its opened sluices powers;
Winter-Frosts cannot mellow; and the Flame
It self that did beget it, cannot tame.
Scarce Flint or Marble lasts so long in prime:
This brittle Stone grind's out the teeth of Time.
With this the Immortal Queen built Babels Spires,
burnt Walls beguiled future Fires
There, the Woods Glories fall, and where the Eye
Of Heaven scarce pierced, now mortal sight does pry.
The Shades by Horror hallowed, the early dawn
Admitted, does illustrate and profane.
Oaks presumptuous Axes wound,
Meas'ring their lengths upon the furrowed ground.
Whiles rattling Echo, (as great Talkers do)
Reports at distance every blow for two.
The Ring Dove sees her lofty Nest overthrown,
Turtles that their Love's bewrayed, moan:
The Magpy scolds whiles her arched Roof does fall;
And sharking Rooks, their Camp dislodged, brawl;
The Hare forsakes her Form; the rowzed Deer
Their branched heads now above their Thickets rear;
Game tall Forests used to shield,
Becomes a facile prey in the open field.
The Trav'ler too, who setting forth, designed
The crowned Hills, as certain Guides, to mind;
At his Return, admires the shave Coast,
way, with his Directors, lost.
Yea, Foreign Realms contribute, Spain brings Steel,
Libanus Cedar sends, and Denmark Deal:
A checkered Gift the Sunburned India gives,
Whence the whitest Tooth, and blackest Wood arrives:
Ireland Oak, on which no spider builds,
( Arachne sure hanged on that Timber) yields.
Marbles come varied by their native grains.
This, untrod Snow with purer brightness stains:
That Is pitchy black, a lump of solid Night:
bloody Veins creep through a lovely White:
Some in its speckled Face, heavens pourtrait bears,
An azure sky bespangled over with Stars:
And some, (on which Medusa's Head did fall),
Wherein her Snakes seem still to hiss and crawl.

London by the Great in foreign Lands does rise.
Whiles the Dutch Artist takes his Module hence.
And sends us Houses ready-fram'd from thence.
The laden Sea foams, and the tugged Oar
floating Town to shore.
And the Eastern Wind (now a Repairer grown),
Blows up our buildings as it fired them down.
Whence, ( sound's the Moral often, when Tales are lame
Some doubt New London may prove Amsterdam.
Cities should cross the Seas.
We Poets can do feats as great as these.
We, when the whole combined Earth beside
Unto a laboring Goddess Room denied;
Did float a Delos to her, and assign
Birthplace and a Shrine.
From Naz'reth to Loretto, (quick as thought)
Our Tribe the Virgin Mothers Chamber brought:
Whence Pilgrim-Votaries, (and well they may)
To the wandering Temple like Devotions pay.

The Royal Thames advanced his sindged Head.
At first amazed, (for still his troubled breast
With the late dismal Horrors was poslest)
He wildly star'd around the scorched shore:

With rising Structures; ravished with delight,
He gorged his Eyes with the surprising sight:
And thus he spoke:
'O what Celestial Powers
'(For nothing less could) did erect these Towers?
'Old Troy, two hired Gods did raise, it is said,
'And, though they wrought by the Great, by halves were paid.
'The Virgin-Goddess built the Athenian Town,
'And planted there the Olive, and the Gown.
'But such Romantic Tales will better be
London) in time, told and believed of Thee.
'Not jolly Thebes it self, to whose advance
'The merry Stones into the Walls did dance;
'Nor Dido's Town, in aftertimes too wide
'To be thought once encircled with an Hide;
Rome, (of old and still, the Scene of wonders)
'Whose Vatican Tarpejan Jove out-thunders;
'Nor She, that long has both Romes Rival been,
'For Beauty, Empire, and the Man of Sin,
'Which (from her seven Hills too) once Sov'raigns gave
half the World, but now the whole does crave;
'Nor dirty Paris, where the muddy Seine
'Swells big with Envy at the Crystal Rhene;
'Nor Venice, round which the Adriatic roars,
'And limns her Beauties to th'encircling shores;
stately Florence, (though their Proverb says,
'She's a sight only fit for Holy Days)
'Through which the rapid Arnus posting, stays,
'And from both Banks does on her Glories gaze;
'Nor mighty Millain, with immortals bread
Ambrose fed;
'Nor royal Naples, which two mischiefs tire,
'The Spanish Vapors, and Vesuvian Fire;
'Shall dare appear in a contest with Thee:
'But like mean Shrubs to lofty Oaks shall be,
Nymph exhaust her native Spring,
'And Royal Ayds to our Exchequer bring:
'VVith fresh supplies fill up my empty shores,
'Cloath every flat, and lift the grounded Oars.
'See, all the River's overspread with Sails,
tugs and rails.
'Here, milk-white Chalk, from the unbowel'd hills
'Transform'd to Lime, the sluggish Lighters fills.
'There, th'easie-wrought Freestone in western Boats
'Down my obsequious Current smoothly floats.
Oxford sends, (the Mother of its Pride)
'To all its noble Palaces allied,
'To Wolsey's vast and Bodley's lofty Stories,
'And (the great Prelate-Founders mounting Glories,
'To which even Roman Grandeur must defer
Theater.
'And thee, ( small Island, to the Dorset-strand
'Stuck, like a Glass-drop, with a Tongue of sand)
'We'l waft to Paul's, until again it be
'A taller Mark at Land, than thou at Sea.
Timber-wharf are grown.
'And whole Woods every where on Heaps are thrown.
'My very Banks are peeled. The Fish bewrayed
'In vain seek Covert from their plundered shade.
'Few whispering Trees discourse my purling streams;
daple them with percolated Beams.
'Yet on, kind Axe; no Vegetable spare;
'Rifle the Woods, and poll the Mountains bare.
'This Waste is Merit; May but London rise,
'We'l chide in Thanks, and count our Losses Prize.

(The Timber-Fleet arriving) put him out.
The Cannons Thundered, and from under ground
The grateful Ruins did the Joy rebound:
The applaunding Flood replied: and the grave Sire
mossy Couch retire.
Mean while, the Streets are filled with busy throngs.
It Is doubtful, which sound loudest, Tools or Tongues.
Some pray, some pay; some work, and some advise:
Some use their Hands, some rule those Hands with Eyes.
Buildings the Owners vote out grow,
And to their Speed our very Hopes are slow.
So, the new Hive the active Swarm divides.
Some, with their Teeth file the uneven sides;
Some clear the Rubbish; others, by the Line
Whitehall, a Cheapside there, assign.
The humming Troop surveys the fragrant fields,
And from each Flower a gummy Birdlime peels:
Others, with joy receive their welcome load;
Which with warm breath bedewed, they spread abroad;
Tongues they lick th'obsequious mass
Into a Form which Reasons Art does pass.
Thus, when the industrious Ants design to dwell
In an old Oak, or Moles forsaken Cell,
The Field with little Myrmidons is sown;
clod crawls around the rising Town.
Here, strict Surveyors walk the destined round;
There, Pioneers level the uneven Ground;
Whiles (like a routed Troop with shattered Spears)
Advanced Straws a scattered Squadron bears;

And some for Rafters, some they lay for Thatch.
Their Shoulders some, some contribute their Skill,
Till to a Cone they mount the hollow Hill;
Whose checkered Fabric, mixed of close and wide,
Wind, but turns the Shower beside.
On, gallant Londoners. Husband your Fate,
And clothe your Ruins with a Robe of State.
Prove Death the nobler Lise: and stamp't a Truth,
Nature may circulate through Age to Youth.
Old, New London Size,
Confess their Thoughts confuted by their Eyes:
As old Acquaintance, when men's Fortunes mend,
Find him a Courtier whom they left a Friend.
Till Citizens themselves, returned, stray
lose their way:
Yea, London, whiles among Stars she sows her Spires,
No less her self, then others Her, admires.
Thus, when the Gauls old Rome in Ashes laid,
And Jove himself in a false Balance weighed:
valiant Exile built the City new,
And with her walls advanced her Glories too.
Whence she, that till then, (for so long a while)
Retained the Relics of her base Asyle;
Whose Shepherds sheds with sorry Temples blended,
meanness whence she was descended
Whose each prime street some Hovell did avow,
Whence a Dictator drove his Teem to plow;
Whose wooden Gods by their own Altars flame
Themselves (well-nigh) a Sacrifice became;
Numa's Chapel had a Roof of Thatch,
And Vesta's Nuns her Harth with fear did watch:
Made then an youthful salley from her Grave,
And naught but wrinkles unto Death she gave.
Yea, (thanks to the Gallick Conflagration) grew
rich in aftertimes, and splendid too.
Mud-walls gave place to Marbles, and (compared)
Her golden Tops the Neighbour-Stars out-glar'd,
That by mere Beauties Right, she might have been
Without a Rival, the Vniverses Queen.
London copy all her Glories out:
Rise as Magnificent, nor less devout:
Religion, best, Cities foundations lays:
Be Rome therein her Pattern, as my Praise.
There, (not content, the cheap and sordid way,
private Corners sacred Rites to pay)
As fast their Temples as their Homes they built,
And as themselves, their gods in Cedar dwelt,
Yea, statelier too. The Thund'rer cased in gold,
(Lately his Ransom) held his rescued hold.
Phoebus's gilt beams out-glar'd his own,
And in white Metal Silver-Phoebe shone.
Now Marble Walls did Vesta's fires surround:
And Ears of richest yellow Ceres crowned.
Old Saturn Sent'nell sat on golden Bars,
Juno's Roof, like Heaven, was ciel'd with Stars.
Snakes scaled with Pearl the Virgin-Champion bare,
And Venus was as fine as she was fair.
Luster and Horror Mars's Arms combined,
And old Quirinus like his City shined.

If their Shops statelier than their Altars were.
Yea, Memphis-self claims in my Song a place.
Glorious her Temples, though her Gods were base.
Here, Ibis vested in a Room of State:
ugly Monkey sat:
In richest Shrines the hallowed Bull did bellow;
From like Roofs answered by his Female Fellow.
And shall not We a nobler Zeal express?
Since more our Light, why should our Love be less?
Dunghil-gods
With great Jehovah vye and have the odds!
If Curr-Anubis Heaven's Lord excel;
And the true Thund'rer more obscurely dwell!
Say not, the Eternal Mind delights to come
pure Heart, not the Gaudy Room.
That the Who, in Worship, sanctify the Where:
And make a Barn, or Booth, an House of Prayer.
Thus Satan in a Samuel's Mantle sneaks,
Whiles Avarice Religious Language speaks!
both reside,
Who (equally removed from Need and Pride)
Expects the best, scorns not the meanest Treat;
Val'uing in both the Welcome, not the Meat;
Gifts by the Mind, the Mind by them he weighs;

Ill Parsimony Purity pretends:
Nor is the worship Pure, where foul the Ends.
At least with thee, brave City, in whose frame
Both Art and Cost equally court a name,
Interest sway; lay not a train of Guilt,
Once more to blow up what thy Wealth has built.
It Is an affront too daring to be born,
When the object of our Worship grows our Scorn.
Who shames, disclaims his God; whiles (meanly placed)

Our Fathers (sure) were of a nobler strain,
Whose Times we treat 'twixt Pity and Disdain.
Their Twilight-Zeal raised us the Churches, where
Those Lights have shined that made our Day so clear.

Those the worse Christians that let 'em fall!
And (since Church-founding's now my Muses Aim)
Thou Reverend Paul's her first Essay may claim.
Whether the Royal Charles in Thee design

Or some Successor, Maurice, in thy seat,
Rival thy Honors with a mind as great;
Or grateful Piety thy Sons engage
With thy Revenues to restore thine Age;
private Breasts a glorious zeal inspire;
Or public work a public Purse require;
Or all these helps be neeeful: Pity 'twere
Thy sacred walls alone should want Repair.
And whiles they overlook all round 'em new,
Threaten the City and reproach it too.
True, it is a work of Ages, and our Days
May well despair to grasp so vast a Praise:
But yet we may begin, and part the glory
Bet wixt our own, and our Descendants story,
ancient'st Christian Monument we have
To have redeemed from its fatal Grave.
You, whose, full Chests with smothered Gold are crammed,
At once to Rust and second darkness damned:
Rescue your Treasure from your Heirs Excess.
Part thus spent will the Remainder bless.
Or would you propagate your Wealth by Use?
Cajole the Law, and Cent per Cent produce?
Trust Him that is most Responsible, and add
(Besides the Gain) a Credit to your Trade?
Usury like this you can devise,
Where God's the Debtor, Heaven at Mortgage lies.
And you, whose Riches most in Wishes are,
(The Poets Tribe) assist with Verse and Prayer.
Old Bards did thus build Cities, Churches We;
Paul's, we wish to Thee:
Until (great Doctor of the Gentiles) thine
Become the Envy of the Fishers shrine.
These Verses and diverse that follow are to be referred to the time when the
Latin Poem (of which this is a Version) was written, viz. Feb. 1667. when the
Winter was remarkably dry and calm.
Mean while, calm Winter thanks, young Londons friend,
Never was the Sky to better purpose kind.
Storms to Rest,
To give her space to build her Halcion-Nest!
Whiles February laughs that used to mourn,
And galloping Spring out-post's the Suns Return.
Whiles no hard Frosts lock up the costive ground,
snowy Fleeces severed Rights confound,
Nor Icy-drops the Truel double-glaze,
Nor the cold ferment lodged Bricks does raise,
Nor hasty rains with an impetuous Dash
Into a bog the mellow buildings quash.
Heavens great Fav'rite-City! For thy ends,
The Course of Things and Law of Nature bends:
El'ments commute, and the inverted year
Her Summer-Months on Winter does confer.
What glorious Fabrics may we (then) expect
Vernal Sun advanced shall erect!
When the unequal Ram with equal Rage
The chafed Bull in Combat shall engage:
When from the Martial Twins the fiery Carr
Retreats into the retrogressive Starr:
Nemea's Lion roars, and a cold sweat
Bathes the scared maid amidst her flagrant Heat:
If the decrepit year such Issues show,
And London thus under dull Planets grow.
Then, sure, (as when the Earth has quaffed up
Joves Tankard-bearers overflowing Cup,
And tepid Zephyr thawing Winters cold
Makes sprouting Trees their closed Buds unfold;
Whiles the returning Sap with want on heat
Swelling each Bud, new Blossoms each beget:)
Ruins shall prove Vegetable too:
And thy scorch't Stump to a new City grow.
Whose adverse Fronts at equidistant space,
As Lines drawn Parallel, their Fellows face.
Each noble Street detaining with delight,
Passage to the admiring sight:
Till intercepted by no Envious bound,
It find it self in Heavens vast Ocean drowned.
Thus, whiles the Quin cunx curious Orchards throws
Into a thousand subdivided rows;
Walks are loop'd to the Hemisphere,
And each end-twig not Fruit but Stars does bear.
And where Commerce in crowded Throngs was pent,
Or Fires cooped up had raged for want of vent:
Where obscure Lanes obscurer Facts did hide:
Pests by being straightened, spread more wide:
Traffic in spacious Streets shall now be free,
And Flames soon spent, or soon suppressed shall be.
Day's Eye each where shall skulking Sinners trace,
And transient Air infectious steams shall chase.
Front-buildings shall be backward thrust,
T'enlage each Passage to dimensions just)
London, thou shall not less by lessening grow;
Whiles each House gains above what is lost below,
Its breadth squeezed into Height; and from the skies
Stealing the room the cramped Ground denies,
Thus thy own Thames both robs and makes amends:
VVhiles it pays this shore what from that it rends.
Happp thy Poet, if his friendly Fates
Spare him to see what he prognosticates!

Unto his Autumn to behold thy Spring.
Nor will his Muse (born for thy service) pine,
If, thy Turn's served, her stock of wit decline.
On other Themes to flag less must her grieve,
sole Name to live.
And you ( Great Sir) who toiled in vain to save
A dying London from her dismal Grave:
Shall less repent your unsuccessful pain,
When, worthy you, by you, she lives again.
Fall;
With equal Joy shall read her Rise withal.
And all her past misfortunes from your story
Shall be expunged by her succeeding Glory.
Whence she ( Augusta hight in days of Eald
State her Title swelled)
By this improvement, with a fairer claim
Into her own shall graft your greater Name.
Yea, could she now state on a just account,
How much her Gain her Loss shall then surmount.
thank her Flames, and count it Prize,
Even so to die, that so she might arise.
FINIS.

