Primitiae Regiminis Davidici. OR, THE FIRST FRUITS OF DAVID'S GOVERNMENT, Vowed
to God before, and offered at his actual admission thereunto. REPRESENTED In a
Sermon at the Assizes held at Reading, for the County of Berks, Feb. 28. 1653.
By Simen Ford, B. D. and Pastor of the Congregation at St. Laurence Church in
the said Town. Published At the joint desire of the High Sheriff, and Justices
of Peace for the said County, which (with some mis-reports since blown about
concerning it, and the Author) inclined him to give way thereunto.

LONDON, Printed by S. G. for John Rothwel at the Fountain and Bear in
Goldsmiths Row in Cheap Side. 1654.

TO THE HONORABLE, Judge Atkins, one of the Justices of the Common-Plea's; as
also to the right Worshipful William Backhouse of Swallowfield, Esquire. High
Sheriff of the County of Berks; together with the right Worshipful, the
Gentry, both of and out of the Commission for the Peace of the said County; and
principally to those, at whose request this Sermon was made public.
My Lord, and Gentlemen,
THis Sermon having adventured it self upon the hazardous Trial of God and the
Bench, was adjudged to the Press, when its Author was not by to plead on his
own behalf; who surely had he been privy to the Judgment, (which was only
reported to him by some few of the number) would have entreated the Gentlemen
not to adventure the reputation of their discretions upon a piece too unworthy
the notice of such an Honorable Judicature.

I confess I look upon the coming under the Stationers Press, in these
days, as a punishment to a Sermon, no less (in its kind) then that of the
same denomination, which you in some cases inflict upon offenders; seeing it is
thereby exposed to the weight of public calumnies and reproaches, of which I
am sure mine shall not want its sufficient load.

The only remedy I have herein, is once more to present its case before you
its Judges, (which I do in this Dedication) and to entreat you that the
Grand-Inquest you impannell to enquire concerning it, may be so wise as to
understand the evidence of Truth that is in it; and so honest, as not to
return an Ignoramus, for Billa vera.

Surely, (My Lord, and Gentlemen) you that are sufficiently acquainted with the
Yerburies, Chillendens, Ives's, and others of an inferior Order, whom it would
be too much honor to name, seeds-men of the Devil, with whom this poor Town
has been perpetually pestered and poisoned, will, I doubt not, see cause for
that tartness of application in the close, for which I have been sufficiently
persecuted by the tongues of those, who found their backs too tender to be
rubbed.

Those men's names, and some of the Errors and Heresies they vented, I
represented to your last Grand Jury, and hoped they also would have seen cause
either to have reported them to your Lordship, and the Bench, or at least not
to have misreported me, (as some of them did) to others, as unable to justify
my charge.

My Lord, and Gentlemen, I commit the Vindication of my name, and of this
Truth, first, to God, who (I am sufficiently assured) will bring forth its
righteousness as the light; and (among men) to your wiser, and more impartial
judgments, hoping that you will (as far as it concerns you) impresse the
substance of it upon your Consciences, and walkings. And I pray that that
Edition may be correctior and emendatior, more perfect then the Original Copy
it self: that you may live Sermons better then I can Preach or print them. And
upon that account, I will preach and print as often as you please; upon other
terms I care not how seldom. And this, because I am

Reading, May 24. 1654. (My Lord, and Gentlemen,) Your most zealously
affectionate well-wisher, and (upon that account) servant in the Gospel, SIMON
FORD.

A SERMON Preached at the Assizes holden for the County of Berks at Reading,
Feb. 28. 1653. Mr. William Backbouse of Swallowfield, SHERIFF.
PSALM. 75. 4, 5, 6, 7. I said (or rather, I will say) to the fools, deal not
foolishly: and to the wicked, lift not up the horn, v. 4. Lift not up your horn
on high: speak not with a stiff neck, v. 5.

For promotion comes neither from the East, nor from the West, nor from the
South, v. 6.

But God is the Judge: he puts down one, and sets up another, v. 7.


THis Psalm is a good Magistrates Directory, because it is the Copy of that
Kings heart, who was a man after Gods own heart. David, at the time of the
writing hereof, is by most sound Interpreters supposed to have been in that
Morning-Twilight of Royalty, a midling condition between a King and no King,
which you have described, 2 Samuel 2, and 3 Chapters. Ishobsheth the son and heir
of Saul, the late King, was yet struggling for ten parts in twelve of the whole
Kingdom. 'Twas an hot dispute of two years continuance. But at last, David's
house grows stronger and stronger, and Ishbosheths weaker and weaker, chap. 3.
1. This day star of approaching Royalty, being thus got above the Horizon, and
foretelling the nearness of the Sun to dispel the mists of his long doubts and
fears, (it is supposed) sets David's harp and heart in tune; and thereupon he
takes occasion to testify his thankfulness in this (...), or triumphant
thankful Ode. His thankfulness is partly Verbal, in the acknowledgement of Gods
faithfulness, in so near an issue of an expected mercy, (for this he means by
the nearness of Gods name, v. 1.) and of his Sovereign Power and Justice, in
the way wherein he accomplished it, v. 7, 8, 9. And partly Real, in the
resolvedness of his heart, to repair the breaches and ruins of Saul's dissolute
Government. The whole State, both Ecclesiastical (...) Dissolutus liquefactus
fuit.
and Civil, was like a melted Vessel, run into a lump of confusion and
disorder, (for that is the Original emphasis of that phrase, The earth and all
the inhabitants thereof are dissolved, v. 3. And there was no hope that ever it
would be a Vessel for honor or use any more, except a skilful Founder
undertook to new cast it. Such an one was David, and that he might give
assurance of his undertaking, he beforehand declares the mould or model unto
which he will reduce it.

1. He will first cement the broken pieces of the old frames, viz. Religion,
Law, and Justice, which are the pillars of all Government.

2. He will secure those pillars from the insolent petulancy of bold and
presumptuous offenders, by a severe execution of the utmost severity and rigor
of divine and humane Laws upon them. And both these he will do upon the
consideration of his conscientious obligation thereunto; and that upon this
account, because all his power is confessedly subordinate to Gods, which is the
sum of my Text, and the following verse.

I will say (for so I read it with Paraeus and Musculus) unto the fools, deal
not so foolishly, etc.

For promotion comes, etc.

In which words you have two general parts:

1. David's resolution of reformation, I will say, etc.

2 The reason of that resolution. For promotion, etc In the first of these you
may further observe,

1. The subjects of it, Fools, (that is, bad men, but such whose sins are only
prejudicial to themselves) (...) boasting fools; (...) troublesome fools.
and wicked men, such who by reason of long remisseness of Civil Government,
during the unquiet and turbulent reign of Saul, were grown to a great height of
presumption and violence, daring all Laws both divine and human out of
countenance, which he expresses by two phrases, speaking with a stiff neck,
and lifting up the horn, Metaphors taken from unbroken Colts, or wild Bulls,
who are altogether impatient of the bridle or the yoke. Sons of Belial indeed,
if the received (...) cui non est jugum.
Etymology of that word hold water. These are the persons that David intends to
deal withal in this resolved reformation.

2. The nature of it, and that is by way of restraint upon their unruly lusts:
for this saying implies doing. De merit a vindicta and e^ercione intelligendum
Musculus.
est, one says; Cohibebo (says another) petulantes regni and ecolesiae
porturbatores, zealous and resolute Authority uses not to speak vain words.
This saying is like that Psalm. 2. 5. where God is said to speak to such another
generation of wild Beasts, but how? so, as to vex them in his sore displeasure.
So here, I will say to the fools, etc. is as much, as I will by wholesome Laws,
and a zealous execution of them, either amend their persons, or (at least)
restrain their lusts, If they will deal foolishly, they shall not deal so
foolishly, and if they will wear horns still, yet they shall not lift the horn
on high.

2. The second general part may look two ways:

1. Either as a reason prevailing with David thus to put forth his power to
curb the insolences of wicked men. For promotion (i. e. my promotion, by which
I am advanced to the succession of Saul's Throne) comes, etc.

2. Or as a lesson which he would by just severity teach them, who had sinned
themselves into a near affinity to Atheism, by so long and uncontrolled a
liberty of lust, and insolences. Just severity in Deputy gods may teach men so
much Religion, as, that there is a God that judges the earth. But I rather
look upon it as a motive to David himself. And then the Argument runs thus: I
was awhile since a poor Shepherds boy, and I am now advanced to the potentia
proxima of an absolute Royalty. Therefore it concerns me gratefully to
acknowledge, and zealously to act for him that advanced me, and (seeing
promotion comes not from the East, etc. But God is the Judge, etc.) I will
answer his ends in my advancement.

This part has two branches:

1. A negation of power in any creature to give, or take away honor and power.
Though all assistance from all quarters of the world should concenter their
endeavors for one man's exaltation, they could not do it, if God will pull him
down; and e contra, Though the whole posse of the Creation, were raised to pull
a man down, yet if God say nay, their endeavors shall be successeless. David
here takes his expressions from the Topography of the land of Palestine, and
expresses East and West distinctly, but includes North and South, both under
the expression of midbar, the Desert, that Country being on both North and
South sides bounded with waste lands of that denomination. Whence your Margin
reads it Desert, and your English Meter, forsaken wilderness.

2. An assertion of that power and prerogative in God alone. He is Judge, i. e.
absolute, and independent, inso much that he is no way taxable, though he puts
in and puts out, lifts up, and pulls down according to his own good pleasure;
And yet proceeds in a way of regular justice in this case of
maladministration. As a Judge.

Thus you see I have done this part of my task, i. e. taken to pieces this
excellent watch, and showed you the wheels, and the spring, David's reformation,
and the impulsive cause of it. But the harder part of my business is yet to
come, viz. to put it together again, that you may take direction from its hand
in the business of so solemn a convention, as is that which has brought you
hither this day.

I know the spring-wheel should first be taken in hand, as the foundation must
be laid before the building, in an exact order of nature. But the order I shall
proceed by is Theological, and therefore I shall first begin with the Balance,
David's resolution of a just reformation, and then annex the reason at the last,
to set it a going.

And first and foremost we will consider,

The subjects of this reformation. I said unto the fools, and to the wicked.
Such then David found, even among the great ones, when he came to the Kingdom;
he found beasts, and those armed with power, horned beasts: And such there will
be every where, let the Laws be but a while silenced, and the Magistrate,
either sleep, or connive, or both. Observe,

Evils not suppressed, will be spreading Evils. The case of such a
Commonwealth will quickly be like the field of the sluggard, described Prove.
24. 31. all grown over with thorns, and nettles will cover the face thereof,
(for ill weeds grow apace) and the wall of order and discipline will quite be
broken down. There had need be diligent weeders to keep the field of a
Commonwealth from being overspread. They had need be good hedges, that must
keep in such unruly beasts, as my Text speaks of. Qui non probibet peccare, cum
possit, jubet. If there be none to forbid the fools to deal foolishly, there
need be none to bid them do so; he bids them, that, when he can, does not
forbid them. Men (in a spiritual sense) are all natural fools, folly is bound
up in the heart of a child, Prove. 22. and they need not be taught that trade;
if they be but permitted to set up for themselves, he had need be a wiser man
then ordinary that shall keep them within any bounds of reason or conscience;
for, observe again,

Wickedness tolerated will grow insolent. Such fools, if the rod of correction
do not discipline them, will know no difference, between simple folly and
downright madness. The Asses colt will turn his ears into horns, and grow
horn-mad, and push against all those that shall endeavor to bring him under
the yoke. Sin and Error lose nothing by indulgence. If a logge be King, the
frogs will quickly be presumptuously petulant, and insult over its
sluggishnesse. A Magistrate couchant will quickly make offenders rampant. We
use to say, when an horse runs away with a young rider, he knows who is upon
the back of him. The weakness or unskilfulness of the hand that manageth him,
is a provocation to him to attempt the casting off his burden. There is
nothing which is more intolerable then a servant when he reigns, if Solomon may
be believed, Prove. 30. 22. When those base lusts of men that under restraint
seemed very submiss, are once let at liberty, they will rage the more
intolerably; and much, out of anger they have been bridled.

Two things there were in Saul's Government, and the interval of David's, that
exposed the Land to these wild beasts, and their insolences, which among the
rest of the causes are (like Saul himself, among the people) higher by the
shoulders.

1. A perpetual Militia. Wars, Forain and Civil, defensive and offensive. And
those (though never so necessary) like ill Physic, breed more ill humors, then
they purge out. All Civil Authority must be silent, while the rattling of Arms
drowns their voice; and the sword of the Law must submit to the Law of the
sword. Thence the Soldiers in Plutarch wondered that any one should read Law
to them that wrote it by their side, (...); Plut. in Pompeio.
War (in a sort) necessitates irregularities, not only against Civil, but even
Military Laws. Martial Law, says one, is as great a Soloecisme, as Modern
Policy.
Martial peace.

Thence, when God threatens war to his people, he tells them, that Military
Insolency shall cast contempt upon Civil Magistracy, they shall smite the Judge
of Israel with a rod upon the cheeks, Micah 5. 1. And when he calls for that
Judgment upon a people, he is said to invite the beasts of the field to devour,
Isa. 56. 9. There is a kind of customary fetity bred in the minds of men, by
constant and familiar converse with instruments of death and violence, which
will not easily be charmed into a peaceable submission to civil restraints,
though the most discreet Magistrate charm never so wisely. Far be it from me,
to asperse the persons of any of that profession among us. I can truly say of
diverse of them, what Tertullus said flatteringly, concerning Felix the
Governor of Judea, by them we enjoy great quietness, which we cannot but
accept always, and in all places with much thankefulness, Act. 24. 2, 3. But I
speak of the influences of that profession upon the generality of those that
profess it, and the people living under the exercise of it. Militaribus
animis, (says Salust) adbibenda fomenta ut pacim far veline. I dare say, your
Lordships experience can testify, that most of those that make a trade of the
highway, are the relics of routed and disbanded Forces, (who like the unjust
Steward) cannot dig, and to beg are oshamed, and therefore follow that trade.

2. The maintaining of a faction opposite to the faithful Prophets and Priests
of the Lord. Samuel for many years before Saul's death was laid aside, as a man
of too rigid a spirit for Saul's designs; and Abimelech and the Priests were
looked upon as confederate with David, and upon the information of a
treacherous Doeg, murdered upon suspicion thereof. And no wonder, if they that
are grown so bold, as to trample upon the Ambassadors of God, make as bold
with the Laws and Ordinances of man. I am sure, in Gods just judgment, Civil
confusions have used to accompany Church confusions; when Judah in Abijabs time
was without a teaching Priest, they were also without peace, they went in and
out of their own houses with hazard of their lives, 2 Chronicles. 15. 3. I am glad,
we of this Nation are at last grown so wise as to see that Church-Levelling
needs nothing but a power to its will to introduce State-Levelling too; and
that the Honorable Robes of Magistracy and Law are at the bar of many men's
ignorant and sottish fury, no less guilty of Antic bristianism, then the
contemptible black coats of the Ministry of the Gospel. Assure your selves, My
Lord, and you of the worshipful Bench, that it is only the awe of Conscience
that subdues the fury, and rage of men's lusts; your Provisions of Law are a
lower bank, which these violent ways will quickly break over, when once they
swell above those sacred main banks of Religious Principles and Institutions.
Let Magistrates maintain Gods Ordinances, God will theirs.

In this case David found the Kingdom, a kind of wilderness of wild beasts. And
therefore we need not wonder at his resolution of a severe reformation, of
setting the nets and toils of good Laws to take them, (my next head which now
comes to hand.)

I will say unto the fools, etc. Observe,

Insolent offenders must be curbed with a resolute severity. All diseases (say
Physicians of greatest note) are cured by contraries. And (by consequence) the
diseases of the body Politic occasioned by remissness require more rough and
churlish Physic to remove them. Ne corporis quidem morbos, veteres, and diu
auctos nisi per dura and aspera coerceas: corruptus, and corrumpens, aeger and
flagrans animus haud levioribus remediis restinguendus est quam libidinibus
ardescit, says Tacitus. Stiff-necked Colts will not be managed with a slack
rein. Let David come to the Throne with never so much resolution, yet he will
find enough to do when he comes to act that resolution. He will find cause to
complain that the sons of Zerviah are too strong for him, 2 Samuel 3. 39.
Wherefore he is fain to die in their debt, and to leave it upon his son Solomon
to discharge, 1 Kings 2. 5. And when he goes out of the world his last words
back his first resolution, 2 Samuel 23. 6, 7. But the sons of Belial. etc.

In such cases, a Magistrate had need to sharpen the sword of Justice with the
file of resolution; Fiat justitia, ruat coelum. Come what will, or can come, he
must be armed against it with a fixed purpose of getting the enemies ground, or
dying upon his own: of gaining the horse, or losing the saddle, sawing off the
horns of these wild beasts, or being gored by them. He must resolve to be the
Champion of Justice whiles he can, and when he can no longer be so, he must
become her Martyr.

A Judges heart and his robes must be both dyed in grain, else the color of
the one, and the courage of the other will quickly fade. Good Ministers should
have the Motto of Aarons Miter written upon their foreheads, Holiness to the
Lord; and Magistrates should have written upon their hearts, what Moses had on
his, Resolution for the Lord. This alone will fortify a man against all
mollifying considerations. Thus the Sons of Levi came armed to execute the
vengeance of the Lord against Idolaters, Deuteronomy. 33. 9. compared with Exodus 32.
26, 27, 28. But when does David resolve to put these resolves in execution?
Even as soon as the reins of government are put into his hand. As soon as he
receives the Congregation, v. 2. And lest we should think this was the issue of
some hasty thoughts, which upon better advice he would see cause not to stand
to; you shall hear him back it in another Psalm, I will early destroy all the
wicked of the Land, Psa. 101. ult. Observe, (from the time)

That Magistrates reforming resolutions must be speedily and effectually
prosecuted. For,

1. Good resolutions will cool again, when they are off from the fire of a
present good mood, if they be not speedily put in execution.

2. Delays in this case are dangerous; when the fire once gets to the house
top, the least delay will quickly render it unquenchable. If a small Army be
suffered to entrench, and victual themselves, a great strength will have enough
to do to conquer them.

If the Sea break in upon a Land, it may be at the first a little labor will
repair the bank; but if it be neglected but a few days, all the Country cannot
turn it out again.

Novi ego quod primo fuerat medicabile vnlnus.

Neglectum longae damna tulisse morae.

Wickedness will spread as a Gangrene, (and especially 2 Timothy, 2. 17.
that which the Apostle speaks of in that place, Heresy) and toleration makes
it incurable.

3. Opportunities and seasons of doing good, are not in our hands, but Gods.
This is the ground of that advice of Mordecai to Hester, Who knows but that
thou art come to the Kingdom for such a time as this? Hester 4. 13.

And this leads me to the second general part of my Text, the ground of David's
resolution, [For promotion comes neither from the East, etc.]

Which words are an universal negation of creature-power in the managery of
State-affaires, further then Gods Providence co-operates with it. Men are apt
to expect advancement from second causes. Politicians use to have their Engines
at work in all Quarters. Such correspondencies in the East, and such in the
West, etc. And they are apt to conclude, if but such or such a designtake (one
of many) that makes for their advantage. And when their plots are spoiled in
one part, yet they maintain hope from another quarter of the world. And indeed,
This is the spring of all manner of irregular compliances, with those from whom
we expect furtherance in our designs, that we look upon them, as our advancers.
Thence (says Solomon) many seek the Rulers favor, Prove. 29. 26. and that with
sordid and horrid encroachments upon the principles of ingenuity and
conscience, licking up the very spittle of great ones, (as is reported of
Dyonisius his flatterers) and conforming to their very vices and imperfections,
as is reported of Alexanders courtiers, that imitated his wry neck.

And in the last Kings reign, in the encroachments upon the public liberty by
Ship Money and Monopolies, His Judges, (all but one or two that went with
honor to their graves) persuaded him 'twas Law, and his Divines 'twas
Conscience. As if they had both been of the mind of Cambyses his Counselors,
who advising with them in a case of incestuous marriage, they told him all the
Statute Law of the Land was against him; but there was another Law, that the
King might do what he would.

Now the ready way to keep men from irregular courses for advancement, is to
persuade them, (O that God would do it) that vain is the help of man. Trust not
in Princes, nor in the son of man, (says David) in whom there is no help,
Psalm. 146. 3.

And, Cursed be he that makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from
the Lord. Creature-confidence is the mother of Apostasy, and defeatment, Jer.
17. 5, 6.

But where then is the spring of preferment? And from what Fountain does it
flow? The last part of my Text tells you, God is the Judge, he puts down
one, and sets up another. Of which in a few words, and then I shall dismiss
you with a word or two by way of application to the present occasion. Observe
hence,

All the Translations of Civil power in the world, are the effects of a Divine,
and that, a just Providence. God works these changes, and that as a Judge, in a
judicial way.

There is nothing in the world of more common observation, and less solemn and
sanctified meditation, then the various turnings of the wheel of Providence.
One while, a David taken from the Sheep-coat, from following the Ews great
Psalm. 78. 71.
with young, and advanced (in Homers phrase) (...), to be a Shepherd of men,
his Sheephook changed into a Scepter, and his seat of turf to a Royal throne. A
Joseph from an imprisoned slave, to a Royal Favorite. A Gideon, from a
threshing Jud. 6. 11
floor, raised to be a Savior of Israel, and his threshing instrument of wood,
changed into one Isa. 41. 15.
of iron, to thresh the mountains, as God himself phraseth it. Hester a poor
captive maid, advanced to a royal bed, Hest. 2. 6, 17. And in profane stories,
a Dictator from the Plough, and an Emperor from the hog-trough, a third from
keeping the Cowes, etc. And our Hen. the 8. took his two great favorites, the
one from the Slaughterhouse, and the other from the Forge.

On the other side, Adonibezek a mighty Prince, Jud. 1. 7. Dan. 4. 28.
made Fellow-Commoner with the Dogs; and Nebusbadnezzar, a mightly Conqueror,
and one that lifted his horn to a great height, turned a grazing with the Oxen;
and Herod in his most sumptuous apparel, and amidst the shouts and acclamations
of his people, reduced from a conceited God, to be the most loathsome of men; a
living Acts 12. 23.
carrion, arrested by the vilest of creatures, upon the suit of his affronted
Creator. A great Haman feasted with the King one day, and made a feast for
Crows the next, Hest. 7. 10.

And in humane stories, who knows not that Bajazet.
one of the greatest Commanders in the world, was carried about in an
Iron-grate, to be a footstool to an insulting Conqueror? That Belisarius the
famousest General that the later Age of the Roman Empire knew, and in greatest
favor with Justinian his Prince, was reduced to that want, that he was fain to
beg for his living, Date obolum Belisario. This is commonly the lot of great
Favorites, Fatum potentiae raro sempiternae, (says Tacitus) quippe satias
capit aut illos cum omnia tribuerunt, aut hos cum nihil reliquum est quod
cupiant. The common fate of worldly preserment, that it seldom lasts, Princes
being either cloyed with giving their favors, or subjects with receiving them,
when they have no more to give, nor these to receive.

And in our days, these changes and revolutions of the wheel of Providence
have been ordinary.

We have seen in one Royal Family, (and that one of the most eminent in these
parts of the world) a great and puissant Monarch, in the face of the Sun, at
noonday, at the gate of his own Palace, in the most populous City of these
three Nations, in the midst of thousands of his passionate well-wishers, and
zealous partisans, laying his head upon a fatal block; three Queens of his line
and alliance, reduced to the Contribution of Foraigners, for a mean
subsistence; and a numerous issue of the same family, crushed under the same
wheel of Providence, in whom not many years since these Nations rejoiced, as
the budding hopes of an uninterrupted succession.

We have seen a Parliament, the darling of the people, sitting under the
protection of a perpetual Act, crumbled into piecet, and at last wholly
dissolved with the crucifige of that very people, that a few years since cried
Hosanna, and prostrated their very hearts at their seet, to pave them a
triumphant entrance into that trust they had elected them unto.

We have seen a formidable Meteor of Policy lately elevated to a great height
of confidence and presumption, lifting up the horn on high, or (as a Learned
Jew reads the words) against the high God, and speaking with a stiff neck,
caught R. Immanuel.
like Abraham's Ram, by the horns in a bush, and made a just sacrifice to the
scorn and contempt of all men; and their Arm withered in the very act, for
stretching them out against the Prophets of the Lord.

In a word, such changes of public affairs, as if the stars, or those that
pretend to great familiarity with them, had been but ordinary Prophets, they
could not have overseen, without an inexcusable neglect. Such wonderful, and
momentous Providence as all Europe is concerned in, should not in my judgment
have been omitted among our Calculators, (who are at leisure to take abundant
notice of (that far more inconsiderable thing) the Clergy) except possibly
they calculated the Commonwealths Nativity upon black Monday, when they had
not light * The day of the great Eclipse 1652. concerning which our Stargazers
prognosticated such monstrous darkness but were confuted by the event. Acts 1.
7.
enough to erect their Scheme. However at the present, let them pass with this
mcmento, that it is not for vain man, to know the times and seasons, which the
Father has kept in his own power; and that undoubtedly, God Almighty is better
able to keep his own counsel, then to acquaint the Stars with such affairs,
or at least their Secretaries, who make a livelihood of blabbing all that they
know, and more too. But (to leave this digression.)

This is that great Truth, which Scripture so much inculcates upon men, that
(it seems) are very slow of heart to believe it. How often does God tell us
this truth, in various forms of expressions? That be raises the poor out of
the dust, and lifts the needy from the dunghill, that he may set him with
Princes, Psalm. 113. 7. That he pours contempt upon Princes, and makes them
to wander in the wilderness, whiles (on the other side) he sets the poor on
high, Psalm. 107. 41, 42. that he raises the beggar from the dunghill, and
makes him to inherit the Crown of glory, because the pillars of the earth are
his, 1 Samuel 2. 7, 8. that he cuts off the spirit of Princes, and is terrible to
all the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 76. 12.

Insomuch, that it seems wonderful to me, that (after so much clear conviction,
both from Scripture and experience) the luster of present greatness should
usually so blind the eyes of great ones, and flatter them with a persuasion of
immunity from these changes, as it does. That their inward thought should still
be, (that which this Psalmist notes, as a great folly, That their houses shall
continue for ever, and their dwelling places to all generations, Psalm. 49. 11.
That they conceit their mountain to be so strong that they shall never be
moved, Psalm. 30. 67.

That when men cast about all manner of ways for advancement, they should not
so much as think of God; nay, that they should entertain an Atheistical
conceit, that a conscientious walking with God, is the only way to spoil their
preferment. (As if indeed that which Balak told Balaam, who was a little too
nice for his design, were true, that the Lord keeps men from honor.) Number. 24.
11.
That he that will be great, must have a conscience as large as his designs,
lest being too straightlaced, it cause miscarriage. That seeming good should be
accounted a more ready road to greatness, then being so. Surely, did men
believe God to be the Sovereign Disposer of all preferments, they would in
reason be able to conclude, that he would advance his own servants rather then
others, if advancement be good for them. But because men do not cordially
believe this Truth, therefore they neglect him, and prostitute their
consciences to the base lusts of others. Insomuch that a man would think, when
he reads the stories of some great Politicians lives, that the Devil and they
had struck a bargain upon the terms which our Savior refused. Luke 4. 6. All
this power will I give thee, and the glory of these Kingdoms, for that is
delivered to me, and to whomsoever I will, I give it. If therefore thou will
worship me, all shall be thine. Or, that they had been bred with that great
French Courtier, that chose a part in Paris, before a part in Paradise. Or,
Lastly, that they had learned those Heathen Politics of Flectere si nequeo
superos Acberonta movebo; Virg. And, Varo, regustatum digito terebrare salinum
Contentus perages, si vivere cum Jove tendis.
Pers.

How much better were it for men to keep Gods high way to greatness, which
though it may seem the farther way about to them that are in haste, yet
(considering, that he that makes haste to be rich cannot be innocent, as
Solomon says, Prove: 28. 20. and that they that purchase the whole world with
the loss of their own souls, get nothing, when a dying conscience casts up
their accounts, Matthew. 16. 26.) it is the nearer way by far; Especially when
we have Gods solemn engagement for it, that those that honor him, he will
honor, and they that despise him shall be slightly esteemed, 1 Samuel 2. 30.

Lastly, (considering this great Truth) I cannot but wonder at the spirit that
those men are of, who in such changes, as fall out against the grain of their
expectations, carry themselves, rather like Atheists then Christians under them.

1. Sometimes in a pet at God himself, throwing off that mask of Religion,
which they had hoped might have advantaged them; and because this evil is from
the Lord, they are resolved to wait upon him no longer, like that wicked
Prince, who is branded upon record for that ungodly resolution, 2 Kings 6. 33.
How many have all Ages of the Church known, who because they could not obtain
their designed greatness, by profession of Orthodoxy and Piety, have attempted
to recover it by Apostasy and Persecution?

2. And sometimes in a furious and Diabolical rage, fuming and foaming against
the Instruments causing or occasioning them. How familiar a thing has it been
with our deboist gallantry in these late years, to drink healths to the
confusion of this party, and that party, to curse, and devote to the Devil such
and such men, as the Authors or Promoters of those events, they storm at?

Not considering, that (as we say) the Fox never fares better then when he is
oursed: nor, that the worst of men, in the worst actions, do but Midwife Gods
secret intendments, that the crucifying of the Lord of glory, was indeed the
pre-determined counsel of God, Act. 4. 28. though the fin of that wicked act
were the guilt of those that acted therein: nor that their own sins empower
those instruments, that thus thwart their designs; and that when God makes such
changes, he does it as a Judge, for the just punishment of those whom he
afflicts thereby. Which opens a door to the last branch of this last part of
the Text, God is the Judge. Whence observe,

The greatest changes in the world are judicial acts of Gods Providence. Not
mere acts of Sovereignty, in which God acts by Prerogative, although it be his
Prerogative sometimes so to act. Whence (although God use arguments from this
Prerogative, to silence our cavils, in those great differences which he makes
between one man and another; especially in relation to salvation and damnation,
wherein the Apostles answer has hitherto among serious and solid Christians,
been judged satisfactory. Has not the Potter power over the clay, etc. Romans 9.
12. Nay, and even in Statechanges, he makes use of the same similitude, Jer.
16. 8. Yet,) he has a rule of justice which he commonly walks by; not only
that secret will of his which makes things just, because he wills them; but
also that revealed Law of righteousness, which he has laid down in his Word.
So that it may be truly said, (as to us and our demerits) that no man loses
honor or estate, but he that first forfeits it. If God cast out the
Canaanites, and bring Israel in to tread upon the necks of their Genesis 15. 16.
Kings, it is when their iniquities are full; and if God reject Saul, it is
because he rejects God first; 1 Samuel 15. 26.
and if he make the sons of Eli vile, it is because they made themselves vile,
and made his sacrifice to 1 Samuel 3. 13.
be abhorred. And even Job himself (though he were a singular example, and his
abasement was rather a design to do him good, then a punishment for any
notorious evil, yet) dares not plead his own innocence, except in the
particulars which his friends charged him withal, injustice and hypocrisy, Job
9. 14, 15.

But the causes of such Judgments are not always discernable to others, no,
nor (it may be) to the men themselves, that are the subjects of them, (though
godly,) and therefore (even as Job himself) it was good counsel that he should
say to the Lord, Show me wherefore thou contendest with me Job 10. 2. and, If I
have done iniquity, I will do so no more, Job 34. 31, 32.

Sometimes, they are the sins of the first Founders of a Family that entail
forfeitures upon their posterity: As in the case of Jebu, who doing Gods work
with a spirit of private revenge, cuts off the succession from his line after
four generations, 2 Kings 10. 30. Hos. 1. 4.

And in the case of Ishbosheth, whose Title to the Crown of Israel Saul
forfeited, it may be before he was born, at least before he possessed it.

Sometimes the sins of an immediate parent, and he godly too, as in the case of
Eli and his posterity, may entail an affliction. So in the case of Solomon and
his posterity, the Kings of Judah. 1 Kings 11. 31.
Rehoboam lost ten Tribes for his Fathers sin.

Sometimes it is for the sins of the people upon whom such changes have an
influence. As when God says in Hos. 13. 11. I have given them Kings in mine
anger, and have taken them away in my wrath. See also Isa. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4.

And (in my judgment) this very consideration should move all persons under
any employment, to lay out their utmost interests and abilities for God. The
Wheel of Providence is perpetually turning, the highest spokes will quickly be
lower. He that put down some for maladministration, will (as he can) put down
you, if you administer the affairs you are entrusted with all as they did.

Surely David had often such thoughts. If Saul were cast off, because he spared
where God bade him strike, because he permitted wickedness to range unbridled
over the Nation, and to lift up the horn on high, God will lay me aside too, if
I follow his steps. Therefore I will say, etc.

It is that that concerns most of us seriously to consider.

As for the Ministry, God has poured contempt upon them in an abundant
measure; and truly, considering what a company of ignorant, sordid, sottish,
lazy, Popish fellows, walk up and down in the garb of that profession, I wonder
that error, and sacrilege, have proceeded no farther against them, then they
have. Can any expect, but God should forsake his Sanctuary, when the Priests
make his sacrifices to be abhorred?

For my part, I am as zealous for the Calling and Maintenance of the Ministry
of England, as any that hears me can be. But I desire those of my brethren here
present this day, to be persuaded, that whatever contempt has been or may be
poured upon that reverend Calling, some of their own profession have
occasionally been guilty of.

And, as for the Gentry, I believe there is scarce a Noble Family in the whole
Nation at this time, but God has during these last troubles, brought under
some disparagement, or diminution, or both.

For my part, I can say from my heart, that I have not a levelling spirit, and
I think it a sad Judgment to a people, when they that were brought up in
scarlet embrace dungbils; Lam. 4. 5. God preserve civil distinctions in England.

But, O that God would give them hearts to consider the justice of his
proceedings, in the severity of his dealing with them, and to examine
themselves conceruing the cause of it. Shall I help you a little to find it
out? Look upon the great Charter, the Scripture-Patent, by which (as to God)
all men hold their honors, 1 Samuel 2. 30. Have you not dishonored God the
more, for the power he has given you above others? God has brought Nobility
and Gentry low in England, and if they walk in the sins of their Families,
which commonly have been, and yet are in most places, (a few only excepted)
pride, wantonness, drunkenness, swearing, gaming, and all manner of
debauchery; oppressing their poor neighbors, and Tenants, Simoniacal and
Sacrilegious encroachment upon Church-maintenance, joined with contempt of God,
his Ministers, and Ordinances, let them be assured God will bring them lower;
he will reverse their Eschucheons, break their swords, and cut off their
spurs, and bring such a rot into their families, that their dwelling places
shall know them no more.

Your hearts are ready to say (I know) as they did, when Christ told them God
would take away his Vineyard from them, and let it out to other Luke 20. 16.
husbandmen. God forbid. And for my part, I heartily join with you in that
prayer, so Gods Honor and his Truth may be saved; otherwise, let all the
Titles in the world go for me. Better the pride of man's glory should be
stained, then God any way disparaged. For a remedy of these evils, I beseech
you, (Sirs) let my counsel be accepted of you. For Gods sake, and your own, and
your posterities sake, Get the true knowledge and the fear of God into your
Families; do not maintain a company of Ruffians, Drunkards, Swearers, and
unclean wretches, in your Livery; use them to Reading, Prayer, Repetition of
Sermons, those contemned exercises of true and real godliness; ride abroad,
and encourage honest Lectures, and bring your Tenants in by your example, who
seldom go to Heaven or Hell, but as their Landlords lead them. Get Bibles and
Catechismes, and Books of Practical Divinity, as Perkins, Preston, Reynolds,
Sibs, Bolton, Greenham, etc. into your houses, in stead of Cards and Dice, and
Tables; restore (if it be to be known) what sacrilegious bits any of your
Ancestors have devoured; give more to a godly Minister to maintain him, then
to a drunken Huntsman or Falconer; let not the Gospel be cheaper to you then
your pleasures. Think not less Religion will carry a Gentleman to Heaven, then
a poor labourer. Nay, I tell you he had need of more, if Christ may be
believed, Mat. 19. 24.

If I am plainer with you then you desire, I pray forgive me this wrong, seeing
I do it for your good.

My Apology for it is that of Salust, when he hadript open the vices of his
times, Bonum nulla oration laedere potest; quippe vera, necesse est been
praedicet, Salust. Bell. Jugurth.
falsam illius vita moresque facile superant.

And now the Public solemnity of this days meeting, calls for some
particular addresses to those for whose sake I was called hither. And they
shall be very brief, because I am loath to be your hinderance from your public
businesses.

And first of all, my business is to you, My Judge Atkins:
Lord, concerning whom, though I am a stranger to your face and acquaintance,
yet the reputation you have among good men, where you are most known, emboldens
me to say as the Apostle Paul in another case concerning the Coriuthians, that
your forwardness of mind is such, that it is something superfluous for me to
exhort you: and let 2 Cor. 9. 1.
me add (from him also) thus much, that I hope you will show the proof of
your love to Religion and Justice, and of our boasting on your behalf. 2 Cor.
8. ult.
Only I beseech you to give me leave faithfully to represent to you the state
of the County you have now to do withal, that so your forward mind may have
sufficient matter to work upon.

And first of all, (my Lord) as to Religion, I know not what we are; I am sure
very few of us are what we should be. But for this little Town, where your
present employment lies: I speak my thoughts freely, without spleen, or
passion, that I verily persuade my self, if all Augustines, and Epiphanius's
Catalogues of Heresies were lost, and all other ancient and modern Records in
that kind, yet it were no hard matter to restore them with considerable
enlargements from hence. We have Anabaptisme, Familisme, Socinianisme,
Pelagianisme, Raunting, (and what not?) and the Devil is served in Heterodoxe
Assemblies as frequentlyas God in ours. Concerning whom there will ere long be
a public account given upon the evidence of snndry Oaths, as to both parts of
this Charge, and that in print by a faithful hand.
There is one of the most eminent Church Livings in this County possessed by a
blasphemer; and one in whose house, I believe some here can testify, the Devil
is visibly as familiar, as any one of the family. And shall tne horns of these
beasts never be pared off by the Civil Magistrate? My Lord, I beseech you act,
(I know you will) to the uttermost of your power to restrain these unruly
beasts, and where you want power, represent that want to those that can bestow
it and I hope by this time they see need enough to do so themselves.

As for Civil Affairs, we have (blessed be God) some among us, that would be
zealous and faithful in the Offices they are entrusted withal, if they might
be borne out in so doing. We had the last year a few active Officers, and no
less then three or four vexatious suits, and some of them (it may be) may
come before your Lordship this Assizes, commenced against them by notorious
offenders, for pretended irregularity in some circumstances.

My Lord, you have one suite before you (at the least) from the issue whereof
the whole County will collect whether they may dare to do Justice, or no.
Surely, if Humane Lawgivers be like the Divine, no man should be punished
for too much zeal in the execution of the Law.

My Lord, Drunkenness is grown more impudent 1 Thessalonians. 5. 7.
among us, then it was in Saint Paul's time. And our Officers dare not meddle
with a Gentleman Drunkard, for fear of an Action of Battery.

And for Sabbath Breakers; would God we had Magistrates among us of Nebemiabs
temper, that would contend with them, and lay bands upon them too. I am in
hope, a word from your Lordship Neh. 13. 11, 17, 25
would do much toward the execution of those Acts and Ordinances that concern
that business. Here be insolent Robbers about the Country, almost every
where; scarce a Gentleman's, or other able man's house round about this Town, but
has been assaulted, or threatened at least, and ('it is said) there is a
Corporation of them. I hope Justice will make some of them free of the
Hang-mans Corporation, for a terror to others.

As for you Gentlemen, that are of the Commission of the peace, I do somewhat
please my self, that I can now call the most of you confidently by that name.
We were like to have had (not long since) a Linsey-wolsey Heterogeneous Beneh,
such as the Medley. Constitiution of those times would allow. And indeed it was
not to be expected, but that those that endeavored the extrination of the
Ministry to set up Jeroboams Priests, should discard the Gentry, and fill
their seats with John of Leydons Dukes, both of the same stuff, the meanest of
the people.

(Though I would not hereby disparage those whose known worth makes them
esteemed in the Country, who have the thing which first gave Nobility; and are
as fit to begin a line of Honor to be continued to their posterity, as those
from whom our present Gentry descend. But I conceive, that such mixtures,
except very sparingly made, and that upon weighty considerations, much
prejudice the esteem of Authority to the people.)

I beseech you, honored Sirs, do not think it enough to appear upon the Bench
at Assizes, and general Sessions but appoint frequent, and standing Privy
Sessions, to rectify public disorders in the Country upon the place, to put
down Alehouses, the Devils Universities, where men proceed Graduates in all
manner of wickedness; to suppress Drunkenness, Swearing, Sabbath-breaking:
and when inferior Officers present such offenders before you, do not tell
them by your slight entertainment of them, that you are of Gallio's mind, and
care for none of those things.

I have heard some Officers complain of late, that they are discouraged in
that part of their office: they are zealous in taking hold of such offenders,
and when they come to the Justice he releaseth them. He that (having your
power) does not cut off these offenders horns wears them, yea, and will push
with them also in time. I never knew any Magistrate indulging any sin, but
either he was guilty of it himself, or more then ordinarily inclined to it,
had he suitable opportunity.

And you Grand Inquest-men, I am somewhat ignorant of your particular Function,
but I conceive one main part of your business is, to make presentment of those
grievances, wherein the Country whom you represent, needs redress. And I hope
you will not forget two things, which I think to be of great concernment, the
one is, want of Church Government, without which, Civil Government cannot be
long preserved in a Christian Commonwealth. Churchlevelling, and
State-levelling, are twins; only (like Jacob and Esau) the one rough and
hairy, and not so apt to be dandled and made much of by the Magistrate, who
usually is tender in such things as concern public peace; but the other a
more sweet babe, which under the notion of tenderness of Conscience, and
Christian Liberty, has been the fondling of former Governors, until it had
almost proved a Jacob, a Supplanter indeed, by exchanging the voice of Jacob,
for the hands of Esau.

The other is, Liberty of Prophesying, through the indulgence of former Powers,
grown to such an height, that every whipping-boy, when he he has gotten an
Heretical notion or two by the end, has impudence enough to intrude into any
Pulpit to vent it; or else to draw aside poor silly souls into corners, and
infect them there without control. And some of them though they usurp the
place of the Clergy, yet if they should fall into your hands, would not be
capable of the privilege of the Clergy, and hang for not being able to read.

Friends, for Gods sake, for the Gospels sake, for your poor souls sake, for
your near relations sake, some of whom are in perpetual danger of being
poisoned, till your superiors, as the voice of all that love the welfare of
Jerusalem in the County, that nothing is so intolerable, as a boundless
Toleration.

You of both Juries, take heed to your Oaths and Consciences, and remember that
he that condemns Prove. 17. 15.
the righteous, and he that acquitteth the wicked, are both an abomination to
the Lord. If any silly Cattle come before you, do not gratify a malicious
prosecutor by saying their ears are horns; but where you find horns indeed,
and those lifted up, and such as have used to push in time past, you know the
Law of God as well as man, allows you to return such guilty.

I had almost forgotten you, Gentlemen of the Gown, and it is a wonder I should,
when I spoke of Levelling. I honor your profession, and therefore I will
presume to adventure a little good counsel to your acceptance, without any
other fee, then the testimony of a good Conscience, in the discharge of my
duty. You know that Law is the Sanctuary of a free subject; for Gods sake, do
not you be guilty of turning it into an Inquisition-house, where poor men's
cases are so long stretched out upon the rack of needless delays, till both
their purse-strings, and heert-strings crack. Surely, there is an evil report
abroad concerning some of you, that you betray the privileges of this
Sanctuary; which makes many an honest man rather run all hazards, then fly
thither for refuge. 'Its said, some of you are like indented Pictures, which if
you look on them several ways, present you with several faces in one Table;
such as can take on both hands, of one to speak, and of another to hold their
peace, or (as bad) to say nothing to the purpose. As Juries should not by
verdict, so neither should Lawyers by pleading, turn ears into horns, and
horns into ears, represent a man or cause otherwise then they are.

I know not to whom to recommend the care of the Prison, but to you all. I know
it is the Sheriffs Prison, but I know not how far his power extends in the
things that I am to move in order to its reformation. At most, Sheriffs are
annual, and can take order but for their year; but you, my Lord, and the
Bench, may reform for perpetuity.

For my part, I look upon Goals, as they are usually furnished with Keepers,
as Houses of Infection, and looseness, rather then houses (as they should be)
of correction and restraint. I assure you, it has sadded my soul to hear,
when I have come in and out to see prisoners, the poor Felons in the Dungeon
raunting and roaring, as if they were resolved to walk by the Epicures
principles, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall 1 Cor. 15 32.
die. And I fear scarce any one comes within those walls, but he is made ten
times more the child of the Devil then he was before. O that you, my Lord, and
the Bench, would take some course that those poor creatures that have not long
to live, may be made fit to die, that they might be Catechized and Preached to.
I hear there are places where the Prisons have a Preacher appointed and
allowed upon the Sheriffs accounts. For God sake, my Lord, and Gentlemen, let
something be done herein, that those you condemn to the Gallows, may not be
sent to the Devil too.

Lastly, you of the Country, that have business with the Court, look to it,
take heed of malice, perjury, and revenge. You that go to Law with one another,
if for trifles, let fall your suits; the charges you put any one to in a
vexatious suit, is so much money picked out of his purse, and it may be so much
necessary sustenance plucked out of his poor wives and childrens bellies; if
for matters of moment, and your cause be just, yet use mercy, charity, and
moderation.

Lastly, let us all beseech the Lord, who is the Judge of Judges, as well as
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, that he will be with ours in the Judgment,
that so (to close my Sermon, with the close of my Psalm) all the horns of the
wicked may be out off, but the horns of the righteous may be exalted.

FINIS.

