SYIA PISTIANOY, OR A CHRISTIAN'S ACQUIESCENCE In all the Products of DIVINE
PROVIDENCE: Opened In a Sermon, Preached at Cottesbrook in Northamptonshire
April the 16. 1664. At the Interment of the Right Honorable, and eminently
Pious Lady, the Lady ELIZABETH LANGHAM Wife to Sir JAMES LANGHAM Knight. By Simon
Ford B. D. and Minister of Gods Word in Northampton.

Salv. de Gub. Dei L. 1. Religiosi hoc cunctis beatiores sunt, quia and habent
quae volunt, and meliora quam quae habent, omnino habere non possunt. At turpia
atque obscoena sectantes; etsi juxta opinionem suam beati sunt, quia
adipiscuntur quod volunt, re tamen ipsa beati non sunt, quia quod volunt, nolle
debuerant. LONDON, Printed by R. D. for John Baker at the Peacock in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1665.

blazon or coat of arms of Elizabeth Langham ELIZABETHA Ferdinandi and Lucia
Comitum. Huntingdoniae Filia Ja Langham Eg. A^^r. A^er. and Desiderium
HONORANTES ME HONORABO NEC SINET ESSE FEROS

Imprimatur.

Tho. Grigg R. T. D. Humfr. Ep. Land. a sac. dom.
Ex Aed. Land. Oct. 15. 1664.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL Sir JAMES LANGHAM KNIGT.
Honored Sir,
I Have at length surrendered into your hands to dispose of at your pleasure,
the Sermon and Narrative, which you have long called for (to use Quintilians
phrase) quotidiano convitio, with an importunity reflecting a continual
reproach upon my slow dispatch: which (though I confess it has withal
something of natural in it, yet) principally owns it self to a desire I had
(wherein I knew also I corresponded with yours) that the Character of your dear
Lady might be perfected by all possible accessions of Intelligence for the view
of Posterity to which I understood you designed it. For although it requires
not much accurateness (as the Sen. de Tranq.
Philosopher says) scribere in Diem; yet aeternitati pingere, to raise a
Monument for Ages had need be a work of some Time. I know not, nor shall I much
concern my self in the future Fate of my mean scribles; Had I the confidence to
think, they have any thing of that Genius which the Poet says, gives eternity
to Victurus Genium debet habere liber.
men's Writings, I assure you I would willingly contribute the utmost of it to
Embalm the memory of a Personage so worthy to live in the remembrance of latest
Posterity: but having much more reason to fear they will prove but short-lived,
I doubt, when I have done my utmost, I shall only prove guilty of hindering her
of the service some better pen might have done her.

Indeed, she was so excellent a Piece as required the Pencil of the most exact
Apelles living to express her to the Life: it being impossible to conceive,
much less to delineate her rare perfections, without wronging them, by any
Idea, but that of a most complete virtue. She was one, that might be thought to
have been born on purpose for the Correction of the Age she lived in: but that
these two things seem to argue the contrary; the one that she her self studied
so much to hide her self from its Notice; and the other, that she dyed so
early, as not to allow it the advantage of making a full improvement of her
example.

But why do I presume to inform you, who too well understand it, how to rate
your own Loss, and teach your grief how much it has to plead for the
justification of its excesses? I wish, rather, that it were within my power to
contribute any thing of aid to that Reason, and Grace, which (althongh you are
much Master of them both at all other times, yet) I fear, in this Conflict, may
be engaged in an unequal encounter. I know the just standard of all Grief is
judged to be its Commensurateness to the Cause, -- Flagrantior aequo
Non debet dolor esse viri, nec vulnere major. Juv. sat. 13.

and I confess, I could allow yours, by that proportion, something of
extraordinary, even the utmost of what Religion will indulge to the very
infirmities of mortality under the greatest of Creature-Losses. But I desire
you, withal, to remember, that it will not be safe to give the justest
Affection the Temptation of its utmost Liberty, in which the facility of
exceeding may entice it beyond its bounds. I hope, you will take heed that you
be not found inter exempla eorum quos dolor vicit (as the proud Stoic (for all
his Sen. Epist. 63.
professed Apathy) complains of himself) an Instance of the Conquests of
sorrow: but rather (as Tertullian says of Job) of the number of those who do,
Dei Feretrum de Diabolo extruere, Tertul. de Pat.
by a magnanimous Patience furnish Gods Triumphs over the Tempter, who is never
in more likelihood of obtaining a Victory, than when he can draw in our Reason
(as he did Jonah's Jonah 4. 9.) to undertake the Patronage of our Passions.

I know, you look upon your self as obliged to be a true mourner for so
deserving a Wife, because you were a true Lover of her: and you cannot but send
now and then a deep sigh after her, as tokens of your continued affection to
her. In this respect, Mittamus donae spiritualia conjugi tuae, tu imitationem,
and ego laudem. Aug. Cornel.
let me bespeak you as St. Austin does Carnelius; I think it meet, says he,
that both you and I send tokens indeed, but spiritual ones, of our affection to
your deceased Lady; on your part Imitation; on mine, Commendation. Thus He.
Yea, rather, (say I) let both you, and I, (Sir) join both these together, in
reference to yours; both commend her virtues, and imitate them; yea most really
commend them, by imitating them.

To which purpose, I desire (for her sake, as being conscious that nothing but
her name can entitle it to such an Honor) that this small labor of mine may
be admitted into your Closet; wherein, if the Narrative do you the unkindness
now and then to renew your Tears, I hope the Sermon so near it, may contribute
toward the drying them again: and let them both testify, how willing I am to
endeavor something at least (though I am sensible how little I have effected
therein) which may witness to times to come how much I am,

Honored Sir, Your most affectionate Servant in the work of the Lord Jesus.
Simon Ford.
Northampton October. 20. 1664.
TO THE MOST HONORABLE The Lady LUCY Countess of HVNTINGDON, And HENRY Lord
LOVGHBROVGH His Majesty's Lieutenant of the County of Leicester. All increase
of Honor and Happiness.
THis Sermon and Narrative (Right Honorable) which I here present you withal,
though they mainly impute the adventure of their publication to the importunate
Affection of a dear Husband to his deceased Ladies memory, yet I dare not
altogether acquit my self of the guilt thereof; at least so far, as the
easiness of consent will render me criminal. For, I must confess, that I was
apt to bite with some greediness at the Occasion thereby offered me, of giving
the world a public Testimony of the honor I owe to both the Families to which
this Excellent Personage concern in them stood Related; both tha whence she
was Descended, an that, whereinto she was by marriage Engraffed.

And being thus, betwixt importunity and inclination, prevailed withal to run
this risqu^ I hope, I have in the reasons (...) both, given a general account
(...) the fitness of my entituling you to the Patronage of them.

But withal (Right Honorable) there is something also of peculiar in the claim
which on your Honors behalf may be made unto them.

For you (Madam) as you blessed the world with the Subject of the Narrative
from your Womb: so, you furnished me also with the Argument of the Sermon from
your mouth, in a Text, which (among other expressions savouring of a well
seasoned spirit) dropped from your lips at the arrival of the sad tidings of
your dear Daughters departure. And I the rather chose to make it the Subject of
my Discourse upon that sad Occasion, because your noble Example in the often
practice of the Lesson contained in it, accommodated me with a notable Instance
of its practicableness: Q. sextius habet quod and ostendat tibi beatae vitae
magnitudinem, and desparationem ejus non faciet, Ep. 64.
it being a great advantage to the ingratiating of any Duty, when we can by
some great example, deliver it (as Seneca speaks in another case) from the
suspicion of being impossible.

I have formerly admired at the Temper of that noble and learned Roman Lady,
Cornelia Nunquam 'ego me felicem non dixerim, quae Gracchos pepererim. Cicero
de Consol.
the Daughter of the great Scipio, and Mother of the Gracchi, of whom Tully
reports, that when she had lost her Son Caius, a very hopeful Gentleman, in his
very prime, and in him, her twelfth Child, she brake out into this gallant
Expression, that she would nevertheless always esteem her self an happy woman,
in that she had had the honor to be the Mother of such Children. But I have of
late learned to lessen this wonder, having seen her herein out-shined by one no
less noble and learned than she, and that is your self; who, in much a parallel
case, have demeaned your self with a far greater, because a truly Christian,
Fortitude.

And indeed (Madam) if ever any Mother had reason to take Comfort from such a
Consideration, you have, in that though you have survived diverse of your
Children, yet have you withal had the happiness to see them all signally
virtuous even beyond their years, and consequently, also the Argument of an
ample Assurance of their eternal felicity, in their early maturity and fitness
for it.

In which respect, how can it indeed be other than an infinite satisfaction to
you, that in sending so many Children to the place of happiness before you, you
are (as it were) glorified by piece meal: and instead of planting Families from
your bowels on earth, have contributed toward the planting of Colonies in
Heaven; instead of recruiting the Forces of the Church Militant, have furnished
the Trophies of the Church Triumphant, and (according to the judgment of some
Divines of Note) supplied the vacant seats of so many of the Apostate Angels
with Saints descendant from you?

The usual distasts taken at this kind of Providence, (whether from the
uncomely (...) it is thought to make in nature, which seems (according to the
Proverb) to design the wearing out of the eldest first; or from the
disappointment of the common expectation, that our liberi shall be posteri, our
Children live to shut our eyes and receive our last breath, and dying commands,
and keep up our Names, and inherit our Estates and Honors when we are gone; (a
kind of supplemental and subsidiary immortality which propagation in all
species of Creatures seems to aim at, and (in a sort) promise as part of amends
for the Death of Individuals) and whatever it is of the like nature which
heightens vulgar passions) are all such low and pitiful excuses of impatience,
and implicit blasphemies against the great Sovereign of the World; that I
cannot suspect the Heroical generosity of your spirit, needs the assistance of
any Considerations (which yet both Morality and Christianity afford in great
plenty) to be suggested by me for the removal of them. For you have made it
sufficiently evident to all that know you, that you are a person who do (as the
Philosopher says) fortius amare, love your dearest temporal comforts more
valiantly than so; as experimenting the sweet only and not the soft impressions
of that most powerful Affection.

And therefore (without enlarging this Epistle into another Lecture of
Christian submission to, and Acquiescence in Divine Providence) I only tender
that of the following Sermon to your hands, not so much in the nature of a
Persuasive to your Duty, as the Product of your Example.

And you (My Lord) by the dear affection which you have born to all the
surviving Branches of that Noble Family, and to this excellent Lady in
particular, ever since the decease of your noble Brother and their Father the
late Earl of Huntingdon, have rendered your self so much more than an Uncle to
them, that I fear I had not done you right, had I not given your Name the very
place that the Natural Father's, had he lived, might have claimed in this
Dedication.

And I am withal the more hardened to this adventure, (which otherwise the
little acquaintance I have with your Lordship might render presumptuous) by the
remembrance that when your Lordship rendered your self the principal attendant
of these sacred Relics to their Dormitory (though the great have of your
affairs then enforced you to call for the Sermon before the day appointed, and
necessitated the delivery of it with some disadvantage by the surprise; yet)
your goodness was pleased to give an ample testimony of your acceptance of my
endeavors therein, as having not only in some proportion discharged my Duty to
the Living, but also done something of Justice to the Dead. And therefore, I
hope, that what was then honored with your acceptance, when (in that
discomposure) it had no higher ambition than to obtain your pardon, may now,
having gained by a review something of more orderly composure (though it yet
fall much beneath the excellency of the Subject) aspire to your Patronage also.

To conclude, I shall ease both your Honors of the trouble this tedious
Epistle has given you, when I have offered up a short Prayer on the behalf of
all the surviving Relations of this excellent Lady; viz. That God will enable
them by his Grace to improve this sad Providence to their utmost advantage,
which will be best done by copying out her Virtues in their own practice;
considering, That Domestical examples of eminent Goodness, as they reflect an
honorable luster upon the Families from which they are extracted, (Saints
adding a greater glory to any Pedigree than Princes) so ought they, into them
especially who are nearest of Relation, to insinuate the most ardent and
affectionate desires of Imitation: as those, which through proximity of blood,
have the assistance of something of natural to endear them to the Affections;
the help of frequent and familiar converse to imprint them in the memory; and
lastly, the Evidence gathered from constant observation, to justify to the
Judgment the reality of that Beauty which appears in them in all Dresses,
against the suspicions of Auxiliary tinctures, wherewith our uncharitableness
usually burdens the most resplendent virtues of those that are mere Strangers
to us.

And, for a close, may the God of all Grace so bless them with an increase of
all gracious qualities, that they may all rise up into the like reputation of
singulat Instances and Examples of Christian Perfection with Her that is gone
before them; and yet manage their growth so thriftily for us, that by a
precocious maturity, they may not precipitate their removal from us; that this
profligate Age may be the longer blessed with such living Convictions and
Reproofs of its desperate viciousness; and themselves enjoy the more ample
opportunity of advancing the Comfort of their Friends, and their own Reward.

These Requests, as there is none who prefers them on your hehalf with more
zealous affection, so, I dare confidently affirm, there is none that shall find
himself more obliged to be thankful for the Answer of them, than

(Right Honorable) Your most humble servant in the work of the Lord Jesus
Simon Ford.
Northampton, Oct. 20. 1664.
SYIA PISTIANOY OR, A CHRISTIAN'S ACQUIESCENCE In all the Products of DIVINE
PROVIDENCE, etc.
Acts 21. 14. And when he would not be persuaded, we ceased, saying, The will
of the Lord be done.
THis Text, as it relates to The Coherence of the Text.
the History whereof it is parcel, contains the reception given by the
Christians at Caesarea to that peremptory denial which they received from St.
Paul to their importunate disswasion of him from going to Jerusalem: where one
Agabus a Prophet (the same in likelihood, whose true Prediction of a Famine in
the days of Claudius Caesar is mentioned, Acts 11. 28.) had foretold, that he
should run an hazard of his Liberty (at least) if not of his Life also,
consequently; seeing so eminent a Propagator and Propugner of Christianity as
he, being once in his Enemies hands, could not probably expect less from them,
than utmost extremities. This denial you have recorded, v. 13. He answered,
what mean ye to weep and break my heart? for I am ready not only to be bound,
but to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus. His Answer speaks him
Man, and Christian: As a Man, he shows himself moved with their Affections; but
as a Christian he declares himself not to be removed from his Resolutions; He
has an heart so much flesh, as to be affected tenderly with their kindness,
but so much flint, or steel rather, as to receive no impression from their
Counsel. For, the first words of my Text tell you, that he would not be
persuaded. And herefore seeing he would not, the Brethren (as passionate as
they were in their importunities) had grace enough to conquer nature, and
persuade themselves to cease their suit: as apprehending an intimation of Gods
will to the contrary of what they so earnestly desired, from the
impregnableness of that heart, which they saw held out with so noble a
resolution against the batteries of so many united prayers and tears. They are
loath to contest any farther, where they see God and Grace of a Party against
them; and therefore they raise the siege, cease their solicitations, and
unanimously say, The will of the Lord be done.

A short Text, beloved, but that A brief Descant on the Text.
which contains a long Lesson, to be studied and practiced the longest day of
your lives: an easy Text, but comprehending an hard Task, one of the hardest
in all the compass of Christianity, viz. the most high and heroical duty of a
full, absolute and perpetual resignation of our selves, and all our
concernments to the sovereign pleasure of Almighty God.

Indeed, every word in the Text iscite habere n cord quod nis homo habet in
lin^. Quod vult us hoc agat. Ipsa lingua popularis est le^umque sed doctrina
salutatis. In Ps. 32.
is practically hard, but one, and that is [saying] which is so easy that St.
Austin told his people long since, that these Forms, The Will of the Lord be
done, and let the Lord do his pleasure, etc. are lingua popularis, common
discourse; wherefore he advises them to learn to get this lesson by heart,
which every one was able to say by rote, and then they should find, Doctrina
salutaris, an wholesome and saving Doctrine contained in it.

1. And first, (...), is an hard word to be cordially pronounced by sinful
flesh and blood. Man in his lapsed estate is loath to own any Lord over him,
Psalm. 12. 4. what they conceit they are, Jer. 2. 31. every one would fain be;
(...), a Lord to himself, independent even upon God himself, so as to need to
come no more at him, as there the Phrase is. And that this Lesson is of no mean
difficulty, appears, in that God near eighty times in the Scripture, tells men
he will be at extraordinary pains to learn it them, (sometimes by mercies, and
otherwhiles by Judgments) in this common Phrase, Ye shall know that I am the
Lord.

2. (...), the Will of this Lord, is yet an harder word to be practically
conned. Generally, men are enemies to Arbitrary Power, and Government by will,
even in God himself. Let him rule by known Laws, and Presidents only, (provided
that withal he be responsible to the High Court of humane Reason for what he
does, and admit every man's particular Reason to be of the Quorum, and sit as
Judge in the Court) upon these conditions, it may be, he may be received as a
Titular Lord among the Sons of Men. But so to own him as a Lord, as to leave
him free to do what he pleases in Heaven and Earth, and in all deep places,
(even in Hell it self) Psalm. 135. 6. to have all the world at his sole beck,
without suffering any one to reply against him, Romans 9. 20. to have as absolute
an unaccountable power over all things as the Potter has over the clay, v. 21.
this is an had saying, (as they say in another case John. 6. 60.) and who can
endure to hear it?

3. (...), Let this absolute will be done, is not one jot easier for man's heart
to utter. (...), may possibly go down with us. Gods will, when it is done, and
no man can help it, necessity will enfore men to swallow, after a Fashion:
because it is in vain to attempt to re-call yesterday, to render factum,
infectum; what is done, not to have been done. But Friends, this will not
serve, there is more in this word than so. This (...), imports our free and
voluntary Vote, both of consent when it is to be done, and of approbation and
applause when it is done. Now surely, this is hard. To give God our Fiat
beforehand, to the doing of that will of his, which it may be tends to the
undoing of our selves: and to subscribe to it when done, as done to our minds;
yea, so done, as it could not be better done; and this not (...), out of
constraint, but (...), willingly; not as a man bestows his Goods upon the
Waves in a Storm, (...), with an unwilling will, but as a man parts with his
money for a good purchase; to acquiesce, as satisfied in it: not with a canina
patientia, (as Tertullian, and Bernard call it) a Dogs patience, a patience
perforce, but with a patientia Christiana, a true Christian patience, grounded
upon choice; in this sense, (...), (though Englished is Greek still to most
men, and non potest legi, an hard chapter, and few can read it.

4. Lastly, (...), We ceased, comes behind none of the rest for difficulty. To
calm all our passions, and the expressions of them in whatever kind; and be
still, (as God bids the tumultuous World, Ps. 46. 10. and Christ the
tempestuous Sea, Mark 4. 39;) to take up our Cross cheerfully and make no words
of it, how un-easie soever it sit; not to deprecate the least circumstance of
that Providence which grates most close upon our dearest Interests and
Concernments; and in Thought, Speech, and Behavior, to show that our spirits
enjoy a perfect calm, not so much as the least wrinkle of a wave remaining
upon them; where is the man that will be persuaded, that this Yoke is easy,
and this Burden light? Mat. 11. 30.

And yet as hard a Lesson as this is, the Disciples in the Text had learned it;
and, I hope, ere these Sands be spent, so will You too, at least, as to your
judgments and Consciences, (for God alone can disciple Passions,) so that you
shall be convinced, that these Brethren said well, and did better; and therein
confess, that you are bound to say, and do so too, ecchoing from your hearts
and lives to every providence of God, (...), The Will of the Lord be done.

The words offer themselves to The Parts of the Text.
be handled in a double capacity.

1. In the Matter 2. In the Form of them.
First, The Matter of them is the carriage of these Christians of Caesaria upon
the occasion beforementioned; which farther may be sub-divided into

I. Dictum, what they said, to wit, The will of the Lord be done. II. Factum,
What they did in conformity to this saying, they Ceased, that is, fotbore to
solicit their suit any further.
Secondly, the Form of them; and that consists in the Historical Relation of
both (by the appointment of Gods Spirit) from the Pen of St. Luke, who himself,
(as appears by the Relation it self running in the Plural, We ceased,) was pars
magna, had a great share in all the passages of this part of St. Paul's Story.

These two parts we will handle The first Part handled. I. The Matter of the
Text. 1. Its first Branch the Dictum.
distinctly; beginning with

I. The Matter, or substance of the Text: wherein, first comes to hand,

1. The Dictum, What these Brethren said, Fiat voluntas Domini. The Will of the
Lord be done. And this learns us this Observation,

That, When Gods revealed will and ours so clash and enterfere, 1. Observation.
that both of them cannot be done, it is a necessary piece of Christian duty
for us to veil our wills to Gods.

Say not, this is false Logic, to infer a general Rule from a particular
Example. For that is not a particular example, which though particular persons
only be concerned in, yet bears a conformity with a Principle universally owned
by Christians, and recorded as congruous to that Principle by the appointment
of the Holy Ghost, for the imitation of others. These Brethrens practice was
produced by this Principle; and therefore warrantably may this Principle be
concluded from their practice.

To the more clear handling of Explained.
this Point, it will be needful (according to the intimation given you
therein,) to distinguish of the will of God, under the different considerations
of secret and revealed. The secret will of God is a Rule, by which he alone
acts: the revealed will of God is that that we are to manage our selves by:
Secret things belong (only) to God; but those things that are revealed, belong
to us and to our children. Deuteronomy. 29. 29. The secret will of God therefore, as,
and whiles it continues locked up in the Cabinet of his own breast, to which he
alone keeps the Key, (upon that very account, because we neither do, nor can
know it,) obliges not us farther, than as it stands in a capacity to be
revealed; and in this capacity, it requires from us a general, implicit,
hypothetical, and dispositive submission only, (i. e. an holy disposition,
inclination, and purpose of heart to submit to it) whenever it shall come to be
signified, and revealed. But the will of God once actually revealed, requires a
particular, express, actual, and positive submission of us. The secret will of
God, whiles such, may be lawfully prayed against, and acted against: otherwise,
all Prayers must be sinful, which God thinks not fit to grant, and all courses
of humane providence unlawful, which prove unsuccessful; an assertion so
absurd, that no sober Christian will own it. Yea, more, the will of God, even
when expressed and signified to us, (that, I mean, which concerns the
inflicting any evil upon us or ours) if it be expressed only conditionally, or,
(though it may be delivered in absolute terms, yet) may according to the Tenor
of the Scripture be warrantably supposed to imply a Condition; we may both pray
against, and by all other pious and prudent courses 2 Samuel 12. 22. Jon. 3. 8,
9. Is. 38. 1, 2.
labor to prevent. Of which we have at least three known Instances in the
Scripture; in the several Cases of David, Hezekiah, and the King of Nineveh.
And the reason hereof is, because in such Cases, the will of God revealed,
being not peremptory and absolute, is fulfilled on the one hand even by its
frustration upon the performance of the Conditions, upon which it was
suspended, as it would on the other, by taking place, according to the
commination, in case the Conditions supposed be not performed. So David, and
the King of Nineveh both argue; For who can tell whether God will be merciful?
etc. And in this manner, it is probable, the Brethren in the Text understood
the Prophecy of Agabus, laboring to prevent it, whiles they saw no cause to
conclude it absolute, and irrevocable; and till they perceived by the evident
hand of God upon St. Paul's heart, that he himself had in all likelihood
defeated their importunities, in order to the completing of his own will.

It remains then, that the will of Lomb d. 45. Il. dis: 14.
God, to which ours must submit, is his will revealed, according to the nature,
and measure of that revelation.

The revealed will of God (according to the Schools) contains his precepts, his
prohibitions (under Praecipit, and prohibet, permittit, consulit implet.
which I suppose they include also his promises and threatenings annexed to
them) his permissions, his counsels, and his performances. In reference to all
which, our duty is thus to be distributed; We must do what he bids, forbear
what he forbids, follow what he advises, bear with what he permits, and
bear what he inflicteth, without the least opposition or reluctance from our
wills: or in case any such arise in our hearts through passion or temptation,
our wills must then be denied, and not dandled; humbled, not honored;
mortified, not gratified.

St. Bernard expresses this subjection Sermon. de subjectione voluntatis.
of our Wills to the Will of God in three particulars, We must (says he)

1. Velle omnino quod certum est Deum velle, absolutely and entirely will what
we certainly know God wills; not opposing our nay to his yea.

2. Nolle omnino, and execrariquod certum est Deum nolle, absolutely nill and
execrate what God nills and dislikes; not opposing our yea to his nay.

3. Neque velle ex toto, neque penitus non velle quod incertum est utrum Deus
velit aut nolit: to be indifferent, or (at least) very moderate, not peremptory
and eager in those things concerning which the Will of God is dubious and
uncertain; but to suspend our yea and nay till God have expressed his.

And then are we, in any of these out of order, as St. Austin says, Ad suam
voluntatem flectere Deum, non suam corrigere ad Deum In Ps. 32.
when we rather labor to bend Gods will to ours, than amend ours by his.

I intend not here to treat of subjection to the Will of God in its latitude,
but to confine my self to that, in God's revealed Will, which both the Text and
this sad occasion leads me unto, the providential part of it relating to such
Issues and Events wherein we are concerned, whether in our persons and
interests; and therefore are endangered to temptations of reluctance from our
particular dis-satisfactions and displeasures. It is this will of providence
that the Brethren in the Text strike sail to in this Christian expression, The
will of the Lord be done, q. d. If God will have it so, that no entreaties
shall prevail to keep so dear an Apostle and eminent instrument of God's glory
and the Churches good from honds and imprisonment, then so be it. Let Paul be
bound, and our wills too bound up from obstructing it; that God may have the
liberty of his will: let our prayers and tears be frustrated, rather than his
pleasure and determination be defeated. The Lord it seems will have it so, and
we will have it as he will. And in the same frame do we find good old Eli, when
God sent him that thundering threatening by Samuel, It is the Lord, says he, let
him do what seems him good, 1 Samuel 3. 18. And David when he fled from
Jerusalem to avoid that dangerous Rebellion raised by his Son Absalom, whiles
he yet knew not the Lords pleasure concerning the event, is in utrumque
paratus: If the Lord will permit me to find favor in his eyes, he will bring
me back again; but if he say thus, I have no delight in thee, here am I, let
him do as seems good to him, 2 Samuel 15. 25, 26. And thus our Savior in the
Garden, wherein (according to St. Austins notion) voluntatem suam figuravit and
nostram, he exhibited Ibidem.
as it were in a Table together his will and ours, the will of Nature and the
will of Grace, after he had expressed an human sinless infirmity in startling
at so grievous a suffering, makes a gracious surrender of his Will to his
Fathers, saying, not my will, but thine be done.

Thus, you see, do the Saints of God use to submit to the revealed will of
Providence, antecedenter, even before it is done, by consenting that it be
done; yea, as in the instance of David but now mentioned, before he has so
much as re vealed what he will do; so preparing Is. 40. 3, 4.
the way of the Lord by complanation of every mountain that may retard him.

And a like submission do they yield to the same will of providence,
consequenter, after it is done, by way of approbation; as being highly
satisfied in this, that he has done whatsoever he pleased. Thus holy Job falls
to the ground, and adores that providence, which had reduced him from the
Throne to the Dunghill, Job 1. 20. Non petimus ut Deus faciat quod vult, sed ut
nos facere possimus, quod Deus vult. Sermon. de Orat. Dom.


And in both these, their practice suits their prayers, who are taught to pray
in definitely, Thy will be done Mat. 6. 10. In which Petition, though Cyprian
be of the mind, that we only beg grace to yield active obedience to God's will
enjoined, yet even that includes grace also to give passive obedience to his
will inflicted; patience being no less a duty in this, than performance in
that. (...), (as once Epictetus said) contain the sum of Moral Philosophy, to
bear what God lays on us, and to forbear what he forbids us to do And there is
a great deal of Christianity in them too: For, the first Commandment requiring
us to own him for our God, Verbis reliquit Deos, re sustulit. De Not. Deor.
we must not, as Tully says of Epicurus, give him a Name without a thing: or,
(in the language of a better Author, Tit. 1. 16) Profess we know, and honor
him, and yet in works deny him, which we shall certainly do, if we substract
from him the one half, and that the chiefest of that homage which we owe him,
our submission to his just and necessary severities.

And now that what has been Argued.
said, may not seem an unequal yoke, or unreasonable Task to you, I shall
endeavor to satisfy your Judgments concerning it by these Reasons.

1. On Gods part, and here Reason tells us,

1. That God will have his will on us, as well as of us, whether we will or no.
For who has resisted his will? Romans 9. 19. and who ever hardened himself
against God, and prospered? Job 9. 4. The very Heathens had this notion of Fate
(which some (with great likelihood of truth) think, signified no more to the
nicest of them that maintained it, however their opinion were exposed by their
Adversaries, than the power of an omnipotent will in its unavoidable and
irresistible effects) that it always dragged those against their wills, who
would not be led with their wills to submit unto it;

Ducunt volentem Fata, nolentem trahunt. Seneca Trag. (...) Epict. c. 77. Edit.
Roterd. Better read by Lipsius in his Notes on Seneca Ep. 107. (...) Lact. de
vero cultu.
Whence Cleanthes, (for to him Simplicius assigns that saying delivered in
Iambick verse at the end of Epictetus) took up that noble Resolution of
following, wherever his God and his Fate led him; as thinking it more eligible
to obey with his good will, than to be hurried against it. It is true, the
irresistableness of such events as God assigns us, is a reason for submission
much below a Christian; for (as Lact antius says) nulla laus est non facere
quod non possis) it is no commendation to a man not to do, what if he would he
cannot, and so to submit to that providence which he cannot resist: yet,
because even Christians sometimes act below Christianity and humanity too, I
thought it not amiss to suggest this low consideration here, as that, which, if
it will not purchase them the praise of doing well, yet may serve to keep them
from the guilt of doing ill, kicking against the pricks of providence, and
attempting a bootless and hurtful resistance against an irresistible will. But,

Secondly, that that carries a more generous veyn of Reason in it, is,

2. That could we hinder God of his will, yet it is most just and equal that
we should yield it him voluntarily, upon the account of his deep Wisdom, great
Goodness, spotless Justice, and absolute Sovereignty: considering, that he that
is infinitely wise can commit no error; he that is infinitely good can do no
evil; he that is in infinitely just can offer no wrong; and he that is an
absolute Lord, and unlimited Sovereign, needs ask no leave in whatsoever he
pleases to do. Now, God is so wise, that the Scripture tells us he is only
wise, and all creatures fools to him, Romans 16. 17. all his works are done in
wisdom, infinite, incomprehensible wisdom, Ps. 104. 24. so good, that it
assures us there is none (as he is good, absolutely, originally, independently,
and immutably) good but he, Mat. 19. 17. All the Earth is full of his goodness,
Ps. 33. 5. There is no unrighteousness in him, John. 7. 18. He is righteous in
all his ways, Ps. 145. 17. And though all the World sift and scan his actions
never so much, they will be able to find nothing after him, to quarrel him
justly for, Eccles. 7. 14. and therefore we shall but exalt our folly, and
render it more conspicuous, Prove. 14. 29. and declare our sin, Is. 3. 9. and
show our taking pleasure in unrighteousness, 2 These. 2. 12. if we set up our
foolish, evil, and unjust wills, in opposition against him.

Will thou quarrel him, because his wisdom is not concordant with humane
maxims, his goodness is not measured by humane measures, and his justice not
directed and governed by humane laws? Consider then in the last place, that it
is (as Tertullian says,) a most foolish Stultissimi, qui de humanis divina
praejudicant. Adv. Marc. lib. 2.
thing to prejudge Gods affairs by humane Rules. Because he is an absolute
Sovereign over all the World; he does what he pleases in the Army of Heaven,
and among the Inbahitants of the Earth, and none can stay his hand, or say unto
him, what do thou? as the greatest Monarch, at that day in the World,
confesses, Dan. 4. 35. Now it is proper to an absolute Sovereign, to give Laws
to all, and receive them from none: yea, to be as unaccountable as the Potter
is to the clay, to all under his Dominion, Romans 9. 21. and therefore not to be
commanded to yield an answer to any ones cavills concerning the work of his
hands, as both the Context, the Chaldee Paraphrast, the Arabic Version, and
St. Jerome will have us understand that Text, which some modern Divines take
for an high strain of Divine condescension to the force of Prayer, Is. 45. 11.
It is hardly possible (says St. Austin) but in Aliquid proprium velle
difficile est ut tibi non contingat, sed statim cogita, illum supra te, te
infra illum, illum creatorem, te creaturam, illum omnipotentem, te infirmum,
corrigens te and subjungens voluntati ejus, etc. Aug. in Ps. 32. ubi supra.
something or other every man should incline to his own private will; but then
he ought presently to think, that God is the Sovereign, he the subject; God the
Creator, he the creature; God Omnipotent, he impotent; and then he will see
cause to correct himself, and say, yet not as I will, Lord, but as thou will.

To sum up this Paragraph then. If the will of man shall take upon it to
prescribe to the will of God, either Man must pretend to more Reason, or more
Right to govern the World than He. To pretend to more Reason, must imply a
fondly blasphemous conceit, that he has either skill to do it more wisely, or
goodness to do it more obligingly, or justice to do it more equally than God:
And, to plead more Right, implies no less a blasphemous absurdity; For who has
more right to dispose of the Creature, than he that made it? Now, he made us,
not we our selves, Ps. 100. 3. Of him, and from him, are all things, Romans 11.
36. and therefore in reason (as follows) they should be to him. All the World
was created for his pleasure, Rev. 4. 11. and undoubtedly (therefore) he has
right to dispose of it at his pleasure. The Father is the most proper Governor
of the Child he has begotten, and the Workman Master of the Manufacture that
he has made. How absurd then is it for us, that are (...), Gods offspring,
Act. 17. 28. and (...), his Workmanship, Quorsum tandem prosiliet vestra
arrogantia ut non sinatis me -- in officina mea dominari? Calv. in Is. 45.
Ephesians. 2. 10. not to suffer the Father of our beings to govern in his own
Family, and the great Architect of all the World, to be Master in his own Shop?
as a learned Commentator descants on that Text of Isaiah but now quoted.

2. And Secondly, on our part, it is infinitely for our advantage to be managed
by the will of God, beyong what it would be to be left to our own, and that in
four particulars.

1. This only can effectually quiet us, Ps. 119. 165. Great peace have they
that love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them, says the Psalmist. All our
disturbances (as St. Bernard descants upon that Vnde scandala, unde turbatio,
nisi quod propriam sequimur voluntatem? etc. Bern. Sermon. de sub. vol.
Text) arises from this, that men will not be governed by Gods Law, but their
own wills. Man's will, if left to its own dispose, will never be at rest. Its
own desires (like Actaeons Dogs in the Fable) will worry, disquiet, and distract
it continually. And this (1,) partly from the dubiousness and hesitancy
incident to it in its choice, whence, men that may have what they will, cannot
tell many times what to choose, of all that variety which distracts their
desires. The rational appetite is as much at a loss, de magno tollere Horace.
acervo, to choose among many objects, as the bodily appetite is (in a dubia
coena) to pitch upon what Dish it will feed on in a great Feast. (2.) And
partly from the unconstancy and fickleness of it, which causes it so
frequently to alter its choice. The sick will of Mutationibus ut remediis uti.
Sen. de Tranq. An.
man (as the Moralist expresses it) does, as the will of the sick man, think
changes its cure. So prone are we always to fly from our selves, (says old
Lucretius) that is, Hoc se quisque modo semper fugit.
dislike our present condition; though, had we never so much choice before us,
we cannot tell how to mend it: So that it must needs be as much trouble to a
man to fix such a Mercuriall faculty; as, the Nurse has, that is to please
that Child with Baubles, that dislikes old, and likes new every quarter of an
hour. (3.) And partly from its greediness, arising from its vastness, and (in a
sort) infiniteness of capacity: which nothing moderate will satisfy in any
kind, while there is any thing beyond it desirable, or but appearing so to be:
Crescit indulgens sibi dirus hydrops. Hor. Ode.
Like an hydropicall thirst, that (as the Poet tells us) by its very
satisfactions is rendered more insatiable; and (as the Moralist has it)
Incipit semper a fine, find's the satisfaction of one desire the production of
another. Whence the same Moralist tells, that Attalus compared Senec. Ep. 73.
and 72.
the greediness of appetite in Man, to that of a Dog, that as soon as he has
greedily swallowed one bit that is flung to him, in spem futuri hiat, he is
ready, and gapes for another.

So that in all these respects, it is most for our ease and quiet to be
determined, and limited in our desires by a superior will, especially a will of
so much wisdom, goodness, and Justice, as I have before told you, Gods is. And
submission to this alone, can fix, settle, and satisfy us.

2. This only can truly better and improve us: I mean, contribute to us a
true, inward, and gracious excellency of spirit; and heal the sinful distempers
which naturally we groan under. Our viciousness of nature and life, whence is
it, but from our own wills? whence the Apostle describing our natural
depravedness, Ephesians. 2. 2. ascribes it, in a great measure, to our (...), the
irregular appetites we are subject unto. When God gave the first Man his will,
that liberty served him for no further use than to enslave himself, by debasing
the (...), or governing faculty of his Soul to a sensual, brutish appetite: so
that he whom God made upright, made himself crooked and deformed, by seeking
out many inventions, Eccles. 7. 29. Now, contraria, contrariis, say Physicians.
Diseases are cured by contraries. Wherefore, if our own wills have depraved us,
the only way to cure this depravedness, is to reduce them to subjection, and
conformity to the will of God. Gods will (says the Apostle) is a good, and
perfect will, Romans 12. 3. and therefore our perfection must be to stand
complete in all the will of God, Col. 4. 12. For (according to the Philosophers
Rule, (...) Arist. Top. L 3.
(...),) there being such an infinite goodness in Gods will; to be most like
it, must be, to be best.

3. This only can save us from eternal ruin and destruction. A man never more
speedily and surely damns himself, than when God gives him up to his own hearts
lusts, Psalm. 81. 12. when God threatens to let sinners alone, Hos. 4. 17. he
threatens all evil to them compendiously. For, 1. How often, if left to our
selves, do we wish and pursue those things most passionately, which are most
prejudicial to us? so that it is a sore suspicion, that any thing is naught for
us when our own appetites greedily desire it. And if God would study a close,
quick, and certain way of being revenged upon a man, he need but open his
stores to him, and give him the liberty of choosing for himself.

Evertere domos totas, optantibus ipsis, Dii faciles. Juven. sat. 10.
says an Heathen. An easy God stands his Creature in no other stead, than to
undo him with his own consent. Were it not better then, for a man to be crossed
in his will, by Gods, (as we do our children when they cry for knives or other
hurtful things) than to be let alone to be ruined by his own?

2. How often do we deprecate, and fly from those things, which are (of all
others) most beneficial to us? Like Infants that refuse wholesome food and
Medicines, because they are not sweetened to their Palate. And so do we destroy
our selves by flying the wholesome austerities of Religion, merely because
ascetical godliness, is too sower and ungrateful to flesh and blood? so also do
we, by all means, shun affliction, Job. 36. 21.
and choose sin rather than it, though to our utter ruin, barely because, for
the present, it is not (...), but (...), not a matter of joy but of grief, Heb.
12. 11. Generally men go to Hell, because they will go to Heaven their own way,
not Gods. Which made St. Bernard say, Cesset voluntas propria, and infernum De
Res. Domini, Sermon. 2.
non erit: that there would be no Hell, were it not for men's own wills. Though
no man has a will to be damned, yet every man's own will damns him.

Is it not therefore a thousand times better for us to deny our own wills
herein also, and submit to Gods; who by those things that do not please us,
does preserve us from utter ruin and destruction; and if he should do any
other than displease us, must be enforced to destroy us by humouring us; as
that Surgeon does, who is loath to search a dangerous wound to the bottom;
or cut out of the quick flesh a cancerous substance, for fear of offending and
disquieting his Patient? When we need it, it is the greatest act of Divine
indignation that he can show toward us, to forbear severity; so St. Austin.
And on the other side, Blessed is he whom God corrects, and teaches him out
of his Law, says the Psalmist, Cum parcit Deus, plus irascittur. In Ps. 65.
For thereby he saves his children from the destruction that attends the
wicked, as follows Psalm. 94. 12, 13. upon which notion Tertullian, very
elegantly, and devoutly Decet gratulari and gaudere Divinae dignatione
castigation is. O beatum illum servum cujus emendationi Dominus instat, cui
dignatur irasci, etc. De patient.
descants in this manner. Happy is that Servant whom his Heavenly Master is at
such pains to amend; whom he will condescend to be offended withal; whom by
mildness he does not beguile to his destruction. And therefore we ought to
rejoice in, and congratulate the high vouchsafement of divine correction.

4. This only can Crown us eternally in Heaven, For who (among men) rewards his
Servant for doing Heb. 5. 9. Si pro arbitrio suo servi dominis obtemperant, ne
in iis quidem in quibus obtemperant, obsequuntur. Gub. D. L. 3.
his own pleasure? It is obedience only, that God Crowns. Christ is the Author
of Eternal life to them, (and them only) that obey him. Now (as Salvian says)
if a man do his Masters will, according to his own pleasure, though he do his
commands, he does not obey them. Besides, it is absurd to think that God should
reward any other than he approves. Now he approves not any one that does not
please him; else, in approving him, he would condemn himself. Will you know now
who pleases God? St. Austin tells you, Ille placet Aug. ubi supra, in Ps. 32.
Deo (says he) cui placet Deus, that man pleases God, who is not displeased
with him; as acquiescing and resting satisfied and contented in his pleasure.
After we have done the will of God (says the Apostle to the Hebrews) we need
to have patience to bear it too, before we receive the promises, Heb. 10. 36.
He that thinks to get to Heaven without an entire resignation of himself to
Gods will; had need provide an Heaven of his own, and a Ladder of his own too
to get thither. For there is no room for him in God's Heaven, nor any
possibility for him to obtain it, that will not commit himself to his conduct,
and enter that way which he has appointed him.

3. And thirdly, there is also high Reason for this Truth, on the part of the
whole Creation of God: which Gods will alone preserves in being, and peace;
whereas our wills would hurry it into ruin and destruction, by perpetual wars
and confusions: Meum and Tuum (we say) are the greatest make-bates and
sow-strifes in the World. And how comes this to pass? The fault is not in
propriety: for that is the end of strife, when every one enjoies his own. But
it lies in this, that every man will be the Judge of what is his, and what
another man's; measuring out propriety by his own will. Whence it is, that men
generally think all their own, that (quocunque modo) they can get; and nothing
another, but what they cannot get from him. Which Alexander the Great spoke
out plain (when, to a City that offered to compound with him, upon terms of
dividing their Goods and territories betwixt him and them; Eo proposito veni in
Asiam, non ut id acciperem quod de dissetis, sed ut id haberetis quod
reliquissem. Q. Curt.
he answered) That he came not into Asia to receive what men would give him,
but to assign them what he should think fit to leave them. And hence grow all
wars says St. James chap. 4. 1. because men will share the world among them
according to their own lusts. Now the only way to end them, and preserve the
world in Peace, is for God to interpose his Arbitration. The which he does,
partly by Law, and partly by Power. It is then best with the whole world, when
men will stand to the decisions of Gods Law, or will of Precept, in these
differences. For certainly (although some Atheists Totam de Diis opinionem
fictum a sapientilus Reip. causa, etc. Tull. de Not. De.
strain the notion too far, (as he whom Tully brings in, asserting, that all
Religion was invented by Statesmen for politic ends; of whose mind I doubt
there are still more than a good many) yet) it is an unquestionable Truth, that
Religion has a great influence upon the peaceable Government of Kingdoms, nor
can any Body Politic be well governed without it: seeing no other ties can be
sufficient to keep any man within bounds, that has no principle of Conscience
to oblige him, longer, than till he has power enough, and opportunity offered
to dis-engage himself. Whereas, when the Law of God joins with the Law of man,
such a one as is truly awed thereby, dares not do any unjust action, though he
could, and were sure he had power enough to secure him therein from humane
Jurisdiction.

But because there are some who have no sense of Religion at all, (and so will
not stand to Gods Arbitration by Law) or if they have, yet are apt to interpret
Gods Law for their own advantage; therefore (to keep the world in being) God is
fain to deal with these men by an Arbitration of Power, which (will they, nill
they) they cannot (...), etc. Hom. Il. TH.
evade. Thus Homer describes his Jupiter with a pair of golden balances in his
hand, weighing out the Fates of Armies and Nations; to intimate that God alone
determines the great controversies of the world by his irresistible providence,
according to his own will; and by the changes and vicissitudes of Affairs,
continues the course of Nature, in the channel wherein it has run from the
Creation. Thus when any part of this great body, has grown unwieldy, by
attracting too much nutriment to it self, he has subtracted from it, to give
to others, what was expedient; cantoning great Monarchies, and distributing
them into more moderate Principalities; and when he has seen it needful (on
the other side) strengthening weak members by accessions contributed from
adjacent parts, has enabled them to support themselves. And so in private
concernments, he raises one Family out of the ruins of another, takes away
providentially Labans wealth, and gives it to Jacob, Genesis 31. 9. removes one
generation, that another may stand Eccles. 1. 4.
up in its stead; and so provides for all by succession; for whom, if they
should all exist together, the whole World would not suffice (as the proud King
says of the dust of Samaria, in reference to his numerous Army, 1 King. 20.
10.) to afford every one an handful. And so is the World maintained, as the
River is, by gaining on one bank, what it loses on another: as the Moralist
observes, that by these contrarieties Natura hoc, quod vides, regnum
mutationibus temperat and contrarits rerum aeternitas constat. Sen. Ep. 107.
of Providence the duration of this great Frame is preserved. Whereas if these
Scales could be wrested out of Gods hand, and Men had them in their own; there
would be no end of quarrels betwixt them, but in a fatal ruin of them all, by
means of mutual rapines and bloodsheds,

-- suoque
Mart cadent subito per mutua vulnera fratres.
Ov. Met. And now, Brethren, I would fain persuade my self, that by what has
been said, your Judgments are Applied.
convinced of this truth. But that I am afraid, unruly Passions will not suffer
them (especially in your particular concernments) to pronounce according to
their convictions. Reason is always more easily managed than Passion; Man,
than the beast in Man. The Law of the Members, as the blessed Apostle
complains, is hardly brought into subjection to the Law of the Mind, Romans 7.
23. whence it comes to pass, that though we know this Doctrine to be true, and
will assent to it in Thesi, in general; yet in Hypothesi, (when it comes to be
reduced to every Man's particular) there can hardly a Man be found that does not
persuade himself, his Case does not fall under this Rule, nor ought he to be
governed by it. I complain of my self, (Christians) as well as of you. And
Tertullian did so before me, who Confiteor satis temere me, si non impudenter
de patientia, componere ausum, cui praeftandae omninc id^^eus non sum. -- Ne
dicta factis deficient ibus erubescant De Patient.
makes this ingenuous confession in the presence of God, in the very entrance
of his excellent Book, De Patientia. That he had somewhat imprudently, and in a
manner impudently, undertaken to Treat of a Duty, which he was not able to
practice: in so much, that he was afraid, lest his lines should blush at the
disagreement that was betwixt them and his Life. Indeed, we may, all of us, if
we will be ingenuous, take up the same confession, in reference to the subject
of this Doctrine. We can (all of us) say, We must submit to Gods will; and
(every one of us) find reasons to persuade our Brethren unto it; but, whenever
Gods will crosses us in our particular Interests, how few of us are there, of
whom, that may not be said truly, which Eliphaz charges on Job, Chap. 4. 5.
Now it is come upon thee, and thou faintest, it touches thee, and thou art
troubled. If God take a way a Neighbors Wife, Child, Estate, we can presently
say (and no words are more common in our mouths, than these) that, seeing God
pleases to have it so, he must submit to, and acquiesce in it. But when it is
our own case, we must have a dispensation for our impatience, our immoderate
grief, our murmuring, our discontented Omnes cum valemus sana consilia aegrotis
damus, etc. Ter.
speeches and carriages. So much harder is it to take good counsel, than to
give it. Now in such cases, it is plain, that our Passions usurp the Throne of
Reason. And therefore, I pray, give me leave, after all these Demonstrations,
with which I have endeavored to satisfy your Judgments; to descend to some
moving considerations to make impression upon your Affections themselves; that
by making a Party for God among them, I may, (by their help, once raised) be
the better able to reduce those others to obedience that stand in Rebellion
against him. And, because there is no passion that has a greater influence
upon us, to recover us from our sinful extravagancies, than shame of the
absurdities, that attend them; (for which reason Scripture so frequently makes
it a companion of Repentance,) I shall endeavor to stir up in you that just
abhorrency and detestation of this sinful distemper, as may provoke an holy
and ingenuous indignation against it. Now there are two things in this sinful
opposition and resistance of heart against the will of God, which we may justly
be ashamed of.

(1.) That it debaseth us below those, with whom we account it the greatest
disparagement to be ranked and mustered. There is no Name of greater disgrace
among Christians, than an Heathen: and therefore to be accounted as an Heathen,
is used by our Savior to express the highest brand of infamy that Christianity
can mark the greatest offender withal, Mat. 18. 17. So that, certainly, there
can be nothing in the World, which a Christian has more cause to blush at,
than what is condemned by Heathens themselves. Now, in the point in hand, it is
amazing to think, what an height some Heathens have arrived to, beyond most of
us that call our selves Christians. As you must needs say, when you shall read
in Epictetus, (...), etc. That a Man ought so far (...) Epict. Ench. c. 13.
to renounce his own will, that he must not so much as seek, or desire to have
things fall out as he will: but be willing to have them fall out as they do:
and, that Men come into this World, (...). cap. 24. (...), etc.
as Actors upon a Stage, who are not to choose the parts they will Act, but
only to take care to Act that part decently, which is assigned them; and that
Men ought to demean themselves in the World, as wellbred Persons at a Feast,
who carve decently to themselves of the Dish that is set before them, but call
not for that which is taken off, or set by. That thus we ought to carry our
selves toward Wives, Children, Honors, Estates,; use them moderately, whiles
God vouchsafes the enjoyment of them, but if he deny them to us, or take them
from us, not to be too sollicitous after them. That a Man thus affected, (...).
cap. 21.
is sit to be a Guest at the Table of the Gods; but he that can advance so
high, as to despise all these, (even when he has them) is, in a sort, a sharer
with them in their Throne and Sovereignty: as also, That the chief Principle of
Religion is, to have a right opinion of the Gods, as being most good and most
just, and administering all affairs accordingly; that Man is appointed to obey
and acquiesce in all that they do, (...), etc. C. 38. Cap. 15.
and to follow willingly their conduct, as grounded on the supreme Reason: for,
otherwise, Men will measure their Religion by their advantages, and love their
God, or hate him, as they apprehend him the cause of good or evil to them: and
that Men must not say, when any enjoyment is taken from them, (...), I have
lost it; but, (...), I have restored it to the right owner and proprietor
thereof; restored a dead Wife, or Child, or Friend, a wasted Estate, etc. and
whiles they enjoy any thing, must look on it, as a Permittes ipsis expendere
numinibus, quid conveniat nobis; rebusque sit utile nostris: Nam pro jucundis,
aptissima quaeque dabunt Dii. Charior est illis, homo, quam sibi. Juv. Sat. 10.
Traveller on his Inn, as his own Lodging, but another House: To add to these,
that of the Heathen-Poet (and he none of the best neither) That Men must leave
it to the Gods to choose for them, who, because they love Man better than he
can himself, will choose what is most for his profit, though they deny him what
is for his pleasure: and that of Seneca, Magnus est animus qui se Deo tradidit;
pusillus and degener qui obluctatur. Sen. Epist. 107.
That it is the property of a great, and noble Soul, to resign himself entirely
to God; and that none but a low, and degenerous Spirit will struggle with him.
To which, in the last place, take that high Speech of one Demetrius (recorded
by the same Seneca, from his own Mouth, as he says) That he had only one
thing to complain of Hoc unum, inquit, Dii immortales, de vobis queri possum
quod non ante mihi voluntatem vestram notam fecistis. Prior enim ad ista
venissem, ad quae nunc vocatus ad. sum. -- Maluissem offerre quam tradere. Quid
opus fuit auferre? accipere potuistis. Sed ne nunc quidem auferetis, quia nihil
eripitur nisi retinenti. Nihil cogor, nihil patior invitus: nec servio Deo, sed
assentio. Sen. de Provid.
in the usage he had received from the Gods; That when they designed the taking
of his Earthly comforts from him, they did not acquaint him with what they
meant to call for beforehand. For, (says he) I would have prevented your
calling me to such a condition, by offering my self to it. I would have
tendered what you would have had, as a present, not paid it as a Tax. What need
had you to take from me, what you needed but to have accepted? Nor indeed shall
you now properly take from me any thing; seeing that cannot be properly taken
away, that is not detained. I suffer no compulsion at all from you, I suffer
nothing against my will. I do not so much submit to the Gods, as assent and
vote with them. I confess this last Speech savours somewhat of the high Stoical
Rant; (as diverse other passages in Seneca both his own, and those quoted with
commendation from others of his sect;) and therefore every expression in it is
not to be in strictness and propriety of language imitated or approved. But
however in the high Rhetoric thereof, we may see what an Idea even an Heathen
fancy conceives of that profession which man ought to attain unto, (for the
Stoics, I suppose, when they speak these things of themselves, speak their
Judgments (at least) of what they design, or are convinced they ought to design
the attainment of in their own practice) and thence infer; that, certainly, we
are not able to answer it to God, our own Conscience, or our solemn profession
of Christianity, if we come so vastly short of those men's, (whether aims and
designs, or) avowed principles, whom we count it the greatest disgrace to be
levelled withal. And we may make use of these, and an 100 more like Instances
from the Heathens that knew not God, to shame our selves, for our
non-proficiency in a Lesson; which even out of the very ruins and rubbish of
fallen nature, those Philosophers were able to read so clearly (at least,) if
we will not allow them to have reduced it to practice in their lives and
conversations.

But if withal, we shall be so charitable to them, as to believe they (for the
main) practiced according to their speeches in this kind; (and why should we
not vouchsafe them so much of our charity (at least) as to allow them to be
honest men, against most of whom we have little evidence to judge them other,
but from the pens of their Adversaries?) then, the shame of being, not
outworded only, but outlived also, by the men that we represent to our selves
under so odious a Character, cannot but cloth our faces, and our own confusion
from so just a conviction, cannot but cover us as with a mantle, when we
consider that we come short of them, whom we ought so far to exceed, that a
(...), a bare precedence or going before them (it seems by our Saviors
Question) will not serve our turns, except we advance to a (...) to excel them
so far, as to run them out of distance, and carry the prize from them, Mat. 5.
47.

But if this consideration will not shame us into a better temper, consider we
in the next place, that to run counter thus to the will of God, is

2. That, that is a real contradiction to the confessed principles and
practices of Christianity, and (by consequence) fastens on us the reproach of
being false to our own avowed Religion. For tell me (thou that call thy self
Christian) what is Christianity, but a Doctrine that teaches conformity to
Christ? And how art thou conformable to Christ, when he professes so often,
that he had no will of his own, but only his Fathers will that sent him? who in
his greatest Agonies surrendered himself up to his Fathers will with an absolute
renunciation of his own? Mat. 26. 39. How can thou be a Christian, that art
yet to learn the very A B C of Christianity, self-denial, and taking up the
Cross (Mat. 16. 24.) duties so inconsistent with this maintaining a contest
betwixt our wills and Gods; that the feet of the Antipodes will sooner meet,
than it and they?

Thou therefore, that art of this Character, (though thou call thy self
Christian never so much) know that Christianity disclaims, and Christ disowns
thee.

Thou call God thy Father, be ashamed of thy Impudence, who handlest him
rather like a child under correction, than a Father. Thou call him Master.
How incongruously and incoherently with thy practice; who, whilst thou call
him so, art disputing and contending who shall be more Master, thou or he?

Thou addressest thy self to him (in thy solemn prayers at least) and say,
sanctificetur nomen tuum, adveniat regnum tuum, fiat voluntas tua; and art thou
not ashamed of thy gross hypocrisy, when (notwithstanding thy seeming
devotion) thy heart gives thy tongue the lie, and secretly says [My name, my
Kingdom, my will] instead of Gods? But, possibly thou may profess to be so
modest, as to allow God two of these, the Name and the Kingdom; and thou only
stickest at that hard word, Thy will. Thou art for the sanctification of his
Name, and the coming of his Kingdom; but thou would fain obtain thy will.
Nay, but, thou foolish man, what shall God do with the Name or the Kingdom, if
thou have the will? what a poor name will be left him in the world, if he serve
only as an Instrument for man to work his own ends by? He that is the principal
in any action, carries the Name of it. And what a poor Kingdom, (indeed a mere
titular, and arbitrary sovereignty) will he have; if he have his power measured
out to him by the arbitrary instructions he receives from time to time from thy
will? so that by the granting thee thy will, instead of a Name and a Kingdom,
he leaves himself nothing, but the Name of a Kingdom. Nay, indeed, to what
purpose is it for thee to pray to him at all, if thou take thy self to be thus
(...)? For what a vain thing is it to ask that of God, which, but from thy
allowance, he has no power to give? Besides, how pellucid is that hypocrisy,
which pretends in all humble and submissive manner to beg of God; when (thy
will depriving him of all power to deny thee) a royal style would better befit
thee,

Hoc volo, sic jubeo, stet pro rattone voluntas? speak out man, and tell God,
(in plain English) that when thou say I beg, and I beseech, and I entreat,
thou will be understood to say, I straightly will and command: bid him deny thee
at his peril, thou will un-god him if he do, nisi Deus homini placuerit non
erit Deus, (as Tertullian says) tell him thou art Tert. Apol.
resolved to own no God any longer than he shall please thee; such language is
like thy self, fit for a sovereign will to deliver it self in. And indeed, this
is the genuine language of every humane will, which lifts it self into
competition with Gods, so pregnant with blasphemies is it.

Thou pretendest to love God; a sorty pretense it is, and nothing else, whiles
thou art continually mis-interpreting his actions, and Qui satis diligunt now
cito offenduntur. Salv. Ep. 1.
picking quarrels at him. He loves but poorly (says Salvian) whom every trifle
will offend. Thou love him, thou say. But wherefore do thou love him?
Because he gratifies thee in what thou desire. Sic prata, and pecudes
dillgimus. Tully.
So thou love thy Horse when he paceth to thy mind, and thy field, when it
yields fruit to thy mind, says the Orator: this is (as he says) mercatura, non
amicitia, trading, not love. Thou love him, thou say, how long will that
love last? till he displeases thee next. Thou love him, but tanquam osurus,
as one from whom the next occasion thou take to pick a quarrel at, will
alienate thee again. Away with this boys-play, Christians; thus children are
won with an apple, and Iusulsus puer, amas patrem si blanditur, odio habes,
quod te flagellat: quasi non and blandiens and flagellans haereditatem paret.
Aug. in Ps. 32.
lost with a nut, as the Proverb says. A simple child indeed, (says St.
Austin) that love thy heavenly Father when he dandles thee, and hate him
when he corrects thee, not considering that whether he dandle or correct thee,
he provides a portion for thee!

Thou stilest thy self (it may be) not an ordinary lover, but a friend of God,
and pretendest more communion and fellowship with him than others have. Thou
deceivest thy self grossly, friend. For friendship Idem velle and idem nolle,
perfecta est amicitiam. Tnlly.
(the Orator will tell thee) cannot consist, but in an entire union of wills:
so there may be (will thou say) if God will reduce his will to mine, or
compound the matter at least; in such things and such God to have his will, and
in other things to allow me my will. But stay, proud Creature, God and man are
never so friends, as to become fellows. Abraham, to be sure, was God's Friend,
Isay 41. 8. and yet he knew his distance, as appears in that humble conference,
Genesis 18. 27, 30. when a superior vouchsafes to become a friend, he expects for
his condescension, to be observed and complied withal from him whom he
obliges. This cultura potentis amici, husbanding of a potent friendship, is no
easy matter. And it principally consists in (that, which thou art most averse
to) the perfect melting the inferiors will into that of his superior friend.
He that claims to be Gods friend, must in many cases, either quit his will, or
his friend.

Thou claimest salvation by Christ. How vainly, and incongruously to the whole
Economy of that great work, as contrived and effected by him; see in these two
things.

1. In general, Christ did, does, will do nothing in that great work for any
man, but according to the will of God. Lo, I come, says he, to do thy will, O
God; thy Law is within my heart, Ps. 40. 8. Heb. 10. 9. and he professes, he
came to do, not his own will, (much less any other persons) but the will of him
that sent him, Joh. 6. 38.

2. In special, All the offices of Christ, wherein he works out our salvation,
are managed according to his Fathers will. As a Priest, he sacrificed his will
to his Father, before he offered his blood, Mat. 26. 39, 42. As a Prophet, he
spoke, not of himself, but the words that he spoke, the Father gave him in
Commandment, and as the Father said unto him, so he spoke, Joh. 12. 49, 50. As
a King, he derives his Authority from him that said unto him, sit thou at my
right hand, Ps. 110. 1. And he received his Kingdom by way of petition from his
Father: Ask of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, Ps.
2. 8. God set him as his King upon his holy hill, v. 6. made him Lord and
Christ, Acts 2. 36. And answerably, the saving influence of all his Offices is
dispensed in such a manner; as renders it utterly impossible for any man to
have benefit by them, except upon condition of an entire resignation of his own
will to the will of God. The price of our Redemption, which he paid for us, as
Priest, has bought us wholly out of our own power, and made us entirely Gods
peculiar. 1. Cor. 6. 19, (...). Tit. 2. 14.
20. And in suffering for us, he has obliged us to imitate and resemble him in
his Death: exemplifying it in the crucifixion of our inordinate affections and
lusts, Gal. 5. 24. The Doctrine, he has revealed to us, as the great Prophet
of the Church (in the whole scope and drift of it) tends to nothing else, but
the modelling and moulding our hearts and lives according to the declared will
of God. The power he exercises over us as King, is erected to no other
purpose, but to make us a willing people, in all points of Christian obedience,
Ps. 110. 3. The grace that he bestows upon us, what is it, but the reparation
of Gods Image in us; one main part whereof, consists in the conformity of our
wills to his? The Holy Spirit which he bestows upon us, what is He to do, but
to lead us in all dutiful obedience as the sons of God, Romans 8. 14. and to
teach us what to pray for as we ought, by making intercession for us, i. e. by
exciting holy desires in us, according to the will of God? v. 26, 27. The
Covenant of grace, which he by his mediation has established and ratified,
betwixt God and us; when the Apostle expounds it, what does he mention, as one
of the main Articles in it, but this; that God will put his Laws into our
minds, and write them in our hearts? i. e. reduce our wills to a perfect
conformity to his own, Heb. 8. 10?

So that, from all these instances, it is evident, that to advance our wills
into competition with Gods, and not entirely to conform them to his, destroys
the whole frame of our salvation wrought by Christ; so that it must be as
inconsistent a thing to hope to be saved by Christ, and yet to design the
reservation of our own wills to ourselves, as to expect the House stand firm,
when we dig up the foundation that bears the whole building.

And now, let me ask thee, thou peevish, passionate, self-willed Creature, what
can thou so much as pretend to free thee from the shame of so many absurd,
self-condemning inconsistencies, and contradictory absurdities? Object.


Object. Will thou say, thou art willing to submit thy will to Gods, so far as
thou can in reason be satified concerning it? But whiles thy Reason dissents,
thy will (that is managed according to that which Reason dictates) cannot
consent. Such and such particulars in the government of the world, and the
managery of thine own private concerns, thou can not but think, might have
been ordered better otherwise: and thou hopest God will not be angry with thee,
if thou reason the case with him, as Jeremy did chap. 12. 1. in order to thine
own satisfaction.

Generously said, and much like a Answ.
Man! but (I must tell thee) too little savouring of a Christian Thou would
have God satisfy thy Reason, what Reason do thou mean? thy carnal Reason?
That must not be satisfied, but subdued, and every (...), every (...), the
sublime notions, and acute argumentations of it, must be reduced into captivity
to the obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 5. meanest thou thy renewed, sanctified
Reason? The very genuine property thereof, is, to be satisfied in every thing
God does (eo nomine) upon no other ground but this, that he did it, Ps. 30. 9.
The notions that it has of Gods wisdom, goodness, justice, sovereignty, etc.
(before Sit pro omnibus rationibus, actor Deus. Salv. de Gub. Dei, L. 3.
mentioned) are to it instead of all Reasons to sway it into an humble
subjection, yea, prostration to his will and pleasure.

Again, Thou will have thy Reason satisfied. But when will that be? That Reason
which Gods pleasure will not satisfy, nothing else will satisfy; for, besides
the pride which naturally men take in censuring, (especially their betters)
which alone would produce innumerable cavils; (so that the great Creator of the
world (as Tertullian says to Marcian) would be able to do nothing, that would
not yield matter of censure to these Quid faceret Creator ne a Marcionitis
reprehenderetur. Tert. Adv. Marc. L. 2.
censores divinitatis; but upon every turn they would presume to tell him, sic
non debnit Deus, and sic magis debuit, so he should not have done, and so he
might have done better:) I say, besides the pride that humane Reason would take
in cavilling, the self-love also that is naturally in every man, would (after
God had offered the utmost satisfaction) prompt him to hold the conclusion
pertinaciously, when beaten by the strongest conviction out of both the
premises, applauding his own sophistry above Divine demonstration.

Lastly, Thou would bedealt with as a man, and have thy Reason satisfied.
And shall God have done, when he has satisfied thee? will he not find all the
world alike desirous of satisfaction with thee? And is there not as much reason
for every one to desire it as for any one? For, what can be urged, why thou
should obtain it, which may not as well be pleaded for all the men in the
world? If then the Creator of the world, shall be obliged to satisfy all
mankind in all that he does, what an impossible task would this prove? Do not
men's Judgments differ as much as their Faces? and will not that that will
satisfy one upon that account, dis-satisfie thousands?

So, that still thou art absurd in thy Demands, and instead of being answered
by Reason, deservest (as Job did when he was much in thy strain) to be answered
out of a whirlwind, Job. 38. 1.

But, thou will say, it may be, it Object.
is but a small thing that I desire to be gratified in. I am contented to leave
the main government of the world to God; and not only so, but my own particular
concerns, as to the substance: and all that I would have submitted to my will,
amounts to no more than the alteration of a few circumstances. Losses, I could
submit to, but this pincheth me; that they befall me in such an enjoyment,
which I could worst spare, in such a manner, such a measure, such a time, by
such instruments: And would it not be a small matter for God to gratify me in
these petty things?

Mistake not thy self, friend, in Answ.
calling this a small matter. No;

Magnapetis Phaethon, -- (proud Creature) these are great things, far greater
than thou apprehendest. 'Twas a great offer that Herod made the Daughter of his
Minion Herodias, when he bad Mar. 6. 23.
her ask to the half of his Kingdom. But thy demands herein to thy God, are
greater than his offer. For thou ask not half only, but the far better half
of Gods Kingdom. For although circumstances in a metaphysical consideration, be
but small things, the mere garments, or (less it may be) trimmings of an
action: yet in a moral consideration, these garments are more worth than the
body, these trimmings than the stuff. For the circumstances here, make a thing
what it is. Such an action, as God clothes it with circumstances, is just and
good; alter the circumstances, thou alterest the nature of it: as he
circumstantiates it, it is the Physic of thy Soul wisely compounded for thy
cure; let thy private will be but admitted to leave out or alter one scruple of
the Ingredients, and this Physic will become thy Poison.

Besides; be thy Demands, as thou fanciest, but small, yet still they are
demands; and therefore (in this respect) great matters, because upon the
refusal of them, thou resolvest (it seems) to hold out the Fort of thy Heart in
Rebellion against thy Maker. The smaller the Terms are in this case, the
greater thy disloyalty, who upon such small terms suspendest, yea denyest thy
Allegiance to thy Lord and Sovereign. Know therefore (for a close of this
point) that thou art absurdly impertinent in all thy pretensions against the
equity of this Duty, the resignation of thy will universally to the will of
God. For herein Heathens themselves condemn thee; thine own avowed principles
of Christianity confute thee; yea, thy own Reasons and Arguments to the
contrary, militate against thee. And therefore thou have nothing more to do (if
thou will not do amiss) but to lie down Jer. 3. 25.
in thy shame, and repent thee (with holy Job, after a like saucy debate with
his Maker) in dust and Job. 40. 4, 5. 42. 3, 6.
ashes, acknowledging, that thou have meddled with what thou understoodest not,
and therefore wilt proceed no farther, but quietly lay thy hand on thy mouth,
and (with the brethren in the Text) (...), rest satissied, and give his Will no
farther interruption or disturbance; which brings my discourse and awakens your
attention to the second considerable in the matter of my Text, which comes now
to hand.

2. The Factum, or what these 2. The second Branch the Factum.
brethren did, in pursuance of what they said, (...), we ceased. The word in
the Original, is of a great latitude. Ordinarily it is used to express a quiet,
silent, calm, and peaceable deportment, without the least commotion in ones
self, or disturbance of others. When Wars and Tumults are ended in a Nation,
that no person contrives or attempts new broils, they are by the Greek
Historians, generally said, (...). And in this notion, it may well suit here.
Whiles man desires one thing, and God designs another, there is, as it were a
war (at least contest) betwixt God and him, whose will shall prevail; but when
we resign our wills, and entirely rest in his; then we do yield him the
Victory, and are at Peace with him. But there is more in it than so. For a
conquered Nation, may be at peace, and free from creating any more broils; not
from any satisfaction in their condition, but from-conviction of the
bootlessness of stirring any more to alter it. And therefore the Etymologists
find something also in this word, that imports an inward complacency and
pleasedness of spirit in that condition, wherein a man is thus quiet and
peaceable. For they tell us, it comes from (...), that signifies inward (...),
quasi (...).
satisfaction, delight and pleasure, so that the Lesson which it learns us in
this latitude, is

That he that duly submits to Gods 2. Observation.
will, does with unspeakable calmness, tranquillity, and satisfaction of mind,
acquiesce therein.

A truly noble, and Christianly Its Explication, and Evidence.
Heroical frame of spirit this Doctrine expresses; which (according to the
former explication of the word) includes two things, to be endeavored and
labored after by all Christians.

1. An inward serenity and clearness of mind, that (like a calm after a storm)
does motos componere fluct us, lay all the waves that rumpled Virg.
and ruffled a man's soul, whether from dissatisfaction of judgment, or disorder
of affections. So that instead of tumultuating thoughts, and tempestuous
passions, there is, in the Soul of man so quieted (what the Evangelist tells us
Christ's increpation reduced the winds and sea unto, Mat. 8. 26.) (...), a great
calm. And this, to make it the more plain to you, I shall show in parts.

1. A man's Judgment is reconciled to think well of the doings of God, which
before (possibly) he proudly and peremptorily censured and condemned; and he is
satisfied in them, as most just and good: whence the man is highly pleased in
what God has done; as concluding, that had it been left to himself to order,
he knew not how to have mended it in the least circumstance! Thus did Hezekiah
(...), Good, faith he, is the word of the Lord which thou have spoken; and it is
remarkable, that this word which he owns as so good, was a severe threatening of
the Prophet Isaiah from God, that was to befall his Kingdom and posterity: and
yet, he is reconciled to it, in his Judgment. And he repeats it again (with the
reason of his acquiescence in it with so high a satisfaction.) For he said
moreover, there shall be peace and truth in my days, Is. 38. 8. or (as it is
rendered in the parallel place, 2 Kin. 20. 19.) Is it not good, if peace and
truth be in my days? q. d. However, the Judgments threatened be severe to my
posterity, in whom I am deeply concerned, yet there is more mercy in it than I
could have expected, seeing God has lengthened out the tranquillity of his
Church and people during my time. I am (holy Prophet) conscious of an offense
(brought home to me by thy ministry) which deserved a worse Judgment; and
therefore, I am highly pleased that God has so mitigated his severity. I could
not with reason have wished a more moderate correction. Thus did David (...),
when he cries out, it is good for me that I have been afflicted, q. d. I would
not for all the world have been otherwise dealt with, than God has dealt with
me, in these my sad and doleful afflictions, and persecutions from Saul: and he
gives a reason of it too, because it learned him Gods statutes, Ps. 119. 71.
and again he speaks his high approbation of Gods severities, v. 75. I know, O
Lord, that thy Judgments are right, and that in much faithfulness thou have
afflicted me, thou have discharged the part of a trusty and faithful friend,
in all that thou have inflicted upon me. I know I had been worse if I had fared
better. Had God gratified my humor, he had falsified his Trust, his Covenant,
wherein he stands engaged to me, to give grace and glory, and detain no good
thing from me, Ps. 84. 14. 34. 10. Will you see (yet) an higher approbation
given to God in his severest Providence? Look on Job then: who when God had
made him poor to a Proverb, and that by several gradations and successive
advances of afflicting providence, and those arriving at his knowledge by
several frighted Messengers one after another, (which is among men accounted
the greatest addition of torture that can be, to destroy a man gradually, that
he may sentire se mori, be sensible of every approach of death distinctly) yet
he falls on his face and worships the Lord, and says, The Lord has given, the
Lord has taken (he acknowledges the justice of his proceedings) he had done
him no wrong, to call for his own back again: (and he proceeds) I must have
left them shortly, for I must have returned naked to the Earth (my Mother
whence I was taken) and God has but taken them from me a little sooner,
Blessed be the name of the Lord. This last now, is an high word, to bless God
for such losses, shows the judgment to be satisfied in the inflicting of them,
as in the greatest of Mercies. Methinks I hear him descanting upon this
plain-song thus, Blessed be God that has taken so effectual a course (to wean
me from the world, and to bring me to an entire acquiescence in himself, for my
only portion) as this, the leaving me nothing else to rival him in my
affections. Blessed be that sharp affliction, which instead of letting out my
heart blood, has only lanced an Imposthume. Blessed be the name of the Lord
that has taken from me the rack, and strappado of my anxious thoughts, the
fuel of my lusts, the snares of my heart, the canker of my graces, the matter
of my temptations, the clogg of my holy affections, the thief of my devotions,
the bar and wall of partition betwixt my soul, and its full, entire, and
satisfactory communion with God. Thus high goes the satisfaction of the
judgment, in this (...), or calm serenity of Soul, acquiescing in Gods will.

2 And the Affections in this case are not behind hand; being (not only from a
strong tide of opposition to the will of God (it may be) reduced to a dead
water; but) by a contrary Tide (occasioned by the moving of Gods holy spirit
upon them) turned back, and made to run in the same stream with it, neither do
they (as they say some swift Rivers do, that passing through great Lakes keep
their own waters unmixed) reserve any thing of their own; but mingle themselves
entirely with that Ocean of infinite perfections into which they are swallowed.
So, that let God do what he will, such a soul loves him entirely, desires him
affectionately, trusts and hopes in him securely, delights in him
satisfactorily; and (on the other side) grieves for nothing but offending him,
fears nothing but that it may offend him again, is angry at nothing but its own
foolish prejudices, and hard thoughts of him, for which it could even tear it
self piecemeal, out of a just indignation; befooling and be-beasting it self,
for tumultuating against him, Ps. 73. 22. etc. And hence arises that strange
(...), or Christian Epicurism, (if I may so call it) wherein the ravished Soul
can do (that which Epicurus only vaunted of) cry out even in Phalaris his Bull,
Quam dulce! O how sweet and pleasant, and delicious are the greatest
afflictions! so the Apostle James, Count it all joy when ye fall into diverse
temptations: and the other Apostle speaks of it as a thing of common
experience; both his own, I take pleasure, (...), find high complacency and
satisfaction in varieties of grievous sufferings, 2 Cor. 12. 10. and his
brethrens also, as he witnesses, Romans 5. 3. We (not I only, but I, and my
Fellow Christians) (...), glory, crow, and triumph in tribulations. Thus serene
and calm is the Soul, when it satisfactorily rests in Gods will.

2. It implies also an outward testification of this inward serenity and
calmness of mind, and that in all our carriages and deportments. A man's very
countenance witnesses the complacency of the heart in Gods good pleasure. It
does not fall and lowre, with Cains, out of wrath, and high indignation against
God, Genesis 4. 5. No fire of anger sparkles in the eyes; no wrinkles of care,
sollicitousness and forethought furrow the brows; no melancholy paleness, or
vexing leanness disfigures the cheeks: but the merry heart (as Solomon says)
makes a cheerful countenance, Prove. 15. 13. and the light and health that is in
that (Job. 29. 24. Ps. 42. 9.) speaks the sound and healthy constitution of the
Soul that shines through it. For Index animae vultus; the face is the minds
interpreter.

The Tongue, is not only bound to the good behavior, as to all expressions of
discontent and displeasure, as David's was, Ps. 39. 9. but contrarily, enlarged,
and set at liberty to sound forth the high praises of God, and bless him (as
Job) in the greatest afflictions, in every thing giving thanks, 1 These. 5. 18.
and glorifying him even in the Fires, Is. 24. 5.

Lastly, the very gestures, carriages, and deportments of the whole body,
testify that the spirit is lightsome, debonaire, and free from all such black
and clowdy thoughts as usually derive an unpleasing gloominess, and lowering
sullenness into the whole conversation. So David, when God had declared his
Will in reference to his Child, by and by alters the whole Garb of his
conversation, washes his clothes, and annoints himself, and changes bis
apparel, and eats and drinks as formerly, 2 Samuel 12. 20.

You will say, this is an high Application.
pitch of perfection indeed, and very desirable, but yet such, as it may be
questionable, whether it be possible to be attained, and so consistent either
with nature or duty? For, is it naturally possible so totally to cast off
humanity, whiles we live here below, as not to be affected with any the sinless
softnesses, and imbecilities of it? And did our Savior himself so far comply
with them, as frequently to express a sense of humane infirmities? Besides, it
being not only lawful, but a duty in us, to fear when God threatens, and grieve
when he smites; does not this carriage seem to import a stoical Apathy, betwixt
which and Christian Patience there is a confessed Antipathy? Nay, lastly, where
the affliction is extraordinarily oppressing, how extremely difficult is it for
the most resolved Saint so to mortify the very excesses incident to lapsed
nature, as to keep within any distance in this holy race to those high examples
but now mentioned; so that in us to be contented to fall beneath them seems a
becoming humility?

I Answer, that, notwithstanding whatever in this kind is or may be objected,
that which I have been speaking of, is secure from danger. For,

1. As to the sinless resentments of nature, I grant it neither possible nor
lawful wholly to put them off, and therefore require not of any man so to do;
only I forbid them to obstruct any operation of Grace, which if they do, they
cease to be sinless.

2. A due sensibleness of Gods afflicting hand, if joined (as it ought to be)
with a due consideration of our own deserts, is not only consistent with, but
also highly conducing to that highest degree of Acquiescence in Divine
Providence which I am treating of, and so militates for my Hypothesis; and

Lastly, The total mortification of the sinful redundancies of natural passion,
though confessed to be extremely difficult, is also confessedly a Duty, and (by
consequence) gradually attainable: and so, seeing in the Saints mentioned it
appears a perfection actually acquired, we are not to impute it to special
privilege that they acquired it, but to Gods blessing upon their holy
endeavors; and make their examples a spur to our industry, accounting whatever
disswades us from it, nothing else but sluggishness in an humble disguise. And
therefore dis-hearten not thy endeavors by forcasting impossibilities. For, as
Epictetus encourages (...), etc. (...) Ench. C. 75.
the young Candidate of his Philosophy, whom he had startled with the eminent
example of Socrates, by telling him, that in the practice of the principles he
lays down, Socrates became what he was, and that though he be not yet a
Socrates, yet by aiming and designing to become a Socrates, and living
answerably to those aims, he might in time arrive at the same perfection with
him: so do I encourage thee, Despair not of reaching to the high perfections of
Job, David, Hezechiah, and other eminent Saints; for thou may in time come
to be such an one as they were, if thou will live and do as becomes one who
intends to be so.

My next business, therefore, shall Directions.
be to give thee such Directions, by the practice whereof thou may advance
toward, and in time arrive at this noble pitch.

1. First, then, thou must Love God sincerely, not only for what thou receivest
and expectest from him, but also, and principally, for what thou see and
accordingly adorest in him. And labor to improve the Love thou have for him
into an intimate acquaintance and friendship with him. For hereby thou will
grow so far satisfied in him, that thou will be assured he neither can nor will
order any thing that befalls thee otherwise than may stand with thy best
advantage; thy heart will rest securely in him; and thou will not find a place
in thy bosom for suspicion or censure of any thing he does; yea, thou will be
studious to please and approve thy self to him in all things; and think nothing
thou have too dear for him to dispose of at his pleasure, which he will
vouchsafe to call for or make use of; but rather, (as we use to express our
selves to our intimate friends when they have occasion for any thing in our
possession) thou will tell him from thy heart, that thou art heartily glad thou
had it for him.

2. Interpret Gods providence heartily. Take every thing from (...). Epict. C.
65.
him by the best Handle. If any better construction than other can be made of
his dealings, take hold of that, and therewithal silence thy passionate
prejudices and mis-representations that art apt to mislead thee. What a false
glass is to a beautiful face, and the moved water to a straight staff, that is
prejudicate opinion to the best of Gods Actions. There is a rare Beauty in all
Providence as God orders them, Eccles. 3. 11. do you but hang them in a good
light, and wipe your eyes from all infectious tinctures of prepossession, and
they will appear no less amiable to you, than they are in themselves.

3. Desire moderately, For what we have an immoderate appetite unto, as the
Israelites to flesh, Number. 11. 13. and an inordinate longing for, as Rachel for
Children, Genesis 30. 1. we are apt to over-expect: what we over-expect; if we
attain it, we are prone to over-love, and if we miss of attaining it, or lose
it again when attained, to overgrieve. And then do our discontents advance
themselves upon our disappointments, and an hundred to one, if (while in our
unbounded passions, we fling about us like enraged beasts) we dash not some
dirt in the face of God the Author, as well as on the persons and things which
he makes use of as the Instruments of our Defeats. No man knows what a black
train of daring impieties may be at the heels of any inordinate desire; even
such, as if he were told of before, that is most favorable to himself, when
transported to them, he would bless himself from the very thought of them.

4. Maintain a noble and heroical Faith in God, both concerning the affairs of
this life, so far as they fall under Divine Promises, and those of the Life to
come. And because the security you have for both is not alike, you must
principally fix your confidence in that which relates to your Souls and their
concernments; and then having raised a well grounded assurance concerning them,
you will the more easily quench those sparks of unbelief which are apt to
disquiet you in reference to affairs of an inferior nature. For he that can
deposite his soul with God, being assured (with the blessed Apostle, 2 Timothy 1.
12.) that he will (...), keep that important pledge faithfully; will easily
trust and acquiesce in him for all other things. For will any man distrust him
for Counters, whom he intrusts with Gold and Pearls? And hence it will follow,
that the more nobly and generously your Faith in all things rests in God, the
more full and clear will your satisfactions be concerning him in all his
dealings; so that you will not be easily shaken in your expectations from him,
or debauched into misconstructions of him; yea, love, joy, and delight in him,
will act as high as our Faith, even in defiance of all appearing contradictions
and impossibilities. So was it with the Church, Hab. 3. 17, 18. Although the
Fig Tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vine, the labor of
the Olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, the flock shall be
cut off from the fold, and there shall be no heard in the stalls: yet will I
rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of my salvation.

5. Remember what you have received from God gratefully, and compare it with
what you want, or lose; which if you do, you will find (upon account) a
thousand mercies, it may be, to one or two in considerable crosses. What the
Moralist tells us is the too common fault of Ambition, that, non respicit, it
looks with envy at those few that are before, but never looks back with
gratitude at those many that in the Princes favor come behind; thou may
observe to be the fault of thy discontent, it does not respicere, not look back
upon the many mercies bestowed, or the many other crosses escaped, but only
forward, upon that one mercy or cross, which it desires or eschews Could we
keep an exact account of the various dealings of God with us all our life long,
and confront his afflicting with his obliging providence, we should find
abundance of cause to acknowledge even the most miserable term of life, to be
fuller of mercies than miseries; as the Poet tells us, that whosoever compares the
fair and foul days of a year together, -- Inveniet plures solibus esse dies,
Ovid.
will find the fair days to exceed in number. Set the one against the other
(as Solomon says of the days of adversity and prosperity, Eccles. 7. 14.) and
thou will find nothing after him to carp or quarrel at. He that will give God
thanks for what he has taken, must (according to Jobs order) first consider
what he has given, Job. 1. 21.

6. State your own condition justly, not measuring it by Fantasy, but right
Reason. Opinion makes most men miserable, who would not be so, did they not
conceive themselves to be so. Whence Epictetus Tam miser est quisque quam
credit. Sen. Ep. 78. Ench. cap. 5.
(often before mentioned) advises us to say to all the most frightful evils,
(...), thou that appearest so scaring a thing, art not the evil indeed that
thou seemost to be; but the spectrum, the phantosm, the apparition thereof. It
is true, (which the Stoic will not allow) that sickness, poverty, disgrace,
loss of Friends, pain and death, are not, as he says, mere Phantosms of evil,
for they are really and indeed evils: but thus far his words have an undoubted
truth in them, that our opinion makes them greater evils by far than they be,
the shape in which our abused fantasy beholds them is -- Vera major Imago,
far biggar and more dismal, than that which properly belongs to them. But here
is the misery; we by our fantasies dress the evils we have to do with (like
whiflers) in the most terrible visors that may be, and then, forgetting that
they are the creatures of our own imagination, we suffer our selves to be
affrighted with them.

Yea, commonly, we commit a grosser absurdity than this is, whiles we suffer
our selves to be abused into sad disorders and distempers of spirit, by the
mere opinions of others. How easy a thing it is to Nemo aliorum sensu miser
est, sed suo. Salv. de G. D. 1.
make a melancholy man sick indeed, by confidently persuading him that he is
so, experience has evidenced in diverse instances. And the like fallacy, is
ordinarily put upon us by the vulgar opinion of those things which befall us,
which makes us think worse of what we undergo, than our own reason (yea or
sense) otherwise, would pronounce. Now, in all such cases, we must strip all
those affrighting evils which so disturb us, of whatever, opinion (our own or
others) has clothed them withal; and after so doing, judge of them by the
dictates of sound Reason informed from the Scripture. And then, that providence
of God toward us which in a disguise looked like a Devil, when stripped of it,
will appear a good Angel; and instead of running from its gripes, we shall run
into its embraces.

7. Mind your work that God has laid out for you to do, seriously and
industriously. For, what one says of Love, is true of discontent and
dissatisfaction in Gods procecedings; it is otiosorum negotium, the (...),
Diog. apud Laert. L. 6.
business of unbusied souls, who have the more leisure to mind their wants and
losses, because they make holy day from their work. Whereas he that minds his
great business of Eternity seriously, will rub through with mean accommodations
here, and be so sollicitous to prevent the loss of his own Soul, that no other
loss will much affect him.

8. Hold the scales even, in these 4 Comparisons.

1. Betwixt God and your selves, I mean not only in his infinite wisdom laid
against your folly, his infinite justice against your fond and unjust
partiality, his infinite goodness against your badness, his infinite greatness
against your meanness: but also in the collation of his dealings with your own
deservings. A judgment duly poised, will always find sin outweigh suffering:
and instead of upbraiding God with its merits, find cause in abundance to
deprecate its demerits. He that imputes sin to himself will not dare, whatever
he suffer, to impute the least hard or Patienter obimus quod nobis impatamus.
De Pat.
injurious dealing to God: but will patiently bear what he can find none so
justly to blame for as himself, as says Tertullian. Considering that whatever
a sinner suffers, that Facile est qutcquid in praesenti saeculo neccat; issud
grave quod in aternitate jugulabit. L. 2. Salvad Ecl. La.
is less than Hell, is so much less than he deserves: so easy a burden is
that which hurts us only in this world, in comparison with that which will damn
us to Eternity, that is, suffering than sin! There is not a more quieting
consideration in the world, than this duly applied; that, (as one well says)
whatever, Nontam miseri quam mali G. D. L 1.
and how great soever our miseries are, our sins are greater.

2. Betwixt your selves and others, whether compared as men, or as Christians.
He that compares himself as a man with other men, will find this allay to his
sufferings, that he suffered nothing but in company, nothing, but what is
(...), Far quam sortem patiuntur omnes, Nemo recusat. Sen. in Troad. Queri,
quod spargaris in publico ridiculum. Sen. Ep. 107.
common to humanity, 10. 13. And an Heathen will tell him then, that no man's
shoulders are too good to be laid under a common burden. And another will
acquaint him, that it is ridiculous for any one to complain that he is dashed
with dirt in a public Road, where all Travelers must look to fare alike.

But if we compare our selves with others, as Christians (except pride and
self-conceitedness do miserably delude us) it will be a great abatement to our
vexation, that we shall find abundance of better men than our selves faring
worse, and the greatest Saints oftentimes the greatest sufferers.

3. Betwixt the happiness which you enjoy in God, and that which in other
things you are either denied or deprived of. When Hannah complains to Elkanah
her Husband of her barrenness, he thinks it a sufficient consideration to
qualify her discontent, that she enjoyed in him a mercy better than ten sons, 1 Samuel 1. 8. And may not thy God with much more reason stop thy quarrelling
mouth, when thou complainest of thy losses in Creature Comforts, with a
question of a like nature, Am not I better to thee than ten, yea, than ten
thousand such children, Wives, Friends, Estates? He that, notwithstanding all
his losses, has a God still, may assure himself that (to allude to the Poets
consolation of his cheated -- Nec, tam tenuis census tibi contigat, ut
mediocris Jactur ae te mergat onus. -- Juv. sat. 13. (...)
friend) he is too rich to be undone, though the whole Creation fail him at
once. He that can say with David, thou art my portion, O Lord, Ps. 119. 57.
will have cause to say with Jacob too. I have enough, yea, I have all, Genesis 33.
11. and (by consequence) will not think it reasonable to be over-troubled at
what his God takes from him, be it what it will, whiles, Non est ablatus qui
dedit, quamuis ablatum faerit quod dedit. In Ps. 32.
though (as Saint Austin says) he has taken away his gifts, he has not taken
away the Giver. Upon which consideration, the Psalmist plucks up his spirits,
and recovers himself out of a deep and dangerous discontent, Ps. 73. 25. etc.
and comforted himself in a woeful extremity, 1. Sam. 30. 6. In a word, the least
advantage that can be made of this meditation, cannot be less than the
suppressing unruly passion for a while, upon this consideration, that to give
it the bridle upon any other loss is the ready way to endanger the loss of him
(as to the sense of his favor) who is infinitely better than all things else.

4. And lastly, betwixt that which you hope to enjoy hereafter, and the utwost
of what you can endure here. And in this comparison, the Apostle holding the
balance of the Sanctuary, has alteady turned the scale to your hands in that
notable Text, Romans 8. 18. I reckon (says he) that the sufferings of this life
(indefinitely) are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be
revealed. And again, 2 Cor. 4. 17. (...).
Our light affliction, which is but for a moment, works for us an
hyperhyperbolical and eternal weight of glory. Where he lays a feather in one
scale, and a mountain in the other, yea, -- Pelion Ossae, heaps Mountain upon
Mountain, hyperbole upon hyperbole, to set out the vast disproportion betwixt
our greatest possible afflictions, and our far greater certain expectations.

In a word (to shut up this Point) consider, that he that is the (...), who
appoints the work, and gives the rewards of Patience; that great God, (who (as
Tertullian De Patientia.
says) is idoneus Patientiae sequester, the fittest Trustee in the world with
whom to deposit the Prizes which that noble Grace runs for) sees and observes,
how you run this Race that is now set before you, Heb. 12. 1. and will, if you
acquit your selves gallantly, honor you here, as well as crown you hereafter;
as appears from the second general Part of my Text which comes now to challenge
a brief dispatch, viz.

II. The Form, which consists in The second general Part of the Text.
the historical narration, upon sacred Record, of what these Brethren said and
did, under so great a Trial. Whence we learn two things by way of Corollary.

1. That we had need to take heed Corollary 1.
that in our Afflictions we do not, under the observation of Gods critical eye
(who gave order to his Penman Saint Luke to record this passage, and thereby
records himself an exact observer how his Saints bear Crosses) mis-behave our
selves any way; whether in heart, by pride, discontent, displeasure, and secret
murmurings against him or his proceedings; or in language, whiles such
expressions slip through the (...) (as Homer calls it) that fence of teeth,
within which our Tongue is by nature entrenched, as travel without the Pass of
Reason, and Religion; such as bewray our own irregular Passions, or provoke
other men's; or in carriage and demeanor, behaving our selves like a wild Bull
in a Net, Is. 51. 20. or as the troubled Sea that casts up mire and dirt, Is.
57. 20. or rather like the raging Daemoniack, Mar. 9. 18. but in a calm,
sedate, and submissive manner govern our thoughts, words, and actions, as those
who in Christian patience possess our own souls, having not surrendered them to
any inordinate passion, Luke 21. 19. and are able to manage that unruly beast,
which if he can fling us, will trample us under his feet.

2. And secondly, That it cannot Corollary 2.
but be well-pleasing to God, if we also make the like observations of the
gallant speeches and actions of his heroical Saints in the like occurrences, or
otherwise. For, surely, he that not only observed himself, but also took order
to transmit to posterity what these Christians said and did in so notable an
exigence, herein gives us an example beyond exception. And it may be of
singular use to us to follow it, upon a double account.

Partly, that we may our selves be excited to an holy emulation, and striving
to imitate to them, as concluding that possible to be done again, which has
been done already, Heb. 6. 12. and 13. 7. yea and straining our utmost
abilities to exceed them; to attempt to write fairer than the fairest copy set
us by them, and (as those who run in a Race) strive most of all to conquer
those who have won former prizes.

And partly, that we may declare and publish to the glory of God and the
excitation of others, their virtues and graces, when any opportunity of doing
good thereby is offered unto us.

And thus, you see, I have improved my Text (by a just consequence) to serve me
instead of an Apology for my next and last undertaking, to wit, the presenting
you with such observables concerning the Life and Death of this precious elect
Lady, whom we are now met to Interr, as I have been able by utmost enquiry to
gather up from those who have known her down-sitting and up-rising for many
years together; and some of them curious observers of her, as a choice Piece,
from her Cradle to her Grave. And I the rather credit the particulars, partly,
because I know the Relators to be so judicious, as to be able to make their
observations with due discretion; and so conscientious withal, as not to dare
willingly to abuse me and the world with an officious falsehood; and partly,
because those things which I have learned from them, do so exactly correspond
with that Idea of her, which (from some personal knowledge) I had before
conceived in my own breast.

I know, (as Saint Austin in another case says) that this precious Saint now
in bliss, lauds nec quaerit nec curat humanas, neither needs nor August. Epis.
Cornel.
regards humane praises; yea, and I knew, that her singular modesty (while she
lived) seemed to carry on a constant Plot by way of prevention, against the
service I am about to do her, in a studied concealment of her great worth. But
yet, seeing God has not suffered it altogether to escape the notice of those
that conversed with her (being not pleased, it seems, that so noble a Soul,
though desiring it never so much, should travel through the world incognito) I
account it my duty to follow his providence therein, and publish that to
others, for a more universal benefit, which he, for their particular advantage,
was pleased to make some privy unto. And especially having so clear a warrant
for what I do, from his own word, HONORANTES ME HONORABO (which, from his
mouth, this Ladies noble Ancestors have transcribed into their hereditary Coat
of Arms) those that honor me, I will honor, 1 Samuel 2. 30. Whom, therefore, he
has said he will honor, we have cause to conclude it will be acceptable to
him, if we honor them too.

And in the first place, I think it A Narratixe of diverse particulars of note
in this excellent Ladies Life and Death.
fit my Account of her should begin from the very beginning of that happy Race
which she has now finished. I know it belongs to the Herald, not the Preacher,
to search Pedigrees; and I know moreover, that it is the least of
commendations, which yet is all that some have to commend them, to be nobly
descended. I am of his mind that said, -- Genus, and proavos, and quae non
fecimus ipsi,
Vix ea nostra voco,
Ovid Met. that honor descending from Ancestors can hardly be called Ours; and
of the Moralists, who tells us, that Seneca Ep. 44.
Nemo in nostram gloriam vixit, nec quod ante nos fuit, nostrum est: that true
honor is contemporary to him that has it, not to be born in one age, and worn
in another. But yet, as a sparkling Diamond shines with more advantage, when
set in Gold; so do personal virtues receive much external additament of luster,
when the person in whom they are, is, ex meliore luto, of a more noble
extraction. And indeed men generally love to trace famous Rivers to their
Fountains, which Heathen Antiquity always honored with a kind of Divinity,
for blessing the world with so plentiful and lasting a succession of beneficial
streams.

The descent, therefore, of this precious Lady was from an eminently noble
Family, the House of Huntingdon; the Earldom whereof has continued so long in
the name of HASTINGS, that by mere Age it has worn out most of those that
preceded in the Catalogue of English Earls; and now, in the Person of her
hopeful Brother, sets its foot upon the seventh Round from the very Top of
that scale of Honor. And yet this humble Lady, whiles she lived, made so
little reckoning thereof, that she was never known either in word or carriage
to show any elation of spirit upon that account, which would have tempted many
others, to diverse disdainful and insolent extravagancies. Nor was she ever
observed discontentedly to behold her self exceeded by the affected pomps of
Equipage and Retinue of diverse inferior to her in Quality; as desiring not to
contend with any in so extravagant a vanity, as that, which besides its
offensiveness to others, would be needlessly burdensome to her Husband. Yea,
when her Husband sometimes modestly excused the tenuity of the condition she
had espoused (by marrying where she found an Heir in being to a great part of
the Estate) in comparison of what she descended from; she would interrupt that
discourse with professing the high satisfaction she took to find her self in
such a state of life, wherein she had both liberty and assistance to all works
of severe Piety, and withal, the addition of an honorable and comfortable
worldly competency. The consideration whereof has prevailed with me to pass
over this head with so slight a touch. And yet I could not but touch it,
partly, for the lasting honor of that noble Family, to which it may be some
accession, to have yielded the world so eminent an example of all manner of
virtue; and partly, that in so notable an Instance, this dreggy age of ours
(base enough indeed of it self, but withal, too much sowred into a contempt of
nobility by the scandalous debaucheries of too many nobilia portenta, (as
Valerius Maximus calls the degenerous Issue of the famous old Romans) whose
noble extractions serve for nothing else, but to make their vices more notable)
may be convinced, that, at least, some noble ones are called, 1 Cor. 1. 26. and
that virtue and grace may be grafted on a stock of Honor; the same person
being (as St. Austin said of Demetrias) both nobilis genere, Epist. ad Prob.
and Julian.
and nobilior sanctitate, ennobled by the first birth, but more by the second;
having both that nobility that is (...), and that which is (...), that blood in
the veins which is extracted from many noble and Princely Families, and that
grace in the heart, which is no less than semen Dei, the seed of God received
from the regeneration of the Holy Ghost.

Her Education, (under which I comprise the greatest part of her time, for she
was not much above a year a Wife) was in a School, or rather Academy of
Learning, and Nursery of Virtue; I mean, the constant inspection and converse
of her watchful Mother, the now Countess of Huntingdon, from whose great Parts
and Graces, she received in her soul that vis plastica which formed her into so
eminent, a both Woman and Christian. Under ber, she enjoyed an education (for
the most part) in a religious retiredness, which she has often blessed God
for, as that which not only secured her from the knowledge of any vice by
domestical example (no such -- Citius nos corrumpunt vitiorum exempla
domesticae. Juv. Sat.
thing daring to show it self under that noble Ladies Government) but also
removed her from the very news of what evils were acted abroad; so that she had
the happiness, Neque Pelopidarum facta, neque nomen audire, to be ignorant of
the viciousness of other great personages, even by hearsay.

And as for those Principles that might qualify her for a virtuous life; as she
had the opportunity of learning them from the practices of those she conversed
withal, so also (and chiefly thence) from the grave instructions of her said
Lady-Mother; who, that the whole compass of her duty might be the more firmly
impressed into memory, took the pains to digest all the parts of it into Verse,
whereby she both consecrated an excellent vein of Poetry of her own, and in the
most facile manner insinuated them into the hearts and heads of both her, and
her Lady-Sisters.

Whence it is the less to be wondered at, that she found her comfort in all of
them to grow with their years; but especially in this Lady, who had a Soul so
pliable and ductile to receive the impressions of so excellent a stamp, as
appeared by the proportionable improvements which she attained in every stage
of her Life, as we come now to relate.

And first, For her Childhood, (though I know Tully is reported to have said,
that it is the most difficult Est res diffieilis laudare puerum, etc. In fragm.
undertaking in all Oratory to commend a child, because the most that can be
said in such a case, is rather, spes than res, matter of future expectation,
than present existence; yet) I shall tell you those realities even of that
tender Age, as had something of rare excellency in them, besides the presage of
what they promised for the future. It is noted as a rare thing in young
Timothy, by Saint Paul himself, that (...) from a very suckling, he had known
the holy Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3. 15. and from that precocious piety it is no
wonder if we hear of certain (...) prophetical predections that ushered him
into the worlds observation as he grew up, 1 Timothy 1. 18. ghesses (it is likely)
what so pregnant a Child would grow to in time. Nor was it less noted in this
excellent Lady, how early the seeds of true piety and devotion put forth, not
only into blade, but blossom also and fruit: insomuch, that (...) too, such
impressions of the fear of God possessed her heart, as made her a diligent
performer of Religious Duties, and a strict observer of the Lords Day, to a
degree of exactness beyond most persons, and yet not beyond the Rule; Is. 58.
13. insomuch that she would neither discourse, nor willingly hear others
discoursing of any common or ordinary matters on that day. And as she grew into
more capacity, so to this negative strictness, she added a positive conformity
to the rules of severest godliness in this particular; not only hearing the
word preached, but digesting it by meditation and conference into her daily
conversation; being no less studious, on that day especially, to learn the
mysteries of practical godliness, than in those of the rest of the week, to
furnish her self with what other knowledge tended to a civil accomplishment.

She was also from her Infancy very conscientiously dutiful and obedient to her
Parents, even to the very smallest punctilios wherein she had the least
intimation of their pleasure. Insomuch that her Lady-Mother upon a special
occasion, perceiving her, from the mis-apprehension of an advice she gave her,
more affected than she desired; was fain to expound her self to her, and give
her a Key wherewith to uncypher her bosom for the future, by telling her, that
sundry things which she had spoken to her, were never intended as peremptory
commands, but only as advices and counsels, which, in things of indifferency
must not be over-strained, which considered, gains a sufficient credit to that
which I have been credibly informed, that her Lady-Mother has been heard to
say, that she was the child that never offended her in her life.

As she grew up, she was observed to be of a precise justice, and exactness to
her word; which that she might the better be, (seeing it is seldom known that
they that observe not what they speak, are very observant of what they speak)
she was very circumspect in, and very sparing and thrifty of discourse; a
quality, that undoubtedly kept her from much sin (which the wise man tells us
wants not in multitude of words, Prove. 10. 19.) and contributed much to her
perfection, which the Apostle James tells us, does much consist in the
Government of that unruly member, the tongue, Jam. 3. 2. I have read in Saint
Austin, of a passage quoted from Tully, wherein he commends Nullum unquam
verbum, quod revocare vellet, emisit. Aug. Ep. 7. Marc.
one that he knew, for never having spoken any thing which he wished unspoken,
upon which the Father descants thus. It may, says he, be understood in a more
or less favorable sense: for (as he goes on) a fool may be capable of this
commendation, who, though he speaks many things fit to be recalled, yet
understands not so well what he says, as to recall any thing: but (says he) if
it be taken in the most favorable sense, concerning one that, knowing what he
says, says nothing that he wishes unsaid afterward, it agrees to none so
well as to those who spoke by divine Inspiration. For my part (he proceeds)
this is far from being my commendation. For, angit me plane Horatiana sententia
nescit vox missa reverti: it is my trouble, that wishing will not render many
of my words unuttered. I am sure most of us have cause to partake with that
good Father in his Confession. But as for this exact Lady, she took the
readiest course to arrive at Tullies character in the best sense, by doing what
Seneca advises, Minimum cum aliis loqui, multum cum seipso. Epist. 105.
speaking much with her self, but little with others. Insomuch that a noble
person of a very discerning Judgment, and no less severe a Piety, who had the
advantage of being a witness to almost all her Life, has been heard to say,
that she believed such a person (naming her) had the least account to give for
words of any one that she knew. And yet did she not bind her tongue thus to the
behavior for want of abilities to discourse, or matter to discourse of. For
she was of great intellectual accomplishments, and those improved by much
secular learning, as sufficed to enable her to converse that way with persons
of eminent scholarship.

A greeably to this Government of her tongue, she was exceedingly modest, and
becomingly grave in her whole behavior; not from any natural heaviness of
constitution, or affectation of morose and reserved virtue; but from a just
apprehension how unagreeable to an exact strictness of Life (which she
designed) and how unconducing to the reputation of her Sex a too sanguine
conversation is often found. And that she was not cynically averse to a decent
and convenient degree of affability and courtesy (a virtue which was also very
conspicuous in her) it appeared, in that she was wont to receive the visits of
the meanest of her Neighbors with wonderful kindness, and converse with them
with a great deal of becoming condescension: to which, as any of them appeared
to her to savor more of godliness than others, she could (upon occasion) add a
fit proportion of familiarity. For very careful she was to admit none into her
bosom, but such as by critical observation she found to answer that character
of worth by which she first valued her self, and then chose her intimates, not
Greatness but Goodness.

Her Courtesy, as I have intimated, she extended to all sorts of persons; even
to those whom we commonly brow-beat, and look down upon with a supercilious
loftiness of countenance (those, I mean, whose necessities made them
petitioners to her bounty) for even those she treated with great affability. So
that what was said once of Titus the Roman Emperor, was true Sucton. in Tito.
of her, Neminem a se tristem dimisit, that no person departed out of her
presence discontented. Yea, even those whom she denied her Alms (and some
persons in want are not meet objects for a discreet charity) she would so
handsomely reprove for not using their abilities of body to get more creditable
Bread, that they seemed no less satisfied in her Counsel, than they would have
been whith her Alms.

Her inviting countenance did so embolden the Poor to implore her Patronage,
her compassionate heart rendered her so sensible of their conditions, and her
prudence so enabled her to manage their Causes, that as she was most frequently
employed in many of their important addresses to several of her Relations upon
whom they depended; so she followed their suits in such a manner, that most
an-end she proved successful, as meeting with such a blessing of God upon her
charitable endeavors, as the justice of the causes in which she engaged might
warrant her to expect.

Yea, her very Servants had a share in the obligingness of her conversation.
For though she well understood her own Quality, and could keep them at
convenient distance, yet she attempered her carriage, even to them, with so
much mildness, that she was never observed to drop an hasty or passionate
expression to any of them, though much provoked thereunto.

Of so innocent a deportment she was (even from a child) that one of capacity
enough to observe, and integrity enough to vindicate the relation from the
least suspicion of flattery, gives her this character that during ten years
abode in her Mothers Family, she could never observe any intemperate word or
action; or any thing, which if all the world had been acquainted with, would
have in the least tended to her just diminution or disparagement.

She much studied the gratifying the Tempers, and contenting the dispositions
and propensions of those she conversed with, in all lawful ways: insomuch,
that she has been often observed to deny her self for the pleasing of others,
according to that Apostolical Rule, Romans 15. 2. And this disposition rendered
her, even in matters of Argument, which (as I told you before) she wanted not
ability to manage, not obstinately tenacious of her own opinion, but obligingly
compliant to the Judgment of others, where the conscience of duty required not
the contrary; that thereby she might render her self, offensive to none, but as
far as might be, profitable to all. A quality thus, the more observable,
because not ordinary in others, who being owners of great parts, commonly
affect a dictatorship in discourse. So true is it, that

Qui volet Ingenio cedere, rarus erit! These qualities rendered her of an
excellent composure for a friend. And accordingly, an excellent friend she was.
She did not (as was before noted) rashly admit any to the honor of her bosom
acquaintance; but when once she had lodged any persons there, she was heartily
free and open in communicating what her Judgment (which was always riper than
her years) suggested to be most for the advantage of their particular
soul-concerns, advice, comfort, or reproof. For which last, she always
reserved a liberty even toward her choicest and most intimate friends; (and
most indeed toward them) but managed it, constantly, with abundance of winning
meekness and tenderness. And so severely conscientious was she in the discharge
of this friendly office, (for such indeed it is, whatever men ordinarily think
of it, and the neglect of it, where it needs, an act of hatred, Levit. 19. 17.)
that having frequent occasions to receive visits from, and return them to
persons of her acquaintance, that made the reverend names of [Jesus! and Lord!]
interjections in their ordinary discourse (a thing which to me seems too near
of kin to that taking the name of God in vain, which the very letter of the
third Commandment forbids) that she made it a Case of Conscience, whether she
did not highly neglect her duty in not reproving them.

And that she might not appear more rigidly to others in this kind, than she
was to her self, her own life was a comment upon the Apostles (...), Ephesians. 5.
15. so exactly she walked, that she took care to avoid not only what she
condemned, but what she did but suspect in others conversation. Insomuch, that
her conscience would not permit her to pardon her self, what her charity taught
her to indulge in others.

And indeed, she was always of a very nice and delicate conscience, sensible
of the smallest and lightest sin, or but probable appearance of it. The skin of
that Sybarite whom Seneca mentions, De Ira lib. 2.
who complained he was sorely hurt with lying upon doubled rose leaves, was not
more tender than her conscience was. Of which (though out of place) take these
two Instances of many that might be given, that she was known once in her
younger years to address her self to her Governess with tears, entreating her
pardon for that in her very childhood she was conscious she had been defective
in affection to her, for she thought, that then she did not love her. A fault
(I doubt) which others that are far more guilty of it, are less troubled for.
Another time in her maturer Age, when she had mildly enough threatened a child
over whom she had some inspection committed to her, that if she did not such a
thing she would not love her; she presently recalled that as an hard word,
saying, Alas! God deals not so with us, notwithstanding our continual
disobediences.

But, to return (whence we digressed) to her character as an accomplished
Friend. One eminent property of true friendship was very conspicuous in her;
(and the more, considering what is commonly imputed to her Sex) that she was
most careful to lock up her friends secrets in her own breast, and to conceal
their insirmities. Those whom upon a Christian account she made her friends,
she loved very affectionately, or (in the Apostles phrase rather) with a pure
heart, and (...), with the utmost stress of zealous fervency; nor could she
endure to be accounted tepid and indifferent in her love toward them.

And yet in all this ardency of true affection she still observed her constant
wont of being sparing in verbal expressions of the esteem and value she had for
her friends; and that, out of scruple, lest she should incur the danger of
flattering them, or at least seeming to do so. Yea, she was wont (sorely
against her natural genius and disposition) sometimes to curb and restrain the
overflowing kindness of her carriage and deportment, out of a conscientious
fear, lest she should thereby gain the applause of others; being more afraid to
be too well spoken of, than most persons are of deserving to hear ill.

As a friend, she observed, that exchange of kindness is the fuel that feeds
the flame of mutual affection, and keeps it from burning dimly or going out,
and therefore was a great nourisher of gratitude; accounting it the greatest
solcism in friendship, to be suspicious in receiving, or parsimonious in
returning kindness. And therefore what of this nature she received, she would
not (though sometimes possibly there were probable ground so to do) interpret
amiss, as professing she abhorred the suspicion of a design in kindness, as the
bane of gratitude. And in her returns, she was always nobly obliging, as
studying rather to stand in her friends Books a Creditor than a Debtor.

I mentioned her Devotion before, as an early blossom. But I must tell you now,
that it had not the usual fate of such precocious blossoms, to be blasted and
drop off before it arrived at maturity. For as she grew in years, she grew also
in acquaintance and communion with God, and kept a constant correspondence, and
intelligence with the Court of Heaven. Which Heavenly Trade she followed so
close, that her Lady-Mother, whiles she was under her Government, observing how
she labored at it more than her constitution of body would well bear; and
being afraid, lest by overstraining the bow to reach the mark she aimed at, she
would endanger the breaking it; once in a friendly manner told her, that if she
intended to hold on that course, she was not fit to live in this world. To
which the humble Lady (reflecting probably upon her self that Term of unfitness
to live, in another notion than it was meant) answered with much meekness, No,
indeed, Madam, I confess, I am not.

After she was married, she abated not of her Devotion; and thereby rendered her
self a singular instance of exception, to the difference the Apostle puts
between a Wife and a Virgin, (and which Romanists make so much use of to
advance a vowed Virginity, an invention of theirs, above marriage, an
institution of God) 1 Cor. 7. 34. you may the better judge of her Devotions by
the proportion of time which she assigned them every day. I am credibly
informed that her constant retirements to that purpose were proportionably to
Daniels, thrice a day, Dan. 6. 10. And, since the decease of her precious
Sister-in-Law (whose Dr. Langham's Wife.
great worth deserves a far more honorable remembrance, than upon this
occasional mention can be allowed) dying some weeks before her; (as if she had
taken the Allarm to prepare for her own dissolution shortly to follow from that
providence) she more than doubled that proportion even to David's seven times a
day, Ps. 119. 164.

In mentioning her Devotions. I mean not only secret prayer and meditation, but
also constant reading and study of the Scriptures, which was always a
considerable part of the employment that filled up her daily hours of
retirement; together with something or other of the writings of some learned
practical Divines, with which her Closet was well furnished. I might reckon
also as a part of her daily task, the reading over one Sermon a day, most
days, out of her notebooks, (for she constantly penned the Sermons she heard)
and I could wish that other great Sermon writers, would herein follow her
example, and not turn their notes to wast-paper so soon as they filled their
books, as it is to be feared too many do. By which practice of hers, (learned
from the mention of the like in the Life of the Young Lord Harrington) by
frequent inculcation, she fixed in her memory all that she had heard, and had
it in a readiness for the direction of her conversation, when ever she had need
to make use of it.

And now, it is possible that some persons that knew her not, upon the mention
of so great a daily task of Closet Religion (comparing her with other Ladies of
that Quality) may be sollicitous to know, what time she could allow for the
trimming and adorning her Body; or, it may be, may suspect her to have been
some strange deformed Piece, who being fallen out with her Glass, for telling
too much truth, had neglected all care of auxiliary handsomness as mere lost
labor; and addicted her self to the beautifying of her Soul, out of despair of
ever rendering her body tolerably handsome or beautiful. To satisfy therefore
all those who, may be concerned in this matter, I must tell them, that, as her
Person was such, as to a middle and decent Pitch, and just proportion of all
Parts, wanted not a Face, whose amiable lineaments might by the ordinary
Artifices of that kind, have been advanced to the Reputation of a Beauty, had
she thought fit to have made use of them: So she neglected not to bestow upon
it so much time and pains, after the necessary occasions of her Soul, first
attended, as decency required, though possibly not so much as Curiosity (had
she studied it) would have called for. And so much shall suffice for this
digression.

To this proportion of constant Devotion which she cut her self out for every
day, if you add her great care to fill up all the rest of her time, with
profitable converse, you cannot but look upon her as a great Instance of that
command, Ephesians. 5. 16. So did she (...), buy Time out (as the word signifies) of
the hands of those wasters of precious minutes, which are apt, where they are
not observed, to forestall the Market, and buy it up all even from the most
religious employments; I mean, Pastimes, and Recreations. Whence it was, that
(though she did not rigidly censure the liberty taken by others in that kind as
absolutely, and in its own nature unlawful; yet) she never allowed her self to
see any Masque, Interlude, or Play, or to play at Cards or the like Games;
merely, because she doubted whether the expense of so much time, as commonly
such diversions require, would be allowed upon her account, or no. Much,
herein, of a different temper from those great Persons, whose Time so lies on
their hands, as a dead Commodity, that they study all ways possible to put it
off, because they know not what profitableuse to put it unto. A prodigallity,
which how much cause they have to repent of, they may possibly understand, when
upon their deathbeds they find the want of those precious minutes for more
serious uses, which they have so lavishly thrown away. In the mean time, to the
Apostolical command (but now mentioned) I would entreat them to add in their
serious meditations, the commendable resolve of that Heathen, who purposed Nemo
ullum aufer at Diem, nihil dignam tanto impendio redditurus, Sen. de Tranq.
to allow a whole day to no converse, that would not make him amends for the
precious Time expended in it.

But, to return again to our excellent Personage, whom we left pursuing her
daily design of acquainting her self with God in her set hours of devotion,
accounting it (as she said) a singular mercy that the great God of Heaven and
earth would vouchsafe his Creatures such plentiful discoveries of himself, both
in the books of Nature and Providence; and beyond both those in his written
Word. And therefore she prized them all, but especially the last, with an
infinite affection; insomuch that she often rose early in the morning to read
and meditate thereon: nor would she, when she was engaged in that holy work,
suffer any interruptions how necessary soever, without evident signs of trouble
and discomposure, till she returned to her beloved Bible again. Yea, toward
the Book it self, for love of the excellent matter contained in it, she
expressed such a respect, that she resented with a pious displeasure, any
undecent usage of it, or careless throwing it among ordinary Books.

Now, though she had a singular value for every part of the holy Bible, yet
there was one part of it, the Book of Psalms, which she seemed to be most
passionately in love withal; Perhaps, because (similitude being the ground of
Love, according to the great Philosopher) she found so much agreement Arist:
Eth: 8:
betwixt her own heart, and the spirit of that Book. This affection she showed
by reading, or causing to be read, one or more of them constantly at her hour
of repose in the evening, which by meditation and discourse she was wont to
improve to her own benefit and theirs who were about her. And in her bed, she
was wont to lock up her lips till morning with the repetition of some one that
she had by heart, to which, having added some devout ejaculations with
wonderful fervency, she usually dropped asleep in some holy ecstasy of
Devotion. And as she shut up her lips and heart too in this manner at night, so
she constantly opened them again in the morning with the same golden Key. So
that her sleep seemed to be but a Parenthesis betwixt her evening and morning
Devotions, which discontinued indeed, but not disordered them; yea, rather
connexed and united them into one entire piece, of which (it is probable) her
very sleeping Fantasy, by holy Dreams, made a part; seeing it was next to
impossible, that even they, being hedged in between two such immediate acts of
Devotion, should not receive a proportionable tincture from them.

These her set Devotions, it is likely, she methodized most commonly according
to her own discretion; but yet, she did not so tie up her self to the order of
her own designment, as not to leave her self a liberty upon any extraordinary
occasion, to vary as that occasion required. Which appears, in that upon the
solemn great Festivals, at least, observed in this Church, she would
accommodate them to those seasons respectively. A course, which I am a little
jealous, may, from some persons perhaps, undergo a censure, as if it savoured
somewhat of superstition. But, as she feared not that censure in the practice,
as finding that benefit thereby, which abundantly weighed down that scar-crow
in her own consideration: so do not I fear it in the relation, as being
persuaded that it may be of use to some one or other, who may be thereby
induced to take up the same course with the same advantage.

For, whereas those grand Articles of Religion, the Incarnation, Death,
Resurrection and Ascension of our Savior, have (each of them) a signal use and
influence toward the improvement both of Faith, and Holiness if particularly
studied and applied, yea, and the recurring of those Festivals, wherein they
are by public order commemorated, affords a special opportunity thereunto, by
giving us a particular remembrance of them; it stands with Reason, that the
taking hold of such opportunities when offered, and accommodating our private
readings, meditations and prayers to them, should yield us the particular
advantage before mentioned; which possibly, in a like measure at least, we
might not reap otherwise. For experience shows, that those signal mercies
seldom come under our particular observation, for respective improvement,
except upon those seasons for diverse years together. And for this reason, I
suppose, or the like (of no affinity to superstition at all, which our Lady was
too knowing a Christian to be endangered unto in such a matter) she took up,
and continued this Practice.

In her course of Life, she was precisely careful to avoid all manner of sin;
and sollicitous in all emergencies of consequence to understand her duty, that
she might practice accordingly. As she made Gods Testimonies her delight, so
she made them her Counselors also, Ps. 119. 24. Insomuch, that she never
determined any dubious occurrence without great deliberation, and the best
advice she could procure. But especially, when she was a Wife, she made
frequent use of the counsel given by the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 14. 35. when she
desired to learn any thing, to ask her Husband. And herein was she singularly
happy, in being directed by Providence to such an Husband as abundantly
answered that character of another Apostle, dwelling (and conversing with her)
as a man of knowledge, 1 Pet. 3. 7. One, who as he was able (richly able) to
maintain, so was he no less propense to entertain such a converse, especially
with so near a friend as the Wife of his bosom, upon any occasion. So that
herein (besides the advantages hereby reaped to her self) she highly gratified
him, by affording him the opportunities of an employment so acceptable to his
own Genius and disposition; and withal practiced the advice given her upon her
Marriage by her prudent Lady-Mother to make her self fit conversation (so she
expressed it) for her Husband. A notable Instance whereof may be; that if, at
any time, in her solitary discourses with him of this nature (with which kind
of converse she was much delighted) there had happened a cessation on both
hands for a little while, she would presently be apprehensive of the loss, and
desire him not to let her time pass unimproved, but either to renew the
conference, or read some good Book to her.

And yet, (so greedy she was of improving her self by all good means) she did
not make this advantage of him alone; but constantly attended the public
Ordinances, from a due respect unto which she was too weighty a Christian to be
blown away by the pitiful prejudices of these times; as too many are, to the
unsufferable affronting of Gods goodness, who vouchsafes them to us, and (it is
to be feared) too often, to the forsaking their own mercy, the particular
benefit they might reap from them. And that she might make the utmost
improvement of Gods Ministers, whose lips God has appointed to keep knowledge,
she would according to his command (in private conference, as well as public
Ordinances when occasion was offered) seek it at their mouths, Mal. 2. 7. An
Instance whereof of special remark, may be, that, when She met with any Divines
of note at her Father-in-Law's Sir JOHN LANGHAMS Table, with whom after her
marriage till her death She resided (and that plentiful Table was seldom
without some such guests of special eminency) She would request her Husband to
offer such discourse, as might give the company the benefit of their presence
and converse; professing that she judged it altogether absurd and incongruous
to Reason, as well as Religion, that Physicians and Lawyers should be so
ordinarily entertained with discourses proper to their respective Faculties;
and Divines only treated without the verge of their Profession, with matters
altogether heterogeneous and eccentrical to the sphere of their holy Function.

Such, as you have heard, was her devotion toward God. And She had as well
learned her duty to her Neighbor, which She evidenced in every Relation and
Capacity.

When by her Marriage She was to be transplanted into her Husbands Family, her
Lady-Mother failed not to give her those Instructions, which as Maxims of duty
She constantly practiced in a just proportion to all her Relations. And
accordingly,

The first place in her Affection, She bestowed upon her Husband, whom She so
loved, that She professed she could even die for him. This her Love She showed
in an eminent degree of dutiful compliance with whatever she observed to be
agreeable to him. For she never received the least intimation of his pleasure,
though delivered in a way of request, but it had with her the force of a
Command; with which (waving her own opinion, in case of difference from his)
she always respectfully comported. Insomuch, that no Instances of conjugal
happiness in others, ever minded him of any deficiency in his own; but rather
produced a greater complacency in his so great felicity, whiles he found
himself happy in his own choice, beyond the most eminent examples.

And, as her Love and dutiful Carriage, so also her Learning rendered her an
Help meet for him, as being thereby made capable of conversing with him, both
in points of Divinity and Humanity, very knowingly and judiciously, and that in
more Languages than one; being able to make use of Learned Authors in other
Tongues, without the help of a Translation. As for Latin, that learnedest
piece of Peter Martyr, (his Common-places) she frequently had recourse unto.
For French she was intimately acquainted with the works of (that Prodigy of
Learning and Language) M. du-Moulin, out of whose Buckler of Faith. she was
both enabled to defend her own Protestant Faith and (as she had occasion to
converse with any Ladies of the Romish communion) to assault and overthrow
theirs. And, for Italian she could make as good an advantage of what Learning
that Language affords.

And yet (which in an accomplishment wherein she so much exceeded the rest of
her Sex, in so much the more remarkable) was she not hereby elevated. That
(...), or swelling conceitedness, (which the Apostle tells us too often
fly-blows eminent Gifts, 1 Cor. 8. 1. and is the very bane of these times) she
was not tainted withal, so that her Husband was perfectly unacquainted with all
those inconveniences which some have fancied do necessarily accompany a learned
Wife. For to him, even herein, She always would strike sail, as to her Lord
and Head; making use of her own knowledge only to capacitate her to make the
best improvement of his; of whom She would (as one that with her other
learning, had learned her Duty from the Apostle) (...), receive instruction in
all submissive silence, or quietness.

To her Lady-Mother, She did not forget her Duty in the least, no not when her
married estate had manumitted her from her Government; but, allowing her still
the next place in her affection, and respects to her Husband, so demeaned her
self toward her, that She esteemed her not only a very dutiful and deserving
Daughter, but (as her own Phrase was) an excellent Friend also. To her
Fatherin-Law, she paid the same Duty (according to the particular directions,
which she received from her at her marriage) which she performed to her
Lady-Mother; as considering, that where the Ordinance of God makes two persons
one flesh, it makes a proportionable union to their respective natural
Relations too; they being but Reliquiae carnis nostrae, the remainders of every
ones own flesh in other bodies: as both Arias Montanus, and our own Margin from
(...)
him, render, those words by which nearness of kin is expressed, Levit. 18. 5.

To the memory of her predecessor in that Relation she bore to Sir James
Langham, she testified (contrary to what is usual in such cases) a very signal
respect, enquiring with some earnestness after her special virtues, which she
designed for her own Imitation, and giving the good she heard of her, a just
commendation.

To the children that Sir James had by that Lady (providence denying him any by
this, evcept one in expectation, to whom the death of the mother rendered the
womb a grave) she was in care and tenderness so much more than a Motherin-Law,
that it was impossible for any, but those that knew otherwise, not to have
mistaken her for their natural Parent; and if, with them, she had had any of
her own body, I believe she could hardly have told how to have rendered her love
to her natural issue (in any considerable indication) more Emphatical. So
sollicitously did She interest her self both in education of, and provision for
them; and so concern her self in their behalf, in all occasions of never so
little bodily distemper; that She deserved thereby to have rendered, even
Noverca, a name of honor, by being such a Mother-in-Law, from whom even
natural Mothers themselves, might not disdain to receive a Law of kindness
toward the children of their own bodies.

From her Daughter of about 11 years of Age, She exacted constantly a
repetition (by heart) of the Sermons she heard; for which Task She had by her
Instructions so logically methodized theme mory of that so young a child, that
She was able to Analize a discourse of 30 or 40 particular heads memoriter,
with the most remarkable enlargments upon them.

This care of her children She not only continued during her health, but even
in her sickness also She influenced that that others took of them, so far as
her weakness would permit. And to to show that She minded them as long as She
minded any thing in this world, even upon her dying bed She requested her
Husband (though he needed not any such spur to quicken him in his Duty) to
breed them up in the exercises of severe Godliness, and to see them taught such
Evidences of salvation, as might be supports to them one day in their dying
Agonies.

To her Servants, She demeaned her self so mildly (as I before told you) as if
they had not been so properly Servants, as humiles amici, (in the Moralists
phrase) a sort of inferior friends. Which carriage won her from them a great
deal of aw-ful Love, and heartservice, instead of eie-service, the common vice
of those in that Relation. She took care even of the meanest of them, not only
for their bodies, but their Souls also: calling them that were more immediately
under her inspection (her Maidens) to account (in scriptis if they could write)
for the Sermons they heard, and helping their deficiencies from her own exacter
notes. She would call upon them in the morning (as her phrase was) to go to
God, i. e. to wait upon him in their morning Devotions, before they waited on
her. And if (for She would examine them concerning it) any one of them
confessed, or by silence bewrayed a neglect therein, She would dismiss her
immediately to that work from her present attendance, not without some
reprehension withal, for giving her service the precedence of Gods. And this
care She took (as She would frequently express her self to her Husband) from a
deep conviction of this truth, that Governors of Families, are accountable to
God for the Soul of the meanest under their inspection. A course which (as far
as She could bear it, She continued even in her last sickness, for when the
importunities of her own bodily distempers kept any of them from Church to
attend her necessities at home on Gods day, She would tell them, that nothing
but an absolute necessity should have been reason sufficient for her detaining
them about her. But yet, (would She say) your minds are at liberty; let God
have as much worship as you can give him: lift up your hearts, lift up your
hearts and remember it is the Sabbath.

An example, this, very fit to be followed by others of her Sex, and Quality;
yea, it were well, if those that are much inferior to her both in Birth and
breeding, would learn so much Religion from her, as to consider that their
Servants have Souls as well as themselves; and Souls, that require some time to
trim and dress them, as well as their Ladies and mistresses bodies. And that
those persons will surely give but a poor account one day of their Servants
souls, whose tedious dressings spend the greatest part of every day, (not
excepting Gods Day it self) and will not allow their Maidens a minutes privacy,
to lift up a short prayer in secret, wherewith to sanctify the employments of
the day.

Nor did She extend this care toward her Servants, only whiles they continued
with her, but enlarged it even to those that departed from her. An Instance
whereof may be, That when a mean servant came to take leave of her, She gave
her (together with some other expressions of her charity and kindness) much
good counsel, and desired her Husband to add something to her favors too, but
above all to dismiss her with a second largess of good Advice.

To the Poor, She was hugely charitable; sometimes not staying till they
expressed their own wants, but pressing out of them those complaints, which
their modesty would have suppressed, by her own enquiries into their
conditions, that She might know wherein She might be beneficial to them. And
when She had information of any wants above an ordinary charity, She was even
sollicitous how to procure a proportionable relief for the parties concerned,
nor was She charitable to the bodies only of those whom She relieved, for She
gave to most (but to those especially, whose great exigences (in probability)
rendered them more capable and inclinable to follow it) the double Alms of her
bounty and counsel together; which last (though the other were not mean
neither) was constantly the best of the two.

A thousand Instances of her great Charity in this kind, have escaped the
observation of any, but those only that received it; (She being in acts of this
nature contented with the notice of God and Conscience) so that our Saviors
Rule in this, was hers, not to let her left hand know what her right hand did,
Mat. 6. 3. And yet, to Gods glory, and her own deserved commendation, those
good deeds of this nature, which She studiously (to avoid what She always
abhorred, the very appearance of vainglory) concealed in her life time, in a
great measure came to light after her death, as appeared in the passionate
resentments of great crowds of poor people, who (as is usual in such cases)
thronging to obtain a sight of her Hearse whiles exposed to view, declared that,
not so much their curiosity as affection drew them thither, by the bitter
lamentations and tears wherewith they bewailed her death (as the Widows did
Dorcas, Acts 9. 39.) as their common and irreparable loss.

In this her bounty, partly, out of her great fear (as I told you before) to be
too well thought of, if others knew the proportions of it; and partly, that She
might be the more assured that it was not diverted from the right channel, She
commonly trusted no hands but her own: making it her care before She went out
of doors at any time, to furnish her Poor-mans Purse, with such moneys, as were
most convenient to be distributed and divided among those necessitous people,
which providence before She returned, might cast in her way.

One special passage I must not omit, under this Head of Charity; though it
only so far concern her, as it expresses her judgment in the choice of fit
subjects to lay it forth upon. She was once told of the prodigious bounty of
some of her Ancestors toward Religious places and Persons, and particularly,
upon young students in the Universities. This last sort of charity as soon as
mentioned, She especially applauded, thus expressing her thoughts of it.
Indeed, said She, it is the best Charity to promote the good of souls, and in
that respect it is a much nobler bounty, to be the means of consecrating the
life of one, than relieving the age and infirmities of twenty.

Let me close up this Section, with the averseness she expressed to (the great
bane of Love and charity) Tale-bearing, for which she constantly had a high
degree of detestation, She always suspected a passionate Accuser, as commonly
more faulty, than the party accused; it being the usual artifice of malice, to
endeavor the concealing its own guilt, by stopping the ears of Justice with a
prejudicate opinion against those from whom it fears a recrimination. And in
all differences of this nature, which came under her cognizance, she constantly
used this healing method, first, to allay the acrimony of the contending
spirits, and then to accommodate the difference it self.

In a word, her Charity in all points answered the Character which the great
Apostle gives of that Heavenly Grace, 1 Cor. 13. which to read, is to comprise
the whole History of her Life in a nutshel, a short Abstract or Epitome. Read
it here if you please, and accommodate the several parts of it to my former
Relation. Charity, (and such was hers) suffers long and is kind, envieth not,
vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly,
seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, rejoiceth not in
iniquity, but rejoiceth in the Truth, bears all things, believes all things,
endures all things, v. 4, 5, 6, 7.

And now, to so eminent a progress in all manner of perfections, there could
hardly be made any accession in this world; so that it was high time for her to
be transplanted from hence to the society of the spirits made perfect in
another. And God (whose wont it is Heb: 12: 23:
to gather his fruit when it is fully ripe) having thus made her meet for the
inheritance of the Saints in Col: 1: 12:
light, accordingly, thought fit on March 28. 1664. to translate her thither.
Her sickness, of which she dyed, surprised her tanquam ex insidiis, being the
small Pocks disguised under the relics of a Fever (to appearance) almost
perfectly profligated. Such a surprise of death in the very borders and
confines of expected health, had been sufficient to have discomposed any soul,
and ruffled it into disorder, but such an one as hers; which kept always so
good a guard, that no event could befall her for which she was not provided.

During that twilight of hopes and fears, which sometimes held both her
Physicians and Relations, in suspense concerning her; she always seemed in her
own inclinations to propend to Saint Paul's choice, Phil. 1. 23. having a desire
to depart, and to be with Christ: begging of her dear Husband, who was (as he
had great cause) humbly importunate with God for a longer enjoyment of her;
that he would not pray for her life, but for her soul, and that God would make
her fit to die; or if he pleased to gratify the desires of those who so
affectionately wished her recovery, that he would so sanctify his hand unto
her, that she might obtain grace to pay her vows. Indeed her great aim and
design, was to 2 Cor. 7. 1.
perfect holiness in the fear of God; and her great request for her self in
midst of her feverish Paroxysms, was, that by that burning heat (as she said)
she might be purified and refined. Conformable hereunto, was that Request of
hers, taken notice of in a former sickness, which fell out a year before her
Marriage, which she expressed with a most pathetical vehemence, O that I could
do the whole will of God!

At other times of this her last weakness, when her Husband praying by her
prosecuted with earnestness his constant Request, for her recovery to health,
and a longer life; she would, after the duty, kindly chide the exuberancy of
his affection; and desire him to rest content in Gods Promise, that all things
should work together for his good, Romans 8. 28. and to submit (as she wholly did)
to his sovereign Lugeatur mortuus; sed ille quem gehenna suscipit quem Tartarus
devorat, etc. Hier.
will: telling him withal, that he had no reason to give the reins to his
sorrow, if he saw her die with good evidences of her going to Heaven. And to
allay his passion in his greatest dreads of that separation, which he so much
deprecated, We came not (said she) into the world together, nor can we expect
to go out of it together; yet it is a great satisfaction to me that I am going
thither, whither you, after a while, shall follow me. And somewhat inquisitive
she was (probably in order to the advancement of that satisfaction) what
degrees of Communion the Saints glorified have one with another, and what
measure of knowledge they have of each other? A question, which is often asked
by gracious souls; but (in my judgment) impossible to be resolved from clear
grounds of Scripture, the Argument on both sides being alike probable. And it
need not create any trouble to us, if it remain in the dark. It is but a little
while, ere comfortable experience will decide the controversy to all that wait
for the coming of the Lord Jesus, beyond all our uncertain disputes.

She was very sollicitous during her whole sickness, of her carriage and
deportment under Gods afflicting hand; and afraid lest the restlessnesses
occasioned by her distemper, might be the fruit of her impatience. To which
purpose, she would oftentimes, (with an holy self-jealousie) ask of those about
her, Whether she did not seem to them to be deficient in Patience? and would
seem to be troubled at the remembrance of the carriage of such and such
Christian friends, whom she had conversed with on their sick beds, as conscious
to her self how short she came of them.

Some Conflicts she had with Temptation (if I may so call it, and not rather
the exceeding tenderness of her own Conscience, apt to smite her (as David's did
for cutting off but the skirt of Saul's Robe, 1 Samuel 24. 5.) for the smallest
omissions, of which yet those that knew the strictness of her walking with God,
thought she had little cause to complain.) And yet those very complaints, in
the nature of them, argued a very great proficiency in holiness; witness one
amongst the rest especially, viz. that she had not been so sensible, as she
ought to have been of the estate and condition of Gods Church; a thing which
surely most of us may more justly charge on our selves (considering the Havoc
at this day made in it by the Eastern Wild-bore out of the Forest; and Ps. 80.
13. Cant. 2. 15.
the little Foxes out of their holes, Romish Emissaries in several disguises
spoiling its tender grapes) but that we do not (with her) prefer Jerusalem
above our chief Ps. 137. 6.
joy.

But these were but thin and light clouds, quickly scattered, the light of Gods
countenance breaking through them, and clearing up hers. So that she told one
of her visitants, with a great deal of comfort, that she thanked God, that
instead of a world full of troubles and miseries, he had now given her the
sight of a better Country. And this prospect, together with the clearing up of
her Title to it, (a thing which in her health she expressed a great
sollicitousness for, insomuch that she has been heard to say with some
Emphasis of zealous earnestness, Who, being once assured of the pardon of sins,
would not be willing to die the next hour?) made her, now she had attained it,
so willing to Luke 23. 46. 2 Timothy 1. 13. 2 Cor. 5. 1.
resign her soul into the hands of God, as knowing whom she had trusted: and
lay down her earthly Tabernacle, in exchange for that House made without hands,
eternal in the Heavens.

And thus fell, what was mortal of this precious Saint, to her own infinite
gain, but to the inexpressible loss of all her surviving friends and
acquaintance, but especially her dear Relations. Who (notwithstanding, I hope)
will consider, that, seeing the WILL OF THE LORD IS DONE, it becomes them to
acquiesce in it. It was (as I am informed) her counsel to her tenderly loving
and affectionate Husband, in her health, to take heed of over-loving her,
bidding him beware of it, as he desired not to be rid of of her: for God would
endure no Rival. I hope (though, withal, I confess it a difficult piece of
self-denial not to over-love a Wife so over-deserving; and so strong a
temptation may very well excuse and lessen an offense of that nature) that
worthy person to whom that caution was given, had always so much of the
Christian, as might balance the Husband in him; and preserve him from ever
rivalling his Maker. But, however let me presume to remember De non nostro
amissum dolemus. Cum alie number amissum aegre sustinemus, affines cupiditatis
invenimur, Tert. de Pat.
him, that this may be done ex post facto, by over-grieving, when God has
taken away such a comfort. As no doubt Phaltiel was David's Rival, not only
whiles he enjoyed his Wife Michal; but also, when she was sent for from him, in
that he accompanied her, as far as he dared, weeping, 2 Samuel 3. 16.

And let all her other Relations consider, that, the more virtuous she was, and
the more any way qualified to be a comfort to them here; the fitter was she to
yield them the opportunity of offering the compleater sacrifice of self-denial
and holy Resignation, by giving her to God; for whom nothing can be too good,
seeing we can have nothing so good as he deserves, who is the Author of all
good, yea, is himself all good, and alsufficiently so, to us. Let them
consider, how ripe she was for Heaven, and then they cannot but connclude it
had been to her loss to have been longer detained from it: as it is to the
choicest fruit to hang on the Tree beyond due maturity. And this very
consideration (if any of them were not sufficiently prepared for this loss
beforehand) ought to have had the force of a presage, to fortify them against
this Event: seeing it could not (in reason) be expected, that a Life so thick
packed and crowded with Virtue and Grace, should be long: her living so much in
a little time (by that common Rule, celerius occidere festinatam maturitatem,
that over-hastened Quintil. Inst.
fruit is the first that falls) was a kind of ominous intimation that she had
not long to live; and that riding such Posthast toward Heaven, she would not
be long thence. However, now Gods will is done, let our hearty assent
thereunto, show us Christians; our rejoicing in her happiness, her friends; and
our imitation of her excellent perfections, true honourers of her memory; who
is gone before us to that bliss, to which (I think, we may all safely say) the
Land in due time bring us all for Christ's sake. Amen.

A POSTSCRIPT.
SInce the finishing of this Narrative, there came to my hands an excellent
Character of this incomparable Lady; being part of a Letter written by him
whose learned Pen copied her from his heart; of whom it may be verified, which
was by the Greek Epigrammatist once said of the Statue of Love, so curiously
cut by Praxiteles.

-- (...).
(...).
No wonder Love is thus to Life expressed,
The Graver, had the Original in his breast:
Of this Treasure, being unwilling to defraud the Reader, partly, because of
its own accurate elegancy; and partly, because it contains a compendious
Abstract of all the foregoing Relation, from him who best understood her worth:
I thought fit to subjoin it here.

Believe it, Sir, (says he to his Friend) it is not more my Affection, than my
Judgment, that esteems that happy Lady so much above the rate of those that
enjoy the common Title with her of being Wives; that it is still the reason of
my thanks to God, that I once enjoyed so matchless a Person, and withal a
justification of a Grief of an extraordinary size, that I have lost what is not
comforted with the least hopes of a repair. Not that I am ignoraut of the
omnipotency of God who is always able to equal himself by doing that again
whenever he pleases, which at any time before he has done. But because I
know such an excellency was ornament enough to illustrate a whole age, and
humane things are more checkered, than that such an unusual happiness, as I
have twice enjoyed should the third time fall to my share. That the
superiorities of her Birth should descend to the privacy of my condition,
without the being so troublesome to it as to tax my living up to any other Rate
than what my own pleasure admitted, was that humble Prudence, of which few in
that Order, before her self, ever gave an example. To comply in all those
obediences to me as an Husband, by which inferior Wives pay for the kindness
of taking them up into a condition which their Birth and Fortunes despaired of,
was so much to my admiration, that I could not but ravishedly wonder at it; and
bless God for that happiness of mine, in the contemplations whereof, I was so
busy, as not to have the leisure of expressing it to others, but by over-joyed
looks. And perhaps, I did not imprudently with silence possess my comforts,
whiles speaking might have wanted belief, or created too much Envy. How
matchless a commendation of hers was it, in so many years, amidst the variety
of humane things to be without the guilt of Word or Action, that needed a
Recall, or feared a Censure? what the Laws require of others, she taxed her
self at: what others promised, she performed; in whom a most sweet Temper was
subjected to so informed a mind, that her compliance with her Duty, was as
perfect as Humanity admits, without noise or reluctance. And (would Divinity
allow the expression) it might be said, that she had always in her power
something of supererogation, which she added, after she had paid the exactness
of justice and expectation. She delighted to show those children of mine, which
others would have concealed, as the Allay of their Marriage; lengthened their
lives by prayer and care; made them better than she found them by instruction
and example; and was so constant in her kindnesses, that there was not an
intermission through which to suspect the least simulation. She not only bore,
but delighted in the Relations of my first Wives Virtue: and did so satisfy me
in all the appetites of my soul, that nothing made me sollicitous in my
conjugality whiles I enjoyed her, but either the fear an extraordinary
happiness would not be long; or desire that I might obtain the ioies of another
Life hereafter, who had the greatest measure of those here, which that state
knows without which even Paradise was by God himself judged to want something
of Compleatness. I could with safety trust my deepest Counsels with that Heart,
that did not easily part with any thing; leave the charge of my Children with
that sincerity and prudence, which no interest could tempt awry, nor disguise
easily deceive. Methinks I could justify my self in an unspeakable Love,
whiles the Reason of it was an unusual plentiful measure of rare Grace: in the
Honor of an illustrious Birth, the most submissive Humility; in the knowledge
of the Pomps of the world a pious neglect of them: the most express Characters
that I ever saw of God, in that, or the other Sex. In whom Religion seemed
pardonable if not beautiful even to the Enemies of it, from those good
qualities that accompanied it, viz. a Readiness to Oblige, an Easiness to
Pardon, Respects to Superiors, Kindness to Equals, Regards and Compassions to
Inferiors. Such an One have I lost, such an One do I bewail.

And then he piously concludes thus (with which I conclude also) But he, whose
Right it is, to do what he pleases, and whose Privilege it is, that he cannot
be unjust, has recalled what was his own from me who had no claim to that
Grace; and although I grieve, I murmur not, who know her Happiness whiles I
feel my own Calamity.

REader, notwithstanding the great care of a watchful Corrector; the distance
of the Author, has (besides diverse literal mistakes, and mis-punctations,
which it is hoped thou will indulge) occasioned these grosser escapes of the
Press, which it is desired, thou will before thou read correct.

PAge 15. line 13. from the top, read or interests, p. 14. l. 4. r. humoured,
p. 19. l. 12. r. wisest, p. 45. l. 9. r. perfection, p. 55. l. 6. r. exerted,
p. 70. l. 12. r. (...), p. 104. l. 25. r. so much, p 109. l. 2. r. this, p.
110. l. 19. r. rigidly severe, p. 116. l. 20. r. have filled, p. 129. l. 27. r.
is.

On the MEMORY Of the RIGHT HONORABLE, The Lady ELIZABETH LANGHAM.
HAd I a subject of a meaner size,
Methinks I could write Volums, and mine eyes
Land-flood whole quires of Paper with a Tide
Of Elegies. Deep Rivers silent slide.
Great Contemplations tie the Tongue, that Mind
That Is rapt to Heaven, cannot Utterance find.
So Commentators on an easy Text,
Are endless in their Paraphrase, but vexed
With a mysterious place passed by, (be sure)
And veil the Bonnet with Vot serviture:
So holy Cloisters Veneration's dumb,
Their walls being motto'd with Silentium.
But as the Heralds blazon Princes Coats
Not by mean colors, but Celestial Noats;
By Heavenly Planets, thence to signify
Their near approaches to Divinity.
So an inspired Angel from the Muse
Of Jesse's Son, this equal task should choose,
With quill plucked from a Cherub's wing to paint
The great Example of this illustrious Saint.
Her Apparition makes me all aghast,
Like her of Endor, or the Enthusiast,
Scared and convulst with his own Oracles,
Thou Constellation of Miracles.
Epitome of the whole sphere of Excellence,
Extract of all that nature could dispense;
Where Great, and Good, Noble, and Humble met,
Learned, and Modest; Wit without Deceit,
That skill in Scriptures and in Tongues she got,
Made her a living Bible Polyglot.
These did not puff her up; she did descend
To the kind Offices of Wife and Friend,
Mother and Sister, as if Ethics were
Not so much taught her, as transcribed from her;
Oh what a glorious Creature and how rare
A Saint 't would be, that had what she could spare.
Where has she left her Equals now in fame,
But in the Noble House from whence she came;
Too small alas! where Virtues sacred Fire
Retires in Embers, Oh may't never expire;
Dark Lanthorn of the most resplendent Light,
There is the Goshen, all the rest is Night.
Alas our Pharos is blown out of late
By which we did prosperously Navigate,
And trade both Indies for more precious wealth,
A nobler Traffic with Heaven and her self;
But whilst we did expect so rich a Cargo,
Death on the sudden made this sad Imbargo.
We only expect a restitution there
Where Saints shall be revealed, and the Revelation clear.
William Langham.

An Elegy Upon the RIGHT HONORABLE And MOST INCOMPARABLE LADY, The Lady
ELIZABETH LANGHAM, Who departed this life March 28. 1664.
COme sacred Muse assist my Quill,
With somewhat of your learned Skill;
Inspire my Fancy from on high,
Who to Parnassus never came nigh.
Fear not the spleen of Critics eye,
For Momus censure I defy.
Egged on with Duty, Love and Zeal,
My unpractiz'd Muse I will reveal.
Look not for much from a small store,
She that gives all can give no more.
Proclaim I do our own sad Fate,
By what has fallen out of late:
The Sun which makes a perfect Day,
Its influence took from her bright Ray,
Who while she here did make her stay,
Each minute had more worth than Day.
Beloved, admired, adored by all,
No equal had (since Adam's fall)
Descended of a Noble Line,
A Vertuosa most Divine:
The Royal blood ran in her veins,
And guiltless did admit no stains,
Her Fame was great, and of Renown,
She to her Husband was a Crown;
No sand of time did e're slip by,
Without its action sweet as high,
Improving all the cost was spent,
On her Large souls ennoblement;
Of such a body as might vye,
With glorious ones in purity:
When she her eie-lids did display,
The Sun ashamed made have away;
And we might see the Day Star rise,
Within the circuit of her eyes:
Alone she stood (in her bright sphere)
Not to be matched far or near.
All Beauties which might bless the sight,
Mixed with transparent Virtues light,
At once producing love and awe:
Her souls perfection had no flaw,
Discerning thoughts, but a calm breast,
Most apt to pardon, needing least;
Strict, mild, and humble, great and good;
As all her Friends well understood.
Most pious in her life and death,
(A Pattern to her latest breath)
Heaven could not brook the earth should share
A Pearl of such a Price; so rare,
So good, so wise, so chaste, so blessed,
Angels alone can speak the rest,
God took her hence betimes, lest we
Should fall to flat Idolatry.
Anne Lumley.

Upon The much Lamented Death Of That most virtuous and Incomparable LADY
ELIZABETH Daughter of the RIGHT HONORABLE FERDINANDO Lord HASTINGS, Earl of
HUNTINGDON. And Wife to the RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, Sr. JAMES LANGHAM.
PAss not, but wonder, and amazed stand
At this sad Tomb; for here enclosed lie
Such rare perfections, that no tongue, or hand
Can speak them, or pourtray them to the eye:
Such was her body, such her soul divine,
Which hence ascended, here has left this shrine,
To tell her Princely birth, and high descent,
And what by noble Huntingdon is meant,
Transcends the Heralds Art, beyond the rules
Of Ore, or Argent, Azure, or of Gules:
To that Nobility her Birth had given
A second added was, derived from Heaven;
Thence her habitual goodness, solid worth
Her piety, her virtues blazon forth,
Her for a pattern unto after ages,
To be admired by all, expressed by sages,
Who whilst they write of her, will sadly sorrow,
That she did not survive to see their morrow.
So good in all Relations, so sweet
A Daughter, such a loving Wife; discreet
A Mother, though not hers, not partial,
She loved, as if they had been natural.
To the Earl and Ladies she a sister rare,
A Friend, where she professed, beyond compare.
Her hours were all precisely kept, and spent
In her devotions; and her studies meant
To share some for her languages, which she
In Latin, French, Italian, happily
Advanced in with pleasure; what do I
Recount her parts? her Memory speaks more
Than what can be, or has bin said before.
It asks a Volume rather than a Verse
Which is confined only to her Hearse.
But now blessed Soul, She is arrived at Heaven,
Where, with a Crown of life, to her is given
A new transcendent Name, to the world unknown,
Not writ in marble, but the Saints white Stone:
Enthroned above the stars, with glory crowned,
Enstal'd with bliss, and Hallelujah's sound.
Bathshua Makin.

On the MEMORY Of the RIGHT HONORABLE, And VIRTUOUS LADY, The Lady ELIZABETH,
Late Wife to the worthy Sr. JAMES LANGHAM KNIGHT.
HIghly descended, born of noblest blood;
Yet one, who (Great) was not more Great than good,
Skilled in the Languages, and in the Arts,
(Acquired learning added to good parts.)
Humble, Grave, modest, and of temper sweet,
Wise to keep silence, when as it was meet:
And knowing how, as well, to speak in season,
And then to guide her tongue with grace, and reason.
In place, of a good Lady dead, to come,
And, so well, to fill up the Vacuum;
By acting so the Wife, and so the Mother,
(One would have thought she had not bin another)
Acting both so, as if the very same
Mother and Wife, deceased, were come again.
So full of all the tenderest love and care
To two sweet Children, which another bare:
To Husband so obsequious and so sweet
In carriage, that an help more meet
He could not have. And as to each Relation
Wondrous obliging in her Conversation.
The meanest person That would not contemn,
That, rashly, would not any one condemn.
Who, always, would interpret in best sense,
What others use to rack with violence.
Easy to pardon other's faults, and yet
Severe in those laws, which t'her self she set.
One, to the poor, that did draw forth her soul,
So much, their pinching wants she would condole.
What time some, of her Rank, do set a part
To Cards and Plays, who spent to search her heart,
To read, and pray, and to converse with God,
With whom she hoped, once, for a blessed abode.
The Sun did not, more duly, set and Rise,
Than she kept constant to this Exercise.
The Lords Day was her joy, his word her meat,
Which she not only Read, and Heard, but Eat.
But where is the Subject, unto which this throng
Of Epithets and Adjuncts does belong?
Is she in the Land of Living? Alas! No,
She might have been seen here some months ago.
She was, How sad a word's this Was! (woes me)
This blessed Lady Elizabeth was she.
Hasting to Heaven, she touched (by the way)
At Crosby-House, where we hoped she would stay;
But fondly: Of a sudden she took flight
Heaven ward, and's gone: she is quite gone out of sight.
Into the World she came, it is vanity,
She saw; contemned, and withdrew presently.
T. B.

In Obitum Illustrissimae Heroinae, Dominae ELIZABETHAE LANGHAM, Epicedium.
ERgone foeminei laus, and victoriasexus,
Et desiderii meta suprema jacet?
Vna bonis animi, generisque, and corporis aucta,
Quae data sunt aliis singula, cuncta tulit.
Nobilis a proavis, and origin magna Parentum,
Nempe Hunting doniae splendida gemma domus.
Invidia, haud pietas est hanc deflere Beatam,
Cui data coelesti est clara corona polo.
Marmora mitte igitur, celebrare aut carmine lauds,
Huic immortali, quid moritura struis?
Namque loquendo, satis digne laudaverit unquam
Nemo, nisihic maerens qui stupet atque silet.
An Epitaph.
STay! read her name, lest thou pass traveller,
Hence irreligiously without a tear.
Say, did thou know her? then thy loss resent,
If not? at least thy ignorance lament.
Here lies interred one, by whose decease
Heaven has one Saint the more, and earth one less.
Where Grace and Nature truly did present
A complete draught, of what was excellent.
In whom dwelt virtue with Nobility,
Great parts, with yet greater Humility.
Her well replenisht mind did like a vein
Of Earth, a Rich and plenteous ore contain.
Strictness, zeal, mercy, meekness, patience,
Combined to take up here their residence.
Her outside spoke it, as if designed to tell
How pure, and large a soul within did dwell.
How in her Face, and carriage might You see
Bright Honor, shadowed with modesty.
Her Gravity with sweetness mixed, did show,
That distance was not her desire, but due.
Too soon snatched hence, to prove that she was here,
Not an Inhabitant, but Sojourner.
Sleep then in silence quietly her dust,
Till the Resurrection of the just.
When Body and Soul shall reunited be,
And each enjoy their Immortality.
I. S.

To the RIGHT WORSHIPFUL And Worthy of Honor, Sir JAMES LANGHAM. A Memorial of
His Most Dear and Excellent Wife, THE RIGHT HONORABLE The LADY ELIZABETH, A
great pattern of true Honor and Piety.
WHat Man can write, that is not Enthusiast,
I mean not, what thou art, but what thou wast?
Can Man breath living Words, and realize
Thy Worth, and not be thought to Poetize!
But thy great Name, and far greater Merit,
Will clear my Verse, from a lying Spirit.
Similitudes from Sun, Stars, Meteors
Dwelling in Clay, are but low Metaphors.
All were Mine own, and nothing like to Thine,
If I should speak of Thee, less than Divine.
I have seen David's Harp, but not his Heart
On Buckrom daubed, the Noble inward Part.
Was too subtle to come to Painters view,
It Is my hard task to show a Saint to You.
Once it was said, the Gods came down like Men;
I miss a Godly one gone hence again.
If here I robbed a Tomb, and there a Stone,
And shaped her like to some Fantastic One,
And set up Her Pillar, like goodly Saul,
Higher than those in Westminster, and Paul.
Or for a louder strain, ran to some Poet,
Her Reverend Ghost would chide me for it.
Out of the truly Noble Maunch she came,
The Badge of Honor, that is known by her Name:
From Kingly Lions, and the Flowers De Lice,
You may discern Her yet far higher rice.
Her Family thrice mixed with Royal Blood,
She knew; and yet, as though not understood.
She spoke not on it, as if she never knew
The large and Noble Stem, on which she grew;
Or yet, as if that Elevating Blood
Was, like Rich Drops, lost in a Richer Flood.
That precious Blood, that Her did cleanse from sin,
The only Blood was, that she gloried in.
She did esteem the second Birth the better,
The first was High, Below, the other greater
If we do higher look. This high born Mind,
Enriched with Parts, soared higher still to find
That hidden Life, secrets of Piety,
Pure Love, unfeigned Faith, true Charity.
Her Life, and actions a good Comment was
Upon Gods Law, in which as in a Glass,
She dressed Her inward, and Her outward part:
Her humble Carriage, spoke an humble Heart.
She learned the Law, both to observe and love it,
From None but me, unto, Thou shall not covet.
She was oth' good Elizabethan Sect,
That, blameless, bear to all Gods laws respect;
But yet no Pharisaic Legalist,
Her Works were Fruits of living Faith in Christ.
She 'gan the day with God, with him it ended,
Escapes marked to day, were all to morrow mended.
From God in Closet, Church, warm and devout,
No waste-time pastimes ever turned her out.
Her Husband's soul and Hers you would think were twined,
Rare Parts, rare Hearts, matched into a mind.
But! Death consenting not to such rare Matches,
Away from him, his right half soon dispatches.
Is there no way to break a Match, and not
Undo the suffering part, to whose hard Lot
Surviving falls? But, this has always been,
Since Man and Wife opened the door to Sin.
His Children Hers became, whose curious care
Was to complete, and Saint that hopeful Pair.
Her Servants were the Flock, she duly fed
With Milk, and the Portions of that Bread,
Which from Her Fathers house, she carried home,
And did impart to all about her some.
In all Relations, home, and abroad,
She lived like such an one, as would please God.
Her Face was Wisdom's Front, and Her Demeanor
Observed the Laws of Meekness and of Honor.
Her Speech, her Looks, her Person so arrayed,
Spoke, that she looked to God, to Heaven and prayed.
Her senses Servants were, Reason was Lord;
Fruitful she was in Deeds, sparing in Word.
I cannot pass by what she never looked over,
Gods great Receivers, miserable poor:
She felt their cold, and wants as well as they,
She was the saddest when they went away.
She made them Rich, they made her Spirit poor,
They spent her Alms, she of their moans made store.
She was no Legend -- (but a Scripture --) Saint,
Her piety no Hypocritick paint.
I will not speak what she was not, for Nots
Are in a Character but comely blots.
If she had lived in those darker Times,
When Legends went about with Monkish Rhimes.
She had at least been canonized at Rome,
And hither crouding multitudes would come,
To see the Relics, which, nor lead, nor stones
Could guard those Ashes, and those Sacred Bones.
But in this brighter day, she was a light,
Her Morn was Noon, but ah! her Noon proved night.
(Night, like that Cloud in which the Sun does ride,
We have the Cloud, she is on the sunny side.)
Her Life dropped in the Flower, Grace grew Mature,
Grace seldom dwelt with a better Nature.
O happy she! would all of us were there!
And yet, if so we wish, why stay we here?
Earth was no bait: Heaven was so much preferred,
That first she died before she was interred.
Celestial mind! she is fled unto her Crown,
Here was not Earth enough to weigh her down.
But, that there is none perfect here, I know,
I should go nigh to say, that she was so.
Sir, shall I write? or must I here forbear?
Least every line I write cost You a Tear.
I have of Her great Deeds collected some,
The Margent of whose Life would fill a Tome.
Edward Pierce.

AN ELEGY On that Right Honorable And Right Pious LADY,
The Let Herauldry display her Progeny,
Aggrandiz'd both with Age and Majesty.
Death Royal Lions conquers, Lillies blasts:
Yonder Is that glorious Piety, that last's,
Even when time's teeth shall have disgraced the world,
Laying all level, and it self be hurled
Into the gulf of vast Eternity.
She had a mind most humble, yet as high;
A spiring Saint! who Earth a footstool made,
But Prayer's mount, the vantage ground, whose aid
Enabled her to step into the Throne;
That her ambition was, and That alone.
How sparing of her words! more of her time:
Leaving this matchless praise behind; no Crime
A blemish left on any word or deed:
No not for many years! Such exact heed
Governed both tongue and feet. O glorious hight!
Her bended knees made her walk so upright.
As for her Honor; 'twas supported by
Most orient virtues, which her memory
Now do embalm. In sickness patience
Obtained the garland with preeminence.
Whilst in that furnace tried; She Jesus spied,
Her Joy, loosing the bonds, which burnt, she died.
At our black midnight, dawned her brightest day:
Presently wiped from here is, all tears away;
Pouring them into our lamenting, eyes.
Ye clouds dissolve: gush forth ye springs, Arise --
But! here (that Painter's Rhetoric) a Vail
Signifies most, when tears and pencils fail.
Silence (grief's Orator, and wonder's tongue)
Utters best those sighs and thoughts that throng,
Sticking astonished within sorrw's womb.
God's word, her worth, our grief, bid, make us dumb.
To the RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir JAMES LANGHAM Upon the Exaltation of his second
Lady, etc.
Honored Sir,
WHen first you encircl'd in your happy Arms
That Center of perfections and charms;
My Muse rejoiced, that, though your 10 Stars were born by his former Lady in
her paternal Coat.
Stars were set,
(Mufling you in a two years darkness) yet
A Sun was risen, whose most illustrious rays
Mingling with yours, at once would show and praise
Kind virtues Darlings; and withal advance
Joy the ascendant in your countenance:
As if that former splendent Piety
Improved and gilded with Divinity;
Into your lap, once more, were stowred down
From Heaven; whence marriages have birth and crown.
But oh so dark it was when she went hence!
That groping, we, our faith and patience,
Could hardly find: and stumbling at her Urn
Had almost fallen a murmuring; to turn
Loss into sin. But (Sir) thus take the plot;
God joined your hearts in that true Lovers knot,
That when his Angels, that blessed Soul, away
Should carry, home, to bliss, you might, obey
The doubled force of this attractive cord,
Start up and say, my Wives, my God, and Lord
Stand above beckning on that heavenly mount,
Whilst the slow minutes with my sighs I count.
I Will speak no louder, least your griefs awake;
But, wipe your eyes, look, run, and overtake:
And shine in triumphs, having raised a name,
As great as hers; who came, prayed, overcame.
Sam: May.

In obitum Honoratissimae Dominae Dominae ELISABETHAE LANGHAM, Illustrissimorum
Ferdinandi and Luciae Comitum Huntingdoniae Filiae natu maximae: Et
insignissimi viri Domini Jacobi Langham Equitis aurati, Conjugis semper
desideratissimae Heroniae incomparabilis and immortalitate dignae, (...)
defunciae (...), sive Epicedium.
SIste parum (Lector) monitum te convenit; illis
Ne fidens oculis decipiare tuis.
Quicquid enim cernis, non est quod cernis, and illud
Cernere quod poter as, cernere posse negas.
Effusis nimium lachrymis vitiantur ocelli,
Intempestivis fletibus ora cadunt.
Expect as (scio sat) tumulum, gelidumque Sepulchrum,
Ossa, urnam, cineres anticipare soles;
Sed minus attente; si quaeris talia, cedo,
Non sunt haec isto conspicienda loco.
Quem spectas, non est tumulus, sed lectus, and urna
Quam credis, non est urna, sed arca Dei.
Non pulvis, sed pulvinar; non ossa, sed ata
Scilicet e saxis concumulata sacris.
Equibus haec? si forte roges, Virtutibus istis
Praesto est hinc animum figere velle tuum;
Quae tantam Dominam solitae sunt cingere vivam
Nec modo de functam deperiisse sinunt.
Quos ego si cuperem Lapides distinguere junctos,
Perque suas gemmas enumerare vices,
Ne possim cumulo vereor succumbere toto,
Ignarusque mali mole perinde premi.
Attamen experiar; quid enim non audet amoris
Impetus, and votis haud satianda sitis?
Quid negat officii ratio aut reverentia mentis
Quae nescit stimulos dissimulare suos?
O Sanctam in Coelis Animam and Coelestibus auctam!
Te quibus Auspiciis amplificare queam!
Nolo quidem stirpem tot Regum stemmate claram,
Ant Genus aut Proavos commemorare tuos.
Quanquam si vellem digito te pingere possem
Summis Principibus Nobilitate parem.
Te Pietas, te sancta Fides, te propria Virtus,
Contemptus mundi, ac Relligionis amor.
Tran smittent seclo nunquam moritura futuro
Pignora, and aeterni Marmoris instar erunt.
Conjugis Affectus retinebat viscera Prolis,
Deliciae Matris; Deliciaeque Viri.
Accedunt Fratris lachrymae, gemitusque Sororum,
Affines, sociae congemuere piae.
Rara animi Comitas, blandique placentia vultus,
Sed majestatis non aliena modis.
Felici Ingenio juncta est Prudentia nexu,
Divitis ac animi Lingua diserta comes.
Anglica Romanam suscepit, Gallica Graecam
Nec minus Italicos est imitata sonos.
Sedula Divini praeibat lectio Verbi
Audita est grata Concio sacra mora.
Mox pia Colloquiis cessit meditatio crebris
Singula praemissa sanctificata prece,
Chara Homini, dilecta Deo, sed mortua mundo
Perpetuas meriti tot Monumenta tui.
Tho. Horton S. T. D.

To the Eminently Learned and Religious Sir JAMES LANGHAM Knight. In pious
memory of his Most Excellent CONSORT The Lady ELISABETH LANGHAM Daughter of the
Right Honorable FERDINANDO Earl of HVNTINGDON.
Most honored Sir,
PReaching has spoiled my Poetry, and I
Instead of writing Elegies, Learn to die.
But if I should Ambitious be to use
A Fairer, Nobler, and Diviner Muse
Than all the Nine; That Phoenix of high prize
Could only from your Ladies Ashes rise;
Able, with Life, wit's Carcass, to inspire,
And warm the coldest Brain with Heavenly fire.
Yet then no sooner would that Flame appear,
But your sad Loss would quench it with a tear.
For never was all Good in One so met,
(Like Diamonds and Pearls in pure Gold set.)
Her Highborn Blood flowed from the Royal spring,
To which great Birth, Grace, did a Greater bring.
So that in Her we might these Wonders see,
Princely Grandeur crowned with Humility;
Beauty, with Learning, Wealth with wisdom shined,
And piety so kept Court within her Mind,
That if for lost Religion we should look,
In her Life we might Read the Holy Book.
And if for banished Modesty we would seek,
We might behold it blushing in her Cheek.
Her Temperance too was much, her Charity more;
'Twas Meat and Drink to Her, to feed the Poor:
And with her Alms such Counsel she would give,
As might at once make Soul and Body live.
Public and Private, she never drew in Air,
But what went out in holy Word or Prayer.
With this she Honored all her Honors, and
Enriched your Family more than all your Land.
Others are Glorious from their Ancestrie,
But she Ennobled Her Nobility.
That Wife which Famous Overburie writ
With Height of Judgment, Eloquence and wit,
Was but a Type of her, who can alone
Be Peer'd with the Elect Lady of St. John.
Whose praise is better Preached than Poem'd forth,
No Verse but what is a Text can reach her Worth.
Our Meeters added to this Sermon, sound
Like Sternhold's Rhimes with the Holy Bible bound.
I Will borrow then Words from the Preaching King,
And with His Hallowed Truth Her Glory sing.
Many a Daughter has done virtuously Prove. 31. 29

But she excelled them all; I might apply
Much of that Chapter to Her, as a Wife
Who acted, what is writ there, to the Life.
R West. D. D.

On the death of the truly Noble and Virtuous LADY ELISABETH Wife to Sir JAMES
LANGHAM Knight, Who dyed great with Child.
Could Beauty, Wealth, Wit, Learning, Grace or Birth
Free any one from death, thy life would have
Been lasting as thy Fame, nor had the Earth
And Heaven called back the Jewel that they gave.
But ah, alas! such noble Souls as thine
Dwell in as crazy cottages as ours;
Yea, being framed of mold more pure and fine,
They are less able to brook storms and showrs.
Hence Thou art gone betimes; and we remain
A while behind, here to condole our loss,
To celebrate thy memory, and complain
That want of such as Thee's our greatest cross.
But Thou, sweet Infant, losest naught at all,
But gainest, by thy Mothers early death:
Her womb's thy tomb; thou have a funeral
Before a birth, and dy'st ere thou draw'st breath.
Thus without knowledge of this gloomy shade,
Wherein we sadly wander up and down,
Thou a quick passage unto Heaven have made,
And without sweat or toil have got the Crown.
Let not surviving Friends then take it amiss,
Because they saw thee not to ripeness grown:
For thou art ripe before them, and in bliss,
Longing to see them also wear the Crown.
Anthony Scattergood D. D.

STemmata imaginibus, titulis distincta, Coronis
Inclyta, quam decorant, Ornant quam propria virtus,
Quam pietas, quam Relligio, men's para, fidesque,
Conjuge quae fulget, cui par vix contigit ulli
Conjuge qui gaudet, cui par vix contigit ulli
Quam cito, quam subito nobis erepra, parenti
Eximiae chara, Eximio perchara marito!
Ereptam eheu lugemus, lugemus ademptam
Terris, aethereas seeds gaudemus adeptam.
Comprime nunc lachrymas ergo, moestissime conjux.
Comprime nunc lachrymas ergo maestissima matter;
Terreno sponso, Terrena matre relictis,
Coelesti sponso, Coelesti patre potita
Coelieolas inter sedet, aeternumque sedebit.
Pauculis hisce versibus lectissimae, Illustrissimae, Nobilissimae Heroinae
ELISABETHAE HASTINGIAE Celsissimi comitis Huntingdoniae Filiae; Illustriss: ac
Nobiliss: Viri Jacobi Langbamii equitis Aurati conjugi, Londini parentabat

Ludovicus Heraldus Ecclesiae Londino-Gallicae Ecclesiastes.

In Obitum ILLUSTRISSIMAe Heromae Dominae ELISABETAE HASTINGIAE, Honoratissimi
Comitis HUNTINGDONIAE Filiae. Ad Illustrem ipsius Conjugem, Dominum JACOBVM
LANGHAM, Equitem Auratum. (...).
LAnghamiae docus ornamentum and gloria gentis,
O infignis Eques quo non infignior alter,
Magne opibus, major virtutibus atque loquela
Melliflua tibi quam donavit suada Latina.
Miraris moestus cur intra quatuor annos,
Vxores tibi fata duas in flebile mortis
Imperium rapuere? stupenti mente revolvis,
Tecum, cur intra lustrum thalamus tuus orbus
Bis sit, qua caasa cogaris vivere solus?
Nil tamen est cur attonito Clarissime Langham.
Expendas animo fati decreta, Deique
Consilium sapiens quod sacra agitare marita
Te prohibet nimium mirere, Hymeneia festa,
Transivere cito, paucisque potitus es annis.
Queis tibi subsidium Numen donarit amatae
Vxoris, quia nimirum meliore potiri.
Vita digna erat uxorum utraque. Poma videre est,
Decidere arboribus cum sunt matura, quid ergo
Miri est si uxores ambas discedere mundo
Videris, aeternae matura erat utraque vitae.
Praeterea quae sunt in terris summa, necesse est
In pejus ruere ac retro sublapsa reserri:
Pancratica si quis fruitur valetudine, part
Ex omni incolumis sanusque, incesset acerbus.
Morbus eum pinguesque cito populabitut artus,
Febris, sic cum quis foelix est atque beatus
In terris quantum sors fert mortalis, iniquum
Adversumque illi casum fortuna minatur.
Nil ergo mirum tibi contigit, aura secunda
Afflabat tibi, te vultu spectare sereno
Sors dignabatur, plane tibi nulla negarat
Illorum vitam quae possunt reddere amoenam.
Dives erat, clarus doctrina and mactus honor,
Londinum vocatur Augusta ab Ammiano Marcellino.
Missus ab Augusta fueras civitate Britanni,
Quae caput est orbis, qua vix ingentior ulla est
In toto mundo-quo ipsius nomine posses.
Omnia magnanimo vovere beata Monarchae,
Sub cujus tremit imperiis and laeta triumphat
Anglia, quando ovaas Belgarum solvit ab oris,
Vt posset natale solim liberare Tyrannis,
Sub quibus ingemutt saevos tolerando lahores,
Angligentsque suis dominari legibus aequis.
Gaudens inde novo cumulatus honor redisti,
Cuncta videbatur tibi tum promittere fansta
Fatum, sed subito letho tibi tollitur uxor,
Quae nunquam laudata satis, quamquam monumentum
Nobile fecit ei Reverendus Episcopus ille
Nordovicum, quem relligio doctrinaque summa
Commendant and qui sacrorum ex ordine Patrum,
Esse merabatur quos fulgens infula vestit,
Et quorum regitur prudenti Ecclesia cura,
Placata dein sort fuit tibi reddita conjux
Altera, quae potuit desiderium omne prioris
Ex animo delere tuo, charaeque Mariae
Te facere omnino immemorem, nam gloria sexus
Faeminei dici poterat perfecta sue quantum
Vlla sit inter eas quae gaudent lumine; sane
Elisabeta tua omnigeno splendore micabat
Et quae faelices factunt, collectatenebat:
Stemmate fulgebat quo vix illustrius ullum,
Nata erat antiquo magnatum sanguine, vixit
Nobilis ingenio, meritis, virtutibus atque
Sincera pietate, ut deni que plurima paucis
Dicantur, te dignafuit, Dignissime Langham,
Illustrique sua p^oles dignissima Matre.
Verum cheu mundus tam praeclara hospite dignus
Non fuit, illa ideo lumen vitale reliquit,
Ac ipso vere aetatis sua fata subivit.
Haec equidem mors est inconsolabile vulnus
Si carnem auscultes; verum si credere verbo
Divino placeat, nulla est tibi causa doloris,
Nec vano decorare ipsius funera fletu
Debes, quippe nefas illam dubitare beatam
Esse; aeternos coelorum transivit in orbs
Et nostras fugit tenebras ut lumine vero
Se impleret, possetque sequens convexa Tonantis
In coelum quo digna fuit quodque anxia votis
Optabat recipi atque choris permista beatis,
Collaudare Deum cujus flagrabat amore.
J am Christum spectans qui nostra piacula demit
Dulcia sepositis persentit gaudia curis,
Jucundis ejus nunc gaudet amoribus, and jam
Elizabeta Vox (...) quam Graeci Exodus 6. 23. (...) dedere significat Deus meus
est satietas.
suo Domino satiatur abunde,
Omnia subsiliunt ejus praecordia, namque
Non solum fruitur conspectu Virginis almae,
Quae mundi Regem sub luminis edidit auras.
Verum etiam aeterni soboles aeterna Parentis
Obversatur ei summo fulgore coruscans:
Sicque micans radiis quantis non fulget Olympus.
Nos dolet in terris tanta sub nocte jacere,
Et nostras miserata vices nostros que dolores
Expetit ut demum coelestia templa recepti
Secum perpetuum Numen celebremus in aevum.
En illam contemplor majestate verendam
Summa, stellarum cinctam radiante corona
Tempora, qua coram pallescunt lumina solis
Aethereas inter mentes sanctasque cohortes
Spirituum quos consummavit gratia Christi,
E coelis ad te raptim haec in verba laquentem;
O tu qui quondam vita lux unica nostrae,
O conjunx o lim dilecte and nostra voluptas,
Tecum vivebam foelix si terra beatos
Possidet, and nostris nunquam benedicere taedis
Non poteram thalamumque tuum laudare jugalem.
Verum creed mihi nostrisque fidem addito dictis,
Quam long a terra distat domus inclyta coeli,
Quantum mortales superat venerabile numen,
Tantum subsidunt bona queis tecum potiebar
Infra coelestis quam duco praemia vitae.
In terris erat ampla domus, divesque supellex;
Semper erat variis dapibus mea mensa parata;
Otnari poteram gemmis auroque nitenti
Vest, meis quod majus erat, tua colla lacertis
Amplecti, tibi blanda dare oscula, mentis
Arcanos sensus, imi penetralia cordis,
Scire tui leges and fas and jura sinebant.
Nunc vero o Conjux immensa palatia coeli
Incolo, quae gemmas aurum Solemque serenum,
Luce sua superant, in queis spectare triumphos,
Atque trophaea Alluditur ad nomen domus Amplissimi Domini Langham quae
Crosby-House dicitur
crucis licet, and queis gloria tanta est
Mente capi ut non possit: honos and sceptra thronosque
Possideo nihil indiga: vero nectare, vera
Ambrosia vescor, specie satiata Tonantis,
Qui fons aeternus vitae est omnisque salutis
Author: jam bysso pura, jam lumine amicta
Incedo: Christus stirps vora Dei, Deus ipse
J am sibi me vinclo voluit sociare jugali
Continuo ille mihi sua porrigit oscula, queis nil
Gratius esse potest, coelorum denique cunctis
Expansis adytis mihi sacra arcana recludit,
Seque mihi indignae totum donare fruendum
Non renuit. Quae causa ergo tot signa doloris
In vultu esse tuo? cur pullo operiris amictu?
Olim laetitiae dulces sub pectore motus
Volvebas dum loeta fui frontemque serenam,
Indueram, cur factum ut jam tibi dispar acerbo
Corrumpas gemitu, quod terque quaterque beata
Aerumnae vivam immunis, curisque soluta?
Si me diligeres tacito sub pectore totus
Gestires me fati ereptam legibus esse,
Meque videre Patrem summum, qui temperat orbem,
Et cujus visu capiuntur gaudia summa,
Ergo age nulla tuo suspiria ducito cord
Amplius and nullas moestas expromito voces,
Contentus posito luctu tua tempora comple,
Erigere and laetus certam tibi sum quietem,
Donec coelestis potiaris praemia vitae.
Haec dixit sacraque sua sic voce locuta est,
Plura videbatur dictura, jubarque coruscum
Descriptura tibi long radiantis Olympi,
Et quae in coelitibus videantur lumina, queisque
J am rutilet radiis Christus dulcissimus ille
Servatcr, quem Judaei, gens impia, quondam
Affecere probris variis ac denique dura
Morte peremerunt ut crimina nostra subiret.
At vero meminit divinis vocibus auri
Humanae prorsus ignotis esse loquendum,
Exprimere ut posset digne miracula coeli:
Praeterea meminit sibi cum mortalibus aegris
Versandum non esse, and se nunc agmina sancta
Spirituum J'ovam celebrantum laud perenni,
Se Christam se summum Numen habere sodales,
Atque una cum illis sibi perpetuo esse loquendum.
Idcirco sic fata, silet Christique recumbet
In gremium, sanctam penetrant ubi gaudia mentem,
Clara ubi sunt illam sua gesta secuta, labor
Omni ubi nunc expers meritarum encomia laudum
Personat usque Deo. Nunc ergo maxim Langham,
Expendas tibi moeroris number causa spersit
Vlla, an tristitia oppressum decurrere vitam?
Non te dedeceat? Macta esto, triumphat amata
In coelis tua conjux, menti ipsius imago,
Sancta tuae cum aderit vide ne suspiria cord
Eliciat, potius divino pectus amore
Incendat, mentemque tuam ad coelesti a tollat,
Te desiderio suminaque cupidine totum,
Impleat, olim ingentia coeli tecta videndi,
Aeternoque Deum Patrem Dominumque canendi,
Qui solo nutu mundi moderatur habenas,
Quemque acies superum slammantes semper adorant,
Et cui laus debetur, honos and gloria in aevum.
Sic pientissimae Heroinae manibus Parentebat tui nominis ac virtutum Cultor
Humilimus D' Primirosius, Ecclefiae Londino-Gallicae Minister.

Epitaphium,
SIste viator iter, justa est tibi causa morandi,
Spectare ut possis signatum hoc carmine saxum.
Hic posita est mulier quae si Solomonis in aevo,
Luce potita esset, judaeorum inclytus ille
Princeps non esset conquestus quod sibi frustra
Foe mineo in sexu sapiens quaesita fuisset
Foe mina. Quippe in ea doctrina fidesque micabant,
Dotibus heroicis, pollebat, origin clara,
Dignis qua sata erat, miranda modestia cunctos
Ipsius mores ornabat. Noscere si vis
Illam, ipsi fuit Elisabeta Hastingia nomen.
IN PERPETUAL MEMORY Of the Most RELIGIOUS, TRULY NOBLE, and VIRTUOUS LADY,
ELISABETH: WIFE to Sir JAMES LANGHAM, Knight.
I.
A Thousand times I tried, but all in vain,
Me thoughts my Verse came on but slow,
And that which used to be all wing, could hardly go,
I could not close one happy Strain,
But e're it was half done, begun again.
At last, in rage, this once, said I,
And but this once, whether it do, or no, I Will try;
And all my aides I summoned in,
And bid them all their Treasures bring,
Judgment, Invention, Art and Wit,
Those to obey, and that as Queen to sit;
With all the Offspring of the Brain,
And all the numerous train
Of quick Conceits, that fancy breeds, or Poets feign.
II.
I called, but could make none to hear,
Nor Wit, nor Judgment would appear,
Fancy it self, till then my Tyrant, drew not near.
Yet still I waited, till at last
In stead of these, my Muse came in
With Beauties, that I n'ere before had seen,
Beauties, I dare not venture to express,
Beauties, which words would make but less,
And gently by me would have past,
But never to return again,
Whilst I the Vision wished might longer last,
And followed, more to make it so, then to complain.
But as I that too, thought to have done,
And told my wrongs, e're she was gone,
With eyes that spoke more pity, then disdain,
My Muse prevented mine, and thus her speech began.
III.
"What could thou hope amidst the Learned Crowd
"Of Votaries that come,
"With more then common service, to this tomb,
"As if thy whispers could be heard, and they so loud.
"Go seek some other, whom thy Verse may raise,
"Her Virtues are above thy Praise,
"Nor there can needed be
"Where all already has been said,
"By them that knew Her, as she honored is by thee
"The living to instruct, or praise the Dead,
"Yet her Own laurells, more then theirs have crowned her Head.
"To tell the Glories of her Name,
"The Families she joined, and whence she came,
"Her Learning, or Her Piety
"The Saint she was, and what she is gone to be,
"How little here she left unknown,
"What she acquired, or what was born her Own,
"The Languages she understood,
"The best of all, and all that they had good,
"The French, Italian, and the Tongue
" Tully declam'd in, and great Maro sung,
"Which Rome scarce half an age did see,
"And longer Mistress of the World could be,
"Then Queen of that, yet never purer spoke than she,
"These are above thy humble flight,
"Whom meaner subjects better fit,
"Only the Muse, that taught her how to speak, her praise can write.
IV.
"That shall my Province be, and her great name
"I will enroll in the lasting Monuments of Fame;
"Amongst my learned Daughters, who have been
"The Honor of the Age they flourisht in;
"And whom to Heaven I have preferred,
"That thence, with greater awe they might be heard,
"Like Thunder, both command attention, and be feared.
"I will immortal make her, I, who gave
"Eternity to them, whom she admired;
"My Priests, who triumph over the grave
"With a less heat, then hers, by me inspired.
"Still in my sacred Rolls they live,
"And all, but their own virtues, shall survive;
"When proudest Sepulchers must dye,
"And though they Heaven and Age defy,
"Low, as the putrid Ashes that they cover, ly.
"They live, and all enjoy eternal day,
"Which shall more glorious grow, and bright
"By this addition of new light,
"When she shall be a Sun, as well as they.
"For so I Will make Her, not a Star,
"As Caesar only was, and Heroes are
"But a bright Sun, that shall below 2
"Its flames above, and all its influence bestow. 2
"You wrong Her if you think she is dead
"For she never lived till now. -- This having said
"The Muse in have withdrew, and I inclined my head.
Sam. Woodford.

In Obitum Honorabilis Dominae, Dominae ELISABETHAE, JACOBI LANGHAM, Equitis
Aurati conjugis praecharissimae, immaturum, quae quinto Calend. April.
novissime dilapso fatis concessit.
QVi multae proavos ostentat imaginis, omni
Virtutis propriae nomine saepe caret.
Nobilis haec Domina insignes matresque patresque,
Enumerat plures, extrahit unde genus.
His ornata licet, licet ornatissima, cum sit
Singula Regali sanguine vena tepens.
Hujus opus tamen, hujus honos, apprendere Christum,
Hinc sacra fit vitae pagina norma suae.
Hinc praeteztatum pectus virtutibus auctum;
Hinc quoque caelesti verba referta sale.
Vita interstinctis quasi floribus insitus Hortus:
Divite decursus mess refectus Ager.
Tanta penes totum diffusa est gratia gestum,
Vt nisi quod lauds, dicat agatve nihil.
Tempora deficerent, si singula dicere tentem,
Omnia, sunt meritis metra minora suis.
Mortua sed nunc est, quid dixi? mortua vivit,
Vivet apud Dominum, tempus in omne Deum:
Scilicet huic mors est liber status absque labor,
Nullum ubi peccatum, sed mora labis inops.
Aliud Brevius.
SPonsam permittunt hanc tantum fata, sed ultra
Vivere, and in terris usque manner negant.
Talia, quae lux haec profert, spectacula monstrant,
Rebus in humanis stansve moransve nibil.
Ast simul ac Nati fere, cogimur ire, redire,
Nex ubi perpetua est, and sine fool Dies.
Thomas Martyn.

In Obitum ELISABETHAE LANGHAM, Insignis Nobilitatis Dominae, charissimae,
JACOBI LANGHAM Equitis aurati, conjugis.
TRistia fata cano, cecidit flos Nobilis, eheu:
Casta viro conjux, Docta, Modesta, Pia.
Ossa Sepulchra tenent, animam caelestia Regna.
Haec cinis: in cinerem tuque redactus eris.
Omnia vana fluunt terrestria. Gratia gratos,
Sola Deo reddit, sola petenda tibi.
Corpus parturiit corpuscula nulla, sed ingens
Fructus adest animae; qui super astraviget.
Non moritur sterilis, virtutum prole refulgens,
Divini quas nunc ubera lactis alunt.
Vox Coeli.
SEal up thy Springs of Tears, my Dear Relict;
With mournful sighs, no more thy Soul afflict.
Weep not for me, but for thy selflament;
With Holy Faith prepare for Heavens ascent.
Whence spring thy Tears? that I behold Gods face?
And reap the joy-fruits of my Saviors Grace?
Is It love to me? then why, why does it grieve thee,
That by this blessed retreat, God does relieve me?
Was I not born to dye? and when Death strikes,
Shall that expected stroke draw forth such shrikes?
What is my gain thy loss? my Joy, thy Sorrow?
My Weal, thy woe? away, away, to Morrow
Thou and thy Branches shall be planted here,
Bove storms and Winters, free from Care and Fear.
Oh dwell on this, for this provide: thy Lamp
Trim with pure oil; thy Soul with Grace new stamp
Instead of cries for my remove, make have,
Me to overtake, and let not Tears run wast.
Have off rough Seas into the Hav'n of rest.
Who soonest quit's this World, is soonest blessed.
What may not God fetch home his loan? and must
Heaven stoop to Earth? God's Rights to Mortals lust?
If bad I seemed, rejoice thy ills are fled;
If good, Joy, Joy, that I Am lodged in Christ's bed.
Act Gratitude for thy enjoyment of me:
This and not murmur is expected of thee.
Bless God, who blessed thee with so meet a mate;
First served thy hearts delight with this Rich Cate,
And last himself, don't this content? then hither
Ascend my Dear, and Joy we all together.
Where both shall God, and God shall both enjoy,
And both each other, where naught can annoy,
Or part our blessed embraces, pant, fly, mount,
Enter Heavens Palace: where we may recount
Fresh Joys Sans measure, where in the bed of Honor
We'll sollaces exchange, and praise the Donour.
Till then adieu, my Dear. Heavens Anthems hollow,
Which call me off, and mundane thoughts up swallow.
Blessed is the Death, that dies into blessed Life:
Where Christ and Saints grow one, as Man and Wife.
Virtue enobles: Grace on high blood graft;
That Crowns with Glory, makes a polished shaft.
Transcendent strains surmount my shallow reach,
To flourish I aspire not, but to teach.
L. Goodrick.

To the PIOUS MEMORY Of the RIGHT HONORABLE And no less Religious LADY The
Lady ELLIZABETH, Wife to Sir JAMES LANGHAM. Who was married to that worthy
person, November 20. 1662. and dyed great with child, March 28. 1664.
FAith now or never help us; See what storms
We are surpised with, Thus Heaven deals with Worms,
Mounts them on pinacles of bliss, and thence
Dashes them on the shelfs of Providence:
Peace fretful murmurs, We should wrong the Saint
Her self, should we wrong Heaven by our complaint,
For Heaven is just; at least we will Rest in this
Our loss makes up her gain, Our woes her bliss:
But it was no surpize Heaven had forbore
Her presence long, and Angels waited for
Her flight -- While here she staid could not we see
That purer sparkle of Divinity.
Her soul still towering upwards to the sphere
Of blessedness, whence we might justly fear
Earth could not keep her long; while here she shined
Had we but marked how her seraphick Mind
Reached at perfectiou: How she used to dress
Her Soul with graces; we might easily guess
It was a holy plot 'twixt Heaven and her
To rob us of our joys. Her Heavenly Dear,
Wanting his Spouse, loses her marriage tie
That she might come and live with him on high:
'Twas unto him her Vows were given ere
Her Nuptial contracts here confummate were;
And (whilst that little time in happiest bands
Of wedlock she remained) yet her heart stands
Fast to its former vows, and still she longs
With earnest throbbings and unwearied pangs
Of Love to finish those endearments she
Had here begun in an Eternity
Of Blessedness. Alas we thought when Heaven
Had joined this Noble pair, and freely given
Pledges of bliss to each (unparel'd bliss
Too great for my weak fancy to express)
When we considered that same Harmony
Of Minds, and hearts that chim'd their joys, whereby
Two Heavenly souls entwined in one great flame
Of love: how we could wish that we could frame
A Tabernacle for them, to enclose
Their joices, and keep them in a long repose;
But she, that better knew the world than we,
And knew where lay their true felicity,
Seeing our Mistakes, and fearing we should wrong
God and our souls, withdraws out of the throng
Of friends and steals to Heaven; puts out the blaze
Of all our joies and leaves us in a Maze.
Could those indearments be so suddenly
Cut of that linked hearts with such a tie!
Would not Heaven pity those same groans and tear
That needs must follow such a loss. Ah! here is
Great Love unseen; Our losses are our gain
Oft-times when our enjoyments prove our bane:
God can afford us comforts, but lest we
Should surfeit, calls them back, that he might be
Our chief desire and aim, this likewise knew
That precious Saint who therefore hence withdrew
Her self to Heaven, least such satiety
In time should draw them to Idolatry.
With what a servent holy jealousy
Kept she her Vows to Christ! fearing lest she,
Blessing her Nuptial state at any time
With too much love, should fail in loving him:
Thus ever tender of that Union
That linked them both to God, she strives to drown
The current of their loves and joies together
In Loves true Fountain, Christ the fairest Lover.
Methinks I hear her chide the Ardencie
Of his affection, fearing lest that he
Should wrong his God by too much loving her;
Since Christ admits of no Competitor.
And lest he should (alas how could he do
But love her where so much love was due)
She leaves him, flies to Heaven; then calls, My Dear
And bids him if he loved her seek her there.
Well She is gone; But Marked we how she went
Home to Her Joys: A Pursivant was sent,
That like Elijah in a Coach of Fire,
Mounted her Spirit to the Holy Quire,
Of Angels; there she Rests: Yet ere she went,
We might perceive her Face that Firmament
Of Beauty spread with stars hiding its light;
Then we Began to bid our Joys Good night,
We knew our Sun was set and left us here
To shine more Brightly in a higher sphere.
With her refulgent Rays while this our Sun,
Glorified our inferior Horizon:
Those her Magnetic Beams (her Graces) Drew
The love of all unto her that but knew,
What Goodness meant; Those Exhalations,
Whilst she was rising, followed her but once:
Clouded and set dissolve again and Power,
Themselves on Earth again in a Briny shower.
But Loose we thus the Phoenix of our Age
Without succession; Had we not a Gage,
A Pledge from Heaven of one that should survive;
And keep her precious memory alive:
Or was that Dust so sacred that the young
Rather than take a Resurrection,
Should be content to Mingle't with its own?
Earth was not worthy, Heaven was Greedy to
Possess so Rich a Purchase, both must go
To Glory, Root and Branch, Whilst the glad Mother
With One hand reaches at her Crown, the other
Presents her foetus, with whose Innocence,
Unsullyed yet by Earth, the Blessed Prince
Of Purity delighted, Crowns it with
a Brighter Crown than others. Thus the death,
Of Both gives them a glad deliverie
From present and succeeding misery;
Leaving behind her all those pangs and throws
She should have felt, to be supplied by those,
That big with Love, now suffer pangs of grief,
And sorrows for their sister, daughter, Wife,
And Friend. Yet may her precious memory
Produce some sweeter fruits than these, to be
Arguments of our Love; May we so live
As she: So learn to grow in grace, and thrive
In goodness; So to improve our golden hours,
So to deny our selves and what is ours
To win a Christ, So to despise the Vain
Honors and pleasures of the world to gain
A Crown of Glory. So to love, as she,
First God, and then our friends; (so charity
In her kept to its rule) to imitate
Those lustres that proclaimed her truly great,
Her Faith, Devotion, and Humility,
Her meekness, sweetness, pity, charity
And Love; Thus to imbalm her memory
Serv's better far than tears. And thus to do
After this life may make us happy too.
R. Tuke.

To the RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir JAMES LANGHAM IN MEMORY Of his most VIRTUOUS LADY,
The RIGHT HONORABLE, The Lady ELISABETH,
AS is my Subject, such my Verse should be,
Grave, sober, modest, full of Piety,
Noble, yet humble, every way complete,
Would this my mirror were but half so neat.
Had I but wit and words, great as her name,
All had commanded been to serve the same.
I want, a golden pen from Angels wing
To write, their heavenly notes, to sing
Her praise: In whom virtue and greatness strove
To make her merit reverence, and Love.
Streams of most Royal Blood did fill her veins,
Yet she did boasting check with golden reins
Of humble prudence. To the King of of Kings
Allied by grace: That lasting honor brings.
England's Elisabeth and Suffolks Jane,
(Each Phoenix of her sex and age, those twain,
Whose virtues, learning, crowned their glor'ous Names
Were matched by her, whose worth all others shames.
But death both Saints and Princes does controwl,
And at the Cistern breaks the silver bowl.
Could not thy dearest friends prevent their fears
With all their potency of prayers and tears!
Must all fall under deaths imperial stroke?
Alas! alas! the word by deed is spoke.
Were it not heresy, my heart could wis'
A pythagorean metempsychosis:
But such a metamorphosis would rob
Her of glory, and bring her back to sob
With us, who in this vail most mournfully
Ly humbl'd under sin and misery.
Rest then in bliss, and let us quiet rest
With what is now done: for what God does is best.
We wish our souls with here is; and is it love
To wish her soul below, and ours above?
She was so soon, so wonderfully grown
Above her self and all that here is known,
That soon she was preferred and fixed on high,
Above our sphere, to look like Majesty.
This earthly mould was not of comprehension,
The impress desired, deserved more extension.
This straightened tent could not contain her soul;
Her heart to Heaven flew up and then did toll
Her after it, to take desired possession
Of that blessed mansion here she had in vision.
(Most Worthy Sir) my Web's homespun indeed,
A levidense with a gouty thread:
A garb too coarse, to cloth your Ladies name,
Therefore I fear, I shall derive your blame.
I wish 'twere better, for I do impart,
By this same symbol, symptoms of my heart.
Such as it is I it present; it take
Not for the Author's own, but Objects sake:
Who died once, yea twice, to die no more,
Rose once, to rise, to live an endless score
Of lives, by myriads to Eternity;
To samplar us, that we so live, so die.
Rich. Hook.

P. M. S. Honoratissimae Heroidis ELISABETHAE Langham, etc.
FLete oculi and largos lacrymarum effundite rivos,
Cordaque non fictus contrahat agra dolor,
Ora tegat pallor, torpescat lingua, manusqne
Dediscat cythara ludere dulce melos;
Sed discat moestum moestissima tundere pectus,
Edens occulti vulneris indicia.
Sit procul a nobis cultus, laetaminis index;
Hoc se ornent quos nil publica damna movent.
Ferte citi vestes, queis circum vestiar, atras,
Pullatum pectus dedecet alba toga.
Heu! etenim patriae, sexus, aevique, domusq,
Erepta est nobis Elisabetha, decus:
Sponsi delitiae, desideriumque suorum,
Solamen miseris, praesidiumque bonis.
Illa, inquam, cujus nuper connubia laeta
Perfudere nova pectora laetitia.
Occidit heu! terrasque bominesque repent reliquit;
Parvum interstitium est inter utramque facem.
Quam brevia excipunt quam longi gaudia luctus,
Vt nox longa brevi proxima solstitio est.
Quantula votorum contingit portio nobis,
Quanta mali moles nos inopina premit!
Quam mera sunt adversa, insinceraeque secundae
Res, quam nostra hominum est lubrica prosperitas!
Mundus hic immundus, ingloria gloria nostra,
Illepidusque lepos, noster amaror amor.
Scilicet hic nostris infixus mentibus error,
Quod nimium nobis exteriora placent;
Atque aliquid quasi tentantes abradere rebus
Ardentem unde queant corda levare sitim:
Acrius ardemus, nimirum nostra cupido
Fraenanda immodica est, and retinenda magis.
Tandem igitur discamus to convertere mentes,
Quo nos supremi vox vocat alta dei.
Et cujus merito deflemus funus acerbum,
Illius vitam factaque sancta sequi
Contendamus. Ego vero quo carmine soler
Cor aegrum and moerens, Inclyte sponse, tuum?
Decreto aeterno patris parere necesse
Cujus amorem in Te virga paterna docet.
Hunc precor, ut Te constanti amplectatur amore,
Ictuque absque gravi pectus ut Erudiat.
Sponsam olim Tibi percaram signaverat ante
Ipse sibi, donis, pignoribusque datis.
Abstulit Ergo suum, tibi nulla injuria facta est,
Vsus Jure suo est Arbiter Omnipotens:
Cui, laus, obsequium, cui debita gloria soli,
Cujus ad arbitrium, hic nascitur, ille perit.
Hoc nobis sit opus, semel ista ut luce renatae
Dilectae nunquam, bis percant Animae.
Mortua and Foelix alloquitur Amicos.
Veneranda Matter, sponseque suavissime,
Frater, sorores, cari amici, quid tument
Lacrymis ocelli? quidve singultus, sonos
Querulos, frequentes ore pallido intersecant?
Fugit renidenti ore cur risus, genis
Rubedo, and omne gaudium vultu exulat?
Carent lepore verba, cultui atque ahest
Solitus honos, muta lyra est, ingratum melos?
Respondent.
Heu! luget, amissam parens tua filiam,
Dulcisque conjux eonjugem, Te, singulae
Cum fratre dilecto sorores in gemunt,
Moerent amici, si peris, qui gaudeant?
Respondet iterum.
O caeca corda fragilium mortalium!
Men' vos perisse dicitis? vivo procul
A foece purgata omnium terrestrium;
Melior superstes pars erit semper mei,
Quam dente nigro mors ferox nunquam petet,
Quam non senectus carpet, aut aetas teret.
Egressa terris altiorem intro locum,
Faelix quiesco, functa cunctis casibus.
Mutate, mando, luctum acerbum gaudio;
Multis procellis libera, and multis malis,
Portum attigi, and puris fruor tandem bonis:
Non est amici, rebus invidere, aequi,
Florentibus, suorum: iniqui Judices!
Morbum saluti, bella, si pacis bonis,
Praeponitis; vel si lahorem ducitis
Durum, quiet dulci amabilem magis,
Poenam voluptate, atque inopia copia,
Securitate antiquius periculum,
Si dedecus praeponderare gloriae;
Miseria si bonitate dulcior.
Ergo; alma matter, sponseque suavissime,
Frater, sorores, cari amici, discite
Colere, alacres, perennem nostri memoriam:
Metam and malorum a morte speretis, modo
Christo marito nupta sit foelix anima.
Tho. Dominel.

ON THE DEATH OF THE RIGHT HONORABLE, The LADY ELIZABETH LANGHAM.
THough the just Praises of her House would be,
Things nobler, than the handsom'st Flattery
Ascribes to Others; since no Soul from Hence
E're rose; but Lived Example or Defense
Unto his Country, and nor any Name
In the whole Race needs lean upon the Fame
Of a great Ancestor; yet to this Tomb
No pompous brag of Pedigree does come,
Nor any History of her Princely Blood,
Writ big, to make the rest of the Epitaph good.
She that outwent all Old, does claim New praise:
And is it not due? the Vices of the Days
She counterpoiz'd, though fresh ones hourly grew,
With Virtues both as Many and as New;
So that we saw Religion did begin,
At length to be on equal terms with Sin.
She showed it was (whilst Other Arts do thrive)
No dull and unadvancing One to Live.
Nothing in Her was granted, naught derived,
Her Graces sweetly Flowing, not contrived.
How did she Live! Not like dull Souls, that feel
No Life or Spirit, but like a heavy Wheel
Turn by Example, only or by Passion,
Are implicitly virtuous, good in Fashion.
Those Crimes, which weekly with rude heat we see,
Or unconvincing stifness chidden be,
Her Manners did so nobly reprehend,
That by Her Actions all our Lives did mend:
Every of which was so exempt from blame,
She might on any One trust her whole Fame;
Yet such Her Piety, that on them All,
She would not bear her Conscience. O how small
And limited were Her Indulgencyes
To life, who scarce durst ever taste of Ease.
Touched but not Dwelt with Pleasures: no hour spared
To Sleek her Life; it was severe and hard:
Not outward or affected, whilst within
The Soul lies rioting in sloth and sin.
Like a sour Vot'ry, at whose Cell's grim Door,
In public notice lays her bloody store,
Engines of sullen Penitence, whilst she
Lies snorting in her stall of Luxury.
But she not needs that loathsome Vice stand by,
To mend her Form: she is seen to every Eye
By Her own Light, which flows upon the sense,
And dazles all our weak intelligence.
She, that lived thus, without the small st pause,
To spoil it by contriving Vain Applause.
She that was Great and Noble without thought
Of being so, and never poorly bought
Renown by little Ambushes of Good,
Concea'ld, on purpose to be understood.
She that being grown in every One so high,
Could use so many Virtues rev'rendly;
Enjoyed so much of Heaven, by such Grace,
She died for mere distinction of the Place.
Samuel Wills.

A Monsieur Le Chevalier Jaques Langeham: Sur la mort de La Tres Noble, Tres
Illu stre, and Tres Vertueuse Madame Elisabeth sa Chere MoitiE --
LEs plus cuisans mal-hours trouuent allegement,
Apres que le deuoir a rendu sagement
Tout ce que l'amitie demand a la Nature:
Mais lors que mon Esprit song a vous consoler,
Contre les sentimens d'v-ne perte si dure:
Plus ie suis prepare, moins j'ay dequoy parler.
Je scay bien que votre ame touiours robuste and saine
Aueeques son discourse a combatu sa peine,
Et qu'elle a seurement treuve sa Guerison;
Y tascher apres vovs on nele peut sans Blasme:
Car ie ne pense pas qu'on treuve enla Raison
Que ce que vous treuvez mesmes dedans vostre ame.
Ne vous aigrisses plus d'vn chagrin si recent
Que votre ame entraitant d'ennuy ce qu'elle sent;
Pour sa Chere Compagne sans cesser ne soupire.
Ainsi son Entretien ne vous serarendu
Mais Le Ciel consolant vos pertes d'vn Empire,
Vous donnera, un jour plus que n'auez perdu.
I. D. dG.

IN Illustrissimam Heroinam, ELISABETHAM LANGHAM, Quae gravida obiit.
Men's pia luce mera radiosa perennat Olympo:
Haec, bis nata solo; terque beata polo.
Bina perillustri tumulantur Corpora tumba:
Embryo, Matre sua; Matter and ipsa, sua.
Mira bipartito memorantur Facta libello:
Et quae non capiat, commemorare licet.
Idem contractius.
Corpora, Facta, Animam, capit, Urna, Volumen, Olympus,
Bina, Serena, piam, tristis, Manuale, Refulgens.
S. M. Vt prius.

Anagramma
ELISABETHA LANGHAMIA

Ah! hei! Magna illa abest.

Analysis.
AH est dolentis utique pectoris sonus,
Et HEI similiter ingemiscentis tonus.
Utrumque Pulchre convenit negotio
Praesentis instituti, and apt funebris
Solennitatis exprimit tristes notas.
Vbi ILLA MAGNA Herois and Miraculum Praesentis Aevi flentibus nobis ABEST.
Quis non in isto flebili casu miser
Salsas in ipsas solveretur lachrymas,
Praesens and illam condolens absentiam
Lugeret hisce voculis AH, HEI gemens!
CHRONOGRAMMA ELIsabetha LanghaM nobIs abLata Deo VIVIt. EPIGRAMMA.
CVr impotenti conquerimur modo?
Vltrave metas plangimus invidi?
Ablata nobis chara Langham
Elisabetha Deo (ecce) vivit.
Posthac amictus tollite fordidos.
Vultusque tandem ponite squalidos
Ablata nobis chara Langham
Elisabetha Deo (ecce) vivit
Ducat chorae as spirituum chorus
ovent beati coelitus Angeli.
Ablata nobis chara Langham
Elisabetha Deo (ecce) vivit.
Qui vultis illa perpetuo frui
Ipsi supernas scandite semitas
Ablata nobis chara Langham
Elisabetha Deo (ecce) vivit.
T. H. ut prius.

FINIS.
Upon the DEATH Of the LADY ELIZABETH, Wife to Sr JAMES LANGHAM, Daughter to
FERDINANDO, Earl, and LVCY, Countess of HVNTINGDON.
COuld Noble Birth command Impartial Death,
Or court him to prolong this vital Breath;
A fever had not scorch't those veins, where met
The Blood of Hastings and Plantagenet.
If Beauty could have moved unto remorse,
Or charmed, with powerful spells, the conqu'rors force,
Those cheeks had saved her, where united were
The Roses both of York and Lancaster.
If Virtues self, or Miracles could have done,
She had lived still; for she her self was One.
Virtue it self's Immortal; But alas
The Virtuous in the Mortal crowd must pass.
Her Husbands Riches we will not think upon,
(His Mines in present, or Reversion)
As being Richer in his Lovely Bride,
Yet Death her snatched from his unwilling side:
Nor yet those Treasures of a Nobler Mine,
Which make him in the van of Learning shine:
His Parts could not (Immortal though they be)
Prolong his better Part's Mortality.
But why presume I to eclipse her Rays
Wronging Perfection with Imperfect Praise?
Praises that fall below their subjects worth,
Deface, and darken, what they should set forth.
To speak her Praise, her Husbands Tongues, and those
Which her Incomparable Mother knows,
(Which are the Modern and the Learned too)
Are each of them too weak, and all too few:
Only this comfort we have by the By;
More Sweetness cannot live, and Goodness Dye:
Nor shall the World again, in any one
Lament the Loss of more Perfection.
She and her Spouse, in Life, changed mutual flames,
Death should have changed her and her Mothers names:
For had her Name been Lucy, 't had been right,
Lucy the shortest Day, and longest Night.
See what terrestrial Constellations are!
A Blazing now, and then a Falling starr!
But Stars that set must rise again: for she
Sleeps but to wake during Eternity.
Subscripsit Jo. Joins.
Fecit Tristitia Versum.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir JAMES LANGHAM, Upon the DEATH of his most
Virtuous, and Matchless LADY, The RIGHT HONORABLE The LADY ELISABETH.
WHat clammy Stygian Fog! What Chaos hurled
Over every Climat of this Little World!
Dark Soul! -- Benighted thus! -- Not one faint Ray
From the Bright Orb of Light, to let in Day!
All Hung with Blacks! -- No Phoebus to inspire
A Laboring Phant'sy, with Po etick Fire!
Light up the Virgin-Tapers; -- Let me see,
By those pale Flames, to write an Elegy.
"('It Is much to see how in a Tragic Part,
"A wounded Eye will make a Bleeding Heart!)
There lies the Noble Corpse;-Stand nigh the Hearse,
And ('spite of all the Muses) Mourn a Verse.
What though their Springs be Frozen!-Grief shall be
An Overflowing Hippocrene to Me.
I Will Bathe in Tears;-And still fetch New Supplies
Of Sorrow, from the Torrents of my Eyes.
Shall Noblest Blood, -- Shall Saint-like Piety,
Shall Humble Greatness, -- Virgin-Modesty;
Shall Un-Exampl'd Goodness, Wisdom, Parts,
Shall Learned Skill in Languages, and Arts,
Shall Honor, Sweetness, Meekness, Beauty, Youth,
Shall Spot-less Innocence, -- and Naked Truth,
Shall Pure Devotion, -- Shall Seraphick Love,
(Scarce Understood -- but by blessed souls above)
Shall all the Virtues, -- all the Graces lie
Enshrined with this Great Lady! -- And shall I
Be un-concern'd at this great Funeral!
First Self-Revenge, and Indignation shall
(In spite of Fate) make me Poetical.
I must not thus ungrateful be (Dear Sir)
Though, all I write, but serves to lessen Her.
And (might I plead excuse for such Neglect)
It Is: -- Her Sublimity, and my Defect.
My weak-nerv'd Eyes will not confront the Sun;
Nor Leaden Heels his rapid course outrun;
I never could stride the Ocean with a Span,
Nor, -- with my finews cramp Leviathan:
No more is it possible for Human Praise,
On That exalted Head, to plant the Bays.
This -- is a Task for Angels, -- and the Quire
Of Essences, composed of Light and Fire.
The great admired Apelles never could think
To paint the Glaring Noonday Sun with Ink.
But, -- May not This Bright Sun reflected be,
By Muddy shallow pudles, to the Eye?
It Is true indeed; -- And such is That Reflex,
From us, on This Great Mirror of her Sex:
Grandchild of Kings, -- Branch of the Royal Stem,
And -- Orient Sparkle of the Diadem!
Great Huntingdons Fair Daughter, fair as Light,
With all resplendent Beauties shining-bright,
Daz'ling, with Beams of Glory, Human sight!
It Is She, -- Bright offspring of Great Lueia,
That scatter's Darkness, -- and restores the Day,
Where She appears; -- Nor can our Hemi-sphere
Boast of a more refulgent Foemal Peer:
It Is She, -- The Dearest Consort (late) and Life
To Him, the best deserving Such a Wife,
The Noble Langham, -- Whose Magnetique Soul
Tremble's -- and Hovers toward the Starry Pole,
Where She Is on high ascended, -- Nor can be
Yet pacified, -- without Her Company:
It Is She, -- the Great Eliza, -- Hastings named,
Yet-more for Goodness, than for Greatness Famed:
It Is She my Verse should Treat of -- But in vain,
I see, it is, to row against the Main;
And therefore here, -- Draw over a Veil I must
Of Sable Silence, -- and Weep over Her Dust.
Haec serio, quamvis sero, Et Madens adhuc Lachrymis Genas, Conquestus est
Vtriusque tum Nobilissimae Hastingiorum, tum Amplissimae Langhamiorum Familiae.
Cultor Devotissimus Ferd. Archer.

Upon the Much deplored DEATH Of the TRULY RELIGIOUS And RIGHT HONORABLE The
Lady ELISABETH LANGHAM.
Epicedium intempestive maestum.
THough Funeral Rites be done, The Sermon past;
The Corpse interred, the blessed Soul at rest:
Cancel not Homage, though it speak so late;
This Subjects-worth, never speaks it out of date.
Nor can plain Dialect implead that Verse,
Inflamed with Rhetoric, from such an Hearse;
Speak to the height of worth, and when we can
Express no more, Her Name's the Vatican:
But more pure Lines, and Lectures, here do lie
Urn'd in this Ectype of Divinity,
Than Volumes now can teach, or mortals find,
Wait 'till you come to Heaven, then read her mind.
Transcribe we may, the Jewels Casque a little,
But to the Pearl it self, bequeath no Tittle;
Our muddy thoughts, would wrong what grace now crowns
And work, instead of Plaudits, shameful frowns.
Look not upon Seraphick-Spirit in Throne,
'Till tears be quite dissolved, Then look on,
Which will not be (I think) 'till that time come,
That man needs write no Epicedium.
Though at this sacred Shrine, some pious pay
Of Tears devoted to that solemn day
Have offered been, and some spent all their store;
Yet, Time have had since then to gather more,
Stock their Eie-vessels, in each Channel'd Vein
With drops in Zeal, to weep her over again.
And must that stand for all? No, when that is gone
To Ages; say, the mourning's but begun;
When the salt-springs of Natural tears are dried
Up; And (in course) the mourning's laid aside;
(Which (as to Fate) has seldom been from hence,
'S if Heaven had fixed Blacks for Inheritance.)
Despair not of an Artful Train, whose Hearts,
In sable-sadnesse, will lament their Parts;
And if that fail, the Rural sort will sing
Their doleful Anthems to this gracious Thing.
If any Bankrupt be, of Grace, and sorrow,
Make bold (of those who are full stockt) to borrow;
Trade in some tears and sighs; here such worth lies,
To which thou ow'st the tribute of thine eyes,
That when thy self art dead, there may remain
Some, that for this, will pay thee tears again.
Let Us not delay the time, where have ye laid
This precious Piece? Is this the vaulted shade
Famous for what it holds? This is that Tomb,
Whose every single dust in its cold Womb,
Speaks louder worth, and is of value more,
Than Mines of Potasie, and Ganges shore:
Far Richer, is this Odor, than had all
The Eastern Gardens spic'd Her Funeral;
And to the consecrated ground, we will add
This, that her body here lies buried.
Light up a Torch, whose beams may blaze as far,
(As does the portent or strange bearded-star)
To summon every Eye to come and see
How Heaven has acted us, to Tragedy.
But stay a while, until your thoughts can bring
Consigned goodness for an offering;
First read this Table, then unlock your eyes,
And drop your spirits into Elegies;
So vast, so good, so fair, so full a Theme,
Calls for a Cherubs quill, or Phoebus beam.
Tabella incondite sculpta.
Draw not too nigh, least you offend those Laws,
Wherewith this Sepulcher affection awes;
Dread to molest that sacred Ghost, whose soul
Abjured the very name of Vain and Foul.
What rude attempter ever durst advance
Her presence, without check of countenance?
The sliest stratagem, that Vice could plot,
Felt the strong working of her Antidote.
If in discourse, the least mistrust did lie,
She stopped the rise with quick antilogie.
Virtue stood sentinel, at every sense,
Repulst assaults with Divine influence.
They who did read her Phisnomy aright,
Could not but read true Honors Margarite.
Devote in Closet, yet in Chamber free
To sweet Converse; Low in her highest degree:
Nothing indeed in her extract did shine,
But what was truly noble and Divine.
To run all Graces over in short transact,
Were, but t'epitomize, her fuller act;
To speak them one by one, were but in vain,
The project of whose soul's the Counterpain.
She was the Citadel, and centered all
That we can either Good, or Gracious call.
Nature, Art, Grace contesting; gently strived
Which of them had her more embelished;
At length admiring all, they cease the strift
For her, in whom all had their equal thrift.
This threefold Fabric, so composed in one,
Man could not judge which had Dominion;
The last, was that indeed, which seemed to sway,
And Crown her morals, to her dying day.
Clotilda's dead, and so's Eudoxia,
Mariamne likewise, and Pulcheria,
Choice Ladies in their days: without offense,
(And fawning laid aside) here lies the sense,
And meaning of them all; In finer mint
By how much more, there is truth of Virtue in it.
Mirror of Ladies, Virgin, Wife, and Child,
For every stage so congruously compiled;
'Twas hard to tell, which was her nobler part,
She acted all with such prudential Art.
Flattery she hated, as that base result,
Of worthless spirits; truth was her grand consult.
(If Priest and People, do not flatter some,
First falls a frown, then next their day of doom)
What, some the Crest, she counted Pest of honor,
They must speak truth, that any thing spoke on her:
Her beauty was her own; Nor needed more,
Her amorous dressings, were for inward store.
She left the gaudy Plumes and Paints, for those
Decoy's, that have no other worth than clothes
And face, like Pageants to be seen and shown,
With those often borrowed trappings, not their own.
Let others trim their outsides, she made sure
To polish that, which Heaven was toimmure.
As she thus lived, so thus she left her breath,
Making her dying life, her living death.
Tabellae Catastrophe sive Corollarium Elegiacum.
Ask ye, why so small Grace in the world is found?
It Is because so much Grace is here entombed;
Surely she scarce had Peer, (nor scarce will have)
But those who went before her to the Grave.
'Twas she made up the sacred number seven;
All Saints on earth together, now Saints in Heaven.
What more contributes Glory upon earth
Than to nurse a Constellation every birth?
And what more calms the spirit, when passions high
Than signals, which make good this Charity.
Wrong not my Faith; their honored Lord, though dead,
Lives to wear this seven-star'd Coronet on his head.
Well, since to Heaven, they all have made such have,
Let the rest longer stay, but go at last
Where Hierarchies, will welcome them, with more
Joy, than with grief, we can their loss deplore.
Epitaphium succincte digestum.
Tears are the common pledge, then to this fall
Bring tears of mirrhe and balm, or none at all.
Acquit the debt we cannot, for here lies
That which we lost, but what we cannot prize.
Disburse what store we can, the more we may
And pay that over again, we paid to day;
Deposite to the utmost drop, yet still
There Is more behind, for what is invalu'ble:
A richer Piece on earth, could we not find,
Were it the pensil could pourtray the mind.
But since with that, our eyes cannot here be blessed,
We Will draw the curtain; leave her to her rest.
Sic ex animo defleuit. Jo. Rosse.

TO THE SACRED And Spotless MEMORY OF THAT RIGHT HONORABLE LADY, THE LADY
ELISABETH LANGHAM DECEASED.
POets, and Priests were anciently allied
So near in blood, that one, same name did hide,
Or rather signify both Functions; and
They still (like brethren) solemn mourners stand
Here at this Noble Hearse (the imbalming's sweeter
That Is made of Preachers Prose, and Poets Meeter)
Not for to add, but only to proclaim
The Odor of her Virtues, and her Name;
Which, now her earthen Case, or Box is broken,
(Like the Nard Pistick in the Gospel spoken)
Fills not some private Room with fragrant smell,
But sweetens, and delights all that dwell
Within the Circuit of those neighboring places,
That blessed were with the perfume of her Graces:
Who was as Good as Great, as Chaste as Wise,
Borne this debauched age for to chastise
By her example; to teach Wives t'amend,
And know their Husbands only for their friend;
She bad our wanton Madams all, avaunt,
With Paint, and Patches, and their high Ga-lant;
Bad them, for shame of Womanhood, forbear
Thus to outface chaste Virtue, and take care
They shame not both the Pulpit, and the Stage
To touch upon the ryots of this Age,
Acting such horrid crimes, even at high noon,
As none dare touch with Tongs, -- but foul Lampoon.
But when she saw these sulfurous flames increase
In spite of Med'cins, neither quench nor cease;
Loathing this black Stye of lust.
Seraglio, up she high's
Into the Snowy Sanctuary of virtue.
Nunn'ry of the Sky's,
Carried in fiery Char'ot fitt's her mind,
('It Is but her Mantle we have left behind)
Where the great King of Virtues does her grace,
And thus bespeaks her in that blessed place --
In Cassiopeia's Chair, come, sit thee down, Rest.

And on thy head wear Ariadnes Crown. Glory.

There with sweet peace, and joys Celestial
Feast, blessed Soul; the Guerdon due to all
Pure Hearts, that scorned to obey the sense,
Like Vassalls to that Beast Concupiscence:
For they, whose Spirits here did not incline
To serve the Flesh like Bruits, are now Divine.
S. Bold.

Upon the Death of the RIGHT HONORABLE The LADY ELISABETH LANGHAM.
THe joy of Angels, whom the World beheld
Like to a blazeing Pattern that excelled
In shineing Virtues, and in Graces pure,
Adorned with Modesty, that would endure
The touchstone, and the test of heavenly fire:
So dear, that Saints did her sweet soul admire.
Even she whose amiable Sanctity
And chastest Amiableness did vie
And far outvie the virtuous Presidents
Of ancient and of modern Matrons, Lent
A luster of most glorious Piety
With faith and patience joined in amity.
Even she whose life a perfect copy wrote
Of Righteousness clothed with an holy coat:
Whose steadfast faith and patience did conspire
By wisdom, holy zeal to set on fire:
Who never thought her time was better spent,
Then in his service, who her life had lent.
Even she whose lovely Glances did enthrall
Her Dcarest's fancy, and engaged all
Her to admire; and bless his happy Fate
Within whose arms such peereless beauties sat.
She loved her God, in him her Husband she
Loved with a pure and holy chastity.
Even she (who while below, did live above)
Is gone to dwell with Christ, the God of Love.
Her earthly Husband she has left below,
Her Husband-Maker now does her bestow.
The world has lost a Copy, he a Wife,
Whose virtues clothed his Love with heavenly life.
Sure happy she. Then let true love aspire
To bear that loss that perfects her desire;
'Twas here to serve her God in holy Love:
In Glory then, to reign with him above.
Long was she pressing, now the Mark has hit,
Press to the same, You may enjoy her yet:
If not after a carnal manner, yet
With holy habits you your self may fit
In time with her in heavenly place to fit.
Have care no discontent your entrance let.
Though loosers, as we pray, yet say we must,
Thy Will be done, though our Joy lies in dust.
This Lady, and her high borne thoughts are flow'n
Unto her heavenly kindred, does them own.
Whose teeming womb showed she was loath to mount
To her great God upon a singl account.
Her noble birth you counted honor here,
Out of Your bed two souls are honored there.
Your loss it is by her gains quite weighed down,
You want her presence, she has gained a Crown:
A Crown of endless Glory. Let that cheer
Your drooping spirits. Seek to meet her there.
Let her advancement be to you a pawn,
That in her happiness your hopes do dawn.
Let Patience have her perfect work, so we
Entire and perfect, lacking naught shall be.
Impatience may provoke, it cannot gain
Grief-healing Medicines, but increases pain.
Increase in love to God, who does assure
That all shall work for good, that work endure.
These Meditations, and the like, I here
Do to your soul commend, with filial fear,
Least you should him provoke, whose Goodness lent
The light of her most holy President,
To guide your steps into the paths of bliss;
March in those paths of joys, You cannot miss.
S. Newton.

Upon the much Lamented DEATH of the RIGHT HONORABLE The LADY ELISABETH
LANGHAM Lately Deceased.
FArewell Conglobate Virtue, You are gone,
To be some Glorious Constellation.
One Star is but a taper to your light,
A Glowe-worm, when your Virtues come in sight.
Had Plato seen you, ripe, his wish had grown,
And virtue visible, he might have shown.
Your Souls symmetry had old Poets known,
The had changed their trine of Graces into one.
Now Archimedes sphere shall useless grow,
Your acts the heavenly motions better show,
What Honor all men give to virtues shrine,
To best examples, we will give to thine.
Since you are Virtues standard, we will be
Procrustes like, without his tyranny,
By yours, like to his bed, we measure shall,
Our Actions er'e we them do virtue call.
Alex. Jones.

In Obitum Nobilissimae Dominae, Dominae ELISABETHAE LANGHAM.
AVdiat Vtopiae rudis incola, cujus ad aures
Nondum pervenit nobilis historia
Tam celebris Dominae! reputetur anonymus iste
Qui tantum nomen nesciat, aut taceat.
Conarer frustra meritas tibi dicere lauds,
Maxima, quum nequeunt id satis, ingenia.
Defunctae tenuis calamus ne detrahat, ejus
Vita nil potuit pulchrius exprimere.
Caelebs dum mansit, cunctis virtute praeivit
Vxorem nullam, novimus esse parem.
In terris coelo charissima vixit, and inter
Aethereos proceres jam tenet aureolam.
Annos excessit pietas, tamen altius urgens,
In coelis tandem purior emi^uit.
Quare ue doleat conjux, bane esse beatam,
Sed quod nulla, sibi quae foret aequa, manet.
John Davis.

FINIS.

