THE LORD FINCH HIS SPEECH in the house of Commons, the 21 of December, 1640.

He being then Lord Keeper.

Printed in the Year, 1641.

THE LORD FINCH HIS SPEECH in the house of Commons, the 21 of December, 1641.
He being then Lord Keeper.
Master Speaker
I Do first present my most humble thanks to this Honorable Assembly, for
this favor vouchsased me in granting me admittance to their presence, and do
humbly beseech them to believe it is no desire to preserve my self, or my
fortune, but to deserve the good opinion of those that have drawn me hither. I
do profess, in the presence of him that knows all hearts, I had rather go
from door to door, and crave Daobulum Bellizario, with the good will of this
assembly, then enjoy all the Honors and Fortunes I am capable of.

I do not come hither with an intention to justify my words, my actions or
opinions, but to make a plain and clear narration of my self, and there
humbly to submit to the wisdom and Justice of this House, my self and all
that concerns me.

But this House will not take words, but with clear and Ingenious dealing.

And therefore I shall beseerh them to think that I come not hither with a set
or studied speech. I come to speak my heart, and to speak it clearly, and
plainly, and then to leave it to your clemency and justice, and I hope if any
thing shall slip from me (to work contrary to my meaning, and Intention
disorderly or ill placed) you will be pleased to make a favorable
Construction, and leave me the liberty of explanation (if there shall be any)
but I hope there shall be no cause for it.

I hope for my affection in Religion, no man doubts me: What my education
was, and under whom I lived for many years, as well known eI lived near
thirty years in the Society of Grayes-Inne; and if one (that was a Reverend
Preacher there in my time, Doctor Sibs) were now living, he were able to give
Testimony to this House, that when a party ill affected in Religion sought to
tire and weary him out, he had his chiefest encouragement, and help from me. I
have M. Speaker bin now 15 years of the Kings Council; from the first hour
to this minute, no man is able to say, that ever I was either Author, deviser,
or consenter to any project.

It pleased the King, my gracious Master, after I had served him diverse years,
to prefer me to two places; first to be chief Justice of the Common Pleas;
and then Lord Keeper of his Great Seal: I say it in the presence of God, I was
so far from the thought of the one, and the ambition of the other, that if my
Master the King, his Grace and goodness had not been, I had never enjoyed
those Honors.

In all that time, I may speak it with a Confidence, these hands never touched
bribe nor reward, these eyes were never blinded with guist, I took heed to
these affections, common to man, which are aptest to mislead a Judge,
Friendship and hatred, neither in the own, nor the other have I adhered.

Those that know me, know me far from a vindicative nature.

I cannot know, M. Speaker, what particulars there are by which you have an ill
opinion of me, and therefore I shall come very weakly armed: Yet these, that
either in my own knowledge or such knowledge as is given me, and not from any
of this house, I shall speak somewhat that I hope, being truth and accompanied
with clearenesse and ingenuity, will at the last proceed some allay in that ill
opinion, which may perhaps be conceived of me.

M. Speaker, I had once the honor to sit in that place, from the first time I
came hither, to the unfortunate hour I went out, I do appeal to all that
were then; if I served not you with candor.

Ill office I never did to either of the Houses, but did ever wish the good of
both.

For that last unhappy day, I had my share of grief in it, and I hope there
are some do remember, no man within the walls of this House did express more
Symptoms of Sorrow then I did.

After an adjournment for two or three days, it pleased his Majesty to send
for me, to let me know, he could not so resolve of things as he desired, and
therefore was desirous there might be an adjournement for some few days more.

I protest, I did not then discern in his Majesty, and I believe it was not in
his thought, to think of the dissolving of the Parliament, but was pleased to
command me to deliver his pleasure to the House for an adjournment for some few
days, and forthwith upon the delivery of the mesuage, to come and wait upon
him.

He likewise commanded me, if questions were offered to be out, upon my
Allegiance I should dare to do it.

How much then did I in all humbleness reason with his Majesty, is not for me
here to speak; only thus much let me say.

I was no Author of any council in it, I was only person in receiving
Commission.

I speak not this, as any thing I now produce, or do invente, or take up for
mine own excuse, but what is known to diverse, and some Honorable persons in
this House to be most true.

All that I will say for that, is humbly to beseech you all to consider, that
if it had been any man's cause as it was mine, between the displeasure of a
gracious King, and the ill opinion of an Honorable Assembly.

I beseech you lay altogether; lay my first actions and behavior with the
last, I shall submit with your honorable and favorable constructions.

For the shipping business, my opinion in that cause has layne heavy upon me;
and I shall clearly and truly present unto you what every thing is, with this
protestation, (that if in reckoning up mine own opinion, what I was of, or
what I delivered, any thing of it he displeasing, or contrary to the opinion of
this House) that I am far from justifying of it, but submit that and all
other my actions to your wisdom and goodness: Master Speaker, the first
Writs that were sent out about shipping business, I had no more knowledge of
it, and was as ignorant as any one member of this House, or any man in the
Kingdom, I was never the Author or deviser of it* and will bouldly say, from
the first hour, I did never advise or council the setting forth of any ship
Writs in my life.

Master Speaker, it is true, that I was made chief Justice of the common Pleas
some four days before the Ship-writs went out to the Ports and Maritine
places (as I do remember) the 13 of October, 1634, they do bear test: And I
was sworn chief Justice the 16 of October, so as they went out in that time,
but without my knowledge or privity, the God of Heaven knows this to be true.

Master Speaker, afterward his Majesty was pleased to command my Lord chief
Justice of the Kings Bench, that then was (Sir Thomas Richardson) and chief
Baron of the Exchequer that now is, and my self, then chief of the Common
Pleas, to take into consideration the president then brought unto us, which we
did, and after returned to his Majesty what we had found out of these
Presidents.

It is true, that afterward his Majesty did take into consideration, that if
the whole Kingdom were concerned, that it was not reason to lay the whole
burden upon the Cinque Ports and Maritine Towns.

Thereupon, upon what ground his Majesty took that into his consideration, I
do confess I do know nothing of it.

His Majesty did command my Lord chief Justice that now is, my Lord chief
Baron, and my self, to return our opinions; whether, when the whole Kingdom
is in danger, and the Kingdom ingenerall is concerned, it be not according to
Law and reason, that the whole Kingdom, and his Majesty and all interessed
therein, should join in defending and preserving thereof.

This was in time, about one 1634.

In Michaelmas Term following, his Majesty commanded me to go to all the
Judges, and require their opinions in particular.

He commanded me to do it to every one, and to charge them upon their duty and
allegiance, to keep it secret.

Master Speaker, it was never intended by his Majesty (so professed by him) at
that time, and so declared to all the Judges, that it was not required by him,
to be such a binding opinion to the Subject, as to hinder him from calling it
in question, nor to be binding to themselves, but that upon better reason, and
advise they may alter it; but desired their opinions, for his own private
reason.

I know very well, that extrajudiciall opinion of Judges ought not to be
binding.

But I did think, and speak my heart and conscience freely; my self, and the
rest of the Judges being sworn and by our oaths tied to Counsel the King when
he should require advise of us, that we were bound by our oaths and duties to
return our opinions.

I did obey his Majesty's command, and do here before the God of heaven avow
it.

I did never use the least promise of preferment or reward to any, nor did use
the least menacy; I did leave it freely to their own consciences and liberty;
for I was left the liberty of my own by his Majesty, and had reason to leave
them the liberty of their own consciences.

And I beseech you be pleased to have some belief, that I would not say this,
but that I know the God of heaven will make it appear, and I beseech you that
extravagant speeches may not move against that which is a positive and clear
truth.

Master Speaker, in the discourse of this (as is between Judges, some small
discourses sometimes) yet never any cause wherein any Judges conferred, that
were so little conference as between me and them.

Master Speaker, against a Negative, I can say nothing, but I shall affirm
nothing unto you, but by the grace of God, as I affirm it to be true, so I
make no doubt of making it appear to be so.

This opinion was subscribed without Solicitation, there was not any man of us
did make any doubt of subscribing our opinion, but two, Master Justice Hutton,
and Master Justice Crook.

Master Justice Crook made not a scruple of the thing, but of the
introduction, for it was thus:

That whereas the Ports and the Maritine Towns were concerned; there according
to the Presidents in former times, the charge lay on them.

So when the Kingdom was in danger, of which his Majesty was the sole Judge;
whether it was not agreeable to Law and reason, the whole Kingdom to bear the
charge;

I left this case with Judge Crook.

The next Term I spoke with him, he could give me no resolution, because he
had not seen the writs in former times, but did give his opinion, that when
the whole Kingdom was in danger, they of the defense ought to be borne by all.

So of that opinion of his, there was no need of a Solicitation.

I speak no more here, than I did openly in my argument in the Chequer Chamber.

This is the naked truth: for Master Justice Hutton, he did never subscribe at
all.

I will only say this, that I was so far from pressing him to give his
opinion, because he did ask time to consider of it, that I will boldly say,
and make it good; that when his Majesty would have had him sometimes sent for,
to give his opinion, I beseeched his Majesty to leave him to himself and his
conscience; and that was the ill office I did.

The Judges did subscribe in November or December, 1635.

I had no conference (nor truly I think) by accident any discourse with any of
the Judges touching their opinions; for till February 1636, there was no speech
of it, for when they had delivered their opinions, I did return (according to
my duty) to my Master the King, and delivered them to him: in whose custody
they be in.

In February 1636, upon a command that came from his Majesty, by one of the
then Secretaries of State; the Judges all assembled in Grayes-Inne, we did then
fall into a debate of the case then sent unto us, and we did then return our
opinion unto his Majesty; there was then much discourse and great debate about
it.

Mine opinion and conscience at that time was agreeable to that opinion I then
delivered.

I did use the best arguments I could, for the maintenance of my opinion; and
that was all I did.

It is true that then at that time, Master Justice Hutton, and Master Justice
Crook, did not differ in the mean point, which was this;

When the Kingdom was in danger, the chargd ought to be borne by the whole
Kingdom.

But this point, whether the King was the sole Judge of the danger? they
differed.

So as there was between the first subscription, and this debate, and
consultation, some 15. months differance?

It is true, that all of them did then subscribe, both Justice Hutton, and
Justice Crook, which was returned to his Majesty, and after published by my
Lord Keeper (my predecessor) in the Stat-chamber.

For the manner of publishing it I will say nothing, but leave it to those,
whose memories will call to mind what was then done.

The reason of the subscription of Justice Hutton, and Justice Crook, (though
they differed in opinion) grew from this that was told them from the rest of
the Judges.

That where the greater number did agree in their vote, the rest were involved
and included.

And now I have faithfully delivered, what I did in that business, till I came
(which was afterward) to my argument in the Exchequer Chamber, for the
question was, Ascire facias issued out of the Exchequer, in that case of Master
Hampdens; of which I can say nothing, for it was there begun, and afterward
rejourned, to have advice of all the Judges.

Master Speaker, among the rest (according to my duty) I argued the case.

I shall not trouble you, to tell you what my argument was, I presume their are
Copies enough of it; only I will tell you there are four things, very briefly,
what I then declared.

First concerning the matter of danger, and necessary of the whole Kingdom.

I profess that there was never a Judge in the Kingdom did deliver an
opinion, but that it must be in a case of apparent danger.

When we came to an argument of the case, it was not upon a matter or issue,
but it was upon a demurrer.

Whether the danger was sufficiently admitted in pleading, and therefore was
not the thing that was in dispute that was the first degree and step that led
unto it.

I did deliver my self as free and as clear as any man did, that the King
ought to govern by the positive Laws of the Kingdom, that he could not alter
nor change, nor innovate in matters of Law, but by common consent in Parliament.

I did surther deliver, that if this were used to make a further revenue or
benefit to the King, or in any other way but in case of necessity, and for the
preservation of the Kingdom, The judgment did warrant no such thing:

My opinion in this business, I did in my conclusion of my argument submit to
the judgment of this House.

I never delivered my opinion that money ought to be raised, but Ships provided
for the defense of this Kingdom, and in that the writ was performed.

And that the charge ought not to be in any case, but where the whole Kingdom
was in danger.

And Master Justice Hutton, and Master Justice Crook, were of the same opinion
with me.

I do humbly submit, having related unto you my whole carriage in this
business, humbly submitting myself to your grave and favorable consures,
beseeching you not to think that I delivered these things with the least
intention to subvert or subject the common Law of the Kingdom, or to bring in
or to introduce any new way of government, it has been far from my
thoughts, as any thing under the heavens.

Master Speaker, I have heard too that there has bin some ill opinion
conceived of me about Forest business, which was a thing far out of the way
of my study, as any thing I know toward the Law.

But it pleased his Majesty, in the sickness of Master Noye, to give some
short warning to prepare my self for that employment.

When I came there, I did both the King and Commonwealth acceptable service,
for I did and dare be bold to say, with extreme danger to my self and
fortune, (some do understand my meaning here in) ran through that business,
and left the Forre^^ as much as was there.

A thing in my judgment considerable for the advantage of the Commonwealth, as
could be undertaken.

When I went down about that employment, I satisfied my sulfe about the matter
of perambulation.

There were great difficulty of opinions, what perambulation was.

I did arm my sulfe as well as I could, before I did any thing in it.

I did acquaint those that were then Judges, in the presence of the noble
Lords, with such objections as I thought it my duty to offer unto them.

If they thought they were not objections of such weight, as were not fit to
stir them, I would not do the King that disservice.

They thought the objections had such answers as might well induce the like
upon a conference with the whole Country, admitting me to come and confer to
with them; the Country did unanimously subscribe.

It fell out afterward, that the King commanded me, and all this before I was
chief Justice, togo into Essex, and did, then tell me he had been informed,
that the bounds of the Forest were narrer, then in truth ought they to be; and
I did according to his command.

I will here profess that which is known to many, I had no thought or
intention of enlarging the bounds of the Forest, further then that part about
it, which there was a perambulation about 26 Edward 4.

I desired the Country to confer with me about it, if they were pleased to do
it; and then according to my duty, I did produce these Records which I thought
fit for his Majesty's service, knowing them to discharge themselves as by Law
and Justice they might do.

I did never in the least kind, go about to overthrow the charter of the
Forest.

And did publish and maintain Charta de Forest^, as a sacred thing and no man
to violate it, and ought to be preserved for the King and Commonwealth.

I do in this humbly submit, and what I have done, to the goodness and
Justice of this House.

FINIS.

