A FORM OF CONSECRATION or DEDICATION OF CHURCHES AND Chapels, Together with
What may be used in the Restoration OF RVINED CHVRCHES, AND EXPIATION of
CHURCHES Desecrated or Profaned.

Dublin, Printed by John Crook, Printerto the K^^^^ Most Excellent Majesty, and
are to be so^^ by Sam. Dancer in Castle-street. 1666

Imprimatur Haecformula Consecrationis etc.

Ja. Armachanus. Mich. Dublin. Can.

A FORM OF CONSECRATION, OR, Dedication of Churches and Chapels, according to
the use of the Church of Ireland.
THe Patron, or the chief of the Parish where a new Church is erected, is to
give timely notice to the Bishop of the Diocese, and humbly to desire him to
appoint a convenient time, some Lords day, or other great Festival of the
Church, for performance of the solemnity.

At the day appointed, the Bishop, with a convenient number of his Clergy (of
which the Dean or Archdeacon to be one) and the Chancellor of the Diocese, and
his Register shall come between the hours of eight and ten in the morning; and
when they are near, the bell is to ring till they be entered into the Church
appointed to be consecrated.

First, the Bishop and his Clergy, together with the Patron or his Deputy,
shall go round about the Coemitery, or Churchyard; which done, the Bishop and
his Clergy shall enter into the Church at the West door, the Patron and people
standing without, while the Bishop and Priests do vest themselves in their
respective Ecclesiastic habits.

When they are vested, they shall kneel down in the body of the Church, with
their faces to the East, and say together,

OUr Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come, thy
will be done in earth, as it is in heaven: Give us this day our daily bread,
and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us; and
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Amen.

Then the Bishop shall pray,

PRevent us, O Lord, in all our doings with thy most gracious favor, and
further us with thy continual help, that in all our works begun, continued and
ended in thee, we may glorify thy holy Name, and finally, by thy mercy obtain
everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then rising up, they shall go together to the West door, and the Dean or
Archdeacon on one hand, and the Chancellor on the other, shall bring the
Patron to the threshold of the West door, and present him to the Bishop; who
shall thus say to him,

SIr, I am come hither at your desire; I ask therefore for what intent you have
desired my coming?

The Patron shall answer; or some of the Clergy at his request and appointment,
shall answer for him.

HE hath] or, mutatis mutandis [I have caused a house to be built for the
service of God, and the public Ministeries of Religion, and separated a
burying place for my dead; and [his, or] my humble desire is, that it may be
set apart from all common and profane uses, and dedicated to the honor of God
by your prayers, and holy Ministeries, according to the Word of God, and the
Laws and Customs of this Church.

Then shall the Bishop say,

WHiles it remained, was it not thine own? and before it is given to God, was
it not in thine own power? but when once you give it to God, it can never be
recalled, but is in his propriety for ever.

The Patron or his Deputy shall answer.

I humbly desire he will be graciously pleased to accept it, and that it may
remain his own for his service, and his honor for ever.

Then shall the Patron kneel down and receive the Bishops blessing in the words
following.

The Bishop laying his hand upon, or lifting it over the Patrons head, shall
say,

THe Lord bless you, and prosper you; the Lord make his face to shine upon you,
and be merciful unto you. Remember thy servant, O God, concerning this also;
accept his gift, sanctify his heart, purify his intentions, reward his loving
kindness, and spare him according to the greatness of thy mercies. Enrich him
and his family with all blessings of thy Spirit, and thy Providence for ever,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

And now in the Name of God, and to the honor of our Lord Jesus Christ, let us
perform this Ministry.

Then the Patron arising, the Bishop shall call for the instrument of Donation;
which the Bishop receiving from the hands of the Patron, shall deliver to the
Register to be read publicly in that place.

Which being done, all may enter into the Church: Then shall the Bishop,
attended by his Clergy, kneel in the body of the Church; before the Chancel
door, at a convenient distance, upon a footstep raised higher than the floor,
and shall say,

Let us pray.

I.
BLessed be thou, O Lord God, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ for ever and
ever. Thine, O Lord, is the greatness, 1 Chronicles. 29. 10, etc.
and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the Majesty: All that is
in the heavens, and in the earth is thine. Thine is the Kingdom, O Lord, and
thou art exalted as head above all. Both riches and honor come of thee, and
thou reignest over all; and in thine hand is power and might, and in thine hand
it is to make great, and to give strength unto all. Now therefore, our God, we
thank thee, and praise thy glorious Name, that thou have put it into the heart
of thy servants, to build a house for the honor of thy Name, and the service
of thy Majesty. O Lord our God, What are we, and what is this people, that
from thy servants any thing should be given and offered unto thee by us? All
things come of thee, and of thy own we give unto thee. But we know also, O God,
that thou triest the heart, and have pleasure in uprightness. O Lord God of our
Fathers, God of mercy, and Father of men and Angels, keep this, and all
thankfulness, and piety, and devotion in the imagination of the thoughts of the
heart of thy servants for ever; and prosper thou the works of our hands unto
us, O prosper thou our handiwork. Confirm this thing which thou have wrought
in us, from thy holy Temple, which is in Jerusalem, which is from above, and is
the Mother of us all: And for ever be pleased to employ us in thy service, to
strengthen us in all obedience, to lead us in the way everlasting, and to
accept us in those Religious duties which we shall perform by thy Commandment,
and by the assistances of thy holy Spirit, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

II.
O Almighty and Eternal God, who by thy Immensity fillest all places both in
heaven and earth, and can not be limited or circumscribed in any: Thou art
the most High, and dwell not, as we do, in houses made with hands; for
Heaven is thy Throne, and the earth is thy footstool; And what house can we
build for thee? and what is the place of thy rest, that we can furnish out for
thee? Surely every place is too little, and too low for thee, who dwell on
high, and thy glory is above the Heavens: And yet thou humblest thy self to
behold the things that are in heaven and earth, and thy delight is to be with
the sons of men. Thou speak our words, thou compliest with our weaknesses,
thou acceptest our services, and wilt be worshipped and adored according to
what thou have put into our power. Thou therefore have been pleased in all ages
to meet with thy servants in places separate for thy worship, and for the
invocation of thy holy Name. In Paradise there was a proper place which thy
servant Moses called, The presence of the Lord; and thy servant Abraham called
on thy Name, in the place of the Altar: And thou did meet the Patriarch Jacob
Genesis 13. 4.
at Bethel, and he consecrated a stone for thy memorial, and it became dreadful
and venerable, the House of God, and the Gate of Heaven; and Rebekah had a
proper place Genesis 28. 17.
whither she went to inquire of the Lord. Thou also did fill the Tabernacle
with thy presence, and the Temple with thy glory; and when the fullness of time
was come, thou by thy most holy Son did declare, that thou will be present in
all places, where two or three are gathered in thy Name; and that amongst all
Nations for ever, Thy house shall be called the house of prayer; and by thy
Apostle have signified to us, that our dwelling houses are to eat and drink in,
but that we must not despise the Churches of God. For thou art a jealous God,
and wilt not endure that thy Temples should be defiled. Our God is a consuming
fire, and he that defiles a Temple, him will God destroy.

Therefore in confidence of thy goodness, in expectation of thy favors, in
full assurance of thy promises, in obedience to the manifold declaration of thy
pleasure, and in imitation of the piety of thy servants, who in all the
generations of the world have separated places and houses for thy service, and
left great monuments of their piety for our comfort and example, that we may
come together into one place, (...). S. Ignat. Epist. ad Magness.
and by a joined prayer, wrestle with thee for blessings, and not depart thence
till thou have blessed us: We thy servants walking in the steps of their most
holy faith, partakers of the same hope, fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of
the household of God, are this day met together in thy fear and love, to
dedicate a house to thee, and to the glories of thy Name, that we may not
neglect the assembling of our selves together, but meet here to implore thy
mercies, to deplore our sins, to deprecate thy anger, to magnify thy goodness,
to celebrate thy praises, to receive thy Sacraments, to bless thy people, and
to perform all ministeries of Salvation.

Be pleased therefore, most gracious Lord and Father, to accept the devotion
and oblation of thy servants: admit this place and house into a portion of
thine own inheritance: Let it be a resting place for thy feet, and the seat of
thy Graciousness. Depute thy holy Angels to abide here, to defend thy servants,
and to drive away all the power of the Enemy. Place thy mercy-seat among us
also: Let thine eyes and thine ears be open toward this house night and day,
and hear the prayers of thy people which they shall make unto thee in this
place; granting to them all the graces which they shall need and ask: And
whenever in humility and contrition, they shall confess their sins unto thee,
be thou more ready to hear, than they to pray: forgive them all their sins,
increase and perfect their repentances, remove thy judgments far from them,
and let them feel and rejoice in thy mercies and loving kindnesses for ever and
ever. Grant this for his sake who is the King of the Saints, and the Head of
the Church, the great lover of souls, and our High Priest, who continually
makes intercession for us, our blessed Lord and Savior Jesus. Amen.

III.
O Almighty God, who art the Father of the faithful, and a gracious God to all
that call upon thee in truth and love; thou have taught us by thy holy Apostle,
that every thing is sanctified by the word of God and prayer: Attend this day
and ever to the prayers of thy servants: be present with thy grace in all our
ministeries of the Sacraments, and Sacramentals; and bless all the labors, and
accept all the religious duties, and satisfy all the holy desires of them who
in this thy house shall make their supplications before thee. And let the dew
of thy Divine blessing descend and abide for ever upon this house, which by
invocation of thy holy Name, and to the honor of the Lord Jesus, and the
Ministeries of thy servants, we, though unworthy, consecrate and dedicate unto
thee.

Spare all the penitents, relieve the distressed, comfort the comfortless,
confirm the strong, and strengthen the weak: Ease the afflicted, heal the
wounded and the sick; provide for the widows, and be a Father to the
fatherless; and unto all them whose consciences being accused for sin, come
with confidence to the Throne of Grace, Give help in all the times of their
need, that whenever thy Name is called upon, thy blessings may certainly
descend. Let thy Eternal peace be to this house, and to them who in this house
come to thee to be eased and refreshed.

Here let thy Priests be clothed with righteousness, and let thy Saints sing
with joyfulness. Here let thy people make their prayers, and perform their
vows, and offer thee freewill offerings with a holy worship. Here let the
weight of their sins that so easily besets them, be laid aside: here let the
chains of their corruption, and the chords of vanity be broken. Let the lapsed
be restored, let the sick be cured, let the blind eyes and hearts be enlightened
with the lanthorn of thy Word, and the light of thy Spirit. Here let the power
of Satan be lessened and destroyed; and let thy servants find a cure for all
their wounds, a comfort for all their sorrows, a remedy to all their
inconveniences: that all who shall enter this house now dedicated to thy
service, may obtain all their desires, and triumph in the Name of the Lord our
God who has performed all their petitions. Preserve their souls from sin,
their eyes from tears, and their feet from falling, for Jesus Christ his sake,
to whom with thee, O Father, and thy most Holy Spirit, be all honor and glory,
praise and thanksgiving, love and obedience, for ever and ever. Amen.

Then the Bishop and the Congregation arising from their knees, the Bishop
attended by his Clergy, shall go in Procession round about the Church within,
and say this Hymn alternately.

HYMN. I.
1. EXcept the Lord build the house, they labor in Ex Psalmis 127. 84.
vain to build it: except the Lord keeps the city, the watchman waketh but in
vain.

2. Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee, in whose heart are thy ways.

3. They go from strength to strength: every one of them in Sion appears
before God.

4. How amiable are thy Tabernacles: O Lord of Hosts.

5. My soul longs, ye even faints for the courts of the Lord, my heart and
my flesh cries out for the living God: when shall I come and appear before the
presence of God?

6. The sparrow has found her an house, and the swallow a nest for her self,
where she may lay her young: even thy altars, O Lord of Hosts, my King and my
God.

7. Blessed are they that dwell in thy house; they will be always praising thee.

8. For a day in thy courts is better than a thousand: I had rather be a
doorkeeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness.

9. For the Lord God is a Sun and a shield: the Lord will give grace and glory,
and no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.

10. O Lord of hosts: blessed is the man that trusts in thee.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost:

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

Then shall the Bishop go to the vault appointed in the Church for the burial
place (in case there be any) or else standing in the most open pavement of the
Church, the Archdeacon shall read this lesson.

The Lesson in the Coemetery.

ANd when the Inhabitants of Jabesh Gilead heard of 1 Samuel 31. 11.
that which the Philistims had done to Saul: all the valiant men arose, and
went all night, and took the body of Saul, and the bodies of his sons from the
walls of Bethshan, and came to Jabesh and burnt them there. And they took their
bones, and buried them under a tree at Jabesh, and fasted seven days.

And they told David, saying, that the men of Jabesh 2 Samuel 2. 4.
Oilead were they that buried Saul. And David sent messengers unto the men of
Jabesh Gilead, and said unto them, Blessed be ye of the Lord, that ye have
showed this kindness unto your Lord, even unto Saul, and have buried him.

And the son of David, King Solomon, said, If a man Eccless. 6. 3.
beget an hundred children, and live many years, so that the days of his years
be many, and his soul be filled with good, and also that he have no burial; I
say that an untimely birth is better than he.

And so I saw the wicked buried, who had come and Eccless. 8. 10.
gone from the place of the Holy, and they were forgoten in the city where they
had so done.

But let a man remember the days of darkness, for they chap. 11. 8.
shall be many.

For the dust shall return to the earth as it was, and the chap. 12. 7.
Spirit shall return unto God that gave it.

Then the Bishop standing in the same place shall pray,

O Almighty God, with whom do live the spirits of them that die in the Lord,
grant unto all thy servants whose bodies shall be buried in this dormitory,
that they may lie down with the righteous, and their souls may be gathered unto
their Fathers in the bosom of Christ, and their bodies may rest in peace unto
the latter day; and when thy holy Son shall come to judge both the quick and
the dead, they may hear the sentence of the right hand, and may have their
perfect consummation and bliss in thine eternal and everlasting glory, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then the Bishop, with the Clergy attending, shall go to the Font, and the
Verger or Clerk presenting pure water to him, he shall pour the water into the
Font.

Then shall the senior Priest read this Lesson.

The Lesson at the Font.

ANd Jesus came and spoke unto them saying, All power Mat. 28. 18.
is given unto me in heaven and in earth. Go ye therefore and teach all
Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost: teaching them to observe all things which I have commanded you; and
lo I am with you always even unto the end of the world. Amen.

Then shall the Bishop pray,

O Eternal God, Fountain of all Purity, bless and sanctify the waters which
thou have ordained and constituted for the mystical washing away of sin: and
grant unto all those who shall come hither to be presented unto thee, and be
washed in this Lavatory, that they may receive the baptism of the Spirit, and
may have a title and portion in repentance, remission of sins, and all the
promises of the Gospel, that they may not only have the washing of the filth
of the flesh, but the answer of a good conscience toward God; that they dying
unto sin, and being buried with Christ in his death, may live unto
righteousness, and become thy Disciples in an unreproveable faith, and a
perfect obedience, and at last may partake of the Resurrection of thy Son to
life Eternal, through the same Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then the Bishop shall go, attended as before, to the Pulpit, and laying his
hand upon it, shall appoint one of the Priests to read the following Lesson.

The Lesson at the Pulpit.
I charge thee therefore, before God and the Lord Jesus 2 Timothy 4. 1.
Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and his
Kingdom, Preach the Word, be instant in season, and out of season, reprove,
rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine: For the time will come
that they will not endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts shall they
heap to themselves teachers having itching ears.

This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou Tit. 3. 8.
affirm constantly, that they who have believed in God might be careful to
maintain good works: these things are good and profitable unto men. But avoid
foolish questions, and genealogies, and contentions, and strivings about the
Law, for they are unprofitable and vain.

But let the man of God watch in all things, endure afflictions, 2 Timothy 4. 5.
do the work of an Evangelist, and make full proof of his Ministry.

Then shall the Bishop pray,

O Almighty God, who by thy Word, and by thy Spirit do instruct thy servants,
and teach them all truth, and lead them in the way of salvation, Grant that
this place may be always filled with wise and holy persons, who may dispense
thy word faithfully, according to the ability thou give, and the charge which
thou imposest, and the duty thou requirest; giving to every one their portion
in due season, and feeding the flock of God, not of constraint, or of
necessity, but willingly and cheerfully; not for filthy lucres sake, but
readily, and of a good mind. O send faithful laborers into thy harvest, and
grant that all the people which from this place shall hear thy word, may not
receive it as the word of man, but as the good word of God, able to save their
souls: and let thy holy Spirit for ever be the Preacher, and imprint thy word
in their minds, opening their hearts, convincing their understandings,
overruling their wills, and governing their affections, that they may not be
hearers of the Word only, but doers of good works; that they by their holy
lives adorning the Gospel of God, and seeking for glory and honor, and
immortality, may attain eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then the Bishop and Clergy shall go toward the Chancel, the doors of which
being shut, he shall stand there, and with the Priests recite this Hymn
alternately.

HYMN II.
1. O Pen to me the gates of righteousness, I will go into them, and praise the
Lord.

2. This is the gate of the Lord into which the righteous shall enter.

3. The stone which the builders refused, is become the head stone of the
corner.

4. This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

5. This is the day which the Lord has made: we will rejoice and be glad in it.

6. Save now, I beseech thee, O Lord: O Lord I beseech send us now prosperity.

7. Blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord: we have blessed you out
of the house of the Lord.

8. God is the Lord which has showed us light: bind the sacrifice with chords,
even to the horns of the altar.

9. O Lord open thou my lips: and my lips shall show forth thy praise.

10. For thou desire not sacrifice, else would I give it thee: but thou
delightest not in burnt offerings.

11. The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart,
O God, thou will not despise.

12. Do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion: build thou the walls in Jerusalem.

13. Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifice of righteousness, with burnt
offerings, and whole burnt offerings: then shall they offer bullocks upon thine
altar.

14. Whosoever offers praise, glorifieth me, and to him that orders his
conversation right, I will show the salvation of God.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end. Amen.

Then the doors being opened, the Bishop with his Clergy shall enter, and
ascend to the Communion Table, and sitting in a chair on the South side of it,
shall appoint the Dean or Archdeacon to read this Lesson.

The Lesson at the Communion Table.
I Speak as to wise men, judge what I say. The cup of 1 Cor. 10. 15.
blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The
bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of Christ? For we
being many, are one bread, and one body, for we are all partakers of that one
bread. Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of Devils: ye cannot be
partakers of the Lords table, and the table of Devils. Do we provoke the Lord
to jealousy? Are we stronger then he? Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or
whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God.

We have an altar whereof they have no right to eat, Heb. 13. 10.
which serve the Tabernacle. Wherefore Jesus also, that he might sanctify the
people with his own blood, suffered without the gate. Let us go forth therefore
unto him, bearing his reproach. For here we have no continuing city, but we
seek one to come: By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise to God
continually, that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his name. But to
do good, and to communicate, forget not; for with such sacrifices God is well
pleased.

Then the Bishop arising from his chair, shall kneel before the Altar, or
Communion Table, and say,

Let us pray.
O Eternal God, who in an infinite mercy to mankind, did send thy holy Son,
to be a sacrifice for our sins, and the food of our souls, the Author and
finisher of our faith, and the great Minister of eternal glory; who also now
sits at thy right hand, and upon the heavenly altar perpetually presents to
thee the Eternal Sacrifice, and a never ceasing prayer, be present with thy
servants, and accept us in the dedication of a Ministerial altar, which we
humbly have provided for the performance of this great Ministry, and in
imitation of Christ's Eternal Priesthood, according to our duty, and his
Commandment. Grant that all the gifts which shall be presented on this table,
may be acceptable unto thee, and become unto thy servants a savor of life unto
life. Grant that all who shall partake of this table, may indeed hunger after
the bread of life, and thirst for the wine of elect souls, and may feed upon
Christ by faith, and be nourished by a holy hope, and grow up to an eternal
charity. Let no hand of any that shall betray thee, be ever upon this table:
let no impure tongue ever taste of the holy body and blood which here shall be
Sacramentally represented and exhibited. But let all thy servants that come
hither to receive these mysteries, come with prepared hearts, and with penitent
souls, and loving desires, and indeed partake of the Lord Jesus, and receive
all the benefits of his passion. Grant this for his sake, who is the Priest and
the Sacrifice, the feeder and the food, the Physician and the physic of our
souls, our most blessed Lord and Savior Jesus. Amen.

Then the Bishop arising shall return to his Chair, and sitting covered; some
persons by the Patrons appointment shall bring the Carpet, the Communion cloth
and napkins, the Chalice, Paten, and the other Vessels, Books and Vtensils for
the Communion; and humbly presenting them on their knees to God, the Bishop
shall receive them severally, and deliver them to the Deacon, to be laid
orderly on the Communion Table; excepting only the Chalice, and the Paten,
which two Priests shall (when the Table is covered) humbly on their knees lay
upon it. Then the Bishop returning to the Altar, shall with reverence and
solemnity (his face being Eastward) lay his hands upon the plate, and say this
prayer, standing.

WHat are we, O God, and what is this people, that we should be able to offer
so willingly after this 1 Chronicles. 29. 14.
sort? For all things come of thee, and of thine own we have given thee. Accept
the Oblation of thy servants, who in the uprightness of their hearts have
willingly offered these things, and give unto them a perfect heart to keep thy
Commandments, thine Ordinances, and thy Sacraments: and be pleased to grant to
them a greater ability, an enlarged heart, and an increasing love to serve thee
with their souls and bodies, with all their time, and all their goods, that
thou may be honored with all their heart, and all their strength; and grant
that these gifts may be received into the lot and right of God, and of
Religion, and the Donours be continued for ever in the lot of thine
inheritance: that by thy grace accepting these gifts, they may in all their
other possessions be blessed, and by the use of these gifts in the Ministeries
of thy holy Religion, they may be sanctified, and by a Guard of Angels they may
be preserved from all evil, and by the perpetual presence of thy holy Spirit,
they may be lead into all good, and accepted to pardon, and preserved in peace,
and promoted in holiness, and conducted certainly to life Eternal, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then the Bishop shall go to the North end of the H. Table, and turning to the
people shall say,

The Lord be with you.

Answer.

And with thy Spirit.

Let us pray.

I.
O Most Glorious and Eternal God, who make all things by thy power, and
adornest all things with thy bounty, and fillest all things with thy goodness,
and sanctifiest the hearts and gifts of thy servants by thy Spirit, we worship
and adore thy glories, who fillest all the world by thy presence, and
sustainest it by thy Almightiness: We love and magnify thy mercies, that thou
have been pleased to enable and admit thy servants [ to build an house to thee,
That clause is to be omitted when the Bishop only dedicates any oblation: and
so are the other clauses which are enclosed in []
and] out of thine own store to give gifts to thee, who give all that we
possess. We humbly pray thee by the Death and Passion, by the Resurrection and
Ascension, and by the glorious Intercession of our Lord, that thou would
vouchsafe to sanctify [ this house, and] these gifts to thy service, by the
effusion of thy holiness from above. Let the Sun of Righteousness for ever
shine here, and let the brightest illumination of the holy Spirit, fill [ this
place, and fill] all our hearts for ever with thy glorious presence: That which
we have blessed, do thou bless; that which we offer, do thou accept; that which
we place here, do thou visit graciously, and for ever, through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

II.
LEt this house be for the Religious uses of thy servants; let it be the abode
of Angels, let it be the place of thy Name, and for the glory of thy Grace, and
for the mention and honor, and the memorial of the Lord Jesus; Let no unclean
thing ever enter here: Drive from hence all sacrilegious hands, all
superstitious Rites, all profane persons, all proud and unquiet Schismatics,
all misbelieving Heretics: Let not the powers of darkness come hither, nor the
secret arrow ever smite any here: Let no corrupt air, and no corrupt
communication, no bloodshed, and no unclean action ever pollute this place
dedicated to thy holiness.

By the multitudes of thy mercies and propitiations, to the visitors of this
place, coming with devotion and charity, let there be peace and abundance of
thy blessings. Hear them that shall call upon thee, sanctify their Oblations,
let the good Word of God come upon them, and dispense thy good things unto
them. Let the title of this Church abide until the second coming of Christ, and
let thy Holy Table stand prepared with the blessings of a Celestial Banquet.
Bless the gifts and the givers, the dwellers, and the dwelling, and grant unto
us here present, and to all that shall come after us, that by the participation
of thy heavenly graces, we may obtain Eternal life through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Amen.

III.
O Eternal God, who art pleased to manifest thy presence amongst the sons of
men, by the special issues of thy favor and benediction, make our bodies and
souls to be Temples pure and holy, apt for the entertainments of the Holy
Jesus, and for the inhabitation of thy holy Spirit. Lord, be pleased, with the
powers of thy grace, to cast out all impure lusts, all worldly affections, all
covetous desires from these thy Temples, that they may be places of prayer and
holy meditation, of godly desires, and chaste thoughts, of pure intentions, and
great zeal to please thee, that we also may become Sacrifices, as well as
Temples, eaten up with the zeal of thy glory, and even consumed with the fires
of thy love; that not one thought may be entertained by us, but such as may be
like perfume exhaling from the Altar of Incense; and not a word may pass from
us, but may have the accent of Heaven in it, and sound pleasantly in thy ears.

O dearest God, fill every faculty of our souls with the impresses of Religion,
that we loving thee above all things in the world, worshipping thee with
frequent and humblest adorations, continually feeding upon the apprehensions of
thy Divine sweetness, and living in a daily observation of thy Divine
Commandments, and delighted with the perpetual feast of a holy Conscience, may
by thy Spirit be sealed up to the day of Redemption, and the fruition of thy
glories in thine everlasting Kingdom, through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom
with thee, O Father of mercies, Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and with thee,
O blessed and Eternal Spirit the Comforter, all honor and power be ascribed
from generation to generation for ever and ever. Amen.

Then add the Prayer of S. Clement.

GOd, the beholder and discerner of all things, the Lord Clement. 1 epist. ad
Corinth. in fine.
of Spirits and all flesh, who has chosen our Lord Jesus, and us through him,
to be a peculiar people, grant unto every soul that calls upon his glorious
and holy Name, faith and fear, peace and patience, long-suffering and
temperance, with purity and wisdom, to the well-pleasing of his Name, through
our High Priest and Ruler, by whom unto him be glory and Majesty, both now and
to all ages evermore. Amen.

Then the Bishop arising, shall sit in his Chair, at the South end of the H.
Table, and being covered, shall cause the Chancellor to read the Instrument of
Consecration, and give command that it be entered into the Registry, and an Act
made of it in perpetuam rei memoriam: A Duplicate of which Instrument, attested
under the Registers hand and seal of the Office, is to remain with the Patron
or Founder, and the Original with the Bishop.

After which, this Anathematism shall be read by him and his Clergy
alternately, all standing up.

The Anathematism.
KEep not thou silence, O God: hold not thy peace, Ex Psalmis 79. 83. 129.
and be not still, O God.

2. Let not thine Enemies make a tumult, and they that hate thee lift up their
head.

3. Let them not come into thine inheritance to defile thy holy Temple, lest
they lay waste thy dwelling places, and break down the carved work thereof with
axes and hammers.

4. Make their Nobles like Oreb and Zeeb: yea, all their princes like Zeba and
Zalmunna.

5. Who say, let us take to our selves the houses of God in possession.

6. O my God, make them like unto a wheel, as the stubble before the wind.

7. As the fire burns the wood, and as the flame sets the mountains on
fire.

8. So persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afraid with thy storm.

9. Fill their faces with shame, that they may seek thy Name, O Lord.

10. That men may know, that thou, whose Name is Jehovah, art the most High
over all the earth.

11. For the Lord is righteous, he will cut asunder the chords of the wicked.

12. Let them all be ashamed that hate Sion.

13. Let them be as the grass upon the house tops, which withers before it
grows up.

14. Wherewith the mower fills not his hand: nor he that binds sheaves his
bosom.

15. Neither do they which go by say, The blessing of the Lord be upon you: we
bless you in the name of the Lord.

The Bishop. Glory be to God on high.


Answer. And on earth peace to men of good will.


Bishop. Amen.


Answer. Amen.


Then shall the Bishop conclude with this (...), or Acclamation, the Clergy
answering alternately.

The Bishop first saying.

Seeing now, dearly beloved in the Lord, that by the blessing of God, and his
gracious favor, we have dedicated to God [this House of Prayer, and] these
gifts for the Ministeries of Religion, let us give hearty thanks to Almighty
God for these benefits, and say,

1. PRaise ye the Lord: praise God in his sanctuary, Ex Psalmis 150. 68. 87.
99. 100.
praise him in the firmament of his power.

2. Blessed be the Lord who daily loadeth us with benefits: even the God of our
salvation.

3. He that is our God, is the God of salvation: and unto God the Lord belong
the issues from death.

4. The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of Angels: the Lord
is among them as in Sinai, in the holy place.

5. They have seen the goings of God, even the goings of my God, my King in the
sanctuary.

6. The singers went before, the players on instruments followed after: amongst
them were the damsels playing with the timbrels.

7. Bless ye God in the congregations: even the Lord from the fountains of
Israel.

8. Thy God has commanded thy strength: strengthen, O God, that which thou
have wrought in us.

9. O God, thou art terrible out of thy Holy places: the God of Israel is he
that gives strength and power unto his people. Blessed be God.

10. His foundations is in the holy mountains: The Lord loves the gates of
Sion more than all the dwellings of Jacob.

11. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O thou city of God: and of Sion it
shall be said, This and that man was born in her, and the highest himself shall
establish her.

12. Exalt ye the Lord our God: and worship at his footstool, for he is holy.

13. Moses and Aaron among his Priests: and Samuel among them that call upon
his name: they called upon his name, and he answered them.

14. Thou answeredst them, O Lord our God: thou wast a God that forgavest them,
though thou did take vengeance of their inventions.

15. Exalt the Lord our God, and worship at his holy hill: for the Lord our God
is holy.

16. Enter into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with praise:
be thankful unto him, and bless his name.

Then shall all together say,

FOr the Lord is good, his mercy is everlasting, and his truth endures to all
generations.

Bishop. Worship Jesus.


Answer. We worship and adore the great King of heaven and earth, the blessed
Savior of the world.


Bishop. Holy is our God.


Answer. Holy is the Almighty.


Bishop. Holy is the Immortal.


All together. Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Sabbath, blessed be thy Name in
Heaven and Earth for ever and ever. Amen, Amen.


So ends the Office of Consecration.
Then the Bell tolling a little in the interval, the Bishop shall appoint the
Dean to read the Morning Prayer, or first Service, in the reading Desk.

The Psalms appointed for the day.

Psalm 122, 125, 132.

The first Lesson is Genesis 28. verse 10. unto the end. Or else 1 Kings 8. verse
10. unto verse 62. exclusively.

The second Lesson is S. Matthew 21. ver. 1. unto v. 17. inclusively.

At the end of the Letany, the Bishop shall confirm such persons as can be
conveniently brought to him, fitted to that purpose.

The Bishop shall read the second Service, and administer the Communion.

The Epistle is taken out of the third of the Acts, verss. 1. unto verse. 16.
inclusively.

The Gospel is Luke 7. verse. 1. to the 10. inclusively.

The Collect to be said at Morning prayer, and the Communion, together with the
Collect of the day.

O Almighty God, who dwell amongst thy Saints, and have placed thy
Tabernacle in the hearts of thy servants, give thy heavenly blessings, and
increase to the place where thine honor dwells; that what is founded by thy
Providence, and built according to thy Commandment, may be established for
ever, and blessed in all things by thy Eternal goodness, through Jesus Christ
our Lord. Amen.

AN OFFICE To be used in the Restoration OF A CHURCH.
When the Fabric of a Church is ruined, and a new Church built upon the same
foundation; the Bishop attended by his Clergy, shall enter into the
Churchyard, and go in procession round about the Church new built; and recite
alternately Psalm 74.

O God, wherefore art thou absent from us so long: why is thy wrath so hot
against the sheep of thy pasture?

2. O think upon thy congregation: whom thou have purchased, and redeemed of
old.

3. Think upon the tribe of thine inheritance: and mount Sion, wherein thou
have dwelt.

4. Lift up thy feet, that thou may utterly destroy every enemy: which has
done evil in thy sanctuary.

5. Thine adversaries roar in the midst of thy congregations: and set up their
banners for tokens.

6. He that hewed timber before out of the thick trees: was known to bring it to
an excellent work.

7. But now they break down all the carved work thereof: with axes and hammers.

8. They have set fire upon thy holy places: and have defiled the
dewlling place of thy Name, even unto the ground.

9. Yea, they said in their hearts, Let us make havoc of them altogether: thus
have they burnt up all the houses of God in the land.

10. We see not our tokens, there is not one prophet more: no, not one is there
among us, that understands any more.

11. O God, how long shall the adversary do this dishonor: how long shall the
enemy blaspheme thy Name, for ever?

12. Why withdrawest thou thy hand: why pluckest thou not thy right hand out of
thy bosom to consume the enemy?

13. For God is my King of old: the help, that is done upon earth, he does it
himself.

14. Thou did divide the sea through thy power: thou brakest the heads of the
dragons in the waters.

15. Thou smotest the heads of Leviathan in pieces: and gave him to be meat
for the people in the wilderness.

16. Thou broughtest out fountains, and waters out of the hard rocks: thou
driedst up mighty waters.

17. The day is thine, and the night is thine: thou have prepared the light and
the sun.

18. Thou have set all the borders of the earth: thou have made summer, and
winter.

19. Remember this, O Lord, how the enemy has rebuked: and how the foolish
people has blasphemed thy Name.

20. O deliver not the soul of thy turtle-dove unto the multitude of the
enemies: and forget not the congregation of the poor for ever.

21. Look upon the covenant: for all the earth is full of darkness, and cruel
habitations.

22. O let not the simple go away ashamed: but let the poor and needy give
praise unto thy Name.

23. Arise, O God, maintain thine own cause: remember how the foolish man
blasphemeth thee daily.

24. Forget not the voice of thine enemies: the presumption of them, that hate
thee, increases ever more and more.

Then entering into the Church, the Bishop and Clergy shall vest themselves;
which being done, and the people in their places, the Bishop shall kneel down
in the body of the Church, on a footstool raised above the floor, and say,

OUr Father which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name, thy Kingdom come, thy
will be done in earth, as it is in Heaven: Give us this day our daily bread,
and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us; and
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

The Clergy and people repeating after him every petition.

Then shall the Bishop say,

PRevent us, O Lord, in all our doings with thy most gracious favor, and
further us with thy continual help, that in all our works begun, continued, and
ended in thee, we may glorify thy holy Name, and finally by thy mercy obtain
everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then the Bishop standing up with his face to the people, shall pray in the
words of Ezra, paucis mutatis, ut sequitur.

O Lord our God, we are ashamed, and blush to lift up our faces unto thee, O
God; for our iniquities are Ezra 9.
increased over our heads, and our trespasses grown up unto the heavens. Since
the days of our Fathers have we been in a great trespass unto this day; and for
our iniquities have we, our Kings and our Priests been delivered unto the hands
of our Enemies, to the sword, and to the spoil, and to confusion of face, as it
is this day. And now for a little space has grace been showed to us from the
Lord our God, to leave us a remnant to escape, and to give us a nail in his
holy place, that our God may lighten our eyes, and give us a little reviving
from our afflictions. For our God has not forsaken us, but has extended mercy
to us in the sight of our enemies, to give us a reviving, to set up the house
of our God, and to repair the desolations thereof. And now, O our God, what
shall we say after this? For we have forsaken thy Commandments which thou have
commanded us by thy servants the Prophets. And after all that is come upon us
for our evil deeds, and for our great trespasses, seeing that thou our God have
punished us less than our iniquities deserve, and have given us such a
deliverance as this, should we again break thy Commandments? Would not thou
be angry with us till thou had consumed us?

O Lord God of Heaven and earth, thou art righteous, and just, and true; thou
art also good and gracious, and of great mercy, and loving kindness; and though
thou have punished us for our inventions, yet thou have forgiven our misdeeds,
and restored us to a rejoicing this day. O give unto us abundance of thy grace,
that we may no more provoke thee to anger, or to jealousy; that we may never
force thee to severity, and to pour forth thy heavy judgments upon us: but
give us thy holy Spirit to lead us in the ways of righteousness, and to prepare
us for thy mercies for ever. Defend thy Church, and bless thine inheritance;
feed them, and set them up for ever: So shall we thy people give thee thanks in
the Congregation of thy redeemed ones, and rejoice in giving thee praises for
the operations of thy hands, who have mightily delivered thy sons and servants
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Then shall be said or sung Psalm 144. alternately.

BLessed be the Lord my strength, who teaches my hands to war, and my fingers
to fight;

2. My hope and my fortress, my castle and deliliverer, my defender, in whom I
trust: who subdueth my people that is under me.

3. Lord, what is man, that thou have such respect unto him: or the son of man,
that thou so regardest him?

4. Man is like a thing of naught, his time passes away like a shadow.

5. Bow thy heavens, O Lord, and come down: touch the mountains, and they shall
smoke.

6. Cast forth thy lightning and tear them: shoot out thine arrows and consume
them.

7. Send down thine hand from above: deliver me, and take me out of the great
waters, from the hand of strange children;

8. Whose mouth talks of vanity: and their right hand is a right hand of
wickedness.

9. I will sing a new song unto thee, O God: and sing praises unto thee upon a
ten-stringed lute.

10. Thou have given victory unto kings: and have delivered David thy servant
from the peril of the sword.

11. Save me, and deliver me from the hand of strange children: whose mouth
talks of vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of iniquity.

12. That our sons may grow up as the young plants: and that our daughters may
be as the polished corners of the temple.

13. That our garners may be full and plenteous with all manner of store: that
our sheep may bring forth thousands, and ten thousands in our streets.

14. That our oxen may be strong to labor, that there be no decay: no leading
into captivity, and no complaining in our streets.

15. Happy are the people that are in such a case: yea, blessed are the people
who have the Lord for their God.

After which, the Bishop attended with the Clergy, shall go to the Font, and
use the same Office as is appointed for the consecration, or dedication of
Churches; and so to the end: Omitting the word [place, or places] because the
place was consecrated before, and so was the Coemetery. In other things proceed
without change.

The first Lesson at Morning prayer shall be Haggai 1.

The second Lesson Luke 12. beginning at verse 32. to the end.

The Collect the same as is used at Morning-prayer in the Office of
consecration.

A SHORT OFFICE FOR EXPIATION and ILLUSTRATION OF A CHURCH Desecrated or
Profaned.
IF a Church has been desecrated by murder and bloodshed, by uncleanness, or
any other sort of profanation, the Bishop attended by two Priests at least,
and one Deacon, shall enter into the Church, which shall be first prepared by
cleansings and washings, etc.

The Bishop and his Clergy being vested, shall go in Procession about the
Church on the inside, saying alternately the seventh Psalm, and the ningth
Psalm.

After which, the Bishop with his Clergy shall go to the Holy Table, and there
kneeling down shall pray.

O Almighty God, who art of pure eyes, and can not behold impurity, behold
the Angels are not pure in thy sight, and thou have found folly in thy Saints;
have mercy upon thy servants, who with repentance and contrition of heart,
return unto thee humbling our selves before thee in thy holy place. We
acknowledge our selves unworthy to appear in thy glorious presence, because we
are polluted in thy sight, and it is just in thee to reject our prayers, and to
answer us no more from the place of thy Sanctuary; for wickedness has entered
into the Courts where thy holy feet have trod, and have defiled thy dwelling
place, even unto the ground, and we by our sins have deserved this calamity.
But be thou graciously pleased to return to us as in the days of old, and
remember us according to thy former loving kindnesses in the days of our
Fathers. Cast out all iniquity from within us, remove the guilt of that
horrible profanation that has been committed here, that abomination of
desolation in the holy place, standing where it ought not; and grant that we
may present unto thee pure Oblations, and may be accepted by the gracious
interpellation of our High Priest, the most glorious Jesus. Let no profane
thing enter any more into the lot of thine inheritance; and be pleased again to
accept the prayers which thy servants shall make unto thee in this place. And
because holiness becomes thine house for ever, grant to us thy grace to walk
before thee in all holiness of conversation; that we becoming a Royal
Priesthood, a chosen Generation, a people zealous of good works, thou may
accept us according to thy own loving kindness, and the desires of our hearts.
O look upon thy most holy Son, and regard the cry of his blood, and let it on
our behalf speak better things than the blood of Abel.

O Let that sprinkling of the blood of the Holy Lamb, who was slain from the
beginning of the world, make this place holy and accepted, and purify our
hands and hearts, and sanctify our prayers and praises, and hallow all our
Oblations, and preserve this house, and all the places where thy Name is
invocated, from all impurity and profanation for ever, and keep our bodies,
and souls, and spirits unblmeable to the coming of our Lord Jesus. Then, O
blessed Father, grant that we being presented unto thee without spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing, may be clothed with the righteousness of the
Saints, and walk in white with the Lamb in the Kingdom of our God for ever and
ever. Grant this, O Almighty God, our most gracious Father for Jesus Christ his
sake, to whom with thee and the Holy Spirit, be all worship, and love, and
honor, and glory from generation to generation for ever. Amen.

Then the Bishop and Clergy arising from their knees, shall say the
Anathematism unto the (...), or Acclamation, as in the form of Consecration:
After which, kneeling down shall be said the III. prayer placed in that Office
a little before the Anathematism. And next to that, the II. Prayer which is
immediately before that; and then the Prayer of S. Clement.

After which arising from his knees, the Bishop shall say,

Seeing now, dearly beloved in the Lord, we have by humble prayer implored the
mercy of God and his holy Spirit, to take from this place, and from our hearts,
all impurity and profanation, and that we hope by the mercies of God in our
Lord Jesus Christ, he has heard our prayers, and will grant our desires, let
us give hearty thanks for these mercies, and say,

Then shall be said the (...), or Acclamation, as at the end of the Office of
Consecration of Churches, etc.

And then shall the Priest whom the Bishop shall appoint, begin Morning prayer.

The Psalms for the day are Psalm 18, and Psalm 30.

The first Lesson is Zechariah I.

The second Lesson Mark II. unto verse 26. inclusively.

The Collect the same with that at Morning-prayer in the Consecration of
Churches.

If any Chalice, Paten, Font, Pulpit, or any other Oblation or Vtensil for the
Church, be at any time newly to be presented; the Bishop is to use the forms of
Dedication of those respective gifts, which are particularly used in the
dedication; and this to be done immediately after the Nicene Creed, at the time
of the Communion; ever adding the Anathematism and Acclamation.

Te decet Hymnus.

Instrumentum Publicum conficiendum, and ad finem Consecrationis public
legendum, and postea in ARCHIVIS EPISCOPALIBUS reponendum.
IN nomine Dei, Amen: Quum dilectus filius noster. A. B. de C. in Comitatu D.
pia and Religiosa devotione ductus Ecclesiam in villa de H. continentem intra
muros ejusdem in longitudine ab Orient ad Occidentem () pedes aut circiter, in
latitudine vero ab Aquilone ad Austrum versus () pedes aut circiter,
aedificaverit, erexerit, and construxerit, sacra mensa decenter ornata,
suggestis ad precandum, legendum, and paerdicandum, convenienter compositis,
nec non locum sive aream pro Coemiterio separaverit (qui locus in toto circuitu
continet () pedes) aliaque necessaria ad cultum divinum, sufficienter and
decore concinnaverit, nobisque supplicaverit quatenus Nos authoritate nostra
ordinaria atque Episcopali, pro nobis and successoribus nostris dictam
Ecclesiam ab usibus pristinis, communibus and Prophanis quibuscunque separare,
and in usus sacros and divinos consecrare and dedicare dignaremur: Nos T. D.
permissione divina D. Episcopus, pio and Religioso ejus desiderio in hac part
favorabiliter annuentes ad consecrationem Ecclesiae hujus de novo (sicut
praefatur) erectae and ornatae, authoritate nostra ordinaria atque Episcopali
procedentes, eandem Ecclesiam ab omni communi and prophano usu in perpetuum
separamus, and soli divino cultui and divinorum celebrationi in perpetuum
addicimus, dicamus, and dedicamus: ac insuper eadem authoritate pro nobis and
successoribus nostris licentiam pariter and facultatem in Domino concedimus ad
rem Divinam inibi faciendam, nempe preces publicas and sacram liturgiam, caetui
suo in lingua Anglicana, aut alio Idiomate ipsis communiter intellecto
recitandum, ad verbum Dei sincere and fideliter proponendum, atque
supplicandum, ad sanctissima sacramenta (quoties par erit) in eadem
ministranda, ad mortuos (si voluerint) sepeliendos, ad caetera quaecunque
peragenda, quae in aliis Capellis and Ecclesiis Parochialibus communiter licite
fieri possunt and solent: ac tam Presbyteris and Diaconis (respective ad leges
Ecclesiasticos) inserviendi, preces divinas dicendi, ceteraque praemissa
faciendi, quam dicto A. B. and Parochianis omnibus in eadem preces divinas
audiendi, caeteraque praemissa percipiend, plenam in domino potestatem facimus:
eandem quoque Ecclesiam in honorem Dei and sacros usus eorum qui in Parochia
habitant and commorantur nunc and in futurum consecramus per nomen Ecclesiae
SS. and individuae Trinitatis [vel Christi, etc.) and sic consecratam fuisse,
and esse and in futuris temporibus sic remanere debere, palam and public
pronunciamus, decernimus, and declaramus: privilegiis insuper omnibus and
singulis in tali Ecclesia usitatis, aut alicui Ecclesiae Parochiali in hac
Diaecesi ab antiquo fundatae competentibus, Ecclesiam hanc ad omnem Juris
effectum, munitam and publicam esse volumus, and quantum in nobis est, and de
Jure possumus, sic munimus and stabilimus per praesentes. Reservamus tamen
semper nobis and successoribus nostris Episcopis D. potestatem visitandi dictam
Ecclesiam quando visum fuerit ad officium spectare, ut constet an
reparationibus, aliisque rebus decoris conservetur, and an omnia ibidem
Canonice and secundum ordinem fiant, quae omnia and singula sic reservamus
quoad caetera vero praemissa, quatenus in nobis est, and de jure possumus, pro
nobis and successoribus nostris, decernimus and stabilimus per praesentes.

FINIS.

