Eternal Glorification, BEGUN IN REGENERATION; OR A DISCOURSE OF REGENERATION.

Wherein is showed: 1. What Regeneration is, with the causes of it. 2. The
necessity of Regeneration, in order to Salvation. 3. The Lets and Hindrances of
it. 4. The certain Signs and Tokens of it. 5. The small number or fewness of
Regenerate Persons. 6. Their Privileges and Happiness. 7. Their Duties, and
how they ought to walk.


Intended for the profit of all, both REGENERATE and UNREGENERATE Persons.

By STEPHEN FORD, Preacher of the Gospel in LONDON.

For in Christ Jesus, neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor
Uncircumcision; but a New Creature, Gal. 6.15. London; Printed for Nath.
Crouch, in Exchange Alley, over against the Royal Exchange. 1675.

The Epistle Dedicatory.
To my much loved and regarded Friends, the young men, etc. who have chosen me
for your Instructor; are of, and continue your cheerful attendance on the Lords
Days Evening Lecture; and to all other persons who do frequently wait on, and
encourage the same; Grace, Mercy, and Peace, be multiplied unto you all.
SIRS;
THe great ends for which we are set and maintained in this world, are 1. To
get new hearts, and prepare for another world that is to come. 2. To live to,
and walk with God, and serve our Generation; and in, and by our so doing, to
look for, and receive from God, the portion of Blessings he has provided for,
and promised to bestow on us here. We are all, and every one of us,
indispensably bound to endeavor all we can to obtain and prosecute these ends,
because otherwise we shall all perish. In this world we have our day of Grace
to fit us for glory; if we are wise, and do faithfully improve it, we shall
assuredly reap the fruits of it in another world; yea, the earnest or
first fruits of it here. You have but a little uncertain time here to run your
Race in, and to prepare for Eternal Life, and if you neglect to do it to
purpose here, you will most certainly be shut out of Heaven hereafter, Mat.
25.1-13. v. If you trifle in this matter, and seem indifferent, you are not
wise, but play the fool, and err exceedingly, as you will find to your cost at
the last day, if not before. To prevent which, and to make you truly wise,
sensible, serious, and diligent, in and about your everlasting concerns, I have
written this little Book, and do present it to your serious and faithful
consideration and improvement, and that in and with unfeigned love and cordial
affection: For I do assure you, that I have bowels of love for you, and with
all my heart and soul do pray for, and endeavor your Regeneration and
Salvation, which I hope you see, and are convinced of, by my constant, free,
and unwearied labors amongst you, according to my small Talent. The great and
holy God knows, that I seek not yours, but you, as I hope you can all bear me
witness; having once and again told you, that I had Dedicated my poor Labors
as a Free Will Offering unto God, and the service of your Souls; and that I did
not look for, or expect any reward from you for my pains, but your holy and
spiritual improvement of them, to the glory of God, and your own Eternal
Salvation. The Truths here presented to your eyes to read, were first (you
know) preached to your ears to hear; but knowing how treacherous and weak our
memories are, and how apt we are to let slip that which we hear; and also
fearing that the great Doctrine of Regeneration, and your concernments in it,
might by this time be worn (very much) out of the minds and hearts of many of
you, I thought it a necessary and useful work to provide (as well as I could)
for the reviving of it on you, and fastening it in your hearts, by writing and
composing the sum and substance of what I preached to you, which here I have
done. I have endeavored to contract the whole within as narrow a compass as I
could, and to hold forth great Truths unto you, with all possible plainness.
You may not expect a large Epistle from me, because I want opportunity to do it
at this time; and therefore shall sum up all I have to say in a few words.

1. I do entreat you to read and ponder well what you shall find here written,
and importune the Lord to give you much spiritual wisdom and understanding,
that you may be enabled to make a right judgment of the glorious Truths herein
revealed.

2. Look on the great Doctrine of Regeneration, as a most weighty and important
Doctrine, to add for your selves, as well as others; that you stand in need of
it, and are indispensably bound to know and understand it, as it is asserted
and laid down in the Gospel, and as written and set up in men's hearts, in order
to their Eternal Glorification; yea, and to know and experience the excellency
and power of it in your own hearts.

3. Apply what you read unto your selves; examine and prove your own states and
conditions by what you shall find in this Book; search and see if the work of
Regeneration be indeed wrought in your Souls, and do not take up and deceive
your Souls with a bare Reformation, instead of real Regeneration, with an
external change only, instead of an internal. Oh! how many poor Souls are here
among Great Professors, who bless and speak peace to themselves, and hope all
is well with them; that they are in Gods favor, and shall certainly be saved,
because they have gotten some light in their heads, and quiet in their minds,
good notions of good things, and also a clean outside, and form of godliness.
But if you have any pity for your Souls, try and prove your selves to purpose,
until you know your conditions, and take not up in any thing or seize
short of Regeneration; for if you do, you shall be shut out of Heaven.

4. If you find upon search, that the great and rare work of Regeneration is
indeed wrought in your hearts and souls, give glory to God, and exalt the Lord
Jesus Christ; rejoice and be exceeding glad, for you are the blessed of the
Lord; you are the happy people, and are sanctified and set apart for God, and
his holy works and ends; and now you must unfainedly devote your selves, and
your all to him, to live to, and serve him with your all: Now you must wholly
mind how to please and honor him, and to express your thankfulness in all
possible, hearty, and filial obedience. You must be wholly taken up with, and
employed for God, perfecting Holiness in his fear, and bringing forth fruits
whereby he may be glorified; and you must in all your ways endeavor so to
walk, as to adorn the Gospel, and have your good works shine in the world, to
the praise of God.

5. You whom God has Regenerated, and given a well-grounded hope thereof, put
your selves under all the Ordinances of Christ, and do not content your selves
with some, when he proffers you the use and enjoyment of all. They are your
Privileges, and you need them. Christ has commanded you to observe them all,
and appointed to nourish, comfort, and educate your Souls in his Churches, and
with his Ordinances there: Therefore do as the Primitive Converts were wont to
do, join your selves to some Church, or Society of Regenerate Christians, that
there you may be fed with the Bread of Life. The doors stand open for you, and
the Lord Jesus wa^ts there for you, to invite you in, and welcome you. You need
the Lords Supper to strengthen and confirm you, and the Communion of Saint
(...) a Churchstate (as means) to secure and preserve you. But I can only
mention these things, leaving the enlargement of them to your selves.

6. If you find any good or profit to your Souls, in and by my Ministry and
Writing, bless God, and ascribe all the glory to him, for all belongs to him,
and to him only: But forget not to pray for me, that I may be enabled by Divine
Assistance to fulfill my Ministry, and continue to hand out the Gospel of
Salvation to you, that the Name of the Lord Jesus may be glorified, and your
Souls profited, and that I may be blameless before God and Men.

7. And lastly, Continue in the good work and ways you have taken in hand, and
begun to walk in: Have your eyes always to Jesus Christ; keep fast hold of him,
and let your whole dependence be on him. In him are all your Springs, and it is
he that has the keeping of your Stock of Grace: He can and will supply you
with all Grace, and preserve you unto his Heavenly Kingdom: Therefore live
upon, and stay your selves on him. Run your Race, and finish your course in his
hand, and you shall obtain the End of your Faith, the Salvation of your Souls.
Which that you may do, is the prayer and earnest desire of

Your Cordial Friend, S. F.

ETERNAL GLORIFICATION BEGUN IN REGENERATION. OR A Discourse of Regeneration.
From John 3.3. Jesus answered and said unto him: verily, verily, I say unto
thee; except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God.
Beloved,
I Shall begin this Lecture, (which you have desired, and are now waiting on)
with the Doctrine of Regeneration: because it is one of the great fundamental
and Soul-saving Doctrins that you should first understand, and be early and
experimentally acquainted withal. Here God begun with Ignorant and
unregenerate Nicodemus, and here he begins to open the door of everlasting Life
unto such as he will save; and by Regeneration you must begin to seek for and
expect Salvation, and eternal Glory. It is the Lords fixed and constant way, to
send down and infuse into the hearts of men the first fruits of Heaven, in
order to his possessing them in the fullness of everlasting Glory in Heaven.

The seeds of special grace sown in the Soul in Regeneration, are the earnests
and first fruits of Heavens glory. And as it is a certain Truth, that without
Regeneration here, men cannot be saved hereafter; so it is as certain, that
whoever are really Regenerated here, they shall be saved hereafter.

This is a Truth that nearly concerns every one of you, and therefore requires
your serious attention and consideration; for here God will begin to save you,
if ever you be saved.

The words in the Text are spoken by Jesus Christ unto Nicodemus, as you may
read in the 1. and 2. verses. The subject matter of the Text is, or contains
Regeneration, or the Renovation of men, in order to their eternal Salvation;
and they are spoken to and intended for us, as well as Nicodemus, because we
are all by nature in as had and miserable a condition as he, and stand in as
much need of Regeneration and the Doctrine thereof, as Nicodemus did when Christ
spoke these words to him; and therefore observe how Christ words the matter,
verily, verily, I say unto thee; except a man be born again. That is, unless
thou Nicodemus, to whom I do now immediately direct my Doctrine, and other
persons in thy present case and condition; except a man, that is, thou, or any
other man, be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, so verse. 5. And it
is observable how the Lord Jesus ushers in the matter or Doctrine of
Regeneration in the Text, and verse. 5. it is with a double asseveration; verily,
verily, (Text) and again, verily, verily 5. verse. which informs us of these
four things;

First that the matter of Christ was speaking of, was a very great and weighty
matter indeed, and such as Nicodemus, and other men, were indispensibly bound
on pain of eternal death, to take notice of, and concern themselves about with
all possible diligence and faithfulness; for it was for their Lives, except a
man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God; that is, he cannot be
saved. And therefore he quickens and provokes the minds of men to ponder the
matter, and lay it to heart, by his verily, and verily, I say, etc.

2. That we are dull of hearing, and slow of heart to believe, and apply this
great Doctrine to our own Souls; but to imagine and fancy that we stand in no, or
very little need of it; and therefore may overlook, slight, and neglect it, as
most men do. 3. That the Lord Jesus is very serious, hearty, and earnest with
men, in persuading them to seek after Regeneration, and that he does really and
unfainedly desire to see them serious in that so great concern of theirs, and
to labor after it to purpose. 4. That there is such a thing as Regeneration,
and that men may be Regenerated if they will not slight and oppose it. These
and other such things were in the eye and heart of Christ toward men, in
speaking thus to them, which he would have them believe, and think on, in his
verilies.

I shall have occasion in my proceedures to speak further to this Text, and
therefore shall speak no more of it now, but proceed to what I intend to
commend to your serious considerations. These are the most material heads I am
to discourse on, which I shall do, by way of Question and Answer.

Quest. What is Regeneration? wherein does it consist, or what does it contain
or import?

Answ. Regeneration, is a special, powerful, and saving work of God, on a
sinner; changing and renewing his whole man, by infusing a measure of the
Spirit, and special grace of Christ into him, through the Ministry of the
Gospel, and that for holy and gracious ends and purposes. This is the best
definition I can give you of Regeneration, and I think it will serve, and do
well enough, if rightly understood and improved by you. If any material thing
be found wanting, it may be afterward supplied. I shall take abroad the parts
of the definition, and briefly clear and prove it; and then proceed.

First, You have the Author and Worker of Regeneration; that is God. God is the
sole and only Author of it, without the help or assistance of men. God needs
none of their help, neither can they afford him any at all, toward their
Renovation; and therefore it is God alone.

For first, men are all dead in sins and Trespasses, Ephesians. 2.1, 5. and therefore
cannot move themselves, to produce new habits or principles of that they have
not, nor can they set forward the great work of Regeneration in themselves, for
want of Life to act withal.

2. Blind. They are in gross darkness, Isa. 60.2. They cannot so much as see
where, nor what they are, nor where they are going, Joh. 12 35. They are born
blind, and continue such. They see not the Light that shines round about them;
Joh. 1.5. much less can they direct themselves in procuring, or forwarding
their own Regeneration.

3. There is nothing in them to make use of, toward the production of it, but
very much to impede and hinder the work. They will it not, neither will they
suffer God to do it, until he has mightily persuaded and bowed them to yield;
Phil. 2.13. Psalm. 110.3. therefore it is not in them to work it in themselves.
As they will not come to Christ that they may have Life, Joh. 5.40. so they
will not have him to come and create his Life in them.

Therefore, it must be of God alone, without the concurrance of second causes
in men. And I say it is the work of God, and not of one of the glorious persons
only, (although the work be especially attributed to the holy Ghost) but God
the father has his Almighty hand employed in the work. Ephesians. 1.19, 20. 1 Pet.
1.3. and so has Jesus Christ his son too, Joh. 5.21. Joh. 10.10. so it is also
the holy Spirits work. Joh. 3.5. Tit. 3.5. The Reasons why the Scripture tells
us all the persons in the Godhead have their hand in the work of Regeneration,
are, First, to show, and impress a deep sense of the exceeding greatness and
excellency of the work, on the hearts of Regenerate persons: that they might be
induced thereby to admire and value it, and to have it in high esteem, as a
most excellent and glorious work indeed, which had so many hands of infinite
wisdom, power, and love exercised and employed about the effecting of it. 2.
That they might be directed and provoked thereby, to ascribe all the glory unto
all the three persons, and not to the holy Ghost only.

It Is true, that men unregenerate ought to use Gods means in order to
Regeneration; they are to hear the Gospel preached, read the Scriptures and
good Books, and to pray to God to Regenerate them; because God has commanded
them so to do. Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27, 37. Luke 11.13. and also because they are
the ways and means of Gods own appointing for their Regeneration, whereby he
will work it. Jam. 1.18. Romans 10. Joh. 15.3. But yet your using the means and
waiting in them, cannot Regenerate you, until God put forth his Almighty power
in them, and form a new Creature in you. God tells us again and again, that it
is his work alone, and that there is none to help him. Ephesians. 2.8, 9, 10. Tit.
3.5. to take off all boasting from men, and that he that glories, might glory
in the Lord, 1 Cor. 1.31.

It Is said to be a special, powerful, and saving work (of God) to distinguish
it from those common and ordinary works, or workings of God on many, which
never arises to, or Issues in real Regeneration on their Souls. First, it is a
special work; it differs not only in the degree or measure of it, but in the
kind. There is a specifical difference between what God works in, and bestows
upon such as he Regenerates, and others who are never Regenerated, although he
bestows many Spiritual gifts on them. 1. In the root and spring of his gifts
and favors, Namely, his Love in Christ. That is the Fountain and efficient
cause of their Regeneration, or of the grace and power whereby they are
Regenerated. Ephesians. 2.4, 5. Deuteronomy. 7.6.7. etc. God had loved and chosen them in
the Lord Jesus, to be a peculiar people unto himself, and therefore
Regenerates, and makes them such by his grace.

But God does not so love others, neither has he chosen them in Christ, and
Sanctified them to his use, to be his peculiars, and therefore he never
effectually Regenerates them. Romans 9.21, 22, 23, 24, 25. And yet no one person
is denied Regenerating grace, but such as by their own wickedness do procure it
unto themselves: and therefore none shall have cause to complain of partial,
unjust, or cruel dealing from the God of Truth, with whom is no unrighteousness.

2. There is a difference in the grace its self, although it is hard to express
and clear it, to your Apprehensions, yet a wide difference there is between the
grace and gifts of the Spirit on men, some are awakened, enlightened and
reformed by the holy Ghost, which never are indeed Regenerated. I shall not
discourse of the differences here, but only shall tell you, that special grace
has virtue in it to enliven, as well as to enlighten, to quicken dead Souls,
and revive dead hearts, as well as to enlighten the head. Common grace may put
Light into the head, but never quickens and enlivens the heart, but special
grace does both; and that from its own nature and tendancy; for it is given for
that end, Namely, to cause the dead to live, and the blind to see Spiritual
things Spiritually. 1 Cor. 2. There is a generative and renewing nature and
virtue in the one, that is not in the other. But more of this elsewhere.

3. There is also a specifical difference in the ends, special grace is given
by the God of Love, and from the Love of God to some, to conform them to, and
mould them for the Lords special use and service, to make them lovely and
aimable; pleasing and delightful to him; that he may delight in them, and they
in him, and be made capable of Communion with himself. 1 Cor. 1.9. Joh. 14.21,
23. 1 John 1.3. That they may be vessels of honor fitted for his use; live to
him, and not unto themselves. 2 Timothy 2.20, 21. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. and also that
they may live in the fruition and presence of God for ever, in another world.

But now common graces are not given for these ends, because they cannot effect
them. They leave men in as bad a state as they found them in. Their hearts are
not changed, neither made new Creatures by them, but remain under the reign and
power of their lusts, and are Lovers and obeyers of them under their common
grace.

2. It is the powerful work of God; that is, Regenerating grace is
Irresistible. It carries all before it, and prevails. It is mighty in opposing,
resisting, and conquering all its Enemies; to prosecute and obtain its ends,
which the common works of God are not, (as experience shows) where Regenerating
grace comes, it dislodges Satan, and turns him out of his Throne, Luke
11.21.22. Luke 10.18. It silences carnal self, and fells down lusts. Gal. 1.16.
makes the old man bow down, yea, and all the strongholds of sin and Satan,
fall before it. 2 Cor. 10.4.5. It will not be baffled as common grace is; for
that gives place to Lusts and Temptations upon every assault; but Regenerating
grace is so mighty and powerful, as that it takes the strongest Castles,
disarmes the stoutest Soldiers, and levels the strongest and highest Bulworks
of sin, world, and devil; so that it effectually subdues and captivates all
opposers, and oppositions whatsoever, and makes the whole Soul to yield
subjection to, and comply with it. It makes men willingly desert their old
delights, and break their former confederacies, and to put themselves under the
yoke of Christ, and choose his service.

3. It is a saving work of God. It is not for a time as the common work of
grace is, Math. 13.20, 21. but it is for ever, Regeneration is little in the
seed, but grows to a great Tree. Men are Regenerated for Salvation, 2 Cor. 5.1,
6. and it will not fail, or miss of its end. Regeneration is the ea^nest and
first fruit of Salvation, and Gods power is engaged to nourish and keep it to
Salvation, 1 Pet. 1 3, 4, 5. therefore they cannot lose the very end of it. God
would never bestow the grace of Regeneration on men, if he had not first
designed their eternal Salvation to be obtained in that way; but he having
decreed and appointed; designed and determined the saving of Souls, by or
through Regeneration; all that he Regenerates shall be saved. And therefore I
call it the saving work of God, because it shall certainly Issue in their
everlasting Salvation, notwithstanding their oppositions, weaknesses and sins.

3. The subjects of Regeneration, Namely, sinners, that is Ignorant, vile,
wicked, and abominable men. Not such as have purified themselves, made
satisfaction to God for former injuries; such as are worthy or meet for the
grace of God, or such as are friends, and to whom God is engaged for any
goodness of theirs, or service they have done him; no, but God of his free
grace Regenerates sinners, while they are yet sinners and ungodly. God finds
them sinners, and by Regeneration, makes them Saints; of hateful persons, he
makes them lovely and beloved; of enmies, he makes them friends, and of
strangers he makes them intimates. God says unto men in their blood, live,
Ezekiel. 16.6. Tit. 3.3, 4, 5. and the vilest of sinners he washes. 1 Cor. 6.9,
10.11. Romans 3.9. - 20. Therefore here is great encouragement for all willing
sinners, how vile, filthy and abominable soever they have been, that they may
be Regenerated and made new Creatures.

4. Regeneration changes and renews the whole man. It is powerful and effectual
on the whole body, Soul and Spirit, to revive, quicken and renew it. It affects
every part, and it is influential to prosecute and obtain its ends throughout.
As the natural Life diffuses its self into every part of the man, so does the
new Spiritual Life in Regeneration. 1 These. 5.23. The understanding is thereby
enlightened, 1 Pet 2.9. 2 Cor. 4.6. the will is sanctified and drawn to choose
and close up with the promises, Christ and the Covenant of grace, and with the
whole will of God. Isa. 56.4. Psalm. 119.30. Psalm. 110.3. Phil. 2.13. Col. 2.6.

The mind is Spiritualized and set on heavenly objects. Phil. 3.20. 2 Cor. 3.
ult. Romans 8.5. The affections are quickened, enlivened, and run Heavenward,
being risen to a new Life with Christ. Col. 3.1, 2. in a word, the Conscience
is made tender and active, to do its work, and the whole of his conversation is
changed; all things are become new. 2 Cor. 5.17. The grace of God has (in
measure) seasoned and leavened the whole man, within and without: there is not
a faculty or member of Soul or Body untoucht, but grace runs through every part.
But more of this anon. For I am now but pointing out to you the parts of the
definition of Regeneration.

5. Regeneration is wrought by infusing a measure of the holy Spirit and
special grace of Christ into a man. In Joh. 3.3. men are said to be born from
Heaven; and verse. 5. to be born of the Spirit. The Spirit is called the Spirit
of Christ, Romans 8.9. and the grace of Christ, 2 Cor. 13. ult. and this Spirit
and grace of Christ is said to be in men, Romans 8.11. and Christ by them dwells
in men. Ephesians. 3.17. and says God in the New Covenant, I will put my Spirit
within them, and a new heart will I give them: Sprinkle clean water on them,
and make them clean. Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27. So he puts his fear into men's hearts,
Jer. 32.39, 40. and sheds abroad his love in them, Romans 5.8. A Believers new
state is twofold, 1. A state of Justification. 2. Regeneration. Justification
is Gods imputing the Righteousness of Christ to him, acquitting and discharging
him of Guilt and Condemnation, pardoning all his sins, revoking the Sentence of
the Law given out against him, removing the Curse, and remitting the punishment
due to him, and graciously accounting and declaring him perfectly righteous in
Christ, and receiving and accepting him into favor and friendship, 2 Cor. 5.
ult. 1 Cor. 1.30. Isa. 53. Romans 4. Gal. 3.

This is not Regeneration (though Justification and Regeneration are never
separated) for Regeneration is the work of God within us; Justification is the
Act of God without us: Regeneration is not our Justification, neither is
Justification our Regeneration, although all that are Regenerated are also
Justified. There is a great difference between the one and the other, which we
must carefully understand, and consider well, lest we confound what ought to be
distinguished. God does not Justify us by Regenerating us; they are two
distinct Acts, or works of God toward us, and so we ought to understand, and
make improvement of them: Therefore (I say) in defining Regeneration, that it
is the work of God, infusing the Spirit and Grace of Christ into us, that you
may distinguish it from Gods Act in Justifying us; for many poor Souls do
miserably confound them.

6. Regeneration is wrought by the Ministry of the Gospel. God does
(ordinarily) Regenerate men by the Preaching of the Gospel. By men's Preaching
and hearing of the Gospel, the holy Ghost is given unto men, to to change their
hearts, and make them new Creatures. Acts 10.44. Gal 3.2. The Gospel shows us,
that faith comes by hearing, Romans 10.17. that is, God works faith and all other
graces in men by it, as in and by his own ordinance. By this Instrument he
begets us again to a lively hope, Jam. 1.18. 1 Pet. 1.3. It is the power of God
to Salvation. Romans 1.16. and Christ tells us, Joh. 5.25. that the dead shall
hear the voice of the son of God, and they that hear shall live. So Isa. 55.3.
This is Gods engine whereby he pulls down strong holds, levels mountains, and
overthrows the Devils Kingdom, as the blowing of the Rams horns did fell down
the walls of Jericho. By this means the dead are raised to Life, the blind are
made to see, Acts 26.18. and deaf ears are unstoped. By the Gospel, men are
Translated out of the Kingdom of darkness, into Christ's Kingdom of Light.

7. God Regenerates men to and for holy and gracious ends and purposes. They
are created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God had before ordained that
they should walk in them. Ephesians. 2.10. That they that live should not henceforth
live unto themselves, but unto him that dyed for them and rose again. 2 Cor.
5.15. That they should walk in newness of Life, and not serve sin. Romans 6.4, 6.
God Crowns them with, and makes them the subject of his special grace, that
they may be Agents of his glory, in bringing forth fruit worthy of their new
state.

God has great ends in bestowing great grace, and special ends in giving
special grace. God honors and beautifies men with his grace, that they may
therewith adorn his Gospel and exalt his name. By Regeneration God makes men
loving and lovely, and meetens them for communion with himself. I have (I
think) said enough to or of the definition of Regeneration, therefore shall say
no more of it in this place.

Quest. Pray explain the great work of Regeneration more fully, and show us
what those works of God on men are, that do not amount to, or ordinarily Issue
in Regeneration, that so we may clearly understand what Regeneration is not,
and also what it is?

Answ. I shall first show what it is not. 2. What it is, more fully.

First, Mere light in the head is not Regeneration. For men may have much
Spiritual light without Spirittual Life. Some are enlightened, who fall away
from the truth, and become Apostates, Heb. 6.4, 5, 6. and after they have known
the way of Righteousness, do turn from the holy commands of God, to their own
wicked ways. 2 Pet. 2.21, 22. And we read of some who knew their Lords will,
but did it not, Luke 12.47. which shows that they were never Regenerated.

Secondly, Men may have many and great convictions of sin, and of their
miserable and wretched conditions by reason thereof; they may be under much
trouble of Spirit, and cry out with tears and heart-grief, and they may mourn,
and be in bitterness of Soul, in the sight of their sad case, and perishing
state; and yet all may be blown over, and come to nothing, but end in sin and
eternal death. Pharaoh cries out, I am wicked, Exodus 9.27. and Saul saw his
wickedness, and wept, 1 Samuel 24.16. and confessed his sin, 1 Samuel 26.21. Wicked
Ahab had conviction of, and was greatly troubled for his sin, and humbled
himself, 1 King. 21.27, 28, 29. so the Israelites in the Wilderness, and
afterward. Judas was troubled, and cries, I have sinned, Matthew. 26.3, 4. yet
none of them were Regenerated.

Thirdly, Men may greatly reform their ways, and look like New Creatures; their
Conversations may be white, while their hearts are black; they may have a clean
outside, when they are foul and abominable within; they may appear beautiful to
men, whilst they are but whited Sepulchers, and full of all manner of
wickedness within, Mat. 23.25, 26, 27, 28. they may be washed, and yet be still
Swine, 2 Pet. 2.22. and they may go for Saints amongst men, whilst they are
Devils within: Judas was so; and the Lord Jesus tells us, that many go in
Sheeps clothing, but are indeed Wolves, Matthew. 7.15. Therefore mere
Reformation is not Regeneration. Thou may forsake many sins whilst thou
love them, and perform many duties that thou love not, but loathest. Herod
was a Reformer, he did many good things, Mark 6.20. but he was not a New Man.

Fourthly, Thou may have much spiritual joy, and yet be still an unregenerate
man. Herod heard John preach with gladness, Mark 6.20. The stony-ground hearers
had joy for a time, in the good ways of God, Mat. 13.20. Thou may have many
tastes of the good Word of God, and the Powers of the World to come, Hebr. 6.4,
5. yea, thou may have such tastes of the Heavenly Gift, as to raise thy Soul
to delight in drawing nigh to God in his Ordinances of Divine Worship, and
continue in thy unregenerate state, Isa. 58.2.

Fifthly, Thou may believe the truths of the Gospel, and on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and yet be in an unregenerate state and condition. Simon Magus
believed, when in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity, Act. 8.13.23.
The rockie hearers did believe a while, but were afterward Apostates, Luke
8.13. Christ his hearers are said to believe on him, Joh. 8.30. yet in verse
44. he calls them the children of the Devil; Ye are (says he) of your Father
the Devil, and his works ye will do. The Hypocrites mentioned in Psalm. 106.12,
13, 14. were said to believe; and so may you have Faith, and believe, and yet
be Hypocrites still. You may think you do believe aright unto Salvation, when
in truth you do not, but delude your own Souls.

Sixthly, Thou may be much in hearing and praying, and yet be an unregenerate
man. Herod was a hearer of John, Mark 6.20. Hypocrites in Ezekiel, were great
hearers of him, and he was to them as a very lovely Song, Ezekiel. 33.30, 31, 32.
The three bad grounds were all hearers of the Gospel, Matthew. 13.18-22. but not
a good hearer amongst them; they were all stark naught, and so may thou be
also, who art a great hearer of good men; and then for praying, or rather
saying of prayers, thou may pray often and long, and yet be an hypocrite, and
an unregenerate man; yea, thou may have the gift of prayer, and yet be a
graceless man. The Scribes and Pharisees made many and long prayers, Matthew.
23.14. So the hypocrites we read of in Job, Chap. 27.8.10. Many make such
prayers as God abhors, and will not hear, Isa. 1.14, 15.

Seventhly, Thou may be very strict, and very severe in fasting and
afflicting thy self, and yet be an unregenerate man. The Scribes and Pharisees
fasted and afflicted themselves in the height of their hypocrisy, Luke 18.12.
I fast twice in the week: And wherefore have we fasted and afflicted our souls,
say the hypocrites in Isa. 58.3. and the like they did in Babylon, Zach. 7.5, 6.

Eighthly, Thou may be a charitable man; I mean, thou may give much Alms to
the poor, and yet be an unregenerate man. The Scribes and Pharisees did so,
Mat. 6.1, 2. Luke 18.12.

Ninthly, Thou may be a zealous man for, and in Religion, and yet be in an
unregenerate state. Paul was so before his Regeneration, Act. 22.3. Gal. 1.14.
The Jews had a zeal for God, when in their blindness and hardness of heart,
Romans 10.2. Thou may be of a warm zealous spirit, even whilst thou have a
carnal unregenerate heart.

Tenthly, Thou may have much Integrity, and do many good things uprightly, or
without designed guile or fraud toward God and men; Abimelech did so, with
respect to Abraham and Sarah, Genesis 20.5. to which God gave his testimony,
(namely) that it was so indeed, verse 6. Paul, while unregenerate, had a great
deal of Moral Integrity; I have (says he) walked in all good Conscience before
God until this day, Acts 23.1. (Mark it) I have walked in all good Conscience
before God; he speaks of his carriages toward God in his unconverted state. To
the same purpose he speaks of himself in Acts 26.4, 5, 9. But when he declares
his sincerity and integrity in walking before God in his Regenerate State, he
gives us another account of it, 2 Cor. 1.12. For our rejoicing is this, the
testimony of our Conscience; that in simplicity and godly sincerity, or as the
Greek word reads it ((...)) that in, or with the simplicity and sincerity of
God, we have had our Conversation; and also by (says he) the Grace of God, to
distinguish his Evangelical and gracious integrity, from his moral and old
sincerity or integrity he had whilst a Pharisee, and in an unregenerate
condition: And Paul further tells us in Phil. 3.6. that concerning the Law, he
was blameless; that is, he did act and walk according to his Knowledge and
Conscience.

These seeming Graces, and good works, look like Regeneration, special Grace,
and real good works, but in truth they are not so. These are commonly taken for
such, and men conclude that they are Regenerate, and in a happy condition,
because they find such things as these in and by themselves; but assuredly,
such good things may be in you, and done by you in your unregenerate states,
yea, you may fear God, and love God, and be (in many things) conscientious men;
you may love the People of God, desire their Society, and wish your Souls in
their condition, and yet be unregenerate men; you may be meek, humble, useful,
and desirable men, and be taken and accepted, respected and honored by, and of
the best of men, as good and holy men, and all that while be in the gall of
bitterness, and bond of iniquity; therefore it nearly concerns you to be
serious and diligent in examining and trying your selves, whether or no you be
such as you seem to be, lest you continue to seem to be what you are not, and
so delude men, and deceive your own Souls; harden your selves in a presumptious
confidence, and flatter your selves to everlasting destruction. I could have
presented you with many other things that look like Regeneration, but I may
speak something more of this matter, when I shall characterize Regenerate
persons, or open Regeneration on another Head.

2. But I shall now give you a fuller explication of the great work of
Regeneration; the word is (...), and signifies a new or second state. This is a
compound word of (...), again, and (...), Generation: So Regeneration is a New
Birth; or as Peter expresses it, a being born again, 1 Pet. 1.23. The word is
used in Tit. 3.5. and in Matthew. 19.28. In Titus it is meant of the first
Regeneration, or change of state here; but in Matthew, it may import the state
of Grace here, and Glory hereafter. The words in the Text, and in 1 Pet. 1.23.
which are rendered born again, are of the same import, and signify the same
thing, or work of God on men; and so do those expressions of begetting, 1 Pet.
1.3. Jam. 1.18. Indeed the work of Regeneration is variously expressed, and set
out in Scripture by many significant and diverse words and phrases; to show us,
that it is a great and glorious work of God on sinners, to commend it the more
to our consideration and acceptance, to explain and make it the clearer to our
understandings, and to quicken and persuade us to seek after it in good
earnest, to esteem and value it, and to move Regenerate persons to much
thankfulness for it, and to provoke to walk worthy of it; to convince men that
it is too great a work for them to do, that they are beholding to Free Grace
and Omnipotent Power for it, and to lay them low, and make them vile in their
own eyes. Now Regeneration is expressed and set out to us in the Gospel,
sometimes by renewing us, Col. 3.10. Heb. 6.6. sometimes by making us partakers
of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. and stamping the Image of God on us, Col.
3.10. Ephesians. 4. sometimes it is expressed by Gods writing his Law in our hearts,
Jer. 31.33. Heb. 10.16. and by circumcising hearts, Deuteronomy. 30.6. sometimes by
shedding abroad his love, and putting his fear into them, Romans 5.5. Jer. 32.39,
40. as also by quickening the dead, Ephesians. 2.1.5. Joh. 5.21.25. sometimes by
Creation, or creating them in Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians. 2.10. Col.
2.10. sometimes by putting off the old man, and putting on the new, Col. 2.9,
10. Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24. sometimes by translation, or by translating us from
death to life, 1 John 3.14. and out of darkness into the Kingdom of Christ,
Col. 1.13. sometimes by opening blind eyes, and turning men from darkness to
light, and from the power of Satan unto God, Acts 26.18. sometimes by Gods
working us to will and do, Phil. 2.13. and working us for this self-same thing,
2 Cor. 5.5. that is, preparing us for another world; and sometimes by calling
us by his Grace, Gal. 1.6. to be Saints; to holiness, 1 Pet. 1.14. and to
newness of life. Regeneration is held forth to us by such expressions, and
works of God in and upon us; it includes all these, and several other mentioned
in Scripture. But I have more to say for the unfolding and clearing this great
truth to you, who desire to learn.

First, Regeneration, Renovation, or the New Birth, is made up of all and every
Grace of Christ: I mean the seeds and first fruits of all Grace, Christ imparts
and infuses a measure of all his Grace in regenerating a man; he opens the
Fountain and Treasury of his Grace and Fullness by the hand of the Holy Ghost,
he conveys it into our hearts, Joh. 16.13, 14. yea, and the Holy Spirit himself
gets into men, and dwells there, Romans 8.10. as I showed you before.

Q. What are the Graces of Christ, that constitutes and forms the New Creature,
or that makes the great Change?

Answ. First Life. We are all by Nature dead in sins, not only as under the
Damning Sentence of the Law, but we are personally dead; that is, as the Body
is dead without the Soul and Spirit that animates the Body, so without the
Spirit and Grace of Christ, our Souls, Bodies, and Spirits, are spiritually
dead, as being without spiritual life, Ephesians. 2.1.5. Matthew. 8.22. Joh. 5.25. Now
when Christ Regenerates a man, he infuses and conveys of his Life into him, and
that enlivens the whole man. Hence Christ tells us, that he is the Life, Joh.
14.6. that he came to give Life, Joh. 10.10. that he quickens whom he will, and
the dead shall hear his voice, and live, Joh. 5.21.25. And Paul tells us, that
our life is hid with Christ in God, Col. 3.4. He is the Fountain of the Water
of Life, which he invites men to come and drink, Rev. 22.17. Joh. 7.37. And he
tells us further in Joh. 11.25. that he is the Resurrection, and the Life; and
that whosoever finds him, finds life, Pro. 8.35. So that Regeneration is a new
Life, a Heavenly Life, and the Life of Christ.

Secondly, Light; special and peculiar Light. By Nature we are blind, walk in
darkness, and know not whether we go, because darkness has blinded our eyes;
we know neither Christ, nor our selves; there is a Vail before our eyes, so as
that we cannot discern spiritual things and matters spiritually; they are all
Mysteries unto us, and we cannot see them so as to love, prize, and esteem them
more than our lusts, and the things of this world. So the Gospel tells us, that
by Nature we are in darkness, Ephesians. 5.8. Acts. 20.18. and our calling is out of
darkness, 1 Pet. 2.9. and the Light (that is Christ) shined in darkness (that
is in men's hearts) Joh. 1.5. And we are told, that men by Nature are not only
in darkness, but that they love it, or to abide in it, Joh. 3.19. Now in
Regeneration God causes light to shine in our hearts, to give us the knowledge
of the glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. And we are brought
out of darkness into mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2.9. and by this light we are
enabled to discern heavenly and spiritual things spiritually, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10,
12, 13, 14, 15. Our sin and hypocrisy from God has brought us into a Dungeon
of darkness; and therefore it is absolutely necessary, that God should give us
spiritual light in Regenerating us, to make us teachable and tractable to know
his will, and do it; for without this Light we cannot know, nor do it aright.

Thirdly, Faith; Christ gives men Faith that they may believe in him, and in
God the Father, as he commands them to do, Joh. 14.1. 1 Pet. 1.21. 1 John 8.23.
Joh. 6.22. Men have no Faith, I mean no special and peculiar Faith of their
own, whereby they can rightly believe in Christ unto Salvation, Heb. 10. ult.
and therefore they must have it from him, and from him they have it in
Regeneration; for he is the Fountain of Faith, as well as of Life and Light.
All things are delivered to him of the Father, Matthew. 11.27. and it pleased the
Father that in him should all fullness dwell, Col. 1.19. that of his fullness men
might receive Grace for Grace, Joh. 1.16. Christ commands them to believe in
him, and tells them that in so doing they shall have Eternal Life, Joh. 3.16.
and that they may so believe, and obtain Eternal Life, he bestows of his own
Faith upon them, which is a part of their New Life, or Regeneration. This is a
lively Faith, 1 Pet. 1.3. of the Operation of God, Col. 2.12. and it is given
them in the behalf of Christ, Phil. 1.29. And in Ephesians. 2.8. it is said, not to be
of our selves, but the gift of God; and presently sub^oyns, verse 10. that we
are Gods workmanship, created (or regenerated) in Christ Jesus unto good works,
whereof believing is the most excellent, Joh. 6.29. And in 1 Pet. 1.3. the
Apostle tells us, and blesses God, that he had begotten some Souls to a lively
Faith or Hope; which shows that Faith and Hope are part of the New Creation:
And the Faith whereby we believe in Christ unto the saving of our Souls, is
called the Faith of Christ, Romans 3.22. Ephesians. 3.11, 12. The Faith that mere
natural men have, it is a dead Faith, Jam. 2.20.26. but the Faith of Christ is
a part of the Life of Regeneration. We do not first believe that we may be
quickened, and Regenerated, but we are first Regenerated by the Spirit of Faith,
and then we believe with a living, lively, and with a heartpurifying Faith,
Acts 15.9.

Fourthly, Hope: Hope is a Grace of Christ, and a part of our Regeneration, or
of the New Creature in us. Hence Regenerate persons are called Children of
Hope, 1 John 3.3. and in Col. 1.27. it is said, that Christ is in them the Hope
of Glory. Unregenerate men are said to be without hope, while they are without
God in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. and when they are savingly called, or Regenerated,
they are said to be called in Hope, Ephesians. 1.18. and all believers are called in
one Hope, Ephesians. 4.4. that is, all have the same grace of Hope given them in
their calling; and in 1 Pet. 1.3. (beforenamed) they are said to be begotten
again to a lively Hope, by the Resurrection of Christ from the dead.

Fifthly, Love: Love is another Grace, given from the God of all Grace in
Regeneration. Such as loved not God before, above the Creature, are enabled by
Regenerating Love, to love him mostly, heartily, obediently, and constantly.
This Love is shed abroad into the heart by the Holy Ghost, Romans 5.5. and God is
said to give it to men by circumcising; that is, by regenerating their hearts,
Deuteronomy. 30.6. This is one of the Laws that God promises to write in their hearts,
Jer. 31.33. God requires men to love him with all their hearts, minds, and
strength, Matthew. 22.37. and that they may so do, he Regenerates them; that is,
he gives them Regenerating Love; and this Grace helps to complete the work of
Regeneration in us. This Love is a Beam, a drop of that Love wherewith he loves
his Elect, and therewith Regenerate persons love God again with the same love
that he loves them; it is the same for kind, though not of the same degree; so
that he who loves not God with all his heart, is not Regenerate; but he that
does, is certainly Regenerated.

Sixthly, Fear: Men have cast off the fear of God, and fear not to offend him;
but God will be feared by men, and requires them to do it all the day long,
Pro. 23.17. Men indeed are naturally afraid of Gods Judgments, when they see or
seel them, but they are not afraid of provoking God by their disobedience and
rebellion; men have cast the fear of God behind their backs, but God will have
some hearers of him; and therefore he puts it into their hearts, Jer. 32.39,
40. that with his Grace of holy fear, they may indeed stand in awe of him, and
sin not, Psalm. 4.4. There are no men in the world that fear God aright, but
Regenerate persons; and the fear of God being a part of their Regeneration,
they do from the day of their New Birth begin to fear him, and ever after they
are called Fearers of God, Psalm. 115. The Eye and Commands of God keep them in
awe; God has put fear into men and beasts, to be a means to cause them to
preserve themselves, and to keep them from hurting one another: So in
Regeneration God puts his holy spiritual fear into their hearts, that they may
not sin against God, or wrong their own Souls. God has promised to cause men
to fear him, not so much for his Judgments, as for his Mercy and Co^dness, Hos.
3.5. and this fear he put into the Body of Regeneration, without which it will
be imperfect.

Seventhly, Humility, Meekness: These Graces (if they are two) are parts of the
New Creature; they are the Beauty and Ornament of the New Creature, without
which it would not be so amiable and lovely as now it is. We are by Nature
exceeding proud, rugged, haughty, sour, and pievish Creatures, but God loves a
meek and humble spirit; and therefore he Regenerates some with Humility and
Meekness, and the more men have of these, the more lovely they are to God and
men, the more conformable to Christ, who was meek and lowly in heart, Matthew.
11.29. Christ will have all his Members like himself; the Body must be like the
Head; and Christ becoming their Head in Regeneration, he bestows on them his
Humility and Meekness, which is a part of that fullness of Grace he has
received for his Members. Meekness is one of the glorious fruits of the Spirit,
Gal. 5.22. and one of the Graces of Christ, Jam. 4.6. By Humility and Meekness
Christ prepares and capacitates men for his service, and communion with
himself; to bow and bend them to his holy will, and make them obedient unto him
in all things; for only the Humble and Meek are such persons and walkers.

Eighthly, Zeal: Regeneration makes men zealous against sin, and for God, and
godliness. Before Regeneration men may have a zeal for God, but not the Zeal;
it is not according to knowledge, Romans 10.2. True Gospel-zeal is a glorious
Grace of Christ infused into men in Regeneration, and that in pursuance of one
of the great ends of Christ his death, Tit. 2.14. He gave himself to redeem us
from all iniquity, and to make us a peculiar people, zealous of good works.
Before men are Regenerated, they are zealous for their own gain, honor,
pleasure, and superstition; but Regeneration makes them zealous for God, with
the Zeal of God. As soon as Paul was converted, he showed himself a true and
great Zealot indeed for Christ, Grace, Holiness, and the Souls of men. It is
holy Gospel-zeal that makes men active for God, and puts them forward to follow
their Light. Light in the Head, without Zeal in the Heart, may fill men with
notions of duty, but never make them Practitioners of duty; they may know the
Will of God, but they will not, they cannot be persuaded to do it: it is true,
that Zeal without knowledge is not good, and as true, that knowledge without
zeal is unprofitable; Christ has a fullness of zeal for men, and in
Regeneration he imparts it to them.

Ninthly, Prayer: In Regeneration Christ infuses the Grace and Spirit of
Prayer; as soon as Paul was Regenerated, behold he prays, Acts 9.11. He had
often prayed before, for he was a zealous Pharisee, and concerning the Law he
was blameless, Phil. 3.6. but he never prayed aright until he was Regenerated,
for then Christ gave him the grace of Prayer; he could then pray with Grace in
his heart, and then, not till then, behold he prays. There are none can pray
spiritually but New Creatures, for the voice of Nature is the voice of the
flesh, and what is of the flesh is flesh, Joh. 3.6. and that voice God is not
pleased with, and hears not; but it is the voice of the New Creature, which
is formed and made up of the Grace and Spirit of Christ, that God hears and
delights in, Pro. 15.8. Therefore God promises to give unto men (in
Regeneration) the Spirit of Grace and Supplication, Zach. 12.10. that they may
thereby be enabled to pray unto God holily and acceptably, 1 Pet. 2.5. Romans
8.26, 27. God is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and truth, Joh.
4.23, 24. and therefore he spirits them in Regeneration so to do. Men may speak
great and good words, and make plausible and seemingly good prayers from light
in their heads, and other common spiritual gifts, without Regeneration, but
they are but fleshly, cold, dead, and loathsome prayers, because they proceed
not from a Divine Root and Spring; they are dead, their hearts are dead, and
therefore their prayers must needs be dead prayers, which the Living God
abhors, Isa. 1. But now Regeneration opens their hearts and tongues, enlivens
and quickens them, puts a heavenly Principle into them, so that now they can
speak to God with new tongues and hearts; now they can pray in Faith and Hope,
with spiritual and lively affections, and in obedience to the Will of God.

Tenthly, Self-denial: Men are by Nature altogether selfish, they are wholly
devoted to the service of the flesh, and set upon fulfilling the desires of the
flesh, and of the mind, Ephesians. 2.3. Romans 8.5. Phil. 3.19. But God lays in
Self-denying grace on their hearts in Regeneration; so that now they can deny
themselves of their ease, pleasures, profits, opinions, relations, peace, and
all their once beloved Interests whatsoever, for God, Holiness, Truth, and the
welfare of their own Souls. They can, and that upon choice, displease
themselves, to please God; they can willingly be nothing, that Christ may be
all in all things, Col. 3.11. yea, they would be the Footstool of Christ to
exalt him, and set him on the Throne. Regeneration makes them account their all
too little for him, as before they accounted a little too much for Christ. This
is the great term on which we receive and believe in the Lord Jesus, Mark 8.34.
Matthew. 16.24. Luke 9.23. and by Regeneration he gives them power and will to do
it, Psalm. 110.3. Phil. 2.13. Joh. 6.44, 45. This Regeneration wrought in Paul,
Gal. 1.16. I consulted not with flesh and blood (says he) that is, as soon as
he was Regenerated, Christ sent him to preach the Faith which before he had
zealously destroyed, verse. 23. and that amongst the barbarous Heathens, where
was much danger, and in the doing of which he should meet with many
difficulties, (as he did) yet he immediately yielded up himself to the Will of
Christ, and laid his own in the dust. So when Christ called Peter and Andrew,
they straightway left all and followed him, Matthew. 4.18, 19, 20. and after ward
Matthew did the like; he presently left his gainful Trade at the Custom-House,
and followed Christ, Matthew. 9.9. So the Disciples tell Christ, Luke 18. that
they had left all, and followed him; and the grace of Self-denial is given to
all Regenerate persons in the very moment of their Regeneration.

Eleventhly, Sincerity: This is the general grace, or that which is the Salt
that seasons and makes (as it were) all other grace good and singular.
Gospel-sincerity is the holy spiritual Leven, that runs through the whole Lump,
or Body of the graces of Christ given in Regeneration; it is not properly one
single grace, but it is rather the grace of all other graces; it is that which
makes the specifical difference between common and peculiar grace, that makes a
man to be what he seems to be; it makes and really qualifies a man, a truly
godly and gracious man; it makes the heart, face, and tongue of a man the same
toward God and men; it makes a man entire, and wholly for God, Christ and
Holiness, according to his holy profession; it brings up, and musters all
graces, sets them in their places, and directs them all unto God in duties, and
to those holy ends for which he has appointed them to be performed.
Gospel-sincerity is a special gift of God bestowed on men in Regeneration, 2
Cor. 1.12. that in the simplicity and sincerity of God we have had our
Conversation among you, (says Paul;) and he tells the Colosians, that they had
heard and known the Grace of God in truth, Col. 1.6. Gospel-sincerity has all
grace in the Womb of it; by it the Holy Ghost makes men a peculiar people unto
God, qualifies and fits them for all spiritual and holy employments, and
Religious Exercises, for acceptance and Communion with God. This is it that
makes men lovely, and desirable to God and man, that makes them true and
faithful to God, that draws forth and ingages their hearts to God, and causes
them to yield up their wills to the Will of God. Without Gospel-sincerity men
are but whited Sepulchers, and like the Apples of Sodom, beautiful without, but
rotten and abominable within. Men's Religion, I mean their profession of it,
without Gospel-sincerity, is vain and unsavory. Gospel-sincerity is that which
makes us like God, Jer. 22.41. and that which spiritualizes and persumes all
our duties. All our duties must be done, and profession of godliness made in
Gospel-sincerity, or God will abhor both us and them, Joshua 24.14. Heb. 10.22.
Joh. 4.23, 24. Isai. 1. Therefore that God may have some to serve him in Spirit
and Truth, he Regenerates them, and makes them New Creatures, by putting his
own Nature, and stamping his own Image into, and upon them, and so they are
made holy and sincere, in measure, like unto himself. This is another glorious
part of Regeneration. These are some, and but some of the graces of Christ,
that makes forms, and constitutes the Heavenly Babe, the New Creature. There
are many other graces of Christ given to men in their Regeneration, to make a
complete New Creature; as Joy, Temperance, Patience, and several other, which I
shall not now insist on, nor mention, because I have many other Truths to open
to you on this Subject. Let me then advise you, who think you are Regenerated,
to examine and try your selves, if you can find indeed these graces of Christ
in you; and if you you can, and do find them in you really, you may be sure
that all other graces (that have not been mentioned) are in you, and that you
are in a state of Regeneration; but if there be none of these graces in you,
then you are in an unregenerate state and condition.

Q. What have you further to say and declare of Regeneration?

Answ. I say, that the Holy Ghost gets into a man when he Regenerates him, and
brings in all the Graces of Christ with him, Joh. 16.7, 8, 13, 14. as was
showed before, Rom, 8.9, 10, 11. And Christ is said to be in Regenerate men by
his Spirit and graces, 2 Cor. 5.17. and by regenerating them, he works in them
new principles, habits, dispositions, and ends, and he sets up in their hearts
and souls new Laws, namely, his own, to direct and guide them, to rule and
order them; All things are become new in him, and to him, that is Regenerated,
2 Cor. 5.17.

1 There are new, that is, divine and heavenly Principles in him; there is
Divine Light to see withal, and New Life to walk withal, in the ways of God;
there is Love to move and incline his heart to his duty, Life to quicken, and
Light to direct and guide him: so that his duties proceed from his new
Principles of Light, Life, Faith, and Love. All things are become new in him.

2 New Habits. His new Principles are become fixed, stated habits in his Soul;
he does not move and act in the things of God by Foreign causes, and external
motives only, as he did before Regeneration, but he acts and brings forth fruit
from a stock of grace in his heart. In Matthew. 12.35. Christ tells us, that a
good man, out of the good t^easure of the heart, brings forth good things;
that is, from a gracious fixed habit. His good works do naturally flow from
him; he is fixed and resolved at all times, to do and comply with the Will of
God, in all states and condit^ons whatsoever, not only when he hears or feels
some stirring word, or provoking judgment, to quicken and irritate him, but
also at other times, when none of these things do occur. Thus we find David and
Paul, Psalm. 57.7. Psalm. 119. Acts 20.24. Acts 2. All things are new.

3 New dispositions. Regeneration disposes us to every good word and work; it
is an habitual disposition, though it be sometimes stronger, sometimes weaker,
yet they do genuinely mind and will God, their duty, and eternal happiness,
Romans 7.18. For to will (says he) is present with ^ne, but how to do it he knew
not. And the same Apostle shows us, that it is so with all good men, Gal. 5.17.
and they are said to be spiritually minded, Romans 8.5, 6. that is, the bent,
inclination, desire and intention of their hearts were so. Thus Regenerate men
are said to be ready to every good work, Acts 17.11. Tit. 3 1. 2 Cor. 8.11.
Romans 1.15. Regeneration disposes them to pray in secret, Acts 9.11. to hear and
learn the Will of God, Acts 17.11. so to be delivered from all sin, Romans 7.24.
to perfect holiness, Phil. 3.13, 14. and as these, so all other things and
duties whatsoever. It is true, that the carnal spirit in Regenerate persons,
does greatly oppose and draw them backward, but yet that hinders not their holy
dispositions and inclinations, but they will breathe and operate in them, with
a notwithstanding, as good men do experience. And indeed, this is one of Gods
great and holy ends in regenerating men, namely, to move and incline their
hearts unto himself, and his holy will, that they may move, will, aed act
freely, by his Life and Power within them; that their habitual inclinations and
dispositions may be suited to his will, and the things above, and that his
external motives may sweetly and freely draw, and not force and drive them to
himself, and their duty. Hence the Spouse prays Christ to draw her, and she
will run after him, Cant. 1.4. showing thereby which way she was disposed and
bent.

4 New ends and designs. All things are become new with regenerate persons, and
therefore needs they must have new ends and designs in their eyes, and hearts;
in their wills, understandings, judgments, minds, and affections; as their ends
and designs in things before Regeneration were base, low, and sordid, so now in
a Regenerate state they are high, noble, and honorable: They were wont to make
the Lusts of the flesh, of the eye, and the pride of life, the mark they shot
at, and the point, scope, and end of all their projects, contrivements, and
endeavors; but Regeneration has sublimated and heightened their spirits,
caused them to see, and carry on more worthy and glorious designs and ends;
their hearts are in measure suited to the Commands of God, and the end of
Christ his. Death. This the Apostle notably declares, 2 Cor. 5.15. and that he
died for all, that they that live, (that is, that are Regenerated, and begotten
again to a lively hope) should not henceforth live unto themselves, (but to
whom then?) why, to him who died for them, and rose again. They are now
partakers of the Divine Nature, and are of a heavenly descent; they are the
spiritually natural and adopted Sons and Daughters of God, the Offspring and
Royal Issue of the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and therefore they must
needs have aims, ends, and designs in their eyes and hearts, according to their
new Nature, and Royal Spirits. Now their Hearts and Souls are bent and set to
live in the Court, in the presence of the King, to wait on, and do homage to
him, to honor, serve, and please him; to keep his favor, and smiles of his
countenance; to know his pleasure, and yield him free and cheerful obedience
thereunto; to enrich themselves with his graces and Spirit, and prepare
themselves for full and everlasting Communion with himself. Now they desire to
hold up his Interest and Concerns in the world, to enlarge and augment his
Kingdom, and to have their light so to shine in the world before men, as that
they may see their good works, and be induced to glorify God, Matthew. 5.16.
These, and such like glorious ends and designs, are in the New Creatures eye;
but to live, project, and contrive, to get and keep worldly riches, honors,
pleasures, beauty, and a great name, are things far beneath the Noble and
excellent nature and spirit of the New Creature; it is of a Christ-like Spirit
and Nature, and therefore it must of necessity have and design the same ends he
does; Their old ends are passed away, and new take place.

5 New Rules, or Laws. Regeneration brings into a man, and puts him under new
Laws, Orders, and Rules; All things are become new. Before Regeneration they
were ruled and governed by the will of the Flesh, the counsels of the Flesh,
the suggestions of Satan, and examples of carnal men, and accordingly they
walked and steered their course, blessed themselves in so doing, promising peace
and felicity to themselves in those ways of their own hearts, Isa. 66.3. 1
These. 5.3. But Regeneration puts into them, and brings them under the Laws and
Orders of Jesus Christ, and the Kingdom into which they are translated, Col.
1.3. The Laws written in the Gospel, are by Regeneration written with the
Finger of the Holy Ghost in their hearts; so that now they have (as it were)
two Bibles, or Books of Laws, the one in their hand, the other in their hearts,
Jer. 31.33. Jer. 32.40. Heb. 8.10, 11. Heb. 10.16. By these Laws and Rules,
they desire, choose, and endeavor to walk under them, to live and be subject to
them, and to none else. The New Creature knows no other Lord, Laws, or
Lawgiver, over it is Soul and Conscience, but Christ; it freely yields up its
self to all cheerful obedience to all his Laws, and accounts it his happiness
to walk by his Rules; he honors them, and is thankful for them.

These are his Laws upon choice, and his obedience to them he esteems as a
great privilege and honor, Deuteronomy. 4.8. He would not vary from them, but have
them continually before him, in his eye, heart, and hand; he makes them his
delights and Councillors, and they are the joy and rejoicing of his heart, as
David and Jeremy experienced. When they vary from them, or in any thing
transgress them, they are afflicted; and when they conform to them, they
rejoice.

Q. You said before, that Regeneration signifies a change of state, or a second
state; pray show what is meant by a second, or new state, that Regeneration
puts men into?

Answ. I have showed you already, that Regeneration puts men into a new state
of life; it translates and raises them from spiritual death, to spiritual life,
from darkness to light, etc. by the infusion of the Spirit, Light, and Life of
Christ: And several things have already been discoursed on, which may not here
be mentioned, but shall refer you to what has been said before. Here I shall
add, secondly, that Regeneration transplants men out of the old Adam into the
new; it takes them from the old stock, and grafts them into the new, out of the
Earthy man, and puts them into the Heavenly, 1 Cor. 15. By Regeneration they
are actually put into Christ, and Christ into them; they are taken out of the
Kingdom of Satan, and put into the Kingdom of Christ, as these Scriptures show,
Romans 8.9, 10. 2 Cor. 5.17. 2 Cor. 13.5. Col. 1.13. Acts 26.18. Joh. 18.36. Men
are first put into Christ by Election, they are said to be chosen in Christ,
Ephesians. 1.4. and that before the Foundation of the World; and they were united to
Christ in his Incarnation, when he took up our Nature into a Personal Union
with the Divine; but in Regeneration, we are fully and completely, actually and
personally united to Christ, with our own choice, and free consent; so that
here is a great change indeed. Regenerate persons are set into a new and living
stock, which will yield sufficient sap and nourishment to such grafts. I am the
Vine, (says Christ) ye are the Branches, Joh. 15.5. And hence it is that they
bear much fruit unto Eternal Life, after Regeneration, Joh. 15.5. Joh. 4.36. By
Regeneration we are made Subjects of his Kingdom, and living Members of his
Body, 1 Cor. 6.15. Ephesians. 1. ult. Ephesians. 5.30. They are now of another Kingdom, and
Corporation, of another Root, Stock, and Body, of another Family and Household,
Ephesians. 2.19, 20.

Thirdly, Regeneration puts men into a state of liberty and freedom. In their
unregenerate state, they are in bondage, in prison, and slavery to their Lusts,
Romans 6.17. to Satan, 2 Timothy 2. ult. Ephesians. 2.2. They are also in bondage under
the Law, and enjoined to keep every tittle of it, on pain of Eternal Death,
Gal. 3.10. Romans 6.14. They are also by Nature Children of wrath, as they are
sinners and transgressors of the Law, Ephesians. 2.3. And they are, as sinners, under
the damning Sentence of the Law, Joh. 3.18. Moreover, the Scripture tells us,
that all men, while in their unregenerate states, are Prisoners, Isa. 61.1. and
Prisoners in the Pit, Zach. 9.11. This, and much more, is their misery and
bondage, thraldom and slavery, while in their state of sin; but now
Regeneration sets them at liberty and freedom, Gal. 5.1.13. Christ has by his
Death purchased their freedom and liberty, Tit. 2.14. but it is made theirs by,
or in Regeneration. Then he opens the Prison doors, Isa. 61.1. turns the Devil
out of his Throne, Luke 11.21, 22. breaks off their bonds, and brings them out,
sets them at liberty, and lets them go free, and all by virtue of his blood, in
pursuance of the Covenant, Zach. 9.11. Now they are said to be free from sin,
and become the servants of God, Romans 6.22. and the wicked one touches them
not, 1 John 5.18. In Regeneration Christ leads Captivity captive, Ephesians. 4.8. It
is a great, real, and Everlasting Freedom that men have in Regeneration; they
shall no more return into Captivity: If therefore the Son shall make you free,
ye shall be free indeed, Joh. 8.36. Hence they are ever after Regeneration
called the Lords Freemen, 1 Cor. 7.22. for by Regeneration they are put into
the state of liberty, not upon condition, or for a time, but for ever. They are
free from the Ruledom of Sin and Satan, from the Law of sin and death, by the
Law of the Spirit of Life, Romans 8.2. By Regeneration they are made free to, and
for God and Holiness, to serve him without fear, in righteousness and holiness,
all their days, Romans 6.22. Luke 1.74, 75. So that now they have nothing else to
do or mind, but how, as Freemen, to walk worthy of their new state, to live
unto God, and bear fruit to his praise and glory; for they are now in a secure
state of freedom and liberty, and need not fear the loss of it.

Fourthly, By Regeneration we are put into a state of Relation to God the
Father, and Jesus Christ the Son. In our unregenerate states we are the
Children of the Devil, Joh. 8.44. are his subjects and servants, and also the
servants of sin, Romans 6.17, 18. and then we stood in no special Relations to
Christ: For when we are made free from sin by Regeneration, then, and not till
then, we become the Lords servants, Romans 6.22. God is indeed related to us, as
our Creator, and we are related to him, as we are his Creatures; but this is no
special Relation, for the Devils are so related to God: But Regeneration puts
us into several special Relations. (1.) Into a Conjugal Relation. Christ is
Married to them, and they to him, 2 Cor. 11.2. Cant. 2.16. Christ is their
Husband, and they are his Wife, as the Song of Solomon shows. (2.) God is their
Father, and they are his Children, not as by the first Creation, but by
Regeneration, Joh. 1.12. 2 Cor. 6. ult. Isa. 9 6. Heb. 2. (3.) Christ is their
Head, and they are his Members, Ephesians. 5.30. (4.) Christ is their Lord and King,
and they are his Subjects and Servanti, Col. 2.6. Romans 6.16.22. Psalm. 2.6. (5.)
Christ is their Shepherd, and they are his Sheep, Joh. 10.11.14.27. (6.) Christ
is their Prophet, and they are his Scholars, Acts 3.22, 23. These are some of
the near Relations that Regenerate persons stand in to Christ, and they are
instated in them by Regeneration; for then they are contracted to Christ: I
have (says Paul) espoused you to Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2. namely, by the means of
his Preaching to them; and so they are made Sons and Daughters, Gal. 4.5.

Fifthly, In Regeneration men are put into a state of Righteousness and
Justification; not that they are Justified by Inherent Grace, or because they
are Regenerated, but that God does by Regenerating them, enable them to take
hold of Christ, and believe in him unto Justification of Life, Romans 5.18. Romans
3.22.25. So also, for that God does actually and personally justify men, when
he Regenerates and makes them New Creatures. Before Regeneration men are in a
guilty state; they are in an unrighteous, and (as such) in a condemned state
and condition; but by the means of Regeneration they are enabled to believe,
receive, and apply the Righteousness of Christ unto themselves; and they can go
to God the Father, and take out his Acquittances, and promised Discharges,
Pardons, and Acceptance, bring home, and apply all unto themselves; and so God
accepts them, acquits and forgives them, discharges them of, and justifies them
from and against all Crimes, Accusations, and Indictments whatsoever and puts
them into a Justified state, or into a state of Righteousness and
Justification, upon their believing in him, with the Faith given them in and by
their Regeneration, Romans 8.33, 34. 2 Cor. 5. ult. Romans 3.24.26. 1 Cor. 1.30.

Sixthly, Regeneration puts men into a state of Friendship with God. By Nature
we are all Enemies to him, and God seems to be, and to carry himself toward us
as an Enemy, Romans 5.10. Isa. 63.10. yea, we are by Nature worse, and more than
Enemies, for being in Friendship with the World, we are at Enmity with God,
Jam. 4.4. But Regeneration makes a great change, for it makes us Friends to
God, and God carries himself Friendly toward us: The old Enmity is turned into
a sweet, real, and comfortable Friendship. God carries himself Friendly, and as
a Cordial and great Friend to us, and so do we (in measure) unto him; we have
his Heart opened to us in love and kindness, and ours are opened unto him in
duty, love, and obedience. There is a great kindness, familiarity, and
communication, between God and Regenerate persons, and they do greatly delight
in one another company, Isa. 62.4. Isa. 58. ult. Pro. 15.8. This Friendship
between God and New Creatures, is a real, not feigned Friendship; it is a
heart-endearing, and Soul-knitting Friendship; it is a pleasant and delightful
Friendship; it is a sure and well-grounded Friendship, and it is a constant and
perpetual Friendship; it is such a knitting and fast Friendship, as that
neither Sip or Satan can possibly desolve. In, and ever after Regeneration, God
calls his New Creatures his Friends, Luke 12.4. Joh. 15.13, 14. Isa. 41.8. Jam.
2.23. and God and them declare themselves true and choice Friends indeed to
each other, by their love, and loving one another at all times, which is the
property of a true Friend, Pro. 17.17.

Seventhly and lastly, They are by Regeneration put into a state of Grace. By
Nature men are not only sinful, but they are in a state of sin and death; they
are dead in sin, and sold under sin; yea, they are altogether sin, Ephesians. 2.1.
Romans 3.10-20. As their services to God are, so are they; they are iniquity,
Isa. 1.13. It is their name, character, and nature, Romans 5.8. Gal. 2.15. But
Regeneration sets men in a state of Grace; for although after Regeneration they
have much sin and filthiness in them, yet their state is accounted and called,
and it is really a holy state; and after Regeneration, men are never accounted
and called sinners, but Saints, holy Brethren, the People and Children of God,
and the like; for they have their new Names from their new States. As the
Apostle speaks to the Ephesians, Ye are (says he) no more Strangers and
Foreigners, but Fellow-Citizens of the Saints, Ephesians. 2.19. so it may be said,
and that truly, of all Regenerate persons, that they are no more sinners,
(although they sin) but holy and beloved, Col. 3.12. It is, and may be called a
state of Grace, on many accounts; I Will name a few, and so dismiss this Head.
(1.) Because they are ingrafted into Christ, who is their Root, Revel. 22.16.
the Stock and Vine in whom they are set by Regeneration, Job. 15.2.5. (2.)
Because they are in favor with God; he loves the New Creature with the love of
complacency and delight, because it is his very Image and Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4.
Col. 3.10. and he has great favor and kindness for them as such, Tit. 3.4, 5.
(3.) Because they are under the Conduct and Power of Grace: For as before sin
reigned unto death, in, and over them; so now the Grace of Christ reigns
through righteousness unto Eternal Life, Romans 5. ult. (4.) Because of their
Relation to God. They were the Children of the Devil, but now the Children of
God: So their new Relation puts them into a new State. (5.) Because of their
work and service; their work was to serve sin, Romans 6. but now to serve God. It
is now their only work and business to live unto God in all sincere
Gospel-obedience. Holiness is their Aim, Trade, and Principle; it is stated in
their hearts, molded and framed there, and expressed in their endeavors. (6.)
Because they are in an abiding and lasting state; it is not transient, but
their Regeneration shall be perfected in Glorification, Phil. 1 6. Romans 8.30.
Thus you have heard what Regeneration is; I have opened it as plainly as I can
unto you, that you may understand it, and make a judgment of your own states,
whether you are indeed in a Regenerate state and condition.

CHAP. II. Showing the absolute necessity of Regeneration.
Q. IS there an absolute necessity of Regeneration?

Answ. Yea, there is an absolute necessity of it: We have it from the Mouth of
Christ himself in the Text, and verse 5. Except a man be born again, he cannot
see the Kingdom of God. And again, Verily, verily, I say unto you, except a man
be born of Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.
And in verse. 7. Marvel not that I said unto you, you must be born again. And
this great Truth is confirmed, as by the so often repeating, and reiterating of
it, so likewise by no less than four Verities, or Asseverations. So that you
see there is an absolute necessity of it.

But I shall not leave it so, but further prove and demonstrate this great
Truth, that so much, and so nearly concerns us all, by showing 1. (The
necessity of it) from the ends and uses for which men were created, and are
regenerated. 2. From the utter inability and incapacity they are in, to obtain
or prosecute those holy Ends of God, whilst in their unregenerate states.
First, let us enquire into the ends and uses of Gods Creations; his first and
second Creating work. 1. Here. 2. Hereafter.

1 God created Man in his own Image, Genesis 1.26, 27. He was pleased to make us
glorious and excellent Creatures indeed. God made man upright, Eccl. 7.29. he
stamped the impressions of his own Wisdom, Knowledge, Holiness, and
Righteousness on us; he made us capable of knowing, trusting, loving, pleasing,
and enjoying him for ever. God Created us with pure and unspotted Natures, with
free and holy dispositions and inclinations, with all abilities of will and
power, to will and do that which was good and pleasing in his sight; and as
such he delighted in us, and was refreshed in our Communion with him, Genesis
1.31. God looked on this Noble Piece of his Workmanship, and tells us, it was
very good; not only good, as his other works were said to be, Genesis 1.18.21. but
(says God) they are very good. Hence it is that they are said to be Crowned
with Glory and Honor, Psalm. 8.4, 5. Now in allusion and conformity to this his
first Creating of Man, (the Gospel informs us) is his work in recreating or
regenerating him: They are Gods workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good
works, Ephesians. 2.10. renewed in knowledge, after the Image of him that created
him, Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.24. Sanctified to the Lords use, and made partakers of
the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. Thus the second Greation, or Regeneration,
answers to the first, is commensurate to it, (although in some things,
afterward to be spoken of, it exceeds it) and is the same with it in kind and
degree, in likeness and reality.

Secondly, The ends of both these Creations are the same; namely, to glorify
God, and enjoy him for ever, Isa. 43.21. This people have I formed for my self,
they shall show forth my praise, 2 Cor. 5.15. That they which live should not
henceforth live unto themselves, but unto God, 1 Cor. 10.31. Whatever ye do, do
all to the glory of God. And as to glorify him, by living to him, so also to
live with him, and enjoy him for ever, 1 These. 4.17. Joh. 17.24. 2 Cor. 5.1-6.
But more particularly.

1 They were at first created in the Image of God, to hold forth the great and
distinguishing goodness of God to them, beyond what it was to other Creatures;
for the Excellency and Glory of their Make, and Nature, their state and
capacity, loudly proclaims the Wisdom, Power, Sovereignty, and Goodness of God
to them. All Creatures were as Clay in the hand of the Potter, in his Eye and
Hand, to make and form of it what manner of Creatures he pleased, But he was
pleased to make and form Man of the dust of the ground, put a reasonable Soul
into him, and stamp his own Image of Knowledge, Righteousness, and Holiness
upon him, that in this state and condition he might commend and show forth the
transcendent and glorious Excellency of the Maker. Thus Man is said to be the
Image and Glory of God, 1 Cor. 11.7. so in Regeneration God declares and holds
forth his distinguishing Love, Wisdom, Power, and Sovereign Grace, his
Holiness, and Righteousness, by restoring them to their Primitive state, and
restamping his Image upon them, after they had wickedly and shamefully defaced,
and utterly marred it, by their own wicked inventions, Eccl. 7. ult. and that
when they were his vile and hateful Enemies, Romans 5.10. By this work of God on
them whom he Regenerates, he holds forth his Sovereign Attributes, especially
his Sovereign Love and Power, distinguishing Goodness, and the exceeding riches
of his Grace, Ephesians. 2.4, 5. Romans 9.23, 24. Romans 11.33. Ephesians. 1.19, 20. This is
one of the glorious ends of God in Regenerating men.

2 That they might trust in, and live upon him. This is a homage which all
reasonable Creatures do owe to their Sovereign Creator, namely, to trust him
with the keeping of themselves, commit all to him, and rely upon him for all
things, 1 Pet. 4. ult. It was one of the Natural Laws that was concreated with
them, and put into their hearts in their first make, to live always in a
dependency on their Creator. For although God made Man a perfect Creature,
filled him with his Grace, and adorned him with his Image, yet he was but a
Creature, and he was always to live and have his dependency on God for his
subsistence, and not to stand and continue in that state, from and by himself,
but to depend wholly on him that made him. This he was bound to do, not only in
point of prudence, for his own security and peace, but in point of duty, as
that which he was indispensably bound unto by the Law of his Creation. His
neglect of his duty in this, occasioned his Dreadful Fall, which ruined him, (I
mean Adam) and all his Posterity. The same end does God Regenerate men for,
namely, that they may believe in Jesus Christ, and in God the Father by him,
Joh. 14.1. 1 Pet. 1.21. that they may trust, commit themselves to him, and live
in a constant dependence on him, Isa. 26.4. Psalm. 37.3.5. Therefore does he
infuse his Faith into them, when he Regenerates them, Col. 1.12. and writes
this Law in their hearts, that they may obey it, Jer. 31.33. Heb. 10.16.

3 They were at first Created to love God, with all their hearts, and chiefest,
strongest, and warmest love; that they might esteem and love him as their
highest and chiefest good, and singular Object of all their affections. This
Law of our Creation we have expressed in Matthew. 22.37. Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy Mind. So
likewise this is Gods End in his second Creation, or Regeneration; and
therefore does he circumcise their hearts to love him, Deuteronomy. 30.6. writes this
Law in their hearts, and sheds it abroad into them, in Regeneration, Romans 5.5.
that they may love him aright, and that with his own love, without which they
cannot do it.

4 The Lord Created Man to fear him, to reverence and stand in awe of him, as
their great Sovereign Lord and King. This Law was created with them, and
written in their hearts, until sin had defaced and blotted it out. This Law is
also written in the Bible, that men may remember what was written in their
hearts in their Creation, and know their duty, and one of the ends for which
they were Created, how they have lost it, and to provoke them to endeavor the
recovery of it. How often have we this Law expressed in Scripture, Thou shall
fear the Lord thy God; thou shall stand in awe, and sin not, Deuteronomy. 6.13.24.
Deuteronomy. 10.12.20. Psalm. 2.11. Psalm. 4.4. 1 Pet. 2.17. It is a holy fear, not a
perplexing and heart-disquieting fear that is commanded; it is a fear that is
not an Adversary to Faith and Love, as the forbidden fear is, but it is useful
for us, and helpful to all other Graces. Now in Regeneration God puts this fear
into our hearts, Jer. 32.39, 40. that we may serve the Lord with reverence, and
godly fear, Heb. 12.28. that we may not sin, or depart from God, Jer. 32. I
will put my fear into their hearts, and they shall not depart from me. But I
must hasten.

5 God Created Man to obey him, and yield him free, loving, and cheerful
subjection and obedience. He formed them for his Subjects and Children, that
they should subject themselves unto his Laws and Authority, and yield or give
to him the obedience of Subjects to their Sovereign, and of Children to their
Creator and Begetter; and accordingly they were Created with the Principle and
Power of obedience; and to this Created Principle God presently added a
positive Law, to try and exercise their obedience unto God, Genesis 2.16, 17. But
of the Tree of Knowledge, thou shall not eat of it, nor touch it. The Image of
God, in which Adam, (and we in him) were Created, was such, as fully enabled
him and us, had we kept it, to have yielded all heart and practical obedience
unto his whole will; he wanted nothing to help him, but he had all Grace in
perfection to obey and conform to the whole Will of God, at all times: But Sin
rooted the Principle and Power of Heart-obedience quite out of us; so that men
have now neither will nor power to obey the Will of God, until they are
regenerated by Grace. But that God might not loose this End (altogether) for
which he created Man, he is pleased, of his mere Grace, to Regenerate and renew
some of Mankind, and thereby frame and mould them to such obedience, as he at
first intended them for; for men cannot, neither will they obey, until Grace
has restored this old Power and Principle of obedience which they had lost.
And therefore he Regenerates and infuses this Power and Principle into men, to
make them willing Subjects, and obedient Children, 1 Pet. 1.14. Romans 6.16, 17,
22. This was Gods End in sending Paul to convert the Gentiles, Romans 15.18. and
this is powerfully effected in men, in and by the work of Regeneration.

6 That they might serve and worship him, according to his revealed will. God
made men to worship and serve him externally, as well as internally, by loving,
fearing him, and the like. Christ mentions this in Matthew. 4.10. when the Devil
desired external worship from him; It is written, thou shall worship the Lord
thy God. They were created in the Image of God, to serve him with fear, that
is, to worship God, Psalm. 2.11. Heb. 12.28. Now God Regenerates men, that they
may by his Grace be enabled to do and perform that worship to him, which he at
first created them for, and the Law of their Creation enjoins them to; that is,
to worship God in Spirit and Truth, for such (Christ tells us) the Father seeks
to worship him, John 4.23, 24. God works them for this self-same thing, (though
not only for it) says Paul, 2 Cor. 5.5. Regeneration makes men, together with
the help of the Spirit, worship God according to his own Will and appointment,
spiritually, holily, and acceptably through Jesus Christ, Heb. 12.28. 1 Pet.
2.5. Romans 12.1. But assuredly there are not any such Worshippers in the World,
but Regenerate persons; for all other men do what they do, in the Worship of
God, without the Grace and Spirit of God; and therefore cannot worship him in
Spirit and Truth.

7 God created Man in his own Image, that they might know him; and therefore
gave them a sufficient light to see by, and eyes to use that light; revealed
and made known himself unto them, that they might clearly see him, and always
have him, and his Will in their eyes. The Image of God was Light and Knowledge,
as well as Righteousness and Holiness; and therefore Adam knew, and saw God so
far, as a Man was, or in that state could be capable of knowing him; which as
it aggravated his sin, so it heightened his happiness while he kept it. The
knowledge of God was absolutely necessary to help him (and us in him) to trust,
love, fear, and obey him; so likewise to adore and admire him, and to worship
and serve him as our God: But the knowledge of God being lost, God has
provided means for the retriving of some, and bringing them to the knowledge of
himself again; and this is done by Regeneration. Hence they are renewed in
knowledge after the Image of him that created them, Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 4. And Paul
says, God that commanded light to shine out of darkness, has shined in men's
hearts, to give them the knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Christ, 2
Cor. 4.6. The having of this knowledge, is Life Eternal, Joh. 17.3. For this
end God opened Paul's eyes, Acts 22.14. and for this end he opens others eyes
also; and until men are Regenerated, they are in darkness, and know not God,
nor Christ the Mediator; and therefore regenerates men, that they may know
both, and whatever else is necessary to be known. Men are like Moles and Bruits
without the knowledge of God, Jesus Christ, his Grace and Laws.

8 God Created Man, to make him the Object of his Love, Delight, Complacency,
and Communion; and therefore made him in his own likeness, Genesis 5.1. beautified
him with his own Image and Nature, Genesis 1.27. 2 Pet. 1.4. that thereby he might
make him a lovely and suitable Object for those ends. Man was the Flower,
Crown, and Quintescence of the whole Creation, not so much because he had a
Reasonable Soul, and a more Noble Nature, but because he was created in the
Image of God. God puts the Accent on that part of his Workmanship several
times, Genesis 1.26, 27.5. 1. Eccl. 7. ult. to which the Apostle alludes, Col.
3.10. This was the Creature that God saw very good, as fitted for these ends,
namely, to be the objects of his love and delight, Genesis 1.31. God made them
after his own Heart, meet and answerable to his gracious purposes and
intentions; but man quickly marred and disrobed himself, and thereby made
himself utterly incapable and unworthy of Gods Delight, Complacency, and
Communion; so that now God had not a Creature left in the World to delight in,
and have Communion withal. But that he might not be altogether destitute of
some to take up withal, he chose a certain number, with a design to make them
Vessels of Honor, and to prepare them for this his special use, namely, to be
his Companions, to solace himself with them, and rejoice in them, as with his
Friends and Lovers, Zeph. 3.17. Isa. 63.3, 4. The Book of Canticles abundantly
declares it. Now this he does accomplish in and upon them, in and by
Regeneration, or making them New Creatures. By Regeneration, God in measure and
degree, restores to them what they sinfully lost, by their Rebellion against,
and Apostasy from God, and reposes them with, and of his Grace and Nature,
which they had deprived themselves of; by which they lost that love, delight,
and complacency that God had to, and in them, and that Communion he had with
them whilst they kept their integrity, and intended them for, in creating
them. I say, God restores to them, and creates in them that which will for ever
make them lovely and delightful unto him, by regenerating them; he puts his
Grace and Spirit into them, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26, 27. stamps and impresses his own
glorious Nature and Image on them, Col. 3.10. imputes the Righteousness of
Christ to them, 2 Cor. 5. ult. and infuses his Holiness into the whole man, and
so makes them lovely and beautiful, by the comeliness that he has of his own
put upon them, Ezekiel. 16.14. Then he loves and delights, then he takes
complacency in them, and then he enters into, and holds communion with them
with satisfaction, for his own Image and Grace sake, as well as for his own
love, and Sons sake, Joh. 13.1. Pro. 8.17. Joh. 14.21.23. Pro. 15.8. Zeph.
3.17. Isa. 63.3, 4. 1 John 1.3. 1 Cor. 1.9. These are some, but not all the
Ends of God in regenerating men, which must be obtained in this world. But
besides these that concern this life, there are others that concern Christ his
coming, and the Eternal states of Gods Elect. A word of these, and I have done
with this.

1 The Elect are the Spouses of Christ, by Christ's Purchase, and Gods Gift to
him, they were given to him, Joh. 6.37. Joh. 10.29. that he might Marry them,
and take them into a Conjugal Relation (as you have heard before) in pursuance
of Gods Ends in giving them to Christ, he pays a price for them, and purchases
them for himself; (for although they are said to be given to Christ, yet he
could not get them out of Prison, but by paying their debts, and full ransom,
which Divine Justice demanded, 1 Cor. 6.20.) and then comes and requires his
own, and contracts, and takes them to himself; and by regenerating them, he
shows himself unto them, and acquaints them with himself, persuades them to
consent to his Proposals, and choose him for their Husband; and so by his Grace
in their hearts, they freely, willingly, and cheerfully give their consent, and
Christ and they do mutually give themselves to each other, and take each other
into a Matrimonial state and resolution. This cannot be done without
Regeneration; for men are not adorned with a personal loveliness, and made meet
for Christ, until they are made partakers of the Divine Nature, and are
beautified with his Image, which makes them meet Companions for him: So they
will by no means be persuaded to consent to have him for their Head and
Husband, and resign up themselves unto him, until they have their hearts and
states changed, by his Spirit and Grace, in Regeneration. And therefore, I say,
that Regeneration is absolutely necessary to bring persons into a Conjugal
Relation to Christ.

But yet there is more to be done than what I have yet said, and which I aim at
in what I have spoken, namely, that the Contracted Bride is to make her self
ready for the great Marriage day, or for the compleatment of the Marriage
Solemnities, which shall be at Christ his second Personal coming, when he shall
receive his Bride unto himself, and carry her home to his own Royal Palace in
State and Glory, John 14.3. Revel. 19.1-8. Matthew. 25.31, 32. For this day, and
the great Solemnity of it, Christ must have his Bride in a state and practical
readiness, to meet her Bridegroom in the Clouds, where he will come with his
Attendants in great State, and send his Angels for his Bride to come to him;
where he will wait to receive and embrace her, and then will the Lord make his
great Feast, called the Supper of the Lamb, and a Feast of fat things; to which
Feast and Marriage she must come ready decked, with all her Ornaments and
Wedding Garments, that she may be suitable unto her Husband. For what has been
said, see these Scriptures, Matthew. 25.32, 33, 34. 1 These. 4.16, 17. Rev.
19.9.17. Isa. 25.6. Now, I say, the Lord Jesus exhorts her, or them, to get and
make themselves ready for his coming, Matthew. 24.44. Luke 12.35, 36. 2 Pet.
3.11, 12. Matthew. 25.10, 11, 12, 13, 14. that he may praise and commend her,
bless and reward her, Revel. 19.7. Matthew. 24.46.

Now this cannot be done without Regeneration, for that is their Ornament,
Beauty, Honor, and Glory. Without Regeneration they are not fit for
Contraction, much less can they make themselves ready for the great Wedding
day, and the glorious Solemnity and state thereof. The Lord Jesus will have but
uncomely, black, and dirty Spouses of us, without Regeneration, notwithstanding
our Election.

2 Full and everlasting fruition of, and Communion with the great and holy God.
This is the promised and designed state and portion of all Gods Elect number,
and this they are and shall be fitted for by Regeneration. Election is the
designing and appointing us to that happiness; Regeneration is the preparing
and meeting us for the enjoyment of it. Election is the causes or Spring of
Regeneration, and Regeneration is the fruit of Election; but the fruition and
eternal enjoyment of God in Heaven, is the end of both. Men are no more capable
of living in the presence and enjoyment of God, in their state of sin, than
Swine are to live in a Kings Palace, or Earthly Bodies in the Sun. Regenerate
persons shall meet the Lord in the Air, and for ever be with him, 1 These. 4.17.
They shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. and face to face, as Paul speaks, 1
Cor. 13.12. and they shall live with Christ for evermore, in perfect holiness,
joy, and glory, Matthew. 25. ult. But this men cannot do nor obtain without
Regeneration. (1.) Because of the unsuitableness of unregenerate men's hearts,
unto so glorious a state of holiness, honor, and dignity. (2.) Because God is
a holy God. He is glorious in Holiness, yea, Holiness its self, and no
uncircumcised heart can be admitted into his presence, and men in their
unchanged states are an abomination unto him, who is the Fountain of Holiness.
(3.) Because it is Gods own Ordinance, which shall stand fast to all
Generations, namely, that Regeneration shall precede and prepare the way to
Glory, and the everlasting fruition and enjoyment of God, John 3.3.5.7. Romans
8.29, 30. It is Gods filed, stated way with men, that they must have their
fruit unto holiness here, before they can enjoy Communion in Heaven with him
hereafter; and it is Regeneration that puts men into a state of holiness here,
to qualify and prepare them for Eternal Glory, and Communion with the Father
and Son in another World.

Thus I have presented you with the first grand reason or ground of the
necessity of Regeneration, namely, the uses and ends God designs men to in
their first and second Creation. Now in the second place, I am to show you the
necessity of Regeneration, from the state whereinto Sin has plunged us, or by
showing our weakness, wilfulness, averseness, and utter inability, to obtain
and prosecute those holy Ends of God without Regeneration. Both Scripture and
Experience will afford us sufficient proofs of this.

First then, we are in gross and palpable darkness, (as has been showed) we
are in our sinful state, not only in the dark, but we are in darkness, Ephesians.
5.8. This is called gross darkness, to show that it is exceeding great, Isa.
60.2. yea, it is said, that we are full of darkness, and in great darkness,
Matthew. 6.23. And the god of this World (is said) to bring us into, and keep us
in it, 2 Cor. 4.4. It is such a darkness and blindness, as that men know not
where they are, what they are, nor where they are going. How then can they
answer or prosecute Gods Ends, in Creating them in his own Image, without
Regeneration; and therefore they stand in absolute need of Regeneration, to
make them Children of Light, Ephesians. 5.8. such as the Apostle tells us the
Thessalonians were by Regeneration, 1 These. 5.5. Men are commanded to walk as
Children of Light, 1 These. 5.8. which Regenerating Light enables them to do. It
is only Regenerating Light and Knowledge that shows men the way wherein they
should walk, and the things that they should believe and do, in order to
Eternal Happiness, and without which they stumble, fall, and perish.

2 Let us take a further view of the condition, and the utter incapacity we are
in by Nature, to answer or reach the ends of our first Creation, and the ends
and uses which God designed us to, in forming and making us in his own Image
and Likeness, that thereby we may see the necessity of Regeneration, for the
restoring us (in measure) to our Primitive state, and capacitating us to attain
those ends, and serve his designs, which we are, on many accounts,
indispensably bound to do. I shall therefore present your unregenerate
condition unto you, for your conviction and quickening, yet further; and that
with all possible brevity. 2. We are by sin fallen from God, and become real
strangers to him; we have lost him in the Fogs of Lusts and Blindness. Ever
since we were cast out of Paradise for sin, we have been wandering in the
Wilderness and howling Deserts, and are Strangers and Foreigners to God, and
our selves, Ephesians. 2.12.19. and also to all happiness, and true blessedness.

3 By Nature we are averse, and unwilling to know our states, sins, and
wickedness, our misery and wretchedness, and the right way to obtain
deliverance from, and out of them; as also to know Christ, and true Holiness,
and most of all, to close, comply, and join Issues with God in his own way for
our Salvation. For although we are exceeding sinful and wretched, and God has
told us so plainly and particularly, and has also showed us the way to escape,
held out the Golden Scepter to us, and proffered us his Hand to help us out,
yet we shut our eyes, and stop our ears against him, and his favors, and
refuse to accept his kindness and gracious proffers, until Regeneration changes
us, and gives us new Spirits, Matthew. 23.37. Joh. 5.4. Pro. 1.24. ult.

4 By Nature we are most vile, filthy, abominable, and loathsome Creatures,
laden with sins, lying in our blood unwashed, full of all manner of Leprous
spots, and accursed Plaguesores; hateful and contemptible; compared to Dogs,
Swine, Serpents, Vipers, and Adders. Oh how does the Holy Ghost in Scripture
set us out, and decipher us? Romans 3.10-20. Tit. 1. ult. Rev. 3.17. Rev.
22.11.13. Matthew. 23.33. Ezekiel. 16.2-11. Isa. 1. Matthew. 7.6. Ephesians. 2. with
innumerable other like them.

5 By Nature we are without strength; we are as weak as water; we are so
impotent, as that we cannot help our selves, nor do any thing aright that God
commands; for by sin we lost all our spiritual strength and ability to do good,
or obey any Command of God. By sin we depraved and deprived our selves of
Light, Life, Holiness, Strength, and whatever was created with, or given to us,
in our Creation and first make, all is demolished and ruined, Romans 5.6. Romans
8.3. Therefore in Regeneration men receive new strength and power from God to
obey, Phil. 2.13.

6 By Nature we are Servants to the Devil, and our own Lusts, Rebels and
Enemies to and against God (as was showed before.) We have chosen the service
of Lusts and Satan, and are well pleased and contented with it, do it most
willingly and readily, and are not weary of it; but against God we lift up the
heel, and kick, throw off his Yoke, and reject his Authority over us, in his
Laws and Statutes, Joh. 8.44. Deuteronomy. 32. Ephesians. 2.2. Psalm. 2. Romans 6.

7 By Nature we are lovers of sin, and haters of God, 2 Timothy 3.4. Romans 1.30. We
sin upon choice, Isa. 66.3. and are greatly delighted with it, Pro. 2.14. As
the Law of God is to Believers, namely, their joy and delight, Romans 7.22. Psalm.
1.2. so is sin and wickedness to Unbelievers, whilst such; they rejoice not
only to be evil, but also to do it, and to work it, or in it, with both hands,
Jer. 11.15. It is their meat and drink, their pleasure and satisfaction to sin,
and wallow in the Mire of one or other abomination.

8 By Nature we are dead in sins and trespasses, Ephesians. 2.1.5. and live stinking
above ground, like filthy Carrion. We are unsensible of our sin and misery, or
of the wrong we have done to God, Men, and our own Souls. We are all by Nature
like some condemned Malefactors, who are not touched with their Guilt or
Punishment: Neither Gods Truths, Promises, Precepts, or Threatenings; neither
his Judgments or Mercies, will pierce or make any saving impressions on us.

9 By Nature we are void of all Grace. We have neither Faith to believe, nor
Affection to love God; we neither will that which is good, nor believe that
which is true, nor yet love that which is lovely, although we are indispensably
bound to do it, in order to Eternal Life. He that believes not shall be
damned, Mark 16.16. and if any man love not ou^ Lord Jesus, namely, in
sincerity, let him be accursed, 1 Cor. 16.22. Ephesians. 6. ult. Therefore we stand
in absolute need of Regeneration, that we may be enabled to believe in, and
love Christ aright.

10 And lastly; By Nature we do not so much as desire to be made happy, by Free
Grace, in the Lords own way. A happiness indeed we do desire, but then we would
obtain it in our own way, which will not do it. What men desire, that they
choose to, and for themselves; they desire happiness, and desire and choose their
ow^ way to it, Isa. 66.3. Romans 10.3. There is a way that seems right unto a
man, but the end thereof are the ways of death: So we read it, but J. and T.
render it, Cujus finis est via multiplex as Mortem; the end of that seeming
right way is manifold, or leads men diverse ways to death and destruction, Pro.
14.12. and yet it seems the right way unto them, toward the obtainment of
happiness: But such is our Depravity, Stupidity, Atheism, and Blindness, as
that we see not, desire not to know the right way to it, neither are we freely
willing to find and get it, in the ways God has appointed. God has appointed
Faith in Christ, Repentance toward God, Acts 20.21. and Gospel-Holiness, Romans
6.22. Heb. 14.14. to be the way to happiness; but men will rather lose their
happiness, than have it in these ways of Gods own appointment: They will have
God to bow and condescend to them, but they will not bend to, nor comply with
the will and way of God; so that if God will save them, it must be on their own
terms, not Gods; for they do by no means like or desire to win Heaven by
Self-denial, Faith, Repentance, true Holiness, and Gospel-obedience, but in the
way of their own hearts, Eccl. 11.9. The way of Gods prescribing is contrary to
their Lusts, Humors, Inclinations, Interests, and Affections. Happiness they
would have, but with all these. They do not account their obtainment of
happiness, of that weight and moment, as to deny themselves of these to get it.
All the Moral persuasions in the World will not make them change their minds;
but that they may be happy on other and easier terms than, God propounds unto
them. In Job 21.14. there is this description given of us, as in our Natural
states; They say to God, depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways; that is, the ways of God, which are appointed by God to lead and conduct
men to Eternal Happiness. Now if men do not so much as desire happiness, much
less will or can they seriously seek it in the Lords way; without which, yea,
and also striving for it, men shall not find, nor obtain it, Luke 13.24. 1 Cor.
9.24. Thus we may see (by these few things) the necessity of Regeneration, from
the state and condition we are all in by Nature. I have said but little of what
I could say of this matter; but I think I have said enough to evince and prove
the absolute necessity of a new state, by what has been said of our old; how
unable and incapable we are to answer, close up with, prosecute and obtain the
ends of God in our first Make, or his knowing us in his own Image and Likeness,
without Regeneration. How utterly unable we are to serve his holy designs,
without his special Grace, renewing and new moulding us for his own glorious
ends and purposes, which is done by Regeneration.

Q. What have you else to offer for the further demonstrating and proving this
great Truth, namely, the absolute necessity of Regeneration, for our fuller
information and conviction: for it is a hard matter to believe it, and there
are but few that do believe what you have already said; yea, there are many
that preach quite contrary Doctrine, and persuade men that they are
Regenerated, in, and by their Water Baptism; and therefore they need no other
Regeneration?

Answ. I shall therefore further prove and demonstrate this Truth to you, and
show you the absolute necessity of it, in these following particulars.

1 No man can know Jesus Christ rightly and savingly, without Regeneration;
therefore Regeneration is absolutely necessary for the right knowledge, or of
knowing Christ, which is Life Eternal, Joh. 17.3. And that we cannot so know
him until we are Regenerated, has been already proved: For we are darkness,
Ephesians. 5.8. and walk in darkness, because darkness has blinded our eyes, 1 John
2.11.

2 No man can rightly believe in Christ, and in God the Father, without
Regeneration; and therefore it is absolutely needful, It is absolutely
necessary to Salvation that we do rightly believe, because it is Gods Statute
Law, that such as do not so believe, shall not see life, but the wrath of God
abides on them, Joh. 3.36. Now that none believe in Christ unto Salvation, is
evident, because our sin and Gods Curse has concluded, or ((...)) shut up all
in unbelief, and believing is of Grace, Act. 1.18.2.1.

3 No man can rightly repent of his sins without Regeneration; therefore it is
absolutely necessary for Repentance. Now true Repentance is absolutely
necessary to Salvation; for God has determined, that except we repent, we
shall all perish, Luke 13.3.5. and that none can truly and savingly repent
without the Grace of God in Regeneration, is evident, because the Scripture
says, We are under hardness of heart, in our unregenerate states, Ezekiel. 3.7.
Mark 3.5. Romans 2.5. Matthew. 19.8. And also because Repentance unto Life, is the
special gift of God, Acts 5.31. Acts 11.18.

4 No man can deny himself aright, for Christ, Grace, and Holiness, without
Regeneration; therefore it is absolutely necessary for Self-denial. Now
Self-denial is absolutely necessary to Salvation, and in order thereunto, of
being Christ's Disciples, Luke 14.26. Mark 8.34. And that Regeneration is as
necessary to Self-denial, appears thus; because men have much more content and
satisfaction in what they should forgo and part withal, than in Christ,
Holiness, and Salvation, which they must sell, or leave for the obtainment of;
and they seem to see a greater happiness in keeping their Lusts, Righteousness,
Ease, and Interests, than in all that they may gain by exchanging what they
have in possession, for that which is offered them; and who will part with a
certain and seemingly greater good, for that which they account more uncertain,
and of lesser value? Thus is their case, and thus do they absurdly (in this
matter) reason, as you may read Luke, 18.22, 23. Luke 14.17-21. Men will never
learn, neither can they freely practice the Doctrine and Duty of absolutely
necessary Self-denial, until the Grace of God in Regeneration has wrought them
for it.

5 No man can really mortify his lusts without Regeneration; therefore it is
absolutely necessary. Now this must be done by God and us, or we shall be
everlastingly undone, Romans 8.13. Col. 3.5. Micah 7.18, 19. And that we cannot,
will not do it, until we are New Creatures, is clear; for till then we are in
love and league with them, make provision for them, as for Friends and Lovers,
and have nothing, no Principle of Grace and Power, to do such a work withal;
and will want a will to will it, an eye to see, and a hand to take hold of, and
use the Sword that must do it, 2 Timothy 3.4. Romans 13. ult. 1 John 1.7.

6 No man can love God aright without Regeneration; therefore it is absolutely
necessary. It is absolutely needful that we love the Lord Jesus in sincerity,
as we would avoid the great Curses, Ephesians. 6. ult. 1 Cor. 16.22. and this is done
by the love of God shed abroad in our hearts in Regeneration, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Romans
5.5. without which we cannot so love him; for we have no such love in our
hearts before Regeneration, but are swallowed up in, and with Self-love, with
the entire love of our Lusts, Profits, Pleasures, and Carnal Delights.

7. No man can be united to, and made one with Christ, without Regeneration. We
are not transplanted out of the old Adams Stock into Christ, the Heavenly
Stock, without Regeneration, but in and by it we are. We are not born (at
first) living Members of his Body, but are made such by Regeneration, (as was
showed.) This also is absolutely necessary to Salvation: For all Professors of
Christ, that hang about him only, and are not grafted into him, shall be cast
into Hell Fire, Joh. 15.6. Heb. 6.6, 7.

8 No man can make God his only trust, and live in a continual dependence on
him, without Regeneration. This we are all bound to do, at all times, in all
states and conditions, Psalm. 62.8. Pro. 3.5. but we cannot do it without the
great change; for we have not the Grace to do it withal, until the Holy Ghost
convey it into us, by Regenerating us: Till then our Stays are broken Reeds,
and on the broken Staff of Egypt do we rest our selves; there do we repose our
selves, and from them do we expect protection, aid, and succor; but we look
not to, nor rely upon the Holy One of Israel in truth, but cast him out of our
consideration.

9 No man can pray or worship God in a right manner, without Regeneration;
therefore it is absolutely necessary. Until men are Regenerated, they have
neither the grace nor spirit of Prayer; and therefore cannot possibly pray
according to the Will of God, nor perform any part of Divine Worship, so as to
please God, and be accepted of him. God gives men his Spirit of Grace, and the
Grace of the Spirit in Regeneration, to enable them to worship him spiritually
and rightly, so as to please and honor him; and therefore they cannot so
worship God, before they are Regenerate, Zach. 12.10. Joh. 16.7, 8. Acts 9.
Romans 8.26, 27.

10 No man can obey God, or serve him with Gospel filial obedience, without he
be Regenerated; therefore Regeneration is absolutely necessary to make us
obedient to the Will of God. Men without Regenerating Grace may do what God
Commands, and the matter of Duty, but they cannot do it dutifully, with
Heart-subjection to the Will of God, because he has so commanded; for they are
servants to Sin, and obey their Lusts, and the Devil, Romans 6.16, 17. Joh. 8.44.
It is Regeneration that conforms the whole man to the Will of God, and makes
them real obedient Servants and Children, and nothing less will do it, Romans
15.18.

11 No man can be related to Christ in any special or peculiar Relation. No man
can be the Child of God, or Spouse of Christ, without Regeneration; and then
they cannot be obedient Children, nor Spouses, as they must be, if ever saved,
1 Pet. 1.14. It is Regeneration that begets men to God, and raises up, or
brings forth Children for him, 1 Pet. 1.3.14. It is Regeneration that disposes
men for, and Marries them to Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2. And therefore they are not,
neither may they claim the names or privileges of Gods Children, or Christ's
Spouses, until they are Regenerated and born again; they are neither adopted
Children, nor contracted Spouses, until Regeneration.

12 No man can have dominion over all his lusts without Regeneration, neither
can they curb and keep them under, until they are Regenerate; their Lusts have
dominion over them, and they serve and obey them, Ephesians. 2.3. Romans 6.16, 17. But
ever after Regeneration, they have dominion over their lusts, Romans 6.14. They
are enabled by Regeneration to Reign over, and trample on the Necks of those
Enemies that had dominion over them all the days of their unregeneracy.

13 No man can live to God, and make it his whole business and endeavor so to
do, until they are Regenerated. This is done by Grace after Regeneration, but
never before; for all men have lost their will and power to do it, which is
restored to them in Regeneration, (as was showed.) The great end of Man was to
live to, and walk with God, 2 Cor. 2.15. Ephesians. 1.4. but men in their old state
do devote themselves to live wholly and only to themselves, and not at all to
God.

14 No man can be made free of the Heavenly City, and Spiritual Corporation,
nor be set at liberty from bondage and thraldom, but in and by Regeneration.
All men are (by Nature) in bondage to the Devil and Lusts, (as you heard
before) but Regeneration is the year or day of Release and Enlargement to
imprisoned Souls; for then comes Jesus Christ, opens the Prison doors, and
brings out his Prisoners, Joh. 8.36. Gal. 5.1.13. until then they lie in the
Dungeon of darkness, bound hand and foot with Fetters of Iron, and shut in,
under Impenitency, Ignorance, and Unbelief, and cannot get forth, until the
Jubilee comes and proclaims Liberty to them, Isa. 61.1, 2. Zach. 2.11. Then are
they made Free Citizens of the New Jerusalem, and have their Freedom given
them, to live and Trade in Heaven for heavenly and everlasting Commodities,
Ephesians. 2.19. Phil. 3.20. Behold the necessity then of Regeneration.

15 No man can be actually and personally justified, pardoned, and acquitted,
without Regeneration, but are held under the Guilt and Curse of the Law; for
they must first believe unto Justification of life, before they can obtain a
discharge, and take out an Acquittance under the Hand and Seal of the Holy
Ghost, Ephesians. 1.13. Romans 5.18. but this they cannot do, for want of Faith, until
they are Regenerated, and thereby made partakers of this glorious Grace.

16 No man can fear God aright, namely, with a godly filial fear, nor indeed
can he stand in awe of God, and sin not, or walk in the fear of God all the day
long, as commanded, Pro. 23.17. Psalm. 4.4. until they be Regenerated; for who
can so fear and reverence God, until God put it into his heart to do it, Jer.
32.39, 40. for if they could, and had they wherewithal to do it without this
Grace of God, to what purpose has God promised to do it himself, and declared
it to be a choice and singular Gift and Grace of his own giving and working in
their hearts? I will (says God) put my fear into their hearts, that they may
not depart from me, and that they may fear me for ever. And how can men fear
God with a filial or Child-like fear, until they are made Children by
Regeneration, and begotten again by his Word and Spirit, 1 Pet. 1.3. Jam. 1.18.
Joh. 3.5.

17 No man can make the Glory of God his greatest end and aim, and really
design to please and honor God, in his words and deeds, without Regeneration;
therefore it is absolutely necessary. We are indispensably bound to make God
the chief and great aim and end of all our undertakings, and to seek, design,
and endeavor with all possible seriousness and diligence, to please, honor,
and exalt him, 1 Cor. 10.31. Col. 3.23. Pro. 3.9. Col. 1.10. 1 These. 4.1. But
this we cannot do, until a new Spring of Life, and Divine Principles be put
into us by Regeneration; for we are by Nature wholly selfish, are quite
swallowed up in sinful carnal self; Self is the principle, motive, and end of
all our thoughts, words, and deeds; Self-pleasure, profit, ease, honor, and
security, have only Self in the bottom and top of every Good, as well as Evil,
in Religious, as well as Civil works: And how can it be otherwise with us, the
Fountain of our Natures being so miserably corrupted and depraved as it is? And
it is a truth, that the Streams cannot rise higher than the Fountains from
whence they come.

18 No man can be the object of Gods delight and complacency, until he be
Regenerated, because they have nothing that is lovely and desirable in them.
Before Regeneration men are hateful, vile, and abominable in the sight of God,
(as has been showed) as they are sinners, and unwashed. It is the Nature and
Image of God, that is the Object of Gods delight and complacency in men; for
the God of Holiness cannot look on iniquity, he is of purer eyes than to do so,
Habuk. 1.13. and this Nature and Image we have not, until we are Regenerated,
and made New Creatures by Grace; for till then; God looks on us as in our
blood, Ezekiel. 16. Romans 3. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. and stamps his own Nature and
Image on us, to make us clean, pure, lovely, and delightful in his eyes. He
beautifies men with his Ornaments, that he may take pleasure in, and rejoice
with them, Zach. 3.17.

19 No man can claim a Right unto, and Interest in the Covenant and Promises,
without Regeneration; for they are not under, neither have they any interest in
them, whilst they lay in their blood, and continue in their state of Enmity
against God. No man can be interested in the Promises and Covenant of Grace and
Life, that is not interested in Christ, and no man is interested in Christ,
until he be a New Creature. All the Promises are in Christ, 2 Cor. 1.20. and
they are made ours by virtue of our having of, and being in Christ; and when we
are in Christ, all is ours, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22, 23. and not till then; then we may
claim and use them as ours, but not till then.

20 No man can be in a state of Grace and Life, without Regeneration; no man
can be a holy, gracious, and good man, until he be Regenerated. Whatever good
things he may have, act, and do, yet he is in a state of sin and death still,
until he pass under Regeneration. He may be washed without, yet he is a Swine
still; he may put on Sheeps clothing, but he is a Wolf still; he may be
enlightened, but is in a state of darkness still; and he may believe many
Truths, and yet be an Unbeliever still, 2 Pet. 2.20.22. Matthew. 7.15. Heb. 6.4.
Joh. 8.30.44. Acts 8.13.23.

But I see I must contract my self, lest I run beyond my intentions; and
therefore shall briefly sum up what I have further to say on this Head, that I
may presently dismiss it. Therefore, I say, that as we stand in absolute need
of Regeneration, for the Reasons and Ends already named, so likewise for those
that follow, which I shall but name. We cannot take up in God as in our
portion, satisfaction, and only happiness, without Regeneration, neither can we
choose him for the great and only delight of our Souls, without it. We cannot
have our wills bowed to, and swallowed up into the Will of God, nor freely,
cheerfully, and dutifully yield up our selves to his disposement, without
Regeneration. We cannot rejoice in Christ Jesus, nor in tribulation and bearing
the Cross, nor yet in doing good, and working Righteousness, without
Regeneration. We cannot be dutifully and thankfully patient under, and
contented with an afflicted state and condition, nor demean and carry our
selves well in it, without Regeneration. We cannot be fruitful in every good
work, nor bear fruit unto Eternal Life, without Regeneration. We cannot highly
esteem, and set a due, nor a right value on Christ his Person, Blood, Laws, and
Grace, nor on the great love and kindness of God, but slight and disesteem all,
without Regeneration. Without Regeneration we cannot willingly be nothing, that
Christ may be all in all, nor be laid in the dust and debased, that he may be
magnified and exalted, nor suffer diminution to greaten him. We cannot walk
uprightly with God, nor (indeed) set our affections on things above, as we are
indispensably bound to do, without Regeneration. We cannot walk humbly with
God, nor be adorned and clothed with Humility, be meek, and of poor and
contrite spirits, without Regeneration. Without Regeneration we cannot (ought
not) be Church Members, nor rightly participate of the Lords Supper: For these
great and distinguishing Privileges belong to, and were appointed only for New
Creatures. In a word, we cannot be saved, nor walk in the right way to Heaven,
nor have Communion with God here, or hereafter, without Regeneration.

And therefore Regeneration is absolutely needful for these, all these, and
several other ends and purposes. It is absolutely necessary that we be saved
from wrath to come, and instated in Eternal Glory; and that in order thereunto
we be Regenerated, and made new Creatures. That we be such indeed, and so do
and walk, as has been said, in order to our glorifying of God here, and
Eternal Salvation hereafter, which we cannot be, do, nor obtain, but in and by
Regeneration; but in and by Regeneration we may and shall, and that because God
has so appointed and promised it. It is Gods fixed, stated way, and it shall
stand inviolably; namely, that he will save men in and by Regeneration; and
that such as are Regenerated shall be saved, and such as are not, shall most
certainly be damned.

Therefore let no man flatter himself with vain hopes of ever getting to Heaven
in any other way; for the purposes and Ordinances of God shall stand to all
Generations, and he will do all his pleasure, Isa. 46.10, 11. He has said it,
and shall he not do it? Who can turn his hand, or alter his mind? and who durst
say it shall not be so, when he says it shall? O how bold and daring are men
that contradict God? ho^ audaciously presumptions are they, who confidently
expect Salvation hereafter, without concerning themselves about Regeneration
here? Seeing God has peremptorily resolved the case, and told men so, that
unless they are born again, they cannot, shall not see the Kingdom of God, Joh.
3. and that without Holiness they shall not see God, Heb. 12.14.

Therefore I do exhort and beseech you i^ the Name of Jesus Christ, to look
after, and seriously concern your selves about Regeneration, and never sit down
satisfied with your conditions, until you find the Great Change; but go to God,
and entreat him for Christ hi^ sake, to give you his Spirit and Regenerating
Grace, and make you New Creatures, that you may be enabled to walk with, and
live to God here, and be saved in his own way hereafter; and that he would now,
with all possible speed, work his own Regenerating work with power in your
hearts.

CHAP. III. Of the hindrances and obstructions that lie in the way of
Regeneration.
Q. ARe there any lets, hindrances, or obstructions in the way of
Regeneration, to impede and hinder it?

A. There are very many and great obstructions in the way of Gods Regenerating
men; insomuch, as that it is a wonder that any are Regenerated. God met with no
lets or hindrances in his first Creating of us, but in his remaking us, he
meets with many. He made us reasonable Creatures without opposition, but when
he comes to make us New Creatures, he finds nothing else but impediments,
contradiction, and fightings against him. Hence it is said, Genesis 6.3. His spirit
shall not always strive with man: And how often would I have gathered you, but
ye would not, Matthew. 23.37. And Christ tells the Jews, that they would not come
to him, Joh. 8.40. though he had all the day long stretched out his hand to
them, Romans 10. ult.

Q. What are those contradictions, hindrances, and oppositions, the work of
Regeneration meets withal, to impede and obstruct it, and from whom are they,
or from whom do they arise?

A. These obstructions, contradictions, and oppositions that lie in the way, to
impede and hinder our Regeneration, are within and without us; they proceed and
arise from our Lusts, World, and Devil. Regeneration mee^^ with strong
oppositions from our Lusts, and it is made exceeding hard and difficult, from
the state and condition we are in, before Regeneration.

Q. Pray show us what those Lusts are, which lay in the way of Regeneration, to
oppose, impede, and obstruct it? What are those Iusts?

A. First, Atheism and Unbelief. These Lusts abound, and are exceeding strong
and active in us, to hinder our Regeneration. Sin has made us Fools, and Fools
say in their hearts, there is no God. Psalm. 14.1. When God speaks, men will not
hear him, neither do they believe it to be his voice, Exodus 5.1, 2. Who is the
Lord (says Pharach.) Men are by Nature so Atheistical, as that they will not
believe that God sees or regards their works, and therefore do imbolden
themselves in suming, and following their Lusts and devilish devices with this
persuasion, that no eye sees them and that there is no hand to punish them
Psalm. 10.11. Psalm. 64.5. Isa. 29.15. They imagine and conclude then, that if
God see not their ways, nor takes notice of their wickedness, that no evil
shall fall on them for ^^ Jer. 23.17. yea, they are confident they sh^^ have
peace, and that while they are addi^^ drunkenness to thirst, that is, one sin
to another with all greediness, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. 1 The^ 5.3. This Atheism is
deeply rooted in a^ men by Nature; in Professors of the Name Truths, and good
ways of God; as well as in professed Turks and Heathens, as is showed in the
said Scriptures: And the infidelity of men's hearts is such, as that they will
not believe that they do really stand in need of Regeneration; even those men
who profess to believe there is a God, that he sees and takes notice of their
states and ways, that the Scriptures of God are true, that God rules in and
governs the World, and that he has punishments for the unjust, and will
recompense their way on their heads, and render to every man according to his
works, Romans 2.6. I fay, those men that do so believe, do not see and believe
indeed their own present states, and their own necessity of Regeneration, but
flatter themselves in the vain and groundless imaginations of their own hearts,
that if they mend their ways, reform without, and turn from vicious courses and
practices, to the eternal practice of Virtue, that in so doing they may obtain
happiness, and do well enough hereafter, although they stick there, and never
are Regenerated. Hence it is that they conclude, that it is in vain, and a kind
of superstition in them, to trouble and concern themselves to look any further,
or seek after a change of heart and state, but resolve they will not do so,
whatever is said to confute and convince them of their error, but in that
state they will abide, in spite of God, Angels, and Men, and that when God
comes and proffers to Regenerate and make them New Creatures. And hence it is,
that they stoutly and stubbornly resist and rise up in violent opposition
against God, and the word of his Grace; disputing against, and contending with
him, and the means he gives them for their change; and in effect say, we are
well enough, why should we trouble our selves; yea, why should God concern or
trouble himself any further with us, seeing we are in a state of Salvation
already, and may without any more ado be saved if God will. Men are naturally
such strangers to their own states, as that they do not, will not believe, that
Regeneration is needful and absolutely necessary for their Salvation, or that
it amounts to any more than a bare Reformation and change of practice.
Regeneration is such a Mystery, and they are so captivated to their Ignorance,
Atheism, and Unbelief, as that they think it is but an idle story, and a
needlest thing, especially if they are Moral honest men, and great Professors
of the Gospel. Hence it was, when Christ had to do with, and intended to
convert Nicodemus, (who was a Moral and Religious honest man) that he presses
the necessity of Regeneration on him with four Asseverations together; Except a
man (namely, thou and others) be born again, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom
of God: And marvel not at this, ye must be born again, Joh. 3.3.5.7. So in
Matthew. 18.3. Verily, I say to you, except ye be converted, and become as little
children, ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And as they neither
see nor believe in good earnest, their need of Regeneration, so they believe
not that God has a mind, that he does (indeed) propose, intend, or is really
willing to Regenerate them; but they dream (as being under the power of their
Infidelity and delusions) and persuade themselves, that whatever they read, or
hear Ministers report of these things, that they are but Fictions, and fancies
of men, and that there is no truth nor reality in it, or if there be, yet they
are not concerned in what they say unto them, for their effectual Conviction
and Regeneration. And therefore when Christ strives, and his Ministers strive
with them, to get into their hearts, and Regenerate them, they defend
themselves, stand upon their ground, and do all they can to prevent and hinder
them, Romans 10. ult. Heb. 3.1.15. Thus you see that Atheism and Unbelief is a
Potent Enemy to Regeneration.

Secondly, Hatred of God and Holiness, and their great love, strong and much
endeared affection to their sins, lusts, and the world, greatly opposes
Regenerating Grace, or the work of Regeneration in us. That by Nature we are
haters of God, the Yoke of Christ, and Power of Godliness you have heard
before; as also that we have great affection for, and are much in love with our
Lusts, and the World. Now that these are exceeding great Enemies to, and
obstructions of our Regeneration, is evident in Luke 14.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. God
makes a Supper of Grace and favor for sinners, makes it ready, sets it on the
Table, and sends his Servants to invite them to come and eat; but would they
come? no, in no wise: But why not? why, because they had other things to mind,
and, as they thought, of greater concernment; One had a Wife, another a Farm,
and another Oxen. These were the things they loved, minded, and so greatly
delighted in; these things lay so near their hearts, as that they would not,
could not come, nor could the most loving Invitation persuade them, their
worldly lusts were so strong. This made them reject that Grace that was so
freely and earnestly proffered them: So Covetousness caused the young m^^ to
reject Christ, Grace, and Heaven, Luke 18.22, 23, and made him resolve to lose
all, rather than forgo that bosom lust. He stood it out stoutly, and would not
bow, or yield an inch to Christ, although his Life and Soul lay at stake for
it. And to the same purpose we read in Luke 19.27. of some who were so wedded
to their lusts and interests, as that they peremptorily rejected Christ's Yoke:
They preferred the service of Sin before the service of Christ, and chose
rather to have their Lusts to Reign over them, than the Lord Jesus.

By Nature men are such Enemies to God, and Godliness, I mean the power of it,
as that they hate the Light that would show them their error, acquaint them
with God, and bring to the saving knowledge of true happiness, Joh. 3.19, 20.
And they are said to abhor God, Zach. 11.8. and likewise the Word and Laws of
God, Levit. 26.15. The Scribes and Pharisees were Religious men, and knew more
than others did of the Will of God, and yet they stiffly opposed the Grace and
Gospel of Christ, that was brought to them, for their Regeneration, if they
would accept it; yea, they hated the Lord Jesus Christ for proffering his Grace
and Assistance to them, and publishing the glad tidings of Salvation, Joh.
15.24, 25. And how desperately did the Jews set themselves against the Apostles
Preaching Christ and Grace unto them? what exceeding great enmity, malignity,
malice, and hatred, did they express all along, to and against their Preaching,
and tendering Christ and his Grace unto them, for their Regeneration and
Salvation, you may see at large in the Acts. The Language of us all by Nature
is, we have loved strangers, and after them we will go, Jer. 2.25. and
therefore, as for the Word of the Lord, which he has spoken, we will not do
it, Jer. 44.16, 17. Moreover, Pride is a strong and hostile Enemy to
Regeneration: Man is a very proud Creature, and as full of Diabolical and
Carnal Pride, as a Toad is of Poison. This is the Lust that makes men scorn to
come up to Christ's terms, or bow to his Proposals: They disdain to be beholding
to Free Grace for any thing, and therefore will not hearken to any of Christ's
Offers. Pride sets men in Battlearray against Christ, to dispute and sight it
out with him: It is so strong a Fort, such an impregnable Castle, as that no
strength can take and subdue it, but Omnipotency, that can do it, but none else
can, Ephesians. 1.19, 20. Psalm. 110.3. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. This is the Lust that makes
men so boldly and audaciously set their mouths against the Heavens, Psalm. 73.9.
and so pertinaciously contend with God; it causes men to think highly of
themselves, and vilely of Christ, Grace, and a New State; it makes them
desperate and resolute in the way of their own hearts, and turn a deaf Ear to
the Lords Calls and Admonitions; it causes them to trample on the Gospel,
Christ, and his Blood, and Righteousness, and to harden their hearts against
all reproofs and instructions: All the Angels in Heaven, or Ministers on Earth,
cannot pull down this strong hold, and it is as great an Adversary as any
Christ has in the world; to obstruct his Grace; it is the Great Goliath that
stands in open defiance against Christ, and makes the stoutest resistance
against our Regeneration.

Again, our Self-righteousness is an other great obstacle and Bull-work against
our Regeneration. Men have long been building up that which God will and must
pull down, in regenerating us. God will not suffer our own Babels to stand,
when he comes to set up Zion in our hearts; neither will he let Dagon alone,
when he comes to set up his Ark in us. All our works, conceits, and
imaginations, are but Rubbish and Dirt that must be thrown away, and cast out,
to make way for his building; and therefore God begins here, namely, to
overturn, demolish, and remove out his way, the strong Towers and Fortresses of
our own high thoughts, conceits, works, and vain imaginations, that so we being
left destitute of succor, and grounds of hope in our selves, we may freely
comply and join Issues with God in his works of Grace in us. But now, when God
comes to do this, O what strong resistance, and violent opposition, does our
Self-righteousness, and good conceits of our selves, make against God, and the
works of his Grace: God would undo us, that he may make us; he would pull us
down, and quite deface our own Structures, that he may build and set up his own
in us. Buch such are our conceits and apprehensions of our sufficiency,
goodness, righteousness, acceptable and worthy performances, as that we harden
our hearts against all Convictions of the invalidity and nothingness, yea,
vanity and sinfulness of them; and are exceedingly averse to, and unwilling of
any alteration; cannot endure to think of losing all that we have wrought for
so many years, and after so much labor and confidence, peace and satisfaction
in our states, and what we have done, to lose all at once, and be beholding at
last only to the free gift of another; flesh and blood will never endure it,
and therefore makes all possible opposition against it. Men have been long rich
and happy in their own eyes, and therefore cannot bear to be undone and
impoverished, to be poor and miserable, wretched and naked. And hence it is
that they shut their eyes, and stop their ears against Light, and Gods gracious
Invitations. They will have none of him, because they fancy they have enough,
and do, and may do enough of their own, to make them happy. This was the case
of some of the Laodiceans, Rev. 3.17. they thought themselves rich, and had
need of nothing; and that when they were wretched, naked, and miserable. Thus
it was with Paul before he was Regenerated, Phil. 3.4, 5, 6, 7. And this was
one of the great obstructions that hindered the Jews from receiving the Grace of
Christ, tendered them by Christ and his Apostles, John 8, and 9, Chapters. And
in Luke 18.9, 10, 11, 12. their self-conceited righteousness and light, their
privileges and good works, made them such desperate, resolute, violent, and
stout opposers of the Grace of God; and thus is still the nature and effect of
it in all the Sons and Daughters of men, as sad experience shows.

And as Self-righteousness, and a good Opinion of our selves, is a strong Bar
to fence us against Gods Regenerating work, so are vain and groundless hopes
likewise. These oppositions and contradictions do all hang together in a
string, as so many Links in a Chain; where one is, all are; but one may be
stronger in one man, and another in another man. Men are by Nature exceeding
full of presumptious hopes and confidences, they seign that God will save them,
because he is good and merciful to sinners, although they continue in their
filthiness and practical abominations, in their blindness and unregenerate
states. The Conceptions of Gods Mercies, proves snares and dangerous Rocks to
unregenerate men, while they confidently conclude that God will have mercy on,
and save them, because he is merciful, though they live and die in their
unregenerate states and condition, although the Word of God tell them the
contrary, Isa. 27.11. This is the vain hope of hypocrites, mentioned in Job
8.13, 14. which shall perish with them. Presumptious confidences, and vain
hopes, are natural to us, and we will take hold of any broken Reed to keep us
from despondency, or making a right judgment of our selves, states, and ways,
rather than yield to the counsels of God, and suffer him to save us in his own
way, and by his own means. This vain presumptious hope, is that which arms and
strengthens the Soul against Christ, and lies in a direct opposition to our
Regeneration.

Again, Hardness of heart is a great Bar to Regeneration. We are by Nature
hardened in sin, and in fond conceits of our good conditions; and therefore the
work of Regeneration in us, must needs be very hard and difficult work. We are
so hardened by sin, and we harden our selves more and more, when God hands out
Light to us to see our states, and lead us to himself. When God comes to
Regenerate, then we are most insensible of our conditions, and harden our
hearts most against him, even then when he would soften and melt us, break and
humble us; we were hard and knotty pieces before, but then we make our selves
much harder; for then we do purposely and designedly set our selves against God
and his workings; and as water strives with greater vehemence against
opposition, so do our hard hearts against the Spirits operations in us, to
renew and change us, Ezekiel. 3.7. Pharaoh was a hard-hearted man before God sent
Moses and Aaron to him, but then he set himself to harden his heart against
God, and his Word, more than ever. So when God sent the means of Grace to the
Jews, and strove with them to bring them to himself, the more he wrestled with
them, exhorted, and persuaded them to receive his Grace, and become New
Creatures, the more they strove and fought against him, Acts 19. Acts 28. until
God judicially hardened them also, and then they were sealed up (as it were) to
the day of wrath, Joh. 12.40. Then it is ever after a hard and impenitent heart,
Romans 2.5.

Lastly, Enmity. There is in every natural man most stout and strong Enmity
against God, which is implacable and irreconcilable. There can no peace or
friendship be had with an implacable Enemy, and a man that is at real Enmity
with us, until he be changed. The Carnal mind is not only an Enemy to God, but
(...), Emnity against God, Romans 8.7. And in Romans 1.31. they are said to be
implacable. Enmity will never be won and made to yield, either by fair or foul
means; but such is the nature of it, as that it will rather die on the place,
than conform to any tolerable terms of friendship with an Adversary. But the
Enmity of our Natures is most stout, stubborn, and desperate against God; for
it is possible for a man to persuade him that is at Enmity with him, to some
reasonable terms of accommodation, by his great condescension and bowing to
him, by sweet and affable carriages, by the entreaty and persuasion of Friends,
and by proffering to serve him, and give him all he has.

But it is not so between men and God; for although God condescends, and as it
were bows down to us, and that infinitely more than men can do, though he carry
himself most sweetly and affably to us, proffers friendship and reconciliation
to us, entreats and persuades us by his Ministers, promises and proffers to
wait on us, protect, and guard us; yea, give all he has to enrich us, honor
and exalt us with all his Sons Fullness, and possess us of all his Heavenly
Treasures, if we will yield and be reconciled to him. But all these endeavors
are in vain, none of them will work on Enmity, to persuade and bow it to the
Will and Designs of God; yea, these means are all contemned, and are improved
to heighten and strengthen the Enmity by us. Enmity causes men to bid defiance
to such Acts and Overtures of God for the winning and bringing us over to
himself; they make us more obstinate, implacable, and irreconcilable. The Jews
give us a sufficient proof of this Truth, as well as what is daily found
amongst us: For who shows greater Enmity against Christ, his Grace, and Gospel,
than such to whom he daily holds forth the Golden Scepter of his Mercy, and
beseeches to be reconciled to him.

These are some of the stout Enemies of our Regeneration, which are bred in our
own Bosoms, and strongly arm and fortify our Souls against Christ. These are
some of the Goliah's that rebel against the Authority and Commands of God, and
that hold fast the Castles of our hearts, and keep them shut against him, when
he comes to assault and subdue them; and so makes our Regeneration very hard
and difficult. I could have instanced in several other internal oppositions,
but time would fail me.

Secondly, Without, and within us too. The Devil is an external and internal
Adversary to the work of Regeneration; he is an implacable and active Enemy to
and against our New State; for he hates Christ, and his Grace in men, and
cannot endure to see a holy Job, or gracious Paul in the world; and therefore
endeavors to make and keep all men like himself, and leaves no means
unattempted to effect it, but goes about night and day, seeking whom he may
devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. There is an Everlasting Enmity put between the Seed of the
Woman, and the Seed of the Serpent, Genesis 3. and much more between the Devil and
Grace. And as the Devil hates Christ, and his Grace in men, so likewise the
happy and blessed state that the Grace of Regeneration puts them into. He knows
that he is a most miserable Creature himself, being condemned, and put into
Chains of darkness, to everlasting fire, Jude 6. Matthew. 25.41. And therefore he
greatly envies and malignes the happiness of good men. It cuts him to the heart
to see any of the Sons of Adam restored to a state of Blessedness; to see the
Grace of God in them, and they in Friendship with God. For no sooner had God
made man in his own Image, Genesis 1.26, 27. set them in Paradise, and given them
a positive Law to obey; but by and by, he sets on them to debauch and spoil
them, and uses all possible subtilty and diligence to effect it, Genesis 3. which
succeeded according to his mind for a time. So when he saw Job walk uprightly,
and in high favor with God, how does he labor to corrupt him, and turn him
from his integrity, in the first and second Chapter of Job. And as the Devil
envies the happiness of good men, and therefore labors to hinder their
Regeneration, so likewise his loathness to loose his Subjects. The Devil is the
God and Lord of the World, 2 Cor. 4.4. Ephesians. 2.2. and has many willing and
obedient Subjects, Romans 6. We are all by Nature the Devils Subjects and
Servants, he has the first possession of, and service from us; and when God
Regenerates a man, he takes him out of the Devils Kingdom, and calls him out of
his subjection and service, and puts him into his Kingdom and service, Col.
1.13. Romans 6. Now this is so grievous to him, as that he cannot quietly bear
it, but does all he can to hinder and obstruct it, and that by all possible
ways and means. He is in possession, and rules in the hearts, Luke 11.20, 21,
22. and will not (...) his Subjects go, until a stronger than he fo^ces him to
yield; but as Pharaoh (a shad^^ of the Devil) would not let Israel go out (...)
his Kingdom to serve God, so will not the Devil let men's Souls go to serve
Christ, un^^ he brings them out with a strong hand; (...) so Christ gets all
his Subjects out of Sat^^ hand, and puts them into his own Kingdom In
Regeneration Christ leads Captivity capti^^ Ephesians. 4.8. takes the Spoil out of
his han^ and breaks his Jaws, Job 29.17. Christ binds (...) strong man (or
Devil) and takes away his good^ he turns the Devil out of office, and out (...)
the possession of their hearts, and enters (...) himself; takes on him the Rule
and Government of them, and makes them his will^ and obedient Subjects;
translates them i^ his Kingdom, and that by their own volu^tary Resignation of
themselves to him. No^ this the Devil cannot but greatly oppose a^ fight
against, and will never yield nor submit, but when the Lord Jesus comes to
(...) his own, which he has bought with his bl^^ 1 Cor. 6.19. and begins to
awaken and euven them. O how does the Devil rage (...) storm, fight, and
oppose, to keep his Subject in subjection to him? O how does he dr^ up all his
Forces, and make Head again Christ, to keep men out of his hand? sometimes by
flatteries, and sometimes by thre^ nings. Now he labors to hold them fa^ by
persuading them that they are in pea^^ and in a good condition; that they are
under delusions, and sinister mistakes; that if they continue as they are, they
shall have peace, and need not doubt of their Salvation; and that those
troubles they are under are of the Devil, and their own miss-judging of their
states. He flatters and persuades them to mind their pleasures and profits, and
not trouble or concern themselves about Religion, for that will but distract
and perplex them, and no way advantage them. He tells them, that in their
present state they may have their hearts desire, but so they shall not have in
the singular and melancholy ways of Religion, which now they begin to concern
themselves withal; and that if they once engage themselves in those matters,
they shall never find any good, or satisfaction in them, comparable to that
which they must forgo, and part withal, and which hitherto they have, and
hereafter they may more fully enjoy in their present states and practices.
Sometimes he will threaten and affright them, by telling them that they do make
vain attempts, for it is but lost labor for them to expect or look for
Salvation; for either God hates them, they are not Elected, or that the day of
Grace is past, and so there is no hope for them; therefore they were better sit
still and be quiet, enjoy their pleasures, and fulfill the desires of the flesh,
as long as they may. He tells them, that if they do begin to take up with the
strict ways of Gospel Religion, they will be undone, never hold out to the end,
and so but heighten their mi^sery thereby; that there are but a few sill^
Souls, and that of the poorer sort, that min^ Religion, or suffer such a work
to be wrough^ in them, as Regeneration is; and that to b^ singular in this
matter, is but to expose themselves to all manner of infamy and reproach.

By these, and many other stratagems, does the Devil labor to withstand
Christ, and obstruct our Regeneration; and most poo^ Souls are prevailed on, to
join Issue with him, and continue to make stout opposition against the Holy
Spirit his endeavors to convert them. It is the Devil likewise that obstructs
and hinders the Preaching of the Gospel to men, by such Instruments as he is
pleased to make use of for that end and purpose. Thus he made use of the Jews
to keep the Gospel from the Gentiles, when the Apostles were sent to them with
it; and if he cannot keep the Gospel from men, he will endeavor to keep and
hinder them from hearing it sincerely preached to them: And if this will not
do, but men will hear Christ's Ministers Preach, then he will cause men to turn
a deaf ear to what they hear, that does more nearly concern their states and
conditions, lest the Gospel should fall with power on their hearts. Thus the
Devil wrought and prevailed on Stephen his hearers. In Acts 7. it is said, when
he preached to them, they stopped their ears.

But now, in the mean while, what a hard piece of work has Christ on it,
namely, i^ Regenerating us? O what strong Castles must he assault? and what
potent Enemies must he fight down and destroy, before the work of Regeneration
can be thoroughly effected?

But besides these, there is another great obstruction in the way of
Regeneration, and that is the World. The good and bad people, and things of
this world, are great hindrances of our Regeneration: The unworthy walkings of
many Professors of the good ways of Christ, and the reproaches and persecutions
of the wicked, are no small lets and impediments to, and of Regeneration. So
are also the riches, pleasures, and honors of this World. These pull back the
hearts of men, and keep them from entering into the Kingdom of Heaven, Luke
18.22, 23. and these take off men's thoughts from serious minding of their
states, and another world. These things lie so deep in our minds and
affections, and do so powerfully delude and bewitch all our senses, that we
have no minds, wills, or inclinations, to mind or set our hearts on things
above; yea, they have so great an interest in us, and authority over us, as
that they do command our most serious and fixed attendance on them, and greedy
pursuit after them, whereby the Calls and Commands of God are shut out of our
hearts. The smiles and good things of this world, are the Gods, or rather Idols
of our hearts, the Lovers that we dote on, and are fond of, and the great
desire and delight of our Souls; and they being so, it is as easy for us to
pull the Sun out of Heaven, as our hearts from these things. We may as well
change a Black-mor^ Skin white, or empty the Sea with a Nut-shell, as to empty
and cast out the World of our hearts, and change their course and way. Earthly
things are our Lords, and hold us fast, as Prisoners in their Chains. We are
their Humble Servants, and at their beck we go and come: We are swallowed up in
them at a Ship in a Gulf, and they are enthroned and fixed in our hearts, as in
their proper place and center. We mind and affect Earthly good things (by
Nature) as our Heaven, Happiness, and satisfying good; and see not, neither
will we be persuaded without Regenerating Grace, that there is indeed any
higher or greater happiness, or real satisfaction to be found, than what they
can afford us. These are called their good things, because they account them
so, and are well pleased and contented with them, without Christ and his Grace.
They had rather live in sin, blindness, and under the wrath of God, with
abundance of them, then in Heaven, and under Regeneration, without them, Luke
12.16, 17, 18, 20. Luke 16.25. Luke 18.22, 23, 24.

Oh! How common is it with men to compass Sea and Land for the World; to labor
and toil night and day to get, spend, and be spent to keep it, when gotten,
yea, to hazard and venture their lives, and Souls too, to obtain and secure it;
and that because of their excessive and inordinate love to, and delight in
these things. Men will much more willingly part with Christ, Grace, and Heaven,
than with their Riches, Honors, and Pleasures. Hence Christ tells his
Disciples, that it is a hard matter for them to be saved that are rich, Luke
18.24.25.

Now when Christ comes to regenerate and change our states, he calls us off
from so minding, affecting, and taking up with these things, and to mind,
follow, and set our hearts on heavenly, Col. 3.1, 2. And this is so cross and
contrary unto the Natural Genius of our hearts and course of our lives, our
satisfaction and supposed happiness, as that we will by no means be convinced
of our folly, and persuaded to come to Christ, accept of him, and his
Regenerating Grace for our portion and happiness, until he puts forth his
Almighty Power to work and persuade us to it. And O what a hard and difficult
work has Christ to do in us, and for us? What a world of stout oppositions,
and implacable Opposers, does Christ meet withal in this work? The Lusts of our
Hearts, the Devil and World, Carnal and Spiritual Self, do all combine
together, to make Head and strong opposition against the Lord Jesus, when he
would Regenerate us.

CHAP. IV. Certain signs or undoubted Characters of Regenerate and Unregenerate
Persons.
Q. WHether Unregenerate persons may not know, and be sometimes strongly
convinced, that they are in an unregenerate and evil state and condition?

A. Yea, they may, and it is certain that many are so convinced, but very loath
they are to know it, and exceeding unwilling to think themselves to be so, and
greatly provoked with such friends as tell them that they are in an evil case,
and unconverted state; for we are all by nature exceeding proud and
self-conceited. We think too well of our own conditions, states, and ways, and
imagine that all others should have the same opinion of them that we our selves
have. And therefore conclude, that such as think and speak otherwise of them,
are too uncharitable and censorious. This is one of the greatest stumbling
blocks in the way of Regeneration, and causes many to tune a deaf ear to all
convincing and regenerating Truths that are handed out unto them. Besides the
vain groundless hopes they have formed to themselves, and are greatly in love
withal, that they are in a good and safe condition, (although they are not so
good as they should be) whatever men and the word of God shall say to the
contrary, of or against them. The Jews gives us many proofs and evidences of
it, for when the Lord Jesus Preached to, and discoursed with them about their
states, to convince and regenerate them. Oh! how did they labor to fence off
all the words of Truth spoken to them, how did they strive, dispute, and set
themselves against the Gospel of their Salvation, and that upon the grounds
before mentioned; yea, those very persons which sometimes were convinced in
their Consciences that they were sinners, Joh. 8.9. I say, even these men did
ordinarily harden themselves against the Word of Christ, upon their vain hopes,
high privileges, proud and high conceits they had of themselves, Joh. 8.33.39,
48. -- ult Joh. 9. Joh. 10. Math. 9. Read these Chapters throughout, and you
will find what I have said abundantly confirmed, and as it was with them, so I
am afraid it is with many of you; do not you conceit, and stoutly persuade your
selves, that you are in a safe and happy state and condition before God, that
you shall undoubtedly be saved, notwithstanding the Truth of God, Ministers of
Christ, yea, and sometimes your own Consciences testify the contrary also, and
tell you plainly, That you are yet in the gall of bitterness, and bond of
Iniquity? do not you encourage and support your selves, fortify and arm your
selves under and against all convictions, with many vain and groundless hopes
and delusive conceits of your blessed states, or that you are in a happy case
and condition, although you never experienced any real change in your hearts,
nor any special grace of Christ in your poor deluded perishing Souls?

But yet I say, unregenerate persons may know, and have a shrewd guess, that
they themselves are not unregenerated, but in a state of sin, and under the
wrath of God. Simon Magat was so, Acts 8.24. Pharaoh, Exodus 9.27. unregenerate
men have three means, (if I may so call them) to help them to the knowledge and
conviction of their bad conditions. First, the word of God written, but
especially Preached; and so it is the word of conviction in the hand of an
Ordinance, appointed and designed thereunto by the great God, Act. 26.18. (2)
Their own natural Consciences, and principles of Nature that are in all men,
not feared, which are subjects capable of impressions from the Word of God,
namely of its light and convincing power: and also natural Reason helped by the
Word; so that when they hear the certain Characters of unregenerate persons
laid down from Gods Word; they may reflect on themselves, and apply them to
themselves if they will. They may reason thus, why, if these are certain
Characters or Signs of an evil or unregenerate man or state, as I cannot but
conclude they are: then am I in such a state, for I find them in and upon me, I
cannot deny it. As thus, Is gross ignorance of Jesus Christ, the grace of God,
Sin and Duty, a certain sign of an unregenerate person, surely then I am an
unregenerate person, for I am grossly ignorant of these things. So when they
hear Characters or Signs laid down of a regenerate man, then to examine
themselves, and reason thus, Why, I find not any of these in my self, which I
should if I was regenerate, and therefore I am in an unregenerate state and
condition: much might be done this way, by unregenerate men toward their
conviction and knowledge (I mean not saving knowledge) of their States; would
such men practice it, but that they will not, no, because they love their
carnal ease and peace, and therefore they are willingly ignorant of their
unregenerate state. And as they have these means or helps to know their evil
States, so (3) the holy Spirit of God, to stir up Conscience in and by the
Word. The Spirit speaks sometimes to them, (not as the Spirit of Adoption, but
of Bondage) whose voice is louder, quicker, and pierces further unto, and into
their Consciences, than the word of its self can do, and tells them plainly,
that they are in a damnable state and condition, and shall assuredly perish for
ever, except they be regenerate here, Genesis 6.3. This awakens and affrights
them, this humbles and abases them, and makes them cry out, undone, undone, we
are lost; Oh! what shall we do to be saved? Acts 2.37. And here I might add,
that not only these said means may help them to the knowledge of their states,
but also the discourses, carriages, and conversations of some Regenerate
persons that they are concerned withal, and may make observations of, and
compare themselves with them, and them with themselves, and conclude (clearly)
that there is a vast difference between such and themselves, the states of the
one, and of the other. And if these be Regenerate persons, and Regenerate
persons be indeed such, and so and so qualified, graced and spirited, as they
seem to be, then that they themselves are undoubtedly in an Unregenerate
condition; for that they are not such persons, neither have any of their
qualifications, or any like them, Matthew. 5.16. Now, if Unregenerate men would
improve, and rationally use these means or helps toward the knowledge and
conviction of their states, they might undoubtedly know them better than they
do. But there needs no further proof of this truth, namely, that unregenerate
persons may know they are in a bad condition, then the Gripes, and trouble of
Conscience, their fears, trembling, and consternations, in and under the
apprehensions of Death and Judgment, together with their wishes, protestations,
resolutions, and promises, on their Deathbeds; These do all proclaim this
Truth.

Q. May not Gods people, such as are Regenerate, know that they are so, and be
sufficiently assured of their Regeneration?

A. They may, for first, God has promised the knowledge of it unto them, in
their obedient and holy walkings with God in that state, Hosea 6.3. Then shall
we know, if we follow on to know the Lord. Isa. 32.17. Prove. 2.1.^7. So the
Spirit witnesses with our Spirit, that we are the Children of God, Romans 8.16.

2. The people of God have had certain and clear assurance, or a sufficient
knowledge of their Regenerate states, and the Spirit of God has recorded it,
for our learning and encouragement Enoch had it, Heb. 11.5. and the Apostle
John speaking in the name of Believers, or regenerate persons, says, We know
that we are of God, That we are translated from Death to Life, and hereby know
we that we are in him, 1 John 2.5.3.14.5.19. And Paul tells us, that they,
namely, he and other Regenerate Persons, had received the Spirit, that they
might know the things which were freely given to them of God, 1 Cor. 2.12. Now,
if it was certainly known by the Saints of old, such as run their Race before
us; then we may obtain it now; for we live under the same God, Christ, Grace,
Promises, Love, Spirit, and means of assurance that they did, and we have as
much need of it as they had upon all accounts. And as we have these, and many
other Scripture Evidences or Examples, (I mean the Saints mentioned in
Scripture) so we have had many undoubted Testimonies of it in and from many
good men in our days, and the latter Ages before us. How that some on their
Deathbeds, others in the days of their prosperity, others in their trials and
temptations: Some in one Ordinance of God, and some in another; some in Prison,
and some at the Stake; some under the loss of their Goods and Reproaches for
Christ's sake, have gotten clear, and heart ravishing Assurance of their
Regeneration and blessed States. I say, we have this Truth confirmed to us by
their worthy Testimonies, and glorious Experiences. And assuredly, what they
had, we also may obtain in the same way, in and by the use of the same means,
and in the same, or like case and condition.

2. God has commanded Regenerate Persons, and so has made it their Duty, to
get and keep assurance of their new States; and God would never have prescribed
such a means, and commanded our diligent use of it as our duty, in order to the
obtainment of the end, but that the said end is attainable by, and shall most
certainly be obtained in the faithful constant use of it. For as his commands
makes the work or means our duty, so the End propounded, namely, of the duty to
be done by us, is the obtainment of assurance, so I say, it is an object of our
Faith and Hope: And upon Gods propounding it to us as the end of the duty
commended, we are to believe and hope in the performance of the duty to obtain
the end, (that is) assurance of our being translated from Death to Life;
namely, that God will bless his own means, to effect and accomplish his own
ends to and in us, and he will by no means disappoint us, or make us ashamed of
our trusting him, hoping in, and waiting for him to grant us the end he
presented to us, commanded us to seek it, that we might find it, and which we
have endeavored with all our hearts to obtain in his own way, Isa. 49.20. Isa.
54.4. Now God has charged us to examine and prove our selves, 2 Cor. 13.5. And
to give diligence to make our Calling and Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. And to
worship him, in full assurance of Faith, Heb. 10.22. that is, in the certain
persuasion of Gods Truth, All Sufficiency, and Faithfulness in his Promises,
and of Christ his being a High Priest over the House of God, verse. 21. So
likewise of our Interest and Right to and in all.

4. God has given us many Rules and Marks in his Word, to help us in our
Trials of our states, and to make a comfortable and satisfactory judgment of
them, whether we are indeed Regenerate or no. Very much of the New Testament
was written for that end, that we might know we have Eternal Life, says John,
1 John 5.13. All which Scripture had been to little or no purpose, if
assurance, after all, were not attainable. But it is evident that it is
attainable, and that all Regenerate persons may attain unto and obtain it,
because God has given them such proper and suitable means and helps for the
obtainment of it. There are many of them scattered up and down the Scriptures,
I Will name one or two; that in 1 John 3.14. We know that we are passed from
death to life, because we love the Brethren; that is, here is a certain and
infallible sign or mark of a New Creature, his loving of good men; that is, if
you can really say, and soundly experience, that you do love a holy man, or
gracious men as such, rightly, truly, heartily, with a spiritual and special
love, because they are such, and belong to Christ; why then you may conclude,
that you are in a state of Grace, and passed from death to life. So that if I
can make good the lesser Proposition, the Gospel will prove and make good the
first or greater Proposition thus; He that loves the Brethren (that is rightly,
and in a true Gospel sense) is passed from death to life, but I do so love the
Brethren; therefore I am passed from death to life. Now that which we have to
do in the case is this; namely, to get the clear proof of the second part,
thus, I do know that I do so love the Brethren, according to the true purport
and meaning of that, and other Texts of Scripture; and then conclude from this
Scripture, and others of the like import, that I am passed from death to life;
that is, I am Regenerated. (2.) An other sign or mark of Regenerate men laid
down in Scripture is this; that they desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that
they may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 2.2. Now if I am a Babe in Christ, I do desire
the sincere Milk of the Word of God, that I may (not only eat it) but eat it to
grow thereby; to grow up in Christ, Grace, and in the practice and fruits of
holiness; and if I do so desire the sincere Milk of the Word, then I am (at
least) a Babe, or young Child of God. But this is not my work, or present
design; and therefore do but little more than mention these things; namely, to
show that Unregenerate and Regenerate persons may know the states and
conditions wherein they are; the one in and by sin, the other in and by Grace.
But I thought good to say a little of it, and but a little, as a preparative to
that which I have further to say, and which was mainly intended as the subject
matter of this Chapter.

Q. What are some of the most certain Signs, Characters, or Marks of Regenerate
and Unregenerate persons or states?

A. Much has been said already in opening the work of Regeneration, what it
was, and what was contained in it, as you may see in that Chapter; and
therefore I shall say the less here: But yet I shall endeavor to present so
much unto you, in this Chapter or Head, as shall fully answer and resolve the
Question.

First, A Regenerate person has new life. It is a New Creature, Gal. 6.15. and
it is a living lively Creature; it is not born dead, but alive; it is alive to
God, to live unto him in newness of life, Romans 6.4.10.11. To bring forth fruit
unto God, Romans 7.4. And men are created in Christ Jesus unto good works, Ephesians.
2.10. It is a heavenly and spiritual Creature, Joh. 3.3.5. exactly fitted to
heavenly, and suited to spiritual objects, matters, works, and enjoyments,
which the Natural Man is not, now in it is lapsed and depraved state. Christ
requires a new life of them; and in order thereunto, creates and forms it in
them, Joh. 10.10. 1 John 3.14. This New Creature has, and it is formed with
all it is senses. It has five Spiritual Senses, in allusion to the five Natural
Senses of men; though all of them cannot be so properly and plainly expressed, as
the Natural Senses may; it is a perfect New Creature, and therefore must have
all it is parts and senses. I shall open them to you as briefly as I may.

1. The Sense of Seeing. When God made the World, his first days work was
Light, Genesis 1.3. Let there be light, and there was light, (says the Text.) So
in this new Creation, the first Sense in order that is Created, and does first
appear, is the Sense of Seeing. Before Regeneration (as you have heard) we are
blind, and in darkness, Matthew. 15.14. Ephesians. 5.8. We know not (to purpose) what
we are, not where we are, whose we are, nor where to find true happiness. By
sin we put out our own Eyes, quenched our Candle, and drew a thick Cloud before
our Eyes, and utterly spoiled them; our spiritual knowledge of heavenly things,
and Soul-concernments, is destroyed, and there is none of that Light remaining,
to conduct us in acceptable obedience in the way to Heaven. Therefore as it is
absolutely necessary that we should have new Eyes, as well as new Light to see
withal: So God does in Regeneration give men new Eyes, and Light, called the
Eyes of their Understanding, Ephesians. 1.18. Upon this Errand was Paul sent with the
Gospel to the Gentiles, Acts 26.18. and having received this new Spiritual
Light, they are ever after called Children of Light, as they were called before
Children of Darkness, Ephesians. 5.8. 1 John 2.9, 10, 11. In Regeneration they are
called out of this Darkness into mavelous Light, 1 Pet. 2.9. This their new
sight, light, and power of discerning, is excellent, spiritual, special, and
pecullar, and that in many respects. These are some of them. 1. They can now
see the things, and discern the matters and objects they could not see before.
2. Other things, objects and matters, more plainly and clearly, more lovely,
precious, excellent, and acceptable. First, they see the things that they never
saw before: As 1. The evil of their Natures. The Light of Nature may show men
many of their actual sins and wickednesses, but not the Source and Fountain of
them; namely, our Original, Natural, and Habitual vileness and sinfulness; only
Regenerate persons see a far greater odiousness and abomination in the heart,
than in the life; they find by sad experience, that the Fountain of corrupt
Nature is more full of Poison, than any Acts of sin; and the sight of that
causes such out-crys in them, O wretched men that we are, who shall deliver us
from the Body of this Death? Romans 7.24. And purge me, (that is, the filthy
Spring of the heart) that I may be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter than
Snow, Psalm. 51. For out of the heart proceeds all abominations, Matthew. 15.18,
19. and the Fountain and Root must needs be more full of evil, than the streams
and branches are. This the spiritual eye of the New Creature sees; he has it
not by hearsay, but sees it in himself, and so does not the Carnal and Natural
eye of man.

2. They see and know by their new spiritual light, spiritual sins; yea, they
see and know a greater sinfulness in them, in some sense, than in fleshly sins,
and so do not unregenerate men. They do indeed see an evil in some external
sins, such as are seen and condemned by the Light of Nature, and that by all
men; as Drunkenness, Theft, Whoredom, Cursing, Railing, Backbiting,
Slaudering, Swearing, Cheating, Blasphemy, Pride in Words, Carriages, Clothes,
Cruelty, Oppression, and the like; but they see not, nor apprehend the horrible
evils of Atheism, Spiritual Pride, Self, Vainglory, Envy, Hypocrisy toward
God, Unbelief, Covetousness, corrupting the Worship of God, and his
Gospel Ordinances, Earthly-mindedness, robbing God of his due, departing from
God, malice against, and hatred of the Power of Godliness, and the People of
God, and such like heart and spiritual wickednesses. These are little things in
an unregenerate man's eye, because he wants a spiritual understanding and light
to discern what they are; but they are heinous abominations to a spiritual eye,
for it knows and sees what they are (in measure) and passes a spiritual
judgment on them, as sins more fully and immediatel^ against the Holiness,
Grace, and Truth o^ God, and such as God has declared hi^ greatest indignation
and severity against Matthew. 23.13. to verse. 24. Joh. 15.22. Joh; 19, 20, 21.

3. They see and know that Life that is above Sense and Reason, namely, the
Life (...) Faith; but mere Natural men discern (...) this Life: They are only
acquainted wi^^ the Life of Sense and Reason, and cannot see one step beyond
it, for they are faithless men, 2 These. 3.2. But Regenerate men have found a
new way to Heaven, (I mean it is new to them) and that is the Life of Faith, and
Gospel-Holiness, and this is now their proper Life; they are called to it, and
instructed in it by the Holy Ghost; they live now in a higher Sphere, and walk
in another Region; they now see a singular Excellency and transcendent My stery
in this New Life, in the objects, matters, and ends of it. They see their
former folly and madness, in living such low, base, and sensual lives, and look
on their new Life as far more precious, high, and honorable, and own it as
their proper and peculiar Life, and endeavor to conform themselves to the Will
of God in it, who has appointed this life for them, and commanded them to live
it, Romans 1.17. Heb. 10.38. And Paul tells us, that he, and other New Creatures,
did live this life, 2 Cor. 5.7. Gal. 1.20. But unregenerate men are strangers,
yea, enemies to this life. At the best, they say, how can these things be? and
judge Regenerate men to be under strong delusions, for ta^king of, and
pretending to live the Life of Faith.

4. They see and know the new and living way to God the Father, which they were
unacquainted with before, Heb. 10.19, 20. but so do not unregenerate men. They
may hear of it, and have some general and confused Notions of the Doctrine of
it, but they do neither see nor understand what indeed it is, or what it means,
because of the blindness of their minds, Ephesians. 4. They know only the old Natural
way to God and Heaven, according to their Natural Principles, but wanting
spiritual eyes, and Sunning light in their hearts, they are real strangers to
it continually, Romans 3. But the Light of Christ in the hearts of Regenerate
men, finds it out, leads the^ to, and directs them to walk in it, 2 Cor. 4.6.
Isa. 30.20, 21. but unregenerate men do stumble at it; they know not whether
they go, because darkness has blinded their eyes, 1 John 2.11. But the path of
the Just is as the shining light, that shining more and more unto the perfect
day, Pro. 4.18.

5. They see and know (in measure) what Communion with God is, or what it is to
have Communion with God; they might hear of such a thing before, but now they
know wha^ it means; They are called into the Fellowship of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.9.
1 John 1.3. It is their promised privilege and blessing, and they have the
real experimental knowledge of it, Jo^. 14.21.23. But unregenerate men have i^
not, know it not; it is none of their privilege, they desire, they choose it
not: They are in Fellowship with the World, and their Lusts, and are well
satisfied and contented therewith. But I may not enlarge.

6. They see and know the Power of Godliness, 2 Timothy 3.5. The Word and Spirit
of Christ has fallen and wrought on and i^ them with Power and saving
Efficacy, brought them into, and set up Godliness in power in them, 1 These.
1.5. Romans 1.16. Their dearts and Souls are subdued to it, and swallowed up in
it; the Form of Godliness is a poor empty thing to them, without the power of
it in their heart. But it is not so with unregenerate men; they see not any
Religion or Godliness beyond the form or outside; it is not formed or set up in
their hearts; and therefore see little or nothing in Religion, Godliness, or
Religious matters. But unregenerate men do see and find a glorious Excellency
in it; it is exceeding precious, lovely, and profitable to them: They see that
worth and Excellency in it, as to cause them to love and honor it, to prize,
value, and esteem it, as worthy of all acceptance; to cherish, keep, and
augment it, to improve and practice it, and to walk worthy of it, to the glory
of the Giver of it.

7. They see and know the vanity and nothingness of the Creature, and that they
are not indeed such things as they verily thought them to be before their
Regeneration. Their Opinion of them is changed, it is now quite another thing.
Before they looked on them, and their having and enjoying them, as their
portion and happiness: Oh, thought they, what a brave thing is it to be rich?
what happy men are they who have abundance of riches, honors, pleasures? they
doted on them as on their Gods and Lovers, and their very imaginations of them
ravished their hearts; but now they see their folly, and how they were mistaken
and deluded in their judgments and imaginations. They now see them to be but
vanity and vexation of spirit, in comparison of Christ, Grace, and Heavenly
things, Eccl. 1.2. Phil. 3.19, 20. It Is true, they do not now simply contemn
them, but own them, and use them as Gods Mercies, thank and praise him for
them; but comparatively only, with Christ, Grace, and Heavenly things. Now they
see that they are but left hand and footstool Mercies; that they are not worth
the having, nor coveting after, but with and in Christ, Grace, Pardon, and
Holiness, and in order to their living to God with them, and enjoying of him in
them. But unregenerate men see them with other eyes, and they have other
thoughts of them. They account them their good things, as the only or chiefest
good, their great portion and happiness, and accordingly they act, walk, and
steer their course; follow after them, and greedily pursue them, Luke 16.25.
Romans 8.5. For indeed whatever they do profess, or pretend to the contrary, they
do not see, nor mind any higher good.

8. They see and know the vanity and emptiness of that which they did bear
upon, and glory in, namely, their own Righteousness. They once thought that
they had that in them, and such works were performed by them, as would commend
them unto God, and incline his heart to love and pity them, to accept and save
them. But now they see they were deceived, that all their Righteousnesses are
but filthy rags, dirt, and dung; and that they are so far from being accepted,
or accounted of in Heaven, as that they are matters of contempt and loathing,
Phil. 3.7, 8. Isa. 64.6. Matthew. 23. So that that which was their glory, is now
their shame. Their Gay Clothing are now mere Rags in their account; Why?
Because they see with other eyes, and by a better light than they did before.
They see they were building themselves on a Sandy Bottom, which would have sunk
under them, and they and it must have perished together, had they not been
taken off it by the power of Regenerating Grace. But now this is all they have
to glory in, who are Professors of Godliness, in an unregenerate state, namely,
God, I thank thee, I am not as other men; I fast twice in the week; I give
Tithes of all that I possess, etc. Luke 18.9, 10, 11, 12. Phil. 3.7.

9. They see and know the Lord Jesus Christ, and his Gospel-will, revealed in
Scripture; they are spiritualized, and made spiritual men by Regeneration, and
thereby are enabled to judge all, or of all spiritual things (in measure) 1
Cor. 2.15. They heard of Christ and his Will before, but now they see and know
him, and it. But more of this anon.

10. They see and know in measure, the great work of real Gospel-Obedience,
what it is, and how to be performed; and also, the holy Ghost his teachings,
helpings, quickenings, and comfortings, in and to their Gospel-Obedience. They
see wide difference between mere doing of that which is good, and that with and
by mere natural helps and principles, and that which is real Gospel Obedience
of the heart in it, To. 6.17. as likewise the Spirits helping their
Infirmities, To. 8.26. But Unregenerate men know nothing of these matters. But
I have done with this. These are some, and but some of the things, matters, and
objects, which by regenerating light, they are enabled to see and discern; as
you that are regenerated can witness. Now then, try your selves by what has
been already said, of seeing, or of the seeing and knowing sense.

Secondly, as Regenerate Persons can see, and do know the matters and things
they saw not before; so secondly, they are enabled to see and understand such
spiritual things and matters which they had some knowledge of before their
Regeneration, more clearly, plainly, distinctly, experimentally, and
powerfully, then they did or could before. For they had only a dim, weak, and
general natural, and spiritual light, and sight before. They did see, but
understood not what they saw, Isa. 6.9. They are like Men or Children that see
some rare and precious Jewels, or Cordials, but know not what they are, neither
understand the worth, excellency, and usefulness of them, as Artificers do, or
like such as hear Music in a strange Tone and Language, they know not what it
means; so at the best their sight and knowledge is an uncertain, weak, and
unedifying knowledge. Their sight and knowledge of these matters, profit them
not. It lies idle and useless in the head, but is of no advantage to the heart.
It brings them not to the things they see, to close up with them, and make them
their choice, to apply and rightly to appropriate them unto themselves. No, but
they still lay at a distance from their hearts, and their hearts from them.
They see no transcendent worth and excellency in them, to cause them indeed to
desire them, and with self-denial to make them their own. But they are enabled
by Regeneration to see and understand Spiritual things spiritually, 1 Cor.
2.13.14. They have now Eyes to see withal, Ephesians. 1.18. and a new light to see
by, namely, The Sun of Righteousness, Mal. 4.2. The Glory of the Lord is risen
upon them, Isa 60.1. But before they saw with their old eyes, though it may be
they were a little anointed with some common spiritual Light still, yet they
were but their old natural Eyes, or sense of seeing, and they had only Candle
light to see spiritual things by; But Regenerate persons are called out of
darkness, into mavelous light, 1 Pet. 2.9. The light of the knowledge of the
Glory of God shines into their hearts, 2 Cor. 4.6. enabling them with a measure
of clear discerning, what they are by Nature, and what they are made by the
Grace of Christ; how they ought to live in this world, and what their duties
are, the workings of their own lusts, and the Temptations of the Devil and
World; the proneness and inclination of the heart to sin, and close up with
Temptations, and the continual need they have of Divine assistance and
protection; what need they have of the Mercy of God, and of the Blood and
Righteousness of Christ.

Moreover, their new light directs and leads them to Jesus Christ, to own,
receive, and accept him for their Lord and Savior, for their King, Priest, and
Prophet; for their Head and Ruler, their Teacher and Lawgiver: and it is
powerful to lead and persuade them out of themselves, to take up in Christ
only, Col. 2.6. Joh. 1.12. Psalm. 73.25, 26. Phil. 3.7.8. and it is powerful to
take off their hearts and hands from sin, self-righteousness, and self-ability,
from self-boasting, or glorying in self, and from the enticing objects of this
world. This new Divine Spiritual Light, sees such a transcendent and singular
beauty, excellency, and loveliness in the person, love and Grace of Christ, as
to draw the Mind, Affections, and whole Soul to him, to lodge them in him, take
up with him, greatly to love him, and cleave unto him; to desire him and his
Grace, and to choose and apply it to themselves. To adore and admire him, to
honor and exalt him, to live and dye with him and for him; to live to him, and
make it their work and business to please him; to speak well of him, and to
commend him, his Love and Grace to the acceptance and admiration of others,
Cant. 5.9 ult. so likewise they see a desirable excellency and loveliness in
the wills and commands of Christ, in their duty and Gospel obedience to him, so
as to fall in love with them and it; so as to observe and do what he commands,
and that because it is his holy Will, Gracious and Sovereign Pleasure and
Appointment that they should so do: yea, and they can in measure discern when
they please him, and when they do not, Heb. 11.5. Besides, Regenerate persons
have an experimental knowledge; they taste, feel, and enjoy a part of the
Heavenly matters which they see; they have the earnest, and first Fruits of
them in their hands; they have a part in possession, namely, of Christ, his
Grace, Spirit, Truth, and Heaven; and they begin to see those things more
distinctly and particularly; they can discern one thing from another, and more
and more look into the nature, property, use, and end of them, and how to use
and improve them to the glory and praise of God, and to the comfort and
edification of their own Souls.

Secondly, another of these new spiritual senses, is Tasting. The natural Man
has the senses of seeing, and tasting things that are suitable to him, so has
the spiritual man or new creature. O taste and see that the Lord is gracious,
Psalm. 34.8. And if you have tasted that the Lord is gracious, 1 Pet. 2.3. It is
a spiritual sense or taste, and they are spiritual things that it can taste and
relish. I shall briefly name some of them, to help you in your trial, or in the
proving and examining your state and conditions by them.

1. The word of God, Gospel Precepts and Promises. The one declaring what God
and Christ the Mediator, and holy Ghost, has and will do for us: the other,
what is our Duty, and what we should do for God. These words of God are
exceeding sweet and pleasant to the spiritual taste of new Creatures, Psalm.
19.10. They are (says David) sweeter than the honey, or honey Comb. So in the
119. Psalm. And Jeremy tells us the same Chap. 15.16. Thy words were found, and
I did eat them, and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of my heart. So
is the word of God to thee if thou art a new Creature, especially at sometimes,
but it is not so to others. Christ calls his Fathers will, his food. My Meat
(says he) is to do the will of him that sent me; and man lives not by bread
only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God, Matthew. 4.
Well, what can thou say of and to this for thy self?

2. The good Counsels, Exhortations, Admonitions, and Reproofs of Christian
friends, and Resolutions, are sweet to thy taste also, 1 Samuel 25.32, 33.
verses, compared with the foregoing verses; And David said, blessed be thou of
the Lord, and blessed be thy advice. Oh! how sweet was a Woman's Counsel and
Admonition unto David, although he was much her Superior. It is the same (in
measure) with thee, if thou art a Regenerate person. Oh! thou will receive,
relish, and eat such friendly words of Counsel and Advice, and bless God for
them, and not quarrel and censure thy friends for what they do, but receive and
eat it as sweet and wholesome food for thy Soul, and give God and them thanks.

3. Ordinances. The Gospel Ordinances, and holy Appointments of Christ, will
be, and are indeed sweeter to thy Taste than any worldly thing. The Ordinances
of Preaching, and hearing the Gospel, are as the Gospel to thee, sweeter than
honey to thy mouth, Psalm. 119.103. So are the other Ordinances to, the Lords
Supper, Baptism, Prayer, singing of Psalms, and Church-Fellow-ship. The Order
and Discipline of Christ in the Church, and all other his Gospel appointments.

4. The Lord Jesus Christ is most Sweet unto their Tastes. As he is the fairest
of ten Thousands, and altogether Lovely, Cant. 5.10. ult. so he is the sweetest
and most pleasant of all things to the Taste; yea, altogether sweet; if his
fruit be so, much more is he himself; But his fruit, the dropping of his Grace,
is so, Cant. 2.3. How much more sweet must himself be unto Believers, who is
the Root and fountain of all those drops or friuts, Zach. 13.1. Revel. 22.16.
Christ is the desire of all these new senses, as he is said to be of all
Nations; Habak. 2.7. And he is most desirable to the Taste; He is the bread of
Life, that came down from Heaven; Which is meat indeed: for he that eats of
this bread, shall live for ever, Joh. 6.48.50.51.55. Christ is the most
precious, desirable, sweet bread, that ever any did eat; It has such a
pleasant relish, savor, and comforting quality, it does so refresh and cherish
the Soul of a Child of God, as that he greatly disires it, longs after it,
Covets to get and keep it, and (as it were) impatiently seeks and waits for it:
It is so good as that it will never surfeit him; all other things how good and
pleasant soever they be, are nothing to him without this. This is the great
dish that makes the Word, Ordinances, and all other dishes, a feast indeed;
It Is that which relishes and makes all other food sweet, nourishing, excellent,
and delightful. Hence they cry out in the fulness of all other things (if
they find not Christ there) Oh! where is Christ, let him come into my Garden,
my Soul, the best and only dish that should feast us and satisfy us, is not
here, till he come, I cannot eat, nor be Satisfied, Cant. 4. ult. Says a
gracious heart. Let Christ be my bread, and I shall be fully satisfied, he is
my all, in all things, Coll. 3.11. and without him I cannot, may not, will not
be satisfied. Oh! give me Christ in all, or I dye, for my Soul will Wither and
famish, whatever else I have, whatever else I feed upon. But Christ alone (if
it so please him) will satisfy me, though he give me nothing else.

5. Experiences are sweet and pleasant to the Taste; They are invaluable
mercies: when new Creatures can bring forth out of their Treasures new and old
experiences, and say this and that I have found; This Assistance I have found
in such a duty, and that comfort I have found in that duty; In such a strait I
found such and such seasonable helps, supports and deliverances; When I was
sad, I found God comforting me; In doubt of my state, I found God saying to me,
be of good cheer, thy Sins are forgiven thee. When my heart was hardened by
Sin, he melted it, and when much straitened and shut up, he enlarged it; when
the guilt of my Sins lay heavy on my Conscience, he applied the blood of the
everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13.20 and so relieved and eased me, and when I
thought he was angry with me, and had shut out my Prayers, he answered them. Oh
how sweet are these and such like experiences to the Taste of new creatures. I
could give you an account of many more had I time.

This spiritual sense has a thirsting appetite. It is always with accompanied
a hungering and thirsting Appetite after all Spiritual and Heavenly things that
he knows, or thinks may be good for him; he hungers and thirsts after Christ,
his Blood, Grace, Righteousness, Ordinances, Word, Experiences, Heaven, and the
presence of Christ; and when he finds them, Oh how sweet, comfortable and
pleasing are they? Then he says, now is my Soul satisfied as with marrow and
fatness, my Soul shall praise thee with joyful Lips, Psalm. 63.5.

2. As he Tastes, and has a hungring and thirsting appetite after Spiritual
things; so it loathes and nausiates the Sins, vanities and follies that he once
delighted in, and fed himself withal: he can neither taste nor digest them; they
are no ways toothsome to him, but odious, hateful, and abominable; They are
now as filthy poison to him; As meat wherewith a man has surfeited himself, is
to him, so are these Sins and vanities unto a new Creature; They are all like
nasty stinking Carrion to him; he abhorrs the sight, smell and taste of them,
and cannot endure they should be nigh him. The very thoughts of them are
grievous to him, Psalm. 119. Ro^. 7. They shall be no more his food, but
loathing: They were never so sweet, as now they are bitter to him, 1 Jer. 2.19.
They were once his pleasant Bread, but now his bitter Poison; They were his
Sugar and Honey, wherewith he was delighted, but now they are Gall and Wormwood
to him; His stomach raises up against them and he can no more endure them, nor
be reconciled to them.

Thirdly, Feeling. Feeling is another Sense of the new Creature; For as the
natural man has the Sense of feeling what does touch, or burden it, so has
the new Creature the like Sense too. The new creatures feeling sense is
sensible of, and burdened with many evils, weights and oppressions, that he is
afflicted withal. But first, not with the Yoke and Service of Christ. The Old
man indeed is greatly burdened with it, and complains sadly of the tediousness
and wearisomness of it, Mal. 1.13. and when will the Sabbath be gone, Amos 8.5.
But the new Creature is not afflicted with, nor weary of it; but finds it and
accounts it as the Scripture reports it to be, namely, an Easy and light Yoke,
Math. 11. ult. And her way are ways of pleasantness, Pro. 3.17. And his
commandments are not grievous, 1 John 5.3. Yea, they find that in keeping of
them, or the right observing of them, is great reward, Psalm. 19.

2. Neither is the Chastising and afflicting will of God, as such, their
burden, or the real burden of the new Creature. For that is swallowed up in the
will of God, and that overballances all, because it is the will of God who
loves him, and he loves God. It is matter of joy to him that the will of God is
done, although he suffer under it. And the new creature knows that it is but a
Fatherly chastisement; The fruit of great love, Care, wisdom and Faithfulness;
not to hurt him, but profit him; not to wound, but to heal the man; not to
destroy, but to save him, Romans 8.28. Heb. 12. Isa. 27.

2. But in the second place, the new Creature is sensible of, afflicted,
burdened and oppressed with other matters. As 1. his Lusts and Sins. These are
the heavy burdens that press him down, and makes him cry out (with Paul and
David) O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of this
Death, Romans 7.24. And with David, There is no rest in my Bones, by reason of my
Sin, Psalm. 38. and who can understand his errors, Cleans thou me from my Sins,
Psalm. 19. and Psalm. 51. There are many of them of his unbelief,
earthly-mindedness, covetousness, desires after worldly things, hypocrisy,
formality, and too often indifferency and lukewarmness of Spirit in the worship
of God. His deadness and carelessness. Robbing God and his soul of their due.
Aptness and Proness of heart to close up and fall in with temptation to Sin.
His Passion, Anger, Wrath, Peevishness, Vanity, Frothyness, Carnal Security,
departing of the heart from God and Duty, and an aversness to it; to envy and
grudge at others prosperity, and to revenge wrongs or injuries received from
men, and whatever other evils (...) finds the heart inclined to; so likewise
its want of spiritualness of heart, freedom and cheerfulness in the worship and
service of God. Also its hardness of heart, and unprofitableness under the
means of Grace, and unusefulness in the world. These and many other lusts and
sins are its burdens, they oppress and press him down. These are the Mountains
that lay on the back of the new Creature, and it earnestly longs for, and
desires deliverance from them all. Moreover, they are greatly burdened with the
Treachery, and deceitfulness of their hearts; their fears, doubts, and
distractions in duty, their want of heavenly mindedness, love to God,
delighting in him, and his service. They are burdened, and smart under the
sense of the impurity of their hearts, and great insensibility of Mercies, and
because God is not honored and glorified by them as he should be. They are
burdened, because their Lusts are so strong and powerful, as that when they
would do good, they cannot; And as they are burdened with these and many other
Evils of their own, so they feel a great weight in others sins likewise. Rivers
of waters run down their Eyes, because other men are Transgressors of Gods I
am, Psalm. 119.136. And (says Paul) who is weak, and I am nor weak, 2 Cor.
11.29. And ye are puffed up, and have not rather Mourned, 1 Cor. 5.2. You
should have been afflicted in Spirit for your Brothers sin, because God was
dishonored, and his Gospel Blasphemed, his People shamed, and the world
stumbled by reason of it. Now they are burdened, wounded, and bleed under the
sense of wicked men's profaneness, debauchery, and contempt of the Gospel of
Christ. But they are mostly wounded with the evils and miscarriages of
Professors, and such as they hope are the People of God. Their Pride,
Worldliness, Frothyness, Back-bitings, negligence and carelessness in the
matters of God, their censorious and rash Judgings of one another, their want
of Love, Kindness, and Charity to each other, and their brawlings and
contentions one with another, and their coldness and lukewarmness in Religion,
with other their sins, do deeply wound and pierce them to the heart, and that
because they are a shame and dishonor to their Father, Husband, and Head, his
Name and People, and because him whom they love and honor, is not glorified in
and by them. And further, as they are burdened and wounded with other sins and
miscarriages, so likewise, with the Reproaches and other sufferings of good
Men. Who is afflicted and I burn not, (says Paul) 2 Cor. 11.29. Their Brethrens
Bonds are their Bonds, Heb. 13.3. their Reproaches, Pains, Losses, Poverty,
Weaknesses, and Persecutions, are their own. They are in Pain, Bonds, Poverty,
etc. with them; They have Spirits to rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep
with them that weep, Romans 12.15, 16. And it must needs be so, because they are
Fellow Members of the same Spiritual Body, joined to Christ their Head; and if
they are not sympathizers with, and Fellow-feelers of each others Afflictions,
it is certain they are not living, but dead Members, whatever they profess
themselves to be, or pretend to, 1 Cor. 12.25, 26, 27. (read and ponder that
Scripture.)

New Creatures have a feeling of many other Burdens also. The Temptations of
the Devil, snares and allurements of the world, are their heavy and grievous
Burdens. They grown under them, and earnestly desire to be delivered from them.
They find by woeful experience, that the Devil shoots his Fiery Darts at them,
and labors Night and Day by his Wiles, to draw them from God, and to entangle
them in Sin, Ephesians. 6. They know that he has his Devices, or Methods, 2 Cor.
2.11. and that he does like a Lion, walk up and down, seeking whom he may
devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. and therefore are fain to be always on their guard to keep
Watch and Ward against him Nigh^ and Day, that he surprise them not, and dra^
or tempt them to Sin. They know that he (...) a subtle and strong Enemy, and
how he ha^^ prevailed over good men, and caused them (...) sin. As David,
Peter, and others, and therefore they are afraid of him, knowing their dange^
and the evils he may stir and move them unto if he should prevail. The World
likewise namely, the good things of it, are in so^ sense burdensome to him;
not as they (...) good things, but as they are powerful to S^duce and ensnare
the mind and affections, draw them from God and Heavenly thing To carnalize the
Mind, deaden or cool (...) Affections, and take off the Spiritual taste,
favor, and relish of Heavenly things; the heart from duty, and serious
striving to enter is at the straight Gate, Luke 13.24. The world is like Pitch
to our evil natures, we can hardly touch it without being defiled with it; like
coals of fire in the bosom, that will burn us, and like a hedge of Thorns that
will prick and tear us, as experience shows. The Lord Jesus knows how dangerous
and pernicious the good things of this world would be to his disciples Souls,
and therefore charges them to take heed, and beware of them, lest at any time,
(Mark it) lest at any time you be ensnared with them, Luke 21.34.

2. As the feeling sense is sensible of smarts, and cries out under the burdens
and weights of these evils, so, it is deeply sensible of the great love and
Grace of Christ to him; he is heartily affected with his Rich mercy, Ephesians: 2.^.
and the unsearchable Riches of Gods Grace to him. Evil and good, Grace and Sin,
affect him; he is not only deeply sensible of what he is, and has done to
God, but what God is to, and has done for him; he is affected with the best
things as well as the worst; with matters of joy, as well as sorrow; he has
his Eye as well on the bright side of the Cloud, as on the dark side of it; and
he is impressed with Gods goodness and holiness, as well as with his own
badness and vileness; he takes in one as well as another, and both make
powerful impression on his feeling Sense. The same Sense is capable of joy and
Sorrow, and there are in his view, suitable objects and matters for both; and
he is really sensible of both. But I hasten.

Fourthly, Hearing. New Creatures have a new Sense of Hearing. The hearing
Sense is appointed and given to men, to receive and take in words spoken,
without which they know not what is spoken to them. Now as men have the natural
sense of hearing, so Regenerate Persons have a new spiritual sense of hearing
given them in Regeneration; until then they are said to be Deaf, Psalm. 58.4.
Isa. 42.18, 19. although they had not lost their natural Sense of hearing; yet
the Scripture says, they were Deaf; why, because they had not Spiritual Ears
to hear; hence the Lord Jesus (speaking to the Asian Churches) bids such as had
Ears to hear, what the Spirit spoke unto them; Revel. 2. and 3. Chapters.
Clearly implying that there were some among them, that had not this Spiritual
Sense of hearing the Voice of the holy Spirit, but that there were others that
had it. And the Prophet tells the Jews that there were some that had Ears, but
were Deaf, Isa. 43.8. that is, they had the natural, but not the Spiritual
sense of hearing the voice of God by his Prophets. This Spiritual hearing sense
imports, not only a hearing and taking in the words or matters they hear, but
also understanding them, and receiving them into the understanding, will, and
affection, Ezekiel. 40.3.4. 2 These. 2.10. Pro. 7.1. Pro. 10 14. They are ready and
swift to hear, Jam. 1.19.21. Let Christ speak to them what he will, they can
and will hear him; Speak Lord, for thy servant hears, 1 Samuel 3.2. is the
language of his heart; and Lord what will thou have me to do, Acts. 9. does God
or good men, instruct, admonish, exhort, reprove, charge, rebuke them, their
Ears and hearts are open and ready to hear and receive it, to love and
understand it; to keep and practice it, or to improve all to the will of God.
Regenerate Persons are the good ground hearers; Luke 8.15. Math. 13. They have
Ears to hear, hearts to receive and understand what is revealed to them; yea,
to keep and hold it fast; convert the word into profit, and turn all into the
practice of Godlyness. They, and they only have learnt the mystery and
Spiritual Art of hearing: They are the only Wise, Serious, Humble, Diligent,
Circumspect, Careful, Reverend, Watchful, Sincere, Profitable and good Hearers.
They are taught to please and honor God better, and advantage their own Souls
in and by hearing. They are the Persons (and none but they) who hear in
hearing; who do truly and faithfully endeavor to hear Christ, in hearing of
men; and to hear that voice behind them, saying, this is the way, walk ye in
it; which is promised in Isa: 30.20.21. They are the men who do indeed make
blessed earnings of hearing, and who do unfainedly intend, design and carry on
right, high and holy ends in hearing, namely, to know Christ, his Will, Grace,
Spirit, Benefits, Covenant, and Promises; to know themselves, their Sins,
Deceits, and Errors; their increase or decrease in Grace and practical
Godliness, and to know how they ought to believe and carry themselves toward
God and men in all conditions, States and Relations, better, more clearly and
Spiritually, that so they may walk worthy of the Lord, unto all well-pleasing,
and be fruitful in every good work; adorn the Gospel of Christ, and beautify
their holy profession. These are the men who hear, that they may be cleansed
and washed, that they may be quickened to, and strengthened in their duty, and
that their lusts may be destroyed by the word of Grace, Joh. 15.3. Joh. 17.17.
Ephesians. 5.25.26. 2 Cor. 10.4.5. And that they may, as in the Lords own way and
appointment, meet with Christ, and Christ with them, to express their
dependence on, and subjection to him, and that they may be filled with all the
fullness of God, Ephesians. 3.19. This is the hearing Ear, and understanding heart,
that is rarely to be found in the world.

Fifthly, Smelling. In the natural body there is the Sense of Smelling, so
there is in the new Creature also; Christ is full of sweet smells and Savours,
fitted and suited to a believers new sense; and Christ has provided for, and
given them a sense capable of receiveing and resenting it, which adds much to
their strength and Comfort, and renders the Lord Jesus more sweet, lovely, and
acceptable to them. For the more senses they have to draw and take in of
Christ's Person, Grace, and lovelyness to themselves, the more they get from
Christ, and the more pleasing and desirable he must needs be to them; had the
patural man only two or three senses, to apprehend and take in objects, and the
good of them, his life would not be so comfortable; because as then, many of
the Creatures would be vain and useless to him, so he would live without the
use and comfort of them that are suited to the senses he wants, and which he
cannot receive nor take comfort and delight in, without them. And men are
naturally best pleased, and most satisfied with variety of objects and matters.
It is much more so in Spiritual and heavenly matters and things, Spiritual men,
love and delight much in heavenly varieties, and therefore to delight and
satisfy them, to endear their Souls to Christ, and encourage them in their Duty
to him, he has given them many senses or subjects capable of apprehending and
taking in variety of heavenly matters and things; and that is not all, but he
has also graciously provided all suitable varieties for them, and presents
them freely to their acceptance. Thus Christ is to them, a sweet smelling
Savor, Ephesians. 5.2. his death was so to God, and his Person, Graces, and
Benefits, are so to them, Cant. 5.13.2.13. Their Persons love and obedience are
a sweet smelling savor to Christ, Cant. 4.10.11. And so is Christ unto them,
Cant. 1.3. and it is powerful to excite and draw forth their strongest and
dearest love to Christ, Because of the savor of this good Ointments; therefore
do the Virgins love thee. And as it excites and draws forth their love to
Christ, so it gladdens and refreshes the hearts of new Creatures. Psalm. 45.8.
All thy Garments smell of Mirth, etc. whereby they have made thee glad. Thus I
have briefly run over, and presented you a few considerations of the New
Creature, his spiritual senses, what they are, and of their nature, work, use,
and end; to help you to make a true Judgment of your selves, whether you are
new Creatures indeed, or only in name and pretense.

And be assured of this, that if thou art indeed a Regenerate person, thou
may in some degree, (especially at sometimes) find these spiritual senses in
thee. And if thou can find them in any degree in thee, thou may conclude,
that thou art a Child of God, and really Regenerate. For it is certain that
unregenerate persons have them not in them, but are real strangers, if not
Enemies to them; and such as regard them not, neither do they find them in any
degree or measure in themselves, they are in an unregenerate state and
condition. And that they have not these senses, is evident; for they are dead,
blind, hard, and wholly carnal, as has been showed already. And so much of the
first Mark or Character of a new Creature, I shall briefly dispatch the rest,
and then proceed to other heads propounded.

Secondly, If thou art a new Creature indeed, thou have been brought forth, and
born again in pain, and with grief and trouble of Soul. Every natural Child is
brought forth with sorrow and pain, Joh. 16. and every n^w-born Babe is brought
forth with sorrow and pain. The Lord Jesus has been in Travail, Sorrow, and
Pain for them that are and shall be regenerated, to purchase their new Birth,
Isa. 53.3.11. he had the hardest labor and struggling for thee; he was in the
greatest and most dreadful Agony and anguish of Soul that could be, to procure
thy Regeneration and new State; he had many a woeful and grievous throw; many a
sigh and groan, and he sweat many drops of Blood for thee, when he was
Sacrificing his life to Divine Justice for thy Redemption and Sanctification,
to Redeem thee from thy old state of Sin and Misery, Luke 22.44. Math. 26. and
to make thee one of his peculiar people, Tit. 2.14. Ephesians. 5. And as he has been
in Pain and Travail for thee, so (if thou art Regenerated) he has given thee a
small Taste of his Pains and Sorrows in thy birth. Thou have not been brought
forth without sighs, groans, throws, Pains and Sorrows, no, but thou have found
much Struggling, and many pangs of heart. It is true, that all Children are not
born with the same degree and measure of pains and sorrows. Some Women feel
more, some less, in their Travail, but all have some. In Sorrow thou shall
bring forth Children, says God, Genesis 3.16. so he says of all sinners that he
will Regenerate, (if grown persons) in sorrow shall thou be Regenerated, and
made a New Creature. Thou shall taste and feel what an evil and bitter thing it
is to be a sinner, and under my Wrath, the dominion of Lusts and the Devil;
That thou have forsaken me the Fountain of living Waters, Jer. 2. Rebelled
against me, thrown off my Yoke, and obeyed the Devil rather than me. Thou shall
know that I have observed all thy contemptuous slightings of my Son, my Grace
and Mercy, and causing me to stand, wait, and knock for thee, and thoud'st not
hearken to me. When God Regenerates men, he lets loose Sin, Guilt, Devil, his
Law and Vengeance on the Souls and Consciences of such for a time, and the
Spirit of God, who is the great Agent in Regenerating them, Joh. 3.5. makes
himself as a Spirit of Bondage to them, and seemingly to their own sense, puts
them into, and leaves them in a far worse case and condition than they were in
before, Romans 8.15. so that now their sinful peace, carnal security, vain and
foolish hopes and confidences are all broken and shattered, and they are left
to the wide world to shift for themselves, and that when they are encompassed
about with fears and miseries, and have none to comfort them, but are like men
shut up in doubts, fears, and distractions, not knowing what to do, nor what to
think of their conditions. They are condemned by the Law, and their own
Consciences, and they see themselves bound over to answer for all their
Transgressions at the Judgment Seat of God. They see themselves in straits and
miseries, and know not how to help themselves, neither can they find any that
will or can; for they look upon God as their Enemy, and are afraid of him. This
makes them cry out, O, What shall we do to be saved? How, or by whom shall we
be delivered? Acts 2.37. Acts 16.29, 30. Now their Hearts, Heads, and Souls are
in traveling pains and pangs, greatly longing to be delivered, like men that
are sinking into the bottom of the Sea, and never like to be saved. Thus they
are brought forth in pain and Sorrow. And God has many wise and gracious ends
in dealing thus with them, which in due time they shall see, and bless him for.
For by bringing forth the new Creature, thus he greatly imbitters Sin to them,
shows them their own vileness, weakness, and wretchedness, and causes them to
loath themselves, and hate their Sin, endears and commends Jesus Christ, his
Grace and love to them, and stirs them up to seek after him, and cleave to him
the more seriously and heartily.

Thirdly, The new Creature is of a humble, meek and lowly nature; it is like
the Father and Author of it, the Lord Jesus; he was meek and lowly in heart
and life, Math. 11.29. Christ was of a Lamb-like, Dove-like nature, Spirit and
Carriage in his life and Death. In his life, Joh. 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God.
In his death, under exceeding great contemps, and innumerable Injuries; he was
as a Lamb, Acts. 8.32. so his Saints are often called his Sheep and Lambs; My
sheep hear my voice, Joh. 10.27. and his Lambs, Joh. 21.15. so he calls them
his Doves, C^nt. 2.14. Cant. 5.2. and so they call Christ, Cant. 5.12. now, who
knows not these Creatures to be meek, lowly, and humble; and because they are
generally known so to be and are so in their own nature, the Lord Jesus sets
out and shows us what his new Creatures are in their natures and carriages by
them; and they are such indeed, or they are not the real Sheep, Lambs, and
Doves of the Lord Jesus; for all his People participate of his nature; they are
of Poor, Meek, Humble, and lowly Spirits, Words, and Carriages, in measure like
their head Christ, how Proud and Lofty so ever they were before. Christ's
Regenerating Grace is certainly Soul-humbling, Spirit-meekening, and
Heart-debasing Grace wherever it is. It Turns Lions into Lambs, Wolves into
Sheep, and Ravenous Birds into sweet Doves; For they are Regenerated with the
divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. and by the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8.9. and they are
said to be, as he is, in the world, 1 John 4.17.

And as they are so by nature, or there new birth, so likewise by their Light
and consideration. Their habits are improved and strengthened by their own
endeavors, as by Gods own Proper means. 1. They see so much of their own
Vileness, Wretchedness, Nakedness, and Impotency, as to make them loath
themselves; and they see so much of their former and past Transgressions and
Sins, as to cause them to abhor and condemn themselves, Job. 42. They do now
see themselves and ways, with another kind of light and judgment than they did
before, so that now their Self-justifying is turned into Self-condemning; and
their high thoughts, into low and Self-debasing thoughts of themselves. They
were never so high in their own Eyes, as now they are low; and never so worthy
and sufficient, as now they are unworthy, and nothing, Phill. 3.7.2. They see
(in measure) the holiness and Righteousness of God and his Laws, and the great
unsuitableness of their hearts and ways unto them; and the sight and Sense
thereof, greatly humbles and debases them, Isa. 6.5. Job. 42.5.6. And as they
are humbled and debased at the sight and knowledge of these things, so also
their serious pondering and considering them does further shame, humble, and
abuse them. They do consider, and lay these things to heart; and do not content
themselves with the bare knowing and apprehending them as true; no, but they
search into them, and apply them to themselves; Thus and thus am I; This and
this have I done, and this and that is my Sin and wickedness, my evil and
misery; and this and much more have I merrited, of the wrath and dreadful
vengeance of God, by my wickedness and rebellion, by my often refusing his
Yoke, and rejecting his grace and favor proferred to me in and by the Gospel;
so likewise the consideration of the holiness and Righteousness of God, and his
Laws and ways, which I have despised, slighted and set at naught, Pro. 1.24.25.
and which I find I cannot close up with, nor conform unto. Oh I have robbed him
of his due, and am likely to do so still, because of the naughtiness of my
heart, and wickedness of my nature, which is most loathsome and abominable
throughout, Ezekiel. 16. Romans 3. 1 Cor. 6. Tit. 3. I have been vile and abominable
in the pure Eyes of God, and di^ love to have it so. I would not believe that
God and his Laws were so holy and righteous, nor that I was so vile and
hateful, as now I see I am. By these and other such considerations, their meek
and humble natures are strengthened and improved against the surging Waves of
Pride, and self-exalting that is in them, and that strives to overcome and
conquer them.

And as Regenerate persons are meek, humble and lowly, by their Spiritual birth
or new nature, and by their divine light and consideration, do improve and
augment it, as has been showed; so this truth may further appear, (namely,
that Regenerate men are such as has been said) by the Names and Titles the
Holy Ghost gives them in Scripture. They are called the Meek of the Earth,
Zeph. 2.3. that is, the only meek men that live in this world, and that from
their new nature and heavenly birth, their thoughts of themselves, and their
singular carriages and walkings before and toward God and men. This
Appellation is often given them in Scripture, to distinguish them from other
men, how good natured soever they are; and to declare and show forth their new
natures and singular frames, carriages and dispositions; to manifest how God
looks on and accounts them, and to provoke them to carry themselves accordingly
before all men, Psalm. 22.26. The meek shall eat and be satisfied: and the meek
will he guide in judgment; the meek will he teach his way, Psalm. 25.9. so in
Psalm. 37.11. Psalm. 76.9. Psalm. 149.4. Isa. 11.4. A^os 2.7. Math. 5.5. so they
are named humble persons, Job. 22.29. Psalm. 9.12. Psalm. 10.12.17. Psalm. 69.32.
Pro. 29.23. Isa. 57.15. Jam. 4.6. They are low and vile in their own Eyes; they
are nothing, yea, worser than nothing in their own apprehensions, and so are
all their works and best performances also. Wherefore you, who think your
selves new Creatures, or to be Regenerated and born again, should examine your
selves whether or no you are indeed under this Character, if you have this
certain and undeniable Mark of Christ's sheep on you? For if you have it not,
you are not as yet Regenerated, you are not the real sheep of Christ, but you
are still in your old sinful states and conditions, and you shall certainly
perish except you be born again. There are very many Persons, who have gotten
light in their Heads, many convictions and much trouble of Spirit; have
reformed their lives, and walk with the People of God: who are so far from
being more sweet, humble and meek, in and by their light, Reformation, and
supposed change of state, as that they are more high and lofty then they were.
In this Sense they are Changed from less to more Pride, from Sin to Sin in a
higher degree. They are greater in their own Eyes, and more haughty in their
words and deportments than they were before their Reformation; which clearly
and infallably shows that they are not as yet partakers of the Divine nature,
or Spirit of Christ: but though they have put on sheeps clothing, yet they are
ravening wolves within. I have known many who took up a seeming true profession
and practice of Godliness, with much Pride and high thoughts of themselves, and
a low and base esteem of others, (possibly better then themselves) but none of
them proved sound, and Regenerate persons, but at long run, they withered away
and came to nothing, or worse than nothing. And when I find persons (especially
young ones) under convictions of, and trouble for sin (as they say) enquiring
after the way to Heaven, and reforming their lives, without evident humble
hearts, words, carriages and deportments: I cannot but fear what their ends
will be. But know, that if you are Regenerate indeed, your Regeneration has
greatly, (though not perfectly) meekned, humbled and made you lowly minded.

Fourthly, The frame and disposition of the new Creature is set upon, and
Resolved to exalt and magnify God, and the Lord Jesus Christ. Men are prone to
adore, exalt, and greaten something or person, and because they do not (by
Nature) know or find any one Person or thing of better account and esteem with
them, then their carnal Self, they do make it their business to exalt, serve,
and advance that, and take much delight in their so doing; but to exalt, serve
and magnify God, they have no mind or delight. And therefore all their care and
endeavors are exercised and lade out about that, namely, to keep a Good
Opinion of themselves, secure, and sense themselves against all Convictions of
a contrary import, and to commend themselves by some good behavior unto men,
that they may think well of them, honor and exalt them: to obtain their good
thoughts and words, and get their applause and renown; and in this they glory
and please themselves, and that when they know themselves not to be the persons
within doors that they seem to be without; For they value and e^teem the praise
of men, more than the praise of God, Joh. 12.43. But as Regeneration humbles
men, and makes them vile in their one eyes, so it greatly magnifies and exalts
God the Father, and Jesus Christ Mediator. It is not fained in or by them, but
it is their very make, their frame, bent, and disposition; It is natural to the
new Creature to honor and magnify God, as it was before to the natural man to
honor and magnify Self; Now they can be nothing, that Christ may be all, and
in all things, Coll. 3.11. they can upon choice, be base and vile, that Christ
many be honored and exalted thereby. They can freely become the Footstool of
Christ, that he may be lifted up on high; they can be any thing (but sinners)
for the greatning of Christ, and setting him (as it were) on his Throne, Phil.
1.20.

The new Creature being of a heavenly make and Constitution, is wholly taken up
with, and Swallowed up in Christ and his Interests. Carnal self is become a
vile thing to that man who is indeed regenerated, in comparison of Jesus
Christ, his Gospel, Names, and Glory. Selfdenial, and Christ exalting, is one
of the first Lessons he Learns, and the first work and concern he is busied
about. As Soon as Paul was regenerated, his heart was raised up to this duty,
bent, and resolvedly set upon it, and without delay prosecuted it. Lord (says
he) what will thou have me to do, Acts. 9.6. and he tells us, that as soon as he
knew his Lords will, he consulted not with flesh and blood, (that is, with self
ease and safety) no, but presently fell to work, namely, to exalt Christ, save
Souls, and enlarge his Masters kingdom, Gal. 1.15, 16. Paul did immediately
join Issues with Christ, and freely and fully closed up with his Terms,
propounded by himself to all that will be his disciples, Mark. 8.34. Luke
14.26, 27. Luke 18. and believe it, so it is with you, if you are his Disciples
indeed, Joh. 8.31. if you are born again of the Spirit, Joh. 3.5. Christ Jesus
the Lord, is precious in your Eyes, and high in your esteem; your Lives,
Estates, Honors, Liberties, Dignities and Relations are small matters to you,
in comparison of Christ, his name, Gospel, and Interests. And therefore your
desire, choice, design, aim, scope, and endeavors are all to greaten,
magnify, and exalt him. As he is the fairest of ten thousands unto you, so you
desire, choose, and labor that he may be so by you. It is a fixed principle in
your hearts, a stated Case in your Judgments and Consciences, and a settled
frame and bent of your Souls. There is nothing in the World more pleasing and
acceptable to you, and there is not any thing that more refreshes your minds,
and delights your hearts then this, that you have a Christ to Glorify, and that
you may Glorify and Honor him. The new Creature is formed for Christ, to be,
and live (...) the praise of his Glorious Grace, Ephesians. 1.6.12. They see and
acknowledge (when Regenerated) that they are no more their own, but born again,
that they might Glorify God with their ^odies and Spirits, which are the Lords,
1 Cor. 6.19.20. and that they that live, should live wholly to him who has
Created them in Christ Jesus unto good works, 2 Cor. 5.15. Ephesians. 2.10. One of
the first questions or enquiries of the new Creature is, how and wherein he may
live to God, please and honor him, and bring forth fruit whereby he may be
glorified, Joh. 15.8. it is the great case and interest their hearts and souls
are concerned in, and they are grieved when they cannot reach it, but receive
or count it matter of joy when he is really loved, honored and exalted by any,
especially when they can do it themselves. It is so natural to new Creatures,
or Regenerate men, and they are so interessed in and with Jesus Christ his
concerns, as that they take and account what is done to or against him, is done
to or against themselves. They are like the Lord Jesus their head in this too,
Namely, that what i^ Christ's Indignity, is theirs, and what is Christ's glory
and honor, is theirs also. His reproach and honor lays nearer their hearts
then any or all their own Earthly and Bodily concernments. The Lord Jesus
accounts his Peoples Reproaches, Indignities, Prosperity and Happiness, his
own, such is his great love and respects to, and care of them, Isa. 63.9. Acts
9.5. Math. 10.42. Math. 25.40. Zach. 2.8. If they be honored, he is so; if
they be abused, he is abused; and if they suffer, he does so to; In all their
Afflictions he is afflicted. And as it is with Christ in their concerns, so it
is (in measure) with them in Christ's concerns. Is his Name, Gospel and Worship,
under a cloud of contempt and reproach, it is matter of grief and mourning to
them, and when they are loved, exalted, and dignifyed, it is their glory and
joy, Phil. 5.17. Psalm. 119. And that it is so indeed, may farther be evidenced.

1. From their near Relations. New Creatures or Regenerate men are the Children
of God. He has begotten them by his Grace and Gospel; Jam. 1.18. 1. Pet.
1.3.14. and all ingenious Children will concern themselves in and with their
Fathers honor and indignity, and naturally seek to advance and exalt them all
they can, or ought to do. How much more does the Divine nature and Spirit of
God in Believers prompt and instigate them to do so to their heavenly Father,
and that by all the ways and means they may.

2. They are the Spouses of the Lord Jesus, and he is their Husband, Cant.
2.16. 2 Cor. 11.2. Jer. 3.14. Christ has chosen and taken them to himself,
Hosea 3.2, 3. to be his loving and affectionate Brides, Joh. 15.16. and they
have chosen and taken him to be their Husband, and become one with himself. The
Lord Jesus Regenerates men, to make them capable of chosing him for theirs, and
to make them meet for this Conjugal Relation. And they have in their hearts the
love and respects (in part) that are due to such a Relation as Christ is.

3. They are related to Christ as members to the head. He is their head, and
they are his members, Ephesians. 5.23.30. And therefore they must needs have his
nature and spirit, to desire and naturally design, intend and endeavor to
exalt and honor him. The members of the natural body do naturally honor their
head, and the head does the same to the members, 1 Cor. 12.26. So it is in the
mystical head and body. And it cannot but be so, because of the oneness and
mutual simpathy that is between them. So then, if you are new Creatures, you
are members of Christ, and if members of Christ, then you simpathize with
Christ. His reproach is yours, and his honor is yours, and you have a natural
frame, bent, and disposition of heart, to honor, exalt, and magnify him all
you can, and it is your delight and joy to do it.

2. Love, esteem and respects, that are in these Relations, and flow from them
to Christ, do prompt and stir you up to Desire, Choose, Design and endeavor to
honor and exalt him. Their strong and endeared love to, and high esteem of
him, provokes and moves them to study, project, watch and labor all they can
to please, honor, and exalt him. The love of so many near and great Relations,
as they stand in to him, must needs be very strong and fervent, being in one
subject. They love and esteem him as their loving, sweet, and kind Head,
Father, Husband, as their Redeemer, Teacher, Comforter, Crowner, and Eternal
Savior, and therefore they cannot but seek, and endeavor his honor and
exaltation. They have eyes enlightened, to see a transcendent Worth, and
glorious Excellency, Beauty, and Majesty in Christ, and they see him, As worthy
of all Acceptance, 1 Timothy 1.15. so of all glory and exaltation. Neither Christ
or his Excellencies are hid from them; but the Glory of them do so shine into
their hearts, as greatly to draw forth their Hearts, Tongues, and Souls, to
magnify and honor him, Psalm. 103.1.2. Cant. 5.10. -- ult. They lay a Charge on
themselves, and command (as it were) their all to bless and glorify him. Now,
what can you say to this mark, Can you say it is so with you? do you find it in
you? and do you experience it indeed, or do you not? can you say in deed and in
Truth, that whatever the performance be, yet the frame, bent, choice,
inclination, and disposition of your hearts, and endeavors of your hands, are
fully and frequently set, and resolved to exalt, serve, please and magnify the
great God, and Jesus Christ, your Lord and King, your Glory and Crown?

Fifthly. The new Creature has a hungring and thursting desire, and earnest
longing after Jesus Christ; after Interest in and Communion with him; after a
clearer and more distinct knowledge of him and acquaintance with him, and
whatsoever is his: as his Laws, Promises, Blood Graces, or what ever else they
hear is in him or has relation to, or proceeds from him. The new Creature is
like Noah's Dove, that can rest the sole of its foot only on, and in this Ark of
the Everlasting Covenant; All other Foundations are but broken Reeds, and Ropes
of Sand to him. Christ and the Covenant of Grace, the faithfulness and
All Sufficiency of God, are his only Anchor Holds, and Rocky Grounds, upon
which he can rest himself, and on which he casts and roles himself. The New Man
is the only wise Builder, for he chooses the Rock of Ages to Build upon, and
none else, Math. 7.25. Math. 16.18. Phil. 3.7, 8. The Foundation which God has
laid in the Covenant of Grace for men to Build themselves, their Faith and Hope
upon, that they desire, choose, hunger, and seek after, and cannot be satisfied
without, 1 Cor. 3.11. Psalm. 73.25, 26. The Regenerate persons take up in rest,
build, and stay themselves; The Lord is my Rock (says David) Psalm. 18.2. so
says every New Creature, the Lord Jesus Christ shall be my only Rock and
Foundation; my hopes, notions, self-righteousness, good works and performances,
my self-supposed abilities, Professions, Privileges, and Reformations, shall
no more be my Foundations as they have been; No, but Christ and the Covenant of
Grace, the Faithfulness and All Sufficiency of God, shall be my Foundation and
resting Place: I will build my self, and all my hopes, confidences, and
expectations, wholly and altogether on them; for they, and they only, can bare
the weight of my Soul, and eternal Salvation, which I must build upon them. But
unregenerate men have other bottoms and foundations to rest and build
themselves upon; they little or nothing at all concern themselves in good
earnest, with the Foundation God has laid, but form a great many to
themselves, and build all their confidences, hopes, and expectations on them,
and say, they are safe and secure, no evil shall come to them, Math. 7.26. Thus
did the foolish Virgins, Math. 25.1. -- and thus did Paul before his
Regeneration, Phil. 3.6, 7. But it was otherwise after his Regeneration, then
his whole Soul and mind was carried forth to Christ, with all possible
earnestness and importunity, Phil. 3.8. Their thousand of Rams, and ten
thousand Rivers of Oil, now, are nothing to them, as once they were, Micah.
6.7. no, but now ten thousand of worlds for a sure and certain bottom or
foundation to rest and build my poor shaken and tossed Soul upon, is the voice
and cry of all Regenerate men, before they clearly find Christ, so as to build
upon him, and commit all their present and everlasting concerns on him.

And as they have a hungering and thirsting desire, etc. after Christ for their
foundation to build upon; so also to have him in their arms and hearts, to
have more and clearer knowledge of, and intimate acquaintance and communion with
him. His absence is grievous to them, but his presence and favor, his smiles
and acquaintance is better to them then Life, Psalm. 30.5. Psalm 4.6. They
greatly desire to see and know their glorious King arrayed with all his Royal
Robes, approaching and comeing near unto, and opening himself unto them; to
impart the secrets of his Love and Grace unto them, and thereby allure and draw
them unto himself. Psalm. 63.1.2. Cant. 4. ult. Psalm. 25.14.

Sixthly, A new Creature has all holy Spiritual passions and affections. The
natural man (you know) has many natural passions and affections, so the new
man has many Spiritual and heavenly passions and affections. The natural man
has many evil and sinful affections and passions, and the Spiritual man has
many divine and holy affections and passions. I shall name some, and but a few
of them.

1. Love. As Regeneration makes men lovely, acceptable and desirable to God,
Men and Angels, Ezekiel. 16. so it makes them exceeding loveing and affectionate
men, to God and men. Before regeneration they are Self-lovers, Sin-lovers, and
World-lovers, but by the new Nature and Spirit they have received from Heaven,
they are no more such, but God-lovers, Christ-lovers, Grace-lovers,
Duty-lovers, and Saint-lovers. Now they have new affections for new objects and
matters. They have operating Affections to and for God. They single out God,
Christ, and Holiness: they choose and single out from other objects and things,
the Grace and Spirit, the Laws, Promises, People, and Ordinances of Christ, for
their Love, and to set their strongest, warmest, and heavenly Affections upon.
The affections or passion of love in them, is stirred, Moved, Warmed, and
Enflamed by the Love of God, the Grace and Loveliness of Christ, that is
declared and represented to them in and by the Gospel. Oh how does this passion
sometimes work and act in them toward these objects and things. It is so full
as that they are not able to vent or express it, especially when Christ appears
to them, and puts in his hand (as it were) by the hole of the door (the heart)
as that they can but sigh and sob, cry and weep out a little of this strong and
working affection. This did Mary Magdalen, Luke 7.38. she stood at his Feet
weeping, and washed the feet of Christ with her Tears: but what was the ground
of her so doing? see Verse 47. why it was her ardent love and affection to
Christ: she did so, for she loved much, namely Christ. Oh! what a strong
passion of love was she in. How did her Affection work toward Christ? so
likewise did Peter's too, Joh. 12. Lord (says he) thou know that I love
thee; but how much or how strong his love and affection to Christ was, he could
not express: David also gives us another Testimony of it, Psalm. 119.97. Oh! how
I Love thy Law: and elsewhere (says he) I love them exceedingly. I do love
them with a greater and more affectionate love than I can express; and so was
his love moved and drawn out to good men, Psalm. 16.3.

2. Hatred. These are opposite and contrary passions in men, namely, Love and
Hatred. In our unregenerate States we do Love what we should hate, and hate
what we should Love. We Love Gods enemies, and hate his friends; we hate his
Laws, Rods, Yoke, Ways, and People, and love our Lusts, the World, Self, and
the Service of sin. But Regeneration sets holy and God Pleasing Love and hatred
in us. So that now, by the power of his Regenerating Grace; we love that which
we should love, and hate that we should hate; that which was our duty to have
done before, now we can do. Now we can and do love holiness, and hate, loath,
and abhor our lusts and sins. Now we hate the works of the flesh, and love the
works of the Spirit. And as the passion of love is strong and intense on its
Objects, so is this of hatred likewise. The man in whom this new holy hatred
is, did never more really, heartily, and fervently love his lusts, and the
fulfilling of them, than he does now hate, abominate, and endeavor to destroy
them, 1. Cor. 9. ult. Gal. 5.24. They that are Christ's (namely, by
Regeneration) have Crucified the flesh with the Affections and Lusts. David
tells us, that this Affection or Passion was strong in him, as well as that of
love, Psalm. 119.104.113. I hate every false way; and I hate vain thoughts, but
thy Law do I love. Blessed Paul Speaks likewise to the same purpose of himself,
Romans 7.15. But what I hate, that do I. I do sin, its true; But I can say, that
my sin is the great and only Object of my hatred, that is as true also. God
hates all Iniquity in all men, Psalm. 45.8. Ja. 44.4. and he puts the same
Affection or passion into his people in Regeneration, that they may hate it
also. All sin is exceeding sinful, loathsome, and abominable to the new
creature for its own sake, in its own nature, and as it is hateful to God. The
evil and pernicious effects and Consequences of it makes or renders it the
object of their constant hatred also. They that are Spiritual minded, and are
in the pursuit after Grace, Christ, and Holiness, to perfect it is the fear of
God, as Commanded, 2. Cor. 7.1. do hate their sin, because it has deprived
them of, and spotted the Image of God, in which they were created, Genesis 1.26.
(2) Because it has robbed God of his due Worship and Service for which he
Created them. (3) Because it has occasioned the great debasement and Suffering
of the Lord Jesus. For had not men Sinned, Christ had not Suffered. (4) Because
it grieves and vexes the holy Spirit of God, Isa. 63. Ephesians: 4.30. (5) Because
sin devides and separates between God and them, Isa. 59.1.2. (6) Because it
does defile and pollute all their holy things, and would quite mar and spoil
them, did not their great High Priest appear for them to purify their
Offerings, Exodus 28.38. (7) Because Sin does clog and burden them, so as that
they cannot Run their Race, nor do that good they desire, and are resolved to
do in this world, Heb. 12.1. Romans 7. (8) Because their sinful hearts draw them
off from God, and indisposes them to, and for their walking with God. (9)
Because it betrays them into the hand of their great Adversary the Devil, and
strengthens him against them. (10) Because by sin God is dishonored, and his
holy Name blasphemed, his Truths despised, and his blessed ways rejected. These
and such like considerations of sin, greatly provokes and stirs up the holy
hatred of sin in all Regenerate men, as they can experience. There is in them a
universal, perpetual, and irreconcilable hatred of all sin, especially such of
their own sins as do more easily beset them, Heb. 12.1. They hate the very name
and appearance of sin; all the Germents spotted with the flesh, Jude 23. They
dare not knowingly parley, or hold correspondency with sin, because the thought
or consideration of it is most hateful and abominable.

3. Fear. New Creatures are the only real fearers of God. The all-seeing Eye,
the Holiness, Righteousness, Goodness, and Authority of God, do awe them, and
cause them to fear and tremble before him, Hosea 3.5. Isa. 66.1.2. Jer. 32.39,
40. They do now approach nigh to God, and worship him with a holy and Godly
fear, and are enabled to walk in the fear of the Lord all the day long, Psalm.
2.11. Heb. 12.28. Prove. 23.17. They are afraid of sin, and temptations to it,
and dare not knowingly and deliberately come nean them, but avoid and eschew
the appearances and occasions of evil. They are more afraid of the cause, then
the effects; the sin, then the punishment. The thoughts of their danger they
are always in, and their aptness and proneness to transgress, by reason of the
deceitfulness and treachery of their hearts, the strength and power of Lusts,
snares of the World, and Satan's fi^ (...) Darts, do make them jealous, fearful,
circumspect, and watchful. They see such a Majesty, Excellency, and glorious
Presence in the holy God, and Jesus Christ, in his Names, Offices, Obedience,
Blood, Love, and Grace: in his Laws, Promises, Ways, and Ordinances, which
causes them to fear and reverence them erceedingly, Psalm. 89.7.

4. Hope. Hope is another holy Passion or Affection in the New Creature. Their
hope is set on God the Father, and Christ his Son, Psalm. 78.7. Tit. 2.13. and
on all the good things held out to them in the Promises, called the blessed
Hope, Tit. 2.13. They have Christ in them, the hope of Glory, Col. 1.27. and
they have Christ without them, with all his fullness, in the Covenant and
Promises, and in Heaven for them, as their hope. Every man has the natural
passion of hope, but gracious men have the spiritual hope. They hope for all
the good of the covenant of grace, fullness of Christ's Grace, and whatever may
make them holy hear and happy hereafter. The natural hope of unregenerate men
is a groundless hope, and the great things it is exercised about, are but vain,
perishing, worldly things, and groundless hopes for a happiness heareafter.
Job. 8.13.14 hence they are said to be with^^^ hope in the world, because they
want the real, spiritual, and well grounded hope, Ephesians. 2.12 1 These. 4.13. But
Regenerate men have a holy, spiritual, and well grounded hope; and they by out
and cast the Anchor of their hope on ^^^ings that are sure, and unmovable; on
spiritual, heavenly, Soul-saving and eternal mat^^s, and their hope is
impressed, provoked, ^^eng thened and quickened by them, to hope more strongly,
steadily and constantly for the enjoyment of them. They hope to obtain eternal
Life in the Lords own way; Tit. 1.2. not in the ways of their own evil hearts,
as other men do. They hope for the coming of Christ, the exaltation and setting
up of his Kingdom, themselves to be like him, and to see (...) as be is, 1 John 3.2.3. Tit. 2.13. They hope for more light, life, and holiness from
Christ, and for greater measures of his Spirit to be poured out upon them in
this world; and they hope for more and more joy and peace in Believing, Romans
15.13. That they may greatly rejoice in hope of the Glory of God, 1 Romans 5.2.
and for that glorious resurrection that is promised. To this hope they are
called in their Regeneration, Ephesians. 1.18.44. and this is one of the fruits of
the spirit in their hearts, ever after.

5. Joy. Joy is another holy passion in good men. There is the natural passion
of joy in all men, and there is the Spiritual passion of joy in Regenerate men.
There is the object or matter of joy, and there is the joy it self, and also
the faculty or subject of joy. The object or matters of joy and rejoicing to
good men are Christ, Grace, and heavenly things, Phill. 3.1.3. Phil. 44. Psalm.
4.4. Psalm. 32. ult. (2) the joy its self which flows forth from these objects
or matters of joy into their hearts. For experience shows, that sometimes the
objects of joy are shut up and yield no joy at all to us when we do eye and
mind them, and would fain draw it out of them, but they are like Clouds that
give down no rain at all sometimes, or as a Fountain shut up (...) sealed,
Cant. 4.12. But at other times they are opened to us, and then the joy of the
Lord refreshes and chears, strengthens and warmes our Souls. This is given us
of God the Father, Christ and the holy Spirit, as a special expression of his
Love and Grace to us. The objects of joy will not afford it until he give it,
or command them to hand it out to us, Psalm. 133.3. Romans 14.17. Romans 15.13.
Gall. 5.22. Joh. 14. Job. 15.11. Joh. 6.20. (3) There is the faculty or subject
of joy, that is, that which is only capable of receiving the impressions of
the joy of the Lord in the Soul, and improving it aright. This is that we call
the affection or passion of joy, and this is given to men namely, as it is a
Spiritual or new passion in Regeneration. For thereby God makes them subjects
capable of receiving and rightly embracing, valuing, and useing the heavenly
joy he intends for, and has promised to give unto them, in their walking with
him in their Regenerate states. Now they can and do rejoice in Christ Jesus,
Phill. 3.3. in his love and Grace, and in his will and their duty, Romans 7.22.
Psalm. 40. now they praise God with joyful lips, Psalm. 63.5. and shout for joy
of heart, Psalm. 32. ult. Now they rejoice and work righteousness, and walk on
in their way rejoicing, Acts 8.39. Isa. 64.5. Their hearts are full of great
and unspeakable joy, at some seasons, so as that their Vessels can now hold no
more, 1 Pet. 1.8. With this Holy Joy in their hearts, they can run, and not be
weary, walk, and not faint, Isa. 40. ult. Neh. 8.10.

6. Sorrow. This is in a sense a contrary passion or affection to that of Joy.
There is a natural and carnal sorrow, and a holy and spiritual sorrow, or grief
of heart; the first is common to all men, the second is only found in
Regenerate men. Sorrow in a natural sense is an evil, but in a spiritual sense
it is a good passion. Joy and sorrow are strong and vehement working passions
in men, when strongly impressed, and deeply affected with real or supposed evil
or good. There is a worldly, and there is a godly sorrow, 2 Cor. 7.10.
Regeneration brings into, and sets up the godly sorrow in men, and thereby they
are enabled to sorrow after a godly manner, 2 Cor. 7.9. This passion is moved
and impressed, and the acts of godly sorrow are produced by several, and these
different objects and matters. First their own lusts, sins, and God-provoking
abominations, their vileness and filthiness, and their former contempts of
Christ, and despising, slighting, and rejecting his Love, Grace, Yoke, Promises
and Kindnesses. These, and many other evils, and the serious thoughts and
considerations of them, do break and wound their hearts, and cause much inward
grief, anguish, and sorrow of heart, and make them cry out, unclean, unclean,
what shall we do, or how shall we appear before the holy and righteous God,
Acts 2.35, 36, 37, Acts 16. This causes them to sigh and mourn, and erercise
revengeful thoughts against themselves, and to take indignation of themselves,
condemn, abhor, and loath themselves, Ezekiel. 36.31. 2 Cor. 7.11. And secondly,
the serious thoughts and considerations of the God, Christ, Grace, Love and
Kindness they have sinned against: They see, know, and lay to heart who they
have grieved, wounded, and dishonored, namely, their God who had thoughts of
love and peace for them, when they were in their blood, Ezekiel. 16. Jer. 29. They
hope they had an interest in his heart, and that he loved them before they
loved God; yea, when they hated him, and would have none of his counsel, 1 John
4.19. Pro. 1. They likewise see and consider the great Love and Grace of
Christ, and what great things he has done and suffered for them, to sa^^ them
from the wrath that is to come, 1 These. 1. ult. The thoughts of the exceeding
great patience and long-suffering of God toward them, his pitying them, and
waiting on and for them, that he might be gracious to them, Isa. 30.18. Romans
2.4, 5. Romans 10. ult. his standing at the door and knocking for them, to have
admission into their hearts, Rev. 3.20. and how willing and importunate he was
to be at peace and in friendship with them; how basely and unworthily they
carried themselves toward him, and how they turned a deaf ear to his Calls and
Invitations, and made him wait so long for their acceptance of him, even until
his Locks were wet with the dew of the right, Cant. 5. This works grief, and
raises great sorrow in their hearts. So when they consider how their sins have
stabbed and murdered the Lord Jesus, and put him to open shame, Heb. 6 6. how
they pulled down the wrath and Curse of God on him, Gal. 3.12. and how he
poured out sighs, tears, yea, his precious Blood and Soul for them, Isa. 53.
and likewise how their sins were imputed to, and laid on him, and how he was
Crucified and killed for them, and all to save them, and instate them in his
own Glory and Eternal Blessedness, 2 Cor. 5. ult. Joh. 10. Joh. 17. and how
ungratefully they have demeaned themselves to him. Oh! how does this work on
them? how do these things irritate, and cause sorrow and bitterness of Soul in
them? Now they can indeed look on him whom they have pierced, and mourn, and be
in real bitterness of Soul, as for their Firstborn, Zach. 12.10. These, and
many other things, (which I cannot now mention) do greatly melt them, and
provoke holy Sorrow, and Repentance unto Life; for as Christ his Love, Grace,
and Sufferings, do work on their passion of Joy, irritates and provokes it, so
they do work on, and cause much sorrow and grief of heart (through the helps of
the Spirit) likewise. The same objects and matters do work savingly and
effectually on both, namely, to cause joy and sorrow in the same New Creature.
These are some of the holy, spiritual affections and passions, which are formed
in the Soul in Regeneration; and if you are indeed Regenerate persons, you can
(in some degree) experience them in your hearts; therefore try and examine your
selves by them, if you are in a Regenerate state and condition.

Seventhly, The New Creature is full of spiritual and heavenly desires after
Divine Matters and Concernments, Isa. 26.8. Psalm. 10.17. 2 Chronicles. 15.15. Pro.
11.23. Unregenerate men are full of carnal worldly desires, Ephesians. 2.3. of which
they make their boast, Psalm. 10.3. But the New Creatures heart is full of
spiritual desires; their desires are ascending, not descending; they came from
Heaven, and like Fire, they do naturally bend and ascend thither from whence
they came; they greatly desire to be holy and conformable in heart and life to
the Will of God; they greatly desire to know and see Jesus Christ, and to have
intimate and constant Communion with him, Psalm. 63.1, 2. Exodus 33. They that
are Regenerated, desire the death and destruction of all their Lusts, and the
thorough cleansing of their hearts of all sin, Psalm. 51. Romans 7. They desire to
love God as he is to be loved, to fear him as he is to be feared, to trust him
as he is to be trusted, to serve and please him as he ought to be served and
pleased, and to honor and glorify him as he ought to be honored and
glorified. They desire that Christ may rule in their hearts, and that he will
pull down all his Enemies there, that so he may Reign alone, so as that they
may not serve sin, or carnal Self any more; they defire to have their hearts
always in Heaven, and to be spiritually-minded continually; they desire the
coming of Christ, and that his Kingdom may be established above the tops of the
Mountains, and be exalted above the Hills, Isa. 2.2, 3. Rev. 22. ult. They
desire that his Name may be great among the Gentiles, and find acceptance among
the Jews. They desire that the Gospel may run and be glorified, and find
acceptance among all sorts of men; and they desire to see a great Spirit of
Humility, Zeal, and Gospel-Holiness, upon Professors of the good ways of Jesus
Christ. In a word, they desire whatever God tells them he desires of, or for
them. Does God desire them to be holy in all manner of Conversation, and to be
fruitful in every good work; why, they desire the same too? Does God will and
desire that they should love the Brethren, 1 Pet. 1.22. be good and charitable
to the poor, simpathize with, and help them in their afflictions, Mat. 25. why,
they desire the same also? Would God have them single and sincere hearted to
himself, and all men, and do to all men as they would have them do to
themselves, why, they do will and desire the same likewise? Would God have them
seek his glory in all their ways, watch and guard their hearts; render good for
evil, be in his fear all the day long, Pro. 23.17. not depart from God, but
give him their hearts, walk with him, and perfect holiness in his fear, 2 Cor.
7.1. why, the same they greatly will and desire also. So that as Daniel was
said to be a man of desires, Dan. 9.23. (margin) so all Regenerate persons, are
men of desires. They are fuller of heavenly desires after divine things, than
of all other good things. They desire to have what they cannot get, as yet, and
to do that which they cannot do. But they are (as it were) made up of desires
after the doing and obtainment of them. Regenerate men's desires are good and
great desires; they show what a man is, and by them they may know their States,
whether they be Regenerate or unregenerate persons. If the desires of a man be
wholly or mostly after the things of the flesh, there is a carnal man: if after
holiness, Christ and heavenly things, there is a Spiritual man indeed; For as
the flood of thy desires are, so art thou, Performanes are short, but desires
are long, obtainments are few, but desires are many in all real Regenerate
persons. To will and desire they find, when they find not how to perform and
act their desires.

Eighthly, New Creatures, or Regenerate Persons, are born to, and employed in
great, special, and peculiar works and services; namely, such as other men, and
they themselves were strangers to before. They loathed the very names of them,
and would by no means be persuaded to mind or consider them before. But now
they are their works, their chosen, desired, loved, and highly esteemed works
and services. They are their acceptable and most delightful works now, because
they are the works of God, and for God their Father; and also because their
hearts and Souls are by the Grace of Regeneration suited to them. The Laws of
them are written in their hearts, and in all the faculties of their Souls, Jer.
3.33. Heb. 8.10. Heb. 10.16. so that they are natural, to and in them. Now all
natural works or actions, are pleasant and delightful to men; and so are New
Creatures acts, works, and services, to them. I delight to do thy will, O God,
(says David) how so? why, the Law of God was written in his heart, Psalm. 40.8.
Heb. 10. so Paul, Romans 7.22. They are born to and for them, and they are
created with and in them, Ephesians. 2.10. For we are his work-manship, Created in
Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has ordained, that we should walk in
them; so Romans 7.4.6. First, they were Elected, Chosen, and Ordained to and for
them, Ephesians. 2.10. Ephesians. 1.4. 1 Pet. 2.9.2. we are Redeemed to and for them, Tit.
2.14. 1 Pet. 2.9. 2 Cor. 14.15. (3) we are called and Regenerated to and for
them. 1 Pet. 1.15. 1 Pet. 2.9. Ephesians: 2.10. They are by Election, Redemption, and
Regeneration, made a Special and peculiar People unto God, and for holy and
special works: in which works and Services they are ever exercised after their
Regeneration. God ever imploys them, and they walk and exercise themselves in
them, as their great Trade and business, Phil: 3.20. These Special and
peculiar works and Services of Regenerate men, are many. I shall name but a few
of them to you at this time.

They are Born again, as with the Love of God in their hearts, so to Love God
withal their heart, all their days, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Romans 5.5. This is their care,
work and exercise; and that not only to love God simply, but to love him
Sincerly, Heartily, Strongly, Purely. Fervently, and Constantly and Obediently.
To love God as God, and as their God, as their great and everlasting, and as
their Gracious, Kind, and Loving God; to love him in the Superlative degree, as
their chiefest and only good. This work they love and delight in; they contrive
and project it, study and endeavor to do it as they ought, and this they
resolve on, and use all means to obtain it. They charg their hearts with it,
and lay bonds on themselves to do it, Psalm: 18.1. Psalm. 116.1. Cant. 1.4. They
use Gods means to help and enable them to do it. They read, hear, and
Contemplate; they meditate on, consider and apply to themselves the great love
of God to them, and his exceeding great Loveliness, to stir up and inflame
their love to him again. They pray importunately and frequently to him, to
shed abroad more of his love into their hearts, and to reveal himself in his
Love and Grace unto their Souls, that they may thereby be quickened, moved, and
enabled to love him more Cordially and ardently. They are so set upon it, and
so greedy after it, and they do so desire and covet it, as that they are never
satisfied with the degree and exercise of their love to God: But are
unregenerate men employed so in this work; no not in the least, For they have
not the love of God in their hearts, Joh. 5.42. Their hearts are not
circumcised to love God, because they are not Regenerated, neither do they love
or desire to have it so; for when God proffers them his Spirit to do it, they
refuse and reject him, and will not have him to concern himself with them in
that matter, Pro. 1.23.24. Isa. 63. Genesis 6. Well then, try your selves by this;
what can you say to it? Is this special work of Regenerate men your work, or is
it not? Be you sure of it, that if you be Regenerated, or born again, it is
your work and business? But if it be not, you are yet in your old and
unregenerate states.

2. They are exercised and employed about the good work, of searching out their
own iniquities, and to find out the Plagues, Errors, and deceits of their own
hearts and ways, that they may repent of their sins, and mend what they find
amiss. To reform what ought to be reformed, and to remove whatever is hurtful
to their Souls, or displeasing to God; that they may see more cause of
Self-abasement, and be excited and provoked to walk more circumspectly and
humbly with their God, Micah 6.8. Ephesians. 5.15. This is not the work that
Regenerate men are exercised about; no, but on the contrary, they labor to
hide their sins, Pro. 28.13. Joh. 3.20. and to live in continual ignorance of
their hearts, states, and ways, that so they may live in peace and quietness at
home, and not be troubled at the sight of them. They love and delight in their
iniquities, and they work and practice what they love, Psalm. 62.4. Isa. 66.3.
They let their own sins alone, they neither desire nor endeavor to know them,
but they are (especially some of them) great enquirers after, and searchers
into others transgressions; which clearly demonstrates, that whatever they do
profess to be, yet they are hypocrites, Psalm. 64.6. Mark 32. Luke 6.7. Luke
20.20. Greater and more certain sign of a Hypocrite cannot be found than this,
namely, for a man that professes godliness, to be willingly ignorant of his own
state and sins, and to be a Pryer and Searcher into other men's, without a clear
Call from God so to do. This the Hypocrites deal with Christ and Paul, that
they might find occasion to Charge, Censure, and Judge them, as the aforesaid
Scriptures show, and in 2 Cor. 11.12. But it is otherwise with Regenerate men;
they hate and abhor that filthy odious wickedness of others, and make it one
part of their business to know themselves, and the evils of their own hearts
and ways, Job 13.23. Psalm. 77.6. 1 Samuel 21.1. They cry and pray, they call and
wait on God to show them all their lusts and sins, such is the desire and
fervency of their hearts in this matter, Job 34.32. This is their work, and
this they do conscientiously, seriously, fervently, heartily, and frequently;
and that as their duty, work, and business, in all states, trials, and
conditions whatsoever: For they are jealous and suspicious, not of others, but
of their own deceitful hearts. Thus they do; and when they have made any new
discovery of their sins, they bless God for their success; and then they fall
to another work.

3. To subdue and mortify such unmortified Lusts as they find in their hearts,
to purify themselves, and rectify such errors and mistakes, as upon search
do appear and come to light. This they are enjoined to do as their duty, and
this they do exercise and employ themselves in, in obedience to the Will of
God, because it is his Holy Will, Col. 3.5. Mortify therefore your members, 2
Cor. 7.1. Let us cleanse our selves of all filthiness of flesh and spirit. And
the Gospel assures us, that this is the work and business of the Children of
God. In 1 John 3.1-3. Behold (says the Apostle) what manner of love is this,
that we should be called the Children of God. This is a great and high
privilege indeed. Well, but what are they employed about, and exercised in? Is
it in making provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, as
unregenerate men do? Romans 13. ult. no, but the clean contrary; namely, to
purify themselves, 1 John 3.3. Every man that has this hope in him, purifies
himself, even as he is pure. The like we have mentioned, Gal. 5.24. And they
that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts. That
is, they have not fully done and effected it, but they are seriously,
diligently, and sincerely employing and exercising themselves in and about that
work and great concern of theirs.

This is another of their peculiar and special works, and this they do and
prosecute with servent prayer to God, Psalm. 51.7. O purge and wash me, that I
may be clean: And O wretched man that I am (says Paul) who shall deliver me
from the body of this death? Romans 7.24. And as they pray for it frequently and
fervently, so they do meditate on, and apply the Blood and Death of Christ to
themselves, for the effecting of it, and that as Gods Ordinance and appointment
for that end, Tit. 2.14. Who gave himself to redeem us from all iniquity, and
to purify unto himself a peculiar people. They apply themselves unto, and use
all Gods means for the accomplishment of it; as Fasting, the Lords Supper, and
hearing the Gospel preached, which God has appointed to mortify their lusts,
and to purify and clean their hearts, Ephesians. 5.25, 26. John 15.3. John 17.17.
Every word of God is pure; and the sincere preaching and hearing of it, is a
powerful means to kill our lusts, and purify our hearts, when heard and
received in Faith for that end, as Gods Ordinance, Acts 15.9. Heb. 4.2. This
they know, and therefore they use them, or for that end and purpose, as well as
for light and comfort.

But what is the work and business of unregenerate men, or what do they in this
matter? Truly nothing at all; They do neither understand, or like it; but are
perfect strangers and enemies to it; there is no principle in them to do it
withal, neither do they desire there should be; their minds and thoughts are
wholly taken up about making provision for their Pride, Covetousness, Carnal
Security, Vain Glory, Good Opinion of themselves, and other filthy Lusts: and
they make themselves their Drudges, and humble servants, Romans 13. ult. And
hence they are said to serve sin, Romans 6.6.17.20. But new Creatures know and
account their Lusts their greatest Enemies, and prosecute them with implacuble
enmity and hatred. They know either they must destroy their Lusts, or they will
destroy them. They know that they have trucifyed the Son of God, and put him to
open shame; and they know that they have greatly wronged their own Souls, Pro.
8. ult. And therefore they will give them no Quarter, but stab them to the
heart, whatever it cost them to do it.

4. Watching. They are called to, and employed in the work of watching and
guarding themselves, against all their enemies. This is another of their
Special and peculiar works and businesses. It is spetial and peculiar to new or
regenerate men, (though it is the duty of all men) yet none but they are
conscientiously, and dutifully employing and exercising themselves in it. But
good men are, 1 John 5.18. But he that is begotten of God, keeps himself.
That is, they do watch, a^me, and guard themselves, so David did, Psalm. 102.7.
Psalm. 130.6. and the Scripture makes it one of the Special properties of good
servants, as well as their works; Habak. 2.1. which Christ pronounces Blessed,
Revel. 16.15. 2 Cor. 11.27. Luke 12.37. Regenerate men are beset with enemies,
which watch their opportunities to assault and betray them, and that they know.
They know that Satan watches them, and Lusts watch, and the world watches to
hurt and mischief their Souls, and therefore they watch them, and prepare
against them. It is true, that good men are apt to be too negligent in this
duty, and need stirings up to it, and it is as true, that they do ordinarily
practice this duty and work. They are moved to it (1) by the will and command
of God. God requires them to watch and guard themselves, Mark 13.33, 34, 37.
(1) Their own hearts, Pro. 4.23. Keep thy heart with all diligence. (2) the
Devil, 1 Pet. 5.8. Be Sober, be Vigilant, for your adversary the Devil as a
Roaring Lion, walks about, seeking whom he may devour. (3) The World, Luke
21.34.36. (4) To watch unto prayer and all other duties, Col. 4. and Acts
20.31. (1) The Calls to, and opportunities for them, that through heedlesness
and inadvertency we let them not slip away from us, without embracing and
improving them to the Glory of God and our Souls profit, or advantage of
others. (2) That we may close in, and join Issues with God and his designs in
giving them to us, and that in the time and season of them, and that freely and
readily. (2) They are moved to a fervent attendance on this work and duty, by
and from their dangers. They are in continual danger of assaults and
surprizalls from them, and therefore they must be always upon their watch; to
prevent their designs, discover their plots, and foyl them in their Attempts.
(3) From their own security and comfort, they are moved to this work. It is
easier keeping an Enemy out of the Garrison of the heart, then dealing with, and
driving him out ^hen admitted in. Their own (as well as Christ's) honor, safety
and happiness, is much concerned in their so doing. God has (1) committed
themselves to their own keeping, and given them the care and charge of
themselves, 1 John 5.21. Pro. 4.23. Jam. 1. ult. It Is true ^^at God does watch
over and keep them in especially manner also, Isa. 27.3. 1 Pet. ^5. and that
when they are most careful to ^eep themselves (2) God has entrusted them with
power, light, will, and abilities to keep themselves; and in their doing of it,
in obedience to his will, he has promised to keep and secure them from Sin and
danger likewise, 1 Pet. 5.7.2. Tim. 4.18. They watch and keep themselves
dutifully, in order to their safety; and God keeps and watches them powerfully
and effectually, so as that the s^es of Hell, shall not prevail against them,
Math. 16.18. But they cannot so keep and secure themselves, with their utmost
diligence. This I say is the work and employment of regenerate persons; they,
and they only, live in the practice of it. Unregenerate persons do no way
concern themselves in this great and special work. They know it not, they love
it not, neither have they hearts to do it withal. They think it a work of
supererogation, and that such as are busied about it, are more strict and
precise than they should be. They fear neither God, Sin, World, nor Devil,
neither are they sensible of the danger they are in of destruction; but go on
securely in the ways of their own hearts, and speak peace unto themselves,
presuming that no evil shall come to them.

5 They are employing and exercising themselves in worshipping God according to
his own will and Appointment: namely, to worship God in Spirit and Truth, and
that with his own worship. We are they (says Paul of himself and other Saints)
who worship God in Spirit, Psalm. 3.3. They are convinced that they must, and
that God will so be worshipped of them, Joh. 4.24. God is a Spirit, and they
that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and Truth. For this self-same
thing (though not only) does God Regenerate men, and thereby lays in, and sets
up a principle of divine worship in them, that so they may readily do it
according to the will of God. For (says Christ) the Father seeks such to
worship him, Joh. 4.23. that is, that the Father does by Christ's Gospel and the
holy Ghost, call and regenerate, teach and Spirit some to worship him. It is
their desire, choice, care, and study to draw nigh to God in all parts of his
worship with true hearts; Heb. 10.22. and to worship God sincerely and
Spiritually. To please and honor him; to sanctify his name and holy worship,
and to give unto the Lord the hon^^^ due unto his name, to comply with his holy
will and ends, to make his praise glorious, Psalm. 29.1. 2. Psalm. 66.2. This is
also one of their high and noble works, holy and Spiritual employments, and
that wherein their Souls delight, to this they are called; for this they are
(in part) fitted and qualified in their Regeneration, and this is their work
and business ever ^^er. Thus it is with you, and so is your ^ractice, if you
are Regenerated. Unregene^^te men are strangers and adversaries to this
peculiar work and duty of new Creatures; they know it not, they do it not,
neither con^^rn themselves with it. They take up in, and are satisfied with the
Letter without the Spirit, with the form without the Truth, and ^^er of
Godliness, and they imagine that they have done God good service, when they
have spent some time in external duties and ordi^ances, without the great and
only necessary things, that God requires in them. But good men cry, watch and
pray, and do all they can to worship God in Spirit and Truth, from their new
Natures Root and spring within, and the holy Ghost his assistance; and without
this they cannot be satisfied. This is the mark they have in their Eye, in all
their addresses to God.

6 Trusting in, and liveing on Christ. This is a special and peculiar work and
duty, which none can do but new Creatures. But it is their work and business, 2
Cor. 5.7. Heb. 10 38. R^^. 1.17. It is a duty that lies with power in their
hearts, and it is of great account in their Souls. They are commanded to live by
faith, and make God their only Trust, and in obedience thereunto they do it,
Isa. 26.4. Psalm. 37.3.5. 1 Pet. 5.7. Psalm. 62.8. They are called to live the
life of faith and pure dependence on God for all things, and they are furnished
with abilities so to do. The faith of Christ is written in their hearts, and
they have a kind of a natural Genious and disposition to it. Thus we find
Abraham, David, Paul, and other Saints of God had and did. It is a Li^^ far
above and beyond the reach of nature and natural Reason, and God works some to
and for it by his Grace in Regeneration, and presents unto them suitable
grounds and objects, for their faith to rest and live upon; as his bonds or
promises; his covenant and oath, his truth and faithfulness, and his all
sufficiency and immutability. God presents to them his S^^s blood, Death and
Resurrection, his natures and offices, his intercession and potency with God,
to prevail for them in Heaven, and procure mercies for them, and the fullness
of Christ, as furnished and filled with all Grace for them. And upon these
grounds and objects they re^^ and bear themselves. There they fly for Refuge,
Pro. 18.10. and there, and on them they live, and wait for all supplies of
Grace, Phill. 4.19. And that when the Figtree does (...) blossom, nor any
herds are in the stall, Habuck. 3.17, 18, 19. For what ever God has promised
to his people, they claim a share in, and can trust him to give it to them in
his own time and way. To instance in some particulars. (1) God has promised to
pardon them, Isa. 55.^. they can and do believe him, and rest upon his for it.
(2) Has God promised to give Repentance, they can believe and trust him. (3)
To heal their Backslidings, and love them freely, Hose^ 14.4. They can believe
and trust him. (4) To pour out more of the spirit, and abundance (...) grace,
Acts. 2. Joh. 10. they can trust him. (...) Has God promised to give grace and
^^y, and to supply all their wants, Psalm. 84.11. ^^on. 4.8. and never to leave
them nor forsake (...), Heb. 13.5. they can and do believe and ^^st him. (6)
Has God promised to subdue (...) Lusts and sanctify their hearts, Ezekiel. 36.25.
(...). Micah. 7.18.19. they can and do believe and trust him. (7) Has God
promised to hear ^eir prayers, Psalm. 50.15. Help their infirmitites, (...).
8.26. Accept their offerings, Isa. 56.7. ^eward their Services, 2 Cron. 15.7.
and to ^^ep them by his power through faith unto salvati^^; 1 Pet 1.5. they can
and do believe and trust him upon his word. They do commit ^eir all to, and
leave their all with him, and are ^^isfied in their so doing. They believe all
is ^afe and sure that is entrusted in his hand, and glad they are that they
have themselves and their all in his custody. It is true they have their fits
of unbelief, and do too often distrust God, and in measure let go their Anchor
hold; but they recover themselves, and what they ^ave lost again, when the
Tempest is over, and they are in a Calm. It is one of their great works and
employments, notwithstanding to trust God, and live the life of faith, and that
upon choice, and with their whole desire; and in the general course of their
Lives, they are enabled by Grace to reach and live it, whate^er oppositions are
in their way. Therefore it is, that they are called Believers and Trusters of
God, by the holy Ghost in Scripture, namely, because it is their proper Life to
which they are called in Regeneration, and that which they do choose and
endeavor to Live: But unregenerate persons do not live this Life at all. They
have no acquaintance with it, neither know they what it means, experimentally,
but only upon hearsay, they are not regenerated, and therefore are still in a
state of unbelief and impenitency. They have no living faith at all, neither do
they heartily desire it. They are called unbelievers, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15. Revel.
21.8. because they have no special faith to trust God withal, and do not live
the Life of faith.

7 They are called to, regenerated for, and exercised about all sorts of holy
duties and heavenly things. They live in Heaven and Trade in Heaven, Revel. 13,
6. Phil. 3, 20. In a word, their business is to acquaint themselves with their
Fathers and Husbands Laws, and their d^ties, and to love and obey them, with
their promises, and the good of them, that they may believe them, and hope upon
them, and to suck out the honey and sweetness of them, for their consolation and
peace; and to encourage them in their duty and walking with God; and they
acquaint themselves with their God and Savior, and the great things, of
another world. These are their good things, and they allure and draw their
minds and affections to them. In them, and the contemplation of them, do they
delight. They feel, taste, and see the Goodness of them, and are greatly
enamored with them. They have their hearts, and that causes them so much to
converse with them, and Trade in them and with them. They know it is their duty
to live and converse with them, because God has so commanded, Coll. 3.1.2.3.
and they do it in obedience thereunto. But that is not all the Reason of their
so doing, no, but they do it because these things and matters are their
Spiritual and everlasting Treasures. In them lies all their durable riches,
honor, comfort, and happiness. They are sweet to their taste, and pleasant to
the eye, and they are the only Good and Portion of their souls, Math. 6.21.
Coll. 2.3. They have nothing else to trust to, nor any thing besides that can
satisfy the wants and craving desires of their Souls. For these ends and
purposes are they born again, and set here in this world, and for these ends
and purposes are they kept and maintained, their hearts have chosen all; they
love all, and their desires and endeavors to go out after, to reach them all.
About them, their minds, judgments, understandings, consciences, wills,
affections, and their all are busied and employed, and that, as in and about
their own proper and constant work and business. But other men do wholly mind,
work, and employ themselves in other matters, not at all in these. They only
mind and follow the things of the Flesh, whilst others do mostly mind the
things of the Spirit, Romans 8.5.6. Phil. 3.19, 20. Regerate men do mostly mind
how to please God: Carnal men how to please them elves. Regenerate men do mind
and endeavor to honor the will of God and obey it: Carnal men do mind and
endeavor to know their carnal Interests, and obey the will of the flesh.
Regenerate men do live in Heaven, converse with, delight in, and set their
minds and affections on things above: Carnal men do only converse with, live
in, delight in, and set their minds and affections on things here below.
Regenerate men do mind and endeavor to be rich in grace and good works, Carnal
men how to get, and keep the good things of this world. Regenerate men do make
Religion their business: Carnal men do make sin their profits, and pleasures
their business: Regenerate men do live in the Spirit, and walk in and after the
Spirit: Carnal men do live in, and walk in the flesh, and the things thereof.
These are some of the many differences and contrarieties of regenerate and
unregenerate men, which have now been presented to you, to help you to try your
selves, and to make a right judgment of your states and conditions. Therefore,
do you prove and examine your selves by them, whether you are in a regenerate or
unregenerate state, yea or no. For as suredly, if you be regenerated and born
again, you may find many, if not all these marks and characters of regenerate
persons in and on you. You are indeed such persons (in measure) within and
without, in heart and life, as you have heard regenerate persons are. And know,
that if it be otherwise with you, and you care not to know or find such real
signs of regeneration in you, nor any other of like import; that then you
ought to fear and tremble, judge your selves, and conclude that you are (as
yet) in an unregenerate state and condition, and under the curse and wrath of
God. And if so, let me in the name of Christ, exhort and persuade you to go to
God the Father, in Christ his name; and tell him how it is with you. Fall down
before him; pray and beseech him to pity you, and give regenerating Grace; and
with all Importunity and Constancy cry to him, and wait for him, to come and
give you new hearts, stamp his Image and divine nature on you; and now with all
possible speed to convert and make you new Creatures indeed.

CHAP. V. Showing there are but few real Regenerate Persons among the
multitudes of Professors.
Q. THere are many great Professors of the Name and good ways of Jesus Christ
in the world, which are called Christians: May we think or judge them all
Regenerate persons? Are there many, or but few Regenerate persons? What shall
we judge of this matter, for all Professors do pretend to, and would have men
think them a singular and peculiar people; such as are in a good and happy
state and condition; in which they cannot be, except they are indeed
Regenerated.

Ans. That there are many great and high Professors of the holy Name, and good
ways of Jesus Christ, is certain; and that there are but few really Regenerate
persons among them, is as certain too. That they have the Name, and do own
themselves Christians, is also apparent; but that they are not such in Truth (I
mean the greater number) is clear and notorious, as will appear by and by. That
they do pretend to, and would have men think them to be (what they are not
indeed) namely, a singular and peculiar, and a happy people, is clear, and that
they are not so, or such as they pretend to be, is evident also. Now this I
shall (the Lord helping) prove and demonstrate to you, as well as I can, and I
am sure I have clear proof for what I say. That there are but a small number of
Regenerate persons in the world, Comparatively, or if compared to the number of
such as seem or profess to be such, I shall evince by many Scripture
Testimonies, Math. 7, 14. Because strait is the Gate, and narrow is the way
that leads to life, and few there be that find it. Mark it, few there be that
find it, namely, among, or of those that seek it, which the most of men do not.
They do not so much as seek to be Regenerated and saved in the Lords way. But
of them who do really (though not rightly) seek to enter in at the strait Gate:
I say, that such Professors shall not find it. This is further confirmed in
Luke 13, 24. Strive to enter in at the strait Gate, (says Christ) why, because
many shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able. Another testimony is in
Math. 20, 16. For many are called, but few are chosen: So Math. 22, 14. Christ
calls his People, A little Flock, fear not little Flock, (says Christ) to and
of his true Disciples, Lu^. 12, 32. And the Apostle Paul assures us; Romans 9,
27. That although the number of the Children of Israel be as the sand of the
Sea, a Remnant shall be saved. Now, who or what kind of men were they which are
so innumerable, and should not be saved were they the Heathenish world, such as
the Apostle says, Ephesians. 2.12. Are strangers, without hope, and without God in
the world: No, they were the Seed of Abraham, John 8, 37. To whom appertained
the Adoption, and the Glory, and the Covenants, and the giving of the Law, and
the service of God, and the Promises, Romans 9, 4. They were Jews by nature, and
not sinners of the Gentiles, of whom he speaks, that they should perish and be
damned. And yet there was amongst them a little flock, a small Remnant that
should be saved; but these were comparatively, very few. For what is a small
Remnant in number, compared with the innumerable sands of the Sea. God tells us
in, Jer. 3.14. That he will take one of a City, and two of a family, and bring
them to Sion. What is one or two to a City and Tribe, where were many
thousands? and yet you see these are the number of Regenerated and saved
persons. Thus you see the Truth Cleared and confirmed by many express
Scriptures. But I shall further prove and explain this Truth, namely, that
there are but a very few Regenerate men comparitively to the multitude of high
Professors, thus. First, the Scripture, or the holy God in his Word, shows us,
that there are but a few, a very small number that shall be saved (as was
showed) therefore there are but a few Regenerated; for all Regenerate persons
shall be saved, 1 Pet. 1, 3, 4, 5. The Lord Jesus that knows the number of them
to a man, having all their Names in the Book of Life, and calls them all by
their Names, Revel. 21, ult. Joh. 10, 3. tells us so, and he knows very well
what he says: He is the Truth its self, Joh. 14.6. and therefore cannot
deceive us, in and by what he speaks. We are taught this Doctrine by Christ,
and therefore we may and must believe it as a real Truth: He certainly knows
their persons, and number, though he keeps that to himself, as a secret not fit
for us to know. But although simply they are a great number, (no doubt on it)
yet if compared to the number or multiude of unregenerate Professors, they are
but a very small number. For (says the Lord Jesus) Many are called, but few are
chosen, Math. 23, 16. that is, many come to the Word and Ordinances of the
Gospel, and there they are called upon to come to Christ, and believe in him:
but they do not, will not come to him, nor accept him on his own terms, John
5.40. But why not, why will they not answer Christ's call, and come in on his
Invitation? why, because they are not chosen. To the same purpose he speaks in
John 10, 26. But ye believe not, because ye are not of my Sheep, as I said unto
you.

Secondly, This Truth is further evidenced by their general frames, walking,
and want af all those qualifications and Seize that all new Creatures or
Regenerate persons have. Regenerate men are Singular and peculiar men, Tit.
2.14. Caleb was a man of another Spirit and followed God fully; Numb. 14.24. he
was of a choice, singular and Peculiar Spirit; much above and different from
the Spirit of the Generality of the Congregation with whom he walked. So all
the Children of God are persons of another, namely, of a Choice, Singular and
Peculiar spirit. They differ as much from other men, as Gold from dross, Light
from darkness, and in some sense, as good from evil. Their frames of heart,
their qualifications and atttainments, and their carriages and walkings toward
God and men, are vastly different; for Regenerate men are men of other Spirits.
They are (1) knowing men: they see and discern Spiritual things Spiritually,
Ephesians. 1.18. 1. Cor. 2.12.13.14. They are Children of light, Ephesians. 5.8. But all
others are Children of darkness, Ephesians. 5.8. 1 Pet. 2.9. Now how few are their
Comparatively, that have the eyes of their understandings thus enlightened? how
few are their that see and understand the things of God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, with a Spiritual Judgment and discerning? Regenerate men, are men of
wisdom, Mica. 6.9. they have hidden wisdom of God and divine things in them, 1
Cor. 2.7. But how few Spiritually wise Professors of the Gospel are there to be
found? All other men are called fools in scripture, Pro. 1.7, 22, 32. Eccles.
5, 1. Ephesians. 5.15.

2. How few are there among the multitudes of Professors, that can indeed
experience a real Change of heart and State? many, very many are reformed and
have the outside changed, and that they think is Regeneration, when it is but a
Reformation of their own, not a work of God on their hearts, making them new
within, and changing their frame, habits and course. Nicedemus was a reformed,
but not a new man; his outside was clean, but his heart and Soul was
unsanctified and in darkness, and so were the Scribes and Pharisees too, Math.
23.26, 27, 28. and Paul was in the same plight and condition likewise, before
his conversation or Regeneration, Phil. 3.4, 5, 6. Acts 23.1. Concerning the
Law (says he) I was blamless; and I love walked in all good Conscience before
God ^unt (...) day.

3. How few are there that deny themselves, take (...) the cross of Christ and
follow him; without which day cannot be his disciples? Luke 14.26.27. (...)
there any Self-deniers amongst them, but (...) little flock, and small Remnant?
did not the ^^ng man in Luke 18. Stick at this, and here Christ and he parted?
and did not they in John (...) tell Christ, this was a hard saying, and
thereupon went away from him, and walked no more with him, Joh. 6.60.66. Peter
and the little ^ock came fully and freely up to his terms and continued with
him, 67.68.69. Verses. How few are there, but are Lovers of pleasures, more
th^n Lovers of God, 2 Timothy 3.4. that will deny themselves of any worldly,
carnal pleasures, profits, or Interests for Christ, Grace, and hosiness, or so
much as take any pains, be at any Costs, or deny themselves of any thing that
is near and dear unto them, to please, and ho^our Christ; to have communion
with and to be saved by him, in his own way?

4. How few are there that do seriously and in Good Earnest, seek and strive to
be saved, that take the kingdom of Heaven by a holy violence, or that ran so,
as if they were fully set and bent to ^in the prize and wear the Crown of life
and Righteousness? And yet all men and women that are Regenerated do, and all
that shall win the prize, wear the Crown and obtain Salvation by Christ must so
strive, run, and press into the kingdom of Heaven, Luke 13.24. Math. 11.12.1. 1
Cor. 9.24. Heb. 12.1. without which they shall not obtain them. When God
Regenerates men, he sets them a Running for an Incorruptible Crown; Striving to
be saved, and to take the kingdom by a kind of violence. But assuredly there
are but few professors who do so, and therefore there are but a small number
amongst them that are Regenerated. For were they such indeed, they would do all
they can in the Lords own way to win the Crown of Righteousness, in the true
way of Righteousness. They would do all they can, to run so as to obtain,
would most freely lay aside all other business to attend on this, and suffer
any thing rather than this Eternal concern should be neglected, as all truly
regenerate persons do, and cannot but do. They would not act and do like the
foolish Virgins, as the most do, namely, neglect to take Oil in their Vessels
with their Lamps, Math. 25. No, they would strive and labor night and day, to
get Grace into their hearts, as well as Light into their heads, as the Wise
Virgins did, and they would cry, and give God no rest, until they had wone the
Prize, and got the Crown of life on their heads.

5. There are but a few wounded and brokes hearted Professors, and few who are
indeed deeply and heartily sensible of their Misery and Sin, that do really see
and feel their pressing need, and absolute necessity of Christ, and change of
state; and therefore there are but a few Regenerate persons among Professors;
for all Regenerate Persons are deeply sensible of, affected, and afflicted with
their own deplorable states, and see an absolute necessity of Christ, and
interest in his Blood and Righteousness, as also a real change of their states,
Phil. 3.7, 8, 9. ^^e not the generality of Professors, whole, see not, and feel
not their sin and misery, nor any need of a Physician to heal and save them,
Mat. 3.12, 13. Revel. 3.17.

6. There are but a small number of Professors, (...) do indeed go out of
themselves and take up in Christ, or that have the faith to believe in him, to
(...) saving of their Souls, Heb. 10. ult. There are many (indeed) that have a
Faith, and pretend to believe in Christ so, John 8, 31. Acts 8. but very few
have that faith to do so in Truth, neither do they much, if at all, desire and
seek after such a Faith, but are pleased and satisfied well enough without it:
Oh! how few are there, who have the Faith of Gods Elect, and their precious
Faith, that do Believe through ^race, and have that Faith which purifies the
heart, and leads them forth, and carries them out of themselves to Christ, to
take up in him only, Tit. 1, 1. 2 Pet. 1, 1. Acts 15, 9, Acts 18, 27. This they
could and would do indeed, were they Regenerated, for (as has been showed) all
such as are Regenerated do so, in and by the light and power of Christ's grace
in Regeneration.

7. How few are there among the great multilades of professors that love God,
the Lord Jesus Christ, his Grace, Laws, People, and Gospel Obedience, ^^re, or
so much as they do their own Lusts, the world, and their own carnal profits,
pleasures and honors; Oh! how few are there that love our Lord Jesus Christ in
sincerity, Ephesians. 6. ult. and with their whole hearts, Math. 22.37. how few are
there to be found, that have their hearts circumcised to love the Lord, and
that have had the holy Ghost sheding abroad the love of God into their hearts,
as all regenerate persons have, Deuteronomy. 30.6. Romans 5.5. Is it not apparent that
the most of professors are strong and greedy, fervent and zealous Lovers of the
world and carnal self, 2 Timothy 3.2. men shall in the last days (says Paul) be
lovers of themselves, and of pleasures, more then God, Verse. 4. And is it not
really so now with the greater number of professors, which shows they are in an
unregenerate state and condition. For were they new Creatures indeed, they
would love God, Jesus Christ, and heavenly things, as the great and only
objects of their lovely delight, choice and complacency. All other things would
be to them, as they were to regenerate Paul: namely, di^^ and dung, in
comparison of Christ, Grace, Gospel-obedience, Holiness, Heaven and heavenly
things, Phil. 3.

8. How few are there, who have, or are about the great work of Crucifying the
flesh with the affections and lusts in good earnest; which were they ^ew
Creatures indeed, they would assuredly be much concerned in, and busying
themselves about, as one of their great and indispensible works and
businesses. For all regenerate persons are seriously exercising themselves in
this work, Gall. 5.24. they (...) purifying their hearts by faith, and
perfecting holiness in the fear of God, Acts. 15.9. 1 John 3.3. 2 Co. 7.1. But
so are not the Generality of professors: they are strangers, if not ene^ies to
this work. They are (as was said) in (...) with them; they are their joy and
de^ight, and who will seek and unfainedly endeavor to destroy them, they love,
deilght, and take pleasure in? These are only the works of regenerate men.

9. How few are there, who do unfainedly repent (...) their Sins, and mourn
night and day for their transgressions, are in real bitterness of soul, and
abase, Judge and condemn themselves; which if they were regenerated, they would
(...). They would humble themselves, be ashamed of themselves for uncovering
their nakedness and laying open their shame before God and men, and they would
repent in dust and Ashes withal their hearts and Souls, Job. 42.5.6. Izek.
36.31. For this is the New Creatures daily work. Regenerate men have that
berefit of Christ his Resurrection and Ascension as well as others, namely,
Repentance, Acts 5.31. and that great grant and fruit of the Covenant of Grace,
and the blood of it, Acts 11.18. Heb. 13.20. Repentance unto Life. By the power
of which they practice Repentance. They have it in their hearts, and act it in
their walkings. They mark and observe what they should be, and what Errors and
mistakes they are guilty of, mourn for it, and labor to mend them. But do the
multitude of professors do so? no, not in the least: they cast these things out
of all serious Consideration; it is a work they loath and wholly neglect. It is
too low and base business for them to mind or concern

10. How few are there among the multitudes of professors, who make it their
business to please and honor God; to fear and reverence him, and to worship
him in Spirit and Truth? This, or these matters would be strong and powerful on
their hearts and Souls, and they would labor to do it indeed, were they
regenerated. For all regenerate men have it so on their hearts, and they do
really aim at and endeavor it (as was before proved) Phill. 3.3. God has
wrought in them that which is well-pleasing in his sight, Heb. 13.21. and to
worship him in Spirit and Truth, Joh. 4.23. They are formed by Grace to honor
and magnify God, and to make it their work and business, Isa. 43.21. and are
created in Christ Jesus unto this and all other good works, Ephesians. 2.10. They are
renewed in knowledge to understand them, and with power and will to do them,
Coll. 3.10. Phil. 2.13. Psalm. 110.3. But where are such persons to be found
among Professors? O! how few, how this are they sown, and how rarely do they
appear, if compared with others? how few have the power of Godliness, in
comparison of them, who take up with the mere form? how few professors are
Spiritually minded persons, who set their Affections on things above, and not
on things below? Coll. 3.1. 2 Romans 8.5.6. and that have thee Conversation or
(...). Trade in heaven, Phil. 3.20. how few are their who guard and watch
themselves and their Souls adversaries, and keep their hearts with all
diligence, or above and before all things? Pro. 4, 23. how few are there who
labor and make it their Trade and business, to be fruitful in every good
work, and dound in the work of the Lord; to bear much fruit unto Eternal Life,
and all that God may be glorified, and their own Souls profited and saved by
Grace? Coll. 1.10. 1 Cor. 15. ult. J^b. 15.8. Romans 6.22. How few are there who
do unfainedly mind and labor to walk sincerely and uprightly with God and
before him, and to adorn the Gospel of our Lord Jesus. Surely very few do and
are so indeed. Only a little, little flock do; they and they only are such
persons within, and walk so without; as has been showed. From which Proofs and
Instances we may certainly conclude, that there are but a very few, a small
number of Regenerate persons among the multitudes of professors. I have (I
think) said enough for the confirming and clearing of this Truth, although I
could say much more to and of it, were it needful. Now then, what use and
Improvement should we all make of this Truth? Surely it is a great Truth, and
that which does very much and nearly concern us all and every one.

1. Such as are Regenerated, and have sufficient proof of it, that they are so
indeed, why, they should consider and lay to heart their great privilege and
singular happiness in their Regeneration, and that Exceeding great love and
Grace of God that have been put forth and expended on them, to make them new
Creatures, and they ^ould labor to walk worthy of so high a calling to which
they are called in and by their Regeneration. And declare that they are in
Truth a Choice and a peculiar people.

2. This Truth should be considered and laid to heart by all sorts of
professors, to cause them to fear and tremble, and to look with all seriousness
and diligence into their states and Souls Concernments. To search and try the
bottomes they build upon, and see indeed if they will hold and stand them in
stead in the great day of Gods trial: which trial they must pass under and come
to. That they may no more delude themselves, and say they shall have peace,
while they continue Regenerate and in a State of sin and death. The most of
professors are willingly Ignorant of their own conditions, and of what is
likely to be their future State. If there are, but few Regenerate men among
professors, and they are such a people (as was proved) then the most of you may
conclude that you are unregenerate, because you are not indeed such a people.

CHAP. VI. Of the Privileges and Happiness of Regenerate Men.
Q. WHat are the singular privileges and peculiar happinesses of regenerate
persons. For if they differ so much in their frames of ^eart, carriages, and
walkings in their principles, and endeavors from other men that are not
regenerated; then surely they have some special privileges and blessednesses
beyond other men? show us therefore what they are, that we may know them.

Ans. Regenerat persons are possessed of, have right unto, and Interest in many
and singular Privileges and happinesses, is most certain. And indeed they are
the only privileged and happy men and women in the world. Others have not,
neither can, or may they claim any at all, whilst they continue in their
Unregenerate states. Regenerate persons have all the Spiritual, Divine, and
Heavenly privileges given and granted to them, and likewise eternal happiness:
but the truth is, others have none at all. For they are not, neither will they
be included in the great Charter, in and by which new creatures do receive and
hold their privileges. They will not be of, nor come into the holy and
Spiritual Corporation of regenerate men; neither will they own, value and
accept their privileges, in the way that the great Lord and King has
appointed and commanded. But all are regenerate persons right and due. All
(such the Apostle) is yours, 1 Cor. 3.22 Some of them I shall present unto you;
to comfort and encourage you in your walking with God unto all well-pleasing,
as now you are bound to do.

1. You that are Regenerated, must call and account all whatever was said of
you before, namely, wherein you are by Grace made to differ from othermen, your
privileges; for they are great and real privileges indeed. For is not your
change of state, or your Regeneration by special Grace, a great and glorious
Privilege? Is it not an exceeding great privilege to be renewed in knowledge,
after the image of God, Col. 3.10. And to be created in Christ Jesus unto good
works? Ephesians. 2.10. To be ho^n again of incorruptible seed, 1 Pet. 1.23. and be
made partakers of the divine or heavenly nature? 2 Pet. 1.4. Surely it is. Oh!
my brethren, is it not an inestimable privilege to be made Child en of light,
who were Children of darkness, 1 Pet. 2.9. And to be made the Children of God,
who were the Children of the Devil? Joh. 8.44. Is it nor a great privilege to
have the Love of God shed abroad into your hearts, and been abled thereby to
love God with all your hearts, as commanded? Math. 22.37. Is it not a great
privilege to have new and Spiritual Senses, Passions or Affections, and to be
quickened and raised from death to life, as you are? Is it not a great
privilege to be called too, and employed in and about Spiritual and heavenly
works, and that with Spirits, Frames, and Dispositions suited to them? why,
all these and many others (as you heard before) are yours, and so you ought to
look upon and esteem them; to rejoice in, and bless God for them.

2. By Regeneration you are made Freemen. You are now no more Bondmen, but
the Lords Freemen, Gal. 5.1. You are no more strangers and Foreigners, no,
what are you then, why, you are by Christ, in your Regeneration, made fellow
Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of God, Ephesians. 2.19. The Lord Jesus
has made you Free of his Spiritual and Heavenly City and Corporation, and
therefore you are free indeed, Joh. 8.36. hence the Apostle tells regenerate
Servants, that they are the Lords Freemen, 1 Cor. 7.22. though they were the
servants of men. And he further assures such, that they are of the free
Jerusalem, and Children of the free Woman, Gal. 4.36. ult. Here I shall briefly
show you what your freedom and liberty is. 1. what you are freed from. 2. what
freed for or to.

1. You are freed from the dominion and ruledome of Sin, you were before your
Regeneration the Servants of Sin, and in subjection to your Lust, But now you
are fully delivered from the dominion of that Lord, by Christ, in your
Regeneration, Romans 6.14, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22. your sin and lusts may now disturb
and afflict you, and they may and will distract, and trouble you. They will
assault and delude you, and they will dwell in you and pursue you, obstruct and
hinder you of, and in your good works and duties, yea, pollute and defile them.
But now for your comfort, that they shall no more reign over you, rule and
command you as they did, for you are called out and off from their dominion.

2. You are freed from the devils yoke and ruledome. He was your Prince, and
your God, and ruled in and over you, 2 Cor. 4.4. Ephesians. 2.2. although you knew it
not then, for the Scripture says that the Devil had blinded the minds of such
as did not believe, (which you did not, until you were Regenerated) lest the
light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, should shine unto them. You were his
Servants, and that with your own consents; ye are of your Father the Devil
(says Christ) and his lusts ye will do, Joh. 8, 44. That is, you were not
forced and constrained by him to it, but you did obey and serve him as
Volunteers, willingly and cheerfully, his lusts ye will do. All men by nature
are dilivered over (by the great God) into the Devils hand: not absolutely so,
for God still keeps his dominion over his Creatures, but as a Judge delivers up
a Rebel unto a Jailer to keep, and order him. So when we had rebelled against
God, transgressed his holy Law, hearkened to, and obeyed the Devil rather then
God, Genesis 3. then God gave up and delivered them over to Satan (as his Jailer)
as they were condemned Rebels, that had thrown off his Authority and
Government, and chosen the Devils counsel and service before his. Then says
God, take them Jailer, let them be thy servants and subjects, seeing they do so
well like thy service and advice. They are weary of, and do refuse my easy
yoke, ^e now put them under thine; do thou rule over them. Hence the Scripture
calls him their God and Prince; and tells us, that we are his Captives, and
Bondmen or Servants, 2 Timothy 2. ult. Heb. 2.14.15. But from this Cruel Lord you
are set at liberty, in your regeneration. Then the Lord Christ commands the
Devil to deliver you up to him, and let Prisoners go free, Isa. 61.1. 2 They
are mine faith Christ, for they were given to me, Joh. 10.29. And of them which
thou have given me, I will lose none, Joh. 6.39. For although they were thine
as they were Rebels against God, and therefore delivered to thee; yet now they
are and shall be mine, Heb. 2.15. Regenerate men are so delivered from Satan
and brought out of his kingdom, as never more to return again to their old
Service and bondage. For when the Son makes men free, they are, and shall be
free indeed, Joh 8.36. It is true that the Devil will never cease to vex and
disquiet you, to tempt and disturb you, and to afflict and distract you; but be
of good Cheer, he shall never have the rule and dominion over you any more, but
you shall prevail against, and rule over him. For you are not his, but Christ's
Servants and subjects.

3. You are freed from the Law, as a Law and Covenant of works. So that as
such, it shall neither Command, Condemn, or Curse you; for you are d^livered
from it, and brought under the Law to Christ, 1 Cor. 9.21. That is, you are
under the matter and precepts of the Law, to be a Rule of your obedience and
walking with God, as it is Gospellized in the hand of the Mediator, annexed to
the Covenant of Grace, and made the preceptive part of it; and as it is (as it
were) molded and fitted to the state, frame, and Condition of new Creatures,
or the Children of God, and to the nature of their Gospel obedience. But
otherwise, as was said, you are not under it, but delivered from it by Christ
in your Regeneration. For being made new Creatures, and married to Christ, you
are brought under the new Law and Covenant, Romans 8.1.2. Romans 6.14. Romans 7.1-7.
I will (Says God) Cause you to pass under the Rod, and bring you into the bond
of the Covenant, Ezekiel. 20.37. The matter of the Law is the Rule of your
obedience, as it is the Revelation of the mind and will of God, and as his
Authority over you, is in it, requiring your subjection and conformity
thereunto; so you are under it, and it commands you: but not simply as a Law of
works, as in its first make, and promulgation, for and to men as Gods
reasonable Creatures; and by, or as respecting him as their Creator and
Sovereign Lord, only or mostly: no, but as their reconciled Father and God, and
respecting them as his Children, begotten by him unto Obedience, that is,
Gospel filial obedience and newness of Life, 1 Pet. 1.3.4. Romans 6.4. Romans 7.6.
For as men are created in Christ Jesus unto good works, and made new Creatures
by his Grace, so all things are become new, in, to, and for them, 2 Cor. 5.17.
Their State is changed, their Relation Changed, their obedience and some of the
ends of it (in a Sense) are changed also. So that now they are dead to the Law,
and are not under it, but under the Law of Grace. This is another of your
Liberties and Immunities.

4. You are freed from Guilt and grounded fears. I do not say you are freed
from the Just Accusations of Conscience when you sin, or groundless distracting
fears, but from guilt, as it binds you over to Eternal punishment and wrath of
God, and from grounded fears thereof, for your Miscarriages. It is a choice
mercy and a great privilege to have our Consciences speaking to us, telling us
of, and accusing us for Sinning, and to have the passion of fear in us, to
affright us from, and keep or hold us back from sin. But it is a grevious
bondage to be, and lie under that guilt, which binds us over to punishment, and
that which makes us afraid of God, his Law and Justice; filling us with
amazing, disquieting, and dreadful thoughts of God. Or else God would not have
promised to give his people deliverance from them, as his great mercy and
kindness to them in Christ, as he has done, Pro. 1. ult. Luke 1.73.74. And
Christ would not have shed his precious blood for their deliverance, as he has
done, Heb. 9.14. if the one had not been a great Judgment to them, namely,
their being under such Guilt and fears; and their deliverance from them, their
great and invaluable mercy.

5. You are freed from the curse and wrath of God. For in and by Regeneration
you are enabled to, and you do believe in, and accept of him who has born the
Curse and Wrath of God, and delivered you, 1 These. 1. ult. Gal. 3.13. So that
now the Curse of the Law is taken off from your Souls, and you are and shall be
blessed; yea, the blessing of Abraham is come on you, upon the removal of the
Curs, and you are now really blessed, and so called by the great God, Gal.
3.14. Math. 5.2.12. and not only blessed your selves, but a blessing also to
others, Isa 19.24. Pro. 11.11. So likewise the Wrath of God is turned into love
to them; Ephesians. 2.4. and they shall never fall under his wrath and curse any
more, although they do fall into Sin. But if Regenerate men do carelessly or
wilfully Sin as David and Peter did, they shall feell the effects of his
fatherly displeasure, and smart for their follies, but the Curse and Wrath of
God shall never return again upon their Souls. This is another of your great
and Glorious Privileges, who are Regenerated. But all other men are under the
wrath and curse of God, although they will not believe they are so; yet
nevertheless they are, Joh. 3. ult. Gal. 3.10.

6, You are freed from Blindness of mind, and Hardness of heart, under which
you were held, in your unregenerate states and conditions. You were then
Darkness, and held fast under gross Darkness, Ephesians. 5.8. 1 Pet. 2.9. 1 John
2.11. Your Lusts and the Devil, yea, the Justice of God also, had blinded the
Eyes of your minds; so that you saw not, knew not your Sin, danger or misery;
now the way how to escape and obtain deliverance. You were ready to ^^mble into
Hell Flames every moment, but understood it not; and that when you thought you
saw your selves in a safe and secure state, and would by no means believe the
contrary of your selves. For you were held in the chains of Spiritual
Darkness. But now you are privileged with spiritual saving light. Now you are
Light in the Lord, Children of Light, brought ^^t of darkness into mavelous
Light, and you may now walk as Children of Light, in the light of Christ, Ephesians.
5.8. 1 Pet. 2.9. Now you are no more Fools but Wise, Ephesians. 5.15. For the wisdom
of Christ is in you. And you are delivered from that hardness, and impenitency
of hearts, under which you were as prisoners, ^^n. 2.4.5. Your regenerating
Grace has s^^tned and melted you, broken your hearts, and made your
Consciences soft and tender; so that you who were once hard-hearted Saul's, are
now mourning Paul's, and you who were hard-hearted Nabels, are now weeping
Jere^^es. This is certainly your privilege in your regenerate states.

7. You are freed from that pernicious self that h^^d you Captives in its
Chains. Before your Regeneration, you were enslaved to your selves. You were
not only servants to your Lusts, but to your selves also. You were kept from
Christ by your carnal self and spiritual self. Your selfulness,
self-righteousness, self-abilities, and self-confidences, ruled and swayed you,
dissuaded and beguiled you from believing, repenting, and seeking after
Regeration. You were wedded to your own conceits and misguided apprehensions of
your selves, and yielded up your selves to their counsels and delusion. Self
was in the Top and Bottom of all, so as that you could not once think
seriously of your selves, states, and ways, and of Regeneration, and how to be
saved; but one self or other, would interpose, to draw and hold you back from
prosecuting what was begun in and by you. For by and by, they would arise and
appear to you, telling you that all was well. You had enough of this and that,
to make you happy, and therefore what need to trouble your selves about such
matters: But eat, drink, and be merry, for you have much goods laid up in store
for many years, Luke 12.19. Therefore says self-ease, and self-confidence, and
security, thou have Righteousness and worthiness, worldly comforts, and
abilities enough, to make the a happy man here, and hereafter, and that is
enough for thee, for what would thou have? But now you are delivered by
Grace, from the power and reigning prevelency of your captivating Self, which
is a great privilege.

2. You are not only freed from these and many other evils and bondages, but
you are set at liberty and freed to many other privileges also. I shall name a
few, 1. you are made Freemen for God. You are it is true, his Servants, but
your condition and service is not your bondage, but your liberty, freedom and
privilege. And therefore the servants of God are called his freemen, as was
showed, 1 Cor. 7.22. And Romans 6.22. They are (said to be) made free from Sin,
and become the Servants of God, and so have their fruit unto holiness; you are
made (...) to serve God without fear in holiness and Righ^^^sness all your
days, Luke 1.73.74. This is a ^^eedome or privilege which you had not the
enjoyment of, when you were unregenerated, but now it is yours, you are freed
from ^any Bondages, and made free to and for his service; which is most easy.
2. You are made free to serve God without fear, Che^^fully, Obedi^^tly,
Joyfully, and in Faith and Hope of pleasing God, and being assisted, accepted,
and rewarded of (...); which you could not do before. It was not your
privilege, neither had you wherewithal to do it, before you were Regenerated
and made new Creatures, by his spirit and grace. But now being such, you are in
a Capacity to do it, and you can and will so serve God. You are made free not
only to do God service, but so to serve him, that is freely, readily,
cheerfully, joyfully, thankfully, and in faith and hope; yea, you may now serve
him obediently too, namely, with the Gospel obedience of Children, or Child
like obedience, 1 Pet. 1.14.3. You are freed and privileged to be fellow
Citizens of the Saints, and of the household of God; Ephesians. 2.19. you are
Incorporated with them in the heavenly Jerusalem, and made partakers of their
Charter, of their liberties and Immunities, and have the pririledge of Trading
where they Trade, and in the same heavenly commodities; which until you were
regenerated you could not do. 4. You are freed and privileged to and with all
the fullness of Christ, and good of the Covenant of Grace. For by the Spirit
and Grace of God in your Regeneration, you are put into Christ, and under all
the Grace and Blessings of the Covenant. You are in a capacity of receiving and
in a condition of claiming them. They are all yours by Gods everlasting Grant
of them to Christ for you, and in your behalf, 2 Timothy 1.9. Tit. 1.2. They were
given or granted to you, and Christ received them for you, when you were given
to Christ in election, and Christ accepted and received you at the hand of God,
Joh. 17.6. Thine they were, and thou gave them me. This was hid from you
before you were Regenerated, but now they are brought to light and entailed on
you, as regenerate persons. And the way is opened to you to find and take them,
to claim and fetch them, to apply and appropriate them unto your selves. These
are some of your privileges and immunities, as you are Gods freemen. I could
name many more but that I may not be large, beside my intendment.

3. You are Pardoned and Justified. All your Sins and Iniquities are crossed
out of Gods Book, and cast out of his remembrance. They are all put on the head
of the escape Goat, and sent away into the wilderness or land of forgetfulness,
never to return any more to you, or be laid to your Charge. And you are fully
acquitted and cleared from all Guilt and Punishment, as the fruit and wages of
Sin. The Righteousness of Christ is accounted and imputed to you, and your sins
guilt and punishment to Christ, and so you are declared just and righteous in
Law, and you are made the lighteousness of God in him, Jer. 31, 34. Heb. 10.17.
2 Cor. 5. ult. Romans 4.24, 25. Isa. 53.11. All such as God sanctifies, he
justifies, Romans 8.29, 30. that by the first fruits of their sandification,
which is their Regeneration, they might be enabled to believe to justification
of ^^fe, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 5.18. and unto the saving of the Soul,
Heb. 10. ult. for by the Faith they obtain in Regeneration, they do so believe,
as to be justified, (not for) but through or by their believing. You may
henceforth, all your days, pray for, believe, and expect the Pardon of your
daily sins, of all sorts of sins; and that notwithstanding your frequent slips
and failings, you shall not be laid under guilt, and be any more unjustified,
or put into an unjustified state. But you may freely and constantly go to the
Court of Justice and Mercy, and crave Pardon of all your sins, and take out
sealed Pardons, through the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant. For Christ gave
himself, to Redeem you from all Iniquity, Tit. 2.14. so that you are now in and
by believing, made free from sin, and stand as clear in Christ's Righteousness,
and Gods Justification, as if you had never sinned. This is another of your
glorious Privileges, who are New Creatures.

4. You are Privileged with great Interest in Christ, and God the Father by
him, and have free ^ccess to him at all times in your dutiful carriages, and
obedient walkings toward him. You have great interest in, and power with God,
and you are priviledg'd with open ingress to him. His doors stands always open
to let you into his Presence Chamber, for the Lord Jesus has opened them for
you, and none can shut them against you. You have this great Master of Requests
waiting on, or rather sitting by the great God, and waiting for you, that when
you come with your Petitions, you may find him ready to attend, and prosecute
your concerns in Heaven for you, Heb. 7.25. Heb. 9.24. Romans 8.34. You have his
heart, and he has always his Fathers ear, Job. 11.42. so that you need never
fear any miscarriage of, or in your businesses there. And be sure that all your
greatest concerns lie in his hand, and he is engaged to you, and to his Father
for you, to mind and manage them to your advantage. For he tells us, That he
would go to Heaven, and pray the Father for you, Job. 14, 16. and has told us
since he went to Heaven, that he was always attending on it, Heb. 7.25. Before
he left the World, in his last Will and Testament, he bequeathing this
Privilege unto his People, and left it as a part of their Legacy, to and for
them, that we might have what we would of him, Joh. 14, 13, 14. And he gives us
all possible assurance of it, by his Asseverations, Verily, verily, verse. 12.
(says he) I say unto you, that whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name,
that will I do. And then he further confirms his grant and promise, by an
Argument taken from his Father, his concern and interest in his so doing,
namely, That the Father may be glorified in the Son; that is, by the grant he
had given his people, of power and interest in him, to make use of him, and
using his Name at the Throne of Grace with his Father; as also his praying and
appearing for them, to and with his Father, and carrying on his peoples
concernments there, ^is Father would take it as his honor, concern, and
interest. This Truth is evidenced and confirmed throughout the Gospel, in
innumerable places. As in Joh. 15.7. Joh. 16. This is another of your great and
dear bought Privileges, which are conferred on you, and put into your
possession in Regeneration. For assuredly other men have it not, neither had it
you before. I pray for them, I pray not for the world, no, but for them which
thou have given me out of the world, for they are thine and mine, says Christ,
Joh. 17. Other men have nothing to do with me in this matter, nor I with them;
I pray for my Sheep, my Members, my Believers, my New Creatures. For such as
have chosen me for their King and High Priest; to govern and interceed for
them. These are the persons for whom I have shed my Blood, and for whose Souls
I sacrificed my Life to Divine Justice. These are the men that I have dearly
bought, and those are the persons that wear my Livery, and bear my Image, and
therefore I pray for them. They lie deep in my Affections, and so do I in
theirs. They are near and dear to me, and so am I to them likewise. I have
promised this privilege to them, and they have thankfully accepted it, and
kindly embraced it. They make use of me, and have their eyes and dependence on
me, to appear for them in Heaven; and therefore they may come boldly to my
Throne of Grace, and find favor and Grace, to help in time of need, Heb. 4.
ult. These my New Creatures may ask of me what they will, and it shall be done
to them, Job. 15.7. And as they have great Interest in the ear and heart of
Christ, and may be familiarly bold with him; as he does and will pray for, and
manage their concerns in Heaven for them; so they have free access unto the
Father, and a great interest in his ear and heart also, upon Christ's account.
Hence the Lord Jesus tells his Disciples, when he was comforting and
encouraging them, and pouring out (as it were) his heart and Bowels of Love
unto them: I say not that I will pray the Father for you, for the Father
himself loves you, Joh. 16, 26, 27. That is, your heavenly Father has such
Love and Affection for you, and your interest is so great in him, upon my
account, that if I should hold my peace, and not speak a word to him in your
behalfs, yet he has Grace and Love enough to and for you, and that he will
also mind your concernments. And you may go to him in my Name, and make use of
him in all your matters and businesses.

5. All the promises that are made and given, appointed and intended for the
Saints and People of God in the Gospel are yours. All the promises of Grace,
and to Grace and Gospel obedience, with all the good, all the marrow and
fatness of them, are yours. Not a Honeycomb in all the Hive of the
Gospel Covenant, but what will yield you some drops of honey and sweetness. And
you being new Creatures, and married to Christ (in whom are all the Promises,
yea and amen) 2 Cor. 1.20. all the Promises are your Dowry and Portion. They
are all Intayled on, and made over to you: they are your great Pattent and
Charter, for all Grace and Glory, and by which you may plead, and do hold your
Right and Title to Grace, and Christ hear, and Eternal Life hereafter. For if
all things be yours, as the Gospel says they are, 1 Cor. 3.22. Then all the
Promises of the new Covenant are yours likewise; And with a holy boldness, you
may Claim and appropriate them, and all the milk and honey of them to your
selves, as yours by Grant and Purchase. Are you indeed and in Truth, Regenerate
Persons? why, then rejoice and be exceeding glad, for the great Charter of
heaven is yours. You are of the little, holy, and heavenly corporation and
City, Citizens of the new Jerusalem, that came down from heaven, and therefore
you have a Right unto, and Interest in all the promises of the life that now
is, and of that which is to come, 1 Timothy 4.8. You have the promises of all
Grace and happiness, and for whatever you need, and much more. To instance in a
few of many, and that briefly.

1. You have the Promises of pardon; of the Pardon of all your Sins for time to
come, Exodus 34.6, 7. Isa. 55.7. Jer. 31.34. hence the Lord Jesus commands and
directs them, Namely, you that are Gods Children, to Pray, Our Father forgive
us our Trespasses, Math. 6.12. And Paul tells us from Christ, that there is now
no condemnation to them, which are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. and if there be
indeed no condemnation, then no Sin unpardoned. To the same purpose Christ
speaks in Joh. 5.24. He that is passed from Death to Life, (as all Regenerate
Persons are) shall not come into Condemnation. Therefore encourage your selves
in true holiness hereby.

2. You have the Promises of Cleansing and Healing you, or of Gods sanctifying
and purifying your hearts, Hosea. 14.4. For which end and purpose, among other,
Christ gave himself, Tit. 2.14. Ephesians. 5.25.26. And sets open the Fountain, to
flow in upon us, Zach. 13.1. And, Ezekiel. 36.25.26.27. I will sprinkle clean
Water on them, and they shall be clean, and from all their filthiness, and from
all their Idols will I cleanse them.

3. You have promises of perseverance in Godlyness unto the end of your race,
until you have finished your course here, you shall be kept by the power of
God, through faith unto salvation, 1 Pet. 1.5. And my sheep follow me, and I
give to them eternal Life, and they shall never Perish, neither shall any take
them out of my hand, Joh. 10.27.28.29. Moreover God tells us, that for our more
certain and full assurance of our safety and security, he will keep us, water
us every moment, yea, and keep us Night and Day, Isa. 27.2.3. And engages
himself, that whatever enemies beset us round about, and seek to devour us,
that he will watch us, and be our defense; by being a wall of Fire round about
us, Zach. 2.5. God has promised, that he will put his fear into their hearts,
and they shall not depart from him, Jer. 32.40. and that his Children shall
call him my Father, and shall not turn away from him, Jer. 3.19. They have
underneath them the Everlasting Arms, and they are held in his hand. They are
safe within the walls of their Fathers house, and are guarded with the holy
Angels. Their victory over all their enemies is sure, because they are ever
under the Conduct of their great Captain, Christ, and fight under his Banner,
in his cause and quarrel, with his Armor of proof, who has all their enemies
under his feet. Their Lusts, the world and Devil are all in subjection unto
your great King and Captain. And because the Victory is sure on our side, as
fighting under him, he is styled the Captain of our salvation. And therefore
you may be sure you shall not Perish. For you have all possible security from
him, and his Father, to strengthen and encourage, to fence and arm you against
all your own fears, weakness, and temptations whatsoever. Even the Gates of
Hell shall not be able to prevail against you. But if you are in a state of
Grace, you shall most certainly run your Race, win the Prize, and wear the
Crown of Righteousness. For you have their bonds for your security, who are
both able and faithful to perform and make them good, to you and to all who
shall trust and rely on them for the doing of it.

4. You have promises of Peace. This is one of your husbands Legacies to you,
Joh. 14.27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, not as the world
gives, give I unto you. And in Joh. 16. ult. In the world (says Christ) ye
shall have tribulation, but in me ye shall have peace. And Glory, honor, and
peace, to every man that works Righteousness, Romans 2.10. and as many as walk
according to this Rule, peace be to them, Gal. 6.16. So in Phil. 4.7. And the
peace of God shall keep your hearts and minds. This Spiritual peace, is a fruit
of Gods Love, and the mediation of Christ: of our Justification and Sincerity
of heart toward God and men. For he is our peace, Ephesians. 2.14. and being
Justified by faith, we have peace with God, Romans 5.1. Those that know and have
experienced the great and sore Affliction and trouble of a wounded Conscience,
which none can bear, Pro. 18.14. and the load and weight of guilt and fear on
the Soul, can give a better account of the worth and Excellency of this peace
of God. For indeed it is so great, that it passes all understanding, Phill.
4.7.

5. Satisfaction. You have the promises of being satisfied with good. The
meaning is not, so to be satisfied with what we have, as not to desire and seek
for more of that, and other mercies, no, but to be satisfied with, and in the
will and disposements of God, and the measure of our present Enjoyments, until
God shall augment them, Joh. 4.14. But whosoever drinks of the water that I
shall give him, shall never thirst, Isa. 58.10. Jer. 31.14.25. It is a great
mercy to have a satisfied and contented Spirit with Gods Allowance, and at the
same time to endeavor after more. An unsatisfied Spirit is very sinful,
grievous and vexatious to a man's own Soul. He enjoys not what he has, that is
not satisfied in the will of God, ^^ith his portion and measure. God dispences
^is favors, according to his sovereign wisdom, Will and Grace; he gives two
Talents to one servant, and to another five, Math. 25. to declare and make
known to men his sovereignty and dominion over them; and that he does in Heaven
and Earth whatsoever pleases him. That he will not dispose of his favors
according to our wills, but his one.

6. You have promises of Assistance in your duties, or of a supply of the
Spirit of Grace, and the Grace of the Spirit, to enable you to perform them
according to the will of God, even to acceptance in Heaven, Phill. 4.19. And
my God shall supply all your wants, Psalm. 84.11. The Lord God is a Sun and
shield: he will give Grace and Glory; and no good thing will he withhold from
them that walk uprightly: as all Regenerate men may do. The holy Spirit is
promised to help our Infirmities, and enable us to do the will of God
acceptably, Romans 8.26, 27. Zach. 12.10. And fear not Jacob my Servant, although
thou art a worm, a poor weak Creature; yet seeing thou art a New Creature, I
will help thee, yea, I will strengthen thee, yea, I will uphold thee with the
Right hand of my Righteousness, Isa. 41.10, 13, 14. He gives power to the
Saint, and to them that have no might, he increases strength; That they that
wait on him may increase their strength, to run and not be weary, Isa. 40.29,
31. so that whatever God calls you to, and sets you upon, be sure that he will
fully enable you to do it, how weak soever you are, in and of your selves. For
God is strong and faithful, who has promised it.

7. Joy and Consolation. God has privileged you with promises of rejoicing
your hearts, and of causing you to Sing for joy of heart, when others shall
howl for vexation of Spirit, Isa. 65.13, 14. This is also one of your Husbands
Legacies, which he bequearned to you, in his last Will and Testament, and
therefore you may look for, and confidently expect it of him, John 15.11. These
things have I spoken unto you, that my Joy may remain in you, and that your Joy
might be full; so in John 16.20. But your Sorrow shall be turned into Joy. And
your hearts shall rejoice, and your Joy no man shall take from you, verse. 22.
And in verse 24. Ask and ye shall receive, that your Joy may be full. For this
end he has promised and bequeathed, not only the Consolations and Joys of the
Spirit, but the abiding presence of the Spirit himself, who is to convey and
impart them unto his people, Joh. 14, 16, 17. And calls him therefore, the
Comforter, as in that Text, so in John 14.26. and in the 15. Chapt. 26. and in
the 16. Chapt. 7.

8. You have promises of being taught of God, and of being made wise unto
Salvation. You are already renewed in knowledge, Col. 3.10. and now you shall
be tutored up by Christ your Prophet; so that you shall be still increasing in
the knowledge of God, Christ, Duty, and heavenly things, John 7.17. Ephesians. 4.15.
1 Cor. 2.12. Isa. 54.13. Psalm. 84.7. John 6.45. Men teach by Gods Appointment,
and it is his Ordinance for ever, which all men are bound to attend unto and
wait on, as it is the Ordinance of God to them for Good, in and by which God
will teach men, Math. 28.19, 20. Ephesians. 4.11. -- 17. and God teaches also. God
teaches, and reaches the heart with his teaching, but so cannot men's teaching
do of themselves. God teaches men powerfully, convincingly, and effectually,
and they only are made truly wise, whom God teaches by his Spirit. Now this is
one of your Privileges, that you are the willing Scholars of Jesus Christ. You
have chosen him for your Prophet and Teacher, and he has chosen, and accepted
you, for his Scholars, and it is your desire to be taught of him, all the
things that do concern his Glory, and your duty and happiness: You have him
engaged to you to teach you, and cause you to grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of all things you are to know; and you may and ought to believe that
he will do it. To make use of him, apply your selves unto him, rely on and
expect it of him.

9. You have promises of a sanctified use of all his dispensations toward you,
and that all things shall work together for your good. Your afflictions and
chastisements shall not hurt, but better you, not spoil, but make you. God
shoots not his Arrows at rovers, neither does he lay his Corrisives beside your
soars, or apply an improper or ineffectual Medicine to your wounds. He is an
alseeing and alsufficient Physician, and thorrowly discerns you maladies, and
what does aile you: and he can give you suitable Playsters, and Physic for
your distempers, Psalm. 103.13.14. And what he can, that he will, (in this
matter) do for you. For your profit and care, your health, prosperity and
salvation, are the things that are in his Eye, and heart. All things shall work
together for your good; for you are his called ones, and such as he loves, and
you are such as love him, Romans 8.28. does your Father and Lord chastize you,
and make you smart? why, the fruit of all is to humble you; to take a way Sin,
which you are willing to part withal, and to make you partakers of his
holiness, and the like blessed and gracious ends and disigns, are in his Eye
and heart, Duter. 8.15.16. Isa. 27.7.8.9. Heb. 12.10.11,

10. You have promises of eternal Life, and everlasting Blessedness with God in
Heaven. You have promises of an Incorruptible Inheritance, 1 Pet. 1.4. to which
you are begotten and born. You have promises of a Crown of Life, Revel. 2.10.
Jam. 1.12. Of Righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.8. And of Glory, 1 Pet. 5.4. You have
promises of Living and Reigning with Christ, and of being and abiding where he
is, and with him, Revel. 20. Rev. 5.10. Joh. 17. And of seeing him as he is, 1
Job. 3.2. You have promises of Christ his coming in Glorious state, to fetch
you home to his Kingdom, and Palace of Holiness, Glory and Joy; of Honor,
Dignity, and Renown, Math. 25.32.33. Rev. 19. 1 These. 4.16.17. Joh. 14.3. You
have an Eternal weight of Glory laid up in Heaven for you, and Christ is bound
to secure it for, and give it to you. You have a blessed Hope and great Glory
laid up for you, and the Lord Jesus has engaged himself to put you into the
possession of all, in his time. It is as sure, as if you had the whole already
in your own hands, and you must believe and expect it; for neither height nor
depth, nor any thing shall prevent or disappoint you of it. All the great
things promised you, are yours, they are your own. They are all yours by an
everlasting grant, of God the Father, and by the purchase of Christ; I mean,
they are the Price of his Blood, and the fruits of the travail of his Soul. And
therefore look for them, and live in continual expectation of them, as of
certain things.

These are a few of the many great and Heavenly things that are promised to
you, who are new Creatures, or Regenerate Persons. I know that I have mentioned
several of them before, and there promised to speak more fully of them, on this
head.

6. You are the great objects of Gods love, delight and complacency. Your union
with Christ, Relation to him, and the Divine nature on you, makes you most
beautiful, aimable, and lovely in the sight of God; and he loves you with an
exceeding great, singular and special love. It is his own loveliness that makes
you lovely in his eyes. You have none at all of your own, to commend you to his
love and acceptance. God says of, and to you, I have loved you with an
everlasting love; Jer. 13.3. And therefore with loveing kindness have I drawn
thee; namely, to accept of my Son, and become new Creatures. And in Ephesians. 2.4.
The Apostle tells us, that God loves his quickened or Regenerate Creatures, with
a great love, and tells us, (...) Ephesians. 3.18, 19. That there are Heights, Depth^
Lengths, and Breadths, in the love of Christ t^ them; yea, that it is so great,
as that it passe^ all understanding; not of Christ's understanding (...) but
ours and Angels. When God would express his love to Regenerate men, in the mo^
Emphatical way that we are capable of conceiving, or apprehending it, he words
it (...) indiffinite Terms. As God so loved the World (namely, the little
World of new Creatures) God so loved them, Joh. 3.16. That is, he greatly,
unexpressibly, and unconceivably, loved and loves them. The Apostle John
expresses it thus, 1 John 3.1. Behold what manner of Love the Father has
bestowed upon us, that (...) should be called the Children of God? Behold, what
manner of love is this. I cannot conceive, much less express how great and
admirable his love is to his children. God only knows how much he loves them,
but they do not know it, no, nor yet can they tell how much they do love God.
For love between them and God, and God and them, is unmeasurable, innumerable,
unsearchable, and past finding out. Their love to Christ is as strong as Death
that many waters cannot quench; Cant. 8.6.7. O! then how great is his love to
them. New creatures are sick of love to Christ, it is so fervent, strong, and
working, Cant. 5.8. How much more strong and fervent is Christ's love to them.
It Is true, that Christ is a far more lovely and desirable object of, and for
their love and delight, than themselves are for Christ's, for he is the fairest
of Ten thousands, and altogether lovely, ^^t. 5.10. ult. But then they have not
so ^uch love for Christ in their hearts, as he ^^th for them. The Lord Jesus
looks on his ^^w Creatures, his Spouses; like a true and ^^hement Lover indeed.
Like one that is ena^ored and ravished with them: hence we have ^^^en such
expressions falling and droping ^^om his pure Lips. How fair and how pleasant
^^t thou, O Love for delights? Cant. 7.6. And ^^ou have ravished my heart, my
Sister, my Spouse: ^^^u have ravished my heart with own of thine eyes, ^ith one
chain of thy Neck, Cant. 4.9. By all which expressions of his, he commends and
sets out his exceeding great love to his people. Oh! what a rich and invaluable
privilege is this, to be so much, and lie so deep i^ the love and affections
of the great God, and the Lord Jesus Christ. He loved you before your
Regeneration, so as to make you truly lovely, with his Grace and Spirit, with
his Righteousness and holiness. But now he loves you as most lovely and
dilightful persons indeed. He loves you now with the love of delight, joy and
complacency, as was showed. You are his delight, and Crown of rejoicing; your
Countenance is comely, and your voice sweet to him, Cant. 2.14. His Love to you
is true and hearty, strong and fervent, fruitful and profitable, and it is
everlasting and unchangable: he loves you, notwithstanding your many unlovely
carriages toward him, and with all your personal deformities: he takes
pleasure in you, and refreshes (as it were) himself with you; he cannot endure
to see you slight and forget him, or to suffer your minds and affections to
depart from him; he delights in you, and in his love to, or loving of you; and
the like he does in your love to, or loving of him. The more you love him, the
more be sure, he will unbosome himself, and open unto you the hidden Treasures
of his love, Prove. 8.21. For his great love to you, causes him to desire, and
call for love from you.

Seventhly. You have the privilege and great dignity of Adoption. You were
Vagabous and Miserable Beggars, cast out to the loathing of your Persons. None
pitied you, or took you in, none hearkened to you, nor cared for you, neither
had you any hand stretched out to help you, until you came to the Lords door.
But there you found compassion and mercy, there you found provision ready for
you. You knocked but once there, before the the Lord of Glory came himself and
opened the door to you, and invited you into his house. He hastened to bring the
Fatted Calf, and called for his best Robes, took off your filthy Rags, and put
o^ his own Garments of Grace, Righteousness and holiness on you: then he writ
his own name on you, and Stamped divine nature upon you, and made you beautiful
and desirable. He gave you a new name when he made you new Creatures, which is
your honor and glory, and the he said of, and unto you, These shall be my sons
and daughters, 2 Cor. 6. ult. And hence forth he accounts and calls them so.
These are my Sons and my Daughters, which I have formed for my self and taken
into my house and family; Ezekiel. 16.20. Isa. 43.21. For they are my first born.
They were born for and unto me, as in that of Ezekiel, I have appointed, and
ordained them to live in my house as my Sons and Daughters, and they shall go
no more out, or return to their former estate again. For they must abide with
me for ever: For the Son (though not the Servant) abides for ever, in his
Fathers house or family, as the Son of such a Father, Joh. 8.35. I have (says
God) put in their names, their new names, for, and entitled them unto an
Eternal Inheritance, Coll. 1.12. Heb. 9.15. Ephesians. 1.11.14. 1 Pet. 1.4. I have
made them my heirs, yea, joint heirs with my Christ, whom I have given to be
the heir of all things, Heb. 1.2. Romans 8.17. These shall in due time be put
into the possession of their Inheritance, for it is reserved in heaven for
them, and I will keep them for it, 1 Pet. 1.4.5. and in the mean time, they
have and shall keep in their hands (their hearts) the Earnest and first fruits
of it, namely, the holy Spirit of Promise. He is the Spirit of adoption to and
in them, Romans 8.14.15. Gal. 4.5. by, and as working and fitting them for it,
and the meetening them to live as Children in their heavenly Fathers house, and
to demean themselves there as they ought to do. So likewise to Seal up and
confirm their Inheritance to them, and bear witness to the reallity and Truth
of it, namely, that there is such an Inheritance reserved for them, and that
they are appointed for, and chosen to it: and also to the Truth and
faithfulness of God who has promised it, Romans 8.16. Ephesians. 1.13.14. In their
Scriptures, he is called a witnesser and a Sealer: Now to what does he Seal and
witness? but to the hearts and faith of the adopted, that there is such an
Inheritance entailed on them that they shall possess and enjoy it, and to th^^
faithfulness, Truth, and Alsufficiency of God, who has promised it, and must
do it for them, Besides this, there is another privilege in you adoption,
which is your boldness and Intimacy with your God and Father, notwithstanding
the Infinite distance that there is between you and him: which you have
mentioned in Gal. 4.6. And because ye are Sons, God has sent fo^^ the Spirit
of his Son into your hearts, Crying, Ab^^ Father. And in Romans 8.15. but ye have
received (...) Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. That is, we
may now, in and by your Adoption and the Spirit thereof in our hearts, conve^^
familiarly, Intimately, and boldly with God through Jesus Christ. We may draw
near to (...) in full Assurance of Faith, as commanded, H^ 10.22. And boldly,
Heb. 4. ult. And that because we are adopted Children in our Father house, and
can come to, and converse in, wi^^ and by the Spirit of Adoption, with our Go^^
and Father. You shall forever be fed at you^ Fathers, and eat at his Table with
him, (...) he will make all sorts of Spiritual provisi^^ for you, because you
are his adopted Ch^^dren, and in his house. You shall for ever (...) upon no
worser fare, than the Bread of (...) that came down from heaven, Joh. 6. And
y^^ ^^all for ever Drink of the Rivers of his pleasures, ^^ely, of the Fountain
of Life, Psalm. 36.8. and (...) shall never want. You are in an adopted ^^^e,
and may expect all provisions from him (...) has Adopted you, for he will not
deny you any good thing, nor fail to make ready for (...) your daily bread.
Therefore look on (...) great dignity and Privilege of yours, apply it to your
selves, suck out all the mar^ow and sweetness of it, and comfort your selves
with it, to the enabling and encouraging you in your Wilderness Journey, work
and condition. You know it so amongst men ^^th respect to worldly Inheritances.
Such as are entayled or entitled to them, will often think on them, and
comforting themselves in ^ope of possessing and enjoying the good of ^^em after
a few years. Why, do you so, ^uch more. For your Inheritance, to which you are
Adopted, is a much more glorious, certain, and rich Inheritance than any
worldly one can be, and it is an Incorruptible and ^ternal Inheritance, that
you are entitled to. The Lord Jesus, the Elder Brother and Heir, is gone to
take possession of your Inheritances for you, who are Regenerated, and made by
Adoption fellow Heirs of Salvation.

8. Union and Communion. You are United to Christ, and made one Body with him,
or you are Members of his Body, of his Flesh, and of his ^^es, Ephesians. 5.30. as
you heard before, and therefore shall not insist on it here. This Union is
expressed, and set forth unto us, by many things. As by natural Unions that are
between the Head and Members in the Natural Body, Ephesians. 5.23. Ephesians. 1.22, 23.
Ephesians. 4.15. by the natural union and oneness that is between the Vine and
Branches, Joh. 15.1, 2, 4, 5. so also between Voluntary and Conjugal Relations,
as Husband and Wife, Ephesians. 5. Friends and Friends, John 15. Now from this Union
flows Communion of Persons and Estates. What the Lord Jesus has is theirs, and
whatever they have is Christ's. Christ is theirs, and all his fullness and Riches
theirs; he can withhold (...) good thing from them, neither does he account any
thing he has, to be so his own, but that they have a kind of propriety and
Interest in it, and may claim it of him. What he has received of his Father,
it was for them; he deposited all their stock and Portion in his hand, that he
might impart and communicate it (...) them, which he does, and will do, and
th^^ most faithfully, carefully, wisely, and seasonbly. For this end he gives
them free and (...) access to him, and invites them not to be strangers to him,
but come and apply themselves freely and constantly to him, and ask of (...)
what they will, John 14.13, 14. John 15.^. John 16. All which he holds forth to
the^ in and by the hand of Promises. Ask what y^ will, and it shall be done to
you, John 15.7. Jo^^ 16.24. In like manner, Regenerate Men (...) open hearted
to Christ (in degree) they (...) willingly design and dedicate their all to
(...) All their love and affections; all their stren^ and abilities; and all
their earnings and (...) tings, They give him their service and (...) age,
their hearts, hands, and Souls, and the fruits of their experiences of his
Grace and love to them. Christ and they do Visit one mother in the Galleries,
and in their Closets. There they do unbosome themselves, and open the secrets
of their hearts to each other; This is another of your great Dignities and
Privileges. But having spoken something of this before, I shall say no more of
it here. You should consider this Truth, and make the best of it you can.

9. You are privileged and dignified with the holy Angels Guard and
Attendance. They are by nature more noble and excellent Creatures then you, and
yet they wait on you, and keep guard round about you night and day. They love
and honor you, and are ready to do you any service they can; and you are
greatly engaged to them for the honor and service they do you. They do you
much good, for they are Ministering Spirits, sent forth to Minister unto the
Heirs of Salvation, such as you are: they secure you from, and guard you
against Devils, and they support and uphold you in, and with their hands, Heb.
1. ult. Psalm. 91 10, 11. Psalm. 34.7. Math. 4. When you are Journying, they go
with you, and when you lie down, they watch at your Beds-side. The holy Angels
rejoice in and with you, Luke 15.7, 10. They are glad at your Regeneration and
Salvation, and they no way envy your prosperity, or disdain your service as
below them. Whatever they do for you, they do it freely, faithfully,
cheerfully, and with delight. Thus you see what you are born to, and what
Dignities and Privileges are conferred on you, and do attend your New states
and conditions. Apply them to your selves, and lay them near your hearts, lodge
them in your minds, and realize them to your selves, for they are yours, and do
belong to you, as you are New Creatures, or in a state of Grace. Use them as
Divine Cordials, and drink freely of them continually, to strengthen and
encourage your hearts and hands in the work of the Lord. For it is your Fathers
will you should so do, because he knows you need them, and gives them into your
hands, for these ends and purposes. And now what follows, but that you
endeavor to walk worthy of your new State, Privileges, and Dignities: Which
will be the matter of the next Chapter.

CHAP. VII. Showing how you ought to walk, and carry your selves in your
Regenerate States, and what God looks for, and expects from you.
Q. WHat is the Work? or what are the works and duties of New-Creatures in
their Regenerate states? how ought they to walk, and carry themselves toward
God and Men? what does God require of, and expect from them?

A. They have great and special works and duties to do and perform to God and
Men, in which they must exercise and employ themselves all their days. They
must never be Idle and unfruitful in the knowledge of Christ, or their new
States, 2 Pet. 1.8. Regenerate persons must abound in the work of the Lord, 1
Cor. 15. ult. and make it their whole work and business to bring forth fruit to
God, Romans 7.4. that God may be glorified in and by them, John 15.8. God expects
singular things, and special works from you, for the whole Revenue of his
Glory, is entrusted with, and in your hands, and with other of his New
Creatures, and he has and will give grace and assistance enough to enable you
to live to the praise of his glorious Grace; namely, in the practice and
performance of all the Duties he expects and requires of you: Your whole
conversation before men, and the frame, disposition, and carriage of your
hearts before God, must of necessity be as becomes the Gospel of Christ, Phil.
1.27. All your thoughts, cares, and abilities, must now be exercised in, and
laid out about your living to, walking with, and pleasing of God; in walking
worthy of your high Calling, holding up the Honor, Glory, and Reputation of
your New states and conditions, and in setting off, and commending the
excellency of Gods Grace, and your Regeneration to all men, as you have
occasion and opportunity to do. You must manifest and declare in the whole
trade and course of your lives, what and who you are; that you are indeed,
what, or that which you seem to be in your Profession. You must walk, and carry
your selves as new Creatures toward all your Relations, and toward all such
as you converse with, and have to do withal. Your special and becoming works
and carriages, must show and demonstrate whose and what you are to men; and
your principles, ends, and frames of heart, must declare what your state and
condition is unto your own Consciences, 2 Cor. 1.12. John 13.35.

Now in prosecuting this Head, I shall briefly show you, 1. what your Duties
are, or what frames of heart, works, and carriages, God requires of, and
expects from you, as his New Creatures. 2. What Enemies and obstructions you
will meet withal, to hinder you in your so walking. 3. show you what Bonds and
Obligations God has laid on you, so to walk and carry your selves toward God
and Men, as shall be opened and represented unto you briefly.

First then, I shall show you some of your ^uties, and how you ought to walk in
your ^egenerate states; and the first that I shall ^ame, is, Thankfulness. Your
whole life should ^e spent in praising and thanking God for ^egenerating and
making you new Creatures, and for those other appurtenances or Mercies, that
are joined with, and annexed to your Regeneration. Your happiness, and the love
and kindness of God to you in Regenerating you, are so exceeding great, as that
Eternity will be too little to thank and bless God for them. Now God has
therefore made you New Creatures, and delivered you from and out your old
states, put you under his Grace, and formed you for himself; that you should
adore and admire, thank and praise, bless and glorify his holy Name, and his
unspeakable grace to you, Psalm. 50.15. Thus was holy David his Trade and
Practice, as you may find every where in his Psalm. 10.3, 1, 2. Psalm. 89, 1.
Psalm. 104, 1. Thus. he presses on others likewise, Psalm. 105.1, 2, 3. Psalm.
118, 1, 2. And the Apostle charges us, in every thing to give thanks and
praise, 1 These. 5.8. and tells us, That this is the will of God in Christ Jesus
concerning us. You must thank God with your hearts; as well as your lips, and
with your works and carriages, as well as with your Tongues; all must be
exercised in, and employed about this work. You have grace to do it withal,
therefore you must do it as becomes such. A deep sense of your unregenerate
states, and what the evil and misery of them was: Of what you are delivered
from, and called to, in your Regeneration; as also a deep and working sense of
the exceeding riches of Gods Grace, and what he has laid out, and expended on
you, to put you into a state and condition to thank and praise him acceptably,
is very necessary for you, to quicken and stir up your, hearts, and open your
mouths to this great Work and Duty. God minds, and takes special notice of what
you do in this matter, and also how you do it, and what your omissions are, at
any time. Hezekiah had received a new life from God, and he neglects to praise
and thank him; he did it not as he might, and was bound to have done it. This
God takes notice of, and Records it for our Learning, 2 Chronicles. 32.24, 25.
Christ healed ten Lepers, and takes notice but of one of them that returned
thanks and praise to God, Luke 17.17, 18.

Secondly, Make your Regeneration sure to your selves. This is your duty, and a
part of your new work: this you must, and this you may do. God would have you
to live in assurance, and walk in full assurance of Faith; and therefore he
has made it your duty, that you must do, and your Privilege, which you may
obtain and enjoy. Examine your selves (therefore) whether you are in the Faith,
and under Regeneration or no, 2 Cor. 13.5. And give diligence to make your
Calling and Election sure, 2 Pet. 1.10. Other men do not this work, neither
(indeed) can they do it; for they want materials to do it aright and to
purpose. But it must be one of your works and businesses to get and keep
Assurance of your new States; for is is your work and duty, and you will stand
in daily need of it, to encourage, strengthen, and quicken; to and in other
duties, and comfortable walking with God, as you ought to do, God will Seal and
confirm his own work in you, if he find you dutifully and diligently
endeavoring after it. For he has so Sealed and confirmed others, Ephesians. 1.14.
Ephesians. 4.30. And he has promised to do it for you, Hosea. 6.3. Pro. 2.1. -- 7.

If you live in doubt, and walk in darkness in this matter; Know that it is
ordinarily your own faults, which you may and must amend. It is because you are
negligent and careless, and do not all you may to get and keep assurance. It is
because you slight and undervalue it, and grieve the holy Spirit, who is
appointed to be your Regenerator and Sealer, Ephesians. 4.29.30. He does not, will
not help you to Assurance, because he sees you negligent to help your selves to
it. Therefore do your duty and make use of his means, by which he will do it
for you; and without which he will not, but leave you in the Wilderness of
doubts, darkness, fears, and heart-wounding distractions and perplexities.

3. Fix and resolve on a Trade of Godlyness, and universal respect and
obedience unto the whole will of God, and your duty. Mould and form, set up and
intend in your Judgments, hearts and consciences, a course, way, and trade of
holiness and walking with God, in conformity to his will as such. Take heed,
beware of delusions in your progress. You will be tempted and inveagled to take
up with Parts and Pieces of your work and duty, and to be partial in the Laws
of God accounting some duties indispensible and great, and others little and
dispensible; and so of Sins too. You will be tempted to look on this Sin as
great, and therefore you must avoid it, (that is well) but you will be tempted
to look on other Sins as little and next to none; and then dispense with the
commission of them, or not be so careful and diligent, as you might and ought
to be, to avoid and reject them. Regenerate men are too to often deluded and
ensnared by these and such like temptations, and fancies about Sin and duty,
which proves very destructive to their peace, and communion with God, and
exceedingly obstructive to their trading in Godlyness, and universal obedience,
as many can sadly experience.

Therefore I advise you, yea, the great God advises and exhorts you, to get the
whole Trade and course; the whole matter and way of Godliness, all your works
and duties, molded and framed in you: and take up fixed, peremptory, and
unchangable purposes and resolutions, notwithstanding temptations to the
contrary, to take up with, and really to practice all your duties, and the
whole will of God, that is or shall be made known to you. Thus did David, Psalm.
119.30. I have chosen the way of Truth: thy judgments have I laid before me.
And I will never forget thy precepts. Verse. 93. And again says he, I have
sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous Judgments, Verse.
106. Paul and other Saints did so, and it proved very advantageous to them.
They had their Trade and work of Godlyness fixed, formed, and settled in their
Judgments, Minds, Wills, and Consciences. They knew, or did endeavor to know
the whole service of their work and business, and as they grew into
Acquaintance with it, so they took it into their hearts and consciences; and
there it became a stated and a vowed interest of theirs; which produced (as a
means) their so willing, ready, steady, and constant practice of Godlyness,
and frequent Trade, Phil. 3.20. do you so too, and you will find the like
effects.

Fourthly. Take up in Christ. Live, walk, and Trade in Godliness, in, from, and
by him. He is the Author of your new states and beings, works and duties,
from him you must still have fresh supplies. The new Creature is but a Cistern
without him, it is he that can and must fill your Treasures, Pro. 8.21. He it
was who begot you to a lively hope, and set you in your new states, 1 Pet.
1.3.4. by the virtue and influence of his Life, Heb. 12.2. and it is he who
must and will nourish, and cause to grow that which he has begotten, Hosea.
14.8. That which I call here a taking up in, and living on Christ, is the same
(as I judge) which the Lord Jesus calls abiding in him, Joh. 15.4.5.6. Abide in
me and I in you: as the branch cannot bear fruit of its self, except it abide
in the Vine, no more can ye except ye abide in me. I am the Vine, ye are the
branches: he that abides i^ me, and I in him, the same brings forth much
fruit. For without me ye can do nothing. This is your exceeding great
privilege and happiness that you may, and your indispensible duty, that you
must, abide in Christ. That is, that you may and must take up in, live upon,
derive all supplies of Grace from him, as from your Root and Fountain. In him
are all your springs and he is the only fountain of Light, Life, Strength,
Faith, Hope, Peace, Joy, and Consolation. Remember what you heard before,
namely, that he is the Keeper, and great Lord Treasurer of all your stock,
portion, and supplies. God the Father sent and committed all into his hands for
you; and therefore be sure that you live on, in and upon him for all good. It
is appointed you should do so. God has commanded you so to do, and therefore
it is your duty: in and by this way and duty, you shall obtain your portion and
all supplies of Grace to enable you to discharge your duties, and perform your
works, and so it is your privilege and happiness. It is your privilege and
happiness to have such a stock and portion laid up and secured in his hands,
and that you may live in and upon him, and have free access to him for it. This
is a duty thou owe to God and Jesus Christ, yea, it is a duty thou owe thine
own Soul. By the wise, serious, and constant practice of this duty, thou will
greatly enrich thy self with all Grace and heavenly supplies. Thou shall be
furnished thereby to every good work, and made a fruitful branch in thy
Generati^^. In Christ lay all thy Treasures, and from (...) is thy fruit found,
Col. 2.3. Hosea. 14.8. Do thy duty, and he will supply all thy wants, make thee
wise unto salvation, and a fat and ^ourishing Member in the house of God. Thou
may freely and securely trust him with thy all, for thy God and Father, who
loves thee better than thou love thy self, has done so for thee, Math.
11.27. Joh. 3.35. Col. 1.19. Col. 3.9. And thou that art a Regenerate Person,
may ask what thou will of him, and he will do it for thee; and that because
he loves thee; is thy Trustee, and has thy stock and portion.

Fifthly. Give God thy all. Let him have thy all dedicated to him, and laid out
in his service and work every day. For thy all, is all his, and he expects of
thee no less then thy all. Whatever Talents thou have, he lent them thee, and
made thee his Steward to use and employ them for him, in his work and service.
God is the first cause, and last end of all thy enjoyments: he had himself in
his eye, and design, when he gave, or lent them to thee, as the great end, end
he requires and expects to have the fruit of all thy Receivings. It is true
that he allows thee a share in them; the Comfort of them is thine, but the
honor and Glory of them is his. That is his part and portion, the other is
thine. And therefore as thou have thy part and portion in, and out of them, so
be sure God have his also, and that in the first place. Let him not be put off
with a part of your Receivings, for he will have all or none. Whether he has
given, or lent thee much or little Grace, or any other good things, be sure
when thou do any service to or for him, to lay out and expend thy all in it,
as much as possible: for then thy little all shall be excepted, and he will
account thee a faithful servant, and himself respected and glorified by thee,
not else, whatever pretenses thou may make, by way of excuse? As you must not
take up with a part of your work and duty, and let the rest alone, (as was
showed) so you that are new Creatures must not think to put God off with a part
of your abilities and Receivings in his service, for that is to deal
deceitfully with him, and rob him of his due. He will have all or none. God
requires thee to honor him with thy substance, and with the first fruits of
all thine increase, Pro. 3.9. that is, with thy all. And thou shall love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy Soul, and with all thy mind,
Math. 22.37. That is, thou shall not fail to serve thy God with thy all. Thus
David did Psalm. 119.10. With my whole heart have I sought thee. And in Psalm.
103.1.2. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy
name. For doing this, the poor Widow was much commended, namely, for casting
into the Treasury, her all, Mark. 12.41. -- ult. Her mites was her offering to
God, the matter was small indeed, not worth the minding among men. I but it was
her all, and so it was of great account with Christ. The question is not about
the quantity, whether the offering be much or little, but whether it be thy all
or no. We are often tempted to put off God with part of our all, and with
pretense for our so doing. But let us take heed and beware of this gross and
horrible Hipocrisy, for God will not long winck at it. When we have been
tempted to do so, then we are put upon studying and making excuses when we
have Napkind up our Talents, and not brought them forth, then we had them not;
and when we have laid aside our strength, or not stirred it up to practice, then
alas we are poor weak Creatures, then we complain of wants and weaknesses,
when in truth it is our wickedness and carelessness. But take heed and beware of
this Temptation and deceit.

Sixthly. You must be singular and peculiar in all things, and in all your
ways, toward God and men. There should, yea, there must be as great a
difference between you and unregenerate men, as between light and darkness,
good and evil. For you are a holy people unto God, Children of light, and a
Special and a peculiar people indeed, Deuteronomy. 7.6. Ephesians. 5.8. Tit. 2.14. You are
of a divine make, and of a heavenly descent, and are born to and for higher and
more noble Acts, Works and Employments, and to more excellent frames and
carriages than others are. Therefore you must exceed and go beyond others, in
all manner of holy conversations and godliness: that thereby you may declare,
and hold forth your distinguishing Characters, and manifest what Grace can do,
beyond nature. I shall for brevity sake give you but hints of several things,
that you should be singular in. In the general, you must be singular in all
those works, frames of heart, carriages, duties, and deportments, which are
yours, or in an especial manner required of you, as new creatures, and which
other men are unacquainted withal.

1. As First, The exercise of all Graces in external duties. In all the
worship and ordinances of God, and in all religious matters, you must call up,
bring forth, and exercise all the Graces of the Spirit. There must not one
hooff be left behind of your Graces when you worship God, but all must be
employed in it. Your faith, Love, knowledge, zeal, hope, patience, etc.
whatever is entrusted in your hands to work and worship God withal, must
concur and work together in the doing of it.

2. Self-denial. This is always necessary in all your walkings with God. For
one accursed Self or other will always be interposing, opposing and
intercepting of you, to hinder and obstruct you, or to mar and utterly spoil
your duties and performances. You are called off from serving and gratifying
self, to the serving and pleasing of God, and you are called to the constant
work of Self-denial; and therefore you must do it.

Again; you must be singular in Watching and guarding, in keeping and
defending your selves against all your spiritual Enemies within and without,
and you must keep on, and make continual use of your Spiritual Armor, and
fight down all such Adversaries as raise up against you, Ephesians. 6.11-18. 1 Timothy
6.12 These are some of the many works and duties that you must be continually
exercised about and employed in; (...) which you shall find true peace and
comfort.

Secondly. You must expect many assaults and ^^^ng attempts upon you, from all
the Enemies of your Souls. The Devil, world and Lusts, will continually
endeavor to tempt, draw, and ensnare you to, and in all evil. They will not
let you ^one, but be always watching you, and improveing all their
opportunities against you ^ight and day, in all places and businesses, to
^^tice and persuade you to sin against God and men; to cause you to rob God,
wrong your own Souls, and injure men; and they are Subtle and potent. But I may
not enlarge at present. And therefore shall only mention some of the many
obligations God has laid on, and encouragements he has given you, to walk
with (...) unto all well pleasing in your new states. Remember what God has
made you, what excellent pieces of his Work-manship you are, and what expenses
the Lord Jesus has been at and hid out to make you a peculiar people unto
himself. He will never leave you nor forsake you, but water you every moment,
keep you night and day, supply all your wants, keep you by his mighty power,
and guide you by his Counsels until he shall receive you unto his glory, Heb.
13.5. Phill. 4.19. Isa. 27.3. 1 Pet. 1.5. Psalm. 73.24. The holy Ghost shall
abide with you for ever, Joh. 14.16. impart to, and convey into your Souls all
the fullness of Christ; Joh. 16.13.14.15. and whatever Christ has is yours.
His Joy, Peace, Life, Light, Strength, Love and Glory is your, 1 Cor. 3. and
you may go to, and have free access to him for all that is his.

FINIS.
Reader, I entreat thee to mend, and pass (...) charitable Judgment on the
faults thou will find in thy Reading, which are not the Authors, but the
Printers. The chiefest (...) them are here noted.
PAge 3. l. 14. put out of, p. 20. l. 4. put out word, p. 25. l. (...) for
hypocrisy r. apostasy, p. 28. l. 12. for hearers r. fea^^ p. 49. l. 13. for
verities r. verilies, p. 59. l. 8. r. repossess^ p. 62. l. 28. r. meetening, p.
63. l. 25. r. fixed, p. 70. l. 9. (...) for knowing, r. making, l. 33. put of
before or, p. 71. l. 12. (...) can, p. 72. l. 31. for will r. we, p. 85. l. 21.
r. external, p. 1^ l. 8. r. they, p. 118. l. 6. r. shining, p. 119. l. 12. r.
Regener^^^ p. 124. l. 30. r. will, p. 129. l. 11. r. accompanied with, p. 1^.
l. 23. for of r. as, p. 137. l. 9. for will 5. glory, p. 139. l. 31. (...) this
r. thy, p. 145. l. 13. r. abase, p. 148. l. 34. r. laid, p. 1^. l. 18. r.
cause, p. 155. l. 20. put out the, l. 21. r. upon, p. 160. (...) r. Jer. p.
173. l. 25. r. unregenerate, p. 177. l. 22. for but r. (...) p. 179. l. 9. r.
an, p. 185. l. 20. for to r. do, p. 188. l. 7. (...) that, p. 192. l. 13. r.
the, l. 32. r. conversion, p. 196. l. 17. (...) out ly, p. 197. l. 34. r. and
themselves about, p. 200. l. 13. ^. unregenerate, p. 204. l. 2. for now r.
know, p. 207. l. 11.1. (...) p. 208. l. 34. for now r. nor, p. 214. l. 22. r.
bequeathed, p. 2^. l. 10. r. own, p. 223. l. 32. r. your.


