A Form of Prayer, etc.
Translated from the Dutch.
O God who have commanded us to make our Address to thee in Times of Trouble,
with this Promise, That thou will deliver us; to the end that we may render our
most humble Thanks unto thee: We prostrate our selves in an extraordinary
manner before the Throne of thy Holy Majesty, to implore thy Succor from on
high, in this present Conjuncture, to travel for the Deliverance of thy Church.
Thou know, O God, how many Evils they have been made to suffer hitherto, and
the Designs wherein the Earthly Potentates have combined to destroy and root
them out, if it were possible, from off the Face of the Earth. We may say with
David, Why do the Nations Rage, and wherefore do the Kings of the Earth, and
the Princes take Consultations together against the Eternal, and against the
Anointed? Yea, great God, it is against thee they are set, since they would
destroy the Truth of thy Word, and set up an Idolatrous Worship, which is
abominable in thy Eyes. Look down O God, from the highest Heavens, upon the
Afflictions of thy People, and come down from the high Throne of thy Glory, to
overthrow and confound their Counsels and Combinations, which tend to no less
than the Oppression of thy poor Children, who groan under the heavy Load of
Persecution.

Assemble the Kings and Princes that serve thee in Purity, to defend thy Cause;
make them Victorious over thy Enemies; and do thou, Great God of Hosts, make
their Hands fit for War, and surround them with thy Protection. In particular,
we pray thee, vouchsafe thy Grace and Favor to thy Servant the Prince of
ORANGE, who has been particularly Affected with the Reproach and Injuries
done, and which they would still do to thy Church: Maintain his Cause, seeing
it is thine own; and Grant him thy Favor, that he may be Victorious over his
Enemies. His Enterprise is Dangerous, but what can he not do, if sustained by
thy good Hand? Command the Sea and its Boisterous Waves to be still before him;
bind up Contrary Winds, and let none Blow but what may be favorable to him.

Thou, O Great God! who sometimes said to Joshua, by thy Servant Moses, Be
Strong and of good Courage; do thou Strengthen and Invigorate this great
PRINCE; this Leader of thy People, this Great Joshua, whom thou have raised up
to us, as another Zerubbabel, to build up thy Jerusalem; That he may be girded
with thy Power and Might, that he may be Vnafraid in the greatest of Dangers,
that he may have the Strength of Sampson, the Success of Gideon, the Victories
of David; and that finally after the signal Victories, that thou shall Crown
him with, he may be a Prince Peaceable as Solomon: Approve, O Lord, the
Blessing which we join in with him.

The Eternal, (O Great PRINCE) answer thee in the day of Trouble; the name of
the God of Jacob be thy safe Refuge, and send thee Succor from his Holy Place,
and sustain thee out of Sion, and remember all the Offerings which he gives
thee, according to thy Heart, and fulfill all thy Counsel.

O Lord, thou know that thou broughtest this great PRINCE into the World, as
it were by a Miracle; thou have Preserved him by the same Miraculous Power:
Thou have been his God from his Mother's Womb; Thou have laid thy Protecting
Hand on his Knees, and preserved him from the Hands of his Enemies; Thou have
hitherto wrought great things by his Valor and Courage; Thy People look upon
him as the Pillar of thy Church; and would thou Great God, Deprive them of
this Support, which in this Unhappy time is all our Consolation? Remember O
Eternal God, the Travels of his Forefathers, for the Establishment and
Maintaining of thy Holy Gospel; they have Experienced in a thousand Occasions,
That thou have been their God, Thou have preserved them in Wars, in Sieges, in
Battles, and in a thousand Dangers.

We hope Lord of thy great Mercy, that thou will still Protect with thy great
Power, this PRINCE, who has many Formidable Enemies against his Head. Shorten,
O Lord, Shorten rather our Days, than those of so Precious a Person. Let thy
Holy Angels Encamp round about him; make them Fight for him, as once thou did
in the days of Sennacherib, to Destroy those Idolaters, who would Oppose
themselves against the Armies; And lend, O Lord, the Guards of thy Grace and
Truth, that this Prince may accomplish his just Enterprise, and that thy Church
set up its Banners, and sing a Holy Song, God is Arisen, and his Enemies are
Scattered; Halelujah, Halelujah! Salvation and Power belong to our Eternal God.

Bear up, heavenly Father, the Heart of his Illustrious Consort, her Royal
Highness the PRINCESS of ORANGE, in this Trial; Fortify her against all the
Fears, which may seize her Royal Heart; and say to her Soul, that thou will
give Deliverance to her Spouse, and that no Evil shall come near his Tent.
Hear, Holy Father, the Fervent Prayers, which she sends up before thy
Presence; That thy good Spirit may be with her, to Comfort her in this Trial;
that none may come near her Sacred Person, but the Bringers of good Tidings:
Thou will do it, O Lord, seeing thou have filled her Heart with the fear of thy
great Name: She hops in thee, grant that she may never be put to Confusion:
Preserve her in Life, in Health, to thee, that being raised up to the high
Dignity, which we so ardently wish, she may be a Nursing-Mother of the Church,
the Esther of the Age, a Blessed Mary, and bring forth another Savior to the
World, who may Defend the Church, and cause thy Gospel to be carried to the
utmost Ends of the Earth.

Alas! O Lord, we might expect all this Grace with Assurance, were we not
great Sinners: But as we find our selves extremely Culpable, we are in
continual fears; strengthen us, O Eternal God, by thy Holy Mercy, blot out our
Great Sins, for the sake of our Savior; in whose Name we call upon thee, and
in whose words we further pray: Our Father, etc.

Exeter, Printed by J. B. 1688.


