A DISCOURSE Concerning God's Judgments; Resolving many weighty QVESTIONS and
CASES Relating to them. Preached (for the substance of it) at OLD SWINFORD IN
WORCESTERSHIRE: And now published to accompany The annexed NARRATIVE,
Concerning the Man whose Hands and Legs lately rotted off: In the neighboring
Parish of KINGS-SWINFORD, IN STAFFORDSHIRE; Penned by another Author.

By SIMON FORD, D. D. and Rector of the said Parish.

LONDON: Printed by A. C. for Henry Brom, at the Gun at the West End of St.
Paul's, 1678.

Imprimatur.

Sept. 25. T. Turner.

To his Honored Friends, THOMAS TOLEY OF KEDERMINSTER; AND PHILIP TOLEY OF
PRESTWOOD-HALL, Esquires.
Honored Sirs,
THat I join both your Names in one Dedication, is not barely because you are
Brethren, both in Nature, and endeared affection each to other: but also,
because you have been, and still are so, in the particular kindnesses you have
for me, and my labors. For I gratefully acknowledge, that from the free and
unexpected donation of the elder of you, I am fixed in this Sphere wherein I
now move: and from the others near neighborhood I receive constant expressions
of a more than ordinary value for my Ministry. And withal, knowing the great
Influence both your Names have on those parts, to the benefit of which
especially the following Papers are designed; I thought it necessary in the
publication of them to desire your joint-countenance in the recommendation of
them to your many Tenants and Dependants. A request, which I doubt not to
obtain from you, because I know both your hearts are already possessed with a
just veneration of that great Providence which occasioned them, and an hearty
desire that all those who any way relate to you may be bettered thereby.

Which Providence, as it filled all these parts, and thence the whole Nation,
for some months, with discourse and wonder; and exercised the curiosity of all
inquisitive Persons, whose occasions brought them near the place where it was
acted; and I hope has contributed toward the edification of many of them. So
the consideration thereof excited me to attempt to render it more serviceable
to that great End. This I endeavored lately, by preaching several Sermons
relating to that occasion, to my own Congregation, who had generally been led
either by their Curiosity, or better Motives (as it is to be hoped of diverse of
them) to the sight of that sad spectacle, exposed by the Divine Majesty to
public view so near their own habitations: and afterward upon the declared
opinion of diverse Judicious Auditors, that they might be more publicly useful,
reviewed them, and fitted them, as well as such plain Country Discourses could
be, without wholly altering the frame of them, for the Press.

And this I did, the rather because they were thought fit by the Reverend
Author of the annexed Narrative in particular, to accompany it into the world;
which he therefore sent to me, that I might so annex it; and withal, might
farther assist it to the obtaining its honest end, by my attestation and
recommendation.

And the former of these (though he needs it not) I do hereby readily give him,
as being assured by unquestionable Testimony, (though I my self was out of the
Country, during the greatest part of the time wherein that sad Providence was
acting) that the substance of what he relates is exactly True, and concerning
the Particulars, (seeing they are averred upon his own Personal knowledge, who
by occasion of the nearness of his residence, being within the bounds of the
same Parish, was the most frequent Visitor of the Party whose condition he
relates) no man can rationally doubt, who knows him, (as you both have for many
years) or will but ask a character of him from you.

The latter, because I need not give it as to you, to whom the knowledge of the
Author himself sufficiently recommends it; and yet I desire to give it to
others by you; and beg the same again my self from you on the behalf of the
discourse prefixed, which (as being more properly mine own) I hereby consign,
with my self, to your service, as being,

Honored Sirs, Your most affectionate and obliged Servant in the work of the
Lord Jesus, SIMON FORD.
Old Swinford, Sept. 20. 1677.
To the Christian Readers of this Discourse, and the annexed Narrative:
Especially the Inhabitants of Old Swinford and Kings-Swinford, with the Town of
Sturbridge, and the adjacent Parishes and Hamlets.
Christian Readers, and especially you of this Neighborhood,
I Suppose many (if not most) of you are already acquainted with the Providence
which occasioned these Papers I now present you with: or, if any be strangers
thereto, they may be informed thereof from the Narrative annexed. The Reverend
Author whereof (sufficiently known to diverse of you both for his ability and
integrity) has thought fit to honor me so far, as to recommend the
publication of it to me, together with this Discourse, the substance whereof,
on the same occasion, was lately preached in the hearing of a considerable
number of you.

That I direct them to you especially of this Neighborhood, will be a
sufficient Testimony to Aftertimes, that the matter of Fact to which they
relate, is an undoubted Truth, seeing it dares in this manner to appear so
open-faced before the whole Country where the Scene of it lay: and also a
convictive Testimony against all those of you (if any such there shall be) who
after so loud a call to repentance and amendment of life, shall continue in the
practice of those sins for which the deceased young man (once your Neighbor)
acknowledged to so many of his Visitants, that the Divine Majesty made him a
spectacle to so many hundreds (I might say thousands) for so many Months
together.

Wherefore my earnest request to you, is, that you will often recall to your
memories that sad stroke, which whilst it was fresh News, so affected all the
Spectators and Auditors thereof; that you may not lose the good Impressions
then wrought in any of you. And to help you therein, when you find them wearing
off, let this Book be your Monitor to renew and govern them; which was the end
why it was published and directed to you especially, by your Servant in the
Gospel,

S. F.

PSALM. ix. 16. the former part. The Lord is known by the Judgment which he
executes.


THE Discourse that I shall make to you upon this Text, (as I suppose you will
easily ghess, if I should not tell you) is occasioned by as remarkable an
Instance of Gods just Providence, (which most of you know to have lately fallen
out in our neighborhood, and that so notoriously, as to fill all men's Tongues
and Ears with the discourse of it, and the Eyes of many hundreds, if not
thousands of them with the beholding it;) as it may be, in all the
circumstances, is hardly to be parallei'd in any History.

And that which induced me to make such a discourse on this occasion, was,
partly, because I thought it needful (at this convenient distance of Time
wherein the common talk concerning it as News, is almost spent) to recall it
again to your thoughts in a more serious and edifying way; lest it should die,
as to its best use among you, as nine days wonders, (according to the Proverb)
are wont to do? And partly, that (seeing the apprehensions of men have been so
different, and their discourses so various about it, most men judging of it
according to their particular Tempers and Humors, in compliance with the
Principles they are governed by;) I might, so far as such works of God, the
main springs whereof are concealed in his own breast, may be understood by us,
help you in some competent measure so to understand it, as to turn it to your
greatest benefit and advantage: And lastly, that having now gained the sight of
a just and impartial Narrative of that sad Story from a Reverend Person of
great Integrity, and a diligent enquirer into all the circumstances thereof,
(to most of which he was an eye and ear-witness) I might dispose you to receive
it when it comes to public view with more readiness, and give it the better
entertainment, being instructed before how to make use of it.

And the Text I have chosen for this purpose, is part of a Verse made
remarkable by two unusual words in the close of it; which, though Interpreters
agree not in the expounding of them, yet they generally concur in this, that
they have something extraordinary in them, [viz. Higgaion, Selah.] For,
whatever the latter may mean; or whether it be a bare Note in Music, which is
an undetermined dispute: the former of them, by the signification of the Ab
(...) locutus est ore; vel cord, meditatus est.
root whence it is derived, evidently recommends to us a matter of serious
meditation.

And such indeed the Verse is, being a solemn and weighty attestation of the
holy Psalmist to the Divine Providence, upon occasion of some remarkable
appearance of it, on the behalf of his Church against some of their heathen
Enemies; which is the subject of the preceding part of the Psalm: the account
whereof he seals up with this Epiphonematical Instruction to all the world,
[The Lord is known by the Judgment which he executeth] and especially, by this
oftentimes most remarkable circumstance accompanying it, that he makes
offenders themselves the executioners thereof upon themselves, and ensnares
them in the work of their own hands.

From the former part of which Divine Testimonial, (as I may properly call it)
I intend, on this occasion, to handle this plain observation.

That Gods public signal Judgments upon any offender or offenders are evident
Testimonies by which he is known to mankind. Doct.


In the handling of which Observation, I shall endeavor these seven things:

1. To show you, what I mean, by these public signal Judgments of God upon
offenders. 2. To evince, by such evidence, as I hope will be satisfactory to
all rational men, that there are some such penal strokes inflicted by God on
offenders in this life, as deserve the name of signal Divine Judgments; and
that such events are not (as Atheists pretend) the mere products of chance, or
casualty. 3. To prove, that God is (or ought to be) known by such Judgments as
these. 4. To explain, what of God it is, which may be, and usually is made
known by them. 5. To give you the proper Characters, by which such Divine
Judgments are differenced from like Providence befalling men on other
accounts. 6. To direct you in the application of such Judgments to particular
persons and cases, so as that you may not offend against Justice or Charity. 7.
And lastly, to close up this whole Discourse with some useful practical
Inferences.
1. First, To show you, [What I mean by these public signal Judgments of God
on offenders.] And here you are first to understand, that Gods Judgments in the
notion of the Holy Scriptures, are of two sorts, to wit,

His Judicia Judicantia, and Judicata.


1. His Judicia Judicantia; or Judgments pronounced in the Sentence of his Law,
dooming offenders to such penalties for their offenses against it. And it is
usual with the Scripture to call the Laws of God, on this account, his
Judgments, and to join them with Statutes, as words of like import, as I could
show in very many places.

2. His Judicia Judicata; or Judgments (in the phrase of the Text) executed,
which are the former dooms actually inflicted; and are therefore called by the
name of those, according to which they do befall men. Now, though it be true,
that no evil of suffering befalls any sinner, but what (to speak properly) is
such a Judgment of God, because all evils penal are before denounced in Gods
Law, which every sinner breaks: yet the Scripture is not wont to call them all
by that name. For that is usually applied to those penal strokes of God, which
have some special Characters of his Vindictive Justice upon them; to wit,
something in the nature of them, that is not (...), common to men; or in the
Circumstances, something of surprising suddenness from the unexpectedness or
unlikelyhood of their befalling men, in respect of the Time, Place, Condition,
Employment, Company, etc. or something unusual in the Instruments by which, or
manner in which they are inflicted, etc. and especially, if there be any thing
in them, that appears to be either above, or contrary to, or but besides the
wonted course of Nature, and so is either miraculous, or prodigious.

Now these Two, are either inflicted on sinners in a private way, so as few or
none know of them, but such as feel them, and those who are intimately
conversant with them: or else they are laid on them in a public notorious
manner, (as the Judgments amongst us pronounced upon great offenders are wont
to be executed) so as to call in, and invite Spectators to behold them. And
such Judgments, as these last, the Text must be meant of; and of such I desire
to be understood, in what follows on this Argument.

And this shall suffice for my first undertaking.

II. The second deserves to have more Time spent on it, because it contains the
main foundation of the whole following Discourse. For, if there be no such
Judgments executed by God at all; Eccles. 9.11.
but Time and Chance, (in this case as well as others) not only happen to all,
but govern all too: then there can be no knowledge of God drawn from them. Yea,
if there be no such things as Divine Judgments; then the very God they are
supposed to attest to, (which is that the Atheist would have) may, for all
their Testimony, not be. Whereas, if we evince by Reason, that any, though
never so few, of those Events, cannot be produced but by a Divine Providence;
we do both prove the being of such a Providence, and withal vindicate Religion,
from the imputation of being superstitious, in attributing all others of like
nature to the same cause.

And therefore on this Head, I take my self to be obliged to make good these
Two things.

1. That there are some penal Events which can by no rational Person be justly
attributed to mere chance or casualty, or any like cause not capable of choice
or design, in its actings. 2. That such penal Events, as these, must therefore
be the effects of a Providence, and that Providence Divine.
I. The first of these Propositions, I prove by the following Arguments.

1. There are some penal Events befalling men in this world, which have been
punctually threatened and foretold, as they have in the Issue fallen out: and many
of them so threatened and foretold in the very Circumstances, with which they
were accompanied in the Event. As for instance,

(1.) In reference to the generality of Mankind. So in the first Threatening
annexed to the Law given to our first Parents in Paradise; Genesis 2.17.
the daily experience of all Humane Nature, (taken notice of by Heathens
themselves) shows it to have been punctually fulfilled, in the corruption and
calamities generally befalling the whole race of Men. And that other, in the
Law given to Noah, Genesis 9.6.
that whosoever sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed; is
continually (in the almost miraculous discoveries of Murders, and bringing
Murderers to condign punishment) verified in the observation of the generality
of Mankind to this very day. As also is that, of the wonderful ways by which
Conspiracies against Sovereign Princes are brought to light, according to the
notable threatening to that purpose, Eccles. 10.20. (2.) And in reference to
particular Persons, and Nations. See, and compare Number. 20.12, 27,
28.24.27.12.15. Deuteronomy. 32.49.34.5.
So in the exclusion of Moses and Aaron from Canaan, it is taken notice of
expressly in the account given of their deaths, (of Aarons, by Moses, his own
Brother, and of Moses his own, by him that fills up his Story after his
decease) that it fell out to both of them according to what God had denounced.
And it were easy to add many more of the same kind, to particular Persons.
But, 1 Kings 13.
that of the old Prophet to the disobedient Prophet at Bethel; 2 Kings 7.19, 20.
that of Elisha to the incredulous Lord in Samaria; those of Elijah and Micaiah
to Ahab and Jezebel, 2 Kings 21.19.23.22, 28.
shall suffice, instead of all the rest, whereof the Historical part of
Scripture is full, because they are so notoriously evident, to all that know
the Bible.
And as to Nations. To omit the long Catalogue of all the plagues of Egypt,
threatened and inflicted in the circumstances mentioned in the relation of them:
that one great Instance of the often foretold Captivity of the whole Jewish
Nation; is so observable, and so attested beyond all exception by the public
Records of that Nation held to this day by all their Posterity in veneration,
that there is no more (nay not so much) cause to doubt it, then there is, that
England was conquered by William the Norman.

I shall close this Argument with two Instances, so punctual in a circumstance
of all others most unlikely to be lighted on by chance; that I know not what
can be objected against them to invalidate the force of them, but an Exception
against the Records themselves, whence they are taken: to which I shall
therefore add a word or two anon.

The one, is that of the Judgment denounced against Jeroboams Altar, 1 Kings
13.2.
and the Priests that offered on it, to be executed (as it was) by Josiah, 2
Kings 23.16.
mentioned by his very Name, about 300 years before the performance.

The other, is that of the destruction of Babylon (in order to the restitution
of the Jewish Nation;) wherein Cyrus is also, by his very Name, Isa. 44. ult.
and 45.1, 2.
foretold to be the Person that (as he did) was to effect it. Which Prophecy,
by the learned Grotius his computation, was uttered 170 years, and by that of
Junius and others, above 200, before he accomplished it, or probably was in
being. And the very manner how he was to take that great Imperial City, (to
wit, by the turning away and drying up Euphrates) is so lively described by the
Prophet Jeremy; that the Heathen Authors, ( Herodotus, Jer. 50.38.51.31, 32.
and others) who give us an account of the event, justify the verification of
the prediction the same way.

Now in these and the like Predictions of future Events, with such
circumstances, there is no man but must allow a greater certainty, (with
respect to the causes on which they depend) then there can be in any products
of mere Casualty. Which is my first Argument.

2. The second is this. There are Instances of some penal Events, that have
been brought upon offenders in a way of formal Proceeding; yea, such as is
usual even in Humane Judicatures. For Instance. When Joshua had forbidden the
embezelling any part of the spoil of Jericho under the penalty of a Divine
Curse, Josh. 6.18.7 16, 17, 18.
Achan, the offender, falls under the danger of it: Upon the discomfiture of
the Host before Ai, enquiry is made after the unknown Transgressor of that Law.
Then he is found out by the direction of a fourfold Lot, that brought all the
people (down to his very family) under a scrutiny, till the Lot takes him. Then
follows his Examination, Confession, Judgment, and Execution. And not much
unlike was the Process, Jon. 1.
by which Jonah was cast into the Sea, and there imprisoned in the belly of a
Whale, till his Repentance procured his Release. Now, abating the extraordinary
way of discovery in these two cases; the rest of the Procedure in these
Judgments in formed Methodically, according to the order of Humane Justice. And
must these proceedings (in so exact a Method too) be attributed to mere
Casualty? May not the persons who have the confidence to assert this, as well
affirm that Malefactors are hanged at Tyburn by mere Casualty, when they have
been seized by order of Law, committed to Newgate by warrant, tried at the
Sessions House, and having received their Sentence upon the Verdict of a Jury,
been conducted to the place of Execution, and there turned off the Cart, by the
known Officers thereunto by Law appointed?

3. My third Argument is this. In the actual punishing of offenders, many times
the Instruments made use of have been irrational Creatures; and yet have by an
unknown Influence been directed to act, as if they were governed by Principles
of Justice, as well as Reason: as putting an evident discrimination and
difference betwixt them and the innocent, when both of them have equally been
within their Power. In the famous case of the plagues of Egypt, how came the
Frogs, the Flies, the Hail, and the Plague, etc. to seize only the Houses,
Cattle, bodies of Egyptians, and not touch an Israelite, or any of his
concerns, when (as it appears, by the order for the sprinkling of the Jews
houses with the blood of the Paschal Lamb for distinction) they lived, for the
most part, Exodus 12.22.
and conversed intermixedly each with other? How was it, that the waters of the
Red Sea stood as a wall on both sides, whilst the Israelites were marching
through it; and returned to their course, Exodus 14.
so soon as they came on dry land, to overwhelm Pharaoh and his Host, who were
in pursuit of them? When the three glorious Confessors were adjudged to the
fiery Furnace by Nebuchadnezzar, whence came it that the fire (so ragingly hot
as it was) abstained from touching so much as one hair of their heads, or
singing their Garments, and to burn only their bonds asunder, and set them at
liberty to walk in it, Dan. 3.22. to 27.
who were cast in bound: and yet to lick up and devour (even without the mouth
of the Furnace) those who cast them in? And when Daniel himself was cast into
the Lions Den, and lodged among them in the bottom of the Den, one whole night,
whence was it, that the hungry and cruel beasts did not the least hurt to him;
and yet the very same Lions, when his Accusers and their Relations were cast in
thither, had the mastery of them, Dan. 6.22, 23, 24.
and brake all their bones in pieces, before they came to the bottom of the
Den? Lastly, (to name no more Examples of this nature) when the Lion, according
to the prediction of the old Prophet at Bethel, 1 Kings 13.
slew the Man of God that against Gods Commandment had eaten and drunk there;
was he directed by mere chance so to do? Did he (being hungry, and seeking for
Prey) light on him casually only? If so, why (according to the usual wont of
such beasts of prey, as they observe who have been in those Countries, to
forbear falling on Men, but when they can light on no other food) did he not
seize on his Ass rather; but kill him, and not touch his Ass, that (as
unconcerned in the danger) was afterward found standing by his side? Verse 28.
Why did he only kill him, and not devour him, and then withdraw to his Den:
but rather choose to stand by him, as resolved to avouch the fact: and that all
the while the news was carrying to the City, and came by report to the old
Prophet, and his Horse sadling, and he and his company traveling to the place
of that sad spectacle? And when they came, why did he suffer them to carry away
his prey so tamely as it seems he did? Do these things look like mere
Casualties? Is it not rather evident, that such Agents acting so differently
from their own nature and inclination, (so as to punish only the guilty, and
single them out among others equally within their reach) were directed by an
Intelligent Cause, by whose order and Commission they made this difference? And
this is our second Proposition to be proved upon this Head; [That seeing these
things cannot fall out by mere chance, or any thing else of like nature, they
must be governed by Divine Providence] which I make good by these steps of
rational Argumentation. Such Events as fall not out by chance, fall out
according to choice or contrivance. That choice and contrivance (in matter of
punishment) must either be the choice and contrivance of the Sufferer or
Inflicter. Sufferers are not wont to choose and contrive their own harms: but
rather to avoid, and use what means they can to guard themselves from them. If
the Inflicter (then) choose and contrive the punishmenes mentioned; then, as
the contrivance argues him to be a rational Being; so the bringing his
contrivances to pass by such Instruments as have been mentioned, and with such
certainty, argues him to be such a Being, as has a predominant power over
Nature it self: which can be no other then Divine; and these effects mentioned,
and the like, can be no other then the products of his Infinite Power and
Wisdom, as you will see more anon.

Against the force of these Arguments, I cannot imagine how the Atheist can
guard his Principles, but by excepting against the Evidence of the matter of
fact in the Instances before mentioned: Seeing there is no clear proof of them,
in most of the cases, but from the H. Scriptures; which, though we own and
reverence, yet he looks on with contempt and scorn, as not owning the Authority
we allow them.

But he ought to consider, that it is not in this whole process of
Argumentation in Question before us, whether these writings be divinely
inspired or no? There is, herein, no other esteem required to be given them, by
him, but only what is due to credible Histories. And it is enough for our
present purpose, if they can justify themselves to be true Records of those
matters which fell out in those Ages which they undertake to account for. And
so much I can hardly imagine, how any man can have the forehead to deny:
considering that they have all those Motives of credibility for them, (with the
advantage of indisputable Antiquity, and the having been owned by so great a
part of the World for so many Ages) which other Histories whatsoever can
pretend to. Whence it must appear to all unbiassed Judges, that he that will
allow (upon the Motives mentioned) Plutarch, and Thucydides, and Livy, and
Tacitus, and other such Historians to be competent witnesses of the matters of
fact related by them; must needs be governed by prejudice rather then Reason,
if he deny the same to Moses and other Jewish Historians, concerning the
matters falling out among them, who are, and have been always in greater esteem
in their own Nation, (who best knew their own story) then those mentioned ever
were either in Greece or Rome.

But if yet (notwithstanding all that has been said to the contrary) the
Atheist will still persist in denying the matters of fact upon which the former
Arguments are bottomed, because they are (for the greatest part) only recorded
in that book, which it is the Interest of his Irreligion to disbelieve: What
will he say to two Instances, (which I have purposely reserved to this place,
because they are so great, as to prove themselves to be the effects of a Divine
Providence; Vid. H. Grot. Annot. ad libros suos de ver. Rel. Chr.
and because they are confirmed by several Heathen Authors too, as well as
related in the Holy Scripture) I mean the universal Deluge, and the destruction
of Sodom and Gomorrah? For if these Instances de facto be true; to which there
is such a concurring Evidence; he will find it very difficult to persuade
himself, (that I say not others) that so vast a quantity of waters as so
covered all the face of the earth, and overflowed the highest Mountains, could
be collected by any power less then Divine; and much less, come together by
chance: and will be no less puzzled, to show by what inferior Agent such a fire
as burnt those Cities could be kindled; and burn with that vehemence, as to
preserve its remembrance without alteration in a Lake of sulphurous water for
so many thousand years; (though that Lake continually for so long together has
swallowed all the Streams of so great a River as Jordan falling into it) which
is the constant wonder of all Travelers to this day.

And so I discharge my second undertaking, to prove, [That there are some such
Judicial Providence that have been executed by God.]

III. I come now to the third, to show, [That God is, or ought to be, known by
them] as he that works them upon that design. And here I shall be but brief, as
indeed I need not to be large in a matter so plain and evident both from Reason
and Scripture. For (1.) in Reason, what can be the end of Sovereign Providence
in such extraordinary appearances, but to manifest it self and its Author? An
end, for which even men are wont to do those great things which at any time
they have attained to, in public Theaters, or other great concourses of
people, as our Saviors kindred tell him. (2.) And the Scripture also declares
no less in other places. Jo. 7.4.
So, when the Royal Psalmist prophetically imprecateth those dreadful Judgments
which make up the greatest part of the 83. Psalm; in the last Verse he assigns
the intended use of them to all the world; to wit, That men may know that he
alone whose Name is Jehovah, Psalm. 83. ult.
is the most High over all the Earth? And God himself is elsewhere brought in,
upon the Desolations which he had made by his penal Providence in the Heathen
world for oppressing his people, as calling on all men to behold those his
works, and be still, ( i. e. to cease from farther hostilities against his
Interests) as knowing by experience already dearly bought, that he is God, and
(will they, nill they) resolved to be so, Psalm. 96.8, 9, 10.
and to be exalted in the earth.


In a word, (to add no more Texts for proof of that which almost every Page in
the Bible attests unto) the whole Church are by the Author of the Apocalypse
represented (upon such notable Judicial Providence) as singing the Song of
Moses and the Lamb, ( i. e. a Christian Song, like that of Moses after the
drowning of the Egyptians) and therein instructing all the world in this Duty.
Rev. 15.3, 4.
Who (say they) shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy Name; for all
Nations shall come and worship before thee, for thy Judgments are made
manifest? Even as Moses and the Israelites in the Song to which this is
parallel, infer from the Judgments of God on Pharaoh and his Host, Who is like
thee, O Lord, among the Gods? Who is like thee, Exodus 15.11.
glorious in Holiness, fearful in Praises, (or the Actions whence thou
gatherest thy Praise) doing Wonders? And this opens the way to my sourth Head.

IV. The Enquiry concerning [What of God it is, which is known or to be known
by these signal Judgments?]

And to this Enquiry I answer Two things.

1. His Being, and Existence. [That there is a God.] For he that executes
Judgment so, as no finite limited Being, no created Power can, must needs be a
Supreme uncreated Being; that is, God. And this is an Argument so strongly
conclusive against the Atheist, that he is forced (to secure his Principles) to
fly to that sorry refuge of lies, which I have before refuted; to buoy up his
reputation among those who know not the difference betwixt Reason and Noise,
and judge no disputant baffled, that has any thing to say, though what he says
be next to nothing. For, as he that is a mere stranger in England, if yet he
see Courts of Judicature, constantly kept in the Kings Name, and Criminals
continually punished by a Power deputed and commissioned by him; cannot
rationally doubt, whether there be a King in England: so neither can any man,
with any color of Reason; seeing Gods Judicial Providence continually
executing his known Laws, make it a Question, Whether there be a God that
judges the Earth. Thus is Jehovah known by his Judgments, to be Jehovah. 2.
His eminent Divine Perfections and Glorious Attributes are illustriously
manifested by his Judgments executed. As for Instance, (1.) His Justice; Which
in these remarkable Providence always justifies it self; as ordinarily
lighting upon those offenders, concerning whom not only their own Consciences,
(as in the confession of Pharaoh himself, crying out [The Lord is righteous,
and I and my people are wicked.] Exodus 9.27.) but also the whole world are, or
may be, abundantly satisfied they have deserved it: yea, and among them, even
they who not only commit those crimes which they see punished in others, but
promote them, by showing the pleasure they take in those that do them, yet know
that they who do such things are worthy of death; Romans 1. ult.
and approve the Judgment of God, even in those Sentences and Executions
wherein they themselves are implicitly condemned. (2.) His Mercy and Goodness;
In many particulars. As 1. when he spares so many for every one that he smites,
though equally criminal: and is as remarkable in his patience and
long-suffering to some, as he is in his severity to others. 2. In punishing
less then men's iniquities deserve, Ezra 9.13.
by how much the greatest temporal suffering, that can be, is less than Hell.
3. In making the greatest evils men suffer here, occasions and means to
preserve them from greater Judgments hereafter. 4. And lastly, in making his
severities to the worst of men the means of signal preservations and
deliverances to those that are eminently good; and showing thereby, that he as
well knows how to deliver the righteous, 2 Pet. 2.9.
as to punish the wicked.
(3.) His Omnipotent Power, and Sovereign Greatness, whilst [1.] he reaches
those Malefactors that are too high for Humane Justice, and pride themselves in
their uncontrolableness by Humane Laws. Thus, by his dealing with Pharaoh,
Exodus 5.2.
who would own no Lord but himself, he draws an acknowledgement from Jethro,
that he was greater than all Gods, because in the thing wherein the proud
Tyrant and his people dealt proudly, Exodus 18.11.
he was above them. And [2.] whilst he summons in the posse of the whole
Creation to bring such over-sized Malefactors to Execution, and arms the very
meanest and most contemptible of them, (as flies, and lice, and frogs) with
weapons to subdue and conquer them. And [3.] lastly, whilst he sometimes makes
a kind of new Creation, to serve his just ends, by altering the very course of
Nature. as in the general deluge, when the very Fountains of the great Deep
were broken up, i. e. The waters which were in the bowels of the Earth, with
those of the vast Ocean it self, left their proper seat naturally appointed for
them, and came up to cover the face of the Earth. Genesis 7.11.

(4.) His Verity or Truth; Often, in the performance of particular threatenings
and predictions in particular cases, as those before mentioned: and always,
(even in them too) in fulfilling the general Curses and denunciations of his
wrath against the Transgressors of his Laws. So that men are hereby convinced,
that his Judgments are not only righteous, but true. Apoc. 15.3.16.7.19.2.
(5.) His Omniscience, or certain knowledge of all the Words and Actions of
men, though never so much concealed in all imaginable secrecy: and yet
oftentimes by the process of his Judicial Providence he brings them to light.
For (1.) by them he sometimes draws out of the bosoms of offenders, by their
own Confession, (as in the cases of Achan, Jonah, and others) those things
which were not otherwise discoverable. And (2.) by strange and unusual
accidents he sets the inquisitive humor of men on work, to lay odd and uncouth
passages and circumstances together, till at last they make a sufficient
concurrent Evidence, to convict Malefactors of secret and unknown Crimes; than
which there is nothing more usual in ordinary Courts of Justice. So that it
comes frequently to pass, as Zophar observes, that the Heavens first reveal
men's iniquities, Job 20.27.
and then the earth rises up against them.
(6.) And lastly, (not to multiply more particulars on this Head) his Infinite
Wisdom, and most Prudent Counsel; whereby he manageth those penal Providence
so, as to out-wit the wisest of men, when they employ all their Policy to
secure themselves: by which he shows himself wonderful in Counsel, and gives
the world daily occasion wisely to consider his doings, Psalm. 64.9.
to find out the admirable contexture of the wheels and springs, by which that
great Engine is moved, which takes the wise in their own craftiness, Job 5.13.
and snares the wicked (as the following part of my Text expresses it) in the
work of their own hands.

And in many of those great works, when Ages have studied them all they can,
yet still there is something remaining undiscoverable to exercise the wonder of
the most curious Enquirers, and make them cry out with the holy Apostle, Romans
11.33.
O the depth! How unsearchable are Gods Judgments, and his ways past finding
out! And this shall suffice to be spoken to my fourth Head.

V. The fifth follows, to wit, To give you the best account I can, of [The
distinguishing Characters by which such Divine Judgments are differenced from
like Providence befalling men upon other Accounts.]

The reason of which disquisition is, because God many times either actively
inflicts, or (at least) passively permits great afflicting evils, to befall
men, yea, the best men; which are not to be ranked by us under this Head of
Judicial Executions, as being intended by God to promote holy Designs of his
own of quite a different Nature, and tendency.

Now in the pursuance of this great Enquiry, I shall first adventure to your
consideration some general observations concerning Divine Judgments, which may
conduce to the governing our selves in it with due caution: and then give you
the Characters I promised.

1. The general observations are these.

[1.] That such public signal Judgments as my Text and Doctrine suppose, are a
sort of Divine Providence which God does more rarely than is ordinarily
believed, exhibit to the world. For he himself calls the execution of Judgment
in such public and notorious manner, Isa. 28.21.
his strange work. And (speaking after the manner of men) tells us, Lam. 3.33.
it is that which he does not willingly, i. e. not of his own natural
propension, but upon the urgency of some special occasions, which indispensably
require it. Wherefore it is, that the obliging Instances of his Mercy and
Bounty, his Patience and long suffering, and other expressions of his Goodness,
(his most natural Attribute) are the daily and hourly exercise of his
Providence: but those other harsh aad unwelcome Issues of it (like unnatural
Births) are produced but now and then. And that (1.) partly, because this world
is not properly seculum Mercedis, Romans 2.9.
the season for the revelation of the righteous Judgment of God, wherein to
render to every man according to his works; but that business is reserved for
the world to come, and the Day in which he has appointed to judge the world by
the man whom he has ordained: Acts 17.31.
and he thinks it (therefore) not fit to lessen the expectation thereof, by a
seeming anticipation of the employment proper thereunto: and (2.) partly,
because he is desirous to keep up the just value of such great occurrences by
the rarity of them; which if they were common, would grow into like disesteem
with other things that come under daily observation: and (3.) partly, because,
as a bountiful Benefactor, he is not willing to streighten his liberality to
the very worst of men; but to give them a plentiful share of the good things of
this life, whose portion is laid out here: Luke 16.25.
And lastly, Psalm. 17.14.
because it conduces to the glory of his Justice in another world, to give bad
men (of themselves inclined to grow insolent upon his forbearance) the occasion
of hardening their hearts in evil, by not executing Sentence against every
wicked work speedily. Eccles. 8.11.



[2.] That it is highly probable, that these sorts of unusual Providence are
yet rarer in the latter Ages of the world, than in the earlier: and under the
Gospel, and among Christians, then under the Law, and among the Jews. Because
there was in those times more occasion for them, and use of them, than now
there is. Before the Scripture in any part was written, Tradition, with the
relics of the light of Nature, sometimes assisted with extraordinary
Revelation, was the Rule whereby the world was governed. But because the two
former were much corrupted, and the third afforded but now and then to a few
eminently good men; the generality had need to be often taught their Duty, as
Gedeon taught the men of Succoth with thorns and briars, sharp and severe
Providence. Judges 8.16.
And even after so much of it was written, as served to govern the Jewish
Church under that Administration, God was pleased to keep up still, in great
part, the same Method of administering his Kingdom upon earth by exemplary
Providence. As (probably) considering, (1.) that what was so written, was to
be kept among them to whom it did principally pertain; Romans 9.4.
and that the rest of the world was to be left generally in the same condition
they were in before. And (2.) that (by the difference put betwixt the Jews and
them, by a peculiar discriminating Religion) the rest of the world were
generally like to be exasperated against them; so, that had they not been kept
in awe by such penal Providence now and then, they would continually have been
attempting the extirpation of a sort of men so odious: and had not the Jews
themselves been encouraged in their singular Religion, by such frequent
miraculous appearances of God for the punishment of their persecutors, they
would have been the more tempted to have purchased their peace with their
Neighbors, by waving their Religious observations to purchase their good will.
And (3.) that this Law, to the Jews themselves, was for the most part like a
book sealed; in that the greatest encouragements to obedience, (the great
Promises of the Gospel) were obscured under dark expressions, and typical
shadows, 2 Cor. 3.14.
till the vail on Moses his face was taken away by Christ, and life and
immortality by him were brought to light: 2 Timothy 1.10.
and therefore even they had still much need to be quickened to their duty by
sensible Motives, And (4.) lastly, that they were, by the very constitution and
temper of the Nation, a very stiff-necked and unmanageable People; and so not
easily to be kept in obedience by bare written Rules, without a Rod of severe
Temporal Judgments, frequently laid on the backs of some amongst themselves, to
keep the rest in awe.


And if we also consider these Particulars, (as God probably did) and some
others that might be suggested of the like nature; we may very well (I think)
be satisfied, that if we do not now hear of such frequent notorious Executions
of Divine Justice as then were the state of the Church since Christ, and that
Church spread over all the world; the clearness and perspicuity of his Doctrine
in the main inducements to a good life; and the more plentiful effusions of the
Holy Spirit upon all flesh to produce a more filial obedience thereunto; render
it less necessary that we should do so: Especially, seeing we have all those
great Instances of Divine severity which were exhibited in those ancient Ages,
delivered down even to us upon whom the ends of the world are come, 1 Cor.
10.11.
by holy Penmen in writing, for our admonition.

[3.] That the certain Interpretation of such rare Judicial Providence, when
they now adays fall out, is to us in these latter Times more difficult, that it
was to the men of those days, in which they were more frequent. The Reason
whereof is, because God, since the Scriptures were completed, and generally
received, has put a stop to that Spirit of Prophecy, which in former Times
raised up Prophetical Men, to predict and threaten Judgments before they came,
and interpret them infallibly when they came. So that the most perfect Judgment
we can now make of them, though we use all the means left us to that purpose
with the greatest and most conscientious exactness, will fall very short of
Infallibility, and amount, at most, only to a great Moral certainty, in most
cases of that nature.

[4.] That it is therefore very easy to mistake in this affair, and be
deceived by the making such Interpretations of Divine Providence of this
nature as Fancy and Passion, (continually ready herein to interpose) may be
apt to suggest to us: and the most of men (and too many good men too) are very
prone to be misled by them themselves, and to mislead others.

[5.] That such errors and mistakes, are not more easy and frequent, than (as
they are commonly made use of) sinful and dangerous. Because, by our aptness to
avouch them, and (in a sort) impose them on the belief of others, we too often
render our selves guilty of profaning Gods Name, (of which his great works are
a considerable part) by stamping our own fond conceits with his Image and
Superscription, which is no less a crime in this case against God, than the
minting and vending adulterate Coin in worldly dealings and payments is to the
temporal Prince, under whom we live.

[6.] And yet, lastly, (notwithstanding all that has been said to beget a new
caution in us in a matter of so great an import) I must avouch, that I do not
believe God has altogether tied up his hands from executing signal Judgments,
even in these days, or in those Regions where the Gospel is preached with
greatest clearness and most powerful Evidence: Especially, in case the
substantial corruptions of so pure a Religion be at any time so gross, or the
general debauchery of men's lives under such excellent Instructions be so foul
and scandalous to the holy Doctrine of our Savior, as to call for them: and
when any new Impieties of the largest dimensions, and prodigious Immoralities,
become bold and audacious beyond the examples of the former Ages of
Christianity, (with impunity, if not countenance and encouragement, from those
that ought to suppress them) among those that are the noted Professors of it.
Nor do I think that we are, in such cases, so destitute of direction, partly,
from parallel Instances of Scripture; and partly, from the general motions of
Mankind in all Ages concerning such Providence; and partly, from the
concurring Evidence of the circumstances of them when they so fall out, etc.
but that we may, even in these days, by the ordinary assistance of Gods Spirit
(even without a Revelation) discern sufficient marks and tokens of Divine
Judgments upon many of them, to lay a foundation for the improvement of them to
the ends which God generally designs by them, both to our selves and others.
For a moral certainty, in such matters wherein a Duty is to be inferred from
the various accidents of this life, has (to us) the force of a Divine Command.
A Principle, which if it be not owned, we must necessarily be endangered to be
governed, in most of the ordinary actions of our present callings and
employments, by that wild and extravagant Rule of exspecting special
Scripture-determinations in all the particularities of our worldly conditions;
which no sober man will own as the measure to govern his Actions by.

2. And such (in the second place) as I have described, I hope, will the
characters of remarkable Divine Judgments be, that follow.

(1.) The greatness and publickness of a Divine stroke, beyond what is common
to men; especially, if so great, as in common repute to be above the power of
man to inflict, (as I have before intimated) gives the first glimpse of light
in this Case. Which puts us, (as it lawfully may, nay, more in duty ought where
the concern is some way our own) upon enquiry into the Nature of it. For we are
wonted to do so in Humane Societies. If a stranger come by a Gallows or a
Whipping-post, and see a man hanged, and drawn, and quartered at the one, and
another severely whipped at the other; he will presently be enquiring,
wherefore such persons are handled with such severity in so notorious a manner?
And when severities, it may be far greater from God, befall any with as public
circumstances, it is equally rational for the spectators, and much more the
sufferers, to enquire what he means by them; and even to suspect the worst,
that they may be Judicial Executions, till he be informed otherwise. Yea, God
himself intimates his approbation of men's inquisitiveness, in such cases: when
he tells the Jews, that he would inflict such sore plagues on them, as should
move all Nations to ask, Wherefore has the Lord done thus unto this Land?
Deuteronomy. 29.24.
What means the heat of this great Anger?

(2.) But this alone, is not a sufficient character to warrant us to pronounce
such a stroke to be a Divine Judgment, how severe soever it be; except there
appear as evident and notorious a crime in conjunction with it. For the judging
by the former mark singly, misled Jobs friends in his Case: and the men of
Melita in the censure they passed upon St. Paul, Acts 28.4.
when they saw the Viper hanging on his hand. And it may mislead us in like
cases. For if we interpret all such great and remarkable severities, on
whomsoever they fall, to be Divine Judgments, we shall be often endangered
unjustly to condemn the Generation of Gods best Children. Psalm. 73.15.
But where both these in the same persons meet, with equal Evidence; we can
hardly be mistaken, (except all Mankind be supposed to be so too, who commonly
argue in such cases from this character) in calling such Providence Judgments
of God: or, if we be mistaken, it is (in a sort) a safe error; as that which
(if we make a religious use of our apprehensions about it) will mislead us only
into such affections and actions as tend to Gods glory, and our own benefit and
advantage.

(3.) And a far greater evidence is given in this Case many times, to make
Divine Judgments manifest, by the fair and legible Impression and Image of the
very offense it self, upon the punishment inflicted. Exodus 14.
The drowning of Pharaoh and the Egyptians in the Red Sea, was a punishment so
like their sin in drowning all the male Children of the Israelites in the
River: Exodus 1.20. Levi^. 10.1, ^.
the burning Nadab and Abihu with a strange fire from Heaven, was a Divine
stroke so aptly suited to their offense in offering Incense with strange fire to
Heaven: the incestuous defilement of David's Concubines by Absalom, 2 Samuel 12.11.
had so express a signature of the defilement of Vriahs wife by David: and (to
mention no more Examples at present) the cutting off the Thumbs and great Toes
of Adonibezek himself, Judges 1.7.
was so signal a requital of the like cruelty showed by him to 70 Kings before:
that no man needs to doubt the lawfulness of calling them by the Name they have
always born, that of remarkable Divine Judgments. And it can rationally be no
matter of scruple to any one, to give Providence of the like stamp the same
name still.

(4.) And it makes much to the strengthening the Evidence in such matters, when
such remarkable Divine strokes tread close upon the heels of some notorious
offense, as oftentimes they do: yea, so close, as to surprise the offender in
the very Act. Genesis 19.11.
The striking the Sodomites blind in the very attempt of a foul sin not to be
named; and the firing of the whole City the next morning with a storm of
flaming Brimstone; Number. 16.32.
the cleaving of the Earth to swallow Korah and his company, even whilst they
stood daringly in the face of God and the Congregation, to avouch a foul
Rebellion against Moses, and a sacrilegious usurpation of Aarons Priesthood;
the running through of Zimri and Cosbi, Number. 25.8.
in the very act of bold and audacious uncleanness; the slaying of Belshazzar
the very night following his profane debauch, acted by the abuse of Gods
Consecrated Vessels to drunkenness, Dan. 5.30.
at an Idols feast; the turning of his Grandfather Nebuchadnezzar a-grazing
among oxen, when that vaunting brag was scarce out of his mouth, Dan. 4.31, 32,
33.
Is not this great Babylon that I have built for the house of the Kingdom, by
the might of my power? Acts 5.5, 10.12.22, 23.
the smiting Ananias and Saphira dead, with a lie in their mouths to cover
their sacrilege; the eating up Herod by worms, so closely attending upon his
owning the blasphemous flattery of the people: and many more like Instances to
these, none ever gave a softer Title to, than that of Divine Judgments. And
wherefore the drunkards breaking his neck in his drunkenness, and the hectoring
challengers being slain in a Duel, and the perjured persons being smitten dumb
or dead in his perjury, and the like penal events befalling other sinners in
the very act of other sins of as heinous a nature; may not still, by a parity
of Reason, pass for Providence of the same denomination, I cannot imagine.

(5.) When such penal Providence are the evident and notorious consequents of
provoking and daring Appeals, Applications, or Addresses to God of any kind; or
of contests with him: there is all the Reason in the world why we should take
them for Divine Judgments, extorted by an impious importunity, or provoking
Insolence.

1.) In case of Appeals to God, implicit or explicit. When the bitter water,
under the Law, envenomed by the imprecation of the disloyal wife against her
self, in case she was guilty of the fact she was suspected of, caused her belly
to swell, and her thigh to rot; Number. 5.22.
the implicit Appeal to Gods Decision in this case, made the event evidently to
be a Divine Judgment. When Korah and his Accomplices dare put it to a Divine
determination, Number. 16.5.
whether they had not as much right to offer Incense as Aaron and his Sons: The
Event in this Case declared that God judged the cause in which he was thus
appealed to against them? And when the wicked Jews by tumultuous outcries call
on Pilate to crucify Jesus for a Malefactor, and encourage him, when his
Conscience boggles at so foul an act of Injustice, with this fearful
imprecation, (in the nature of such an Appeal) that if he were not guilty, God
would lay his blood on them and their children; and the Event of so many Ages
has declared the said guilt not to be yet washed off from their whole
Posterity: None but an hardened Jew will ever doubt, whether there be a Divine
Judgment in this case or no. Lastly, When holy Job (against the unjust charges
of his censorious friends, who among other crimes, taxed him with breaking the
arms of the fatherless: Job 22.9.
i. e. That by his power he had so crushed them that they were disabled to
maintain their right against him) had appealed to God for his vindication, and
imprecated against himself, that if he were guilty of this Crime, his Arm might
fall from his Shoulder Blade, Job 31.21, 22.
and be broken from the bone; i. e. That the flesh might rot from the bone,
till his Arm fell from his Shoulder; if a little after, that Arm had dropped
off according to his Execration, and some concurring evidence withal had
appeared to prove him guilty of the fact which he so disclaimed, (I say, if it
had so fallen out, which it did not, because he was innocent) had not his friends
been justified, if they had cried out in the words of the Psalmist, Behold! the
Lord is known by the Judgment that he executes! 2.) In case of Address or
Application to him, in matters of another nature. As in promissory Oaths, (or
which in substance is all one) Imprecations of Gods vengeance, upon
nonperformance of what men undertake to do. Which Addresses are either serious
or customary. And in both sorts, Gods Judgments may be manifested, as the
circumstances may be. (1.) In serious addresses of this kind. As in the Case of
the Children of Israel, when they were obliged to say Amen to the fearful
Curses annexed to the Law; Deuteronomy. 29. from 15. to 26.
they did therein implicitly address themselves to God, and pray, that all
those curses, in case of disobedience to that Law, might befall them; which
Curses are therefore called the Curses of the Covenant, Deuteronomy. 29.21.
because they covenanted with God upon that penalty to keep his Commandments
there mentioned. And therefore, afterward, when God had executed those
severities upon them, which made all the Neighbour-Nations to enquire,
[Wherefore the Lord had dealt so with them.] Men are directed by God to answer,
Because they have forsaken the Covenant of the Lord, Ver. 25. to 29.
the anger of the Lord was kindled against this Land to bring upon it all the
curses written in this Book. And he moreover tells them, that they need not
fear offending by a rash censure, where Gods Judgments with the Causes of them
were so manifest. For though secret things belong to God; i. e. in dark cases,
we must not be too forward to pass our sentence upon Gods providential
proceedings; yet things revealed, (as such Judgments inflicted upon such a
forfeiture by Covenant betwixt God and a People are) belong to us and our
children, to interpret and improve them. And the like may be the case of
particular persons, when they vow and solemnly Covenant with God to leave such
vices, and amend their lives; and to bind themselves the more firmly, imprecate
such evils upon themselves, in case they fail in performance. Of which there is
a notable Instance in one of our late Writers, of Sir Jervase Ellowis, Wilson
Hist. of K. James.
(as he calls him) who at the place of Execution took notice to all the people
present of Gods just Judgment that brought him to that end: for that he had
solemnly (being given to gaming) upon some special occasion, prayed to God,
That if he did so any more, be might be hanged: and having broken promise with
God, he had brought his own wish upon him. (2.) In customary Addresses of that
nature; when men upon every slight occasion imprecate in the form of a
customary wish, (as a vain Parenthesis in discourse, with some persons too
frequent) any evil upon themselves, to back every slight purpose or trivial
Promise that drops unadvisedly from their lips: These men, though they use not
Gods Name explicitly in such forms of discourse, (and yet too often even that
is done, [ I wish to God, etc.] is too frequent a Phrase) yet they do imply it,
and it has the force of an application to God, to inflict such an evil on
them. Now, if when men fail, as too often they do, in those unadvised promises
of theirs, and God brings the calamity they wished upon them; I should not
scruple in such a case to look on it as the execution of a Divine Judgment, to
warn people, how they use any expressions wherein Gods Name is concerned, in a
slight and customary manner. And I am persuaded, if it were well observed, God
does to very many persons of lewd Tongues, perform in earnest, what they so
often inconsiderately imprecate in this world: and doubt the does so to many
more in another world, where their [God-damnme's] and [The-Devil-take-me's] and
the like familiar forms of customary discourse, with profane men, are (with
the stinging attestations of their own Consciences to Gods Justice therein)
sadly verified upon them to all eternity.
3.) In case of Contests with God, Gods Judgments are often manifested and made
known to be what indeed they are. As, (1.) When they light upon the furious
maintainers of a false Religion against the true: especially, if in a public
and notorious competition, God be (as it were) challenged to appear in the
vindication of his Truth. Which was the case of Baals Priests in their notable
contest with Elijah, wherein God brought them to public Execution, 1 Kings 18.
by a miraculous Confutation in the presence of all Israel. (2.) When such
Divine severities befall the professors and propugners of Atheism and
Irreligion, in opposition to all Religion. If such persons die not the common
death of other men, the common vote of Mankind pronounces them to be executed
by a Divine Judgment. Vid. Cic. de Not. Deor m. I. 1, and 2. L^ert in vit.
Prot. Aristip. Epic. B^^nis. Athen. I. 13. Aelian. I. 4.
As appears, by the censures passed by Heathens, themselves upon the strange
ends of Diagoras, Protagoras, Bion, Theodorus, Epicurus, Pherecides, and
others, who either were, or were generally reputed, Atheists among them: And by
those of the Holy Scriptures on Pharaoh: and of the Ecclesiastical Writers on
Caligula, Maximinus, Julian, and many other Atheistical and profane promoters
of Irreligion. (3.) When the like severe Providence befall such, as though
they profess the true Religion, yet because they make use of that Profession
only as a mask, to cover those designs against it, (which they dare not carry
on with open face) God fore-dooms in the Scripture (as guilty of most
pernicious opposition against it) to a notable and signal Ruin and
Destruction. As in the case of the great Antichrist; when God, having revealed
that wicked one fully, shall finally destroy both him, and his Seat, where
sitting in the Temple of God, he acts the Devil in Gods Name, 2 These. 2.4. to
12.
by Satanical signs and lying wonders: Apoc. 15.2, 3, 4, 19.1, 2.
both the Church Militant and Triumphant are called on to acknowledge and
rejoice in the just Judgments of God executed on him and his Adherents.

(6. It is no slight Evidence to a Divine Judgment, when (as it often falls
out) an offenders Conscience under such a remarkable stroke of Gods Hand, owns
it as the just punishment of such a particular notorious Crime: and gives glory
to God, (with Achan) by confessing it before the world. When Adonibezek,
convicted by his own Conscience, cries out, Jud. 1.7.
as I have done, so has God requited me: and Joseph's Brethren, in the danger
they were in to be executed for Spies in Egypt, charge themselves with the
guilt of their envy and cruelty against their Brother; Genesis 42.21.
and acknowledge, that therefore that distress came upon them: And when
Malefactors at the place of Execution; and debauched livers in some notable
Calamities, and especially in the near prospect of Death and Eternity under
some signal stroke of Gods Hand, accuse themselves, and attribute those
severities to their particular Crimes: What Reason has any man to give their
sufferings a milder name than they give them themselves?

And thus have I given you the best Characters I could, by which to discern
Divine Judgments from Providence of a like severity, befalling men on other
accounts: my fifth Head.

VI. The sixth follows: to wit, [To give you directions in the making
application of Divine Judgments to particular Cases, without offending against
Justice or Charity.]

The Reason why such directions are needful, is very evident. For we are
forbidden by our Savior, Mat. 7.1.
to judge our Brethren, lest we also be judged. And in the noted Cases of those
on whom the Tower in Siloe fell, Luke 13.1, 2, 3.
and those whose blood Pilate mingled with their Sacrifices; our Lord seems to
take the part of the Sufferers against their Censures. And the miscarriage of
Jobs friends in their dealings with him, Job 42.7.
is by God himself expressly condemned. Wherefore, it is meet this Case should
be carefully stated, that we may (in the present Argument) be satisfied, how
far we may lawfully go in applying Gods Judgments, so as to preserve our selves
from such Errors. And in Answer to this Case, I shall (as I did on the former
Head) first premise some Grounds to proceed on; and thence proceed to the
direct solution of it according to them.

[1. The Grounds which I shall premise, are these.

1.] That it follows from what was said on the former Head, that in such
Applications of Divine Judgments to particular Cases, we are to be very
cautelous and circumspect.

2.] And yet it does not follow, that we are totally obliged to forbear them.
Yea, rather, there are diverse Arguments from Scripture, which give great
countenance, and (in some Cases) great encouragement, to the making of them.

(1. As first, the Text it self, which asserts such Judgments to be means
whereby God is made known, will necessarily infer, that in order to the making
this use of them, we must be allowed the liberty of discreet and considerate
Application of them. For to suppose a notable Judgment executed with signal
manifestation of a Divine Hand therein, and of purpose designed for men to take
notice of it: and yet, not to allow them to observe it in those circumstances
which render it most observable, (all which circumstances are necessarily
annexed to particular Cases) implies a contradiction.

(2. The Scripture tells us of Holy Men who have made such particular
Applications, and have not been blamed, but rather commended for it: and their
examples left on sacred Record for the imitation of future Times. It is given
as an honorable character in general of good and holy men, that because they
have pleasure in that employment, Psalm. 111.2.
they seek out the great works of the Lord, of which these judicial Providence
are a special part. And holy David propounds himself in particular, as an
encouraging example to patient expectation of the Issue in that stumbling Case
of Divine Providence, [The notable prosperity of some notorious wicked men]
telling us, that he himself had seen some such in great power, Psalm. 37.35, 36.
(probably Saul and his profane Courtiers and Favorites) flourishing like a
green Bay Tree; whom yet he observed in the Issue notably extirpated, so that
they could not be found. And that notable speech of Hezekiah to the Levites, is
recorded to his commendation, (as a considerable part of that which gave him
just Title to that honorable character, that he did that which was right in
the sight of the Lord, according to all that his father David bad done) wherein
he observes particularly, (though with reflection upon his father Ahaz) that
the Lord had lately delivered Judah to trouble and astonishment, 1 Chronicles. 29.2,
6, 7, 8, 9.
and hissing and that their fathers fell by the Sword, and their sons, and
daughters, and wives, were yet in captivity, for the neglect of Gods House;
which he thence quickens the Priests and Levites for the future to take more
care of.

(3. Good men in general are encouraged with the promised prospect of Divine
Judgments on some notorious wicked men. When the wicked (such whose prosperity
was a tentation to good men to fret and be envious against them) are cut off,
thou (says the Psalmist to the man whom he encourages to wait on the Lord and
keep his way) shall see it, Psalm. 37.34.
i. e. so as to take notice of it to thy great satisfaction and encouragement
to depend on God for the future. And elsewhere, the righteous is told, that
when the notorious oppressing Judges, against whom that Psalm is directed,
shall be taken away as with a whirlwind living, and in Gods wrath, i. e.
brought in the prime of their prosperity to a sudden and violent end; Psalm.
58.10.
that he shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance: and wash his feet in the
blood of the wicked, i. e. in a kind of holy Triumph for the manifestation of
Divine Justice, shall even trample upon them when they lie in their blood,
without fear of defilement, (to which in other cases the Jews by the Law for
touching any thing of a dead Corpse were liable) any more than if they had
washed their feet in water.

(4. And sinners are blamed, for not drawing Arguments of caution and
reformation from the particular Instances of Gods Judgments in their days. As
Belshazzar, for that when he saw and knew how God had dealt with his proud
Grandfather Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 5.18, 19, 20, 21, 22.
he notwithstanding lifted himself up against the same God, before whom he
ought on that consideration to have been humbled. And the remaining Tribes of
Judah and Benjamin are severely taxed, for that when they saw that God had
rejected and sent into Captivity the Ten Tribes, their brethren, for their
Idolatry; yet they feared not, but went on confidently in the same provoking
sin themselves And it is not to be understood how any persons can be obliged to
take warning from particular Examples, if they be not allowed to apply such
Providence of God to them, in those particulars from whence that caution is to
be gathered.

3.] Wherefore we must find out some other Interpretation of those Scriptures,
which seem totally to prohibit all applications of Divine Judgments to
particular Cases: and particularly of those before mentioned. And that (as to
them at least) is a matter of no great difficulty. For the first of them
forbids one Christian indeed to judge another: Mat 7.1.
but it is only a rash and a harsh censuring Christian brethren (as the
Pharisees were wont to do) even for the smallest faults; and that when the
censurers themselves, it may be, (as they) indulge themselves in greater, (such
as are like beams to the others motes, as appears, v. 2.) that is there
forbidden. Luke 13.1, 2.
And the blame which in the second Text, the relaters of the fall of the Tower
of Siloe, and the mixing the blood of the Galileans with their Sacrifices by
Pilate, did incur; was not barely for taking notice of these Events as Divine
Judgments, but for judging the persons (in a like Pharisaical pride) greater
sinners than others, and than themselves in particular; having no other
evidence to ground that censure, than that what they suffered was more severe
than what usually befell others; which indeed was none at all. And Jobs friends
(the third Text) were censured by God for making the like uncharitable and
unwarrantable Inference from his Providential severities upon Job. So that all
these Scriptures thus interpreted, (as indeed they must be) make nothing
against the lawfulness of a modest, sober, prudent, and discreet application of
Divine Judgments to particular cases; seeing in an application so qualified, we
shall be secure from offending against Justice or Charity.

[2. And therefore I proceed, in the next place, to give you the Directions
promised you to preserve you from so offending, in like applications of Divine
severities.

(1. First then, Privately and in our own bosoms, we may with more freedom and
latitude make such applications, than we may discourse them withal to others:
if withal we take care to turn our inward sentiments only to those uses, which
reflect Glory to God, and benefit to our selves; without gratifying any
unlawful Passion, apt on such occasions to be stirred toward our suffering
brethren, and neighbors. And yet,

(2. When Gods Providence it self makes any Case notorious by producing an
offender, as it were, and chastising him upon a public Theater, the case being
clear and evident of it self in the eyes of all men; no man is then bound up
from bearing his part in the public discourse: but (as he has a call either
by office, or occasional charity to the souls of men to take notice of it)
every one may, nay ought, to serve Gods design therein, by making use of it for
others, as well as his own, edification. And it is related as a thing imitable
in the primitive Christians, that they interpreted the sudden deaths of Ananias
and Saphira, as remarkable Judgments of God, and not only were possessed with
great fear themselves on that occasion, Acts 5.11.
but also derived that fear to many others, by publishing it, so that they
feared likewise as many as heard of it.

(3. We are not so much in danger of offending against Justice or Charity in
the application of Divine Judgments, when they befall great Communities and
Societies of men, as when they light only on particular Persons, or smaller
Parties. For when Nations and other great Communities fall under great
Epidemical calamities, wherein every member some way or other suffers, or at
least is endangered to suffer; there God himself expects his hand should be
publicly acknowledged, and due means used by religious Addresses to him
solemnly and generally made for the removing of them; and in them requires that
each Member bear a part, and accuse himself and be deeply humbled, as being a
partaker in that guilt which procured them: So that what every one is obliged
to own, is without injury or breach of charity imputable to them all. Whereas
there are very few private Cases, wherein the Persons suffering can be
convincingly brought by others under a like obligation, to own and acknowledge
the particulars charged on them by their Censurers, as the Causes for which
they so suffer: and so we are endangered to charge them at adventure, and
therein to be unjust and uncharitable.

(4. We run less hazard of violating Justice and Charity, in applying such
Divine strokes, as Judgments to some persons, than to others. For whereas there
are some notoriously bad men, Isa. 3.9.
who publish their sin as Sodom, and proclaim themselves to have no fear of God
before their eyes, Romans 3.18. Psalm. 14.3.
being altogether become filthy or stinking (as the Margin has it) in the
nostrils of all serious and sober persons; so that no Charity, be it never so
large, (except it be wilfully blind withal) can judge better of them: when any
remarkable hand of God finds these persons out, to seize them for public
Exemplary punishment, I cannot see, why we may not, without any hesitation in a
case so plain, think and say, This is a remarkable Judgment of God; and a fair
warning to all men to avoid such courses. And especially if such persons have
arrived to that height of professed wickedness as to glory in their shame at
that rate, Phil. 3.19. Psalm. 1.1.
as to set themselves down in the seat of the scornful, and scoff Religion and
Virtue out of countenance, as a thing despicable and contemptible; and to own
themselves in all companies, as the public Hectors and Champions of
profaneness and impiety, and professed persecuters of all persons that dare
appear on the side of God and goodness. For in such cases, as I told you
before, the opinion of all the world justifies us, in making the severest
reflections upon their sufferings.

But when sufferers, though the hand of God lie heavy upon them, are either
eminently good men, or such as in the judgment of rational charity we are bound
to think well of for the main, though they have their allay of humane frailty,
and are Gold, though mixed with dross; yea, or such, as there is hope they may
become better, because there is nothing that declares them desperately and
incorrigibly bad: We are toward all these sorts of men to proceed in censuring
with far greater Caution, and the better they are, the more must be observed;
according to the following measures.

1.) That we endeavor to be as sparing in applying these sorts of Divine
Providence, to the cases of particular persons under the former characters as
God is in inflicting them; and appear as loath and unwilling to do the one, as
he to do the other. For it is very uncharitable for any man to be over-forward
in crying out, upon every unusual stroke upon another, A Judgment, a Judgment;
because thereby he cruelly vexes his brothers sores; a thing which is done by
nothing more than by exaggerating his calamities with the representation of
Gods displeasure testified in them. Besides, that the hastiness of men in such
applications, looks too much like that disposition which Charity disclaims, 1
Cor. 13.6.
of rejoicing in iniquity, i. e. in the opportunity of colorable laying a
criminal matter to ones brothers charge, without staying to examine what ground
there is for it: as on the contrary, to rejoice in the Truth, i. e. to be glad
when by the discovery of the truth, our own and others suspicions or
misapprehensions concerning him are removed, and he vindicated, is a charitable
Temper, as the Apostle describes it.

2.) That we do not first fancy a Divine Judgment in our own thoughts to have
befaln such a Person or Party as we do not affect; and then search out
iniquities, Psalm. 64.6.
(in the Psalmists Phrase) or make a strict Inquisition, to find out criminal
matters in him to apply it unto, for the justification of our own censure. For
this is a preposterous inverting of the Rules of Justice, which is never wont
to pronounce sentence first at all adventure, and then examine the Cause, or
rather, whether there be any cause: and a great breach of Charity also, as
implying a malicious design against our brother, which we seek an opportunity
to execute.

This seems to be the fault of those Disciples themselves, who enquired of
Christ concerning the man that was born blind: for they first resolve upon it,
that this was a Judgment of God on him for some sin; and then they came to our
Savior to resolve them, Joh. 9.2.
for whose sin it was, his own, or his Parents? And it seems evident, by the
whole carriage of their discourses, that Jobs friends, though they unanimously
first conclude among themselves, that his sufferings were Divine Judgments upon
him for some foul crime; yet they are at a loss what crime of that nature to
find him guilty of, and therefore they tax him at all adventure, with all the
horrid Crimes they can imagine, to draw a confession from him at least of some
of them, for the justification of their own uncharitable censure.

3.) That we do not hastily call such severe Providence of God toward such
particular Persons, Judgments, whom we can charge with nothing that is
notoriously sinful, in the general Judgment of all Mankind, or at least, of all
Christians. For it is a great piece of uncharitableness, as well as injustice,
which is too ordinarily practiced in such places where the common Christianity
is crumbled into Sects and Parties; for dissenters of all sides to impute the
sufferings befalling their opposites, to Divine displeasure against them for
holding such opinions as differ foom theirs, or practicing in some particulars
otherwise than they do. Now this arises ordinarily from a partial fondness
which every one has for his own opinion or way: which inclines him to think
God has as great a kindness for it as himself, and his Party have: and to
conclude all his Providence to be accordingly engaged to serve under those
banners of distinction, under which he has listed himself: whence such persons
find it easy (upon every unusual stroke of God upon any that are not every way
agreeable to their humor) to conclude, that the very point in difference
betwixt them is judged by God and their opposites, confuted from Heaven by a
Demonstration of Divine displeasure against them. And such an unhappy
Paralogism as this, we are told by our Historians, it was, which in the dark
times of Popery gave the cause, in the opinion of an whole Synod, against the
married Clergy, when the side of the Room where the maintainers of it sat fell
down, killing some, and burting others. For thereupon they that were for
Priests single life, cried down the Cause of the fallen Party with them, as
witnessed against by God himself; and by that sorry Argument and Noise
prevailed. Now against this great mistake (by the way) we shall never be
sufficiently armed except we govern our Apprehensions by these Two Principles.

(1.) That God never appointed the dark Rule of Providence (to us it is no
other) to judge Canses by, whether right or wrong, good or bad. Judge. 20. 21,
25.
Oftentimes, for secret ends of his own, he blasts a good, and prospers a bad
cause, as the had Cause of the Benjamites, in two set Battles, against the good
Cause of the Eleven Tribes: and the horrid and blasphemous Imposture of the
Mahometans has now for many Ages, by the permission of Providence, prospered
wonderfully against the greatest part of the Christian world. (2.) That Gods
great and signal Judgments, of which we are discoursing, are now adays rarely
inflicted, but for such Crimes as are generally condemned in the Judgment of
all Mankind, or at least, the generality of Christians, according as he designs
the notice of them to be spread in a greater or narrower compass. And the
Reason is evident, to wit, because it cannot otherwise be rationally expected,
the Justice of them should be clearly and convincingly owned, and so the good
they are intended for must needs be hazarded to so many as are dissatisfied in
the merit of the Cause that is taken to procure them. But when a Divine
severity justly makes an example of any person in the general opinion
notoriously criminous; they are all inexcusable, who thenceforward do the same
things they condemned in another, Romans 2.1.
(as the Apostle says) and confess Gods Judgment to have righteously befaln
him for.
4.) That we publish not on the house tops (in our Saviors phrase on another
occasion) that which is, Mat. 10.27.
it may be, whispered in our ears only; and few, possibly no other persons know
of. For it may so fall out, that our intimate acquaintance with some men, and
their circumstances, may give us knowledge of their particular vices, secret as
to all the rest of the world; and of Gods secret strokes befalling them in
their persons or private concerns, which we in our own thoughts may rationally
conclude to be Divine Judgments inflicted for them. Now in such Cases, though
we may with great charity declare our apprehensions hereof to the parties
concerned themselves, and admonish, and exhort them on that occasion; yet it
were great uncharitableness to publish to others either the one or the other.

For, when God intends (as appears by his way of proceeding therein) only a
private correction; it must proceed from a defect of charity in us, if we by
divulging it, turn it into a public Execution, to the exposing our Brother to
an open shame. And the very justice of every petty School may convince us of
the evil of so doing; wherein the corrections given within those walls are
forbidden to be divulged, under a like penalty to that which the disgraced
School-fellow suffered.

5.) That we apply not the severe strokes of God upon our neighbor to the
satisfaction of our private spleen and revengeful Humor: which is too ordinary
when we think such as lie under them have wronged us, (or it may be they really
have so) and we conclude, their sufferings are Divine Judgments befalling them
on our Quarrel. This was the uncharitable Consure of Shimei against David, when
he tells him that God had avenged on him the blood of the House of Saul, by the
Rebellion of Absalom. For it is plain by the Text, 2 Samuel 16.5, 6, 7, 8.
that Shimei was of the very family of Saul: and it may be looked upon himself,
as in some probable vicinity to the Crown, if the succession of it had
continued in that family. At least it is probable, that by the translating it
from thence, he found his hopes (as to those preferments and other advantages
which usually are attained at Court by those of the Royal Blood) blasted and
defeated. It is true indeed that Gods Justice does sometimes appear in the
remarkable vindication of eminently good men's, and his useful Instruments.
Causes: but for every ordinary person upon every petty trifling injury, to
expect that he should do the like for him, or suppose he does it, is too great
a Presumption.

6.) That we judge not our Brethrens estate toward God, and much less their
future estate from the most evident Judgments temporally befalling them.

(1.) Not their present estate toward God. For a sore Judgment may befall a
man greatly in Gods favor, for a foul Crime; as in the case of the Death of
David's child, inflicted, even after his Repentance, for those heinous sins of
Adultery and Murder; because he had by them caused the Enemies of God to
blaspheme; 2 Samuel 12.14.
does evidently appear.

(2.) And much less must we thence judge their future estate in another world.
For there is no sufficient cause to judge even Nadab and Abihu, Lev. 10.3. 1 Samuel 6.19. 2 Samuel 6.7.
the inquisitive Bethshemites, Vzzah, and others, damned; though God smote them
dead in unwarrantable actions. Yea, even Moses and Aaron themselves died by a
Divine Sentence in the Wilderness for their sin at Meribah: and yet one of them
(Moses) we have sufficient evidence is in glory: Mat. 17.3.
and have no reason to doubt the case of the other. Yea, men may be judged of
the Lord, (in the Apostles supposition) when chastened with sickness and death
extraordinary, that they may not be condemned with the world: 1 Cor. 11.30, 31,
32. 1 Cor. 5.5.
and an offender delivered even to Satan, may suffer to the destruction of the
flesh, that his spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord, i. e. in the
private Judgment which he undergoes from the Lord at his death.

7.) That we assign not particular sins as the special Causes of a Divine
Judgment too peremptorily; except where the circumstances notoriously evince it
by the Rules before given, or some of them at least. For if we be therein
mistaken in our Judgment; yea, if there be no moral certainty that we are not
mistaken, (such as may rationally convince the persons concerned and others
thereof) the end which we are supposed to design by such application, (to wit,
to render the particular sin to which we attribute the procuring that Judgment
more formidable) is lost upon those whom we particularly intend to benefit by
it, and others too: and we our selves are liable to be censured, for putting an
uncharitable brand upon our brother without a cause.

8.) That we vaunt not, or magnify our selves against our suffering Brother,
by comparing our selves with him, as if we were therefore the better men,
because we fare better at Gods Hands he. This is one property of Charity,
(among the many excellent characters given it by the Apostle) that it vaunts
not it self, 1. Cor. 13.4.
( i. e. with the diminution of a man's brethren, for else it were rather a
description of Humility than Charity) nor is, upon such an account, puffed up.
And the most uncharitable account upon which any man can vaunt to the lessening
of his brother; is, when it is done merely upon the difference that Gods only
pleasure makes betwixt the one and the other. This (among many others) was one
great piece of uncharitableness in Jobs friends, that having in his sad
sufferings taxed him with being of the number of those whom God had signally
branded with remarkable Judgments, and a partner in guilt with those of the old
world whose foundation was overflown with a flood, Job 22.15, 16, 20, 21, 29,
30.
though he were differenced in his punishment, being a sufferer by the contrary
Element of fire; they in the mean while boast, that their substance was not cut
down, as being men more acquainted with God, more humble, more innocent; as
they imply, when they advise Job upon their experience to become so too.

9.) That we make no man's religious living formerly, or eminent profession of
it, (no not though we have some cause to think him declined from it now) by
objecting it to him under suffering, a part of his calamity: nor occasion him
whilst he suffers under Gods hand to suffer for his sake too: A thing too
usual, when bad men apply the Judgments of God (or those which they interpret
to be such) to good men, or those who have had a reputation to be such, beyond
their neighbors. For this is to give them (as the Persecutors did to our
Savior) gall and vinegar to drink, when they have already bitterness enough
upon their spirits from the Cup of their Cross, that God appoints them to drink
off. This was to David, as he tells us, like a Sword in his bones, when profane
men said to him in his affliction, Where is now thy God? Psalm. 42.10.
and when they cast in his Teeth, (as their successors did afterward in our
Saviors) his former trusting in God, as if it had either been Hypocritical,
Psalm. ^2.1, 8, 9.
or (if real) misplaced on one that had thus forsaken him. Now to deal thus
with our neighbor, is at all times greatly uncharitable. For it either argues
an hard censure of him that he is an hypocrite; or a greater and fouler
affront, if we do not so esteem him; for then we turn (as the same Psalmist
elsewhere taxes men of the same uncharitable temper) his glory into shame,
Psalm. 4.2.
and endeavor to make that a matter of disgrace to him which is really most
commendable.

10.) In a word: That we do not rejoice, insult, or triumph over any man under
Gods hand, upon any account; much less revile, and reproach him; but really
pity, bewail, and condole with him rather; and (as we have opportunity)
instruct, admonish, comfort, and pray for him. For to do the former, is the
constant guise of those that (in the character of Gods Holy Spirit in the
Scripture) are marked for wicked men. The Heathen Edomites were such; Obad. 1^.
and they rejoiced in the day of Judah's distress. David's Enemies, (being so to
him on Gods account) were such; and in his adversity they rejoiced. Psalm. 35.13.
Our Saviors Persecutors were such; and as they judged him smitten of God,
they shaked their heads at him upon the Cross, Isa. 53.4. See Mat. 27.40, 41,
42, 43, 44. Mark 15.29, etc.
and reviled him with most unsavory and reproachful speeches.

And although there be several Passages in Scripture which seem to propound
Gods Judgments as a glad spectacle to good men, and a matter of rejoicing, when
they befall those that are notoriously wicked: As when it is prophesied, That
the righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance, etc. Psalm. 58.10.
And when God calls on all the Saints even in glory, Apoc. 18.2.
(the holy Prophets and Apostles especially) to rejoice and triumph over
Antichristian Babylon.

Yet it is to be observed, that these and the like Texts relate only to such as
were Gods public and notorious enemies: and the joy and triumph required or
allowed, in their destruction, is only upon account of the success of his cause
against them, and the vindication of his Glory and Interests. As appears
remarkably in the Psalm quoted, wherein he tells us, how the observers should
express their joy, to wit, by taking notice, that verily there is a reward for
the righteous, Psalm. 58.11.
and that verily he is a God that judges in the earth.

But the latter dispositions and deportments are recommended to us by the
Examples of the best men, and most eminent of Saints. When Jobs friends had
dealt so uncharitably with him, he tells them what a different usage they
should have found from him, if their souls had been in his souls stead; and
assures them, that though he could in such a case have spoken as they did to
him now, and heaped up words against them, and shaken his head at their
calamity, as they used him: yet he would have strengthened them with his mouth,
and the moving of his lips should have assuaged their grief. Job 16.4, 5.
And when David's very bitter enemies, that insulted over his calamity, were
sick, he clothed himself with sackcloth, Psalm. 35.13.
and his prayers, though ungratefully received by them, and thrown back in
scorn into his bosom, whence they proceeded, were heartily and sincerely from
that bosom poured out to God for them. And our Savior, the most perfect of
men, to the many sufferers under Gods hand whom he relieved, was generally so
compassionate; that he took on him, by a merciful Sympathy, all the Infirmities
that he cured, and bare all his Patients sicknesses. Mat. 8.17.
Yea, he could not forbear weeping over the very prospect of those Tragedies he
foretold himself against Jerusalem, though the Shambles of his Prophets, and
his own Slaughterhouse. Luke 19.41.
And God expects, (as well as the sufferers themselves) that to him that is
afflicted pity should be shown; Job 6.14.19.21, 22.
especially, if the hand of the Lord has touched him: and dislikes that men
(in their brethrens calamities) should persecute like him, i. e. take the same
liberty of harsh and severe usage toward them, as God does, as if they could
do it with like right and justice as he. In a word, it is his express command,
that to show our selves to be of the same mind one toward another, we not only
rejoice with them that rejoice, Romans 12.15, 16.
but weep also with those that weep. And thus I discharge this sixth Head also.

VII. Come we now to the seventh and last, to draw such Inferences from this
whole discourse as may be of use and advantage to us.

[1. And first, I infer the great Reason that there is for a general Judgment
in another world. For, seeing God is known by the Judgment that he executes;
and all that which he executes here, extends but to a few offenders; and it
may be, the notice taken of those Executions that are made, reaches but a
small part of Mankind: it stands with the highest Reason, that there should be
a Time wherein all the world may see (even those that while his hand was lifted
up on earth would not see) that just and true are his Judgments. Isa. 26.11.
Besides, by the rareness of the Judgments he executes here, instead of being
known as he ought, he is by many apt to be misunderstood; whilst they are
generally stumbled at his letting so many notorious offenders escape for one
that he punishes: and those that escape he^e, many times are the greatest and
most prosperous of men, that even dare his justice, by setting their mouths
against the Heavens themselves. Psalm. 73.9.
Wherefore, that he may make it known, that he spares not so many high and
mighty offenders, either through impotency, or partiality; it is easy to
infer, that there must be such a day, wherein all men, whether they be small or
great, shall stand before him, Apoc. 20.12.
and be judged according to their works.

[2. I infer, that those men do God great disservice, who either carelessly
overlook, or designedly endeavor to suppress and keep from the notice of the
world, these remarkable Divine Judgments: or (when by reason of their own
public circumstances they cannot but be taken notice of by others) attempt to
slur, and stifle as much as they can, the evidence of those particularities
which so much conduce to the preserving and propagating the knowledge of God in
the world. Those of the former sort are injurious in an high degree to God;
who, when he exposes his glorious Attributes to view as on a Theater, will not
vouchsafe to be spectators of them. But those of the latter rank are
prodigiously wicked. And yet too many even of these are to be found in all ages
of the world, who study to darken Gods glory in such remarkable Judgments, and
to lead the apprehensions that people naturally are apt to have of them, as far
from God and Providence as they can find any color to do. Thus the Egyptian
Magicians (encouraged by a profane Atheistical King, as well as prompted
thereto, by their own malice) emulated the miracles that Moses did, and by
frequent attempts to do the like; endeavored to persuade the People, that
there was nothing in them beyond the power of created beings to effect; till
God at last in the plague of the Lice, drew from them an unwilling confession,
that neither they nor their master the Devil could imitate it, Exodus 8.19.
and that therefore it was the finger of God. And it seems to me, that the
Priests and Diviners of the Philistines, were willing (when they were called
into consultation what to do with the Ark of God) to have carried on as bad a
design, and to have persuaded both themselves and the people that it was a
disputable case, whether the God of Israel had inflicted those Judgments upon
them, 1 Samuel 6.9.
which they had suffered; or whether it were a mere chance that had befaln
them. And therefore, though they speak some good words concerning the God of
Israel, and give their advice, that if they returned the Ark, they should make
him some Presents too, (it may be forced thereunto, as Caiaphas prophesied, by
a Divine impulse) yet they contrive to put the determination of that great
Question upon the issue of such an odd Experiment, as without a miraculous
influence of the Lord of all the Creatures upon those that they employed, would
in all rational probability have determined it against God. For it was ten
thousand to one odds, but that the Kine (being milch Kine, and their Calves
newly taken from their sides, and shut up in their sight, just as they were put
into the Cart, that was by their advice to carry the Ark) being let loose
without a driver, had turned, as nature would prompt them, the same way their
young ones had gone, rather than toward the Land of Israel. And a foul scandal
it is to the Christian Name, that too many of those who bear it, do herein act,
as if they joined in design with the forementioned Heathens. For, besides the
downright Atheists, (too many of whom pass muster now adays under Christ's
colors) whom I have before confuted; the sottish and profane generation of
men are desirous to look beside God in all such strokes; lest by confessing his
hand in them, they should be obliged to be more Religions, than suits the
Interest of their Lusts. Whence, in the calamities which at any time befall
themselves or others, those of them who pretend to but the least smattering in
Philosophy, seek for causes to assign them to, either in the general order of
Nature, moved when once set a going, without any special hand of God governing
the motion of it self; or in the Influence of superior Bodies upon the
inferior, by the Conjunctions and Oppositions, or other Aspects of Planets, in
imaginary Houses, which the inventions of juggling Astrologers have built for
them in the Heavens to consult and quarrel in, about the government of the
lower world; or to the distempers at some seasons naturally corrupting the
Elements, and by them the bodies, yea and the very minds of men. Others of a
lower rank in their Intellectuals, through an ignorant malice suspect the evil
Tongues of some persons who have some way or other (and often undeservedly)
gotten an evil Name among their Neighbors; or it may be, accuse the Devil
himself for paying them some ill turns he owed them, though they were never
known to have carried themselves so toward him as to deserve any such usage
from him. In all which, and the like conjectures, it is the main business of
the champions of Ignorance and Profaneness, to cast a mist before their own
eyes and other men's, to obscure the Providence of God in those Judgments which
he executes, lest he should be known by them. Which certainly is a crime of
the greatest magnitude: for it argues an envy at the glory which Gods wonderful
Providence are wont to procure him in the world: than which there can hardly
any attempt be conceived more Satanical.

[3. We may hence infer, How great Reason there is, that such Judicial
Providence should be exactly taken notice of, and with all the notable
circumstances which most manifest God, recorded, and transmitted to Posterity.
The learned and judicious Lord Verulam takes notice of it as a defect in the
historical part of Learning, De aug. ^. ent. l. 2.
that there is not extant an impartial and well-attested Historia Nemeseos, (as
he calls it) an account of the most remarkable Judgments of God on notorious
offenders; and complains of it. And it were to be wished, that God would put it
into the heart of some supreme Magistrates to promote so godly a Design by
their Authority, that the great Judgments of the King of Kings and Lord of
Lords might be preserved in public avowed Records, as their own Judgments
are. For certainly it would be a great check to the Atheism that so reigns in
the world at this day, to have such public testimonies preserved against them
to stop their profane mouths withal, when they take liberty to cry down God
and Providence. And such a work cannot be done effectually to such a purpose,
but with their encouragement and assistance, who are able to oblige the
Relators of such signal Providential strokes, by the sacred tie of an Oath, to
speak the Truth, all the Truth, and nothing but the Truth, in Gods cause, as
well as men's: and severely to punish those persons, who shall appear upon due
examination to lie for God, or against him. But seeing such a design is rather
to be wished, than hoped to be carried on, in such an Age as this; I forbear to
insist longer on this Point; and in the fourth place infer,

[4. That those private Persons, in the defect of more public endeavors in
this kind, do God good service, and much oblige Posterity; who take what honest
pains they can, in so profitable a discovery, by enquiring into, and informing
themselves and others from good Evidence, of such Instances of Gods just
Providence, as their Ages and the places they live in afford. For however some
Atheistical spirits are, according to their wont, apt to slight and despise
them: yet, abundance of serious and considering Persons, do, and it is to be
supposed, will, in after-Ages, make great advantages by them.

[5. And yet this must be attempted with great care and caution, as a thing
which we cannot lay out too much circumspect diligence and industry. Which also
follows from my Text and Doctrine. For those Judgments by which the Lord is
known, must be first known to be, and to be his Judgments; that is, it must be
known that such things, as to matter of Fact, are certain; and that they are
accompanied with such circumstances as carry in them a moral certainty also,
(as I before told you) that they are inflicted by God upon such an account:
because if there be a rational doubt of the one, or the other, there must be an
equal uncertainty in the conclusions drawn from such uncertain Premises.

Wherefore, it is certainly a foul and heinous crime, and a thing highly
injurious both to God and man, for any Person or Persons, either out of a
misguided zeal for God, or out of a particular fond affection to any Party in
Religion, and much more, upon the account of any more unjustifiable Passion; to
become a forger of Divine Judgments: or a busic reporter and spreader of such
Forgeries. For this is to speak wickedly for God, Job 1^.7.
and talk deceitfully for him; which Job charge with great abhorrency upon
his friends; as judging it a most unbecoming thing to endeavor to prop up the
Cause of the God of Truth with falsehoods. Nor indeed is it less mischievous,
than it is unsuitable, to the interest it pretends to defend. For though one or
two such pious frauds may prove at the first, (in some juncture of Time wherein
simple and well-meaning devotion prevails over the inquisitive humor of
Mankind) to be some way serviceable to the Design they were coined for: yet in
process of Time, as the state of Religion alters, and men (having it, may be
discovered the fallacy) grow more nice of belief in such matters; the case is
quite different. For then strikes in (ordinarily) the subtle Atheist or
misbeliever, and aggravates the flaws he finds in such stories, as are really
obnoxious, to the blemishing the Reputation of the most undoubted Records of
Christianity it self. And it can hardly be imagined what a foul imputation upon
that holy Religion of our blessed Savior amongst Atheists and other Infidels,
those Cart-loads of Monkish stories in the Romish Church have occasioned;
wherein the Miracles of their fictitious Saints, and the Judgments of God upon
their pretended Adversaries, are equally numerous; and yet both so grossly
contrived, that the unskilfulness of the bungling Inventers saves the confuters
of them the pains of any studied Arguments to disprove them. And yet with such
a fottish credulity are the generality of that Religion possessed, that there
is hardly any one who was eminently instrumental in the Reformation, but they
can tell you of some miraculous Judgment of God that brought him to his End;
which they believe with equal faith to what they have for the Gospel it self:
even that of Luthers body being carried away out of his Coffin by the Devil,
which he himself lived to disprove by his own Pen.

And it were well if it could be said of them only, that they prop up a cause
with lying wonders (as is prophesied of them) that needs it: 2 These. 2.9.
and that the indiscreet zeal of others, who would be thought to have better
Consciences, as they have (wherein they differ from them) a better Cause, did
not make use of their Example too much, and treat their Brethren of different
Judgments in the petty disputes that divide them into Parties, in the same
uncharitable manner. At least it were to be desired, if such hot spirits will
needs continue (with Solomon's Madman) to cast Firebrarnds one at another;
Prove. 26.18.
that they would not (with the Poets Prometheus) steal fire from Heaven to
kindle them withal, by forging miraculous Providence to blast the Reputation
of those Causes they are prejudiced against, in the Persons of those that
defend them.

[6. Lastly, we may learn hence, on all hands, to make a more beneficial use of
Gods Judicial Providence: to wit, that of the Text, to endeavor to advance in
the knowledge of God by them. Which Duty (according to the usual extent of that
Phrase in Scfipture) includes many particulars.

(1. As first, If any of us be sufferers under any such strokes, as our own
Consciences suggest to us are Divine Judgments: we are betwixt God and our own
souls to endeavor to take up the Controversy which he seems to have with us
betimes: and in order thereunto to acknowledge and bewail those known sins
which we are convinced of; and in a more special manner, those which our own
hearts seize on in fresh pursuit as the particular causes of that displeasure
from God, under which we lie: to humble our selves under his mighty Hand, and
remove by serious reformation and amendment of life, out of his sight, whatever
is offensive to those pure eyes which cannot behold evil, Hab. 1.13.
or look on iniquity.

And if it be not clear to us what particular quarrel God has with us; or that
he has an especial cause given him beyond the ordinary frailties of humanity;
so that (as to any known great crime) we are as clear as Job himself; yet we
are (as he is well advised, and also of himself resolves before that advice) to
say to God, Job 10.2.34.31, 32.
show me wherefore thou contendest with me: and that which I see not, teach
thou me: and if I have done iniquity, I will do so no more.

This is to be done betwixt God and our own Consciences, if none but God and
they be acquainted with our circumstances.

But if our Cases and our Crimes too be already by Gods Providence exposed to
the public notice, it is our duty in this Case to go farther; and to evidence
our true Repentance to the world, by a true, free, and ingenious
acknowledgement, justifying God, and giving glory to him, Ps. 51.4, Josh. 7.19.
as David and Achan did; and warning others not to offend him in like manner,
by our Example.

And in all these cases, if the present Judgment be upon such courses taken,
removed; and Gods Hand turned away from us: we are our selves to take heed we
sin thus no more, lest a worse thing come unto us: and not provoke him, John
5.1^.
(by a feigned humiliation whilst we are under his correcting hand, destitute
of real amendment) to do as he threatens, i. e. punish us seven times more, and
augment his severities, till our wound become incurable, Lev. 26. Jer. 15.18. 2 Chronicles. 26.16.
and past remedy.

(2. If we be (as in Epidemical Judgments) sufferers in common with others; our
duty is, (instead of shifting off the blame upon others) each man in particular
to own his own share in the common guilt, 1 King. 8.38.
(as knowing the plague of his own heart) and by true Repentance and amendment
to lessen the public Load which he has contributed to greaten; and call on
others, as he has opportunity, to do the like: and lastly, when he has
rendered himself fit for that charitable office to the public, by having
recovered his own Innocence, to intercede earnestly and affectionately, (using
his renewed Interest with a reconciled God) for the society to which he does
belong.

(3. If we be bare hearers or beholders of Gods great severities upon others,
and our selves free; we are then,

(1.) Wisely to consider his doings: Ps. 64.^.
so as to observe carefully what of God more than ordinary appears in them:
that we may give him the glory of those perfections, which he has thereby
rendered most conspicuous, for which those that have pleasure in his works
specially study them.

(2.) And particularly, to endeavor to reduce Gods Providence of this kind
(as well as all others) to the Rule of his written word; and observe the
correspondency they bear each to other. For this will serve us to very great
purposes, in order to a firm faith in him, and fear of him, when we can say,
Lev. 10.3.
(with Moses in the case of Nadab and Abihu) This is that which the Lord has
said.

(3.) To lay them up in memory as a choice treasure, to be made use of when
occasion serves. For God expects his great works should make deep Impressions
in the minds of men. And therefore some Interpreters read that clause of Psalm.
Psala 111. A. Verse. Tig.
111. which we render, He has made his wonderful works to be remembered,
[Memorioe consecravit] he has devoted or consecrated them to remembrance.
Wherein they imply, that it carries in it a kind of sacrilege, to let them slip
through our memories as common and inconsiderable things. And he takes notice
of it himself as a great crime in the Israelites, That they remembered not his
hand, Psalm. ^8. ^^ 43.
how he wrought his signs in Egypt, and his wonders in the field of Zoan.

(4.) And to improve that remembrance, as occasion is offered, by applying it
to our selves and others, according to the sutableness that those Providence
bear to the cases to which they are applicable. So when the Israelites were apt
to be afraid of the mighty and numerous Enemies they were to encounter, at
their entrance into Canaan; God sutably recalls to their memories, Dent. 7.16,
17.
what he did to Phaaoh and all Egypt. And when our Savior would fortify his
Disciples against the Tentations to compliance with the obstinate and
unbelieving Jews, in holding out the siege of Jerusalem, out of affection to
their concerns there; having before told them of that great day of the
Revelation of the Son of Man in his Judgments on that City, Luke 17.
and that there wanted nothing to complete its destruction in proportion to
Sodom, but only the removing the Christians thence, 29, 30, 31, 34.
(as they went afterward to Pella out of the City) in conformity to Lots going
out of Sodom: he bids them to remember Lots wife, whose tenderness of her
concerns in Sodom, made her look back, and therefore by Gods just Judgment, in
the very place, she was turned into a Statue of Salt. And the Psalmist
comforted himself against Gods present Enemies, and their outrageous
insolences; by remembering Gods Judgments of old. Psalm. 119.52.


(5.) And to be sensible of the special Mercy and Goodness of God to us, whom,
it may be he has as signally delivered when we were in equal guilt and danger
with others, who no less signally perished: yea, possibly, when our own
Consciences told us, that we our selves better deserved to have been made
Examples of Divine severity, than they that were so.

Thus the returning Jews acknowledge with gratitude the Mercy of God to them,
that in the common destruction of Jerusalem, Ezra 9.8.
he had left them a remnant to escape; and to give them a nail in his holy
place, i. e. a little, though but a weak fastening there. And so ought all those
whom Gods Judgments have left, in public calamities especially, like a few
gleaning grapes after the Vintage, Isa. 27.6.
as Isaiah expresses the said Remnant of returning Jews.

(6.) To possess our hearts with a reverend and awful fear of that God, Ps.
66.5.
who is terrible in his doings toward the children of Men. This use David made
of Gods stroke upon Vzzah; 2 Samuel 6.9.
he was afraid of the Lord that day. And the whole Christian Church, yea, the
generality of men that heard of the unusual deaths of Ananias and his wife,
Acts 5.11.
(as I before observed) were surprised with a great fear. When God as a Lion,
does but roar in his threatenings, who will not fear? says Amos, and much more,
Amos 3.8.
when (as his contemporary Prophet expresses it) he tears like a young Lion,
Hos. 3.14
does he expect, certainly, that all men should serve him with fear, Ps. 2.11.
and even those that rejoice before him, (in the most festival exercises of
Religion, wherein joy was part of the service required) should do it with
trembling? Thus are Christian Gentiles taught, upon consideration of the noted
severities of God toward his former people the Jews, Romans 11.^^.
not to be high-minded, but fear; as also the Christian Jews, upon the
remembrance of the severities of God toward their forefathers under the Law,
in the very delivery whereof Moses himself said, I exceedingly fear and quake;
are called on by the same Apostle, to serve him with reverence and godly fear:
as considering, that not only Mount Sinai, but Mount Sion also had its
thundrings, and the Gospel its terrors, as well as the Law: So that offenders
against him that speaks from Heaven, shall not escape, more than they that
despised him that spoke on Earth; nay, shall rather be punished with more
severity, because the God of Christians, Heb. 17. ^1. to v. 2^.
as well as Jews, is, if provoked, a consuming fire; and not to be met (as
Isaiah expresses it) by thorns and briars set in array against him, (...).
27.4.
left he go through them, and burn them together.

(7.) Lastly, to improve that fear for our future Caution; that taking warning
by his noted severities toward others, we give him no occasion, by the same or
like provocations, to take us in hand next. But especially, are we to take heed
of those sins in particular, against which we are evidently convinced God has
given public Testimonies by any remarkable Judgments. Which is the use the
Apostle tells us we ought to make of the great Judgments of God, against the
old Israelites left us upon Record in Scripture. (...) Cor. 1^. ^om 6. to 11.
All those things (which there he reckons up) befell them, says he, for
examples, and were written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world
are come: to the intent, as he implies it in several Instances, that we should
not lust, or commit Idolatry, or Fornication, or tempt Christ, or murmur, as
they did, for fear of the same or like Judgments.

And the like End surely God aims at, in those Judgments, which fall out in any
Age or part of the world, to admonish men to repent of, and for the future,
abstain from those Courses which (as it were) after violence to his Patience
and long-fussering, and extort those notable severities from him, by the
audacious importunity of their notorious Impieties.

And in all such cases the wise man (in Solomon's Phrase) will hear and increase
in learning, Prove. 1.5.
by fortifying himself against all Tentations to those sins, against which he
sees the Hand of God so notably lifted up. So that if among all the jolly crew
of sottish drunkards, but now and then one break his neck in his drunkenness,
or by a cup-quarrel lose his life; (though withal many such should escape such
ends, even so many as to give countenance to the profane Proverb, that drunken
men come by no harm) yet the prudent man will lay those few contrary Instances
to heart; and say in himself, Why should I not fear, if I despise such
warnings, that I may be made the next Example in that kind? If there be a
signal Instance in his Age, and within his observation of a noted cruel
oppressor, upon whose estate and house the curse of God remarkably descends, so
that his posterity are either all buried in death, i. e. die obscurely, Job
27.15, etc.
so as to be missed by scarce any body: or if any of them survive, they are not
satisfied with bread; but the great estates gotten by unlawful means, melt away
like wax before the Sun, e're inherited by the third Generation; Prove. 3.31, 33.
the serious observer will learn, not to envy him, nor choose any of his ways.

If the Examples should be more rare, than in these days they are, Luke 15.30.
of a debauched Prodigal, spending all his living with harlots, and by means of
whorish women reduced from an ample Estate to a piece of bread: Prove. 6.26.
or of some sinners in the same kind, Prove. 5.11.
whose flesh and body are consumed with a loathsome disease, thereby receiving
in themselves (in the Phrase of the Apostle, concerning uncleanness in another
kind) that recompense of their error which was meet: Romans 1.27.
the considering man will say with himself, What security have I, that the same
sin, if I follow it, will not reduce me to the same Case? If but the field of a
sluggard be overgrown with thorns, and nettles cover the face thereof, etc. (
i. e. his worldly estate goes backward for want of honest Industry) a wise
Solomon will consider it, Prove. 25.32.
and receive instruction. If the daring and audacious Appeals of a bold sinner
to God in fearful Curses upon himself; or profane affectations of a new uncouth
way of gallantry, by inventing new Imprecations against himself: or the
malicious shooting of bitter words as arrows in evil wishes against others;
amongst men that love cursing, do but once or twice in an Age meet with a
suitable stroke of Divine severity, and cursing come into the cursers bowels
like water, Psalm. 109.18.
and as oil into his bones: a considerate Christian will take heed, Ps. 39.1.
that he offend not thus with his tongue; and by a solemn purpose, as with a
bridle, keep his mouth from transgressing in that manner.

In a word, when all the places of Execution in a Nation become Pulpits, whence
the miserable Malefactors from their own woeful experience, preach Recantation
Sermons, wherein they renounce the evil Principles they have lived by, and warn
all men of the dangerous consequences of licentious and debauched Courses: and
the same Doctrine be also as frequently preached from the deathbeds of other
sinners, wherein the curses written in Gods book are verified in the eyes and
ears of all men, except they wilfully shut them both: who, but a desperately
forlorn wretch, will dare say in his heart, I shall have peace, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20.
though I walk in the imagination of mine own heart: i. e. gratify my own
sinful inclinations to satiety, as one that adds drunkenness to thirst? Against
such an one, surely, (if any such there be) the anger of the Lord and his
jealousy may well smoke, yea and burn (as he elsewhere threatens) to the
lowest Hell; 32.22.
the place appointed for them (says the Verse following my Text) that under
such evident tokens to remember him by, forget God. Ps. 9.17.
And justly may God make them Examples themselves, whom the Examples of others
will not amend: as being guilty of tempting his Justice beyond all possibility
of forbearance, by the ungrateful abusing of that Patience that should have led
them to Repentance; of daring presumption upon that lenity and goodness which
only has given them that merciful reprieve, Ps. 66.9.
by which their forfeited souls are held in life; of monstrous hardness and
impenitency of heart, whereby they treasure up to themselves wrath against the
day of wrath, Romans 2.5.
and the revelation of the righteous Judgment of God; and lastly, of prodigious
madness, and desperate foolhardiness, when as (notwithstanding the fearful
Instances in all Ages by which God has taught the world that none ever hardened
himself against him, Job 9.4.
and prospered, yet) as if they would wrestle a fall, or fight a duel with the
Almighty, they run upon him even on his neck, Joh 1 15.25, 26.
and on the thick bosses of his bucklers.

Believe it, sinner, believe it, (for Truth it self has spoken it) though God
spare thee a while, Eccles. 8.11.
Neh. 9.17
and execute not sentence speedily against thy wicked works; Romans 9.22.
though he be slow to anger, and endure with much long-suffering the Vessels of
wrath fitted for destruction; 2 Pet. 3.9.
as not being willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance: yet will he not finally suffer his holy spirit to be vexed, his
patience to be trampled upon, his word and its warnings to be despised, and his
Exemplary Executions to be entertained only as news without any farther effect;
but if the wicked turn not, he will whet his Sword, Psalm. 7.1^.13.
he will bend his bow and make it ready, and prepare for him the Instruments of
death: and (when he has stirred up all his wrath, Psalm. 78.38.
which yet in his great compassion he forbears) he will wound the head of his
Enemies, Psalm. 68.21.
and the hairy scalp of all such as go on still in their trespasses; and either
here or hereafter make them feel by experience, who without feeling would not
believe it, what a fearful thing it is to fall into the hands of the living
God, Heb. 10.31.
From which doleful experience God keep us all, for Jesus Christ his sake. Amen.

FINIS.
A Just NARRATIVE, OR, ACCOUNT Of the Man whose Hands and Legs rotted off: In
the Parish of KINGS-SWINFORD, IN STAFFORDSHIRE, Where he died, June 21. 1677.

Carefully Collected by JA. ILLINGWORTH, B. D. An Eye and Ear-Witness of most
of the material Passages in it.

LONDON: Printed by A.C. for Henry Brom, at the Gun at the West End of St.
Paul's, 1678.

To the Reverend S. FORD. D. D. Rector of Old-Swinford in Worcestershire.
SIR,
BEing importuned by diverse (Gentlemen, Ministers, and others of our
Neighborhood) to draw up a full Narrative and Account of that late sad
Providence (which has filled the hearts and mouths of the Country round about
us, the same whereof is also spread into remote parts) I was at last prevailed
with to endeavor their satisfaction: And the rather because of a general
rumor in the Country, that the man had declared several things to me of near
concernment to himself, which he concealed from all other Visitants. That I
might not therefore suffer such Reports to pass uncertain, nor be wanting in
that which was by some urged as my duty; I did (by traveling, at several
times, above sixty miles in the parts adjacent) enquire into diverse particular
circumstances, which I was not before fully clear in: and have now at last set
all down in plain words (suitable to such an account) that the meanest concerned
to know and make good use of the providence, might at first reading clearly
understand it.

Sir, That I address this to you, is, that I may take an opportunity to make my
hearty acknowledgments for your learned and useful Discourses in the Pulpit
upon this occasion, to the general satisfaction of your Hearers; and I must in
my own name, and many of theirs, entreat, you would make the substance of them
more public from the Press, that the Readers may learn not to be too
censorious in things of this nature, not yet to pass by so signal a Providence
without that just Observation it deserves, and due reverence toward that God
who is known by the Judgments which he executes, as you have fully showed us.
I hope, Sir, I invite you to nothing, but what your own Judgment accounts
worthy your labor; and I am confident it will be no mean addition to your
former elaborate services of God and his Church. In which that you may be long
continued for his Glory, and the good of his People, shall be the hearty Prayer
of (Reverend Sir)

Your most affectionate (though unworthy Friend) to honor and serve you, J.
ILLINGWORTH.

A just Narrative or Account of the Man whose Hands and Legs Rotted off in the
Parish of Kings-Swinford in Staffordshire, where he Died, June 21. 1677.
RIchard Duncalf of Godsal Parish, not far from Wolverhampton, in the County of
Stafford, dying many years since (and his Wife also) left behind them many
Children, and but slender provision for them.

One of their Sons, John Duncalf, bound himself an Apprentice to Thomas Gibbons
of Kings-Swinford in the same County, Wheelwright. When he had served his
Master two years and seven months (or thereabouts) he and his fellow Apprentice
stealing from their Master a considerable quantity of Iron, delivered it to a
third person, who promised to conceal it from their Master: but being all
brought before the Right Honorable the Lord Ward of Dudley-Castle, upon
examination severally, they accused each other, and confessed the whole: By
which means there was found concealed (as Tho. Gibbons says) 26 pound of old
Iron, besides more that was wrought up, new Waggon-Nails, ends of Bars, etc.
Upon their Confession the Lord Ward sent them to the House of Correction, about
October 14. 1675. But the other Apprentice being dangerously sick there, and
this John Duncalf pretending, at least, to be sick also, they two were set at
liberty the week foll^^^ng. After which time this said John Duncalf (...) to
come again to his former service (say^^^, he would never set his feet in
Kings-Swinford whilst he lived) but offering and engaging to pay to his Master
each other: by which means this young man (who was then full twenty years of
age, and at more liberty than formerly whilst an Apprentice) gave himself up to
licentious courses, viz. (as he confessed to me, April 26.1677) to Idleness,
Stealing, Lying, Cursing, Swearing, Drunkenness, and Uncleanness with Women.
Which last, he said, was not by committing actual Fornication or Adultery, but
in the thoughts of his heart, and by lascivious words, and gestures, whereby he
had endeavored to tempt them to lewdness in diverse places. I must therefore
here clear my self and him from an unjust rumor and report common (as I am
informed) in the Country hereabouts, which many people yet believe, viz. [That
he confessed some things to me which he desired might be concealed whilst he
lived, as, that he had committed a Rape upon a young person, and afterward
murdered her: That he was guilty of Buggery, or lying with Beasts, etc.] I do
therefore openly declare to all, that these were groundless rumors or reports,
and I do assure them he never desired me to conceal any thing he said or
confessed to me, nor did he ever speak to me of any such things as these which
some have reported and others believed. But the faults abovementioned seemed
to lie as an heavy burden upon his Conscience, when he judged Gods hand was
severely chastizing him for them, and all his other impieties; among which his
constant profaneness had not been the least, in that, although he could both
read and write, yet he had (as he said to me) a long time neglected all manner
of Service and Worship of God, as well on the Lords day as other days, and that
both in private and public. It is said, he stole many things to supply his
growing necessities (which his idleness and intemperance brought upon him)
chiefly Bibles; and the rather because they would soonest be bought by others.
About January the 6th. 1676/7 coming to the house of Humphrey Babb, living at
the Grange-mill, about three miles from Wolverhampton, he begged of Margaret,
the said Humphrey's Wife, Victuals and small drink. The Woman having formerly
known him, and compassionating his present condition, gave him freely such as
she had, but whilst she stooped to draw drink for him, he stole her Bible, (as
he confessed to her afterward.) This Bible he sold for three shillings to a
Maid of John Downings, who lives near the Heath-Forge, not far from the place
where he stole it. By which means, not long after, Humphrey Babb's Wife heard
of her Bible, demanded it of the Maid that bought it, and making her some
allowance toward what she paid for it, received it again long before either of
them saw him, or heard what was become of him: But this being noised in the
Country thereabouts, one Henry Evans told his Father Thomas Evans (commonly
called Painter) who lives near Henly or Himley (they both knew him) what John
Duncalf had done: at which the said John Duncalf, when he heard of it, was very
angry, and gave out threatening words against the young man; but being charged
with it by them, he did not only deny it with some fierceness, but execrated
and cursed himself, wishing his hands might rot off, if that were true (as the
said Thomas Evans testifies) and John Bennet his Keeper, says, he often heard
him say to Gentlemen that visited him in his sickness, that he did so curse
himself upon that occasion to Thomas Evans. And this he acknowledged of his own
accord, to me and many others, several times, when he seemed most serious and
in earnest [That he so cursed himself, and that immediately upon the execration
or cursing of himself, he had an inward horror or trembling upon him, a dread
and fear of the Divine Majesty, and Justice of God, which fear and working of
his Conscience continued more or less many days after.]

When I asked him (upon this ingenious acknowledgment) why he did not confess
his wickedness, and endeavor that the Bible might be restored to the owner?
his answer was, [That the Devil and his own heart would not suffer him.] Yet
this he acknowledged to me [That within a few days after that execration his
flesh began to look black at the wrists of his hands, and so continued diverse
weeks before it did sensibly rot.] He went then and wrought with one Thomas
Osborn a Joyner in Dudley, and (as Osborn says) continued with him about a
fortnight (Shrovetuesday being the last day as he well remembers) and that it
was the last work that ever he did; which I cannot wonder at, considering what
this poor man said to me concerning himself in reference to that time, viz. [
After I had cursed my self about the Bible, I wrought with a Joyner at Dudley;
but at that time I had a fear and trembling upon me, which frequently troubled
me, and made me have no great mind to work; and so feeling my self weak and
faint, and fearing an Ague or Fever, I went toward my acquaintance, but in the
way finding I was unable to go any further, I laid my self down in a Barn ( at
Parton-Hall as I remember) belonging to Sir Walter Wroteseley, and there
continued two days and nights before I was found] (some say he said (at other
times) from Tuesday night to Friday morning.) Being found, he was kept at the
charge of the Parish of Tettenhal (in which Parton-Hall stands) until the next
monthly meeting of the Justices of the Peace, who ( March 27. 1677.) by
examination finding Kings-Swinford to have been the last place of his
settlement, made an order he should be carried thither, and maintained by that
Parish. There he was received, March 28. and John Bennet appointed to take care
of him: first in a Barn belonging to the three Crowns, (an Inn standing on the
Road between Wolverhampton and Kidderminster) and after one fortnight removed
by the Overseers for the Poor, to the dwelling house of the said John Bennet
his Keeper in Wall-Heath-side. His flesh at first began to rise in great lumps
or knots at the wrists of his hands, and at his knees (as his Keeper tells me)
and after a little time to break and run, and shortly after to shrink from the
bones at those places, at which time, white putrid matter came out and ran
abundantly, causing exquisite pain and torment to this poor man: And so
offensive was the smell for several weeks together, that those who came to
visit him who were not only many hundreds, but, it is believed, thousands (his
Keeper and Neighbors say many thousands) were not able to abide in the room
with him, nor stand near without the door, except they had herbs or other
things at their mouths and noses to smell to. The Visitants being so numerous
at all times of the day, especially on the Lords-days, it seemed to give him
great disturbance, and made him very unwilling to talk many times, or answer
them any thing. They moved him once so far to impatience, when they crowded
about him each with a question, having Herbs, and other things at their Noses,
that his passion made him to forget his own condition, and wish their Noses
might rot off (as diverse there present assured me;) for which I gently, but
seriously, reproved him at my next visit. He seemed to take the reproof well,
acknowledging the fault of his passionate expressions toward them (provoked as
he said, by their crowding, impertinent curiosity, and foolish questions; or to
that effect:) But he had forgot, or would not confess, that he used those
words, -- about their Noses rotting off.]

But his Keeper tells me, he would often be very impatient toward the
multitude, and call to him, saying, John, why do thou not dash out their
teeth? do thou not see how they grin at me? and the like.

About the twentieth of April many little Worms came out of the rotten flesh,
such as are usually seen in dead Corpses (as his Keeper told me) but after he
was well washed and cleansed, those ceased, and the room and smell was nothing
so offensive as formerly: yet all that while (though it was rumor'd in the
Country) he would never confess his execration, and wishes against himself,
until his Keeper denied to ease him of the Vermin, Lice, etc. that filled his
shirt and doublet, and continually tormented him. (...) promised, that if his
Keeper (...) and cleanse him, (he had long (...) all the hair of his head) he
would ackno^^^^^, the whole truth, which he then did in ma^^^^ as is before
related.

And now he began to beg instruction, and help to repent and that some
Ministers and others, who came to visit him, would pray for and with him, which
many did, both public Preachers and others, at several times; and some who
lived near him (as I did) often. Being asked by me what he desired might be
begged of God for him, he returned answer to this purpose: That God would give
him repentance, and pardon his sins abovementioned, viz. Idleness, Stealing,
Lying, Cursing, Swearing, Drunkenness, unclean Thoughts, and constant
Profaneness, etc. that he would save him for Christ's sake, and give him
patience in the mean time.] I did accordingly endeavor to represent his case
before God, and with humble earnestness to pray for mercy for him; and he
seemed at that time to be somewhat affected with the Prayer, etc.

It was about this time, if I mistake not, that he sent for Humphrey Babb's
Wife, from whom he stole the Bible, she came and brought the Maid he sold it
to, along with her: to them he confessed the wrong he had done, and desired
they would forgive him; which the Wife told me she did heartily, and prayed God
to forgive hin as she did. The Maid seemed to be of the same mind and Christian
temper.

Very many (as I hinted before) hearing of him, came from all parts adjacent,
and some from places far distant, to see this sad spectacle of Divine Justice:
and amongst the rest, some of the Romanists, one of which, he and his Keeper
supposed to be a Priest of that profession, who was earnest with him to
renounce his Religion, and become a Catholic (as he called it) and they would
remove him, take care to heal his Sores, and (said the man, whom they supposed
to be the Priest) I will pawn my soul for thine, that thou shall be saved:
which I am informed, is an ordinary form of speech amongst the Papists of this
Country, when they would persuade men to their party. When I enquired of this
poor man (to try him) why he did not accept of their offers? he answered to
this purpose, [To what end? How can he pawn his soul for mine? none can save me
but Christ.]

Others who had occasion to travel this way from London, and other parts far
off, West and North, visited him, we hope not to satisfy their curiosity so
much, as to behold a monument of Divine severity, and that they might bear
witness, that although sentence against an evil work is not always executed
speedily, yet, God leaves not himself without witness, in this, as well as
former ages, against Atheism and grand impiety.

Upon the eighth of May following, both his legs were fallen off at the knees,
which the poor man perceived not until his Keeper told him and showed them to
him, holding them up in his hands, and his right hand, hanging only by some
ligament, by a little touch of a knife, was taken off also: The other hand at
the same time being black as a shoe, and not much unlike, in the fancy of
some, for roughness and hardness, to the outside of a dried Neats-tongue. This
hand hanged on a long time afterward by some such thing as the former, and
might ('it is possible) have continued in that manner until his death, if he had
not desired his Keeper to take that away also as the former, because it was
troublesome to him. Now although putrid matter frequently issued out at those
places, yet he had not so much pain as he had formerly for a month or six
weeks, as he freely confessed; and acknowledged that his stomach was good, and
did digest such meats as he took, and that he had evacuations by siege and
urine, as heretofore in his health.

So that, continuing in this condition some weeks, many began to think the
Issues might be stopped, and his life preserved many years, if regularly
ordered. Some the Parishioners were moved in it, that Physicians and Surgeons
might be consulted, and good advice taken in the case; but I cannot learn that
any thing was done about it, being judged, by some, incurable. It is said that
he expressed himself to some that visited him in this manner. [That now the
curse wherewith he had cursed himself being fully come to pass (in that his
hands were rotted off) he was persuaded it would go no further.] But he forgot
that God punished him, not for that sin only, but, for all his great
transgressions (though for that chiefly) as he formerly confessed to me, he
believed. At last his flesh began to wast, and his spirits to fail; so that
visiting him again, and observing some change in his flesh and countenance more
than formerly, I labored to convince him more fully of his condition, and to
persuade him to look up to the great Physician, in whose hands are the issues
of life and death, etc. He seemed to give diligent attention, and earnestly
desired me to pray with him; after prayers, when I was about to leave him for
that time, he desired I would not forget him in my prayers; making it also his
earnest request, that I would come again when ever he should send for me, which
I promised I would at any hour day or night. This was June 16. and on the 19.
(as his Keeper acknowledges) he was in great anguish and trouble of mind,
crying out [What shall I do to save my poor soul?] with many other expressions
to the same purpose; being very sick, and fearing his approaching death. But
upon what account his Keeper would not send for me (in whose hearing he so
earnestly desired me to come to him) he knows best, and must answer it, if it
was his fault for private respects, as is conjectured. On June 21. in the
morning, I went again to visit him, unsent for, but found him unsensible, and
past any further advice. I staid by him until almost noon. He lay still, with
his eyes fixed, as a dying man, moved not at any thing we said to him, but upon
pouring into him a little drink with a spoon at several times, he coughed a
little, and groaned, and then lay as before. When I saw there was no
probability he would understand any thing I said, I left him (after prayer made
for him with the company there present, in the house) and had notice brought
me, that he died about two hours after my departure from him.

Before I sum up the whole of this Narrative, and account of his condition, I
judge it may be acceptable to the Reader to insert some short Observations,
communicated to me by an ingenious Gentleman, our Neighbor, who several times
visited him in his affliction. Take them therefore in his own words.

When I first saw this young man (which was quickly after he was brought into
Kings-Swinford) he appeared to me to be of a vigorous state of body, and of an
healthy constitution, saving the strange defect under which he labored, his
hands and legs being then deprived of sense and motion. I observed them, and
handled him: They were from both wrists and knees blackish and dying; and I
took notice, that about each wrist and knee there was as it were a Circle at
the joint that divided the sound from the dying parts, and seemed like a
ligature, prohibiting any nourishment to pass those bounds; so that the blood
and spirits being wonderfully stopped in their circulation, it must necessarily
follow, that the parts thus deprived of their wonted supply, must wither and
die as a leaf in Autumn: which sad progress they made till both hands and legs
from the wrists and knees became dead and dried, black and hard, like Mummy,
before they fell off at the joints, which they afterward did. I also observed,
that at the first, above each of the forementioned circles, there brake out a
sore, at which the nourishing juice (designed by nature to have fed those
parts) emptied it self (now in those sores corrupted) in a quitture or sanies,
so horribly stinking, that few of his Visitants could well endure the room
without some strong smelling defensative. But visiting him after those dead
limbs were fallen from the body (all but one hand which was almost severed) I
saw the joints with the flesh look well and healthy They seemed to me free and
untouched by the former mortification, being quick and sensible, that now the
fellow complained upon the least touch thereof, yet seeming to promise an easy
cure, for that ichorous stinking humor was gone; the flesh was raw, but sweet,
and here and there besmeared with a thick corrupt pus, an encouraging sign (say
Artists) that sores incline to healing: But this poor creature wanting all help
from Art or Medicine, save what the application of the leaves of Mullein
afforded, which by his Keeper were used to defend the raw parts; in some weeks
there issued the like thin and stinking humor as before, which soon put a
period to his life. So far my Friend.

As to the young man himself, he was (as he told me a few days before he died)
about twenty two years of age. It was easy to observe, he had been a strong
young man, naturally of a stubborn temper, much hardened by evil courses; yet
he seemed sometimes to be affected with his condition, the discourses made to
him, and prayers with him; and I wish I might have had from him as clear an
evidence of a comfortable change wrought in him, as I would gladly have told
the world. I must in charity leave his final condition to God, who thus
afflicted and chastized him for the space of near about four months, that he
might be a signal spectacle to thousands, of Gods displeasure against impiety.

The sum of all is this, That a strong, lusty, young man, as most in the County
where he was born, being unfaithful to God and his Master, and giving himself
to licentiousness and wickedness, was brought to a morsel of bread; and by
doing evil and denying it with execrations, had a sting and secret remorse in
his conscience, by which, and want (the fruit of his idleness and intemperance)
he grew faint and weak, and his hands waxed feeble: not being able to work,
designed to betake himself to his Friends, but was stopped by the way, forced
to lie down under the hand of God, that the Curse wherewith he had cursed
himself might come upon him; and so by the stupendous providence of God he was
made a spectacle to the world of Divine severity many weeks, that others might
see, and hear, and fear, and do no more wickedly. And I wish, God may have no
reason to say to any, (as by the Apostle in another case, Acts 13.41.
) -- Behold ye despisers, and wonder and perish: for I work a work in your
days, which you shall in no wise believe, though a man declare it unto you.

FINIS.
SIR,
Being requested by Mr. Illingworth to give you an account of what I am able to
say concerning John Duncalf, I apprehend the best way is by a bare and brief
Narrative of that discourse that passed between us whilst I was with him; if
there is any thing worth your cognizance, you may make use of it as you please.

Our Discourse was as follows.

May 1st. 1677.

Quest. SPeaking to him of the deplorableness of his Condition, and that sure
there was a more than ordinary hand of Gods Providence in it arising from some
evil actor actions of his.

Answ. Answered yes, 'twas for his sins.

Quest. When I told him that sin was generally the procuring Cause of every
man's sufferings; but under such remarkable and dreadful sufferings as these
were, there is usually one or more special sins to be inquired after, as the
nearest procuring Cause or Causes.

Answ. He answered yes; so it was in his case. He stole a Bible from a Woman,
and being charged with it, denied it with this fearful wish, [That his Hands
might rot off if he stole it.]

Quest. Then I asked him, whether his hands began to blacken, or change Color,
or tingle, etc. presently after the imprecation, or that fearful wish of his?

Answ. Answered no; but his Conscience tingled sadly.

Quest. John, how long was it e're your hands began to rot, or had any signs of
putrefaction upon them after the Curse?

Answ. About a fortnight.

Quest. Have you made your peace with God for so great an offense?

Answ. [Being a man not apt to speak, and ignorant withal] made little answer,
only shaked his head.

Quest. Have you asked the Woman forgiveness, and to your power endeavored to
make satisfaction; or if the Bible were in your hands, to make Restitution?

Answ. Yes, he did send for her, and she came accordingly, and prayed God
forgive him, for she did.

Quest. John, can pray? I have not found in thee any motions or inclinations
thereunto since I came.

Shakes his head again, and nothing he said.

Quest. John, do thou know how at so great a distance as sin has made thee,
to go to the Father?

Answ. Yes, by Jesus Christ, whispering it softly, yet so as I might hear him.

Quest. Then fearing he did not understand what Christ has done for the World,
I very briefly opened to him the Tenor and Conditions of the Covenant of Grace,
and so how he must expect Mercy at the hands of God.

Answ. Then (so far as I could guess) he began somewhat to relent, for the
Tears trickled down his cheeks, and many Symptoms of conviction and sorrow
seemed to be upon him; saying these words, or to this purpose: For Gods sake,
Sir, pray for me.

Quest. John, I am glad to see some, though the least tokens of penitence in
thee -- The Lord enlarge thine heart, and make thy Conscience tender -- I am
willing, John, to pray for thee, and so I perceive is this whole company: But
it would be great satisfaction to us, if you would acquaint us, what we should
more particularly desire of God on your account.

Answ. Good Sir, that my sins may be pardoned, as loss of Time, neglect of
Duty, and the service of God.

Quest. Is not Sabbath-breaking one?

Answ. O yes, yes!

Quest. Have you any thing else to say?

Answ. No. Then let us pray. --

Ending with the Lords Prayer, he repeated the Petitions after me, saying Amen,
with somewhat an elevated voice; being observed to weep several times whilst we
continued prayer.

After which I parted with him, making me to promise him the continuation of my
Prayers.

About a fortnight after he sends a Messenger to me to tell me he desired my
company again; at which time I made it my business not so much to ask him
Questions, as to inform him of those Truths that as I thought had a necessary
conducency to our eternal peace. [Spending some hours with him that day, as I
could bear the noysom stench that then came from him.] Before I came away that
time, which was the last time that I saw him; his Keeper told me, that a Popish
Priest had been with him some few days before, earnestly endeavoring to
proselyte him to their Religion; using this Argument: That if he would turn
Roman Catholic, I will pawn my Soul to thy Soul thou shall be saved. But all
he could obtain of the poor man, was only this, that he would consider of it.
Then asking John Duncalf, whether this was true? He answered, Yes. Praying with
him, I took my final leave and farewell. This is all (worthy Sir) that I know
concerning him. I can only add that I am

Your most humble Servant, JONATH. NEWEY.
Kinfare, Aug. 17. 1677.
WE whose Names are hereunto subscribed, living in the Neighborhood of
Kings-Swinford, where John Duncalf the subject of the preceding Narrative,
whilst Gods hand was so severely upon him, for the most part resided; and
having most of us visited him and discoursed him in that condition, and the
rest of us received frequent Informations of the Passages herein mentioned from
a multitude of credible Witnesses; do (in order to the rendering so useful a
Relation more creditable so far as we are known) attest, that we judge it to be
very exactly and impartially penned in all the particulars: and especially, in
those Passages of it which contain the frequent serious acknowledgements of the
mentioned John Duncalf, (That he did imprecate that Judgment upon himself which
is here expressed, and upon the occasion here related) which he made not only
in the hearing of the Author, but also of most of us: as also, in the substance
of those that relate the rotting off of his Hands and Legs before his death, in
the manner herein mentioned. And this attestation we make with no other design,
but that God may have the glory, and the world the benefit of so Exemplary a
Providence. For which end we as heartily accompany this Narrative with our
prayers, as with our hands.

Simon Ford, D. D. Tho. Wilsby. Amb. Sparry. John Raynolds. Samuel Mountfort.
Edward Paget.



