REFORMATION SURE AND STEADFAST; OR, A SEASONABLE Sermon for the present times.
SHEVVING THE LIFE AND DEATH OF REFORMATION.

PROVE. 15. 23. A word spoken in due season how good it is.

Preached June 15. 1641.

Published by order from a Committee of the Honorable House of Commons.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at his shop at
the entrance into Pope's Head Alley out of Lumbard street. 1641.

To the Reader.
GOd has laid the foundation among us long ago, and God be thanked we have
held it hitherto, though with much ado, and some hazard, for Pioners both
within us and without us have been digging at it, but could never undermine
it, to blow it up (for thereby we have been comely though black) and
therefore they have gone another way to work, and built upon it: to wit; wood,
hay, stubble, so that though the power of godliness has preserved us, yet
this combustible matter has kindled such fires amongst us, as have almost
ruined, us. For it is dangerous to separate what God has joined together,
though Power may give as a subsistence, yet never a been esse without Purity,
to which we now hope we draw near by the marriage of these two together
amongst us, but then they must have these properties of marriage, they must not
only join hands but hearts, and that for ever for Cordial unanimity, and
constant perpetuity, make up such a Reformation, as only will make us.

But I will not prevent the Sermon by preaching it in the Epistle, only borrow
so much, as may show how needful it is for Ministers, to join with
Magistrates, and to employ the Word, as they the Sword this way, that so it may
not be done by halves, but thoroughly, and that not only in Action, but
affection, For God says, give me thy heart, which is the sum, and substance
of this Sermon, and that it may be the practice of us all, so prays.

Thine in the Lord, T. F.

REFORMATION Sure and steadfast, or a seasonable Sermon for the present times,
etc.
ZEPHANIAH 1. 1. The word of the Lord which came unto Zephaniah the son of
Cushi, the son of Gedaliah, the son of Amariah, the son of Hizkiah, in
the days of Josiah the son of Amon King of Judah.
THree things there are expressed in the Text; and a fourth employed. First, The
authority of the Prophet. Secondly, The Prophets quality. Thirdly, The time of
his Prophecy; and fourthly, The Argument, or substance of it; which is the
thing employed in the Prophets text, and fully opened in his Sermons.

1. The authority: The word of the Lord: And therefore you are to take notice,
I am not now opening to you men's opinions, or reading a Lecture to you out of a
Philosopher, or an Historian, which you may like where you will, and leave
where you list, hear, or believe ab libitum; But the word of the Lord, who
must be believed, when he speaks most above our apprehensions, or crossest to
our present wills, and affections.

2. The Quality of the Prophet; Which came unto Zephaniah the son of Cushie,
etc. His Father and Grandfather, and great Grandfather and great great
Grandfather are named: Whence it appears, that Zephaniah was a man of an
honorable House, because his Ancestors are mentioned to the fourth generation
Besides, the names of his Ancestors tell him to be honorable.
And hence we see, that Almighty God has made use of men of all degrees, to
be Ministers of his Word. Isaiah came of the blood Royal; Jeremiah, of the
stock of Aaron; Daniel and Zephaniah, of honorable Families. Amos, a
heardman; Elisha, a husbandman; and other Prophets, as Malachi, Obadiah,
Haggai, and Habakkuk, whose naked names we have without their Pedegrees. And
thus we see, that as the Lord does send his Word to all sorts of men, so he
sends it by all sorts of men. And hereby the most true God does the more clear
his Word from jelousie, and suspicion. Here also we see, it is calling
honorable enough, for men that are most honorable by birth, to be Ministers
of Gods Word. As Zephaniah a Noble man by birth, was not undervalued, but
advanced by his calling to be the Lords Minister. A Ministers Calling is honor
enough to him without other accumulations.

3. The time of his prophesying: In the days of Josiah King of Judah: and
therefore one of the last Prophets before the Captivity, and a Contemporarie
with Jeremiah.

4. For the substance, and subject of his prophecy, we shall find; It is
composed of very reproving, and very threatening Sermons: partly indeed against
some others, but principally against Judah.

I, but what should such a Prophet, Quest.
a reproving Prophet, a threatening Prophet do in Josiah's time, a time of
great reformation, and a very reforming Prince?

I answer, Answ.
that though Josiah himself had a right spirit in way of Reformation, yet the
spirits of the greatest part of the Nobles of Judah, and also of the Commons,
inclined to their old superstitions in worship, and corruptions in government.
The Idolatrous ways of their former corrupt Princes, were still in their
hearts; And however the King was sound, yet the greatest part of the Subjects,
both Rulers, and People, were rotten-hearted toward Josiah's Reformation.
Which appears both by some express places of Scripture, and by good
consequence from other.

In the 2 King. 22. 17. and Chro. 34. 25. It was absolutely charged, upon the
Inhabitants of Judah, that they burnt Incense to other Gods; which charge was
in Josiah's time: So that notwithstanding the religious reformation, he had
endeavored amongst them, yet they had their old haunts of superstion, and
therefore then censured, as well as charged.

If it be put to Case, and objected, that this charge might have relation to
Judah's Idolatry, in Manasse's time, as might seem from that passage in 2
King. 23. 26. Let this Question be put upon this Objection: Why should such a
difference be made, in that charge, and censure, betwixt Josiah, and his
people, saving that he was sound, and they still corrupt? I confess it has
reference to Manasse's time; yet not only thither: for its plain to Josiah's
also. And this will be without scruple, upon the view of some passages in the
Prophet, Jer. 3. 6. and 10. The Lord also said unto me, says Jeremiah, in the
days of Josiah the King. Judah has not turned unto me with her whole heart,
but feignedly, or in falsehood, says the Lord. Though the King, and happily
some few of his Nobles, and People were very Cordial in reformation, yet the
major part both of Nobles and Commons, had reformed faces, but not reformed
hearts.

Again, by consequence it is clear. For whereas Josiah, though young, was
upright-hearted himself, and likewise toward the reformation of his Kingdom;
Why yet it seems, it was the twelfth year of his Reign, before he could get
the Kingdom in any readiness to a Reformation. So it is recorded in 2 Chro.
34. 3. That in the twelfth year of his Reign, he began to purge Judah and
Jerusalem from the high places, and the Groves, etc.

Again, after he set upon Reformation, we find it was six years, before he
had purged the Land, and the Temple, which was but a part of his Reformation
intended: for the repaires of the Temple were still behind, verse. 8. And what
should be the Reason, that he should be twelve years before he began to
reform, being so pure a Prince, and six years in one part of Reformation, the
casting out of Corruptions? But because he found it a mighty difficult matter,
to new mold the People from old ways, and to take the generality of them off
from their wonted superstitious customs.

It is observable again, that when the People were brought to an outward
Conformity, to the Reformation, yet their hearts still hankered another way,
and so much as they durst, for the Laws, the Reformation had established, they
declared their idolatrous spirits: as in that 3. Jer. 10. Judah has not turned
to me with her whole heart, but feignedly.

And we are moreover to mark, that after their outward Conformity to
Reformation, came the threatening of their Captivity. Compare the 8. and 25.
Verse, of the 34. Chap. 2 Chro.

There is still another thing more notable for the case in hand, which is this;
When upon the Lords threatening Judah, for the superstitious bent, and byas of
their spirits still; Josiah to the end he might make them as sure as he could
for God gathers them together, to enter into a sure Covenant with the Lord, to
serve him only, and to worship him truly; It is observable that the king was
forced, to force them to stand to the Covenant, that he himself had entered
into. Verses 32. 33. They did not willingly, and freely enter into the Covenant
with the King, but it is said, Josiah caused, and made all that were present, or
that were found in Jerusalem, and Benjamin to stand to it. Again, neither did
they keep this Covenant any longer then Josiah's life, as the last words of
the Chapter, and the Peoples practice in the beginning of the next King do
manifest.

Now if the commendations of the Passover in Josiah's life, and the great
lamentation of the People at Josiah's death, should be an Argument to any for
the integrity of Judah in Iosiah's time; They must needs in serious, and
seconded thoughts, apprehend the carriage of the people in the generality, but
a Ceremony, and no substantial point of their soundness.

Therefore upon all this that has been said, I say in Answer to the Question;
That there was a necessity of this sharp, and threatening Prophecy, even in
Iosiah's time, though a time of Reformation: howbeit, not in respect of Prince,
yet of People for the major part. And then this is the first Doctrine.

That though the Prince, Doct. 1.
and some Rulers of a Nation, be strict Reformers in Religion, yet if the
People generally continue corrupt, the Nation is still in much danger. As we
may take notice of it in Gods angry words against Judah, in Iosiah's time, the
purest of Reformers before the Captivity; So also, as clearly in the pure
reformations after the Captivity, by the confessions, of the Reformers
themselves: Witness Ezra, and Nehemiah their solemn Fasts, to prevent sad
things, which they feared might befall their Nation, through the peoples
corruption, Ezra 9. and Nehem. 9.

Now when I say, when the people are corrupt in Religion, I mean not their
open profession, or confessed practice of superstitions, and crosse-wayes, to
the purity of Religion: But even then, when the people have outsides to
Reformation, yet still hearts and insides to corruption. For this was the case
of the Jews in Iosiah's time. As the purest Elements now are so impure as
subject to change in part into contrary Elements; such was the temper of these
Jews, that as they went to Zoar, their faces were toward Sodom.

And the danger of such a Nation, Reas.
that has such a people appears in this; Because such a People, though they
may be conformers, to godly reformation for the present, yet for present it is
against their wills to be for God, and so soon as ever they have opportunity,
they will be for Baal. Just as your men that stay at shore till wind serve,
they keep upon the Land, because they cannot get upon the Sea; but so soon as
the winds turn to their opportunity, fare well Land.

Thus we may conceive it was in that happy Reformation of King Edw. 6. though
unhappy in respect of his surviving Subjects. Who in reason would have thought,
that, that Reformation should have had such a Metamorphosis, and that so
suddenly; yet the issue gave in evidence that the generality were but mere
Formalists in that reformation, and did but wait for a wind, to carry them to
Rome again.

And as this has been the issue of the People, so Vice versa; Sometimes with
the Prince: as in Joash King of Judah, a good King not from inward principles,
but from outward motives; He made true Religion the fashion whilst Jehojada
lived: For all the days of Jehojada it is said, he walked in the godly paths of
his godly Predecessors, and maintained the reformation, made after Athalia
deposed, and he crowned, 2 King. 11.

But so soon as Jehojada was in his grave, the Princes of Judah came, and made
obeisance to the King, and with flattering speeches motioned to the King, the
renewing of Baalitish worship, and he hearkened unto them, 2 Chro. 24. 17.

To make Application of the point for our own particular use. Use.
And hence we gather that there is as great necessity to pray, and endeavor,
that the hearts of the People of the Land, may be prepared for Reformation, as
that the Lord would prepare Reformers: That Prince, and Peoples spirits, may
move in the same orb in this point, and that the people may not be carried on
in Reformation, as the Sun, and stars are by the Primum mobile, have a
violent motion from it, and another natural motion of their own, quite
contrary. For certainly though the people of the Land move after the motion of
superior Orbs, King, and Rulers that do reform, yet keep another cross
inclination, and motion of their own, surely, I say, our hopes at most, can be
but for an Age, even the lives of Reformers; and so soon as a Josiah is gone,
so will his Reformation too.

It Is true, for the age of Reformers, the Scriptures warrant us, Truth and
Peace in their days; Nay, and according to Scripture evidence, an external
complying of the people with Reformation, is a Supersedeas to the Land from
National judgments. We find in Josiah a Reformer, he must go to his grave in
peace, and his people must be secure till then too. And so there must be peace
and truth, all Hezekiah's reign, being a reformer of Religion, though we find
many heavy prophesies against Judah, even in Hezekiah's time, as we see in the
Prophets, Isaiah, Hosea, and Micah. And so Jehoshaphat, a maintainer of his
fathers Reformation, and something a mender of it, though indeed once he was
affrighted with a great Army, yet says the Scripture; The Realm of
Iehoshaphat was quiet, and God gave him, and his People rest in his Reign, 2
Chro. 20.

But then here is usually the non ultra of hopes, of happiness, when the
peoples hearts move not in the same Orb after the Princes in reforming. The
Scripture is clear in president for it: That when in time of Reformation, the
peoples spirits are not prepared for purity in Divine worship, as the
Governors are (thus the case was with Iehoshaphats people, the hearts of the
people were not prepared, to the taking away of the High Places, 2 Chro. 20.
33.) then the Land has been secured, and happy but that Age. For we find
that when Iehoshaphat slept with his Fathers, even that good Prince, whose
peoples hearts were not prepared, as his, for perfect Reformation, the next
King, was a King after the corrupt peoples own hearts: A man that walked in
the ways of the Kings of Israel, and house of Ahab, 2 Chro. 21. 6.

And what became of the Kingdom then, that was so secure and quiet, whilst
Iehoshaphat lived? Why, we find there, that first the Edomites, they revolt
from the Dominion of Judah, and set up a King of their own; and Libna also
revolted from the government of Judah. And the reason of this change in the
State, is given in the tenth verse of the Chapter: Because Iehoram had forsaken
the Lord God of his Fathers, Iehoshaphat and Asa, both Reformers of Church and
State.

It Is true, we find in Scripture, that Asa's Reformation continued not only
his, but his successors time; But then we find with all in Scripture, that
there is no such thing laid to the peoples charge, as not being prepared for
his Reformation. And this I conceive to be a Reason of the succession of
Queen Elizabeth's reformation through King James his Reign, and our gracious
King Charles; namely, besides the Integrity of their Royal spirits, the
hearts of the people were prepared for that Reformation of Religion. Which
appears to be so, in this, That no Baalam's; though there have been many,
could yet curse England so far, as to Adulterate a considerable part, either
of Nobles, or Commons, from the former Reformation; though from perfection in
Reformation, we have been often stopped.

Moreover, it is beyond all this observable concerning Hezekiahs Reformation;
That though he was very pure in it, and his peoples hearts prepared for it, 2
Chro. 29. 36. The people were much taken with Hezekiah's reformation at first,
and forwarded it with all expedition; For the work was done suddenly, says
the Scripture. Why yet this lasted but Hezekiah's life; Truth, and Peace only
in his days: for after he was gathered to his Fathers, Religion was more
corrupted then ever by Manasses his son, and the Kingdom never in greater
straits, and exigents. Now what should be the reason of this? That he so pure a
Reformer, and his peoples hearts so prepared for Reformation, yet the Kingdom
happy herein, but for his time.

I answer, That we shall find in the search of Scripture in this case; That for
all this forwardness of the People in Hezekiah's reformation, yet alas, they
were but for a spurt, their be stat first, their courage soon cooled this way,
and they quickly weary of the life of Religion. For this complaint the Lord
made of Judah, in the Prophet Hosea: who prophesied in Hezekiah's time against
Judah, Hos. 6. 4. O Judah, what shall I do unto thee? for your goodness is as
the morning cloud, and as the early dew it goes away. And if happily this was
spoken to Judah in another Kings time, and not Hezekiah's, (for Hosea
prophesied in four Kings reigns of Judah, Uzziah, Jothan, Ahaz, and Hezekiah)
yet the very last thing in the Prophecy against Judah, must in all reason be
in Hezekiah's time, Chap. 12. 2. I have a controversy also with Judah, and
will punish Jacob according to his ways. Nay, and that which God spoke in
Judah's commendation compared with Ephraim, Chap. 11. 12. intimates, as it
were, that the Lord was jealous of Judah's declining, and returning to Idols;
Ephraim compasses me about with lies; but Judah yet rules with God. Yet, as
if he did expect that they would fall off at last.

It Is manifest again by the Prophet Micah, who prophesied in Hezekiah's days,
that even then there was a defection in the People, the Magistrates become
corrupt, and the Ministry too, Chap. 3. 9. and chap. last, and beginning of
it. Besides this, it is more then probable that corruptions crept into Judah,
even in Hezekiah's days; because we find there was such a corrupt Minister of
State nigh to the King, and in the Kings house, Shebna by name, both Treasurer,
and also over the Kings house, Isa. 22. 15. A man of a mighty proud spirit for
himself, as is seen in the 16. verse, and a mighty dangerous man to the State
of Judah, as appears in his notable end, in the 17. 18. verse, etc.

To put on the use again in conclusion of these premises. We see and cannot
see; That besides the stirring up of the spirit of Iehoshaphat, or Hezekiah, or
Josiah, or Zerubbabel, or Nehemiah, or Cirus, I say, besides the stirring up of
the spirits of Rulers to reform, there are these two things to be looked unto,
if any continued comfort be expected in Reformation.

First, that the hearts of the people be prepared

Secondly, that the hearts of the people be all external performances, yet the
Ministry properly casts the heart, and inclinations into a reforming temper.

And therefore Brethren now King, Note.
and Ministers of State are discharging their parts in commanding, if Ministers
of the Church do not discharge theirs in informing, and exhorting; Surely, as
it was said of the Priests to their disparagement in Hezekiah's reformation, 2
Chro. 29. The Levites were more upright in heart to sanctify themselves than
the Priests; So will it doubtless be charged on the Ministry in ours; That
the Magistrates were more upright in heart to perform their parts in
Reformation, than the Ministers theirs.

We see also what here is for private men to work upon in their prayers, viz.
the hearts of the people of the Land, as well as the heart of the Prince of the
Land in the day of refining. Though the head be never so well, and in temper,
yet if there be an ill heart, or a corrupt liver, or ulcerated members in the
body, a man's life is still in hazard: So that if Christians do not level as
well in their prayers, and humblings, to the sincerity of the Subjects, as the
purity of Prince, as well to the preparation of the people, as the reformation
of Rulers; the Kingdom is not yet out of danger. For however it be a
happiness to a Kingdom, when Rulers are willing to reform, as to Judah in
Iehoshaphat. Yet if the people be not prepared for Reformation, mark, and it
goes on with much difficulty, and every motion of it pinches much. As, this
being the case of Josiah six years could scarcely get out rubbish from Church
and State, that they might come to repaires. For it was the twelfth year
before he could pull down Baal, and the eighteenth before he could build for
God.

Secondly, there must be care had by the Magistrate in their sphere, and the
Ministry in theirs, and all the people of God in theirs too, to get the hearts
of the people settled, in the rules of Reformation: that they be not wavering,
and of a changeable spirit, except Governors change any forgot, or unseene
errors: that their goodness may not be as Judah's, as the morning cloud, and
early dew which passes away; that they may not be for Antichrist again, when
an opportunity tempts them; but religious when Iehojada is dead, and righteous
when Josiah is fallen asleep. In a word, that they may be implanted into a
Reformation, as the Medes and Persians were into their Law, which altered not.
And if this be not, then this may be; nay, this will be the mischief, and
inconvenience, viz.

Though the work of Reformation go on apace for a time, as it is said of
Hezekiah, he blessed God, that the hearts of the people were so prepared, that
the work was done with speed. I say, though the work may go on with speed
for a time, yet in time there may come a pause, and long demurre: and this was
their case in the building of the Temple, upon the weakening of the hands of the
people of Judah and Benjamin, Ezr 4. The People were extraordinary busy, and
zealous at the foundation of the Temple, but shortly after, by some wiles, and
plots of Ante-reformers, their hands were weakened, their zeal abated, and the
work of building the Temple, received intermission many years, Ezr. 4 Compare
the fourth verse with the twenty fourth.

Thus you have seen cleared, that when the Magistrates of a Land are serious
in separating betwixt the precious, and the vile, if the people of the Land, I
mean the considerable part of them be peccant; the Land is still in danger,
especially for future. For if the hearts of the people be not prepared for
reformation, then it comes on with much difficulty: If prepared, and not
settled, there may come in dangerous delays, and besides little hopes to last
long. As the Israelites at first coming out of Egypt, in one quarter of a
year they got as far as to the wilderness of Zinai, the third part of their
way from Egypt to Canaan, and count all their Compasses in their journey: they
stayed not there much above the year complete, to take their Laws along with
them, and yet after they removed from Mount Sinai, they were nine and thirty
years before any of them got to Canaan. Whereas had their progress been like
their beginning, they might have been at the Land of promise within fix
months more.

You conceive our own case without particular application; and you cannot but
conceive how much it concerns us all to see to it, to our power, that the
hearts of all be not only prepared to reform, but settled in their
preparations. And sure it lies hard upon Gods people (O that they would
heartily take notice of it) not to ebb a jot in the course of Prayer, and
humiliation, or in the way of personal reformation, or exercise of faith, and
activenesse of spirit every way, which is proper for the times, and their
conditions in them. So much for this first Doctrine from the Argument of the
Prophecy.

Secondly, the Prophecy is also to threaten them, that keep corrupt, and
rotten hearts, in times of reformation. And hence this second Doctrine.

That Anti-reformers are sure of ruin. Doct. 2.
There are sure judgments kept for them, that keep corrupt minds under times
of reformation. For why Iosiah's people should be punished for this temper, and
any now escape, I can find no reason; So that to such, ruin will come, though
happily, it may be a whole, or a piece of an Age before: as it was with the
multitude of the Jews in Iosiah's days, his days they were respited, but
after ruined. And if in this case the generality of the people be thus
tainted, the whole Nation is at stake, if but an inconsiderable part Almighty
God can fifth out the accursed thing, and I believe will cull out Achans, and
save Israel.

My Brethren, when in times of reformation and purity, men will not leave
their vanity and superstitions, what the Word cannot take away, the Sword of
the Magistrate must, or Gods will. Men of spirits crossing reformation, are our
Moabites, and Ammonites: We shall observe that the Moabites, and Ammonites in
Isreal's time, were by Gods law, the most accursedst men, of all men; the very
Edomites and Egyptians, were not so hateful a people as they, for the children
of an Edomite, or an Egyptian, might enter into the Congregation of the Lord in
the third generation, but the Moabite, and the Ammonite might not come into the
Congregation of the Lord, to the tenth generation, no not for ever. See Deuteronomy.
23. 3. and 8.

Now what was the nature and disposition of the Ammonite and Moabite, that they
above others must be thus accursed? Why, because they hindered Isreal's passage
to Canaan; thus will it be with the men who hinder the Church of God from the
enjoyment of her promises of Purity and Peace, they are, or God will make them
the hatefull'st of men.

And O that some in these times, would take this into thought, who had rather
in their practice in Religion be conformable to Rome in the Popes time, then
reduced to Rome in Saint Paul's time, and choose to imitate her in her
corruptions, rather then in her purity. Rome is sure to be ruinated, if the
generality o^ pure Divines in all ages since Antichrist known to be there,
do not fail us; nay, and the Scriptures themselves, which we are sure will
not. And if she be sure, as sure are all they that come not out from her, else
what means that place of Scripture, Rev. 18. 4. Come out of her my people,
that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her
plagues.

Again, thirdly the Argument of the Prophecy is to show to all Ages, what
necessity there is, of fidelity, and throughnesse in undertaking the
reformation of States, and Churches, for otherwise they are still endanger.
Though it be no error to take away some corruptions, yet it is an error not to
take away all.

What has been the spring of the miseries of some of Christ's Churches (as in
Germany) since they were reformed, but their partial reformations. Gualther,
and other judicious Germane Divines were in this note whilst they lived.

There is no perfect peace in a State, without full Purity of the Church. The
times of laying down weapons, of beating Swords into plow-shares, and Spears
into pruning hooks, and of learning war no more, and of every man's sitting
under his Vine, and under his Fig Tree without fear, Micah 4. 3. 4. are the
purest times of the Gospel. The times when the Gentiles shall be earnestly
calling upon the Jews, that they may walk together in the glorious light of
the Gospel compare that of Micah with 2 Isa. 4.

And again, Churches are very subject to relapses, when not thoroughly healed,
and relapses are dangerous; the last error is worse then the first. New
Idolaters after a reformation, are more dangerous then former; Consider the
Idolatrous times of Judah after reformations, and it is plain, Idolaters were
more dangerous after Hezekiah's reformation then before, witness Manasses
time, and still more dangerous after Josiah's reformation then before, witness
the Captivity. And it is not in vain to look upon the next Idolaters after
King Edw. reformation. And if we be not blind, we may see in our own days,
that popish spirits are more deep, and desperate then ever yet. But I am not
preaching to reformers, therefore to you my Auditors I commend, and in the name
of God may command, these three things carefully to be looked unto by you,
even in these times wherein the Lord does dispose the spirits of Prince and
Governors to a Reformation.

Jehoshaphat took not away the High places, because the people as yet had not
prepared their hearts to seek the Lord God of their fathers, 2 Chro. 20. 33.
And your primest way for this is powerful prayer.

Judah, was a lon^ stop to the perfecting of the Temple, Ezr. 4. 4. And lastly,
And the surest way for this is to enter into a sure Covenant, the way is lead
for us.

Thirdly, it must be your special care, that Germany have had a sore check
from God, for too much confidence in man I have heard and read, that the
Renowned King of Sweden Item'd so much unto them before his death.
. When, whilst we lay our pipes directly upon the Fountain for derivation, we
are sure to have our pipes full, if once we set the Cisterne in the Springs
place, we are sure to find empty vessels. This may be an error; But that
which certainly is the error, is an undervaluing of the Instruments of
Reformation. It is likely there are many Belials that mutter against Reformers
now, as Sheba did of David, a Reformer of Israel, 2 Samuel 20. We have no part
in David, neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse, every man to his
Tents, O Israel. Some such base spirits no question we have amongst us, whose
hearts rise against Reformers of Church and State, and had rather every man,
should walk by will in both, then by rule in either.

We shall observe it usually in Reformations in Scripture, the Devil has
stirred up Antireformers, whose designs have bin to contrive the disgrace, and
basest esteem of the Instruments of Reformation. Thus Korah and his company
plotted amongst the people, to cast an aspersion upon Moses and Aaron, that
they took too much upon them, Number. 16.

In Zerubbabels reformation Rehum the Chancellor, and Shimshai the Scribe,
insinuated to the people; That Zerubbabel and Jeshua in their reformation, and
restoring the Temple, wronged the King, and Country, and signified as much to
the King also by politic, but lying Letters, Ezra 4. And in Nehemiah's
reformation Sanballet, and Tobia, enemies of the same spirit. When our Savior
was in reforming the state of the Church in his time, and preached against the
errors, and superstitions of the Jews, and their Church, then the high Priests
and Scribes Et cetera, insinuated to the people, that Christ was but a
Wine-bibbet, a companion of Publicans, and though he did strange things, yet
the cast out Devils, by Beelzebub prince of Devils.

Beloved, as the case is with us, your cure must be great against carnal
reason. For carnal reason might have disputed against Josiah's reformation, he
was but a Child, and meddled also with the very rooting out of things, that his
godly Ancestors left standing, both in state and Church. So carnal reason
might have objected more in Hezekiah's reformation; That he did not only pull
down the High places, set up by men, but the Brazen Serpent, formerly apponted
by God. And thus it may be some men, if they confer with carnal reason, may
cavil at our present Reformers, As that they make themselves wiser then their
Fathers, and remove things out of Church, and State, which their Predecessors
found no fault with. And had they been men of such spirits as these, so might
the people have stumbled at Asa's taking away some things in his latter
reformation, which he left in being in his former fifteen years before, 2
Chro. 15.

My Brethren, I conclude with this Parallel, in this point, and I beseech you
take it to heart. As those Israelites, that brought up an ill report of the
Land of Canaan, whither Israel was going, were not only barred from coming
thither, but dyed of the Plague in the Wilderness, Numb. 14. So let those
Cavellors against the Canaan, whither this Church of Christ is going, expect
assuredly, that they shall never enjoy the sweetness of it.

And for a farewell word; If any fear, lest the enemy should hope, to
strengthen themselves, by seeing here, where our strength lies. I must tell
them, they fear where no fear is. For the mysteries of the Kingdom of
Heaven, made known to us, are made Parables to them. And be confident in it;
That God does never discover duty to us, to ensnare us, but to keep us out of
snares that are laid for us.

FINIS.

