FORRESTA de WJNDSOR, IN COM. SVRREY.

The Meers, Meets, Limits, and Bounds of the Forest of WINDSOR, in the County
of Surrey, as the same are found, set out, limited and bounded by Inquisition.

Taken by virtue of His Majesty's Commission in pursuance of one Act made in
the Parliament, begun at Westminster, in the sixteenth year of the Reign of our
Sovereign Lord King Charles.

ENTITLED, An Act for the certainty of Forests, and of the Meers, Meets,
Limits, and Bounds of Forests, as the same now remain upon the Record in His
Majesty's high Court of Chancery.

LONDON, Printed for Matthew Walbancke, 1646.

ANNO XVII. Caroli Regis, An Act for the certainty of Forests, and of the
Meers, Meets, Limits, and Bounds of the Forests.
WHereas by Act of Parliament made in the first year of the reign of the late
King Edward the third it is ordained, that the old perambulation of the Forest
in the time of King Edward the first, should be thenceforth houlden in like
form as it was then ridden and bounded, and in such places where it was not
bounded, the King would that it should be bounded by good men and lawful.

And whereas for many ages past certain meets, meers, limits, and bounds of
the forests, have been commonly known and observed in the several Counties
wherein the said forests lie.

And whereas of late diverse presentiments have been made and some judgments
given, whereby the meets, meers limits, and bounds of some of the said forests
have been variously extended, or pretended to extend beyond some of the said
meets, meers, limits and bounds so commonly known, and formerly observed, to
the great grievance and vexation of many persons having lands adjoining to the
said meets, meers, limits, and bounds so commonly known, and formerly
observed: And whereas of late time some endeavors or pretenses have been to
set on foot forests in some parts of this Realm, and the dominion of Wales
where in truth none have been nor ought to be, or at least have not been used
of long time: for remedy thereof, may it please your most excellent Majesty,
that it be declared by authority of Parliament.

And be it declared and enacted by the Kings most excellent Majesty, and the
Lords and Commons of this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of
the same, that from henceforth the meets, meers, limits, and bounds of all and
every the forests respectively, shall be to all intents and purposes, taken,
adjudged, and deemed to extend no further respectively, then the meets meers,
limits, and bounds, which in several Counties respectively, wherein the said
forests do lie, were commonly known, reputed, used, or taken to the meets,
meers, limits, and bounds of the said forests respectively, in the twentieth
year of our late Sovereign Lord King JAMES, and not beyond in any wise, any
preambulation or preambulations, presentiments, extents, surveys, judgments,
records, decrees, or other matter or thing whatsoever to the contrary
notwithstanding: And that all and every the presentiments since the said
twentieth year made, and all and every other presentment and presentiments, and
all and every judgment and award upon, or by reason or pretext of any such
presentment or presentiments, and all and every preambulation, and
preambulations, surueys, extents, and other act and acts, at any time
heretofore had or made, by which the meets, meers, limits, or bounds of the
said forests, or any of them are, or are pretended to be further extended then
as aforesaid: And also all and every presentment of person or persons at any
Justice seat, Swainemote, or Court of Attachments, for so by reason, or by
color of any act or acts whatsoever done or committed in any place without or
beyond the said meets, meers, limits or bounds respectively so commonly known,
reputed, used, or taken as aforesaid, and all or every fine or fines, and
amercement or amercements, shall from henceforth be adjudged, deemed, and taken
to be utterly void, and in no force or effect, any law, statute, record, or
pretense whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no place or places
within this Realm of England, or dominion of Wales, where no such Justice
seat, Swainemote, or Court of Attachment have been held, or where no Verderers
have been chosen, or regard made within the space of sixty years next before
the first year of his Majesty's reign that now is, shall be at any time
hereafter adjudged, deemed, or taken to be forest, or within the bounds or
meets of the forests; But she same shall be from henceforth for ever
hereafter disafforrested, and freed and exempted from the forests laws; any
Justice seat, Swainmote or Court of Attachment held or kept within, or for any
such place or places, at any time or times since the beginning of His Majesty's
said reign, or any presentment enquiry act, or thing heretofore made or
hereafter to be made or done to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, and be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that for
the better putting into certainety, all and every the meets, meers, bounds, and
limits of all and every the forests, as aforesaid, the lord Chancelour, or
Lord keeper of the great Seal of England for the time being, shall by virtue
of this act upon request of any of the Peers of the Kingdom, or of the
Knights and Burgesses of the Parliament, or any of them, grant several
Commissions under the great Seal of England, to Commissioners to be nominated
respectively by the said Peers, Knights, and Burgesses, or any of them, to
enquire of, and finds out by Inquests of good and lawful men upon oath, and by
the oaths of witnesses to be produced at the said Inquests, and by all other
means, all, and every the meers, meets, bounds, and limits respectively of the
forests respectively, in the said twentieth year of the reign of our late
Sovereign Lord King JAMES; And to return the Inquests so taken into the Court
of Chauncery; And that all and every the Sheriffs, and Bailiffes of, and in
every County wherein any such Inquests shall be so to be taken, and all and
every the Verderers, Forresters, Rangers, and other officers of the forests
respectively where any such officers be, shall be assistant, and attendant to
the execution of the said Commissions, according as by the virtue of the said
Commissions respectively they shall be commanded; And where no such officers
are, or where such officers be, if they, or any of them shall refuse, or
neglect such assistance, and attendance as aforesaid, Then the said
Commissioners shall, and may proceed without them in the execution of the said
Commissions.

And be it fuxther enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that the forests
whereof the meets, meers, limits, and bounds shall be so returned, and
certified by virtue of any of she said Commissions as aforesaid, from
thenceforth shall not extend, nor be extended, nor be deemed, adjudged, or
taken to extend any further in any then the meets, meers, limits, and bounds
that shall be so returned and certified: and that all the places and
ferritories, that shall be without the meets, meers, limits, and bounds so
returned and certified, shall be, and are hereby declared to be from
thenceforth free to all intents and purposes, as if the same had never been
forest, or so reputed: And act or acts matter, or thing whatsoever to the
contrary thereof notwithstanding.

Provided, and be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That all and
every the grounds, territories, or places which have been, or are
deafforrested, or mentioned to be deafforrested, in or by any letters patents,
Charters, or otherwise, since the said 2 th. year of the Reign of our late
Sovereign Lord King James, shall be excluded, and left out of the meets,
meers, limits, and bounds of the forests, which are to be enqui-of, returned,
and certified by virtue of the said Commissions, or any of them respectively:
And shall be, and hereby are declared, and enacted to be utterly deafforrested,
free, and exempt to all intents, and purposes, as if the same had never been at
all forest or so reputed: Any thing in this present act contained, or any
other act, matter or thing whatsoever to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

Provided nevertheless, and be it enacted, That the Tenants, Owners, and
Occupiers, and every of them of Lands and Tenements which shall be excluded and
left out of the Meets, Meers, Limits or Bounds of the Forests to be returned,
and certified by virtue of any the said Commission, shall or may use, and enjoy
such Common and other profits, and easements within the forests as anciently,
or accustomably they have used, and enjoyed: Any thing in this present act
contained, or any Act or Ordinance made in the three and thirtieth year of
King EDWARD the first, or any Custom, or Law of the Forest, or any other
matter, or thing to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

CAROLUS Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Rex, Fidei
defensor, etc.
Dilectis and fidelibus nostris Arth. Manwairing Militi, Rich. Onslow Militi,
Rob. Parkhurst Militi, Nich. Stoughton Armigero, Johanni Denham Armigero,
Woolley Lee Armigero, Jacobo Zouch Armigero, Benjamino Titchborn Armigero,
Johanni Hammond Armigero, Arthuro Squib Armigero, Mattheo Carleton Armigero,
and Richardo Beareblock Generoso, salutem;
Sciatis quod nos de fidelitatibus and providis circumspecionibus vestris
before confidentes, ad requisitionem predilecti and fidelis nostri Henr.
Domini Mowbray and Maltrevers, ac dilectorum Richardi Onslow, and Roberti
Parkhurst, Ac etiam dilectorum and fidelium nostrorum Edvardi Bagshaw, Johannis
White, Roberti Goodwin, and Johannis Goodwin Armigero Burgensium in instanti
Parliamento nostro modo assemblat. Assignavimus vos prefat. Arthurum
Manwairing, Richardum Onslow, Robertum Parkhurst, Nicholaum Stoughton, Johannem
Denham, Woolley Lee, Jacobum Zouch, Benjaminum Titchborn, Johannem Hammon,
Arthurum Squib, Mattheum Carleton, and Richardum Beareblocke, december, novem,
octo, septem, sex, quinque, vel plures vestrum Commissionarios nostros, ad
inquirendum and inveniendum per inquisitionem proborum and legalium hominum
super sacramenta sua, and per sacramenta testium producendorum apud praedict.
inquisitionem, and per omnes alios modos legitimos omnes and singulos terminos,
Metas, Bundas, and limits Forrestae nostrae de Windsor, infra Ballivat. de
Surrey, qui fuerunt vulgaritur cognit, fuisse termini, metae, bundae, and
limits dictae Forrestae, Anno vicesimo Regni Domini Jacobi nuper Regis
Angliae, etc. patris nostri praecharissimi, juxta tenorem cujusdam Actus in
presenti Parliamento nostro apud Westmonasterium in Com. Midd. modo assemblat.
edit. and provisis Intitulat. An Act for the certainty of Forests, and of the
Meets, Meers, Limits, and Bounds of the Forests: Presentibus annexi, and ad
omnia and singula alia faciend. and per implend. in and circa Inquisitionem
predictam capiend. and retornand. ejusdem faciend. que juxta tenorem Actus
predict. faciend. sint and per implend. Et ideo vobis and singulis vestrum
mandamus, quod circa omnia and singula premissa diligenter intendatis; Mandamus
enim Vicecomiti nostro Surr. quod ad certos dies and loca quos ad hoc vos
december, novem, octo, septem, sex, quinque vel plures vestrum provideritis and ei
scire facietis, venire fac. coram vobis quinque vel pluribus vestrum tot and
tales liberos and legales homines de eodem Comitatu, per quos rei veritas
melius sciri and Inquisitio predict. fieri poterit sicut predictum est;
Mandamus etiam Vicecomiti Ballivis dicti Comitatus nostri Surr. and omnibus and
singulis viridariis, Forrestariis, Rangiatoribus, and aliis Officiar. dictae
Forrestae quod sint assistentes and attendentes executioni hujus nostrae
Commissionis, Insuper etiam mandamus quod Inquisitionem illam distinct and
aperte in forma predicta factam una cum toto and integro processu vestro in
premissis sub sigillis quinque vel pluribus vestrum and sigillis eorum, quorum
sacramenta facta fuerit hujusmodi Inquisitio nobis in Cancellar, nostrum
distinct and aperte sine dilectatione mittatis una cum hac commissione
nostrum: In cujus rei Testimonium has litteras nostras fieri fecimus Pattentes,

Test meipso apud Westmonasterium quarto decimo die Septembris, Anno regni
nostri decimo septimo. WILLIS.

Sur. ss.
INquisitio intendatur capta apud Guldeford in Comitatu Surr. septimo die
Januarii, Anno regni Domini Caroli gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and
Hiberniae, rex fidei defensoris, etc. decimo septimo, coram Richardo Onslow,
Militi, Roberto Parkhurst Militi, Nicholao Stoughton Armigero, Johanni Denham
Armigero, Woolley Lee Armigero, Jacobo Zouch Armigero, Johanni Hammond
Armigero, and Mattheo Carleton Armigero, Commissionar. dicti Domini Regis per
litteras Pattentes ejusdem Domini Regis sub magno sigillo suo Angliae geren.
dat. apud Westmonasterium quarto decimo die Septembris ultimo, preteriter iis
and aliis Commissionaris ejusdem Domini Regis, quinque vel pluribus eorum
direct. and hinc Inquisitioni annex. ad inquirend. and inveniend. per
Inquisitionem proborum and legalium hominum super sacramenta sua and per
sacramenta testium producendorum apud predict. Inquisitionem, and per omnes
alios modos legittimos, omnes and singulos terminos, Metas, Bundas, and Limits
Forrestae, dicti Domini Regis de Windsor, infra Ballivat. de Surr. qui fuerunt
vulgarit. cognit. fuisse termini, metae, bundae, and limits dictae Forrestae,
Anno vicesimo Regni Domini Jacobi nuper Regis Anglia, etc. Patris Domini Regis
nunc precharissimi, juxta tenorem cujusdem Actus in presenti Parliamento ipsius
Domini Regis, nunc apud Westmonasterium in Comitatu Midd. assemblat. edit. and
provisis intitulat. An Act for the certainty of Forests, and of the Meets,
Meers, Limits, and Bounds of the Forests: Eidem Commissioni annex. and ad
omnia and singula alia faciend. and per implend. in and circa jurisdictionem
predict. capiend. and retornand. ejusdem faciend. Que juxta tenorem Actus
predict. faciend. sint, and per implend. assign. pro ut per Commissionem
predict. before liquet predictis, Richardo Onslowe Militi, and Nicholao
Stoughton Armigero, existen. viridariis Forrestae predict. and in presentia
Willielmi Hannington, Henrici Fen, Tutcher Robinson, Rolandi Rapley, Georgii
Rapley, Francisci Nevill, Thomae Green Genesis Willielmi Curtis, and Thomae
Charter, Forrestariorum ejusdem Forrestae, nec non Georgii Clifton, Johannis
Atfield, Henrici Ede, Willielmi Cross, Johannis Wheatley, VVillielmi Lambert,
Johannis Bartholmew, and Henrici Field, Regardatorum ejusdem Forrestae, eandem
Commissionem assisten. and attenden. reliquis Officiariis ejusdem Forrestae, ad
hoc prius premonitis secundum formam and effectum Actus predicti, sed
executionem minime assisten. sive attenden. per sacramentum Johannis Down de
Cobham Genesis Christopheri Creswell de Cranley Genesis Thomae West de Stoke Genesis
Lionelis Rawlins de VVorking Gen Henrici Bickerstaffe de Walton Genesis Thomae
Child de VVaybridge Genesis VVillielmi Harris de eadem, Johannis Warner de
Chertsey, Richardi Roke de eadem, Richardi Mountain de Egham Genesis VVillielmi
Kirkham de eadem, Philippi Street de VVcversh, Johannis Walton de Shalford,
Johannis Diddlesford de Hascomb, VVillielmi Clifton de VVorplesden, Johannis
Hammond de Binscomb, Iohannis Heart de Puttenham, Thomae Avenel de eadem, and
Georgii Billinghurst de eadem, proborum and legalium hominum Comitatu predict.
Qui quidem juratores super sancta Dei Evangelia jurat. and onerat ad inquirend.
and inveniend. secundum formam and effectum Commissionis, and Actus predict.
diversis testibus fide dignis ad captionem hujus Inquisitionem coram
Commissionar. predict. debito modo super sancta Dei Evangelia jurat. and aliis
in evidentiis juratoribus predict. product. dicunt super sacramentum suum
predict. quod Parcus de Guldeford in Comitatu predict. palis and repagulis
inclusus est Forresta Domini Regis nunc de Windsor, infra Ballivat. de Surr.
Et ulterius dicunt super sacramentum suum predict. quod termini metae, bundae,
and limits, predicti Forrestae de Windsor, infra predict. Balliva^ de Surr.
qui fuerunt vulgarit. cogin. and reputat. fuisse termini metae, bundae, and
limits predict. Forrestae, in Comitatu predict. in predicto Anno vicesimo
dicti Domini Regis Iacobi fuerunt palae and pagulae, Anglice the Pales and
Railes, Parci predict. pro ut modo includit. Et quod totus Com. Surr. preter
predict. Parcum de Guldeford in predicto Anno vicesimo dicti nuper Regis Iacobi
fuit, and modo est extra Forrestam de Windsor predict. and sic vulgarit.
cognit. et reputat. fuit fore extra Forrestam predict. in predicto Anno
vicesimo dicti nuper Regis Iacobi. In cujus rei testimonium tam Commissionar.
predict. quam Iur. predict. hinc Inquisitionem sigille sua apposuerunt, die
Anno et loco primo supra dictis, etc.

Convenit cum Recordo, and ext. per EDMUND. HOSKINS.

CHARLES by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To Our faithful and beloved Arthur Manwayring Knight, Richard Onslow Knight,
Robert Parkhurst Knight. Nich. Stoughton Esquire, John Denham Esquire Woolley Lee Esquire
James Zouch Esquire Benjamin Tichborn Esquire John Hammond Esquire Arthur Squib Esquire Matthew
Carleton Esquire and Richard Bearblock Gentleman, greeting;
Know ye, that We of your fidelity and provident insight, being fully confident
of, at the request of Our faithful and beloved, Henry Lord Mowbray, and
Matrevers, and of you the aforesaid Richard Onslow, and Robert Parkehurst; As
also of Our faithful and beloved Edward Bagshaw, John White, Robert Goodwyn,
and John Goodwyn Esquires, Burgesses in this instant Parliament of Ours now
assembled, We have assigned you the aforesaid Arthur Manwayring, Richard
Onslow, Robert Parkehurst, Nicholas Stoughton, John Denhan, Woolley Lee, James
Zouch, Benjamin Tichborn, John Hammond, Arthur Squib, Matthew Carleton, and
Richard Bearblock, ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, or more of you Our
Commissioners, to inquire and find out by inquisition of good and lawful men
upon their oath, and by the oath of Witnesses to be produced at the said
Inquisition, and by all other lawful means, all and singular the endings of
the Meets, Bounds and Limits of Our Forest of Windsor, within the Bayliffwick
of Surrey, and which were vulgarly known to be the endings of the Meets,
Bounds, and Limits of the said Forest in the Twentieth Year of King James,
late King of England, etc. our beloved Father, according to the Tenor of a
certain Act in this Our present Parliament at Westminster, in the County of
Middlesex, now assembled, enacted and provided; Entitled, An Act for the
certainty of Forests, and of Meets, Meers, Limits, and Bounds, of the
Forests, to these presents annexed; And to all and singular other things to be
done and fulfilled, in and about the aforesaid Inquisition to be taken and
returned, and the same to be made and fulfilled according to the Tenor of the
Act aforesaid: And therefore We do command you, and every of you, that to all
and singular of the Premises you do diligently attend; We do also command Our
Sheriffs of Surrey, that at certain days and places, which to this purpose,
you ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, or more of you shall appoint, and to
him made known, that he do make to come before five or more of you such and so
many good and lawful men of the same County, by which the truth of the things
may the better be known, and the Inquisition aforesaid the better made, as is
aforesaid. We also command Our Sheriffs and Bayliffes in Our said County of
Surrey, and all and every Our Verderers, Forresters, Rangers, and other
Officers of Our said Forest, that they be assisting and attending at this
Commission of Ours: In like manner We do also command, that the said
Inquisition distinctly and fairly in form aforesaid made; together with all
and every your proceedings of the premises, under the Seals of five or more of
you, and the Seals of those, by whose oaths the same Inquisition shall be
made to Us into Our Chancery, distinctly and fairly without delay you send,
together with this Our Commission.

In witness of which, We have caused these Our Letters to be made Pattents:
Witness Our Self at Westminster this 14. Day of September, in the Seventeenth
Year of Our Reign. WILLIS.

Sur. ss.
AN Inquisition Indenture taken at Guildford in the County of Surrey the
Seventh day of January, in the Seventeenth Year of the Reign of Our Sovereign
Lord CHARLES by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc. Before Richard Onslowe Knight, Robert Parkehurst
Knight, Nicholas Stoughton Esquire, John Denham Esquire, Woolley Lee Esquire,
James Zouch Esquire, John Hammond Esquire, and Matthew Carleton Esquire,
Commissioners of Our said Sovereign Lord the King, by the Letters Pattents of
our said Sovereign Lord the King under the great Seal of England, bearing date
at Westminster the Fourteenth day of September last past to them and other the
Commissioners of Our said Lord the King, and to five or more of them directed,
and to this Inquisition annexed, to inquire and find out by the Inquisition of
good and lawful men upon their oaths, and by the oaths of Witnesses to be
produced at the said Inquisition, and by all other lawful means, all and
singular the Endings, Meets, Bounds, and Limits of the Forest of Our said Lord
the King of Windsor, within the Bayliffwick of Surrey, and which were vulgarly
known to be the Endings, Meets, Bounds, and Limits of the said Forest in the
20. Year of the Reign of Our Lord King James, late King of England, etc.
beloved Father to Our now King, according to a certain Act in this present
Parliament, of Our said Lord the now King at Westminster in the County of
Middlesex assembled, and enacted and provided; Entitled, An Act for the
certainty of Forests, and of the Meets, Meers, Limits, and Bounds of the
Forest, and to this Commission annexed, And to all and singular other things
to be done and fulfilled in and about the aforesaid Inquisition to be taken and
returned, and the same to be made and fulfilled according to the Tenor of the
Act aforesaid, and according to the Commission aforesaid does appear; The
aforesaid Richard Onslowe Knight, and Nicholas Stoughton Esquire being Verderers of
the aforesaid Forest, and in the presence of William Hannington, Henry Fen,
Tutcher Robinson, Rowland Rapley, George Rapley, Fraencis Nevill, Thomas Green,
Gentlemen, William Curtis, and Thomas Chuter, Forresters of the said Forest;
as also of George Clifton, John Atfield, Henry Ede, William Cross, John,
Wheatley, William Lambert, John Bartholmew, and Henry Field, Regardors of the
aforesaid Forest, the said Commission assisting, and attending the rest of the
Officers of the said Forest, to this formerly summoned, according to the form
and effect of the aforesaid Act, but the execution not at all assisting or
attending, By the oath of John Down of Cobham Gentleman, Christopher Creswell
of Cranley Gentleman, Thomas West of Stoke Gentleman, Lyonell Rawlins of Woking
Gentleman, Henry Bickerstaffe of Walton Gent. Thomas Child of Waybridge Gent.
William Harris of the same, John Warner of Chertsey, Richard Rovk of the same,
Richard Mountain of Egham Gent. Willivm Kirkham of the same, Philip Street of
Wonershe, John Walter of Shalford, John Diddlesford of Hascombe, William
Clifton of Worplesden, John Hammond of Binscombe, John Heart of Puttenham,
Thomas Avenell of the same, and George Billingburst of the same, good and
lawful men of the aforesaid County, which said Jurors upon the Holy Evangelist
being impanelled and sworn to inquire and find out according to the form and
effect of the Commission and Act aforesaid diverse Witnesses of good worth at
the taking of the said Inquisition before the Commissioners aforesaid, in due
form of Law, being sworn upon the Holy Evangelist, and other evidences
produced to the Jury aforesaid, say upon their oath aforesaid, that the Park
of Guildford in the County aforesaid, with Pales and Rayles included, is the
Forest of Our now Lord the King, of Windsor within the Bayliffwicke of Surrey,
And they do further say upon their oath aforesaid, that the Endings, Meets,
Bounds, and Limits of the aforesaid Forest of Windsor within the aforesaid
Bayliffwicke of Surrey, which were commonly known and reputed to be the
Endings, Meets, Bounds, and Limits of the aforesaid Forest in the County
aforesaid, in the aforesaid Twentieth Year of Our Lord King James, were the
Pales and Rayles of the aforesaid Park as now it is included, And that the
whole County of Surrey, except the Park of Guildford, in the aforesaid
Twentieth Year of King James, was, and now is out of the Forest of Windsor
aforesaid, and so was commonly known and reputed to be out of the Forest
aforesaid, in the aforesaid Twentieth Year of Our Lord King James: In witness
of which, the Commissioners aforesaid; as also the Jury aforesaid to this
Inquisition, have put to their Seals the Day and Year first above written, etc.

It agrees with the Record, and examined by Edmond Hoskins.

FINIS.

